

It was to be expected that the censorship should show a constant zeal in guarding the sacred person of His Majesty, a zeal that was not always appreciated. Napoleon would have homage, but he wanted it to be in good taste and to have at least the appearance of spontaneity; it always irritated him to have this spontaneity too closely associated with official pressure. One of the chief ways in which we find the bureau exhibiting tenderness for the imperial susceptibilities is in its watchfulness over references to individuals who had lost imperial favor; the tactless author who concluded his article on General Kléber in an Histoire des Généraux Français with “un éloge de démesuré que la malveillance ou la sottise auraient pu faire envisager comme un trait lance d’une main impuissante contre une gloire et une renommée au dessus de toutes les gloires”, found that “cet éloge a disparu”. A later appearance of the Egyptian theme seems to have occasioned more embarrassment to M. de Pommereul. In 1812 he prohibited the Egyptiad, an heroic poem on the Bonapartist conquest, because the author had not risen to the height of his theme. “Ce n’est point par un ouvrage si inferieur que Sa Majesté doit être louée. II lui faut un Homère. Alexandre ne voulait être peint que par Apelles.” But an additional objection was conveyed in the carefully worded query, “l’Empereur n’ayant pas conserve l’Egypte, conviendrait-il de faire une grande épopée de sa conquête?” The minister to whom the report was made passed over this delicate point, and remarked that, while any unfitting allusions were to be suppressed, he did not think the poem should be prohibited simply because of its mediocrity. The clemency here suggested was extended with evident regret in the case of an Histoire de Bonaparte (a title which, by the way, was ordered changed to that of Mémoires pour servir a l’Histoire de Napoléon le Grand), where however there were suppressed “quelques détails sur les premières années de la vie du héros et différans discours mis dans sa bouche“.

II est trop difficile [remarks M. Portalis] de traiter un pareil sujet dignement pour qu’on soit étonne de l’imperfection de tant d’ouvrages enterpris sur un thème si beau et si fécond. On souffre de voir travestir, ou rendre en mauvais termes ce qui est grand et beau de sa nature . . . mais il faut compatir a l’empressement du public . . . et a la bonne intention des écrivains.

That, however, there were limits to the censor’s receptivity of the Emperor’s praises is shown by the suppression in a drama of a eulogy of His Majesty on the ground that it had been put in the mouth of one of the rogues of the piece.

Any presentations of the recent history of France or of Europe would necessarily involve the very delicate matter of the revolutionary origins of the existing regime; it can occasion no surprise to find the censorship very sensitive in regard to such references and on the whole decidedly averse to having the period dealt with at all. This is in line with the whole spirit of the administration, anxious, not necessarily to deny its origin or its earlier principles, but to leave unstirred all dangerous questions and events, and to continue quietly with its task of reconciling all interests and classes to the new institutions and to one another. This is well illustrated by the corrections and remarks concerning a production entitled Les Tombeaux du Dix-Huitieme Siecle. “L’auteur”, we are told, “passe en revue tous les hommes remarquables de cette centurie dont il feint de visiter les tombeaux. . . . Le Directeur de la Librairie pense qu’il était au moins inutile d’évoquer de pareilles ombres. II ordonne la suppression de tous les tombeaux révolutionnaires à commencer par celui de Louis XVI”. It was not often indeed that any commendatory references to the men either of the Old Regime or of the Revolution escaped a jealous pruning. An educational treatise on the model of Rousseau’s Émile was subjected to correction because the central figure was described as a noble of the Old Regime forced by the Revolution to emigrate. “On a fait disparaitre cette indication”, says the director, “on n’a pas besoin d’avoir émigré pour donner une éducation chrétienne a ses enfans”. The recalling of the Bourbon past was perhaps even more frowned upon than references to revolutionary days; and when during the Emperor’s absence in Russia the bureau became aware that manuscripts in favor of the old dynasty were being passed from hand to hand the nervousness became extreme. A Vie du Général Monck was prohibited because of the suspicion that only an adherent of the exiled Bourbons could have any interest in calling attention to the restorer of the House of Stuart; an Histoire du Bourbonnais, it is intimated, would have been suppressed if the author had not had the good judgment to stop “au moment où la race des anciens seigneurs de ce nom s’éteint”.