---
source_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/censorship-literature-napoleon/"
final_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/censorship-literature-napoleon/"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "d22fea8e487c1a3d09d495770cf65f704ace7b89ac34df270ce36ed0531231c6"
title: "Censorship and Literature under Napoleon I - napoleon.org"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Censorship and Literature under Napoleon I - napoleon.org

- Go to menu
- Go to content
- Go to search

# Censorship and Literature under Napoleon I

Author(s) : COFFIN Victor

Share it

The Napoleonic régime was largely occupied with the elaboration of a system competent to curb the unbridled individualism that the Revolution had evoked, and of which the great Corsican was himself the chief exponent. Such a system could be but slowly elaborated, and it is not strange that it was never fully applied; the parts of it that were concerned with the moral and intellectual conditions of individual life and with the development and expression of public spirit were still largely in a state of experimentation when the Empire passed away. It was only in 1810 that the educational machine was fully set up with the organization of the University, and it was in the same year that the control of publication through a formal censorship was provided for by the establishment, as a bureau of the Ministry of the Interior, of the Direction Générale de l’Imprimerie et de la Librairie.

In the following pages I propose to examine closely the principles and practice of this Direction Générale as disclosed in its weekly reports through the period 1810-1814. The bureau however cannot be represented as constituting the complete censorship of the period, even with regard to the press, for the police supervision that up to 1810 had been all-powerful over all agencies of public expression and intercourse, was limited by the establishment of the formal censorship only with respect to non-periodic publications. And even here the censorship frequently found itself impeded by the police; there had been a bitter contest between the Ministries of Police and of the Interior all through the working out of the imperial decree of February 5, 1810, by which the Direction Générale had been established, and both Fouche and Savary continued to resent the curtailing of police jurisdiction that the decree represented. The present article therefore is not a full exposition of censorship under the later Empire, but a study of one branch of it, from the point of view chiefly of the administrative attitude toward literature and esprit publicThe substantial monograph of M. Henri Welschinger, La Censure sous le Premier Empire (Paris, 1887), aims to cover the whole field and does so with considerable success. The author, however, has passed over the bulletins of the Direction Générale somewhat hastily, and has occupied himself rather with the fortunes of the more noted writers than with the general attitude and influence of the bureau. The extracts from the bulletins given here and by M. Welschinger may be usefully supplemented by the citations from those of 1810 published in 1870-1871 by M. Charles Thurot in the Revue Critique d’Histoire et de Littérature. I have used these bulletins in two different manuscripts of the Archives Nationales, indexed as “AF IV. 1049, Rapports du Ministere de l’Intérieur “, and “AF IV. 1354, Pièces Ministérielles”; there are 5 in all, blanks existing for June, July, August, and September, of 181o, and for July and August of 1812.. It is based on the authoritative and detailed account of the operations of the censorship that is preserved for us in the weekly bulletins of the Director General to the Minister of the Interior, who was supposed to lay them before the Emperor. These extend with some breaks from April 1810, to January 1814. They were prepared by the Director General on the basis of the reports of the censors and inspectors (for the departments, of the prefets also), and no doubt often incorporated the ideas and even the language of the individual readers, though in general the form of statement implies the director’s own examination and conviction. At times the director is requested by the minister to undertake a personal reading and report; aggrieved authors had the right of appeal to the minister, but this seems to have been but rarely exercised (I find but one instance of the manuscript being sent to another censor, who reversed the decision of the first). It is clear that the minister gave close attention to the bulletins and we find him not infrequently ordering or suggesting changes. It is impossible to say how far they came under the eye of the Emperor or how far the minister’s interventions were thus caused. As in January, 1813, the latter asserted that he had long sought to impose leniency on the bureau, it is fair to assume that his attitude would date back to the strong expressions of dissatisfaction with the censorship used by Napoleon in the Council toward the end of 1811Welschinger it is true asserts that the imperial interventions “ne produisit aucun effet utile et l’arbitraire continua” (p. 46), but it is evident that he had not examined the bulletins closely enough, and was probably basing his statement upon general literary complaints such as that quoted by him from Villemain. I have not found the document from which Welschinger quotes the Instructions issued by M. de Pommereul to the censors, December 22, 1812, in pursuance of the new orders; according to this the following principles were now laid down: “Lorsqu’un ouvrage vous est soumis, qu’il soit bien ou mal écrit, spirituel ou non, contenant des idées sages ou déraisonnables, ce ne sont point la des motifs pour proposer d’en suspendre ou arrêter la publication. L’ouvrage est-il obscène? Sa publicité serait-elle contraire aux règlements de police municipale? Alors a-t-il pour but de réveiller des passions, de former des factions, de semer du trouble dans l’intérieur? Le danger qu’il présente avertit assez de réclamer la défense de sa publication. L’intention libérale de Sa Majesté est que, a ces exceptions près, la presse jouisse d’une entière liberté.” Welschinger admits that these new directions were followed by “une certaine détente dans la répression”, but declares that it did not last. So far as the records show it lasted through the rest of the period. The cases of the two manuscripts set down as prohibited in January, 1814 (though only 15 had been submitted to the censors), will be found on examination to bear out this conclusion; both were reported by the director as being markedly of an objectionable political tendency, and yet in both instances the minister disapproved the action and ordered reconsideration (of the final outcome we have no information). As a matter of fact the milder regime had set in earlier than is indicated above, and quite suddenly, showing that some external pressure had been applied; for the months of January, February, and March, 1812, with 185 manuscripts examined, there were 10 prohibitions and 39 corrections, while for the months of April, May, June, September, October, November, and December (there were no bulletins for July and August), with 386 manuscripts there were only 4 corrections and 1 prohibition. The activity in correction of the year 1811 and of the first three months of 1812 is even more striking than the prohibitions; it was in January, 1811, that Portalis was replaced by de Pommereul, and but for the proverbial activity of the “new broom” we should not have expected this result. Portalis had been very vigorous in his plans for corrections, and it may be that these plans came to the stage of application only after his removal. The manuscripts “corrigés ” were for the most part simply mutilated. This activity naturally aroused much complaint, and to this doubtless were due the strong expressions employed by the Emperor in the Council of State, December 13, 1811 (Locre, Discussion sur la Liberté de la Presse, etc., Paris, 1819, p. 296 ff.), though they seem also to have been caused in part by his irritation at the demand of the bureau for larger appropriations. He intimated that it might be necessary to abolish the Direction Générale, and declared that “II est nécessaire que la direction de l’imprimerie prenne des idées plus libérales. On sent maintenant tous les abus de cette institution. . . . Elle devrait savoir que la censure n’est établie que contre les libelles qui provoquent a la révolte; qu’elle laisse parler librement sur le reste; qu’elle souffre les caprices de la presse. II est fort égal a l’état qu’un extravagant vienne dire par exemple: que c’est Louis XI qui a fait la révolution. . . . On règlemente beaucoup trop. II est beaucoup de choses qu’un gouvernement sage abandonne à leur cours naturel. L’amour du mieux n’enfante pas toujours le bien; et les innovations sont rarement heureuses”. It will be remembered that Napoleon’s interventions in administration were frequently not followed up, and that they often occurred under such circumstances as justified the impression that they did not proceed from clear conviction and settled policy and consequently could not be safely regarded as laying down rules of action. But in this case there is no reason to doubt that his attitude continued consistent and that the censorship began to respond to it by the spring of 1812.