

Bulletin statistics, 1810-1814:

| Date | No. Bulletins | No. MSS. | No. Corrections | No. Prohibitions |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1810 | 15 | 422 | 64 | 3 |
| 1811 | 48 | 669 | 163 | 76 |
| 1812 | 41 | 571 | 43 | 21 |
| 1813 | 51 | 585 | 2 | 14 |
| 1814 | 3 | 15 | 0 | 2 |
| Total: | 158 | 2262 | 272 | 116 |

But the Emperor’s earlier interventions were spasmodic and were probably not followed up. He did not like the censorship, for he was very sensitive as to the suspicion that he was afraid to let people say what they thought; but, as with the police tyranny, he could not dispense with it. It is clear however that he finally interposed decisively in the interests of leniency, the permanent results being evident from the statistics of censorship operation given aboveWelschinger it is true asserts that the imperial interventions “ne produisit aucun effet utile et l’arbitraire continua” (p. 46), but it is evident that he had not examined the bulletins closely enough, and was probably basing his statement upon general literary complaints such as that quoted by him from Villemain. I have not found the document from which Welschinger quotes the Instructions issued by M. de Pommereul to the censors, December 22, 1812, in pursuance of the new orders; according to this the following principles were now laid down: “Lorsqu’un ouvrage vous est soumis, qu’il soit bien ou mal écrit, spirituel ou non, contenant des idées sages ou déraisonnables, ce ne sont point la des motifs pour proposer d’en suspendre ou arrêter la publication. L’ouvrage est-il obscène? Sa publicité serait-elle contraire aux règlements de police municipale? Alors a-t-il pour but de réveiller des passions, de former des factions, de semer du trouble dans l’intérieur? Le danger qu’il présente avertit assez de réclamer la défense de sa publication. L’intention libérale de Sa Majesté est que, a ces exceptions près, la presse jouisse d’une entière liberté.” Welschinger admits that these new directions were followed by “une certaine détente dans la répression”, but declares that it did not last. So far as the records show it lasted through the rest of the period. The cases of the two manuscripts set down as prohibited in January, 1814 (though only 15 had been submitted to the censors), will be found on examination to bear out this conclusion; both were reported by the director as being markedly of an objectionable political tendency, and yet in both instances the minister disapproved the action and ordered reconsideration (of the final outcome we have no information). As a matter of fact the milder regime had set in earlier than is indicated above, and quite suddenly, showing that some external pressure had been applied; for the months of January, February, and March, 1812, with 185 manuscripts examined, there were 10 prohibitions and 39 corrections, while for the months of April, May, June, September, October, November, and December (there were no bulletins for July and August), with 386 manuscripts there were only 4 corrections and 1 prohibition. The activity in correction of the year 1811 and of the first three months of 1812 is even more striking than the prohibitions; it was in January, 1811, that Portalis was replaced by de Pommereul, and but for the proverbial activity of the “new broom” we should not have expected this result. Portalis had been very vigorous in his plans for corrections, and it may be that these plans came to the stage of application only after his removal. The manuscripts “corrigés ” were for the most part simply mutilated. This activity naturally aroused much complaint, and to this doubtless were due the strong expressions employed by the Emperor in the Council of State, December 13, 1811 (Locre, Discussion sur la Liberté de la Presse, etc., Paris, 1819, p. 296 ff.), though they seem also to have been caused in part by his irritation at the demand of the bureau for larger appropriations. He intimated that it might be necessary to abolish the Direction Générale, and declared that “II est nécessaire que la direction de l’imprimerie prenne des idées plus libérales. On sent maintenant tous les abus de cette institution. . . . Elle devrait savoir que la censure n’est établie que contre les libelles qui provoquent a la révolte; qu’elle laisse parler librement sur le reste; qu’elle souffre les caprices de la presse. II est fort égal a l’état qu’un extravagant vienne dire par exemple: que c’est Louis XI qui a fait la révolution. . . . On règlemente beaucoup trop. II est beaucoup de choses qu’un gouvernement sage abandonne à leur cours naturel. L’amour du mieux n’enfante pas toujours le bien; et les innovations sont rarement heureuses”. It will be remembered that Napoleon’s interventions in administration were frequently not followed up, and that they often occurred under such circumstances as justified the impression that they did not proceed from clear conviction and settled policy and consequently could not be safely regarded as laying down rules of action. But in this case there is no reason to doubt that his attitude continued consistent and that the censorship began to respond to it by the spring of 1812.. In 1811 more than thirty per cent of the manuscripts examined were corrected or prohibited, but in 1813 only somewhat less than three per cent. We should of course take into account the presumed efficacy of the censorship, the effects of the making known of its principles and prejudices to authors and publishers; but the examination of the bulletins of the director shows that there was a real and forced relaxing of the earlier activity, and that this leniency was distasteful both to the individual censors and to M. de Pommereul. After the inauguration of the milder régime the bulletins of the Director General change in tone, and are devoted mainly to descriptive statements and to more or less jocular and trivial criticism. It is clear that the bureau was no longer taking itself very seriously; there is no further reference to the early educational campaign, and we get on the whole the impression that the worthy M. de Pommereul and his censors are more or less marking time. The direct activity of the censorship proper seems to have been confined almost entirely to Paris and its vicinity, for in the provinces it is probable that the change brought about by the establishment of the new bureau amounted to but little more than a change of address of the prefectoral reports from the Ministry of the Police to the Ministry of the Interior. No doubt throughout the Empire as in Paris the surveillance of the police continued as before, but their activity was now detached from that of the prefets acting as agents of the formal censorship which existed as a bureau of the Ministrv of the Interior.Reference is frequently made in the bulletins to information furnished by the préfets in pursuance of the instructions “données a MM. les Préfets par le Directeur Général de la Librairie”. Inspectors of the censorship were employed in the surveillance of distribution through local booksellers and through colporteurs throughout France, but it is not clear whether they reported directly or through the préfets, or what their relations were to the similar agents of the police. The large range of this surveillance as compared with that of the police is probably indicated in the reference of the bulletins to efforts of its agents to furnish extended information as a basis for a policy of improving popular reading. I shall not delay on this provincial censorial activity, for it is of minor importance, and is represented but slightly in the bulletins of the Director General; the provincial press had virtually ceased to exist as a medium or factor in public opinion, and the publication provincially of a new book had become a rare event. The activity of the censorship in Paris had of course reference very largely to the reading public of the provinces, though from points of view which seem to become less prominent as time passed. It is the provinces mainly that are in view when the censorship planned most aggressively, took itself most seriously; the first director, Count Joseph Portalis, a strenuous and pedagogic bureaucrat, entered upon his work with much enthusiasm as to the opportunity offered to direct popular reading and thus mould public opinion. His second report as Director General, dated May 31, 1810, addressed to the Emperor direct, was prefaced by some general considerations.