

This last instance represents an attitude which we find the censorship frequently exhibiting; for the number of manuscripts on English affairs or containing references to England that were submitted was surprisingly large. In spite of the war and of the Napoleonic commercial policy the intellectual relations between the countries continued to subsist in a large degree, and evidences of the fact have a good deal of interest. ‘The reception of English thought in France was still such as frequently to disturb the censorship, which lost no opportunity of discrediting it. This inhospitality does not it is true often extend to purely literary productions, the frequent translations in this field being seldom interfered with. But in all other ways every opportunity is taken of working against “cette Anglomanie que nos écrivains du siècle dernier nous ont si inocules et dont ceux du siècle présent auront quelques peines a nous guérir”. Every occasion is seized to revile British institutions; even trial by jury (almost the only part of the revolutionary innovations in judicial procedure that Napoleon had let live) was referred to as “n’offrant aucun avantage au dégré de civilisation où nous sommes parvenus”. Eulogies of the British constitution received short shrift; a book entitled Anecdotes Anglaises et Américaines was in 1813 strongly approved of as disclosing the vices of the British system, showing (to use the language of the bulletin) “que la constitution anglaise ne donne au peuple qu’elle régit ni la garantie ni les droits ni les libertés dont on prétend qu’il lui est redevable; que si les Anglais ont une moralité, leur gouvernement dans ses rapports publics n’en reconnait et n’en pratique aucune”. One instance of these attacks is of interest in more than one way; it is in connection with the passing of a book concerning Lord Elgin’s antiquarian activities in the Levant in 1799.

Les anglais [the bulletin proceeds] qui n’ont pas le sentiment des beaux arts, qui n’ont encore produit aucun grand peintre, aucun grand sculpteur, aucun grand musicien, ont heureusement beaucoup d’or et non moins d’orgueil; ils y joignent une jalousie nationale qui les excite a se montrer toujours nos rivales. M. de Choiseul-Gouffier a illustre son ambassade par son beau voyage de la Grèce. Le Lord Elgin a voulu l’imiter et faire aussi son voyage pittoresque…. Elgin obtint de la Porte la permission de faire des fouilles a Athènes et on sait qu’il en a abuse au dernier point. Les magnifiques bas-reliefs du temple de Thésée ont été brises et mutiles pour en ravir quelques fragments, et l’insouciance Ottomane a été moins fatale aux restes d’Athènes que la cupidité et la barbarie de cet Anglais.

The attitude of the censorship toward educational books and problems can perhaps be regarded as of even more interest than the manner in which it carried out the policy imposed upon it in the field of political authorship. The importance of the training of the young was now being realized in a new sense; while the freedom of the eighteenth century was still demanded by some defiant spirits, the vast majority had fallen in with the declared policy of the new government of entrenching Society and the State behind the old religious and moral bulwarks, and developing anew a sense of discipline and a respect for authority that would harmonize with and be a secure prop for the restored monarchical system. The gropings of the Revolutionary and early Napoleonic years toward the setting up of educational machinery had now at length produced a system that seemed a marvel of centralization; the new University of France, embracing all stages and conditions of the educational process, was organized and operating. It was organized, as was the censorship, as a section of the Ministry of the Interior, and the Director General in this first period seems animated by the ambition of being really a co-ordinate educational force, if not of developing a superior educational control. Count Joseph Portalis was a very serious young man, and (as has been shown in part above) he lost no time in magniloquently enunciating extended plans for influence through his office in general education, as well as for the direction of the adult spirit. His first general bulletin set forth this programme explicitly; after dwelling upon the unsatisfactory character of popular publications, he proceeds: