

This vigilance was no doubt very discouraging to historical research, but though quite a number of brief histories of France appear only to be sadly mutilated, we do not seem on the whole to have lost much that we cannot do without. We should like indeed to have had preserved the work which aimed to present a study of the statements as to local conditions and instructions sent up with the deputies to the États Généraux of 1789; it was rejected because it was constantly harping on the vague idea of popular power and sovereignty, and because it presumed to propose reforms in the Napoleonic laws. No such regret perhaps will be extended to a Dutch publication entitled Delicia Poetica, proscribed because “une très grande partie de ce recueil a son origine dans les opinions exaltées de 1792 et 1793”. The differences presented by these earlier eras are strongly insisted on in a critical reference to the appearance of a new edition of De Flassan’s Histoire de la Diplomatie Française; although the work is not proscribed, objection is expressed to the disclosures it makes of the diplomatic secrets of the old French state.

Mais l’ouvrage est déjà publie; l‘ancienne diplomatie, même celle du règne de Louis XVI., est aussi vieillie que si elle avait deux mille ans. Tout est change autour de nous. II ne s’agit pas seulement d’une nouvelle dynastie, ce sont les temps qui ne sont plus les mêmes. L’Empereur a commence une nouvelle ère pour le monde politique, même l’ordre social, même l’art de gouverner comme celle de vaincre et de combattre sont renouvelles en entier.

It is perhaps surprising that the prejudice against publications relating to the French Revolution was not also extended to those that dealt with the preceding American one; on the contrary, in 1813 we find an approving notice of a translation from the Italian of Botta’s Histoire de la Guerre de l’Indépendance des États-Unis. This was probably due to the part taken by France in that struggle, especially since France was again at war with England. It certainly would not seem to be explainable by any tenderness toward the contemporary United States, if we may judge by a reference to a work unfortunately not approved because objected to by the Minister of Foreign Relations as inopportune. This was entitled Aperçu des États-Unis au 19 Siècle jusqu’en 1810, by M. Félix Beaujour: “Les Anglo-Américains”, remarks the director, “ne se sont pas encore présentes devant un miroir plus fidèle. Ils seraient bien connus en France si cet ouvrage peu étendu mais plein et substantiel pourrait voir le jour”. We may I think assume that the reflection in this mirror was not complimentary. This intervention of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs recalls an important limitation of the bureau’s freedom of action. It was not only constantly interfered with by the police, but it was obliged to refer to various departments of the administration such projected publications as were likely to be of particular interest to them-a reference that was especially important for manuscripts in the province of the Ministre des Cultes. One of the interventions from the diplomatic side is of interest as displaying one of the embarrassing sides of the censorial system; it is with regard to the prohibition of a volume entitled Versailles, Paris, et Londres, described by the director as not ill-intentioned but very stupid. “Mais dans un pays”, he explains, “où le public croit que les ouvrages politiques sont faites par ordre du Gouvernement ou publies sous sa censure, il est impossible de laisser paraitre de telles rhapsodies”. This leads to the reflection that manifestly an active censorship would proceed very easily from corrections to suggestion. There are many instances of such suggestions; as in the case of the text-book on geography to which the Foreign Office insisted on adding some maps, or of the translation of Costigan’s Letters on the Government, Manners and Customs of Portugal, which the translator was required to add various remarks on the duplicity of the English conduct in that country, and on the great improvement effected by the short sojourn of the French.