

The learned M. Lenoir in his Histoire des Arts en France, too engrossed in his researches to have noticed that the revolutionary tone was no longer in fashion, had permitted himself to make slighting references to divinity as “une invention de l’ignorance”, as also to the great legislators of mankind.

On l’a prie de modifier ces locutions qui attaquent l’existence de Dieu, l’immortalité de l’âme, et le respect du au législateur. On peut dans un ouvrage de philosophie disputer les points les plus importants de la religion naturelle, mais il ne faut pas dans un livre pour ainsi dire populaire glisser des maximes contraires ‘a des dogmes qui n’appartiennent pas moins a la sociabilité qu’a la religion.

The criticism of manuscripts in the fields of dogma or religious philosophy was furnished by an ecclesiastic of decided Gallican convictions, and he was instructed to hold an even course between maintaining respect for religious things and encouraging mysticism or excessive piety. The frequently expressed apprehension as to mysticism (we might also say as to undue piety) is perhaps peculiarly French; a religious revival was however making headway, and there were good political reasons for not encouraging it. The Souvenirs Continuels de l’Éternité by M. Lasausse, described by the Director General as an “espèce de missionnaire a l’imagination bouillante”, was suppressed because the author had addressed himself con amore to the task of terrifying the frivolous and was thought likely to have much success. Another and more philosophical book on the same subject was passed with the contemptuous remark, “Lira qui pourra”. A theological work in support of the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception is prohibited with the wish that “ces jongleries du 14e siècle” might be relegated to the age which had produced them; this particular decision the minister did not accept, but forwarded the manuscript to the Ministre des Cultes. A treatise on Divine Love is rejected because containing “des germes de quiétisme qui ne me paraissent propres qu’a entretenir l’illusion de quelques faibles imaginations”; in this case also the minister orders a new report. Les Anges Gardiens des Hommes is in the Dutch language and the censor records the fact with satisfaction, for in his opinion it is a homily, “la plus triste, la plus froide, la plus ennuyeuse dont on ait pu s’aviser”.

It was to the field of belles-lettres that most of the attention of the censors was directed, and their literary criticisms are often of very considerable interest, more especially perhaps with regard to the origins of French romanticism. Of the 116 manuscripts submitted to the censorship in the month of April 1812, seventy-six were literary; we may probably regard this as a representative pro- portion. Even when not considered objectionable these productions were described in the bulletins, and the descriptions were frequently accompanied by reflections as to the literary conditions and tendencies of the day. The student of public spirit in France will find here much information concerning popular reading and the intellectual tastes and habits of the period; there are valuable indications also in the field of comparative literature. If space permitted it would be of interest to present references to and decisions concerning the light literature of the day in a sufficient degree to show not only its characteristics, but something of the literary fashions of time, and of the conditions under which the literary artist was working. Of the few notable books of these four years Mme. de Stael’s L’Allemagne is practically the only one dealt with in these bulletins; as the tribulations of Mme. de Stael are well known and as the formal censorship played only a subordinate role I will not linger on the episode.Mme. de Stael’s clashes with the censorship and the police will be found detailed by Welschinger, together with the fortunes of some other notable authors. The production of the period was for the most part unimportant, and this dearth of notable authorship was naturally associated with a strong tendency to translation and with popular support of translations. One of the most interesting instances is that of Scott’s Lady of the Lake, examined by the censorship in two independent versions of the early part of 1813 (the original had appeared in 1810). M. de Pommereul does not attempt corrections, but solemnly informing the minister that the poem deals with everything that is marvellous in a world of knights and fairies, adds, “L’imagination dans ce champ si vaste serait trop malheureuse si elle n’y trouvait pas de quoi intéresser”; in which we may assume that he was not voicing national feeling but was simply exhibiting a lack of sympathy with the romantic school. In the following month there is recorded the submission of a translation from Schlegel of what is entitled Cours de Littérature Dramatique, the original of which had appeared in Germany about two years before. We are surprised to find the book passed without change, in view of Schlegel’s close association with Mme. de Stael and of the severe comments now made on the work by the Director General.