

Among the literary fashions of the period that are indicated in the bulletins is, we are surprised to learn, a demand for books on Mme. de Maintenon; “Il est”, we are told, “à la mode d’en parler et de la vanter”. The output of poetry seems slight and the director’s remarks about specimens submitted are usually disrespectful. M. Cantalou would publish Oeuvres Poétiques et Lyriques; he is allowed to, but the censor crossly remarks that he has made a mistake in the title for there is nothing in the book remotely resembling a poem or a lyric. A producer of Pensées Tristes is described as a poet who has lost his mistress and been thrown thereby into a melancholy that he labors to make interesting and profitable; “mais les grandes et véritables douleurs sont muets”. A translation of selections from Pope is received with an amiability that is exceptional, and with some remarks on the literary connections between France and England that are of interest. “Voltaire est le premier qui ait fait connaitre Pope en France. Depuis ce temps Le Tourneur nous familiarisa avec Young et Shakespeare comme Prévot nous avait fait gouter Richardson, mais c’est l’émigration pendant la révolution et le retour des émigrés qui a surtout fait parmi nous la fortune de la littérature anglaise”.

I have perhaps yielded somewhat to a natural tendency to dwell disproportionately on the trivialities and illiberalities of these reports. A more extended survey would reveal much sound sense. But it is not necessary to moralize on this episode in the history of censorship. As censorships go it was perhaps on the whole not a very bad one, and it may be doubted whether the literature and learning of the First Empire would have been distinguished under any conditions. Sober thought and modest worth were not in fashion; the imaginative faculties were dulled or satiated amidst the engrossing marvels of everyday fact. Literature will be trivial when men think it such, and public spirit cannot endure without ideals. France under Napoleon had lost the sense of proportion, and France paid the penalty in various ways. It was in May 1813, between two German battle-days, that Count Beugnot, falling into conversation with the Emperor on these matters, suddenly found himself violently reproached with being one of those “ideologues” who would have freedom of the press and other such excesses of revolutionary days. And putting his hand on the hilt of his sword, Napoleon cried, “Tant que celle-là pendra à mon côté, et puisse-t-elle y pendre encore longtemps, vous n’aurez aucune des libertés après lesquelles vous soupirez”. That sword was broken within the year, and on April 3, 1814, the Senate which had accepted all the tyrannies of the regime and which had never once dared to use the defences of freedom that the Constitution had pretended to endow it with, passed solemnly an Act of Deposition which in its recital of these tyrannies declared that Napoleon had “constamment soumise à la censure arbitraire de la police, la liberté de la presse, établie et consacrée comme l’un des droits de la nation”. It was not an accurate statement, and the Senate had no right to utter a reproach; before the end of the year these same senators had joined in the setting-up of the censorship of the Restoration.