

Nous avons longtemps lu l’histoire Romaine [remarks the bulletin] avec une admiration presque superstitieuse. . . . Les temps sont extrêmement changés. Ce n’est plus un doute raisonnable qu’on essaie d’inspirer, c’est une satire qu’on en veut faire. Tous les récits sont des fables. Nos docteurs modernes dans leurs leçons publiques nient que Regulus se soit immole a sa patrie, comme si cet acte de dévouement, vrai ou faux, n’était pas toujours une admirable leçon a donner aux élèves . . . qu’y a-t-il donc a gagner pour nos descendants a vouloir leur persuader que tant d’actes d’héroïsme et de vertu n’ont point eu lieu? Cette critique indiscrète et trop facile me parait un des plus grands travers de l’esprit de nos nouveaux pédagogues.

For my present purpose the exercise of the censorship in the interests of religion and morality may be classed as educational. But it is a large additional field of activity, evoking frequent interventions, and can only be glanced at. Here the censorship cannot be accused of bigoted or devotional tendencies, its spirit being rather the secularizing spirit of the eighteenth century, tempered by the conditions established through Bonaparte’s restoration of the Church. Harmony between the new Charlemagne and his pope had indeed long since departed, but the State for statesmanlike reasons continued to demand respect for the Church, and to uphold its place as one of the chief props of society and government. In the field of morals the austere and pedagogical Portalis was much more severe than his older and more military successor; both the minister and the Emperor however seem to have intervened in the later period against a policy that was charged with being Puritanic. As we should expect, it is M. Portalis who is particularly concerned to up- hold the Church as the basis of morality and an indispensable prop to Society and the State. He even enters on the Herculean labor of keeping the novel of the day in line with decency and safe theology. “Les romans”, he says, “sont la bibliothèque des antichambres, et si elle est infestée de déclamations contre la croyance salutaire d’une Providence divine, ses lecteurs pauvres et violents et surs de l’impunité, seront des sots, comme le dit très bien Voltaire, s’ils n’assassinent pas leurs maitres pour voler leur argent”. Seizures and confiscations of obscene books and prints are frequently referred to. A manuscript is reported as shorn of “quelques détails obscènes”, while in another the author is required to cast a veil “sur des nudités trop révoltantes” (the veil which one ingenious writer attempted to furnish by writing only the first letters of his objectionable words was not regarded by M. Portalis as sufficiently opaque). Another romance is prohibited on the ground of immorality in allowing the adventures of two rogues to be wound up by a happy and prosperous marriage; “Le roman n’est précisément obscène, mais il est au moins d’une très mauvaise moralité. C’est le vice menant à un état prospéré.”