involvement in armed conflicts with rival powers on the one hand, with the
long-term material progress on the other. 9
       Engagements in war may have delayed, accelerated or arrested
economic development. Counterfactuals are certainly implicit in any
enquiry that poses the meta question about their economic
consequences and economists remain commendably explicit in the
parsimonious methods they utilize to deal with the key question of what
might have occurred in the absence of mobilizations for warfare?
Impatient with history, they cut through detailed investigations into its
impact upon the factors of production (labour, capital, natural
endowments and technology) behind economic growth. They also avoid
difficulties involved in disaggregating the unmeasured and possibly un-
measurable effects of mobilization upon the distinct sectors and industries
that make up national economies. By making heroic assumptions that, in
the absence of conflict, rates of growth for national incomes, industrial
and agricultural outputs, labour productivities, consumption per capita and
other macro-indicators of development would have continued on the
trends observed and measured for runs of pre-war years, cliometricians
posit that: without the interruptions and diversions associated with warfare
these trends (as represented on several varieties of growth curves
invented by statisticians) would have persisted; that deviations from them
are imputable to the malign effects of reallocating resources from the
civilian economy into purposes directly or indirectly connected to armed
conflict; and finally that estimated declines below trends represent the




9
  A. Milward, The Economic Effects of Two World Wars on Britain (London, 1984); R.
Andreano (ed.), The Economic Impact of the American Civil War (Cambridge, Mass.,
1967); H.G. Vatter, The US Economy in World War II (New York, 1985). For recent
attempts to construct theories that draw connexions between warfare and state
formation vide T. Besley and T. Persson, ‘Wars and State Capacity’, in Journal of the
European Economic Association, 2 (1009), pp. 522-30.
                                           4
