The Contributions Of Warfare With Revolutionary And Napoleonic
France To The Consolidation And Progress Of The British Industrial
Revolution ∗
                                                              Patrick Karl O’Brien


    “Great Britain is under weightier obligation to no mortal man than to this
    very villain. For whereby the occurrences whereof he is the author, her
    greatness prosperity, and wealth, have attained their present elevation.”
A Prussian General’s reference to Napoleon at the Congress of Vienna, 1815 1


       Abstract
       My essay surveys a range of printed secondary sources going back
to publications of the day (and includes research in primary sources) in
order to revive a traditional and unresolved debate on economic
connexions between the French and Industrial Revolutions. It argues
that, on balance, the costs flowing from the reallocation of labour capital
and technical knowledge to wage warfare from 1793-1815 have been
overstated in relation to the range of benefits analysed below that
accrued from: crowding out a potential invasion by Napoleon’s armies;
improvements to the skills and discipline of the workforce; the integration
of Ireland into a national market; the accelerated diffusion of technologies
associated with coal and iron; the circumvention of diminishing returns to
agriculture and above all from a victory that left the Royal Navy with
undisputed command of the oceans and the realm’s maritime sector,
poised and ready to retain most of the gains from trade and servicing the
international economy, obtained at the expense of rivals during these long
wars with France.
       My conclusion is that the costs and benefits derived from
participation in a global war from 1793 to 1815, that was integral to the
era’s geopolitical and mercantilist international economic order could
never be measured. But in the context and history of that order it is
difficult to represent their outcome as anything other than positive and
significant for the consolidation and progress of Britain’s famous transition
to become Europe’s First Industrial nation.


∗
  Not to be cited without permission from: p.o’brien@lse.ac.uk. I wish to thank Phil
Hoffman, Stan Engerman, Mark Harrison and Javier Cuenca Esterban for their
comments and help with this paper.
1
  A Prussian general’s reference to Napoleon at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 cited
by A.D. Harvey, Collision of Empires. Britain in Three World Wars 1793-1815 (London,
1945),
                                         1
