of clear and positive correlations between power and profit. As Charles
Wilson observed: their “logic was the logic of violence in an age of
violence”. 5 While a later dominant tradition in English political economy
running from Adam Smith to Maynard Keynes has influenced
generations of liberal economic historians to regard all wars as inimical
for material progress and for the welfare of British society. 6
       There is a literature, even a journal on the economics of war, but
modern historians are understandably more chary than economists in
entering debates that attempt to investigate the economic consequences
of wars. 7 They prefer to concentrate upon their origins and political
outcomes or to conduct more manageable research into the mobilization
of resources for engagement in power politics in order to expose and
analyse wars as integral to processes of state formation in early modern
Europe. 8 Clearly conclusions (or even conjectures) about outcomes from
wars for the histories of national economies will be much more difficult to
support with reference to evidence hard enough to draw clear inferences
about their costs and benefits or to measure connexions between active

5
  C. Wilson, England’s Apprenticeship, 1603-1763 (New York, 1968)p. 67 and K Tribe,
‘Mercantilism and the Economics of State Formation’ in L. Magnusson (ed.),
Mercantilist Economics (Northwell, 1993), pp. 175-86; E . and S. Reinert,
‘Mercantilism and Economic Development: Schumpeterian Dynamics, Institution
Building and International Benchmarking’ in K. S. Jomo and E. Reinert (eds.),
Development Economics. How Schools of Economic Thought have Addressed
Development (London, 2005).
6
  They are more inclined to use economics to explain military history. Vide J. Brauer
and H. Van Tulyll, How Economists Explains Military History (Chicago, 2008); E.
Silberner, The Problem of War in Nineteenth Century Economic Thought (Princeton,
1946).
7
  V.W. Ruttan, Is War Necessary for Economic Growth? Military Procurement and
Technology Development (Oxford, 2006). E.L. Bogart, Direct and Indirect Costs of the
Great War (New York, 1920); A.O. Bowley, Some Economic Consequences of the
Great War (London, 1930); G. Kennedy, Defense Economics (London, 1983); S.N.
Broadberry, ‘The Impact of World Wars on the Long Run Performance of the British
Economy’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 4 (1988), pp. 25-37; T. Sandler and K.
Hartley, The Economics of Defence (Cambridge, 1995).
8
  F. Lane, Profits from Power. Readings in Protection, Rent and Violence (Albany,
1979); P.W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics (Oxford, 1992) and S.
Baxter , (ed.), England’s Rise to Greatness (Berkeley, 1983).
                                          3
