Firstly, why did this “re/misallocation” of resources to support 23 years of
warfare fail to depress the growth and structural change of the economy
even further below levels that might well have been anticipated if trends in
investment, towards diversification and of technological innovation
(discernible and visible during the decade of peace that followed the
Treaty of Paris in 1783) had continued into the 19th century? In other
words, why was the momentum already transforming the economy from
the 1760s onwards not held in check for far longer and more seriously by
this costly war? 31 Secondly (and this is a key argument for reviving an
old discussion) what, if anything, could be claimed for positive legacies
and spin-offs from mobilization for war that contributed to recovery and
placed the economy back onto a course that led to the long Victorian
boom and to Britain’s interlude of hegemony as the commercial hub and
industrial workshop of the world? 32
       Fiscal and financial accounts provide the most accessible and most
frequently used bodies of data for historians who attempt to analyse and
elaborate upon economic costs inflicted by warfare. But they bias
investigations towards the measurable, neglect real or opportunity costs
and divert attention away from any serious consideration of material
benefits that flowed from money efficiently spent by states. Furthermore,
budgetary accounts are reported in current prices for a period when
extraordinary fluctuations from year to year renders deflation to real terms
highly problematical. 33 In short, while these accounts promote

31
   This is virtually the way the question has been posed by England’s most
distinguished historian of this period. Vide: Boyd Hilton, A Mad, Bad and Dangerous
People. England 1783-1846 (New Oxford History of England, Oxford, 2006). Hilton
provides an excellent survey of the social and political problems of the post war period
attributable to twenty-three years of engagement in warfare.
32
   As celebrated in recent books by Allen, The British Industrial Revolution; Mokyr,
Industrial Enlightenment and by P. Vries, Via Peking back to China: Britain, the
Industrial revolution and China (Leiden, 2003).
33
   J.T. Salerno, ‘War and the Money Machine: Concealing the Costs of War Beneath
the Veil of Inflation,’ in Journal des Economists, 1 (1995), pp 153-73. For the French
wars see the classic paper by J. Mokyr and N. Savin, ‘Stagflation in Historical
                                           15
