highly implausible because it implies inconceivable rates of expansion for
the national income and its component fiscal base. Over these years of
warfare expenditures by the state increased at an annual average rate of
nearly 5% at a time when (according to Crafts) the estimated growth rate
for gross domestic product decelerated to 1.5% per annum. 29
       Unless the elasticity of tax revenues with respect to changes in
national income was more than an inconceivable coefficient of 3.3, the
data in Table 1 seems to support the orthodox inference that wars against
France imposed steep and rising burdens associated with taxation and
state borrowing on the domestic economy and British society both during
the conflict and for several decades after final victories at Trafalgar and
Waterloo. 30
       Nevertheless, the numbers also suggest that the First Industrial
Revolution continued (vide the indices calibrated by Deane, Cole, Crafts,
Cuenca-Esteban and others) on an established trajectory, but the rate
and pattern of industrialization never transformed the national economy
or extended its fiscal base at a pace anywhere near fast enough to carry
more than a small share of the costs of this most expensive of conflicts.
Given that invasion and defeat by the armies of Napoleon could
conceivably have set back the Industrial Revolution for decades, the
search for connexions is best conducted by specifying and, if possible,
marshalling evidence to answer two counterfactual questions that cannot
be dismissed as anachronistic exercises in theoretical speculation?

29
   N.F.R. Crafts and K. Harley, ‘Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: A
Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View,’ in Economic History Review, 45 (`1992) pp.
703-30 and K. Harley, ‘Reassessing the Industrial Revolution: a Macro View in J.
Mokyr (ed.), The British Industrial Revolution (Boulder, 1993) pp. 160-205. The debate
about resources to carry on with the war against France was a dominant discourse of
the times. See J.E. Cookson, ‘Political Arithmetic and War in Britain,’ in War and
Society (1983) pp. 37-60.
30
   J.E. Cookson, ‘British Society and the French Wars, 1793-1815,’ in Australian
Journal of Politics and History, 31 (1985) pp. 74-88 and C. Emsley, British Society and
the French Wars (Totawa, 1984). The aftermath of the wars has been well covered by
historians referenced in footnote 47 and in Hilton’s text cited below in fn. 31.
                                          14
