naval state emerged during an interregnum of republican rule and the
restoration of monarchy. Thereafter it evolved over time to supply several
public goods of real significance for businessmen operating in the home
economy and supported investment overseas. By increasing control
over a unifying kingdom, the state provided firms with: external security
against invasion, internal stability, the rigorous enforcement of private
property rights, a bellicose foreign policy to sustain support for the
maintenance of an ideology of xenophobia, supporting cultures of
deference to hierarchy and, above all, compliance with the taxation
allocated for naval (and military) protection for expansion overseas. 21
       As the level, scope and stability of tax revenues accruing to the
restored monarchical regime increased, Britain’s ruling aristocratic elite
became steadily more confident the state could fund (basically through
the medium of debt accumulation), more aggressive geopolitical and
mercantilist policies against the country’s economic rivals: the
Netherlands, Spain, Scandinavia and Russia and above all France, for
the gains from trade and colonization at a time of geo-political extension
to and accelerated expansion in world commerce. By the Seven Years
War, 1756-63, the realm’s aristocratic and plutocratic elites had
consolidated a political consensus, behind Britain’s fiscal and financial
systems, invested heavily in naval power to defend the realm,
commanded a military apparatus to deter serious challenges to property
and could rely upon a culture of nationalism and deference to hierarchy
required to sustain drives for expansion overseas and become Europe’s
hegemonic power. 22


21
   P.K. O’Brien, ‘State Formation and the Construction of Institutions for the First
Industrial Nation,’ in H.J. Chang (ed.), Institutional Change and Economic Development
(New York, 2007), pp. 177-98.
22
   This argument is elaborated and referenced in a forthcoming survey and speculation
for the Economic History Review. Vide P.K. O’Brien, ‘The Nature and Historical
Evolution of an Exceptional Fiscal State and its Possible Significance for the
                                          9
