incurred or gains that accrued from peace treaties concluded at the end
of wars. 19
       Economic historians continue to adopt more structuralist and
comparative approaches by exploring multiple examples of mobilization
for warfare by several European polities and their connexions to the
formation of institutions and organizations – primarily and in the first
instance to service their geopolitical policies, but which over time
contributed to the establishment of comparative advantages including
formation of more efficient centralized (“Weberian”) states, evolving to
protect and sustain institutions that promoted the development of national
interests. This style of research recognizes the inseparable connexions
between warfare, state formation, competitive advantages and the
construction of favourable and/or restrictive institutions for long term
growth. 20
       For example, several of the institutions established for defence and
internal order by England’s republican regime during and in the wake of
the Civil War ( including a greatly enlarged standing navy, the taxation of
domestic production by way of excise duties and a reformulated strategy
for the implementation of navigation acts) embodied long term spinoffs
and externalities for private capital formation and innovation in domestic
agriculture and industry, as well as the Island’s trade, shipping,
commercial services and colonization overseas. The political consensus
and organizational capacities that sustained Britain’s well funded fiscal


19
   Typified by the scholarship displayed in the writings and volumes edited by Philippe
Contamine and Jeremy Black. Vide J. Black, (ed.), European Warfare, 1453-1815
(Basingstoke, 1999), and P. Contamine (ed.), War and Competition Between States
(Oxford, 2000). For economic history the tradition, represented in seminal books by R.
Davis, The Rise of the English Shipping Industry (London, 1962) and C. Wilson,
England’s Apprenticeship, has not attracted new research in recent years.
20
   Surveyed and fully referenced in two recent volumes: L. Prados de la Escosura,
Exceptionalism and Industrialization. Britain and its European Rivals, 1688-1815
(Cambridge, 2004) and R. Torres Sanchez, War, State and Development. Fiscal
Military States in the Eighteenth Century (Pamploma, 2007).
                                           8
