ordnance) was classified as “pay and provisions”: which translates into
“labour” and “subsistence”. By the latter years of the Napoleonic war,
Parliament voted to pay and feed military, naval and ordnance forces in
excess of half a million men compared to some 75,000 in 1792. 35 This far
larger force under arms included Irishmen, foreigners, volunteers,
yeomanry and militias (embodied for only part of a year). Parliamentary
“votes” can be transformed into “conjectures” that “outerbound estimates
for the shares of British workforce recruited to serve in the forces of the
crown during the French wars were at the very most 6% for the total
labour force and 11% of males in their prime years. 36 These calculations
make no allowance for troops and sailors recruited from Ireland who
(according to Fortescue and Glover and Chart) constituted “significant”
proportions of the British Army. 37 Alas no estimates have been
constructed for the increased numbers of workers engaged in
maintaining, servicing and building ships, producing commodities,
weapons, equipment, munitions, transportation, buildings, shelter etc and

35
    To clarify and classify the numbers of men mobilized for full and part-time service in
the forces of the crown and the sum spent by the state on their pay and food would
require years of research among several bodies of disparate and opaque records for
audited public expenditures. The imperfect data cited here refer to: budgetary
estimates produced for parliament (including “extraordinary” expenditures sanctioned
after they had been incurred). They were published annually in appendices to Journals
of the House of Commons and Supply Ledgers of the Treasury (Public Record Office
Series T/35). They are printed in consolidated form in the British Parliamentary Papers
1868-69 (35) and 1858 (17). The categories of manpower recruited and paid for military
service to the state are discussed in C.M. Clode, Military Forces of the Crown (London,
1869).
36
    I made a calculation for the census year 1801 designed to provide a quantified upper
bound notion of the possible shares of the British male workforce reallocated from
normal civilian employment into production for the navy, army, ordnance, militia,
volunteers, fencibles etc. After making due allowance for the scale of the pre-war
armed services, for part-time soldiers and foreign mercenaries, I concluded that the
numbers involved could not have been more than 60% of the totals referenced in
estimates put before Parliament for budgetary support – a total equal to around 11% of
male workers in their prime years: and around 6% of the entire male workforce.
37
    J.W. Fortescue, A History of the British Army (London, 1910), pp. 94-96; R. Glover,
Britain at Bay (London, 1973) , p. 131 and R. Glover, Peninsular Preparation. The
Reform of the British Army, 1795-1809 (Cambridge, 1963) p. 225, and D.A. Chart,
‘Irish Levies’, English Historical Review, 26 (1911) pp. 102-32.
                                           17
