property and English “freedom” all helped the kingdom’s well developed
fiscal and financial systems to appropriate revenue and borrow money
more efficiently than ever before. Nevertheless, four quantified
conclusions undermine any simplistic view that economic growth and
structural change provided the state with a significant proportion of the
extra taxation allocated to service loans to fund the resources required to
defeat France.
       For example, less than 10% of the incremental taxation allocated to
wage this war emanated from additions to the volumes of goods, services
and incomes taxed before its outbreak in 1793. 55% came from raising
rates of taxation levied on goods, services, wealth and incomes already
taxed between 1788-92. Taxes introduced in wartime, especially the
income tax (imposed in 1799), provided the state with 36% of the
additional taxation required to defeat the bid by France for hegemony
over Europe. Most of these “new taxes” did not, moreover, fall either
directly or severely upon industries and sectors of the economy
undergoing the kind of rapid growth, structural change and urban
agglomeration associated with the First Industrial Revolution. For
example, cotton textiles, the iron and metallurgical industries, coal,
internal transportation by canals, shipbuilding and shipping as well as
exports of manufactured goods continued to enjoy roughly the same kind
of favourable fiscal treatment long advocated by mercantilists for new
industries and for foreign trade and shipping - by then receiving heavier
protection from the Royal Navy to cope with intensified dangers at sea.28
       Finally, the view that economic growth and structural change
proceeding more slowly between 1793-1815 could have supplied
anything more than a fraction of the resources required for warfare looks


28
  P.K. O’Brien, ‘Taxation for the Wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France,
1793-1915,’ in C. Storrs (ed.), The Fiscal Military State in Eighteenth Century Europe
(Farnham, 2009), pp. 167-201.
                                          13
