quantification, historical scholarship could now move on from liberal
antipathies to unavoidable wars and concentrate upon the nature,
significance, transformations and potential benefits as well as the
opportunity costs of the resources mobilized by Britain and other early
modern states for warfare. 34 The resources, reallocated from civilian
production, included manpower, capital, natural endowments and the
skills and funds diverted from research and development for more
efficient technologies and their diffusion across the private sector in order
to produce weapons and other inputs utilized primarily for warfare. Apart
from the long term benefits imputable to victory rather than defeat,
engagement in warfare carried in its train positive outcomes for the
accumulation of human and physical capital for the diffusion of
technologies and, perhaps above all, for the enhancement of a nation’s
competitive advantages for trade and commerce overseas.




4.     Labour
       Ostensibly the most significant of the factors of production
reallocated from employment in the private economy either to serve in or,
indirectly to provide goods and services for the forces of the Crown was
manpower. According to annual budgetary estimates published for the
period 1793-1815, a modal 60% of the revenues “voted” by parliament for
the support of the armed forces (army, navy, militias, volunteers and


Perspective: the Napoleonic Wars Revisited,’ in P. Uselding (ed.), Research in
Economic History, 1 (1976), pp. 198-259. Modern economists who properly prefer to
deal with real or constant prices should remain aware that indices to measure anything
other than grain prices were not available to contemporaries at the time. Vide A.
Young, An Inquiry into the Increases in Prices in Europe during the Past Twenty-five
Years (Goldsmiths Collection, London, 1815) and T. Tooke, Thoughts and Details on
Prices (Goldsmiths Collection, London 1824).
34
   In this and other respects the article by G. Hueckel, ‘War and the British Economy,
1793-1815: a General Equilibrium Analysis,’ in Explorations in Economic History, 10
(1973) pp. 365-96 promises more than it delivers.
                                          16
