instead of loans. Thereafter and by the end of this protracted interval of
wartime public finance 58% of the money raised to secure victory had
emanated from taxation compared to around 21% for four previous
wars. 52 Even so, the nominal value of the sums borrowed by selling
perpetual annuities and other public securities on the London capital
market do prima facie look like an enormous diversion of the nation’s
savings away from investments for more productive purposes. This
impression often arises, however, from citations of official figures which
refer to the face values of the national debt serviced by the state which
rose from a nominal total of £292 million (1788-92) to £862 million in
1817. 53 Apart from the impression conveyed by nominal values even
when expressed as ratios of national income (another modern number
unknown to contemporaries) the whole problem of “crowding out” could
be dismissed as anachronistic and malposed because ultimately the
funds borrowed by the state were allocated to “crowd out” plans for
invasion by French armies, and a conceivably far more serious check to
economic transformation that could have followed from the occupation of
the United Kingdom by Napoleon’s army. Nevertheless, a counterfactual
exercise for a First Industrial Revolution, proceeding within an
ontologically improbable peaceable geopolitical international economic
order, could be heuristic to contemplate with reference to capital
formation because some degree of crowding almost certainly occurred,
particularly in the short run. There are, however, no valid reasons to
accept hypotheses that the elasticity of substitution between borrowing by
the government and investment by the private sector could have been

52
  O’Brien, ‘Taxation for the Wars Against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France’
53
  P.K. O’Brien, ‘Mercantilist Institutions for the Pursuit of Power with Profit. The
Management of Britain’s National Debt, 1756-1815,’ in F.P. Caselli (ed.), Government,
Debts and Financial Markets in Europe (London, 2008), pp. 179-208. Even though
market prices were quoted for the range of paper assets representing government
debt, it is not clear what meaning could be attached to a market value for the entire
stock of any national debt?
                                         23
