of investible funds available for from capital formation by the private
sector. Rates of interest referenced above as the nominal yield on
consols rise by too small a percentage to support a strong hypothesis.
Furthermore, these average yields on consols fall into line with rates of
interest the Treasury had to offer contractors, in order to sell perpetual
annuities to financial intermediaries operating on the London capital
market between March 1793 (when the annual interest bill for a loan of
£4.3 million amounted to 4.29%) and June 1815, when net receipts on the
final loan of £35 million (to fund armies for the Battle of Waterloo) incurred
annual interest payments at a rate of 5.79%. In between the modal rate
fluctuated between 4.75% and 5.75% with peak rates of just over 6%
during the months of crisis between April 1797 and April 1798. 57 This
data, together with a reading of day-to-day records of governmental
transactions with the money market could not rule out some degree of
crowding out or dismiss theoretically plausible connexions between public
and private operations, that occurred in the context of an integrating but
hardly an integrated national market for capital. 58 But they do suggest
that the properly specified and most interesting question for historians to
address is, as usual, the issue debated by contemporaries at the time;
namely why flows of funds made available for purposes of warfare and
for the continued formation of capital in agriculture, industry, commerce
and the infrastructure, remained relatively elastic during a quarter of a
century of discernibly elevated levels of demand for loans and credits by




57
   P.K. O’Brien, Government revenue, p. 17. These rates are ratios in current prices for
the amounts received at the Exchequer and annual interest payments incurred to raise
loans. The late John Wright of Trinity College, Oxford, clarified the meanings that could
be attached to total returns on the range of government stocks traded on the London
capital market in an unpublished paper, ‘Government Borrowing and the Interest Rate
1750-1815’ (unpublished paper, Oxford, July, 1996).
58
   J.L. Buchinsky and B. Polak, ‘The Emergence of a National Capital Market in
England,’ in Journal of Economic History, 53 (1993), pp. 1-24.
                                           27
