       Although the table is a crude representation of the annual flows of
savings, private investment, government loans and debt servicing
operations for the period, it provides some kind of statistical basis for
addressing the possible significance of crowding out. That hypothesis
(even if it could be tested econometrically) could not, however, support
hyperbolic claims that wars had (or indeed ever could be) “factored out of
the industrial revolution”. 55 The theory required to address such an unreal
separation of the kingdom’s industrialization from its engagement in a
sequence of mercantilist wars from 1651 onwards could only be infinitely
more complex than an underspecified model for growth that concentrates
on capital formation alone for a sub-period 1793-1815. 56
       Yet warfare and its potential for “crowding out” does not prima facie
look trivial. The sums borrowed by the state represented substantial, and
in the early stages of the war, high ratios relative to total net investment in
privately owned stocks of fixed and circulating capital. Nevertheless, other
data particularly quotations for interest rates (both nominal and real)
undermine the impression that the annual average sums borrowed by
government to wage war could be interpreted as a really serious diversion


55
   Even if the model is reformulated to include rational expectations about movements
in bond prices and interest rates – vide R.A. Black and C.G. Gilmore, ‘Crowding Out
during Britain’s Industrial revolution,’ in Journal of Economic History, 50 (1990), pp.
109-31 and G. Hueckel’s cliometric exercises to factor out war from the industrial
revolution are not convincing.
56
   For the opposite view that this and presumably other wars could with help from
econometrics be “factored out” see the articles cited in this paper by G. Hueckel and
J.G. Williamson, ‘New Views on the Impact of the French Wars on Accumulation of
Britain,’ in Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper 1480 (1990), pp.
1-25. Other cliometricians are not convinced that the supply curve for investible funds
had been a key constraint on British economic growth or that it remained inelastic to
changes in the relative price levels, interest rates and to the institutional and political
changes surrounding the domestic and international markets for capital during the
French wars. Vide. N.F.C. Crafts, ‘British Economic Growth, 1700-1850. Some
Difficulties of Interpretation ,’ in Explorations in Economic History, 24 (1987), pp. 245-
68 and J. Mokyr, ‘Has the Industrial Revolution been Crowded Out? Some Reflections
on Crafts and Williamson,’ in Explorations in Economic History, 24 (1989), pp. 293-319.
The connexions between warfare and industrialization are analysed in P.K. O’Brien,
‘State Formation and the Construction of Institutions for the First Industrial Revolution.’
                                            26
