minimize the burdens of taxation, to contain the crowding out of private
investment and to reduce dependence on imports, and thereby reserve
hard currency for such strategic priorities as payments to allied,
mercenary and British troops committed to conflict on the mainland of
Europe and for payments to provision, refit and repair naval warships
resting in ports overseas.85
       Not surprisingly warfare depressed the kingdom’s rate of growth
and pushed the domestic economy off a rapid course of recovery it had
been on during the decade between the end of the war with the United
States and its allies (1783) and the opening of the long conflict with
Revolutionary France some ten years later. Unfortunately the macro-
economic data set for the analysis of trends and fluctuations from 1783-
1821 (when the monetary system returned to full conventibility and
taxation reverted to peace time levels) is neither extensive in range,
adequate in quality nor sufficiently complete in chronological coverage to
provide acceptable records to analyse and quantify the overall
performance of agriculture, industry and foreign trade for a period of
something close to three decades when the kingdom’s economy operated
under conditions of warfare, inflation and its aftermath.
       Several indices used to measure the long term growth of the
national product, agricultural and industrial outputs, average wages and
prices remain in dispute. More serious, for attempts to quantify the
immediate impact of war are published figures based upon interpolations
between benchmark years which are too widely separated in time to

‘Mercantilist Policies and the Pattern of World Trade ,’ in Journal of Economic History,
27 (1967) pp. 39-55.
85
   They are articulated in all the statesman’s papers for the period deposited in the
British Libraries Collection of Additional Manuscripts. Vide the papers of Auckland,
Herries, Liverpool, Rose, Vansittart and Wellington, as well as the Pitt Papers at the
Public Record Office and debates in Parliament. M. Sherwig’s Guineas and
Gunpowder. British Foreign Aid in the Wars with France, 1793-1815 (Cambridge,
Mass., 1969) elaborates on the role of wartime transfers of bullion to allies and
mercenaries.
                                           37
