increased inequality and contributed to social distress and internal
disorder for some three decades in the wake of the final victory at
Waterloo. 78 While the wars against France continued the reinvestment
mechanism built into the Hanoverian states fiscal and financial system
maintained an elastic supply of loans and credits for a state engaged in
warfare to protect the political privileges and rights of property, including
the assets of bondholders - who could in any case confidently anticipate a
significant uplift in the value of their securities once the end of any war
terminated the need to run budgetary deficits and when the operations of
Pitt’s constitutionally safeguarded sinking fund would resume operations
designed to redeem the entire public debt. 79
       To sum up: some crowding out inevitably occurred during this most
protracted and costly of mercantilist wars, but several factors operated to
weaken its potentially serious obstruction to Britain’s trajectory towards an
industrial economy. Firstly, Pitt’s suspension of convertibility created
conditions of flexibility for an unusual increase in the money supply that
allowed for the widening, deepening and integration of financial
intermediation without running into a really serious danger of fiscal and
financial collapse while promoting a lag of wages behind rising prices.
Secondly, the nature and extent of warfare on the mainland, initiated and
sustained by France, together with the extensions to the formal and
informal British empire overseas promoted movements of foreign capital

78
   N. Gash, ‘After Waterloo: British Society and the Legacy of the Napoleonic Wars,’ in
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 28 (1978), pp. 145-57; M. C. Buer, ‘Trade
Depression Following the Napoleonic Wars,’ in Economica, 2 (1921), pp. 159-79 and
Hilton, Corn, Cash and Commerce and other books cited in fn 47.
79
   O’Brien, ‘Mercantilist Institutions for the Pursuit of Power and Profit’; Wright,
‘Government Borrowing and Interest Rate’. J.G. Williamson, Did British Capitalism
Breed Inequality? (London, 1985). Ch. 4 surveys and calibrates the rather restricted
evidence available from tax data and contemporary estimates to address this issue and
vide: Allen, ‘Capital Accumulation.’ Pitt funded the massive deficit for 1797 with what he
termed a “loyalty loan” and published the names of patriots who contributed. On the
fear of Revolution in England, vide: Dickinson, Britain and the French revolution; Gee,
The British Volunteer Movement, and Hilton, A Bad and Dangerous People; Harvey,
Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century.
                                           34
