all constraints of convertibility associated with an 18th century version of
the gold standard. 67 Assisted by the greater flexibility introduced into the
supply of paper money and credit, the kingdom’s financial intermediaries
(merchants, metropolitan banks, insurance firms, mortgage companies, a
reformed stock exchange and literally hundreds of newly founded
provincial banks) extended their services and accessibility to include a
range of hitherto riskier customers and securities for credits and loans as
well as a wider array of assets which were, moreover, cushioned at the
safer end of their portfolios by the bonds and bills of the Government
bearing rates of interest some 30%-40% above normal pre-war levels and
predicted to appreciate in value once victory was secured. 68
       From 1797 to 1819 the flexibility afforded by the suspension of
specie payments to transact with paper money, bank deposits and bills of
exchange, as well as with the government’s own bills, promoted the
extension and integration of the market for money, stimulated financial
intermediaries to take greater risks and encouraged those with liquid
savings to invest, not only in government paper, but to participate in what
moralists, conservatives and monetarists of the day condemned as



67
   The 18th century monetary system is described in classic texts by J. Clapham,
History of the Bank of England, vol.1 (Cambridge, 1948); T.S. Ashton and R. Sayers
(eds.), Papers in English Monetary History (Oxford, 1953) and L.S. Pressnell, Country
Banking in the Industrial Revolution (Oxford, 1956). M. Collins, Money and Banking in
the United Kingdom updates those texts. The classic article on monetary regulation is
by M.C. Lovell, ‘The Role of the Bank of England as a Lender of Last Resort in the
Crises of the Eighteenth Century’, in Explorations in Economic History, 10 (1957), pp.
8-21.
68
   The operations of the financial and monetary system under a regime of inconvertible
paper, 1797-1819 has been covered by a prolonged and voluminous contemporary
debate surveyed by E. Wood, Theories of Central Bank Control (Cambridge, Mass.,
1939); J. Viner, Studies in the Theory of International Trade (London, 1955) and F.W.
Fetter, The Development of British Monetary Orthodoxy (Cambridge, Mass., 1965).
There is also an extensive modern literature in British monetary history the most recent
publications with bibliographies are M. Bordo and F. Capie (eds.), Monetary Regimes
in Transition (Cambridge, 1994), and my forthcoming paper ‘Monetary Policy and its
Critics: The British Experience with Inconvertible Currency, 1797-1819.’ (forthcoming
2011).
                                           31
