states - and except perhaps momentarily in 1797 and 1805 – neither
domestic nor foreign investors in the securities of the Island state could
have rationally contemplated that the realm might be successfully invaded
from the sea; or that the government’s debt (with its traditionally secure
and untaxed payments of interest) might be repudiated either as an
outcome of conquest or as the result of any unmanageable fiscal and
financial crisis of the state. 63 Over 23 years of prolonged and widespread
revolutionary warfare (when the external security and internal stability of
almost all other European empires, realms and republics either
experienced or anticipated threats from French aggression and when
property rights of all kinds became extremely difficult for states to protect)
the safest haven for mobile capital was located offshore.
       References to the flight of liquid capital (along with people with
commercial expertise) to Britain are not difficult to cite. Bonds and bills
issued as securities by the Government, or firms, in London surely
continued to provide European investors with marketable and less risky
assets for their portfolios than anything available elsewhere including
Paris. Alas, data for flows of capital emanating not only from the mainland
but from the United States; from Britain’s expanding empire and
conquests in the Caribbean, India, South East Asia and the unstable
empires of Portugal and Spain in South America cannot be aggregated
into an unambiguous and incontestable table of annual estimates of
transfers of foreign and imperial funds into and out of London during the


63
   This view has been developed by Neal in a seminal book on the international capital
market and a series of articles on capital movements during the French wars is aligned
with the perceptions of contemporary observers. Vide: L. Neal, The Rise of Financial
capitalism (Cambridge, 1990); L. Neal, ‘A Tale of Two Revolutions, International
Capital Flows, 1789-1819.’ In Bulletin of Economic Research, 43 (1991), pp. 307-37.
Neal’s views are shared by Acworth, Financial Reconstruction in England. While Lord
Grenville told Auckland : “the proposal of confiscating foreign property in the fund I hold
in abhorrence”, Dropmore Papers 1892-1915, vol. 8, letter dated 2 December 1806. On
the migration of European merchants into London, vide S. Chapman, Merchant
Enterprise in Britain from the Industrial Revolution to World War 1 (Cambridge, 1992).
                                            29
