wars. Cuenca’s recently and constructed balance of payments accounts,
Feinstein’s estimates and Wright’s research into overseas holdings in the
national debt add up to an impression of gross but not necessarily
substantial net inflows of savings from overseas. 64
       Given that international markets for mobile capital had been
integrating for several decades before the outbreak of revolution in
France and the strong historical evidence that during the wars with
Revolutionary France, London became Europe’s most secure haven for
capital and skills, the presumption that foreign savings helped (in some
and perhaps significant measure) or at least mitigated the more adverse
effects from crowding out remains plausible. After all, the French
Revolution, particularly in its initial phases, represented a serious attack
upon aristocratic and other forms of ancien regime, wealth and property
rights. 65 Revolutionary and Napoleonic armies threatened and/or actively
disrupted the operations of capital markets in Amsterdam, Antwerp,
Venice, Hamburg, Frankfurt and other European cities that before the
Revolution had rivalled London as centres for dealings in financial
assets. 66
       At the same time positive if unintended offsets flowed from Pitt’s
famous decision of 1797 to release the country’s monetary system from

64
   Cuenca-Esterban’s research which has superseded the controversial estimates from
Brezis is cited at fn.152. Feinstein’s data is in P. Mathias and M. Postan (eds.),
Cambridge Economic History of Europe , vol. 7, p. 66 and Wright’s unpublished
research is cited in fn. 57 and by J. Wright, ‘The Contribution of Overseas Savings to
the Funded National Debt of Great Britain,’ in Economic History Review, 50 (1999) pp.
657-74.
65
    F. Crouzet, Britain Ascendant: Comparative Studies in Franco-British History
(Cambridge, 1990).
66
   E. Aerts and F. Crouzet (eds.), Economic Effects if the French Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars (Leuven, 1990); P.K. O’Brien, ‘The Hanoverian State and the Defeat
of the Continental System,’ in R. Findlay et al (eds.), in Eli Heckscher, International
Trade and Economic History(Cambridge, Mass., 2006), pp. 373-406; A. Milward and
S.B. Saul, The Economic Development of Continental Europe 1780-1870 (London,
1973), pp. 248-70; S. Schama, ‘The Exigencies of War and Politics of taxation in the
Netherlands,’ in J.M. Winter (ed.), War and Economic Development (Cambridge,
1975), pp. 103-38; Harvey, Collision of Empires.
                                          30
