a trained supply of skilled seamen and soldiers; reserves of cannon,
muskets, pistols, swords, bayonets, extended royal dockyards, new
barracks, coastal fortifications, military roads, organizational capacities,
etc. In short the realm’s military and naval capital had been significantly
increased by wartime expenditures, by expropriations (principally ships
and a small indemnity from the enemy) and by some technological
innovations. Twenty-three years of conflict, allowed Britain’s victorious
and hegemonic state not merely to demobilize most of its armed forces,
but to radically reduce future expenditures on the capital goods required
by the army and navy to defend the realm and its extended commerce
and empire overseas and maintain order over several difficult decades of
industrialization and urbanization after the treaty of Vienna had stabilized
the balance of power in Europe. 83
       Factoring in the benefits as well as the costs of crowding out are
difficult enough to specify and model. Meanwhile, the prospects for
striking anything other than a conjectural balance sheet look entirely
remote.




6.     War and the Intensified Exploitation of the Island’s
       Cultivatable Land, Minerals, Industries and Technologies
       Once at war British statesmen sought to augment and exploit the
potential of the Island’s natural resources and national system of
production to the full. 84 As mercantilists appreciated the need to

83
   F. Crouzet, A History of the European Economy (London, 2001); F. Crouzet, The
Second Hundred Years War: Some Reflections,’ in French History, 10 (1996) pp. 432-
50 and P.W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics (Oxford, 1994).
84
   The political economy of power and warfare is analysed by the predecessors (not
the precursors) of Adam Smith, vide: T.W. Hutchinson, The Emergence of Political
Economy (Oxford, 1988). Mercantilist views on the strategic necessities for conserving
bullion as a “war chest” are covered in Magnusson (ed.), Mercantilist Economics and
C. Perrota, ‘Is the Mercantilist Theory of the Favourable Balance of Trade Really
Erroneous?’ in History of Political Economy, 23 (1991), pp. 302-55 and R.C. Blitz,
                                          36
