operated to stimulate savings and to cheapen construction and all labour
intensive forms of capital formation. 74
       In theory a floating pound detached from gold might, however, have
checked the flight of capital from Napoleon’s extensive empire into
London. But sterling was by no means the only currency to fluctuate in
value when French armies rampaged across Europe. 75 Meanwhile
fluctuating rates probably encouraged foreign investors to retain sterling
assets until the pound stabilized and the government kept to its repeated
promise to return the monetary system to full convertibility at the
traditional parity with gold. 76
       Thirdly, over the years of conflict interest payments to service the
mounting burden of debt (see Table 2) rose from about half the annual
net amounts borrowed by the state to prosecute war against
Revolutionary France (1793-1802) to reach about double the sums raised
as loans in order to vanquish the Napoleonic empire between 1803-15.
This “regressive” political mechanism for transferring income from
taxpayers to creditors (or from social groups with lower capacities to save
and invest to those with higher propensities) had evolved steadily, war by
war, since the Dutch coup d’état of 1688. 77 It augmented a trend towards

74
   Runs of bad harvests, inflation and swings relative prices renders the task of
constructing a representative trend for rates of change in real wages during a period of
war very difficult. Vide N. Von Tunzelman, ‘Trends in Real Wages Revisited. 1750-
1850,’ in Economic History Review, 32 (1979), pp. 33-49. Feinstein’s widely accepted
indices in ‘Pessimism Reunited,’ suggests that real earnings adjusted for
unemployment did not regain 1788-92 levels before 1818-22. Crouzet surveys the data
and plumps for a disaggregated representation. Vide F. Crouzet, ‘Guerre et Salaires de
L’Angleterre 1793,’ in F. Crouzet (ed.), Melange d’histoire economique offerrs au
Professeur Anne Marie Kinz (Geneve, 1989), pp. 71-85.
75
   Young, An Inquiry into the Increase in Prices in Europe; Neal’s point ‘Tale of Two
Revolutions,’ that a potentially large share of European capital flowing into London
went into shipping and commercial, services allied to trade and enjoyed protection from
the Royal Navy, is supported by histories of London merchants. Vide the bibliography
in K. Morgan, Slavery, Atlantic Trade and the British Economy (Cambridge, 2000);
Chapman, Merchant Enterprise and Liss, Atlantic Empires.
76
   O. Brien, ‘Mercantilist Institutions for the Pursuit of Power with Profit.’
77
   O’Brien, ‘The Political Economy of British Taxation’ and J. MacDonald, A Free Nation
Deep in Debt. The Financial Roots of Democracy (New York, 2003).
                                          33
