into London. Thirdly, the bias already built into the states’ fiscal and
financial system (together with inconvertible paper money) intensified
tendencies towards inequality in the distribution of income that promoted
propensities to save and invest among a propertied and patriotic elite,
whose political and economic stake in the kingdom was under threat from
the armies of Revolutionary France. 80
       Finally, and to complete a specimen balance sheet on capital
account, it will be necessary to analyse and quantify not merely the
incalculable costs of averting invasion and defeat but an offsetting list of
long term gains derived from expenditures by the state on warfare that
augmented the stock of private and public capital available to contribute
to the recovery and longer run growth of the British economy after 1815. 81
For example, some of the surplus capital owned by the forces of the
crown in 1815 (including ships, buildings, wagons, horses, stores etc)
could be resold at bargain prices for civilian use at the end of the conflict.
For several decades after final victory at Waterloo the state commanded
a range of warships, weapons and skills held in reserve for the defence of
the realm and empire, to support the kingdom’s foreign, strategic and
commercial policies and an enlarged army of troops with equipment and
barracks for the maintenance of internal order.82 Lord Liverpool’s and
subsequent administrations controlled an intimidating fleet of battleships;

80
   This argument was elaborated by a long list of political arithmeticians whose writings
and numbers on post-war wealth, power and resources of Britain and its extended
empire can be consulted in the Goldsmiths Collection at the Library of the University of
London. Under the names of G. Chalmers, P. Colquhoun, J. Lowe, J. Marshall, C.
Moreau, T. Vaux. These writings neglected by economic historians in thrall to classical
economics have been surveyed and contextualized by historians including: Acworth,
Financial Reconstruction; Hilton, Corn, Cash and Commerce; Gambles, The
Boundaries of Political Economy; Hilton, England 1783-1860.
81
   Stocks of military and naval capital are reviewed in the House of Commons Journal
(1806), pp. 781-86 and Parliamentary Paper 1817 (4). For the navy see J. Coad, The
Royal Dockyards, 1690-1850 (Aldershot, 1989).
82
   Acworth, Financial Reconstruction; Hilton, Corn, Cash and Commerce; S. Pollard
and D.W. Crossley, The Wealth of Britain, 1095-1966 (London, 1968), ch. 6; S.
Checkland, The Rise of Industrial Society in England, 1815-1885 (New York, 1964).
                                           35
