expose fluctuation in outputs, incomes and prices imputable to both
negative and positive influences from engagement in conflict. For
purposes of this survey, I will consider both quantitative and qualitative
sources (published and unpublished) for agriculture, industry and
international commerce and attempt to offer some plausible conjectures
about the significance of the war for the growth of an economy passing
through the First Industrial Revolution.
       For example, between 1793 and 1815 the expansion of domestic
(including Irish) agriculture already underway, probably accelerated to a
rate of advance that continued down to mid-century. 86 The kingdom’s
agrarian sector played an important role in mobilizing provisions and
organic raw materials for the forces of the crown. Along with previous
conflicts the French wars remained labour intensive. Budgetary estimates
indicate that very high proportions of the revenues allocated by
Parliament for the Army and Navy were for the pay and provisions of
British soldiers and sailors. 87 While fiscal data suggest that the incidence

86
   A range of growth rates for agriculture are reported by R.C. Allen, ‘Tracking the
Agricultural Revolution in England,’ in Economic History review, 52 (1990), pp. 209-35
and his contribution, R.C. Allen, ‘Agriculture during the Industrial Revolution,’ to R.F.
Floud and P. Johnson eds.), Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, 1700-60
(Cambridge, 2004), pp. 96-116. The standard text on the agricultural revolution is M.
Overton, Agricultural Revolution in England. The Transformation of the Agrarian
Economy, 1500-1800 (Cambridge, 1996). A good thesis on the stimulus imparted by
the war to Irish agriculture is by A.J. Fitzpatrick, The Economic Effects of Revolutionary
and Napoleonic Wars on Ireland (Manchester PhD, 1973).
87
   The allocation of funds raised to prosecute warfare across sectors of the economy
are recorded in various ways by the several departments of state (the Admiralty and
Navy Board, the War Office and Board of Transport, the Transport Office, the Board for
Barracks etc and at Regiment levels). The records make it virtually impossible for
modern historians to aggregate data that would provide a valid tabulation of wartime
expenditures for purposes of economic analysis. Commissions and Committees of
Enquiry established for purposes of auditing military and naval expenditure also found
the tasks of post hoc audit too complex to comprehend and control. (Vide the Reports
of Committees and Commissioners appointed to “Examine, Take and State the Public
Accounts of the Kingdom”, 1780-91 volumes II and 12 and 13, Journals of the House of
Commons, volumes 38-42 and Parliamentary Papers 1790-91 (92). Parliament
continued to attempt to take control of expenditures of the armed forces during and
after the wars with France. Vide: reports from Commissioners of Naval and Military
Inquiry in Parliamentary Papers, Parliamentary Papers 1805 (2), 1810 (2), 1810-11 (4),
                                           38
