       For present purposes I simply note that on none of three rival
indices do the wars from 1793-1815 appear to have precipitated
fundamental discontinuities (negative or positive) in the pace and pattern
of industrialization. Indeed nobody at the time claimed they had. Most
mercantilist literature published during and after the wars under titles
extolling “the wealth, power and resources of the British empire” was
basically concerned to reassure Britons that their state possessed access
to all the resources required to defend the realm and protect and extend
its colonies and commerce overseas and support industrialization. 105
       Turning next to that most frequently explored connexion between
warfare and industrial growth, namely technology, historians also observe
that in contrast to the great wars of the past century, only a confined
range of inventions with spin offs for the long run growth of the civilian
economy (or indeed for the effectiveness of the armed forces) have been
directly associated to demands generated by the widespread and



production in their index which in effect augments the rate of industrial production has
been mounted by J. Cuenca-Esterban, ‘British Textile Prices? 1770-1831: are British
Growth Rates worth Revising once again?’ in Economic History Review, 47 (1994), pp.
66-105 with the reply embodying another set of cotton textile prices was published by
C.K. Harley, ‘Cotton Textile Prices and the Industrial Revolution,’ in Economic History
Review, 5 (1998) pp. 49-83. In his attempt to mediate his way through the range of
estimates now available to quantify rates of growth for gross domestic product,
agriculture and industry, J. Mokyr, ‘Accounting for the Industrial Revolution,’ in C. Floud
and Johnson (eds.), Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain, pp, 1027
preferred to concentrated upon estimates based upon new research by G. Clark, ‘The
Secret History of the Industrial Revolution,’; U.C. Davis, Working Paper in Economic
History. Clark’s estimates in this and other papers cited above tend to show that
discontinuities on nearly all indicators deployed to measure trends in economic growth
occurred after and not before 1800. Is there a consensus in prospect?
105
    L. Magnusson, Mercantilism: the Shaping of an Economic Language (London 1994).
There is a substantial bibliography of pamphlets and books written to refute the claims
of radicals that the British economy had been severely damaged by the strains placed
upon it by taxes and loans raised to mobilize resources for warfare. The counter and
mainstream tradition of writing in mercantilist economics and political arithmetic
continued for decades after the final victory at Waterloo and is well covered by the
Goldsmiths Collection of Economics Literature at the University of London Library.
Characteristic writers include: G. Chalmers, Comparative Views and J. Lowe, The
Present State of England.
                                            46
