of the incremental taxes imposed to fund the wars of 1793-1815 may
have fallen with particular severity (both directly and indirectly) upon the
production of foodstuffs and raw materials and upon the incomes and
wealth of farmers and landowners. 88
       Fortuitously but fortunately ministers (seeking to secure compliance
with their increasing demands for taxation and requests for loans from
affluent groups of aristocratic landowners and tenant farmers of the
United Kingdom) the agricultural sector contained both a sufficient area
of under-utilized but cultivable land and growing supplies of under-
employed labour available to respond elastically to rapidly rising
demands for food and organic raw materials. 89 These demands
emanated basically from the acceleration in population growth and
internal migration to towns, but were supplemented by “incremental
purchases” by the state for provisions, fibres, horses, leather, timber and
building materials to support the mobilization of young men for service in
the army, navy, ordnance, and militia. 90
       Contemporary observers reports from the Farmers and Monthly
Magazines and Arthur Young’s Annals of Agriculture as well as the
testimonies of numerous farmers, landowners, agents and others with
professional knowledge - who appeared before Parliamentary committees
investigating the state of the agrarian economy as it adjusted to post war
deflation, demobilization and the persistence of high taxation - have left a


1812 (4), 1817 (4) and Committees on Finance in Journals of the House of Commons,
volumes 41, 42. Reporting and auditing problems have been studied by J.E.D. Binney,
British Public Finance and Administration (Oxford, 1958). My attempt to reclassify a
sample of budgetary estimates laid before Parliament during war suggest that
something like 70-75% of expenditures on the armed forces were allocated to
foodstuffs and organic raw materials produced by the kingdom’s agricultural sector.
Estimates were published annually in the Journals of the House of Commons and are
cited in fn. 35.
88
   O’Brien, ‘Triumph and Denouement of the British Fiscal State,’ pp. 86-200.
89
   Allen, The British Industrial Revolution, pp. 59, 62 and 67.
90
   See footnotes 35, 86 and 88 and Journals of the House of Commons, which report
annual budgetary estimates.
                                         39
