and energy for rival competitors (Holland and France) on the mainland.
129

       Over the second half of the eighteenth century coal fields beyond
the boundaries of north eastern England were opening up and mines
utilizing improved Newcomen and eventually Watt engines for drainage,
haulage and winding and railed ways for carriage were providing cheaper
access to the extending network of inland waterways. Whether the
diffusion of these technologies led to some or any increase in total factor
productivity is less germane to the argument elaborated here which is
concerned to draw attention to rising freight rates, higher export taxes,
repeated interruptions to the timber trade – all associated with warfare –
that operated to intensify the extension and deepening of coal mining in
Britain. This more rapid the exploitation of coal and technologies
associated with its diffusion as a source of energy and fuel for such heat
intensive industries (as iron, copper, glass, salt, brewing sugar) pulled
owners and managers of the coal industry into another “cage” of fixed
investments and commitments that promoted and maintained a trajectory
for long term development for the heavy industries of the first industrial
revolution both during the war and thereafter over the difficult decades of
post war adjustment and deflation. 130
       To sum up, after the war and as all indices show, British industry
rebounded. Major industries such as iron, coal and shipbuilding improved
upon their capacities for growth built up in the hothouse conditions of a
wartime economy by cutting costs, diffusing materials and technologies
with demonstrable potential for future improvement and above all by
holding onto the advantages of entry and access to foreign and imperial
markets and sources of raw materials and supplies overseas which had
129
    Customs 10901 and C. Beaumont, Treatise on the Coal Trade (London, 1789) pp.
34-35 and 211-12.
130
    The technologies of the extraction of coal and their diffusion are discussed by R.L.
Galloway, Annals of Coal Mining (London, 1893); Ashton and Sykes, Coal Trade of the
Eighteenth Century and Flinn, British Coal Industry.
                                           54
