outcome in his memorandum to Ministers as early as 1800 when he
wrote: “It is obvious that the present strength and pre-eminence of this
country is owing to the extent of its resources arising from its commerce
and its naval power which are inseparably connected.” 134
       Crowding out, misallocation and destruction of national resources
had certainly occurred as unavoidable costs of participation in twenty-
three years of warfare. Nevertheless, when the currency returned to the
gold standard in 1819 the real present values (expressed in international
purchasing power parities of that time) for the kingdom’s natural
endowments (land, minerals and coal); its stocks of private fixed,
circulating and human capital, its augmented supplies of useful
knowledge, its battleships, fortifications, bases and stores of weapons for
the defence of the realm and protection of its commerce and assets
overseas all became available to an economy on the move and well
placed to take advantage of opportunities flowing from the rebound and
expansion of the post war global economy. 135
       Britain’s prolonged mobilization for successful warfare at sea,
together with the disruption to rival port cities by French and other
European armies fighting on the mainland had certainly left the maritime
sector of the Island’s economy with expanded and probably more
efficient capacities to take advantage of opportunities for engaging in and
servicing of overseas trade and commerce. A quarter of a century of
complementary expenditures by the state and the private sector for the
construction of ships; for extensions and improvements to the Island’s
maritime infrastructures: for the training of seamen; for the expansion and

(eds.), Studies in Capital Formation in the United Kingdom, 1750-1920 (Oxford, 1988).
Structural improvements to the commercial organization surrounding trade has been
analysed by Chapman, Merchant Enterprise in Britain and Nash, ‘The Organization of
Trade and Finance in the British Atlantic Economy’, pp.95-152.
134
    The Dundas Memorandum is in Pitt Papers 30/8/207 dated 31.3.1800.
135
    J.B. Williams, British Commercial Policy and Trade Expansion, 1750-1850 (London,
1972) A. Herman, To Rule the Waves. How the British Navy Shaped the Modern World
(London, 2005).
                                         56
