reorganization of the mercantile and financial networks available to
coordinate, fund, insure and transport increasing volumes of merchandize
and passengers by sea to every part of an integrating world economy had
all been raised as an outcome of warfare to levels and possibly to
standards that could not have been anticipated before the outbreak of
revolution in France. 136
       With the exception of the conflict with the United States and its
European allies, opportunities to displace and replace competitors for the
gains from trade and servicing the world economy had been taken from
the time of the first Anglo-Dutch War of 1651 onwards. 137 The
destruction, degradation and depreciation of the rival mercantile sectors
of France, the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia, Russia, India
and, after 1808, the United States, competing for these gains seems,
however, to have occurred to an unprecedented degree during the war
with Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. Intensified predation by
British privateers (supported by their all-powerful Royal Navy) inflicted
relatively more serious losses on the enemy and neutral shipping, sailing
along lanes connecting the economies of Europe and their seaborne
trades with the Americas, Africa, Asia and Australasia. That conflict also
witnessed a sequence of dislocations of port cities on the mainland,
disruptions occasioned by Napoleon’s intrusive but unsuccessful

136
    C. Wright and C. Fayle, A History of Lloyds (London, 1928); P.K. O’Brien, ‘The
Hanoverian State and the Defeat of the Continental System,’ in R. Findlay et al (eds.),
Eli Heckscher, International Trade and Economic History (Cambridge, Mass, 2006) pp.
373-407; The contemporary commentator, C. Moreau documents and quantifies
Britain’s enhanced competitive position in the world economy over this period. Vide
Moreau, Chronological Records and State of the Trade of Great Britain.
137
    P. Crowhurst, The Defence of British Trade 1689-1815 (Folkestone, 1977). C.
Wilson, Profit and Power: A Study of England and the Dutch Wars (Cambridge, 1957)
and England’s Apprenticeship, 1603-1763 (London, 1965); L. Gomes, Foreign Trade
and the National Economy (Basingstoke, 1987); K.E. Knorr, British Colonial Theories
(Toronto, 1944); N. Koehn, The Power of Commerce. Economics and Governance in
the First British Empire (Ithaca, 1994);


                                          57
