       This raises the unanswerable question of whether the cyclical
upswings associated with the fortunes of mercantilist warfare engendered
expectations that promoted research and development, investment and
ultimately growth? Such connexions could be heuristically pursued by
analysing how the fiscal, monetary and commercial policies implemented
by the state to wage war may, on balance, have promoted benign
outcomes for the longer term development of major industries. 110 For
example, the shift after 1797 into an inconvertible currency and a greater
reliance on taxation relaxed the terms and expanded conduits for access
to loans and credits even for riskier ventures. They reinforced
established traditions of fiscal mercantilism that operated to promote
exports; maintain lower rates of taxation upon raw materials and inputs
utilized by industry. They also elevated protection against imports of
manufactures up to virtually prohibitive levels and accorded relatively
favourable fiscal treatment to technologically progressive manufactures
(like cotton textiles) as well as strategically significant industries (such as
iron, coal and shipbuilding). By default the state condoned as
administratively unavoidable the widespread evasion of liabilities for direct
taxation by the owners and managers of industrial and commercial
capital. 111


110
    Connexion s between the macro economic monetary and fiscal policies and the
development of a sample of British industries have been elaborated in previously
published papers. Vide P.K. O’Brien, ‘The Impact of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars 1793-1815 in the Long Run Growth of the British Economy,’ in Review, 12
(1989), pp. 335-96; ‘Taxation for British Mercantilism from the Treaty of Utrecht (1713)
to the Peace of Paris (1783).’ in R. Sanchez-Torres (ed.), War, State and
Development. Fiscal Military States in the Eighteenth Century (Pamplona, 2008), pp.
295-356, ‘Taxation for the Wars against France’ and O’Brien, ‘British Incomes and
Property in the Early Nineteenth Century,’ in Economic History Review, 12 (1959), pp.
255-67
111
    O’Brien, ‘Taxation for the Wars against France’; J.V. Beckett and M. Turner,
‘Taxation and Economic Growth in Eighteenth Century England,’ in Economic History
Review, 43 (1990), pp. 377-403; Bowen, War and British Society and the bulk of
pamphlets on fiscal policy contained in the Goldsmiths Collection of the University of
London Library.
                                           48
