been secured and thereafter retained by the hegemonic power of the
Royal Navy, conjoined to the competitive superiority of Britain’s
mercantile marine with its linkages to the Island’s expanded and
competitively superior shipbuilding industry. Is it not necessary for
historians to investigate how warfare might have on balance promoted a
transition from one set of trajectories for industrial growth to another and
potentially superior set that came on stream once peace returned.




7.     The Revolutionary and Napoleonic War as the Last Great
       Mercantilist Conflict and the Culmination of Britain’s Maritime
       Strategy for Security with Economic Growth
       Metternich, Talleyrand and other European statesmen gathered at
the Congress of Vienna, recognized that the Peace Treaty of 1815
marked a conjuncture in great power politics when the Royal Navy had
secured indisputable command of the oceans. 131 The kingdom
possessed the largest fleet of merchant vessels, workforce of skilled
seamen and shipbuilding capacity in the world. 132 During the wars
London, Bristol, Glasgow, Liverpool, Hull, Newcastle and numerous other
port cities had extended their harbours, shipyards, commercial
organizations, financial intermediaries and networks of merchants
required to continue to reap extraordinary shares of future gains from the
integration of a world economy as it moved along a trajectory of more
peaceful expansion under the undisrupted hegemony of the Royal
Navy. 133 Henry Dundas (the Minister For War) had anticipated this

131
    C. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh.
132
    R. Hope, A New History of British Shipping (London, 1990); G. Bayley, Tables
Showing the Progress of the Shipping Interest of the British Empire (London, 1844); A.
Herman, To Rule the Waves: How the British Navy Shaped the Modern World (London,
2005).
133
    Estimates for infrastructural expenditures on ports and their facilities have been
published in several publications by Feinstein. Vide: C.F. Feinstein and S. Pollards
                                         55
