warfare and its aftermath) raised incentives to accelerate the already
ongoing process of import substitution by Britain’s coal and iron
industries. Both industries successfully resisted attempts by ministers,
desperately seeking tax revenues, to impose excises on their outputs.
While iron, much more than coal, benefitted directly and indirectly from
augmented demands from the navy, army and ordnance departments for
their products. Both industries also gained from the high rates of
investment maintained in wartime to extend, integrate and improve the
country’s system of internal transportation, canals, rivers and roads as
well as the extra protection afforded by a greatly enlarged navy to
transportation by sea around the coasts of the Isles. 123
       Responding to incentives heightened by war to replace imported
timber with domestically produced, coke smelted iron, puddled iron for
Swedish and Russian imports of bar iron and wood fuel with domestic
coal (mined and more easily and more cheaply transported along the
canals, rivers and protected coastal waterways of the Isles) both heavy
industries experienced remarkable accelerations in their rates of growth
that cannot be disconnected from stimulus afforded by the state’s
engagement in warfare. Domestic pig iron production probably multiplied
by a factor of 3.5 between 1788-92 and 1811-15 – a period when the
price of bar iron declined in real terms and when imports fell from about
43% to 6% of total consumption. 124 By 1821 the industries long transition


123
    Raw data for investment in internal transportation are available in the form of the
numbers of bills and estimated costs submitted to Parliament for expenditures on the
construction of turnpike roads, canals, improvements to rivers. They are cited in A.
Gayer et al, Growth and Fluctuations in the British Economy, and calibrated and
revised by C. Feinstein and S. Pollard (eds.), Studies in Capital Formation in the United
Kingdom, 1750-1920 (Oxford, 1988) and by Feinstein, in ‘Capital Formation in the
United Kingdom.’
124
    P. Riden, ‘The Output of the British Iron Industry before 1879,’ in Economic History
Review, 30 (1977) pp. 442-59; C.K. Hyde, The British Iron Industry (Princeton, 1977);
R. Church (ed.), The Coal and Iron Industries (Oxford, 1994). The development of both
industries has been cogently analysed by Allen, British Industrial Revolution, chs 4 and
9.
                                           52
