       Their scholarly caution seems, moreover, to have been vindicated
by the convincing critique made by Nash of estimates recently published
in the Economic History Review for several items on the current account
of the balance of payments for benchmark years going back no further
than 1710. They include net earnings from shipping and mercantile
profits, together with a set of guesses of net outflows or inflows derived
from servicing Britain’s foreign debt. 146 Their compiler did not respond to
his challenge to publish the procedures and data she utilized to construct
one of the standard and key components for balance of payments
accounts, namely commodity imports at current (cif) prices, or explain
why her data for exports was not comprehensive. Yet this debate over
numbers has been heuristic enough to confirm that the construction of
acceptable estimates or even controlled conjectures for Britain’s balance
of payments in current prices as Ralph Davis and Imlah told us, may not
be possible for the period before, say, the 1770s. 147
       Nevertheless, these modern attempts to envisage stylized balance
of payments accounts lend support to perceptions (already familiar to
historians and most contemporary commentators) on long term trends in
the volumes of Britain’s commodity trade with the rest of the world based
upon official statistics which refer to exports and imports measured in
constant prices. This familiar but imperfect data is often used to estimate
trends in rates of growth for seven decades between two periods of


Minchinton (ed.), The Growth of English Overseas Trade in the Seventeenth and
Eighteenth Centuries (London, 1969).
146
    E. Brezis, ‘Foreign Capital Flows in the Century of Britain’s Industrial Revolution:
New Estimates, controlled Conjectures,’ in Economic History Review, 48 (1995); R.
Nash, ‘The Balance of payments and foreign Capital Flows in Eighteenth Century
England: a Comment,’ in Economic History Review, 50 (1997) pp. 110-125. E. Brezis,
‘Did Foreign Capital Flows Finance the Industrial revolution?’ a reply in Economic
History Review, 50 (1997), pp. 129-32. Her mimeo is cited but apparently not utilized in
Cuenca-Esterban’s reconstruction of the accounts for 1772-1820. Vide J. Cuenca-
Esterban, ‘The British Balance of Payments, 1772-1820: Indian Transfers and War
Finance,’ in Economic History Review, 54 (2001), pp. 58-86.
147
    Davis, Industrial Revolution and British Overseas Trade; Imlah, Economic Elements.
                                          61
