recalibrated official and other data for exports, imports and re-exports and
published plausible estimates, in current prices, for net earnings derived
from supplying shipping, banking, insurance, mercantile, military and the
services of imperial governance to the world economy (including Ireland
and India) for the period 1772 to 1820. He has also ventured to construct
controlled conjectures for the costs of servicing Britain’s balance of net
indebtedness to foreigners. 152 This truncated but hard-won set of macro-
economic estimates allows for a foreshortened perspective on the
conjuncture from 1793-1815 that exposes the place of warfare and
colonization in narratives seeking to explain the history and evolution of
the comparative advantages enjoyed by Britain within a globalizing world
economy from 1793 to 1914. Although increasing returns accruing from
the realm’s precocious industrialization continue to be analysed in depth
and sophistication but its connexions to prior developments in shipping,
financial, commercial, governmental services and ship-building for the
kingdom’s seaborne trades and increasingly for world commerce at large
has moved away from centre stage in the writing of British economic
history in recent decades. 153
       Yet there is a historiographical tradition favoured by previous
generations of economic historians (led by Ralph Davis) who insisted on
according strong significance to international trade and commerce. 154
That emphases may have been qualified but it has not been undermined.
Cuenca-Esteban’s new data set can now be included in narratives of the
Industrial Revolution to make the point that the maritime sector of the

152
    References to his impressive archival-based scholarship are listed in Prados De La
Escosura (ed.), Exceptionalism and Industrialization which includes an essay by J.
Cuenca Esterban, ‘Comparative Patterns of colonial Trade: Britain and its Rivals,’ pp.
35-66.
153
    Allen, British Industrial Revolution and Mokyr, The Enlightened Economy. The
Economic History of Britain (London, 2009); M. Daunton, Progress and Poverty. An
Economic and Social History of Britain 1700-1850 (Oxford, 1995).
154
    R. Davis, Rise of the English Shipping Industry; The Industrial Revolution and British
Overseas Trade; Cain and Hopkins, British Imperialism.
                                           64
