       The Registrar’s reports and data indicate the share of freight
carried into and out from the kingdom’s ports usually declined in wartime
when the regulations for navigation confining overseas trade to imperial
shipping had to be relaxed to allow neutral vessels to replace imperial
merchant ships and their crews who had been redeployed to serve in and
for the Royal Navy. Between 1793 and 1815 that changed in three
respects. First, tonnage of freight clearing imperial ports in “British ships”
rose sharply. Secondly, the tonnage constructed and registered as
“British” built also increased over this period. Thirdly, the war for
American independence seems to have been a serious setback for the
upward progression of the kingdom’s shipping and shipbuilding
industries. While the longer and more expensive conflict with
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars witnessed a pronounced expansion
in Britain’s capacities to build ships and to transport domestic, imperial
and foreign freight by sea to every port throughout the world economy. 158
That capacity had certainly been augmented at the expense of enemies,
rivals and competitors, both during and as the outcome of warfare at sea
(and to some extent on land) by the victory over France and her allies and
all other rivals for the gains from trade and commerce.
       Alternative hypotheses that the rise of Britain’s shipping and
shipbuilding industries emanated basically through higher rates of total
factor productivity growth compared to the industries of its rivals must,
however, be considered. That notion is untested and looks improbable.
Few contemporaries or historians made the claim and the state continued
for decades after 1815, to subsidize and protect both these industries. 159

158
    J. Marshall, A Digest of all the Accounts (London, 1833); Bayley, Tables showing
the Progress of the Shipping Industry (Goldsmith’s Collection, London 1844).
159
    Davis in his magnus opus Industrial Revolution and Overseas Trade made no such
claim and for the state protection see Harper, English Navigation Laws Admiralty
Papers at the Public Record Office 106/1457, 106/1481, 106/2055, 49/94 , 95/85
dealing with relations between the Navy Board and private yards complain about the
lack of improvement in shipbuilding techniques. Commissioners for Naval Enquiry
                                         66
