       Britain emerged from the wars with revolutionary France in poll
position in a new international economic order with an extended territorial
empire , naval bases in every part of the world and an enlarged and
more efficient maritime sector linked to export industries poised to sell
higher high shares of their outputs overseas. Meanwhile the economies of
France, Portugal, Spain, Holland, Denmark, Venice, Russia, even the
United States and other rivals, slowly recovered many of the competitive
advantages for trade that they had possessed or were developing
between the Peace of Paris (1783) and the outbreak of the French
Revolution six years later. This relative decline of rivals made space for
the Island’s maritime sector, which since the times of Cromwell, had
played a major part in leading the economy to a plateau of opportunities
from where a sustainable transition to an industrialized economy would
not be checked either by the relatively small size of the United Kingdom’s
home market or by the risks to specialization from potential shortages of
food and raw materials which attended the urbanization of a growing
share of a workforce, generating increasing returns as it agglomerated in
towns and factories. 141
       These positive outcomes flowing from victory in the Revolutionary
and Napoleonic wars and the stimulus that they had imparted to
agriculture and industry add up to a representation of that conflict as a
conjuncture in the kingdom’s economic history that brought a long period
of mercantilism to a successful conclusion and thereby offered particularly
strong advantages and opportunities for the Island’s industrializing
economy. Such post hoc representations would not, moreover, have
surprised mercantilists of the day who never hesitated to extol links

141
   Schmoller had emphasized the geopolitics behind economic growth more than a
century ago. See G. Schmoller, The Mercantile System and its Historical Significance
(New York, 1967). His views are echoed by Findlay and O’Rourke in their recently
published text, Power and Plenty; Jomo K.S. and E.S. Reinert The Origins of
Development Economics. How Schools of Economic Thought Have Addressed
Development (London, 2005)
                                         59
