       For shipbuilding there seems to be almost no indications of
productivity change for a multinational industry producing a
heterogeneous range of ships designed for a multiplicity of specialized
tasks, located around the coasts of Eurasia. The designs, technologies
and techniques and skills utilized to construct ships for specific purposes
seem to have been accessible to many firms in several European
countries, the United States and India. Innovations could, moreover, be
copied fairly easily from purchased or captured foreign boats, models and
blueprints. Technologies, techniques and skilled workers migrated easily.
Apparently best practice and designs diffused readily from shipyard to
shipyard. Economies derived from agglomeration, specialization, the
accumulation of skills, superior management and organization must,
however, have emerged from site to site and reduced costs of production
below average in some countries before others. 160 Nevertheless the
limited and under-quantified secondary sources published on the
construction of sailing ships for this period leaves us with nothing better
than general impressions. First that Dutch shipyards seem to have
retained the competitive position they had built up over the centuries. 161
Secondly, access to cheap sources of raw materials (timber, pitch, tar,
hemp, copper and iron) required to build fully rigged and equipped ships
ready to sail the world’s seas and oceans became foundational for


(Parliamentary Papers 1805 (2) and 1817 (4)) found no significant examples of
technological change in shipbuilding for the Royal Navy from 1608 to 1805.
160
    G.P. Naish, ‘Ships and Shipbuilding,’ in C. Singer et al (eds.), History of
Technology. Vol. 5 (Oxford, 1963), ch. 18. A more extensive literature on the
construction of battleships suggests that technologies for the design and construction
of sailing ships changed slowly and innovations diffused fairly rapidly. Naval historians
do not make strong claims for national superiorities in the construction of battleships.
See Rodger, Command of the Oceans and D.H. Roberts (ed.), Eighteenth Century
Shipbuilding. Remarks on the English-Dutch Navies (Rotherfield, 1992); J. Glete,
Navies and Nations: Warships, Navies and State Building (Stockholm, 1993); B.
Lavery, Nelson’s Navy. The Ships, Men and Organization, 1793-1815 (London, 1989).
161
    R. Unger, Dutch Shipbuilding before 1800 (Amsterdam, 1978); D. Ormrod, The Rise
of Commercial Empires. England and the Netherlands in the Age of Mercantilism 1650-
1770 (Cambridge, 2003).
                                           67
