period of settled peaceable international economic relations (in the 1820s
and 1830s) have run into diminishing heuristic returns and look
ontologically unreal.
       Complex “loops of inter-connexions” between British industry and
its imperial and foreign markets overseas are probably impossible to
disentangle. Theories imported from an array of competing models
available in economics journals in order to engage with the utopian
aspiration of factoring out the manifold influences on the growth and
fluctuations in industrial exports flowing overseas during some twenty-
three years of warfare and its aftermath could be represented as under-
specified and un-quantified. 169
       Yes, warfare augmented risks for merchants trading beyond the
shores of the realm. But it also widened opportunities, opened up new
markets, degraded foreign competition, augmented fiscal and monetary
incentives and offered naval protection to an extended range of nouveau
businessmen, shippers and bankers (including asylum seekers from the
mainland), described at the time by the mercantile establishment as
socially inferior “speculators” who engaged recklessly with overseas
trade and commerce in wartime. 170 According to Crafts, shares of
industrial output collected, funded and insured for sale overseas, jumped
from 22% in 1780 to reach 53% by 1831. And Cuenca-Esteban’s revision
to Craft’s estimates suggest an even more pronounced leap from 14% to
46% over that same period. 171 Export volumes certainly rose more
rapidly than manufactured outputs during the wars which thereby

169
    J.G. Williamson, New Views on the Impact of the French Wars on Accumulation in
Britain (Harvard University Discussion Paper 14890, 1990) for a defence of economic
theories that purport to “factor out” wars.
170
     P.K. O’Brien, ‘Merchants and Bankers as Patriots or Speculators. Foreign
Commerce and Monetary Policy in Wartime,’ in J. McCusker and K. Morgan (eds.), The
Early Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, 2000). This book also includes chapters by
Engerman and Crouzet concerned with trade. The classic article on commerce in this
period is Crouzet, ‘Wars , Blockades and Economic Change in Europe’.
171
    Cuenca-Esterban, ‘The Rising Share of Industrial Exports.’
                                        73
