Under superior protection from the Royal Navy British mercantile firms
responded to “capture” extraordinary shares of the returns from the sale
of the commercial services associated with the distribution of both
domestically produced and foreign commodities sold on to European,
American and other world markets. 174
       At the time contemporaries became well aware of the gains from
the accelerated rise of London and other British ports to become far and
away the leading entrepôt for world commerce through the rhetoric of
politicians, who referred with pride to official data recording large
increases in imports and re-exports. Ministers also recognized, debated
and investigated the recurrent and cyclical problems of “gluts” of foreign
produce (mercantile inventories) lying unsold in the realm’s warehouses
when the French and American governments managed to block and
disrupt normal channels for British trade. 175
       By value approximately three quarters of the returns from this
commercial activity came from shipping tropical groceries (sugar, tea,
coffee, spices, tobacco etc) and raw materials (cotton fibres, thrown silk,
dyestuffs, hardwoods etc) from Asia, Africa and the Americas onto the
mainland of Europe. Marine insurance also prospered in risky wartime




174
    Parkinson (ed.), Trade Winds; Wright and Fayle, Lloyds; Moreau, State of the Trade
of Great Britain; Bayley, Tables showing the Progress of the Shipping Interest of the
British Empire, C. Shammas, ‘The revolutionary impact of European demand for
tropical goods,’ in McCuster and Morgan, The Early Atlantic Economy, pp. 163-86
discusses the inelastic nature of European demand for these exotic and luxury
products.
175
    Harvey, Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century, chs 2 and 3. The official statistics
were recorded in parliamentary papers and journals of the House of Commons. The
inventory cycles of the period are analysed by Ashton, Economic Fluctuations, Gayer
et al, Growth and Fluctuations and in Crouzet’s magnus opus, Le blocus. The most
recent study of world trade in wartime is by K.O’Rouke, ‘The Worldwide Economic
Impact of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1815,’ in Journal of
Global History, 1 (2006), pp. 123-51. He concluded that Britain gained relative to its
rivals from the wartime disruption of evolution towards the integration of global markets.
                                           75
