trade from which Britain’s shipping, shipbuilding and allied industries
eventually emerged in clear positions of primacy.
        This positive outcome has been well documented by historians,
trade by trade, and has been referenced in classic texts dealing with
growth and cycles for the British economy as a whole from 1789 to 1819.
165
      The triumphal re-emergence of these two major industries from
doldrums that accompanied the global conflict for American
independence and from the fluctuations in their fortunes due to the ups
and downs of twenty-three years of mercantilist warfare at sea, as well as
on land, can be validated with reference to official familiar values (the
proxy for volumes) of retained imports, domestic exports and re-exports
for 1774-1821. 166
        Latterly and thanks to the seminal research of Cuenca-Esterban
who has reconstructed a comprehensive set of balance of payments
accounts in current prices for the period 1772-1820, historians are now
placed to offer plausible conjectures based upon superior data that
reveals the evolution of major connexions between the British economy
and the rest of the world over initial stages of the first industrial revolution
before, during and by including a chapter anyalysing potential outcomes
emanating from wars at sea with France and her allies from 1793 to 1815.

165
    Parkinson (ed.), Trade Winds. The secondary sources providing dense description
trade by trade is surveyed by P.K. O’Brien, Government Revenue 1793-1815 (D.Phil.
thesis, Oxford, 1967) ch. 9. On growth and fluctuations at more macro levels in imports,
exports and re-exports the classic studies are by Ashton, Economic Fluctuations;
Gayer et al, Growth and Fluctuations and Crouzet, Le blocus: W. Schlote, British
Overseas Trade, 1700-1930 (London, 1952).
166
    Mitchell, Abstract, p. 281; appendices to Journals of the House of Commons, vols.
51-71. Parliamentary Papers, Accounts and Papers; Marshal, Digest of all the
Accounts; Moreau, State of Trade; C. Moreau, Chronological Records of the British
Royal and Commercial Navies (Goldsmiths Collection, London, 1827). The approach to
Britain’s foreign commerce exemplified by the works of Ashton, Gayer and Crouzet
cited above may leave the impression that the war years generated not only instability
but severely depressed the prospects for British trade. Again that was not the view of
the day – vide. A.D. Harvey, Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century; Ehrman, The
Younger Pitt. The Consuming Struggle.

                                          69
