women, sexual freedom and other demands for “enlightenment” until well
into the nineteenth century. 185
       Yet, the economic ramifications and significance of Britain’s victory
over Revolutionary and Napoleonic France was widely recognized by
European statesmen intellectuals and historians as a conjuncture in
European and global history that marked the beginning of the end of that
malign international economic order and represented retrospectively by
economic historians as a midpoint of the First Industrial Revolution. 186
       Yet mercantilism may continue to retain its status as an irrational
system of thought among economists who continue to read centuries of
European writing in political economy teleologically as economic theory
in retrospect. 187 Historians don’t read it that way and will to insist on
representing the policies pursued by statesmen and the texts of their
advisers in context. Historically, as Crouzet told us years ago, the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars find their genesis in a sequence of
conflicts between Britain and France going back for more than a century.
188

       Meanwhile to claim superiority for the insights derivable from
attempts based on a modern economic theory and to factor wars out of
an otherwise peaceful, but utopian, process of long run economic growth

185
    J. Israel, Enlightenment Contested: Philosphy, Modernity and the Emancipation of
Man 1670-1750 (Oxford 2010).
186
    L.S. Magnusson, Nation, State and the Industrial Revolution (London, 2009). Ch 1.
Crouzet, Britain Ascendant: Comparative Studies in Franco-British Economic History
(Cambridge, 1990).
187
    A perusal of Lane, Profits from Power, might be more heuristic and vide N.
Hampson, The Perfidy of Albion: French Perceptions of England during the French
revolution (London, 1998). The essays on Heckscher’s studies of ‘Mercantilism and
the Continental System by Magnusson, Irwin, Mokyr, Lal, Crouzet, Davis and
Engerman and O’Brien in parts IV and V of R. Findlay et al (eds.) Heckscher,
International, Trade and Economic History; J. Nye War, Wine and Taxes (Princeton,
2007) are also relevant.
188
   F. Crouzet, ‘The Second Hundred Years War’ and throughout his books, Britain
Ascendant: Studies in Franco-British History (Cambridge, 1990), and including his last
book, La guerre economique Franco-anglaise au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 2008); J. Black,
Natural and Necessary Enemies. Anglo-French Relations in the Eighteenth Century
(London, 1986).
                                          79
