2 P. E. TRTLOCK AND A. BELKIN

the Cuban missile crisis, Lebow and Stein (Chapter 5) note that liberal “revi-
sionists . . . provide no compelling justification for their expectation that
had Kennedy made a secret overture to Khrushchev before choosing the
blockade, Khrushchev would have responded positively.” It is just as plaus-
ible that he would have stood firm and accelerated the construction of the
missile sites—as the Soviet military in Cuba did initially in response to the
blockade. Although some liberal revisionists do advance the connecting-
principle rationale that it would have been easier for Khrushchev to back
down in the absence of a public confrontation, they cannot rebut the coun-
terargument that Khrushchev needed a serious confrontation to justify a
withdrawal to hard-liners in the politburo. They cannot do so because they
lack a sound basis for specifying when the Soviet political leadership would
hhave responded in an accommodative or confrontational fashion.

‘Conservative revisionists have similar problems. They are fond of coun-
terfactuals in which a president who displayed greater resolve prevented the
missile crisis of 1962. In this view, Khrushchev doubted Kennedy's resolve
for two reasons: the presidents poor performance, and Khrushchev’s view
‘of Americans as “too soft, to0 liberal, and too rich to fight.” The counterfac~
tual hypothesizes that Khrushchev would not have sent missiles to Cuba if
Kennedy had displayed greater resolve at the Bay of Pigs, at the Vienna
summit, and in Berlin. It does not specify, however, how presidential dis-
plays of resolve would have altered Khrushchev’s view of the American
people. Although Khrushchev might have revised his alleged estimate of the
‘American public had it enthusiastically supported a hard-line strategy, it is
also plausible that had Kennedy committed American forces to the Bay of
Pigs, he might have embroiled his administration in a politically divisive and
militarily costly quagmire that only reinforced Khruschchev's view of Amer-
icans. Here again, no compelling political logic connects antecedent to con-
sequent.

The complexity of the connecting principles underlying counterfactual ar-
‘guments creates plenty of opportunities for running afoul of the cotenability
standard (Goodman 1983; Elster 1978). Consider, for example, one part of
Jon Elster’s (1978) critique of Robert Fogel’s (1964) classic counterfactual
that “if the railroads had not existed, the American economy in the nine-
teenth century would have grown only slightly more slowly than it actually
did.” Elster argues that itis nonsensical to postulate as a supportive connect
ing principle that the internal combustion engine would have been invented
carlier in the America without railroads because the postulate presupposes a
theory of technical innovation that undercuts the original antecedent. If we
have a theory of innovation that requires the invention of cars fifty years
carlier, why does it not also require the invention of railroads? (Of course,
Fogel’s core counterfactual claim concerning the limited economic impact of
railroads may still be correct even without speeding up the invention of
automobiles. It rests on complex comparisons of the actual world with an