

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS. 2B

elaborate counterfactual model of  nineteenth-century American economy
that relied on waterways instead of railroads.)

In a similar spirit, Lars-Erik Cederman (Chapter 11) criticizes John
Mueller’s (1989) claim concerning the “irrelevance” of nuclear weapons.
Mueller constructs a counterfactual non-nuclear scenario to demonstrate that
nuclear weapons did not contribute to the postwar peace. Cederman notes
that “the problem with Mueller’s account is that he explicitly traces postwar
history as it actually happened, including the Cuban missile crisis, while
merely subtracting nuclear technology.” This procedure illustrates the perils
of superficially rewriting history. It is not at all clear that cotenability ob-
tains between the counterfactual antecedent of a non-nuclear world and any
connecting principle that posits the occurrence of the Cuban missile crisis in
1962. Why would the Soviets go to all the trouble of placing conventionally
armed intermediate-range missiles in Cuba? Why take so large a risk for so
small an advantage? There is something odd about the hypothetical world
that Mueller created,

‘The two standards considered so far—logical clarity and cotenability—
are helpful for screening out ambiguous and oxymoronic counterfactuals;
purely formal (content-free) standards are not helpful, however, for screen-
ing out counterfactuals that invoke bizarre antecedents or connecting princi-
ples. What, for example, should we make of the suggestion that “if Napo-
Jeon had possessed a Stealth bomber, he would have won the Battle of
Waterloo,” or that “if Oswald did not shoot Kennedy, then someone else
would have done so, because Kennedy was astrologically fated to die by
assassination”? An adequate normative theory of counterfactual inference
should give us principled grounds for rejecting conjectures of this sort. We
see four ways of preempting such nonsense and we take up each in turn,

3. Consistency with Well-Established Historical Facts

Several scholars have proposed a “minimal-rewrite-of-history” rule designed
to eliminate far-fetched counterfactuals that radically transform the temporal
landscape (cf. Hawthorn 1991, 158; Weber 1949). They propose that, in
Principle, possible worlds should: (a) start with the real world as it was
otherwise known before asserting the counterfactual; (b) not require us to
‘unwind the past and rewrite long stretches of history; (c) not unduly disturb
what we otherwise know about the original actors and their beliefs and
goals. As noted earlier, these guidelines represent ground rules for assessing
historical “possibility-hood.” Operationally, investigators might agree to
constrain conterfactual speculation in a host of more specif
sidering as antecedents only those policy options that participants themselves
considered and (ideally) almost accepted, by giving extra weight to counter-
factual antecedents that “undo” unusual events that appear to have made the

