---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1806/dec/30/negociation-with-france"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1806/dec/30/negociation-with-france"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "8347263f5439106e0bf6f65409a24fbcb27734691f9c4235c64ff86986d48989"
title: "NEGOCIATION WITH FRANCE. (Hansard, 30 December 1806)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

NEGOCIATION WITH FRANCE. (Hansard, 30 December 1806)

# NEGOCIATION WITH FRANCE.

HC Deb 30 December 1806 vol 8 cc241-50 241

rose for the purpose of putting one or two questions to the noble lord opposite (lord Howick), on the subject of the papers then in the hands of the members of the house, with a view to obtain information upon certain points, which appeared to him to require to be further elucidated; He wished to put the questions to the noble lord, because the answers he might receive; might perhaps render it unnecessary for him to give any notice of a motion on the subject, and it might also happen, that the noble lord, when informed of the points to which his enquiries were directed, might not have any objection to accede to such motion as should be necessary, in order to cone at the information he required, in the most satisfactory manner. He should, therefore, state the points on which he thought information necessary, and be guided by the answers he should receive, as to the course he should ultimately adopt. The fist point upon which he wished to be informed, related to an extraordinary interpolation, which appeared in the letter from M. Talleyrand to Mr. Secretary Fox, dated April 1, as published by the French government, when compared with the letter of the same date in the official papers on the table (p. 95.) He wished to know whether there had been a passage similar to that extraordinary interpolation in any letter received by Mr. Fox from M. Talleyrand, and also whether any answer had been returned by Mr. Fox to that letter. The next object of the information he desired was the letter No. 3, from M. Talleyrand, dated March 5, as it appeared in the papers before the house. This was evidently an extract from the letter received by Mr. Fox, and it struck him that it would be extremely desirable, previous to the discussion of the papers, that the house should be in possession of the whole of this document. Of this he was so convinced, that if the noble lord should not be prepared to produce the document to the house, he should feel it his duty to make a specific motion upon the subject, reserving his reasons until he should come to make the motion. This letter, he was aware, was a private one; but as it had been made the channel of communication upon the relations of the two countries, 242 it was very material that the whole of it should be produced. Another point on which he desired to be informed, was whether lord Yarmouth had received any communication from Mr. Fox, or from any of his majesty's ministers, previous to his first leaving France; also the date of that noble lord's communication with M. Talleyrand; together with the date of his leaving Paris, and of his arrival in London. The first communication from lord Yarmouth to Mr. Secretary Fox certainly appeared dated the 13th of July, but he wished to know whether that was the date when the dispatch was addressed to Mr. Fox, or when it was drawn up. The next point related to a statement in an official note presented by lord Lauderdale to gen. Clarke, dated Aug. 6, "that intervening circumstances, which it was unnecessary to detail, had enabled his majesty to enter into a separate treaty." Now, it did not appear upon the face of the Papers what these circumstances were, and he wished to be informed respecting them. Another question he wished to ask, grew out of a passage in the dispatch of the 10th of September, from the right hon. gent. opposite (Mr. Windham) to lord Lauderdale. The passage was, "every effort was made at the outset of the negociation to obtain the restitution of Naples to his Sicilian majesty." He wished to know what those efforts had been" and whether there were any documents to skew that they had been made, and whether there would be any objection to lay before the house the details of the reasons for departing from that claim, as said in that dispatch to be detailed in the correspondence of the foreign office, with lords Yarmouth and Lauderdale. The last question he had to put, related to the communication made by lord Lauderdale to M. Talleyrand, stating that he was authorized to negociate also for Russia on the same terms as had been communicated to M. Talleyrand by his excellency count Budberg. It did not appear on the face of the papers what these terms were; and on an occasion in which the house was to be called on to decide upon the merits of the negociation and the rupture of it, he felt that it was absolutely necessary that they should be put in possession of the terms upon which it was proposed to treat.