

admitted the statement of the noble lord to be satisfactory upon this point, as well as upon most of the other points upon which he had called for information. But until this statement had been made, they had no means of knowing what were the terms upon which Russia proposed to treat. However, as the communication had been made to the French government, he did not think there could be much impropriety in producing it to the house. But he would not press this farther. The statement in lord Lauderdale's note, appeared to him to refer to something that had occurred previous to the signature of the separate treaty; it might be an allusion to something that had been previously communicated by the court of Russia. There was one point upon which the noble lord's statement was not satisfactory to his mind, and therefore he should feel himself bound to submit a motion to the house upon the subject. If the house would permit him, he would then state the grounds upon which he meant to bring the motion forward. This course would save the time of the house, and prevent the necessity of his returning again to the subject. The two governments appeared to him to be at present at issue upon a fact. If there was any assertion in his majesty's declaration that was not true, the ministers who had advised the insertion of it, were guilty of a heinous offence by such conduct. It was necessary for the house to have every document that could throw any light upon this point. In the extract from M. Talleyrand's letter to Mr. Fox, stated, "if you are pacifically disposed, you know where to find the basis upon which to negociate." If this expression referred to the extract from Buonaparte's speech, it could not mean the uti possidetis, but the peace of Amiens. He wished therefore to know whether there was any passage in the remainder of the letter which referred to the basis uti possidetis. There was another reason why he wished for the production of that letter, arising out of the nature of the transaction. It was with peculiar jealousy that house ought to view a 246 correspondence carried on during a war between the minister of the enemy, and a secretary of state. Besides, in the answer to the letter from which the extract is taken, it appears that an apology is made for having submitted any part of it to his majesty. If any part of it ought to have been so submitted, the whole ought. And what opinion should the house entertain of a private communication, where such an apology was necessary for laying any part of it before his majesty? They were told, the letter was private; but he insisted, the house ought to be jealous of such communications, and contended, that the whole of the letter ought to be called for. On these grounds he moved, that an humble address be presented to his majesty, that he would be graciously pleased to give directions, that the whole of the said letter should be laid before the house.

observed, that if, after the manner in which he had assured the learned gent., that the whole of the letter that had any reference to the negotiation had been produced, he should still persist in his motion, he should not object to it. He doubted, however, whether the mode adopted by the learned gent. was the proper one to attain his object. This letter was not preserved in any of the public offices. However, there could be no doubt that a document in the possession of his majesty's servants would be produced, if his majesty should lay his commands upon him for that purpose. To the whole of the doctrine laid down by the learned gent. as to the heinous nature of the offence, if his majesty's ministers were to introduce any false assertion into a declaration bearing Ins majesty's signature, he fully subscribed. But when his majesty's ministers laid papers before the house, they were bound upon their responsibility to lay the whole that bore any reference to the case. He took that occasion to repeat, what he as expressly declared before, that the whole of the remainder of that letter had no reference whatever to the overture for negotiation. When he said this, he meant none that he knew of. He could not tell what reference to that overture might be discovered by the ingenuity of the gentlemen opposite in the expressions of civility, which it might be found to contain, but he could positively assert, that it contained no direct reference whatever to that subject. As to the other ground upon which the learned gent. had thought proper to 247 rest his motion, he could not discover any weight in it. When the learned gent. had argued, that that house should regard with jealousy a correspondence conducted under such circumstances, did the learned gent. mean to say, that there was any thing criminal in the expressions of reciprocal civility that appeared in these communications? Did he mean to say, that, when such a correspondence had taken place, it was reprehensible in persons who had formerly been acquainted, to recall some of the feelings of past intimacy, and give way to friendly enquiries respecting mutual connections and acquaintances? Did he mean to assert, that it was criminal in persons under such circumstances, to cultivate a disposition of mutual conciliation, with the desirable view of finally accommodating the differences between the two nations? He had stated before, that this letter contained nothing relative to the case before the house, and it would be for the house to decide, whether it should be produced. Of one thing be was clearly satisfied, that there was not, in any letter or document written by the illustrious person now no more, (Mr. Fox) a single expression that in the slightest degree committed the honour or dignity of his sovereign. He had but one word more to add by way of explanation. He admitted that the passage, quoted by the learned gent. from the note of lord Lauderdale, would seem to refer to something antecedent to the signature of the treaty of M. d'Oubril. It might have arisen from some inaccuracy in the language of the note, but certainly no communication relative to a separate negociation had been sent by his majesty's ministers until after the signature of the treaty of July 20. It was, previously to that event, proposed that Russia and Great Britain should treat provisionally with France, that the two treaties should go on together, and that neither should be signed until both were brought to a conclusion. The circumstance might possibly have arisen from the communication from the court of Russia, that M. d'Oubril was to be sent to Paris.