

* Histoire de TAnarcliie de Pologne, vol. ii. p. 229. 



lo MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

The triumph of theCzartoryskis now seemed assured. 
Even their adversaries, seeing the wise measures of 
which they were the authors, and the benefits which 
these measures were already conferring on the country, 
abandoned their attitude of passive resistance, and 
Poniatowski was elected king without opposition 
(1764), after which the Diet passed a resolution direct- 
ing that statues of the Princes Michael and Augustus 
should be erected at Warsaw and Wilna ' in memory 
of the national gratitude.' The princes did not, how- 
ever, possess the qualities which ensure popularity : 
their strict, almost harsh, sense of justice, their aver- 
sion to compromise and conciliation, revived the 
dormant hostility of their adversaries and alienated 
many of their supporters. Yet the Poles had never 
enjoyed such security at home, or greater respect 
abroad than in the first years of the reign of their new 
king, when the Czartoryskis were the virtual rulers of 
the country. * Every citizen,' it was said, ' at length 
felt that his life, his honour, and his property were 
safe,' and for the first time for many years Russia and 
the other neighbouring powers abstained from inter- 
ference in Polish affairs. Unfortunately the influence 
of the Czartoryskis did not last long enough to produce 
a permanent improvement in the administration. 
Both the King and the people grew restive at the dic- 
tation of these two rigid old men, who were so much 
their superiors in wisdom and self-control, who despised 
popularity, and sought no approval but that of their 
own consciences. Moreover, the reforms which were 
gradually and quietly being introduced by them 
began to inspire anxiety in the neighbouring States. 



INTRODUCTORY it 

Frederick the Great, with his usual sagacity, saw that 
the effect of these reforms must ultimately be to make 
Poland entirely independent of her neighbours, and his 
correspondence with the Empress Catherine and the 
Prussian Ambassadors at Warsaw shows how eager he 
was to throw every possible impediment in the way of 
the Czartoryskis, and especially to prevent the abolition 
in the Great Diet or Parliament of the libemm veto, to 
which the Poles still blindly clung as one of the 
pillars of their freedom. At length the Russian and 
Prussian Ambassadors openly declared themselves 
against the Czartoryskis, and taking advantage of 
their unpopularity, secured a majority against them 
in the first Parliament convoked under the new reign 
(1766). The Czartoryskis accepted this defeat with 
characteristic stoicism : the project for the abolition 
of the libeT^um veto was deferred for a more favourable 
opportunity, but they remained in office and silently 
but steadily pursued their work of reform. This, 
however, did not at all suit the views of the Russian 
Government, which, now thoroughly alarmed, deter- 
mined to come forward in active opposition to the 
Czartoryskis and the King, whom it regarded as their 
tool. A pretext was ready to hand in the position of 
the dissenters, who were under the same disabilities 
as the Catholics then were in England, and whom 
Catherine had always affected to protect, thereby 
gaining the applause of her friends the encyclopaedists, 
and making a display of liberalism which cost her 
nothing and was very convenient for her policy. The 
Russian Ambassador, -Repnin, who had been one of 
the warmest of the supporters of the Czartoryskis, 