



6 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

at the Russian Court. Finding themselves abandoned 
by the King, they looked more and more to St 
Petersburg for support, and the accession to the 
Russian throne of the Empress Catherine in 1762 
seemed at length to hold out a prospect of the realisa- 
tion of their hopes. In a long letter announcing the 
event to Poniatowski, she informed him that she 
would at once send Count Keyserling to Warsaw to 
make Poniatowski King after the death of the reigning 
sovereign ; or, if this should not be possible, to endea- 
vour to obtain the election to the throne of Prince 
Adam Casimir Czartoryski, the son of Prince Augustus 
and the father of the writer of the following Memoirs.* 
Catherine was thought at that time to be a 
sovereign of liberal ideas, who would give her people 
a constitution, and would introduce a new era of 
freedom and universal justice. These illusions were 
so general that even such experienced and sagacious 
politicians as the Czartoryski princes were deceived by 
them ; they thought that the regeneration of Poland, 
for which they had worked thirty years, was at hand. 
But King Augustus's favourite Minister, Brtihl, did 
his utmost to foil their plans. The chief dignities 
in the country were taken from the Czartoryskis and 
their adherents and given to their adversaries, and 
scandalous scenes were got up in the Diets with the 
object of decrying them in the eyes of the public. t 

* * J'envoie incessamment le Comte Keyserling ambasaaileur en I*oIogne pour voiis 
faire roi, apr^ le decbs de celui-ci) et en cas qu^il ne puisiie n^ussir pour vous, que oe 
Boit le Prince Adam.' M^>moires de Stanislas Auguste Poniatowski et sa coiTes- 
pondancc avec Catherine II. Posen, 18C2. 

t The following letter, of which there is a copy in the Czartoryski archives, was 
addressed on this subject by the Empress Catherine to her ambassador Count 
Keyserling : * M. le Comte de Keyserling : Je viens d apprendre que la dil;te en 
Pologne est romiiue et que vos amis ont ponse etre massacres. Je vous recommande 



^ 



INTRODUCTORY 7 

This brouarht matters to a crisis. The two heads of 
the Czartoryski family were growing old, and 
Catherine was showing an inclination to conclude an 
alliance with Frederick the Great ; it seemed to them 
that if they did not at once take decisive action, all the 
fruit of their life-labour might be lost. The occasion 
was afforded by the candidature of Prince Charles of 
Saxony, the favourite son of the King of Poland, for 
the dukedom of Courland. The Russian candidate, 
Biron, was supported by the Czartoryskis, but the 
majority of the senate declared itself in favour of 
Prince Charles, and a note asserting his claims and in- 
timating doubts as to the legitimacy of Catherine was 
addressed by the Ministry to the Russian ambassador. 
This was equivalent to a rupture with Russia, and 
the Czartoryskis proposed to Catherine that they 
should form an armed confederacy, not against the 
King of Poland, but against his Minister Briihl, 
recalling the words of the Due de Gramont to Louis 
XIV : * We make war against Cardinal Mazarin, but 
we serve your Majesty/ The confederacy was to 
take the government of the country into its own 
hands, restore order and reform abuses, and after 
the death of Augustus III give up the throne to a 
prince whose election should be agreeable to Russia. 
In order to avoid a civil war, the Czartoryskis asked 
that Russia should send an overwhelming force into 
the country to support them, and in return they 
promised to recognise Catherine as Empress of Russia, 