



12 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

was instructed to demand that the disabilities of the 
dissenters should be removed. The princes replied 
that in the then existing state of public opinion it 
would be impossible to carry such a measure in the 
Polish Parliament, upon which Catherine sent her 
troops into the country to ravage the estates of the 
Czartoryskis and the King, and issued a proclamation 
condenming the new policy of reform and promising 
that the Empress would take all those who had 
grievances under her special protection. The Czar- 
toryskis, in DO way cowed by these barbarous reprisals, 
undauntedly stood their ground, and when Repnin 
called upon them to resign office, replied that they 
did not hold their posts from the Empress of Russia, 
but from the Kinsf of Poland.* Their steadfastness 
and the abuses committed by the Russian soldiery 
produced such a reaction in their favour that Repnin, 
hoping thereby to paralyse the growing opposition to 
his plans, caused some of the principal senators to be 
arrested and sent into the interior of Russia. Those 
who remained, threatened with a similar fate, parsed 
all the measures that Repnin proposed to them. The 
disabiUties of the dissenters were abolished, and a 
treaty was concluded with Russia assigning to that 
Power the right of protecting and controlling the 
Polish administration. But the great majority of the 
Polish nation indignantly refused to ratify the de- 
cisions of its intimidated representatives. On the 29th 

^ * Je n'ai pan re^u inon emploi de S. M. Imp^riale, ainai elle me i>ardonuera si je 
ne veux pas in 'en defaire h, Ha rcqudte. Je suis vieux, tr^-vieux ; elle me fera 
tr^-l)eu de mal en m'otant le i>eu de jours qui me restent. Mais j'ai trop soin de 
ma gloire x^our ternir la fin d'une vie qui, j'ose le dire, a ^te paas^e sans tache au 
Hervice de ma patrie, yvox un acte que le monde avec raison condamnendt oomme 
l&cho et intcress^.' 



Ili^TRODUCTORY 13 

of February, 1768, an armed confederation was formed 
at Bar to rid the country of its Russian aggressors. 
Kussia, hampered by her war with Turkey, strove in 
vain to induce the King to declare himself against 
the confederates, and the Czartoryskis entered into 
communication with them in order to extend the 
movement over the whole country, and enable Poland 
to present a united front against her northern neigh- 
bour. These efforts failed through the unpopularity 
of the King and the jealousy of the other great 
aristocratic families. Yet the confederation stood its 
ground ; its principal founder, Joseph Pulaski, was an 
old retainer of the Czartoryski family ; and Repnin's 
successor in the embassy, Prince Wolkonski, reported 
to Catherine that ' nothing could be done so long as 
the Czartoryskis remained in Warsaw.' The Russian 
Government then^ confiscated their property. They 
persisted; however, in their patriotic attitude, declaring 
that whatever happened they would remain faithful 
to their country ; and the King, feeling that they 
were his only support and that he had neither the 
ability nor the character which alone could in such a 
crisis enable him to maintain himself, refused to 
abandon them. 