

VOL. I. A 



2 MEMOIRS ' OF PRINCE A DA M CZA RTOR YSKI 

rapidly rose to a position of almost unexampled in- 
fluence among his countrymen. Augustus, his brother, 
proud and reserved in character, but ambitious and 
passionate, chose the military career. He became a 
Knight of Malta, and took part in the capture of 
Belgrade under Prince Eugene, who presented him 
with a sword of honour in recognition of his bravery on 
the occasion. In 1729, he became a Major-General 
in the Polish army, and in 1731, after a duel with one 
of his rivals for the hand of Madame Denhoff, a lady 
of rare intelligence and immense wealth, she selected 
him out of a crowd of suitors, among whom were 
various foreign princes, such as the Duke of Braganza, 
the Prince of Charolais, and the Duke of Holstein. 
Prince Augustus thus became one of the wealthiest 
men in Europe, and by good management he not only 
paid the debts on his wife's estates, but doubled her 
income. At the end of the first year after their 
marriage, he sent to her a number of boxes full of 
gold pieces, representing the revenue from her estates, 
which she at once ordered to be returned to him ; 
and this ceremony was repeated annually during the 
forty years of their married life. 

When Augustus III was called to the Polish 
throne in 1741, Poland was enjoying the blessings of 
peace, while the surrounding countries were desolated 
with the conflicts of hostile armies ; and her people 
presented all the outward signs of prosperity. But as 
a State she was powerless. In some countries it is a 
frequent subject of complaint that the people do not 
take suflBcient interest or part in politics, and that the 
Government consequently falls into the hands of pro- 



INTRODUCTORY 3 

fessional politicians. In Poland, not to take part 
in public life was regarded almost as a crime. Nearly 
every voter* was an active politician ; but this pro- 
duced an exaggerated sense of the importance .of 
iudividuals in the State. Each man had his own 
opinions, and refused to be bound by those of others; 
the liberum veto^ originating in times when the 
principle of government by majority had not yet 
been discovered, was regarded as a palladium of liberty. 
Under such circumstances government was impos- 
sible.t The Diets had repeatedly to be dissolved with- 
out passing the measures necessary for administration, 
and a wide field was opened for the intrigues of foreign 
powers and ambitious magnates, especially as the old 
principle of elective monarchy was still retained. The 
two Czartoryski princes set themselves to the task of 
restoring order^in this chaos, of combining and directing 
the national forces which were dissipating themselves 
in futile individual effort, and of enabling Poland to 
resume her position among the independent States of 
Europe. But the difficulty of the task was greatly 
increased by the fact that the Poles did not see their 

* It is a common mistake among Englishmen to talk of Poland as * an aristocratio 
republic* The so-called nobles did not form an aristocracy in our sense of the term, 
bat consisted of all those who had political privileges. In the eighteenth century 
they numbered one-fifth of the population — a proportion considerably greater than 
that of the electorate to the population in England, even after the first Reform BilL 