

The most important matter that was considered 
at this Diet was the withdrawal by the chapter of the 
Cathedral at Cracow (with the support of Prince 
Poniatowski, Bishop of Plock) of Monsignor Soltyk, 




THE POLISH DIET 31 

Bishop of Cracow, from the adininstration of that 
diocese, oq the pretext of mental incapacity. 

The anti-Russian party defended the bishop, who 
had been one of the most valiant members of the 
Confederation of Bar.* The party of the King and 
of Russia strove to maintain and justify the act of 
violence committed against Monsignor Soltyk, and 
being the most numerous, succeeded in obtaining a 
majority in favour of the measure. 

The opposing parties spoke with much passion, 
endeavouring to prove on the one hand that the 
Bishop of Cracow was perfectly sane, and on the 
other that he was mad. One of the most moving 
and eloquent of the speeches was that of the Castellan 
Ankwicz, who was at that time regarded as an 
exemplary patriot, but afterwards passed over to the 
Muscovite party. He was one of the victims of 
Kosciuszko s revolution ; the people of Warsaw 
themselves executed the sentence which had been 
pronounced against him. 

During his year's residence in Lithuania, my 
father had gained the sympathies of the citizens 
of that province, and he thought that he would have 
the majority of the Lithuanian votes at the Diet 
in favour of the party of which he was one of the 
chiefs; but the fear of Russia and the King's 
presents decided otherwise. Many of the Deputies 
found reasons to avoid the inconvenient results which 

* The originators of the Confederation of Bar were two bishoptt, Soltyk and 
Knminalri. The object of the Confederation, which was formed hy Caaimir Pulaski 
on the 29th of February, 1768, was to deliver Poland from the domination of Russia. 
The confederates maintained their ground by extraordinary feats of arms against 
the Kuflsian troops for five years, and were finally crushed by Souvaroff in 1772, a 
few months before the first partition of Poland. (See the previous Chapter). 



32 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

would ensue from an open rupture with the King 
and the Russians. 

The Diet having thus come to a close in so 
unfavourable a way for our party, my father deter- 
mined to visit the estates which he had inherited 
in Volhynia and Podolia. 



CHAPTER III 



1783 



JOURITST TO VOLHYNIA AND PODOLIA. — INTERVIEW WITH FREDERICK 

THE GREAT. 

Before leaving for Volhynia, I went with ray tutor 
to pay a visit to Prince Lubomirski. This was the 
last time that I saw him ; he did not long enjoy the 
fortune which his wife had inherited, and died in 
the same year, universally regretted. He lived in 
the palace which afterwards became that of the 
Tarnowskis, and belonged by right to the Czarto- 
ryskis. The Princess and her husband were very 
sensible people, but as often happens in the marriages 
of great families, their characters were not suited 
to each other. The Prince left heavy debts which 
his widow admitted and scrupulously paid. His 
sallies and repartees were characteristically Polish. 
My mother esteemed him greatly, and he was a true 
friend to her. I do not know on what occasion he 
once said to her that he would come to see her after 
his death, and for a long time she feared he would 
keep his word. These apprehensions recurred nightly, 
when everybody was asleep ; the slightest noise re- 
called to her the promise of her deceased friend. 