

* On the 4th of April, 1782. (See preceding Chapter). 



A CRIMINAL PRIEST 29 

with the Nuncio, and had himself taken into the 
bedroom ; the prelate followed him, and began to 
read the psalms for the dying. While he was reading 
he held the Prince's hand, and as he spoke the words 
of the Psaloiist : * My God, I give up my soul to 
Thee,' the Prince pressed his hand and gave up his 
last breath. The crowd which had penetrated into 
the palace, hitherto respectfully silent, then burst into 
tears and sobs. 

At the time of my grandfather's death, my father 
was still at Wilna, where he was for the second time 
President of the Chief Tribunal of Lithuania. He 
entirely devoted himself to his functions in this 
capacity. Several magistrates were accused of having 
done injustice to individuals either through indul- 
gence for others, or from motives of personal re- 
venge. I heard people say that while my father 
was in oflSce, an action was brought against my 
grandfather by a gentleman who had a claim on 
his estate, and that my grandfather was condemned 
in costs. 

There was much talk at this period about a crime 
which had been committed some years earlier, but 
the author of which could not be discovered. By a 
singular accident the first trace of the criminal was 
found in 1781, and it drew suspicion upon a man 
named Ogonowski, who had become a priest and was 
protected by the Bishop of Wilna, Massalski, well 
known for his dissolute life. My father, who was 
then President of the Court, used all his influence to 
have the culprit brought to trial. 

The Abbd Ogonowski, who had rapidly passed 



30 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

the various ecclesiastical grades which lead to final 
ordination as a priest, hearing that he was in danger, 
took refuge in a convent, under the protection of 
Bishop Massalski. A detachment of troops belonging 
to the Lithuanian Guard, of which my father was in 
chief command, was ordered to surround the con- 
vent during the night, and succeeded in getting 
the doors opened, notwithstanding the resistance of 
the priests. Ogonowski was found with some diflS- 
culty in a cell, and taken to prison in spite of his 
protests and those of the clergy. He was convicted 
of murder and other offences, after a very long and 
careful trial, and was condemned to death and 
executed. 

Several old cases were settled while my father was 
in office, and the procedure became much more regu- 
lar than had previously been the case. He finally 
withdrew from his post in 1782, and hastened to 
return to Warsaw to take part in the Diet which had 
been opened under the presidency of Colonel Krasinski. 
This was the first meeting of the Diet at which I 
was present. My tutor and myself frequently went 
both to the senate and to the Chamber of Deputies. 
I was struck by the grave and imposing presence 
of Prince Lubomirski, Marshal of the Crown, 
who, as I have heard other people say, was emi- 
nently fitted to keep order at the meetings of both 
Houses. 