

After a time everything resumed its usual course, 
as generally happens in this world ; the fetes w^ere 
revived and new members were admitted into the 
colony. A great friend of my mother's, the Countess 
Tyszkiewicz, nee Kinska, daughter of the Princess 
Poniatowska, and niece to the King, was received 
with great ceremony. She had lost an eye through an 
illness in early youth, and had replaced it by one of 
glass ; still she was very pretty, and was fond of 
active sports, such as hunting and riding. 

Being desirous of returning my mother's polite- 
ness, the Countess Tyszkiewicz had a comedy played 
in her house under the title of * ramoureux de Quinze 
AnsJ She herself took the part, dressed in man's 
costume, of the lover, and my second sister played 
the heroine. The theatre was in the sheepfold, and 
the Countess went to it on horseback, in the costume 



PRINCES AND PRINCESSES ON THE STAGE 27 

in which she was to act. After the play there was 
a collation. 

There were also theatrical representations in the 
house of the Chanceliere Princess Sapieha. One of 
the pieces that were played there was an opera, ' La 
Coloniej in which the performers were the Princess 
Eadziwill, nee Przezdiecka, who often came to 
Powonzki and had a fine voice ; my mother ; M. 
Wojna, who was afterwards ambassador at Rome ; 
and General Briihl, of the artillery. 

On another occasion they played ' Andromaque.^ 
The leading part was taken by the young Princess 
Sanguszko, who had just married ; she was very 
pleasant and good-natured, but a little frivolous, and 
she had taken lessons of a celebrated tragic actress 
from Paris. The part of Hermione was played by 
another Princess Sanguszko, who was afterwards 
Princess of Nassau ; that of Orestes, by Prince 
Casimir Sapieha ; that of Pyrrhus, by a Swiss named 
Glaize ; and that of his confidant, by Prince Calixtus 
Poninski. This tragedy did not produce any impres- 
sion upon me ; I only recollect that Prince Sapieha 
was dressed in a Greek costume, and M. Glaize in a 
Koman one. 

When we were at Warsaw I was often sent, 
according to the custom of that time, to assist at my 
grandfather's toilet. When I went to him they had 
to put pomatum on my hair, and to powder and curl 
it, which was very unpleasant to my mother, who did 
not like to see me thus disfigured. On one of these 
visits it was Corpus Christi day, and there was an 
altar in the courtyard. The Bishop, a jjrotege of my 



28 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

grandfather's, was under the canopy, and my grand- 
father assisted at the mass. Shortly after my grand- 
father died,* and all amusements ceased. He 
was buried in the church of the Holy Cross, and* 
his death caused general regret — especially to his 
daughter, the Princess Lubomirska, who was at 
Warsaw at the time, and did not leave him until the 
last moment. 

He died simply and naturally, without the least 
desire to attract remark. Every day after dinner he 
used to play at a game called * tryset,' which was very 
like whist, and was played by four people ; the Pope's 
Nuncio generally joined in the game. The Prince 
kept up this habit to the last, and although he was 
very weak, he had himself dressed to go to the card- 
table. On the very day of his death he came as 
usual, bowed to the Bishop Archetti (who afterwards 
became a cardinal), and apologised for coming a little 
late. As his sight was failing, he asked why they 
had not lit the candles, although the room was lighted 
up as usual. Meanwhile the Princess Lubomirska 
was in her apartments in deep grief, and could not 
come dow^n into the room, where my mother was with 
the whole family. All the people of the house, down 
to the lowest servant, were assembled in profound 
silence. The Prince, who w^as in an invalid chair, 
turned to Dr Bart, who never left him, and asked 
him in German : * Wie lange wird's dauern ' (How 
long will it last) ? The doctor felt his pulse, and 
replied : ' Another half-hour, I think.' The Prince 
then apologised for not being able to play any longer 