

* I was never handsome, but I have often been 
pretty ; I have beautiful eyes, and as all my feelings 
are reflected in them, the expression on my face is 
often interesting. My complexion is white enough 
to be almost brilliant when I blush; a smooth 
forehead does not make my face ugly, and my nose 
completes the sj^'mraetry of my features. My mouth 
is large, my teeth white, my smile amiable, and 
the shape of my face a graceful oval. I have enough 



L 



i6 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

hair to make an easy and becoming head-dress ; it is 
dark, like my eyebrows. I am rather tall than short : 
my figure is elegant, my bust perhaps too thin, my 
hands ugly, but my feet charming ; and there is much 
grace in my movements. I have an extreme desire to 
please, and am skilful in showing both my physical and 
my mental qualities to the best advantage. Though 
vain and ill-tempered, I am endowed with such tact 
that I very seldom do anything which does not either 
give pleasure or inspire lively interest. I am most 
warm and constant in my friendships ; nothing can 
abate my confidence in those I love, and I always 
look up to them as superior to myself My predom- 
inent passion is the love of my country. This is a 
sort of religion with which all my future is bound up, 
and which my husband and children and my own 
disposition have made the dearest and most indispens- 
able sentiment of my life.' 

{The Memoirs of Prince Adam Czartoryskiy with 
some notes and other supplementary matter illustrative 
of the text ivhich have been added by the Editor, begin 
in the next Chapter.) 



CHAPTER II 

1776-1782 

RARLY YOUTH. FAMILY RKCOLLBCTIONS. — LIFE IN A POLISH COUNTRY- 
HOUSE. — PRINCES AND PRINCESSES ON THE STAGE. — A CRIMINAL 
PRIEST. THE POLISH DIET. 

My recollections of the days of my childhood pass 
before my eyes like a landscape in which some objects 
stand out here and there in clear and definite forms, 
while others disappear in a mist or in the distance. 

The first place of which I have any precise remem- 
brance is Rozanka, on the river Bug, where there was 
an old stone mansion, with numerous underground 
cellars containinor excellent old wines. 

This was in the year 1776. My father, then com- 
mander of a regiment of the Lithuanian Guard, had 
taken his detachment to Rozanka during the summer 
in order to train his troops in some military man- 
oeuvres which he wished to introduce into Poland. 
He obtained some good soldiers from Prussia, and 
sent young Poles there to learn the Prussian system 
of drill. 

I well remember the tents which were pitched on 
the green meadow, and the officers of the Guard who 
used to assemble there for dinner, with a monk of St 

VOL, I. B 



1 8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Bernard, who was the almoner of the resrimeiit — a 
tall, stout man, very popular with the officers on 
account of his merry conversation. 

I also recollect the hetman Branicki, who was for 
many years my father's intimate friend, coming to 
Rozanka. At that time the hetmans had entirely 
recovered their former authoritv, and M. Branicki 
was accordingly received with all the official honours 
as well as with the hospitality always accorded to a 
guest. The whole regiment was in parade uniform, 
and seemed to me a large army, though it was only 
composed of two battalions. My father s man-servant 
was at that time in attendance upon me. He was a 
Frenchman named Boissy, a native of Pontoise, near 
Paris ; a worthy and intelligent man, who by his 
democratic spirit had preserved me from the influence 
of the habits of grandeur which at that time were 
pretty generally prevalent in Poland. His example 
induced me to develop from my earliest youth a spirit 
of activity and independence. 