

At this time my parents were in the habit of pass- 
ing the summer at Woloczyn, some miles from 
Rozanka, and my later recollections are connected 
with the vast palace of Woloczyn, which was then 
occupied by the Chancellor Michael Prince Czar- 
toryski, my father's uncle. It was there that my 
mother was educated under the supervision of the 
Chancellor's wife, and she was also married there to 
her maternal uncle, the son of my grandfather 
Augustus. 

The two old princes were very favourable to the 
match, but it was vehemently opposed by the Princess 



L 
k 




EARLY YOUTH 19 

Luboinirska, my father's sister. The chief reason of 

her opposition was this. Shortly before her marriage, 

my mother went to see one of the peasants on the 

estate, and found in the cottage a child suflFering from 

a very severe attack of smallpox. This gave her a 

great shock, as she had lost several of her sisters from 

the same illness ; and she caught the infection so 

dangerously that her life was despaired of Directly 

she recovered, her parents hastened the marriage, and 

she came to the altar with her face covered with marks 

of the disease and a wig on her head, as she had lost 

all her hair. The Princess Lubomirska was much 

grieved to see so ugly a woman given in marriage to 

her brother ; but though she used all her injfluence 

with her father against the match, she could not 

prevent it, as it was considered a very advantageous 

one. Some time after, my mother entirely recovered 

her health, and soon became celebrated for her beauty. 

The main building at Woloczyn was of wood, and 

the outbuildings of stone. I remember the portraits 

of Charles XII, Augustus II, and Poniatowski, the 

King's father ; there was a large garden crossed by a 

long and wide canal, at the end of which was a statue 

of Neptune and his attendants, in the French style 
then in fashion, imitated from the statues in the 

gardens of Versailles. 

There were some brilliant fetes at Woloczyn, at 
which the guests were amused by music and theatri- 
cals. Once there was a swimming race, in which the 
swimmers were dressed as tritons, and among them 
the one who was most remarked was General Count 
Briihl. 






20 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

My mother taught me French. One day she told 
me to learn by heart some verses of Racine which we 
had read together, and in which Mithridates discloses 
to his children his plans against the Romans. I have 
never forgotten these verses, as I was punished for 
not having learnt them by being obliged to stop at 
home, while the other people at the palace went on an 
excursion to a neighbouring village with a spring, in 
a very picturesque spot, which my mother had de- 
corated with flowers. These expeditions were very 
merry and noisy, and I was bitterly disappointed at 
not being allowed to go. 

My first recollections of Warsaw are very vague. 
One of the incidents which struck me the most was 
the general mourning which followed the death of my 
father's uncle. Prince Michael ; * all the inhabitants 
of the ' blue palace 't were dressed in black. 