

We seldom received strangers ; but living as we 
did for each other — our mother for her children and 
we for her — our life was a very happy one. It was 
like an eclogue — a true picture of rustic poetry. 

Each of the cottages in our colony had its particu- 
lar emblem. My sister Marie had a chaffinch with 
the motto, ' Gaiety. ' My device was a branch of oak 
with the word * Fermet^ ' inscribed upon it. At the 
top of my mother's house was a hen with her chickens ; 
on that of my sister Teresa, a basket of white roses. 



LIFE IN A POLISH COUNTRY HOUSE 23 

with the inscription * Bontd ; ' on that of the steward, 
a swarm of bees, and below the word * Activity' The 
Miss Narbutts also had their cottages at Powonzki ; 
and the whole organisation of the place had been 
devised and carried out by my mother. 

We got up early, breakfasted either at my 
mother's or with the steward's wife, who gave us some 
excellent coffee, and then went to work in the gardens. 
At dinner-time one of our servants named Martin 
used to come from Warsaw, leading a donkey which 
carried our food in two panniers, and which was 
always received with joy and expected with impati- 
ence. Dinner was laid sometimes in one place, some- 
times in another, and was announced by a gong. 

We often went out on donkeys, and on Sundays 
we used to go to Mass, some riding and others on 
foot. 

Occasionally there were grand fetes, at which the 
King was sometimes present. One day the signing 
of the peace of Chocim* was represented in the middle 
of a little wood of elder trees, in a grove generally 
used for theatrical performances. Lubomirski, who 
had succeeded Chodkiewicz in the command of the 
army, and a Turkish Pasha, advanced towards each 
other with their respective escorts. These grand 
ceremonies were the things that gave me the least 
pleasure. 

Meanwhile the question of my education was being 
seriously considered at the ' blue palace,' and my tutor 
sometimes objected to my going so often to Powonzki; 
but the attractions of the place were so irresistible 

* In 1C21, when Sigismund III was King of Poland. 



24 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

that, yielding to the wish of my mother, he pitched 
his tent next to my cottage. 

Those happy times lasted for a few years and were 
interrupted by a great misfortune. We lost my 
eldest sister through a terrible accident. We looked 
upon her as a second mother, and were very fond of 
her, for she was devoted to her younger brothers and 
sisters. One day, as she was standing before the 
chimney-piece, her dress took fire. She fled in terror ; 
Mademoiselle Constance Narbutt tried to hold her 
back and extinguish the flames, but could not stop 
her. In the next room was the governess, Made- 
moiselle Petit, who as usual was playing piquet with 
M. Norblin. The latter, hearing the screams of the 
children, ran out and wrapped my unfortunate sister 
in a cloak, thereby extinguishing the flames. She 
was, however, severely burnt ; for some days it was 
hoped that she might recover, but she was too delicate 
to bear the shock, and she died shortly afterwards.* 