

I also recollect the shame and grief which I felt 
one day when I cast the blame of some fault I had 
committed upon one of the running footmen employed 
in the palace. This man's name was Anthony, and he 
was so stout that his place was practically a sinecure. 
He came dressed as for a journey, with a sheepskin 
coat on, and reproached me with having been the 
cause of his dismissal, upon which I at once admitted 
that I was the culprit. I learnt afterwards that the 
story of his dismissal was an invention ; but it pro- 
duced a salutary effect. 

Shortly after, I became seriously ill. There were 
several physicians at ray grandfather's, including one 

* On the 13tl) of August, 1775, when the author of the Memoirs was five years 
old. (See preceding Chapter). 

t The residence of the CzartorysVis at Warsaw. 






FA MIL Y RECOLLECTIONS 2 1 

named Bart ; they all arrived at the conclusion that 
my recovery M^as hopeless. My mother begged them 
to remain in attendance upon me, but none of them 
would take the responsibility. A friend of my parents 
then brought Dr Bekler, physician to King Stanislas 
Augustus, and he restored me to health. 

From this date I beo^an a new life. Colonel 
Ciesielski was appointed my tutor; great care was 
taken of my health, and I resided sometimes at 
Powonzki,* sometimes at Warsaw. Impromptu fetes, 
in which I and my two sisters took part, used at that 
time to be given in the * blue palace,' and there were 
several Frenchmen who contributed in a material 
degree to these entertainments. M. Dorigny, a very 
efficient dancing master, formerly attached to the 
opera in Paris, and ballet-master at Stuttgart, where 
the Duke of Wurtemberg ruined himself in theatrical 
performances, presided over the dancing ; M. Patonar 
directed the music, and M. Norblin designed the 
costumes and the scenery. 

One day a fire broke out after one of these fetes, 
just as the last guest had gone. It began in the wing 
of the building where my sisters lived. The actors, 
who still had their costumes on, were the first to help. 
One of them had red silk stockings, and while he was 
occupied in extinguishing the flames, a servant threw 
a large pailful of water on his legs, thinking they 
were on fire. My sisters and their governess. Made- 
moiselle Petit, had to escape to the other side of the 
building with their friends, the Miss Narbutts. 

Meanwhile the flames continued to spread, and 

* A villa near Warsaw. 



32 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORTSKI 

had covered the whole of the wing. The fire did not, 
however, penetrate the main body of the building, and 
my sisters established themselves there. A third 
sister, Sophia, was born at this time. My health was 
still delicate, and it was thought necessary to teach 
me riding, which gave me great pleasure. 

My rides were usually taken in the direction of 
Powonzki ; and the time I passed there was the 
happiest in my life. The estate was a sort of green 
oasis, whose verdure was the more attractive as it was 
surrounded by a sea of sand. Each of the children 
had a cottage and a garden, and in the centre, on a 
hillock, was a larger house inhabited by my mother, 
with a wood on each side of it, and looking down on a 
little lake, whose waters flowed into a stream that 
bathed all the plantations of the estate. My mother 
also had some artificial ruins erected, after the fashion 
of the time, to complete the attractions of the place. 
There were an island in the lake, a mill, a grotto on the 
island, stables in the shape of a classical amphitheatre, 
and a large courtyard with a great many hens and 
pigeons which we used to feed. 