

VOL. L c 



34 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

We left for the estates in Podolia with a large 
suite. My father at that time had a very immerous 
court, chiefly composed of noblemen's sons, many of 
whom came even from Lithuania. The rendezvous 

was at Pulawy, from which place we started. Dozens 
of carriages followed each other in line, and we 
travelled at the rate of not more than six miles* a 
day. After breakfast we proceeded to the next stage, 
where we dined ; the food and wine always preceded 
us. There were a great many led horses, and we 
often mounted them to get over a stage more quickly. 
One of the principal officials of the court always went 
on beforehand to get our quarters ready. We were 
accompanied by several young pages dressed after the 
Polish fashion ; and before we left Warsaw, the major- 
domo thought proper, as a prudential measure, to 
administer some corporal discipline to them. My 
father, as he was coming out of the house, perceived 
traces of tears and vexation on their faces, and asked 
what was the matter. ' See how the major-domo has 
punished us,' they answered. My father then asked 
the major-domo what they had done, to which the 
latter rejoined that it was a good thing to prepare 
them in this way for their jourrle5^ 

We stopped on our way at the houses of several 
landowners, many of whom joined our party, which 
increased the number of our led horses and carriages ; 
we had also brought some camels with us, as my father 
wished to introduce them into general use. The 
caravan stopped at Klewan, the first of my father's 
estates in Volhynia. We next arrived on the property 

* A Polish mile is equal to five English miles. 



JOURNEY TO VOLHYNIA AND PODOLIA 35 

of Prince Sapieha, who received us with the amplest 
hospitality. The Prince suffered much from gout, and 
this was attributed to the custom, which at that time 
was very general, of always drinking with a visitor. 
Prince Sapieha came every evening leaning on a cane 
to look at the brilliant illuminations in the garden. 
Our next halting-place was Mikolajew, in Podolia. 
There were not enough rooms here for the whole of 
our party, which had become very numerous, and • 
many of us slept in tents. 

Among the many friends who accompanied us on 
this journey was Niemcewicz,* my father's aide-de- 
camp. Opportunities were frequently taken of em- 
barking on various love adventures, in allusion to 
which one of the poets of our party wrote a song of 
which the first couplet was as follows : 

* Beautiful Tomira, this is probably the last of our 
pleasant evenings ; I am with you to-day — to-morrow 
I shall be alone, and woods and streams will separate 
us. But when I shall no longer be there, remember I 
was the first to love you.' 

Niemcewicz was very assiduous in his attentions 
to the sex. One of the houses where we stayed the 
longest was that of M. Onufry Morski. This gentle- 
man had a very important position in Podolia, and 
was a friend of my father's, for whom he had a 
great liking. He had a very handsome wife, of whom 
he was jealous, and he did not trust the friendship of 
Niemcewicz. One day the comedy of * Le Joueur^ 
which my father had translated from the French, was 