

Prince Adam returned to Poland in 1791, and 



^2 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

entered the army under the command of his brother-in- 
law, the Prince of Wiirtemberg. It was in this year 
that the famous Reformed Constitution of the 3rd of 
May, which was afterwards made by Russia and Prussia 
the pretext for a second partition of the country, was 
passed by the Q-rand Diet (known as * the Four Years' 
Diet ') at Warsaw.* This Constitution was regarded 

* ' It was the deliberate and systematic policy of Russia and Prussia to maintain 
anarchy in Poland, in order that it might never rise to prosperity or power or 
independence. With this object they agreed, at the begmning of the reign of 
Stanislas Poniatowsld, that they would maintain by force the existing Constitution, 
and oppose any attempt to abolish the Lib*rum Veto, or to make the monarchy 
hereditary. A strong and earnest effort was, notwithstanding, made to effect the 
former object, and the reform was so powerfully supported that it would have 
undoubtedly succeeded had not Russia again interfered, and re-established, with the 
concurrence of Prussia, Liberum Veto in its full stringency. The jealousy of three 
great powers alone for a time saved Poland. At last they agreed upon their share of 
the spoiL In 1772 they signed *in the name of the Holy Trinity,' treaties for the 
plunder of Poland, and in a few months the first partition was easily effected. It 
was justified at the time, and has been defended by some later historians on the 
ground of that very anarchy which it had been for many years a main object of two 
of the plundering i)owers to foment and to perpetuate. Prussia solemnly guaranteed 
the integrity of Poland. She promised to assist her against all hostile attAclcs, and 
all interference with her internal concerns. The King of Prussia not only fully 
recognised the right of the Polish people as an independent nation to revise their 
Constitution, but he also strongly urged them to do so. 

* The Prussian policy of detaching Poland from Russia was, however, perfectly 
successful, and, relying on Prussian support, the Polish Diet, which first met in 
September 1788, and which was confederated for the emergency, carried a series of 
reforms which totally changed the constitution and condition of Poland. It was 
decreed that the army should be raised from 20,000 to 100,000 men. The system of 
taxation was thoroughly revised. A considerable representation was given to the 
trading towns. The excessive powers of the Dietines were abolished. The Liberum 
Veto was swept away, and finally on l^Iay 3, 1791, a new Constitution was voted, in 
which, after the reigning King, the crown was offered to the Elector of Saxony, and 
to his heirs for ever. It was certain that Russia would resist bitterly what was 
done, and she early announced to the Diet that she would permit no cliange what- 
ever in the Constitution of 1775. The King of Prussia expressed his satisfaction at 
what had occurred, to the Polish Minister at his Court, to the King of Poland, and 
the Elector of Saxony. He urged the Elector to accept the Polish crown: he 
offered him his warm alliance, and he professed himself fully determined to fulfil 
his own treaty obligations. 