

' As for the policy of Russia towards Poland, it was one of cynical, undisguised 
raxMMsity. The course of events depended largely on the King of Prussia. That 
sovereign, as we have seen, had first induced the Poles to assert their independence 
of Russia. He had himself urged them to amend their constitution. He had been 
the first to congratulate them on the constitutional reform of May 1791. He had 
bound himself before Qod and man, by two solemn and recent treaties, to respect 
the integrity of Poland ; to defend the integrity of Poland against all enemies ; to 
oppose by force any attempt to interfere with her internal affairs. Yet, as we have 






VISITS TO ENGLAND 5^ 

by the greatest statesmea and political writers of the 
time as the highest step yet attained in the science 
of government. Burke said that it was ' a glory to 
humanity ' and ' the noblest and greatest benefit shed 
upon the human race/ Fox described it as * a work to 
which all the friends of freedom should be sincerely 
attached,' and Volney remarked that Poland was the 
only country of Northern Europe which had amelio- 
rated the hard lot of its peasantry. 

In 1792, Prince Adam took part in the campaign 
against the Russians, who had invaded Poland in con- 
sequence of the issue of the new constitution ; he 
fought in the battle of Gran no, and was decorated by 
the King for his bravery. 

In 1793, he again went to England, and entered 
into close relations with nearly all the politicians of 
note in that country.* It was while he was still 
staying there in 1794 that the Kosciuszko insurrection 
broke out. Directly he heard the news, he hurried 
back to join the insurgents, but was stopped at 
Brussels and put in arrest under orders from the 
Austrian Government. Meanwhile the insurrection 
was suppressed, and the third partition of Poland took 
place. Soon after the Prince rejoined his parents at 
Vienna, where the Emperor Francis intervened with 
the Empress Catherine of Russia to cancel the confis- 

ako geen, he had resolved as early as March 1792, not only to break his word and to 
betray his trust, but also to take an active part in the partition of the defenceless 
coontry which he had bound himself in honour to protect.' (Lecky, Hittory of 
England in the EighUenth Century y Vols V and VI.) 

* There are in the Czartoryski archives several bulky manuscripts written by the 
IVinoe during his stay in Bngland at this time. Two of these, in the English 
language, are treatises on English law and on the system of police and civil 
•dministration generally; a third, in Polish, is on the judicial administration in 
England. 



54 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

cation of the estates of the Czartoryski family, ordered 
by her in consequence of their participation in the 
insurrection. The Empress insisted, as a condition of 
her entering into negotiations on this subject, that the 
two young princes should go to St Petersburg to 
enter the Russian service, and after much deliberation 
at a family council this condition was accepted.] 