

He hardly remarked the admiration of a youth 

like myself, for this was a homage to w^hich he was 

accustomed. When he afterwards became Minister 

to the Grand-Duke of Weimar he no longer showed 

the same disregard of official favours and decorations ; 

but he always retained in his face and demeanour a 

sort of grandeur which made people compare him to 

Phidias's statue of the Olympian Jove. 

At length we arrived at Carlsbad, where we 
found Madame Oginska, whose presence greatly 
contributed to our pleasure. She had with her 
several young ladies, the daughters of her major- 
domo Siedlecki, and also Dr Kittel, who was young 
and very handsome, and was consequently much in 
request with ladies whose health required, or seemed 
to them to require, a doctor's care. 

There was at that time at Carlsbad a very bril- 
liant casino, where the whole society of the place 
assembled, and where there w^as dancing almost every 
evening. One of the ladies was said to be much 
admired by the Archduke Leopold, whose weakness 
for the sex was notorious, and who ascended the 
U throne some years later. I was struck by the beauty 
of the features of this lady, and especially by the 
extraordinary vivacity of her movements. 

We returned home in the autumn, and the winter 



48 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

of 1786 to 1787 was passed partly at Pulawy, partly 
at Siedlce. We continued our studies at Pulaw}'' 
without much regularity, but with great interest and 
diligence, and passed the carnival at Siedlce, where 
there was a numerous and brilliant githering of 
visitors. Madame Oginska, who held her Court 
there, was very pious, but her sole anxiety was to 
amuse her guests and mak6 them merry. She had 
in her house a great many charming young ladies 
belonging to noble families. When her toilet was 
over, her guests were admitted into her apartments, 
and these young ladies were to be seen taking to her 
some article of dress — a flower, a ribbon, a veil, or a 
bonnet — which was to be worn in the course of the 
day. Afterwards everybody went into the drawing- 
rooms, where amusements of all kinds were constantly 
going on. 

Madame Oginska was very fond of playing at 
cards, and invited the best players to Siedlce. This 
was not perhaps very praiseworthy, but it con- 
tributed to our amusement for part of the day. In 
the evening there was dancing and drawing-room 
games ; in the summer we walked about in a large 
garden which was called Alexandria, and which 
Madame Oginska had decorated in the English 
fashion ; in the autumn we went out shooting, and 
she used to join our party, firing from her place at 
the birds as they flew by. 

It was difficult to sufi'er from ennui at Siedlce, 
and the natural consequence was that romantic 
adventures frequently occurred, in which I sometimes 
played a part. I had found some books which fired 



VISITS TO ENGLAND 49 

my imagination ; I read them during several nights, 
when I should have done better to devote the time 
to study. One of the young ladies at Siedlce, 
Mademoiselle Marie Niezabitowaka, became the object 
of my ' sighs/ which I did not venture to communicate 
to her without great hesitation. To enter into the 
young ladies' room was beyond my power, and often I 
used to stand near the door, fearing to cross the 
threshold. At length I got over my timidity, and my 
usual place was on a box in the young ladies' room. 