

I do not quite remember whether it was then or 
later on that my father appointed as our tutor M. 
Dupont de Nemours, a member of the National 
Assembly, who was much esteemed in France for his 
ability and character. He had with him a secretary 
named Noyer, a very importunate man who paid 

* The author and his brother Constantine. The Bohemian traveller Tanner, 
writing in lG7i^, says of this magnificent country seat of the Czartoryski family : — 
'ProBpeximus hicadextra fluminis parte Pulavii castrum splendidum, eta circum> 
jace^tium hortorum am.xnitate deliciosum.* 



EDUCATION AND STUDIES 43 

marked attention to Madame Petit One day he 
knocked at her door, and not knowing any other way 
to get rid of him, she told him she was not at home. 
M. Dupont did not stay long with us ; he returned to 
France, and I saw him in Paris at the time of the 
Restoration. He introduced himself to me as my old 
tutor, but I had entirely forgotten him. 

There was a fencing-master at Pulawy who gave 
us a lesson every morning in the garden after we got 
up, which was very early, and then we passed to other 
studies. The company used to be very large at 
dinner, as all the persons in the service of the family 
were present. 

Besides our studies, we had various pleasures, such 
as hunting, excursions to the house of M. and Madame 
Filipowicz, the steward of the Pulawy estates at 
Konska Wola, country rides, and especially coursing. 
I was very fond of this pastime ; in a wood in the 
vicinity there were hares on the hills, and a brood of 
foxes which we amused ourselves by driving out of 
their holes with dogs. 

This was for us children what I may call 'the 
Pulawy period.' My father's stay in Lithuania at- 
tracted to our house a great number of citizens of that 
province ; several young men also came from Lithuania 
to be educated at our house, and they amused the 
company during the hours which were not given up 
to study. 

Our daily fencing-lessons took place in the garden 
during the summer. Although accustomed to the use 
of the foil at the school of Cadets, Rembilinski, one of 
our tutors, was once hit in the eye, and on another 



44 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

occasion, as he was fencing with me, my foil pierced 
his mask and wounded him in the mouth. He was 
much frightened, and his first thought was to ascertain 
whether his second eye had not been hurt. I was 
profuse in my apologies, and thanked God that my 
awkwardness had not had any more serious con- 
sequences. 

We used to hold meetings like those of the Diets, 
at which we discussed public questions. I recollect 
that at one of these meetings the question discussed 
was, which was the best government, one in which 
political power was distributed among the people, or a 
government in which all power proceeded from a 
central authority. I advocated the greatest possible 
liberty, while to my great surprise Rembilinski de- 
clared himself in favour of a central and paternal 
government. His speech was so eloquent that I 
could not find words to answer him, which greatly 
dissatisfied me. I was beaten, but not convinced. 