



CHAPTER V 



1786 



H HOLIDAY IN GERMANY. — WIELAND. — GOETHE. — A POLISH 

CARNIVAL. — VISITS TO ENGLAND. 

In 1786, I first went to travel abroad ; I was accom- 
panied by my tutor, who had been ordered to take 
the waters at Carlsbad. Madame Osfinska, the 
hetman's wife, my father's cousin and my mother's 
aunt, started for Carlsbad at the same time as we 
did, accompanied by a numerous suite, as was then 
the custom. We visited several German towns where 
I came into contact with many eminent men. I can- 
not say that I made their acquaintance, for my mind 
was as yet not sufficiently developed ; but I still 
remember having met them. 

My father had invited to Pulawy a professor of 
Latin and Greek who had been recommended to him 
by Steine, the celebrated professor of Gottingen. 
He was a young Dane and an enthusiastic admirer 
of the beauties of ancient literature, like all who 
came from that university. I shared this enthusiasm 
— a little childishly, but very sincerely — under the 
influence of Kniaznin, who taught us Polish and 



46 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Latin literature. I neprlected the tedious though 
indispensable study of grammar, and tried to under- 
stand the classic poets, which gave me the appearance 
of knowing much more than I did in reality ; and I 
paraded my knowledge in the presence of the German 
savants whom I met on my travels. At Prague I 
made the acquaintance of Meissner, professor of Greek 
literature and author of several German works. 
His reputation, which at that time was very great, 
did not survive him. I recollect with pleasure the 
conversations I had with him, and I was much 
astonished to find that I was able to quote to him 
from memory some verses from the Greek poets. 

We passed through Gotha, where, thanks to a 
letter of introduction from my father, we made the 
acquaintance of Baron Frankenburg, Minister to the 
Duke of Gotha. He was an intelligent, amiable, and 
cultivated man, and he placed us in relations with 
other celebrated and interesting persons. He gave 
us letters with which we went to Weimar, already 
known as the German Athens, where I saw Wieland 
and Herder, with whom my father kept up a corres- 
pondence. 

Wieland's appearance was anything but poetical ; 
he was short, rather stout, somewhat advanced in 
years, wrinkled, and wearing a sort of nightcap which 
he seldom took off. 

Baron Frankenburg also enabled us to make the 
acquaintance of Goethe, and I was admitted with my 
tutor to a private house where the poet read to 
some friends his play of * Iphigenia in Tauris,' which 
he had just finished. I listened with great en- 



GOETHE 47 . 

thusiasin. Goethe was then in the brightest period 

of bis youth ; he was tall, and his face was handsome 

and imposing, with a piercing look, sometimes a little 

disdainful, as if he were looking down upon the 

horizon of humanity. This slight tinge of arrogance 

was also visible in the smile on his beautiful mouth. 