

To make love or fall in love was the lot of every 
young man at Siedlce, and I had some rivals, among 
whom was Niemcewicz. Mademoiselle Niezabitowska 
was one of the prettiest of the young ladies there, and 
she was also endowed with other qualities by Nature 
which distinguished her from other women during 
her long life. Poets wrote verses to her, and I 
remember that one of these effusions ended by 
deploring her severity to those who surrounded her. 
It was indeed difficult to secure her good graces, and 
she treated her admirers with much rigour. 

Some cases of scarlet fever having broken out in 
the ladies' apartments, my mother recalled me to 
Pulawy. 



[Here there is a break in the Memoirs, which are 
not resumed until the year 1795, when Prince Adam 
Czartoryski proceeded with his brother Constantino 
to St Petersbtirg. In 1789, when he was nineteen 
years of age, he Went with his mother to Paris and 
then to London, where he stayed for some weeks 

VOL. L I> 



50 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

with Lord Mansfield, to complete his political educa- 
tion by studying the English constitution. During 
this time he witnessed the trial of Warren Hastings ; 
and afterwards he visited Scotland and the principal 
manufacturing towns in England. One of his English 
acquaintances of that period, Dr Currie of Liverpool, 
thus describes, in a letter to Mr F. Creevy, M.P., 
dated the 3 1st of October, 1803, his impressions of 
the Prince in 1790: — 'I dined yesterday by special 
invitation with Prince William of Gloucester. There 
was a good deal of talk about the Northern coasts, 
where the Prince and several of his suite were last 
year, and I was a good deal interested to hear that 
the politics of Russia were led by Prince Adam 
Czartoryski, the Secretary of State. The Prince 
said that he was a most agreeable, accomplished man, 
but decidedly in the French interest, a Jacobin, etc. 
etc., and that his influence was the great bar to 
England resuming her proper weight at the Court 
of St Petersburg. Now you must know this Czar- 
toryski is an old acquaintance of mine — was a cor- 
respondent, and might have been so yet, but for my 
own neglect, for he wrote me several letters since 
I ceased to write to him. He made the tour of 
the island along with his mother in grand style, some 
time in the earlier and better stages of the French 
Revolution. He was then about twenty or twenty- 
one, and a very fine young man indeed, full of great 
expectations of happy changes in society ; full of 
ardour, benevolence, and adventure. He had passed 
the preceding winter at Paris, in close attendance on 
the National Assembly in the most brilliant days of 



VISITS TO ENGLAND 51 

Mirabeau. He had afterwards beea a close attendant 
on the debates in our own Parliament, at that time 
BO interesting. He seemed to me extremely capable 
of appreciating the great talents then displayed on 
the theatres of both nations, and was very fond of 
comparing the statesmen and orators of France and 
England. Mirabeau and Fox were his heroes — but 
he preferred the latter. He was absolutely as great 
an idolater of Fox as you are of the General [Sir 
John Moore], and seemed to me to have that sim- 
plicity and elevation of soul which is necessary to 
appreciate our incomparable Charley. I took to 
Czartoryski extremely, and he used to ride out with 
rae and walk with me during the fortnight he stayed 
here, as you do. He is an English-looking man, a 
black fellow, very tall and handsome — spoke our 
language and loved our country. I had several 
letters from him during his tour in Scotland (where I 
introduced him) and mean to have a search for them. 
He was very deeply interested in the Revolution in 
Poland, in which I think his mother played a prin- 
cipal part. She was with him, and took the direction 
of him — a woman then still handsome, and said to be 
of great address of every kind, but perfectly intel- 
ligible and feminine. When I revolve all these things, 
Sheridan's scheme of sending Fox to St Petersburg 
struck me as a noble thought. Depend upon it, if it 
could be accomplished, that his influence there would 
be speedily felt. For this Czartoryski is a virtuous 
man, and, if w^e knew how to approach him, neither is 
nor can be the tool of Bonaparte.' 