



1 



CHAPTER VI 

1794-1795 

JOURNEY TO 8T PETERSBURG. — LEADING PERSONAGES IN RUSSIAN 
SOCIETY UNDER THE EMPRESS CATHERINE. — THE ZUBOFFS. — 
CATHERINE. — HER COURT. — THE YOUNG PRINCES ENTER THE 
RUSSIAN SERVICE. 

It was the 12th of May 1795, when my brother and I 
arrived at St Petersburg. In order to form an idea 
of our feehngs on entering that city, it is necessary to 
know the principles in which we were brought up. 
Our education had been entirely Polish and Republican. 
The study of ancient history and literature, and of the 
history and literature of our country, had occupied 
the years of our adolescence. Our minds were full of 
Greets and Romans, and, following the example of 
our ancestors, we thought only of perpetuating the 
ancient virtues on the soil of our fatherland. With 
regard to political liberty, more recent examples, 
taken from the history of England and France, had 
up to a certain point rectified our ideas, without in 
any way diminishing their energy. The love of our 
country, of its glories, its institutions, and its liberties 
had been inculcated into us by our studies, and by 
everything we had seen or heard around us. I should 



56 MEMOIRS OF FRINGE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

add that this feeHng, which penetrated the whole of 
our moral nature, was accompanied by an invincible 
aversion to all who had contributed to the ruin of the 
fatherland which we so much loved. 

This two-fold sentiment of love and hatred domi- 
nated me so entirely, that I could not meet a Russian 
either in Poland or elsewhere without feeling a rush of 
blood to the head — without blushing or turning white 
with anger — for every Russian seemed to me an 
author of the misfortunes of my country. 

My first task was promptly to replace on a satis- 
factory footing the affairs of my father. Three- 
fourths of his fortune, all consisting of land situated 
in the provinces seized by Russia, had been seques- 
trated. These estates were mortgaged to a consider- 
able extent, so that not only my father's own property, 
but also that of a great number of our countrymen, 
was in question. The representations made in my 
father's favour by the Court of Vienna had had no 
result. Catherine was provoked by the patriotism of 
my father and mother, and their sympathy with 
the Kosciuszko insurrection. * Let their two sons 
6ome to me,' she said, *and then we will see.' She 
wished to keep us as hostages. 

Our departure for St Petersburg was thus indis- 
pensable. Our father, kind and considerate as ever, 
did not venture to demand this sacrifice from us ; and 
it was the, fact of our knowing this that prevailed 
over every other consideration. Our fatherland was 
lost: were we also to condemn our parents to want, 
and make it impossible for them to discharge their 
debts ? We did not hesitate an instant. At the same 



y 



JOVRNEY TO ST PETERSBURG 57 

time we knew well that to go to St Petersburg, 
far from all our connections — to give ourselves up 
as prisoners, so to say, into the hands of the most 
detested of our enemies, of the executioners of our 
country — was in our situation the most painful sacrifice 
we could make to paternal affection ; for to do this it 
was necessary to act in opposition to all our senti- 
ments, all our convictions, all our plans — to every- 
thing that was nearest to our hearts and minds. 