



40 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

then ventured to look at the man who had called 
my daughter an angel. To my surprise I saw not a 
giant, but a little man, shorter than myself, rather 
crooked, and in a shabby uniform covered with snufF. 
He had beautiful blue eyes, a mild but penetrating 
glance, and a manner which inspired confidence. 
Seeing that I was looking at him, but that I did not 
yet venture to open my lips, he continued : " Your 
angel will always find in me a friend. She has 
married my nephew, but I must plainly tell you that 
they are not made for each other, she is an angel and 
he* — " The King did not finish the phrase, but added, 
** Anyhow you know him and will do him justice ; all 
I will say now is that this cannot last, but let 
her boldly come to me whenever she finds it 
necessary." These words calmed my anxiety, and 
there remained only a feeling of gratitude which it was 
easy for a mother to express when speaking of her 
daughter. The interview lasted over an hour. 
Frederick II afterwards spoke of many other things. 
He asked me about Poland and our King. This 
was a very delicate subject, as he had only recently 
plundered our King with the help of his allies, who 
had shared in the spoil. Among the questions he 
addressed to me I remember his asking whether 
Stanislas Augustus wore a military uniform. I felt 
the irony of this question, as our army had at 
that time been so reduced that we hardly had any 
troops at all. I answered, as was the fact, that 
the King wears the uniform of the School of Cadets. 

* Prince Louis of Wurtemberg was afterwards deprived of his command in the 
Polish army for declining to fight against Russia, and his wife, the Princess Marie, 
then refused to live with him. 



INTERVIEW WITH FREDERICK THE GREAT 41 

"He is right," observed Frederick; ^^c^est vi'aiment 
un roi d Fecole" I felt indignant at this remark, which 
seemed to me quite uncalled for. I turned red, the 
tears again rose to my eyes, and I exclaimed without 
thinking : " Sirey voxis lui avez donn4 unc legon cruelle 
et peu mentee" When I came in I did not dare to 
raise ray eyes to him ; afterwards, when he began 
to speak of my daughter, I felt bolder, and I was 
thoroughly roused when he spoke slightingly of my 
unhappy country and King, whom he had humiliated 
after plundering him. After I had spoken I felt 
frightened, but Frederick thus went on, as if he had 
not heard what I said : " I have often remarked that 
in Poland women should govern ; if they did, every- 
thing would be better there, and our conversation 
to-day has confirmed me in that belief" He then 
bowed to me politely and respectfully, again saying 
that my daughter could always reckon on his protec- 
tion ; and with this our first interview ended.'] 



CHAPTER IV 

1784-1787 

PULAWY. — EDUCATION AND STUDIES. 

At Pulawy we* began an existence which was entirely 
new to us, and we entered on our studies seriously 
and regularly. 

Up to that time we had only been taught elemen- 
tary knowledge, and our lessons were frequently 
interrupted, while now they became almost our sole 
occupation. M. Lhuillier taught us mathematics and 
universal history ; Colonel Ciesielski, the history of 
Poland ; Kniaznin, literature and Latin. Our clas- 
sical master was at first a Dane named Schow, and 
afterwards Groddeck, who subsequently became a 
professor at the University of Wilna. 