

* An emineDt Polish writer, best known for his * Historical Songs ' and his 
excellent translations from various English i)03ts. He was bom in 1757, and died 
n exile at Paris in 1841. 



36 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

performed at his house, and his wife took a part in it. 
He himself played the hero, and had to address her 
in a speech full of ardent love, to which she listened 
with the greatest coldness, as I remarked at each 
performance. Morski's younger brother was after- 
wards the ambassador of the King of Saxony and 
Grand-Duke of Warsaw at Madrid. His elder brother, 
the canon, was passionately fond of dancing ; I still 
remember with what entrain he danced the mazurka 
at a masked ball at Siedlee, and he was not a man 
of very rigid morals. 

Among the more intimate guests at my father's 
house was Colonel Molski, a wasf fond of bon-mots and 
good eating. He once made a bet that he would eat 
an enormous dish of pirogi* alone, without hurting 
himself He gained his bet, and drank some punch 
to wash the pirogi down. 

At Miendzyboz we met a large detachment of 
Cossacks, which gave us the idea of constructing a 
sort of fortress and feigning attacks upon it. My 
tutor shut himself up in the fortress with my brother ; 
the besiegers were under the command of Colonel 
Molski, to whom I acted as aide-de-camp. When the 
day for the attack came, there was much noise and 
fighting on horseback. M. Siehen, mounted on a very 
spirited horse and riding at full gallop, encountered 
one of the Cossacks, and the shock was so violent that 
Siehen fell from his horse and became insensible. 
When he recovered consciousness, he had completely 
lost his memory, and he did not recollect what had 
happened until several days afterwards. The Cossack 

* Small meat puddings. 



JOURNEY TO VOLHYNIA AND PODOLIA 37 

escaped with a few contusions. Soon after there was 
almost a real battle between the Cossacks and the 
inhabitants of the village, a detachment of whom were 
in the fortress where we were to breakfast. The be- 
sieged at last ate the food that had been prepared for 
us, and an arrangement was then made to prevent 
further accidents. I assisted at this fight on horse- 
back, and it greatly interested me. 

From Miendzyboz we went to Kamieniec, where 
was M. Witt, the father of General Witt, whose wife 
was the beautiful Greek that afterwards married Felix 
Potocki. At that time she was in all the freshness of 
her beauty, and shortly after she travelled all over 
Europe, her charms attracting universal admiration. 
She did us the honours of her house at Kamieniec, sur- 
rounded by people distinguished by their youth, their 
birth, or their talents. All paid her implicit obedience, 
and besides her beauty she attracted by a sort of 
originality proceeding either from a feigned naivetd or 
from ignorance of the language. I was told that 
when people admired her beautiful eyes, or when she 
spoke of them herself, she used to say in French : 
'mes beaux yeux,' thinking that this was a single 
word. 