

The evenings were passed in the amusements I 
have described, but during the day, which is so long 
in that climate, the whole bitterness of our situation 
forced itself upon our minds. We had to visit, to 
solicit, to humble ourselves. It was hard, and we 
should have had much more difficulty in doing it if 
Gorski had not been there to keep us up to the work. 
He exercised all his authority over us ; he did not 



THE ZUBOFFS 71 

leave us a moment's relaxation, repeating that 
the eflfects of our neglect would fall upon our parents, 
and that the only object for which we were at St 
Petersburg was to replace them in their estates. 

Plato Zuboff was at that time the most powerful of 
the Empress's favourites, and we had to go to him 
first. We came to his apartments in the Tauris Palace 
at the appointed hour. He had a brown coat on, and 
was leaning on a piece of furniture. He was under 
middle age, with a good figure and an agreeable 
countenance ; his dark hair was curled and brushed 
up into a tuft ; his voice was soft and clear. He 
received us with an air of benevolent protection. 
Gorski acted as our interpreter, and hastened to reply 
to the questions which Zuboff addressed to us ; his 
French was not correct, but his mien was always 
imposing. Zuboff assured us that he would do all he 
could to help us, but added that we must not be 
under any illusions, that everything depended on her 
Majesty's favour, and that neither himself nor any 
one else was able to influence her decisions. He 
added that we would soon be admitted to her presence. 
Prince Kourakin, brother to the future ambassador, 
who had undertaken to protect us, had taken us 
to Zuboff; but at the moment when we entered 
he disappeared, or rather stayed behind in the ante- 
chamber. He rejoined us as we were going out, 
and listened with a smile of curiosity to our account 
of what had happened. All his questions proved 
that he was convinced that we had just left the 
most powerful man in Europe. 

But there was another man equally important; 



72 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

this was Valerian Zuboff, Count Plato's younger 
brother. His more masculine face and figure made 
him more attractive than his brother, and it was 
said that the Empress liked him so much that if 
he had presented himself first he would have become 
the favourite. As it was, the fact of his being Count 
Plato's brother, and his personal qualities, gave him 
great influence over the mind of the old Czarina. 
We were therefore obliged to pay him a visit. By a 
singular coincidence, Valerian Zuboff' had been the 
commander of the detachment which had sacked 
Pulawy* in the previous year. The horrors which 
marked the passage of the Russian troops through 
Poland are well known, and though Zuboff* did not 
preside in person over the pillage of Pulawy, it can 
hardly be credited that the most savage soldiery 
would have acted in so outrageous a manner without 
their commander's consent. If, as is probable, they 
acted under orders from above, a man of honour would 
have taken care to show that it was with reluctance 
that he acquitted himself of such a mission, and would 
have at least moderated the execution of it. No such 
moderation, however, was shown; and we, the victims 
of the pillage, had to ask the spoiler (for such we 
thought him) for his protection. We were even 
obliged to request his intercessibn to be admitted into 
the presence of his brother, and it was to him that 
we owed the special honour of a private reception. 