

I described with all the ardour of a youthful poet 
my state of mind at this time, in some verses entitled 
* The Song of the Bard,' which I composed during mj'^ 
stay at Grodno. When I left that town I sent the 
manuscript to our friend Kniaznin, and it was often 
read with tears of sympathy by my family. 

We bade adieu to our parents (who at that time 
were residing at Vienna), in the month of December 

!. 1794. After sadly passing a few days at Sieniaw^a,* 
we proceeded on our journey at the beginning of 
January, and stopped at Grodno (where the King 
Stanislas Augustus then lived under the surveillance 
of Prince Repnin), until we received permission, 

I which did not arrive till the following spring, to go 
on to St Petersburg. The Empress at first refused 
to give this permission, and we were shown a note in 
her own hand in which she stated as the reason of her 
refusal that my mother had, as in the story of 
Hamilcar and Hannibal, made us swear eternal hatred 

>■ to Russia and her sovereign. While at Grodno we 

(often went to see the King, and we were witnesses of 
his grief and bitter self-reproaches at not being able 
* lu Galicia, now the countzy resideuce of Prince Ladislas CzartoryakL 



58 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

either to save his country or to perish in fighting for 
her. 

Since my first arrival at St Petersburg my feelings 
have never changed, but their outward expression has 
necessarily been modified by events. The same 
juvenile ardour which made us regard our departure as 
a heroic sacrifice to paternal affection, made the detested 
position in which we were placed more tolerable. 
When one is young, there are few things that cannot 
be borne ; one is strong enough to contend with every 
kind of adversity and even of misfortune. New 
scenes, new impressions, though painful, yet hitherto 
unknown, always distract the mind in the end even 
if they do not change it. 

We were received in St Petersburg society with 
much consideration and good-will. Our father, who 
had lived in the Russian capital at the time of 
Elizabeth, of Peter II, and of the accession of 

r 

Catherine, was well known and respected there by 
the older inhabitants. His letters, which we brought 
with us, procured us a favourable reception. The 
injustice with which we had been treated by the 
Cabinet, elicited a sympathy in our favour which was 
not entirely barren, as it \vas openl}'' and fearlessly 
expressed. I have no doubt, remembering the com- 
pliments which were paid to us, that the courtiers 
of whom St Petersburg society was at that time 
almost entirely composed, knew beforehand that their 
politeness to the disinherited of Poland — the foster- 
children of liberty — could not compromise them at 
Court. Perhaps they had even received a hint that 
this conduct on their part would be pleasing to the 



RUSSIAN SOCIETY 59 

Empress. After a few weeks we had made many 
acquaintances, and we received invitations every day 
from the members of the aristocracy. Dinners, balls, 
concerts, soirees, private theatricals, succeeded each 
other without intermission. 