



RUSSIAN SOCIETY 65 

great and small, were not in the least shocked at the 
depraved tastes of their sovereign or the murders and 
other crimes which she committed. Everything was 
allowed to her. Her luxuriousness was a sacred thing, 
and no one dreamt of condemning her debaucheries ; 
it was like the pagans respecting the crimes and the 
obscenities of the gods of Olympus and the Caesars of 
Rome. 

The Muscovite Olympus had three stages. The 
first was the so-called * young court/ occupied by the 
young princes and princesses, all of whom were grace- 
ful and cultivated, and promised well for the future. 
The second was held solely by the Grand-Duke Paul, 
whose sombre character and fantastic humour inspired 
terror, and sometimes contempt. At the top of the 
edifice was Catherine, with all the prestige of her 
victories, of her prosperity, and of her confidence in 
the love of her subjects, whom she could always lead 
according to her caprices. 

All the hopes that could be based on the * young 
court ' belonged only to a distant future, and did not 
in any way diminish the general affection for the 
supreme authority of the Czarina, especially as the 
* young court ' was regarded only as a creation of the 
ruling power. Catherine reserved to herself exclu- 
sively the care of the education of her grandchildren ; 
and their parents were forbidden to exercise any 
influence in this respect. Directly they were born 
the princes and princesses were taken away from their 
parents, and they grew up under the eyes of the 
Empress, to whom alone they seemed to belong. 

The Grand-Duke Paul was the shadow in the 

VOL. I. E 



66 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

picture, and augmented its effect. The terror which 
he inspired greatly strengthened the general attach- 
ment for the rule of Catherine. Everyone wished 
that the reins of government should long remain in 
her strong hands ; and as all feared Paul, they admired 
the more the power and the great abilities of his 
mother, who held him in dependence, far from a 
throne which by right belonged to him. 

This rapid sketch will explain the idolatry of the 
inhabitants of St Petersburg for their female Jupiter. 
It was in some sort a reproduction of the adoration of 
Louis XIV before death had carried away his numer- 
ous descendants. 

It would have been very difficult, if not impossible, 
for a stranger arriving at St Petersburg to resist 
impressions and prejudices so deeply rooted. Once 
he entered the Court atmosphere and the society 
which depended upon the Court, he was imperceptibly- 
carried away by the same ideas, and generally ended 
by joining in the concert of praise which was con- 
tinually rising around the throne. As a proof of 
this, illustrious travellers might be cited, such as the 
Prince de Ligne, the Counts de Sdgur and de 
Choiseul, and many others. In the group of strangers 
and natives who slandered their acquaintances, who 
would sacrifice anything to a hon mot, and who had no 
reason to mistrust us, there was not one who, so far as 
I knew, ever ventured to make a joke at the expense 
of the Empress. They respected nothing and gossipped 
about everything ; a disdainful and mocking smile 
often accompanied the name of the Grand-Duke Paul ; 
but if that of Catherine was mentioned, all men's faces 