

The Narishkin palace was of quite a different 
kind. With all its anachronisms, it was a true 
Russian building of the Asiatic type, and the young 
ladies there, who were less looked after than they 
usually are in Russia, were said to have been also 
distinguished by Prince Potemkin. The doors were 



RUSSIA K SOCIET Y 63 

open to * everybody, and Cossacks, Tartars, Cir- 
cassians, and other Asiatics were among the guests. 
The owner, Leo Narishkin, gay, affable, good- 
natured, an old favourite of Petef III, and after- 
wards a courtier of the Empress Catherine, always 
ready to please her favourites, with all of whom he 
was on good terms, spent enormous sums as Grand 
Equerry in balls and receptions, and yet, though he 
had been doing this for ten years, did not manage to 
get through his fortune. I do not know if his heirs, 
who had the same taste for lavish expenditure, have 
been more successful. 

At the Golowin palace there were not daily 
soirees, as elsewhere, but little coteries like those got 
up in Paris, to perpetuate the ancient traditions of 
Versailles. The mistress of the house, whose two 
daughters have since married MM. Fredro and 
Potocki, was very witty, talented, sentimental, and 
fond of art. 

Another house which had a peculiar character of 
its own was the palace of Count Strogonoff. The 
Count had lived for a long time in Paris, and had 
contracted habits there which were in singular con- 
trast to the old Muscovite customs. He and his 
friends talked of Voltaire, of Diderot, of the Parisian 
stage, and discussed the merits of the pictures of the 
old masters, of which the Count had a rich collection ; 
and while this conversation was going on, a huge 
table was laid, with a barbaric disorder betraying the 
origin of his Siberian riches, 'at which people dined 
without being invited and were waited upon by a 
crowd of serfs. 



64 MEMOIRS OP PR/XCE ADAM CZARTOKYSKI 

I will not sketch in detail the societv of St Peters- 
burg ; I have to speak of more serious subjects. I 
will only add that Russian society was at that time, 
as it probably is still, only a reflection of the Court. 
It might be compared to the vestibule of a temple, 
where no one has eves or ears for anvthinof but the 
divinity within. Every conversation, I had almost 
said every phrase, always ended in a reference or 
question relating to the Court — what was said or done 
there, or what was intended to be done. Every 
important impulse came from the Court ; this de- 
prived society, it is true, of any distinctive character, 
yet it seemed to be animated and gay. 

The Empress Catherine, the immediate author of 
the ruin of Poland, whose very name inspired us with 
horror, and who was cursed by everyone with the 
heart of a Pole-^-who, in the opinion of people outside 
her capital, neither had virtue nor even womanly 
decency — had nevertheless succeeded in gaining the 
veneration and even the love of her servants and 
subjects. During the long years of her reign the 
army, the privileged classes, and the administrators 
had their days of prosperity and lustre. There can 
be no doubt that since her accession the Russian 
Empire had gained in prestige abroad and in order at 
home far more than during the preceding reigns of 
Anne and Elizabeth. People's minds were still full 
of the ancient fanaticism and of a servile feeling of 
adoration for autocrats. The prosperous reign of 
Catherine had confirmed the Russians in their servility, 
though some gleains of European civilisation had 
already penetrated among them. Thus the people, 