

We were everywhere accompanied by M. James 
Gorski, who had been requested by our father to be 
otir friend and guide, and to assist us by his advice. 
No better mentor could have been selected. Easy- 
going, merry, tolerant, a genial and witty companion, 
and at the same time scrupulously honourable and 
never hesitating to tell an unpleasant truth, he was 
the very man to keep us in the right way without 
alienating us by excessive severity. We were very 
happy in the society of this excellent friend, and I 
only satisfy the demands of my conscience in here 
expressing our gratitude to him and our grief at his 
unexpected loss. He encouraged us to take advan- 
tage of the friendly reception given to us, by entering 
into relations with the persons who were ultimately 
to bring about the restitution of our fortune. Gorski 
spoke French with a strong Polish accent, but this 
did not in any way disconcert him. All he said and 
did was marked by a laconic precision which was 
thoroughly in accordance with his character and ap- 
pearance. He held his head high, and had a proud 
manner and a brief and decided way of speaking, 
always, however, within the limits of politeness. 
Although he did not much esteem the majority of his 
acquaintances, they were devoted to him. He was 
very fond of pleasure and good living, and persuaded 
us to go into society, which perhaps our melancholy, 



6o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARWRYSKI 

and also a little natural indolence, would otherwise 
have prevented us from doing. He never lost sight 
of the object of the journey we had undertaken, and 
he never neglected any means calculated to achieve 
it. He always urged us to pay visits and take steps 
which were inexpressibly disagreeable to us, and it 
was to his persistence in this respect that our success 
was mainly due. 

This period of our youth was a decisive one for 
the rest of our career : for, thus suddenly introduced 
into a state of things entirely foreign to us and 
contrary to our ideas, we saw all our plans disappear 
and our future changed and broken in opposition to 
our wishes and our convictions. As regards myself 
this phase of my life produced deep and painful 
results. The misfortunes of my country, of my 
parents, and of many others of my countrymen, the 
defeat of justice and the triumph of violence and 
crime, had unhinged my mind. I began to doubt 
the ways of Providence. I saw only contradictions 
and aimless struggles; nothing seemed to me to 
deserve any serious attention ; I was absorbed by 
a feeling of scepticism, of cold and despairing indiffer- 
ence. I have since more than once relapsed into these 
attacks of despair. But although, seeing nowhere 
any solid basis of action, and suspecting everybody, 
I looked upon men and things with contempt, an 
interior voice suggested to my reason that virtue 
and charity were indubitable realities that were worth 
living for, and that even if this were not the case, 
they were to be prefe^red to anything else. This 
debate of my conscience alone saved me from the 