



RUSSIAN SOCIETY 6i 

fatal effects of universal doubt. The first germs of 
belief, though weakened, still remained in my soul. 

Compliments and pleasures always produce their 

effect on a youthful mind, though they do not 

prevent, and indeed sometimes promote, a feeling of 

scepticism. Our souls retained their wounds, but we 

felt some change on the surface. We found that, 

according to the proverb, the devil is not so black as 

he is painted, especially if he makes himself amiable ; 

that it was not just, notwithstanding the outrages 

that had been committed on our country, to accuse 

the whole Russian nation of them — to include in our 

detestation of the Government, individuals who had 

nothing in common with it ; that the appearances of 

things change according to the condition and status of 

persons, and that to arrive at a sound judgment of 

their private, and still more of their public, conduct, 

one should put one's self in their place and have regard 

to the circumstances by which they are surrounded. 

By degrees we came to the conviction that these 

Russians, whom we had instinctively learnt to hate — 

whom we indiscriminately classed as malignant and 

sanguinary beings, with whom we were to avoid every 

contact, and whom we could not even meet withou^ 

dissrust — that these Russians were much like other 

people ; that there were among them young men who 

were witty and courteous, and even kind, so far at 

least as could be judged from their words ; that 

Russian ladies were very amiable ; that, in a word, one 

could live among Russians without repulsion, and 

even sometimes feel obliged to give them one's 

friendship and gratitude. 



62 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

I only make these self-evideat remarks to show 
that we were in no way prepared for the transition, 
and that, passing so suddenly from one extreme to 
the other, we felt as if we had been cast from a preci- 
pice on a sea where, not being able to land, we were 
obliged to direct our course as best we could. We 
were young, and we met with dangerous and insidious 
acquaintances and amusements. The society of St 
Petersburg was on the whole brilliant, animated, and 
full of variety. Many houses of different kinds were 
open to us, and strangers were everywhere received 
with eagerness. 

The salons of the Princess Basil Dolgoroukoff and 
those of the Princess Michael Galitzin, both of whom 
have since become well known in Paris, were dis- 
tinguished by their elegance. These two ladies 
rivalled each other in wit, beauty, and amiability. 
It was said that both had been admired by Prince 
Potemkin. The unfortunate adorer of the Princess 
Dolgoroukoff was at that time Count de Cobentzel, 
the Austrian ambassador, while the Princess Galitzin 
had enchained Count de Choiseul-GoufBer, known by 
his mission to Constantinople and the narrative of 
his travels in Greece. He had converted the 
Princess's palace into a sort of art museum, though 
she herself did not much care for art. 