



CATHEltlMPS COURT 93 

give ourselves up to the Russians, the form which 
the sacrifice should take was a matter of very little 
importance. We considered that it would be unworthy 
of us to propose the slightest compromise, or to show 
the least anxiety to obtain any higher position. The 

[ highest rank would be as insupportable to us as the 

, lowest ; any discussion on this point would show that 
we attached importance to the proposal, while the 
fact was that it was to us a matter of perfect 
indifference. 

, With bowed heads, feeling like victims, we were 

ready to accept any suggestion that might be made to 
us, without enquiry into its consequences. A traveller 
suddenly placed by some chance in Central Africa, 
would not attach the least importance to the forms, 

i distinctions, or honours used among the savages, and 
this was precisely our case. Thrown out of our natural 
sphere by misfortune, surrounded by violence and 
compulsion, filled with disgust and despair, we thought 
it our duty not to express any wish whatever : it was 
not worth while. 

At length came the long-expected ukase announc- 
ing the decision of the Government as to the confiscated 
estates. Catherine distributed a whole mass of them 
among her favourites, her Ministers, her generals, 
governors of provinces, and even subaltern oflBcials ; 
also among some Poles who were traitors to their 
country. She did not restore my parents' estates, but 
without mentioning them she made a present of their 
fortune (amounting, according to the Russian mode of 
calculation, to 42,000 souls) to my brother and myself 
The estates of Latj^'czew and Kamienier, which 



> 



94 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

m 

formerly belonged to my father, fell to the lot of 
Count Markoflf. The ukase did not mention my 
sisters ; but this arbitrary and illegal act having 
always been regarded by my family as invalid, it 
remained without result both with regard to my 
sisters and my parents. The property really went 
back to them, as all we had to do was to send my 
father full power to dispose unconditionally of the 
fortune which had been ceded to us. 

There had been so much uncertainty as to 
Catherine's final decision in this matter, that the 
result was received in society with general satisfac- 
tion. We were told that the loss of Latyczew and 
Kamieniec should be regarded as a fine, and that 
we had no reason to complain. We thanked Catherine 
with one knee on the ground, as required by the 
etiquette of the Court, and almost immediately after 
w^e had our uniforms on. Mine was that of the 
cavalry of the guard ; my brother's, that of the 
IsmailoflT regiment of infantry. 

It would not have been proper abruptly to cease 
our visits to the favourite, and Gorski was too much 
a man of the world to allow it. We also received 
several invitations to the concerts in the Tauris 
Palace, which was regarded as an extraordinary favour 
for officers of the guard who do not form part of the 
Court. These were further signs of the Empress's 
good-will ; but they all ceased directly the Court 
moved to the Winter Palace. We were then classed 
as officers of the guard, who only go to the palace 
on Sundays and holidays, when they have to stand 
at a door next to the diplomatic corps as the Empress 