

* This League, formed by Branicki and others at the instigation of the Empress 
Catherine, was the precursor of the second iiartition of I^oUnd. 



J 



CATHERINE'S COURT 85 

He seemed really attached to our parents, with 
whom he had passed many long and eventful years ; 
but he could only help us by advice, which might be 
expressed in the words * patience and submission.' 
He told us of all that passed, and offered us a room 
at Court on the audience-days, when people had to 
wait a long time. We accordingly went to him on 
arriving at Tsarskoe-Selo to wait for the hour when 
we should be presented. He gave us his instructions, 
and when we asked whether we were to kiss the 
Empress's hand, he replied, ' Kiss her where she likes, 
so long as she gives you back your fortune.' He 
also showed us how to bend the knee. 

The Empress was still in the chapel when those 
who were to be presented to her went to the reception 
room. We were first presented to Count Schouvaloff, 
Grand-Chamberlain, formerly the favourite of the 
Empress Elizabeth ; he was at that time all-powerful, 
and was known for his correspondence with D'Alem- 
bert, Diderot, Voltaire, and other eminent writers who 
solicited his favour. It seems that it was by Elizabeth's 
orders that he engaged Voltaire to write the life of 
her father Peter, and Catherine, who was then young, 
also strove to gain his good- will. Count Schouvaloff 
was now old, but still vigorous, and insisted on per- 
forming the functions of his office. We were placed 
by him in a line near the door through which the 
Empress was to come. The mass being over, the 
procession passed two abreast. First came the 
gentlemen of the chamber, the chamberlains, and the 
great dignitaries ; then the Empress herself, accom- 
panied by the princes, the princesses, and the ladies of 



A I 



85 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORTSKI 

■ 

the Court. We had no time to look at her closely, for 
it was necessary to bend the knee while she pronounced 
our names. Then we stood in a circle with the ladies 
and other Court personages, and the Empress walked 
round addressing a few words to each person. 

She was well advanced in years, but still fresh, 
rather short than tall, and very stout. Her gait, her 
demeanour, and the whole of her person were marked 
by dignity and grace. None of her movements were 
quick ; all in her was grave and noble ; but she was 
like a mountain stream which carries everything with 
it in its irresistible current. Her face, already wrinkled, 
but full of expression, showed haughtiness and the 
spirit of domination. On her lips was a perpetual 
smile, but to those who remembered her actions, this 
studied calm hid the most violent passions and an 
inexorable will. In coming towards us her face 
assumed a gentler expression, and with that sweet 
look which has been so much praised, she said : ' Your 
age reminds me of that of your father when I saw 
him for the first time. I hope this country suits you.' 
These few words suflSced to attract to our side a 
crowd of courtiers, who began to lavish upon us 
compliments even more flattering than those we had 
previously received. We were invited to occupy seats 
at the table under the colonnade ; this was a parti- 
cular honour, as the Empress never gave such invi- 
tations but to her private friends. 