

It was tlie custom for certain of the elect, our- 
selves included, to go after dinner to Zuboffs rooms. 
This was not a ceremonious visit ; one was supposed 
to be admitted to a certain familiarity, and to form 
part of a friendly meeting. The favourite used to 



/ 



CATUERINKS COURT 89 

wear a loose coat, and was more nonchalant than 
ever ; he would ask his visitors, who usually were 
not numerous, to sit down, and would then stretch 
himself at full length on a sofa. The conversation 
was characteristic of the host : it was sometimes 
brightened by Count Cobentzel, the Austrian Am- 
bassador, or by Count Valentine Esterhazy, after- 
wards master of the ceremonies at Vienna. The 
latter was a welcome guest at Tsarskoe-Selo, having 
by his good stories, and a bluntness of manner which 
is best suited to every kind of flattery, insinuated 
himself so far into the good graces of Zuboff and 
the Empress that he obtained some considerable 
estates in Volhynia. Neither Count Esterhazy nor 
his wife had any nobility of character or appearance, 
yet the latter was on a very intimate footing with 
Catherine. Their scapegrace of a son, a spoilt child 
brought up in the palace with a Calmouk girl, and 
amusing by his tricks, greatly contributed to the good 
fortune of his parents. 

It was whispered at the Court that while Count 
Plato ZuboiF was being loaded with favours by his 
septuagenarian mistress, he paid court to the Princess 
Elizabeth, the wife of the Grand-Duke Alexander, 
who was at that time only sixteen. This aspiring 
and chimerical pretension covered him with ridicule ; 
people were surprised at his having dared to nourish 
such a thought under the very eyes of Catherine. 
As for the young Grand-Duchess, she took no notice 
of him whatever. It seems that he was seized with 
a love-fit generally after dinner, and he then did 
nothing but sigh, lie on a sofa with a sad air, and 



90 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

look as if he were oppressed by a heavy burthen on 
his heart. Nothing would please him but the melan- 
choly and voluptuous sounds of the flute, and he 
had all the appearance of a man seriously in love. 
It is said that he had imparted the secret to some 
of his confidants, who professed to sympathise with 
his sorrows without appearing to have guessed their 
cause. His servants alleged that whenever he re- 
turned to his rooms after a visit to the Empress, he 
was prostrate with fatigue and pitiably sad ; he then 
used to pour scent on his handkerchief and receive 
intimate visitors with an air of depression which 
was the subject of general remark. Yet he refused 
to take any rest, alleging that sleep deprives us of 
some of the most beautiful moments of our lives. 

In this manner the summer season of 1795 passed 
away. In the autumn the Court returned to the 
Tauris Palace, and our morning visits to the favourite 
recommenced with more frequency than ever, as the 
day was approaching when our case was to be de- 
cided. The Zuboffs constantly repeated to us that 
their good-will was not sufficient, and that they could 
not do all they wished. No good augurj^ was to be 
discovered in these words. Meanwhile, the suitors 
became more and more pressing : some sought to 
recover their estates, while many others set every 
engine in motion to obtain part of the sequestrated 
estates for themselves. From the highest to the 
lowest, each wished for a share of the spoil : for 
Catherine^had not yet said anything as to what she 
w^ould do with the immense private estates, crown 
domains, and church property, which she had seized. 