



V. 



ENTERING THE RUSSIA N SERVICE 05 

poes by. She merely gratified us with a look as she 
went to the chapel and returned from it. The Grand- 
Dukes always bowed to us with much grace. 

It was for these dress receptions, which were 
repeated on every Sunday and holiday, that the 
dandies of the barracks put on their best uniforms, 
tightened their waists, put pomatum on their hair, 
and placed themselves in line with the hope of 
attracting the eyes of the Empress and fascinat- 
ing her with their tall stature and broad shoulders. 
It is said that some of them used in days gone 
by to be promoted to her favour on these occa- 
sions ; but she was now too old to indulgfe in such 
fancies. 

The military service in the Guards' regiments was 
at that time much neglected, but it was necessary to 
attend drill at least once a year. Some officers really 
liked the service and performed it, but this was 
because they chose to do so, and their zeal was 
thought rather ridiculous by young men of fashion. 
The generals who commanded us did not take any 
pains to make us work. We were seldom on guard 
in the palace, and my turn only came once. As to 
my brother, being an infantry officer, he was on duty 
with a detachment of his regiment, which always had 
to guard the castle at night. The Empress having 
perceived him, said that now he was on guard she 
would sleep in peace. 

An amusing adventure happened at this time to 
my friend Gorski. The ukase relating to my father's 
family had been published, but the order for handing 
over the property to us had not yet appeared. Plato 



96 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Zuboff was entrusted with the task of communicating 
the order to the Governor-General Toutoulmin, who 
was then at St Petersburg, hoping to participate in 
the act of spoliation and to derive illicit advantages 
from it ; but Zuboff did not hurry. We were there- 
fore obliged to continue to assist at his toilet. One 
day the favourite, who had on his shoulders a white 
towel, beckoned to Gorski to come to him. The 
latter came up at once, and listened with such 
attention to Zubotf that he allowed some snuff to drop 
from his nose and stain the favourite's towel. The 
audience expected some tragical denottment, but 
Gorski, who never lost his presence of mind, finished 
what he had to say and returned to his place as if 
nothing had happened. 

On New Year's Day we were appointed Gentle- 
men of the Chamber. Court appointments were at 
that time held in much higher estimation than they 
are now. Ranks at Court stood on the same footing 
as corresponding ranks in the army, and took preced- 
ence of ranks in the civil service ; the consequence 
was that families with a great name, or with great 
interest, always placed their sons in the Guards, and 
tried at the same time to obtain for them an appoint- 
ment at Court. Being thus raised in the hierarchy 
of the tchin, they afterwards passed into the civil or 
military service with the rank to which they had 
been promoted. 