



J 



CATHERINES COURT 91 

The crisis was very interesting, and its solution 
was looked forward to on all sides with anxiety. 
How many Russians founded upon it their hopes of 
enlarging their estates and increasing the number of 
their serfs or ' souls/* as they called them ! This gave 
a new stimulus to sycophancy, not only with regard 
to the favourite, but to his secretaries, who aped his 
ridiculous morning receptions, and rehearsed his 
arrogance before the stupid mob that crowded their 
ante-chambers. Among the speculators who, like 
pillagers on a battlefield, sought to enrich themselves 
at the expense of the vanquished, there were unfortu- 
nately some Poles unworthy of the name they bore. 
Appealing to their services, to their treason to the 
fatherland, they chose their victims among those who 
had been convicted or even suspected of patriotism. 
The more they increased the number of these victims, 
the greater were their chances of plunder. 

Our parents, pressed by their creditors, and 
anxious about their fate, were still more so for us, as 
at the time when we were informing them of the 
friendly receptions we had met with at St Petersburg 
my mother had received an anonymous letter, written 
in excellent French, describing in exaggerated language 
the effect we had produced in society and our favour- 
able reception at Court, but adding that what was 
most to our credit was that, insensible to all cajoleries, 
we remained steadfast in our love for our country and 
our hatred for the Empress Catherine. As it was 
known that all letters to my family were opened at 

* Serfage properly bo called, t.c., the right of selling a jxiasant as part of one's 
property, never existed in Poland ; it was a purely Russian institution. 



92 MEMOIRS OF FJRI^'CE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

the post-office, my mother's distress on receiving this 
communication may easily be imagined. It was evi- 
dent that the anonymous letter had only been written 
with the intention of awakening Catherine's suspicions, 
and preventing the restitution of my father's estates. 
It will be recollected that during our stay at Grodno, 
Prince Repnin had shown us the autograph of a note 
from Catherine, with regard to an oath of hatred to 
Russia and the Empress which I was supposed to 
have taken before my mother. This story was pro- 
bably also manufactured by one of our countrymen ; 
it was absurd to suppose that such a theatrical demon- 
stration should be necessary to inspire us with hatred 
for such enemies. 

The only means left to us for obtaining the re- 
covery of our parents' estates was to resign ourselves 
to entorinor the Russian service. This was the siiie 
HKii noUy the completion of our sacrifice, the inevitable 
consequence of our journey to St Petersburg. At 
one of our oveninij visits to Tsarskoe-Selo, Zuboff had 
told us that the Empress intended to give us commis- 
sions as officers of her guard ; and that it was the 
greatest piece of good fortune that could happen to 
us that we should thus become part of a glorious and 
irresistible army, which was strong enough to march 
across the world without being stopped by any 
obstacle. This was indeed the prevalent idea among 
the officers in the Russian army, and they could not 
as yot rid themselves of it. Although we were pre- 
pared fi>r the proposal, our hearts failed us when it 
was made i>fficiaUy, It was impossible, however, to • 
refuse it and nu^reover, havinvr once determined to 