



THE ZUBOFFS 8i 

afterwards the possessor of millions in Podolia, who 
was not unknown to us, as his. father had been 
employed by my grandfather to manage his affairs ; 
the other was Poradowski, afterwards a valiant 
general, killed in the war of 1812. 

Poradowski had been an officer in the regiment of 
my brother-in-law, the Prince of Wurtemberg ; we 
were thus old acquaintances. These two gentlemen, 
Poradowski especially, found means of obtaining some 
news for us about the prisonelrs. We learnt in this 
way that Niemcewicz, Konopka, and Kilinski were 
shut up in the casemates of the fortress ; that 
Kosciuszko had been removed from them and con- 
fined somewhere else, and that he was treated with 
every consideration and generally respected. He was 
placed in charge of Major Titoff, who was much 
attached to him and related various anecdotes of him 
which were- very insignificant (the Major was very 
rough and ignorant); but, being about such a man as 
Kosciuszko, were repeated from mouth to mouth, 
Potocki, Zakrzewski, Mostowski, and Sokolnicki were 
'confined in a house in Liteina Street. Not being able 
to do anything for them, we at least gave ourselves 
the pleasure of often going through this street, either 
in a carriage or on foot, in the hope of seeing them. 
Sometimes we succeeded in catching a glimpse of 
them passing like shadows before our eyes ; but they 
[probably never perceived us, as the house was very 
btrictly guarded both within and without. Our hearts 
peat fast, however, when we raised our eyes to the 
irindows behind which the prisoners were confined. 
Except Marshal Potocki, they were not personally 

VOL. I. F 



■*! 



82 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

known to us ; but they had become dear to the heart 
of every good Pole- by the great deeds which they 
were being made to expiate by sufferings equally cruel 
and unjust. 

When we came back in the evening we used t<> 
talk of the impressions of the day. Our worthy- 
friend Gorski did not spare his epithets with regard 
to those whom he had been obliged to treat with 
consideration in public. Whenever the name of any 
of these people (except a few whom he reall}'^ re- 
spected) was pronounced, he immediately added : 
* Yes, he is a villain, a rascal,* and so on. These 
expressions he used particularly with regard to Poles 
of an equivocal or tarnished reputation. People un- 
fortunately were to be found daily, who thought that 
their indifference to the fate of their country and 
their treasonable practices would gain them the favour 
of the Ministers and the Court. If their former 
services did not seem to them to have been suffi- 
ciently rewarded, they tried to show themselves more 
base in order to get a larger reward. We had more 
than once to blush at this disgraceful conduct on the 
part of some of our countrymen. We were not, how- 
ever, confounded with them ; the Poles at St Peters- 
burg were divided into two classes, entirely distinct hm 
their qualities, their manners, and their sentiments, j 