



THE ZUBOFFS 77 

by one of the servants to take a seat, only ventured 
to sit on the edge of a chair and got up directly 
afterwards. 

While the favourite was having his hair dressed, 
his secretary, Gribovsky, usually brought him papers 
to sign. The applicants used to whisper to each 
other the sum that was to be paid to induce him to 
get his master to look favourably on their requests, 
and he took these presents with as much pride as Gil 
Bias. When the hair-dressing was over and the 
papers were signed, the Count put on his uniform or 
his coat and withdrew into his apartments. All this 
was done with a nonchalance which he tried to pass 
off as gravity and dignity ; but there was too much 
artifice in it. When the Count had disappeared, all 
went to their carriages, more or less discontented at 
their reception. 

We did not plead our case before any Minister, as 
in Gorski's opinion it was better to rely on the protec- 
tion of Zuboff alone. We were introduced, however, 
to several other eminent persons. One of the most 
important of these was Counf Bezborodko. He was 
a native of Little Russia, and had begun his career 
under the orders of Marshal Romantzoff*. Having 
been recommended to the Empress by his chief, he 
soon obtained by his talents, his great aptitude for 
work, and his extraordinary memory, rapid promotion 
both as regards fortune and dignities. He was 
appointed a member of the Committee of Foreign 
Affairs, and was employed by Catherine in the most 
secret negotiations. With the outward appearance of 
a bear, he had a keen wit, a lucid intelligence, and a 



78 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

rare power of mastering a subject. Lazy to a degree, 
and given up to pleasure, he never set to work till the 
last moment : but then he worked very rapidly and 
without stopping. This gained him the esteem of the 
Empress, who loaded him with rewards. He was the 
only man of any distinction at Court who did not 
flatter the ZuboflTs ; he did not even visit them. All 
admired his courage ; but no one imitated it. 

The old Count Osterman, Vice-Chancellor and 
senior member of the Committee of Foreign Affairs, 
looked like a figure in a piece of old tapestry. Long, 
thin, pale, dressed in the ancient fashion with cloth 
boots, a brown coat, gold buttons, and a black 
ribbon round his neck, he represented the period of 
the Empress Elizabeth. He was quoted as an ex- 
ample of honesty, a rare quality in those days ; he 
was grave in manner, and without saying a word 
he would wave his visitors to their seats with his 
long arm. He now only appeared at solemn dinners 
on great occasions, when there was a question of a 
final despatch or declaration to which his name was 
to be signed at the head of those of the other 
members of the Committee. Though advanced in 
years and of moderate capacity. Count Osterman was 
valued for his high principle, his good sense, and his 
great experience. He was the only member of the 
Council that had opposed the partition of Poland ; he 
represented that such an event would rather be of 
advantage to Austria and Prussia than to Russia. 
His advice was not taken, but he should have the 
credit of it. Since then his influence declined daily, 
and although still the titular head of the department 