



i 



^ 



THE ZUBOFFS 79 

of Foreign Affairs, he was really shelved ; this, how- 
ever, did not prevent Catherine from treating him 
with every consideration. 

At the time of the accession of the Emperor 
Paul, Osterman retired to Moscow, with the title 
of Chancellor of the Empire. His elder brother, 
the Senator, known for his absence of mind, also 
lived there. These two old men were still in exist- 
ence at the time of the coronation of the Emperor 
Alexander. As they did not leave any direct heir, 
they adopted as their successor Count Tolstoi, who 
assumed the name of Tolstoi-Osterman, and after- 
wards distinguished himself by his bravery at the 
battle of Culm, where he lost a leg. 

Count Samoiloff, Procurator-General (an office 
which at that time comprised the direction of the 
Ministries of the Interior, of Justice, and of Finance), 
although he was a nephew of Potemkin, was one of 
the most assiduous of the flatterers of the Zuboffs, 
who, as everybody knew, were declared adversaries 
of his late uncle. Samoiloff was not remarkable for 
ability, and indeed he made himself ridiculous by his 
foolish pride. He was not ill-natured, but, as was 
well said by Niemcewicz, he committed evil actions 
by his want of discernment, his meanness, and his 
pusillanimity, rather than by inherent wickedness. 
In making use of him, Catherine wished to prove to 
the world that she could govern her immense empire 
even with an incapable minister. She took a pride 
in showing that she was thoroughly acquainted with 
legislation in everything that related to the conduct 
of the affairs of the country, and one must in justice 



8o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

aduiit that its internal orgariij^ation was visibly im- 
proved under her reign. Samoiloff, however, had 
really no preponderant position in the Government, 
and any one who had to do business with him gener- 
ally found reason to regret it — not because he wished 
to do harm, but because he was incapable of under- 
standing anything clearly, and was at the same time 
too vain to admit it. Prince Alexander Lubomirski, 
who negotiated with him for the purchase of his 
estates, and our unfortunate fellow-countrymen who 
were locked up in prison, had only too much reason 
to know this. 

Days and weeks thus passed in constant move- 
ment — various scenes, sometimes disagreeable, some- 
times unimportant, succeeding each other and at least 
giving variety to our lives. But neither our constant 
anxiety as to the recovery of our parents' fortune, nor 
the splendour of the society into which we were, 
thrown, effected any change in the deeper sentiments 
of our hearts. When we returned to our rooms we 
always thought of our parents, our sisters, our country, 
and of the sad position in which we were placed. 
What we felt most bitterly was that, at the moment 
when we were passing our time at balls and entertain- 
ments, the most heroic of our countrymen were in 
prison. It was very difficult and dangerous to get 
news of them ; but fortune favoured us in this respect. 
After the second partition, when part of the Polish 
army in Podolia and the Ukraine was forced to enter 
the Russian service, two young men put on the 
Russian uniform and managed to obtain places in the 
service of Plato Zuboff. One of these was Komar, 