

Our reception by the Empress and the society of 
St Petersburg was, considering our age and position, 
evidently only the last echo of old traditions relative 
to Poland — of the high opinion still held by the 



CATHERINE'S COURT 87 

Muscovites as to our leading luen. Our family 
especially, which during the previous century had 
unfortunately been forced into frequent relations with 
Russia, was better known than the others. My 
grandfather and my father were generally respected 
in Russia, and we met at St Petersburg the two 
Narischkins and their wives, w^ho had known my 
father when he was in great favour with Peter III, 
and with Catherine at the time of her accession. 

We were presented on the same day to the Grand- 
Dukes. Paul received us coldly, but with dignity ; 
his wife, the Grand-Duchess Maria, showed us much 
consideration, chiefly on account of her brother, whom 
she wished to reconcile with our sister.* The younger 
Grand-Dukes received us frankly and graciously. 

' The wealthier classes at St Petersburg pass the 

summer in countrj'-houses in the vicinity. Every 
great nobleman has one, and lives in it as luxuriously 

I as iu the capital. As the fine season is short, every 
one tries to use it to the best advantage, so that for 
some months the town is deserted. Our visits conse- 

* quently had to be paid in the country, and as we 

i were always travelling we often returned to town 
very late. There is scarcely any night in the 
summer, and the recollection of our moonlight nights 
in Poland made us sad. Gorski allowed us no 
breathing time ; we had to renew our journeys daily, 
and neglect no opportunity of multiplying our rela- 
tions. This was, indeed, the only means of attaining 
our object, for in spite of our flattering reception at 

\ Court, and the repeated recommendations of people 

* See note on page 40. 



88 MEMOIRii OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

in power, our business was still in suspense. Catherine, 
who was well informed as to everything that was 
going on, knew that we were popular in the capital, 
and the praise that was lavished upon us could not 
fail to produce a good impression upon her. 

Besides our journeys to the country villas, which 
were in themselves very fatiguing, we had to go 
every other Tuesday and on each holiday to Tsarskoe- 
Selo to assist at Zuboffs toilet. Having been pre- 
sented, we were also qualified to go to the Palace, and 
on these occasions we were usually invited to dine at 
the principal table. At the head of this table sat the 
Empress and the Imperial family, but people of all 
the hiorher classes were admitted to it. We were 
also advised to take part in the evening entertain- 
ments, Avhich in fine weather took place in the garden. 
The Empress walked there with the whole of her 
Court, or sat on a bencli surrounded by the older 
courtiers, while the J'oung Grand-Dukes and Grand - 
Duchesses, with the younger ladies and gentlemen 
of tlie Court, played at various games before her on 
the grass. The Grand-Duke Paul never took part 
in these anmsements, for when divine service or 
dinner was over he went to his residence at Pavlovsk. 
While plaj'iiig at these games we became more closely 
acquainted with the Grand-Dukes, who were most 
amiable to us. 