

Two snow hills were sometimes erected in the 
vicinity of the Tauris Palace. The princesses and 
the whole personnel of the Court used to go there 
to descend in sledo-es according to the Russian custom. 
People were very merry at these entertainments, the 
young men having young and pretty ladies as their 



COURT AMUSEMENTS ip7 

partners. One day young StrogonofF gave the officer 
of police, who wished to prevent his passing, a box 
on the ear. Strogonoff was reprimanded, and there 
was an end of the matter. Some excellent concerts 
were given in the Grand-Duchess's apartments, and 
at the Hermitage Palace French plays and Italian 
operas were admirably performed. The Austrian 
Ambassador, Count de Cobentzel, usually conversed 
with the Empress ; besides these the only persons 
present were the Grand-Dukes and Grand -Duchesses 
and people belonging to the Court. These perform- 
ances took place twice a week, and w^ere very pleasant 
as there was no constraint of any kind. I still see the 
audience as it then appeared to me. In front of the 
stage was the Empress, occupying a double seat owing 
to her size ; next to her was the Count de Cobentzel, 
with his squint, and his bald head covered with a 
thick coat of powder, approving everything she said. 
On either side were the Imperial family, all fresh 
and pretty faces, except that of the Grand-Duke 
Constantine ; and the rest of the society occupied 
seats raised in the shape of an amphitheatre. 

The Empress was quite satisfied at her second 
grandson's marriage, and she seemed to revel in the 
leisure which was given her by the favourable turn 
in foreign politics. Everything went smoothly : the 
affairs of unfortunate Poland had been settled accord- 
ing to her wish, the King of Prussia was about to 
cede the city of Cracow to Austria in compliance 
with her orders, and all the European monarchies 
were at her feet, approving and flattering her plans. 
This was because England and Austria wished to 



io8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

procure her active assistance against France, while 
Naples, Rome, and Sardinia, fearing the repubHcan 
movement, sought the same object. The King of 
Prussia took care not to oppose her in anything. 
But while Catherine issued the most vehement diplo- 
matic notes against the Revolution and the French 
Republic, and fomented the whole of Europe against 
them, she prudently avoided war, observing the 
vicissitudes of the fortunes of the allies, and taking 
care not to allow her troops to intervene. While 
the others were exhausting themselves in sanguinary 
battles, she twice* robbed Poland of territory and 
distributed fragments of the booty among her accom- 
plices ; she was supreme over the whole of Northern 
Europe, the terror of the Turks, and proud of the 
universal homage paid to her. Tranquil at home, 
she sent troops to Persia under the orders of Valerian 
Zubojff, for her feminine instincts were always mixed 
up witli the masculine, or rather Macchiavellian, enter- 
prises of her policy. These were the last of her happy 
days. The victories of Buonaparte in Italy and the 
conduct of the young King of Sweden were soon to 
fill with bitterness the last year of her life. 