

It was assuredly a most fortunate and important 
incident that in the midst of these elements there 
should be a prince, the future ruler of Kussia, who 
would necessarily exercise immense influence in 
Europe, holding such decided and generous opinions 
entirely opposed to the existing state of things. Now 
that I look back, forty years afterwards, upon the 
events which have taken place since that conversation, 
I see only too well how little they have realised the 
picture that our youthful imaginations had drawn. 

VOL. I. H 



114 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Liberal ideas were at that time in our eyes still 
surrounded by an aureole which has paled since they 
have been tested by experience ; their realisation had 
not yet produced the cruel deceptions which have so 
often disheartened us. That period, in the years 1796 
and 1797, was the most brilliant one of the dawn of 
liberal ideas : the cycle of the French Empire had 
not yet chilled and dispersed the warmest partisans of 
the Revolution. 

Our Polish sentiments, our wishes, our inexperi- 
ence — our faith in the ultimate success of justice and 
liberty — will explain how at that moment we aban- 
doned ourselves with joy to the most seductive illu- 
sions. For some days after this remarkable conver- 
sation we had not an opportunity of talking with the 
Grand-Duke ; but whenever he met us we exchanged 
friendly words and sympathetic gestures. 

Soon after, the Court left for Tsarskoc-Selo. All 
the cavalry officers of the guard had to go there on 
Sundays and holidays to attend at mass, at dinner, 
and in the evening ; some even resided there, either 
in one of the very inconvenient little houses which 
surrounded the courtyard opposite the palace, or in 
the village, where the discomfort was equally great, 
but where the officers were less under constraint. 

Alexander at first urged us to come often, and 
then to stay at Tsarskoe-Selo, in order, as he said, to 
have an opportunity of being more with him. He 
liked our society and wished for it, as it was only 
with us that he could speak unreservedly. We 
had a right to come into the Imperial apartments 
when the Empress went there in the evening, to take 






CON VERSA TIONS WITH A LEXANDER 1 1 5 

part in the promenades and games which took place 
every fine day, and to join the courtiers who met under 
the colonnade, a part of the palace which the Empress 
liked best, and which was close to her apartments. 
The oflScers did not on ordinary days dine at the 
Empress's table unless they were on duty. This 
happened to me once ; I was placed opposite to 
Catherine and had to wait upon her, which I did 
with some awkwardness. 

We often returned to Tsarskoe-Selo, and soon 
after we settled there for the season. Our relations 
with Alexander naturally aroused much interest: 
it was a kind of freemasonry, but the Grand-Duchess 
was let into the secret. An intimacy whose object 
was at that time so recent and so ardently discussed 
furnished material for conversations which were sus- 
pended only to be resumed on the next opportunity. 
Political opinions which now seem trite and hack- 
neyed were at that time startling on account of their 
novelty, and the mystery we had to preserve, the 
idea that we were expressing these opinions under 
the eyes of a Court encrusted with the prejudices of 
absolutism and of Ministers puflfed up with their 
supposed infallibility, added interest and piquancy to 
these relations, which grew more frequent and 
intimate every day. 