



MARRIAGE OF THE GRAND-DUKE CONSTANTINE 103 

struction to be found in Protestantism, or the .devotion 
and the tender aspirations of Catholicism ; these bear 
the stamp of civilization, while the Russian rite is 
Asiatic and barbarous. There is somethinor stransfe 
even in its manifestations of devotion. Thus every- 
body — young or old, elegant or shabby — takes the 
sacrament. People who belong to the churches of 
Western Europe often do not wish or do not dare to 
approach the holy table, yet they often have more 
faith and true piety ; their abstention from the sacra- 
ment, though sometimes blameable, is accompanied by 
respect for their religion, and may be merely a con- 
sequence of it. In Russia, on the other hand, religious 
' ceremonies are often performed not in satisfaction of 
one's moral aspirations, but merely as a matter of 
custom, and the people who go to church turn the 
hymns and [)rayers sung by the popes into ridicule. 
A.t confession the priest reads to the penitent or 
penitents (for sometimes several confess their sins at 
the same time) a list of sins, and the penitent usually 
does not answer aloud, but when some sin is mentioned 
of w^hich he is guilty, he murmurs long prayers, often 
without seeming to pay attention to them, and then 
goes to take the sacrament. 

These reflections occurred to me when I saw the 
young princess, endowed by nature with gaiety and 
charm, accepting the new religion without foreseeing 
her destiny — which, however, it was easy to guess 
at ; while those of her family who were present 
seemed to beam with happiness. 

Some days afterwards the marriage took place. 
The princess was given to a youth barely entering man- 



I04 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

hood, but with a violent temper and savage caprices 
which had already furnished many a topic of conversa- 
tion. The ceremonious dinners, balls, entertainments 
of all kinds, and fireworks lasted for several weeks ; 
but as usual all these noisy diversions, splendid as 
they were, did not inspire mirth. The marriage 
ceremony always has a tinge of melancholy ; it is a 
solemn moment which decides the whole future of 
the persons who are united by it, and those who 
witness it cannot help reflecting on the fact that at 
that mouient the happiness of two human beings is at 
stake. This was especially the case at the marriage 
of the Grand-Duke Constantino ; a sinister veil of 
sadness hovered over the ceremony and the fStes 
which followed it. It was a mournful spectacle, this 
handsome young princess, come from so far to adopt 
a foreign religicm on a foreign soil, to be delivered up 
to the capricious will of a man who it was evident 
would never care for her happiness. These fatal 
presentiments were soon confirmed by the confidential 
avowals of the Grand-Duke himself. What he 
related to those with whom he was intimate about 
his honeymo(jn was marked by an unexampled want 
of delicacy towards his wife. She and the wife of 
the Grand-Duke Alexander became friends. Beinsr 
both German and both far from their respective 
families, they were naturally inclined to a mutual 
confidence which might be their consolation in case 
of adversity, and might double their happiness if 
their marriages should prove a success. The Grand- 
Duchess Elizabeth, who was destined to a more 
elevated position, and was incomparably more fortu- 