

While we were walking about in the garden we 
several times met the Grand-Duchess, who also was 
taking a walk. The Grand-Duke told me that he 
confided his thoughts to his wife, that she alone knew 
and shared his sentiments, and that I was the only 
persoli besides herself to whom he had dared to speak 
of them since his tutor had gone ; that he could not 
mention them to any Russian, as none were as yet 
capable even of understanding them ; and that I must 
therefore feel how great a pleasure it would be for 



112 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

i 

him to have in future some one with whom he could 
talk openly and in entire confidence. 

This conversation was, as may be imagined, 
occasionally interrupted by demonstrations of friend- 
ship on his part, and of astonishment, gratitude, and 
devotion on mine. He bade me farewell, saying that 
he would try to see me as often as possible, and urging 
on me the greatest circumspection and secrecy, though 
at the same time he authorised me to communicate 
to my brother the subject of our conversation. 

I was deeply moved, and could hardly believ6 my 
ears. That a Russian Prince, Catherine's successor, 
her grandson and her favourite child, whom she 
would have wished to see reigning after her instead 
of her son, and of whom it was said that he would 
continue her reign, should disavow and detest his 
grandmother's principles — should repel the odious 
policy of Kussia — should be a passionate lover of 
justice and liberty — should pity Poland and wish to 
see her happy — seemed incredible. And that such 
noble ideas and great virtues should be able to grow 
and flourish in such an atmosphere and with such 
surroundings, was surely little less than a miracle. 

I was young, full of exalted sentiments and ideas ; 
extraordinary things did not long astonish me, for I 
readily believed in anything that seemed to me great 
and virtuous. I was subjugated by a charm which 
it is easy to understand : there was so much candour, 
innocence, resolution which seemed unshakeable, and 
elevation of soul in the words and countenance of this 
young prince, that he seemed to me a privileged 
beings whom Providence had sent to this world for 



CONVERSATIONS WITH ALEXANDER 113 

the happiness of humanity and of my country. My 
attachment to him was boundless, and the feeling 
with which he inspired me at that moment lasted 
even after the illusions which had given birth to it 
successively disappeared ; it resisted the attacks 
which Alexander himself made upon it, and it never 
died in spite of the many events and sad misunder- 
standings which might have destroyed it. * I told my 
brother of our conversation, and after giving a free 
rein to our surprise and admiration, we plunged into 
reveries of a radiant future which seemed to be 
opening before us. It should be remembered that at 
that time so-called liberal opinions were much less 
prevalent than they are now, and had not yet pene- 
trated into all the classes of society and even into the 
Cabinets of sovereigns. On the contrary, every- 
thing that had the appearance of liberalism was 
anathematised in the Courts and salons of most of the 
European capitals, and especially in Kussia and at St 
Petersburg, where all the convictions of the old 
French regime were grafted in an exaggerated form 
on Russian despotism and servility. 