

Our appointment as Gentlemen of the Chamber 



MARRIAGE OF THE GRAND^DUKJE CONSTANTINE loi 

initiated us into the private habits of the Court, and 
enabled us to make a closer acquaintance with several 
high dignitaries and with some young men whom we 
met in the salons and who became our comrades. It 
also had the effect of bringing us nearer to the Grand- 
Dukes. 

I will first speak of the ceremonies which attended 

the marriage of the Grand-Duke Constantine. His 
choice was well known to the public. The young 
Princess Julia, who, as the future Grand-Duchess, 
was to assi^me the name of Anna, was already being 
taught the Russian catechism, and was preparing 
to change her religion. It is said that German 
princesses who had any chance of marrying a Russian 
Prince, did not receive any special or profound in- 
struction as to the dogmas which mark the line of 
distinction between the various Christian religions. 
This precaution was taken by the prudent parents 
so that the princesses might change their religion 
without much conscientious scruple. Be this as it 
may, the facility with which they adopted the 
Russian faith certainly gave the statement a colour 
of truth. They were mostly quite indifferent to 
religious dogmas, or if not, they adhered secretly to 
the religion which they had publicly disowned. 

The day of renunciation and baptism — for even if 
you are a Christian you have to be baptised over 
again when you embrace the Russian religion — came 
first. The Imperial family and all the courtiers pro- 
ceeded in splendid dresses ta the chapel, which was 
already occupied by the bishops and the clergy. It 
was painful to see the young princess advancing in a 



102 MEMOIES OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

dress of cloth of gold laden with diamonds, like a 
victim crowned with flowers, to bow her head to 
images which were in no way sacred to her, to submit 
to the exigencies of a ceremony which was opposed to 
her convictions and her sentiments. It was evident 
that she did this simply out of deference, knowing 
opposition was useless, and without attaching the 
slightest importance to the ceremony. 

The Russian rite reminds one rather of pagan than 
of Christian observances. The bishops and popes, all 
with long beards, involuntarily recall to one's mind 
the high priests of antiquity. Everything is calculated 
for external pomp and to appeal to the Senses ; there 
is no provision for that religion of the heart, lifting 
up the soul to the Creator, which demands tranquillity 
and reflection. Preaching is a mere form ; I have 
never heard a good sermon in a Russian church either 
at Court or elsewhere. Moreover, the clergy never 
preach except on grand occasions. Their sermons are, 
both by habit and obligation, borrowed to a great 
extent from the writings of the primitive Slavonic 
church ; this always makes their eloquence subtle and 
pompous rather than instructive or convincing. 
Hymns and ceremonial take up the whole time of the 
service, so that there is none left for doctrine. The 
services are, in fact, theatricral representations copied 
direct from those of idolaters. The chalices carried 
on the acolytes' heads, the opening and closing doors 
of the sanctuary, the worship before images, the 
censers constantly in motion, present a scene very like 
those we read of in connection with pagan sacrifices. 
One would look in vain for the simplicity and in- 