

Catherine wished the Grand-Duke Constantine to 
marry while she was still living, and all preliminary 
preparations were made for the establishment of his 
household. People intrigued for places either for 



MARRIAGE OF THE GRAND-DUKE CONSTANTINE 97 

themselves or for others, and lists were formed of the 
gentlemen of the chamber and the chamberlains, the 
former with the rank of brigadier, and the latter with 
that of major-general. The Duchess of Saxe-Coburg, 
accompanied by her three children, had just appeared 
at St Petersburg, and it is from that time that the 
elevation of this princely family began. Whenever 
a princess was wanted at Moscow, a diplomatic agent 
was sent to the capitals of the small German princes 
who had pretty daughters to marry, and made a 
detailed report on the qualities of these princesses, 
and the moral character and blood-relations of their 
parents. After reading these reports, the Empress 
designated the princesses whom she wished to see 
at St Petersburg, in order to make her selection. 
She had in her time herself undergone an examina- 
tion of this kind, and did not think that she was 
inflicting any humiliation on these ladies by subject- 
ing them to the same ordeal. Indeed all the German 
princesses were very glad to get a summons of this 
kind for any of their daughters, and felt very flattered 
when one of them was chosen ^s the bride of a Grand- 
Duke. During the past century Russia had perhaps 
more prestige — in Germany at least — than she has 
now, and the young princesses who were destined for 
that country looked forward to a life the prospect of 
which singularly pleased their old mothers. They 
were like the Circassian women who think their 
fortunes made when they are taken as slaves to 
inhabit the harems of Turkish pashas. The mothers 
looked upon the brilliant position of Catherine as a 
presage for their daughters, and were not repelled by 

VOL. I G 



98 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

any thought of possible sacrifices, or else only looked 
upon them as difficulties from which the young 
Grand-Duchesses could easily extricate themselves, 
and which therefore need not cause them any anxiety. 
It was Baron Budberg, then a diplomatic agent, and 
afterwards Minister of Foreign Aftairs, who procured 
for the Duchess of Saxe-Coburg the happiness of 
bringing her three daughters to St Petersburg. 

The Duchess was very clever, and her daughters 
we»e all pretty. It was painful to see this .mother 
offering her daughters like goods for sale, and watch- 
ing anxiously to discover on which of them would fall 
the eye of the Empress and the handkerchief of the 
Grand-Duke Constantino. There was something so 
humiliating in this conduct that we tried not to notice 
it, especially as the Duchess and her daughters were 
in all other points very amiable and worthy of respect. 
Various anecdotes about the Grand-Duke Constantine 
were current which were far from confirming the hope 
that the match would be a happy one. These stories 
ought to have opened the eyes of the daughters and 
their mother, but perhaps they thought that as they 
had come from so far it was too late to go back, or 
maybe their eyes, fascinated by the splendour of 
greatness, did not see things in their right light. 