



122 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

once — even their father's scoldings, which they greatly 
feared — gave attractions to this mode of life, which 
was very different from the one which the public 
of St Petersburg and the views of Catherine had 
marked out for them. 

The Empress did not know how to appeal to the 
imagination of her grand-children or how to give 
them active and varied occupation. Their father was 
more successful, and this was a great evil which had 
unfortunate consequences. The young Grand-Dukes 
thought themselves, and were in reality, more a part 
of the army of Gatchina than of the Russian army. 
Gatchina was Pauls favourite Palace and his resi- 
dence during the autumn ; he was there at some 
distance from St Petersburg, and could give himself 
up without constraint to his hobbies. The Grand- 
Dukes regretted not to be able to go there, but they 
liked to imitate the manners of Paul's troopers, and, 
in speaking of what was done in his little army, to 
say, ' That is our way, after the fashion of Gatchina ' 
[Po naszemUj po Gatchtnski). 

I recollect that the Empress one day thought of 
sending Alexander with General Kutuzoff, to inspect 
the fortresses on the Swedish frontier. The young 
Prince did not seem to like the idea, and it was 
consequently abandoned. The minutiae of the mili- 
tary service and the habit of attaching extreme 
importance to it gave an unfortunate turn to Alex- 
ander's mind ; he took a liking for it of which he 
could not afterwards rid himself, even after he had 
perceived its absurdity. During the whole of his 
reign he had a mania for parade which made him 



THE GRAND-DUKE PAUL AND HIS SONS 123 

lose much precious time while he was on the throne, 
and prevented him during his youth from working 
usefully and acquiring indispensable knowledge. . This 
was also the bond of union between Alexander and 
Constantine, and it often gave the latter too great 
an influence over his brother, for Constantine was 
well versed in military science so far as mere drill 
is concerned, and his brother could not help having 
a great idea of him in this respect. It was the 
constant subject of their most animated conversa- 
tions. 

The Empress Catherine saw the understanding 
between Paul and his sons with displeasure, though 
she did not foresee all its consequences, for if she had, 
she would probably have prohibited it. Alexander 
said to me one day as he was returning from 
Pavlovsk : ' They do us the honour of fearing us,' 
meaning that Catherine was beginning to be anxious 
at the maintenance of the troops at Pavlovsk, and 
at the sort of concert which had been established 
between Paul and his sons. Alexander was flattered 
at the thought of having inspired some fear in the 
Empress ; but I doubt whether she really felt any 
such sentiment ; if she did so it was very occasionally 
and to a very slight extent. Catherine knew too 
well the cowardly spirit of her son, the ridiculous 
appearance of his troops, and the disfavour with 
which they were regarded by the public and the rest 
of the army, to trouble herself by fearing them. She 
remained in peace under the protection of a single 
company of Grenadiers, while Paul was manoeuvring 
with his little army half-a-league off*. 