



n 



124 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

The Empress Elizabeth had done the same at Peter- 
hoff with Peter III, who lived at Oranienbaum, sur- 
rounded by a corps of devoted Holsteiners ; she also 
knew the extreme pusillanimity of her successor, and 
perhaps also his kind heart. Various rumours have 
been current as to the legitimacy of Paul I ; but 
those who saw the extreme resemblance of character 
and conduct between him and Peter III, could have 
no doubt that he was really Peter's son. 

During this year an event occurred which had 
vast consequences for Europe and terrible ones for 
Poland. The Grand-Duchess Maria gave birth to 
a son. The baptismal ceremony took place in the 
chapel of Tsarskoe-Selo ; the whole Court attended 
in full dress in the spacious hall which precedes the 
chapel. The ceremony, as was to be expected, was 
a most sumptuous one. The ambassadors were 
present, and some of them held the child at the 
baptismal font as the representatives of their respec- 
tive sovereigns. He was named Nicholas ! Looking 
at him then in his swaddling clothes as he moved 
about impatiently while the long baptismal ceremony 
of the Russian Church was being performed, I little 
thought that this weak and pretty child would one 
day become the scourge of my country. 

Among the motives which attracted the young 
Grand-Dukes to their father was one that was more 
noble and sensible than those above mentioned. 
They were painfully impressed by the cruelty of 
Catherine in not allowing her sons and their wives 
to enjoy the company of their children pven in ex- 
treme youth. As soon as the Grand-Duchess Maria 



BIRTH OF NICHOLAS 125 

could leave her bed, her child was taken away from 
her to be brought up with his brothers and sisters 
under the eyes of their grandmother. Not one of 
them was, so long as Catherine lived, left to the 
care of its parents or remained with them. Such 
injustice revolted the young princes and alienated 
them from the Empress. Moreover, Alexander's 
views as to his grandmother's policy did not make 
him disposed to follow her wishes when he could do 
otherwise. He always found some objection to raise, 
and showed nothing but ennui and indifference when 
he was called upon to take part, however little, in a 
government which was not at that time at all in 
accordance with his opinions. Constantine, who did 
not share his brother's liberal views, yet agreed with 
him in his disapproval of the manners and character 
of Catherine. I have heard him more than once 
speak about his grandmother, even after she was 
dead, with outrageous rudeness and in the coarsest 
terms. 

The stay of the Court at Tsarskoe-Selo was draw- 
ing to a close. This gave us a feeling of sadness : we 
regretted our unceremonious meetings, our daily 
conversations, our long walks in tlu) gardens and in 
the country. We had gathered the first flower of 
youthful and confiding affection — we had enjoyed the 
dreams with which it is soothed. Whatever we may 
do, we do not again find sensations so strong and 
fresh ; as we advance in life they become more and 
more rare. 