



REFLECTIONS ON ALEXANDERS EDUCATION 129 

wished to enter upon it ; but his will was not suffi- 
ciently strong to overcome the daily obstacles presented 
by the duties and unpleasantnesses of life. The few 
years of his early youth thus passed away, and he 
lost precious opportunities which he had in abundance 
so long as Catherine was alive, and of which he 
might have recovered a part even under the Emperor 
Paul. 

While he was Grand-Duke, and even during the 
first years of his reign, Alexander remained what his 
eduition had made h!m, a.d was very different from 
what he became later on when he followed his natural 
propensities. It must be concluded that nature had 
endowed him with rare qualities, as notwithstanding 
the education he had received he became the most 
amiable sovereign of his age and the cause of 
Napoleon's fall. After having reigned for some years, 
and acquired the experience entailed by the necessity 
of at once taking the management of important affairs 
of State and by constant intercourse with men in 
office, people were surprised to find him not only an 
accomplished man of the world, but an able politician, 
with a penetrating and subtle mind, writing without 
assistance excellent letters on complicated and difficult 
subjects, and always amiable, even in the most 
serious conversations. What would he have become 
had his education been less neglected and more 
adapted to the duties which Were to occupy his life ? 
M. de la Harpe was the only man that can be 
mentioned with praise among those to whom the 
education of the two Grand-Dukes was entrusted. I 
do not know exactly who were the persons directed 

VOL. I. I 




I30 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

by Catherine to select their tutors ; probably they 
were some encyclopaedists of the clique of Grimm or . 
the Baron d'Holbach. 

M. de la Harpe does not seem to have directed 
Alexander into any serious course of study, though he 
had acquired so much influence over the Grand-Duke*s 
mind and heart that I believe he could have made 
him do anything. Alexander derived from his 
teaching only some superficial knowledge : his infor- 
mation was neither positive nor complete. M. de la 
Harpe inspired him with the love of humanity, of 
justice, and even of equality and liberty for all ; he 
prevented the prejudices and flatteries which sur- 
rounded him from stifling his noble instincts. It was 
a great merit in M. de la Harpe to have inspired and 
developed these generous sentiments in a Russian 
Grand-Duke, but Alexander's mind was not penetrated 
by them ; it was filled with vague phrases, and M. de 
la Harpe did not sufficiently make him reflect on the 
immense difficulty of realising these ideas — on the 
thorny task of finding means to obtain possible 
results. He was, however, merely charged with 
Alexander's literary education ; the choice which was 
made of those who were to look after his moral 
training was extraordinary. Count Nicholas SoltykoflT, 
who was a subaltern during the Seven Years' War 
and had not since seen any active service (which did 
not prevent him from attaining the highest rank in 
the army), was the superintendent of the education of 
the two Grand-Dukes. Short, with a large head, 
afiected, nervous, and of health so delicate that it 
required constant attention (he could not wear braces, 