

At the close of the stay in the Tauris Palace in 
1796, the last year Catherine was there with her 
Court, the chief topic was the approaching arrival of 

* A decoration which gives the rank of Field Marshal. Three ladies tinder 
Paul, and one under Nicholas, obtained this rank. 



ARRIVAL OF THE KING OF SWEDEN 133 

the young King of Sweden, who came to marry the 
eldest of the Grand-Duchesses. The Empress directed 
the ladies of the Court to learn the French contre- 
danse, which was then the favourite dance at the 
Court of Stockholm, and this was the daily occupation 
of all at Court who were dancers. The King of 
Sweden was received with exquisite politeness. He 
came with the Regent, his uncle, Duke of Suder- 
mania, and with a numerous suite. The Swedish 
costume, which resembled that formerly worn in 
Spain, produced a fine effect at the receptions, balls, 
and other fetes which were given to the young King 
and his suite ; all the Court entertainments were 
for them. The Grand-Duchesses only danced with 
Swedes, and never did a Court show more courtesy 
to strangers. 

While the f§tes were going on at the Winter 
Palace, and balls, concerts, and montagnes Russes 
were daily repeated at the Tauris Palace, the King of 
Sweden was admitted to the presence of the Grand- 
Duchess Alexandra as her future husband. She was 
of rare beauty and sweetness of character ; to know 
her was to admire her, and his daily interview with 
her could only add to the motives which seemed to 
prompt the King of Sweden to unite himself by 
family ties with the House of Romanoff. The Duke 
of Sudermania was strongly in favour of the match, 
and had urged his nephew to go to St Petersburg so 
as to leave no doubt as to his intentions. All that 
remained was to agree as to forms and the treaty 
to be drawn up between the two powers; and this 
did not seem of a nature to cause any diflSculty. 



134 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

As both parties were said to be agreed, no negotiation 
seemed requisite, and the task of framing the neces- 
sary documents was entrusted to Count Markoff, 
whom the Zuboffs were putting forward in order to 
eclipse Count Bezborodko, who, though he had refused 
to cringe to them, yet kept his place and his credit 
with the Empress. 

After some gay and brilliant weeks the day of the 
betrothal was fixed ; the ceremony was to take place 
in the evening. The Archbishops of St Petersburg 
and Novgorod, with a numerous suite of clergy, went 
to the chapel where the ceremony was to take place. 
The whole of the Court, the Ministers, the Senate, 
and many generals were assembled in the waiting- 
room. We waited for several hours. It was getting 
late, and people observed whisperings among those 
who were likely to be well informed, and movements 
to and fro of persons proceeding to the Empress's 
apartments, all of whom came out at a quick pace. 
At length, after four hours of suspense, we were 
told that the ceremony would not take place. 
The Empress sent to apologise to the Archbishops 
who had come in their pontifical robes, to the ladies 
in panniers, and to the rest of the Court, and 
announced to them that the ceremony had been post- 
poned owing to some unexpected difficulties. 