

Soon after it became known that the marriage was 
broken ofi: Count Markoff, frivolous through self- 
sufficiency, and inattentive through pride and disre- 
gard of all but himself, was persuaded that all was 
arranged without troubling himself to put the arrange- 
ment in writing and get it signed. It was when the 



FAILURE OF MARRIAGE NEGOTIATIONS 135 

signature was required that difficulties arose. King 
Gustavus IV wished to limit the liberty which the 
Russian princess who was to be his queen should 
enjoy in following the rites of her religion. The 
Swedes, who are staunch Protestants, had made 
objections on this subject, but Count Markoff took no 
notice, and proceeded to act as if the matter had 
already been decided, thinking that the Swedes would 
not dare to withdraw at the last moment, and that 
the Grand-Duchess's beauty would succeed where the 
ability of the Russian Ministers had failed. But he 
was wrong in his calculations. The young King was 
the most zealous Protestant in his kingdom, and he 
would never consent to his wife having a public Russian 
chapel at Stockholm. His Ministers, his Councillors, 
and the Regent himself, fearing the consequences of 
an affront to the Empress, pressed him to yield or to 
seek a compromise, but in vain. Instead of inclining 
to the Russian demands, Gustavus IV, in the pro- 
longed conversations which he had with the Grand- 
Duchess, strove to convert her, and almost made her 
promise that she would adopt the religion of her 
husband and of the country in which she was to 
reside. 

The King obstinately rejected all the proposals 
which Count Markoff* made to him with the view of 
overcoming the difficulty ; he was told in vain that 
he would expose himself to a war with Russia, if after 
having gone so far, he broke off the marriage just 
as it was about to be concluded. All was useless — ■ 
even the fixing of the day, the presence of Catherine 
in her Imperial robes, and the convocation of the 



136 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZART0R7SKI 

clergy and the whole Court, failed to move the Swedish 
King. 

The young sovereign's obstinacy at first made 
the Swedes anxious, then frightened them, but finally 
pleased them ; they were proud at their King having 
shown so much character. As for the Russians, all 
the excitement produced by the appearance of the 
King of Sweden in their capital was changed into 
a sombre silence of disappointment and vexation. 
The next day was the birthday of one of the little 
Grand-Duchesses (afterwards the Queen of Holland), 
and there was a Court ball in honour of the occasion. 
The Empress appeared with her eternal smile, but 
her eyes had a sombre expression of sadness and 
anger ; people admired the impassive dignity with 
which she received her oruests. The Kingf of Sweden 
and his suite showed constraint, but not embarrass- 
ment ; there was a stiffness of manner both on their 
part and on that of the Empress which communicated 
itself to the whole company. The Grand-Duke Paul 
expressed great irritation, though I suspect he was not 
really displeased at the blunder made by the Cabinet. 
As for Alexander, he was indignant at the insult 
which had been offered to his sister, but cast the 
blame of it on Count Markoff ; and the Empress was 
very glad to see her grandson share her indignation. 