



EFLECTIONS ON ALEXANDERS EDUCATION 131 

and constantly hitched up his breeches like a sailor) 
he had the reputation of being the most astute 
courtier in Russia. When Catherine discovered that 
her favourite Momonoff had formed intimate relations 
with one of her maids of honour, she ordered the 
culprits to come before her, had them married, and 
then expelled them from her Court; after which 
Soltvkoff at once introduced to her Plato Zuboff, who 
speedily became Momonoft's successor. The elevation 
of Zubotf so angered Prince Potemkin that he de- 
clared he would go to St Petersburg to extract this 
tooth {zuh means tooth in Russian) ; but he died 
before he could carry out his intention, and Soltykoff 
remained in high favour with the Empress. He was 
not only the channel by which her messages and 
admonitions were conveyed to the young princes ; he 
also acted as intermediary whenever Catherine had 
anything to communicate to the Grand-Duke Paul. 
Soltykoff used to oniit or soften any words which 
seemed too disagreeable or severe in the orders or the 
reproaches of his Imperial mistress, and he did the 
same with regard to the replies he had to convey to 
her. This gave satisfaction to both sides; he alone 
knew the truth, and took good care not to tell it. 
There was perhaps some merit in doing this success- 
fully, but Count Soltykoff was certainly not the man to 
direct the education of the young heir to the throne, 
or to make a salutary impression on his character. 

Besides Count Soltykoff, each of the two princes 
had a special director of studies with assistants. The 
selection of the two directors was even more extra- 
ordinary than that of the chief superintendent. The 



132 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

one attached to Alexander was Count Protasoff, 
whose only merit was to be the brother of the 
demoiselle d portrait* an old favourite of the Empress 
as to whose functions, though she was a good woman 
at heart, there were all sorts of* extraordinary 
anecdotes. Constantine's special director was Count 
Sacken, a weak-minded man who was the object of 
incessant ridicule on the part of his pupil. Count 
Protasoff may justly be said to have been a 
complete imbecile ; Alexander did not laugh at him, 
but he had never the smallest esteem for him. The 
assistant directors were selected solely by favour, 
with the exception of Mouravieff, whom Alexander 
when he ascended the throne made his secretary for 
petitions, and afterwards appointed curator of the 
schools of the Moscow district. He was a worthy 
man and was said to be well-informed, but he was so 
timid as to be almost incapable of transacting business. 
I should also not omit Baron Budberg, who some 
years later succeeded me as Minister of Foreign 
affairs. 

Such surroundings could onl}^ produce a bad effect 
on the young princes, and the qualities displayed by 
Alexander are the more astonishing and praiseworthy, 
as he developed them notwithstanding the education 
he had received and the examples which were before 
his eyes. 