

The Court proceeded as usual to the Tauris Palace 
for the season which precedes the winter. Alexander 



126 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

was not so often visible, and could not have * us so 
often with him at his meals. Yet our relations, the 
partial interruption of which caused us much regret, 
continued to be the object of our constant pre-occu- 
pations. 



CHAPTER VIII 



1796 



THE FATE OF THE PRISONERS. — REFLRCTIOXS ON ALEXANDER'S EDU- 
CATION. — ARRIVAL OF THE KING OF SWEDEN. — FAILURE OF THE 
NEGOTIATIONS FOR HIS MARRIAGE WITH THE GRAN D-DUCB ESS 
ALEXANDRA. DEATH OF CATHERINE. 

Our friendship with Alexander had not helped us to 
improve the condition of our countrymen who were 
imprisoned in the town or the casemates of the fortress. 
We often talked of them and of Kosciuszko; Alexander 
always spoke with enthusiasm of the devotion and 
the great deeds of these martyrs of patriotism, and 
was indignant at the unjust tyranny of which they 
were the victims. But, bound by his position, and 
timid from a consciousness of his youth and inex- 
perience, he took no part in affairs of State, and did 
not even think he ought to seek to interfere in them. 
He accordingly had no influence or even contact with 
those who had the management of affairs. 

It is certainly astonishing that Catherine, who 
took pleasure in the thought that Alexander would^ 
continue her reign and her glory, did not think of ' 
preparing him for this task by familiarising him in 
his early youth with the various branches of govern- 



128 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

ment. Nothing of the sort was attempted. Perhaps 
he would not have acquired very correct information 
on many things, but he would have been saved from 
the want of occupation. Yet it would seem that either 
the Empress and her council had no such idea, or that 
the former did not at least insist upon its being carried 
out. Alexander's education remained incomplete at the 
time of his marriage, in consequence of the departure 
of M. de la Harpe. He was then eighteen years old ; 
he had no regular occupation, he was not even advised 
to work, and in the absence of any more practical 
task he was not given any plan of reading which 
might have helped him in the difficult career for which 
he was destined. I often spoke to him on this 
subject, both then and later. I proposed that he 
should read various books on history, legislation, and 
politics. He saw that they would do him good, and 
really wished to read them ; but a Court life makes 
any continued occupation impossible. While he was 
Grand-Duke, Alexander did not read to the end a 
single serious book. I do not think he could have 
done so when he became Emperor, and the whole 
burthen of a despotic government was cast upon him. 
The life of a Court is fatiguing and yet idle. It 
furnishes a thousand excuses for indolence, and one 
is constantly busy in doing nothing.' When Alexander 
came to his rooms it was to take rest and not to 
work. He read by fits and starts, without ardour j 
or zeal. The passion of acquiring knowledge was not 
sufficiently strong in him ; he was married too young, 
and he did not perceive that he still knew very little. 
Yet he felt the importance of useful study, and 