

During the long years of his retirement Paul had 



142 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

planned out everything he proposed to do directly 
he should come into power. Changes and novelties 
accordingly succeeded each other with extraordinary 
rapidity. The men of Gatchina were divided among 
the three regiments of foot guards and the regiment 
of horse guards. The regiment of cavalier guards 
was supplied with silver helmets and cuirasses which 
were manufactured for the occasion, as these articles 
of uniform had ceased to be worn in the Russian 
army. The officers of Gatchina were all promoted, 
and one soon saw old soldiers and courtly officers of 
the Guards obliged either to retire or to obey the 
commands of ill-bred braggarts, whose names they 
had never mentioned except to laugh at them. 

In the midst of all that was eccentric and ridicu- 
lous about the first acts of Paul's reign, there was an 
element of seriousness and justice ; thus the Emperor 
ordered the young courtiers to choose some career 
and devote themselves to it. No one w^as allowed to 
join the Guards as an amateur; and the service became 
so severe that most young men preferred a civil 
career. 

Scarcely had Paul come into power when his 
first thought was to render a striking act of homage 
to the memory of his father, and at the same time a 
sort of verdict upon those who were guilty of his 
death. During the first fe\v days after the death of 
the Empress and the time necessary for embalming 
her bodj'', the whole of the Court, including ladies and 
high functionaries of State, were ordered to watch * 
by the body day and night in the Imperial apart- 
ments, and soon after the Emperor directed that his 



ACCESSION OF PAUL I 143 

father's remains should be exhumed and carried in 
cereiliony from the Nevski convent to the Winter 
Palace to be deposited by the side of Catherine. There 
were still living three or four of those who had been 
accused of complicity in the murder of Peter III. 
They were at that time privates or sub-oflScers in the 
Guards ; they were now great nobles with large 
incomes. Among them was the Court-Marshal, 
Prince Bariatynski, who was disliked because he was 
rude, ill-bred, and ill-tempered, and Passeyk, Gover- 
nor-General of White Russia, who was the Empress's 
aide-de-camp. There were very few who possessed 
this title, and it gave very high r^nk and great 
privileges. When the Imperial aide-de-camp was 
present he alone held a cane, commanded at the 
palace, and watched over the safety of his sovereign. 
Passeyk disappeared on the day of Catherine's death, 
and Prince Bariatynski almost died of fear. He and 
some of his accomplices were forced to watch at the 
coffin of Peter III and follow his body in the funeral 
procession. Count Alexis Orloff, one of the principal 
assassins of the late Emperor, was the only one who 
walked with a firm step and a countenance apparently 
tranquil. 

The Emperor Paul had the two coffins placed 
together on a bier, where they were exposed (that of 
Catherine was open) to the sight of the crowd. The 
high functionaries and ladies of the Court continued 
theiy' service by the side of the bodies night and day 
for ysix weeks ; this gave rise to singular meetings, 
and created friendly relations among pebple who had 
previously been almost strangers. Others, after pass- 