

VOL. I. K 



146 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

cdiTTj out some of his hobbies, and doubled his 
property by grants of land and of considerable sums 
in cash. 

The Emperor's choice of his Ministers was always 
directed by one dominant idea — that of surrounding 
himself with servants on whom he could entirely 
rely ; for from the moment of his accession he fore- 
saw and dreaded a Palace revolution. He raised to 
the highest positions persons who werte quite insig- 
nificant and often the least capable of performing 
their ncAV duties. They were chiefly taken from 
among those (or their descendants or relations), whom 
he had employed at Gatchina, and who had given 
proofs of fidelity to his father. He persecuted and 
dismissed those who had been in favour with his 
mother ; this alone made him suspect them. The 
fear of treason was continually present to his mind 
during the whole of his reign. He erred in the 
selection, and especially in the extent, of the means 
which he employed to save his life and his power ; 
they only precipitated his deplorable end. Among 
the men whom he suspected, he persecuted some 
with implacable rigour, while he retained others at 
their posts and endeavoured to secure their fidelity 
by presents ; this, however, only made them ungrate- 
ful. Never was there a sovereign more terrible in 
his severity, or more liberal when he was in a gener- 
ous mood. But there was no certainty in his favour. j 
A single word uttered intentionally or by accident | 
in a conversation, the shadow of a suspicion, sufficed 
to make him persecute those whom he had protected. 
The greatest favourites of to-day feared to be driven 






PAUL'S CHARACTER 147 

from Court on the morrow, and banished to a distant 
province. Yet the Emperor wished to be just 
Notwithstanding his capricious and disorderJy im- 
pulses, he had a profound feeling of equity, which 
often caused him to perform praiseworthy actions. 
It often happened that after he had dismissed some 
one whom he had badly treated, he called him back, 
embraced him, almost asked his pardon, confessed 
that he was wrong, that he had unjustly suspected 
him, and gave him presents to make up for his past 
severities. He inspired all the officials of his empire 
with the terrors which he often felt himself, and this 
universal fear produced salutary effects. While at 
St Petersburg and at the centre of Government the 
uncertainty of the morrow tormented and agitated 
people's minds, in the provinces, the civil governors, 
the governors-general, and the troops, fearing lest the 
abuses they committed should reach the Emperor's 
ears, and they should some day be suddenly dismissed 
without any form of trial and banished to Siberia, 
paid more attention to their duties, treated their 
subordinates with more humanity, and refrained from 
abuses of a flagrant kind. In the Polish Provinces 
especially the inhabitants felt the change, and the 
reign of Paul is still mentioned there as a period 
when there were less abuses and acts of oppression and 
injustice than at any other time when Poland was 
under foreign rule. 