



156 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor and Empress were once present at the 
christening of a child in the Chapel of the Palace. 
We were on duty together with two chamberlains, 
and we had to be ready to precede their Majesties as 
they left their apartments. We were late, and when 
the time for the ceremony came we were not at our 
posts. Paul, not seeing his escort as he came out of 
his room, flew into a terrible rage. We arrived 
breathless with haste, and found all the courtiers 
assembled at the closed door of the chapel, anxious to 
see what would happen. The door opened ; Paul came 
out and passed before us with a threatening look, 
making furious gestures and breathing hard as he 
generally did when he was angry and wished to inspire 
terror. Our punishment, however, was slight ; we 
were simply ordered to remain in our apartments and 
not leave them until further orders. Alexander 
interfered on our behalf, explained that we had not 
received our orders in time, and pleaded in our favour 
so effectively, with the assistance of Koutayschoff,* 
the Emperor's barber, that in a fortnight's time we 
were free. Soon after we entered the army, in con- 
formity with the rule that every officer of the Court 
must take up an active career. 

Our rank in the army was that of brigadier, the 
one usually given to gentlemen of the chamber ; and 
by a special favour due to the preference shown to us 
by the Grand-Dukes, I was appointed aide-de-camp 
to Alexander and my brother to Constantine. These 
appointments greatly pleased us, as they attached us 
more closely to the Grand-Dukes and relieved us of 

See imge 184. 



THE EMPERORS CORONATION AT MOSCOW 157 

the functions of the Court, for which we had no 
vocation. Our duties consisted in accompanying the 
Grand-Dukes at military parades, and in standing 
behind them when the Emperor passed the officers 
in review. He used to address his sons by the title 
of Monseigneur, and then returned to place himself in 
the midst of the officers and superintend the drill 
which usually preceded the regular parade. 

We constantly saw the Grand-Dukes in our 
capacity of aides-de-camp. Both of them were ab- 
sorbed by their Court, family, and military functions, 
and by endless details connected with their command 
of the two regiments of the Guards. The whole 
morning was taken up by these occupations, which 
involved more bodily fatigue than mental work, al- 
though great attention was necessary not to omit any 
of the minute details of the service. Alexander 
almost always dined with the Emperor. The after- 
noon was the only time when one could speak to him 
more freely, but he was generally too tired by his 
work of the morning, and he took some rest until 
the evening, when he had to go to the Empress. 

In the beginning of the spring of 1797 the Emperor 
went to Moscow for his coronation. All the society 
of St Petersburg followed him. It was still very 
cold, and the hahituh of the salons of St Petersburg 
were to be seen passing each other on the roads, 
wrapped up in furs and reclining in sledges, all 
hastening to the ancient capital of the Empire. 
Moscow had at that time a characteristic appearance, 
which must have greatly changed since it was burnt 
down and rebuilt. It was like a collection of towns 