

* Marina Mnuzck, married to * the false * Dimitri 18 May 1603. 



152 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

said that Marshal Mniszek at that time hoped that 
the goodwill of Catherine's successor might one day 
bring them even to the throne, to which he might 
perhaps have thought he had a claim as the heir of 
Wiszniowiecki * and the descendant of the father of 
the celebrated Czarina. The story goes that in the 
course of a familiar conversation with him the Grand- 
Duchess, showing her diamonds to make her hosts 
remark the beauty of a diadem in precious stones 
which was in her jewel-box, placed it on the head of 
the King's niece, and then on that of the Grand 
Marshal. 'I accept the augury,' said the latter, 
carried away by an impulse of naivetd or of empty 
vanity which he probably regretted immediately 
afterwards. 

By inviting to his Court the prisoner-King from 
his confinement at Grodno — an invitation in which the 
Empress Maria heartily concurred — Paul made some 
return for the hospitality he had received, and gladly 
found an opportunity of showing himself more gener- 
ous than his mother had been. The King was 
received at St Petersburg with all the honours due to 
a sovereign. On approaching the capital he was met 
by chamberlains and other high dignitaries, who compli- 
mented him on behalf of the Emperor and the mem- 
bers of the Imperial family. Paul offered him one of 
his palaces, furnished it magnificently, and did all he 
could to make the King's stay at St Petersburg 
agreeable. There were mutual receptions and ban- 
quets, and at first no cloud obscured the friendly 
relations which seemed to be a continuation of those 

* Michael Wiszniowiecki, King of Poland from 1CC9 to 1C75. 



ARRIVAL OF KING STANISLAS AUGUSTUS 153 

of Wiszniowiec ; but there was no talk of Stanislas 
returning to his kingdom, except perhaps that the 
Emperor told him, as he had done to Koseiuszko, 
that it was impossible to undo what had been done, 
however unjustly, by the Empress Catherine. 

The first years of Paul's reign were marked by a 
curious confusion ; they were a series of moving 
incidents and of singular and ridiculous scenes, which 
seemed to foreshadow the reversal of the existing 
state of things and the estabUshment of a new one, not 
radically, but only in outward form. The civil officials 
and generals were constantly changed, and promotion 
w^as given without any enquiry as to the capacity of 
those whom seniority placed in ranks to which they 
had never hoped to attain. 

The Emperor's only consideration in the decisions 
he gave, was that his will, although the fruit of im- 
pulse and not of reflection, should at once be executed. 
The terror which he inspired ensured submission to 
his most unexpected and most eccentric commands. 
The parades daily gave rise to singular and provoking 
incidents. Generals and other officers of rank received 
for mere trifles, degradations or distinctions which 
only unpardonable faults or great services to the State 
could have justified. 