



■ 



H4 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

ing twenty-four hours together at a stretch, and find- 
ing each other amiable and pleasant companions, never 
saw their fellow-watchers again. 

The burial of Peter and Catherine took place six 
weeks after ; they were interred in the same vault of 
the Nevski convent. All the troops of the garrison of 
St Petersburg and of its neighbourhood accompanied 
the procession, and all who belonged to the Court or 
Government went on foot to the convent, which is 
at the other end of the town. Neither the men nor 
the women were allowed to wear powder, and as they 
had not altered their way of dressing the hair, this 
was very unbecoming. Mourning was strictly pre- 
scribed and observed ; and as the funeral procession 
was extremely long, the ceremony lasted a whole 
day. 

The Emperor kept the apartments at the Winter 
Palace which he had occupied when he was Grand- 
Duke. The waiting-room was usually filled by those 
who were admitted to his presence. People some- 
times passed the whole day there, and went as if to a 
diverting entertainment. There was incessant agita- 
tion and excitement : footmen and aides-de-camp in 
thick boots ran about knocking against eaph other, 
some carrying the Emperor's orders, other^^^looking 
for some one they were sent to summon to his pre- 
sence. Those who were called ran up breathle^, not 
knowing what was to be their fate ; many entered 
the room and left it immediately after with racMant 
faces and a red or blue sash across their chests. fl)ne 
of those whom I saw coming out of the room vjas 
Count Nicholas Zuboff, appointed Grand-Equerfy 



L 



ACCESSION OF PAUL I 145 

and decorated with a blue ribbon for bavins: been 
the first to bring Paul the news of his accession. 
Changes w^ere occurring daily. Nearly all that 
had been great and distinguished under Catherine 
became neglected and insignificant under Paul. New 
persons were constantly coming forward and being 
advanced with extraordinary rapidity, and almost all 
the Ministers were changed. 

Plato Zuboff, who looked like a dethroned 
sovereign, went to his estates in Lithuania, a vast 
domain which Catherine had given him (and the 
desire to acquire which was one of the causes of the 
two last partitions of Poland), sufficient to furnish 
him with ample means to defray the expense of his 
travels. He visited several towns in Germany. 
Some women of ready wit and easy virtue made him 
lose that air of languid dignity which he usually wore. 
He recognised the advantages of an independent 
existence, but soon his ambition and vanity, leading 
him to believe that he was destined still to play a 
great part, brought him back to St Petersburg, and 
rendered him more guilty and unfortunate than he 
had ever been before. 

The only one of Catherine's Ministers whom Paul 
adopted was Count Bezborodko ; this was because of 
his remarkable talents, his high reputation, and per- 
haps also because he had neglected Zuboff when he 
was at the height of his favour with the Empress. 
Paul felt that while he was still inexperienced in the 
art of government he needed Bezborodko's services, 
and he loaded him with distinctions of all kinds. He 
made him a prince, consulted him when he wanted to 