

One of Paul's first and most generous thoughts 
after his accession, was to liberate the Polish prisoners. 
Like his father, when he visited Ivan VI in his prison, 
Paul went himself to Kosciuszko and ordered him to be 



148 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

treated with the greatest consideration, telling him 
that if he had been on the throne at the time, he 
would not have consented to the partition of Poland, 
and that he regretted that so unjust and impolitic a 
deed had been committed ; but that it was not now 
in his power to withdraw it. At Kosciuszko s request 
he liberated all the other prisoners, only requiring 
them to take the oath of allegiance. Whenever Paul 
did not grant a request made by Kosciuszko on behalf 
of his countrymen, he excused himself by alleging 
that he was obliged to pay attention to the represen- 
tations of his Ministers, who prevented him from 
following his inclination in this respect. Kosciuszko, 
oppressed by a feeling of sadness, covered with wounds 
which were not yet healed, and bearing on his face an 
expression of despair, of touching resignation, almost 
of remorse at being still alive and having failed to 
save his country, greatly interested the Emperor and 
did not inspire him with the least fear or suspicion. 
He often used to visit Kosciuszko, accompanied by 
the whole of the Imperial family, which showed real 
interest and almost affection for the unfortunate 
patriot. Alexander no doubt felt these generous 
sentiments more than anybody, but his duties at that 
time entirely absorbed him, so that at first I could 
hardly see him. Since Paul's accession our relations 
had become more rare and more difficult, and his 
extreme fear of his father prevented him from 
expressing on his own account to Kosciuszko what he 
had long felt with regard to him. 

We were each called to the palace to sign an 
assurance that Marshal Potocki would not enter on 



PAUUS CHARACTER 149 

any enterprise prejudicial to the State, and to be 
guarantees for his conduct at our own risk. This 
obligation had to be expressed clearly and precisely in 
writing. The meeting was a numerous one. Prince 
Kourakin, the new Vice -Chancellor, was present, and 
was directed to see that each document clearly ex- 
pressed the obligations undertaken by the signer of it. 
My brother and I signed without hesitation ; we had 
long felt too much esteem and family attachment for 
the Marshal to hesitate to give this general assurance 
which alone could restore him to liberty. Some 
raised difficulties, others went away directly they 
learnt the object of the meeting. Among the latter 
was Count Irenoeus Chreptowicz, the son of the 
Chancellor of that name who had done the most to 
induce King Stanislas Augustus to join the Con- 
federation of Targowitza,* and who soon became 
entirely Russian. The number of signatures, how- 
ever, was sufficiently large to induce the Emperor to 
liberate Count Potocki. 

One may imagine how happy the prisoners were 
to see each other again after so long and painful a 
confinement, though their happiness was mingled 
with regret. The most illustrious members of the 
Grand Diet of 1788-92t were assembled there : Count 
Potocki, Count Thaddeus Mostowski, Julian Niem- 
cewicz ; Zakrzewski, mayor of Warsaw, known by 
his integrity, his patriotism, and his great courage ; 
General Sokolnicki, who voluntarily went to prison 
with him, not wishing to leave him ; and Kilinski and 