

* See page 84. 

t The Diet which passed the famous Constitution of the 3rd of May 1791 
(see page 52). 



150 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Kapostasz^ worthy citizens of Warsaw, the first a 
master bootmaker, and the second a money-changer, 
who exercised great influence over the population of 
that city. We saw them every day. After having 
had the happiness of being liberated from prison and 
of seeing each other, they had to disperse in different 
directions. The Emperor lavished presents of money 
on Kosciuszko to make him independent, and the 
latter was obliged to accept them. When he arrived 
in America, however, he sent them back with a 
letter expressing his gratitude and that of the other 
prisoners. 

On Twelfth-day, one of the most solemn festivals 
of the Russian Church, there was a great military 
parade in the Russian fashion, and the En)peror 
wished the day to be celebrated with all possible 
pomp. The Guards and all the regiments in the 
neighbourhood were posted on the banks of the Neva, 
between the Winter Palace and the Admiralty. The 
Imperial family alighted there, and the Emperor took 
the command of the troops in person ; he liked to 
put himself forward on these occasions. He defiled 
at the head of the army together with the Grand- 
Dukes before the Empress and the Princesses. I 
thought this march past would never end. The cold 
was intense, and we were in Court dress, with silk 
stockings ; although we wore warm coats, we were 
almost frozen. My arms and legs were numbed, and 
I and several others, feeling that our lives were in 
danger, stamped our feet and moved our arms about 
to keep up the circulation. I could not stand this 
martyrdom, and went home, where it took me some 



ARRIVAL OF KING STANISLAS AUGUSTUS 151 

hours to get warm. My fingers have since that day 
lost all feeling whenever there was the slightest cold. 

Our King, Stanislas Augustus, with whom we had 
dined during our six months' stay at Grodno, was 
invited by Paul immediately after his accession to 
come to St Petersburg. During Paul's journey 
abroad (in 1785 I think) with his wife, they had 
passed through Southern Poland, and King Stanislas 
Augustus had left Warsaw to meet them. The 
principal reception took place in the Palace of 
Wisznioviec, which belonged to Count Mniszek, 
Grand Marshal of the Crown. This palace was a 
princely abode that had belonged to the Wiszniowiecki 
family, now extinct, whose last heir had married a 
Mniszek, the descendant of the one whose daughter 
was for some time seated on the throne of the Russian 
Czars.* The apartments of the palace were full of 
valuable historical portraits. Among them was that 
of the famous Marina and of Dimitri ; there were 
also pictures representing their consecration at 
Moscow. 

It was in this beautiful palace that the King of 
Poland welcomed the Grand-Duke of Russia to his 
kingdom. Stanislas Augustus had the gift of 
amiability, and Paul took a liking to him ; he also 
made himself agreeable to the Grand-Duchess Maria. 
They had several confidential interviews, at which 
perhaps promises, or at least hopes, which were never 
realised, were expressed that when Paul should come 
into power, he would repay to his host a hundredfold 
the splendid reception given him in Poland. It is 