



158 ME}rOTRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

communicating with each other not only by gardens 
and parks, but by vast fields. People often had to 
drive for an hour to pay a visit in another part of the 
city. Everywhere, by the side of ugly huts, were 
sumptuous palaces, inhabited by the Galitzins, the 
Dolgoroukis, and other families with historic names — 
great noblemen who consoled themselves by the 
luxury in which they lived for the vexations and dis- 
appointments they had experienced at Court. In the 
midst of this vast city was the Kremlin, a sort of 
fortress surrounded by a crenelated wall, outside 
which the tradesmen had their principal shops in a 
series of bazaars. The ancient residence of the 
Muscovite Grand-Dukes, full of old associations, was 
the place where the ceremony of coronation was to be 
performed. It lasted several days. Paul had stopped 
for the night outside the barriers of the town, and 
made his solemn entry into the Kremlin on the follow- 
ing day, with an immense suite. He first went to the 
cathedral, whore Plato, Archbishop of Moscow, who 
was regarded as the ablest and most learned prelate of 
the Russian Church, complimented the Emperor in 
biblical language. Then took place the coronation, 
the return to the palace with the same solemnity, and 
finally the Imperial banquet, at which the sovereigns 
and their families were served on a raised platform and 
under a magnificent canopy by the high officers of the 
Crown. Various minor ceremonies took place during 
the following days. The Emperor appeared in them 
all ; he was passionately fond of display, and was 
proud of his figure and his grace. Whenever he 
appeared in public he walked with a measured step. 



THE EMPEROR'S CORONATION AT MOSCOW 159 

and tried to look tall and majestic, though he was really 
short; it was only when he entered his apartments that 
he showed the fatiorue which his efforts had cost him. 
Each ceremony was preceded by a dress rehearsal, in 
order that everybody should know where to place 
himself and what to do. My brother and myself of 
course had to take part in the ceremonies as aides-de- 
camp to the Grand-Dukes. The Emperor was as 
active and busy as a stage manager, and looked after 
the smallest details of costume and decoration. He 
liked to appear to the best advantage before the 
ladies, and once he stood at the head of his favourite 
battalion of the Guard \Vith a halbert, to do honour 
to the Empress, whom he had crowned with his own 
hand. 

Paul ordered the King of Poland to follow him to 
Moscow, and insisted on his being present at all the 
solemnities of the coronation. He had to join the 
brilliant suite which surrounded the Emperor and. his 
family — a sad part for a King to play. During 
divine service and the ceremonies which preceded the 
coronation, and were very long and tedious, Stanisjas 
Augustus was so tired out that he sat down in the 
tribune which had been assigned to him. Paul at 
once remarked this, and sent a messenger to tell him 
to stand up so long as they remained in the church ; 
and the poor King had no alternative but to submit. 