

Paul had forbidden round hats, which he reofarded 
as a sign of liberalism. If a poor man, with an old 
round hat on his head, showed himself in the crowd 
which witnessed the parades, an aide-de-camp imme- 
diately pursued the culprit, who fled to avoid being 
bastinadoed at the first guard-house. The chase was 
often continued in the streets, to the great amuse- 



154 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

ment of the people, who hoped the unhappy man 
would succeed in making his escape. 

Lord Whitworfch, the British Ambassador, was 
obliged to have a hat of peculiar shape made for hina, 
so as to be able to walk about in the morninof without 
contravening the Emperor's orders. 

Paul drove through the town daily in a sledge 
or an open carriage, accompanied by one of his aides- 
de-camp. When he met a carriage it stopped, the 
coachman and footmen had to take off their caps, 
and the persons in the carriage had to alight and 
make a profound bow to the Emperor, who observed 
whether it was sufficiently respectful. Sometimes 
women, with their children trembling with fright, 
were seen descending into the snow in a hard frost, 
or into the mud during a thaw, to accomplish this 
salutation. Paul always thought that people wished 
to slight him as they did when he was Grand-Duke ; 
he liked everywhere to meet with marks of fear and 
submission. When people went out into the streets 
in carriages or on foot, all took care to avoid meeting 
their Imperial master ; they fled at his approach and 
went down a side street or hid under a gateway. 
Another dangerous person to meet was the terrible 
Archaroff, Grand-Master of Police, who also drove 
through the town to see that everything was being 
done according to his orders. He prohibited rapid 
driving in sledges, which is one of the greatest 
pleasures of a Russian ; and when he perceived a 
sledge which seemed to go at a forbidden pace he 
at once ordered it to be seized, had the coachman 
flogged, and then appropriated both sledge and coach- 



COURT ETIQUETTE 155 

man to his own use for any period he pleased, while 
the occupant of the sledge had to walk home. This 
once happened to my brother. He had driven out 
in a sledge and met the Emperor, upon which he 
at once jumped to the ground. As he passed, Paul 
cried out to him, ' You might have broken your neck.' 
On his return, M. Archaroif sent by the Emperor's 
orders for my brother's horses and his sledge, and 
used them for a week, after which he returned them. • 
Both at Court and at parade the Emperor wished 
to establish strict exactitude in the ceremonies, in 
the way of approaching him and the Empress, and in 
the number and kind of salutations to be made. The 
Grand-Master of the Ceremonies, Natouyeff, treated 
the courtiers like recruits who do not yet know their 
drill and in what order they ought to march. When- 
ever they met the Emperor they had first to make a 
profound bow, and then, with one knee on the 
ground, apply a sounding kiss to the Emperor's hand 
while he kissed them on the cheek. The same genu- 
flexion had to take place when they approached the 
Empress, after which they had to withdraw without 
turning their backs, which often caused confusion, as 
they trod on the toes of the other courtiers who were 
coming forward to perform the same ceremony. 
Thanks to the efforts of the Grand-Master of the 
Ceremonies, the courtiers at length learnt to go 
through this manoeuvre without a hitch, and Paul, 
satisfied at the look of fear and submission which he 
saw on their faces, then made the etiquette less rigid. 
My brother and I had to go through this ordeal, and 
in doing so we nearly fell into disgrace. The 