

When the ceremonies were over, the Emperor and 
his family left the Kremlin to go to a more spacious 
residence, called the Petrovski Palace, in another 
quarter of the town. He gave up the rest of his time 
at Moscow to fStes, parades, and military exercises. 



i6o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

There were fireworks and public banquets both at 
Moscow and at St Petersburg, and the nobility gave 
the Emperor a ball in a vast hall where they usually 
met. These f§tes were somewhat tedious, and did 
not give satisfaction either to Paul or to his hosts. 
Numerous deputations from all the provinces of the 
empire were ordered to salute the Emperor and 
present addresses of submission. The delegates from 
the Polish provinces had an air of great constraint 
and depression. All of them had been citizens of an 
independent Poland ; all had distinguished themselves 
either in their palatinates, at the last Diet, or in 
appointments of State. They saw their King 
relegated to a side gallery, and had to pass him to 
kneel before a foreign prince and declare themselves 
his subjects. I met several of my acquaintances, but 
could not feel any pleasure at seeing them again under 
such circumstances. I was struck by the change in 
their appearance ; they looked confused and humili- 
ated. Among the delegates from Lithuania was 
Bukaty, who had for several years occupied the post of 
Polish Minister in England. He was a man of simple 
manners and great good sense, and had acquired the 
esteem of the English people and their Government. 
Several of his English friends gave as a token of their 
friendship their names to his children at their 
christening. I had often dined with him in London 
with my mother. He was at that time stout, in good 
health, and in excellent spirits. He was now thin, 
his face was pale and haggard, his clothes, which in 
England fitted tight to his body, now hung about him 
in loose folds; he walked with bent head and an 



PRINCE ADAM'S RELATIONS WITH ALEXANDER i6i 

uncertain step — he was a picture of what Poland had 
become. No satisfactory or consoling word came 
from his mouth. Soon after his return to his home 
at Minsk he died. 

The death of Catherine and the accession of Paul, 
which brought Alexander nearer to the throne, had so 
far in no way changed the latter's political opinions ; 
on the contrary, all that had happened since these 
events seemed to confirm him in his views, and the 
resolutions he thought he could execute. When he 
had a few moments of leisure after his military 
labours, to which he devoted himself with zeal and 
with a desire to carry out the wishes of his father, he 
always spoke of his plans and the future he wished to 
prepare for Russia. The despotism of his father- 
sometimes eccentric, terrible, and even cruel — and its 
immediate and probable eflTects, produced a lively and 
painful impression on Alexander's generous mind, 
which was full of ideas of liberty and justice. He w»8 
at the same time appalled at the extent of the diffi- 
culties which awaited him and were rapidly advancing 
upon him. The ceremonies of the coronation, which 
he would have to undergo some day, and which were 
totally opposed to his principles and his natural tastes, 
contributed to strengthen him in his views. 