

At the conference which took place during the 
coronation it was decided that Novosiltzoff, who was 
in bad odour on account of the opinions he was sup- 



I70 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

posed to hold and his known independent spirit, 
should leave Russia until it should be possible to 
recall him, and that he should pass the interval in 
England. Alexander obtained a passport for him 
through Rostopehin, the Minister for War, who was 
beginning to be in high favour with the Emperor. 
This Minister had been one of his most assiduous 
courtiers at Gatchina and Pavlovsk before his accession 
to the throne. He was, I think, the only able man 
who had attached himself to Paul's person before he 
became Emperor. Alexander, who during Catherine's 
reign was devoted to his father, had remarked 
Rostopehin, and had felt great esteem and friendship 
for him. These relations were afterwards converted 
by Court intrigues into coldness and opposition ; but 
at that time they still existed, and Rostopehin was 
also on friendly terms with Novosiltzoff, for both had 
found fault with the Government. Although, how- 
ever, he had promised Novosiltzoff a passport, he did 
not at once carry out his promise, and when I re- 
minded him of it, he expressed impatience and sus-^ 
picion at the political importance which he said 
appeared to be attached to this journey. The pass- 
port came at last, and Novosiltzoff proceeded to St 
Petersburg and thence to England, where he remained 
during the whole of the period of Paul's reign. He 
completed his studies there, and entered into relations 
with English statesmen which were afterwards very 
useful to him. 

Our leave having been granted, my brother and 
niyself, accompanied by Gorski, left for Pulawy, where 
our parents were impatiently expecting us after an 



PROPOSED A US TBI A N A NNEXA TION OF GA LICIA 1 7 1 

absence of two years which had given them much 
anxiety and care. The time we passed with them, in 
the place where we had lived in our happy youth, was 
one of great joy to us, though it was somewhat 
marred by the prospect of having soon to go back 
again to St Petersburg, where we knew that fresh 
trials and troubles were awaiting us. We talked of 
nothing but Alexander's good qualities and the hopes 
we had of him. Our parents listened with astonish- 
ment, anxiety, and doubt. I received at Pulawy 
several letters from Alexander full of friendly 
expressions ; they were brought by various persons, 
among others by the Archduke Palatine, who had 
just married the Grand-Duchess Alexandra. This 
obtained for me a friendly reception from the Arch- 
duho when I passed through Pesth in 1812. 

My mother was anxious for our safety. She feared 
lest we should be denounced and the object of our 
relations with Alexander be betrayed. This was the 
topic of all our conversations. 

The Governor of Galicia, Count Erdody, came at 
this time to pay my father a visit* A Hungarian by 
birth, he was preoccupied with an idea which he was 
constantly talking about. He wished to prove to the 
Poles that the best thing that could happen to them 
would be to be united to Hungary ; for, he said, the 
Emperor of Austria had only put forward his claims 
to Galicia as King of Hungary. This language on 
the part of a high Austrian functionary proved how 
much strength the Magyar element still possessed. 