



n 



176 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

husband. He also had a certain number of chamber- 
lains, among whom was Trembecki the poet. We 
often went to present our respects to his Majesty, who 
received us with pleasure at all times. I have often 
seen him in the morning in his dressing g^own, writing 
what I was afterwards told were his memoirg. I 
never could learn what had become of this work, which 
must have been very voluminous. All I . .coald 
recover was the first volume, which only contained an 
account of his embassy to Russia at the time of 
Augustus III ; the other volumes, which must have 
been much more interesting, were either desiroyed or 
so well concealed, that so far as I know no trace of 
them has been found.* 

This unfortunate prince seemed to me to accept 
his position too patiently. He strove to make himself 
agreeable to his masters who had dispossessed him, 
and to indulge the capricious fancies of the Emperor, 
who pretty frequently came with the Imperial family 
to dine with him. His dinners were exquisite and 
served to perfection, thanks to the skill of his famous 
maitre cC hdtel, Fremeau, who alone reminded him of 
his past existence. The King and his suite, in order 
to vary the entertainments he was able to offer to the 
Emperor and Empress, were preparing a soirde with 
private theatricals, when he was struck down by an 
attack of apoplexy on the 2nd of February, 1793. 
The news at once spread through the town, and we 
hastened to the palace. Dr Bekler had bled the 
patient and employed all the resources of his art, but 

* They have since been published at Poseu (in 1862) under the title * M^moires 
de Stanislas Auguste Poniatowski et sa correspondance avec Catherine II.' 



f* 



r 



DEATU OF STANISLAS AUGUSTUS 177 

in vain. The King lay on his bed unconscious, the 
persons of his suite stood round him in tears, and 
Trembecki, who had come to have a last look at his 
sovereign, fled into his room with a gesture of despair. 
The Emperor also came with the Imperial family. 
Baciarelli has painted this sad scene in a picture in 
which he has represented with remarkable talent the 
likenesses of all those who were present. The King 
was buried with suitable pomp in the Roman Catholic 
Church of the Dominicans at St Petersburg. 

Stanislas Augustus was only mourned by those 
whose existence depended on his own ; and he had 
no cause to regret life so far as his happiness was 
concerned. His conduct as a King had been such 
that no one looked upon him as a representative of 
Poland, and his end made no change either in her 
destinies or her hopes.* There were some people 
who, in view of the great expense which he had caused 
to the Imperial Treasury, thought his death had been 
accelerated for reasons of State. This no doubt is 
possible, but none of the circumstances of his illness 
seem to confirm such a suspicion, which, unhappily 
for Russia, always arises at the death of any illustri- 
ous personage in that country. 