



174 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

the same as before, both as regards his feelings and 
his opinions. 

Towards the end of the year 1797, the follies and 
eccentricities which had agitated the Court of the 
Emperor Paul were succeeded by a period of compara- 
tive calm, which looked as if it were likely to last. 
When he was Grand-Duke he had, during his stay at 
Pavlovsk and Gatchina, conceived a passion for Mdlle. 
Nelidoflf, maid-of-honour to his wife. This sentiment, 
which was entirely platonic, had continued to exist 
since his accession. Mdlle. Nelidoff had remarkable 
qualities of heart and mind, and had captivated the 
affection and confidence of the Empress. The latter 
thought she had nothing to fear from her rivalry, as 
she was tall, fair and handsome, while Mdlle. Nelidoff's 
figure, complexion, and features were in no way 
attractive ; her only charms were her sparkling smile 
and her animated conversation. The two women had 
a perfect understanding with each other, and the result 
w^as that the Emperor's conduct, his selection of high 
officials, and even his policy, became less changeable and 
confused, and more consequent, than they had been 
before. Unfortunately this salutary influence did not 
last long. On the return of the Court from the corona- 
tion, it went to Gatchina, where Paul liked to pass the 
autumn. His presence added to the naturally depress- 
ing effect produced by this season of the year in Russia, 
as it is foggy and rainy, and the cold, though less 
intense, is more disagreeable than in winter. The 
friendship and the extreme confidence shown to us by 
Alexander, and the familiarity which he and his 
brother allowed us to use in our relations with them, 



THE GRAND-DUKE CONSTANTINE 175 

amply compensated, however, for the tediousness and 
melancholy of the Court, and we did not complain. I 
rcooUect having had some very warm disputes with 
4he Grand-Duke Consfcantine, in which I did not give 
Vay to him either in words or in gestures, and one 
day I had a struggle with him in which we both fell 
to the ground. I think it was the recollection of 
these, familiarities of our youth that impelled 
Constantine to treat me with consideration even at 
timefl when he was all-powerful in Poland, and deeply 
irritated at my opposition. He attempted to cultivate 
similar relations with my brother to those which 
existed between Alexander and myself; but his 
intolerable temper made his company much less 
agreeable than that of Alexander, though it had the 
advantage of keeping my brother and myself together. 
While we were at Gatchina we made the acquaintance 
of Baron Wintzingerode, a young officer of much 
nobility of character, a prot^g^ of the princes of Saxe- 
Coburg, whom Constantine had made his aide-de-camp. 
Our friendship with him never varied, and lasted 
until his death. 

At the end of the autumn, the Court returned to 
St Petersburg for the winter. (I may mention here 
that during the years I passed in Hussia the only 
interesting events that I witnessed happened in Court 
circles, and I am therefore obliged to be always 
speaking of the Court). Our King Stanislas Augustus 
was, I believe, located with his suite at the house 
known as the Marble Palace, and lived magnificently 
at the expense of the Government. His niece, the 
Countess Mniszek, was attached to his suite with her 