



i64 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM GZARTORYSKI 

the latter made him go on walking tours and en- 
deavoured to give him an education in which Rous- 
seau's precepts were followed and perhaps too closely 
imitated. When the French Revolution broke out, 
and the revolutionists boasted that they were follow- 
ing Rousseau's teaching, M. Romme strongly sympa- 
thised with it, and wished to combine what he regarded 
as his duties as a citizen with those which he had 
undertaken with his pupil. Frequent occasions pre- 
sented themselves of showing him in practice the 
principles M. Romme had inculcated in theory. Both 
master and pupil eagerly took part in the revolutionary 
scenes which were then succeeding each other in France 
with alarming rapidity, and joined the Jacobin club, 
whose meetings they regularly attended. Count 
Strogonoff was informed of this by the Russian 
embassy, which had not yet left Paris, and also, I 
believe, by the letters of M. Romme himself, who 
thought he could not complete the education of 
Count Paul more effectively than by making him take 
part in a practical course of his teacher's doctrines. 

M. de Novosilfczoff was then sent to Paris to with- 
draw his young friend from the charge of a tutor 
whose zeal had become so dangerous, and he acquitted 
himself of his commission with great skill. He 
managed to overcome the resistance of M. Romme, 
and his regret at the separation of, as he said, two 
friends who understood each other so well. Notwith- 
standing the attachment of the young Count for his 
tutor, he was persuaded to return to St Petersburg, 
where he was soon made to perceive the danger to 
which he had been exposed. His opinions changed 



COUNT STROGOJSOFF AND M. BE NOVOSILTZOFF 165 

entirely, but he always retained in his character and 
his principles of action some traits of his first educa- 
tion. 

The general tone of conversation in Count 
StrogonoflTs house had always been, so to say, liberal 
and somewhat critical ; the doings of the Court were 
a favourite topic. Yet the old Count was always on 
good terms with the Empress Catherine. She liked 
to see in him a man who had known her old friends 
the encyclopaedists, and who was not a stranger to 
any of the doctrines or sayings of that sect. This 
permitted him sometimes to speak frankly even to 
herself or in her presence. He has often told me 
that being admitted to the Empress's toilet, a privi- 
lege granted only to the most distinguished noblemen 
of the Court, he was once there when she was prepar- 
ing to give an audience to a deputation from the 
Confederation of Targowitza, which had come to thank 
her for the * signal benefits ' she had conferred upon 
Poland (in depriving her of the constitution of the 
3rd of May,* and soon after taking her finest pro- 
vinces at the second partition). When it was 
announced that the deputation had arrived, and that 
the Empress was about to enter the throne-room to 
listen to the false speeches which were to be addressed 
to her, Count Strogonoff laughed and said : ' Your 
Majesty will not have any diflSculty in replying to 
the eloquent thanks of these gentlemen ; all you can 
say is that really they have nothing to thank you for.' 
This remark did not please the Empress. She took 
it in cold silence, and went out to receive homages 