



i68 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

ascend the throne, and desirous of making his country 
happy and of knowing how to set about it. The 
portion which Novosiltzoff translated was only the 
introduction, where the subject was treated generally, 
each special branch of Government being dealt with 
in detail in the body of the work. He was to trans- 
late the rest of the book, but he never did sp. The 
succinct review, however, of the obligations of the 
head of a State and the labours which should occupy 
him was listened to by Alexander with much attention 
and satisfaction. It contained well-chosen views and 
general deductions as to the foundations of national 
prosperity, with a scheme of the measures necessary 
for promoting it. The author had introduced some 
eloquent passages which went straight to the young 
prince's generous and patriotic heart. NovosiltzoflF 
wrote Russian with elegance ; his style was clear and 
seemed to me harmonious. Alexander praised him 
highly, and assured both him and Count Paul that 
he adopted the principles expressed in the work, 
which were indeed his own. He urged Novosiltzoff 
to complete the translation and then forward it to 
him, in order that he might be able more maturely 
to consider its contents and some day put its theories 
into practice. From that day the young Count 
Strogonoffand Novosiltzoff shared in the confidence 
which Alexander had bestowed upon me,' and were 
admitted to our understanding, so long kept a secret. 
This afterwards produced serious results, and the 
admission of two zealous Russian patriots to Alex- 
ander s confidence, naturally began to dissipate the 
illusions of our first dreams — so attractive to me as 



COUNT STROGONOFF AND M. DE NOVOSILTZOFF 169 

holding out the prospect of the independence of my 
country, and to Alexander as leading him to believe 
in the possibility of tranquil retirement from State 
aflfairs. These dreams were not, however, at once 
abandoned ; we adhered to them in spite of hard 
facts which gradually destroyed them. Alexander con- 
stantly reverted to his plans, seeking in them con- 
solation for a near future whose approach and whose 
burthens he already felt. He could not make up his 
mind to lose the hope of another future, more distant 
and more in conformity with his wishes ; his imagina- 
tion presented it to him under such attractive colours, 
that it was even after the conversation which I have 
described that he insisted upon having the draft 
proclamation which I mentioned above. 

Alexander's new friends perceived his inclination 
for a quiet life, relieved of the cares which the Crown 
would impose upon him ; they said with justice that 
this could neither promote his fame nor the happiness 
of his country, which should be his sole object. They 
took every occasion of opposing these egotistical 
leanings, while pretending not to know of them. I 
understood Alexander's views, and I could not entirely 
condemn them, though I did not conceal from him my 
belief that they were impracticable. The consequence 
was that his confidence in me grew stronger. It 
cqntinued, after many vicissitudes, for a considerable 
time, and did not cease until after I had left St 
Petersburg. 