

* StaniBlas Augustus Poniatowski. the son of the famous statesman and soldier 
who twice saved the life of Charles XII and with the two CaArtoryskis governed 
Poland during the reign of Augustus III, went with the English Minister Sir Hanbury 
Williams to St Petersburg in 1755 and there became the favourite of the Empress 
Catherine, then Grand-Duchess of Russia. Through the influence of the Russian 
Government, which had concluded a secret alliance with Prussia (21st April 1764) 
pledging the two powers to prevent * by force of arms, if necessary,' the establish- 
ment of hereditary monarchy in Poland, Stanislas Augustus was, on the death of 
Augustus III, elected King (7th September 1764). Although at first he endeavoured 
to act independently of Russia, he was easily outwitted by the superior abilities and 
greater force of character of the Muscovite diplomatists, and after Poland had been 
thrice partitioned, he was held in confinement by the Russians at Grodno, and after- 
wards at St Petersburg, where he died as above described (see Chapter I.) 

VOL. L M 



178 MEMOIRS OF PRIXCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Things now seemed to be settling down : the 
Emperor's manias had diminished under the com- 
bined influence of the Empress and her friend, and 
the public also had become accustomed to Paul's 
way of acting by fits and starts. The life we led at 
Gatchina or at St Petersburg would have been well 
adapted for study, if we had known how to profit by 
it. Our time was regulated, and there was only one 
indispensable occupation during the day — the mili- 
tary parade ; after passing an hour or two in this 
duty every morning, we had the whole day at our 
disposal except Sundays and holidays, when certain 
Court functions had to be performed. These 
were regarded as so important, that they liber- 
ated us from all social conventions and duties, 
BO that there was plenty of time for other occupa- 
tions, but unfortunately I did not avail myself of 
the leisure thus afforded me. l^eiug attached to 
Alexander's person as aide-de-camp, my service 
obliged me to attend him at military parades, and 
I used to go to his apartments every afternoon to 
take his orders ; this was our time for intimate con- 
versation. It is also from that period that dates ray 
acquaintance with Prince Peter Volkonski, adjutant 
of the Semenofsky regiment of the Guards, of which 
Alexander was colonel. His position placed Prince 
peter on a footing of familiarity with Alexander, and 
he afterwards became his aide-de-camp, then major- 
general, and finally grand chamberlain, which post he 
continued to occupy under the Emperor Nicholas. 
Without possessing brilliant or very superior faculties, 
Volkonski was very systematic and persistent in his 



PRINCE VOLKOiVSKI 179 

duties, and fulfilled theui to the Emperor's entire 
satisfaction ; he also acquired information indispens- 
able to an officer of high military rank. He was good- 
tempered, his advice was always sensible, and he did 
not hesitate to give it even when it caused dis- 
pleasure ; moreover, he was always ready and willing 
to do a service. We passed much time together, and 
I constantly received from him proofs of good-will to 
which I gladly bear testimony after an interval of 
more than half-a-century, when our relations have 
been interrupted by forty years of separation and by 
revolutions and other events. 