

My brother and myself having obtained three 
months' leave to see our parents in Poland, Alexander 
was uneasy at the prospect of remaining without any 
one who could understand him or in whom he could 
confide. His anxiety increased as the time for our 
departure arrived. He asked me to leave him a draft 
proclamation expressing his resolutions, in case he 

VOL. L L 



i62 .\fEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

should be called to the throne durino: our absence. 
In spite of my objections he insisted upon uiy doing 
this, and I ultimately complied to quiet him. My 
draft set forth the evils of the regime under which 
Russia had up to that time existed, and the benefits of 
the one which Alexander proposed to introduce ; the 
blessings of liberty and justice which Russia would 
enjoy after the obstacles to her prosperity had been 
removed ; and his resolution to abdicate after having 
accomplished this task, in order that some one more 
worthy than himself to be in power should be called 
upon to consolidate and perfect the great work which 
he had inaugurated. 

1 need not say how little all these reasonings and 
fine phrases, which I endeavoured to bring into con- 
nection as much as possible, were applicable to the 
true state of affairs. Alexander was delighted at my 
work, which satisfied his fancy of the moment — a very 
noble, but at bottom a very selfish one, as while wish- 
ing to secure his country's happiness as he then saw 
it, he at the same time desired to be free to withdraw 
from a position which he feared and disliked, and to 
live quietly in retirement where he would enjoy at a 
distance the good he had done. Alexander put the 
paper in his pocket with great satisfaction and thanked 
me effusively for my work. It reassured him as to his 
future. He thought that with this paper in his desk 
he would be prepared for the events which fate might 
suddenly bring : a strange and almost incredible effect 
of the dreams and illusions which youth cherishes 
even in circumstances where experience soonest chills 
the heart ! I do not know what became of the 



COUNT STROGONOFF AND M, DE NOVOSILTZOFF 163 

paper. I believe Alexander did not show it to any- 
body, and he never spoke to me about it again. I 
hope he burnt it, seeing how unreasonable was what 
he had asked me to write — which indeed I never 
doubted. 

While we were talking about these chimeras a 
new incident gave a more practical character to 
Alexander's intentions. Since my arrival at St 
Petersburg, one of the houses which I most visited 
was that of Count Strogonoff. I had become, so to 
say, part of his family. The friendship, indeed the 
affection shown to me by the old Count has left me 
recollections which will be always dear to me, and 
which fill me with gratitude. I was on intimate 
terms with his son Paul and his friend M. de 
Novosiltzoff, said to be a distant relation of the 
family, both of whom were of about the same age as 
myself. The young Countess was a lady of much 
distinction, good, amiable and witty ; without being 
exactly beautiful, she had more than beauty, the gift 
of pleasing and charming all who came near her. 
The old Count had long lived in Paris under Louis 
XV ; like most Russian noblemen, he wished his son 
to be brought up by a Frenchman. He even sent 
him to France with his tutor, M. Romme, a man of 
ability, and, as I was assured, of high principle, but 
an enthusiastic admirer of Rousseau. He proposed 
to make an Emile of his pupil, a plan which did not 
displease the old Count, whose generous propensities 
and loving heart had inclined him to some of the 
doctrines of the philosopher of Geneva. Count Paul 
was accordingly placed in M. Romme's charge, and 