

* Palawy tben formed part of Austria, together with Lublin, Sandomir, and 
Cracow. 



172 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

The annexation of Galicia to Hungary, if it had been 
possible, would doubtless have brought great material 
advantages to Galicia, would have conferred upon her 
a free government, and would especially have pro- 
tected her against the many evils which she suffered 
during the fifty years which preceded the year 1848. 
What would have been the immediate result of such 
an annexation at that period it is difficult to guess. 
In any case the Poles would have gladly fraternised 
with the Hungarians; yet public opinion and the 
Polish national spirit would probably have been 
opposed to such a measure, besides which I do not 
think the Austrian Government of that time would 
ever have agreed to it. 

Pulawy was just then recovering from a two-fold 
pillage to which it had been subjected during the 
war of Kosciuszko. The first occurred under the 
command of Count Bibikoff, and its results were long 
felt by the inhabitants of the village ; the second, 
which was chiefly directed against the Palace, was 
carried out by the advanced guard of a corps under 
the orders of Count Valerian Zuboff. The Palace 
was completely sacked. All the ornaments were 
broken and destroyed. Valuable pictures were cut 
in pieces ; the books of the library were stolen and 
dispersed in various parts of the Empire, and the 
only room that was spared was one which, as it had 
gilt wainscots and pictures by Boucher over the 
doors, the Cossacks thought was a chapel. All 
the provisions in the house — oil, wine, sugar, coffee, 
spirits, preserved meats, &c. — were thrown pell-mell 
into a basin in the middle of the courtyard, which 



PULAWY 173 

was then used by the Cossacks as a bath. When we 
arrived, people were still employed in cleaning the 
ruins, rebuilding damaged walls or partitions, and 
repairing the library. In the middle of the vast 
courtyard before the Palace there was a little hill, 
a sort of Monte Testacioy composed of debris covered 
with earth. When our parents returned to their 
home they had some difficulty in finding rooms fit to 
live in, and the works of restoration were not com- 
pleted when we left. 

About this time we lost our friend Gorski, who 
died of an apoplectic stroke. I found him one morn- 
ing complaining of pains in the head and difficulty of 
speech ; a surgeon was called to bleed him, and he 
was put to bed. Dr Goltz, who was absent at the 
time, came too late to save him. Gorski remained 
unconscious, talked incoherently, and only complained 
of the pain in his head. He recognised me and I 
remember his smile with gratitude. I did not leave 
him ; he died on the same day late in the evening, 
without pain. I felt his loss deeply. He was a 
true man, with nothing but justice and sincerity 
in his heart. He had often expressed a desire 
for a good and short life : his wish was accom- 
plished. 

Our three months' leave had now expired, and we 
returned to St Petersburg. We were sorry to leave 
our parents and our home, but we were anxious to see 
Alexander again and resume our relations with him. 
The letters I had received from him during our stay 
at Pulawy proved to me, if I had had any doubt on 
the subject, that he had not changed. We found him 