

* See page 52. 



i66 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

the absurdity of which she probably felt. / Despotic 
sovereigns should spare those whom they oppress the 
necessity of telling them falsehoods by which nobody 
is deceived. 

The service rendered by M. de Novosiltzoff to the 
Strogonoff family, by bringing back the young Count 
to Russia, had strengthened the friendship for him 
both of the father and the son. He became the 
adviser of the family in all circumstances, and took a 
pride in having an independent character, in acting 
according to fixed principles, and in not tolerating any 
unjust constraint. He had been attached as aide-de- 
camp to the Prince of Nassau when he was charged 
with the command of the Russian fleet against the 
Swedes, and he had also accompanied him at the siege 
of Warsaw in 1794. He thought he had deserved 
the military cross, and he indignantly refused the civil 
cross of Vladimir with which the Empress wished 
to decorate him. He insisted on sending it back, and 
it was only wath great difficulty that he w^as appeased 
on being shown the risks he would run by taking such 
a step. He finally consented to wear the cross, when 
a knot of ribbon was added to it, signifying that it 
was the reward of military prowess. 

M. de Novosiltzofi* had wnt, penetration, and great 
aptitude for work, but an extreme love of pleasure 
and sensual enjoyments ; this had prevented him from 
reading many books, and from acquiring any sound 
knowledge of law, of legislation, or of political economy, 
though he had studied all these subj^ts. He had a 
facile philosophy which strove to be free from all pre-, 
judice, but which did not seem to impair the clear and 



COUNT STEOGONOFF AND M, DE NOVOSILTZOFF 167 

decided qualities of his mind. These qualities were 
reflected as in a glass in the young Count StrogonoflEl 
The opinions and feelings of these two young men had 
a spirit of justice, of sincerity, of European enlighten- 
ment which at that time was scarcely ever to be 
found in Kussia, and which was the foundation of the 
intimate friendship and reciprocal confidence between 
us of which I have spoken. They often asked me 
questions about Alexander ; and I thought that while 
maintaining a certain reserve, I could without indis- 
cretion communicate to them some of the statements 
he had made to me, and the generous projects which 
he entertained. They fully appreciated the extreme 
importance of what I told them. 

I spoke of my two friends to Alexander ; he had 
already remarked Count Paul, and I told him that 
their convictions resembled his own, that he could 
rely oa their sentiments and their discretion, and that 
they wished to see him in private, to offer him their 
services, and to ascertain what would have to be done 
to carry out his noble impulses. Alexander consented 
to their being informed of his secret plans and 
associated in his designs. I spoke to them on the 
subject at St Petersburg, immediately after Paul's 
accession, but the arrangement was not finally com- 
pleted until after the coronation at Moscow. It was 
agreed that we should meet on a certain day and 
hour in a retired spot, and that Alexander should 
join us. NovosiltzofF prepared himself for the con- 
ference by translating into. Russian a fragment of a 
French work whose title I do not remember, which 
related to advice given to a young prince about to 