

From Moscow we went by way of Nijni Novgorod 
to Kazan. The country between these places is fine, 
and might be rich through the fertility of its soil and 
the navigable streams which cross it in all directions, 
but it is little inhabited. Some of the inhabitants 
are still half-savage tribes, apparently of the Finnish 
race — Tchouvasches and Tcheremisses who have pre- 
served their odd national costumes. I made sketches 
of them, w-hich I gave to my old friend M. Wiesi- 
olowski. At Kazan there are still many Tartars who 
have also preserved their ancient dress and customs, 
but I do not think they have any strong national 
spirit, any more than our Tartars of Lithuania. It is 
only further east, among the Nogai's and the popula- 
tions adjoining the steppes of Great Tartary or the 
slopes of the Caucasus, that this spirit shows itself 
and is accompanied by a warlike disposition. 

The journey was performed with a rapidity which 
deprived it of the practical advantage that might have 
been gained if the Emperor had seen with his own 
eyes what was going on in the country. We returned 
without passing through Moscow, and our last stage 
was Schlusselburg, the fortress which was rendered 
famous by the catastrophe of the unhappy Ivan.* 
Paul embarked on the Lake of Ladoga, and while we 
were on the boat he called my brother and myself 

• Ivan VI, killed in 1764 in attempting to escape from the f ortresn of Hchlussel- 
burg, where he bad been confined since 1741. 



1 84 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

and decorated us with the Order of St Anne of the 
second class as a reward for our services during the 
journey. This was the only honourable distinction 
I ever received in Russia. 

We passed the remainder of the summer at 
Pavlovsk, and then moved to Gatchina for the 
autumn. This palace, which ]iad recently been en- 
larged, looked like a prison ; it is built on a perfectly 
level plain, without trees or fields. The park had a 
sombre and melancholy air; the sun seldom shines 
there, and it was so cold and rainy that we had no 
temptation to walk. Military parades or manoeuvres 
in the morning, and the French or Italian theatre in 
the evening, did but little to relieve the prevailing 
dulness. This latter part of the year 1798, and the 
beginning of 1799, brought much trouble and unex- 
pected change into the situation of the persons who 
composed the Russian Court. 

At the time of the capture of Kutaysk and the 
massacre of its inhabitants, a Turkish child, after- 
wards named Kutayschoff, who had escaped with his 
life, was adopted by Paul, who had him educated, 
and then made him first his barber, and afterwards 
his principal valet. At the beginning of Paul's reign 
I saw Kutayschoff bring some broth to his master 
at the training school, where the infantry and cavalry 
drilled during the winter. He was in his barber's 
dress, of middle size, a little stout, but alert and quick 
in his movements, very dark, always smiling, with 
Eastern eyes and a countenance displaying a sensual 
joviality. In this costume he looked a sort of 
Figaro ; but he was already the object of obsequious 