

During these continual changes shameful and petty 
intrigues were as usual mixed up with the events of 
the day. While the Emperor believed himself to 
have broken the chains which he fancied had bound 
him, Kutayschoff entered into relations with Madame 
Chevalier, a handsome woman and a charming actress 
engaged at the Court Theatre, who was the object of 
the assiduous attentions of M. Bignon, the French 
Minister at Cassel, but had abandoned him on receiving 



PITT AND MOSTOPClIfN 191 

more sumptuous offers from Paul's valet. These amor- 
ous intrigues led to mutual confidences which added 
piquancy to the moments which the Emperor passed 
with his servant, and augmented the latter's influence. 
Paul's nervous excitement was increased by political 
events. Austria obtained the alliance and help of 
Russia, and Count Rostopchin, since his recall to the 
Court, had infused a spirit of firmness into the Foreign 
Office, which he directed with much activity and an 
ability all his own. The whole credit of the new 
coalition * and of its first successes was attributed to 
him, and his friends used to say with complacency that 
the two great men of the age were Pitt and Rostopchin. 
Marshal Sou varofi' also was recalled ; he had been since 
Paul's accession in exile on his estates and under close 
surveillance as a partisan of Catherine. Very cen- 
sorious remarks of his were quoted about the Govern- 
ment of the Emperor Paul, and he made some rather 
unseemly jokes on the new organisation and uniforms 
of the army. But as soon as the Emperor wau^^oJ 
him he loaded him with honours and compliments. 
Souvarofi* took the command of the army, and had 
some astonishing successes over the French, who 
wore no longer led by Buonaparte. During the year 
1796 and the following years we had rejoiced at 
Buonaparte's extraordinary victories, hoping that they 
might lead to the reconstruction of Poland. We used 
to call him * the friend ' in order not to compromise 
ourselves by mentioning his name ; and now every 
victory gained over the French seemed to us a stab 
in the body of our country. 

* RuBsia, Turkey, England, Austria, and Naples were then allied against France. 



192 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

When SouvarofTs first successes became known, the 
Court was at Pavlovsk. The old Cossack General 
DenisofF was also there ; he had been beaten by 
Kosciuszko at Raclavice. He took a malicious 
pleasure in examining our faces each time that the 
news of a victory was brought from Italy. He used 
to say to us : * I told you the French would be beaten; 
it could not be otherwise. Russia will beat her 
enemies always and everywhere. She is invincible.' 
Te Deunis were continually sung in the churches, 
while the Emperor still mingled thoughts of his 
mistress with those of politics, war, and piety, and 
placed at her feet the trophies of the victories gained 
by his armies. One day she praised an undecided tint 
known as chamois, and he at once ordered everything 
to be coloured with this tint. He ordered chivalrous 
plays to be performed in which he imagined himself 
to be the hero ; sometimes he was a Bayard, at others 
a Nemours. He also published in the papers a 
challenge to any sovereign who differed from him to 
settle the difference by single-handed combat. This 
was addressed especially to the King of Prussia, who 
had refused to join the coalition. Paul would have 
been in a great difficulty if the challenge had been 
accepted, as he had not much personal courage, and 
was very timid on horseback, so much so that when 
he was in front of cavalry he never would allow them 
to charge. 