

My brother and I suffered with the rest from the 
Emperor's abrupt changes of temper. The fact that 
we were Poles, and the antecedents of our family — 
perhaps also charges made against us or casual 



PAUUS ECCENTRICITIES 193 

remarks uttered with or without intention — had led 
Paul to suppose that we were liberals, or even 
Jacobins in disguise. Yet he had treated us with 
some kindness on various occasions at Court assem- 
blages where we were near him. He especially 
seemed to like my brother, and he sometimes joked 
with him. When he was in a good humour Paul was 
continually saying and doing things which he thought 
witty. Once he told my brother to make a coarse 
and insulting remark to one of the persons present. 
My brother objected, but the Emperor repeated his 
order with such a menacing air that he had no alter- 
native but to obey. On another occasion when 
Paul met my brother he put out his tongue at him ; 
and during our stay at Peterhoff, seeing my brother 
in one of the alleys of the garden leading to the 
rooms of the Countess SchouvalofF, who had a very 
pretty chambermaid, Paul took him by the shoulders 
and told him to go away, adding * That bird is not 
for you.' He also asked him to tell him his adven- 
tures, and promised not to betray his secrets to any 
one. The Grand-Duke Constantino was Governor of 
Peterhoff, and was responsible for the military 
service of the palace. One day the Bavarian Minister 
passed out of the gates, and the officer in command 
of the guard having omitted to report the circum- 
stance, Paul sent him through my brother the usual 
messasre that he was a fool. The Grand-Duke was 
much disturbed at this incident, but the officer simply 
replied that the message did not produce the slightest 
effect upon him, as it came from a madman. This 
shows the impression which was already generally 

VOL. I. N 



194 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

produced by the Emperor's conduct ; and although 
he had been kind to us, he gradually became irritjited 
at seeing us on such intimate terms with his sons. 
Prince Bezborodko, who afterwards died suddenly — 
which perhaps saved him from a disgrace which he 
would certainly have experienced sooner or later, as 
Paul looked upon him as a censor and an inconvenient 
obstacle to his caprices — had advised Paul to send us 
to the Austrian armv with letters, but nothing: came 
of this proposal. The Emperor still suspected us, 
and expressed his suspicions to General Levaschoffi 
This old general had in his youth been a gambler and 
a creature of Potemkin's, but he was ver}"- jovial and 
good-natured, and liked to render people a service. 
He hardly knew us, but he spoke in our favour. 
Suddenly the Emperor turned upon him and said : 
' Will you answer for them ? ' — * Yes, Sire,' was the 
reply. * With your head ? Mind what you say.' 
The General stopped for a moment ; but to hesitate 
was to ruin us. He then said deliberately : * Yes, I 
will answer for them with my head.' This reassured 
the Emperor for some time. I had the story from 
LevaschofF himself. Our turn for promotion by 
seniority to the rank of Lieutenant-General having 
arrived, and this rank being incompatible with the 
appointment of aide-de-camp to the Grand-Dukes, 
the Emperor decided to make me Court-Marshal to 
the Grand-Duchess Helena, who shortly after married 
the Grand-Duke of Mecklenburg, and my brother 
Equerry to the Grand-Duchess Maria, who was 
betrothed to the hereditary Prince of Weimar. These 
places gave us the effective rank of Lieutenant- 