



A PALACE PLOT 185 

salutations and hand-shakings on the part of most of 
the generals and other persons who took part in 
the drill. Soon his influence with his master made 
him a dignitary of the Empire and an all-powerful 
favourite. This metamorphosis was accomplished by 
the autocratic wand of Czarism. In less than a year 
he rose from a barber and a valet to be Grand-Equerry, 
and astonished the Russians by appearing successively 
with the Orders of St Anne, St Alexander, and St 
Andrew, accompanied by extensive grants of land 
and money. He was not, however, promoted to 
these honours all at once, and he would not have 
got them so rapidly if the Empress and Mdlle. 
de Nelidoff had continued to retain their influence 
over the Emperor's mind. It was difficult, sometimes 
impossible, for aspiring officials to get what they 
wanted so long as the influence of the Empress 
and her friend was preponderant, and this was the 
principal cause of their defeat. Ambitious people 
now made overtures to the favourite valet in order 
to advise him and take advantage of the ahnost 
magnetic power which he was able to exercise over 
his master. The instigator and prime mover of this 
plot was Count Rostopchin. He had been removed 
from the post of Minister for War, succeeded by M. 
Nelidoff*, the nephew of the dernoiselle d portrait* 
and even banished to Moscow, for Paul always acted 
in extremes both with regard to people whom he liked 
and those who no longer enjoyed his favour. Ros- 
topchin was not the man to forgive such a slight, 
and, determined to have his revenge upon those who 

* See page 132. 



1 86 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

had caused his fall, allied himself with Kutayschoff. 
la order to divert Paul from his attachment to 
Mdlle. Nelidoft, and to make him quarrel with 
his wife, it was insinuated that he was in leading- 
strings, and that all Kussia was convinced that the 
two women reigned in his name. The plotters 
brought him a younger and prettier woman than 
Mdlle. Nelidoff, without her decided character. 
She was the daughter of Lapoukin, who had been 
Director of Police at Moscow under Catherine ; Paul 
made her his mistress, and rewarded her father for 
his complaisance by making him a Prince and giving 
him the blue ribbon. Rostopchin was then appointed 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, and all the high function- 
aries w^ho belonged to the Empress's party — the 
Princes Kourakin and their relatives, the chief of 
whom was the old Prince Repnin — lost their places 
and were banished to Moscow. The break-up of the 
party was complete ; it was enough for any one to be 
suspected by the Emperor of having been protected 
or liked by the Empress to ensure bis dismissal and 
banishment from the Court. 

Paul now became more suspicious than ever. He 
thouofht his sons were not sufficientlv devoted to his 
interests, and that his wife wanted to reign in his 
place. All who approached the Court were in constant 
fear and uncertainty, being exposed at any moment to 
be addressed in the presence of the whole Court by 
the Court-Marshal with some insulting message from 
the Emperor, and then to be sent into exile. It was 
like the Reisfn of Terror. The balls and Court festivals, 
were arenas where each man risked his position and 