

His wife, the Princess Sophia, who belonged to 
another branch of tlie Volkonski family that had been 
more favoured by fortune, had a quicker temper and 
a more generous heart, and she often showed herself 
a true friend to me, even since my total withdrawal 
from the Russian service— for which I am sincerely 
grateful to her. She never pardoned the Emperor 
Nicholas for having kept her brother for thirty 
years in the mines of Siberia ; he became old there, 
and was not restored to his sister and his family until 
the coronation of Alexander II. Her sorrow had 
separated the Princess Sophia from the Russian 
Court during the whole of Nicholas's reign. 

Among the young men of the Court there was 
only one who was received into Alexander's intimacy : 
this was Prince Alexander Galitzin, one of the 
Gentlemen of the Chamber. He was called * Little 
Galitzin ' on account of his short stature, and pleased 
Alexander by his amusing gossip and his wonderful 
powers of mimicry, which enabled him closely to 



i8o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

imitate the appearance and the voice of every member 
of the Court. When we were alone without 
Alexander, he used to imitate the Emperor Paul 
with such accuracy that we feared lest he should be 
arrested and punished. He had been a passionate 
admirer of the Empress Catherine, and notwithstand- 
ing her advanced age he would have gladly become 
one of her favourites. When I knew him he was a 
thorough epicurean, devoting much calculation and 
reflection to all possible enjoyments of every kind ; 
but after Alexander's accession he determined to 
enter on a more serious mode of life, and, encouraged 
by the Emperor, became Procurator to the Senate. 
Afterwards, probably under the inspiration of Alex- 
ander's piety, he became very devout, saw visions 
with M. de Kocheleff, and was finally appointed 
Minister of Public Instruction, a post which I should 
never have thought him qualified to fill. His appoint- 
ment did not take place, I think, until the year 1822, 
when I was still Curator of the University of Wilna. 
Remembering * Little Galitzin ' as I had known him, 
I could not picture him to myself as a Minister 
directing the public instruction of the Empire, as he 
did not seem to possess any talent but that of amusing 
people and making them laugh. He was totally 
without personal animosity — which did not, however, 
prevent crying abuses from occurring at Wilna while 
he was Minister, the result of which was that I was 
obliged to resign, my post of Curator. 

There were sometimes select balls at Court, at 
which the etiquette was not so strict as usual. The 
Emperor appeared at one of these balls in a dresscoat. 



A N IMPERIA L PROGRESS TO KAZAN 1 8 1 

which he never wore on other occasions ; it was of dark 
red velvet and of an old-fashioned shape. He danced 
that evening with Mdlle. Nelidoff. It was a curious 
sight, which stills dwells in my memory. The Emperor 
Paul, short, with very large shoes, placed himself in 
the third position, rounded his arms, and bent his body 
in the manner then taught by dancing masters, while 
opposite him was a lady of equally short stature, who 
thought it her duty to respond to the would-be grace- 
ful airs and harmonious movements of her partner. 