



HOSTILITY TO FRANCE 195 

Greneral, but I was sorry not to be officially attached 
any longer to the Grand-Duke Alexander nor to be 
able to accompany him in his military duties. The 
change, however, did not in any way alter our 
relations. 

Soon after I had to separate from my brother. 
Our parents had settled in Galicia, and wanted one of 
us to go to them and become an Austrian subject. 
The family decided that this should be my brother. 
He addressed a very respectful letter to the Emperor, 
in which he explained that in order to satisfy the 
requirements of the Austrian Government and the 
demand of his parents, he found it necessary to ask 
permission to join them in Galicia. Paul was 
indignant at this very natural step, which was amply 
justified, and his irritation was perhaps the greater as 
he had shown some special kindness to my brother. 
He was so angry that his first impulse was to send 
him to Siberia. Fortunately Kutayschoff, who liked 
my brother, and who had been spoken to on the 
subject by the Grand-Duke Alexander, succeeded in 
calming the Emperor's anger. My brother not only 
got permission to go, but was decorated with the 
order of St Anne of the first class. After he had left 
I felt very solitary, and gave myself up to sad reflec- 
tions. About this time a messenger came from the 
army who was asked how the French officers dressed. 
He said among other things that they wore large 
whiskers. When the Emperor heard this, he at once 
ordered every man at the Court to shave off his 
whiskers, and the order was executed an hour after- 
wards. At the ball in the evening there were a 



196 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

number of, so to say, new faces, with blank spaces on 
their cheeks, showing where they had shaved. People 
laughed as they met each other. The order was con- 
veyed by the Court-Marshal, Naryshkin, who himself 
saw that it was at once carried out. 

After dinner there were cavalcades at Pavlovsk in 
which the Grand-Duchesses managed their horses 
with much grace and dexterity. The Empress, who 
was ordered to ride by her physicians, sat astride on 
her horse like a man, and only went at a foot pace. 
The summer was finer than usual. I was quartered 
in a solitary house at the entrance to a wood at the 
end of the Park. Here I was- more isolated, and 
could fill up my day with some useful occupation. 
One morning I suddenly received a letter from Count 
Rostopchin, informing me that I had been appointed 
Russian Minister to the Court of Sardinia, that I 
must at once go to St Petersburg to get my instruc- 
tions, and that then I should have to leave in eight 
days for Italy. This was a disgrace in the guise of a 
favour.* The order saddened and displeased me ; it 
was painful to me to leave the Grand-Duke Alex- 
ander, to whom I was sincerely attached, and several 
other friends who by their affection had mitigated the 
disagreeables of my stay in Russia. I left Pavlovsk 
next day, and Alexander expressed to me his sorrow 
at my departure. On recalling his words to me on 
that occasion, it seems to me that he was no longer 
the same as when I left him after the coronation of 
his father at Moscow. He had already looked more 
closely into the realities of things, and they had 
produced their effect. Some of his dreams — those 