



MISSION TO THE COURT OF SARDINIA 197 

especially which related to himself personally, and of 
which we had not again spoken for a long time — had 
vanished. Moreover, Alexander had not been able 
to resist entirely the temptation to do as the people 
round him did, and he had sought to divert his 
thoughts by paying court to the most celebrated 
beauties of the capital. He heartily bade me farewell, 
and promised to write to me as soon as he could. I 
asked the Minister to allow me to stop a few days 
with my parents on my road to Italy. He refused ; 
but as my road passed in the vicinity of Pulawy, I 
hoped to see them, if only for a few moments. 



CHAPTER X 

1798-9 

STAY AT VIENNA. — THE GRANI>-DUKE CONSTANTINE. — POZZO DI BORGO 
AND THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT. — THE KING OP SARDINIA. — 
ALPIERI. — QUARREL BETWEEN RUSSIA AND AUSTRIA. — RAPPROCHE- 
MENT WITH FRANCE. — THE NEAPOLITAN COURT. — A RUSSIAN 
LOTHARIO. 

I REGRETTED the more my forced departure as I had 
made arrangements for employing my leisure in 
literary work, for which purpose the solitary house I 
occupied at the entrance to the forest of Pavlovsk was 
eminently suited. This was a pleasant illusion. One 
fancies that one can create something, but it is only 
when one sets to work that one becomes convinced 
that hard labour and more information are necessary 
to give adequate expression to a favourite idea, and 
that talent and perseverance are often wanting. On 
arriving at St Petersburg I proceeded to the Foreign 
Office as directed, but the documents I found in its 
archives gave me only a general idea of the duties of 
my post, and no instructions whatever were furnished 
me as to the special mission with which I had been 
entrusted. I passed eight days in preparing for my 
journey, and then left St Petersburg. At Mien- 
drzyrzec I found my eldest sister, who had come to 
tell me news of our parents. We passed part of the 



STAY AT VIENNA 199 

night and the following morning in relating our joys 
and sorrows. Prudence did not allow me to stop any 
longer or to go to see my parents. We parted in 
the hope of meeting again at Vienna, where my 
young sister Zamoyska was already staying, and 
where the eldest also soon arrived. 

Four years had elapsed since my brother and I 
left Vienna. I was then proceeding to Russia to ask 
as a favour that which was only justice — the restitu- 
tion of our property ; while now I came to Vienna as 
the representative of the Russian Government. This 
change in my situation produced an immense impres- 
sion on Viennese society, and especially on the 
Government functionaries. The few months I passed 
here with my sisters were among the happiest of my 
life. My aunt, the Princess Lubomirska, also lived at 
Vienna in the winter ; she had a house on the Bastei 
(the old fortifications) and received all the most distin- 
guished people in Viennese society, which was com- 
posed of women celebrated for their beauty and wit, 
and of foreign travellers, who came there in crowds, 
as France and Paris, closed to Europe, were just now 
detested by the wealthier classes in all countries; 