

* The Order of St John, which had obtained possefwion of Malta in 1530 from 
the Emperor Charles V, was divided into eight 'languages,' each of which had its 
prior. The first Russian Knight of Malta was Sberemetieff, who was sent to the 
island in 1698 by Peter the Great to learn naval warfare, and diplomatic relations 
were then oi>ened by the Order with the Court of St Petersburg. In 1774, a new 
priory of the Order was established in Poland, with six commanderships, each of 
which was to be held by a Pole. The property of the Order in Poland was trans- 
ferred to Russia at the second partition, and this led to the selection by the Grand 
Master, Rohan, of M. de Litta as plenipotentiary to arrange with the Russian 
Government as to the disposal of this property. 



RUSSIA, ENGLAND, AND MALTA 189 

from contradicting him. Count Litta and his brother, 
the Papal Nuncio at St Petersburg, who afterwards 
became a Cardinal, readily fell in with the Emperor s 
plan and encouraged him in it. In Poland there 
were still some commanderships of the Order, notwith- 
standing the bad repute into which it had fallen among 
us by Prince Poninski having trafficked in its property 
and been condemned by the Diet after the first parti- 
tion ; and Paul created other commanderships in 
Kussia without troubling himself about differences of 
creed Count Litta framed, in accordance with the 
ancient rite, the ceremonial of a Grand Chapter of the 
Order, in which the new Grand Master was to enter 
on his dignities. The Emperor appeared several 
times on his throne in the costume of Grand Master, 
with the cross of the Order, which had been sent him 
from Rome. Paul was passionately fond of cere- 
monies ; he wished that people taking part in them 
should preserve an imperturbable gravity and should 
attach great importance to them. My brother and 
myself were appointed Commanders of the Order, and 
had to put on the ancient costume, consisting of long 
cloaks of black velvet, with belts and embroidered 
crosses. There had been some rehearsals of the cere- 
mony of offering the Grand Mastership to the Emperor, 
and the whole business had an appearance of theatrical 
masquerading which made the spectators and even the 
performers smile, with the single exception of the 
Emperor, who was thoroughly identified with his 
part. The secretary to the Chapter was an old 
acquaintance of ours, M. de Maisonneuve, a French- 
man who when young had sought his fortune in 



I90 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Poland, had had some success with the ladies, and 
had obtained through them rank in the army and the 
Cross of Malta. He came to Kussia in his old age to 
restore his fortune, which he had squandered twice 
over. Count Litta appointed him his secretary, and 
in this capacity M. de Maisonneuve gave entire satis- 
faction, as he wrote fluently and was well acquainted 
with legal and diplomatic phraseology. 

This hobby of the Emperor's produced a quarrel 
with England, who, without giving any definitive 
reply, refused under various pretexts to give up 
Malta. The only result of his assuming the rank of 
Grand Master was the marriage of Count Litta, who 
was relieved from his vow of chastity by the Pope, 
and became the husband of the Countess Skovronsky, 
the favourite niece of Prince Potemkin, still a hand- 
some woman, though not in her first youth, who when 
Alexander became Emperor procured for her husband 
a large fortune and the important position of Grand 
Chamberlain, which he held until his death. Her 
daughter-in-law was the Princess Bagration, w^iose 
estates Count Litta administered with much regularity 
and zeal. 