



A PALACE PLOT 187 

his liberty. The Emperor constantly fancied that 
sufficient respect was not shown to some person who 
was the object of his favour, or to the relations of 
that person, and that this neglect was inspired by the 
Empress, and in such cases he at once ordered the 
supposed culprit to be dismissed from the Court. 
His fancies and his decisions were equally sudden, and 
were at once carried out. 

Other sovereigns, after a fit of anger or extreme 
rigour, sometimes become calm and strive to soften 
the effects of their first decisions. This was not the 
case with the Emperor Paul. Usually, after giving a 
severe order with regard to a man who had displeased 
him, the punishment did not, after reflection, seem to 
him sufficient, and he often augmented it. All who 
belonged to the Court or came before the Emperor 
were thus in a state of continual fear. No one was 
sure that he would remain in his place at the end of 
the day, and in going to bed it was quite uncertain 
whether during the night or in the early morning some 
policeman would not come with a kihitka to drive you 
off at once to Siberia. This state of affairs began with 
the disgrace of Mdlle. Nelidoff, and continued with 
increasing aggravation during the remainder of Paul's 
reign. Mdlle. Nelidoff behaved with much pride and 
dignity. She left the Court, showed no desire to 
remain there, and did not attempt to return. She 
said with marked disdain to all who would listen to 
her, that nothing was more tedious than a Court life, 
and that she was glad at last to have left it. 

Paul had a new hobby which sometimes diverted 
him from his fanciful suspicions and the rigours which 



i88 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

followed thera. He wanted to become Grand Master 
of Malta.* Political considerations had probably con- 
tributed to this wish, as of all the Powers that might 
have protected or possessed Malta, England, who had 
taken it, was the one that Europe liked least. Paul 
was at that time in intimate relations with the British 
Cabinet, which attached great importance to the 
active co-operation of Kussia against France, and he 
may have thought that under these circumstances 
England would perhaps not refuse to cede to him a 
territory which she had only provisionally occupied 
with the express promise to return it to the Order of 
St John, to whom it belonged, and to place it under 
the protection of a power which should be designated 
by Europe. Paul was full of the idea of himself 
becoming Grand Master of Malta, and of uniting in 
his person both a title so famous in history and the 
power necessary for the protection of the independence 
of so important a station in the Mediterranean. Politi- 
cal considerations were less concerned in this idea than 
the vanity of posing as a hero of chivalry before the 
Princess Lapoukin. Being the supreme chief and 
defender of the Russian Church, he saw no difficulty in 
placing himself at the head of the principal Order of 
the Roman Catholic Church. The combined Cabinets, 
with the exception of England, carefully abstained 