

In May, 1798, the Court proceeded to Pavlovsk, 
the property and creation of the Empress Maria, 
which, considering the general appearance of the 
environs of St Petersburg, was a pleasant and gay 
place. The buildings and gardens had been enlarged 
under the superintendence of the Empress. She 
attempted to entertain her guests by assembling them 
after dinner to listen to a reading of a French trans- 
lation of Thomson s * Seasons.' The Emperor did not 
assist at these readings, and the idea was not a 
success ; everyone tried to escape what was generally 
voted to be a dull and somniferous entertainment. 

The Emperor Paul wished this year to make a 
progress through part of his Empire. The Grand- 
Dukes took part in the journey, and my brother and 
myself accompanied them. The Emperor visited the 
Canal which joins the Volga to the Neva, thereby 
establishing a communication between the Caspian 
Sea and the Baltic. This work of Peter the Great, 
which does great credit to his genius and activity, 
passes in a diagonal line through the whole of the 
interior of Russia. Paul went to see the fleet of boats 



i82 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

on the canal, some of which started for St Petersburg 
and others for Astrakhan. M. de Sivers, notorious for 
the odious manner in which he carried out the second 
partition of Poland, was charged with the Works De- 
partment. Being on a so-called tour of inspection, he 
went to meet the Emperor. He looked old, thin, pale, 
and depressed, without any energy or distinction. The 
very cold reception accorded to him by the Emperor 
showed him that he would not long remain at his post. 

We passed by Tver on our way out, and on our 
return by Yaroslav and Vladimir. These provinces 
are rich and populous, with an air of abundance and 
prosperity which strikes all who travel through them. 
It is in the interior of Kussia that her true strength 
lies ; if it were well administered by a government 
concentrated within reasonable limits, this reofion 
should by its resources and prosperity disgust the 
Russians with the task of being the tormentors and 
gaolers of neighbouring countries. 

At Moscow, which was the first place to which 
the Emperor went, there was a considerable assem- 
blage of troops, which he reviewed and ordered to 
perform some manoeuvres. They were regiments of 
the line which had not been trained like the Guards, 
and had not had time to obtain instruction in the new 
system. The infantry was divided into two lines 
which marched in two columns, at the head of each of 
which was placed one of the Grand-Dukes. They 
were to deploy at a given signal, and I remember with 
pleasure the activity with which we executed this 
movement, which was successful beyond our hopes, 
without any crowding or spreading out of the lines, 



AN IMPERIAL PROGRESS TO KAZAN 183 

each of which was composed of from twelve to fifteen 
battalions. The Emperor was highly satisfied at the 
order in which the troops marched, and liberally 
distributed rewards among the officers. 