

When I was at Vienna in 1790 Kaunitz was still 
living. His place was occupied by Thugut, whom I 
had known at Brussels, and who was now all powerful. 
He professed to be a friend of my father's, and when 
he was Ambassador at Warsaw he held his own 
against adverse pretensions so firmly, that he even 
offended the King. He was of humble birth, and 
that he should have been placed at the head of the 
Government was astonishing; in a countrv like Austria. 
Thugut was an unshaken partisan of war, and gave up 
his portfolio after the Battle of Hohenlinden, to the 
Emperor Francis's great regret, as he possessed his 
entire confidence. He had extraordinary firnmess of 
character, perseverance, and power of work. While 
he was Minister ho scarcely ever went out, ate no 
meat, and lived entirely on fish and vegetables. 
When I afterwards saw him in 1820, his sole occupa- 
tion was to go every evening to the Kasperle theatre, 
and his faithful friend, Count Ossolinski, was the only 
one that did not abandon him. 

On my journey to Sardinia I was particularly 



204 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKl 

struck by the miserable appearance of the villages of 
Northern Italy as far as Verona. I paid a hurried 
visit to the principal buildings of Verona, Venice, and 
Mantua, having but little time to give myself up to 
the meditations to which those celebrated cities have 
always given rise in my mind. It is impossible for 
one who knows something of the arts and literature 
of antiquity not to feel their influence. In passing by 
these cities and their fields festooned by vines, my 
thoughts were full of Virgil and Shakespeare, of 
Othello and Romeo and Juliet. The country was in 
a pitiable state ; it had been the theatre of war, and 
had passed from one conqueror to another. Its in- 
habitants, who were formerly citizens of the Cisalpine 
Republic, were accustomed to French successes and 
reckoned upon them ; now that the French had been 
defeated, they were despondent and helpless. It was 
a melancholy season of the year, and the roads were 
almost impracticable. At the first stage beyond 
Mantua my carriage stuck in the mud, and we had 
to get oxen to extricate us. On arriving at Bene- 
detto, an inhabitant of the place oftered me supper, 
saying that he had shot a bird which was unknown 
in that country. He at the same time complained of 
the hardness of the times, watching me, like the rest 
of his countrymen, as he spoke, to find out what party 
I belonged to, and what opinions it would be safe for 
him to express. He gave me some excellent soup, 
but the bird was thin, black, and with an enormous 
head and beak ; I think it inust have been a crow. I 
passed twenty-four hours under his roof, and this 
Lombard, who in his heart sympathised with the 



THE KING OF SARDINIA 205 

French, but feared the Austrians, made a strong 
impression upon me. The King of Sardinia, who, 
expelled from the Italian Peninsula by the French, 
had been forced to take refuge in the Island of 
Sardinia, had taken advantage of Sou varoiTs* victories 
to return and establish himself at Florence ; he was 
encouraged to do this by the Court of St Petersburg, 
which had taken him under its protection. He could 
not yet venture as far as Piedmont, where the armies 
were standing opposite each other. The Battle of 
Novi had been fought, but Buonaparte was already 
coming back from Egypt, and Massena had shut 
himself up in Genoa. The Court of Vienna, too, was 
doing its utmost to prevent the King of Sardinia 
from returning to his dominions. At first it feared 
that his presence might interfere with its military and 
political plans, and the two Courts had long been 
estranged. Austria did not care for anybody but 
herself Selfishness is no doubt common both among 
States and individuals, but Austria was more passion- 
ately and evidently selfish than any other Power, and 
this exclusive sentiment prevented her from having 
any generous impulse, or a friendly and sincere, or 
even honest policy towards others. 