

Vienna was, so to say, the capital of the Con- 
tinental States which were allied with England 
against the horrors of the French revolution. In the 
midst of this select society, which was less Austrian 
than European, my two sisters had a most amiable 
and flattering reception. My younger sister was 

then at the climax of her beauty, and my elder sister, 
who also was beautiful, was especially distinguished 
by the qualities of her mind. An accidental circum- 



200 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

stance doubled the prestige which they exercised at 
Vienna. By the order of the Emperor Paul, the 
Grand-Duke Constantine was to join the army of 
Souvaroff, which was then pursuing its victories in 
Italy, and was to stop at Vienna on his waJ^ My 
sister, the Princess of Wurtemberg, who had just been 
divorced from the Grand-Duke's uncle,* was under 
these circumstances in a difficult position. She was 
the intimate friend of the Countess Razumovska, 
nee Thun, wife of the Russian Ambassador, and the 
eldest of three sisters who by their beauty, their 
grace, their wit, and their noble sentiments, were the 
ornaments of Viennese society. The youngest, after- 
wards Lady Guildford, was at one time engaged to 
Prince Joseph Poniatowski, and always loved him as 
a brother. The Countess Razumovska, though the 
wife of the Russian Ambassador, detested the Russians 
in general as much as her two sisters did. But the 
Ambassador, not knowing how the Grand-Duke would 
treat my sister, already began to avoid her company, 
and though he had professed to be her friend, did not 
dare to give her any advice. When Constantine 
arrived, there was a meeting of Russians at the 
embassy, and as my sister used to go there every day, 
and she did not want to make any demonstration 
which might be prejudicial to me, she also was 
present ; but being received with evident embarrass- 
ment by the rest of the company, she remained 
alone in a corner of the room. When, however, 
Razumovski began to present to Constantine the 
ladies who had come to meet him, the Grand-Duke 

* See page 40. 



POZZO DI BORGO AND ENGLAND 201 

asked for my sister, went to her, addressed her as his 
aunt, and conversed with her for some time and with 
much amiability about her two brothers whom he 
used to see daily at St Petersburg. When he left, 
all those who had held aloof from my sister were as 
eager in their protestations of friendship as they had 
been distant before. Next day Constantino came to 
her house, having announced his visit beforehand. 
Prince Esterhazy and several Austrian generals had 
to wait in the ante-room, and my sister, who was 
much vexed at this, begged him to allow them to 
come in ; but he took a pleasure in tormenting them 
for more than an hour, talking and laughing without 
intermission. It amused him to keep them waiting ; 
this, indeed, was his usual custom both in Austria 
•and elsewhere. He always treated in this way 
strangers who wished to do him honour. 