



214 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 
during the first period after the foundation of Rome ; 

» 

but it did not in any way carry out ray idea. 

My enforced absence from my country, my family, 
and my friends, and the fact that my position was un- 
congenial and without aim, plunged me into a sort of 
lethargy similar to that which had oppressed me on 
my first arrival at St Petersburg, and the gravest and 
most unexpected events could not rouse me. During 
the whole of my life the sole motive of my actions 
has always been one exclusive and dominating senti- 
ment — the love of my country. That which did not 
in some way promote the welfare of my fatherland or 
of my fellow-countrymen had no value in my eyes, 
while the most futile matters relating to Poland 
interested me. Thus at Warsaw there was a good 
French theatre and a very indiflferent Polish one ; yet 
I went to the latter much oftener than to the former. 

The period of my stay in Rome was, however, by 
no means barren of events. Pius VI, who had been 
elected Pope at Venice, entered the Holy City while 
it was still suffering from the excesses committed by 
the French troops. I recollect that at a reception of 
Romans and foreigners at the house of Monsignor 
Consalvi, who had just been promoted cardinal, the 
Russian Consul, wishing to pay him a compliment, 
awkwardly predicted that he would become Pope, and 
that Consalvi very sincerely protested against the 
idea. I may say in passing that in my official reports 
I did not hesitate to censure the French for their 
conduct. This seemed greatly to astonish M. 
Karpoff, the first secretary of the legation, an old 
Russian official who had probably been instructed to 



QUARREL BETWEEN RUSSIA AND AUSTRIA 215 

watch my movements. Knowing the sympathy 
generally felt by the Poles for France, he almost 
reproached me for my severity ; but I replied that if 
the French behaved badly I could not speak well of 
them. All men, whether French or not, lose on a 
nearer view much of the prestige and enthusiasm 
which they inspire at a distance. 

The friendly relations which had existed between 
the Emperor Paul and Austria began about this time 
to grow cool. There were various reasons fur this ; 
I will give some which are not generally known. 
The Grand-Duchess Alexandra, the eldest of Paul's 
daughters, who, as I stated in a previous chapter, was 
intended by Catherine to marry the King of Sweden, 
became the wife of the Archduke Joseph, Prince 
Palatine of Hungary. This union was contracted at 
a period when the Courts of St Petersburg and 
Vienna were on the best terms with each other, 
and at the time when Souvaroft' had gained his vic- 
tories in Italy. The Archduchess was of uncommon 
beauty ; her features resembled those of her brother 
Alexander, she was most graceful, and she possessed 
all the moral qualities which are the highest orna- 
ments of her sex. When she came to Vienna, she 
inspired universal admiration, respect, and enthusiasm, 
without in any way seeking it. Her popularity ex- 
tended from the highest classes of the capital to the 
most populous districts of Vienna. This displeased 
the Neapolitan wife of the Emperor Francis II, a 
woman of jealous and eccentric character and of ex- 
traordinary habits. She loved monsters, and filled 
her gardens with burlesque statues. There was 