



2o8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZART0R7SKI 

Though almost destitute, he had a big stomach and a 
face like a full moon, and he was not devoid of 
political ability. 

Only a few Piedraontese families had followed 
their sovereign ; they lived in complete isolation and 
did not see or receive anybody. M. Bailly de Saint- 
Germain, formerly tutor to the King, was supposed 
to be the Court Chamberlain, but no one ever saw 
him or did business with him. He once gave a dinner, 
and this was the only official function he performed. 
M. Dunoyer, Count Chalembert's right hand ; M. 
de Lamarmora (uncle, I believe, of the General of 
that name) ; M. de la Tour, Governor of Piedmont 
at the time of the Austrian occupation ; and a noble- 
man from Sardinia, completed the number of the re- 
presentatives of Piedmont. Among the Florentines 
only the Marquis Corsi used to visit the Piedmontese, 
and he also called upon me. Another house which 
was an exception to the general rule was that of 
Madame d' Albany, who had been divorced from the 
Pretender, and was now the wife of Alfieri. She 
often gave dinners to which strangers were invited. 
The painter Fabre was frequently at her house ; I 
knew him long after at Montpellier, his native 
town, where he had established a museum of 
pictures and curiosities collected by Alfieri and left 
by the latter to the Countess of Albany, who gave 
them to Fabre and, if I am not mistaken, married 
him. 

While I was staying at Florence Alfieri enjoyed 
robust health, and occupied the greater part of his 
time in long walks. While he was walking he used 



ALFIEKI 



209 



to declaim aloud verses from his trajredies without 
paying the slightest attention to pasaers-by or to the 
objects which surrounded him. In the evening he 
looked tired and exhausted, and directly he returned 
from his rambles he used to sit down to a game of 
chess. His youth had been, as he himself says in his 
memoirs, a very stormy one. It was Madame 
d' Albany, to whom he was warmly attached, who had 
advised him to write the tragedies and other works 
which even during his lifetime had gained him ^ 
great reputation. Some years before I had met him 
in Paris. At first he was an ardent admirer of the 
principles of the French Revolution, but afterwards, 
disgusted by its excesses, he looked upon France with 
horror, and devoted all his zeal to the cause of King 
Emmanuel, strongly blaming himself for not having 
been constantly faithful to it. When some years later 
a sudden illness had deprived him of the means of con- 
tinuing his usual walks, he concluded that he would 
soon die, and he passed away in a few days. He was 
a man of great merit, and looked upon events from a 
truly elevated point of view ; but he was the slave of 
an exalted imagination, and was subject to illusions. 

The inertia into which the Sardinian Court and 
the society of Florence were plunged, was too 
monotonous to be interesting ; the days followed each 
other without bringing anything tiew. Under these 
circumstances I decided to go to Pisa to see M. 
Francis Rzewuski, formerly Marshal of the Polish 
Court. He was a friend of my parents, and I and 
my mother had lived in his house during our stay in 
Paris. He received me with great cordiality, though 