



2i8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

M. Italinsky, afterwards envoy at Constantinople 
and then at Rom6, a Ruthenian and formerly a 
surgeon, had for some years been at Naples on a 
diplomatic mission. He was, or at least he tried to 
be, a learned man. He studied archaeology and 
physics, and knowing how to do his own business 
people concluded that he would also know how to do 
that of others. In ordinary matters he certainly 
acquitted himself very well, but he was never very 
successful, either from want of capacity or of good 
fortune, in dealing with affairs of greater importance. 
He owed his favour with Catherine to some letters 
on the eruptions of Mount Vesuvius, and he always 
stated at the end of his despatches that he had blotted 
them with some of the volcanic ash that had fallen 
upon Pompeii eighteen centuries before. He was 
also helped in his career by his ill-health. He suffered 
from a sort of aneurism which obliged him to lead a 
very regular life, but it lasted many years. 

The Court of Naples sought to take advantage 
of the friendly relations which had been established 
between Paul and Buonaparte. It solicited the 
Emperor's intervention against the advance of the 
French, which people thought would, after Marengo, 
be continued to the most southerly point of the 
peninsula. Italinsky proceeded, at the instigation 
of the Chevalier Acton, to Florence, where Murat 
then was, to obtain some favourable conditions for 
Naples ; but his efforts produced no result. He 
started before my departure from Rome, and M. 
Karpoff, my first secretary, being jealous of Italinsky. 
and wishing to revenge himself for his sarcasms 



THE NEAPOLITAN COURT 219 

called this fruitless journey 'The Italinsky Pilgrim- 
age.' 

On my arrival at Naples I requested Italinsky 
to present me to the Chevalier Acton. We found 
him at a table covered with papers. He was a thin, 
sickly-looking man, with a gaunt and sallow counten- 
ance and black eyes. His demeanour showed at every 
movement the ravages of time ; he walked with a 
stoop, and constantly groaned under the weight of 
his labours and misfortunes. Yet he was said to be 
the favourite lover of the Queen Caroline, who was 
the absolute mistress of her husband and the kingdom. 
Nothing was done except by her will, and even official 
letters bore her signature by the side of the King's, 
to show that they governed together. She had all 
the activity of her brother, the Emperor Joseph ; this 
was sufficiently proved by her sparkling glance, her 
quick movements, and her shrill voice. I saw her 
at Leghorn when she was disembarking with her 
daughters, one of whom, the Princess Am^lie, after- 
wards married Louis-Philippe. Maria Theresa had 
fashioned her daughter's mind to domination long 
before she was married to King Ferdinand. This 
habit of governing afterwards became her passion. 
She also had a succession of favourites ; her liery 
temperament was stimulated by the Neapolitan 
climate, and it would have been difficult to believe 
her boast that she had never had a child of whom 
Ferdinand was not the father, if there were not an 
unfortunate likeness between them and Ferdinand — 
not only as regards personal appearance, which, in his 
case, was anything but attractive, but also as to 