

VOL. I. o 



210 ME}fOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

he was in pain ; he had already been attacked by the 
malady which ended in his death. He was very 
impatient as regards suffering, and always relieved it 
by taking opium. He did this with the approval of 
a physician who was a professor in the university of 
Pisa ; but there is no doubt that by taking so much 
opium he hastened his end, and that it did not prevent 
him from suffering horribly. We had known and 
loved M. Rzewuski since we were children. • He 
alwa3^s had some sweets for us, and we used often to 
go from Powonski to his house at Marimont, which 
he had fitted up with much luxury and taste. He 
was a man full of good qualities — amiable, beneficent, 
scrupulously honest, but too fond of ease ; he was 
generous and a great nobleman in the true sense of 
the word, of a race which is now extinct. Sometimes 
he would not show himself to his guests, though he 
treated them with munificent hos])itality. When he 
was in good health he liked to come down to his meals, 
and was very fond of conversation, which he made very 
interesting by relating a number of anecdotes. One 
of these referred to his stay at St Petersburg. He 
had been sent there by the King after his accession, 
and was on very friendly terms with Count Panin, 
Chancellor of the Empire, and tutor to the Grand- 
Duke Paul. Being one day at the Count's house he 
took the young prince on his knees, when the latter 
had a fit. 'I was never so frightened in my life,' he 
said, *and I took good care not to play again with 
this sickly child, who might have died in my arms/ 
He knew all the scandalous gossip of Warsaw and St 
Petersburg by heart, and was much attached to the 



1 



ROME 



211 



King, though after being for a long time his Minister 
he at once abandoned the Court when he perceived 
that the King was not faithful to his engagements. 

I profited by my leisure at Florence in visiting the 
masterpieces of art in the galleries, and in studying 
the Italian language. 1 read Dante with a priest 
who was remarkable for his extreme cowardice, and 
was constantly repeating the expression ' ho paura,' 
which at that time people were not ashamed to use. 
The Italians have greatly changed since then. 

This tranquil and monotonous existence lasted all 
the winter; in the spring people's faces began to 
lengthen, they talked in whispers, and signs of great 
anxiety followed the placid security of the previous 
months. At length we all had the news of the cross- 
ing of the Alps by Buonaparte and of the battle of 
Marengo and its results. Sommariva disappeared 
with his troops, and the King of Sardinia with all his 
Court, myself included, hastily packed our things to 
go to Rome. 

The impression produced by the sight of Rome, 
when one comes there for the first time, is indefinable. 
One gathers together all one's recollections, one 
strives to remember all one has learnt, read, and 
heard of this ancient capital of the world, and to com- 
bine all these echoes of the soul to make them more 
sonorous. It is diflacult to realise the idea that you 
are really at the spot where such great events have 
occurred, that you tread the soil trodden by such 
great men. At the age especially when one has just 
completed the study of the classic writers who tell 
you what has passed and give you the names of those 