



212 MEMOIRS OF PRIXCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

who have lived at Rome, the very name of the Holy 
City raises up a multitude of thoughts. You do not 
see things as they really are, but by a magical effect 
of imagination you see them as they were formerlj'^ ; 
the present puts on the pomp and the colours of the 
past. Directly I had alighted from my carriage I 
hurried to the Capitol and the Palatine Hill. I could 
not subdue my impatience — I could not sufficiently 
occupy my eyes and my imagination with the sight of 
the places which had witnessed such great actions. 
' Is it possible/ I said to myself, * that it was here 
that lived the Scipios, the Catos, the Gracchi, the 
CsBsars, that it was here that Cicero thundered and 
that Horace sang ? ' and I recalled to my memory all 
that had since my infancy been the object of my 
admiration and my sympathies, all that history and 
the poets had taught me. I regret nmch that at the 
time of which I am speaking the Christian antiquities 
of Rome did not interest me as greatlj^ as they do now ; 
all my dreams were only of heroic but pagan Rome. 

Penetrated with these grandeurs of the past, I 
thought of nothing else during my stay in the Holy 
City. I determined to visit every trace of its antiquity, 
and by examining the ruins and studying all that had 
been written on the streets and buildings of ancient 
Rome, to construct the plan of the city as it appeared 
at different epochs. My idea was to make not only 
general plans, but a series of drawings of portions of 
Rome, such as the Tiber, the seven hills, and the 
edifices built upon them, so far as imagination can 
picture them — beginning with the first foundation of 
Rome on the Palatine hill and the Capitol, then show- 



ROME 213 

ing her as she was under the Kings and in the various 
phases of the Republic, when she was still built of 
brick, and finally under Augustus, when she became a 
city of marble. Each of these drawings was to repre- 
sent something characteristic of the epoch. The above 
plan, which to me was new, had been conceived by 
others, but it has never been thoroughly executed. 
The drawings representing the open spaces, the 
temples, and the forts of the city divided into seventeen 
districts (regioni) occupied me during the whole period 
of my stay. I wished my work to be exact and con- 
scientious, and to make it so required much time, 
expense, and research. It was necessary to consult a 
niultitude of authors, to check their statements, to 
employ antiquaries, architects and draughtsmen. I 
did not finish the work ; all I could do was to begin 
it. I had a very good plan and two water-colour 
drawings made of the city. One represented the 
Forum as it was at the time of the Republic, with a 
crowd of people opposite the Palatine hill, as was 
usual in stormy times ; an orator above the rostra ; 
and the via sacra with the edifice w^here the voting 
was to take place. The other drawing, which was of 
large size, also represented the Forum, but on the side 
opposite the Capitol. The subject was the triumph 
of Germanicus. All the temples on the slope of the 
Capitoline hill were there, and Tiberius, his -face dis- 
torted with hatred and rage, was represented as 
coming out of one of them accompanied by the 
members of the Senate. A third drawing, which I 
ordered to be made during my absence, was to repre- 
sent the grottoes on the Tiber near the Palatine hill 