



2 i6 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

soraethinjf underhand and cunning in her manner, 
and she never looked one straight in the face. The 
only persons with whom she was intimate were her 
servants, who never ventured to rival her in beauty 
or wit ; she gave them hizavre banquets and private 
theatricals in which she played herself, and her 
husband, whose mind was also not very, brilliant or 
suited to a more distinguished society, used to take 
part in these entertainments, of which singular stories 
were related at Vienna. The Archduke Joseph's 
beautiful and amiable wife was regarded by the 
Austrian Empress as a rival, and she rendered the 
Archduchess's life so intolerable that the latter 
had to withdraw with her husband to Ofen. She 
was Paul's favourite child, and when he learnt 
how she had been treated he flew into a rage, 
demanded that she should be sent back to St 
Petersburg, and even threatened war. Her death, 
which happened almost simultaneously with that of 
her father, rendered any further action useless, but it 
plunged the whole of St Petersburg in deep mourn- 
ing, while Austria, having re-established herself 
in Ital}', had begun to treat the Russian Cabinet 
with less deference. The Austrians had sent away 
Souvaroff' with little ceremony, and thinking them- 
selves already masters of the country, they were 
glad to rid themselves of an inconvenient and 
haughty ally. Then came the defeats of the 
Russians in Holland and Switzerland, which con- 
tributed still further to estrange Paul from Austria. 
Buonaparte, taking advantage of this change, hastened 
to send back to Paul all the Russian prisoners, clothed 



RAPPROCHEMENT WITH ERA NCE 2 1 7 

in new uniforms and well provided in every respect. 
This friendly step on the part of the First Consul gained 
the Emperor's heart, and he declared to his Ministers 
and the people with whom he was intimate that 
Kussia had been too lavish of her blood and money 
for Austria, who only repaid her by ingratitude. 
He enlarged on Buonaparte's ' noble conduct,' and 
interpreted it as a sign that he sincerely wished for 
the alliance of Russia ; he had, Paul said, suppressed 
anarchy and the demagogues, and there w^as no good 
reason why Kussia should not come to an under- 
standing with him. Paul accordingly sent General 
Levaschoff to Naples to mediate between the French 
Government and that of the two Sicilies. In passing 
through Rome the General gave me a letter from 
Count Rostopchin, the Foreign Minister — the first I 
had received from him — introducing General Levas- 
choff to me and instructing me to give him niy 
services. I did this readily, for the General was n<jt 
only a good companion, but was very friendly. Soon 
after I received a second missive from Count Rostop- 
chin informing me that the Emperor, not being 
satisfied with the conduct of the Sardinian Court, 
wished me to leave it under the pretext of visiting 
Naples. 

I was delighted at this order, and left for Naples 
at once. The Court was not there ; its only repre- 
sentative was the Chevalier Acton, an all-powerful 
Minister, who had left Sicily to govern the kingdom. 
Though Naples, thanks to its brilliant sun and its 
unequalled position, cannot be otherwise than beauti- 
ful, it had at that time a very melancholy appearance. 