

I arrived at Florence in the winter of 1798-9. 
On the night of my arrival there was a terrible storm, 
accompanied by thunder and lightning, which re- 
minded me of other similar natural phenomena that 
preceded some of the gravest events of my life. My 
diplomatic occupations as the Russian Minister at the 
Court of King Emmanuel, which consisted only of a 
few faithful partisans, were not very arduous. My 



2o6 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

task was to restore courage to this unfortunate prince 
bj'^ assuring him of the friendly sentiments and the 
protection of the Emperor Paul, and to send to my 
Cabinet at least once a month a report, which it was 
difficult to make very interesting, as other Ministers 
were posted nearer to the places where great events 
were occurring than I was. I was limited to a certain 
kind of news, and yet I was expected to invest it with 
interest. The task was especially difficult to me, as 
since my arrival in Russia, I had felt nothing but 
indifference with regard to all I was required to do. 
This indifference enabled me to bear numerous trials 
with firmness and equanimity, and it was especially 
necessary in my new appointment, as I had to regard 
as a success what I could only consider a calamity. I 
had to keep up a correspondence with Souvaroff and 
forget the massacre of Praga,* and I had to write at 
the end of each of my despatches to the Emperor : 
'Your faithful subject and slave (rab),' according to 
the formula then laid down by him. 

The King of Sardinia reminded one a good deal — 
theological erudition apart — of James I of England as 
he has been described in history, and especially by 
Scott. The branch of Savoy, descended from an 
English princess, the daughter, if I am not mistaken, 
of James I, was the oldest of the branches of the 
Hanoverian line. The King did not like business, 
and though very pious, was fond of telling good 
stories, for, like his predecessor James, he had a 
turn for buffoonery. His wife. Queen Clotilda, was 
one of the sisters of Louis XVI ; she used to be 

• See page 73. 



THE KING OF SARDINIA 207 

called at Versailles le gros Madame, on account of 
her enormous size, but when I was presented to her, 
she was extremely thin. Her eyes were still very 
beautiful, and her face and the sound of her voice 
had an expression of sweetness and melancholy. 

The diplomatic body of which I formed part was 
composed of myself and Mr Wyndham, brother to 
Lord Wyndham, a celebrated member of the House 
of Lords; he was a stout Englishman who looked 
more like a brewer or butcher than a diplomatist. 
We both used to go to the King's residence on every 
Sunday and holiday. He occupied one of the palaces 
of the Grand-Duke of Tuscany ; it was outside the 
town, and afterwards became one of his most splendid 
residences. We were always introduced by Count 
Chalembert, who was the so-called Minister of 
Foreign Affairs. The Count presented us to the King 
and Queen, the conversation usually turned on insig- 
nificant subjects, and it did not last longer than twenty 
minutes. After some jocular remarks the King would 
dismiss us, sometimes imitating the person of whom 
he had been speaking, which he did in a very comic 
way. The Queen used to bow to us with a melan- 
choly smile. There was also a hungry subordinate 
diplomatist who did not go to Court ; his name was 
Winterhalter, and he was Chargd d' Affaires of Prussia. 
This poor wretch was so badly paid that he hardly 
had enough for his living ; but though his clothes 
were threadbare, he was constantly moving about and 
insinuating himself everywhere. He chatted inces- 
santly, and in order not to lose his wretched pay he 
doubtless filled his daily report with endless gossip. 