

It was during my stay at Vienna this year that 
I made the acquaintance of M. Pozzo di Borgo, and 
he owed to our meeting the high position and im- 
mense fortune which he afterwards obtained. Pozzo 
was at that time a young man who rightly or wrongly 
imagined himself a martyr to patriotism. General 
Paoli, wh9 had become celebrated in the seventeenth 
century for having defended the independence of Corsica 
against the armies of Louis XV, had been compelled 
to take refuge in England, where I often met him in 
1790 at the house of the beautiful Mrs Cosway, an 
artist who used to receive the most distinguished 
people in London. In that year the English seized 
Corsica, and made Paoli the head of the Government ; 
the latter appointed Pozzo his secretary of state, 



202 MEMOIRS OF FRINGE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

which shows that he was already knowii as a man of 
ability ; and although he was at first a zealous advo- 
cate of the French Revolution, in Corsica he belonged 
to the opposite party. The influence of England in 
Corsica did not, however, last long. After the 
capture of Toulon, the French republican and revolu- 
tionary party gained the upper hand, turned out the 
English and their Government, and took possession 
of the island. Pozzo thus became a refugee ; and, 
passionate and vindictive like a true Corsican, he 
vowed eternal hatred to France and Buonaparte. He 
received a pension from England, though he had no 
employment or mission, and strange to say he never 
inspired the slightest confidence in the British 
Government, which, after giving him a pension, took 
no further notice of him. He now exerted himself to 
the utmost in all directions to satisfy his ambition. 
As the prot^gd of Lord Minto, the British Ambassador, 
father of the ex-Minister, and knowni for his diplo- 
matic travels in Italy in 1848, Pozzo was received in 
the salons of my sisters and of Madame Lanckoronska, 
a lady who was universally respected, and thus formed 
part of the Polish coterie, which at that time enjoyed a 
hicrh reputation in Vienna. This gave him the ejitree 
to the best society and the protection of the ladies 
who were its chiefs. Though still young and generally 
liked, there was something so underhanded and 
mysterious in his conduct that he had not a single 
friend or person who could say he was intimate with 
him. This at least was the impression he produced 
upon me when I first made his acquaintance. He 
had a cultivated mind, and sometimes he seemed 



1 



POZZO DI BORGO AND ENGLAND 203 

inclined to cast a tinge of poetry over his life and to 
work at history, moral philosophy, and politics ; but 
his face belied his words, and his only thought was 
how to obtain wealth and a high position. Although 
circumstances sometimes forced him to enter the 
sphere of sentiment, he never swerved from this 
dominant idea. Yet he was regarded at Vienna as 
an interesting man, as sincere, and as worthy of true 
friendship. The praises which were generally lavished 
upon him almost persuaded me that I had formed a 
mistaken impression of his character. 