



ASSASSIXATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 233 

relations of life, passions are excited which are naiuch 
more formidable than those produced by evils which, 
though affecting the entire community, are little felt 
by individuals. This was the real motive of Pauls 
assassination. I utterly disbelieve the story that 
English money contributed to this event. For even 
supposing — and I am sincerely convinced there is no 
foundation for such a belief — that the English 
Government of that day was devoid of all feelings of 
morality, such an expenditure would have been 
totally unnecessary. The deposition, if not the 
murder, of Paul had become inevitable in the natural 
course of events. Even before my departure from St 
Petersburg it was the fashion among the young men 
of the Court to talk freely on this subject, to make 
satirical epigrams on Paul's eccentricities, and to 
suggest all kinds of absurd plans for getting rid of him. 
The universal aversion to his rule was shown, often 
without any attempt at concealment, on every possible 
occasion ; it was a State secret which was confided to 
all, and which no one betraj^ed, though the people 
lived under the most redoubted and the most suspicious 
of sovereigns, who encouraged espionage, and spared 
no means of obtaining exact information not only 
of the actions, but of the thoughts and intentions 
of his subjects. The wish to get rid of the Emperor 
Paul showed itself more strongly the nearer one 
approached the Court and the capital, but it did not 
really become active until almost at the moment of 
its execution. Notwithstanding the extreme favour 
with which the conspiracy was regarded in the most 
distinguished society of the Eujpire, it could not have 



234 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

attained its objects, and would probably have been 
discovered, if the appointment of Governor-General 
of St Petersburg, which placed at his disposal the 
garrison and the police,, had not been in the hands of 
the chief promoter of the enterprise. 

One day the Emperor said, with a scrutinizing 
glance at Pahlen : ' I hear a conspiracy is being 
formed against me.' 'Such a thing is impossible, 
Sire,' replied the General with his frank and good- 
natured smile ; ' it cannot be formed unless I belong 
to it/ This reassured Paul, though it is said that his 
suspicions were aroused by anonymous letters, and 
that on the eve of his death he had sent for General 
AraktcheyeflF to give him the place of Governor- 
General of St Petersburg, after dismissing Pahlen. 
If Araktcheyeff had come in time St Petersburg 
would have . been the scene of many tragic events ; he 
was a man imbued with a strong sentiment of order 
and with an energy which sometimes grew into 
ferocity. His return would probably have been fol- 
lowed by that of Count Rostopchin, and Paul might 
then have been saved. He had dismissed so many of 
his Ministers that he was surrounded by incapable 
men to whom he had given the highest offices of 
State. Prince Kourakin continued to direct Foreign 
Affairs with much kindness of heart and little wisdom, 
while an insignificant man named Obalianinoff held 
the important post of Procurator-GeneraJ, involving 
the direction of the police and the whole administra- 
tion of the Empire, solely because he had formerly 
been steward of the Gatchina estate. Kutayschoff 
was still the man in whom Paul most trusted. When 