



ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 231 

a great impression on Alexander, but it did not con- 
vince him. It required more than six months to 
enable his tempters to obtain his consent to their 
plans. Pahlen had at first left all the speaking to 
Panin, who was an adept at specious arguments ; but 
when the latter was sent to Moscow, Pahlen completed 
the work of his colleague • by hints and allusions, in- 
telligible only to Alexander himself, which were so 
skilfully introduced, with a military frankness which 
he made almost as effective as eloquence, that Alex- 
ander became more and more persuaded that the 
aims of the conspiracy were just and good.* 

It was a thousand pities that a prince so anxious 
and so well qualified to be a benefactor to his country 
did not hold . entirely aloof from a conspiracy which 
resulted almost inevitably in his father's assassination. 
Kussia certainly suffered much under the almost 
maniacal Government of Paul, and there are no means 
in that country of restraining or confining a mad 
sovereign ; but Alexander felt and exaggerated in his 
own mind all his life the sombre reflection of the 
'^ crime committed on his father^ which had fallen on 
himself, and which he thought he could never wipe 
out. This ineffaceable stain, although it was brought 
about solely by his inexperience and his total and 
innocent ignorance of Russian affairs and the Russian 
people, settled like a vulture on his conscience, 
paralysed his best faculties at the commencement of 

* Palilen had the reputution of being one of the most astute men m BuBsia. 
There was no one like hin\ to get out of a difficulty, and to advance his interests in 
spite of all obstacles. He fell, however, just at the moment when he seemed to have 
nothing to fear. He came from Livonia ^ where they used to say of him : * Er hat die 
Fiffologie stndiert ' (he was a student of Fitfology — from the German word, fiffiy 
cunning). 



232 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

his reign, and plunged him into a mysticism some- 
times degenerating into superstition at its close. 

At the same time it must be admitted that the 
Emperor Paul was precipitating his country into 
incalculable disasters and into a complete disorganisa- 
tion and deterioration of the Government machine. 
Paul governed intermittently, without troubling him- 
self about the consequences, like a man who acts 
without reflection according to the impulse of the 
moment. The higher classes, the principal oflScials, 
the generals and other oflScers of rank — all, in a 
word, who thought and acted in Russia — were more 
or less convinced that the Emperor had fits of 
mental alienation. His reign became a rule of terror. 
He was hated even for his good qualities, for at 
bottom he desired justice, and this impulse sometimes 
led him to do a just thing in his outburst of rage ; 
but his feeling of justice was blind, and struck 
at all without discrimination of circumstances ; always 
passionate, often capricious and cruel, his decrees 
were constantly suspended over the heads of the 
military and civil officers, and made them detest the 
man who thus filled their lives with uncertainty and 
terror. The conspiracy had the sympathy of all, for 
it promised to put an end to a regime which had 
become intolerable. A sovereign may commit grave 
mistakes, bring evils on his country, cause its wealth 
or its power to decline, without exposing himself to 
death as a punishment for his misdeeds. But when 
the sovereign authority weighs at every moment on 
each individual in the State, and continually disturbs 
like a fever the peace of families in the ordinary 