



MURAT 225 

Minister, who was shortly after deprived of his port- 
folio and retired to Moscow, upon which Paul broke 
off his relations with Austria, declared war against 
England, and prepared to enter into a eordial alliance 
with Buonaparte. All this happened during my 
absence, and although I was on good terms with 
Kutaysohoff,* I never could learn the exact details 
either of LevAschoft's mission or of Rostopchin's 
dismissal. LevaschofTs negotiations, which he was 
authorised by the Cabinet to continue after Paul's 
death, were not successful. The French negotiators 
at once suspected that Alexander would not.be so 

V 

easy to manage as Paul had been. This was doubtless 
also Murat's opinion, for, without waiting for instruc- 
tions from Paris, he occupied the whole of Tuscany, 
and continued his advance. The more he suspected, 
however, the more loudly he proclaimed his belief in 
the maintenance of a friendly understanding between 
France and Russia. He occupied the palace of the 
Duke of Tuscany, where he gave me and General 
Levaschoff a splendid dinner to which all the generals 
and the principal people of Florence, comprising some 
sixty persons, were invited. We sat on each side 
of Madame Murat, who was very slim and pretty. 
Murat, who sat opposite, paid us constant attention, 
and was more amiable than his wife. He proposed 
the health of the Emperor of Russia, and afterwards 
drank the health of both of us. When the General 
went to see him in his box at the play he observed 
that above his head were the Russian and French 
flags crossing each other. 

* The £mpeit)r'8 barber. See page 184. 
VOL. I P 



2 26 MEyfOIRS OF PRINCE ADA}r CZART0RY8KI 

Before leaving Italy I went to Leghorn to bid 
farewell to ' Marshal Rzewuski, whom I found very 
ill. I met at his house several of my countrymen ; 
among them was Sokolnicki, a very active officer of 
engineers whom I had known in Lithuania during our 
campaign of 1792^* and Rozniecki, who was with me 
in the camp of Golomb and in the skirmish at Granno. 
Both heartily shook me by the hand, recalling with 
emotion the events we had witnessed together. 
Rozniecki told me that he had introduced into the 
Polish legions the system of drill practised at Golomb, 
which made the Polish cavalry of the republican army 
superior in rapidity of movement to the French 
cavalry. I left Rzewuski with a heavy heart, and 
this illustrious man, proved friend, and worthy citizen 
passed away soon afterwards. .He is buried in the 
Campo Santo at Pisa. His family intended to erect 
a monument to his memory, but I believe they did 
not carry out their intention. . 

After staying two days at Vienna, I went- on to 
Pulawy, where I found the whole of my family ; but- 
much as they wished. me to stay, they felt that it was- 
necessary I should go on at once. I travelled day 
and night until I reached St Petersburg, where my 
brother joined me soqn after, • . 

I approached the Russian capital with mixed 
feelings of joyful impatience to see the persons to 
whom I was attached, and of uncertainty as to the 
changes which time and new circumstances might 
have produced in them. A messenger met me at 
Riga with a friendly note from the Emperor and a 