

escaped the Emperor s caprices and remained steadilv 

in favour. Besides his relationship to Prince 

Kourakin, Count Panin was the son of the eminent 

General of that name, and the nephew of the Minister 

who had been the Grand-Duke Paul's tutor. These 

antecedents gave Count Panin a certain assurance 

and air of importance. He was a tall, resorved-lookin«' 



COUNTS PANIN AND PAHLEN 229 

man, and wrote in excellent French ; his despatches 
were perfect in every respect both as regards matter 
and style. Ho had the reputation of being a man of 
great talent, energy, and good sense, but of dry and 
imperious character. After remaining for some 
months in the Foreign Office, he displeased the 
Emperor, who deprived him of his appointment and 
sent him back to Moscow. As will be seen further 
on, Panin was one of the chief leaders of the con- 
spiracy which brought about Paul's death, though he 
did not actually take part in it During my previous 
stay in the Russian capital I had never met him, for 
having entered the diplomatic career at an early age, 
he scarcely ever came there. His wife, a Countess 
Orloff*, did not follow him abroad ; she was good and 
amiable, and had been very kind to me. When I 
returned to St Petersburg she insisted on bringing 
me and her husband together, and did everything 
in her power to make us friends, but without success. 
Apart from other reasons, the Count s exterior would, 
I think, almost have alone been sufficient to make 
this impossible. I have often been struck by his 
icy expression ; his impassive countenance, on a body 
as straight as a spike, did not induce one to address 
him. I saw him but little, however, and my judgment 
of his character might have been erroneous and even 
unjust. 

The two Counts Panin and Pahlen were at that 
time the strongest heads of the Empire. They saw 
further and more clearly than the other members of 
Paul's Council, to which both of them belonged ; and 
they agreed to initiate Alexander into their plans. 



230 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

It would not have been prudent to attempt anything 
without being assured of the consent of the heir to 
the crown. Devoted fanatics or enthusiasts might no 
doubt have acted otherwise. By not implicating the 
son in the dethronement of his father, by exposing 
themselves to a certain death, they would have better 
served both Russia and the prince who was to be 
called upon to govern her ; but such a course would 
have been almost impracticable, and it would have 
demanded an audacity and antique virtue which ia 
these days very few men possess. Pahlen, as 
Governor of St Petersburg, had easy means of access 
to the Grand-Duke, and obtained from him a secret 
audience for Panin ; their first interview took place 
in a bath. Panin represented to Alexander the evils 
from which Russia was sufi*ering and would continue 
to suffer if Paul continued to reign. He said that 
Alexander's most sacred duty was to his country, and 
that he must not sacrifice millions of people to the 
extravagant caprices and follies of a single man, even 
if that man was his father ; that the life, or at least 
the liberty, of his mother, of himself, and of the whole 
of the Imperial family was threatened by Paul's 
inconceivable aversion for his wife, from whom he w^as 
entirely separated ; that this aversion increased from 
day to day, and might prompt him to the most out- 
rageous acts ; and that it was therefore necessary to 
save Russia, whose fate was in Alexander's hands, by 
deposing Paul, which would be the only means of 
preventing him from inflicting greater calamities on 
his country and his family, and securing to him a 
quieter and more happy life. This speech produced 