

On that evening Plato Zuboff gave a grand 
supper, to which were invited all the Generals and 
other officers of rank who were supposed to approve of 
the objects of the conspiracy. These were only now 
clearly explained to tliem, as the only way to secure 
the enterprise against accidents was for two or three 
leaders to prepare it, and not to announce it to the 
others who were to take part in it until the moment 
for its execution should arrive. 

Zuboff represented to his guests the deplor- 



ASSASSJXATIO^' OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 237 

able condition in which Russia was placed by the 
insanity of her sovereign, the dangers to which both 
the State and each individual citizen were exposed, 
and the probability that new and more outrageous 
excesses might at any moment be expected. He 
pointed out that the insane act of a rupture with 
England was contrary to the essential interests of the 
Russian nation, dried up the sources of its wealth, 
and exposed the Baltic ports, and the capital itself, 
to the gravest disasters; and that none of those whom 
he addressed could be sure of their fate on the morrow. 
He enlarged on the virtues of the Grand-Duke 
Alexander, and on the brilliant destinies of Russia 
under the sceptre of a young Prince of such promise, 
whom the Empress Catherine, of glorious memory, 
had regarded as her successor, and had intended, if 
she had not been prevented by her death, to place 
on the throne. He concluded by declaring that 
Alexander, rendered desperate by the misfortunes of 
his country, had decided to save it, and that all that 
was now necessary was to de{)ose the Emperor Paul, 
to oblige him to sign a deed of abdication, and, by 
proclaiming Alexander Emperor, to prevent his father 
from ruining both himself and his Empire. Pahlen 
and both the ZubofFs repeated to the assembled guests 
the assurance that the Grand-Duke Alexander ap- 
proved of their plan. They were careful not to say 
how much time it took them to persuade him, and 
with what extreme difficulty and with how many 
restrictions and modifications his consent was finally 
obtained. The last point was left vague, and every- 
one probably explained it after his own fashion. 



238 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

When the company had been made to understand 
that Alexander's consent had been given, there was 
no further hesitation. Meanwhile champagne was 
drunk freely and there was general excitement. 
Pahleu, who had gone away for a short time on 
business connected with his functions as Governor- 
General, came back from the Court and announced 
that the Emperor did not seem to suspect anything, 
and had said good-night to the Empress and the 
Grand-Dukes as usual. Those who had been at 
supper in the palace afterwards said they recollected 
that Alexander, when he took leave of his father, 
did not change countenance or show that he was 
conscious of the scene which was preparing. Pro- 
bably they did not look at him, for he has often told 
me how agitated he was, and certainly the risks he 
ran not only for himself, but for his mother, his 
family, and many others were enough to niake him 
sad and anxious. The Grand-Dukes were always 
obliged to maintain an attitude of strict reserve 
before their father, and this constant habit of con- 
cealing their emotions and thoughts may explain why 
at this grav^e and supreme moment no one perceived 
in Alexander's countenance what was passing in his 
mind. 