

[The following is a translation of Alexander's 

letter : — 

March 17 th 1801. 

You have already heard, dear friend, that owning 

to the death of my father, I am at the head of affairs. 



ASSASSIJ^ATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 223 

I do not mention any details, as I wish to give them 
to you by word of mouth. I write to ask you at once 
to hand over all the affairs of your mission to the 
next senior member of it, and to proceed to St 
Petersburg. I need not tell you with what impatience 
I am waiting for you. I hope heaven will watch 
over you during your journey and bring you here 
safe. Adieu, dear friend, I cannot say more. I 
enclose a passport for you to show at the frontier. 

Alexander.] 

This order gave me immense pleasure. Italy is 
undoubtedly a delicious countr}-, full of interest, 
especially for those who have leisure to study it. The 
wars which had ravaged it had at this period deprived 
it of some of its charms, though the ravages were in 
themselves not without interest. But I was far from 
my country, my family, and all I loved ; I was sad 
and solitary ; I was never quick to make acquaint- 
ances ; much time and peculiar circumstances were 
necessary to break the ice which separated me even 
from people whom I saw often. My old friendships, 
though not numerous, are dear to me, and I do not 
feel inclined to contract new ones. It was with 
inexpressible pleasure, therefore, that I made my 
preparations for departure ; but I could not leave 
Naples without visiting Vesuvius, Herculaneum, 
Pompeii and Portici. As I was ascending Mount 
Vesuvius, I stumbled and began to slip down towards 
the crater, when the guide ran up, gave me his hand, 
plunged his iron-shod staff into the moving debris, 
and thus saved ray life. The idea of death was at 



2 24 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

that moment very painful to me ; I was about to 
return to my people, and to exchanj^e a passive for an 
active existence. I felt that I was more attached to 
life than ever, as radiant visions of hope, not yet dis- 
pelled by experience, were floating before my eyes. 

On the day following that on which the news of 
the death of the Emperor Paul was communicated to 
us, the messenger sent from St Petersburg by the 
Neapolitan Ambassador brought us a circumstantial 
account of the catastrophe. It did not astonish me, 
as I saw before my departure that the whole of the 
Court was planning a conspiracy against the Emperor. 
At Naples the general impression was one of joy 
almost exceeding the bounds of decency. On the 
second day after the messenger's arrival. General 
Borozdin gave a ball to which he invited the best 
society of the town. The dancing was kept up all 
night, and the General encouraged by his example 
public demonstrations of a gaiety which, to say the 
least, was ill-timed. The wife of the British Consul 
was conspicuous at this fete in a pink dress. 

My companion on the journey from Rome to 
Florence was General LevaschofF; he was very 
amiable and full of anecdote. He had been sent to 
Naples with the secret intention of negotiating an 
armistice between the belligerents. The Emperor 
Paul, who had withdrawn from the coalition, wished 
by this means to avoid all reproach ; and General 
Levaschoff had been despatched immediately after the 
defeats in Holland and Switzerland on the pretext of 
visiting Italy for his pleasure. His instructions were 
drawn up by Count Rostopchin, then Foreign 