

* See page 53. 



RETURX TO ST PETERSBURG 227 

written order for post-horses to accelerate my journey. 
The note was addressed to me in the Emperor's own 
hand, and gave* me the title of Privy Councillor, 
which gives the rank of General. I was surprised at 
this rapid promotion, which I decided not to accept. 
When I arrived at St Petersburg I showed Alex- 
ander the envelope, and he admitted that he had 
given me tlie title in a moment of forgetfiilness, but I 
could have taken advantage of the mistake had I 
wished to do so. I never received any rank or 
honorary distinction in Russia than that which had 
been conferred upon me by the Emperor Paul. 

The first impression produced upon me by the 
Emperor Alexander confirmed my presentiments. 
Ho had just come back from parade, and was pale 
and tired. He received me cordially, but with a sad 
and depressed air, as if he were under a feeling of 
constraint. Notv he was the master, I thought I 
observed in hini^ — perhaps wrongly— ra tinge of re- 
serve and embarrassment which pained me. He took 
me into his room. * You have done well to come,' 
he said ; * our people expfect you with impatience ' — 
alluding to^ some persons who he thought were more 
enlightened and liberal than the rest, whom he re- 
garded as his particular friends, and in whom he 
placed entire confidence. * If you had been here,' 
he added, * things would not have turned out as they 
did ; I should never have been led away if I had 
had you by my side.' Then he spoke to me of his 
father's death with inexpressible grief and remorse. 
We often returned to this subject, and Alexander 
gave me full details of it which I shall repeat below, 



• 



228 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTOUYSKI 

together with information communicated to me by 
other actors in the tragedy. As regards the matters 
which had formerly absorbed our attention, and as 
to which I wished to ascertain how far his feelings 
had been changed by his sudden elevation to the 
throne, I found him much as I expected ; not quite 
aroused from his past dreams, to which he still always 
returned, but already in the iron hands of reality ; 
yielding to force, and not yet knowing the extent of 
his power or how to use it. 

Alexander told me that the first man who spoke 

to him about the plans of the conspirators was Count 

Panin, and he never forgave him. This personage 

seemed destined more than anyone else to play an 

important part in the affairs of the Empire, and he 

had all that was wanted for such an undertaking ; 

a celebrated name, uncommon talents, and much 

ambition. While still young he had made a brilliant 

career. He was appointed Russian Minister at 

Berlin, from which post he was recalled by the 

Emperor Paul to be a member of the Council of 

Foreign Affairs under the orders of Prince Alexander 

Kourakin, his maternal uncle and Pauls faithful 

friend, the companion of his infancy and youth, who 

alone of the leading men at the Imperial Court had 