



220 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

character and mind. Queen Am^lie was the only 
exception to this ; her rare moral qualities were in 
strong contrast to the characteristics of Caroline's 
other (children. 

The Russian army corps which then occupied 
Naples was under the command of General Borozdiu, 
the eldest of three brothers. There was at one time 
some idea of pushing on the combined forces as far as 
Rome in order to check the French advance, and the 
General had himself gone to Rome with this object. 
But he could not come to an understanding with 
General Roger de Damas, the commander of the 
Neapolitan troops, as to who was to have the general 
command, and the plan was dropped, fortunately for 
the two generals, who would otherwise have inevitablj'- 
been defeated. General Borozdin was a dandy of the 
time of Catherine ; he was very amiable in society, 
but his military talents were doubtful. Being in the 
most voluptuous of climates and furnished with ample 
means by the Neapolitan Government, which reckoned 
on the Russian troops more than on its own, Borozdin 
had all a Russiq.n can desire — display and enjoyment. 
To complete his pleasures, fortune had also placed in 
his hands a conquest which he valued more highly 
than any other. A British Consul who had married a 
young and charming lady had thought fit to escape 
from Naples directly he heard of the defeat of the 
Austrians at Marengo and the victorious march of 
the French towards Florence and the south. In 
order not to expose his young wife to the dangers of 
a precipitous journey, he determined to place her in 
the charge of General Borozdin, with whom he was 



A RUSSIAN LOTHARIO 221 

on intimate terms. The worthy Englishman doubtless 
thought he had deposited his treasure in safe hands, 
but the temptation was too strong. The lady was 
like a rosebud, and Borozdin had with the husband's 
permission located her in the house where he himself 
lived, on the plea that he would thereby be able to 
take better care of her. The result may be imagined. 
When the panic of a French invasion was over, the 
Consul returned, took back his wife, and could not 
sufficiently express his gratitude to his friend for the 
service he had rendered him, Shortlv after, when I 
left Naples to go back to Rome, the General accom- 
panied me. He was in very good spirits, and did not 
speak any more about the Consul's wife, whom he had 
doubtless soon forgotten. 



.1 



r 



CHAPTER XI 



1801 



ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL. 

The news of the death of the Emperor Paul suddenly 
fell upon us like a clap of thunder iu a summer sky. 
The first result of the unexpected news was astonish- 
ment accompanied by a sort of fear, but these senti- 
ments were soon followed by others of joy and relief. 
Paul had never been loved even by those whom he 
had benefited. He was too fantastic and capricious ; 
no one could ever rely upon him. The messenger 
who brought the news to the legation looked as if he 
were deaf and dumb ; he did not answer any questions, 
and merely uttered unintelligible sounds. He was 
terrified, and had been ordered to keep silence. All 
he did was to convey to me a few words from the 
Emperor Alexander, who asked me to come to 
St Petersburg at once. 