



THE SECRET COUNCIL 259 

was well treated in the capital. This was at the 
time of our grand Diet,* and during the reign of 
Leopold, when Russians used to be received by ladies 
in drawing-rooms in a manner anything but flattering. 
I remember the Countess Caroline, afterwards Lady 
Guildford, being asked by Count Tchernitcheff to insult 
him in order to enable him to gain a wager, upon 
which she said : 'You are a Russian.' But to return 
to Count Kotchoubey. He had acquired a certain 
European varnish and grand manners which made 
him a favourite in society. Vanity, a general defect 
among men, and especially among Russians and Slavs 
of all kinds, exposed Kotchoubey to sarcasms from 
other vain people, but he was too good-natured to 
resent them. He was also accustomed to business, 
but he had not much knowledge ; his intelligence was 
clear, but not deep, and he had more good-nature and 
sincerity than are usually found in Russians. This 
did not save him from certain weaknesses characteris- 
tic of his nation — a great wish for place, for dis- 
tinction, and especially for a fortune to . coyer his 
expenses and those of his family, which had become 
very numerous. He showed an extreme readiness 
to adopt any opinion that might be in fashion and to 
follow any lead imposed upon him by a superior will 
or by the conventions of society. When he was with 
us he professed liberalism, though with a certain 
reserve, as it was not to be reconciled with his real 
opinions. His vanity was such that it betrayed it- 
self when he strove most to conceal it, which ex- 

* The Diet which passed the Constitution of the 3rd of May, 1791. It sat for 
four years, from 1788 to 1792. (See page 52). 



26o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

posed him to the satire of my two colleagues. I did 
not join in their jokes, as he had estimable qualities 
and showed me much friendly feeling, of which I had 
strong evidence some years later. 

We were privileged to dine with the Emperor 
without a previous invitation, and we used to meet 
two or three times a week. After coffee and a little 
conversation, the Emperor used to retire, and while 
the other guests left the palace, the four members of 
the Secret Council entered through a corridor into a 
little dressing-room, which was in direct communica- 
tion with the private rooms of their Majesties, and 
there met the Emperor. Various plans of reform 
were debated ; each member brought his ideas, and 
sometimes his work, and information which he had 
obtained as to what was passing in the existing 
administration and the abuses which he had ob- 
served. The Emperor freely expressed his thoughts 
and sentiments, and although the discussions at these 
meetings for a long time had no practical result, no 
useful reform was tried or carried out during Alex- 
ander's reign which did not originate in them. Mean- 
while the Official Council, namely, the Senate and the 
Ministers, governed the country in the old way. 
Directly the Emperor left his dressing-room he came 
under the influence of the old Ministers, and could 
do nothing of what had been decided upon in the 
Secret Council ; it was like a masonic lodge from 
which one entered the practical world. 