



ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 251 

ander was accused of duplicity because on the day 
before Pahlen was banished he had behaved to him as 
usual when he received his daily report. He could, 
however, hardly have done otherwise, and the fact is 
that this act of absolute sovereignty on the part of 
the young Enaperor displeased and alarmed the leaders 
of the conspiracy. 

The views of the Zuboffs as to the conspiracy were 
communicated to me by Count Valerian Zuboft' a few 
days after my return to St Petersburg. He coui- 
plained that the Emperor did not declare himself for 
his true friends, who had placed him on the throne 
and had not feared any danger they had incurred in 
his service. The Empress Catherine had acted other- 
wise ; she had always supported those who had 
helped her, and had not hesitated to maintain them 
in power. By this wise and sagacious conduct, said 
Zuboff, she had been able always to reckon on their 
devotion. No one hesitated to make a sacrifice for 
her, as such sacrifices were always rewarded ; but 
Alexander was exposing himself by his vacillating 
conduct to the most serious consequences, and was 
discouraging his best friends. Zuboff' added that the 
Empress Catherine had expressly enjoined him and his 
brother to look upon Alexander as their only legiti- 
mate sovereign, and to serve him alone with unshaken 
zeal and fidelity. This they had done, and what was 
their reward ? He said this to exculpate his brother 
and himself in the eyes of the young Emperor with 
regard to the assassination of his father, and to prove 
to him that their conduct was the necessary result of 
the engagements Catherine had demanded of them as 



252 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

to her grandson. But they did not know that 
Alexander, and even his brother Constantine, by no 
means regarded their grandmother's memory with 
veneration or attachment. During this conversation, 
w^hich lasted more than an hour, I several times 
interrupted the Count to explain the young Emperor's 
conduct. It was evident that the Zuboffs wished me 
to communicate their views to the Emperor, and 
though I did not promise, I considered it my duty to 
do so. Their statements produced but little impres- 
sion on Alexander, but they showed that the con- 
spirators were still very proud of their achievement, 
and that they felt convinced they had done a great 
service to Russia, had a right to Alexander's 
gratitude and confidence, and were necessary to the 
security and prosperity of the new reign. They even 
hinted that their discontent might be dangerous to 
him. Alexander, however, was deaf both to their 
arguments and their threats. He could not look with 
favour on his father's murderers, or give himself up 
into their hands. Moreover, he had already dismissed 
Pahlen, who was perhaps the only one of the con- 
spirators who by his ability, his connections, his 
boldness, and his ambition, could inspire serious fear 
or become really dangerous. Alexander also dismissed 
other leaders of the conspiracy who were not 
dangerous, but the sight of whom was odious and 
disagreeable to him. The only leader who remained 
at St Petersburg was Count Valerian Zuboff, who 
was a member of the Imperial Council. His 
amiability and frankness pleased Alexander and 
inspired him with confidence; and this feeling was 