



I 

J 



ASSASSINATIOA^ OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 245 

would have been crowded with exiles, and his venge- 
ance would probably have extended to his sons. 

I vf\\\ now describe what happened during this 
terrible night in the part of the palace which was 
inhabited by the Imperial family. The Grand-Duke 
Alexander knew that his father would in a few hours 
be called upon to abdicate, and without undressing he 
threw himself on his bed full of anxiety and doubt. 
About one o'clock he heard a knock at his door, and 
saw Count Nicholas ZubofF, his dress in disorder, and 
his face flushed with wine and the excitement of the 
murder which had just been committed. He came up 
to Alexander, who was sitting on his bed, and said 
in a hoarse voice : * All is over.' ' What is over ? ' 
asked Alexander in consternation. He was some- 
what deaf, and perhaps he feared to misunderstand 
what was being said to him, while Zuboff on his side 
feared to state exactly w^hat had been done. This 
somewhat prolonged the conversation; Alexander had 
not the least idea that his father was dead, and did 
not therefore admit the possibility of such a thing. 
At length he perceived that Zuboff*, without clearly 
explaining himself, repeatedly addressed him as 
' Sire ' and ' Your Majesty,' while Alexander thought 
he was merely Regent. This led to further question- 
ing, and he then learnt the truth. Alexander was 
prostrated with grief and despair. This was not 
surprising, for even ambitious men cannot commit a 
crime or believe themselves the cause of one without 
repulsion, while Alexander was not at all ambitious. 
The idea of having caused the death of his father 
filled him with horror, and he felt that his reputation 



246 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

had received a stain which could never be effaced. 
As for the Empress, directly the news reached her she 
dressed hastily and rushed out of her apartments with 
cries of despair and rage. Perceiving some grenadiers, 
she said to them repeatedly : * As your Emperor has 
died a victim to treason, I am your Empress, I alone 
am your legitimate sovereign ; follow me and protect 
me.' General Bennigsen and Count Pahlen, who had 
just brought a detachment of men whom they could 
trust to the palace to restore order, strove to calm 
her and forced her with difficulty to return to her 
room. She had scarcelv entered it, however, than 
she wished to go out again, although guards had been 
placed at her door. At first she seemed determined 
at all risks to seize the reins of government and 
avenge her husband's murder. But though she was 
generally respected, she was not capable of inspiring 
those feelinors of enthusiastic devotion which cause men 
to act impulsively and without weighing the conse- 
quences. Her appeals to the soldiers (which were 
perhaps rendered somewhat ridiculous by her German 
accent) produced no effect, and she retired in con- 
fusion, vexed at having uselessly disclosed her 
ambitious views. 