



ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 243 

It will be seen from the above narrative how easy 
it would have been for the undertaking to have been 
foiled by an accident, notwithstanding the precautions 
which had been taken to ensure its success. The 
conspiracy had the sympathies of the higher classes 
and most of the officers ; but not of the lower ranks 
of the army. The persons who suffered from Pauls 
insane fits of rage and severity were usually the 
higher military and civil officials; his caprices very 
seldom affected men of the lower ranks, who, more- 
over, were continually receiving extra pay and rations 
of bread, wine, and brandy when they were on drill 
or on a parade. The punishments to which the 
officers were exposed did not therefore produce any 
unpleasant impression on the common soldier ; on the 
contrary, they were a sort of satisfaction to him for 
the blows and ill-treatment he constantly had to 
endure. Moreover, his pride . was flattered by the 
great importance attached to his calling, for to Paul 
nothing could be more important than a foot raised 
too soon on the march, or a coat badly buttoned on 
parade. It amused and pleased the soldiers to see 
their Emperor dispensing endless punishments and 
severities among the officers, while he took every 
opportunity to afford to the men ample compensation 
for the work and trouble that was required of them. 
The soldiers of the Guard, many of whom were 
mkrried, lived with their families almost in opulence, 
and both they and those of the other regiments 
were satisfied with and attached to their Emperor. 
General Talyzin, one of the principal conspirators, 
who was very popular among the soldiers, had under- 



244 ' MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

taken to bring to the palace one of the battalions of 
the first regiment of the Guard which was under his 
command. He assembled the men after leaving 
Zuboffs supper, and began to tell them that their 
fatigues were about to cease, and that they would 
now have an indulgent and kind sovereign who 
would not impose upon them the rigorous duties 
they had hitherto had to perform. He soon per- 
ceived, however, that his words were not listened to 
with favour ; the soldiers preserved a gloomy silence, 
their faces had a sombre expression, and some mur- 
murs were heard. The General cut short his speech, 
uttered in a sharp tone of command the words * Right 
wheel — march,' and the battalion, which had now 
again become a machine, marched to the palace, all 
the outlets from w^hich it occupied. 

Count Valerian Zubofi*, having lost a leg in the 
Polish War, could not belong to either of the bands 
of the conspirators. He. entered the palace soon 
after the death of the Emperor became known, and 
then went to the guard-room to sound the opinions 
of the soldiers. He congratulated them on having a 
new and a young Emperor ; but this compliment was 
ill received, and he was obliged to leave the room 
hastily to avoid disagreeable manifestations. All this 
shows how easy it would have been for Paul to crush 
the conspirators if he had been able to escape them 
for a moment and to show himself to the guards in 
the courtyard. It also shows how illusory and 
impracticable was Alexander's plan of keeping his 
father in confinement. If Paul's life had been saved 
blood would have flowed on the scaffold, Siberia 