

As for General Pahlen, he at first thought himself 
strong enough to maintain his position without 
support. It was he who took the external and 



ASSASSINATION OF THE EMPEROR PAUL 249 

internal measures which had become urgently 

necessary by the probability of the British fleet 

entering the waters of Riga, Revel, and Cronstadt, 

after the battle of Copenhagen. Nelson had won 

this battle shortly after the Emperor Paul was 

assassinated.* The news did not become public for 

some days, and in the trouble and confusion which 

followed, Pahlen took into his own hands the reins 

of State, wishing to add to his important functions 

as Governor-General of St Petersburg the still more 

important ones of Secretary of State for Foreign 

Afiairs. The proclamations issued at that time were 

all signed by him ; nothing could be done except 

through him and with his consent ; he affected to 

protect the j'Oung Emperor, and scolded him when 

he did not do what he wished, or rather ordered. 

Alexander, overcome with sadness and despair, seemed 

to be in the power of the conspirators ; he thought 

it necessary to treat them with consideration and 

bend his will to theirs. 

Just at this time the important post of Procurator- 
General, which combined the direction of all the 
administrative departments of the Empire, .became 
vacant by the dismissal of one of Paul's favourites 
who had occupied it. Alexander bad the happy idea 
of selecting for this place General Beklescheff, who 
had been #»ummoned by Paul to St Petersburg 
perhaps with the same object. He was a Russian of 
the old school, with coarse and abrupt manners, 
ignorant of the French language or barely under- 



* Paul was assassinated on the night of the 23rd of March 1801 ; the hattle of 
Copenhagen was fought on the 2nd of April, 1801. 



250 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZART0R7SKI 

standing it, but firm, straightforward, and compassion- 
ate for other people's misfortunes. His reputation as 
a man of high character was generally established, 
and he had even preserved it while he was Governor- 
General of the Polish provinces of the South, where 
he showed himself just to the people he governed and 
severe to his subordinates. He had done his best to 
prevent robbery and falsehood, and did not permit the 
officials to sell justice by auction as other Russian 
governors did. When he left he was followed by the 
gratitude of the people whom he had ruled. No more 
difficult task can be given to a high Russian official, 
and not many have acquitted themselves so well. He 
knew nothing of what was going on be^^ond the 
frontier, but he was thoroughly acquainted with the 
ukases and the routine of Russian administration ; he 
executed them with rigour, but with all the justice of 
which they were capable. He had been a complete 
stranger to the conspiracy, and Alexander complained 
to him of Pahlen's dictatorial ways. Bekleschefl^, 
with his usual abruptness, expressed surprise at a 
Russian autocrat complaining that he did not do as 
he pleased. * When flies annoy me,' he said, * I 
drive them away.' The Emperor took the hint, and 
signed an order directing Pahlen at once to leave St 
Petersburg and proceed to his country house. 
Beklescheff*, who was an old friend of Pahlen's, under- 
took as Procurator-General to take this order to him 
and make him leave within twenty-four hours. He 
came to Pahlen early on the following morning, and 
the latter at once obeyed the Emperor's decree. This 
event made much noise at St Petersburg, and Alex- 