

There was no longer any question of the old 
reveries of extreme liberalism ; the Emperor ceased 
to speak to me of his plan of giving up the 
throne, or of the document he had made me write. 
But he was constantly thinking of more practical 
matters, such as the administration of justice, the 
emancipation of the masses, equitable reforms, 
and liberal institutions ; this was his diversion when 
he was alone with me. He understood the often 
insurmountable obstacles which the most elemen- 
tary reforms would meet with in Kussia ; but 
he wished to prove to those with whom he was 
intimate that the sentiments he had expressed to 
them were still the same, notwithstanding the 
change in his position. It was necessary, however, 
not to disclose them, and still less to take a pride in 
them, in the presence of a public which was at that 
time so little prepared to appreciate them, and 
would have regarded them with surprise and horror. 
Meanwhile the government machine continued to 
work according to the old routine, and the Emperor 
was obliged to take part in its management. In 
order to remedy the discrepancy between Alexander's 
opinions and his acts, he established a Secret Council 
composed of persons whom he regarded as his friends 
and believed to be animated by sentiments and 
opinions in conformity with his own. The first 
nucleus of this Council was formed by the young 

VOL. I, R 



2s8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Count Paul Strogonoflf, M. de Novosiltzoff, and myself. 
We had long been in near relations with each other, 
and these now became more serious. The necessity 
of rallying round the Emperor and not leaving him 
alone in his desire of reform drew us more closely 
together. We were regarded for some years as models 
of intimate and unshakeable friendship. To be 
superior to every personal interest, and not to accept 
either presents or distinctions, was the principle of 
our alliance. Such a principle could not take root in 
Russia, but it was in accordance with the ideas of 
Alexander's youth and inspired him with special 
esteem for his friends. I was the sole author of the 
principle, which indeed w^as specially suited to my 
peculiar position. It was not always liked by my 
companions, and the Emperor himself afterwards 
grew tired of servants who wished to distinguish 
themselves by refusing to accept rewards which were 
so eagerly sought by everyone else. 

The understanding between us had, as I have 
shown, begun at the coronation of the Emperor Paul 
at Moscow, and we had for a long time been on 
intimate terms, as we met daily at Count StrogonofTs. 
The fourth member admitted by the Emperor to the 
Secret Council was Count Kotchoubey. Being the 
nephew of Count Bezborodko, a Minister who had 
been held in high esteem by the Empress Catherine, 
he was sent when still very young to the embassy at 
Constantinople, and was recalled under the Emperor 
Paul to give place to M. Tamara. While at Constanti- 
nople he conducted himself to the satisfaction of his 
Government, and was perhaps the only Russian who 