



THE SECRET COUNCIL 263 

he explained it in such diffuse papers that Alexander 
himself had not the courage to read them. One of 
his favourite phrases was organisation riglementaire ; 
an important idea no doubt, but he used to repeat it 
so often and with such emphasis that it was at last 
attached to him as a sort of nickname. 

The Emperor, perhaps without admitting it to 
himself, began to think less of the capacity of his 
former tutor, though he was always seeking reasons 
for raising him in our esteem ; his character he always 
continued to value highly. He did not like us to cast 
ridicule on the inanity of M. de la Harpe's papers, 
and he was always much pleased when we praised 
any of his former tutor's suggestions. But in truth 
M. de la Harpe had little or no influence on the 
reforms which Alexander afterwards introduced. He 
had the good sense to hold aloof from our meetings, 
and the Emperor himself preferred this, in order, I 
suppose, to avoid the scandal which might have been 
produced by an ex-director of the Swiss Republic 
and a recognised revolutionist preparing reforms for 
the Russian Empire. He was, however, recognised 
as one of our colleagues; there was always a chair 
ready for him at our meetings, and when he left St 
Petersburg he assured us that he would still in spirit 
take part in our deliberations. 

Immediately after the Emperor's accession the 
Margravine of Baden, mother of the Empress 
Elizabeth, hastened to St Petersburg, being happy 
and impatient to see again a beloved daughter from 
whom she had been separated for seven years. She 
was accompanied by the Margrave of Baden, her 



264 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

husband, son of the reigning Grand-Duke, and the 
Princess Amelia, the eldest of their children. These 
visitors represented an influence totally opposed to 
the principles which were at that moment being 
advocated by M. de la Harpe at St Petersburg. The 
Margravine was the sister of. the first wife of the 
Emperor Paul,* who died in Kussia while still young 
and beautiful, and was more regretted by the 
Empress Catherine, her family, and the whole Court 
than by her husband, who discovered after her death 
from some letters which she had imprudently kept 
that he was not the sole possessor of her heart, t 

The Margravine was tall, with a grand air and 
much dignity in her movements, and it was evident that 
in her youth she must have been beautiful. She had 
justly obtained a high reputation for wisdom, pru- 
dence, and wit, which placed her far above the 
generality of German princesses of similar rank. The 
Empress Dowager, instead of rejoicing at the prospect 
of the Margravine's influence counteracting that of 
M. de la Harpe, took umbrage at it ; the two 
princesses were too unlike each other to agree. 
Moreover, the Margravine had brought about the 
marriage of her youngest daughter with the King of 
Sweden, who had refused the Grand-Duchess Alex- 
andra.! This marriage, which at that time was 