

* A third sister was married to the Grand-Duke of Saxe- Weimar ; she had a 
daughter who was married to the Duke of Mecklenburg, and became the mother of 
the Duchess of Orleans. I recollect that when the Duchess of OrleauB arrived in 
Parifl I was struck by her likeness to the members of her family whom I had known 
in Russia. (Note by Prince Adam CzartorpskLJ 

t The gentleman who had attracted the Grand-Duchess^s attention was Count 
Andrew Razumovski, then young and strikingly handsome. He made so many 
conquests among the ladies of St Petersburg that he was sent as ambassador to Stock- 
holm, and afterwards to Naples, where he gained the favour of the Queen. (NoU hy 
Prince Adam Czartorydci, J X See page 135. 



THE MARGRA VINE OF BADEN 265 

regarded as the most brilliant in Europe, was a 
triumph of which the Margravine was very proud, 
and did not contribute to reconcile her with the 
Empress Dowager, especially as the eldest of the 
daughters of the House of Baden, the twin sister of 
the Princess Amelia, had married the Elector, 'who 
afterwards became King of Bavaria, while none of the 
Bussian Grand-Duchesses had attained so elevated 
a position. On the other hand, the Margravine was 
disappointed to see that the Empress Dowager re- 
tained all the advantages of a reigning sovereign 
and had not given up any of them to her daughter- 
in-law. When Alexander ascended the throne, being 
desirous above all to appease the continual regrets 
of his mother since the catastrophe which had made 
him Emperor, he left her the dower of a million 
roubles which Paul had assigned to her at the begin- 
ning of his reign, and added nothing to the moderate 
allowance of which his wife was in receipt as a Grand- 
Duchess. The latter readily and graciously accepted 
this arrangement, which afterwards placed her in a 
painful position, and deprived her of the means of 
responding to the numerous applications for assistance 
which were addressed to her. The Empress Dowager 
continued to have the sole direction of various char- 
itable, educational, and even manufacturing, establish- 
ments with which she had been charged during the 
preceding reign, while the Margravine would have 
liked her daughter to take a more active part in 
affairs and to be in a position to distribute the 
largesses and benefits which one has a right to ex- 
pect from the wife of the sovereign. 



266 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

I was very amiably received by the Margjravine, 
and afterwards she honoured me for many years with 
marks of her kindness. She often spoke to me about 
the Emperor with the most lively interest. She 
feared that the reforms he was contemplating would 
prove ill-timed, hurtful, and dangerous, and wished 
him to be dissuaded from introducing them ; she 
did not approve his tendency to diminish the 
ceremonial and the splendour of the Court, and 
she especially objected to his assumed simplicity of 
manner, which, she said, made those who approached 
him and whose duty was to obey him too familiar, 
thereby giving his Court an appearance ill-suited to 
the greatness of the Empire. She pointed to the 
example of Buonaparte, who, she said, was better 
acquainted with mankind and with what was neces- 
sary to obtain its respect, its obedience, and its 
admiration ; who surrounded himself by pomp and 
magnificence, and neglected nothing that could aug- 
ment the prestige without which supreme authority 
cannot be maintained. She wished to rouse Alex- 
ander's ambition, to make him profit by the lessons 
which so great a genius was then giving to the world, 
and to induce him to become Napoleon's rival without 
being his enemy, so that the acts of his Government, 
like those of the First Consul, should be continual 
proofs of greatness, of strength, and of decided will. 
The Russians, she said, want such a Government quite 
as much as the French. I communicated these conver- 
sations to the Emperor ; I thought some of the things 
said by the Margravine were just and true, and that 
they might strike him and be of use to him. But they 