

The ceremony of the coronation increased his 
sadness ; he had never more strongly felt remorse at 
having contributed, though against his will, to his 
father's death. I again strove to pacify him by 
reminding him of the great task he was called upon 
to perform; these exhortations were only partially 
effectual, but they contributed to ^give him sufficient 



ALEXANDER AND FREDERICK WILLIAM III 279 

self-command not to betray his despair in public. 
The recollection of that time is one of the saddest of 
my life, and I cannot recall it without painful 
enaotion. 

r 

The Court returned to St Petersburg for the 
winter, and our after-dinner meetings were resumed. 
They were soon interrupted, however, by the meeting, 
of Alexander and the King of Prussia * at Memel in 
the spring of 1802. 

The Emperor was at that time beginning to pay 
special attention to foreign affairs. Kotchoubey, the 
Foreign Minister, had adopted a system which he 
believed to be in entire conformity with the Emperor's 
opinions and views, and at the same time with his 
own. This .was to hold Russia aloof from European 
affairs, and to keep on good terms with all foreign 
Powers, so. as to devote all her time and attention to 
internal reforms. Such was indeed the Emperor's 
wish and that of his intimate advisers, but none of 
them had adopted it with more conviction, or main- 
tained it with more persistence, than Kotchoubey. 
Russia, he used to say, is great and powerful 
enough both as regards population and extent of 
territory, and geographical position ; she has nothing 
to fear from any one so long as she leaves other 
Powers in peace ; and she has too often mixed herself 
up with matters which did not directly affect her. 
Nothing had happened in Europe but she claimed to 
have, a part in it; she had made costly and useless 
wars. The Emperor Alexander was now in such a 
fortunate position that he could remain at peace with 

♦ Frederick William III. 



S o MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

all the world and devote himself to internal reforms. 
It was at home, not abroad, that Kussia could make 
immense conquests, by establishing order, economy, 
and justice in all parts of her vast empire, and by 
making agriculture, commerce, and industry flourish. 
European affairs and European wars were of no 
advantage whatever to the numerous inhabitants of 
the Russian Empire; they only lost their lives through 
them or had to furnish new recruits and taxes. What 
was necessary to their prosperity was a long peace 
and the incessant care of a wise and pacific adminis- 
tration — a task eminently suited to the Emperor, 
with his ideas of reform and liberal government. 

This system was somewhat similar to that advo- 
cated by the English radicals. The idea is plausible 
and not without a basis of truth, but it has the 
disadvantage of reducing to insignificance and humi- 
liation the State which follows it too literally, as by 
so doing it incurs the risk of becoming the vassal and 
tool of more enterprising and active States. More- 
over, a consistent adherence to such a system would 
require much tact and firmness to avoid damaging com- 
promises, which, in the then existing state of European 
relations, would have become almost inevitable. This 
is what happened to the Emperor Alexander in the 
case of the Memel interview. 