

This^ mysterious Council, which was not long con- 
cealed from the suspicions, or ultimately from the 
knowledge, of the Court, and was designated *the 



THE SECRET COUNCIL 261 

young men's party/ grew impatient at not obtaining 
any result whatever from its deliberations ; it pressed 
the Emperor to carry out the views he had expressed 
to us and the proposals he considered desirable and 
necessary. Once or twice an attempt was made to 
induce him to adopt energetic resolutions, to give 
orders and make himself obeyed, to dismiss certain 
superannuated oflScials who were a constant obstacle 
to every reform and to put young men in their place. 
But the Emperor's character inclined him to attain 
his end by compromises and concessions, and more- 
over he did not yet feel sufficiently master of the 
position to risk measures which he thought too 
violent. In our Council Strogonoff was the most 
ardent, Novosiltzoff the most prudent, Kotchoubey 
the most time-serving, and I the most disinterested, 
always striving to curb undue impatience. Those 
who urged the Emperor to take immediate and 
severe measures did not know him. Such a pro- 
posal always made him draw back, and was of a 
nature to diminish his confidence. But as he com- 
plained of his Ministers and did not like any 
of them, an attempt was made in the Council, 
before inducing him to change them, to discuss 
the matter in a practical spirit, apart from the 
abstract considerations of reform which had pre- 
viously occupied us. StrogonoiF accepted the post of 
Procurator of the First Department of the Senate ; 
and Novosiltzoff was appointed one of the Emperor's 
secretaries, a place which gave him many advantages, 
as every letter addressed to the Emperor passed 
through his hands, and he had a right to publish the 



262 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Emperor's ukases. His special department, however, 
was at first to deal with promoters of public under- 
takings, who are sometimes men of talent, but more 
often adventurers of very doubtful honesty who flock 
to Kussia from abroad at the beginning of each 
new reign. This was a duty for which he was 
qualified by his varied knowledge in matters of 
finance and industry, and it was at the same time 
a school which did much to form his character. 
I must not here forget the fifth member * of the 
Secret Council, M. de la Harpe, Alexander's tutor, 
who had come on a visit to his former pupil. He did 
not take part in the after dinner meetings, but he 
used to have private conversations with the Emperor, 
and frequently handed to him memoranda reviewing 
all the branches of the administration. These memo- 
randa w^ere first read at the secret sittings, and 
afterwards passed on from one member of the Council 
to the other to be considered at leisure, as they were 
interminably long. M. de la Harpe was at that 
time about forty -four years of age ; he had been a 
member of the Swiss Directory, and always wore the 
uniform of that appointment, w^ith a large sword fastened 
to an embroidered belt outside his coat. We were 
all of opinion that he did not merit his high reputation 
and the esteem in which Alexander held him. He 
belonged to the generation of men nourished with the 
illusions of the last part of the eighteenth century, 
who thought their doctrine a sort of philosopher's 
stone, or universal remedy which removed all 
difficulties to the regeneration of society. M. de la 
Harpe had his own particular panacea for Russia, and 