

* See page 192. 



EUROPEAN COALITION AGAINST ENGLAND 271 

fleets to those of the Northern powers in order to 
destroy the maritime supremacy of England. Paul 
had ordered the whole of the Don Cossacks to march 
at once to India under the command of their attaman 
Platoff; and although this order had spread consterna- 
tion among the Cossacks, and their chief did not know 
how to execute it, he was preparing to obey it. 

What would have happened if Paul had continued 
to reign it is not easy to say. Nelson's expedition to 
Copenhagen had certainly foiled the plan of a naval 
combination against England, but its success had been 
almost entirely due to Nelson's boldness and good 
fortune. If the Danes had had the courage to persevere, 
this rash enterprise might have ended very differently. 
So great, however, was the terror inspired by Paul 
that the Danes adhered to his alliance in spite of 
their defeat. He had ordered his coasts and his 
harbours to be placed in a state of defence, and I 
doubt whether the British fleet could without con- 
siderable reinforcements have attempted an attack 
upon Cronstadt or Revel ; if not, time would have 
been given for reforming and strengthening the 
alliance of the naval powers. 

Paul's sudden death at once dissipated all the 
difficulties of the coalition, and created new ones for 
Napoleon, as it lost him a powerful friend. In his 
infatuation for the First Consul, Paul had persuaded 
himself that it did not matter wdiether the ruler of 
France were legitimate or not, so long as he could 
make himself obeyed. He had accordingly expelled 
Louis XVIII from his dominions,* and encourasred 

* Louis returned to Russia after Paul's death. 



, 



272 MEMOIRS OF PRII^CE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Napoleon in his ambition to become Emperor of 
France. His death changed everything. The naval 
alUance lost its strength and value, there was no 
further necessity for fortifying the coasts and 
harbours, and trade, which ^ad been suspended in 
Russia to the great detriment of the proprietors of 
mines and land, resumed its ordinary course, while 
the Don Cossacks, who had already proceeded on a 
day's march towards the Caucasus, turned their 
horses* heads homewards and crossed themselves in 
gratitude for the abandonment of Paul's insane enter- 
prise. 

The immediate result of Paul's death, so far as 
European politics were concerned, was an arrange- 
ment between Russia and England. The state of 
war which Paul had maintained against that power— 
which had long been Russia's best customer for iron, 
corn, wood for building, sulphur, and hemp — was one 
of the principal grievances of the Russian people 
against their Emperor, and immediately after his 
death the Government hastened to effect an arrange- 
ment with England which showed how eager Russia 
was to effect a reconciliation at any price. The 
interests of her maritime allies were not sufficiently 
considered, and essential points on the question of 
the neutral flag were either passed over in silence or 
left in doubt. The cessation of hostilities was the 
great object aimed at. Alexander had in reality 
no great sympathy for England. His education had 
given him ideas and inclinations totally different 
from those of the policy of Pitt ; and Napoleon's aide- 
de-camp Duroc was accordingly received by him with 