



ALEXANDERS CORONATION 277 

hopes. When I felt that the realisation of the noble 
sentiments Alexander had expressed for my country 
was indefinitely postponed, I was utterly discouraged, 
and felt invincible disgust for the Court and all its 
members. Although on intimate terms with my 
colleagues of the Secret Council, I could not entirely 
confide in them ; their Russian thoughts and feelings, 
which they often expressed, were too incompatible 
with my hopes. It was to Alexander only that I 
could freely disclose my sadness and its cause. Our 
old intimacy, though it was more restricted, had not 
ceased, and while my position with regard to current 
affairs was insignificant, I still possessed the Emperor's 
confidence more than any one else ; when he was with 
me he was more confiding and more at his ease than 
with the others ; I understood him better, and could 
more freely tell him the truth about men and things, 
and even about himself 

Our secret interviews were interrupted by the 
coronation at Moscow. The recollection of this 
ceremony, to which I have already alluded, left me a 
painful impression. I know nothing more disagree- 
able than these occasions, when everything is thrust 
out of its accustomed order. Festivals generally give 
me a feeling of emptiness and melancholy ; there is an 
inflated and exaggerated spirit about them which 
causes fatigue and is typical of the vanity of human 
things. The gaiety whicl\^would be naturally elicited 
by the occasion disappears directly it becomes obliga- 
tory. One gets tired of the long periods of waiting, 
during which one has ample time to think of the 
nullity of such pleasures ; and while surfeited with 



278 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

inaction, one is incapable of action. In Kussia these 
festivals are very sumptuous, and comprise innumer- 
able masked balls, banquets, illuminations, fireworks, 
and popular amusements of all sorts. I have seen so 
many of them that I look upon them with aversion, 
and I am truly glad whenever I can avoid them. 

The melancholy shed over the beginning of 
Alexander's reign was in strong contrast to the 
brilliancy with which it was endeavoured to invest his 
coronation. The father's tragical death and the son's 
remorse deprived these f6tes of the vivacity and fresh- 
ness they should have had, and the joy which was at 
first felt by the people at their deliverance from the 
fantiistic tyranny of the Emperor Paul was followed 
by the exhaustion produced by deceived expectations, 
as often happens at the beginning of a new reign, 
when all classes imagine their hopes will be realised, 
and are always disappointed. The young and hand- 
some couple who were to be crowned did not look 
happy, and could not inspire a joy or satisfaction 
which they did not appear to feel themselves. 
Alexander had not the art of influencing and con- 
tenting those whom he wished to please ; this faculty, 
so necessary to a sovereign, was absent in him, 
especially at the beginning of his reign. 