



THE SECRET COUNCIL 267 

made no impression whatever. He admired Napoleon, 
but did not think himself capable of imitating him. 
They were two opposite natures, and their lines of action 
were different. It was not till many years after that 
a supreme danger, the boundless ambition of the ruler 
of France, and his incredible blunders, gave Alex- 
ander an opportunity of showing great though always 
defensive qualities, which enabled him to conquer his 
rival. After some months' stay, the Baden family left 
St Petersburg to visit the Queen of Sweden, the 
youngest sister of the Empress Elizabeth, at Stock- 
holm. During this journey a great misfortune hap- 
pened : the Margrave died in consequence of a carriage 
accident. This made it impossible for the Margravine 
to reign over the Grand-Duchy, and had fatal con- 
sequences for her family. 

During the summer of 1801 the Secret Council 
continued to meet. The only measure it decided upon 
before the coronation was the dismissal of Count 
Panin, whose participation in the conspiracy which 
brought about the death of Paul filled Alexander 
with dislike and suspicion. After much discussion it 
was resolved that Panin should be succeeded as 
Minister of Foreign Affairs by Count Kotchoubey, 
but should be allowed to remain at St Petersburg. 
The Emperor, wishing to avoid disagreeable scenes, 
treated Panin as a Minister up to the last moment, 
and this again was interpreted as a sign of duplicity. 
The Emperor's will was notified to Panin by letter, 
and Kotchoubey entered upon his duties to the great 
satisfaction of Alexander and of our council. 

So long as Panin remained at St Petersburg he 



268 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORTSKI 

was surrounded by spies, and the Emperor every day 
received reports from the secret police stating in detail 
all that Panin had done from the morning till the 
evening, where he had been, whom he had spoken to 
in the street, how many hours he had passed out of 
doors, who had visited him, and as far as possible 
what he had said. These reports were read in the 
Secret Council, and were drawn up in the mysterious 
style affected by police agents to give a certain 
interest to the most insignificant circumstances. 
They did not really contain anything remarkable, 
but the Emperor was extremely anxious, and was 
always suspecting Panin of new plots. He had no 
peace till Panin had left St Petersburg, which he did 
soon after, knowing that he was everywhere pursued 
by spies, and that his presence was disagreeable to 
the Emperor. He subsequently received orders 
never to show himself in any town where the 
Emperor might be staying, and passed the rest of his 
life in retirement at Moscow or in the country. 

In this way three of * ours,' as the members of the 
Secret Council were called by the Emperor, were 
placed in the sphere of practical affairs, and obtained 
experience of the difficulties and obstacles which are 
met with directly one becomes a wheel in the govern- 
ment machine. As for me, I had no ambition to 
serve Russia ; I was there merely by accident, like an 
exotic plant in a foreign land, with sentiments which 
could not, as regards their full scope, be brought into 
entire accord even with the intimate opinions of the 
friends whom accidental and quite ordinary circum- 
stances had given me ; and I remained the only 