



MISSION FROM NAPOLEON TO ALEXANDER 273 

a sincere cordiality which was hardly to be expected 
in a moment of reaction aofainst Paul's infatuation for 
the First Consul. Duroc's reception was, indeed, the 
result of Alexander's secret and personal sympathy 
for the principles of 1789, which had been inspired in 
tim by M. de la Harpe. Alexander was glad to see 
at last Frenchmen of the famous Revolution, who he 
supposed were still Republicans ; he regarded them 
with curiosity and interest, having talked and thought, 
so much about them. Both he and the Grand- 
Duke Constantine took great pleasure in addressing 
them as ' citizens,' thinking that the title was one they 
were proud of This was a great mistake, and 
Napoleon's envoys had repeatedly to point out that 
the term had gone out of fashion in France before 
Alexander and his brother ceased to use it. Napoleon's 
chief motive in sending his confidential aide-de-camp 
to St Petersburg was to sound the young Emperor as 
to his feelings with regard to a French alliance. I 
was told that Duroc wrote to Napoleon that there 
was no cause for either hope or fear ; this statement 
was at the time perfectly accurate, and was founded 
on an exact knowledge of Alexander's character at 
the beginning of his reign ; but later on it was belied 
by events. 

Count Panin, who was then Foreign Minister, had 
concluded a convention with Duroc which did not 
mention any of the difficultieis that had long sown 
discord between the two countries, and had prevented 
them from being at peace with each other. In this 
convention there was only one remarkable article, 
and it was directed against Poland and the Poles. 

VOL. I. s 



274 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Kussia and France engaged reciprocally not to protect 
political refugees, and not to help them in their efforts 
against the order of things established in their 
respective countries. This article was aimed by 
France against the Legitimists, and by Kussia against 
the Poles. Thus Alexander's first public act was an 
abandonment of the sentiments which had united us. 
He did not tell me anything of it, and it was doubt- 
less a very natural arrangement to make between two 
countries that wished to be on good terms with each 
other ; it was the necessary consequence of an agree- 
. ment between Hussia and France, which must be 
always fatal to the Poles. I made this remark with 
some sadness to the Emperor, who answered with 
embarrassment that the article had no real signifi- 
cance, that he could not avoid accepting it, as it had 
been proposed by France and agreed to by Count 
Panin, that it was a mere formality which ought not 
to cause me any anxiety, and that the destinies of 
Poland were as dear to him as ever. The best and 
most powerful man can do nothing if circumstances 
do not permit him to act and to keep his promises ; 
and it may safely be asserted that Alexander was the 
only sovereign of that time who, without publicly 
admitting it, still remembered and busied himself 
about the future of Poland. She had for the moment 
been forgotten by all Europe, with France at its head. 
Since the treaty of Lundville there had not been any 
Polish troops in France ; the legions were either 
broken up or sent to St Domingo never to return.* 