






THE SECRET COUNCIL 269 

member of the Secret Council that had held aloof 
from practical life, and was glad not to enter it. I 
was often tired of my position, and yearned after 
my country and my parents ; I wished for nothing 
so much as to go back to them, and the only thing 
that retained me was my personal attachment to the 
Emperor and the wish to be able to serve my country 
through my influence with him. But this hope often 
seemed entirely to disappear. The dreams of my 
early youth had vanished like the morning mists 
before the sun's rays, and whose was the blame? 
Could I expect of men more than they can or know 
how to give ? Those whose pretensions and hopes are 
in advance of realities and possibilities in this short 
life of ours are doomed to cruel disappointment ; but 
when one's illusions have gone, one hopes at least not 
to be deprived of some prospect of happiness, and this 
was in many respects denied me. I accordingly often 
thought of leaving St Petersburg. The Emperor 
spoke to me of Poland at more and more prolonged 
intervals; when he found me anxious and discouraged, 
he returned to the subject, but no longer in the same 
way. He used to console me vaguely or keep silence 
on a matter with which he found it more and more 
difficult to deal, though it was the only real bond of 
connection between us. At the same time, while 
avoiding precise explanations, he wished me always 
to believe that on this point as on many others he 
had not changed his opinions or his intentions. But 
in his position what could he do and what could I 
reasonably ask for ? 

On my return to St Petersburg, I had no longer 



270 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

found there Buonaparte's aide-de-camp, Duroc, who 
had come with another officer to compliment Alex- 
ander on his accession. Paul's death waS a severe 
blow to the First Consul ; he had hoped much from a 
sovereign who would never admit that what he ordered 
was impossible. Fortune had favoured Buonaparte in 
his efforts to gain the good-will of the Emperor Paul. 
The news of the Russian prisoners who had been clothed 
and sent back to their country by France, and that 
of other advances skilfully made to Kussia, had 
arrived at St Petersburg at the moment when Paul 
was in a violent rage with Austria and England, 
partly on account of the defeat of the Russian armies 
in Switzerland and Holland, which Paul attributed to 
the lukewarmness of the allies, and partly because of 
the capture of Malta, which Buonaparte had offered 
Paul, and which the English, now masters of the 
island, had refused to give up to him, although he 
had already been appointed Grand-Master of the 
Order. Under these circumstances, Paul, always 
passionate and impulsive, took a violent fancy to 
Napoleon and the French Government, whom he had 
detested, and an equally violent dislike for the allies, 
who had been the particular objects of his affection 
and zealous support. As usual with him, his likes and 
dislikes became stronger as time went on. After the 
chivAlrous challenge which I have already mentioned,* 
he concluded a maritime alliance with Denmark and 
Sweden with the object of closing the Baltic to the 
English, and maintaining the inviolability of neutral 
flags. France, Spain, and Holland were to join their 