



PLANS OF REFORM 291 

Simon VorontzofFs speech began and ended with the 
Senate, and when he did not know what to say or 
answer he simply repeated the word. This affectation 
was somewhat awkward and ridiculous, and was more 
likely to chill the Emperor than to rouse him. The 
Senate had certainly much changed since its establish- 
ment by Peter I, and it could no longer be said even 
to have the power it enjoyed in the reigns which 
immediately succeeded that of the founder of modern 
Hussia. In all difficult questions the Senate was 
always referred to, but it was nothing but a name ; it 
was composed of men who were for the most part 
incapable and without energy, selected for their insigr 
nificance, and it could not therefore act as a mediator 
between parties or be of any weight either on one 
side or the other. 

At length the Emperor's vague and floating ideas 
were consolidated into a practical shape. All the 
eccentric views which were mere fireworks were 
abandoned, and Alexander had to restrict his wishes 
to the realities and possibilities of the moment. He 
consoled himself by indulging in his hours of 
leisure, which were daily becoming more rare, in 
hopes of progress which enabled him not to give up 
entirely the dreams of his youth. These dreams 
seemed to me like a tree transplanted into a dry and 
arid soil and deprived of its exuberant vegetation, whose 
despoiled trunk puts forth a few weak branches and 
then perishes. The Emperor's first step was to issue 
an ukase or manifesto to restore the authority and 
dignity of the Senate ; this was a prudent course, cal- 
culated to predispose the public for the changes which 



292 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

were to follow. In speaking of the Senate he spoke 
a language which the Russians understood and which 
flattered the nobility ; it was already the Supreme 
Court of Justice and Administration, for although every 
order of the Emperor, whether written or spoken, 
had the force of law, they had (especially those relat- 
ing to general administration and the civil and 
criminal law) all to be addressed to the Senate, which 
was entrusted with the task of publishing them and 
seeing to their due execution. The various depart- 
ments of the Senate were charged not only with 
trying on final appeal the civil and criminal cases of 
the empire, but also with punishing contraventions 
of the administrative regulations. It had the right 
of issuing ukases of its own founded on those of the 
Emperor, and, when necessary, explaining and develop- 
ing them ; and it presented him with reports for his 
approval. The governors and financial authorities of 
the provinces were under its direct supervision, and it 
was their duty to send to the Senate regular and 
formal reports upon which the sovereign gave such 
orders as he pleased. It was accordingly called * The 
Senate administering the Empire.' Its vague func- 
tions, partly judicial and partly executive, were not 
in accordance with modern ideas, being so cumbrous 
in form that they retarded and might even em- 
barrass the course of government ; but there was no 
way of touching this ancient organisation without 
exposing internal affairs to even greater confusion, as 
the institution of the Senate had become part of the 
routine and the habits of the government machine. 
The Senate was consequently allowed to retain its 