



THE VORONTZOFFS 287 

withdraw from public affairs during the reign of 
Catherine. He used to have fits of bad temper, and 
his ambition was not easily satisfied. While Paul 
was on the throne the Count had the good sense 
to remain in retirement, although Paul was very well 
disposed towards the Vorontzoif family on account of 
the liaison of Peter III with one of their sisters. It 
was only at the time of the new Emperor's accession 
that Vorontzoff reappeared at St Petersburg, with 
the reputation he had enjoyed during the reign of 
Catherine still further increased by his having so 
long and so wisely remained in retirement. He did 
not join the old Ministers, most of whom were in- 
ferior to him in knowledge and judgment, and whom 
it would have been necessary to dismiss in order to find 
a place for him. The position he assumed was a more 
elevated one ; he undertook the task of reconciling 
the Emperor's ideas with those of the old Russian 
routine, of moderating the changes which he foresaw 
might arise from Alexander's inclinations. It was 
easy to adopt and at the same time to guide them, 
and thereby to gain favour and power. Vorontzoff 
accordingly entered the ' young men's party,' feel- 
ing that in order to rise it was necessary to free one's 
self from the old traditions, and that in any new 
arrangement the first place would be secured to 
him. 

Vorontzoff's brother Simon had also arrived at St 
Petersburg after a long absence. He had very fixed 
opinions and sentiments, and was always a blind and 
passionate partisan of any idea he adopted, or any 
man he chose as his idol. During the revolution 



288 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

which placed Catherine II on the throne he was a 
subaltern oflScer in the grenadiers, and loudly declared 
himself in favour of the unfortunate Peter III, which 
did not prevent him from being afterwards employed 
by Catherine and appointed Ambassador in London. 
It is known that one of VorontzoflTs sisters was Peter 
Ill's mistress, while another was a conjidante of the 
Empress Catherine. The zeal he had shown in his 
youth for Peter III, induced the Emperor Paul to 
recall him from London to St Petersburg, and oifer 
him the first posts in the Empire, but he refused 
them all and asked to be left in London. He had 
acquired friends in England by his noble, frank, and 
determined character, and had, so to say, taken root 
in the country. England had quite fascinated him ; 
he loved her more than the most bigoted of Tories, 
and he adored Pitt to such an extent that he looked 
upon the slightest criticism or even doubt as to his 
policy and doctrines as simple nonsense, and as show- 
ing an inexcusable perversion of mind or heart. Be- 
bides his worship of England and Pitt, he cultivated 
another which was more natural and of older date — 
that of his elder brother. He considered him the 
ablest and most virtuous man in Kussia, and his 
decisions were to him oracles. His devotion to his 
brother was indeed touching, for it was quite spon- 
taneous and sincere. The two brothers were so 
united that they did not even divide the property left 
them by their father. Alexander, who managed the 
property, gave his brother his share, and there was 
never the slightest altercation between them on the 
subject. 