

The Prussian and Russian sovereigns had both 
expressed a wish to meet each other. The former 
thought this would be a means of facilitating to his 
advantage the question of indemnities in Germany, 
which at that time was being dealt with under the 
influence of France, while Alexander's sole object was 



ALEXANDER AND FREDERICK WILLIAM III 281 

to become personally acquainted with his neighbour 
and relative. He had a liking for the Prussians and 
their King which arose from his military education at 
Gatchina, and he looked forward to seeing the 
Prussian troops, of whom he had a great idea; he 
would, moreover, get an opportunity of augmenting 
his knowledge of drill, uniform, and parades, to which 
be attached great importance. He also wished to 
make the acquaintance of the beautiful Queen of 
Prussia, and to appear before her and her Court as 
the Emperor of Russia. For all these reasons he 
started on his journey with much anticipation of 
pleasure, and he was accompanied by Kotchoubey as 
Foreign Minister, Novosiltzoff as Secretary, and 
Count Tolstoi, who had administered the affairs of his 
house when he was Grand-Duke, as Marshal. Tolstoi 
was sincerely attached to the Emperor, and was very 
zealous in his service; but he possessed little intelligence 
or instruction, and was often laughed at by Alexander, 
though he placed implicit trust in his fidelity. 

At Memel, where the same sovereigns had after- 
wards to meet in very different circumstances, there 
were many parades, reviews, and balls. The Emperor 
contracted a personal friendship for the King of. 
Prussia to which the latter afterwards owed the pre- 
servation of his monarchy, and the King hastened to 
take advantage of the good impression he had made 
on Alexander to secure his consent and support for 
the arrangements which were then preparing between 
Prussia and France with the object of withdrawing 
Germany from the influence of the Church. Kotch- 
oubey had been opposed to the interview, whose 



282 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

consequences he foresaw ; he endeavoured to dissuade 
the Emperor from going to Memel, and went there 
himself very unwillingly. To interfere in the affair 
of the indemnities would be contrary to the principle 
of non-intervention adopted in the Secret Council, 
and would be playing into Prussia's hands. What 
especially displeased Kotchoubey in the proposed 
arrangements, and made him wish not to take part 
in them, was that the disposal of the indemnities 
was left entirely to Napoleon's good pleasure, and 
that the latter might consequently be regarded as the 
prime mover in the whole business. But the two 
sovereigns settled the matter personally, without con- 
sulting their Ministers — a bad .way of dealing with 
political affairs, as it necessarily makes dupes of those 
who are straightforward, disinterested, and generous. 

It was also at this first interview at Memel that 
began the Platonic coquetry between the Emperor of 
Russia and the Queen of Prussia — a sort of connection 
which was especially pleasing to Alexander and to 
which he was always ready to sacrifice much time. 
It very seldom happened that the virtue of the ladies 
to whom Alexander paid his attentions was really in 
danger. The Queen was always accompanied by her 
favourite sister, the Princess of Salm, now Duchess 
of Cumberland,* about whom there was much scandal- 
ous gossip. She relaxed the Court etiquette, made 
conversation more merrv, and introduced more 
familiarity into intimate society. She was thoroughly 
informed of her sister's secret thoughts, and would 
have been of her secret actions if there had been any. 