



THE VORONTZOFFS 289 

Novosiltzoflf, during the years he had passed in 
England while Paul was on the throne, had been a 
frequent visitor to Simon Vorontzoffs house, to which 
he had been introduced by Count StrogonoflF ; he had 
gained his intimacy and confidence, and thus became a 
sort of bond between Alexander Vorontzoff and the 
'young men's party.' Simon's arrival at St Peters- 
burg made these relations more intimate and effec- 
tive. His Tory opinions were regarded in Kussia as 
extremely Liberal, and they had considerable influence 
on his brother, through whom they were transmitted 
to the Emperor, who was already elaborating a plan 
of reform. Alexander Vorontzoff was in no way 
opposed to certain Liberal ideas ; on the contrary, he 
was inclined to adopt and support them, and this 
inclination was fostered by the traditions of the old 
Russian aristocracy which had wished to limit the 
power of the Empress Anne when she was called to 
the throne. He once told me that in passing through 
Warsaw in his youth, during the reign of Augustus 
III, to make a tour in Europe, he had thought that 
nothing could have been better or more fortunate for 
himself and his country than that he should be a great 
nobleman like those of Poland, with the same rights 
and privileges. The Russian aristocratic spirit of 
one of the brothers and the pure Toryism of the other 
both looked to the Senate for a solution of the problem. 
The basis and the source of all reforms should, they 
thought, be found in the Senate ; by that body alone 
could they be carried out without danger. Yet, though 
various plans were discussed in the Secret Council, 
nothing was done. This discontented the Vorontzoffs, 

VOL. I. T 



290 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZAKTOUYSKI 

and they agreed with the * young men's party ' to take 
a decided step to draw the Emperor out of the timid 
inertia in which he had entrenched himself. 

The country house of Kamienny Ostrog, where 
the Emperor then lived, was separated from that 
of Count StrogonofF by the river Neva, over w^hich 
there was a bridge. The Emperor and Empress went 
to dine at Count StrogonofTs, and the Vorontzoflfe 
were also there. After we had got up from table, 
the Emperor walked in the garden and went into 
one of the pavilions, where he found Novosiltzoff; 
we all followed him, and entered into conversation. 
Simon Vorontzoff had been chosen as the speaker on 
this occasion, as, having only just come from England, 
and being a stranger to what had passed at St 
Petersburg, he had a right to be regarded as impartial 
and to state his views freely. His speech was not as 
eloquent as we had expected ; the Emperor, who was 
very clever in raising objections and difficulties, re- 
peatedly disconcerted both Simon and his brother. 
They tried to prove to him that it was necessary to 
do something, that improvements were expected of a 
new reign, and that both Russia and Europe generally 
expected them, especially of him. These were only 
vague phrases; and when the Emperor asked what 
line the improvements should take and how he was to 
proceed, the Vorontzoffs could only answer that if the 
authority of the Senate were re-established all diffi- 
culties would be removed. They held that this body, 
if restored to its power and dignity, would possess all 
the safeguards and the means necessary for bringing 
about the projected improvements. Each sentence in 