



PLANS OF REFORM 299 

« 

foreign institutions. The easy good-nature of the 
Emperor encouraged these criticisms, so far as they 
were possible in Kussia, and they found a certain 
amount of support in the Empress Dowager, who was 
annoyed, without admitting it, at not having been 
more consulted by her son and at not being able to 
influence his decisions. She perceived in all these 
novelties a germ of liberalism whose development 
she feared, and her salon became a centre of opposi- 
tion where people came to express their discon- 
tent. 

The head of the new administration was Count 
Alexander Vorontzoff, who was made Foreign Min- 
ister, and also Chancellor — a title of which he had 
long been ambitious, and which had not been given 
to any one for many years. Kotchoubey left the 
Foreign Office without regret, even with pleasure, as 
he thought, nothing could be done in it under that 
system of impassiveness which he considered most 
suitable to Russia and most in conformity with the 
Emperor's character and his views and wishes ; he 
threw himself with extreme ardour into the new 
sphere of action opened to him by his appointment 
as Minister of the Interior. The important branches 
of police and general administration of which this 
department was composed had until then been buried 
in the mass of the functions attributed to the Senate, 
to the Procurator-General, and occasionally to some 
of the sovereign's secretaries. Kotchoubey had 
entirely to reorganise an administration which had 
been long neglected, and which in the more distant 
provinces was without any direction or supervision, 



300 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

and given up to all the abuses arising from the ig- 
norance and cupidity of subordinate officials. It was 
a noble and arduous task, and if he did not succeed 
as well as he had wished, it was not for want of 
zeal or good-will. He began by organising his office, 
dividing it into several sections, each of which 
had to deal with a distinct branch of the vast de- 
partment. He invited the assistance of all the able 
and experienced officials he could find, and en- 
deavoured to raise in general estimation the post of 
Governor of a province by appointing in that capacity 
men whose character and position affi^rded guarantees 
of integrity, and who, though inexperienced in official 
work, were likely soon to obtain the necessary 
knowledge. It seemed as if order was going to break 
through the chaos, and the immediate effects of the 
change were soon felt by the people. One of the 
reforms he introduced \yas in the supply of salt, which 
in Russia is a matter of great importance. This w-as 
not nominally a Government monopoly, but the 
Government alone was able to supply salt to all parts 
of the Empire by obtaining it from the salt marshes 
or distilling it from sea-water. Kotchoubey took 
steps to reduce the cost of production and of convey- 
ance to the lowest possible point, so as to enable the 
people to buy salt more cheaply, and the Government 
to be repaid its expenses. 