



PLANS OF REFORM 295 

rator-General united in his person the offices of 
Minister of the Interior, of Police, of Finance, and of 
Justice ; but sometimes the sovereign created separate 
departments, and the Empress Catherine placed the 
conquered provinces under the direction of one of her 
favourites, such as Potemkin or Zuboff, who were 
independent of the Senate and reported direct to the 
sovereign. Moreover, when the reports of the Senate 
and the various committees were handed to the 
sovereign by the Ministers or other high function- 
aries of State, they were often put away in a drawer, 
and after some time had elapsed a decision totally 
opposed to the one suggested was issued. Thus there 
was practically no bar to the caprices of the sovereign. 
Paul, who thought he was a great general, and was 
especially jealous of any control over the army apart 
from his own, appointed one of his aides-de-camp in 
whom he had confidence to examine and submit to 
him all the proposals of the War Committee, and all 
promotions and appointments. The direction of 
Foreign Affairs was nominally entrusted to a com- 
mittee of three members, each of whom worked with 
the sovereign separately, and had the management of 
some particular question which was kept a secret from 
his colleagues. This post was much sought after, 
and Catherine's favourites obtained some magnificent 
presents from foreign powers in employing for a 
negotiation with which they had been charged by the 
Empress one of the members of the Foreign AflFairs 
Committee on whose complaisance they could rely. 
This was the case with Prince Zuboff and Count 



296 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Markoff, who were haDdsomely rewarded for advoca- 
ting the two last partitions of Poland. 

In the time of the Emperor Paul foreign afiairs 
were often directed by his favourite aides-de-camp. 
The Vice-Chancellor or the eldest of the members of 
the committee only had the direction of the admin- 
istrative and financial branch, and of the current 
correspondence. This system suited an able sovereign 
like the Empress Catherine, who, notwithstanding its 
disadvantages and a complete absence of unity, still 
ultimately carried out a consistent policy. Paul, with 
his incessant caprices and changes of mind, yet had a 
most decided, almost furious, will which all the 
wheels of the government machine had at once to 
obey. But with a sovereign of vacillating character 
it is evident that the system of administration above 
described must lead to serious evils. The Emperor 
was continually exposed to making mistakes, to 
seeing only one side of a question ; he was liable to 
be confused by a mass of opinions from persons many 
of whom had an interest in not letting him know the 
whole truth ; and he could never advance towards a 
definite object. Kussia therefore had reason to be 
grateful to the Emperor Alexander and those whose 
advice he then followed for having sought to introduce 
more order and method in the Imperial administration. 