



THE STROGONOFFS 2S5 

celebrated women, where the greatest noblemen used 
to meet men of letters ; his conversation was full of 
the anecdotes and good sayings of that day, and he 
had in many things adopted its opinions. He was 
very impulsive and enthusiastic, but the slightest 
obstacle suflSced to cool his enthusiasm. He was a 
singular mixture of the encyclopaedist and the old 
Russian boyard. His mind and his language were 
French, his manners and customs Russian ; he had a 
great fortune and many debts, a large elegantly 
furnished house, a good picture gallery, of which he 
had himself drawn up a catalogue, and an immense 
number of servants (including some French valets) 
whom he treated as slaves, though with great kind- 
ness. He was surrounded by disorder, and his 
servants robbed him ; but he did not care. He kept 
open house, and anybody could come to meals on 
certain days in the week. The society was less mixed, 
and included more learned men and artists, than at 
the house of the Grand Equerry Narishkin, and the 
complete absence of etiquette, together with the 
Count's extreme amiability, made his house very 
pleasant. He had taken a great liking to me, and 
was angry when I did not come to his dinners ; he 
treated me as one of the family. 

By natural inclination and by his French training 
the Count was liberal so far as his words and desires 
were concerned. He wished to give happiness and 
liberty to everybody ; but at the same time he was a 
thorough courtier, and the favour and consideration of 
his sovereign was to him a necessity. He was not 
ambitious or desirous of place ; but a cold reception or 



286 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

a frown from the Emperor made him unhappy and 
deprived him of all energy and rest. He had been 
liked by Catherine, by Paul, and by the Empress 
Maria, and he was especially so by Alexander. The 
latter was his son's friend, and was very fond of the 
young Countess, who by her amiable character had 
obtained a great influence over him. At the old 
Count's he felt in his element, for he used to meet 
people who understood and appreciated those modern 
and liberal ideas which were at that time Alexander's 
secret passion. 

The special favour enjoyed by the StrogouoflT 
family at the beginning of Alexander's reign gave the 
old Count more weight than he had ever had before, 
and as he was a senator, and his Kussian manners had 
gained him much popularity among the nobility of the 
district of which he was Marshal, his enthusiastic 
approval of the new ideas which were supposed to be 
entertained by Alexander and the members of the 
Secret Council was very valuable to the latter. An 
even more important supporter was Count Alexander 
Vorontzofi^, who was regarded in Russia as one of her 
ablest sta.tesmen. He and Count Zavadovsky had 
been Count Bezborodko*s friends ; they used to come 
to see him to talk about public affairs, and it is said 
that when they left Bezborodko used to have the 
doors and windows opened, and to wander about the 
rooms panting, fanning himself, and saying, * Thank 
God, the pedagogues have gone,' as they were con- 
stantly reproaching him for his indolence and his 
yielding temper. They were, however, true friends. 
I do not know what induced Count Vorontzoff to 