

* Af terwardfl Queen of Hanover. 



ALEXANDER AND FREDERICK WILLIAM III 283 

A-fter one of his interviews the Emperor, who then 
liad transferred his affections to some one else, told me 
he was seriously alarmed at the distribution of the 
rooms which communicated with his, and that at 
night he used carefully to lock his bedroom door to 
prevent his being surprised and led into dangerous 
temptations which he wished to avoid. He even said 
this plainly, with more frankness than gallantry, to 
the Queen of Prussia and her sister. 

On returning from Memel, the Emperor made a 
tour in Lithuania, and showed that he took an in- 
terest in the Poles by distributing some favours arid 
repairing some acts of injustice, and at the same time 
holding out the prospect of further benefits. All this 
was very hurriedly done, as is usually the case during 
the tour of a sovereign in his dominions. When he 
arrived at St Petersburg, the treaty relative to the 
indemnities was made public, and it turned out to be 
a general distribution of ecclesiastical property in 
which Prussia had the largest share. In Paris the 
property was sold by auction : the First Consul took 
the leading part in the arrangements, but Talleyrand 
was entrusted with the details of the distribution, 
and as a rule the highest bidder got the property. 
Right had little chance unless it had money to back 
it. Germany was parcelled out for the advantage of 
Prussia — whose favour the First Consul wished to 
gain — and of the distributors in Paris. The import- 
ance of France was sensibly increased, while that of 
Russia was greatly diminished ; she played a second- 
ary part and was led into giving her assent to an 
arrangement which was far from honourable in its 



284 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

origin and the results of which she could hardly ap- 
prove. Kotchoubey was much distressed, and in the 
salons people talked of the insignificant part Russia 
had been made to play. France, on the other hand, 
boasted of her triumph, and the Prussian Ministers 
were delighted. In order to gild the pill for Kussia, 
Napoleon offered some advantages to the houses of 
Wurtemberg and Baden, which were allied with her; 
but these States felt that their fate must ultimately 
depend on the good-will of France, and not on the 
power of Russia. As for the Duke of Oldenburg, 
the Empress Dowager's son-in-law, he complained of 
the prejudicial effect of the treaty upon his estates, 
but he could not obtain any redress : Napoleon had 
been oflFended by his strong German feeling and his 
stiff manners. 

The meetings of the Secret Council were now 
resumed, and they had become the more important as 
three of its members — Kotchoubey, Novosiltzoff, and 
Strogonoflf — were now in the service of the State. 
Novosiltzofl's ante-chamber began to fill ; men with 
new ideas sought and obtained employment. Many 
matters passed through his hands and were influenced 
by his liberal leanings. The Emperor found him 
useful for giving Russian forms to his European 
aspirations. We were also supported by some of the 
older and more distinguished functionaries of the 
Empire. One of these was the father of Count Paul 
Strogonoff, who had passed the greater part of his 
life in Paris at the time of Louis XV. He had been 
in the society of Grimm, d'Holbach, and d'Alembert; 
he had been a frequent visitor in the salons of 