



J 



PLANS OF REFORM 293 

administrative functions, though it was intended to 
let them fall by degrees into desuetude. All its 
powers were confirmed in pompous terms of which the 
author was Vorontzoff, and to them was added the 
right of making representations on the Emperor's 
ukases. It was at the same time laid down that all 
the Ministers should make detailed reports of their 
functions, which the Emperor would send to the 
Senate for its opinion. 

This, it was hoped, would be a first step in the 
direction of national and representative government. 
The idea was to deprive the Senate of its executive 
powers, to leave it those of a Supreme Court of 
Justice, and gradually to convert it into a sort of 
upper chamber to which would afterwards be attached 
deputies of the nobility who, either as part of the 
chamber or as a separate body, would, for the 
Emperor's information, state their views on the 
management of affairs by the Ministers and on the 
laws which were in existence or in preparation. This 
plan was never carried out, and what really happened 
was very different. 

Those who think that the Senate of St Petersburg 
can ever be of any importance for the destinies of 
Russia are entirely mistaken, and only show that they 
do not know Russia. The Russian Senate in its 
present form is less able than any political body in 
the world to make itself respected or to act on its own 
initiative. It can neither give an impulse nor even 
receive one ; it is a marionette which one can move 
about as one pleases, but which has no motive power 
of its own. 



294 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Those who are tired of official life and wish to 
retire and live quietly in idleness are the sort of 
people who seek the appointment of Senator. The 
Senate thus becomes a receptacle for the indolent and 
the superannuated ; all its work is done by the pro- 
curators and the secretaries, who decide questions at 
their pleasure and then take the decisions to the 
Senators, who as a rule sign them without reading 
them. These decrees are drawn up in a more diffuse 
and tedious style even than the official documents of 
other countries; the minutes in each case fill an 
immense volume, and it would require some courage 
to read them. One or two Senators who do read the 
decrees that are submitted to them for signature are 
spoken of with admiration as heroes. It is evident 
that such a political body is incapable of undertaking 
or following up any reform. 

After laying the first stone of the edifice of a regu- 
lated legislative power, and devising a limit to the 
autocratic power, the Emperor turned his attention to 
the organisation of his government, so as to make its 
action more enlightened, more just, and more methodi- 
cal. The government machine was irregular and 
intermittent in its action, and the administration was 
a chaos in which nothing was regulated or clearly 
defined. The only administrative authorities that 
were recognised were the Senate and the Committees 
of War, of the Navy, and of Foreign Affairs. These 
were not deliberative or consultative bodies ; one of 
the members of each committee, usually the president, 
brought the reports of the committee to the sovereign 
and then informed it of his decisions. The Procu- 