



3T4 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

abroad. Having accepted these functions, I threw 
myself heartily into the work. I soaietimes wrote 
incessantly for eight or nine hours at a time. This 
produced a sort of nervous disorder which Dr Roger- 
son said might have serious consequences ; but I was 
young, and did not pay any attention to his counsels. 
Later on I had reason to regret that I did not do so. 

The policy of Russia was in essence the same 
under VorontzofF as it had been under Kotchoubey ; 
but it became stronger and more dignified in form. 
Its leading principle, which was well adapted to 
Alexander's character and projects, was to be on 
good terms with all the world, and not to interfere in 
European affairs, in order to avoid being carried too 
far ; in a word, carefully to avoid difficulties without 
appearing to fear them. The principle was not 
changed ; it was only the way of carrying it out 
that was different. The Russian Cabinet assumed a 
tone of hauteur which deceived people as to its 
true policy, and somewhat reminded one of the 
spirit of Catherine's diplomacy. The Chancellor was 
very careful to avoid any quarrel, or even slight 
estrangement, with any of the great Powers ; but he 
was not sorry when an opportunity presented itself to 
frighten the weak ones and crush them under the 
weight of Russian power. This is what happened 
with Sweden. The two Governments had a difference 
as to the possession of a wretched little island in a 
river which at that time separated Finland proper 
from the Russian province of that name. The point 
at issue was on which branch of the river was to be 
the bridge constituting the frontier. This question 



N> 



THE CHANCELLOR 70R0NTZ0FFS POLICY 315. 

had been pending for some time, and the Chancellor 
resolved to cut the knot. He addressed Sweden in a 
dry and imperious tone, and I was very glad that I 
was not asked to write the despatches on this matter, 
which were in Russian ; my abstinence afterwards 
obtained for me proofs of confidence on the part of the 
King of Sweden and his Government. At the same 
time Russia seemed to prepare for a rupture, and 
Russian generals were sent to inspect the Swedish 
frontier. The Emperor himself went there, and I 
accompanied him with Strogonoff and Novosiltzoff. 

We passed along the greater part.of the frontier 
on . horseback. The soil mostly consists of a slight 
layer of earth on a substratum of granite, and there 
is some extraordinary scenery, with magnificent 
water-falls, but the country was not populous, and we 
often had to sleep in thinly scattered villages, at the 
houses of the clergy, some of whom knew no other 
language than the Finnish. The villages and parson- 
ages were surrounded by meadows, but the general 
appearance of the country was melancholy and arid. 
I refer here only to the portion of Finland which at 
that time belonged to Russia, as other portions are 
rich and abound in corn. Beyond the town of Abo 
the country looked more cultivated, and the people 
seemed more prosperous. We visited the disputed 
island, and the fortress and harbour in its vicinity, 
which in case of war were to form the basis of our 
operations. General Suchtelen, then commander of 
the engineers, and afterwards Russian Minister in 
Sweden, was having some works constructed in this 
fortress according to a new system of his own inven- 