



320 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Government probably intended to reassure and tran- 
quillise those whose friendship it wished to gain. He 
represented one of those dead calms which in 
diplomacy follow or precede a storm. 

There was nothing important or even interesting 
in the relations of Russia with the other great 
Powers ; they reduced themselves, so far as I re- 
member, to an exchange of rounded phrases the drift 
of which was : ^ Let us be quiet and avoid all embar- 
rassments and conflicts.' This feeling was shared 
even by the Governments which had sufiered from the 
peace ; they would have been glad to strike another 
blow in the hope of regaining what they had lost, but 
. they did not dare to confess it. Even England did 
not expect a speedy rupture. A ustria groaned only 
in secret, and when she thought she could complain 
without compromising herself; while Prussia congratu- 
lated herself on her constant neutrality and looked 
upon it as a source of prosperity and progress. 
France, too, seemed to have turned all her attention 
to internal affairs. The First Consul was organising 
the administration and the laws of the country ; but 
all eyes were still turned to this vigorous sap which 
could not long be satisfied with the immense terri- 
tories it had already fertilised. All continental 
Europe feared France, while Russia, although she 
was both pacific and inoffensive, assumed a tone which 
denoted a consciousness of equal power and a feeling 
of independence. The relations of the Chancellor with 
General Hddouville showed a friendliness based on 
mutual consideration. A convention of no great 
significance was concluded, and the Chancellor took 



TEE FOREIGN AMBASSADORS 321 

the opportunity of offering to the French Minister 
the usual present of 4000 ducats and a gold 
snuff box adorned with diamonds and the Emperor's 
portrait. The Chancellor was ill, and received 
the Ambassador in bed while the ratifications were 
being exchanged. The presents were laid out on 
the bed, and I never saw a face so beam with pleasure 
as did the General's when he saw the bags of ducats. 
Forgetting all decorum and the little speech he should 
have delivered on the Emperor's portrait, his eyes 
were fixed on the money-bags, and he carried them 
away with an expression of delight which was quite 
comic. He was a very worthy man, however, and 
everyone would have been glad to see him so happy 
if he had been a little more dignified in showing his 

joy- 

Among the members of the diplomatic body the 
most remarkable was Baron Stedingk, the Swedish 
Ambassador. He was distinguished both by his 
wisdom and by his noble sentiments; with a simple 
exterior, his conduct also was marked by simplicity, 
by tact, and by perfect loyalty, and was strictly 
honourable in the highest sense of the word. He had 
that rare perspicacity which always appreciates both 
men and events at their true value. In his youth he 
had served with distinction against the English in the 
American war, and had been decorated with the cross 
of St Louis, which, being a Protestant, he wore with 
a blue ribbon. Afterwards, being honoured with the 
confidence of Gustavus III, he distinguished himself 
at the head of the army corps which fought the 
Russians in 1789 and 1790. When peace was signed 