



STATE OF EDUCATION IN RUSSIA 309 

and in his capacity of curator he showed zeal and 
perseverance. 

The universities which were most progressive 
were Wilna, Dorpat, and KharkoflF. The nobility of 
Livonia, Esthonia, and Courland did not look with 
favour upon the University of Dorpat, which had 
declared itself the protector of the peasants and the 
bourgeoisie. One of the professors of this univer- 
sity was named Parot; he was a worthy man who 
expressed boundless attachment to the Emperor 
Alexander, and was very anxious about his health. 
Once Madame Parot sent a waistcoat, woven 
by herself, which she said would preserve the 
Emperor's life. Parot begged him to wear it, and 
by such manifestations of affection he gained Alex- 
ander's favour, and had private conferences with him 
during his frequent journeys to St Petersburg. The 
Curator of Moscow was M. de Mouravieff, one of the 
gentlemen formerly attached to Alexander's service 
when he was Grand-Duke, and also his former secre- 
tary. He was a worthy man, but excessively timid 
and quite devoid of energy. The Emperor appointed 
him assistant to the Minister of Instruction in order 
that it should not be said that young men only per- 
formed the duties of assistant, and that these posts were 
created only for the members of the Secret Council. 
Novosiltzoff was appointed Curator of St Petersburg. 
As there was already in that capital a faculty of 
medicine dependent on the Ministry of the Interior, 
and a faculty of law could not be established before 
the commission for the revision of the laws had ter- 
minated its labours, Novosiltzoff for the present 



310 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE AJ)AM CZARTORYSKI 

confined himself to establishing a feiculty of philo-; 
sophy, with the special object of training professors of 
the exact sciences, of administration, and of literature, 
This faculty began brilliantly by turning out some 
distinguished pupils, but they did not afterwards 
realise the hopes that had been formed of them, and 
the institution perished without leaving any durable 
results. A university with privileges and endow- 
ments would have better maintained itself, as was 
shown by the universities of Moscow and Kharkoff, . 
which, though they declined, were still active in the 
midst of the indiflference and oblivion by which they 
were long surrounded. 

Count Zavadovsky was appointed Minister of 
Public Instruction. He had been secretary to Count 
Romantzoif at the same time as Prince Bezborodko, . 
and they had remained friends ever since. Count 
RomantzofF had presented them both as secretaries 
to the Empress Catherine, and this was the origin of 
their brilliant fortunes. Bezborodko, to whom I have 
already referred, soon rose by his great capacity for 
work ; he enjoyed the confidence of his sovereign and 
attained to the highest dignities. Zavadovsky's 
success was obtained by other means. The Empress 
made him her favourite ; he became attached to her 
and was very unhappy when after six months had 
elapsed he was dismissed. His friends Bezborodko 
and Vorontzoff endeavoured to console him, and the 
presents which Catherine always lavished on a dis- 
missed favourite were in his case richer than usual, . 
as she recognised in him other merits than those 
which had merely attracted her fancy. He after- 