

• On the 29th of February, 1801. 



3i8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

representations, but only replied by assurances of 
interest and good-will which meant nothing. Prussia 
was represented by Count Goltz ; the only qualities 
which had obtained him advancement were a good 
memory, a. knowledge of routine, and a kind heart, 
and he was completely under the domination of his 
wife, remarkable for a somewhat noisy and brusque 
vivacity. When Prussia, perfidiously violating the 
treaties of the past ten years, took her share of the 
plunder of Poland, he succeeded M. Lucchesini as 
Ambassador at Vienna. He treated me with a defer- 
ence which betrayed a feeling of regret, almost of shame, 
at the conduct of his Government towards my country. 
His predecessor at St Petersburg was M. Tauentzien, 
afterwards known as one of the ablest of the Prussian 
generals. While my mother was at Berlin on the 
occasion of my sister s marriage with the Prince of 
Wurtemberg, he was an officer of the Guards, and 
often came to her house, where he was deeply smitten 
by Mdlle. Constance Narbutt (afterwards Madame 
Denbowska). She refused his oflFer of marriage, but 
the only result was that during his stay at St Peters- 
burg he often asked me and my brother to dinner. 
The relations of Russia with Prussia were purely 
personal between the two sovereigns, as there was no 
sympathy between the Cabinets, the armies, or the 
people of the two States. Prussia's equivocal conduct, 
her base submission to France, and the acquisitions 
which she obtained by it, were much disapproved by the 
Russians, who did not spare their sarcasms on the sub- 
ject. The Emperor, however, remained faithful to his 
friendship with the King, and to the high opinion he 



THE FOREIGN AMBASSADORS 319 

had formed of the Prussian army. This perseverance, 
which was often blamed at St Petersburg, was never- 
theless of great advantage to Russia, as she managed 
thereby to attract Prussia to her side and make her 
a sort of satellite. 

England had just concluded the peace of Amiens. 
Her ambassador at StPetersburg was Sir John Warren, 
an excellent admiral, but an indifferent diplomatist. 
He was a perfect representative of the nullity and 
incapacity of the Addington Ministry which had 
appointed him. In those days the English Government 
was seldom happy in its choice of ambassadors. The 
diplomatic service, though much sought after, contained 
few able men ; the most important posts were given 
by favour or through party arrangements, either to 
satisfy some supporter of the Ministry or to obtain 
a few more votes in the House of Commons. Other 
promotions were entirely by seniority ; want of know- 
ledge or of intelligence was no disqualification. It 
was generally remarked at that time that there was 
neither ability nor zeal among the great majority of 
English diplomatists. All this is entirely changed; 
the English diplomatists are now^ among the ablest 
in Europe. 

General Hddouville represented France. He had 
obtained a reputation as a General by his pacification 
of La Vendue, but he did not seem very likely to 
sustain the reputation of French diplomacy, whose 
cleverness and general ability seemed even to increase 
under the Consulate and the Ministry of Talleyrand. 
In selecting a Minister so benevolent and quiet, not 
to say tedious, in manner and conversation, the French 