



PLANS OF REFORM 303 

was theu only to be obtained by reading French and 
English works. His practical mind rejected all vain 
theories ; he possessed skill and tact in dealing not 
only with individuals, but with the Russian public, 
which he knew thoroughly. He had bad qualities 
also ; but these had not yet developed themselves. 
One of his greatest merits was that he seconded 
Alexander's wishes as to the improvement of the 
condition of the peasants, and he drew up the 
first ukase on this subject. He also reconstituted 
the commission for the revision of the law. This com- 
mission had been formed by the Empress Catherine, 
who thereby gained the flattering appreciation of 
Voltaire and the Diderots ; but the only result was 
the publication of the philanthropic and philosophical 
instructions addressed by Catherine to the commission. 
It was dissolved soon after, and its proceedings were 
never made public. The new commission was organ- 
ised by Novosiltzoff with the assistance of a German 
jurist, Baron Rosenkampf, on a vast and well-con- 
ceived plan. It was directed to codify all the exist- 
ing Russian laws, which were very numerous and 
often contradicted each other, classifying them accord- 
ing to subjects, omitting such as were obsolete, and 
adding new ones when necessary, but taking care to re- 
tain in the new codes all that had entered for many 
years into the life of the Russian people, even if not 
quite reconcilable with the ideas of modern jurisprud- 
ence. The system adopted was somewhat similar to 
that of Justinian ; but the task of the Russian codifiers 
was far more difficult than that of the Roman ones, 
The latter merely had to select and classify out of a 



1 



304 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

somewhat confused mass of laws, most of which were 
admirable examples of wisdom and legislative science, 
while in Russia the laws were not only confused, but 
in many respects defective and insufficient. For such 
a work not only jurists, but real legislators were 
wanted. A similar code was to be prepared for the 
outlying provinces of the Empire, such as Livonia, 
Esthonia, Courland, and the Polish provinces of 
Little Kussia, each of which had its own particular 
language, laws, and customs. 

This great undertaking was begun methodically 
and pursued for some time with activity ; NovosiltzofF 
w^s allowed by the Minister of Justice to make it his 
exclusive occupation. The classifications were pre- 
pared by Baron Rosenkampf, and so long as they 
were adhered to the work progressed ; but it did not 
produce the results which were expected of it. This 
is usually the case in Russia; if there is no immediate 
result, the persons entrusted with the execution of 
the work are changed, and it has to be begun over 
again. 

I was the only member of the Secret Council who 
remained without employment. Alexander oflfered 
me, with Count Vorontzoffs concurrence, the post of 
assistant to the Minister of Foreign Afiairs, and all 
my friends, the Emperor especially, pressed me to 
accept the offer. I hesitated for a long time, feeling 
how much surprise and dissatisfaction such an appoint- 
ment would cause in Russia. The Emperor observed 
that during my mission to the King of Sardinia I 
had made myself favourably known by my despatches, 
and that my nomination to the Foreign OflBce ought 