

The new Finance Minister was Count Vasilieff, a 
capable and honest official who had in financial 
matters been the right hand of Prince Viaziemskoy, 
the only Procurator-General who had been mentioned 
with praise at the time of the Empress Catherine. 



J 



PLANS OF REFORM 301 

In the various changes which had taken place since 
the Prince's death in 1794, M. VasiliefF, as treasurer 
of the Empire, had been indispensable ; he was a 
steady worker, appreciated new ideas, and adopted 
them when he thought they were opportune. All 
the branches of the public revenue, the brandy traffic, 
the Imperial Bank, etc., were comprised in this depart- 
ment, to which was added the mines department, 
which had been reorganised on a larger scale. 

The functions of Minister of Justice were united 
to those of Procurator-General of the Senate. 
General Beklescheif did not wish to stop in this 
department, as it had been deprived of the greater 
part of its functions by the creation of the Ministers 
of the Interior and of Finance ; and he was succeeded 
by the Senator Dzierzanin. He was the personal ,^ ^^K- -* 
choice of the Emperor, without communication with 7I -^ - 
the Secret Council. A worthy man, and the writer of 
some much admired lyrics which were full of swing 
and passion, he was imperfectly educated and knew 
no language but Russian. The Emperor had been 
attracted to him by his ardent sentiments and poetic 
dreams, not being able to resist fine phrases ; the 
vaguer they were the better they pleased him, as he 
could then easily assimilate them to his hopes, which 
also were not very clear. He liked expressions of 
energetic liberalism, and was especially attracted by 
admiration of himself when it was couched in the 
language of devotion to the cause of humanity. 

The Emperor had direct and special relations with 
certain persons whom he himself introduced at our 
meetings; he liked to patronise them and defend 



302 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

them against objections raised sometimes by people 
who knew them more intimately. It gave him 
pleasure to have these relations without the know- 
ledge of his friends, who already at that time had 
begun to displease him because they were so united 
among themselves. Yet it was absolutely necessary 
to introduce members of *the young men's party' 
into the admini^stration, for all Alexanders hopes 
rested upon them for the zealous continuation and 
accomplishment of the reforms he had at heart 
Kotchoubey was provided for, but what was to be 
done with the others? It would be too much to 
make them Ministers, and it was accordingly decided 
that assistants to the Ministers should be appointed ; 
in this way the Emperor's friends would be able 
to direct their chiefs in accordance with the Emperor's 
views, and to keep him fully acquainted with what 
was going on. 

Count Paul StrogonofF was at his request ap- 
pointed assistant to the Minister of the Interior, and 
Novosiltzoff obtained the post of assistant to the 
Minister of Justice, retaining his former appointment 
of Secretary to the Emperor. This gave Novosiltzoff 
the most important place in the administration, as it 
was through him that the Emperor was to begin the 
work of reforming jurisprudence and the existing 
laws. He was well qualified for the task, as he had 
studied jurisprudence and political economy in Eng- 
land, and had made good use of the opportunities 
thereby afforded him of becoming conversant with 
those subjects. No one in Kussia was at that time 
his superior in that administrative knowledge which 