



STATE OF EDUCATION IN MUSSIA 307 

the Russian capital from abroad. Euler came when 
he was already an old man, and died there soon after. 
The transactions of this Academy were for the most 
part written in the French and German languages ; 
it had no relations whatever with the country, and 
exercised no influence on its progress. At Moscow 
there was a university which was equally isolated, and 
was attended by not more than a hundred students 
maintained at the expense of the Government. The 
only other educational establishments in Russia proper 
were the so-called * National Schools.' The teaching 
in these schools was bad and extremely meagre ; the 
teachers were poor wretches whom idleness and ennui 
had rendered drunkards, and no respectable person 
sent his children to them. The establishment of 
the Ministry of Public Instruction completely changed 
all this. The existing universities of Moscow, Wilna, 
and Dorpat were better endowed, and three new 
ones were created — those of St Petersburg, Kharkoff, 
and Kazan,— each forming an educational centre for a 
prescribed district, in which it directed all the educa- 
tional arrangements. The University of Wilna was 
exclusively Polish, and during the next few years the 
whole of Russian Poland was covered with schools in 
which Polish feeling freely developed itself. This 
University, to which I appointed the most distin- 
guished literary and scientific men of the country, and 
some eminent professors from abroad, directed the 
movement with admirable zeal and intelligence, and 
its consequences, which the Russians afterwards 
deeply regretted, seemed at that time to flow 
naturally from the Emperor's generous intentions with 



3o8 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

regard to the Poles. The University of Kazan was 
to look after the instruction of the Tartars and of 
Siberia generally. Each university had its curator, 
and the curators formed a council of public instruction, 
the President of which was the Minister. The 
persons appointed to these posts by the Emperor were 
such as to give a hope that the work of public instruc- 
tion would be pushed forward with zeal and success. 
General Klinger, commandant of one of the cadet 
corps, was appointed curator of Dorpat. He was a 
distinguished German author, with liberal opinions 
which might almost be called Utopian, although he 
had been in the service of the greatest despots ; his 
'intentions, however, were good, and he was full of 
zeal for the advancement of science and instruction. 
His eccentric and dreamy views were expressed with 
a German bluntness which gave him an appearance of 
frankness and energy, and all this had gained him 

Alexander's favour. Count Severin Potocki was 

* 

appointed Curator of the University of KharkoflT, 
which was the centre of a district the inhabitants of 
which were strongly desirous of obtaining the means 
of instruction. Count Severin, as a Pole, had been 
treated with great consideration by Alexander when 
he was Grand-Duke ; he had been admitted, like my 
brother and myself, into his familiar circle, and was 
one of his most enthusiastic admirers. The Emperor 
appointed him not only curator of Kharkoff, but also 
senator of the third department of the Senate, which 
issued decisions on appeals against measures taken by 
the administrations of the Polish provinces. Count 
Severin obtained some celebrity in Russia as a senator, 