



3i6 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

tion ; it was more simple, he said, than those of 
Vauban and Coehorn, which it combined and made 
more effective. 

The King of Sweden was very obstinate in his 
resistance to the demands we had made in so imperious 
a tone. Count Stedingk, the Swedish Ambassador 
at St Petersburg, often expressed to me his astonish- 
ment on this subject, and shrugged his shoulders in 
speaking of the offensive way in which Russia dealt 
with a matter which in reality was quite unimportant. 
Sweden resisted for a long time, and we continued 
preparations for war. She had to give way at last, 
but the conditions imposed upon her were insignificant, 
and Sweden could not be mad enough to make war on 
account of them. The Chancellor was very proud 
of his victory, but it might easily have been obtained 
without humiliating Sweden — which I think would 
have been preferable. The conduct of Bussia left a 
bitter feeling in the mind of a neighbour which had 
already been often ill-treated, and which, notwith- 
standing its relative weakness, might on occasion do 
much harm. But Vorontzoff knew Russia, or at least 
those who spoke in her name. He knew that every 
demonstration of power, even if unjust, pleases the 
Russians ; that to domineer, to command, to crush is 
a necessity of their national pride. Not being able 
to overcome the strong, the Chancellor attacked the 
weak, hoping thereby to bring into prominence 
the young Emperor's government. I am con- 
vinced that this was one of the motives which 
induced him loudly to proclaim his pretended victory 
over Sweden ; but the Russian public was not de- 



THE CHANCELLOR VORONTZOFFS POLICY 317 

ceived. There was at that time in the two capitals 
among the civil officials and in the army — the class 
which afterwards formed the elements of public 
opinion — a vague desire of improvement, or rather of 
events Avhich should be more interesting, more profit- 
able, and especially more flattering to their vanity. 
It must be admitted that the Emperor Alexander did 
not at that time have public opinion on his side, and ^ 
this was indeed but seldom the case during the whole 
of his reign. At that period especially his conduct 
was too natural, his views too pure and too much in 
conformity with the welfare of the great majority of 
his subjects, to be appreciated by a country whose 
upper classes had tasted of a corrupt civilisation and 
had been excessively indulged in their avidity and 
vanity. The goodness, the kindness, and the pure 
intentions of Alexander as he then was did not suffice 
to make him popular. Notwithstanding all the 
Chancellor's efibrts, no great satisfaction was expressed 
at the advantage gained by him over an adversary of 
such little importance as Sweden ; on the contrary, 
the old Minister was reproached for attempting to 
throw dust in the eyes of the public and take advan- 
tage of its vanity. 

Count Sauvan was then the Austrian Ambassador ; 
he used always to come to the Chancellor in full dress, 
and conferred with him in a very solemn manner. 
The policy of Austria was at that time lachrymose 
and sentimental. The peace of Lundville had only 
lately been signed,* and the Vienna Cabinet sought 
for consolation. Russia did not reject its mournful 