



APPOINTED ASSISTANT FOREIGN MINISTER , 305 

not therefore to be a matter of astonishment, 
besides which Count Vorontzoff, who alone had 
a right to be consulted on the subject, had consented 
to my becoming his assistant. I replied that he 
(the Emperor) knew more than anyone my feelings 
with regard to my country; that they could never 
change, and that I had some reason to fear that they 
might be incompatible with the duties of the appoint- 
ment he wished to give me ; the safest and most 
proper course, therefore, would be for me not to accept 
it. To this Alexander rejoined that he did not at 
present anticipate any such contradiction as that 
which I feared ; that I should always be at liberty to 
give up my post if such a contradiction were to arise ; 
and that, on the contrary, he thought that events 
would occur which would be favourable to my views. 
He added some very flattering expressions with regard 
to my qualifications for the post. It is every man's 
duty, he said, to pay his debt to humanity ; when one 
has talents one must not refuse to employ them in the 
most useful way. I still declined, but Alexander was 
bent on my taking the appointment ; this was one of 
his irresistible fancies which nothing could induce him 
to abandon until they were satisfied. His persistence 
and kindness to me were such that at length I 
yielded, on the express condition that I should 
be allowed to resign the appointment directly 
its functions should become incompatible with my 
feelings as a Pole. My chief object in this was, by 
spending some years in the Emperor's service, to 
prove to him my sincere attachment and my grati- 
tude for his friendship and confidence. I accepted 

VOL, L u 



1 



r^ 



306 MEMOIRS OF PRIKCE ADAM CZARTORYSKl 

with some sadness, as by so doing I was entering on 
a new career full of pitfalls which would retain me at 
St Petersburg, where I was always like an exotic 
plant which could not take root ; I felt I could not 
enjoy life unless I were with my own people. 

I will not pretend that I had more foresight and 
prudence than was really the case. In accepting the 
post which was offered me, I was determined not to 
do anything which might exercise an injurious in- 
fluence on the destinies of my country ; but I had 
no clear or decided idea as to the nature of the ser- 
vices I might be called upon to render to Poland in 
my new position. In this respect, a substantial bait 
ivas offered me as a reward for having at length yielded 
to the Emperor's wishes. He entrusted to me the 
direction of the schools in the eight Polish pro- 
vinces, which at that time constituted the whole 
of that portion of Poland which belonged to his 
dominions. 

The creation of a Ministry of Public Instruction 
was a remarkable innovation in Russia which was 
fruitful of great and salutary results, and posterity 
will owe gratitude both to Alexander and to the 
young men, then so much criticised, who supported 
him in his plans and gave them practical shape by 
dividing into special branches the confused organisa- 
tion which was then in existence. Nothing could be 
more wretched or insufficient than public instruction 
in Russia up to the reign of Alexander. There was 
an Academy of Sciences at St Petersburg which 
owed its only celebrity to the presence of some 
learned men whom the Government had brought to 