

The friendly relations which had hitherto existed 
between Kussia and Prance began about this time to 






334 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

be disturbed. Count MarkofF, supposed to be the 
ablest man in Russia, and the prototype and almost 
the last living representative of the diplomacy of 
Catherine, had been sent as Ambassador to Paris. 
When Paul became Emperor Markoff fell into 
disgrace, and was banished to Podolia, on one of my 
father's confiscated estates. After Alexander's acces- 
sion he hastened back to the capital, and Count 
Panin, who was then Foreign Minister, fearing in 
him a dangerous rival, decided to send him on a 
mission abroad. The most important task in foreign 
affairs was at that time the renewal of friendly 
relations with France, and for this it was necessary 
to send Napoleon an Ambassador capable of controlling 
and restraining his policy, and sustaining the dignity 
of Russia. MarkoflF, who was selected for this post, 
accepted it with eagerness, for he knew Alexander 
did not like him, and he was pleased at the idea of 
playing an important part in a capital where Napoleon 
and other personages already celebrated were influenc- 
ing the destinies of the world. He did not, however, 
justify his reputation,* which had already been impaired 
by his extraordinary want of tact in the afiair of the 
proposed marriage of the King of Sweden with the 
Grand Duchess Alexandra, which was the cause of 
Catherine's death. Notwithstanding his aversion for 
Napoleon and his Ministers, Markoff did not succeed 
in preventing the dismemberment of Germany to 
compensate the princes who had lost part of their 

* Lord Whitworth, then EngUsli Ambassador in Paris, says of him : 'He haa 
not the talent of inspiring confidence, and indeed his conduct here is such as to 
render any confidential intercourse with him extremely dangerous.' (Despatch to 
Lord Hawkesbury of November 16, 1802, in the Record office). 



NAPOLEON AND THE RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR 335 

dominions, and to indulge the avidity of Prussia. The 
Convention was sent to the Emperor for his approval 
after it had been concluded, and when it was too late 
to make any change in it. A more favourable result 
would no doubt have been difficult to obtain, but 
Markoff did not even attempt to do so ; he did not 
give the Cabinet of St Petersburg the necessary 
time to state and defend its opinions, and compelled 
it to accept the Convention like a child forced to obey 
orders. He was a creature of the Zuboffs, and he 
had voted with them for the partition of Poland ; he 
was the incarnation of an unscrupulous State policy 
and a diplomacy without justice or pity ; very extra- 
vagant, he was inflexible in money afiairs, and though 
fond of presents, he would not take them if by so 
doing his pride would suffer. His face, seamed with 
the smallpox, constantly expressed irony and scorn ; 
his round eyes and his mouth, depressed at the corners, 
resembled those of a tiger. Though he had adopted 
the language and the grand airs of the Court of 
Versailles, his manners were haughty and rude. He 
spoke excellent French, but what he said was gener- 
ally harsh, trenchant, disagreeable, and totally devoid 
of feeling. 