



328 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

law, who wanted to give the young Emperor every 
possible quality and success. She endeavoured to 
stimulate him by the example of Napoleon, but in 
vain. The two Emperors went in opposite directions 
in everything ; one demolished, while the other re- 
stored, old ideas; and the comparison made between 
them was not to Alexander's advantage in the eyes 
of the very Russians for whom he was working. He 
was, in fact, not at all popular during the first few 
years of his reign, although he was never more devoted 
than he was then to the good of his country. But 
men want to be dominated and fooled, and this neces- 
sity is nowhere so much felt as in Kussia. At the 
beginning of his reign, Alexander did not know how 
to do this ; he learnt it later, but even then, and 
notwithstanding his great success, he never attained 
the popularity and the moral power of his grand- 
mother, who could have said of the Russians j as 
Buonaparte said of the French, that they were in her 
pocket. 

The Emperor had made it a maxim to respect 
other people's opinions, and not to punish anybody for 
expressing them, so that no great courage was required 
to criticise the sovereign and tell him unpleasant 
truths. Full advantage was taken of this privilege, 
especially in the salons of the two capitals. Every- 
thing that the Government did was found fault with, 
and these criticisms, growing like the waves of a 
heavy sea, used in the same way to subside and grow 
again at the least breath of wind. Such was the 
constant state of opinion in Russia during the first 
year of Alexander's reign. The old courtiers used to 



THE PRINCE BECOMES UNPOPULAR AT COURT 329 

say, in order to calm the anxiety of the young ones, 
that all new reigns began in the same way, and that 
the first years of the reign of Catherine were marked 
by the same pre-occupations. What people most ob- 
jected to, however, in the case of Alexander, was 
my presence at his Court, and my appointment as 
assistant to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. A 
merely honorary title would not have shocked the 
Russians, but they could not accustom themselves to 
see me at the head of the department : a Pole enjoying 
the confidence of the Emperor, and initiated into all the 
secrets of State, was to them an intolerable innovation.* 
This was a fertile subject of suspicion and calumny 
in the Russian salons. My parents had always been 
averse to Russian influence, and their fortune had 
been confiscated oil account of their participation in 
Polish revolutions. That their son, who had never 
concealed his enthusiastic devotion to his country's 
cause, who had often loudly proclaimed it, and proved 
it by the national spirit in which he promoted public 
instruction in the Polish provinces, should be the 
intimate and confidential adviser of the sovereign, was 
naturally the subject of much comment. It was easy 
to imagine that I betrayed the interests of Russia, 
and that I would at any moment prove false to my 
duties as a Minister and a friend in order to advance 
the cause of Poland. All the ambitious men who 
thought themselves more worthy of the Emperor's 
confidence than a stranger — all the young men of 