



^ 



334 MEMOIRS OF PRINtE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

to give more appearance of reality to the little scene 
'Which it was believed had been got up for the occasion. 
Count Strogonoff, who was deputed with two other 
senators to take the representations of the Senate to 
the Emperor, readily set out on his mission ; but the 
deputation was received by Alexander very coldly, 
and Strogonoff, disconcerted and not knowing what 
to say, withdrew. The Emperor sharply reprimanded 
the Senate, ordered it not to meddle with things 
which did not concern it, and directed it by a new 
decree to carry out the very ukase against which it 
had appealed. To my great astonishment it was 
Novosiltzoff who was the agent of the Emperor's 
unjust anger in this matter. This failure of the first 
move of the Senate in the direction of liberalism 
sufficed to discourage people whose generous aspira- 
tions were not, it must be admitted, very strong. 
The Senate did not again attempt any independent 
action, and its rights became a dead letter. At my 
first interview with the Emperor after this incident, I 
could not help smiling at his extreme alarm in 
presence of the new attitude of the Senate. My 
jocular remarks on this point were ill received by 
Alexander, and I believe they left in his mind a 
certain anxiety as to ray liberal tendencies which 
afterwards came back to him. This was an indication 
of Alexander's true character, which then appeared to 
me in a novel and unfortunately too real light. Grand 
ideas of the general good, generous sentiments, and 
the desire to sacrifice to them part of the Imperial 
authority, and resign an immense and arbitrary power 
in order the better to secure the future happiness of 



ALEXANDERS LIBERALISM PUT TO THE TEST 325 

the people, had really occupied the Emperor's mind 
and did so still, but they were rather a young man's 
fancies than a grown man's decided will. The 
Emperor liked forms of liberty as he liked the 
theatre ; it gave him pleasure and flattered his vanity 
to see the appearances of free government in his 
Empire ; but all he wanted in this respect was forms 
and appearances ; he did not expect them to become 
realities. In a word, he would willingly have agreed 
that every man should be free, on the condition that 
he should voluntarily do only what the Emperor 
wished. 

Alexander never forgot Count Severin's indiscre- 
tion ; he was still received at Court on the same 
footing as heretofore, but he no longer shared the 
confidence and favour of his sovereign. The incident 
gained him great credit at Moscow and in the ancient 
provinces of the Empire, where he was regarded as a 
true Russian patriot and a generous defender of the 
immunities of the nobility. This wave of popularity 
had so much charm for the Count that it made him 
forget his old Polish sentiments. In his youth, at 
the diet of the 3rd of May, he had been an ardent 
Polish patriot ; in his old age he forgot his country, 
thought only of augmenting his fortune and living 
pleasantly, and amused himself by opposing the 
Russian Government. He got into the habit of travel- 
ling continually between his estates and the Senate, 
reading much on the journey, and preparing the 
speeches which he made every year either at Moscow 
or at St Petersburg. His mind tended rather towards 
doubt than action ; he seldom expressed any positive 