

VOL. I. X 



322 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

he was appointed Ambassador at the Court of St 
Petersburg, where he was already known by his 
military successes. He remained at this post during 
three consecutive reigns, serving his country in the 
most diflScult emergencies, without ever losing any of 
the high consideration he had acquired. Of all the 
men I ever met he seemed to me one of the best and 
the most worthy of confidence ; he was a man whom 
one could not help liking, and whom one would wish 
always to have for a friend. I think he was mine, so 
far as he could be in view of our different positions, 
which afterwards entirely separated us. As second in 
the Ministry, I was not obliged to take an active part 
in the difficulty which had arisen between Russia and 
Sweden, and the Chancellor wished to conduct the 
matter himself in order to gain the merit of having 
brought it to a triumphant conclusion. His insulting 
affectation of superiority, and the way in which he 
deprived a weaker power of a worthless island which 
was only taken to humiliate her, inspired me with pro- 
found repugnance, and, as I have already remarked, 
this gained for me marks of gratitude and confidence 
from the Swedes. 

The progress of internal reform in Russia was 
abruptly stopped by an unexpected incident. Count 
Severin Potocki, who, as I said above, was a great 
admirer of the Emperor, often addressed memoranda 
to him on various subjects. The Senate had received 
from the Emperor, among other important preroga- 
tives, the right of making representations to him, but 
it had hitherto not made any use of this right. Count 
Severin naturally thought the Emperor was sincere 



t 

> 



ALEXANDER'S LIBERALISM PUT TO THE TEST 323 

in his liberal opinions ; the Emperor himself thought 
so ; and the Count therefore imagined it would be a 
good thing, and would please his Imperial master, if 
the Senate were prompted to exercise its preroga- 
tives. For this an opportunity soon presented itself. 
Although almost every noble in Kussia entered the 
army, he was not obliged to do so, and could leave 
it when he thought proper. This double privilege 
was granted by Peter III in an ukase for which 
many blessed his memory. Alexander, however, 
restricted the privilege to nobles who held the rank of 
officer ; those below that rank were obliged to serve 
for twelve years. This was looked upon as an attack 
on the guaranteed rights of the nobility, and pro- 
duced a deep and painful sensation. The Minister of 
War, an old military bureaucrat of low origin, was said 
to be the author of the new ukase, and Count Severin 
Potocki proposed to the Senate that it should address 
representations to the Emperor on this violation of 
the nobles' charter. His proposal was read to the 
general assembly of all the departments, and the 
senators, seeing that one of the confidential advisers 
of the Court was taking the initiative in the matter, 
and that his opinion was warmly supported by Count 
Strogonoff, thought they could safely vote in its favour. 
They gladly did this, under the impression that by so 
doing they could without danger assume an air of 
independence in a matter to which it was believed the 
Emperor did not attach any serious importance. 
Count Severin s proposal was adopted, notwithstand- 
ing the opposition of the Procurator-General (Minister 
of Justice), which was supposed to be feigned in order 