



326 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

opinion, and sentiment did not in any way affect his 
decisions, which were invariably prompted by con- 
siderations of personal interest. His self-love was 
greater than his fear, which could not indeed be very 
great, as Alexander, at that time especially, never 
persecuted anybody, and his displeasure could be in- 
curred without danger. Count Severin retained as 
long as he liked his appointments of senator and 
curator, which gave him a circle of activity that 
pleased him. He was able and well informed, but 
made light of everything except what touched his 
material interests, and had no religious sentiments 
whatever. Such a man was destined to end his days 
without friends or sympathy. I did not see him 
again. Alexander had given him the use of a con- 
siderable estate for fifty years ; I had done my best 
to arrange the matter, and later on I did some service 
to his son Leo. All this established a reciprocity of 
good feeling between us which lasted as long as I was 
in Russia, and afterwards gradually died out. 

If it had been in the nature of man to be satisfied 
with what is practicable, Alexander ought to have 
satisfied the Russians, for he gave them a tranquillity, 
a prosperity, and even a degree of liberty which were 
unknown before his reign. But the Russians wanted 
something else. Like the gambler who seeks violent 
emotions, they were tired of the monotony of their 
prosperity. They did not like their young Emperor : 
he was too simple in his manners, too averse to pomp, 
too disdainful of etiquette. The Russians regretted 
the brilliant Court of Catherine and its abuses, the 
opening which it gave to so many passions, struggles. 



ALEXANDERS POLICY AND THAT OF NAPOLEON 327 

intrigues and successes. They regretted the days of 
the Imperial favourites, and the possibility of gaining 
colossal positions and fortunes like those of Orloff and 
Potemkin. The courtiers had no ante-chambers to go 
to, and sought in vain for an idol before which they could 
burn their incense; their platitude was condemned 
to inaction, and there was no one to whom they could 
cringe and bow. The grumblers at Moscow, too, did 
not like the Court because it no longer afforded food 
for their censure, while it did not offer them any of 
the advantages which they valued. Their liberalism, 
moreover, was very different from that of the Epiperor 
Alexander ; he inclined rather to the democratic and 
levelling ideas of the Emperor Joseph of Austria, 
though in a milder form. 

Only the Empress Dowager attempted to main- 
tain the customs and the brilliancy of the old Court. 
Alexander's Court was of an exaggerated simplicity, 
totally devoid of etiquette, and he met his courtiers only 
on intimate and familiar terms. The Emperor and his 
family only appeared in full dress on Sundays and 
holidays, when they went to church. Dinners and 
soirees were mostly given in the private apartments, 
and were quite different from what they had been in the 
preceding reigns. Later on, Alexander became more 
sumptuous in his receptions, but at the beginning of 
his reign he was not sufficiently so. While Napoleon 
surrounded himself with a pomp and ceremonial re- 
vived from the times of the monarchy, Alexander 
liked to eclipse himself and to behave like an ordinary 
citizen. His friends found fault with him for this — 
especially the Margravine of Baden, his mother-in- 