



332 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

who was the head of the department. He replied 
that he knew well there was an understanding 
between the Chancellor and myself to refer matters 
from one to the other in order to avoid the diffi- 
culty of a precise answer. The discussion almost 
became a quarrel, and the Emperor had to interfere 
to put a stop to Dolgorouky's remarks. We no 
longer spoke to each other, but he continued his in- 
trigues with more animosity than ever. Under the 
reign of Paul we had been on very good terms, and 
he had shown me much confidence in an affair of 
honour which he had with M. de Wintzingerode, a 
worthy German, very stiff and punctilious. Having 
quarrelled with Dolgorouky, he challenged him, and 
both agreed to take me as the only witness of the 
duel. The scene of the encounter was a garden, and 
I loaded the pistols and placed the adversaries in 
such a way as to make it exceedingly difficult for 
them to hit each other. The result was that both 
missed, and the incident was closed by a complete 
reconciliation. 

The Chancellor's health now began to break down. 
He was several times seriously ill, and he often 
thought of temporarily retiring to his estates near 
Moscow, though he had no wish to withdraw from 
political life altogether. One day when he was ill 
I was seated by his bed ; he was in a high fever, and 
speaking with much animation, though somewhat 
delirious, he said several times : * These young men 
wish to govern everything, but I will not allow it ; I 
alone will remain at the head of affairs.' I thought it 
probable that some one had led him to suspect those 



THE CHANCELLORS ILLNESS 333 

who were called the Emperor's friends ; perhaps these 
suspicions had spontaneously arisen in his mind. I 
am convinced, however, that he never distrusted me, 
or listened to the insinuations which people made 
ao^ainst me. The extreme and entire confidence which 
he showed me lasted to the end of his life, which is 
surprising, as so many people had an interest in 
making us quarrel. He gave his confidence and 
friendship to very few people ; his sentiments were 
delicate and noble, and although they were not based 
on strict principle, they showed that he was kind- 
hearted and sensitive. Always inclined to render a 
service, he judged others with great indulgence, and 
even at times when he spoke his mind most freely, I 
have never detected in him any feeling of hatred or 
desire for revenge. The Emperor, however, had an 
invincible dislike for him, which increased every day. 
His somewhat old-fashioned manners, his voice, his 
deliberate way of speaking, even his gestures, were 
antipathetic to him. During his frequent attacks of 
illness, the Chancellor used to send me with his papers 
to the Emperor, and the latter expressed his joy at 
not being obliged to see him. In spite of all I said in 
his behalf, he used to ridicule the old Minister, and 
often told me he would like to be rid of him. I was 
at this time in high favour with the Emperor, and he 
spoke with marked approval of my drafts of despatches 
and rescripts. He in no way opposed the Chancellor's 
wish for rest ; on the contrary, he encouraged it in 
every way. 