

* ' Prince Czartoiyski,* says Lord Whitworth in a despatch to Lord Hawkesbury 
(in the Record Office), dated January 4, 1803, * for some years past the intimate and 
most confidential friend of the present Emperor of Russia, . . , is now second in 
point of precedency, but perhaps first in point of influence, in the Foreign Depart- 
ment.' 



330 MEMOIRS OF PRINCE ADAM CZARTORYSKI 

Alexander's Court — were agreed on this point. But 
their suspicions were unfounded. I do not think I 
have ever been more zealous and devoted than I was 
in the Emperor's service. He knew better than any- 
one my attachment to my country, and it was this 
knowledge which was the first basis of our intimate 
relations and the source of the esteem and friendship 
with which he honoured me. He did not at that 
time think that the welfare of Russia was really 
incompatible with that of Poland. Perhaps he did 
not have a very clear idea of that grave question, and 
as its solution appeared distant, he did not think it 
necessary to go very deeply into it. Meanwhile he 
accepted the services which I cordially rendered him, 
and he thought it just and proper to reward them by 
giving me a certain liberty of action in regard to the 
Polish provinces under his rule. I of course availed 
myself of this concession ; I reorganised public in- 
struction in Poland on a larger and more national 
basis, and made it more conformable with modern 
ideas. The Russians could not understand my rela- 
tions with Alexander, and indeed they were only to 
be explained by the fact that we were both very young 
and had become friends at an age when generous 
impulses are stronger than reflection. The Russians, 
however, attributed our connection to personal ambi- 
tion and dissimulation on my part and silly good- 
nature on that of Alexander. They imagined that I 
secretly favoured France, and that I wished to bring 
Alexander under the fascination of Buonaparte's genius. 
It was to my influence that they ascribed the some- 
what colourless policy adopted by the Emperor in 



THE PBINCE BECOMES UNPOPULAR AT COURT 331 

European politics, which they thought arose from my 
connivance with France. This was also the Empress 
Dowager's opinion, and she propagated it among the 
young officers of the army. 

My position was not an easy one. The part 
played by Russia was certainly not so brilliant or 
preponderant as might have been desirable, and was 
not at all in accordance with Russian vanity or 
Russian pretensions. Alexander was eclipsed by 
Napoleon, who, at the pinnacle of military glory, 
introduced into diplomacy, hitherto so discreet, that 
bluntness and rapidity of decision which were the 
secrets of his success on the battlefield. He took the 
initiative in every European question, and daily gained 
ground, increased his preponderance, and showed that 
he intended to become the arbiter of Europe. I 
constantly heard Russians complain of the weakness 
and want of dignity of their Cabinet ; and if I had 
ascribed these faults to Alexander's character and 
opinions, I would have cast the whole blame upon him. 
Among the most active and ambitious of the malcon- 
tents was the young Prince Dolgorouky. He was the 
prime mover of the Russian party, and his passionate 
vexation at seeing a stranger occupy a post which he 
considered should have been given to him made him 
witty, much to the surprise of his friends. Being 
one of the Emperor's aides-de-camp, he was con- 
tinually at Court, and I often met him, on which 
occasions he used to pursue me with reproaches and 
sarcasms on the indolence of the Russian Foreign 
OflSce. He provoked me so far that I once told 
him he should address his remarks to the Chancellor, 