Preface

This book originated in my studies of German intellectual history,
in particular of the ‘panentheist’ philosopher, Karl Christian Friedrich
Krause, and the ways he shaped radical free-thinking in nineteenth-
century Spain. Yet the more I began empirical research into Spanish
radicalism, the more I recognised the need for a ‘bottom-up’ study of
the masses and their relationship to radicalism rather than a top-down
study of the elites. Very quickly I realised that ideas exist only in the
‘context of their context’, and that no satisfactory study of ideas could
be sensibly sustained without any empirical study of their reception and
impact. I also discovered that my early interest in Spain’s 1850s and
1860s was being pulled back to the events of Spain’s early nineteenth
century. Time and again I had to explain such events as the failure of
the revolution in 1848 and its success in 1854, the Loja rising, and the
evolution of the Spanish Democrat Party with reference to the chaos
and revolution wrought by the Peninsular War of 1808–14 and hard-
ened by the bloody struggles between Left and Right during 1820–23
and, especially, the First Carlist War of 1833–40.
  I noticed that the First Carlist War was a comparative blind-spot in
the English-language scholarship. Thanks to the feedback I received at
various international conferences, the untiring inspiration and encour-
agement from Professor Charles Esdaile, and the particular interest of
the ‘War, Culture and Society’ editorial board at Palgrave Macmillan,
I was able to produce this monograph.
  I should offer a note of explanation with regard to my use of lan-
guages. A glance at twenty-ﬁrst-century maps of the Basque country,
Catalonia and Galicia will reveal the respective use of Basque, Catalan
and Gallego names for places which, in the nineteenth century, were
generally written in Castilian. Largely for the beneﬁt of my Anglophone
audience, I have used Castilian place names instead of their regional
equivalents (which I use more sparingly). Hence my readers will not
be arrested by the sight of ‘Bilbo’ instead of ‘Bilbao’. Equally, I have
privileged the use of Castilian over Anglicised Spanish place names.
‘Corunna’ and ‘Saragossa’, for example, must look quaint to twenty-ﬁrst
readers who will have at least some familiarity with Spanish geography,
and I think I am not making too many cognitive demands by using
La Coruña and Zaragoza, respectively.

                                   vii
