2   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the history of modern Spain. Yet, unlike the Peninsular War (1808–14),
the First Carlist War is something of a Cinderella for monographs and
transnational histories alike.1 The conﬂict’s Spanish historiography is far
better, thanks to such scholars as Jordi Canal, Josep Clemente, Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza, Ramón Urquijo Goitia, Pedro Rújula and the late
Julio Aróstegui, to say nothing of the wealth of local and regional stud-
ies. But it is surprising that even the Spanish historiography was late in
applying modern historical methods to the conﬂict; rather, until the
1970s, the war, like the broader issues of Carlism and Liberalism in
general, was the battleground of ideologically committed panegyrists
and detractors. Antonio Pirala’s exhaustive six-volume study, written
between the 1850s and 1870s, remained authoritative for more than
a century as a consequence. But the Spanish innovation has not yet led
to a monograph of the conﬂict in English. In principle, then, there is a
need for a new study in English which will examine the whole of the
war and integrate the military narrative into wider questions concern-
ing politics and society. This monograph shows how the First Carlist
War created a radical movement within the ranks of Spanish liberalism
which thereafter never ceased to exert pressure on its more moderate
(and distinctly elitist) movement.
   Spain’s Carlist Wars make interesting and exciting reading, especially
the ﬁrst and most prolonged of these civil wars, the First Carlist War
of 1833–40. The background to this conﬂict is extremely complex, but,
in brief, as a result of the Peninsular War (1808–14) Spain had been
plunged into a far-reaching political, social and economic crisis. The
only way forward from this situation was a comprehensive programme
of reform that extended and deepened the changes already made in
the reigns of Charles III (1759–88) and Charles IV (1788–08). Initiated
by the progressive group of liberales that had dominated the Cortes of
Cádiz (1810–14), and picked up in more timid fashion by the counsellors
of Ferdinand VII after 1814, this programme of reform was challenged
by elements in the Church and the nobility who had hoped rather
to ‘colonise’ Ferdinand VII and to make him not only turn back the
clock in respect of the changes made in the period of 1808–14, but
reverse those made in the period of enlightened absolutism as well. For
a long time it seemed that they would ultimately reverse the tide of
reform – the heir to the throne, Ferdinand’s younger brother, Prince
Charles (‘Don Carlos’: hence the word ‘Carlist’) was very much under
their thumb – but the last months of Ferdinand’s life saw a compli-
cated series of events threaten their dominance, and no sooner had he
died than they staged an armed revolt aimed at ensuring their triumph
