                                         Introduction, History and Sources   5


but was by no means illegitimate. Not only had the Cortes effectively
legitimised a female succession as early as 1789, but the Salic Law in
any case was the worst example of ‘foreign despotism’ to contravene
centuries of Spanish tradition, and which had been instigated by the
Bourbons in 1713 solely in order to settle European fears of a formally
integrated Franco-Spanish monarchy.6 One of the ironies of the dynas-
tic dispute was that modernising Liberals invoked medieval Spanish
tradition whereas medievalist Carlists invoked the eighteenth-century
Bourbons, the very dynasty whose enlightened absolutism created the
conditions for nineteenth-century liberalism to emerge.
   Certainly, nineteenth-century Liberals used Spanish tradition in other
contexts for political ends. Most markedly, the 1820s radical-liberals
named their secret society the Comuneros in honour of the 1520s
Comuneros revolt of Castile, the founding myth for Spanish Liber-
als who viewed it as the ﬁrst modern defence of popular sovereignty.
Historicism came easily to nineteenth-century Spanish Liberals, many
of whom (Count Toreno, Agustín de Argüelles and Alcalá Galiano, to
name a few) were themselves historians. But despite their erudition,
their works are unhelpfully partisan and self-exculpatory with regard
to the early nineteenth-century crisis that unleashed the Carlist War.7
This is not only because an equally strong case could be – and was –
made by Carlist historians for Don Carlos’s claim,8 but also because
most nineteenth-century histories lacked the analytical and contextual
rigour demanded by modern scholarship. An adequate understanding
of the background to the First Carlist War needs to integrate archival
research with the advances made in Spanish social history since the
mid-twentieth century.


The First Carlist War: history and sources

Whereas most publications relating to the First Carlist War appeared
during the conﬂict itself and its immediate aftermath, the highest qual-
ity of publications has appeared since the 1970s.9 That said, the most
important single body of work remains Antonio Pirala y Criado’s six
volumes, written over two decades from the 1850s. Pirala was a posi-
tivist progresista (Spanish ‘Whig’) and sometime ﬁction writer who, in
his youth, ﬂirted with democracy in response to failure of the 1848
revolution in Spain. His politics moved to the Right in proportion
to his advancing age and career. But he remained a Liberal, thinking
the Carlists were wrong even though he was objective and unusu-
ally knowledgeable about them. His even-handedness was commended
by the Carlist side. He was bequeathed private Carlist correspondence
