8   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Fueros, and later came the traditionalists with an agenda of their own,
adding God and Fatherland to our popular movement and turning it
into a political philosophy of traditionalism’.25
   Clemente’s neo-Carlism did not hold the ﬁeld for long, however:
in the early 1990s neo-traditionalism counter-attacked with Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza’s doctoral thesis, quickly turned into a published
monograph. Bullón de Mendoza found Clemente’s neo-Carlism, along
with conventional Marxist analyses, to be ‘wilful history’ (historia voli-
tiva), left-wing propagandistic distortions foundering upon their lack of
‘objective facts’. Thus, there was not a single coherent Carlist manifesto
offering social justice, and episodes of villagers and combatants assert-
ing their ‘moral economy’ came as much from Liberal as Carlist quarters
(i.e. the side was irrelevant). Meanwhile, the Basque fueros on which
Clemente based part of his argument, were no pre-capitalist model of
social harmony but simply a different model of social exploitation.26
Bullón de Mendoza’s thesis provoked a furious debate with the neo-
Carlists, which was happily sustained more by evidence rather than
assertion. We may add to this by considering how Carlist War newspa-
per extracts qualify Clemente’s ‘social dissidence’ thesis. On one level,
Clemente’s thesis does indeed reﬂect the fears of 1830s Cristino elites
who saw Carlists as reactionary levellers bent on smashing the progress
and hierarchy of respectable society, or, as a moderado newspaper in 1837
put it: ‘Carlism could never be attractive to people who have something
to lose because it is in fact a kind of pure democracy, demagoguery, and
anarchy.’27 This would support the ‘social dissidence’ thesis, until we
ﬁnd that the same Cristino elites also despaired of the excesses made by
the ‘democratic rabble’ on their own side.28 The inference must be that
the First Carlist War should be studied not from the perspective of elite
discourse and ideology but from the perspective of contingency. This
book aims to take this perscpective, using a chronological organisation
to enable the simultaneous analysis of concurrent developments which
shaped the background and the course of the conﬂict. This approach, it
is hoped, will avoid the constrictive, jargon-prone methodologies of so
much of the ideological scholarship.
   A narrative study can make an original contribution for two reasons.
First, the 1990s ‘end of history’ made Clemente’s focus on class conﬂict
seem passé. Second, connected to this, a ﬁfth category of Spanish histo-
riography has emerged which, to a large degree, has liberated itself both
from the ideological hegemony of Marxism on the one hand and the
rebarbative legacy of Francoism on the other. Much of this feat may be
attributed to Jordi Canal’s now standard work, El carlismo (2004). This
