10   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of the 1830s without having to resort to the contingencies of military
history.34 They found Spain’s 1830s liberal revolution not to have been
arrogant, as the neo-traditionalists held, but timid. The capitalist prop-
erty revolution actually left the old nobility’s socio-economic hegemony
unmolested and frustrated the ‘correct’ emergence of new forces as dur-
ing the French Revolution.35 As such, it is hard to categorise the Artola
school as part of the First Carlist War historiography, as these social his-
torians, with some important exceptions,36 saw the war as a symptom
rather than a cause of social conﬂict. As a result, the Cristino response to
the First Carlist War has not been studied with anything like the degree
of innovation as the Carlism side. Because of this, perhaps, the con-
ﬂict’s collective memory remains weighted towards the smaller Carlist
side, in their victory anthem ‘Oriamendi’ and the recording of colour-
ful village memory (‘Espartero hid in this farmhouse’).37 The relative
dearth of Liberal memory is especially stark when compared with the
1872–76 Second Carlist War, a conﬂict which forged a galaxy of Spanish
intellectuals across the political spectrum in a European context of class
conﬂict.38
   Yet the Cristino side deserves a study of its own in English: it was
both by far the larger side and ultimately victorious. As Cristino Spain
was the government rather than insurgent side, its hundreds of thou-
sands of conscripts had no a priori reason to be ideologically committed
(although interesting exceptions can be seen in the volunteer free corps
and militia) as they were recruited indiscriminately and via the estab-
lished arms of the state.39 Even during the most extreme episodes
(1835–37) of Carlist expeditions and Liberal revolutions, the vast major-
ity of Spanish territory and population remained outside of formal
Carlist control. Thus, the civil war, in all its diverse demands of mobili-
sation, violence, insecurity, militancy and deprivation, impacted on far
more inhabitants in Cristino than Carlist zones of control. Even cities
such as Málaga and Cádiz, hundreds of miles beyond formal front lines,
were affected by the civil war. Given that Cristino Spain’s war with
the Carlists profoundly shaped the 1830s liberal revolution, a narrative
study of the popular impact would seem particularly propitious. A study
of the militancies of combatants and non-combatants would offer schol-
ars a more diverse understanding of the conﬂict, going beyond the
historiographical pitfalls of elitist censure or apology and beyond struc-
tural analyses of the ancien régime. The civil war, after all, left no part
of Spain untouched and over seven years killed 5 per cent of the 1833
population. A new study therefore needs to show how the experience
of warfare shaped the politics and society of 1830s Spain, especially
