                                          Introduction, History and Sources   3


by force. This civil war has attracted nothing like the critical attention
lavished upon its iconic successor a century later. In some ways this sit-
uation is surprising, as, for a start, the enduring stereotype of the ‘Two
Spains’ – which for so long was deemed central to understanding mod-
ern Spain – might have seemed an equally compelling paradigm for the
First Carlist War: whereas the Spanish Civil War saw Nationalists and
Republicans ﬁghting for their respectively hegemonic visions of Spain,
the First Carlist War offers a comparable struggle between legitimist
Carlists and modernising Liberals which took twice as long to resolve
as its successor, exacted relatively more casualties and even anticipated
the International Brigades (some 18,000 French, British, Belgian and
Portuguese volunteers for liberty). One major difference lay in the rever-
sal of the term ‘national’. Whereas in the 1830s it was the progressive
Liberal side which was ‘national’, in the 1930s the Francoist coalition,
heirs of the vanquished Carlists, claimed this title. Spanish nationalism
had evolved from Left to Right, from a civic force of nation-building
into a conservative force of National Catholicism.2
   It was a dynastic dispute about who should succeed to the throne in
1833 that provided the trigger for war, but the latter’s roots in reality
stretched far wider. The ﬁrst root was contested legitimacy, which was
no arcane matter but an issue that shaped all sorts of popular militancy.
Spaniards had traditionally held their monarchy in great reverence:
unlike the French and English, they have never killed their king. The
illegitimacy of Napoleon’s seizure of their throne in 1808 in the name
of his brother, Joseph, had been the formal casus belli for the Peninsular
War. But to the question of legitimacy needs to be added the question
of absolutist royal will. In 1789 Ferdinand’s father, Charles IV, had used
a secret session of the Spanish Cortes to issue a decree opening up the
royal succession to female as well as male heirs. This broke with the
Salic Law which the Bourbon victor of the 1701–13 War of the Spanish
Succession, Philip V, had conferred on his new dynasty and which
effectively excluded female heirs from the succession by exhausting
all legitimate male bloodlines to the throne. Any doubts surrounding
the validity of the Salic Law had long remained moot: Ferdinand’s ﬁrst
three marriages bore him either no children or resulted in miscarriages
and infant mortalities, which could only mean that the King’s younger
brother, Don Carlos, would succeed him. But the healthy birth of the
royal daughter, Isabella, born in October 1830, revived the question of
the succession. Don Carlos did not challenge his brother openly, and
much of the running was made by Ferdinand’s wife, María Francisca,
who was at odds with his sister-in-law, Luisa Carlota. Bourbon women
