                                          Introduction, History and Sources   11


the Cristino zone. My approach is no whim: the late Julio Aróstegui
observed that ‘the options for violence by individuals or groups ended
up creating cultures of their own’.40 In this spirit, this book tells an
untold story of how otherwise undistinguished Spaniards who hitherto
had been absent from political history underwent seven years of bru-
tal civil war and revolution and framed this military experience in a
politically meaningful and radical way.
   The state of affairs described above creates virgin territory for new
interpretations and justiﬁes the sources I use for this volume, most
of which logically come from Cristino rather than Carlist quarters.
I defend this stance in part in deference to the fact that Carlist archives
in the Basque country have already been mined by some outstand-
ing researchers,41 and in part because the Carlist sources I do use (the
Gaceta Oﬁcial and published memoirs) reinforce my general approach,
which is to show the impact of the war on Spain as a whole. This ambi-
tious task must inevitably fail to exhaust all sources, and experts will
doubtless be alarmed at omissions. Nonetheless, my combination of
secondary with primary sources must perforce appear selective within
the constraints of a medium-sized monograph. The primary sources
are in three categories, published memoirs, newspapers and unpub-
lished archives. The rationale for using memoirs, from both Carlist and
Cristino authors, is explained by the events described. Cristino news-
papers are particularly valuable, especially the advanced Liberal Eco del
Comercio, because their networks of provincial correspondents reported
on local military developments, and newspapers led the maturing Left
versus Right divide in Liberal politics. My unpublished sources come
from three major archives in Madrid (the Archivo Histórico Nacional,
Real Academia de Historia, Archivo General del Palacio), the munici-
pal archives of Barcelona, Málaga and San Sebastián, and the university
archive of Zaragoza. The unpublished campaign letters of the Cristino
‘Duke of Victory’, General Espartero, complete my Spanish archive base,
whilst some foreign sources (George Borrow, French and British press,
German campaign memoirs) help to internationalise the conﬂict.
   A note of caution is necessary with regard to my use of newspapers
as a primary source. News of atrocities was often embellished in the
telling. The war shattered normal systems of information gathering,
and terriﬁed correspondents often lent credence to the worst rumours of
Carlist atrocities, which subsequently sometimes appeared unsubstanti-
ated in the Cristino press. The press thus contributed to the perceptions
of such atrocities, and the degree of terror depended as much on per-
ception as concrete facts. The hold of ‘Carlist atrocities’ over Cristino
