16   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   In fact Francoism manoeuvred the Carlists – who had already merged
with National and Traditionalist Catholics in 1931 to become the Tradi-
tionalist Communion – into a right-wing coalition of virulent Spanish
unitary nationalism and anti-separatism, the very antithesis of Basque
independence. Whereas Franco rewarded his allied provinces of Navarra
and Alava with limited autonomy, he stripped the Republican provinces
of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa of theirs. Franco-era Traditionalists lauded
their 1830s Basque forefathers and their fueros as traditionalist models
not for Euzkadi, but for Spain as a whole. Although some complained at
how the ‘ungrateful’ Francoist regime was pushing the Basque language
and fueros into virtual extinction, most stressed their national region-
alism as Spaniards above all else, rejecting regional nationalism.58 That
said, even though Basque Carlists during the First Carlist War were not
ﬁghting for the independence of their homeland in the modern sense,
they certainly formed a caucus, not just against the Cristinos but also
against the non-Basque Carlists (the ‘Castilians’). This Basque–Carlist
cohesiveness was reinforced by priests who were always local as they
had to hear confessions in Euskera. Cloistered clergy, meanwhile, had
comparatively little presence in the Basque country, and those institu-
tions which did exist were disproportionately of the humbler Franciscan
orders; this explains the alliance of the vast majority of Basque religious
with Carlism.59 Thus, even though Carlism was not Basque proto-
nationalism, the Basque Carlists certainly mustered enough identity –
in particular, popular Catholic piety – to separate themselves culturally
and psychologically from the rest of Spain. Evidence of this is the persis-
tent xenophobic term guiri coined by Basque Carlists, an abbreviation
of the Euskera guiristino, or Spanish Cristino name of their enemy, a
term which survived the conﬂict to describe the centralising paramil-
itary police force, the Guardia Civil and, in the twentieth century, even
foreign tourists.
   But the Basque Carlists represented just one part (albeit the biggest
part) of the insurrection. Carlism in the 1830s was Janus-faced. Whereas
in the Basque country Carlism defended a still-viable socially conserva-
tive, stable rural society from the onslaught of liberalism, in the eastern
areas of rural Aragón, Valencia and Catalonia it was a protest vehicle
for peasants whose livelihoods were already being eroded by capital-
ism in nearby urban centres and by the Liberal property revolution.60
These socio-economic issues were the reasons why a second ‘safe zone’
for Carlism was forged in Lower Aragón and adjoining inland areas of
Valencia and the northern extremities of historic Murcia (an area known
as the Maestrazgo). The character of the war was different here. The
