                                           Introduction, History and Sources   19


the calls to arms, these acted more as a tax than a ﬁne, and with-
out exception targeted families of Liberal sympathies.’72 But in fact the
Carlists suffered almost as much from draft-dodging and desertion as the
Cristinos, or rather popular Carlism was, at least in part, draft-dodging
and desertion. Even in the case of the Basque country, recent research
shows Carlist insurgent leaders at best tolerating rather than endorsing
the early phenomenon of ‘shirt-changing’ amongst their men.73 Yet for
a long time, shirt-changing, the practice of Carlist insurgents dispersing
in the face of superior Cristino forces, was romanticised as something
nobler than desertion, as a form of voluntarism winked at by other-
wise very authoritarian ofﬁcers. Certainly, geography allowed Carlist
combatants in the Basque country to return to their homesteads rela-
tively easily, concealing their weapons usually in the full knowledge of
civil authorities who not only tolerated but also protected them on the
understanding that they would return to ﬁght the Cristinos as soon as
they could do so with advantage, or at least that they would not cause
trouble with Carlist military authorities. But the consolidation of Carlist
military control in the Basque country diminished this practice, and
even though shirt-changing remained common on expeditions and in
patchy areas of Carlist control, the Basque safe zone, and to a lesser
extent, those in the Maestrazgo and Catalonia, produced predictable
and coercive patterns of conscription into increasingly regular armies.
This militarisation was answered by widespread draft evasion and deser-
tion, not on the scale of Cristino Spain, but signiﬁcant and deleterious
to the war effort nonetheless. Thus, even though the Carlists’ exploita-
tion of local military traditions was more successful, as we shall see, than
that of the Cristinos, it was distinctly qualiﬁed.
   The nature and extent of Carlism beyond the three safe zones diver-
siﬁed still further, and its adherents may be differentiated into Carlists
of conscience (‘civic Carlists’) and of violence (facciosos or ‘insurgents’).
Their geographical distribution was patchy and changing, although sup-
port for Carlism was generally strong in northern Castile, Asturias and
Galicia. Galicia was especially prone to Carlism as its clergy were lease
owners of tiny, subdivided peasant plots (minifundia) in a social geog-
raphy sometimes referred to as ‘Spain’s Ireland’. Several Galician clerics
self-interestedly mobilised their rural dependents against the enemy’s
property revolution.74 In general militant Carlism was dispersed into
the countryside and away from the larger towns. Rural pockets were
often held by ‘insurgents’, but many of these ‘Carlists’ were really ban-
dits looking for political cover or deserters from the Cristino army. Many
more Carlists were peaceful (‘civic Carlists’), and were found, above all,
