18   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


how economic reforms impoverished such declining economic centres
in the hinterland of Liberal Barcelona as Baix Camp and Berguedà, a sit-
uation which, in contrast to their counterparts in Castile and Andalucía,
persuaded many Catalan aristocrats to support Carlism.67 Thus, eco-
nomic factors explain some of the motivations for Carlism: a viable
rural economy in the Basque country, a traumatised economy in the
Maestrazgo and an impoverished rural economy in Catalonia. But the
economic factors cannot be simpliﬁed as a ‘rural–urban divide’, as even
in urban settings artisans threatened by recurrent Liberal abolition of the
guilds and redundant ofﬁceholders (cesantes) could be drawn to Carlism,
whilst, by contrast, villagers who had beneﬁted from the Liberal prop-
erty revolution would correspondingly turn Cristino;68 ﬂight either from
or to the countryside in many cases entrenched a rural (Carlist) ver-
sus urban (Cristino) divide, but as an effect rather than a cause of the
conﬂict. Moreover, as the 1832–33 palace revolution had driven Carlist
conspirators from the court and into the country, regional hierarchies
decided local popular political allegiance. The poorest areas of Spain,
which were in Extremadura and Andalucía, were lost causes for Don
Carlos. Carlist writers explained this by congratulating themselves on
how advanced, rather than backward, areas embraced the legitimate
cause.69 But the bald fact was that any nobles outside of the three heart-
lands pronouncing in favour of Don Carlos would have been banished
from Madrid and had their extensive lands and incomes in the south
seized. The northern nobility, by contrast, had either few or no lands
to lose.70 Economic factors thus explain the structural context, indeed
it would be strange if they did not, given that the Spanish state in 1833
collected in revenues barely more than half what it had at its imperial
peak in 1792.71 But they do not explain everything.
   Further explanation can be sought in the Carlists’ exploitation of
local military traditions, although recent research has shown this to be
more coercive in nature than voluntarist, as was previously assumed.
Both the Basque country and rural Catalonia had strong armed militia
traditions, the requetés originating in Navarra and the somatenes, respec-
tively. These militia, especially the Basque militia, which had employed
irregular resistance against the French during the periods 1793–95 and
1808–13 and against the Liberals during 1820–23, certainly possessed
a psychological ‘DNA’ of popular armed mobilisation. Carlist writers,
especially leftist neo-Carlists attracted to the ‘people’s war’ paradigm,
claimed these mobilisations were voluntary rather than coercive in
nature: ‘Don Carlos’s army was fundamentally popular, nourished by
volunteers . . . although ﬁnes were imposed on families who resisted
