                                          Introduction, History and Sources   15


the Church, defected to the Carlist cause.53 In fact, the fueros grew in
importance only when military victory seemed impossible in the wake
of the failed Royal Expedition, and as Carlist peace feelers voiced a grow-
ing willingness to abandon Don Carlos who, since 1834, had been the
fueros’ champion.
   In sum, the fueros do not by themselves explain the prevalence of
Basque Carlism; yet Basque Carlism is also impossible to understand
without them, not least because their most outspoken defenders were
to be found in Carlist ranks and their most outspoken critics amongst
the Cristino Liberals. This dynamic was especially intense in the Basque
country itself, which entered the war bitterly divided. The port-cities
of Bilbao (Vizcaya) and especially San Sebastián (Guipúzcoa) welcomed
their Cristino garrisons. This was because the Cristino-Liberal policy of
moving the customs frontier from the River Ebro to the actual Spanish
frontier in the Pyrenees promised to achieve by war what frustrated com-
mercial elites had failed to achieve at the foral level for decades.54 Even
in the rural areas satisﬁed with their fueros, local juntas and deputa-
tions were split between supporters of Cristinos and Carlists in 1833.
Cristinos were sidelined and then expelled, but the powers of the fueros
themselves were increasingly curtailed by the Carlist Royal Government
in the name of the war effort. These actions made the government
unpopular, not least because they were frequently carried out by non-
Basque Carlists, ‘Castilian’ refugees from Cristino areas of control whom
Basques suspected of meaning to harm local interests.
   Such Basque versus Castilian friction within Carlism, combined with
the wider Cristino versus Carlist struggle, led some Basque nation-
alists to originate their cause in 1830s Carlism, stressing inchoate
wartime demands for Navarrese independence and the ancient fueros
as a blueprint for modern autonomy. The most vociferous nineteenth-
century example was the French Basque Augustin Chaho, for whom the
First Carlist War was a war between the Basque country and Castile.55
But such teleological nationalism deﬁes scrutiny. The late nineteenth-
century founder of Basque nationalism may have come from Carlist
ancestry, but Sabino Arana rejected Carlism because it sacriﬁced Basque
interests to Spanish dynastic politics.56 However, the link persisted in
the minds of several Basque nationalists. In 1935 Bernardo Estornés
Lasa claimed Carlism’s ﬁrst warlord ‘wanted to proclaim Basque inde-
pendence’, and in more recent years the vandalism inﬂicted upon
the ‘English cemetery’ at San Sebastián by the armed Basque sepa-
ratist organisation, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), shows a link between
memory and contemporary militancy.57
