12   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


opinion is explained not only by the events to which they referred
but also by deeper mentalities and traditions through which they were
expressed. Neither the content nor the vocabulary was new, owing to
the trauma of Spain’s recent Peninsular and Royalist Wars. But the
greater duration and irregular quality of the First Carlist War created
a press-driven ‘myth-cycle’ which ﬂourished on patchy knowledge of
the march of events, and reduced strange experiences and inexplica-
ble events to a conspiracy of Carlist ﬁfth-columnists, poisonings, prison
breaks, arms storage in churches and so forth. Confused and poorly
led Cristino conscripts in unfamiliar territory sometimes ﬁred on each
other by mistake, but these shots were reported to have been ﬁred by
‘Carlist’ inhabitants: with dire results. As the war in 1835 expanded
beyond the Basque country, demographic factors increased the scope
both for actual and ‘reported’ atrocities to take place. Cristino atrocities
were often harsher in such irregular areas of Carlist control as north-
ern Castile and, especially, Aragón and Catalonia, precisely because,
in contrast to the Basque country, ‘suspect’ men of military age were
usually encountered inside hostile villages. (The Carlist Basque coun-
try, by contrast, had been thoroughly militarised by mid-war and thus
offered greater resistance to Cristino incursions, and those incursions
that did take place usually encountered few ‘suspect’ combatants as vir-
tually every available man was at the front.) Equally, Carlist raiders into
Cristino territory encountered a vulnerable population disproportion-
ately composed of women and children. Masculine anxieties in a culture
of honour must account for part of the rise in reports in the press of rape
and murder.
   Thus, even though real atrocities took place, it is in fact impossible to
know whether they can really be taken at face value. This uncertainty
can be mitigated in two ways, of a practical and conceptual nature. Prac-
tically, I have endeavoured to substantiate accounts of atrocities and
counter-atrocities, or at least tried to qualify their reporting. Readers
may still feel a humanitarian scepticism at the evidence offered through-
out these chapters, and such a response would ironically match that
of the Cristino Liberals whose politics were radicalised by the need to
combat ‘savage’ Carlists and the backward religiosity and royalism they
represented. Conceptually, then, what matters is not what happened but
what was believed to be happening. Much of the political radicalisation
of Cristino Spain was caused by ‘news’ as much as lived experience. This
news often came from anonymous sources, a routine cause of frustration
for historians interested in the social background of protagonists and
in corroborating facts. Yet anonymity also reveals two types of sources,
