                                          Introduction, History and Sources   13


one motivated vindictively and the other ethically; that is to say, either
delation or whistle-blowing. These motives had an intimately violent
dimension that characterised the local experience of civil war. In sum,
the questionable veracity of sources is not the central issue. There was
enough truth in the sources as a whole to unleash violence and polarisa-
tion, plunging Spain into seven long years of civil war. The Carlists were
always the smaller side in this chaos, which means that there is greater
scope to study the impact of the war in Cristino areas of control. Yet the
frequently asymmetrical nature of expeditions, banditry, revolution and
conspiracy undermined Cristino control and gave the war an enduring
dynamic of insecurity. As most of this book studies the insecure Cristino
zone rather than the Carlist heartlands, it is helpful to set the context
by introducing the debates and dimensions of early Carlism.

Early Carlism

Carlism’s ﬁrst ‘safe zone’ was in the Basque country. The Basque coun-
try comprises the three Basque lordships – later provinces – proper,
Alava, Guipúzcoa and Vizcaya, and the ancient autonomous Kingdom
of Navarra. The early attempts of the Viceroy of Navarra to recruit vil-
lagers into Cristino ranks failed miserably, even when service wages were
offered of double, then treble, what the Carlist insurgents promised.42
Coverdale summarised four factors as to why this was so: (1) traditional
society was still economically viable for most of population, hence liber-
alism was seen a threat; (2) natural leadership strata (clergy, landowners)
lived cheek by jowl with peasants and supported the Carlist cause;
(3) the terrain was sufﬁciently abrupt and broken to prevent the use
of cavalry and to facilitate small bands to escape (to change their shirts
and ﬁght another day), whilst the landscape was densely populated
enough to allow regular food and supplies; and (4) the appearance of
the extremely gifted guerrilla leader, Tomás de Zumalacárregui. Other
parts of Spain may have had one, or some of these factors, but not
all four.43 (In the Aragonese Maestrazgo a comparable situation would
pertain only from 1836.44 ) The Basque provinces, like Catalonia, also
had a long-standing tradition of irregular military service (in the Basque
country recruits were called requetés and in Catalonia somatenes). The
Basque Carlist acceptance of war and armed struggle as a legitimate
means to seize power gave the cause its most enduring characteristic,
resurfacing 100 years later in preparation for the Spanish Civil War as
‘a quintessential part of the Carlist way of life’.45 Contemporary writers
noted the independent, agile and hard-drinking (by Spanish standards)
