                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   27


These veterans had acted with not insubstantial civilian support, often
networked via powerful Masonic lodges which provided a natural con-
spiratorial environment for progressive elites who liked to exhaust all
options for keeping the people out of politics. Yet their conspiracies
ended in failure. What gave Riego success was Ferdinand’s resolve to
bring metropolitan rule back to Spanish America. The absolutist regime
set great store by pacifying America so that bullion could ﬂow again.
Yet quite apart from the unpromising diplomatic environment, this task
could only be achieved with the dispatch of sufﬁcient troops, itself a
task which was so costly as to be undertaken in circumstances which
virtually guaranteed military rebellion: namely, inadequate and irregu-
lar pay and troop concentrations around the Liberal port of Cádiz which
were slow to disperse due to insufﬁcient trans-Atlantic shipping being
available. Thus, when, late in 1819, the King ordered ten battalions to
the province of Cádiz to await transport on festering hulks to Spanish
America, the stage was set for disgruntled commanders to rally their
equally disgruntled men – whose rallying cry was ‘No America’ – to over-
throw the Restoration regime. Consequently, it was the army in 1820
which was breaking a regime, just as in 1814.
   For several weeks it seemed as though Riego’s revolution would meet
the same fate as that of his predecessors. Marching across Andalucía,
Riego’s army blended Liberal appeals aimed at the urban well-to-do with
populist promises aimed at the masses. The port-city of Algeciras, one of
the ﬁrst urban centres to be taken by Riego’s army, saw its import duties
on foreign goods abolished, the unpopular derechos de puerta tax system
mothballed ‘pending the design of a better system’ and the important
state tobacco monopoly broken up.21 Similar measures were enacted as
other cities fell to the constitutional rebellion in January, February and
March, whilst an open trade in grain imports was proclaimed as means
of staving off recurrent famines.22 Despite these measures, Riego’s ris-
ing soon petered out, as populations failed to rally, horses were hard
to ﬁnd, rains were torrential and soldiers deserted into banditry. Even
those men remaining under Riego’s command had no commissariat
and were thus so reduced by hunger as to make enemies of the rural
Andalucían communities in their path, demanding cash from the gen-
erally cashless villagers, and pillaging when none was forthcoming.23
Other soldiers, like the cash-strapped privates in General Freyre’s army,
feared becoming substitutes for the American expedition and so tried to
demonstrate their indispensability by pronouncing against Riego, com-
mitting atrocities (some 71 deaths and 171 wounded) in the genteel
