28    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


streets of Cádiz in the name of the absolute king.24 And if fellow ofﬁ-
cers saw Riego’s men as deserters, so did the civilian population. In a
January 1820 letter to a fellow revolutionary, Riego admitted the lack of
popular support: ‘What guarantees could we give to anyone who joined
us? . . . What help can we expect from the pueblos? Everyone runs for the
hills as soon as they hear the sound of our drums.’25 What saved the
situation were the calculations of commanders elsewhere in Spain who
thought that their careers would be better served by a constitutional
regime. Thus, on 4 March, Ocaña’s garrison pronounced for Riego, and
the Liberal hero of 1812, Ballesteros, followed suit in Madrid, thereby
sealing the fate of absolutism. Crowds sacked the gaols of the Inquisition
and invaded the palace, and the King’s nerve ﬁnally broke on 7 March
1820 when he swore allegiance to the Constitution of 1812.26 A provi-
sional junta staffed by what Ferdinand called his ‘gaolbird’ Liberals came
into being. This junta was soon replaced by the Cortes, whilst those Lib-
eral politicians who had been exiled or imprisoned even claimed six
years’ worth of back pay in a bid to re-establish the continuity with
1814.27
   Even though the army had restored to Spain its ‘liberty’, a crisis
ensued as the resurgent constitutional authorities tried to subordinate
it to civil supremacy. Liberal newspapers noted that, whereas in 1820
the army had been the nation’s liberator, as recently as 1814 it had been
its gaoler.28 As a safeguard, the ‘people-in-arms’ principle now dictated
the creation of the National Militia, a reform which, under the 1810–14
Cortes, had barely left the drawing board. For the time being the mili-
tia was little more than a society for the local well-to-do, enlistment
into its ranks being conditional upon both a literacy test and the ability
to afford the uniform.29 The militia ordinances of 1820 were similar to
those of the later Carlist War, when the citizens’ force was reformed
more cautiously. Zaragoza, a provincial capital with a population of
36,000, was, in April 1820, ordered to create six companies of 144 men
each plus nine ofﬁcers:

     Uniform and turquoise pantaloons, white-metal buttons and black
     boots; ofﬁcers and sergeants longcoat with buttoned lapels, high-
     peaked cap marked with the sign of town and province. Duties to
     include patrols to maintain order, pursue and arrest deserters and
     wrongdoers, whilst militiamen will enjoy fuero militar when active
     in these duties and will thus be bound by army ordinances, and will
     be paid a daily wage of 5 reales for each soldier, 6 for each corporal
     and drummer, and 8 for each sergeant (without bread ration).30
