22   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


changing in response to the demands of the war. The revolution of
1808 saw ofﬁcers from undistinguished social backgrounds rise through
the Patriot ranks, whilst the Patriot provisional government (Junta
Central) embarked upon crash military reforms which were at least
beginning to improve the army’s ﬁghting potential. Yet the Spanish
Liberals divided opinion both inside and outside the military. Liberal
journalists, taking advantage of Cádiz’s ﬁrst (and ﬂeeting) free press,
frequently goaded Bourbon commanders to prove their patriotism in
battle against obvious French superiority on Spain’s high plateaus – with
appalling results. Just as the Carlist War would show, Spanish generals
did not like being second-guessed by civilians. Even though the Spanish
army did eventually prevail, it did so only as a humiliatingly junior
partner under British leadership, ﬁnanced and even clothed by British
subsidies.3 Factionalism, also a dominant feature in the Carlist War,
characterised the Liberals who, from the convocation of the Cortes in
Cádiz in 1810, increasingly dominated the war effort. On the one hand,
the Patriot Liberals championed several military mediocrities, such as
General Ballesteros (who had unsuccessfully challenged the Duke of
Wellington’s appointment in 1812 to the Supreme Command of Allied
Forces), mainly because they proved useful agents in domestic politics.4
On the other hand, the Liberals exaggerated out of all proportion the
effectiveness of the famous guerrilleros, or Patriot guerrilla bands, who
have given the Peninsular War its most enduring image. Viewed by the
Liberals as a useful counterweight to the ‘despotic’ army, the guerrillas
also neatly served the ideological purpose of the ‘people in arms’, literal
embodiments of national sovereignty – though the reality was, in fact,
far more complex.5 Meanwhile the Liberals, especially the more radical
ones, planned to check the Bourbon army with the National Militia, a
part-time citizens’ force organised at local level and in the hands of prop-
erty owners. The National Militia was written into the Constitution, yet
its existence during the Peninsular War was ephemeral: called into being
as late as April 1814, it survived only two weeks in the places where it
had even organised at all before the royalist coup of May rendered all
the reforms of the Liberals null and void. Yet this seed would germinate
during the later Liberal revolutions of 1820–23, and especially during
the Carlist War of 1833–40 when the militia would be dragged as much
into conﬂict in Liberal politics as against the Carlists.
   Given the anti-militarist trajectory of the Liberals, a faction grew
within the army that was hostile to the whole constitutional exper-
iment. Some historians have explained this disaffection in genera-
tional terms, with older ofﬁcers who had established themselves during
