                                             The First Carlist War: Origins   23


Bourbon absolutism being more hostile than their younger counter-
parts, whose more progressive outlook had been forged in the war and
revolution of 1808–14.6 But whilst some ofﬁcers were certainly ideolog-
ically opposed to progressive politics, many more, by 1814, had learnt
to become anti-Liberal because of the army’s shabby treatment at the
hands of politicians: this attitude was common to both old and new
ofﬁcers. Army discontent was matched by a growing conservative group
in the Cortes whom the Liberals called the ‘servile ones’ (serviles) who
seconded the Church’s forlorn attempts to save the Inquisition (the
Holy Ofﬁce was abolished in January 1813). Whether the Liberals would
prevail in their reformist mission depended on the nature of the immi-
nent peace over which King Ferdinand – the legitimate monarch in
whose name even the street radicals of Cádiz agitated – would preside.
In December 1813, Napoleon, in a forlorn bid to split the Spanish Patri-
ots from their victorious British alliance, dispossessed his brother of his
now negligible Spanish realm and released Ferdinand back into Spain.
Whilst the Patriots of all political stripes rejected Napoleon’s gambit, the
arrival of Ferdinand on Spanish soil conﬁrmed the Liberals’ worst fears.
   The serviles of the Cortes issued a legitmist ‘Manifesto of the Persians’.
The title refers to the Persians of antiquity who suffered anarchy after
the death of their King; now the Spanish Persians appealed to the
King to end the anarchy visited on Spain by the Constitution of
1812. But this manifesto was not absolutist in tone but traditionalist.
It wanted Ferdinand to overthrow not just the Liberal Constitution
but also the Enlightenment-inspired reforms of the eighteenth cen-
tury from which liberalism had progressed. Such traditionalism meant
restoring the medieval rights of the king, Church and nobility, above
all the Church. Even though the Constitution had reserved a stri-
dently confessional role for the Spanish state, an anomaly in an other-
wise very progressive charter, the traditionalists countered that Spain’s
Catholicism came from God and history, not as a gift from the arrogant
young lawyers of Cádiz. With more reservations the absolutists agreed,
although the absolutist restoration of 1823 would be less clerical than
1814. During the crisis of 1813–14 these nuances on the Right were
shelved by the abolition of the Constitution. For this task, Ferdinand
needed a military coup, just as he had needed one in 1808 to oust his
father from the throne. Most of the army was happy to oblige and to
coalesce around the ‘reaction incarnate’, General Eguía, whose deﬁant
wearing of outmoded wigs seemed to symbolise a desire to return Spain
to the happier times of absolutism. On 4 May 1814, King Ferdinand,
having amassed enough military support to prevail, decreed all acts
