26   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


monitoring the transit of outsiders.17 The army was thus key to the
Fernandine police state. But soldiers faced arrears in pay, casual bru-
tality at the hands of ofﬁcers and inadequate rations: hardly conditions
propitious to law and order. Meanwhile, despite the coup of 1814, the
army was no monochrome: a Liberal faction remained amongst its ofﬁ-
cers, often now being placed on half-pay or in remote garrisons by a
suspicious King.18 During the autumn and winter of 1819 several such
ofﬁcers were amassing forces around Cádiz as part of Ferdinand’s effort
to dispatch reinforcements for the cause of royalism in Spanish America.
Under the command of Rafael del Riego they would end up marching
not on Mexico, but on Madrid. And they would succeed where previous
Liberal pronunciamientos had failed.
   The ﬁrst of these failures would later end up as the sword-arm
of Spain’s Liberal revolutions during the Royalist and Carlist Wars.
Francisco Espoz y Mina had been the most successful Patriot guerrilla
commander, turning Navarra, a conservative and autonomous region
where socio-economic conditions had generated a uniquely popular
armed mobilisation against the French, into a virtual ﬁefdom (his
French enemies even dubbed him the ‘King of Navarra’). Despite his
later politics, Espoz had been violently at odds with the Liberals dur-
ing the Peninsular War, even allegedly executing by ﬁring squad a copy
of the Constitution of 1812. This anecdote remains apocryphal, but it
would have suited the Navarrese he commanded. Thus, when he hur-
ried to the newly restored court of Ferdinand VII, he expected a reward,
nothing less than the Viceroyalty of Navarra. But the King snubbed
his entreaty, and Espoz returned to his Pamplona garrison and raised
a revolt in the name of the Constitution he had so recently derided.19
When this failed, Espoz escaped retribution by escaping to France (his
idealistic nephew, Xavier Mina, even following through on his uncle’s
pretexts by ﬂeeing via France, the British Isles and the USA to Spain’s
restive Americas where he would die ﬁghting for Mexican indepen-
dence from Spanish absolutism). Ironically, when Espoz ﬁnally became
viceroy, it would be as a Liberal ﬁghting against the Carlist sons of veter-
ans he had once commanded, failing militarily in his advanced middle
age where in his youth he had triumphed. The year 1815 saw another
guerrilla leader, Juan Díaz Porlier, pay the ultimate price for rebellion,
and the following year saw an abortive Republican conspiracy called the
Triangle.20 In 1817 another popular war hero, Luis Roberto de Lacy, was
executed amid much controversy after having tried to raise Barcelona,
whilst in 1819 another commander, Vidal, would meet the same fate.
