24    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of the Cortes null and void. The Liberals were imprisoned, exiled or
banished from court, and were thus tarred with the same brush as the
afrancesados – the ‘Frenchiﬁed’ servants of the vanquished Bonaparte
regime. Thus ensued six years of what is known to Spanish history as
the Sexenio absolutista, Ferdinand’s absolute rather than traditionalist
(with the exception of reviving the Inquisition) monarchy. The White
atmosphere of May 1814 was described by a Zaragoza diarist:

     11 May: Around 300 men assembled in the centre of the city at
     midnight to smash the tablet (lápida) representing the Constitution,
     throwing its rubble into the Ebro, and leaving in its place vivas to
     Fernando VII.

     12 May: The ‘Great Day’. All householders have been ordered to illu-
     minate their windows for three days in honour of the king’s coup, on
     pain of being considered ‘traitors to the patria’.

     14 May: More than 4,000 copies of the king’s decree sold in one
     day, joy increasing all the more when lists were read out of all the
     imprisonments made in Madrid.7

Yet Ferdinand was unable to restore peace with stability. Instead of liv-
ing up to his wartime propaganda image of a hero of suffering Spain,
martyr and ﬁrst amongst Spaniards, Ferdinand treated his kingdom
as a personal patrimony rather than a sovereign nation, whilst plac-
ing himself in the hands of the Spanish Church far more than his
eighteenth-century predecessors did, thereby storing up false theocratic
expectations for the future.8 No peace dividend eased his lot. The post-
war peace established by the Congress of Vienna saw Spain formally
demoted to second-power status. The future peace of Europe would
be directed by the powerful states of Russia, Austria, Prussia and Great
Britain, and even defeated France would be welcomed back into the fold
in response to renewed turmoil in Spain. Even if Ferdinand had had any
vision of Spain’s place in the new era of peace (and all the evidence sug-
gests that he did not), it is difﬁcult to see how he might have achieved
it. The demographic and economic devastation caused by the Penin-
sular War was compounded by the post-1810 Spanish American revolt,
which ﬁrst reduced, and then curtailed altogether, the remittances of
silver and gold that had funded the eighteenth-century growth in state
power. The consolidation of Spanish American independence between
1810 and 1836 caused great economic loss to Basque exports. It also
disturbed traditional outlets for emigration at a time when the rate of
