32   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


was accompanied by the renewal of the 1811 Cortes decree which abol-
ished feudal jurisdiction in the countryside, in theory obliging manorial
lords to provide legal proofs of landownership and the right to receive
rents from villagers, these crucial conditions were blocked by royal veto,
whilst only a minority of Cortes deputies like Romero Alpuente and
Alvaro Flórez Estrada pressed the matter, seeing reparto as a way of mak-
ing the countryside constitutionalist instead of royalist. When the royal
veto was ﬁnally overcome in May 1823, this was done merely as a for-
lorn attempt to win over the countryside from royalism. The Liberals’
failure to enlist much support beyond the urban clubs and militia does
not mean that the rural masses were apolitical. Attempts by the Liberal
bourgeoisie to advance capitalism were met by a recognisably modern
defence of traditional work practices. Alcoy was the textile capital of
the old Kingdom of Valencia, employing some 40,000 rural outwork-
ers. Thanks to the recent abolition of guilds, textile entrepreneurs were
able to introduce self-acting lathes (selfactinas) as means of employing
fewer workers more productively. The workers’ response was decisive:
some 1,200 of them overwhelmed the local militia, helped themselves to
arms and seized control of the town for four days whilst they painstak-
ingly dismantled all the selfactinas.46 Although the Argüellian Liberals
in the Cortes condemned these attacks on the sacred right of prop-
erty, brushing aside Romero Alpuente’s defence of the workers, similar
episodes happened in centres of Catalan proto-industry amidst the
French invasion of 1823.47
   As rural Spain moved from indifference to outright hostility to con-
stitutional rule, it was clear that it was royalism rather than liberalism
which enjoyed the initiative. This is a matter which divides historians.
Leftist historians hold that the 1820–23 revolution failed because it was
betrayed by its own leaders, the wealthy landowners and bourgeoisie
having hijacked the democratisation process inherent in the Constitu-
tion of Cádiz and steered the ship of state back towards absolutism.48
Rightist historians hold that if the masses remained royalist in 1820,
they were even more fervently so in 1823, as the King abandoned all
remaining pretences of accepting the revolution.49 Since the 1990s other
writers have tried to rescue Spanish history from its ideological parti-
sanship by offering regional, comparative and international studies of
the Triennium in a bid to Europeanise Spain.50 The exaltados certainly
went to great lengths in their attempts to embed the revolution in the
masses. Yet most Liberals, even radical ones, shared a superior disdain
for common Spaniards; and time and again they failed to comprehend
the degree to which they were hated in return. Romero Alpuente had
