38    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to Charles Henningsen, a British volunteer in Don Carlos’s army who
later fought for the Confederacy, Spanish civil wars were essentially a
conﬂict between Liberal towns and royalist countryside, an observa-
tion shared a century later by the Hispanist, Gerald Brenan, for whom
‘Carlism (was) nothing else than the hostility of a sturdy race of moun-
taineers and farmers to industrial life.’9 In fact, as we shall see, the
urban versus rural divide was at least as much an effect as a cause of
the Carlist War (on account of the displacement of refugees and com-
batants). But certainly, historians have seen the land as the root of
popular fanaticism. Evaristo San Miguel, exiled in 1823 and returned
to Liberal politics during the 1830s civil war, thought that the spread
of Carlism to the eastern Spain could be arrested by equitable agricul-
tural reforms.10 Twentieth-century historians interpreted the endurance
of rural Carlism, not just during the 1830s war but also in a century
of subsequent conﬂagrations, as evidence that Spanish revolutionaries,
unlike their French counterparts, failed to win over popular support.11
   Some 24,000 Liberal families ﬂed Spain, and military tribunals pro-
cessed those who remained. By the time of their dissolution in August
1825, the tribunals had dealt with some 1,094 individuals, rather more
than half of these being charged with political crimes. Whilst around
three-quarters were condemned to punishments of varying severity,
including death (132), the rest were absolved.12 Former constitucional-
istas were condemned to banishment of a minimum of ﬁve leagues
from Madrid.13 The commercial elites of Málaga recorded the repression
unfolding around them:


     5 September 1823: Málaga has been occupied by French and absolutist
     troops who have decreed the establishment of the old system. The
     municipal staff have ﬂed, and the Constitution tablet has been
     smashed to pieces. Ofﬁcial celebrations have been proclaimed, and
     the pre-1820 municipal system reintroduced.
     27 October 1823: Orders have been issued to dismiss all teachers guilty
     of having taught the Constitution, whilst all National Militia arms
     have to be handed in within twenty-four hours.

     18 July 1824: 3 supporters of the Constitution have been executed for
     no other crime than having been found with several proclamations
     against the government.

     22 July 1824: General O’Lawlor has made important arrests of well-
     known malagueño Liberals.
