                                            The First Carlist War: Context 39


   15 September 1824: 3 men have been sentenced to death and shot in
   Málaga: Lorenzo González (known as el Pato), Mateo de la Cruz and
   Antonio González; all for the ‘atrocious crime of having destroyed
   the royal tablet’ in the township of Benahavis.14

But even these draconian steps did not satisfy the Carlists. Despite
the execution of some high-proﬁle constitutionalists, and the venge-
ful imprisonment and internal exile of thousands who had not ﬂed,
political, ﬁnancial and diplomatic expediency persuaded Ferdinand to
relent. Although laws were passed making execution the penalty for
acts of ‘rebellion’ – laws which would be used by both sides in the
civil war after Ferdinand’s death – these could be implemented as much
against the Carlists as against the Liberals.15 Moreover, this crackdown
was to be enforced not by the Inquisition, as in 1814, but by Spain’s
ﬁrst centrally organised police force, which the Carlists condemned as
the ‘Frenchiﬁed’ takeover of Spain’s traditional character and an outra-
geous end for the Church’s temporal power, which was now reduced
to watered-down ‘faith councils’ (juntas de la fé).16 All these measures
conﬁrmed the worst fears of the royalists who were now referred to as
the ultras, apostólicos and Carlists. A token political amnesty as early
as 1824 provoked a royalist reaction in the abortive ‘Capapé affair’,
followed a year later by a more serious rising at Brihuega. When, in
1826, Ferdinand agreed to a more substantial amnesty aimed at former
moderados, royalist manifestoes denounced the King as a coward and a
disaster as ruler.17
   As with the Liberal ofﬁcers of 1814, part of this invective was
explained by frustrated careers. Reserve armies of royalist ‘heroes’ sought
ofﬁce and promotion but Ferdinand’s second Restoration found the state
coffers even emptier than in 1814. Once again, the state was virtually
bankrupt. Ferdinand’s default on the debts incurred under the Consti-
tution brought only temporary relief as this action barred Spain from
lucrative British debt markets. Ferdinand’s technocratic Finance Min-
ister, Luis López Ballesteros, managed to source new loans from Paris
and Amsterdam, but only under onerous conditions.18 Spanish America
remained free. Even though penny-packets of troops from Cuba and
San Juan de Ulúa continued to harass Mexico as late as 1829, any last
hopes for restoring metropolitan rule to the American mainland were
ended by the defeat of the last great imperial army at the Battle of
Ayacucho (Peru) in 1824. Moreover, even though Ferdinand ruthlessly
dispossessed Liberal ofﬁcers of their commissions, he did not replace
them with royalists. Rather, the regime maintained a French garrison
