                                           The First Carlist War: Context 37


might be gained by defending the revolution. General Zorraquín, the
international revolutionary, died in a skirmish with French troops near
Vic on 26 May 1823.4 The tragically miscast hero of the revolution,
Rafael del Riego, was captured and executed, although not before he
became a left-wing martyr in the process. Corralled by the moderados,
Riego had returned to Madrid in August 1822 as exaltado President
of the Cortes. Having lacked the time and means to gain the respect
of his fellow ofﬁcers, Riego could not but divide army opinion, and
ended up being more admired by civilian Radicals than anyone else.
Other army Liberals played a more ruthless game. Espoz was involved
in skirmishes enough to save his honour, and then led his men into
French captivity, complaining without irony that although the Consti-
tution was great, it was detested by the Spanish people.5 A refugee in
Plymouth, Espoz became a Garibaldesque international celebrity avant
la lettre, local crowds ﬂocking to his public appearances and obliging
the jaded veteran to travel incognito to London; Riego, by contrast, was
publicly garrotted.6 During the decade of reaction that was to follow,
Espoz in exile would reinvent himself as a Radical ‘Great Dictator’, mix-
ing Benthamite with Bonapartist principles, and maintaining an iron
grip on the Spanish Liberals in ﬁrst Britain and then France.7
   But the constitutional collapse of 1823 did not produce the ascen-
dancy of the royalist faction surrounding Don Carlos. It had been
vanquished by Espoz, and remaining royalists who rallied in 1823
necessarily fought as auxiliaries to the French and thus lacked the
independent gravity to sway Ferdinand. What the ‘Carlists’ wanted
(the term ﬁrst appears in ofﬁcial correspondence in 1824) was not the
sort of modern absolute police state which Ferdinand favoured and
which had been common throughout Metternich’s Europe since 1815,
but a full-blooded reactionary policy that would restore the privileged
positions of the Church and nobility, decentralise legislative and juris-
dictional powers, and relegate the monarchy to a medieval coordinating
role. In other words, the Carlists wanted to revise not just the recent
Liberal revolution but the entire eighteenth-century legacy of enlight-
ened absolutism.8 These hopes were dashed during what was called the
‘Ominous Decade’ of 1823–33. The Carlist conception of society was
organic, and in the Basque provinces and Navarra in particular it spoke
out in defence of local traditions and privileges and against the cen-
tralising impulses of Madrid. The strongly Catholic, conservative and
economically stable countryside of upland Navarra made this the nat-
ural refuge for Carlist insurrection. Even so, Carlism during the 1830s
would spread to rural areas outside of its northern heartland. According
