44   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


enlightened absolutist reforms into the modern realm of national
sovereignty, constitutional monarchy and individual (rather than cor-
porate) rights of property, the Right was divided in two ways. The
absolutist wing, personiﬁed in Ferdinand VII, understood ‘absolutism’
to rest on purely in the powers of the king. The traditionalist, or legit-
imist, wing of the Right, however, wanted to strip the monarch of all the
Bourbon reforms which, since the eighteenth century, had so enhanced
his power, passing onto the Church, nobility and other corporate bod-
ies the ‘absolute’ right to enjoy their traditional privileges.43 In the rural
Basque provinces and especially Navarra, where the fueros were resilient,
the Church popular and arms never more than a few yards away, this
Carlist current could raise an insurrection.44
   Luckily for Ferdinand’s regime, the failure of the Aggrieved meant
that the Carlists, for the time being, were a spent force. Don Carlos
remained loyal in deed if not in conscience.45 Portuguese miguelistas
tried to circulate proclamations aimed at reigniting a fraternal rising
in Spain, but postmasters in Badajoz intercepted these with apparent
ease.46 For the Liberals in exile, however, the failure of the Aggrieved
transformed their invasion schemes from spontaneous ‘heroic gestures’
into properly organised affairs.47 But the Fernandine regime also organ-
ised its repression, at both home and abroad. When in 1828 some
Burgos printers produced the inﬂammatory ‘Tears of Mother Spain’,
a thesis which condemned the entire history of Bourbon absolutism,
and demanded that the ‘deaf king’ reconvene the Cortes (‘for Spaniards
saved the nation on the 2 May 1808’), the government response was
ruthless. The writer and his printers were all gaoled, although not before
several copies of the thesis had circulated.48 Abroad, the Spanish gov-
ernment exploited exiles’ penury to inﬁltrate their networks. Romero
Alpuente was so short of cash that he wittingly maintained a spy for the
Spanish regime as his manservant and tried in vain to extract a subsidy
from Prime Minister Wellington, a man whom, in a previous incarna-
tion, he had excoriated.49 In July 1829, Spain persuaded the Wellington
administration to scrap the exiles’ subsidy.50 This was the nadir of Lib-
eral fortunes. But in 1830, the international situation changed in the
exiles’ favour and against the Carlists. In Britain a Whig ministry came
to power and boosted the long-standing links its Radical wing had cul-
tivated with Spanish Liberal exiles.51 More importantly, in France, the
Orleanists came to power in the Revolution of 1830.
   The centre of Spanish Liberal operations thus shifted to France,
where the revolution of July 1830 initially portended better prospects
of success. In October, Espoz sent one invasion across the Pyrenees in
