50   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


liberated the city, they exposed this embarrassing accommodation, for
which the Madrid government made the commander of the Cristino
liberation force, General Sarsﬁeld, a boisterous Peninsular War veteran,
responsible, rather than the local authorities. Sarsﬁeld was removed by
the Cristino regime, which had had cause on other occasions to suspect
his loyalty.9 The early loss of Bilbao was a blow for the cause of Carlism,
as most of the Vizcayan volunteers deserted when Bilbao ceased funding
their pay, and would not return to ﬁght until Carlist territorial expan-
sion throughout 1834 subjected them to compulsory enlistment.10 The
burghers of Bilbao, for their part, stiffened their resolve against future
Carlist attempts.
   Risings elsewhere in the Basque country and beyond hardly com-
pensated for this loss. Royalist War veteran Valentín Verástegui raised
a Carlist insurrection in Alava, named himself commander-in-chief,
and invaded Alava’s capital of Vitoria. Here, foral authorities, as at
Bilbao, tried ‘neutrality’, deﬂecting Verástegui’s overtures. Verástegui
prevaricated and set up a rival junta in the name of Carlos V, an omi-
nous move which could only point to the eventual suppression of the
civil authorities.11 But the foral authorities persevered until Sarsﬁeld’s
Cristino division on its way to Bilbao defeated Verástegui’s insurgents
and liberated Vitoria. Unlike Santos Ladrón, Verástegui survived to ﬁght
another day. Looking beyond the Basque country, the internal threat
to Madrid had been quashed, but there remained the prospect of a
descent on the capital from without. The threat came from the aged
priest, Jerónimo Merino, famous guerrilla veteran of the Peninsular and
Royalist Wars and the obvious choice to command the forces of the
Carlist junta of Old Castile which convened in Merino’s old ‘ﬁefdom’,
the heavily churched province of Burgos. Merino’s conservatism posited
the Cristinos as dangerous revolutionaries: ‘Do you believe that the
declared enemies of Ferdinand VII, those who dragged him captive to
Cádiz, and who proscribed faithful royalists, can in any way be trusted
to defend our monarchical institutions and religion?’12 This proclama-
tion appealed to several thousand more in his path during his march
on Madrid, who remembered the disappointment of Liberal rule during
the Triennium and the opportunities offered by royalism in 1823. Some
even included disbanded royalists ﬂeeing from the Cristino capital. But
Merino was swamped with men he was unable to arm or provision,
and soon had to release the married volunteers from his service. Mean-
while, the Carlist junta near Burgos lost conﬁdence in his campaign and
ordered Merino to return to defend Carlism in La Rioja against Sarsﬁeld’s
counter-insurgency. Thus, the ﬁrst ‘March on Madrid’ in the conﬂict
