                                           The First Carlist War: Context 45


coordination with a 400-strong invasion of assorted émigrés and adven-
turers led by the veteran of the lost American wars, General Jerónimo
Valdés, who had resisted coming under Espoz’s direct command. Espoz’s
propaganda appealed to Spaniards to ‘forget the past’, a shrewd choice
of words which might relate either to absolutism or to the disastrous
effects of Liberal rule during the Triennium. But they were defeated by
a 7,000-strong government force under General Llauder. Valdés’ force
was defeated at Vera, and only the swift intervention of Espoz extri-
cated the survivors and brought them back across the frontier.52 Despite
Espoz’s show of contrition, the civilian population did not rally to the
Liberal invasion, and it was small consolation that the Carlists failed
to answer with a rising of their own. But the Carlists were not demor-
alised. Don Carlos was still the heir to the throne and victorious General
Llauder accordingly ingratiated himself with the heir apparent.53 But
the changed international context belied Carlist conﬁdence. Although
Madrid got Paris to seal the border to Spanish émigrés, the Liberal French
regime received Spanish diplomatic recognition in return.54 Moreover,
the Whig administration in Britain, Belgian revolution, Polish rising
and the resilient pedrista side in the Portuguese civil war, combined
with the French Revolution, all had the hallmarks of an emerging
‘Liberal international’ which might sway Spanish affairs. In November
1831, an international force of idealists, led by the Spanish Liberals
Torrijos and Manzanares, invaded southern Spain in a Mazzinian-style
gesture of ‘spontaneous revolution’.55 This attempt also failed, but in
circumstances which made martyrs out of the invaders.
   Despite – or perhaps because of – the changed international scene,
Carlist conspiracies mounted during 1832–33. As Ferdinand’s health
deteriorated, a series of court manoeuvres contrived to put the crown
beyond Don Carlos’s reach. This scenario was caused by the ‘La Granja
affair’ of 1832, a palace revolution which conﬁrmed that María Cristina
would succeed King Ferdinand as regent until their daughter, Princess
Isabella, came of age. Thus, Don Carlos was excluded from what he saw
as his God-given duty to succeed. With the moribund King handing
over the running of the monarchy to his reformist wife, a crackdown on
Carlists ensued. The Royalist Volunteers were opened up to recruits of
non-royalist backgrounds and state power centralised over them. A tech-
nocratic Ministry of Development (an Interior Ministry by another
name) was created with wide-ranging powers against regional Carlists,
and this was reinforced by the 1833 territorial reorganisation of Spain
into 49 similarly sized provinces.56 Manuel Llauder, who so recently
curried favour with Carlists, now established a military dictatorship
