                                             The First Carlist War: Context 43


by royalist leaders for peasants’ supplies were paid. This made villagers
more willing to support royalist insurrection in 1827 and, especially, in
1833.38 ) But parish priests also justiﬁed their rebellion in spiritual rather
than strategic terms. Liberalism – or rather the progressive and episco-
palian Catholic current they called Jansenism which spawned Spain’s
ﬁrst Liberals – undermined those popular religious practices, such as the
idle saints’ days and the burial of dead inside churches, which deﬁned
cultural life at the local level.
   After a lacklustre start, the rebels made a capital out of Manresa,
whence a royalist newspaper brieﬂy appeared. The rebels took villages,
conveniently discovering amongst local notables ‘Liberals’ whom they
could ransom and rob.39 This conﬂict already showed signs of violent
actions against ‘spies’ and harbingers of ‘melancholic news’, which par-
ticularly damaged a society without railways and telegraphs (this feature
would also characterise the Carlist War).40 But the Agraviados’ domina-
tion of the Catalan countryside was short-lived. Ferdinand sent forth
an army which swept all before it, pacifying the whole region during
September 1827, executing dozens of rebels, and deporting to North
African garrison prisons around 300 combatants who refused the King’s
pardon. Saperes and Bosoms managed to ﬂee to France, although the
latter was lured back to the frontier in February 1828 and given up for
execution.41
   The rising had been launched in Ferdinand’s name, and Liberal histo-
rians have since been routinely perplexed by a legitimist rising against
the legitimate king. In 1823, after all, Ferdinand VII had been restored
to full powers, and wasted no time persecuting his Liberal tormentors
via his Justice Minister, the humble-born Francisco Calomarde – much
derided by contemporaries and historians alike as a base upstart – who
attacked not just the Liberals but also their values when he replaced
‘liberal’ science teaching in colleges and universities with Counter-
Enlightenment theology and bull-ﬁghting.42 But otherwise Ferdinand
would not share power. Rather, through a closed camarilla of favourites,
the King timidly pursued a policy of modernisation which gradually
adopted several of the more conservative, technocratic reforms of the
vanquished Liberals. Thus, all other noble, clerical and popular inter-
ests were to be subordinated to his will, Ferdinand seeing ﬁt, like any
eighteenth-century absolutist before him, to govern in the interests
of the people without having to be accountable to them in any way.
Ferdinand’s gambit reveals that there were not the ‘two Spains’ of pop-
ular legend, but at least three. Whereas the Liberals were certainly the
progressive Left, in that they wanted to advance the eighteenth-century
