                                           The First Carlist War: Context 41


Andalucían Sierra Morena in command of a sophisticated extortion
network, was not only pardoned by Ferdinand but also given a for-
mal commission to punish other wrongdoers. El Tempranillo proudly
quipped ‘Ferdinand rules in Spain and I rule in the Sierra’; in 1833, at
the age of 27, he was killed by a Liberal bandit.27
   Wrongdoing was honoured by political ﬂags of convenience; during
the Carlist War banditry and Carlism would be, in many ways, indis-
tinguishable when operating behind the front lines. Spaniards since the
Peninsular War had been suffering a collective trauma which made them
materially and psychologically prepared to take to arms: this ‘reserve
army’ of demobilised soldiers, deserters, outraged priests and downtrod-
den peasants could become a potent weapon if they could be harnessed
to a political aim. At ﬁrst it seemed as though the restored absolutist
regime might channel this disaffection. As soon as the military tribunals
were wound up, the reactionary militia force of ‘Royalist Volunteers’
(Voluntarios Realistas), which had come together during the Royalist
War, was formalised by War Minister José de la Cruz, with a dedicated
budget independent of army funding, and no real ‘bottom limit’ on
recruitment. As Cruz remarked, this plebeian force would be instilled
with ‘elements of order and monarchical subordination’ in contrast to
the extinguished National Militia, which ‘seemed set on turning each
town into a state, and each town-hall into a government’.28 Rising in
number from 70,000 in 1825 to a peak of 284,000 in 1832, the Volun-
teers, however, proved to be no Sanfedisti. Like their National Militia
forbears the Volunteers enjoyed both immunity from civil prosecution
and cash remuneration when on service, and got to run all manner
of municipal rackets, whilst terrorising village Liberals. Thus, histori-
ans have labelled the Volunteers fanatical, violent and a ﬁnancial black
hole.29 Ferdinand hoped that they might please the royalists, thwart
the Liberals and check the ‘professional subversives’ in the diminished
regular army. Yet Ferdinand would not concede the Volunteers’ main
demand that they replace the army altogether. Nevertheless, the Volun-
teers blocked Liberal attempts to regain power after 1823. The Liberals’
attempts were organised by Espoz who, from his London exile, directed
doomed but often dramatic Liberal invasions. In 1826 the Bazán expe-
dition to Valencia, learning the lessons of the Royalist War, blanketed
villages with propaganda promising land.30 Liberalism was not just a
creed of desperate exiles. A few months after the Bazán expedition,
Don Carlos’s new bride, María Teresa, the ultra-conservative princess of
the miguelista side in the Portuguese civil war (1826–34), was publicly
insulted by a crowd shouting mueras whilst she toured Madrid.31
