58   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


(including, from 1835, elected ofﬁcers), comparatively good pay and
beneﬁts, and internal restrictions on where and when it might serve.
In return, the urbanos resented army ‘despotism’ and protested the Mili-
tia’s exclusion from an internationally brokered agreement in April 1835
which promised quarter to surrendering soldiers serving in the north.
Ultimately the Cristino army retained the upper hand in this inter-
service rivalry: it could impose a state of siege in response to revolution
or Carlist invasion, subjecting the Militia to martial law or even dis-
banding it altogether. But the Militia grew in power. The revolutionary
summer of 1835 made Militia service more attractive, and as its num-
bers expanded, its control over urban spaces and Liberal pageantry
claimed privileged ownership of Spanish patriotism: time and again this
was turned into a focus for radical political action, massacring clerics
and Carlist prisoners, and in September 1835 leading a Liberal revolu-
tion across Cristino Spain. A generation of historians saw this Militia
radicalism in Marxist class-conﬂict terms.54 But whilst class interests
were not absent, members of the Militia were radicalised more by the
experience of the civil war. Their sacriﬁces for the Cristino cause were
used to justify revolution and even the most extreme atrocities. Cities
like Barcelona were ﬁlling with refugees who had witnessed murders
and wanton destruction. Their arrival provoked demands for revenge
against Carlist sympathisers imprisoned in Cristino gaols, a demand that
became impossible to resist during the revolution of 1835.
   The inter-service rivalry about who was making the biggest sacri-
ﬁces raged as Zumalacárregui tightened his grip on the Basque country
and Carlist risings ﬂared up elsewhere. In 1834 the urbanos defend-
ing Cristino towns in the Basque country, Catalonia, the Maestrazgo
had no doubt that they were the defenders of liberty. During the win-
ter of 1834–35, besieged Pamplona ﬁlled with timorous army ofﬁcers
who avoided rejoining their units by exaggerating or inventing per-
sonal injuries, and often hiding behind the presence of their families.
Pamplona’s militiamen, by contrast, with a great deal more than hon-
our at stake, manned their city’s defence by day and night, often in
conditions of appalling hygiene and hunger.55 Forty miles south of
Pamplona, the besieged Militia garrison of Villafranca was heroically
martyred by defeat. Villafranca was the gateway to the Ribera and a
customs-post before the 1834 Cristino suspension of the fueros, and its
Militia garrison went to the utmost lengths to resist Zumalacárregui’s
siege. The Militia retreated into the defensive redoubt of the village
church. Zumalacárregui burnt down the adjoining buildings and burnt
sacks of chilli at the foot of the church in order to suffocate the defenders
