                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   55


of ‘ayacucho’ ofﬁcers, veterans of the lost American wars who, during
the Carlist War, forged a highly praetorian bond of leftist politics. The
campaigns of both Napoleon and Espartero show how men who fol-
low their leaders on distant campaigns grow very attached to them,
with destabilising consequences for civilian politics, as Espartero, the
‘Spanish Napoleon’ of 1840, would show. But whilst Espartero after the
war would divide Spanish politics, in 1834 his local victories had already
made him the symbol of Cristino hopes. Physically brave, Espartero was
wounded several times throughout the war and even more times had his
horse shot from under him. In February 1834, Espartero was promoted
to major-general, and later to Comandante General of Vizcaya. His hum-
ble background and bravery gave him good qualities for leadership, even
though these made him prone to immodesty. Espartero conﬁded to
his wife that ‘the troops love me like a father . . . they have an enthu-
siasm for me which borders on delirium and I fear that this could end
up harming me’.39 This dramatic irony was condemned as callow self-
aggrandisement by the British consul at Bilbao, who thought Espartero
was deluded in thinking that Zumalacárregui’s forays into Vizcaya were
anything more than a feint:

  (Zumalacárregui) seldom came into Biscay. Apparently convinced of
  the inefﬁcacy of Espartero’s operations, he let him amuse himself by
  running after the Biscay battalions, who were accustomed to lead
  him a dance all round the province; and when his men were totally
  fatigued with four and ﬁve days’ marches, they would make a stand
  upon some hillside, right in his road; then after disputing the ground
  for half an hour or an hour, and causing the loss of some 50 or 100
  men, they would run off, leaving the victorious general to write such
  bulletins as were never equalled . . . the ﬁeld of Burseña (for example)
  was cubierto de cadáveres (covered with corpses). There were plenty of
  spectators, the writer among the number; and yet nobody could ﬁnd
  above 18 dead bodies!40

The Carlist press matched the consul’s parody, punning Espartero’s
name, ‘General Embustero’ (General Fiction).41 But Espartero’s minor
victories at Portugalete, Guernica, Sollube and elsewhere, certainly won
him plaudits from the Liberal press. Unlike Espoz, future Commander
of the Army of the North who professed a particular understanding of
his native Navarra, Espartero claimed no insight into why the Carlists
were ﬁghting. His letters throughout 1834 spoke of the enemy as rabble
or canaille and his dealings with Carlists were as harsh as any Cristino
