                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   53


army lacked the strength to wrest Bilbao from its Cristino liberators.
His ﬁrst set-piece battle on 29 December 1833 in La Berrueza valley was
indecisive: Zumalacárregui simply wanted to blood his men against the
superior Cristino forces and disengaged in good time to prepare for his
next operation. This was a raid into the fertile Ribera region of south-
ern Navarra, populated by hostile Castilian-speaking landowners, whose
‘enemy’ produce would feed his guerrillas.25 Zumalacárregui’s second
stage ran from the summer of 1834 until the winter, and involved con-
trolling rural territory and communications. The ensuing third stage
involved taking Cristino forts and fortiﬁed towns.26
   Cristino Spain would never produce a commander to match
Zumalacárregui. Quesada, who had abandoned a lifelong career of royal-
ism in order to escape the Cristino purges, used court pressure to replace
Jerónimo Valdés as Viceroy of Navarra, an old ofﬁce which was inter-
changeable with the new command of the Army of the North. Valdés
was a veteran of the American Wars and Governor of Cartagena (Murcia)
in 1833, but his liberalism was ahead of court politics at the time.
Quesada, by contrast, had absolutist credentials which recommended
him to the Queen-Regent, and, as a ‘pasha’, in January 1834 had dis-
solved a defence junta in Santander which an advanced Liberal had
led against local Carlists.27 His perspicacious ‘State of Navarra’ letter
to María Cristina claimed detailed knowledge of the insurgency and
won him the viceroyalty. As Cristino Viceroy, Quesada acted on his
rightist political instincts by writing to Zumalacárregui, offering him
a post in Burgos in return for his recognition of the Cristino transi-
tion. But Zumalacárregui, in conference with his staff, publicly rejected
Quesada’s overture, thereby reinforcing his own authority and image of
indispensability for the Carlist cause.28 Writers from both sides agreed
that Quesada’s overture was a disastrous own-goal, for in reinforcing
Zumalacárregui’s legitimacy it weakened the Cristino claim they were
ﬁghting outlaws.29 Moreover, Quesada could not parry this blow by suc-
cessful campaigning. Although the new Urban Militia (see below) was
beginning to garrison towns, freeing up the army for mobile operations,
Quesada was deaf to its Liberal-patriotic pull and instead relied on his
army. But the latter waged war ineptly: launching frontal attacks against
mountain positions, losing baggage and communications, and being
outmanoeuvred and outfought by Zumalacárregui’s genius in active
defence.30 A key early Carlist victory occurred at Alsasua in April 1834
when Zumalacárregui routed Quesada’s convoy, cutting Pamplona off
from supplies from Vitoria, and enveloping the Navarrese capital in a
siege which lasted on and off throughout the war.
