                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   57


prone to ﬂee before Cristino incursions, compounding Cristino weak-
ness in local intelligence.47 One of the most mobile Cristino tacticians,
General Marcelino Oráa, blamed his defeats at Zubiri and Urdaniz on
the enemy’s superior local intelligence.48 But Carlist domination by no
means ended the strain on local authorities. Zumalacárregui increas-
ingly overrode civil authorities whilst arrogantly rebufﬁng petitions for
alleviation by Carlist juntas and the Deputation. And little relief came
from the arrival of Don Carlos’s court: although Zumalacárregui’s per-
sonal authority was curtailed, the burdens on the civil authorities only
increased.
   But the military–political crisis of 1834 was far worse for the Cristino
side and quickly made the premiership of Cea untenable. Opposition
centred on the Isabelina Society, whose membership ranged from Lib-
erals of radical to moderate opinions and included several ‘pashas’ who
resented Cea’s civilian absolutism. Demands grew for a Liberal regime to
root out Carlists and attract intervention from Britain and France. Bow-
ing to this pressure, in January 1834 María Cristina appointed as Prime
Minister Martínez de la Rosa, an Andalucían patrician of Spain’s ﬁrst and
second Liberal experiments, who promised to restore Spain’s happiness
by marrying ‘order with liberty’.49 One of his ﬁrst moves was to create
the Urban Militia, to be organised at local level under the command
of the reformed town halls. The advanced Liberal newspaper, Eco del
Comercio, hailed this force as the ‘people in arms’ destined to vanquish
the Carlist insurgency.50 The reality in its ﬁrst year of existence was very
different, however. Property owners remembered the royalist proscrip-
tion of 1823 and had no wish to suffer the same now in the event of
a Carlist victory. Cristino captains-general in Andalucía and Valencia
despaired at the middle classes’ reluctance to lead the Militia, and exer-
cised a range of coercion against them as a consequence.51 The Radical
press complained how patriotic economic dependents substituted their
masters in dangerous roles, and how the notables’ listlessness meant
that disbanded Royalist Volunteers were being enrolled in the Liberal
force.52 Alborea (Albacete), for example, was dominated by the Meoro y
Sánchez family, who maintained their grip on local policing when the
Volunteers’ commander, Anacleto, later Governor of the Bishopric of
Almería, handled the Cristino purge by simply abdicating his command
and preparing his nephew to take command of the ‘new’ militia.53
   The Cristino militia was despised by Carlists as a club for playboy
revolutionaries and was routinely the ﬁrst to be subjected to reprisals
whenever urban centres fell into their hands. It was also poorly regarded
by the Cristino army, which resented the militia’s parochial structures
