                                               The Basque Phase, 1833–35   59


inside. A truce was brokered to allow the release of the militiamen’s
women and children, but shots were ﬁred during this delicate oper-
ation and Zumalacárregui reacted by beating and feather-tarring the
refugees. Before the surviving defenders choked to death, they stormed
out of the church and charged the Carlist ring. Those militiamen who
were not killed were captured and shot. Heroic Villafranca, and its
heroic refugee women, became Liberal cause célèbres. On 10 December
1834, after the Cristinos had retaken the town, the Cristino government
decided to rebuild the church, and compensate the widows and orphans
(the Queen-Regent, seeing the emerging popular meaning of the war,
prudently made a public donation).56 The martyrdom of Villafranca
was downplayed by Carlist historians who resented the muddying of
Zumalacárregui’s own heroic image.57
   The violent, sudden and unsolicited martyrdom which overtook
overwhelmed Militia detachments and pitiful prisoners of war pro-
voked demands for vengeance. Whilst poorly led Cristino armies were
defeated at every turn, these rural defeats were offset by urban defensive
victories – or by valiant defeats which made martyrs to liberty out of the
armed citizens who suffered them. Vergara (Guipúzcoa) controlled vital
communications with the French border, and its Militia garrison distin-
guished itself resisting a Carlist attack in August. In September, a Carlist
force which struck west into Old Castile was defeated by the outnum-
bered militia garrison of Villarcayo, which fought without outside help
and despite half the town being burnt by the attackers. Thus, whilst the
Cristino army elites failed on campaign, the ‘people’s army’ succeeded
in point defence.58 It would not be long until the militia cashed in these
military honours for a stake in politics. In the early stages this radicalism
amounted to vengeance, targeting Carlists captured on the battleﬁeld,
languishing in prisons, or civic Carlists cloistered in monasteries and
nunneries. But it also targeted Cristino elites who were either callous or
incompetent towards their men. And the militiamen were not the sole
agents of vengeance, as the result of Zumalacárregui’s great victory in
October 1834 at Alegría (Alava) showed. This triumph was prepared by
Zumalacárregui’s expert command of geography. Civilians in his path
were forced either to join his columns or to be corralled under guard
away from roadsides, out of sight of Cristino scouts. Then he ambushed
a superior Cristino force, dividing it into two and defeating both sections
in detail. Some 2,000 surviving Cristino soldiers (twice as many as he
had killed in action) defected to the Carlist side and made no protest
when he had their captured Cristino commander shot.59 As Cristino
revolutions and Carlist expeditions afﬂicted Spain from 1835, civilians,
