52   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


suspect governors of Spanish border garrison towns.18 Admittedly, the
insurgents were also too few, as Don Carlos’s refusal to lead an insur-
rection until his brother died had limited their organisation. But the
regional balance in the Basque country would shift in favour of the
Carlists thanks to the emergence of a charismatic military genius as their
leader.
   Tomás de Zumalacárregui (1788–1835) is central to understand-
ing the Basque phase of the war. Born in Ormáiztegui (Guipúzcoa),
Zumalacárregui was a veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, as
a Patriot and Royalist respectively, and was purged for his Carlism
in 1833. Many of his biographies border on hagiography, detailing
such colourful episodes as his men accepting half-pay without protest,
and a Basque grandmother who offered her last surviving grandson
for service, and then a horse after Zumalacárregui tearfully rejected
her blood sacriﬁce.19 Such miracle stories reveal the imaginative and
ideational world of the Carlists. These stories were probably nonsense,
or grossly distorted, but useful, as in being deprived of the open sup-
port of Rome and almost all of Spain’s bishops, the Carlists rallied to
Zumalacárregui as their own Christian soldier, and even refashioned
their own organic religious iconography around him and subsequent
national models and symbols. Unsurprisingly, most modern histori-
ans have seen through this Romantic haze. His most recent biography
reverts to the Romantic legend, however.20 John Coverdale defended a
contingent interpretation of Zumalacárregui’s motivations: he was apo-
litical, the only books he was known to have read being either military
or religious in nature.21 Zumalacárregui’s importance explains the quan-
tity and diversity of his representations. Within weeks of the ﬁrst rising
in October 1833, Zumalacárregui made himself Carlist Commander-in-
Chief of Navarra, at the head of a growing army of local peasants which
used guerrilla tactics to turn Cristino garrisons and expeditions into a
pale imitation of the French a generation earlier.22 These guerrilla tac-
tics were overborne throughout 1834 by Zumalacárregui’s painstaking
formation of cavalry and artillery units, eroding Cristino superiority
in these arms (and indeed despite the lack of a cavalry tradition in
Navarra).23 Zumalacárregui’s military success earned him full admin-
istrative powers, conferred upon him by Don Carlos’s exiled court in
March 1834. Zumalacárregui thus enjoyed untrammelled power until
the King arrived in the Basque country in July.24
   The ﬁrst stage of Zumalacárregui’s strategy began between the winter
of 1833 and the following summer with the employment of his army
in a guerrilla war of surprise and ambush. During this ﬁrst stage his
