                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   61


   Beyond these emerging Carlist safe zones, insurgents were moti-
vated, above all, by adventure and wrongdoing. The mundane case of
‘El Locho’ (Manuel Adame), a pig-rustling day labourer and veteran
of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, and the main guerrilla plague
of La Mancha in 1834, was not untypical. Other bandits preyed on
Manchegan communities using Carlism as their cover. Their colourful
nomes de guerre (the Palillos brothers, Tercero, Rompe, Ventero, Barba,
Lobito) exempliﬁed the Spanish popular culture of using resonant nick-
names to hide mundane identities. Further south and west, virtually all
insurgents were bandits using Carlism as the ﬂimsiest of political covers.
Extremadura had a long border with restive Portuguese miguelistas, but
Cristino border garrisons prevented any organised Carlist insurgencies
from taking hold and security forces instead had only bandits to sup-
press. Andalucía’s aquiline bandits were already infamous, and attempts
to recruit them met with derision from several quarters. Nonethe-
less, Carlist emissaries were dispatched throughout the war to turn the
bandits, smugglers and deserters of the Serranía de Ronda into a guer-
rilla force.64 Thus, even though organised Carlism outside of its safe
zones could never prevail without outside help, the countryside was
strewn with bandit gangs whose varied motives (desertion, landless-
ness, crime) they often explained by allegiance to Carlism. In short,
Carlism was often a cover for contingent rather than ideological
motives.
   This is not to say that Carlism was nothing more than a ﬂag of
convenience. Civic Carlism in the Cristino zone, especially of priests,
often spilled over into incitement or violence in the face of leftist
provocation. Throughout 1834, Cristino authorities uncovered plots
involving Carlists who had got involved with the new Militia,65 sus-
picious arms caches66 and, especially, hostile clerics. Clerical hostility
included incitement: one cleric brought to trial proclaimed ‘Death to
all negros [pejorative for “Liberal”]! The Holy Spirit speaks through me!’
whilst a Valencian capuchin preached that the Church would resist the
onslaught of the ‘philosophers’ of the century and that the cholera
which appeared between 1832 and 1834 was divine punishment for
Spain’s wickedness. The cleric’s curse probably instilled the fear of God
into his parishioners. The Asiatic cholera epidemic had ravaged the pop-
ulation, with the province of Granada alone registering a grisly toll of
5,293 dead between January and August 1834, notwithstanding munic-
ipal quarantines uselessly designed to contain the ‘miasma’.67 In fact,
the cholera had an even more sinister legacy in the pretext it pro-
vided for Cristino elites to channel the anger of those elements of the
