66   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the other.92 Zumalacárregui combined austere charisma with discipline,
planning and resourcefulness. He responded to villagers’ complaints
about Cristino raiding parties by arming ﬂying parties tasked with their
protection. He also used draconian punishments when he judged it nec-
essary. In September 1834, he decimated a battalion of his own men
when their timidity spoilt his plan to trick his way into a key forti-
ﬁed village (Echarri-Aranaz) on the Pamplona–Vitoria road (pro-Carlist
sources conceded Zumalacárregui rare emotion when he halted the
executions halfway, tearfully realising the men were ‘his children’).93
Zumalacárregui’s military state was already in place when the King’s
court arrived. It had even established regular ﬁnance from internal
sources: the revenues of customs posts the Carlists were seizing along
the border with France, taxes levied on parish clergy, and ﬁnes imposed
on Cristino sympathisers and hostile settlements. The harvest of 1834,
meanwhile, was abundant without collapsing market prices, owing to
war depredations and Zumalacárregui’s supply needs.94 Expanding ter-
ritorial control allowed battle casualties to be transferred from homes
to Carlist military hospitals; patients in the latter stood better chances
of recovery than Cristino patients did in theirs. Cristino casualties, by
contrast, had to be transferred over exterior lines of communication,
which gave them greater exposure to the Asiatic cholera epidemic and
also absorbed far more manpower – some ten Cristino soldiers to litter
each patient to safety.95
   By the time of his King’s arrival, Zumalacárregui was thus already pre-
siding over an integrated military state. He even kept a platoon-strength
bodyguard who also relayed messages day or night.96 This insurgent
model provided a mystique for Carlist supporters which their Cristino
enemies completely lacked. Cristino commanders, by contrast, cut lum-
bering, conspicuous ﬁgures, which afforded local authorities time to
desert their posts en masse, so as to avoid reprisals from the stronger
Carlists.97 Thus, the Cristinos routinely lacked local intelligence and
liaison networks, and so manoeuvred their men into vulnerable group
formations and corralled them in valleys. Consequently, the Carlists had
little difﬁculty intercepting communications and, unlike their enemy,
faced no shortage of willing spies in the Basque country.98 The effect of
superior local intelligence was plain to see in Carlist victories through-
out 1834. In August, Zumalacárregui defeated a Cristino division at Las
Peñas de San Fausto (Navarra), inﬂicting some 250 fatalities for the
loss of barely more than a dozen of his own. Zumalacárregui seized
the secret codes with which Cristino commanders communicated with
one another yet, remarkably, the defeated general took no measures
