                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   69


and militiamen; Espoz responded in kind with the wife of a Carlist
mayor and several other prominent Carlist women, ransoming them
in a Pamplona prison.112
   Escalating reprisals provoked international interest in the conﬂict and
motivated foreign volunteers. Zumalacárregui assembled a squadron
entitled the Defensores de la Legitimidad, comprising Spanish and
foreign ofﬁcers who served as simple soldiers, and they increased in
number and distinction (research has revealed between 120 and 250
foreign Carlist volunteers, of whom more than a quarter boasted noble
titles).113 It became fashionable for European aristocrats hooked on
the Hispanophile Romanticism of writers like Chateaubriand, Schlegel
and Hugo to assert old-fashioned notions of honour in a continent
which had otherwise lapsed into the juste milieu. French volunteers were
the most numerous; reeling from their recent failure in the Vendée,
Spain’s conﬂict offered legitimists the chance to reignite the cause of
Henri d’Artois and restore honour. Aubert, a French ofﬁcer and fugi-
tive of 1832, ﬂed France under a death sentence to serve under Don
Carlos in Spain, but faced the same sentence once captured by Cristino
forces. Rejecting an invitation to defect and save his life, Aubert died
a Carlist: ‘In France I would have given my life for Henri V; here,
I owe it to Carlos V. Long live the king!’114 Prussians formed the sec-
ond largest contingent of volunteers; their Protestant piety in the service
of the Carlist Catholicism was explained by a pan-European, interde-
nominational defence of legitimacy.115 German conservatives of both
denominations united in pro-Carlism: the ultramontane Rheinlander
Josef Görres shared Protestants’ enthusiasm for Carlism as the organic
Spanish resistance to ‘foreign’ Liberalism.116 The prospect of adventure
lured other young legitimists. The young August Karl von Goeben, full
of a sense of Romantic adventure, followed his countrymen:117

  A royalist in the full sense of the word . . . I imagined those mountains,
  how the Carlists there were struggling against the overwhelming
  might of the revolutionary armies, bowing neither to sword, hunger
  nor death, and I resolved to offer my blood for the cause of legitimate
  monarch.

The Carlists claimed their cause was truly Spanish, unlike the ‘foreign-
ness’ of the Liberals. Yet his knowledge of European divisions inﬂected
Don Carlos’s proclamations against the Quadruple Alliance. The quar-
ter Zumalacárregui offered to Cristino prisoners after his victory at Los
Arcos was used by the King to counter the black legend his cause
