70   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


attracted in the foreign press and capitals: ‘Europe does not know us and
yet pronounces without hearing us . . . and offers us nothing but unjust
hatred.’118 As we shall see in Chapter 5, far more foreign volunteers with
far more varied motives would soon join the Cristino side, with the
result that, by the summer of 1835, the expanded Spanish political and
military battleﬁelds were accompanied by an expanded international
civil war of ideologies and volunteers. Contemporaries certainly saw the
war as an international struggle between Liberty and Catholicism, not
unlike their great-grandchildren during the Spanish Civil War a century
later. According to three Aragonese Radicals, ‘the Spanish civil war was
not just a dynastic issue between Isabel II and her uncle, Don Carlos,
nor was it just a contest between despotism and liberty in Spain, but
also between Dom Miguel and María de la Gloria, and Henri V and
Louis-Philippe, between Liberal and Absolutist Europe’.119
   But, as with the Spanish Civil War a hundred years later, international
involvement had a ‘great distorting’ effect. The ﬁrst two years of Cristino
Spain, from the start of the war in October 1833 to the revolution of
the juntas in September 1835, were certainly marked by growing polar-
isation between Left (which tended towards republicanism in extreme
cases) and the Right (which in many cases leaned towards Carlism).
Leftist climates along the Mediterranean littoral (Barcelona, Málaga,
Seville) saw Cristino governors there champion reformist calls whilst
the inverse was true in such conservative cities in the north as Burgos
and Salamanca. But beneath this macropolitical trajectory, several thou-
sand local disputes were given a political dimension by the demands of
war. The Liberal postmaster of Valladolid had his house ransacked and
family abused by Merino’s royalist bands in 1822; in 1833 he faced the
same terror at Merino’s hands in 1833 when he refused to frank Carlist
mail.120 Women from the poor neighbourhoods in the south-west of
Madrid regularly invoked the cry of ‘Long Live Carlos V!’ in a primitive
protest against cholera – from which many of the wealthy classes had
ﬂed – and taxes.121 Journeymen resented master tradesmen who man-
aged to embellish their fortunes with Militia service, whilst unskilled
labourers (such as Madrid builders) jeered passing señoritos in uniform.122
Newspapers reported violence between militiamen and soldiers, which,
though sparked off by rivalry over women, in reality was caused by
resentment between those who had to go to the front and those who
could stay behind.123 The poor Triana neighbourhood of Seville saw riots
in protest against the cost of expanding local Militia forces and against
their insufferable behaviour strutting about in the name of liberty hun-
dreds of miles behind the front line, persecuting those without friends
