68   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


included some 23,357 infantry and 1,089 cavalry, but barely more than
half of these were actually available for campaigning. Espoz knew that
they were tired, poorly equipped (they still only had summer uniforms)
and demoralised from previous encounters. However committed Espoz
was to remedying this, he continued the incompatible War Ministry
policy of garrisoning isolated small settlements, diluting his campaign
strength whilst failing even to defend in depth. Most settlements in
Navarra and the Basque provinces proper were unwalled and located in
militarily indefensible valleys, which left ridges and peaks free for Carlist
activities: indeed Cristino attempts at defence in depth had done noth-
ing to break the siege of Pamplona.107 Whilst the Carlists were amassing,
Espoz’s energies were absorbed safeguarding essential relief column sup-
plies for besieged Pamplona. Local Cristino victories at Mendaza and
then Puerta de Arquijas (12–15 December) ensured Pamplona received
supplies safely but barely altered the strategic situation.108 This remained
bleak, as Zumalacárregui’s victory the same month at Las Arquijas
attested.109 Then, inevitably, both sides yielded to the elements, with
a virtual truce over Christmas whilst Spain and the world took stock of
an alarming year of civil war.
   Zumalacárregui retired his army to his stronghold of the Améscoas
valley (Navarra) whilst Espoz had no option but to withdraw Cristino
forces from the countryside. Espoz’s background gave him an advanced
understanding of the war, but his illness usually conﬁned him to
Pamplona, and so he delegated generals to escort convoys into the
city. Espoz’s strategy was to box in Zumalacárregui by arming local
militia units as much as possible. This ran the risk that the inhabi-
tants, especially in the smaller settlements, would turn their arms over
to the Carlists, but Espoz hoped that their initial resistance would
‘soak up’ Carlist forces and free up the Cristino army for a decisive
counteroffensive. This close engagement strategy would turn on the
Cristinos’ clinging on to villages in the valley of Baztán (Navarra),
especially its local capital, Elizondo, as this region controlled access
to French customs revenues and contained valuable arms factories like
Orbaiceta.110 Espoz’s strategy was clearly informed by his ideology, a
form of Bonapartist Liberalism dictating that the people be armed for
authoritarian ends.111 He could claim a common touch (he wrote a
number of key proclamations in Euskera). Like any Bonapartist, Espoz
harmonised Cristino military with civilian administration and proved
tolerant towards civic Carlism, but also intervened ruthlessly when-
ever this turned to violence or reprisals. Thus, when Zumalacárregui
raided the Baztán he imprisoned the wives of absent Cristino soldiers
