                                            The Basque Phase, 1833–35   63


closed off the Mediterranean to all but the most intrepid volunteers for
Carlism.74
   But from the landward side there was one volunteer who would not
be kept out of Spain. Don Carlos’s exodus through Portugal was remark-
able, even more his escape from exile in Britain. Reaching Spanish soil
via the Pyrenees at Urdax in July 1834 – around the same time as the
massacre of his beloved Jesuits in Madrid – Don Carlos ﬁnally gave the
insurrection its natural leader.75 This was a far cry from the months of
exile in Portugal. There the Pretender’s supply trains had been seized
by Rodil’s vanguard and his entourage reduced to scavenging potatoes.
Rodil had almost captured Don Carlos himself, a feat which earned him
Quesada’s incumbency. But this reward backﬁred when news shocked
both Rodil and his government – Don Carlos had reached Spain to pre-
side over the insurgency.76 Some of Madrid’s blindness in this affair may
be attributed to the Cristinos’ poor diplomatic connections resulting
from six years of miguelista control of Lisbon.77 Even though the pedris-
tas captured the Portuguese capital in 1833, the new Cristino legation
in the city had been powerless to inﬂuence Britain’s usual hegemony
in Portugal, in particular the latter’s resolve to undermine the Carlists
by exiling Don Carlos from Iberia, in the same way that the exiling of
Dom Miguel had ended the Portuguese civil war. Upon the Pretender’s
arrival in Britain, the Cristino ambassador in London at last managed
some intercession. Although Foreign Secretary Palmerston protested he
could not hold Don Carlos prisoner, he made the Pretender give his
word that he would not leave Britain, and in any case satisﬁed Cristino
foreign policy by signing the Quadruple Alliance. In the long term this
alliance augured well for Cristino Spain, as it united the constitutional
monarchies of Britain, France, Spain and Portugal in diplomatic sup-
port for Madrid, and was followed by agreements to raise volunteers in
these countries for service in Spain. As this alliance brought Europe’s
two foremost powers to the aid of the Cristinos, an unqualiﬁed Carlist
victory was now highly unlikely. At the heart of the alliance was the
Anglo-French ‘Liberal international’ of Whigs and Orleanists. Whereas
London used this to support a new era of Liberal interventionism in for-
eign policy, Paris used it to help fend off legitimism at home (Orleanist
fears had been evoked by an abortive rising in the Vendée in 1832). But
in the immediate term the alliance fell at the ﬁrst hurdle when Don
Carlos escaped from London, making for Brighton, then Dieppe, Paris
and Bordeaux and Bayonne, and ﬁnally Spain. Don Carlos was himself
amazed, whispering to his companion, Auguet Saint-Sylvain, ‘My good
cousin of the Orleans dynasty is very far from suspecting that I’m going
