                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   77


weaknesses in Espoz’s strategy by dispatching guerrillas to harass multi-
ple Cristino fortiﬁed centres simultaneously, always reserving his main
effort for Bilbao. Eraso was aided both by increasing defections from
Cristino ranks (during the ﬁrst ten days of March alone some 76 men
and an ofﬁcer defected) and by crisis within Bilbao. The Basque capital
was in the grip of an economic crisis caused by the inﬂux of refugees,
mainly from the exposed coastal towns of Portugalete, Bermeo and
Lequeitio, and by the paralysis caused by rural Carlism to local eco-
nomic activity.148 The world anticipated some sort of decision at the
Vizacayan capital; Carlists indeed hoped that their capture of this port
would trigger decisive aid from Metternich’s Europe. International inter-
est in Bilbao also magniﬁed reports of atrocities. On one occasion some
37 Cristino soldiers captured by the besiegers outside the city walls were
shot in reprisal for the killing of three wounded Carlists. The Carlists
castrated some of their victims, as if playing out the emasculation trope
of dynastic propaganda.149
   Mounting atrocities like these alarmed European opinion, and caused
the British expert on Spanish affairs, Lord Wellington, to dispatch a
humanitarian mission under the politician and diplomat, Lord Eliot,
and his adjunct, the Peninsular War veteran, Colonel John Gurwood.
The ‘Eliot Treaty’ which resulted from this mission gave quarter to
regular Carlist and Cristino troops who surrendered in the Basque
country, allocating them mutually recognised prisoner-of-war camps, or
‘depots’, from which they were to be exchanged at regular intervals.
Both Zumalacárregui and Cristino War Minister Valdés agreed that the
treaty could be ‘extended if the war reaches other places’, even though
the Cristinos were horriﬁed by this prospect.150 In fact, this humanitar-
ian mission by their Quadruple Alliance ally poisoned Cristino politics,
especially later in the war when pressure grew from some quarters
to extend the treaty to the irregular war raging in Catalonia and the
Maestrazgo. Both Left and Right Liberals protested that the treaty treated
the Carlists as equals, and even worked in their favour as their forces
were numerically inferior. Left Liberals protested that the treaty allowed
the Carlists to exclude militiamen, foreigners and Cristino free corps
from quarter, licensing them in particular to massacre any militiamen
they captured. As one Bilbao Radical complained whilst his city was
under Carlist siege: ‘here is a treaty which carefully excludes the mili-
tia, the very pith of the popular cause . . . The Spanish Generals ought
to have spurned the mere idea of bargaining for their own safety at the
cost of the families who fed, clothed, and paid them.’151 Other Liber-
als in safe urban centres shared the same indignation in the press.152
