                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   73


extra-parliamentary radicalism to re-emerge, the ﬁrst manifestation of
which was the Radical Isabelina Society. Government listlessness in
response to the anti-Jesuit massacres encouraged the Radical Isabelina
Society to act. Meeting in secret on 20 July whilst the cinders of Madrid’s
monasteries were still warm, the society’s leader, the now elderly Romero
Alpuente mobilised a petition of prominent leftists to the Queen-Regent,
saying that the Royal Statute was too restrictive and asking for it to be
replaced by a Constituent Assembly tasked with introducing a version
of the Belgian Constitution. The petitioners threatened street barricades
if these demands were not met. But whereas the government was pre-
pared to overlook anti-clerical violence, the threat to the monarchy
posed by advanced Liberal elites was another matter. The conspiracy
was quickly penetrated, but despite the arrest of Romero Alpuente and
such other Radical elites as the leader of the dissolved Santander junta,
Flórez Estrada, the network was so wide and well connected that only
Eugenio de Aviraneta e Ibargoyen, an experienced Liberal conspirator
and veteran of Spain’s last attempt to reconquer Mexico, was actually
convicted and imprisoned. Aviraneta was the easiest Isabelina leader-
ship scapegoat for the government. But Madrid’s Liberals did not forget
him. Aviraneta was allowed to keep abreast of politics from his prison
cell, a concession which, so Liberal opinion fumed, had to be wrenched
from the Apostolic ‘Junta of Selva’, a group of Carlist political prison-
ers who informally determined which privileges and punishments their
fellow captives might receive.134 The notion of Carlist prisoners running
a prison in the Cristino capital is almost as striking as the subsequent
story of Aviraneta, whom the 1835 revolution would free from captivity
and elevate to the leading counter-espionage role in Liberal politics.
   The Carlist state would also become politically divided, between
theocratic and enlightened absolutist factions, jostling in a notori-
ously Byzantine court. Indeed, Don Carlos’s civilian court faced several
problems improving Zumalacárregui’s military state. Lacking formal
diplomatic recognition, even from sympathetic absolutist powers, the
Carlists lacked predictable foreign ﬁnancial support. The Carlist com-
mander in Catalonia, the ill-fated Count Romagosa, may have managed
to secure a substantial donation from Turin, but British markets were
the most lucrative, and this foremost ally of Cristino Spain blocked
most private Carlist efforts to tap London loan markets. Privately con-
tracted arms shipments frequently failed to reach the Carlists either
because cargoes were impounded in French and British ports or because
they were intercepted by Quadruple Alliance seapower before they could
reach the safety of the Carlist-held coastline.135 Therefore, populations
