76   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


have. Unlike at Villafranca, the Cristinos yielded the town, evacuating
safely under cover of night and rainfall. Whilst the Cristino rearguard
fought off Zumalacárregui’s cavalry pursuit, the vanguard faced the
wrath of Espoz, who arrested the ‘cowardly’ garrison commander and
his ofﬁcers.146 Espoz knew that the Carlist ring was tightening on the
sensitive Baztán valley, but his exhortations for a maximum effort
sounded hollow as defeatism swept his ranks. When Zumalacárregui,
on 19 March, made a second attempt at Echarri-Aranaz on the key
Pamplona–Vitoria road, the town yielded after a short bombardment
from El Abuelo, the Cristino ofﬁcers accepting terms to keep their swords
and withdraw to Pamplona, whilst the subaltern ranks (including the
artillery), who were also free to go, chose to serve under the Carlists
rather than their own ofﬁcers. These defectors were amazed to discover
the still shoestring nature of the attack: El Abuelo’s bore had worn out
just as the garrison accepted terms (Carlist soldiers joked that it had gone
quiet due to it being ‘promoted’ to lieutenant-colonel), whilst the par-
simonious Zumalacárregui uncharacteristically bribed the inhabitants
with scarce money in lieu of sustaining a full garrison of occupation.
He had now consolidated his communications between Guipúzcoa and
Navarra; Espoz, by contrast, had to abandon and destroy the nearby
fort at Olazagutía, which had now been rendered indefensible.147 Espoz
thus lost hope in destroying the Carlist army in open battle, and instead
focused on holding fortiﬁed towns, and absorbing virtually all his ener-
gies escorting supply convoys. And when fresh troops became available
for a major offensive in April (see below), they failed to wrest the initia-
tive from the Carlists. For the Carlists, meanwhile, only one prize now
mattered.
   Carlist legend says that Zumalacárregui opposed the decision to
besiege Bilbao. Rather, Vitoria, so Zumalacárregui thought, was an eas-
ier target, whose fall could easily be followed by a general offensive
towards Madrid. As he would be killed during this siege, it was com-
forting for the Carlists to read infallibility – and martyrdom – into their
fallen leader. Certainly, the overruling of Zumalacárregui on the Bilbao
question gave the court a pretext for bringing its commander-in-chief
to heel. But early events also strengthened the court’s case. Bilbao was
blockaded from the land as early as March 1835, and illness and exhaus-
tion forced Espoz to resign his command only weeks later. This deprived
the Cristino cause of an experienced counter-insurgent strategist and
Basque speaker. Also, the Bilbao operation was led by Zumalacárregui’s
second-in-command, the very able Francisco Benito de Eraso, who had
fought Espoz during 1822–23 and again in 1830, and who probed the
