74   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


under Carlist control had to shoulder the burden, which meant Navarra,
Alava, Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa (in that descending order of magnitude).
A junta collected income from customs posts which the Carlists had
seized along the French frontier, monies were raised from Basque and
Navarrese clergy, especially during Lent (‘a crisis time for the cause of
Isabel II’136 ), titles and ofﬁces were sold, and other income was found
in ﬁnes, both in an ad hoc (i.e. against local Cristino sympathisers) and
organised basis, such as the 20,000 duros ﬁne imposed on Cristino com-
munities that came under Carlist occupation in the Baztán. Don Carlos’s
arrival had brought some new money from international sympathisers,
but also court sinecures who frittered away the budget.137 Nominally, the
Carlist war economy was dwarfed by the economic and demographic
potential of the Cristino zone, even though revolution there meant that
this was not optimised. Carlist geostrategic inferiority could only be
overcome by formal and substantial diplomatic support. And this, in
turn, could only be won by decisive victories on the battleﬁeld to make
foreign powers view the Carlists as a regime in waiting instead of a mere
rural insurgency.
   The year 1835 seemed to promise the Carlists such an outcome.
Bloody three-day actions opened on New Year’s Day at Celandieta and
Ormáiztegui were defensive victories for Zumalacárregui (they were
falsely reported as Cristino victories in San Sebastián where the Mili-
tia had to rescind victory celebrations).138 Zumalacárregui intensiﬁed
pressure on besieged Cristino towns by employing guerrilla forces. The
Cristino army could win few victories, and those it did win were
ineluctably skewed by political and careerist considerations. General
Córdova, whose later leadership of the Army of the North I address
in Chapter 5, felt his role in the victory had been downplayed and
offered Madrid his resignation in protest; Madrid appeased him with
the comandancia of the Basque provinces, replacing the American wars
veteran, Canterac, who was made Captain-General of Madrid. Political
pressure, buoyed by a radicalised press, exhorted Cristino commanders
to win victories no matter what the cost. Zumalacárregui was dislodged
by overwhelming enemy numbers at Orbiso on 17 January 1835, and
this was subsequently celebrated as a Cristino victory, even though
the Cristinos then abandoned their useless territorial gain, allowing
Zumalacárregui to claim the ﬁeld.139 Two weeks later Zumalacárregui
repulsed a Cristino attempt to seize the bridge at Arquijas, in cir-
cumstances which summed up the Cristino quandary: Córdova and
Oráa saw their communications paralysed by Carlist interception, and
