72   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


with political oxygen. Popular disaffection was heightened because
Carlist violence obliged Liberals to explain often elite-driven reforms
in the strident language of liberty. In order to rally Spain to reject
Don Carlos, it was necessary to make the cause of the infant Isabella
that of liberty against despotism, constitutional government against
absolutism and civilisation against barbarism. Thus, the government
decision in February 1834 to create the Urban Militia on a very lim-
ited basis was quickly overturned by a press campaign, which saw this
force’s expansion as a tripwire against despotism. By the end of the
year the Militia contained about 200,000 effectives, one-third of whom
were unarmed.129 Political newspapers, which were permitted for the
ﬁrst time since the Triennium, exercised unprecedented importance
in radicalising the politics of the Cristino zone. Strict censorship laws
passed in January and June 1834 would be swept away in the revolu-
tion of 1836.130 The Eco del Comercio was mouthpiece to the Left-Liberals
(known as the exaltados – ‘hotheads’ – and, after 1836, progresistas),
whilst more radical, Republican journals emerged besides. The Right-
Liberals (moderados) were represented by a succession of titles (La Abeja,
El Español, El Castellano, El Correo Nacional, El Piloto). The civil war thus
ushered in a recognisably bipartisan political system. The Carlist press,
by contrast, constrained by territory and prior censorship throughout
the conﬂict, failed to evolve. Its ofﬁcial gazette, of which Metternich
despaired for its inquisitorial, sermon-like quality and blindness to
positive propaganda opportunities, was the Gaceta Oﬁcial.131 Just like
the Liberal press with its correspondence, the Carlist Gaceta ﬂourished
on the correspondence of fellow travellers, especially civic Carlists in
Cristino territory. This led Cristino authorities to destroy as many edi-
tions of the Gaceta as came into their hands.132 Liberal newspapers, by
contrast, due to their sheer quantity, inﬁltrated the Carlist zone and
permeated Cristino territory where they became a vehicle for political
parties and revolution.
   Newspaper opinion was central to pressurising María Cristina into
yielding to progressive reform. In April 1834, the Royal Statute (Estatuto
Real) was ‘granted’ by the Crown to the nation. But the bicameral Cortes
it established was even more restrictive with regards to suffrage than
the French Charte of 1814, and only 27 representatives of the 188-
strong lower house had been deputies during the Triennium, and fewer
still exaltados.133 Much of its conservatism was overruled by liberalising
decrees in 1835 before the Statute itself was abrogated the following
year, but this liberalism had to be wrested from a Queen-Regent who
remained almost absolutist in her political instincts. The war caused
