                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   71


in authority. This tense situation was soon made worse by the execu-
tion of a cabal of conspirators led by a purged army ofﬁcer. They failed
to raise Seville for Don Carlos, but not before renewed riots and a pru-
dent decision by the Cristino authorities to execute the conspirators in
secret.124
   Tensions grew between mobilised militiamen and civilian popula-
tions in either front-line or bandit-infested areas. By the summer of
1834, Cuevillas had returned from Portugal and was invading several
rural communities in the province of Logroño, and Cristino mobile
Militia was sent out on a punitive expedition. Unable to catch up
with Cuevillas, the militia nonetheless ﬁned villages which ‘failed to
report’ the transit of Carlists, whilst militiamen were also entitled to
claim ‘expenses’ incurred whilst away on campaign.125 Militiamen sent
on fruitless campaigns to exterminate Carlist bands often vented their
frustrations on civilians. Irregular risings to the south of Madrid that
summer caused a tense atmosphere in Ciempozuelos, where the Urban
Militia rampaged in reprisal for the killing of one of their number in a
tavern. This arrogant paramilitarism was ﬂawed because it tied the exer-
cise of Liberal patriotism on terms favourable to the Militia to the use of
force. To some extent violence against non-combatants was understand-
able in a civil war which was both highly localised and asymmetrical.
But Cristino heavy-handedness often recoiled on the authorities. When
a June 1834 tax riot in Corella (Aragón) was brutally suppressed by
militiamen, the population responded with cries of ‘¡Viva Carlos V!’126
In Novelda (Alicante), local people proclaimed the Pretender in protest
at the continued imprisonment of hundreds of men who, in December
1833, had attempted a Carlist rising. In this case, the Militia likewise
brutally cleared the streets, banishing ﬁve ringleaders, and forbidding
meetings in the open.127 The terrible – and sometimes liberating –
choices that civilian communities were forced to make in this war would
be starkest during the years of ‘deep war’ between 1836 and 1837. In the
meantime, the civilian experience of the war, at the hands of both
Carlist and Cristino forces, created its own community of sacriﬁce which
had a distinctive impact on popular politics. Fundamentally, civilians
under Cristino control resented conscription. The ‘blood tax’ by the end
of 1834 was set at 8,000 reales, a sum beyond the means of all but a
select few, and draftees could not easily escape, as communities had to
provide replacements for any of their number who failed to enlist or
soldiers who subsequently deserted.128
   The blood sacriﬁces demanded by the Cristino regime poisoned the
popular reception of its Liberal project whilst also providing Radicals
