                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   75


Oráa ended up advancing onto the wrong enemy ﬂank, allowing
Zumalacárregui to defeat both armies in detail.140
   Whilst the Cristino army was bogged down, the Carlists were suc-
cessful in a series of localised offensives to expand their hold on the
Basque country. In the front line was the Baztán, whose hard-pressed
Militia felt abandoned by the Cristino army. Elizondo was terrorised by
artillery bombardment: such was the panic that the town’s women were
allowed to leave to take their chances with the surrounding Carlists.
The town made desperate appeals for reinforcements from Pamplona
but Espoz, conscious of Pamplona’s precarious situation, at ﬁrst rejected
these. Espoz himself begged Madrid for more reinforcements, but those
that arrived were of insufﬁcient quantity and quality.141 War Minister
Llauder, himself so recently a royalist and accustomed to seeing Espoz
as a revolutionary, was reluctant to send him reinforcements, and did
not believe his remark that ‘it did not matter whether Juan or Pedro
are War Minister as I know how to obey’.142 Rather, Llauder was one of
the ﬁrst moderados to utter a preference for an international rather than
national solution to the conﬂict, precisely so as to avoid Espoz’s revo-
lutionism. Espoz would soon have his revenge by publicly condemning
the leftist Cardero rising of January 1835, thereby placing the blame
for its success entirely on Llauder’s shoulders.143 Meanwhile, as besieged
Elizondo began to starve, pressure mounted on Espoz to send a relief
force, which he scraped together by mobilising Pamplona’s militia cav-
alry. But this suffered a reverse at Larráinzar, where Espoz himself was
almost captured by the Carlists after a series of errors which histori-
ans have explained along partisan lines.144 Espoz eventually relieved
Elizondo and made a brutal example of the nearby village of Lekaroz,
which had been a Carlist thorn in the Cristino side of the Baztán cap-
ital, executing three male residents and relenting only when villagers
marked for execution disclosed the whereabouts of three buried Carlist
cannon. Carlists condemned Espoz for repeating his terrorism during
the Triennium at Castellfullit. But to the Carlist cry to avenge Lekaroz,
the Cristinos answered with Villafranca. Espoz defended his ruthless-
ness as stiffening the resolve of front-line Cristino communities and
intimidating other Carlist villages.145
   But a pattern had emerged whereby a Cristino local victory in one area
would be cancelled out by two defeats elsewhere. Whilst Espoz relieved
Elizondo, Zumalacárregui took Los Arcos after a bloody siege involving
artillery which the Cristino garrison – accustomed to seeing the enemy
as insurgents rather than a regular army – assumed the Carlists could not
