78   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


The treaty touched a raw nerve in terms of inter-service rivalry, and
the behaviour of Spanish ofﬁcers increased leftist grievances. Episodes
abounded of Cristino ofﬁcers’ callousness towards the Liberals’ Mili-
tia. When the Cristino commander of Ochandiano surrendered his
town to Zumalacárregui, he negotiated the safe handover of his horses
but neglected to negotiate anything for the town’s Militia garrison.153
Episodes likes these fed a popular martyrdom complex and primed the
‘people-in-arms’ to start the revolution of the juntas in 1835. In the
meantime, the Eliot Treaty could not have come at a worse time for
Cristino fortunes, for Valdés signed it only days after having left his
Ministry to replace Espoz in the command of the Army of the North in
order to mount what turned out to be a disastrous offensive.
   On 18 April 1835, the Army of the North mounted the biggest cam-
paign of the war so far, involving some 21,000 Cristino soldiers, which
led on 22 April to the Battle of Améscoas. Valdés’s offensive aimed to
destroy the Carlist army in its ‘den’ of the valley of Améscoas in Navarra,
which Zumalacárregui had developed as a redoubt in the early days of
the insurgency. The army invaded as pincers, one arm led by Valdés
and the other by Córdova from his base at Vitoria. The Cristinos’ 34
battalions vastly outnumbered the 11 which Zumalacárregui had com-
mitted for defence (his main effort was massing against Bilbao) but
the Carlists’ signature tactics of ambush and superior local intelligence
hampered the invaders’ progress. Early success by Córdova’s pincer at
destroying Carlist depots proved a false dawn when his men lost disci-
pline and gorged on the supplies Carlist civilian evacuees had stashed
in oak boughs. Both Cristino armies lost around half their effectives to
desertion during the two-week campaign, and these losses were com-
pounded by suffering as the Cristinos’ ﬂimsy footwear broke on the
notoriously tough limestone terrain and their supplies broke down.
The hunger of Valdés’s men drove most of their effectives away from
the planned route and towards the Carlist capital of Estella instead.
Even though they occupied Estella, their ignorance of local geogra-
phy and a complete breakdown of communications caused the Cristino
columns to ﬁre on each other the whole night before the occupation.
Meanwhile, Zumalacárregui’s rearguard wore out Córdova’s force with
repeated ambushes, especially at night, which meant the Cristino force
which reached Artaza, the gateway to the Améscoas valley, on 22 April,
was hungry, sleep-deprived and diminished. Zumalacárregui issued a
halt order, and repulsed the Cristino attack despite his three-to-one
inferiority, inﬂicting over 700 fatalities. The Cristino line broke and
the demoralised soldiers ﬂed for their lives, vanishing into the hills,
