                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   85


Córdova contracted 1,000 muleteers, of whom some 700 presented for
work (not enough, but a valuable addition nonetheless). But as these
men routinely went unpaid, or were paid only in arrears, most ended
up deserting. Córdova blamed the political leadership for these failings,
and owing to the revolution of the juntas in September 1835, his sup-
ply situation deteriorated still further as Radical juntas exercised their
‘sovereignty’.17
   The everyday life of the Cristino soldier and the ofﬁcer on campaign
was thus precarious in the extreme. Letters to ofﬁcers from loved ones
at best arrived twice per week when soldiers were in garrison, and not at
all when they were on campaign. Relatives might send mail to fortresses
and towns which approximated the soldiers’ whereabouts, but there was
no guarantee that recipients would pass through.18 Billets were dreary
and unwelcoming: Pamplona, Vitoria and even San Sebastián lay under
close blockade. Only Bilbao, with its busy port and entertainments, was
a popular posting, at least for ofﬁcers. But as for the ranks, foreign
observers of both Cristino and Carlist sympathies agreed upon their dire
state. Pro-Carlist Honan remarked: ‘(Cristino conscripts) were chieﬂy
boys from sixteen to twenty years; many of them in tatters, and present-
ing most ungainly specimens. They took all opportunities of deserting,
and some old soldiers escorted them from town to town to prevent it.’19
A British Legion ofﬁcer in San Sebastián, for his part, saw wonders in his
allies’ predicament:20

  The Queen’s recruits are mainly short, poorly clothed and worse fed.
  It is a mystery to me how any man can survive on their fare: meatless
  rations of rice some days, boiled vegetables with an ounce of bacon
  on others, coarse dark bread, no wine, and the meanest serving of
  rough spirits on Sundays.

In fact, this diet compared favourably with that of the civilian popula-
tion: it has been estimated that in 1834 only some 13 per cent of Spain’s
population, some 1,550,000 out of 12,000,000, ate meat as part of their
diet.21 But food supplies were erratic, especially at times of revolution,
which fed a spiral of popular radicalisation, and the war for supplies was
a constant Achilles heel for the Cristinos.
   Meanwhile, politics radicalised in Cristino Spain. A pre-emptive
rightist coup was plotted by Manuel Llauder: the ministerial La Abeja
newspaper, on 18 January 1835, called for a military dictator to come
to power and end the war. Llauder, meanwhile, ordered a levy of 25,000
men into the army and that martial law be imposed on the Urban Militia
