                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   89


governor did the Radicals’ bidding, presiding over a tablet-laying cer-
emony honouring the Constitution of 1812 and collecting signatures
for a petition to the Queen-Regent protesting the states of siege. The
moderado government was losing control of its rearguard.35
   Málaga, one of the most Liberal cities in the kingdom, had been rad-
icalised by a civil war whose front line lay hundreds of miles away,
and both central and regional authorities were heeding its example.
Ofﬁcers needed special leave to enter Madrid and a mass purge of the
Urban Militia was decreed. Captains-general were empowered to assem-
ble military committees against anyone disturbing the peace and a
crackdown was ordered on La Isabelina and other secret societies. But
central government decrees were countered by a Radical double regime
at local levels. Cristino militiamen cleansed town halls of symbols of
absolutism, especially the ﬂags of the disbanded Royalist Volunteers,
and organised revolutionary symbols in their stead, such as a marble
statue of Riego in Seville and a cenotaph to intimidate priests and pro-
Carlists.36 Civil governors publicly burnt police ﬁles from the Ominous
Decade, channelling revolutionary tension and also removing evidence
of their own collusion with the police state.37 It took little to turn this
atmosphere into violence against both real and imagined Carlist ﬁfth
columnists. In Zaragoza, a Cristino priest led a mob against the pseudo-
Carlist archbishop. The violence intensiﬁed as part of the militia went
over to the assailants, and several clerics were killed. Three clerics were
also killed in Murcia on 6 April 1835.38 More serious violence ﬂared up
again in Zaragoza on the night of 5 July 1835 when some 11 clerics were
killed, and similar killings followed in Barcelona. In both places, the
militia stood by as the mobs burned convents and monasteries, a few
hours later, most actually went over to the side of the assailants.39 The
militia stepped in to halt the riots only at the point when the crowd,
having satiated itself on the Church property, moved on to rob nearby
shops.40 Assaulting the Church was one thing, but property was sacred,
and the ‘safety valve’ of popular anti-clericalism could not be allowed to
recoil on Liberal interests. Drawing on this lesson, the military governor
of Huesca forestalled similar riots in his provincial capital by temporarily
evacuating the nuns from their convents and placing them in asylums
which were protected by militiamen he could trust.41 The Cristino mil-
itary was seeing its supremacy challenged by the rising radicalism of its
Militia rivals. Whereas Zaragoza’s captain-general conﬁded his fears to
paper, noting how ‘popular heroes were being made out of the militia
who committed the most atrocious crimes’,42 violence in other Cristino
cities soon forced the military to more drastic reactions.
