82   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


walls were breached on 14 June, but the Militia managed to secure the
gap. Even though the Carlists, as always, managed to work miracles with
their limited artillery, two of their guns were so worn that their bores
split. The Carlists were too exhausted to continue the assault on the
night of 14 June, and the Cristino batteries opened up a counter-ﬁre.
Mirasol had scoured the northern front for spare artillery, as far aﬁeld
as San Sebastián. British and French gunboats were also active in the
River Nervión, and the allies accepted Mirasol’s request to strip their
vessels of some of their guns in order to bolster the defences of the city.
Mirasol’s resourcefulness was matched by a chance catastrophe in the
enemy camp. On 18 June, Zumalacárregui was wounded outside the
walls and died a week later.2 Zumalacárregui’s death turned him into
a Carlist legend, at the right hand of such patriotic ﬁgures as Pelayo
and El Cid.3 Carlism was deprived of its ﬁrst and last undisputed leader,
and no sooner had Zumalacárregui died that rumours abounded that he
had been poisoned by Don Carlos’s court.4 It was therefore strange that
early Cristino responses included panic as well as triumphalism. The
consulate at Bayonne repeated ill-digested rumours that the Quadru-
ple Alliance was abandoning plans to reinforce the Cristinos with some
3,000 Polish émigré infantry who had been awaiting embarkation from
Southampton; news of Zumalacárregui’s death, it seemed, convinced
Paris and London that the war would now be short and that interven-
tion was both unnecessary and dangerous in view of renewed legitimist
plots in France.5 In fact, Liberal Polonophilia in the wake of the recent
Russian repression of Poland had exaggerated the real ﬁgure of 500
infantry, and these Poles would still reach Spain as part of the French
Foreign Legion (and they would be joined the following year by three
Polish cavalry squadrons).6 Rumours and half-truths shaped the Carlist
War like no other.
   Cristno spirits were raised when a relief force led by General Manuel
Latre, a veteran of the Riego revolution, forced a gap in the Carlist
siege line. On 26 June, Don Carlos appeared in person before Bilbao,
but this emboldened rather intimidated the defenders. When a particu-
larly savage bombardment on the morning of the 27th opened a breach
in the walls, into it sprang soldiers and the artillerymen of the Urban
Militia, even British Royal Marines, the shock troops of the Quadruple
Alliance, all of whom displayed doggedly high morale, shouting vivas
to Isabel II and liberty.7 Seeing this resolve, on 27 June Eraso made a
plea for the besieged to surrender, promising even to show mercy to
the Militia as the Carlists recently had at Villafranca and Vergara. But
the resolve of the Militia, Quadruple Alliance and even Bilbao women
