                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   83


who answered the sound of shellﬁre with piano music and dancing,
emboldened Mirasol to reject capitulation.8
   The Carlist siege was formally broken by the arrival, on 30 June, of
a Cristino relief force led by Córdova, acting head of the Army of the
North. The Carlists had ﬁred a total of 1,580 projectiles into Bilbao,
and, in all, more than 200 soldiers and militiamen had been killed or
wounded (no exact ﬁgures exist for civilians).9 On the one hand, the
Carlists had been defeated by the Cristino defence: Bilbao’s Militia had
excelled in urban point defence, giving time for the relief force, and
the propaganda value of the Liberal ‘people in arms’ surged in the wake
of the victory.10 On the other hand, the Carlists also defeated them-
selves via internal dissent. The Carlist court was riven with intrigue and
animosity. Maroto and Eraso disliked each other whilst Villemur, the
French émigré of the 1790s and now Carlist prime minister (‘Universal
Minister’) disliked Zumalacárregui. These court divisions in part resulted
in the Cristino relief force from Portugalete relieving Bilbao. Sturdier
siegeworks and more intense bombardment might have taken the city,
so the Carlists reckoned.
   Meanwhile, the death of Zumalacárregui and the victory at Bilbao
gave the Cristino side the initiative for the ﬁrst time since the Améscoas
offensive. Strategically, the situation showed promise: on 17 March
1835, Madrid had decreed the creation of a Reserve Army comprising
both regular troops and, controversially for the Cristino Left, mobile
militia, to be based in Castile to combat both Carlist incursions from
Navarra and guerrilla activity behind the front line. Valdés’s failure to
lead the lifting of the siege of Bilbao had cost him his job, and on
2 July 1835, he was replaced as commander-in-chief by Luis Fernández
de Córdova.11 A royalist during the Triennium and diplomat during the
Ominous Decade, Córdova’s career was tarnished by a notorious alterca-
tion in 1831 with Prime Minister Calomarde. But Córdova returned to
favour after the transition and became an intimate ally of the Queen-
Regent.12 For the ﬁrst time since the appointment of Espoz the previous
November, the Cristinos had a commander with real vision, albeit a very
different one (Córdova planned a static war of attrition). The Carlists,
by contrast, never found a replacement equal to Zumalacárregui. The
hero’s successor, Vicente González Moreno, was 58 years old – almost
20 years older than Córdova. Moreno’s Ominous Decade had honoured
the Liberal black legend: as Captain-General of Granada he had presided
over the execution of Torrijos. The ‘Hangman of Málaga’ also alienated
his own side: in 1827, he had supported Calomarde’s anti-Carlism and
had timorously ﬂed possible retribution from vengeful Liberals after
