88   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


showing of the Royal Navy ﬂag off the northern coast would cow the
rebels, and also that the French would send in an army.32 But Britain
would not move. Westminster knew that greater intervention in Spain
would need another Act of Parliament and that this would be rejected
by a resurgent Tory opposition, in both chambers, which was either neu-
tral or Carlist in sympathy. If the reactionary Northern Powers tried to
put Charles X on the French throne, then Britain would act, but for the
time being Britain thought that the Spanish Liberals could manage by
themselves. The only olive branch was an undertaking not to oppose
a stronger intervention from the French side. But France would only
intervene after a British security guarantee against the Northern Powers,
which was not forthcoming. The absence of an interventionist French
army, which Interior Minister Thiers desired for purely expansionist rea-
sons, fatally weakened the de la Rosa government and strengthened the
hand of the Radicals.33
   Meanwhile, the Cristino home front beyond Madrid underwent radi-
calisation. In March 1835, Málaga saw riots provoked by the supposedly
lenient treatment of a few Carlists behind bars and the militarisation
of the citizens’ force for service in the Serranía de Ronda. The mili-
tary governor and de la Rosa’s relative, Nicolás de Isidro purged the
citizens’ force of troublemakers, only to ﬁnd a trenchant rival in the
civil governor, who publicly sided with the militia. The clash between
the heavy-handed military governor and the more conciliatory civil
governor resulted in a power vacuum which the militia ﬁlled. Fearing
that what had happened in Madrid could follow in Málaga, Isidro tried
to disperse the crowd, only to be thwarted by a local agitator, Miguel
Deomarco (a tinker by trade and progenitor to a Radical dynasty in
Málaga), whose cry of ‘¡Viva la Constitución!’ rallied the militia to defy
martial law. The following day saw a funeral cortège of a dead mili-
tiaman pass by Isidro’s residence, playing the Riego Hymn. An order
the following day prohibiting subversive music and establishing a cur-
few went unheeded, and the situation spiralled quickly out of control.34
When, on 22 March, the militiamen were summoned to hear a War Min-
istry circular about discipline, they broke ranks and marched into the
town square shouting vivas to the Constitution. Three days of stand-
off followed, as rival factions patrolled the streets: the civil power led
by the militia who besieged Isidro’s residence, and the military power,
which had recruited a posse of some wealthy individuals who had ‘a
decided interest in re-establishing order’. Yet on 24 March, it was the
militia which triumphed, as Isidro suffered a negative pronunciamiento in
his ranks and was forced to resign and ﬂee to Granada. The replacement
