84   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


being purged of his captaincy-general in October 1832. Moreno thus
needed some military success to restore Carlist fortunes and silence his
detractors.13
   Moreno advanced the Carlist army to Mendigorría (Navarra), rashly
joining battle with the Cristinos in a tactically weak position, as the
River Arga lay behind his troops with only one bridge allowing for
the contingency of retreat. Thus battle opened on 16 July 1835, and
Córdova won his ﬁrst victory as commander-in-chief, even though his
cavalry failed to exploit this in pursuit. For the ﬁrst time, Carlist casual-
ties (some 2,000 dead) signiﬁcantly exceeded those of the Cristinos, who
lost about half this toll.14 Moreno’s hopes of silencing his critics were
thus dashed. It was suggested that Moreno hoped his reckless deploy-
ment would intimidate an enemy which had been showing every sign
of nerves, and yield the possibility of a general invasion of Castile.15
Don Carlos, who had never forgotten Moreno’s betrayal during the
Agraviados, replaced him with the ambitious Nazario Eguía, who was
of a similar age but was a career ofﬁcer and a better tactician.16
   Even though Córdova was feted in Pamplona as a hero, the strate-
gic situation was not signiﬁcantly changed. Despite Cristino defensive
victories at Bilbao and Mendigorría, the Army of the North remained
chronically undersupplied, only limited help came from outside Spain
and poor conditions made an ideal environment for Radical agitators
to subvert the army. Córdova repeatedly offered his resignation in dis-
gust but Madrid neither called his bluff nor managed to attend to his
needs. The ﬁrst problem was that the granaries and other foodstores
established in northern forts were either abandoned or empty. The sec-
ond problem was the corrupt and chaotic system of private contractors.
The government regularly defaulted on its payments to the contractors,
or asentistas, and these in turn did not supply the army, or at best, supply
would be partial, erratic and unpredictable. The largest contractor of this
chaotic scheme was Agustín Alinary, and as little as 30 per cent of his
contracted supplies actually reached the army. The third problem was
that it proved difﬁcult to surmount this shortfall by living off the land.
Cristino invaders in Navarra seldom found booty as Carlist defenders
were supplied at short range and the Royal Government issued decrees
against the hoarding of foodstuffs (Carlists invading Castile, by con-
trast, could get booty). Córdova thus had to show an administrative
and political acumen beyond his relatively young years. On the one
hand, he coerced Cristino civilian populations in his zone to shoulder
the burden of supply. This won him the loyalty of his soldiers but not of
civilians. For operations either on the actual front or in hostile territory,
