86   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to replace troops in fortiﬁed areas.22 This threat spurred a leftist coup
forged by the Isabelina and led by a junior rather than senior ofﬁcer, Lt.
Cayetano Cardero, a man with unlimited reserves of ambition. Such vet-
erans of the 1834 Isabelina as Quiroga and Palarea were to be assigned
to captaincy-generalships, whilst the cry that went up in the centre of
Madrid on 18 January was ‘Down with Llauder!’ Llauder, occupying the
all-powerful War Ministry, had got wind of the plot, including its exact
details, through his ﬂourishing network of spies and informers. But,
refusing to stop a ball being held in honour of the Queen-Regent, he
self-assuredly predicted that the plot would fail. But the Madrid rising of
18 January went far beyond Llauder’s expectations. The Captain-General
of Madrid, Canterac, was drawn into negotiations as a stand-off emerged
outside the Post Ofﬁce on the Puerta del Sol, the centre of the revolt.
Seeing that the militia had gone over to the rebellion, Canterac voiced
an appeal for the rebels to unite behind the Royal Statute, but their
response was ‘Long live liberty!’ Canterac then made an appeal to the
loyalty of a palace regiment, but this was misheard as a Carlist cry.23
A hail of bullets was the response from the rebels, who took little con-
vincing to suspect ofﬁcial collusion with the enemy, and Canterac died
instantly.24 Seeing that they had crossed the Rubicon, Cardero’s men
returned to fortify themselves in the Post Ofﬁce whilst pro-government
troops descended on the centre and opened ﬁre. Several bystanders,
especially the ubiquitous aguadores, or water-sellers, were caught in the
crossﬁre. Madrid, which had already suffered cholera and the anti-
Jesuit massacres, had now become an open battleground between the
ministerial and radical wings of Cristino liberalism.
   Eventually a ‘no-winners-no-losers’ truce was negotiated, and Cardero
was even allowed to send a petition to the nearby Cortes (the former
Radical, Argüelles, contrived to ruin the document by spilling ink over
it). Cardero and his men marched out of Madrid towards Navarra, draw-
ing the cheers of a large part of the population. At Burgos Cardero
was taken aside from his detachment and dispatched to ‘safety’ in
the Balearic Islands. But real damage had been done to the Martínez
de la Rosa government. Whereas Liberal writers explained Cardero’s
actions generously in idealistic terms, conservatives condemned the
moral defeat the rising imposed on lawfulness and respectability, and
the political cover it gave to urban criminality which had been rising
since the anti-clerical massacres of July 1834.25 In any case, such was the
powerlessness of the government that all those soldiers involved were
pardoned, Cardero even being promoted, after which, like Riego before
him, he entered the Cortes; by contrast, his soldiers were sent to the
