92   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Church. The anti-clerical massacres may have bound the executioners
together and intimidated the restrained Liberals, but they had failed as
a social prophylaxis against working-class radicalism, for the revolution-
aries killed more than 15 militiamen who were defending the works
whilst they also burned the Bonaplata to the ground. Meanwhile Bassa’s
body was dragged around the city and burnt to ashes in a bonﬁre in La
Rambla.55
   The following day, the civil governor, Pastors, who had survived the
violence, made a show of humility which won over both the anti-clerical
and working-class factions of the Left and halted further fratricidal
killing. Two prisoners were executed in a pathetic resurrection of law-
ful authority, a Carlist cabecilla (Garri) and the Radical instigator of the
Bonaplata attack (Pardinas). Llauder, his nerves wrecked, crossed into
France and exile.56 The militia was expanded from six battalions to 13 in
order to accommodate hungry workers, entrenching popular radicalism
in Barcelona.57 But matters did not rest there. Barcelona’s example was
followed by other Cristino cities threatened by Carlist encroachments.
Tarragona and Valencia, whose hinterlands were invaded by the Carlist
forces of Quílez and Serrador, both saw their prisons invaded by mobs
and several inmates lynched for ‘conspiracy’, whilst the authorities
saved more than a hundred others by hurriedly exiling them to garrison
prisons in Ceuta, North Africa. Equally, Murcia and even Zaragoza, the
latter already an exaltado stronghold saw similar violence. Seven Carlist
prisoners were executed in kangaroo courts, including Don Carlos’s con-
fessor, Blas de Hostalaza.58 The growing violence propelled attempts
ﬁrst by the toothless parliamentary opposition, and then by radicalised
militia in the provinces, to replace the moderado government with a
proactively Liberal and anti-Carlist regime.59
   The Cristino government soon discovered that it was powerless to
arrest this radicalism. A cosmetic cabinet reshufﬂe in July replaced one
restrained (moderado) prime minister with another, Martínez de la Rosa
with Count Toreno, both former Radicals who now shared a grim assess-
ment that popular opinion in the country as a whole had swayed in
favour of Carlism. They may have been right, but this guardedness
was read as defeatism, even as collusion with the enemy, in Radical
circles. On 15 August, Radicals raised the capital’s militia in rebellion,
demanding the imposition of the Constitution of 1812 and the release
from prison of the leader of the Isabelina, Eugenio de Aviraneta e
Ibargoyen.60 But this insurrection was met by a Carlist rising in some
of the poor neighbourhoods of Madrid where artisans and women sus-
tained a low-level urban guerrilla against Militia patrols. Aviraneta had
