100 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


one of the two Belgian formations, even though their ranks contained
many Portuguese and Italian Mazzinian exiles, who were the most rad-
ical Liberal internationalists. The other Belgian formation (which also
contained Portuguese and assorted nationalities) was commanded by
the Genoese Mazzinian who had fought in revolutionary wars in Italy,
Spain and Portugal, Gaetano Borso di Carminati, a Romantic conspirator
who would be executed for his part in the October 1841 rising against
Espartero’s regime.106
   The greatest manpower contribution in proportion to national popu-
lation was made by the Portuguese who, during the winter of 1835–36,
were billeted in Zamora.107 Their legion was distinct as it was for-
mally on loan from the regular Portuguese army, and included a large
minority of pardoned miguelista veterans from the Portuguese civil war.
The Portuguese auxiliaries were thus of the best quality.108 But their
questionable loyalties were complicated by the cinders of civil war in
Portugal, which included resilient miguelismo in northern Portugal on
the one hand, and Radical-Liberal revolution on the other (Radicals
under General Sá da Bandeira seized power in September 1836 but were
defeated by the moderate-Liberal ‘Revolt of the Marshals’ under General
Saldanha the following July). Such domestic uncertainty meant that
the Portuguese were reluctant to deploy their legion too far beyond
their own frontier.109 Thus, the lengthy billeting of Portuguese troops
in Zamora, far behind the nominal front line, was typical of this pol-
icy. General Córdova complained ‘I may have 2,500 Portuguese mouths
to feed but I don’t have 2,500 Portuguese arms.’110 The Portuguese faced
similar supply and remuneration problems as the other auxiliaries. Their
currency had been accepted at an agreed exchange rate, but that winter
the cash-strapped Cristino authorities devalued it in the Spanish favour.
The response was two nights of rioting as the Allies smashed up mar-
ket stalls and Spaniards retaliated with the assassination of a Portuguese
spendthrift. Finding the body of their comrade, the Portuguese ram-
paged through the streets, injuring civilians and looting and destroying
shops. The Cristino commander did not ﬁre on his allies, but restored
calm by circulating news that the Portuguese soldier had been murdered
by a ‘Carlist’.111 But trouble returned in January when Portuguese sol-
diers and Spanish market traders exchanged ﬁre over the price of olives.
Joint Luso-Cristino patrols restored calm, and the Portuguese martial
band was tactfully invited to play patriotic music at a ceremony to
restore a monument to liberty vandalised by royalists in 1823.112
   The foreign auxiliaries were not protected by the Eliot Treaty, and
could expect execution when captured. The Liberal Eco del Comercio
