                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   93


not been the only prisoner running street politics from his prison cell:
the Carlist Junta of Selva had been doing the same. Seizing the chance to
re-establish order, the moderado government mobilised army units and
conservative elements in the Militia to disband three of the capital’s
most radical Militia battalions. The War Ministry then reformed them,
ﬁltering out the Radicals.61 Powerless to resist this purge, the Radicals
replied with a pamphleting campaign. Whereas the Militia was praised
for its sacriﬁces resisting Carlism, the army was scorned as the parasitical
tool of despotism: ‘You are not the people! Nor are you Spaniards! You
don’t belong to or care about our soil and laws at all! It’s a shame you
forget that you clothe and feed yourselves on our blood and sweat!’62
   The government’s success in Madrid encouraged the Interior Min-
istry to issue a triumphalist communiqué the following day (17th),
but this sangfroid proved short-lived. Revolution was sweeping across
all provincial capitals. And gone were the days of popular riots: now
the Radicals were linking the struggle against Carlism to a positive
programme of Liberal renewal. Insurgent juntas frequently restored to
buyers the nationalised property which royalists in 1823 had conﬁs-
cated. They also tried to win over the unpropertied by abolishing the
hated consumption taxes called the derechos de puertas.63 Revolutionar-
ies, meanwhile, attacked not just Carlists but also moderado elites who
attempted resistance. In Tarragona, the governor was killed trying to
escape the revolutionaries by boat.64
   The alarmed Toreno administration reshufﬂed the cabinet again,
but no serious candidates could be made to resist the revolutionary
tide, posts being ﬁlled with the senile and politically innocent. The
ministerial Gaceta de Madrid condemned the revolutionaries as dis-
honourable cowards. But the revolutionaries were no longer leaderless.
Juntas were being formed by exaltado public ﬁgures, including members
(procuradores) of the parliamentary opposition. Even though the gov-
ernment decreed the ‘abolition’ of these juntas, this was vain rhetoric.
The government may have hoped for survival due to the 9 September
1835 proclamation from the Commander of the Army of the North,
Fernández de Córdova, that he would defend the central government.
But Córdova’s attention was absorbed containing a Carlist breakout and
suppressing mutinies in his own ranks, and he could spare only piece-
meal forces under General Latre to shore up the central government.65
At ﬁrst, Latre’s forces were successful pacifying such provincial capitals
as Burgos and Palencia, which were instinctively conservative anyway
and whose militia revolutionaries were not dispersed in the countryside.
Unlike the Carlists, the Radicals centred their militancy in towns, which
