                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   97


especially those deeper in the Cristino zone, made explicitly political
pleas. Zaragoza urged the army to disobey Madrid which was ‘the real
enemy’, Granada declared the Queen-Regent a prisoner, Badajoz con-
demned the government as ‘the real anarchists’, issuing it with a 12-day
deadline to resign, whilst Cádiz declared Toreno a traitor.85 Terriﬁed,
Toreno appealed for French help, but the French foreign minister, the
Duc de Broglie, refused. The only concession France could make had
already made. On 28 June 1835, agreement was reached to dispatch
to Spain the 4,100-strong Legión d’Algérie (the early Foreign Legion)
to Catalonia under the command of Colonel Bernelle. Prime Minister
Thiers had wanted to expand this force by some 8,000, increasing French
inﬂuence in Liberal Europe without provoking Metternich (whose pro-
Carlism, Thiers knew, had practical limits) to intervene militarily on
the Carlist side. But the Liberal interventionism of the French king was
restricted in Spanish matters: Louis-Philippe, much to the chagrin of
Liberal Europe, privately held Don Carlos’s claim to the throne to be
stronger than Isabella’s and in any case did not want Spain to become for
France what Italy was for Austria. French foreign policy never managed
to square this circle.86 Thus, by late 1835, the Legion’s Spanish pres-
ence had not expanded beyond six battalions. Nearly all its ofﬁcers were
French, but its rank and ﬁle included many Germans, Italians and Poles,
this last nationality replacing the Spanish battalion which, in Febru-
ary 1834, was disbanded for service in the Cristino army.87 The French
government, which was worried about Spanish revolution infecting its
soldiers, dispatched its Legion to combat positions only, away from the
‘contagion’ of the exaltados.88 But, despite the hopes of several moderados
for formal French assistance against the exaltados, this force would not
leave its quarantine to be drawn into Cristino domestic politics. His last
hope gone, and revolutionary death threats mounting, Toreno resigned
on 14 September and ﬂed into the safety of a French exile.89 His suc-
cessor, exaltado Juan Álvarez Mendizábal, would channel the radicalism
caused by the war. Mendizábal was the favoured candidate of Britain, the
second Quadruple Alliance great power whose auxiliary British Legion
had come to the aid of Cristino Spain in June 1835, around the same
time as the French. The arrival of organised foreign volunteers coincided
with the radicalisation of Cristino politics and had the effect of the pro-
jecting the Spanish Civil War into a world war between Absolutism and
Liberty.
   Exaltados praised the altruism of the foreign auxiliaries but criticised
their governments’ refusal to make open war on the Carlists.90 Even
though the French had a kind of cultural entrée to the Cristinos which
