                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   91


enraged popular radicalism with his policy of militarising some 40,000
Militia for want of regular troops.51 Whereas members of the Militia
did not object to being sent out of their homes on active patrol, they
did object to garrisoning distant villages and forts surrounded by rural
Carlism, where torture and summary execution often awaited those
citizen-soldiers unlucky enough to be captured alive in ambush.52
   The patricians’ ‘negative pronunciamiento’ against Llauder served
notice on him to leave Barcelona. Leaving for Mataró, Llauder left
power in the hands of his fellow Catalan who became Captain-General,
Pedro Nolasco Bassa y Gerona, and civil governor, Pedro María Pastors.
But hopes of re-establishing normal control were rendered impossible,
because the assault on the convents had unleashed the people not only
against Carlism, but also against the economic liberalism of the Cristino
elites. The eve of the war was also the eve of the modern industrial age
for Barcelona, as José Bonaplata built the country’s ﬁrst steam-powered
cotton mill, known simply as the ‘Steam’ (El Vapor) or the Bonaplata
works. The machines required fewer workers than had been custom-
ary, and even those workers the employers retained were made to do
unpopular piecework, with the measure of cloth per worker being con-
stantly widened for each wage. Meanwhile, the dislocation caused to
agriculture by the war had increased food prices more quickly than
commensurate wage rises.53 But the Bonaplata was well protected: its
owner, José Bonaplata, commanded a militia battalion which had led
the attacks on the Church, and there were middle-class vigilante juntas
besides. The propertied elites also had Captain-General Bassa on their
side, whose ‘restraint’ (moderantismo) was unequivocal. Yet the revo-
lutionaries had not dispersed since their 25 July assault. Whereas the
civil authorities dared not turn the militia against them, Bassa decided
to follow the letter of martial law by marching 1,500 troops down the
Ramblas, rounding up and imprisoning revolutionaries. The revolution-
aries tried to win over Bassa, and when this overture fell on deaf ears,
the civil authorities, on 5 August, implored him to follow Llauder into
ﬂight. But Bassa was adamant: ‘within two hours either I or the people
will have succumbed’.54 The revolutionaries held nothing but contempt
for Bassa, an armchair general who had ‘never even seen a faccioso’, and
the riot that broke out was inevitable. Bassa ﬂed to the near-deserted
Ciudadela, the eighteenth-century fortress overlooking the city, seek-
ing reinforcements in vain, but the mob broke in, cornering Bassa,
shooting him dead and defenestrating his corpse. They then moved on
to the Bonaplata. The militia battalion defending the factory failed to
pacify the revolutionaries with invectives against Don Carlos and the
