104 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Plana, Cuenca, Toledo, and Ciudad Real. Several deserters from Galicia,
Salamanca and Zamora ﬂed to Portugal. Even then, the Commander-
in-Chief of the Army of the North, Córdova, complained bitterly of
the incomprehension of the Madrid regime and of how the radicali-
sation of Liberal politics was making his task harder. Civilian Radicals
turned into armchair generals, criticising Córdova’s inaction in light
of these reinforcements. Yet Córdova complained that the revolution
had sent him conscripts who were worse than useless. They had not
passed any height or health tests, had had little training, and invariably
ended up burdening the hospital system. Municipalities across Cristino
Spain had clearly sent their most destitute and desperate sons. Córdova
was obliged to establish laborious training camps south of the Ebro,
where more conscripts deserted and ended up straining food supplies
(whereas before they had been producers). In any case, Córdova esti-
mated that only some 17,000 actually made it into service after all these
losses.138 In other words, Mendizábal had scored a great political vic-
tory in mobilising his 100,000; military victory, however, patently still
eluded him.
   The march of events at local levels escaped Mendizábal’s attempts to
manage anti-clericalism from the centre. Part of the anti-clerical atmo-
sphere in Cristino Spain may be attributed to episodes of anti-Carlist
hysteria returning with a renewed outbreak of the cholera in July 1835.
The rest was caused by the very real attempts of individual clerics to
ﬁght the Liberal revolution.139 The Cristino authorities sent suspect
monks and priests, especially in the Maestrazgo, into internal exile in
Andalucía, and from November 1835 all new entrants into religious
orders required a certiﬁcate of loyalty to Isabel II signed by the civil
governor.140 The need for deportations was clear after the 10 August
1835 Carlist rising of evicted Dominican friars in Manacor (Mallorca)
who, the Radical press alleged, ‘burnt alive’ militiamen they captured,
and whose ‘lenient’ sentences provoked a revolutionary rising by some
1,400 Militia in Palma demanding ‘a sound example be made of the
guilty to guard against future risings’.141 Other religious were terrorised
by the massacres into ﬂeeing into Carlist zones, where nuns nursed
war casualties, or even leaving into Spain altogether: several were wel-
comed to Buenos Aires where they occupied vacancies in River Plate
monasteries.142 Clerics who remained under Cristino control faced a
bleak future of eviction from disentailed monasteries and subjection to
laic authorities in the meantime, either constitutional or ‘double regime’
in nature. In the former case, the Civil Governor of Pontevedra forced
local nuns to observe night curfews and provide charity relief to war
widows, remarking impudently that the sisters should be content to do
