108 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


into the River Segre weighed down by stones. Residents at nearby set-
tlements for months afterwards avoided the river-water for drinking
and ﬁshing. Such brutality was counterproductive for Carlist campaign-
ing, as news of such outrages only served to embolden the Cristino
defence elsewhere. After Torá, on 8 August 1835, came under Carlist
siege, it resisted against appalling odds, including an all-enveloping
inferno of outlying buildings, set by the Carlists. Concepción Preciado,
wife of a Cristino captain, stepped into the breach brandishing a sabre
and goading the men on. A total of 200 Cristinos had been wounded
and some 70 killed before a relief column ﬁnally arrived to save Torá.
Pastors’s counteroffensive halted the Carlist incursion on his left, retak-
ing Guimerá and establishing a front line from there to the university
town of Cervera and Torá. This protected Barcelona by ensuring Cristino
control of southern, and a large part of central, Catalonia, but it relin-
quished much of the north and all of the far west to the Carlists, who
made a regional capital out of Berga and blockaded remaining Cristino
fortiﬁed centres (Olot’s garrison defected to the Carlists on 28 August).160
Even at his base in Cervera Pastors’s control did not extend far beyond
the town. Cervera, the base of the Aggrieved of 1827–28, had a violent
history of conﬂict between its reactionary ‘town’ and Liberal ‘gown’.161
On 12 October 1835, the Liberal university – whose students, travel-
ling to and from Barcelona, had repeatedly been robbed and attacked by
Guergué’s men – was closed.162 After Pastors repulsed a Carlist breakout
towards San Quintín on 23 October 1835, executing prisoners he had
captured, the Catalan front reached stalemate between a Carlist west
and a Cristino coastal hinterland.163
   Elsewhere the Army of the North came under political pres-
sure to match Mendizábal’s rhetoric with action. The two opposing
commanders-in-chief, Córdova and Eguía, fought a bloody stalemate at
the Carlist capital, Estella. Both sides claimed victory, Córdova because
he managed brieﬂy to occupy the capital on 16 November and Eguía
because he quickly liberated the town. Some residents who had bro-
ken cover by welcoming the Cristino occupation were imprisoned and
ransomed.164 With Cristino forces monetarily spent, Eguía chose to
strike not southwards but northwards, to seize control of the French
frontier and coastal towns garrisoned by Cristinos. The latter objec-
tive, he hoped, would mitigate Quadruple Alliance naval supremacy
by ending the growing Anglo-Cristino naval cooperation in matters of
supplying and fortifying bridgeheads. At the onset of the civil war the
Cristino navy had been small and decrepit. But Madrid acquired for-
eign steamships to sustain the blockade of the Carlist coast, and these
