                                War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   107


Juan Antonio Guergué, a purged colonel of 1833 and prominent ‘brute’
in the theocratic wing of Carlism, on 8 August 1835 led a legion
of just under 3,000 men past Córdova’s covering force and towards
Catalonia. Since the Cristinos had executed Count Romagosa, Catalan
Carlism had been in almost as much disarray as under Llauder’s early
counter-insurgency. Guerrilla bands led by Porredón, Borges, Sobrevías,
Galcerán, Vall, Masgoret, Zorrilla and, above all, Tristany, had kept the
insurgency alive, but Guergué’s expedition aimed to unite the striking
power of these bands and carve out contiguous territory.158 Taking small
towns along the way in Aragón, he intercepted diplomatic correspon-
dence from the Cristino legation in Paris which conﬁrmed Carlist hopes
that the revolution was debilitating the Cristino war effort. Guergué was
welcomed into Huesca on 16 August by local authorities who had tired
of revolution and who implemented Carlist orders to demobilise the
Militia, seize its arms and draft men of military age. Guergué enjoyed
similar success occupying an abandoned Barbastro, where he resurrected
the Royalist Volunteers of 1833 and used them to repulse an attempt by
mobile Militia to recapture the town. Crossing into Catalonia, Guergué
was joined near Tremp on 25 August by Antonio Borges’s force of 500
irregulars and then by the 3,500 Carlists of Jacinto Orteu, landowner
and ex-colonel of the Royalist Volunteers. The next day a Cristino reg-
iment at nearby Orgaña was subverted by conscripts who disarmed the
local militia and defected to Guergué’s Carlists. In two weeks Guergué’s
expedition had traversed Aragón, subverting Cristino populations and
defences at every turn. Major difﬁculties began only as he entered
Catalonia, caused both by his own Navarrese, who complained of inad-
equate food and footwear, and by a stiffening Cristino defence, owed in
part to the unpardonable excesses the revolutionaries had recently car-
ried out. Guergué sent home his troublesome Navarrese, who by now
formed a minority of his force, and concentrated on regrouping the
Catalan guerrillas: by the end of the year these numbered some 22,363
infantry and 395 cavalry.159
   Since the revolutionaries had ousted Captain-General Llauder, neither
Bassa nor Pastors had matched his counter-insurgency zeal. The revo-
lutionary crisis had ended any hopes of regular army reinforcements
creating a mobile reserve. Thus, virtually the entire Carlist offensive
was met by the Militia, ensuring hatred and atrocities on both sides.
When Carlists attacked the village of Camarasa, its 50-strong garrison
of mobile militia fortiﬁed itself in the church, but were soon smoked
out by the outnumbering Carlists and forced to surrender. All were then
executed, most by gruesome beheadings, their corpses being dumped
