                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   109


cooperated with the French and British by transporting men and sup-
plies along the Basque coast; now the Cristino navy would be at full
stretch supplying and defending coastal towns.165 A key target in this
Carlist campaign was therefore San Sebastián, on account of its wealth,
command of the French frontier and its port crammed with Quadru-
ple Alliance vessels. The close blockade had already driven hundreds
of rural refugees into the city and caused a severe shortage of fuel and
food which the shipping bottlenecks had been unable to solve; this was
compounded by the billeting of Cristino troops in private homes. San
Sebastián’s town hall had to counter-license some resident merchants to
whom Carlists had given permits to trade with their zone. These mas-
ters of no-man’s-land brought imported goods to the Carlists in return
for food and fuel for the hungry Cristinos.166
   Carlists began their assault in a swift and devastating conquest of the
fort of Arambarri, adjacent to San Sebastián, wiping out its Asturian
and Andalucían garrison. The Queen-Regent wrote to the city author-
ities, anguished that Arambarri might presage the loss of the city itself,
boosting popular radicalism: ‘it is not just that the faction is embold-
ened insufferably, but also that men may think that my government
has not undertaken precautions in the city’s defence’.167 The loss of
the fort impaired San Sebastián’s deployment of defensive artillery, and
maximised the Carlists’ effectiveness of theirs (only three – but well-
positioned – siege cannon). With the city closely blockaded, the Carlists
turned to securing the French border. In response, French General Arispe
warned the Carlists that if they assaulted the remaining Cristino border
posts, the French army would invade. The French side of the border
had been ﬁlling with refugees, including, ignominiously, the entire
Cristino Provincial Deputation of Guipúzcoa, which timidly feared
Carlist reprisals in the event of San Sebastián’s fall. The French were
afraid the war might spill over the frontier, and whilst they pursued a
hard line with the Carlists, they also ordered all Cristino refugees to
move either deeper into France or back into Spain.168 Sensibly back-
ing down to the threat of formal French intervention, Carlist General
Montenegro decided to assault San Sebastián instead. His close-range,
overnight bombardment of the city began on 6 December. In response,
all remaining 18 to 50-year-old male residents who had not already
enlisted were called into the militia.169 Montenegro hoped that the ﬂight
of city Liberals and the effect of his terror bombardment on refugees
might yield him San Sebastián through a coup from within. But the city
held fast, and the Carlists turned their ﬁre from the city to the forti-
ﬁed ex-convent of San Bartolomé. Concentrated ﬁre forced its Cristino
