110 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


garrison to withdraw into the city proper. As the pursuing Carlists occu-
pied the ruins, they burned the wooden bridge linking the remains of
the convent to the rest of the city. Therefore, San Sebastián was closely
blockaded from the landward side, but the offensive lacked the strength
to storm the city. Carlist cannon-bores had become so overworked that
Montenegro was delighted to pose as a humanitarian by agreeing to
a French-brokered ceaseﬁre to evacuate foreign civilian casualties: this
gave him time to repair his guns.170
   Meanwhile, Eguía’s next effort came on the Carlist Left, with the
assault on the fortiﬁed port of Guetaria. At ﬁrst General Córdova, as if
remembering Napoleon’s famous dictum of not interrupting an enemy
making a mistake, indulged Eguía’s strategy. The Carlist drive towards
the coast diverted attention away from the demoralised centre of his
army at Miranda del Ebro. That said, Guetaria commanded a harbour
and a promontory which could shut off most Guipúzcoan cabotage
when emplaced with coastal artillery. The Cristino garrison knew this:
when Carlist guns, on 19 December, opened ﬁre on the town, the
defenders answered with some 13 guns of their own.171 The Carlists
stormed the town, but not before virtually every building in Guetaria
had been destroyed or damaged. They did not remain long in posses-
sion, as Carlists were caught between the pincers of Espartero’s landward
march and amphibious reinforcements from Bilbao.172 Espartero’s troops
included a free corps of Cristino Basque scouts, the chapelgorris, who
were noted for their brutality and who had looted and destroyed ‘Carlist’
churches during their march.173 When they looted a ruined church
in Guetaria, however, Espartero ordered harsh reprisals. He could not
afford to alienate war-ravaged guetarense civilians and accordingly con-
demned ten chapelgorris to death, actually carrying out the sentence on
nine.174 Espartero’s disciplining of anti-Carlist Basque volunteers made
every possible wrong impression with Cristino Radicals who were still
indignant after a publicised exchange of gifts between the Cristino and
Carlist Commanders-in-Chief, and there was even talk of the need for
revolutionary justice against overbearing ofﬁcers. Espartero thought this
interference by civilians the utmost impudence, conﬁding to his wife
that he would: ‘break the heads of those who have asked for mine’.175
   Elsewhere Catalan Carlists were encroaching on the frontier with
France, causing consternation amongst Cristinos and French alike.
Unlike General Arispe in the Basque country, the governor of the border
fortress of Bellagarde appeased the Carlists by promising to permit no
more armed Cristinos into French territory. This overture recoiled on the
French: not only did it recognise the Carlists as legitimate combatants,
