106 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


grew concerned at the growing number of women visiting newly con-
ﬁscated monasteries, hitherto a closed and sexless male world which
was now the haunt of rowdy National Militia musters, and, it was
feared, copulation.153 In Barcelona, the captain-general was forced to
deal with the local authorities’ quandary about the former convent of
San Francisco del Asís. Its premises had ﬁrst been used for cholera vic-
tims, and then as a ‘lock hospital’ for prostitutes whose numbers had
been increasing since the start of the war. But, much to the annoyance
of the captain-general, both male and female prostitutes were still sell-
ing themselves there, undermining the physical and moral condition of
his conscripts154 :

   It has come to my attention that the inmates there, far from being
   cured of the vice of prostitution, have been propagating it amongst
   themselves, drawing to them individuals who have no other business
   being there. They have been engaging in homosexual acts (amance-
   bamientos de un mismo sexo), corrupting those of a youthful or gentle
   disposition.

Centrifugal radicalism impaired Mendizábal’s relations with General
Córdova. By early 1836, the moderados were openly calling Mendizábal
a dictator, forcing a parliamentary vote of no conﬁdence, blocking
attempts to expand the electoral franchise and politicising the tensions
between the Army of the North and Madrid. All this tension caused
Mendizábal many sleepless nights. Aides recounted how he would spend
days without proper sleep, collapsing onto his papers at his desk for
snoozes, or stealing carriage time for sleep during his trips to the
Queen-Regent at El Pardo.155 The British missionary, George Borrow,
who secured a brief interview with Mendizábal, remembered the prime
minister’s remarkable ability to maintain an English-language conversa-
tion without once looking up from a pile of documents at his desk.156
But even Mendizábal’s energies were exhausted by summer 1836, as his
erstwhile exaltado allies refused to serve under the ‘dictator’, the Cortes
was dissolved, and the Carlists expanded their domain over the north
and east of Spain.157 Again, both the cause and effect of this political
disunity was the failure of the Cristino army to arrest the spread of
Carlism. Mendigorría was the last signiﬁcant victory in a long time, as
the Carlists regrouped, tightened their blockade of Cristino towns in the
Basque country and dispatched expeditions deep into Cristino territory.
   In August 1835, the Carlist court launched the ﬁrst major expedition
of the war in a bid to link the Basque country with Carlists in Catalonia.
