118 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the heights of Arlabán, even though the same geography, and even
the same snow on the peaks, favoured the defenders once more. The
result was a bloody stalemate, compounded by Cristino casualties from
exposure as men could not light ﬁres lest they reveal their positions,
and instead slept beside each other and mules for warmth. Córdova’s
renewed assault in the same sector of the front was greeted with relief
by the Carlist Royal Government and consternation in Madrid. Eguía
knew that there were more vulnerable sectors of the Carlist front line
(the Baztán, Irurzun, Lecumberri), and he thanked the enemy’s rev-
olutionary crisis for having made Córdova so blind and desperate.
Prime Minister Mendizábal, by contrast, had lost patience with his
commander-in-chief. Córdova’s protestations that the second battle of
Arlabán had actually strengthened the Cristino line around the Basque
country made no impression on the Radicals, who demanded swift
victories.215
  The second battle of Arlabán came in the wake of an irate exchange
of letters between Córdova and Mendizábal, in which the military will
clashed with the political. Both men implied that the other was neglect-
ing to put the interests of the fatherland (patria) ﬁrst, emotive language
in the Liberal revolution, and its use was all the shriller from Mendizábal
because of his cosmopolitan background. He assured his commander-
in-chief that Madrid was doing all it could, decreeing mobilisations,
advancing the revolution and even being aided by a fortuitous cabi-
net change in Portugal – which promised to bring 10,000 auxiliaries to
Córdova’s side – and that all this could come to sound effect if only
the commander-in-chief would show some initiative and achieve vic-
tories. Córdova called Mendizábal’s decrees empty, castles in the air,
and his quest for victories as mistaking cause for effect, of wanting to
reap the harvest of victory without sowing the seeds. Córdova claimed
a detailed understanding of the fundamentally defensive nature of the
war which made no impression on Mendizábal. No Cristino comman-
der could force the Carlists to engage if they did not want to. Finally,
Córdova tendered his resignation, trying to remove the potential polit-
ical threat this posed by reassuring the prime minister of his Liberal
credentials in a manner which nonetheless revealed the powers of his
ofﬁce. Thus Córdova boasted about how many convents he had closed
on his own authority, and stated he was in agreement with the legal
reforms and the sale of nationalised property. Córdova, who claimed to
be non-political, obviously could become political at any moment. The
choice facing the Queen-Regent was obvious: either her prime minis-
ter or commander-in-chief had to go.216 On 4 May 1836, Córdova was
