                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   119


summoned to Madrid and a council of war; where his fate and that of
Mendizábal would be decided.217
   The Queen-Regent, who was hardly even liberal, let alone progresista,
in sympathies, seized upon Córdova’s presence in the capital to dis-
miss her Radical prime minster and to call new elections. Córdova had
wrongfooted the Radicals by leaving Espartero in temporary command
in the north, dashing their hopes of animosity between the two men.
Once in Madrid, Córdova petitioned for four things, all of which the
government approved. Firstly he sued for reinforcement. He asked for
whatever troops could be spared from Madrid plus that France be asked
to increase its legion by 4,000 to 6,000 men, the same request to be
made to the British that they might thus reinforce Evans’s strategi-
cally vital position. Secondly, he wanted a Reserve Army to be created
and centred on Burgos. This force should be comprised almost entirely
of National Militia that could be subjected to army command when-
ever necessary.218 Clearly, a more divisive issue for Liberal politics could
scarcely be imagined. Thirdly, he begged for sufﬁcient supplies so that
his army would not starve, beg and riot. And fourthly, Córdova made a
partisan demand which he disguised as a concern for the morale of the
Cristino ‘home front’, namely that the government should refrain from
making a formal request for direct French intervention unless it was
clear that Paris would reply in the afﬁrmative.219 A likely French refusal
would leave Cristino Spain diplomatically stranded and make the posi-
tion of the French Legion untenable. In fact, Córdova was worried that
a refusal would boomerang against the moderados in domestic politics
as it became clear that they did not have the French army as a counter-
revolutionary card to play as a last resort against the exaltados (as the
absolutists had done in 1823). Silence on this matter, by contrast, might
maintain the illusion of the French army’s moderantismo.220
   But the victory of the Queen-Regent and her general was short-lived.
The Cristino army continued to collapse as a cause and consequence
of Carlist expansion, and ousted mendizabalistas began to manipulate
Radicals in the army in order to win back power. The Radical revolu-
tion of August 1836 would be made by junior ofﬁcers and sergeants
against their own leaders, and the Constitution of 1812 they revived
was designed to ensure both a greater degree of civil authority over the
suspect army leadership, and an emasculation of the powers of the trou-
blesome Queen-Regent.221 In the meantime, the removal of Mendizábal
encouraged ofﬁcers to take revenge on the Liberal press for ‘abusing’
its freedom of expression to criticise the army.222 Córdova’s brother, a
colonel based in the capital during the summer of 1836, invaded the
