                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   117


   The greatest strategic blow to the Army of the North originated not
at Don Carlos’s court in Durango but in Paris. Since July 1834, the
French had ofﬁcially closed their south-western border to all supplies
destined for the Carlists. But smuggling was a way of life in the Pyrenees,
and it was in part due to this that Zumalacárregui, throughout 1834,
had been able to assemble his army under the noses of the Cristino
forts. That said, the Spanish Liberals knew from bitter experience that
the French police force was the best in Europe, and French protesta-
tions to the contrary cut little ice with Prime Minister Mendizábal, who
scoffed, ‘let them treat the smugglers as they treated me and other Patri-
ots when we tried to cross the Pyrenees in 1830’.210 But worse was to
come. In February 1836, the Broglie government fell and was replaced by
a new administration led by Thiers, which tried to appease Metternich’s
alarm at the internationalisation of the Spanish revolution. Hence, on
26 March 1836, the French government revoked its 3 July 1835 decree,
which had intensiﬁed the embargo on any trade with Carlists on the
Spanish side of the border. French legitimists rejoiced when they heard
that their allies in Spain would not be starved into surrender. Madrid’s
indignation was only partly appeased by French permission for the
transit of Cristino troops and supplies across their territory. This mea-
sure may have allowed Córdova to outﬂank some Carlist positions, but
its advantage paled in comparison to the abandonment of the French
blockade.211
   Córdova was caught in the vice of Radical pressure and Carlist rear-
mament, and whereas the Carlist threat could be evaluated, that of
the revolutionaries could not. In April 1836, as two regiments rose in
a pay revolt in Bilbao, Córdova conﬁded to General Narváez: ‘I fear that
agents of different extreme parties are working my men with sinister
aims, singling out the sergeants and troops who are most vulnerable
to seduction and intrigue.’212 In May 1836, two companies of Mili-
tia rampaged through the village of Arévalo (Soria), some 50 miles
behind the northern front, smashing the windows of ‘Carlist’ inhabi-
tants. Cristino civil authorities were helpless and the militiamen had to
be disarmed at gunpoint by loyal troops.213 Only victory could silence
Córdova’s critics and stem rebellion in the ranks. British auxiliaries
allied with Royal Marines (a new departure for Quadruple Alliance ‘non-
intervention’) and Cristino militiamen in a bloody attempt on 5 May to
relieve besieged San Sebastián. The withering bombardment by Anglo-
Cristino gunboats and the death of the charismatic Carlist commander,
Sagastibelza, sealed the Allied victory, and the siege of San Sebastián
was lifted.214 At the same time, Córdova renewed his offensive against
