                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   111


but it also failed to prevent their border violations.176 These were starkest
in the Cerdanya/Cerdagne region of Catalonia, where Cristino loyalties
in the border town of Puigcerdá and the exclave of Llívia invited hostile
Carlist attention. Llívia was separated from Spain proper by two kilo-
metres of French territory through which a ‘neutral road’ ran to the
Franco-Spanish border at Bourg-Madame/Puigcerdá. The Guergué expe-
dition made refugees out of Puigcerdá’s public ofﬁcials.177 Their ﬂight to
France was followed by an attempt by townsfolk who were stopped, dis-
armed and returned by Carlist irregulars operating in French territory.178
The Carlist violation of French territory was repeated on 6 February
1837 when some 200 of them crossed the border in order to loot Llívia.
On the way back along the neutral road French troops arrested the
Carlists and conﬁscated their pillaged goods.179 On occasion Carlist sol-
diers were found 45 miles inside France, and Carlists issued passports
to aid smuggling.180 Border contingencies like these involved France in
local interventions which moulded debates about the extent of French
intervention in the civil war. This section of the border would not sta-
bilise until Puigcerdá decisively defeated the Carlist siege of November
1837.181
  Mendizábal desperately summoned Espoz from his French convales-
cence to captain the generals in Catalonia and arrest the spread of
Carlism. Espoz was a leftist hero, a sop to junta opinion, and he was on
good terms with the French who gladly transferred to him impounded
Carlist arms. On 29 November 1835, he imposed a state of siege on the
Principality, with measures including collective punishment on commu-
nities invaded by Carlists, ranging from summary executions of heads
of households harbouring enemy agents to the conﬁscation of property.
These conditions were so draconian that even his Liberal allies in gov-
ernment resiled from them. Espoz had always seen the Catalan Carlists
as criminals deserving of no better treatment. But the effect of these
measures was to promote reprisals and to terrorise civilians caught in
the war zone.182
  Espoz had used collective punishment in the Royalist War, and it was
more than matched by what Cabrera was doing in the cruellest front,
the Maestrazgo. Cabrera’s eastern Carlists combined ruthlessness with
bravery but without the magnanimity that had characterised many of
Zumalacárregui’s operations. Cabrera established a pattern of attack-
ing small towns which were garrisoned only by a handful of local or
mobile militiamen. During these localised but ferocious sieges, Cabrera’s
Christian soldiers ironically became more prodigious at church-burning
than the mobs of Barcelona. This was because the church steeple was
