116 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


face reprisals from outraged Carlists. Two weeks after the Barcelona mas-
sacre, Córdova began an offensive at the mountain pass of Arlabán
dividing Guipúzcoa from Alava, employing ‘foreign revolutionaries’ –
French and British auxiliaries – in large numbers for the ﬁrst time.
But the Carlists turned the geography, snow and fog to their defensive
advantage, repelling the Cristinos at the cost of only half the enemy’s
600 casualties. Captured British and French auxiliaries were shot, and
retreating French committed reprisals of their own against Carlist pris-
oners whom the Cristinos had handed over to them.204 Arlabán had
been one of the strongest parts of the Carlist defensive line, but
Córdova lacked the intelligence networks needed to have known this
in advance.205 Consequently, he was thrown back onto the defensive,
resorting to the static strategic warfare of the blockhouse system.
   In different conditions Córdova’s static strategy might have been
sounder than Espoz’s war of movement. But the Carlists turned the
enemy’s revolutionary crisis and the porous French border to their
advantage. The Royal Army, with its 16,000 infantry, 1,000 cavalry and
13 artillery pieces, was vastly outnumbered by the Army of the North.206
But superior local intelligence, internal lines of communication and the
distraction provided by the expanding Carlist forces in Catalonia and
Aragón, all allowed the Carlists to wrest the initiative after Arlabán in
a series of victories. On 8 February 1836, the Carlists overwhelmed the
1,300-strong Cristino outpost of Valmaseda, capturing ﬁve swivel-guns,
360 riﬂes, 60,000 bullets and 65 quintals of cod, 800 bread rations, 53
boxes of biscuit and other stores besides. The quarter shown to the garri-
son encouraged the capitulation of nearby Mercadillo three days later.207
Things got worse still for Córdova. Plencia, a coastal town on the west-
ern extremities of the Basque provinces, was taken after a short siege
on 25 February 1836, giving a morale boost to the Carlists, who had
now captured a seaport (albeit a very modest one); another seaport,
Lequeitio, would follow on 12 April. A total of 800 prisoners were taken
at Plencia, including National Guardsmen, the revolutionary rebrand-
ing of the Urban Militia, who were conscripted into Carlist ranks whilst
their ofﬁcers went to depots to await exchange. Some 13 artillery pieces
and other effects were taken as prizes, and a 3,000-real ﬁne (the Cristino
‘blood tax’) was imposed on those refusing to defect to Carlist ranks.208
Apart from a minor cavalry victory at Orduña by General Esparero
(whom Córdova had placed under Lacy Evans’s command in a bid for
more British support), followed by a bloody stalemate at Unza two weeks
later on 19 March, the winter and spring of 1836 had seen the Carlists
steadily undermining the Cristino blockade.209
