114 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


turn saltpetre, lead and sulphur into arms.191 In response, the Cristino
counter-insurgency imposed its own state of siege, impounded deliver-
ies of war material to areas where Carlists were known to be operating,
and exploited occasions in which urban and rural geography favoured
the Cristino order of battle. After Terrer Cabrera invaded Castile, but at
Molina de Aragón terrain and cavalry superiority favoured the Cristinos,
and General Palarea won a victory which dispersed the invaders and
silenced his revolutionary critics. Cristino victories were rare that winter,
so Prime Minister Mendizábal tried to consolidate this success by offer-
ing an amnesty to Cabrera’s men. Many accepted but the vast majority
who did used it to ‘change shirts’ and regroup in Aragón.192
   The brutality of the war in both Aragón and Catalonia radicalised
Cristino politics, most violently in Barcelona. The Ciudadela fortress
contained several Carlist prisoners, including the high-proﬁle Colonel
Juan O’Donnell. Civil Governor Pastors knew that O’Donnell was
the target of vengeful radicalism and desperately tried to get him
transported elsewhere, even interceding with the British consul about
possibilities for the evacuation of prisoners by Royal Navy ships.193
Matters were made worse by newspapers’ exaggeration of atrocities com-
mitted by the Carlist defenders of the besieged hill fortress of Hort
(‘news’ reached Barcelona that the Carlists were answering each Cristino
artillery shot by throwing live militia prisoners out of the fortress
windows to their deaths below).194 Cristino spymaster, Eugenio de
Aviraneta, whom Mendizábal had dispatched to Barcelona to work for
the ailing Espoz, was anonymously tipped off that the Carlist prisoners
of the Ciudadela would be massacred.195 On 4 January 1836, Barcelona
revolutionaries allied with sympathetic militiamen and marched on the
lightly defended Ciudadela, proclaiming Liberty and the Constitution
of 1812. Pastors showed physical bravery once again by mediating,
but whilst he spared the Ciudadela’s powder stores from a potentially
catastrophic explosion, he could do nothing for the inmates, who were
all massacred. Carlists turned O’Donnell into a martyr, recording his
last words as ‘Give me a sword! Don’t let me die at the hands of vile
assassins!’196 The massacre was worse than Carlist outrages at Hort.
Although seven Cristino prisoners had indeed been barbarically defen-
estrated, many more victims were Carlists themselves who, after a failed
breakout on 23 January, had desperately tried to escape the siege by low-
ering themselves onto the rocks below. When Hort was ﬁnally taken,
some 104 unmolested Cristino casualties were found whom the Carlists
had abandoned rather than massacred.197
