                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   113


counter-insurgency punctuated by increasing episodes of intense vio-
lence. Whilst there were indeed economic origins for rural Carlism
and urban liberalism, the war distorted these into geographical loy-
alties as civilians sensibly obeyed whichever side was strongest in
their area. Cabrera’s successful military strategy earned him the sobri-
quet ‘Tiger of the Maestrazgo’, whose threat was answered by signal
sacriﬁces from Cristino populations deprived of adequate garrisons.
Requena (Valencia), for example, resisted Cabrera’s siege because its
women and children dug trenches and constructed barricades, max-
imising the defensive power of its outnumbered garrison until a relief
column arrived.188 The revolution of the juntas undermined Cristino
counter-insurgency efforts as militiamen prioritised parochial interests
and soldiers deserted. Nogueras’s minor victory at Orta on 24 September
1835 was important only because it helped to stem the desertion
affecting his ranks. Insufﬁcient Cristino forces encouraged the spiral of
atrocities and reprisals. There was no Eliot Treaty in the east, and prag-
matism overrode any residual compassion. Cristinos were reluctant to
take Carlists prisoner as they had too few forces to guard them sufﬁ-
ciently (on one occasion, some 600 captured Carlists escaped because
the Cristinos had too few cavalry to round them up).189 By the same
token, any acts of mercy which did result from military action usually
had pragmatic motives. On 17 October 1835, Cabrera assaulted Alcanar,
only four miles from the Mediterranean Sea on the Catalan–Valencian
border. There, the tragic routine of an outnumbered Cristino garrison
retiring to the biggest church, defending itself to the last, even throw-
ing beehives at the attackers, repeated itself. Cabrera had wiped out a
scratch Cristino force rushed from the nearby port of Vinaroz which
had tried to relieve Alcanar. The desperation of the besieged women
and children compelled the militiamen to surrender and the town was
sacked.190 Alcanar cut off land communications between revolutionaries
in Barcelona and Valencia. But Cabrera’s dash for the sea was short-lived,
as Anglo-Cristino gunboats repulsed his attempt to seize a nearby port,
and overreach eventually obliged him to evacuate Alcanar.
   Cabrera’s ascendancy was formalised with the 11 November 1835
royal decree making him Commander-in-Chief of Lower Aragón.
Cabrera was still theoretically answerable to the junta at Berga, but in
practice his forces – which at the end of 1835 numbered some 3,416
infantry and 218 cavalry – imposed military rule in territory he com-
manded. Cobblers were forced to produce footwear, Cristino columns –
such as that of Terrer (Zaragoza) on 13 December – were wiped out
and raided for weapons and uniforms, and a factory was constructed to
