112 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


usually the ultimate refuge for Cristino militiamen resolved to ﬁght to
the last, and was targeted by Cabrera’s artillery and arson. Cabrera’s
rural terrorism was answered by Cristino municipalities organising fund-
raising not just for the Militia but also local fortiﬁcations and defences,
all in addition to the usual taxes and conscripts levied by the central
government.183 Carlist atrocities provoked reprisals against mountain
villages where, as the Prussian Carlist, von Goeben, recalled, ‘troops
used terror; all inhabitants, it was said, were Carlists and had to be
destroyed, plundered, violated, and their homes burnt down. Several
hundred were forced by the ensuing misery to join the Carlists.’184 The
Cristino counter-insurgency had the effect of merely reshaping rather
than eliminating the nature of the Carlist threat. General Nogueras
mobilised both troops and mobile militia but his expeditions caused
the Carlists to regroup, reducing their ability to terrorise but increasing
their striking power. Thus, the columns of Miralles and Torner linked
with Quílez in Aragón, whilst Cabrera reorganized his and Forcadell’s
men at Beceite, their fortiﬁed headquarters and refuge.185
   The revolution obliged Nogueras to retire to his starting point, and
Cabrera and Forcadell exploited this in an assault on Rubielos (Teruel),
in the nineteenth century a populous town commanding vital transport
links. Its garrison was outnumbered by the Carlists, whose attack on
11 September 1835 resonates both for its representative military details
and its brutal aftermath. Cabrera fought through the town and obliged
the Cristino garrison to withdraw to the highly defensible convent in
the centre. Cabrera tried to force entry using ﬁre and testudo forma-
tions from carts which were armoured and used as battering-rams. He
then seized an adjoining house in an attempt to break into the con-
vent from the side. Desperate, the Cristinos set ﬁre to the house. But the
wind blew the ﬂames into the convent, so the Cristinos, now thirsty and
suffocating in the fumes, hoisted a white ﬂag on Cabrera’s stated guar-
antee of quarter. But when the pitiful survivors descended the convent’s
tower, many were killed outright whilst the rest of the captives were
herded together and marched to a ﬁeld near Nogueruelas where they
were stripped naked (Cabrera needed the uniforms) and forced to run for
their lives. All the men were hunted and killed by the Carlist cavalry, one
corpse registering no fewer than 26 lance wounds.186 The martyrdom
of Nogueruelas outshone Villafranca’s in 1834, and, soon after the war
ended, the public disinterment and reburial of the martyred militiamen
allowed Radicals to capture public memory of the conﬂict.187
   Cabrera’s initiative turned the remote regions of Aragón and Valencia,
centred on the Maestrazgo, into a hybrid of guerrilla insurgency and
