120 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


home of a Radical editor, assaulting him and insulting his wife. A simi-
lar episode almost unfolded at the headquarters of the all-powerful Eco
del Comercio, but a National Militia detachment was on its premises to
face down the indignant ofﬁcers.223 But Córdova’s ascendancy could not
last long. His return to the northern front did nothing to arrest the dete-
rioration of the war effort. On 11 July 1836, Carlists repulsed a British
attempt to evict them from the French frontier at Fuenterrabia, and on
17 July 1836 a Franco-Cristino force of six battalions failed to force the
Carlist-held bridge at Muniáin on the River Ega. In frustration Bernelle’s
legionaries burnt the harvest of local Carlist villagers, which the Carlists
publicised as part of their reactionary Black Legend against the French
Left and with a threat to execute Cristino prisoners if such outrages were
repeated.224
   The Quadruple Alliance had undertaken a greater military burden
because desertion and draft evasion had rendered the Cristino Army
of North unﬁt for further offensive operations. Even defensive troops
increasingly surrendered at the ﬁrst opportunity, many of these defect-
ing to the Carlists. On 10 June, Carlist Commander-in-Chief Eguía
publicised his government’s offer to ‘true Spaniards’ who wished to
defect, including a sliding scale of rewards depending on rank and chat-
tels, and promotions for ofﬁcers who brought numerous defectors with
them. In response the Cristinos imposed drastic measures, including
cash incentives and even promotions to informers betraying plots to
defect, and verbal councils of war imposing the death penalty against
offenders.225 Yet even if such measures stemmed some defection on the
northern front, they could do nothing to reverse the draft-dodging and
desertion that plagued the Cristino safe zone behind the formal front
line. Virtual ‘reserve armies’ of deserters roamed across the country-
side, sometimes securing remote territory against punitive missions of
mobile militia and preying on civilian communities and travellers. The
revolution of 1835–36 may have ‘democratised’ conscription by abolish-
ing exemptions which the nobility traditionally enjoyed (by abolishing
the nobility as a separate legal estate). Yet in their place it formalised
the system of cash payments (‘blood tax’) for exemption.226 And the
vast majority of draftees had neither money nor protection to escape
conscription. As a British pro-Carlist remarked:

   I had no idea of the desolating effects of the repeated quintas, or
   conscriptions, until I had traversed Spain in so many directions, but
   I was not so forcibly struck with them anywhere as in Estremadura,
   where I saw only old men, women or children; the youth having
