130 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Málaga revolution and the penetration by the Gómez Expedition of the
Cristino ‘home front’.25 During the ﬁrst days of the sergeants’ rising, the
moderado prime minister who had replaced Mendizábal, Istúriz, tried to
win over the rebels, and when this attempt failed, tensions rose further
as the Madrid government declared the Queen-Regent a captive of the
revolutionaries. London and Paris grew alarmed. But whereas the British
backed the revolution to the hilt (an attitude which raised suspicion that
the whole affair was Ambassador Villiers’ doing), France disapproved of
this violent shift to progresismo. But both Quadruple Alliance powers
advised that the Queen-Regent captain the revolution as an act of free
will on her part: otherwise abdication (or worse) could be the alterna-
tive. Villiers was shocked by the apparent leaderlessness of this army
revolution, and the precedent it might set to Europe.26 Franco-British
diplomacy was proving highly prescient. The militiamen who rose in
1835 and the soldiers in 1836 both did so in the name of the con-
stitutional monarchy, but so central had the army’s claims to Spain’s
political future become that it would not hesitate to dispense with any
given monarch in order to recraft the state in its own image, as the
revolution of 1840 would show. The Queen-Regent was defenceless,
and the revolutionaries sent out fraternal calls to other units exhort-
ing them to proclaim the Constitution of 1812 elsewhere in Cristino
Spain. The army and militia in besieged Pamplona united in replac-
ing the city’s elderly governor with a younger leftist.27 Eventually, María
Cristina agreed to reinstate the Constitution of 1812, and the capital’s
revolutionary militia were rearmed and recalled, unpopular ministers
being sacked whilst other diehard moderados fared worse.28
   The revolutionary repression of political adversaries distinguished
1836 from 1835 as it was done by central government rather than
regional juntas. Mob violence certainly featured strongly, perhaps more
strongly, during 1836, too. Captain-General Quesada was lynched by
a Madrid mob led by revolutionary militiamen, his body mutilated
and paraded around the streets. The former moderado Prime Minister,
Istúriz, escaped a similar fate by ﬂeeing in disguise.29 For weeks after-
wards his son went into hiding whilst his wife was forced into house
arrest by demonstrations of rough music.30 In the provinces moderado
governors were often lynched, such as in Figueres or Cartagena, where
the governor was chased upstairs in his house by militiamen and
defenestrated.31
   Gone were the days of ‘Liberal union’. The capital was placed under
a revolutionary state of siege which invaded the homes of its political
opponents. The war had made the regime desperate for money, but it
