128 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


either unhelpfully long term in nature or limited to reinforcing control
of urban centres already inside the Cristino zone. But what mattered
most during the middle years of the war was the expansion of the con-
ﬂict, and not just in Catalonia and Aragón, but also across Castile and
even Andalucía, where banditry grew under the banner of Carlism and
expeditions tore across the countryside. Civilians who were neither sol-
diers nor active revolutionary citizens (militiamen) had to forge their
own responses to violence, occupations and counter-occupations in an
insecure environment.
   Popular responses to this security crisis were part and parcel of the
leftist revolution in the Cristino zone. Jacobin politics had overtaken
Madrid in August 1836, and this was soon reﬂected in the ﬁgure of
Antonio Quiroga, who enjoyed even better Radical-Liberal credentials
than San Miguel, taking over the Captaincy-Generalship of Aragón.
The victorious Army of the Centre was stripped of men to help con-
front a Carlist breakout from the northern front (Gómez expedition),
allowing Carlists to regain lost territory. The Carlist breakout tested the
revolutionary Spain of La Granja beyond breaking point.
   Meanwhile, the Queen-Regent’s closure of the Cortes led to insurrec-
tions in Málaga, Granada and Cartagena, the last one being a bloody
exercise in settling scores. When Cartagena’s governor, O’Daly, deported
the miscreants to Ceuta, the prison ships were recalled so the cul-
prits could stand trial and O’Daly was replaced by Count Mirasol, the
hero of Bilbao. The Málaga revolution had heavy republican under-
tones, despite its protestations of loyalty to the Queen-Regent.17 In July
1836, Donadío, now military governor, was assassinated after some
800 troops under his command refused his order to disarm the rad-
icalised Militia and to come to the rescue of the civil governor, José
San Just, who was hiding from enraged militiamen. When San Just
ﬂed to a nearby building, he was shot dead by Carlos Barritaro, a
militiaman who in 1838 became a correspondent in a press campaign
defending the widows of two murdered Radicals against persecution
by moderado authorities. Donadío, meanwhile, disguised himself as a
National Guardsman and tried to ﬂee, only to be executed in a simi-
lar fashion.18 The following day, a quickly assembled junta arranged for
the Constitution of 1812 to be proclaimed in Málaga, and the revolu-
tion spread until the Queen-Regent was physically forced by rebellious
sergeants to sign the Constitution on 13 August 1836. Some 2,000
malagueño militiamen were dispatched to Catalonia to ﬁght Carlists
in the name of the Constitution.19 Málaga’s radicalism expressed one
extreme of the 1836 revolution; the other extreme was the gentlemanly
