6
Deep War Feeds Revolution,
1836–37




This chapter charts ‘deep war’, when the extent of violence, suffering
and civilian casualties reached their peak. It is the geographically most
extensive chapter, detailing the Gómez Expedition of 1836. It explains
how the collapse of the Cristino war effort – pace the Carlists’ third
failed siege of Bilbao – radicalised Liberal politics and disrupted social
and economic relations across Spain, and forged new patterns in their
place which became a focus for Radical political action. It shows how
this radicalisation was caused by suspicion of moderado collusion with
Carlism, by actual or threatened Carlist invasion, and by the interlinked
phenomena of mass desertion and gloriﬁed banditry that this provoked.
It explains the diplomatic crisis into which Cristino Spain was plunged
by the August 1836 revolution at La Granja.
   The cycle of Carlist atrocities and Cristino counter-atrocities mounted
throughout 1836 and provides the crucial context for the La Granja rev-
olution. The Basque theatre had the Eliot Treaty and increasingly formal
(though still porous) front lines, but Catalonia and Aragón witnessed
an increase in military activity without any of the humanitarian pro-
visions of the north. By April 1836 Carlist forces in Catalonia alone
had grown to 13,367 infantry and 218 cavalry, reinforced by troops
from Navarra, and this greater military presence led to a correspond-
ing war for resources. On 10 May, Tristany sacked the town of Caldes,
25 miles north of Barcelona, after it had failed to supply his forces,
destroying all but a handful of its buildings. Mobile Militia chased the
invaders northwards, but not before Tristany’s men had abducted the
wives of several militiamen and pillaged villages in their path. Terroristic
episodes like these were met with harsh countermeasures, targeting not
just the Carlists, but also demoralised Cristino militia garrisons which
were ordered to ﬁght Carlist invaders whenever the latter’s numbers did

                                    124
