                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   127


conventional assault. It was known to hold Cristino prisoners as well
as foodstores which could augment meagre Cristino rations at the onset
of the dire regional winter. Evaristo San Miguel, Radical prime minis-
ter during the Triennium and Cristino Captain-General of Aragón since
the La Granja revolution, conquered Cantavieja at the end of October
1836, and the momentum of the offensive persuaded the Carlists to
burn rather than try to defend Beceite, their other fortiﬁed town in the
Maestrazgo. Cantavieja was a boost for revolutionary morale, even if
the foodstores were depleted by corrupt commissaries in the vanguard,
who ended up selling on such delicacies as cinnamon and cocoa at
inﬂated prices.11 Yet San Miguel qualiﬁed his victory address with a grim
prediction for Cristino communities:12

  Cantavieja, hitherto a nest of bandits and false defenders of the
  altar and throne, is now under national occupation . . . Yet, people of
  Aragón, defend yourselves. Dedicate yourselves to this sacred task the
  moment you fall under enemy attack. Defend your homes, which are
  yours after all, along with the fruit of your sweat and toil. Who else
  will care as much about your security and who else is willing to match
  your sacriﬁces?

Civilians were thus on their own, and were exhorted to manage their
own affairs as best they could. Army units were too dispersed, and
even militia garrisons could be overwhelmed in point-defence, often
in circumstances which recoiled on civilians they abandoned. Soneja
(Valencia) during the summer of 1836, for example, saw its militia garri-
son ﬂee the superior forces of El Serrador, but not before it had poisoned
foodstores which it knew the Carlists would seize. El Serrador avenged
the agonies of his men not on the absent militia, but on the inhabitants,
who were ﬁred upon as they ﬂed their burning houses.13 Patrician Lib-
erals who were unable to gain victory over the enemy instead proposed
prophylactic measures to divert listless men from Carlist bands. National
elites, like San Miguel, and the deputy for Alicante, Joaquín Abarques,
shared the vague opinion that ‘agricultural improvements’ could turn
Carlist swords back into ploughshares.14 Abarques became a self-parody
of patrician arrogance when he proposed ‘enlightening’ the insurgent
provinces by sending them copies of the Constitution of 1837.15 Local
elites, like Barcelona’s Council of Armament and Defence, worried about
the inﬂux of refugees who might be blandished into Carlist ﬁfth-column
activities, and prescribed practical measures like putting the idle to
work in nationalised monasteries and convents.16 Such measures were
