                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   131


was shunned by non-British lending markets. The government decreed
the famous round of nationalisation of ecclesiastical properties (known
in Spanish as desamortización), accompanying this with the abolition
of all remaining noble and clerical distinctions in law by the following
summer. A levy of 50,000 men was ordered, the blood tax for exemption
being lowered to 2,000 per draftee, or 1,500 with a viable horse. This
cheaper tax helped the lower middle-class constituency of progresismo.
Wealthier Liberals, by contrast, tended to support the moderados, and
were collectively subjected to a 200,000,000-reales forced loan (termed a
‘patriotic subscription’), captive subscribers being promised reimburse-
ment in instalments yielding 5 per cent interest. Wealthy individuals
who tried to ﬂee the country without permission were subject to the
decree of 16 September 1836, which conﬁscated their property, this
being made retroactive to emigrants since the victory of the La Granja
revolution on 15 August. Conﬁscation of property had so far happened
only to the Carlist enemy, so sectarian theft was a new departure. But
such was the economic chaos that even Finance Minister Mendizábal
could not prevent Cristino Spain defaulting in November 1836, for the
ﬁrst time, on some of its interest repayments.
   Other solutions conveniently conformed to stated progresista policy,
including the revival of the 1823 municipal legislation, which devolved
wide-ranging local autonomy (and ﬁnancial responsibilities), under-
pinned by voting rights for male householders.32 But this reform was
inoperable for two reasons. First, states of siege grew to combat grow-
ing Carlism, and military law overrode all civil jurisdiction, even in
reformed town halls. Second, the rural insecurity was compounded by
the revolutionary Cortes decree that wealthy notables should quit their
homes for safe urban centres whenever they were threatened by Carlists.
This decree was designed to drain the lake of economic Carlism by
depriving the enemy of loot or hostages for ransom. But in fact it proved
disastrous. It recoiled on poorer citizens who were robbed instead of
their absent social betters. Such citizens were even more likely to take
their chances joining Carlist bands (despite the fact that the families
they left behind faced the full rigour of revolutionary reprisals).33 Third,
the ﬂight of wealthy individuals severely undermined both the prac-
tice of respectable politics and the organisation of the militia. The tragic
Mayor of Urda (Toledo), for example, should have been a Cristino suc-
cess story. He had spent his family fortune to become mayor during the
transition of 1833, but the civil war saw nearby insurgents rally under
the Carlist ﬂag, ravaging local agriculture and forcing the mayor to take
on debts. Failing to negotiate a middle ground between Cristino and
