136 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


high-handed military jurisdiction against troublesome civilian authori-
ties. The revived civil supremacy principles of the Constitution of 1812
had rendered the daily management of military operations difﬁcult.
Troops had to go miles out of their way in desperate pursuit of insurgents
just so they did not ‘invade’ the Captaincy-General of Madrid. Mean-
while, contending civilian authorities, both well-established ones like
intendants, and new constitutional varieties of provincial governors,
prefects, elected local mayors and civil governors, may have been pro-
gressive as far as Liberal politics was concerned but proved detrimental
to strategic operations. This autonomy impeded the commissariat’s task
even more than the inefﬁcient system of private contractors, and pro-
voked sharp inequalities. In Valencia province, for example, Chiva and
Buñol were overburdened with demands for supplies whereas nearby
Utiel and Requena were not, even though all four municipalities were
threatened by Cabrera.60
   The insecurity caused by rural terrorism places a virtual embargo on
travel. Even the royal escort was robbed on one occasion. A govern-
ment report in 1837 blamed the human geography of Andalucía for
the rural insecurity of the south, as labourers traipsing miles between
pueblo, cortijo and ﬁeld were particularly vulnerable targets for bandits.61
But matters were even worse in the pro-Carlist north, where the Protes-
tant missionary, George Borrow, reported ‘almost every road is teeming
with banditti, who under the name of Carlists plunder friend and foe,
and to robbery join cruelty so atrociously horrible that indignation at
the crime is frequently lost in wonder’.62 Muleteers and labourers suf-
fered particularly, as they were often the easiest targets for opportunistic
raiders. Their fates made for grim government reports and press cover-
age. Accounts abound of civilians being preyed upon by Carlists acting
as bandits (or the other way round). A raid near Vendrell (Tarragona) was
typical: ﬁve farm labourers ridden down and a ten-year-old boy mor-
tally wounded.63 A Cristino supply column trapped by Carlist invasion
in the village of Ruidera (New Castile) refused to surrender to the local
Carlist bandits led by the Pallilos brothers but agreed to surrender to
a Carlist expeditionary force of outsiders.64 Agriculture, especially valu-
able and vulnerable livestock husbandry, was badly hit. Daimiel in New
Castile was so terrorised by marauding Carlist bands during the autumn
of 1837 that its farmers left their animals exposed in the ﬁelds to die,
the harvest going uncollected.65 The absence of village menfolk femi-
nised the practice of agriculture, devolving food production to the close
environs of dwellings. The war accounted for much of the general sub-
sistence crisis of 1837, just as the Peninsular War had done with the
