                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   135


Cuba’s tax revenues – which accounted for some 15 per cent of Madrid’s
exchequer – ‘neutrality’ objectively meant Carlist53 ). Cuba’s fervent reli-
giosity, so Carlists hoped, could be exploited, especially in the person of
Santiago’s Archbishop, Cirilo Alameda y Brea.54 But Tacón expelled the
archbishop from Cuba. Alameda y Brea made, on 2 January, for Jamaica,
then, early in July, to London.55 After a brief exile the archbishop found
his place at Don Carlos’s side as a spiritual leader of the anti-apostólico
faction.56 Deﬂecting the Carlist threat, the Madrid government lost no
time in seeing off the danger that liberalism would lead to indepen-
dence on the island; a special law was quickly passed by the Cortes
exempting Cuba from constitutional rule and allowing for ‘special laws’
in the colony. This came in spite of a spirited campaign by Radical
progresistas to demand political rights for these colonies and even, on
the margins, to abolish slavery (a proposal which was quickly blocked
due to fears of creating ‘another Haiti’ and, most crucially, depriving
the hard-pressed Spanish exchequer of the tobacco plantations’ vital
revenue).57 The effect of these laws was soon felt. In 1838, the ﬁnancially
starved Madrid government ordered the sale of a round of ecclesiastical
property on Cuba, whilst imposing on both Cuba and Puerto Rico an
extra-ordinary tax of 60 million reales.58
   Given Cristino preoccupations with Cuba, it is surprising that the
most impressive Caribbean impact of Spanish Carlism was not conspir-
atorial in nature, but Romantic, in the inspiration it gave to the cause of
Santo Domingan independence from Haitian rule. The Santo Domingan
‘father of the nation’, Juan Pablo Duarte, had spent the Carlist War
in Catalonia, but in 1838 he left for his native Dominican Republic,
inspired to agitate for his nation’s independence against Haitian rule. He
adapted the Catalan Carlist slogan, Rey, Patria y Fueros to Patria, Fueros y
Libertad. This inspired his Trinitaria secret society, which he founded in
1838 in Santo Domingo, and led to the 1844 declaration of Dominican
independence under a Carlist-inspired slogan.59 The symbol of eman-
cipated, black Haitians exercising sovereignty over whites had terriﬁed
colonial societies, and Duarte was doubtless inﬂuenced by the constant
Carlist allusions to the ‘usurping’ Spanish Liberals as ‘blacks’ (negros).
   The international impact of the civil war may have mattered to the
Jacobin politics of Madrid, but was marginal to the daily experience of
war. The Spanish Left’s greatest ‘export’ since 1812 had been the Con-
stitution of Cádiz, but its domestic reimposition after the La Granja
revolution had rendered it otiose as the army overruled local politicians.
Senior ofﬁcers who, unlike San Miguel, Quiroga and Cardero, were not
part of the victorious revolutionary party had even more reason to use
