138 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


them arms, sacking the homes of the absent wealthy and proclaiming
Carlos V. When a Cristino counter-insurgency operation at the end of
1837 re-established control, the captain-general showed no compassion
for the villagers’ plight, and imposed crippling ﬁnes on families whose
menfolk had joined the insurgents. The intimate details of ‘wrongdo-
ing’ possessed by the captain-general implies the widespread use of local
informants.71 Sometimes exasperated municipalities protected them-
selves by deﬂecting military oppression back onto the commanders. The
commissariat of a Cristino division quartered in Sarrión (Teruel) refused
to give the municipality a receipt for 3,000 rations commissioner (habiti-
lado de comisario) Castillo demanded as only 2,800 had been produced.
Even worse, the same division returned to Sarrión a few days later. The
Mayor of Sarrión therefore acted fast. He humoured Castillo and man-
aged to get him to sign off the receipts, and not only these but also
some receipts from Cabrera who had plagued the area shortly before
with similar demands. Castillo did not bother to read the small print.
For this mistake a court martial started against Castillo, but before he
could be sentenced, he defected to the Carlists out of embarrassment.72
   The ideologically committed minority despaired at the apolitical prag-
matism of communities at war. A solitary Liberal in Sonseca (Toledo)
complained at how ‘the insurgents are the only people in charge around
here’, conﬁscating the cattle of local Cristinos and abducting the local
mayor for ransom.73 In Méntrida (Toledo), meanwhile, local authority
had passed into the hands of ‘men of no character’ who, so an inves-
tigating judge was appalled to ﬁnd, paid off Carlist irregulars in the
surrounding hills, thereby preserving a modus vivendi.74 Communities in
Toledo which failed to make such accommodations could expect to fare
worse. In March 1837, some 26 irregulars descended on Malpica del Tajo
(Toledo) and might have kept it in their possession, as the few militia-
men who reported for action merely barricaded themselves in the local
castle. Yet the irregulars contented themselves with sacking the house of
the wealthiest Liberal and burning the mayor’s residence to the ground
before moving on.75 The Protestant missionary, George Borrow, was self-
evidently prone to attract hostile Carlist attention. But his account of
León in the summer of 1837 is nonetheless indicative of how nominally
Cristino civilian authorities were powerless in the face of Carlism:76

   I had scarcely been at Leon three days when I . . . had published my
   advertisements as usual, though without very fervent hope of success,
   as Leon is a place where the inhabitants, with very few exceptions, are
   furious Carlists and ignorant and blinded followers of the old Papal
