140 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


westwards from the Basque country into Old Castile and Asturias began
with not much more than 3,000 men, but, crucially, he picked up more
on the way. High secrecy surrounded the expedition before it began at
ﬁrst light on 26 June 1836. Twenty-ﬁve hours’ march later in blister-
ing sunshine got the expedition to Colina, some nine leagues from the
starting point. A crucial early defensive victory was secured for Gómez
at nearby Baranda when General Tello y López’s Cristino division lost
vital hours discovering the nature of the breakout. By the time Tello
had closed on Gómez on 27 June, the Carlists had had time to choose
their ground. Both sides suffered in the baking heat, and several of Das
Antas’s Portuguese literally died of thirst when pursuing this breakout.
But the Carlists intercepted part of the Cristino supply wagons, which
meant that it was the Cristinos who ran out of water ﬁrst. Tello’s defeat
allowed Gómez to continue the expedition, even though Espartero pur-
sued with forced marches, knowing that he had to deny the Carlists
exploitation of territory because it was marked by ‘weak and abandoned
Cristino garrisons’.79
   Gómez’s remarkable invasion has been analysed in exhaustive detail
elsewhere.80 Its salient feature is a six-month campaign across north-
western, western, southern and eastern Spain, which achieved both
remarkable victories (such as the capture of Córdova) and survived
important defeats (such as Majaceite). The expedition was supported
by a more limited westward raid by Pablo Sanz y Baeza, and another
south by Basilio García, and it was joined across New Castile and
Extremadura by Cabrera’s seasoned forces. Oviedo was twice occupied
by Carlists, ﬁrst by Gómez in July who seized its artillery and small arms,
and hundreds of recruits, before Espartero’s vanguard on 8 July obliged
him to evacuate, and second by Sanz in October who was repulsed by
subaltern revolutionaries who shamed the more cautious army and Mili-
tia ofﬁcers and their declaration of an open city.81 As Espartero drove
Gómez from Oviedo, the Carlists continued westwards into Galicia,
following their King’s instructions. Gómez was aided not just by the
Carlism of clerics, but also by the vicious (or virtuous) cycle of military
paralysis and revolution afﬂicting the Cristino zone. Galicia’s Captain-
General Latre, cowed by his failure against the Andújar revolutionaries
the previous summer, thought the streets of Lugo too dangerous to
leave unguarded and therefore refused to intercept Gómez, conﬁning
himself to ﬁring artillery when the Carlists came into range of the city
walls.82 A political crisis in Portugal withdrew Das Antas’s badly mauled
auxiliaries across the frontier. The provincial committees of armament
and defence came under dictatorial pressure from the army to increase
