                                      Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   133


Italian states in particular, had memories of 1820 which still rankled: for
them the proclamation of the ‘Republican’ Constitution of 1812 proved
little short of a casus belli.43 Russia feared revolutionary Spain would
give strategic depth, and even a battle-hardened army, to a revolution-
ary France bent on tearing up the Vienna settlement.44 The Kingdom
of the Two Sicilies withdrew its skeleton legation from Madrid, whilst a
Spanish merchant at their court who had been acting as a semi-ofﬁcial
ambassador was withdrawn before he could be expelled. A group of 35
Carlists who had seized control of a Cristino ship in the Mediterranean
and sailed it to Naples were welcomed into Neapolitan service. Unof-
ﬁcial Cristino representatives were expelled without regard to rank or
ceremony (Naples, after all, had never recognised the Pragmatic Sanc-
tion of 1830 nor the subsequent accession of María Cristina in the
name of Isabel II), whilst the ministerial Giornale del regno delle due
Sicilie, mouthpiece of the absolutist regime, mounted a sustained cam-
paign of viliﬁcation against Liberal Spain and against the British legation
which was seen as its staunchest defender.45 The Calatrava adminis-
tration responded by expelling such remaining Neapolitan agents as it
could ﬁnd. Yet this was barely more than symbolic: as diplomatic rela-
tions had been broken anyway since 1833, the only Neapolitan agents
who mattered were undercover and protected by powerful friends or
identities. Marquess Grúa, ofﬁcial Neapolitan representative until 1833,
had continued in Madrid ostensibly in the role of court archivist. The
privileged access this commission gave him spared him from revolu-
tionary witch-hunts and equipped him to play a key role in unofﬁcial
diplomatic manoeuvres in 1837 to reach a compromise peace.46
   Meanwhile, serious cracks were appearing in the Quadruple Alliance
itself. Portugal withdrew its legion, citing domestic threats of its own.
France, resentful of Britain’s forward role in the revolution, impressed by
the resignation of the Cristino ambassador to Paris (a move which the
ambassador to Brussels followed)47 and, above all, paralysed by domes-
tic political divisions on Spanish affairs, gave as little support as possible
whilst remaining within the alliance. The French legitimists (dubbed
‘Carlists’, even in France) wanted to support Don Carlos, the govern-
ing party of ‘resistance’ (Guizot, Broglie, Molé) wanted strict neutrality,
and the party of ‘movement’ comprising Republicans and centre-Left
Liberals wanted formal intervention on the side of Spanish liberty.48
Meanwhile, even London’s support could not be taken for granted as
power swayed between the pro-interventionist Palmerston and cautious
Peel. The revolutionary regime thus undertook radical diplomatic mea-
sures. Prime Minister Calatrava concluded a policy, begun in 1835, of
