                                   Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   145


was followed in other provinces like Badajoz, where some 160 civic
Carlists were imprisoned.101 Priests who refused blessings to the Queen
or who even expressed sorrow for the plight of the religious evicted by
the disentailment laws were arrested by the National Militia.102 Andan,
Civil Governor of Zaragoza, imprisoned priests without due process,
whilst Latre, Captain-General of Galicia, threatened mayors with prison
if they refused to cooperate with his military orders.103 Civic Carlists
faced unprecedented government persecution.104 The non-ministerial
Left also ﬂourished, as several Radical conspiracies and secret societies
were now liberated, to an extent, from police pressure. Secret soci-
eties old and new ﬂourished such as Joven Italia, Leñadores escoceses,
Templarios sublimes, Asociación de Derechos del Hombre and others
besides.105 The government tried to keep control of the revolution via
such symbolic actions as auctioning church bells and treasures and
rejecting or extorting those wealthy rightists in the capital and else-
where who applied for passports for exile in France.106 Yet the years
1835–37 still saw the ministerial Left outﬂanked by republican secret
societies, which regarded Carlism as a mortal threat because of its roy-
alism. The Federation (La Federación) convened a clandestine network
of Radicals in Andalucían provincial capitals under the leadership of a
‘Supreme Federated Regulator’ (Supremo Regulador Federado), who resided
out of harm’s way in Paris.107 By the end of 1837, government spies
had penetrated much of its activities, recording the oaths taken by new
members:

 1. I swear never to respect any class of government, power or authority
    which does not originate in the people.
 2. I swear obedience and submission to the Supreme Federated Reg-
    ulator: likewise to those who conduct work and operations in his
    name, whether from the Central or Departmental sections.
 3. I swear to obey no-one other than those purely of the Federation
    residing in my area.
 4. I swear to observe the greatest discretion in everything I obey, see
    and understand, of the Venerated Federation, and to disclose nei-
    ther the names of fellow federados, nor the location of the Assembly,
    nor the hours it meets.
 5. I swear to offer all manner of services demanded of me, sacriﬁcing
    my life, and all my belongings, so that the regenerating principles
    of Universal Federation may prosper and spread.
 6. I swear to recognise tyrants and all those obeying them as enemies
    of man.
