142 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


delegation gave them intelligence about a nearby Cristino unit which
was then subjected to an attack that yielded dozens of prisoners, several
of whom chose to serve under the Carlists. Other communities were
divided between themselves. Almoguera’s (Guadalajara) divisions had
been dormant, but news of both revolution and Carlist invasion radi-
calised local politics. When its Liberal mayor held a banquet to celebrate
the proclamation of the Constitution of 1812, his address was cut short
by one of the musicians in attendance, who lunged forward with a dag-
ger, killing the mayor’s wife instantly and mortally wounding the mayor
(the local surgeon, a civic Carlist, refused to treat him), before snufﬁng
out the candles to assist his escape. The assassin was later caught by
militiamen and executed, but not before he had declared himself ‘glad
to have killed a negro’.89
   Gómez could not seriously consider assaulting Madrid, but it would
have helped Rodil’s career if he had. War Minister Rodil decreed a
strategy which would soon be his undoing. Adopting his tactic of ‘cen-
tralisation’ sustained by parallel lines of deployments and patrols on
the approaches to the capital – ‘defence in depth’ – Rodil certainly
saved the capital, but in a manner of strategic overkill more suited to
his dogged defence of Callao in Peru than against a guerrilla band. His
strategy ceded the initiative to Gómez, deﬂecting him into the surround-
ing areas of Extremadura, New Castile and, eventually, Andalucía, where
he enjoyed a series of embarrassing conquests. Alaix’s campaign troops,
meanwhile, were impeded by the attitude of the local constitutional
authorities, which wanted to stabilise their power by refusing army
demands for supplies and, especially, the mobilisation of local militi-
amen, out of fear that the revolutionary process could be reopened with
unpredictable results. Cristino troops, tired of having to deal with pre-
sumptuous civilians, reverted to imposing states of siege, suspending
constitutional guarantees in the hope that force rather than negotia-
tion would yield more support. This equated the Cristino campaign to
that of Gómez, who was under no such constraints and could offer
civilians either threats or rewards.90 The threat of martial law sup-
plied Alaix’s troops in Cuenca on 11 September with sufﬁcient shoes.91
Cobblers, like telegraphists in later conﬂicts, were artisans whose skill
was so essential that they were targeted by military law. Consequently,
cobblers in revolutionary Málaga faced forced mobilisation on pain of
imprisonment.92
   The disarray of Cristino forces offered the Carlists surprisingly easy
conquests. News reached Gómez that Córdova was lightly garrisoned
(actually, the Cristino garrison would prove larger than Gómez was led
