                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   141


their contributions; Córdova increasingly had to intervene personally.
On 9 July, Córdova found time between his endless threats of resigna-
tion to warn Madrid that he had only enough food to supply the Army
of the North until the next day.83 On 17 July, General Espartero, the
only ofﬁcer yet to show any élan against the expedition, wrote to the
government complaining of the state of his men. Two weeks later the
response he received was evasive and rhetorical.84 Meanwhile, Gómez
seized Espartero’s pay-wagon carrying 8,000 reales and attracted volun-
teers from across the generally pro-Carlist north. On 18 July, Gómez
reached the cathedral city of Santiago, and was welcomed with a Mass.
Gómez ordered a mobilisation in Santiago, to be enforced by the usual
draconian penalties, but Espartero’s pursuit evicted him the following
evening, although not before the Carlists had stripped the city of 100
oxen, 350 sacks of powder, 450 of bullets, 2,000 muskets, 3,000 bayonets
and some 350 cartridges.85
   Gómez’s subsequent evacuation of Galicia and invasion of Old Castile
was remarkable, not least because his expedition survived a defeat by
Espartero at the Asturian village of Escaro on 8 August and the loss
of some 500 prisoners. Yet even more remarkable was the fact that a
rural expedition alternating around 6,000 men (some of these being
priests and other itinerants of little military value) seemed not only
unstoppable but also an external factor in Cristino Spain’s revolu-
tionary crisis. Gómez spent the ﬁrst week of August occupying León,
before ﬂeeing before Espartero’s vanguard once again. Soon afterwards,
Espartero himself fell ill from exhaustion, and the counter-insurgency
forces were led, from 23 August, by Alaix.86 As the expedition drew
closer to the Cristino capital, revolutionary opinion turned on War
Minister Rodil. Rodil had presided over an embarrassing defeat of the
Royal Guard, which, despite its better training and artillery, had suffered
demoralisation since the La Granja revolution, symbolised by the revo-
lutionaries’ insistence that the Guard’s standard be emblazoned with
the green ribbons of the Constitution. Local authorities at Guadalajara
ﬂed to Madrid in panic.87 Guadalajara province saw its communities
caught between Carlist violence and ‘revolutionary justice’. Cristino
forces ﬁned municipalities which did not display tablets dedicated to
the Constitution of 1812, and Carlists sacked those that did. A consti-
tutional judge of Riaza (Segovia) on the border of Guadalajara cut an
undigniﬁed ﬁgure by ﬂeeing to La Granja soon after exhorting others
to ﬁght to the end.88 The isolated Guadalajara village of Maranchón
was surrounded by opposing forces but had no particular afﬁliation
of its own. Its villagers decided that the Carlists were stronger, and a
