150 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


subordinate, General Rivero, detailed the terror Gómez inﬂicted during
his Andalucían campaign. Liberals imprisoned in Córdova were dragged
on a forced march, tied up in villages in the Carlists’ path whilst the
villages themselves were pillaged. Prisoners who could not keep pace
were bayonetted by the wayside. This terror made Andalucía even more
hostile to Carlism than it already was. Estepona’s militiamen circulated
arms to civilians in a successful repulse of 200–300 ‘Carlist scum’ who
had demanded 30,000 reales. The invaders later returned demanding
half this sum, only to be repulsed again. Several British military and
civilians were spectators of an unlikely invasion from the north of San
Roque, on the actual borderline with Gibraltar, on 22 November. With
British help, the Cristinos had reinforced the border with artillery which
harassed the Carlist occupation of San Roque, provoking Gómez into
reprisals including ‘sacking homes, burning others, and smashing the
town’s vats containing wines, olives, oils and spirits, so that the streets
resembled a noxious ﬂood’.128 This sacking of Liberal San Roque con-
trasted with the Carlists’ behaviour in the Serranía where ‘they took
more care of the inhabitants, as they committed nothing like the same
outrages, nor any signiﬁcant inconvenience’.128 But there was no way
back into the friendly Serranía, and whilst Gómez left half his combat-
ants on the border to negotiate their internment (and that of Córdoba’s
fugitive Carlist junta), the other half invaded the nearest Cristino port
of Algeciras. Here the Carlists’ lack of artillery told once more as they
were repulsed by the concentrated ﬁre of a Portuguese frigate, a British
corvette and Cristino coastguard vessels, suffering considerable losses.
The Carlists invaded the Mediterranean on horseback up to bridle-
height in a vain attempt to get near enough to the Quadruple Alliance
naval supremacy to ﬁre their muskets. However, the pursuit of Cristino
forces obliged Gómez to ﬂee Algeciras, but not before he had burnt the
town to the ground.128
   While Gómez was put to ﬂight, the Carlists and their junta of Córdoba
on the Gibraltar frontier were allowed internment in the colony. The
French consul arrived to agree terms, but the internees’ voyage out
of the colony on 23 November was intercepted by the Cristino coast-
guard, the passengers being taken prisoner and sent to Seville for trial.
There they were defended by the local lawyer, moderado provincial
deputy and National Guard battalion commander, Manuel Cortina, and
despite – or because of – his efforts (Cortina had been targeted by local
revolutionaries during riots in July) the Carlists were all deported to
the Philippines.129 The harsh treatment of Córdoba Carlists allowed
Seville’s Radicals to save some face in the context of the moderado rally.
