                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   147


acting commander who would do his bidding whilst he left for Madrid
with only a personal guard, ready to defend his honour at the capital.
Reaching Almaráz (Extremadura), a further order came into his hands
ordering him to march directly to Toledo, not Madrid. Rodil, terriﬁed of
being made a sacriﬁce to Radicals, wrote to the Queen-Regent and got
her personal guarantee for his safety and modiﬁed terms. He could now
choose internal exile in Ciudad Rodrigo, Zamora or Segovia. He chose
Ciudad Rodrigo for its proximity to the Portuguese frontier. After cross-
ing into exile, he issued an indignant manifesto protesting the political
interference in army affairs, the underhand behaviour of Cardero, the
Radical government’s failure to supply his army, particularly with shoes,
and its second-guessing of his strategy.111
   Rodil’s exile was a sideshow to the government’s inability to control
its territory. One of the most powerful men in Cristino Spain was the
editor of the Radical Eco del Comercio, Fermín Caballero, now president
of the revolutionary junta of his native Cuenca. Gómez’s interception of
his correspondence revealed intelligence about the identities of Carlists
and Liberals in La Mancha.112 Córdoba was reoccupied, but the Carlist
junta had stripped the city of military supplies, including some 20,000
sorely needed pairs of shoes. Cobblers were forced to make as many
shoes as possible, and ofﬁcers ordered to buy soles and to set their men
to work making sandals. Poor supplies and unreliable communications
complicated the Cristino pursuit of Gómez.113 Such impediment as came
to the Carlists came from within rather than without.
   At Cáceres Gómez ordered Cabrera to retire to Aragón, overriding his
bitter protest at this breaking of an earlier agreement, and at the manner
that the order was delivered (Gómez amassed armed men around him in
the rituals of a pronunciamiento). The King, Gómez said, needed Cabrera
in the east in the wake of the fall of Cantavieja, but he provided his rival
with nothing more than a personal guard of cavalry, and a suggested
route which would suspiciously take him close to Cristino garrisons.
In the end, Cabrera accepted his assumed identity (Llorens, a Valencia
guerrilla subordinate of Quílez), but set out on his own path through
Cristino territory. Despite Gómez’s parsimony, ‘Llorens’ fought a serious
of successful rearguard actions, zigzagged in order to confound pur-
suers, set off a minor panic in the capital between 21 and 25 November
by invading the Tarancón (Cuenca) area and, most impressively, as he
neared the Basque country on 24 November, captured the Bishop of
Pamplona, Andriani, who had played a double game with both sides and
whom the Cristinos had been holding in internal exile. Cabrera escaped
back across the Ebro after losing a battle to the Cristino covering force
