146 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


 7. I swear to consider as a usurpation of the People the power and
    Authority known as Royal.
 8. I swear to work to give liberty to the world and take it out of the
    slavery of being subject to just one person, even if that person’s
    power is restricted.
 9. I swear to obey Federated law, and any amendments and modiﬁca-
    tions agreed by the Assembly.
10. I swear to submit to suffer the penalty which article 84 prescribes
    for perjurers.
       I make a special oath before the Supreme Legislator that I have
    freely and spontaneously sought admission to this sacred place
    without having been prompted or coerced by anyone.108

Outﬂanked on the left, the progresista government tried to capture pub-
lic disaffection by scapegoating Rodil. The Cortes narrowly rejected a
motion to send deputies on permanent mission to the headquarters of
every ﬁeld army (a version of the French Revolutionary représentantes
en mission), but it did decide to send a deputy to interrogate Rodil.109
The Cortes nominated none other than the upstart Cardero, the darling
of the Radicals, who, since his January 1835 rising, had become Cortes
deputy and aide-de-camp to General Espoz, to lead an investigation into
Rodil.
   Rodil was incandescent with rage receiving Cardero, the man whose
entire career had been attributed to his killing of Rodil’s friend and
fellow ayacucho, Canterac. Rodil feared that what had happened to
Canterac, and later to Bassa and Quesada, could happen to him.
On 11 November 1836 Cardero arrived at Rodil’s headquarters at Monte
Rubio, but pointedly did not go to interview him until nightfall, and
only then in secret. This precaution was sensible, for Cristino troops
across Spain were revolting against Rodil, such as at Miajadas (Cáceres),
where troops refused to march against Gómez and instead shouted
‘Death to Rodil!’ On 29 November 1836 a battalion in the Royal Guard
of Infantry launched a revolt which was suppressed when three of
its leaders were executed.110 During the meeting between Rodil and
Cardero, the former was beside himself listening to the tactful preach-
ings of this upstart; he threatened to silence Cardero and to execute him,
before ﬁnally ordering him to leave his presence. With Cardero turned
out, Rodil now had to act fast. He had received the envelope contain-
ing the order for him to resign his command, so before he opened it,
he assembled his staff, got their support, and only then opened the let-
ter in their presence. All being suitably indignant, Rodil nominated an
