7
Carlist Failure, 1837–39




This chapter explains how Carlist Spain was transformed by the defeat
of the Royal Expedition. The Carlist Basque country was debilitated by
civilian war weariness and army revolts. Popular hatred of ojalateros
(‘would-to-God-ers’, or shirkers) grew on the backs of Basque peas-
antry overburdened by taxes and conscription. War weariness created
factionalism both from within between an ‘enlightened absolutist’
(Marotista) and theocratic absolutist (Apostólico) camp, and even
from without (Muñagorri’s ‘Peace and fueros’ insurgency sponsored by
Madrid). Meanwhile, Cabrera’s military state in the east maintained
its cohesion, defying the Cristino ascendancy elsewhere (as, to a lesser
extent, did the Catalan Carlists). But the strategic situation reverted to
an unsustainable stalemate, renewed minor Carlist expeditions notwith-
standing. The Carlist ‘home front’ in mid-war differed greatly from
that of its enemy. Carlist Spain matched a stultifying social and polit-
ical culture with a generally effective military strategy and order of
battle: the very reverse of the Cristinos. Unlike Cristino Spain, its ter-
ritory was small, restricted to a Basque–Navarrese statelet, and much
more makeshift rural areas of Catalonia, Aragón and Valencia besides.
Although Carlist guerrillas roamed in other areas of Spain, even domi-
nating signiﬁcant geographical spaces, their itinerant nature prevented
them from enforcing anything more than the most rudimentary mil-
itary administration. Thus, the Carlist ‘home front’ entails the Basque
country, and, to a lesser degree, the east. Its study involves three broad
categories, the cultural, the political–economic and the military.
   Culturally, Carlist Spain was characterised by an ofﬁcial puritanism
based on the union of throne and altar. The Vatican never recog-
nised Carlist Spain. Even though most of the cardinals supported such
a policy, Pope Gregory XVI in 1832 had condemned all rebellion

                                   157
