158 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


against constituted authority, which meant that Papal recognition of
the Carlists was impossible without either a dynastic reconciliation or
the capture of Madrid. In this respect, the very conservative Pope resem-
bled Chancellor Metternich.1 Yet the lack of formal Papal recognition
did not impede the Carlist mobilisation of Catholicism in its war effort.
On 1 August 1835, the Virgin Mary was proclaimed Generalísima of
Carlist forces, repeating similar anointments by Peninsular War Patriots
and anticipating Franco 100 years later.2 In fact, beyond ofﬁcial puri-
tanism, Carlists exploited the range of popular Catholicism to inspire
Christian soldiery, exculpate exterminating angels or even justify acts
of protest. Faced with the intensely irrational and violent environment
of war, many Carlists relied on the miraculous powers of icons. Hence,
Carlist guerrillas in Aragón turned against their leader, an exterminat-
ing angel priest called Escoriguela, after he discarded a holy cross when
wading across the River Ebro. The weight of the cross almost made him
drown, but this counted as nought to his men who had always kissed the
icon before battle and almost executed the priest for his act of sacrilege.3
  The demands made by the war distorted the public and private
exercise of Catholicism. In April 1836, Don Carlos revived and trans-
formed the Sancti Spiritus University at Oñati (Guipúzcoa), purging
those scholars suspected of the merest whiff of liberalism, replacing
them with theologians of often inferior qualiﬁcations, and forcing staff
to take an oath of allegiance to the King and to uphold the mystery of
the Marian Immaculate Conception. Yet this traditionalist drive failed
as the University had to be used to house armaments, all areas but
the chapel being used for arms storage.4 Ofﬁcial concerns mounted
that total war was eroding popular religiosity and encouraging licence
and blasphemy, and these were answered by punishments targeting
swearing and ‘scandal’.5 Carlist Spain’s greatest female poet, Vicenta
Maturana de Gutiérrez, suffered from the cultural crackdown when,
on 1 May 1838, her ironic lyric poem, Himno a la luna, was banned
from Carlist territory.6 Of greater concern for its pervasiveness was the
growth of extramarital liaisons and the children these produced, bely-
ing the regime’s ofﬁcial piety as expressed in the Gaceta Oﬁcial, and
the cult of the Virgin. A decree was therefore passed on 25 December
1836 allowing soldiers and ofﬁcers to marry, even though these married
men would have to forgo their rights to military pensions. Beyond dog-
matic anti-liberalism, Carlist religion was always a reﬂection of changing
social relationships. Yet both leftist and traditionalist historians have
tended to view Carlist War Catholicism as a constant rather than diverse
and changing, even though the orphaning of the Pretender’s cause by
