154 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Bilbao that week, whilst dozens more were amongst the total of 307
Cristino wounded. The Carlist projectiles included incendiary ﬁreballs
which had been invented by the French Carlist engineer, Colonel
Lizoire, better known for his braggadocio as ‘Tout-terraser’, whose pro-
jectiles expelled noxious ‘Greek ﬁre’ upon impact.148 Lizoire was joined
by several other European Carlists in the assault on Bilbao, and in being
opposed by European Liberals the struggle for Bilbao became a cru-
cible of the international struggle between Absolutism and Liberalism.149
At one point the Carlists brieﬂy breached the walls, only to be ﬂushed
out by militiamen supported by Bilbao workers. Meanwhile, the morale
of the civilian population was sustained by the erroneous belief that
Gómez had been utterly destroyed somewhere in southern Spain. The
Carlist assault ﬂagged from 29 October and the bitter divisions in the
Carlist court reappeared. Eguía, still rankling from his replacement by
Erro, seized his chance by convincing Don Carlos’s courtiers that he
could take the city within 24 hours, a gambit that won him command
of the besieging troops and the relegation (and subsequent resignation)
of Villarreal.
   Eguía’s conference on 5 November with his artillery generals and engi-
neers resulted in a plan to break the deadlock by assaulting Bilbao’s
adjacent fortiﬁed points and convents which protected its access to
the sea. An unlikely Carlist spy inside Bilbao (an elderly woman) had
disclosed the weakness of the Cristino fort which had been put up at
Mallona on the city’s outskirts. This was taken after a short artillery
bombardment, and was followed up by the capture of a fortiﬁed con-
vent whose surrender gave the Carlists a stranglehold on the city’s river
links to the sea. French residents being evacuated were ﬁred upon by the
Carlists, and, despite the French consul’s protests, Eguía refused them
safe passage. Meanwhile, the Royal Navy commander of the Ringdove
complained to the defending Cristinos of the speed with which the
defenders had surrendered the outlying forts. Eguía in November was
showing promise where his predecessor had failed, as well as a com-
mon touch as he disguised himself as a simple soldier and shared the
violence of the front with his men.150 Time appeared to be on his side:
Carlist espionage revealed to the besiegers that the city was going hun-
gry as food stocks dwindled and the prices of bread, eggs and especially
meat, rose exponentially. A chance shipload of cod had been made to
last and bequeathed Bilbao its signature dish,151 one of two enduring
gastronomic legacies of the First Carlist War.151
   The further Eguía advanced, the stiffer the resistance he encoun-
tered. The Cristino detachment at Luchana withdrew only after it had
