                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   155


exhausted all its ammunition, and even then it redeployed to the
stronger position garrisoned by an Anglo-Cristino force at a place known
as El Desierto, which was strengthened by the gunﬁre of the Royal Navy
brigantines Ringdove and Saracen.152 But Erro was conﬁdent enough with
Eguía’s progress to outline to his King on 17 November elaborate details
of the peace the Carlists would impose on Bilbao. Thus, foreign consuls
in the city representing powers opposed to Don Carlos would be treated
as nothing more than private aliens, a ruinous 12,000,000 reales tax
would be imposed on known Liberal families opposed to Don Carlos,
all nationalised convents and monasteries in the city would be revived
and even put to work ‘imprisoning and correcting those decent women
who had fallen into corrupt and unruly ways and so scandalised the
people’.153 Clearly, the inference between revolution and breakdown of
family morality, which began in the Carlist imagination with the female
usurpation of the throne, was plain to see. Whereas Carlists had the
unimpeachable Virgin Mary as their icon, the Cristinos had the secu-
lar Isabella as theirs. Isabella’s ‘innocence’ and her mother’s worldliness
provoked a veritable avalanche of books, essays and pamphlets debat-
ing the proper role of woman in Liberal society, the vast majority of
which predictably reverted to the traditional feminine values of religion,
morality, self-abnegation and self-control.154
   But in planning the correction of Bilbao’s corrupted women, the Royal
Government was counting its proverbial chickens. Bilbao’s counterbat-
tery was now outgunning the Carlist attackers. The Carlists managed
to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of San Agustín before being halted by
a Cristino rally in front of Sendeja, where the defenders intimidated
some of the weary Carlist attackers by draping a barricade in front of
the ex-convent with a slogan saying ‘Transit to Death’. Meanwhile,
Carlist logistics were also ﬂagging. Carlist civilians shirked work building
wooden siege-trains with the result that soldiers had to be redeployed
for this task. One ﬁnal Carlist effort to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of
La Concepción, which was repulsed on 29 November, ﬁnally pushed
the besiegers into exhaustion. The Cristino garrison was now returning
artillery ﬁre at rates twice and then three times that of the Carlists, who
were under orders to conserve their dwindling ammunition. Even worse,
intelligence arrived of Cristino relief forces. After Evans’s British force
was sent by sea from San Sebastián to Portugalete on Bilbao’s extreme
right, Espartero resolved to relieve the city by striking through the area
of the bridge at Luchana, a key location where the Asúa River ﬂowed into
the Nervión. Espartero’s victory here relieved Bilbao on Christmas Day,
restoring Cristino Spain’s fortunes in the wake of the Gómez debacle,
