                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   161


   The war forced the Royal Government to impose unprecedented reg-
ulation and taxation upon the Basque population. Money was lacking
and it was only a matter of time before the crushing ﬁnes imposed
on local Liberals, combined with forced loans levied on Carlists (even
on nuns), would run dry, not least because discontent was growing
even within the ranks at the one-third pay given to each soldier and
ofﬁcer. Administrative reforms proved more effective at ﬁnding new
resources: Juntas Generales, it was decreed, should meet every two years
at Guernica, the Carlist Deputation of Vizcaya decreed new levies on
imports, whilst the Guernica junta on 14 July 1835 hit the civil popu-
lation yet again with a new forced loan of 2 million reales to be paid
back at 5 per cent annual interest, and to be guaranteed against all
national assets across Spain. Don Carlos, was less successful, however,
when it came to enlisting international ﬁnancial support for Carlist
Spain. The mooted 125,000,000-franc loan arranged by ﬁnanciers Haber,
Jange and Gower never materialised, nor did other deals, largely because
Don Carlos displayed the rare ability always to pick the wrong argument
at the wrong time. He promised that a future Carlist government would
categorically refuse to honour any foreign creditor who had outstand-
ing debts to the ‘usurping government’. This debacle took the wind out
of the sails of overseas Carlist representatives.19 In the event no real
ﬁnancial help arrived apart from the erratic and varying donations of
European legitimists, despite the varying pledges of ﬁnancial support
made by Prussian, Dutch, Austrian and Italian rulers, so Carlist agents
were forced to tap the vagaries of private lending markets.
   The militarisation of Carlist society proceeded more thoroughly than
in Cristino Spain. The Carlists developed a comparatively more efﬁ-
cient hierarchical organisation of their military. Comandante generales
retained default control of all forces in their province unless a divi-
sion general asked for them.20 Beyond this, the demands of the war
regulated food and production far more than in Cristino Spain. From
28 January 1836 food was rationed: two daily rations of bread and meat
and wine for serving soldiers and workers in arms forges and factories,
and half this quantity for all ‘passive’ classes (such as retired, and other
civilians) except heads of family. The wine ration was harder to pro-
vide in Guipúzcoa and parts of Durango where vines were traditionally
not cultivated, but such was the demand of soldiers for wine, especially
Basque soldiers whose relative lack of sobriety was not satiated by the
abundant but unsatisfying local cider, that the Carlists passed a special
decree reserving all wine in these areas exclusively for soldiers and arms
