                                               Carlist Failure, 1837–39   169


powers for peace by both Don Carlos and María Cristina proved not only
hollow, but also the last serious attempt by any Spanish monarch to rule
on so important an issue as war and peace; after the Royal Expedition,
the generals, not the monarch, would have the last word. Moreover, reli-
gious fervour outside of the Carlist safe zones was a notoriously useless
ally. Most purchasers of disentailed Church property had, in any case,
been using intermediaries to avoid excommunication, and could thus
claim innocence if they were unlucky enough to come under Carlist
occupation.
   Don Carlos’s pilgrimage of grace was not immediately exposed as
militarily ﬂawed, in large part because of the usual pattern of Cristino
disintegration. The invasion broke through the Cristino covering force
near Estella on 15 May 1837. Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the
North dispatched a pursuing force under General Iribarren, who was
reinforced by 12,000 militiamen mobilised from Huesca and Zaragoza.
But the ﬁrst battle at Huesca on 24 May 1837 was a Carlist victory, as
some 1,000 Cristino soldiers and militiamen were either killed or cap-
tured as the Carlist invaders were skilled at pinning Iribarren amid the
sticky mud along the banks of the swollen River Cinca, forcing him
to retreat. Virtually all the Cristino authorities ﬂed the city, but the
bishop remained to welcome Don Carlos, who stayed for three days
before moving on to take Barbastro, which surrendered without a shot
being ﬁred. Don Carlos heard Mass in this ancient city’s cathedral whilst
the Cristinos tried to regroup. The next Cristino counteroffensive came
from Oráa’s 12,400 infantry, 1,400 cavalry and artillery of the Army of
the Centre. Yet the Carlists had fortiﬁed Barbastro in time for the bat-
tle on 2 June 1837. The Carlists were massively outmatched in artillery,
but they managed to defeat the Cristinos, by again using the geograph-
ical contours of the river bank to their advantage. Barbastro resonated
for being a civil war within a civil war. The thousand-strong Carlist for-
eign legion (comprised of French Foreign Legion defectors and pardoned
miguelistas defecting from the Oporto Hunters54 ) fought its former com-
rades, and the German Carlist, Prince Lichnowsky,55 was saddened to
hear that they killed each other shouting in French and German.56
One of the fratricidal casualties was the French Legion’s commander,
Brigadier Conrad, an Alsatian Napoleonic Wars veteran known for his
common touch and his humanitarian treatment of civilians, whose
death was all the more galling as it came in a forlorn bid to rally the
terriﬁed ﬂight of men who had recently distinguished themselves at
Huesca.57 The Carlist foreign legion, in the thick of the ﬁghting during
this victory, was almost wiped out and was dissolved.58
