166 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


in El Patriota newspaper, of an article criticising Valmaseda’s evacuation.
Espartero called the author an imposter and agent of Don Carlos and
demanded he be punished. The government could not risk displeasing
its hero and two press censors who had let the article through were
replaced.38 Espartero’s power forced newspaper editors to tread carefully.
The wife of the editor of a new leftist satirical journal (La Injusticia)
fawningly asked for the Generalísimo’s endorsement of its mission to
use satire for the service of ‘the happiness of the people and in defence
of their rights’.39 The structural shift towards a praetorianism caused by
the Carlist War was plain for all to see when, in 1843, moderado counter-
revolutionaries violently evicted Espartero and his remaining supporters
from ofﬁce. A parallel praetorianism dominated Carlist politics as a
result of the defeat of the Royal Expedition and its apostólico advocates.
But both Maroto’s military dictatorship in the north and Cabrera’s in
the east were truncated by the Carlist defeats of 1839 and 1840.
   None of this, of course, was the intention of the fateful Carlist
decision to march on Madrid in 1837. Carlist calculations were com-
pelling for four reasons. The ﬁrst two reasons were interconnected:
diplomatic and dynastic. Despite Cristino Spain’s improved diplomatic
links with Britain and the Americas following the La Granja revolu-
tion, the European response had favoured the Carlists. France’s policy
had been equivocal, whereas several absolutist powers had emboldened
their support for Don Carlos to the verge of virtual recognition. Only
Metternich’s caution – and British naval supremacy – prevented the
Italian kingdoms from launching a Sardinian–Neapolitan naval attack
on Valencia in 1837.40 Although short of direct intervention, the ﬁnan-
cial help and illicit arms deliveries to Carlist Spain had grown since La
Granja, and even though the King’s emissaries overseas still felt let down
by the European capitals of the counter-revolution, they had every rea-
son to believe Metternich’s recognition would follow their capture of
Madrid.41 The second reason was dynastic in nature. María Cristina was
more wounded by her humiliation at La Granja the previous August
than most nineteenth-century writers realised. The very real prospect of
violence against her person, and her regal captivity under Calatrava’s
revolutionary dictatorship, had driven the Queen-Regent to correspond
with her brother, Absolute King of Naples, seeking a private release from
Spain via her abdication and exile, and a dynastic resolution to the civil
war via the future marriage of her daughter Isabella with the son of Don
Carlos. Thus, her captaining of Liberal resistance in Madrid in September
1837 was a double game. Ironically, María Cristina’s eventual capitu-
lation at Valencia during the post-war ‘peace dividend’ revolution of
