170 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   Despite these Aragonese victories, the Carlists’ poor logistics, com-
pounded by the large number of non-combatants accompanying the
invasion, made Don Carlos’s progress appear sluggish when compared
with Gómez a year earlier. Some 300 expeditionaries were drowned in
an ill-fated mass crossing of the swollen Cinca.59 The poor agriculture
of Huesca province could not support invasion, and the Carlists made
enemies of the villages in their path. Angüés had tried to ‘welcome’ the
expedition but had been sacked and pillaged by its hungry contingents
all the same. Estopiñan’s villagers, on 6 June, tried to hide its food-
stuffs, but the telltale eggshells in a pantry drove the Carlists to break in
the chicken pens and slaughter the poultry before moving on.60 Pillage
blunted the expeditionaries’ use of Catholic revivalism in order to win
over civilians. But pillage was inevitable for an expedition advancing
on a nutritional shoestring. Poor nutrition also made it hard to recover
from defeats. It was remarkable that the expeditionaries managed to
extricate themselves from a serious defeat by the Captain-General of
Catalonia, Baron Meer, on 12 June 1837; so remarkable that Cristino
Radicals suspected treachery on Meer’s part.61 Ever since riots had swept
Zaragoza and Barcelona in January 1837 Meer had appeared to be more
concerned about subduing radicalism than ﬁghting Carlism.62
   Radicals were exasperated because the expedition had invaded
Catalonia, a province which, beyond its traditionalist far west, had
become virtually diabolical in Carlist eyes. Santpedor, only 45 miles
from Barcelona, saw its outskirts burnt and far worse threatened after
its militia garrison refused to capitulate.63 The expedition traversed
Catalonia, crossing the Ebro at Cherta on 29 June, a busy day marked
by the defeat of a pursuing Portuguese division, a solemn Mass and Te
Deum in the town’s patron saint church of St Martin (and a pillage of its
surroundings), and a personal meeting between the King and Cabrera,
whose forces were now linked with the expedition.64 Reinforced by
Cabrera, other victories followed. Castellón, a Valencian provincial cap-
ital only a few miles from the Mediterranean, had been abandoned
by revolutionary soldiers and militiamen the previous summer, and
subsequently sacked by Cabrera. The Militia had re-formed since and
those citizens who had not ﬂed were resolved not to face the same fate
again. But Castellón fell a second time all the same, and the expedition
got closer to the safe zone of the Maestrazgo.65 The Cristino Army of
the Centre used superior topography and cavalry to defeat the expe-
dition at the Battle of Chiva (Valencia) on 15 July 1837. But Oráa’s
lack of food and water stopped him routing the expedition, which
escaped into Aragón.66 The march into Aragón was punishing for both
