162 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


workers. Arms workers were given special consideration because of the
vital need for increased output. Output did increase markedly, largely
because of territorial expansion in 1835, but there was an accompanying
rise in explosives-related accidents.21 Otherwise, the Carlists had only
unreliable and intermittent imports from Castile. Alava banned the stor-
ing of grain in order to prioritise military needs; in return a 14 March
1836 decree from Durango treated all food shipments throughout the
Basque country as if they were traversing within a single province (hence
an anti-foral single market), and maximum prices were imposed on
wheat, corn and barley. Thus, the general European grain depression
of the 1830s was distorted in the Basque country into a boom as prices
stayed high.22
   The regulation of the domestic economy was made harsher by the
growing burden of conscription. A decree on 29 January 1836 ordered
all 17-year-olds into the Carlist ranks, imposing a 200 ducados ﬁne on
communities who failed to give up these youngsters within three days.23
Clearly, the early image of hardy Basque volunteers, rising up against
the usurping government in Madrid in defence of throne and altar,
was overborne by the grim demands of total war. This conscription
decree had been preceded by draconian measures targeting desertion.
During November and December 1835, three decrees imposed penal-
ties escalating to the death penalty against deserters. The Carlist state
was thus relying on depressingly modern machinery in order to sustain
the war effort, which contrasted with the timeless religiosity motivat-
ing Carlist villages and combatants. The fact that the Carlist rearguard
still offered a more peaceable and united aspect than the chaos reign-
ing beyond the Cristino lines owed a great deal to the fact that virtually
every available man was at the front, and that Cristino occupation could
realistically threaten any village in the statelet. The taboo of desertion
and draft-dodging thus explained popular anger at ojalateros and further
decrees passed in 1836 tightened up conscription still further, exempt-
ing only the most desperate families (for example, unigeniture with
parents over 60, widowers with dependants under 16).24 The regulation
of the war economy was more consistently applied than in the far larger
Cristino zone. In light of this fact it is remarkable how pre-modern val-
ues of religion and personalities continued to shape Carlist propaganda.
Zumalacárregui was dead but the Royal Government persisted in deploy-
ing the Great Man’s popular resistance motif: the unaltered address of
‘volunteers’ to conscripts, a press publication of an alleged conversation
between a foreign traveller and a belligerent Carlist mother in the Baztán
and the ennoblement of the commoner, Juan Bautista Esaín, dubbed
