                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   171


expeditionaries and pursuers, and doubly so for the civilian commu-
nities in the armies’ path, which saw their entire wealth pillaged by
one army, only to end up being occupied by the following army. After a
retreat of some 150 miles, the Carlists, on 24 August 1837, defeated Oráa
at Villar de los Navarros (called the Battle of Herrera), inﬂicting over
2,000 casualties and capturing sorely needed weapons and supplies.67
   No tragedy matched that of the Cristino prisoners taken after this
battle.68 More than half would die over the course of an itinerant captiv-
ity which would stretch over six months before the surviving prisoners
were exchanged. Cabrera was bent on keeping conditions so dire as to
force the prisoners to defect to his ranks. That the Cristino prisoners
refused to do so turned them into patriotic-Liberal heroes of the Cristino
effort. But it also condemned them to the direst excesses of cold, hunger,
disease and mortality. No trial was spared the prisoners: cannibalism,
scavenging, murder, exposure, typhus, forced marches, random execu-
tions. By the time that the survivors had been exchanged in March 1838
they had become martyrs to liberty. The nineteenth-century historian,
Antonio Pirala, published the diary of a captive ofﬁcer (Sub-Lieutenant
Juan Manuel Martín), which resonates for being a rare literary account
of common suffering in Spain’s last great pre-literary conﬂict.69

  25 August 1837 Passing through the village of Blesa the inhabitants
    take pity on us poor prisoners, giving us big servings of bread,
    chocolate, and some shoes.
  1 September 1837 We return from Cantavieja to Villarluengo, we ofﬁ-
    cers staying in the same building as three days before, and the
    men in a convent. For nine days we remain here, sleeping on hard
    ﬂoors and being given nothing more than a hundredweight of bread
    every day.
  10 September 1837 We return to Cantavieja and are housed in the local
    castle for a fortnight, after which we are incarcerated in the local
    prison.
  27 September 1837 The Liberal prefect of Teruel organises a donation
    which sees us receive some shirts, linen and bandages, and later
    some blankets, too. The Carlists abuse us for this.
  15 October 1837 Word spreads that General Oráa is about to lay siege to
    Cantavieja, so the facciosos spirit us off towards Beceite, after which
    we march by day and sleep at different locations each night.
  20 October 1837 We leave Peñaroya for Valderrobles, some ofﬁcers
    remaining behind stricken with typhus. Reaching Valderrobles we
    realise that this disease has spread amongst us and I’m almost at
