                                              Carlist Failure, 1837–39   173


  10 December 1837 Delivery arrives from Alcañiz of 306 blankets which
    are distributed amongst the men.
  19 December 1837 Constant daily mortality. Word reaches us from
    Cabrera that our exchange is in train, and that Pellicer should give
    us full rations. Nonetheless, we continue to receive only half.
  28 December 1837 No ration whatsoever today. 21 soldiers die. Such is
    the hunger and misery that anyone with even a couple of maravedis
    (ochavo) in his possession risks being murdered just for this puny
    sum. Any soldier ordered to leave for work on fortiﬁcations would
    pick up bones to be ground into bonemeal to be eaten. The corpses
    of dead comrades are hidden away to be picked over and cooked
    at night by lantern light. Such is the state of the unhappy prison-
    ers of Herrera! History teaches us about the sufferings of ancient
    heroes, and about martyrs in Spain’s bloody wars, but can anyone
    have suffered as much as we imprisoned heroes of Espartero?
  29 December 1837 One-ﬁfth rations today. But a subscription arrives
    from Teruel at the invitation of its prefect of some 2,000 reales
    which are distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men.
  30 December 1837 One-fourth rations. Ofﬁcers from the regiment of
    Badajoz province garrisoning Tortosa send us 2,000 reales which are
    distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men. Our thanks are eternal
    and our hearts warm to know that we have not been forgotten by
    our comrades.
  31 December 1837 No rations today. Mortality rises to 13. Only 500
    soldiers are left in their depot, which means that around 600 have
    fallen victim to our appalling situation.

Military solutions to this barbarity were virtually impossible. The
Cristino government hoped that the Expedition had denuded the Carlist
north of forces, yet it had also drawn Cristino forces away from the Army
of the North in pursuit (15 battalions, nine cavalry squadrons and sub-
stantial artillery pursuing the 16 battalions and eight squadrons of the
Carlist expedition). Yet the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country
retained 31 battalions, four squadrons and almost all its ﬁeld artillery,
against which the Cristinos could mount for campaign 28 battalions, 11
squadrons and rather less artillery. The Carlists thus retained defensive
superiority against Espartero’s Army of the North, even while their Expe-
dition was wreaking havoc with Oráa’s Army of the Centre.70 Espartero
was weakened even further when Portuguese politics robbed him of Das
Antas’s Legion, which Lisbon ordered to redeploy from the Navarrese
