172 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


    death’s door. I lie delirious and helpless as some Carlists enter my
    room and rob me of everything they can lay their hands on. The
    care of the village doctors saves me from death, but the same cannot
    be said of several other ofﬁcers who succumb.
  1 November 1837 We leave Arnés for Orta, eating nothing more than
    miserable half-rations whenever they are given.
  10 November 1837 We are ordered to leave at 11 o’clock at night,
    without being given any time even to fetch our blankets, the only
    bedding we possess. No beasts of burden were assigned to transport
    the sick. One ofﬁcer, it is said, was too sick to move and was killed
    by the Carlist guards who were responsible for him, and now they
    are wearing his particulars. Also the widow of the ofﬁcer Mediero
    who had tended to her dying husband until the end is robbed and
    raped.
  11 November 1837 Today and last night more than 40 soldiers have
    been shot who were so weakened by hunger that they couldn’t
    keep up.
  12 November 1837 We sick ofﬁcers who were in the hospital at
    Valderrobles leave for Beceite. Early this morning our men arrived
    here. We were horriﬁed to see them, as they look more like ghosts
    than men. They are put to marching ahead of us whilst we are
    roused from our beds to follow them. We are all starved, but the
    road ahead is littered with the corpses of those captives who were
    executed for straggling.
  14 November 1837 The ofﬁcers’ hunger is assuaged somewhat by some
    occasional half-rations. But the men are not given anything, with
    the result that at least 8–10 soldiers are dying each day from the
    combined effects of hunger and cold.
  25 November 1837 Mortality continues. Ofﬁcers receive some 3,000
    reales generously donated by the National Militia garrison of
    Tortosa, which equates to 37 reales for each individual.
  4 December 1837 Horrendous mortality. The men haven’t had bread
    for more than 12 days and are reduced to eating a ration of one
    pound-and-a-half of raw potatoes per day. They are forced to strip
    the rooﬁng which leaves them terribly exposed to the cold. They
    crowd on to the balcony to beg for help from local inhabitants. The
    balcony gives away killing 15 prisoners and leaving several more
    injured.
  8 December 1837 Mortality continues. Another overcrowded ﬂoor
    holding prisoners gives away. More than 50 are killed or injured.
