176 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


night watches.81 Meanwhile, the capital’s underground Carlist junta
made a clever ploy by circulating a promise not to reintroduce the Inqui-
sition or despotism, and suggesting an honourable Italian exile for the
‘widow of Ferdinand VII’ and the marriage of her child Isabella to the
Carlist Crown Prince. Given this tense atmosphere of plots and counter-
plots, it was remarkable how the crisis was defused: not with conquest
or siege, but with the unmolested withdrawal of the Carlist army from
the capital’s walls.82
   In the midst of this crisis, on 15 September 1837, Captain-General
Quiroga seconded the strident revolutionary rhetoric of Governor
Seoane by condemning the Carlists as vainglorious murderers: brave
words given that many on both sides suspected that a negotiated peace
(transacción) would now take place. Even the session of the ‘besieged’
Cristino Cortes was remembered for being quiet and sombre rather than
inﬂamed and belligerent, in stark contrast to the Patriots’ parliament in
Cádiz during the Peninsular War. Admittedly, Carlist takeover was not
the only threat on the deputies’ minds. Espartero had been drawn into a
stand-off with the capital’s revolutionary dictatorship of General Seoane
over the political leadership of the revolution, which, since 18 July 1837,
had seen its Constitution of 1812 moderated by a bicameral legislature
and other brakes on radicalism that were part of the Constitution of
1837.83 A moderado army insurrection in Pozuelo de Aravaca, to the west
of the capital, had Espartero’s blessing and so the Left-Liberal Calatrava
administration fell. Now Seoane’s ‘revolutionary dictatorship’ had lost
its political support. Espartero’s mobile forces overawed Seoane’s gar-
rison largely thanks to the Carlists’ decision to withdraw in the face
of Espartero’s march. This series of events allowed Espartero – and the
army, as opposed to Seoane’s Militia – to be seen as the saviour of the
capital and the Liberal patria.84 Both men were leftists of the ‘Ayacucho’
clan, but Espartero’s victory consolidated all power in his hands.85
   The expedition’s retreat from the capital opened a series of mis-
fortunes for Carlism from which it would never recover. Redeploying
to Alcalá in a bid to fall on Espartero’s ﬂank, the Carlist army then
received an order to retreat further still, causing outrage in the ranks.
Rumours ran that Don Carlos had ordered the retreat to a more salu-
brious location in order to hear Mass. Others asserted that he wanted
to avoid bloodshed. Both probably played contingent roles, and spoke
of Don Carlos’s piety being his worst enemy.86 But the shifting diplo-
matic situation was the main cause. When the Calatrava administration
expelled the Carlist Marquess Grúa, the Carlist agent carried a letter
from the Queen-Regent to her brother, Ferdinand II of Naples, proposing
