                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   175


almost gentlemanly manner. Its war-weary municipal delegation rode
out to meet Zaratiegui and Liberal members of the local government
resigned and departed whilst pro-Carlist administrators took their place
and awaited Zaratiegui’s instructions. This accommodation spared the
city from pillage and atrocities. The delegation performed this handover
in reverse when the Army of the North arrived to reoccupy the city days
later.77 Some communities, like those on the Ribera del Duero, showed
the same degree of public enthusiasm for the Carlists as they had pre-
viously for the Liberals. Partisan ideology was negligible in this. Rather,
communities were so terriﬁed by the prospect of violent occupations
and counter-occupations that they resolved to ‘manage’ their occupiers
by staging public welcomes which, in reality, kept the soldiers as much
as possible at arm’s length.78 Local authorities across Old Castile dis-
covered their Carlist sympathies. Or rather, perhaps, they rediscovered
them: the Pretender’s ideas of theocratic monarchy were far from being
alien to men who, under Cristino occupation, would opt for moderan-
tismo, but who would also, without much difﬁculty, move from one
camp to another.
   The disarray of the Cristino war effort led Espartero to ride ahead of
his forces to Madrid in order to reassure the Queen-Regent in person.
A spate of military indiscipline in units around the capital was dealt
with in a lenient fashion by Madrid’s military governor, San Miguel,
who admitted that the gravity of the Carlist invasion outweighed the
need to punish indiscipline.79 The main threat came from Don Carlos’s
expedition in the wake of its victory at Herrera. Eventually the Carlists
occupied Arganda and stood before Madrid’s city walls on 10 September
1837. The capital, which had already been placed under a state of siege,
was now in a state of suspended animation. Contemporaries poignantly
associated this crisis with dust being settled: quite literally, as Madrid,
which was already known as the ‘city of dust’, was choked by the dust
thrown up by the demolition of nationalised church property under-
way since the revolution of 1836.80 As the Carlists neared the walls, the
capital fell deathly quiet, with its shops and industry paralysed and the
streets emptied of people apart from the patrols of the National Militia.
Isolated attempts by Carlist agents to whip up a ﬁfth column failed. San
Miguel judiciously sent one general, whose sympathies were suspect,
away from the walls and to the centre of the capital. Now the Radicals
demanded defence à la outrance, but nothing could have been further
from the minds of the well-to-do ‘distinguished citizens’ who were
happy to preside over glittering street patrols by day – especially when
the Queen-Regent came to inspect – but shirked the more dangerous
