                                                 Carlist Failure, 1837–39   177


a compromise peace based on Don Carlos’s accession in return for a
general amnesty and the marriage of the infant Isabella to the Pre-
tender’s son. All depended, especially Metternich’s vital approval, on
Don Carlos’s occupation of Madrid. But the downfall in August of the
Radical Calatrava ministry, and the accession of the moderado, Eusebio
Bardají Azara, meant that when the Carlists reached the gates of the
capital on 12 September, the Queen-Regent no longer felt herself to be a
prisoner of the revolution. Hedging her bets even more, María Cristina
sent Espartero a letter begging him urgently to rescue the capital, a let-
ter that the Carlists intercepted, confusing them even further.87 Never
a decisive commander, Don Carlos thus began an initial retreat which
turned into one of general proportions, whilst sheer luck made Espartero
appear the saviour of the capital and the Liberal revolution. Carlist histo-
rians condemned the Queen-Regent’s spite and duplicity, and regretted
that Don Carlos did not force the issue.88 Madrid was now free of exter-
nal threats. Antonio Quiroga made a triumphalist victory declaration
couched in terms of popular defence and rebranding the Queen-Regent
as a constitutional Patriot.89
   The Carlist retreat, meanwhile, was easy prey for Espartero’s van-
guard: hundreds from the Carlist rearguard at Aranzueque were killed
or captured on 19 September. In desperation, the King invited Cabrera
to replace Moreno as the Carlist Commander-in-Chief but Cabrera,
who had wanted a violent pincer attack on the capital, refused due to
thinly disguised disgust at the failure of the King’s leadership. German
Carlists – anticipating the frustration of their great-grandchildren with
Franco’s slow offensive 100 years later – were exasperated with the
absence of the strategic vision worthy of Cabrera. Lichnowsky was baf-
ﬂed: ‘It was as if no-one had given any thought to descending on
Madrid.’90 The artillery expert, Wilhelm von Rahden, did not under-
stand why Carlist victories were squandered with decorations and
festivals of grace instead of a purposeful thrust.91 Now it was too late: the
Expedition was retreating northwards and the initiative was Espartero’s.
Although Espartero could not prevent the Carlist forces of Zaratiegui
and the King regrouping in their retreat, he was ruthless in his pace
and in the way he treated civilian populations in his path, sometimes
promising the death penalty against hoarders of food and drink. The
Castilians had shown little resistance to the Carlists, and Espartero’s
hand was forced by the perennial problem of hunger and insufﬁcient
and inadequate (cardboard-soled) shoes being delivered by asentistas.
On 25 October, despite his victory against the retreating Expedition
at Retuerta two weeks earlier, Espartero offered his resignation in
