178 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


frustration at the general neglect of his men. He found time to ask his
wife and friends to send him money on his own authority, giving the
Generalísimo a reputation for paternalism as well as heroism. The imme-
diate crisis passed when Espartero reached Miranda de Ebro on 28 Octo-
ber to ﬁnd that the Expedition had retreated back across the Ebro.92
   In some respects this was a strange victory for Cristino Spain. Despite
all the revolutionary rhetoric of the previous two years concerning the
popular struggle of the Militia and citizens against Carlism, the Expe-
dition had been defeated in a fashion more akin to Early Modern than
Modern warfare: a dynastic misunderstanding, a carnivalesque armed
‘pilgrimage’, a cabinet war across seemingly apathetic civilian popu-
lations. Yet beneath the high politics of Madrid and Estella, the low
politics of desertion, mutiny, even economic militancy had continued
to grow. While the Expedition approached Madrid, the Army of the
North had been paralysed by mutiny. In August 1837, General Ceballos
Escalera, commanding the Cristino lynchpin of Miranda de Ebro, was
lynched by his own regiment, his soldiers subsequently seizing con-
trol of the streets and daring ofﬁcers to come out of hiding. News of
this insurrection quickly spread to Vitoria, the Cristino capital of Alava,
which was blockaded by the Carlists right up to its walls. Whilst its
Cristino citizens dared not leave, a muleteer used to running blockades
by both sides carried the news. In Vitoria, too, the Cristino garrison
lynched its military governor, the elderly Cortes deputy, Cano, the pres-
ident of the Cristino deputation, and the editor of the ofﬁcial provincial
bulletin, all before levying a ﬁne of 40,000 duros against the munici-
pality. This was the downtrodden, brutalised Cristino soldier asserting
his honour in solidarity with his comrades against both Carlists and
against Cristino elites.93 In both cases, the caretaker authorities which
the garrisons permitted to enter the power vacuum were prevented from
taking anything more than token measures against the perpetrators of
the violence.
   The last two-and-a-half years of the war would see a surging popu-
lar radicalism in the Cristino zone that was irrelevant, and ultimately
hostile, to María Cristina’s throne. Even the Carlist zone would reject its
king in a bid to advance the secular rights of Basque autonomy and army
veterans. In other words, the dynastic dispute of 1833, upon which Don
Carlos had made his obsolescent calculations in 1837, had turned into
a war whose meaning was transformed into secular concerns of Cristino
liberty and Basque fueros.
   Don Carlos’s humiliating retreat across the Ebro set in motion the
secularisation of Carlist politics. At ﬁrst, it was the brutish, apostólico
