186 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the chronic shoestring nature of Carlist ﬁnances gave a keen edge to the
war-weariness and outright conspiracies which grew in the north dur-
ing 1838. Sometimes Don Carlos managed to ride out this disaffection
by judicious changes in policy. In March 1838, the Bishop of León suc-
cessfully prevailed upon his King to dismiss the unpopular José Arias
Teijeiro y Correa (who had always been regarded as a vulgar and brutal
upstart) as his War Minister and to have him replaced by friends of the
popular Prince Sebastián. But other conspiracies, whipping up hatred of
the ojalateros as a convenient vehicle for protest, grew in frequency and,
as the Muñagorri phenomenon would show, began to break with the
Carlist regime.121
   Despite this strategic and political malaise, in early 1838 yet another
expedition invaded Castile, led by one of the most controversial ﬁgures
in Carlist politics. Count Negri was a middle-aged Peninsular and
Royalist War veteran and twice-fugitive from Cristino captivity. His skills
as a courtier won him promotion and the scorn of fellow Carlist diplo-
mats like Marquess Labrador who judged: ‘chamberlains, chaplains and
lawyers should stick to their assigned duties and keep out of the affairs
of military strategy and commanding armies’.122 Negri’s incompetence
in setting out with a badly provisioned force across unyielding rocky ter-
rain led one later, admittedly biased, anti-Marotista (Negri was Maroto’s
protégé) traditionalist to suspect that the whole operation was designed
to sabotage the Carlist cause.123
   Negri’s expedition during early 1838 was poorly provisioned even
from the outset. It marched across the Ebro and around northern Spain,
including a westward march towards Galicia, and then south-east via
Burgo de Osma and Segovia towards La Granja. Strategic assistance came
from Merino in the mountains around Burgos and from Basilio’s expedi-
tion in La Mancha, both of whom diverted Cristino troops. Yet Espartero
was hard on Negri’s heels, not allowing him time to regroup or take
proper rations. Negri’s men went months without pay. A modest victory
at Bendejo strengthened Negri’s hand in negotiating prisoners’ treat-
ment with the enemy, and the Eliot Treaty was agreed to be respected
by both sides during the campaign. Meanwhile, Negri went about the
usual Carlist invasion tactic of setting up improvised Carlist juntas in
the settlements he occupied, disarming the National Militia and taking
on recruits who proved to be more of a burden than anything else. Once
again, some communities ‘managed’ Carlist occupations: for example,
by town-hall delegations riding out to hand over the ‘keys’ to their
towns. Other settlements barricaded themselves in defensible points,
such as the army and militia garrison of Burgo de Osma, which held
out in the town’s fort and cathedral tower. Negri ‘poached’ conscripts
