                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   183


But Mondoñedo, despite his episcopacy, was a powerful virtual Carlist
whose hitherto quiet hopes for a Carlist victory would soon explode
into a vehement sermon against the Cristino regime and its ‘war against
religion and its opinion’, turning him into a schismatic like León. Mon-
doñedo’s authority proved greater than Urbiztondo’s and the military
power lost to the religious, the troops being billeted elsewhere.110
   The onward march of the Royal Expedition denuded Urbiztondo of
forces and this soon began to tell as the Cristino counter-insurgency
initiative passed to Cristino Captain-General Meer from August 1837.
Urbiztondo’s defeat at San Juan de las Abadesas forced him to do what
he least desired, order his men to change their shirts and resort to guer-
rilla warfare. He complained to Berga at its deliberate neglect of his men,
who had been reduced to scavenging potatoes, but the junta was con-
temptuous in its reply and had in any case been lobbying Don Carlos
for Urbiztondo’s removal. Intelligence reached Urbiztondo of a plot to
kill him, and the junta got the King to promote Urbiztondo’s subordi-
nate, Benito Tristany, a Catalan exterminating angel, to command the
best local forces (his mountain corps). Finally, on 14 November, Berga
presented Urbiztondo with Don Carlos’s note dismissing him. This pro-
duced a stormy junta session from which the deposed comandante was
lucky to escape to Andorra with his life. He was followed into exile by
the Carlist intendant, whose unpopular policing of Carlist mountain vil-
lages, suppression of desertion and heavy taxation of the clergy had also
subjected him to death threats.111 The Barcelona press rejoiced: ‘Berga
is a veritable Babylon, and Urbiztondo has failed in his mission. We are
doing well, very well.’112
   The Urbiztondo controversy had overshadowed the division of the
Junta of Berga, between an aristocrática faction (Catalan nobility led by
Count Fonollar) and universitaria faction (comprising clerics expelled
from the Cristino-occupied University of Cervera). The clerics were
the most intransigent, but the aristocrats had been happy to fol-
low their lead over Urbiztondo, and to persuade Don Carlos to pro-
vide José Segarra as a more amenable replacement comandante. But
Segarra’s command was marred by a vigorous counter-insurgency by
Cristino Captain-General Meer, who reconquered Ripoll and boxed
the Carlists into unyielding mountain areas. By March 1838, Meer’s
counter-insurgency had borne fruit: the Carlist forces had shrunk from
some 13,000 to 7,000.113 Thus Segarra’s command was exposed as
incompetent, and he was replaced in July 1838 by a greater ﬁgure,
Count España, a legitimist of French origin who had been purged from
Catalonia’s captaincy-general in 1832. The Berga aristocrats hoped that
