182 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


agreed that regularisation was necessary. In February 1837, the Carlist
representative in Paris, Pedro Gómez Labrador, made his King aware of
the damage Catalan border violations and terrorism was doing both to
Spain’s richest province and to support for the cause amongst legitimists
in France:108

   The letters of very sensible and royalist people leave no doubt of
   the frightful excesses being committed in Catalonia at the hands
   of guerrillas who call themselves ‘Carlists’, because in reality they
   are nothing more than bandits laying the country waste, rustling
   entire ﬂocks, even those belonging to respected local Carlists, looting
   country houses and farmsteads, levying ruinous contributions, seiz-
   ing hostages amongst those who cannot pay and ransoming them for
   exorbitant sums. Many country houses are now closed and the inhab-
   itants of small villages have ﬂed for the safety of forts and fortiﬁed
   places, preferring to live amongst usurping Liberals than to lay them-
   selves open to the constant robberies and violence of the so-called
   defenders of throne and altar. It is imperative that the strictest orders
   be given to our commanders in Catalonia that they impose military
   discipline on those bands of rogues who are laying to waste the most
   industrious province of Spain.

Urbiztondo’s imposition of military discipline was difﬁcult enough.
A biscuit-store bound for Carlist soldiers protecting the Junta of Berga
was violently robbed en route. Battalion commander, Pau Mañó, had
been conducting a private war abducting and extorting local civilians,
imprisoning them in caves to be ransomed. The money families had to
pay for ransom depleted available resources for the Carlist war effort.
Urbiztondo’s siege of Pont d’Armentera was delayed by his need to dis-
cipline a battalion whose ofﬁcers had absconded to sell looted goods
and whose leaderless men had broken ranks.109 But the opposition
of respectable Catalan Carlists made Urbiztondo’s mission impossible.
When he quartered a new, locally raised battalion from the Mondoñedo
area in the monastery of San Francisco (itself inhabited by only 14 friars
and therefore targeted for dissolution by the Cristinos), the men started
stripping an organ to be melted down to make bullets. The Bishop
of Mondoñedo protested, claiming that Don Carlos never stooped so
low in the Basque country and that there was no Papal approval for
such drastic war measures. Urbiztondo, exasperated by Catalan bandit-
priests, replied that he would strip churches of all metal and ‘even force
the slippers off his Holiness if he thought they were made of lead’.
