                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   187


for his own forces and set up workshops on the approach to Segovia
which employed craftsmen with the loot of surrounding villages to pro-
duce badly needed berets and clothes. Negri took Segovia where, like
Zaratiegui before him, he wooed Catholics by hearing a Palm Sunday
Mass and by issuing a 7 April 1838 proclamation to Castilians asking
them to renounce the usurping Cristinos and to rally to his side in the
name of religion.124
   This was clever propaganda for communities which had faced three
years of drastic secularisation measures tempered only by local inertia
and the incompetence of the Madrid regime. But the time for win-
ning over civilians’ religiosity was over. The latter were exhausted by
repeated demands and outrages from both sides, and were in no mood
to receive Espartero’s reprisals. Espartero, for his part, conducted his
most successful counter-insurgency campaign. Appalling weather and
lack of footwear burdened Negri’s march, his numbers dwindling by the
end of April 1838 to 1,800 infantry and 100 cavalry. Since having been
forced to quit Segovia on 10 April, Negri had not had a moment’s respite,
his forces at one point having to perform a 40-mile forced march. Set-
tlements in his path bolted their doors to his men and increasingly
offered resistance, such as the militiamen and peseteros of Aguilar de
Campo, who barricaded themselves on 25 April 1838, resisting Negri’s
Carlists until Espartero’s vanguard arrived. While Negri extricated his
precious artillery, he was less successful at stopping the desertion of his
men. Finally, on 27 April at Brújula, Espartero routed Negri. Espartero
attributed his triumph to ‘free men’ defeating the forces of despotism.
Even though Negri escaped with his bodyguard, and would ﬁght again
in the defence of Morella, this was the ﬁrst unambiguous defeat of a
Carlist expedition since the Royal Expedition. Cristino military morale,
now virtually personiﬁed by the ﬁgure of Espartero, was recovering.125
So was Cristino military materiel. The 163 higher ofﬁcers, 1,662 ofﬁcers,
23,426 troops, 654 cavalry and over 1,000 artillery ofﬁcers and men
counted by the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country in September
1838 were outnumbered three times by the Cristino forces in theatre.126
Moreover, the Cristino arms production, hitherto massively dependent
upon French and, especially, British factories, promised to improve
markedly when cannon production from foundries relocated from the
Basque country to Seville ﬁnally got underway in early 1839.127
   The Carlists, by contrast, faced a bleak future. Ever since the defeat of
the Royal Expedition, hostility towards Don Carlos in Carlist ranks had
passed its tipping-point. In particular, the King’s treatment of Prince
Sebastián, the hero of Oriamendi, rankled (a ﬂeeting act of insubordi-
nation had been turned by the apostólicos into grounds for dismissing
