                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   185


yet another Carlist invasion and far more willing to oppose it. Two
graphic episodes illustrate how Cristino citizens had learnt from bitter
years of war to mobilise popular resistance against invasion. García’s
Carlists passed through the eastern Andalucían village of Nerpio on
13 February 1838; the village’s resentful inhabitants were rallied by
the local sheriff and murdered some stragglers who had fallen behind
the invaders’ rearguard. But Basilio, unaware of this atrocity, returned
Nerpio whose inhabitants, fearing the worst, deserted their village en
masse. The Carlists did not suspect anything sinister until the bloodied
clothes and powder of their unfortunate comrades were found in the
loft of the sheriff’s house. Outraged, the expedition burnt the house,
and then the whole village, to the ground. Whilst other villages did
not fare so badly, they nonetheless experienced routine ransacking and
wastage: whatever was not useful to the Carlists was destroyed.118 And
even innocent villages sometimes paid the ultimate price for resistance.
When the expedition swung north into New Castile it made an example
of Calzada de Calatrava. Some 166 of its inhabitants – militiamen and
their women and children – were either burnt or crushed to death after
the church they had fortiﬁed was set on ﬁre, weakening its roof, which
collapsed onto the defenders. This catastrophe was made possible by the
defection to the invaders of the local prior. When Army of the Centre
Commander-in-Chief Narváez arrived to liberate Calzada, he bowed to
popular pressure and had the cleric shot.119
  The Basque war effort never recovered from the defeat of the Royal
Expedition. The Royal Police were gone, but the Royal Police state
remained and became more irksome on a population exhausted by the
war. A law passed on 22 January 1838 banned any interaction by any
persons other than designated men with Cristino prisoners-of-war. This
was very hard on families caught between lines and sides. On 19 Febru-
ary 1838, a quarantine was placed on all foreign and Cristino vessels
trying to enter Carlist ports. The ﬁnancial demands of war were exhaust-
ing even the stoic ability of the Basques to give. Total Carlist tax
revenue raised in Navarra, Guipúzcoa, Vizcaya and Alava in the year
up to November 1838 amounted to some 40,188,886 reales, plus some
3,400,000 reales raised at customs. But this 43,588,886 total fell short
of the 46,355,000 expenditure for the same period, leaving a deﬁcit of
2,766,114 reales. This had to be bridged by yet more indirect taxes, ‘vol-
untary’ contributions from clerics, ﬁnes on Liberals and by grants from
foreign powers whose sympathy was wearing thin. In May, the King
of Sardinia promised some 800,000 francs to Carlist Spain, offering to
increase this donation if Russia, Prussia and Austria followed suit.120 But
