184 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


‘Count’ España would be their ally, but in fact he silenced them ﬁrst, and
most of their junta members either ﬂed to France or remained to rubber-
stamp military policy. Then España turned against the universitarios, but
not before he had met, and exceeded, their demands for the most dra-
conian military and most reactionary cultural policy.114 In the latter
regard, for example, España showed particular contempt for ‘geographi-
cally Cristino’ priests. The predicament of the Priest of Balsareny showed
the dangers facing clerics near front lines who made accommodations
with the ‘usurping’ Cristinos. Balsareny was strongly garrisoned enough
to make its priest feel safe from Carlist reprisals by both complying with
the Cristino abolition of the tithe (since 1837), and, consequently, refus-
ing to hand over these monies to the Carlists, thereby breaking with
this wartime tradition of covert clerical ﬁnancing of Carlists in front-
line areas. But one day, the priest went to visit a neighbouring priest on
the occasion of a religious feast. The latter had him seized and carried
into Carlist territory where España set him before an ecclesiastical tri-
bunal. On España’s instructions, the local Carlist paper Restaurador spun
this story in a dastardly fashion. The newspaper reported that the priest
had ﬂed Balsareny to reach loyal territory where he altruistically handed
over not only the tithe but also other donations as well. This marked the
man as a true Carlist. España was unmoved by the fact that this made
the poor fellow a marked man, as the Cristinos would doubtless tar-
get him for his ‘betrayal’. But España was unmoved: ‘a revolutionary
cleric is either a madman or a monster who deserves neither pity nor
sympathy’.115
   España’s military ruthlessness carved out for him the title ‘Tiger’ in
the enemy press, a title hitherto used only to describe Cabrera further
south.116 His Catalan soldiers nicknamed him the ‘decapitator’ (Trenca-
caps), and the count was famed for keeping a gallows outside his sleeping
quarters that was always busy hanging some unfortunate victim of his
wrath. España perfected the role of exterminating angel, renaming all
battalions as ‘Catholic and Royal’ (deliberately imitating the counter-
revolutionary Vendée), marrying it – during 1838 at least – with the role
of successful military strategist.117
   Whereas the Carlist east reached its apogee, the cradle of Carlism,
the Basque country, never escaped from the stagnation caused by the
failed Royal Expedition. Nothing more imaginative than yet another
expedition was proposed late in 1837. Even though the expedition led
by Basilio Antonio García on 28 December 1837 succeeded in break-
ing into Castile, it did not alter the Carlists’ stagnation. Furthermore,
weary Cristino civilians proved both far less willing to collaborate with
