192 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


hand, there was a participatory dimension to praetorianism as soldiers
and – in the case of the underpaid Cristino naval base at Cartagena –
sailors were paid to ‘ﬁx’ election results to favour the moderados (pro-
gresistas during 1835–37 had done the same using militiamen), either
by being unconstitutionally enrolled in the electoral roll, or by being
deployed to exercise a range of ‘moral’ as well as violent pressure. The
phenomenon of soldiers making and breaking elections, which Romero
Alpuente denounced during the Triennium, was repeated during the
Carlist War on a greater scale.4 The praetorian domination of minis-
terial politics turned Spain under Espartero at the end of the war into
the exact opposite of what Cea Bermúdez, Spain’s last civilian absolutist
prime minister at the start of the war, had desired (Table 8.1).
   Whereas the ministerial politicisation of Spain’s hundreds of thou-
sands of serving soldiers was a dramatic consequence of the Carlist War,
its signiﬁcance was pedestrian in comparison to the two other polit-
ical legacies of the conﬂict. The ﬁrst legacy was the rise to power of
a Bonapartist ‘people’s choice’, General Espartero, at the end of the
war, for reasons which were almost entirely to do with the conﬂict
itself rather than structural shifts. The second legacy both accounted for
the ﬁrst (popular support for the ‘peace dividend’ revolution of 1840)
and stood apart, sometimes opposed, to it, namely the radicalisation of
popular, non-ministerial politics (economic militancy and support for
double regime radicalism) which, again, was either caused or at least
shaped by the war. None of this radicalisation assisted the formal war
aims of the Cristino faction, namely the national and international
recognition of the legitimacy of Princess Isabella’s succession and the
regency of her mother, and, as a corollary to this, the institution of a
constitutional civilian rule of law in Spain. Rather seven long years of
war had changed its popular meaning from a dynastic (and consubstan-
tially, religious) dispute, into a war in which hundreds of thousands of
soldiers and militiamen, and hundreds of thousands of civilians besides,
had been schooled by violence into exercising political consciousness
for the ﬁrst time. In the previous chapters we have explored this devel-
opment largely in the context of mobilisations, battles, sieges, invasions
and occupations. But the war also caused, or at least inﬂuenced, social
protests and class struggles in a manner poorly explored by the existing
historiography.
   Some of this radicalisation may be linked to the highbrow concerns
of the Cortes with regard to the virtual bankruptcy caused by the war.
Mon’s despair at the state of Cristino ﬁnances exposed him to ridicule
when he was taken in by a Swiss adventurer that some treasure allegedly
buried in Santiago in 1809 could be unearthed. Excavations were begun,
