198 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


property revolution energised these like never before. A progresista elec-
tion campaign in Córdova six months after the end of the war went
awry when a hired mob of veterans ended up targeting migrant work-
ers instead of moderados. The veterans were reminded ‘not to hit the
Galicians’, but to attack ‘the fat people’.37
   The consubstantiation of war and revolution provoked economic mil-
itancy across the Cristino ‘home front’. Both desertion and banditry
remained high towards the end of the war as virtual reserve armies of
bandits roamed the Cristino countryside. The generalised states of siege
in Andalucía from 1837 allowed Captain-Generals to make short work
of bandits, especially whenever there was the slightest hint that the
bandits might in fact be ‘Carlists’ as well as mere criminals. Thus, the
Captain-General of Granada in November 1838 was glad to make public
proclamations of the execution of 13 insurgents who had been preying
on rural communities.38 Even though civil authorities were emascu-
lated under states of siege in matters of crime and punishment, by the
following spring the Civil Governor of Granada had concluded that
economic grievances were motivating at least some of this wrongdo-
ing. He parcelled out fallow municipal lands to landless labourers, in a
desperate bid to end the violent lawlessness around Guadix caused by
draft-dodgers and deserters.39
   In Cristino cities Spain’s female tobacco workers gained a reputation
for militancy. Smoking was a key part of Spanish popular culture: a for-
eign traveller was surprised to discover that even women smoked, and
that the only smoke-free places were the Cortes and the judicial bench.40
Spain pioneered cigarettes, displacing snuff and requiring dainty ﬁngers
for production. This changed the sex of the workforce as women work-
ers (known as tabacaleras or cigarreras) vastly outnumbered men workers
by the time of the Carlist War. Tobacco had long been a state monopoly
produced in factories at Madrid, Cádiz, Valencia, Barcelona, La Coruña,
Alicante and – the biggest – in Seville; all of these were in Cristino hands,
and the ﬁnished product reached the front line bearing such images of
Liberal patriotism as Espartero and Princess Isabella. Tobacco for troops
ranked in importance alongside food and munitions, which turned its
production into a patriotic and political matter, even more than it had
already been before the war (when the Jacobin, Romero Alpuente, had
campaigned to remove tax from tobacco).41 The war inﬂected grievances
about conditions and management of the state monopoly. When José
Laﬁta, a Cristino desk ofﬁcer with powerful connections to the govern-
ing moderado party, was appointed director of the Cádiz factory, he was
