200 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


overzealous carabineers.49 Smuggling had long been a way of life along
Spain’s porous borders and coastline, practised in three ways.50 But the
civil war had politicised it like never before.
   The war also inﬂected Spain’s experience of the European trade slump
of 1839 and the default it made on National Debt interest repayments.51
Spain’s ﬁrst strike movement to be coordinated across industries was
broken by government charges of ‘Carlism’. The Cristino abolition in
1837 of the guild system had advantaged wholesalers, who ratcheted
up prices.52 This was answered in Granada by a movement led by a
certain Julián Malaguilla, silk worker artisan, who rallied 200–300 fel-
low silk workers to halt work and ransack the premises of wholesale
silk merchants who had hiked prices. The Militia was overwhelmed and
the city’s shoemakers joined the strike. Three companies of infantry
had to be drafted in to uphold the state of siege. But the strike held
as workshop masters were sent letters threatening them with 50 lashes
if they did not cease production. The movement collapsed only when
Malaguilla was tricked into arbitration at the city hall. He was arrested
and imprisoned upon charges of ‘Carlism’ (letters were produced show-
ing Malaguilla’s appeal for volunteers to join insurgents in the restive
Serranía de Ronda).53 Madrid itself saw signiﬁcant strike action, and
from very proletarian quarters. The water-bearers (aguadores) of Madrid
were mostly Galician migrants, numbering some 900 in the capital in
1840.54 The luckiest of these water-bearers rented licences from the
municipal authorities to carry drinking water to Madrid’s private houses
and businesses; the less lucky might subcontract these licences or work
in small teams as journeymen for the licensee; whilst the least fortu-
nate would work the streets as water-vendors.55 As municipal licences
were hard to acquire, and as most of the water-bearing labour involved
seasonal migration, the luckiest aguadores had the opportunity to sell
their licences for inﬂated prices. By February 1840, it emerged that a
cadre of aguadores in Madrid was doing precisely that, the money being
found by raising the monthly fee levied on water delivery from 6 to 8
reales per household to 12. When consumers complained to the author-
ities, the municipality arrested some of the ‘usurers’ whilst enforcing a
cut in water levies. The response from the aguadores was to launch a
strike, which resulted in no water being carried anywhere in the capital
for a whole day. Militia were dispatched to force the aguadores back to
work. The authorities’ hard line was welcomed by several of the most
recent migrants, who had run the virtual blockade of Carlist banditry to
reach Madrid and had indebted themselves in order to subcontract the
licence.56
