194 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


but all that was uncovered were the latrines of the San Roque hospi-
tal, which stank out the unfortunate town.5 Cristino Spain’s foreign
policy during 1838 was dominated by its ﬁnancial crisis. Government
expenditure exceeded receipts by almost double: 838 million reales were
received by the Treasury against outgoings of 1,546 million. Seeing the
ﬁnancial plight, the British minister, Villiers, again pressed a plan which
he had been formulating for four years, namely an Anglo-Spanish free
trade treaty. Britain would lend Spain money in return for the sus-
pension of import duties on cotton. When this proposal reached the
Cortes it was bitterly opposed and defeated, Catalan deputies and sen-
ators leading the resistance.6 Catalonia’s cotton industry was advanced
by Spanish standards but could not possibly hope to compete in a free-
trade environment with that of Britain. Catalan cotton magnates thus
acted as good Spanish nationalists, and a certain strand of Anglophobia
was revived amongst the otherwise generally Anglophile progresistas.
More radical-republican secret societies in Barcelona turned the protec-
tion of ‘national industry’ into doctrine. When, soon after the civil war,
Espartero signed the free trade treaty, the republican ‘Society of Spanish
Regenerators’ alleged that the British want to ‘turn Iberia into a new
India, have no principles beyond their own egotism, and want to keep
us poor and ignorant so that we might work for them as slaves’.7
   An attempt by several moderado Cortes deputies to reintroduce the
tithe in order to assuage the crisis of secular clergy was blocked by
progresista deputies who were undoubtedly expressing the popular will
(which included episodes of popular violence against tithe-proctors,
especially in the Liberal south and east).8 The Count of Ofalia, moderado
prime minister from December 1837 until September 1838, symbolised
the rightward shift in ministerial liberalism, not least for being ‘soft’ on
the Catholic Church.9 But the persistence of tithing was wormwood and
gall to a Cristino population which had come to see the ‘Carlist’ Church
as the source of its suffering. During the revolutionary summer of 1836,
as the Gómez expedition tore into southern Spain, tithe-proctors in the
province of Toledo were jeered at and assaulted, and local authorities
could not (or would not) offer them protection.10 When the central gov-
ernment sent troops, this only served to inﬂame radicalism even further.
Thus, General Peón’s use of force in collecting the culto y clero in the
province of Málaga during the summer of 1838 left bitter memories.11
The following year, citizens in this province mobilised in a mass tithe
strike, which began in Motril (Granada) before spreading to other pueb-
los. Central government despatched an infantry battalion to protect the
proctors but the strike held.12
