202 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


and two failed Cristino attempts to storm Morella. Oráa was exhausted
by years of war and had long thought a military solution to the conﬂict
was impossible. Moreover, he had had to detach some forces to aid the
Prefect of Murcia to crush some revolutionary National Militia. An inter-
cepted letter revealed to the Carlists that Oráa’s colleagues thought him
old, vacillating, bereft of his earlier speed and unable to leave anything
to chance.62 Cabrera’s defensive victory was followed with an offen-
sive victory at the Battle of Maella against a division led by one of the
Cristino’s most popular generals, Pardiñas, whose élan contrasted with
Oráa’s circumspection. Yet Cabrera won the battle, killing Pardiñas in
combat and massacring most of the several hundred Cristino prisoners
taken.63
   Cabrera’s ascendancy in the Maestrazgo was secured. At the end of
1838 his army numbered some 15,255 infantry, 1,328 cavalry, and 378
artillerymen with some 40 guns. Moreover, Carlist artillery had been
improved by the Prussian Baron von Rahden, who had voluntarily quit
a post in the Basque provinces to come to the Maestrazgo for this
end. A grateful Cabrera made him comandante general.64 The brutal-
ity of Cabrera’s war effort continued to be a source for consternation for
Cristino Radicals:

   To understand the state of alarm and indignation which Liberals in
   Aragón and Valencia reached in the autumn of 1838, it is not enough
   to read the Madrid newspapers. Rather one has to have lived in those
   provinces in, or near, the Maestrazgo; to have heard the fathers, sons
   and brothers of the executed, to have seen the pathetic refugees lucky
   enough to have reached the safety of a fortress or column; to have
   conversed with the well-to-do who lost all their cattle, homes and
   livelihoods. One has to hear the stories of those who witnessed the
   killings and the threats made by Carlists who had done away with
   the lives of even the most distant relatives of the Liberals. If those
   lucky enough never to have experienced a civil war can understand
   this, they would not consider Cabrera a member of the human
   race.65

Towns and villages were being sacked. When Urrea near Zaragoza was
sacked, the smoke billowing from its ruins was visible in the Aragonese
capital, causing panic. Such brutality was defended on the self-fulﬁlling
grounds that residents were defending their properties by ﬁring on
the invaders from houses. A furious exchange of letters between San
Miguel and Cabrera did nothing to assuage the violence. Cabrera, as
