                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   209


words foretelling the damage that the execution of loyal ofﬁcers of the
King would do to the Carlist cause.89 However, violence, even projected
assassinations, had long characterised the Byzantine world of Carlist
court politics, and Maroto’s ruthlessness was met as much by relief as
indignation. Only the year before a Carlist princess fundraising at Italian
and German courts had been approached by a Royal Government agent
seeking support for a plan to execute certain Carlist generals.90
   Maroto wanted to kill Balmaseda, too, a particularly efﬁcient guer-
rilla comandante in Aragón who was ﬁercely loyal to the King, but a
signed message arrived from Don Carlos in the nick of time ordering this
man to be spared. Don Carlos, shocked by Maroto’s purge and swayed
by Teijeiro, lost little time in condemning his commander-in-chief as
a traitor and dismissing him from command. Knowing that this would
be his death sentence, Maroto received this dismissal using the familiar
ritual of the pronunciamiento. Gathering his men around him, he read
out the letter in order to provoke their indignation. Having secured
his ofﬁcers’ loyalty, the fate of the Carlist War now basically lay in
Maroto’s hands. Maroto marched on Tolosa and overwhelmed the King
into rescinding his order and sacking Teijeiro and the Bishop of León.
Maroto put his friends in leading positions in the army (Zaratiegui,
Eguía, Villarreal and Elío). The King’s humiliation was almost com-
plete, whilst Maroto’s coup certainly was complete, at least as far as
the provinces were concerned.91 His supporters, Generals Elío, Villarreal,
Eguía and Zaratiegui, quickly occupied leading army posts.
   The Frenchman, Saint-Silvain, stepped in as a go-between between
the chastened court and Maroto, thereby saving himself from the list of
apostólicos Maroto had ordered expelled to France, and allowing Don
Carlos himself to save face.92 Saint-Silvain had been the unimpeach-
able face of French legitimism, and Don Carlos’s most active diplomat
in Spain.93 Don Carlos caved in with understandable meekness, giving
ﬁnal proof, as if any more were needed, that the absolute King was
absolutely helpless in the face of the two main Carlist court factions,
the transaccionista one of which had become triumphant. Teijeiro, who
had been subject to personal attacks in a proclamation Maroto made
to his army, led the ﬂight of elites for France, one step ahead of the
assassins. Carlism’s diplomatic agents endorsed the coup. Even the King
of the Two Scillies had found the machinations of the apostólicos dis-
tasteful. The unofﬁcial Carlist ambassador to Naples, José Alvarez de
Toledo, summed up this mood by declaring that ‘some men at court had
been doing more damage to our cause than Espartero and Van Halen
combined’.94 Maroto marched into Tolosa where Don Carlos reviewed
