208 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


nothing else in the Basque country besides. Maroto was also enlight-
ened absolutist in his politics, and was therefore a perfect broker for a
‘transacted’ peace: indeed, during 1839 the Marotista and transaccionista
parties in the Basque country became synonymous. Maroto had few
Basque or apostólico friends and his appointment to commander-in-chief
in 1838 was the result of patient networking and military accomplish-
ments. Once appointed, Maroto knew that time was not on the Carlists’
side. No sooner had he regularised the disorderly and parochial fortress
system which defended the Basque country at local levels, than he had
to ﬁght against court intrigues (especially that of a certain Eustaquio
Laso, placed at his side to spy on him). Even worse, Maroto’s Cristino
enemies now had a ﬂourishing spy network of their own, straddling
both sides of the French border.87 And militarily the Cristinos had noth-
ing more to learn from Carlist territory or tactics. Under Espartero’s
leadership they knew the ground and in September 1837 marched on
the Carlist capital of Estella. Hence, any new Carlist offensive had to be
perfectly coordinated in order to avoid catastrophe.
   Maroto understood that the apóstolico ‘universal minister’, Teijeiro,
would exploit any military defeat to oust him, so he focused on reor-
ganising the army and ﬁghting only local battles rather than bold
offensives. Maroto enjoyed exceptionally good relations with Carlist
agents abroad, which allowed him to increase the always haphazard for-
eign subsidies.88 But hostility towards him grew, and Maroto realised
that only the execution of the conspirators could reassert his author-
ity. He prepared his ground by warning the King at Tolosa. Kissing Don
Carlos’s hand, Maroto theatrically quipped that his King had no desire
to kill him. The surprised King replied in the afﬁrmative. Maroto replied
that in that case it was his duty to request royal approval for the exe-
cution of rebellious ofﬁcers. Don Carlos temporised, assuring Maroto
that the conspiracies were no more than hot air, and that he knew
from experience more about these things than his loyal commander-
in-chief. Maroto made his intention clear, and left for his headquarters
at the Carlist capital of Estella. There he found the streets suspiciously
deserted, and those of its war-weary inhabitants and garrison he did
encounter hurled abuse at him from windows and doorways. Maroto
summoned one of the apostólico conspirators, General Carmona, to meet
him at a café. Maroto’s escort arrested Carmona the moment he arrived,
whilst swift arrests ensued of García, Sanz, Guergué and Intendant Uriz.
Two other generals, the Conde de Negri and Silvestre, quickly rallied to
Maroto’s side. All the captives were imprisoned in the town’s fort and
executed by ﬁring squad two days later, each offering ﬁnal indignant
