206 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the misﬁred diplomatic venture of the Royal Expedition, various efforts
came from the Cristino side for peace. In January 1839, Eugenio de
Aviraneta designed a plan to abduct Don Carlos via a naval landing
near his lightly guarded winter quarters at Azcoitia, to be launched
on British vessels from Pasajes. Only the reluctance of Lord Hay to
breach British rules of engagement grounded the abduction mission.78
Any effective diplomatic solution to the Spanish problem could only
come via some accord between Europe’s Liberal and absolutist powers.
Palmerston and Metternich were surprised that they saw eye to eye on
this point from 1838. But Metternich’s Europe still saw Liberal Spain as
the revolution incarnate, an attitude that hardened when Spanish emis-
saries with colourful pasts reached Vienna. Manuel Marliani Cassens, a
cosmopolitan, gaditano friend of Mendizábal and protégé of Calatrava,
was made Spanish consul general to France in September 1836.79 He
forged a plan to impress upon Metternich a dynastic end to Spain’s civil
war via the marriage of the young Princess Isabella to an Austrian prince.
But this plan backﬁred on his mission to Vienna when French agents –
wary of the prospect of a Hapsburg on the Spanish throne – destroyed
Marliani’s credentials by reminding the Austrians of his revolutionary
past in Piedmont in 1821. Metternich refused even to see him, and
Marliani was ordered to leave Vienna within 18 hours, after which the
combined pressure of Austria and Sardinia got him sacked as Spanish
consul to Paris. Even though Marliani rebuilt his career in Spain, his
plan for a dynastic solution to the civil war came to nought.80 Equally
there was no diplomatic breakthrough for the Carlists either. The secret
Carlist junta in Madrid had seen its hopes dashed with the failed Royal
Expedition of 1837. In 1838 the Neapolitan foreign minister, the Prince
of Cassaro, suggested to the Carlists that if they descended on either
Zaragoza or Valencia they would be supported by a naval squadron of
Neapolitan volunteers. However, Cassaro’s enthusiasm was not shared
by his King.81
   Carlist diplomacy made desperate pleas for international help to stave
off defeat. But Don Carlos’s plea on 9 March 1839 for more aid from
friendly sovereigns was met by either cool or business-like responses.
Piedmont-Sardinia refused more money, disgruntled at how money sent
hitherto had been spent on maintaining the Carlist army on home
ground – which was now shrinking – rather than marching on Madrid.
Russia and Austria agreed that to send more money would end up
merely postponing eventual Carlist defeat. The only serious offer came
from a minor absolutist power, the Netherlands, which offered money in
return for Don Carlos’s consent to a Dutch conquest of the Philippines
