                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   207


in his name. The Cristino garrison was weak, Amsterdam believed, a ﬂeet
could be launched from Java in the Dutch East Indies, and the Dutch
would be repaid by a stake in Philippine customs revenues. Both Don
Carlos and his cabinet quickly rejected this proposal, but it is unclear
whether they did so out of misplaced imperial pride, realism or supe-
rior knowledge of Philippine affairs. In fact, the Spanish presence in the
Philippines during the 1830s was comparatively strong, as Guillermo
Galvey, amateur ethnographer and Cristino Captain-General of the
colony, led a series of expeditions to expand the colonial frontier in the
Cordillera.82 International supporters of Carlism were disenchanted by
more than just the military situation. Even kings and diplomats openly
upbraided the division and misappropriations of the Carlist court.83
Finally, a plan to sail a 1,500-strong Carlist amphibious force from
Bermeo to attack Cádiz during July 1839 foundered ﬁrst on the lack
of ﬁnancial support from Europe’s absolute powers, and then because
of the Treaty of Vergara.84 Carlist hopes of international aid had col-
lapsed, and Cristino Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the Centre,
Van-Halen, ridiculed Carlists hoping against hope as ‘Jews waiting for
the Messiah’.85
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front, and this
came about ﬁrst because of the executive power taken by Espartero,
and more fundamentally, the exhaustion and political divisions of the
Carlist Basque country. The growing clamour for peace in the Carlist
zone in 1839 undermined the Royal Government’s attempts to sustain
the war effort. The demographic losses caused by the war and Cristino
occupation forced the Carlist government, in December 1838, to issue
a blanket amnesty allowing émigrés on the French side of the border
to return to their homes. Meanwhile, the screw of conscription was
tightened still further, and a crackdown was announced on the growing
tide of subversive pamphlets which attacked Don Carlos’s advisers in a
thinly veiled critique of the King himself. Most decisively, the Basque
and Navarrese peasantry was seeing itself reduced to below-subsistence
level by the repeated requisitioning by the Carlist army (and, as 1839
progressed, by the invading Cristinos), which Carlist civilian authorities
never managed to control.86
   The ‘man of Vergara’ was Rafael Maroto. Maroto was a middle-
aged Murcian, veteran of the Spanish-American wars and widower
to a Peruvian wife. Purged from the army in 1833 and imprisoned,
he escaped from Cristino captivity to join his King in Portugal early
in 1834. Maroto was the archetypical ‘Castilian’ hated by apostólicos
and Basque fueristas: dynastically loyal to Don Carlos and loyal to
