210 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


his army. The King did not even speak about the events of Estella. The
initiative was now Maroto’s.95
   Meanwhile, Espartero had been pondering the best way to take advan-
tage of the civil war within Carlist ranks. Much might have been
achieved by merely awaiting the enemy’s collapse, as the Carlist war
effort was now grinding to an exhausted halt. Overburdened arms
foundries produced inadequate weaponry: shoddy workmanship and
lack of inspection led to tragedy at the fort of Guardamino on 1 May
1839, when its defending Carlist garrison opened ﬁre on the enemy,
only for the shell to explode in the cannon’s bore, igniting the maga-
zine, which killed most of the fort’s garrison outright.96 On 23 March
1839, Espartero wrote to War Minister Alaix, explaining two possi-
ble ways of ending the war, namely, via either a compromise peace,
or transacción, or a scorched-earth policy to devastate the provinces.
Espartero had no qualms about justifying such a policy for the sake of
national integrity: ‘It is best to amputate a diseased member than let it
infect the whole body.’ He was convinced that the civil war could only
be won in the provinces. He hoped an offensive strategy in the north
would capitalise on Carlism’s internal divisions and win the conﬁdence
of sympathetic European powers. But Alaix’s response was unsatisfying.
Whilst he offered Espartero limited and temporary reinforcements from
Galicia, and authorised him to take any action in the north that he saw
ﬁt, he also stressed the self-serving moderado position: that the north-
ern front would have to take its turn for reinforcements along with the
east.97 Espartero was thus ever more inclined to use his military powers
to search for peace above the heads of the politicians.
   Luckily for Espartero, Maroto wanted the same, but for more desperate
reasons. He marched the Royal Army westwards on the back of military
operations towards Santander, a mundane deployment which, in real-
ity, was cover for interviews with Cristino and Quadruple Alliance (Lord
John Hay of the naval squadron at Pasajes) intermediaries. The road
to the Vergara settlement became easier and more comfortable as these
illicit contacts increased. Cristino military superiority obliged Maroto in
any case to approve increasing parleys with the enemy. He negotiated
the surrender of the fort at Guardamino on 12 May 1839: the magazine
explosion of the 1 May combined with a failure to dig in at the crest
surrounding the fort had made the position poorly defensible. For this
feat Espartero was awarded the title Duke of Victory, and Cristino cel-
ebrations embittered the Carlist press, which was at pains to represent
Guardamino as a truce rather than defeat. Maroto was in an unenvi-
able position: he needed to achieve some signiﬁcant victory both in
