                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   205


   Defeated in the capital, Narváez joined with the former Commander-
in-Chief, Córdova, in seizing control of the Seville’s garrison and Militia,
and proclaiming a junta.73 But the Captain-General of Andalucía, the
Conde de Cleonard, condemned the rising from Cádiz and the Army
of Reserve failed to rally to its commander. Thus Narváez and Córdova
ﬂed into exile, their parliamentary immunity notwithstanding: Narváez
to Gibraltar and thence to France where he sustained a petitioning cam-
paign to the Cortes and his friend and owner of a moderado press empire,
Andrés Borrego.74 Espartero now reigned supreme, and the Army of the
Reserve – Narváez’s power base – was dissolved. Actually the humilia-
tion and banishment of Narváez would prove a pyrrhic victory. The man
from Loja had been made into a man who, like Louis Bonaparte, would
prove to have greater ambitions than careerism and personal rivalry.
   Narváez had been a visible threat to Espartero, but the last years of
the war saw Radical plots ﬂourish from lower ranks. In November 1838,
prisoners at the Spanish North African garrison at Alhucemas rose in
revolt, even though barely more than a quarter of the rebels were actu-
ally Carlists, pressed a claim to being Spanish ﬁrst before Liberal or
Carlist and promised to defend the colony against any Moroccan attack.
A similar Carlist takeover ensued at Melilla, before the insurgents agreed
to a negotiated peace and to being shipped back to the peninsula on
the condition that they would be free.75 A plot to assassinate Espartero
was centred on Manuel García Uzal, a Radical Cortes deputy, newspa-
per correspondent and, since 1835, a captain serving in a battalion of
‘guides’ (a species of elite unit generally associated with scouting activ-
ities), the fact that he was also battalion adjutant making him ideally
placed to radicalise the troops. Uzal forged a strange conspiracy between
his own circle and Carlist ﬁfth columnists (led by a writer called Vicente
Canseco), but the plot was penetrated by Espartero’s intelligence net-
works and its leaders imprisoned.76 A republican conspiracy in the army
just a few months earlier at León had petered out quickly. Its two cabecil-
las, the standard-bearer of an off-duty battalion, Francisco Doti, and a
lieutenant, Joaquín María Guisasola, seized a caravan of rations as bait
for the troops to second their calls of ‘Long Live the Constitution of
1812’ and ‘Long Live the Republic’. Even though this pronunciamiento
attracted a limited following, after three days, most had deserted, before
the 12 remaining revolutionaries were captured by loyal troops. Doti
and Guisasola were executed.77
   The war had created a radical constituency in the army and society
which had digested the constant diet of ‘liberty’ and was expressing
it on its own terms. Both Spains were weary of conﬂict, and despite
