                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   203


ever, invoked the execution of his mother as proof that the usurpers had
no lessons to impart on humanitarianism, an attitude which had been
consistently held up in the Carlist press.66 The failed epistolary exchange
took place amidst an escalation of reprisals and counter-reprisals in the
east during late 1838. Oráa’s replacement Commander-in-Chief of the
Army of the Centre, Van-Halen, complained that the Carlists always
retained the upper hand as they could simply rob, kill and snatch
draftees at will. The sovereignty of local municipalities, meanwhile, tied
the hands of Cristino armies and made the ‘nuclear option’ of impos-
ing states of siege necessary not just because of the Carlists but because
of Liberal politics, too. A cycle of riots and assassinations in Valencia
and Zaragoza were directly related to Cabrera’s advances in the sur-
rounding countryside and atrocity stories emanating from them. The
worst ﬁghting and atrocities took place during the Carlist capture of
Caspe. Six Cristinos were shot in cold blood after the town’s capture
on 27 October: three soldiers from the Burgos regiment and three local
militiamen. In reprisal Van-Halen, bowing to the pressure of Cristino
opinion, executed eight Carlist prisoners.67
   Whilst the east went Carlist, Cristino Spain found the threat from the
north far more manageable than during the revolutionary summers of
1835–37. Carlist raids from the provinces during 1838 showed that the
headier days of 1836 and 1837 could no longer be repeated. The elderly
priest Merino, who had been present at the last siege of Bilbao, dur-
ing the Battle of Oriamendi and in the Royal Expedition of Don Carlos,
could not sustain his earlier prowess against stiffened Cristino opposi-
tion. Don Carlos had made him Carlist Captain-General of Old Castile
and the president of its junta, yet Merino’s actions were those of an
insurgent rather than a governor. In 1834 villagers had ﬂocked to him,
but in 1838 he abducted draftees from the countryside around Burgos
and Aranda del Duero and ransomed, even executed, the family mem-
bers of escapees.68 Merino joined forces with Cabrera in a raid during
the summer of 1838 which took Burgo de Osma, threatening Valladolid
on 8 September 1838, whence a prompt campaign by the city’s mobile
militia marched to pursue the Carlist raiders eastwards. Over the fol-
lowing days several villages were invaded. All tailors in Covarrubias
were forced to join the campaign in order to satisfy demands for uni-
forms. Merino was then pursued back across the Ebro. From there,
on the 12 October 1838, Maroto received desperate royal instructions
to order Merino to launch a new raid. But despite the usual speed
and ruthlessness of Merino’s men, they were matched by a Cristino
counter-insurgency equally ruthless with civilians in its path, and which
