                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   219


now been reduced to ruins. Against Cabrera’s terrorism the Cristinos
constructed a narrative of heroic defence, including that of 22-year-
old woman, Manuela Cirugeda, who distinguished herself ﬁghting as
a soldier in the town’s defence.138
   The Cristinos launched assassination attempts against Cabrera, but he
became aware of these plots throughout 1839 and 1840, and took pre-
cautionary measures. No one, except trusted comrades, could get close
to him. He randomly changed his routines, calling on villages for food
and accommodation, in order to either remain anonymous or minimise
the chance of malicious plots coming to fruition. A special police force
was set up to ﬁlter defectors from the Cristinos army for possible assas-
sins and he built up a counter-espionage network which soon foiled
Cristino plots. An elaborate plot involving a poisoned dagger hidden in
the baggage of a ‘Carlist horse-trader’ who claimed to be ﬂeeing Madrid
was thwarted, the unfortunate assassin being caught, tried and decap-
itated. More than ever Cabrera began issuing verbal orders rather than
committing anything to paper, and subordinates obeyed them down the
line of military hierarchy.139 Cabrera imposed a reign of terror against
civilians who threatened to compromise Carlist positions and morale
in any way. In Rossell (Castellón de la Plana) an elderly local notable
with whom Cabrera was billeted pleaded with him to realise that the
Carlist cause was lost. Making an immediate example of this defeatism,
Cabrera marched the old man outside, ordered him to kneel and had
him shot from behind by his escort, Cabrera giving the execution order
himself.140 Any sign of communication with the Cristinos could likewise
spell death for the civilian involved, however innocent and helpless.
A nine-year-old girl from Pobla de Claramunt (Barcelona) who had been
sent to carry chocolates to the fortiﬁed Carlist weapons factory at Forts
del Turó was stopped and searched on her way by some facciosos from
nearby Igualada. In her basket they discovered a letter from her brother,
which conﬁrmed the fall of the Carlist stronghold of Morella. The girl
was executed on the spot.141
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front and promised,
ﬁnally, to produce Cristino victory in the east. Cabrera was fortunate
to receive news of the northern ‘treachery’ – the northern Carlists had
tried to ‘prolong their miserable existence by selling out to the revolu-
tionary power’ – in the wake of two local Carlist victories at Carboneras
and Chulilla. His men were thus well-blooded when he summoned a
meeting to give his ofﬁcers the choice of release from service and safe
conduct to their homes, or the strictest discipline and subordination
to continue the ﬁght. Clutching at straws, he thought that the coming
