212 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


political one, and Maroto asked Espartero for a truce, which the latter
refused.107 Meanwhile, Espartero continued invading Navarra, scorching
farmsteads in his wake. Maroto was in an invidious position because of
Espartero’s refusal to agree to a peace which would allow Don Carlos
to participate in the transacción. Espartero was determined that peace
should be brokered by Spaniards alone, and that international medi-
ation should be minimised. Espartero’s attitude hardened when the
French government, in June 1839, launched its proposals for a mediated
peace which were virtually pro-Carlist, and conﬁrmed the long-held
suspicions about King Louis-Philippe’s afﬁliation. Thus both the fueros
and Carlist military commissions and salaries would be respected, whilst
both Don Carlos and María Cristina would be sent into exile, and the
Spanish Bourbon dynasty reunited via the marriage of the Carlist infant
and Isabella. The repeated use of the French raisonnable to describe these
terms stuck in the throats of the Cristinos, and allowed the British to
monopolise the international side of peace-making to which Espartero
did consent.108
   Meanwhile, Espartero maintained the pressure with a calculated,
gradual pace of invasion designed to exact the maximum psychologi-
cal effect on his opponent. Maroto was also under immense pressure
both from the restive Navarrese peasantry and from their King, who
grew suspicious and fearful of his commander-in-chief’s negotiations
and would launch a furious counter-manifesto once the Vergara terms
were proclaimed.109 Both Espartero and Maroto knew that military logic
would dictate peace on Cristino terms. Both men carried out secret nego-
tiations via Bayonne and an elaborate fourfold secret code. Maroto was
desperate to save face by gaining the concession of either a Cristino for-
tiﬁed town (‘victory’) or the marriage of Don Carlos’s son to the young
Isabella (‘honour’). Espartero refused both, but reiterated his promise
not to harm the fueros and his offer of army commissions for Carlist ofﬁ-
cers as long as Don Carlos was either handed over or sent into exile.110
In the end Maroto caved into these terms, but until the last moment
could not actually bring himself to discuss preliminaries at Vergara,
deputising General La Torre to lead the delegation in his stead. What-
ever the anguish of the Carlist high command, the attitude of the Carlist
rank and ﬁle had become both so despondent and enraged with army
elites that a negotiated peace promised to safeguard against something
far worse. When the Carlist generals set out to meet Espartero at Vergara,
they found a group of Guipúzcoan deserters in their path. The desert-
ers damned the generals and detained them. The situation might have
ended disastrously, but the generals convinced the deserters that they
