218 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


marched on Segura, but he found the town in ashes as Cabrera had
levelled it rather than spend resources on its defence. A series of engage-
ments in March and April 1839 ﬁnally wore out Van-Halen’s momentum
and he was forced to retreat. This sent shock waves through the Lib-
eral government, which had banked on Segura being an easy victory.
Bowing to the inevitable, Van-Halen offered his resignation, which was
accepted.134 War Minister Alaix replaced him with Nogueras, who was
appointed on 16 April 1839 but whose ill health required the temporary
nomination of General Bartolomé Amor in the interim. On 27 April
1839, War Minister Alaix gave both Amor and Nogueras special instruc-
tions to seek out any offensive opportunity against Cabrera in Aragón
and Valencia, lest the northern side of the Ebro end up turning into
Carlist-dominated territory with all the adverse diplomatic connotations
that would produce. In order to streamline this effort, he instructed
them not to prioritise payments to the unpopular asentistas except in the
case of food deliveries.135 The latter stipulation was a shrewd response to
the renewed crisis of morale in the Army of the Centre, with hunger, lack
of footwear and desertion taking their toll.136
   Banditry and insecurity continued to blunt the by-now nominally
massively superior Cristino forces, some 31,556 infantry and 2,136 cav-
alry in the Army of the Centre in April 1839. Furthermore, this army
was riven with unimaginative and timorous commanders who failed to
progress from the inﬂexible tactics of halting their infantry to ﬁre long-
distance volleys at Carlists, even though rushing the enemy from the
outset would have yielded better results. The army was also chronically
undersized by desertion and overstaffed by ofﬁcers – brigades compris-
ing only 12 companies, each of these commanded by comandantes,
being a common phenomenon.137 In short, the Cristino offensive was
a laborious affair. Thus, the suffering continued to devolve onto civil-
ians. Montalbán (Teruel) had been devastated by Carlists in 1836; now
tragedy overtook it again when its National Militia commander, Jaime
Vicente, requested from Cabrera a temporary truce so that medicines
might replenish the exhausted supplies of the town’s hospital which, as
stipulated by the Treaty of Lécera, was treating both Cristino and Carlist
casualties on an equal basis. Cabrera refused, but suggested the defend-
ers hoist a ﬂag on the roof of the hospital so that the Carlist artillery
would be able to spare it their bombardment. As soon as the ﬂag was
hoisted, Carlist artillery rained down a withering ﬁre on the building.
In one day some 66 shells fell on the building, reducing it to ruins and
killing its inmates, including some 13 of Cabrera’s own men. After 50
days of bombardment, the Cristinos abandoned the town, which had
