216 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   you seen what’s been happening and it still happening in Navarra?
   Haven’t I told you several times that Navarra on its own is enough to
   lose us this war?

But the reinforcement of enemy troops made the situation bleak, even
for the Tiger of the Maestrazgo. Lord John Hay operated as a conduit for
negotiations between Van-Halen and Cabrera to instate the Eliot Treaty
in this region. Hay had greater obstacles to overcome in committing
Cabrera to the agreement, as the Count of Morella continued to com-
mit atrocities even after his signature had been secured in March 1839.
Cabrera was reeling from the loss of a shipment of arms which he had
procured in Britain. The Cristino coastguard intercepted a British ves-
sel carrying weapons bound for a remote beach under Carlist control,
impounding the cargo in Barcelona. The Cristinos did not know that
these arms were detailed for nothing less than a 22,000-strong expedi-
tion which Cabrera planned to lead against Madrid in the summer.127
Cabrera tried to take this strategic calamity in his stride, reverting to the
mystique of the guerrilla:

   War has secrets which are not explained in books. Any general who
   does not know more than what is written down may make an excel-
   lent writer of military books and lose all battles at the same time.
   In the War of Independence we saw how Blake hardly won a single
   action in spite of being brave and a great tactician . . . Napoleon’s gen-
   erals who came to Spain were the same, and our guerrillas defeated
   them . . . Now all the generals of the Army of the Centre who are ﬁght-
   ing me think they have technical superiority over me, and I don’t
   mean to debate this . . . but war gives results, not theories. I repeat
   that the science of war has its secrets.128

This ‘people’s war’ theme, inherited from the Peninsular War, was
a desperate but logical response to enemy superiority. But people’s
war requires civilian support, and this was ebbing among the war-
weary communities of the east. Cabrera found civilians feared Cristino
strength whereas once they had feared his own. Cabrera ordered that
Segura (Teruel) organise its own Carlist garrison in order to free up his
sorely needed troops for deployment elsewhere. Fearing the wrath of
the Cristinos, its inhabitants declined, so Cabrera tore down Segura’s
impressive church, other public buildings and some 350 houses. A total
of 1,600 inhabitants were thus turned into homeless refugees, seeking
shelter in nearby settlements and the caves of Los Pinares.129
