                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   215


23,000 troops in Catalonia had so far been available for campaigning)
with the forces of General Antonio Azpiroz (four veteran battalions, one
excellent cavalry squadron, one company of sappers and artillery). These
forces arrived at Lérida on 7 November 1839.123
   España’s notorious theocracy and military discipline had become
objectionable because he had stopped winning battles. España’s strate-
gic defeat revived the Junta of Berga and gave his enemies the chance
to take revenge. España was abducted and forced to appear before the
junta, which dismissed him from his command on 26 October 1839.
España again tried to temporise, this time literally at knifepoint, but it
was to no avail. He pronounced himself happy that his predecessor, José
Segarra, was to be appointed his successor but demanded a chance to
delay handing over his command until he had conversed with Segarra
about conﬁdential military matters which were not appropriate for mere
civilians to hear. The junta was unmoved and España began his forced
journey into exile in Andorra. Although staying at safe houses en route,
travelling by night and undergoing the indignity of being dressed in
peasant clothes, España did not have to endure this humiliation for
long. After crossing the River Segre close to Orgaña España was strangled
by his own escort, and his body dumped in the river.124 His assassins,
who were operating with uncertain connivance of higher authority,
would justify their actions by claiming outrageously that España was a
Mason (i.e. Liberal) and about to turn like Maroto. In reality, the Carlists
knew that once they had bested this fanatical reactionary, they would
have to kill him. Carlos de España, after all, had bloodied Barcelona as
its captain-general during the Ominous Decade, and then subjected the
Carlist war effort in the Principality to the most unforgivingly draco-
nian discipline since. If he lived he could wreak the most abject revenge
upon his enemies, even from exile. Nevertheless, España’s assassination
caused great controversy.125
   The whole of the eastern Carlist zone had been traumatised by the
events in the Basque country. España had never shown much respect
either for the person of Don Carlos or for his Byzantine court. When
desperate diehards in Navarra had suggested placing the Carlist Crown
Prince at the head of the war effort in the east, España’s reply was full of
sententious scorn:126

   Princes, just like all kings, are either too good to be true that we lose
   them, or are so bad because they are worked on by a rabble of ﬂat-
   terers. And do you believe that if our prince came here or to Aragón
   he would not be accompanied by a court worse than Satan’s? Haven’t
