224 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


behind the conﬂict exploded into violence in city barricades manned by
Carlist War veterans.
   The peace was cruel to the losers, especially in the Basque country
which saw a spike in emigration in the early 1840s, in response to the
stripping away of the economic privileges vested in the fueros, and an
economic slump made worse by the devastation and a triumphalist
esparterista elite. As for the vanquished Basque provinces, the Vergara
settlement did nothing to stop the ongoing concentration of power in
the hands of local elites; in fact, it actually encouraged it. Whilst most of
the fueros were left intact, the deﬁnitive removal of the Spanish customs
frontier to the Pyrenees privileged the liberal, commercial oligarchies
of San Sebastián and Bilbao at the expense of the paternalistic, socially
harmonious Carlist heartland of Vitoria.8 As for returning Carlist sol-
diers, little was done for them. The Basque armaments industry was
prevented from supplying the Liberal army, despite the fact that the
largest factory, that of Eibar, had been longer in Cristino hands during
the previous seven years than in those of the Carlists. Workers made
redundant, along with demobilised Carlist soldiers, were thus driven
to emigrate to Cuba and the River Plate (Montevideo). The winter and
spring of 1841 witnessed a surge in emigration from Spain’s northern
ports, whilst newspapers related depressing coverage of the haemor-
rhage of youth, many of the latter ending up shipwrecked, indentured
or exploited upon arrival in Cuba and Spain’s former colonies.9
   The years 1833–40 had submerged Spain in a collective trauma which
killed between 2 and 4 per cent of the 1833 population, and damaged
the lives of hundreds of thousands of survivors. The signiﬁcance of the
First Carlist War is more than what has traditionally been attributed
to it (namely, praetorianism in Liberal politics, proxy for Liberal revo-
lution and the deﬁance of Europe’s most enduring legitimism). It also
created new patterns of popular politics which owed their origins to
the sacriﬁces of communities (army, militia and civilian) that had been
exposed to the conﬂict. This phenomenon shaped the progresista revolu-
tion of 1840. Above all, the length and scale of the conﬂict proved to be
an enduring motor for Spain’s political modernity and, in particular, a
model for plebeian action in Liberal politics. Thus, this book argues that
the First Carlist War shaped Spain’s post-Napoleonic crisis more than it
was shaped by it.
