

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 7 the French forces under Masséna outside Zurich, he occupied that city ( June 1799). The Allies failed to drive the French out of Switzerland, how ever. Instead, Charles returned to Germany and Masséna strengthened his forces and defeated the Russian army of Korsakov in Zurich before Suvorov managed to arrive there. Suvorov was now forced to evacuate Switzerland in order to salvage his own army. Thus, the Helvetic Republic survived and the French retained their supremacy in Switzerland. Similarly, an Anglo-Russian expedition force of 34,000 men invaded Holland to restore the Orangist regime but suffered a defeat at Castricum (September 1799) and pulled out. In effect, the Allies’ defeat in Switzerland and Holland undermined the Second Coalition. Tsar Paul I decided to with draw from the Coalition due to disagreements with Austria. In October 1799, Bonaparte returned to France from Egypt and two months later seized power. To consolidate popular support, Bonaparte had to bring the war to a successful end. As in 1796, France faced the Austrians in Germany and Italy. In Germany, Moreau’s forces defeated the main Austrian army at Stockach (May 1800). The First Consul decided to launch his own campaign in northern Italy and restore French domination there. In May 1800, the First Consul ordered 60,000 troops to cross the Alps via the Great Saint Bernard Pass. Bonaparte soon entered Milan and reestablished the Cisalpine Republic. He then defeated the Austrian army under General Melas at Marengo (14 June). The War of the Second Coalition came to an end, however, only after the Army of the Rhine, led by Moreau, defeated the Austrians at Hohenlinden (December 1800). France and Austria concluded the Treaty at Lunéville (9 February 1801), which reaffirmed the concessions that Austria had made at Campo Formio. Emperor Francis II affirmed his recognition of French annexation of Belgium and control of the left bank of the Rhine. He also recognized France’s satellite republics: the Cisalpine, Ligurian, Batavian, and Helvetic. Austria retained Venice and its possessions in the Adriatic. The Treaty of Lunéville left Britain once again without a Continental ally. It was unable to prevent Portugal, its close ally, from being invaded by Spain with support from Bonaparte, and being forced to close its ports to trade with Britain. Another blow to the British was the formation of the League of Armed Neutrality by which Russia, Sweden, Denmark, and Prussia agreed to close the Baltic Sea to British trade (December 1800). At the same time, any hopes that Bonaparte might have had of forming a broad coalition against Britain were shattered by two events, which occurred almost simultaneously. In March 1801, Tsar Paul was assas sinated and his successor, Alexander I, reversed his Anglophobe policy.

8 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

The next month, a British squadron led by Admiral Nelson bombarded 
Copenhagen, destroyed the Danish fleet, and forced Denmark to abandon 
the Armed Neutrality League; the League itself soon dissolved. France also 
suffered a major setback in Egypt when its army was defeated by the British 
(March 1801) and the Turks captured Cairo and Alexandria. In September 
1801, General Jacques Menou surrendered to the British, thus ending the 
French fiasco in Egypt. 
These setbacks and war-exhaustion among the French people per 
suaded Bonaparte to begin peace negotiations with Britain. Britain was 
also weary after the long years of war. While its territory remained safe, 
owing to the supremacy of the Royal Navy, it had suffered economic hard 
ships, which led to public unrest. British public debt had also increased. 
Under these conditions, public pressure to negotiate peace with France 
grew and Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, who had supported the 
war, resigned (March 1801). He was replaced by the malleable Henry 
Addington, who had long opposed Pitt’s anti-French policy. After more 
than seven months of negotiations, France, Holland, Spain, and Britain 
signed the Treaty of Amiens (March 1802). The treaty was certainly gen 
erous with France, affirming its “natural borders” and recent acquisitions, 
including French control of Belgium, the left bank of the Rhine, Geneva, 
and Piedmont. France agreed to pull its troops out of the Papal State and 
the Kingdom of Naples and to respect the integrity of its satellite states 
and Portugal. Britain agreed to return to France, Holland, and Spain 
their overseas possessions, which it had captured since 1793, except for 
Ceylon (formerly Dutch) and Trinidad (Spain), and to evacuate Malta 
and Elba. 
The peace of Amiens marked the official end of the Second Coalition 
War and was welcomed with enthusiasm in both countries. After all, it 
had been ten years since the beginning of hostilities in 1792. In fact, this 
was the only time during the period 1792–1814 that Britain and France 
were not at war. Lunéville and Amiens recognized the dominant place of 
France in western Europe, most notably its hegemony in Italy and 
Germany. British supremacy on the seas was reaffirmed as well. Amiens 
consolidated Bonaparte’s power in France and a plebiscite confirmed 
him as Consul for Life (August 1802). 