

Introduction xiii

To Julie and Sonali

1

1 The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire

France had begun expanding its boundaries before Napoleon seized power in November 1799. Revolutionary France invaded and occupied neighboring countries as early as 1792, soon after the outbreak of the First Coalition War. This war ushered in a period of more than two decades of international conflicts, the so-called Coalition Wars, between France and European alliances consisting of Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and other less powerful countries. The revolutionary governments justified the occupation of foreign lands, using the theory of “natural frontiers” and declaring their intention of liberating oppressed people from tyran nical regimes. In reality, the French armies requisitioned provisions and imposed heavy war contributions on occupied regions, thereby alienating their populations. The Directory annexed Belgium and established several satellite “sister” republics: the Batavian (Dutch), the Helvetic, and four Italian states – the Cisalpine, Ligurian, Roman, and Neapolitan. The French introduced in all of them constitutions and legal and political structures based on the French system, and compelled them to pay for the upkeep of the French armies stationed on their soil. Following his rise to power, Napoleon Bonaparte intensified French imperial expansion. He annexed Piedmont and the Rhineland to France and transformed the Cisalpine Republic into the Republic of Italy, with him self as President, and the Helvetic Republic into the Swiss Confederation, appointing himself as its “Mediator.” As Geoffrey Ellis points out, it was after his coronation as Emperor in 1804, however, that “the pattern of subjuga tion changed and so did the nomenclature, a sign that Napoleon’s imperial ambition was evolving from the earlier republican forms into a much larger

dynastic system.”1 During the years 1805–10, Napoleon pursued his most 
aggressive imperial policy, launching numerous military campaigns, subju 
gating much of Europe, and creating his “Grand Empire.” He annexed new 
territories to France and established several satellite kingdoms, appointing 
mostly his relatives as their rulers. The Napoleonic Empire, which consti 
tuted the most remarkable French hegemony in Europe, reached the height 
of its territorial expansion at the end of 1810. Napoleon’s victories cannot 
be explained, however, solely by his ambitions and military and diplomatic 
talents. As Martyn Lyons points out, “They reflected the powerful energies 
released by the French Revolution, and they were made possible by France’s 
superior resources, both of manpower and agricultural wealth.”2 He inher 
ited from the Revolution a conscription system that he improved and that 
was instrumental in building the Grande Armée, his principal tool for gaining 
control over a good part of Europe. 
The territories that comprised the Napoleonic “Grand Empire” 
were divided into three groups: pays réunis (annexed lands), pays conquis 
(conquered countries), and pays alliés (allied countries).3 The first group 
consisted of territories that were annexed to France and were directly 
ruled by Napoleon. Those lands constituted the “formal French Empire.” 
The second category included satellite states that were entrusted to 
French rulers. Finally, the pays alliés constituted allied countries whose 
territory was expanded by Napoleon in some cases, and which continued 
to be governed by their native rulers. The “Grand Empire” encompassed 
all three groups of lands and was distinct from the smaller “formal 
French Empire,” which included only the annexed countries. 
This chapter presents a general survey of the formation of the French 
Empire within the context of the international relations and the 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars from 1792 to 1810. 4 It outlines the 
principal military and diplomatic events and their territorial and political 
consequences.5 