

Contents

List of Maps vii Acknowledgments viii Introduction ix

1 The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 1

2 The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule: Reform and Exploitation 19

3 France 34

4 The Netherlands 60

5 Belgium 75

6 Germany 85

7 Switzerland 112

8 Spain 123

9 Portugal 144

10 The Italian Peninsula 152

11 The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 176

12 The Illyrian Provinces 188

v

vi Contents

13 The Collapse of the Napoleonic Empire 197

Conclusion: The Legacy of Napoleon 204

Notes 212

Selected Bibliography 228

Index 234

List of Maps

1 Europe, 1812 17 
2 Germany, 1812 91 
3 Italy, 1812 158 

vii

Acknowledgments

This work has benefited from the generous help of several colleagues 
and friends. A number of colleagues deserve my gratitude for reading 
parts of the manuscript and providing me with useful comments: Don 
Horward, Carlo Capra, Geoffrey Symcox, Bill Baker and Massimiliano 
Ferri. Special thanks go to Richard Blanke, who very kindly agreed to 
read the entire manuscript and made many invaluable suggestions that 
helped me produce a better book. I owe a special debt to Suzanne 
Moulton, the Assistant Administrator of the Department of History at the 
University of Maine, who, very patiently and meticulously, read through 
several drafts of my manuscript and made numerous corrections and 
stylistic improvements. I am indebted to my wife Julie, who has always 
been ready with advice and encouragement, without which completing 
the work would have been much more difficult. I dedicate the work to 
her and my daughter Sonali. 
Lastly, I would like to mention my father, Walter Grab, a scholar of 
German history, who taught for many years at Tel Aviv University. He read 
the early versions of some of the chapters but, regrettably, will not be able 
to read the final product as he died in December 2000. We did not always 
agree about everything, but his encouragement, assistance, and stimula 
tion over many years have been highly instrumental in making me the 
historian that I am today. 

viii

Introduction

Ever since his fall from power in 1815, Napoleon has aroused enormous 
interest among historians. More has been written about him than any 
other French – possibly even European – historical figure (by the latest 
reckoning more than 220,000 volumes). A major reason for this huge 
interest is Napoleon’s meteoric rise to prominence from relatively obscure 
origins in peripheral Corsica. Bonaparte was only 26 years old when he 
was appointed commander of the Italian front, 30 when he became First 
Consul, and 35 when he crowned himself Emperor. Napoleon’s numerous 
military victories and the important legacies that he left to France, includ 
ing Code Napoleon and the lycées, also explain the considerable interest 
in him. 
Although the literature on Napoleon in the English language is exten 
sive, it is rather uneven. 1 There is a vast bibliography on Napoleon’s mil 
itary campaigns and his diplomacy, as well as on his private life, but much 
less attention has been devoted to the economic, social, administrative, 
and cultural aspects of the Napoleonic years. Although nobody doubts 
the importance of Napoleon’s battles and military policy for understand 
ing the Napoleonic period, it is equally important to investigate the tax 
system that paid for these campaigns and the policy that conscripted 
the soldiers for his army. The biographies of Napoleon’s generals are 
important, yet so are the less-explored biographies of his ministers and 
prominent officials in France and his satellite states. 
A second shortcoming of the Napoleonic bibliography is its Franco 
centric nature. 2 Until recently, most English-language books on 
Napoleon have focused on France, devoting relatively limited space – 
a chapter or two – to developments in his annexed and satellite states.3 
Yet one must insist that Napoleon was as much a part of European history 
as he was of French history. 
Indeed, to fully understand Napoleonic policies, we need to study 
them in a European context. Clearly, a critical component of Napoleon’s 