

THE FIRST COALITION WAR

The Revolutionary Wars began in April 1792 when France declared war against Austria, which was soon joined by Prussia.6 The Pilnitz Declaration by Leopold II of Austria and Frederick William II of Prussia, and the presence of émigrés in neighboring countries, aroused suspicion and hostility among many revolutionaries. When the Austrian govern ment rejected a French ultimatum to expel the émigrés from German

2 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe territory, the French Legislative Assembly declared war on Austria. An ini tial French thrust into Belgium ended in a total fiasco and soon the Prussian army invaded France. Its commander, the Duke of Brunswick, issued the famous Manifesto, threatening to destroy Paris if the French royal couple were hurt. This helped to trigger the “Second Revolution” (10 August 1792), which established the first French Republic. In September, the French army defeated the Prussians at Valmy and forced them to retreat. Paris was thus saved and French national morale received a much-needed boost. The Revolutionary government carried the war into neighboring countries. In late October 1792, General Custine led a French army into the left bank of the Rhine. General Montesquiou invaded Savoy and Nice and added them to the Republic. The greatest vic tory, however, was that of General Dumouriez, who defeated the Austrians at Jemappes (6 November) and occupied Belgium. On 19 November, the Convention declared France the protector of liberated nations through out Europe. France’s occupation of Belgium, the threat that it posed to the Netherlands and the opening of the River Scheldt for commerce alarmed Britain. Following the execution of Louis XVI, Britain, the Netherlands and Spain withdrew their ambassadors from Paris, where upon the Convention declared war on all these states (February–March 1793). Naples and lesser Italian states also joined the coalition against France. Thus by mid-1793, France faced much of Europe. The Revolutionary government reacted by ordering the conscription of 300,000 men, thereby provoking counter-Revolutionary revolts in the Vendée and elsewhere. Against such formidable opposition, military reverses were almost unavoidable. In March 1793, Dumouriez not only was defeated by the Austrians at Neerwinden in Belgium but defected to the enemy. The Austrians reoccupied Belgium and invaded France. In the Rhineland, the Prussians beat Custine and occupied Mainz ( July). In the south, a Spanish army crossed the Pyrenees into France. Meanwhile, counter-Revolutionary rebels gained control of important cities, including Lyons, Marseilles, and Toulon. The conditions of Revolutionary France seemed desperate. The National Convention responded by issuing the famous levée en masse (August 1793), ordering a national draft and the mobi lization of all the resources toward the war effort. Soon, the French began to recover. In October, General Jourdan beat the Austrians at the battle of Wattignies, weakening their hold over Belgium. In the east, Generals Hoche and Pichegru defeated the Prussians in the Palatinate while the British were driven out of Toulon in December. The decisive French victory, however, came on 26 June 1794 when Jourdan defeated