

ix

historical role was his effort to consolidate French hegemony throughout Europe and establish himself as its dominant ruler. To achieve these goals, Napoleon incessantly intervened in other countries and reshaped the map of Europe. He annexed foreign territories, created new satellite states, altered borders, toppled dynasties, and imposed new govern ments. He also exploited the human and financial resources of occupied Europe, conscripted young men into his Grande Armée, and imposed taxes and war contributions. Since French resources were inadequate for his military campaigns, his ability to tap European resources was indispensa ble in sustaining and expanding his Empire. To put it bluntly, without drafting European conscripts and extracting financial support from other countries, Napoleon would have been unable to create his Grande Armée and wage his many campaigns. Likewise, Napoleonic economic policies must also be studied within a European setting. The Continental Blockade, his most significant policy after 1806, required the collabora tion of the rest of Europe, and French economic domination in Europe meant that his satellite states had to grant French industry and com merce favorable conditions without reciprocity. But a discussion of Napoleon’s European policies cannot be limited to military operations, conquests, and exploitation. Reform programs that transformed and modernized the internal structures of various countries constituted a highly significant component of Napoleon’s continental impact. Indeed, the Napoleonic regime possessed a Janus face: reform and innovation combined with subordination and exploitation. In fact, the two aspects were linked. To maximize revenues and recruit men more efficiently, Napoleon and his officials initiated broad reforms in the subject states, designed to create a central state apparatus consist ing of a centralized bureaucracy, a uniform tax system, a conscripted army, a uniform court system, and an effective police force. They also launched the transformations of European societies by subjecting the Church to the State, reducing the power of the nobility, and advancing the interests of non-nobles by opening government and military positions to them and selling them national property. Other major changes included the introduction of Code Napoleon, which stressed legal equal ity and property rights; abolition of the seigneurial system; elimination of internal tolls and the formation of national markets; secularization of Church property; and the introduction of secondary education. To be sure, the depth and impact of these reforms varied from country to coun try, depending primarily upon how well prepared each society was to adopt the changes. But in many of the countries that comprised his x Introduction

Grand Empire, Napoleon’s policies undermined a great deal of the traditional structure and paved the road toward a more modern society. Napoleon modeled his reforms throughout Europe on French laws and institutions. Revolutionary France had initiated many of these changes, and Napoleon exported them throughout Europe. Aside from increasing his ability to exploit his satellite states, his reform policies aimed at inte grating the Continent, thereby enhancing French domination in Europe. In addition to these pragmatic considerations, Napoleon and his officials were convinced that the French system was simply the best and that Europeans would be grateful once they experienced the benefits of French laws and institutions. 4 In sum, the policies that Napoleon launched as a French and a European ruler, reformer, and military commander were closely linked. In his view, France’s role was to provide a model for the improvement of the rest of Europe, while Europe’s func tion was to acknowledge the supremacy of the French structure and supply the resources to aggrandize France’s position in Europe. The last decade has witnessed some efforts by historians to rectify the Franco-centrism that has characterized much of the previous Napoleonic bibliography, and to explore Napoleon within a European context. An unprecedented number of English-language works on Napoleon’s rule outside France appeared in the 1990s. Important works such as Stuart Woolf’s Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (1991) and Michael Broers’ Europe under Napoleon, 1799–1815 (1996) provide a wealth of information and analysis on the entire Continent, the former topically and the latter chronologically. Other volumes on Napoleonic Europe, recently pub lished, include: a small but useful volume by Geoffrey Ellis, The Napoleonic Empire (1991); a helpful guide by Clive Emsley, The Longman Companion to Napoleonic Europe (1993); Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (1995); and more recently, a volume of valuable articles edited by Philip Dwyer, Napoleon and Europe (2001). A number of excellent studies on the internal developments in single countries have also appeared during this same period: Christopher Blackburn, Napoleon and the Szlachta (1998); Michael Broers, Napoleonic Imperialism and the Savoyard Monarchy, 1773–1821: State Building in Piedmont (1997); Frank Bundy, The Administration of the Illyrian Provinces of the French Empire, 1809–1813 (1987); Milton Finley, The Most Monstrous of Wars: The Napoleonic Guerrilla War in Southern Italy, 1806–1811 (1994); Brendan Simms, The Impact of Napoleon: Prussian High Politics, Foreign Policy and the Crisis of the Executive, 1797–1806 (1997), and John Lawrence Tone, The Fatal Knot: The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon