

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 3 the Austrians at Fleurus and forced them to evacuate Belgium. That same month, Pichegru crossed the Dutch border and in January 1795 entered Amsterdam. By May, he had completed the occupation of the Netherlands, and the Dutch Patriots had formed the Batavian “sister” Republic. In October 1795, the Convention annexed Belgium to France. Simultaneously, the French completed their occupation of the left bank of the Rhine. Prussia, whose ruler was more concerned with assuring his fair share of Polish territory in the Third Partition of that country, signed the Treaty of Basle with France (April 1795), recognizing French domi nation over the left bank of the Rhine in return for territorial compensa tion for Prussia on the right bank in Germany. Spain also signed a peace treaty with France, leaving Austria as France’s only major adversary on the Continent. The French Directory was thus able to concentrate its efforts on the German front where two large armies under Generals Jourdan and Moreau faced Archduke Charles, brother of the Austrian Emperor. The French armies sought to march along the Danube to Vienna, but a series of setbacks at the hand of Charles forced them to retreat to France. Meanwhile, France and Austria also faced each other in northern Italy where the Directory had appointed the 26-year-old General Napoleon Bonaparte as commander of the Army of Italy (March 1796). His assign ment was to create a diversion and tie up Austrian forces in order to facil itate the main French campaign in Germany. But Bonaparte upset this strategy through a series of rapid victories over the Austrians, which transformed the Italian front into the principal one. In April 1796, he led his poorly equipped army into Italy and within days had defeated the Austro-Piedmontese armies at Montenotte, Millesimo, Dego, and Mondovi. To save his capital, Turin, King Victor Amadeus III signed the Truce of Cherasco. Bonaparte then crossed the River Po into Lombardy, which belonged to the Habsburg Empire. In May 1796, Bonaparte defeated the Austrians at Lodi and entered Milan. After establishing a new administration in Milan and imposing war contributions on the Lombard population, Bonaparte marched eastward, taking Peschiera, Legnano, and Verona, which belonged to the Venetian Republic, and then turned south. To save their states from French invasion, the rulers of the Neapolitan Kingdom, Modena, and Parma signed armistice agree ments with Bonaparte. French forces then invaded the Papal State and occupied the Legations of Bologna and Ferrara. To prevent Napoleon from marching on Rome, Pope Pius VI signed the Treaty of Tolentino, where he surrendered his claim to the Legations and agreed to pay the French 21 million francs (February 1797). Another French division

4 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

occupied Livorno in Tuscany, the main port of British trade in the Italian 
peninsula. 
In July 1796, Bonaparte began besieging Mantua, the main Austrian 
quadrilateral fortress. For the next seven months Mantua was the focus of 
hostilities between France and Austria. The Austrians sent several armies 
in an effort to free Mantua, but Bonaparte defeated each of them (Battles 
of Lonato, Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli). On 2 February 1797, 
the Austrian general Würmser finally surrendered Mantua. Bonaparte 
next ordered his army to advance toward Vienna. In April, after his 
unstoppable march had reached Leoben, 100 miles from Vienna, 
Archduke Charles requested a truce. 
Formal peace negotiations with Austria dragged on for several months, 
during which time Bonaparte consolidated French power in northern 
Italy. In May, French troops entered Venice and set up a new pro-French 
republic. Bonaparte then established the Cisalpine Republic, merging 
Lombardy, the Papal Legations, Modena, and other regions. At the same 
time, Genoa and its surroundings were transformed into the pro-French 
Ligurian Republic. Finally, on 17 October 1797, Bonaparte and Count 
Ludwig von Cobenzl signed the Treaty of Campo Formio, officially ending 
the War of the First Coalition. Austria recognized France’s possession of 
Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, as well as the existence of the 
Batavian and Cisalpine Republics. The Ionian Islands, which had 
belonged to Venice but were then occupied by France, remained under 
French rule. As compensation for its losses, Austria received Venice and 
the Dalmatian coast. Austria also agreed to support the convening of 
a congress at Rastatt (Baden) to negotiate peace between France and the 
Holy Roman Empire. In a secret article, the Emperor agreed to use his 
influence at Rastatt to gain the approval of the other German states for 
the cession of the left bank of the Rhine to France. Campo Formio 
signified a major victory for France and a severe blow for Austria. 7 It 
ratified the emergence of France as the new hegemonic power in Italy, 
a reality that would last until the collapse of the Napoleonic Empire in 
1814. It also confirmed the territorial gains that France had made in 
Germany and its leading role in the future reorganization of that country. 
Finally, it gave France a foothold in the eastern Mediterranean by granting 
it the Ionian Islands. Austria lost its dominant position in Italy and 
was about to lose it in Germany. By inflicting a humiliating defeat on 
Austria, Campo Formio made that country an irreconcilable enemy of 
France, prepared to fight France again at almost any moment to regain 
its position. 