

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 5

The Italian campaign constituted a personal victory for Bonaparte, making him extremely popular in France and launching his Continental reputation. More than just a military commander, he demonstrated his skills and ambitions as a politician and a diplomat when he created the Cisalpine Republic and negotiated treaties with various Italian rulers and the Austrians.

THE SECOND COALITION WAR

The continental peace established at Campo Formio did not last very long. A mere 14 months later, a second anti-French coalition consisting of Britain, Austria, Russia, the Ottoman Empire, Portugal, and Naples was formed and war broke out again before the end of 1798. Britain had never made peace and its leaders remained convinced that they would have to renew the war on the Continent to defeat France. The other states joined the new anti-French alliance because of continued French aggression, most notably its increasing domination over the Italian Peninsula, its intervention in Switzerland, and Bonaparte’s Egyptian expedition. In the Peninsula, the Directory used the killing of General Duphot in a riot in Rome as a pretext to invade the Papal State. In February 1798, General Louis Berthier entered Rome and proclaimed the Roman Republic, where he held supreme power, and deported Pope Pius VI. In December 1798, the French occupied Piedmont, forcing its monarch Charles Emmanuel IV to leave for Sardinia. As for Switzerland, its strategic importance for France only increased after Bonaparte conquered north ern Italy, since it controlled the passage between Germany and Italy. The Directory also hoped to seize the treasuries of several rich cantons. In early 1798, a French army under General Brune invaded Switzerland and occupied Berne, confiscating its treasury, which was used to finance Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt. In April, the French annexed Geneva, a center of smuggled English goods, and gave full support to the procla mation of the pro-French Helvetic Republic. French troops remained in Switzerland to protect the new republic, requiring the Swiss to pay for their upkeep. European powers were alarmed by the expansion of French power through the creation of satellite “sister republics,” which they saw as a violation of Campo Formio. Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt further convinced European powers of the French Republic’s insatiable territorial appetite. Following his return from Italy, Bonaparte proposed to lead an expedition to Egypt,

6 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe aiming to hurt English commercial interests in the eastern Mediterranean and cut the route to India. In May 1798 he sailed from Toulon with 200 ships, 35,000 troops, and 170 scholars to explore Egypt, which belonged to the Ottoman Empire. In July, Bonaparte defeated the Mamelukes, who ruled Egypt, in the battle of the Pyramids and occupied Cairo. Shortly thereafter, however, British Admiral Horatio Nelson destroyed almost the entire French fleet at the Battle of Aboukir, causing Bonaparte to be stranded in Egypt. Bonaparte ruled over Egypt for about a year but failed to achieve any of his original plans, and in August 1799 sailed back to France, abandoning the remains of his army. Particularly provoked by this expedition were the Ottoman Empire and Russia, which had its own impe rial ambitions in the eastern Mediterranean. The Russian Tsar Paul I, who became the protector of the Knights of St John of Jerusalem, the masters of Malta, was further aggravated by Napoleon’s occupation of that island on his way to Egypt ( June 1798). Italy, Switzerland, and Germany were the main theaters of fighting during the Second Coalition War. The first shots were fired in southern Italy when the Neapolitan army occupied Rome (November 1798). Soon, however, the French drove the Neapolitan army out and invaded the Kingdom of Naples, forcing King Ferdinand IV to flee to Sicily and supporting the formation of the Parthenopean Republic ( January 1799). French control of the Italian Peninsula was now complete, except for Venice. Before long, however, French forces and the Italian republics came under attack by coalition forces and popular insurgencies. In northern Italy an Austro-Russian army, led by the veteran Russian general Alexander Suvorov, defeated Moreau’s army at Cassano d’Adda (April 1799) and ended the Cisalpine Republic. Suvorov then restored Charles Emmanuel IV in Piedmont. French forces in Naples withdrew north to aid Moreau’s army but were defeated by Suvorov on the Trebbia River ( June 1799). In July, Mantua surrendered to the Allies. Thus, Suvorov conquered northern Italy in less than three months. Widespread popular anti-French revolts, provoked by looting and heavy impositions by the French armies and encouraged by Allies’ victories, erupted in Piedmont, Tuscany, and Umbria. A counter-Revolutionary revolt swept through southern Italy and brought to an end the Neapolitan Republic ( June 1799). With the collapse of the Roman Republic in September, the French lost all their Italian “sister republics,” except for the Ligurian. Simultaneously, the French also suffered setbacks in Germany. In March 1799, General Jourdan was defeated by Archduke Charles at Ostrach and Stockach. Archduke Charles then invaded Switzerland, and after beating