

Introduction xi

in Spain (1994). John Davis, Michael Rowe, and Alexander Grab have 
added important articles on the Kingdom of Naples, the left bank of 
the Rhine, and the Republic and Kingdom of Italy, respectively. Finally, 
the many valuable articles on various states published in The Proceedings 
of the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, 1750–1850 (hereafter abbrevi 
ated to CRE) also demonstrate the growing interest in Europe under 
Napoleon. 
The present volume is an addition to this growing bibliography on 
Napoleonic Europe. It does not pretend to be exhaustive, by any means; 
it is a work of synthesis, based primarily on secondary literature, whose 
principal innovation is its structure, namely its comparative discussion 
of Napoleonic changes in a wide variety of countries. It focuses on the 
principal events and developments in the ten countries that comprised 
the Napoleonic Empire at one time or another: France itself, Belgium, 
Germany, the Netherlands, the Illyrian Provinces, Italy, Portugal, Poland 
(the Grand Duchy of Warsaw), Spain, and Switzerland. The Napoleonic 
period in each country is the subject of a separate chapter, presented in 
the form of a chronological narrative covering the period from the 
Revolutionary years to the fall of Napoleon. Each chapter discusses the 
pre-Revolutionary period, the context of the French invasion, the incor 
poration into the Napoleonic Empire, the various territorial changes, 
the types of governments Napoleon imposed, the principal officials he 
appointed, significant military operations, the Napoleonic exploitation 
of resources, the effects of the Continental Blockade, and the collapse of 
Napoleonic rule. The primary objectives of this volume, however, are to 
describe and analyze the Napoleonic reform programs in each country 
and to assess their success or failure, their impact on the local popu 
lations, how the latter responded to the changes, and the legacy of the 
Napoleonic period. 
As this book attempts to demonstrate, aside from being a brilliant 
military commander, diplomat, and harbinger of change in France, 
Napoleon was also a major reformer and a catalyst of modernity on 
a European scale. In other words, the Napoleonic years marked a period 
of transition from the Old Regime to the modern era. By building the cen 
tral state, abolishing the privileges of the Church and nobility and weak 
ening their grip on power, advancing the interests of the bourgeoisie, 
proclaiming legal equality, and promoting economic unity, Napoleonic 
rule paved the way for the modernization of Europe. 
Yet as this volume also demonstrates, Napoleonic reform programs and 
their effects were uneven throughout Europe. 5 For example, their impact 

xii Introduction

on the Kingdom of Italy, the Netherlands, and Belgium was greater than 
on Spain, the Kingdom of Naples, or the Duchy of Warsaw. This is not 
surprising, of course, given the wide diversity of conditions in the various 
countries and the different durations of French rule. The former group 
of countries was economically developed and had already experienced 
a period of reform, while the Kingdom of Naples and the Duchy of 
Warsaw, where noble privileges and the seigneurial system were deeply 
entrenched, had experienced little or no change at all. Belgium and 
northern Italy, which were occupied by the French in the 1790s, had more 
time to adopt the reforms than states that became subject to Napoleon 
after 1806. In Spain and the Kingdom of Naples, popular revolts posed 
obstacles to the implementation of the reforms, but in northern Italy 
and Belgium violent popular protest was rare and short-lived. In sum, an 
analysis of these and other differences allows us better to understand 
the uneven pace and depth of Napoleonic reforms in the various parts of 
the Grand Empire. 
There is still much to be learnt, of course, about the Napoleonic sub 
ject states and their societies, including the peasantry, the urban middle 
and lower classes, the new tax systems, the administrative and judicial 
structures and their personnel, public disorder and police response, and 
the implementation of educational reforms. It is hoped that this work will 
help to stimulate continued interest in Napoleonic Europe and encour 
age further research into these and other aspects of this important 
period. 