

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 25 banishment of the Pope from Rome. As for popular resistance, it took the form of insurrections, brigandage, and violations of specific laws by individual citizens. The popular classes reacted against conscription, heavy taxation, requisitions, and looting by crossing armies. Despite heavy Napoleonic pressure, only three enduring revolts broke out in Europe during that period: Calabria (1806–8), Iberia (1808–13), and Tyrol (1809). A few areas, most notably northern Italy (1806 and 1809) and Westphalia (1809), experienced short uprisings. Of the three major insurrections, the Spanish revolt prevented Joseph Bonaparte from ruling his state and implementing his reforms effectively. Likewise, the revolt in the Kingdom of Naples interfered with Joseph’s ability to carry out his new policies there.

THE EXPLOITATION OF OCCUPIED EUROPE

Occupied Europe paid a heavy price for the Napoleonic domination. 
Napoleon incessantly exploited its human and financial resources. Clearly, 
without drawing on the human and economic resources of Europe 
Napoleon could not have built his huge Grande Armée or expanded his 
imperial rule. For his part, Napoleon took for granted his right to use the 
resources of occupied Europe; as he indicated in a letter to his sister 
Caroline, “Above all, my wish is that people should do what suits 
France; for I have conquered kingdoms in order that France should reap 
the benefits.” 16 
There were five principal ways in which Napoleon took advantage 
of his satellite states and annexed territories: (1) Military conscription; 
(2) financial impositions; (3) economic concessions to French industry 
and commerce; (4) land grants to his favorites; and (5) the imposition of 
the Continental Blockade. 

Military draft

Napoleon conscripted hundreds of thousands of young European men, incorporating them into his Grande Armée.17 This was, undoubtedly, the most hated Napoleonic policy and aroused much resistance in every country. While conscription had existed in parts of ancien régime Europe, Napoleon expanded it to unprecedented levels and extended it to states that had never experienced it before. He and his representatives

26 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe introduced an annual draft in the Italian Republic (1802), the Kingdom of Naples (1806 and 1809), the Grand Duchy of Berg and the Kingdom of Westphalia (1807), and Holland and the Hanseatic cities (1810). Satellite states and allies adopted the French conscription system in order to improve their capacity to draft soldiers and provide their quota. Where the French system was not introduced, the authorities improved the implementation of traditional methods of recruitment. The steady supply of European troops enabled the Emperor to ease the pressure on the French population, thereby diminishing internal opposition to con scription in France. Strong resistance and high rates of desertion throughout Europe forced most states to improve their repressive machinery to enforce obedience to the law. In some countries, resistance to the draft diminished over the years. Indeed, conscription efforts proved successful, and some satellite states, such as Westphalia, Bavaria, the Kingdom of Italy, and the Duchy of Warsaw, drafted ever more sol diers with increasing efficiency. Rulers of satellite states viewed the for mation of national armies as a way to assert their independence from Napoleon and reduce the number of French troops on their soil. The total number of European troops who served under Napoleon amounted to 720,000. 18 The Rhenish Confederation committed 126,000 men, the Swiss Confederation 12,000, and the Kingdom of Naples 16,000. Indeed, in the final years of the Grand Empire, the Grande Armée looked increas ingly like a European rather than a French army. The multinational com position of Napoleon’s army was most evident during the Russian campaign, where over half of his 600,000 troops were non-French.