

THE NAPOLEONIC REFORM POLICIES

On a European level, the main significance of the Napoleonic rule lay in marking the transition from the ancien régime to the modern era. Napoleon was a forerunner of change, launching reform policies that paved the way for the long process of modernization of European states and societies. In the context of early nineteenth-century Europe, mod ernization meant a number of elements: centralized states with profes sional bureaucracies based on merit; uniform taxation; conscripted national armies; a state police force; the end of the privileged position of the nobility and its monopoly over power; secularization through the reduction of Church power and its subjection to the State; the political and social advance of the bourgeoisie, namely non-noble, well-off, edu cated classes; legal equality; property rights; dissolution of the seigneurial system; the formation of national markets; and the emergence of nation alism. Revolutionary France had launched many of these changes and Napoleon disseminated these reforms throughout Europe in an effort to integrate the Continent on the basis of the French model. 5 Despite the fact that the outcome of the Napoleonic reform policies in Europe fell short of the stated goals and the French model,6 Napoleon succeeded in replacing a great deal of the traditional structure with new laws and institutions in many of his subject states, thereby facilitating their passage into the modern period. As we saw in the previous chapter, the territorial and governmental changes were an important part of the Napoleonic transformation of Europe. Napoleon created new states and abolished old ones, altered borders, annexed lands to France, and replaced old dynasties with his own rulers. Of particular significance was the reorganization of the German map, where hundreds of tiny anachronistic principalities were wiped out and their territories merged with larger states. The end result

20 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe was a reduction in the number of German states from more than 300 to 39. In Italy, ten states were consolidated into three parts. Obviously, the consolidation of these two countries made it easier for Napoleon to control them. It also enabled him to grant territories to his allies and create new satellite states where he appointed his relatives as rulers. At the same time, the Napoleonic reorganization of their maps marked an important phase toward Italian and German unification, though Napoleon himself had no intention of unifying them. The most significant internal change launched by the Napoleonic regime was the construction of a centralized bureaucratic state character ized by uniform and rational administrative, financial, legal, and military structures based on the French system. What John Davis said about Italy was true about most other subject states as well: “What had remained only aspiration in even the most powerful of the eighteenth-century monarchies was finally put into practice in the systematic reorganization of the administrative, bureaucratic and financial institutions that was car ried through in the brief period of French rule.” 7 In the pays réunis, Napoleon rigorously applied the same laws and decrees that he promul gated in France. In his satellite states, the Emperor and his officials proclaimed French-like constitutions, establishing coherent political and legal foundations. Satellite and allied states created uniform and efficient bureaucracies, opening them to non-nobles who were increasingly appointed on the basis of merit rather than birth. Based on the French model, states were divided into departments run by prefects or their equivalents, who carried out government orders and provided ministers with vital information about their regions. These detailed reports gave rise to the development of statistical data so indispensable to the functioning of effective and orderly governing institutions. 8 Financial reforms set up a uni form and equitable tax system with a single property tax (in some countries based on land assessment), and efficient tax collection by state officials. Code Napoleon, with its emphasis on legal equality and property rights, was translated into a number of languages and introduced into various subject states along with the jury system, a uniform court hierarchy, and judicial due process. Annual conscription systems laid the basis for the formation of national armies. Imitating French educational reforms, satellite states created a uniform school system that they controlled. All these changes significantly transformed relations between the State and civil society. The growing effectiveness of the State’s apparatus also signified a rising authoritarianism. The crushing of any opposition and censorship, which Napoleon established in France, were extended to his subject states.