

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 23

In Westphalia, his German “model state,” the peasants were required 
to redeem seigneurial fees, which, in practice, meant the survival of 
a significant element of the traditional order. Napoleon also ignored 
Code Napoleon when he permitted recipients of land grants to preserve 
the seigneurial system. Furthermore, fiscal pressure by Napoleon caused 
deficits in many states, hampering their ability to carry out their reform 
policies. 
When discussing the efficacy and impact of the Napoleonic govern 
ment, Michael Broers provides a useful distinction between the “inner 
empire,” the “outer empire,” and “intermediate zones.” 11 Aside from 
most of France, the “inner empire” included the Low Countries, western 
and south-western Germany, and northern Italy. There, the Napoleonic 
rule was most effective in transforming the existent structures and left 
a profound institutional legacy that remained after Napoleon’s fall. 
The “outer empire” (lands acquired after 1807) consisted of Tuscany, 
the Papal territories annexed to France, the Hanseatic cities, Spain, and 
the Illyrian Provinces. Those countries were less adaptable to Napoleonic 
change and their societies were less amenable to acculturation than the 
“inner empire.” The success of the implementation of the Napoleonic 
reform programs was much more limited there than in the “inner 
empire.” The “intermediate zones,” which included the Kingdom of 
Naples, the Swiss Confederation, and the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, stood 
somewhere in between the former two groups. 
There were several principal factors that determined how responsive 
states were to changes launched by the Napoleonic authorities: 

1. The structural preconditions that existed at the time of the Napoleonic occupation were the most important factor by far. 12 Countries that pos sessed a developed economy and a strong urban class of entrepreneurs and professionals were much more ripe to adopt the Napoleonic reforms than countries dominated by feudalism and a powerful landed nobility that resisted change. Likewise, states that experienced success ful enlightened reforms prior to the Napoleonic occupation were more likely to adopt the Napoleonic changes than states where social elites prevented earlier efforts to transform the political, social, and legal systems. Such a difference existed between Lombardy and southern Italy. The former, where the Napoleonic Empire had great impact, had experienced economic development, the rise of an entrepreneurial rural and urban classe, and the Habsburg enlightened reform policies prior to Napoleon. In southern Italy, on the other hand, where feudal

24 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

relations dominated the countryside and reform programs had failed 
due to opposition by the clergy and the nobility, the Napoleonic 
reforms had only a limited effect. 
2. The duration of Napoleonic domination also affected implementation 
of the reforms.13 The length of French domination throughout the 
Empire was uneven, ranging from several months in Portugal to 
close to 20 years in Belgium, Lombardy, and the Rhineland. Obviously, 
the changes introduced by Napoleon needed time to take firm root. 
Countries brought into the Napoleonic sphere of influence after 
1806–7, like the Duchy of Warsaw or Illyria, had a relatively short 
exposure to French reform policies and insufficient time to get used to 
the changes and enforce the reforms in a meaningful way. Time was also 
a factor in training state bureaucrats. Local officials needed time to gain 
expertise in the new French legal system and administrative procedures, 
while the population had to have time to get accustomed to and accept 
the new rules and institutions. Time was also needed to suppress local 
resistance to Napoleon and acquire the loyalty of the elite. 
3. The position of the various states within the Grand Empire also had an 
impact on the reform policies. Here, the distinction among pays réunis, 
pays conquis, and pays alliés became significant. The reforms were pur 
sued more rigorously in the pays réunis, which were ruled directly by 
Napoleon, than in the pays conquis or the pays alliés. 14 Once annexed to 
France, Napoleon automatically extended to the pays réunis all the 
French legislation and administrative institutions. In addition, he him 
self had more means to overcome resistance to his decrees than did his 
representatives in the subject states. Moreover, the rulers in the satel 
lite states differed in the degree of rigor with which they enforced 
Napoleon’s orders and reforms. In the Kingdom of Italy, Napoleon’s 
Viceroy Eugène completely obeyed the French Emperor, but Joachim 
Murat in Naples and Louis Bonaparte in Holland refused to fully 
implement the Napoleonic policies, wishing to assert their independ 
ence. As for the rulers of the pays alliés in the Confederation of the 
Rhine, many of them failed to introduce any reforms, while others 
tended to adopt only a part of the Napoleonic changes. 
4. The extent and intensity of local resistance to Napoleon’s policies also 
determined the success of the reform policies in Napoleonic Europe. 15 
Opposition to Napoleon took many forms and cut across class lines. 
Napoleon faced resistance from rulers who delayed and even refused 
to apply different policies, nobles who objected to the abolition of 
their privileges, and clergymen who opposed the Concordat and the 