

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 11

and Germany, as well as most of its Adriatic territories. Austria ceded the 
Veneto, Dalmatia, and Istria (except for Trieste) to the Kingdom of Italy; 
Voralberg and the Tyrol to Bavaria; and its Upper Rhine territories to 
Baden and Württemberg. Austria also had to recognize Napoleon as the 
King of Italy and pay an indemnity of 40 million francs. It lost three mil 
lion people altogether and, in the words of Paul Schroeder, “[was] 
reduced to political, military, and fiscal impotence.”9 The Napoleonic 
Empire was once more the dominant power in western and central 
Europe. 
While Napoleon had his way with the armies of the Third Coalition, he 
was decisively defeated at sea. On 21 October 1805, a British fleet under 
Nelson destroyed the Franco-Spanish fleet led by Admiral Pierre-Charles 
de Villeneuve at Trafalgar, although Nelson was killed in the battle. The 
British triumph essentially concluded the naval struggle between Britain 
and France and ended Napoleon’s hopes of either invading Britain or 
restoring a French overseas empire. 
With full control over northern Italy, Napoleon next ordered his army 
to invade the Kingdom of Naples (December 1805). General Masséna 
easily defeated King Ferdinand’s troops and forced him to flee to Sicily, 
where he stayed under British protection until 1814. Southern Italy 
became a French satellite state under Napoleon’s brother Joseph. In 
Germany, Napoleon became the guarantor of the sovereignty and 
territorial expansion of his allies, Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden, and 
would later create several new satellite states, most notably Westphalia, in 
northwestern Germany. Most significant for Napoleonic hegemony in 
Germany was the formation of the Confederation of the Rhine ( July 
1806), which recognized Napoleon as its protector and agreed to provide 
him with troops. This was followed by Francis II’s abdication as the Holy 
Roman Emperor, bringing to an end the thousand-year Reich founded by 
Charlemagne (August 1806). 

FROM JENA AND AUERSTÄDT TO TILSIT

Only now did Prussia, which had remained neutral since its withdrawal from the First Coalition in 1795, show renewed intent in confronting Napoleon. 10 After Austerlitz, Napoleon increased pressure on Prussia to side with France. In February 1806, he forced Prussian King Frederick William III to sign a humiliating treaty that included territorial conces sions, the closing of Prussian ports to British trade, and recognition of the new Napoleonic order in Germany and Italy in return for Prussia’s

12 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

annexation of Hanover. With the formation of the Confederation of the 
Rhine, however, Prussia found that it could not accept France’s dominant 
position in Germany. 
Confident in the military legacy left by Frederick II, Frederick William 
mobilized his army in the summer of 1806 and signed an alliance with 
Tsar Alexander I. Although Prussian troops initiated hostilities by invad 
ing Saxony, the French army moved very quickly and, on 14 October, 
soundly defeated the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstädt. Shortly there 
after, Napoleon entered Berlin where he issued the Berlin Decree, which 
proclaimed the Continental Blockade against Britain. In December 1806, 
Napoleon invaded Prussian Poland where he would later establish the 
Duchy of Warsaw. In February 1807, continuing eastward, Napoleon met 
a combined Russian–Prussian army at the bloody but indecisive battle at 
Eylau. In June, however, he inflicted a major defeat on the Russians at 
Friedland, and Alexander I asked for a truce. 
In late June, the two rulers met on a raft on the Niemen River, and on 
7 July signed the Treaty of Tilsit. Russia recognized Napoleon’s brothers as 
kings of Naples, Holland, and Westphalia. Russia also ceded the Adriatic port 
of Cattaro and the nearby Ionian Islands to France. In return, Napoleon left 
Russia a free hand in Turkey and the Baltic, which Alexander I used to 
occupy Finland in 1808. Alexander also agreed to mediate between France 
and Britain and, in case of failure, to join the Continental Blockade and 
exert pressure on Denmark, Sweden, and Portugal to do the same. A sepa 
rate treaty between France and Prussia was concluded two days later; Prussia 
survived only in mutilated form, losing half of its population and close to 
half of its territory. Its territories west of the Elbe became part of the new 
Kingdom of Westphalia, while its Polish provinces were converted into the 
Grand Duchy of Warsaw. Prussia was also forced to join the Franco-Russian 
alliance against Britain, suffer French occupation of its territory, and pay 
a war indemnity of 140 million francs. The Convention of Paris (1808) 
restricted the Prussian army to 42,000 men. Prussia was relegated to the 
level of a third-class power and for the next few years would cease to play a 
role in German affairs. The Treaty of Tilsit was a great success for Napoleon, 
marking a new peak in his influence and the rise of France to a Continental 
power. 11 His dominant position and the reign of his relatives in western and 
central Europe were acknowledged by Russia and would soon extend to 
Spain. Napoleon’s hegemony in Germany became unchallenged with the 
defeat of Austria and the dismemberment of Prussia. Highly significant was 
the Tsar’s agreement to join the Continental System. Finally, the formation 
of the Duchy of Warsaw signified the expansion of Napoleonic influence 
into eastern Europe. 