

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 13

A FOURTH WAR WITH AUSTRIA (1809)

In late 1808, while campaigning in Spain, Napoleon received the news that Austria was preparing for another war against France, and rushed to Paris to prepare for the new threat. The French difficulties in Spain and their defeat in Portugal convinced Austria that France was vulnerable after all and that now was the time to avenge the defeats of Ulm and Austerlitz and reverse the humiliating peace of Pressburg. Clearly, Austria was unwilling to tolerate Napoleon’s growing domination in Europe, par ticularly in Germany and Italy. A war party at the Viennese court, led by Chancellor Philip von Stadion, was confident that the Austrian army was finally prepared to win a war against France. This confidence was based on the military reforms that Archduke Charles had introduced since Austerlitz.12 Charles had built up a regular army of 300,000 men and added a citizen militia, Landwehr, with about 200,000 men. He also sought to improve military training and the supply system and, most importantly, borrowed the system of independent corps from Napoleon. At the same time, Charles doubted that the Austrian army had success fully implemented the reforms or that it was ready for war, and therefore advised caution. The war party prevailed, however, and Charles assumed command of the principal Austrian army in Germany. Austria received no support from any other European country, however, aside from a small British subsidy. It hoped that by launching a war, it would encourage anti-French revolts in Germany similar to those in Spain. Thus Charles issued proclamations calling on Germans to rise up against Napoleon, yet except for the insurrection of Major Ferdinand Schill in Westphalia that was suppressed at the end of May, nothing of that sort happened. The Rhenish Confederation’s population remained passive while the German princes, fearing that an Austrian victory would endanger their recent territorial acquisitions, remained loyal to Napoleon. The only significant exception was the anti-Bavarian revolt in Tyrol, triggered by the Austrian invasion of Bavaria in April 1809. 13 Bavaria had received Tyrol only in 1805 and had then revoked its autonomy, imposed high taxes, and tried to conscript Tyroleans. The local clergy was also hostile to the liberal Bavarian ecclesiastical policies. The leader of the insurgency was Andreas Hofer, an innkeeper known for his strong anti-French views and support for Tyrolean independence. He aroused the population to rise “for God, the [Austrian] Emperor and the home land.” The mountainous terrain favored the insurgents, who were able at

14 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

first to defeat French and Bavarian forces and to occupy Innsbruck, the 
region’s capital. 
The renewed Austrian war preparations caught Napoleon at a difficult 
time. The Spanish insurrection persisted, and with much of the Grande 
Armée pinned down in Spain, Napoleon faced manpower problems. 
There were also signs of public fatigue in France in the face of the con 
tinuous wars and sacrifices. In December 1808, Clemens von Metternich, 
Austrian ambassador to France, wrote: “It is no longer the French people 
who are waging war, it is Napoleon alone who is set on it . . . Even his 
army no longer wants this conflict.” 14 But Napoleon prepared for war as 
efficiently as ever; recruitment proceeded smoothly and produced tens 
of thousands of new conscripts. He also called the Imperial Guard from 
Spain and, along with the Grande Armée left in Germany and about 90,000 
troops from the Confederation, he amassed an army of more than 
170,000 soldiers to face Charles in the spring of 1809. 
The two sides clashed on three fronts: southern Germany and Austria 
constituted the major front, while northern Italy and Poland served as 
secondary theaters.15 The war began when Austria invaded Bavaria (April 
1809). Napoleon quickly responded and won four victories within four 
days at Abensberg, Landshut, Eckmühl, and Ratisbon. Despite its heavy 
losses, however, the Austrian army was not destroyed, and Charles 
retreated in orderly fashion toward Bohemia. In May, Napoleon occu 
pied Vienna but still needed to defeat the main Austrian army before he 
could force the Habsburgs to sign for peace. When he tried to cross the 
Danube in order to confront Charles, he was defeated at Aspern-Essling, 
east of Vienna. Six weeks later, however, Napoleon defeated the Austrians 
at Wagram (5–6 July). Although both sides suffered huge casualties – 
37,000 Austrians and 32,500 French – it was Charles who requested an 
armistice, which both sides signed at Znaim (12 July). 
Meanwhile, an Austrian army under Archduke John had invaded north 
ern Italy and defeated a Franco-Italian army under the Viceroy of the 
Kingdom of Italy, Eugène de Beauharnais, at Sacile (April 1809) and 
captured Venetia. As a result of the early reverses suffered by Charles, 
however, John was forced to retreat to Austria to assist his brother. Eugène 
then pursued the Austrians and defeated them on the River Piave, near 
Conegliano (May), and at Raab in Hungary ( June). The Austrians also 
suffered defeat in Poland. Initially, Joseph Poniatowski failed to stop an 
invasion by Archduke Ferdinand into the Duchy of Warsaw, and after 
suffering heavy losses in the battle of Raszyn near Warsaw (April), had to 
retreat, allowing the Austrians to occupy the capital. Poniatowski then 