

Financial impositions

To pay for his costly armies and campaigns, Napoleon had to rely heavily on the fiscal resources of his satellite states since France was unable to guarantee him enough revenue. Especially after 1806, Napoleon based his fiscal policy on the principle that “war should support war.” 19 Naturally, the more revenues he collected from occupied Europe, the less he needed to secure from France, thus reducing internal opposition to his tax policies. In addition to taxes and requisitions, the French Emperor also compelled his satellite states to raise and equip national armies, which fought under him, and to pay for the upkeep of French armies stationed on their soil. It is estimated that between 1804 and 1814 the conquered territories paid half of Napoleon’s military expenditures.20

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 27

Moreover, the Napoleonic armies lived off the land and looted territories they crossed or occupied. Often, top generals made fortunes in subject lands. Napoleonic fiscal pressure and the need to devote most revenues to military expenses caused crippling deficits in many states. To increase their revenues, some governments responded by introducing the more rational French tax system. To cover their deficits, states also followed the French example of confiscating and selling Church property. Indemnities paid by vanquished enemies constituted another source of income for the Napoleonic regime. For example, Austria and Prussia made contributions of 350 and 515 million francs, respectively. Indeed, as Jacques Godechot put it, “It was solely thanks to conquests and permanent war contributions that the deficit remained moderate.” 21 In sum, without the extensive financial support from occupied Europe, Napoleon would have been unable to maintain and expand his empire.

Economic concessions to French commerce and industry

Napoleon was determined to secure French economic domination over Europe, which benefited French industrialists and merchants in particular. To achieve this goal, the Emperor forced his satellite states to grant nonreciprocal advantages to French industry and commerce.22 Even when territories were incorporated into the Empire, it did not mean automatic free passage for their goods into French markets, as the cases of Holland and the Hanseatic cities demonstrated. He prohibited the import of industrial products into France while requiring subject states to reduce their tariffs on French products, seal their borders to goods from other countries, provide French merchandise free passage through their ter ritories, and supply French industry exclusively with the raw materials it needed. These policies caused severe dislocation of industries in other coun tries, now cut off from their traditional markets, but this was of no concern to Napoleon. In 1808, he demanded that the Kingdom of Italy prohibit tex tile imports, except for French goods, and export raw silk exclusively to France for the benefit of the silk industry of Lyons. Napoleon explained his perspective to Eugène: “French trade should also triumph there [in Italy] . . . My fundamental principle is, France first and foremost.” 23