

THE THIRD COALITION WAR

Amiens proved to be a mere truce. Hostilities between Britain and France resumed in May 1803, less than 14 months after peace had been signed.

The Formation of the Napoleonic Empire 9

Bonaparte was unwilling to abide by the obligations of the treaty and he 
continued to intervene in neighboring countries. He also failed to pull 
French troops from the Batavian Republic. He did withdraw from 
Switzerland but ordered French forces back into that country when 
the pro-French Helvetic government was threatened by an uprising 
(September 1802). He then imposed a new constitution that consoli 
dated French influence in Switzerland. Bonaparte also continued to 
strengthen his power in northern Italy. He made himself the president of 
the new Italian Republic, dictated a constitution based on the French 
model, and annexed both Elba and Piedmont in 1802. Finally, French 
influence was also increasing in Germany where Bonaparte played the 
decisive role in the 1803 reorganization. 
Bonaparte also raised English suspicions by his expansionist naval and 
colonial policies. Even before Amiens, Bonaparte had dispatched an 
expedition under General Charles Leclerc to regain the former French 
colony of Santo Domingo, where Pierre Toussaint L’Ouverture had 
declared the island’s independence (May 1801). The expedition restored 
French control and Toussaint L’Ouverture was deported to France, 
where he died (April 1803). The French colonial adventure ended in fail 
ure, however. The French army was decimated by yellow fever, and an 
anti-French revolt liberated most of the island from French rule by the 
end of 1803. This revolt, combined with French difficulties in maintain 
ing effective contact with its colonies, and American threats, convinced 
Bonaparte to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States (May 
1803), if only to keep it from falling to Britain. Meanwhile, however, 
Bonaparte was also challenging British naval supremacy in the 
Mediterranean where the French fleet compelled the Dey of Algiers to 
conclude a pact with France (1802). 
British commercial and manufacturing interests were also frustrated by 
France’s refusal to open up European markets to their goods. Instead, 
Bonaparte imposed new tariffs on manufactured goods, and the Dutch, 
Swiss, and Italian markets remained closed to British merchants. 
Bonaparte, wishing to defend French merchants and manufacturers, 
refused to negotiate any concessions to British traders. Few of these 
actions violated the letter of the Treaty of Amiens, but “they certainly 
infringed what the British regarded as its spirit, and gave them reason to 
suspect that the First Consul would soon dispense with the agreement 
itself.” 8 The British felt that peace had no chance unless British 
commercial interests were satisfied. The underlying problem was that 
while Britain wished to preserve the status quo and the balance of power 

10 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe in Europe, Bonaparte continued to threaten both those premises. After repeated British protests yielded no result, Addington’s government announced a decision to hold on to Malta in violation of the Treaty of Amiens. In May 1803, it declared war on France and quickly reoccupied French and Dutch colonies in America. The French then occupied some Neapolitan ports, Hanover, and Cuxhaven. Bonaparte also prepared a flotilla along the English Channel and assembled the Army of England, 150,000 strong, around Boulogne in preparation for crossing the Channel. British naval superiority prevented him from carrying out his invasion plans, however. Britain was not alone in its hostility toward the growing power of France. Tsar Alexander I saw France as a threat to the balance of power in Europe and was particularly concerned about the expansion of French power in Germany and Bonaparte’s design on the Ionian Islands and his expansionist plans in the Ottoman Empire. The last straw, however, was Napoleon’s gratuitous kidnaping and execution of the Duc d’Enghien. When Napoleon rejected a Russian demand to evacuate Hanover, Russia broke off diplomatic relations with France and began negotiations with England. William Pitt, back in power, offered Russia an annual subsidy to form a new alliance against Napoleon, which Russia accepted (April 1805). Austrian Emperor Francis II was still resentful of the fact that France had replaced Austria as the major power in Germany and northern Italy. He was also concerned that Napoleon’s coronation meant that the French emperor planned to replace the Habsburgs as the Holy Roman Emperor. In early 1805, Napoleon made himself King of the Kingdom of Italy, annexed the Ligurian Republic to his Empire, and entrusted the Duchy of Lucca to his sister Elisa. The Austrians feared that Napoleon planned to expel them from Venice. In August, Austria joined Britain and Russia in a Third Coalition. Soon Sweden and Naples followed suit. Napoleon, for his part, had signed alliances with Spain and Bavaria. Once he heard about the formation of the Third Coalition, the French emperor ordered the Army of England, which then became the Grande Armée, to march into Germany. The appearance of the French army surprised the Austrians. In October 1805, the French forced General Mack’s army of 27,000 to surrender at Ulm. Napoleon then entered the Habsburg capital and, just two weeks later, decisively defeated a Russo-Austrian army at Austerlitz, which many consider to be his greatest victory. Alexander I retreated while Francis was obliged to sue once again for peace. At the Treaty of Pressburg (26 December), Napoleon imposed humiliating terms on Austria, forcing it to renounce all its lands in Italy