

CONCLUSION

It is useful to conclude this chapter by listing all the lands that were brought within the Napoleonic Empire. Some of the pays réunis were annexed to France before Bonaparte assumed power: Avignon (1791), Savoy (1792), Nice (1793), Belgium and Luxemburg (1795), and Geneva (1798). During the Consulate, Bonaparte incorporated Piedmont and the Rhineland (1802) into France. As Emperor, Napoleon accelerated the process of territorial annexations: Liguria (1805); the Kingdom of Etruria (Tuscany) and Parma (1808); Rome and its environs and the Illyrian Provinces (1809); the Kingdom of Holland, Hanover, and Hansa cities of Hamburg, Bremen, and Lübeck, and the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg (1810). At its territorial peak in 1812, the formal French Empire had 130 departments with a population of 44 million inhabitants. Some of the pays conquis had their origins in the “sister republics.” Others were created by Napoleon, who appointed French rulers, many of them his relatives, to govern them. Those states included the Swiss Confederation (created in 1803); the Republic of Italy (1802), which was transformed into the Kingdom of Italy in 1805; the Kingdom of Naples (1806); the Grand Duchy of Berg (1806); the Kingdom of Holland (1806); the Kingdom of Westphalia (1807); the Duchy of Warsaw (1807); and the Kingdom of Spain (1808). The pays alliés included most of the members of the Rhenish Confederation, most notably Saxony and the southern German states of Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden. Napoleon elevated the status of all four rulers and considerably increased their territories.

18 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

19

2 The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule: Reform and Exploitation

Napoleon’s imperial rule over Europe possessed a Janus face, combining reform and innovation with subordination and exploitation. Reform and exploitation were tightly linked. Napoleon initiated changes in his subject states in order to be able to draft soldiers more efficiently and aug ment public revenues. Under pressure from Napoleon, allied states like Bavaria and Württemberg introduced reforms designed to improve their capacity to raise the military quotas they owed France and raise the taxes necessary to pay for their armies. The reforms were modeled on the French system and were also meant to integrate Europe and facilitate Napoleon’s domination over the Continent. Aside from those practical motivations, the Emperor was convinced that introducing the French sys tem everywhere was advantageous to the occupied nations since, in his opinion, French laws and institutions were the best and most effective in Europe. 1 Marshal Masséna echoed this belief, typical of what Stuart Woolf named “cultural imperialism,” when he stated: “Only the efforts of France can stop Europe from falling back into barbarism into which her enemies are plunging her.”2 Napoleon was confident that the people of Europe would be grateful to him once they recognized the benefits of the French organization. In 1807 he wrote his brother Jerome, the ascending king of the Kingdom of Westphalia, which he designed as a “model state” for the rest of Germany, “What people will want to return under the arbitrary Prussian rule, once it has tasted the benefits of a wise and liberal admin istration?”3 In reality, however, the intensity of the reform programs, their effects, and the success of their implementation varied from state to state.4 Belgium, the Rhineland, and northern Italy experienced the successful application of many Napoleonic changes. On the other hand, in southern Italy and the Duchy of Warsaw, the impact of the reforms was more limited while in the Illyrian Provinces the Napoleonic transformation had barely any effect at all. This chapter will discuss the Napoleonic reform programs, the reasons for their uneven implementation in the various states, and the ways in which Napoleon exploited Europe.