

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 21

The Napoleonic regimes strengthened their repressive machinery by 
increasing the police force and creating the gendarmerie to combat law 
lessness, brigandage, desertion, and any other challenge to their power.9 
In sum, the Napoleonic regimes were more coercive and in a stronger 
position than former states to enforce the laws and require citizens to 
acknowledge and obey the governments. Central states increased their 
presence in citizens’ daily lives, becoming more effective in reaching 
remote areas to ensure that all citizens fulfilled their conscription duties 
and paid taxes. 
The consolidation of the centralized states required governments to 
undermine the privileged position and influence of the Church and 
nobility. The Napoleonic authorities were particularly successful in weak 
ening Church power and subordinating it to the State. The Concordat 
became effective in many states. The Napoleonic authorities abolished 
the tithe, dissolved religious orders, and confiscated and sold ecclesiasti 
cal property. 10 States gained control over educational and welfare 
institutions and took over registration of births, marriages, and deaths, 
previously run by the Church. They established religious freedom and 
introduced civil marriage and divorce. In Spain the French abolished 
the Inquisition. In Italian and German states Jews were emancipated, 
receiving the freedom to choose an occupation and own land, although 
for the most part they did not become equal citizens. In sum, by shrink 
ing the material basis of the Church and appropriating its civil functions, 
the Napoleonic regimes provided momentum toward the secularization 
of European societies. 
Governments had less success in weakening the nobility, although the 
latter did experience an assault on their privileges and a loss of power. 
Their monopolies on administrative, military, and judicial positions were 
broken and their fiscal immunity and right to establish their own courts 
were eliminated. In other words, the Napoleonic Empire marked the loss 
of autonomy among the nobility and forced them to recognize the 
supremacy of the central state. It was most obvious in Germany, perhaps, 
where hundreds of imperial knights lost their tiny principalities. At the 
same time, however, nobles preserved their property and remained the 
predominant class enabling them to resist government attempts to elim 
inate their seigneurial privileges, the most serious assault on their power. 
In the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy of Warsaw, and in several German 
states, the authorities revoked the feudal regime, thereby bringing to 
an end the seigneurial fees and obligations the peasants owed their 
landlords. In German states, however, peasants needed to redeem their 

22 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

landlords for the loss of their fees, which they were unable to do, and 
hence their emancipation remained a dead letter. In the Duchy of 
Warsaw and the Kingdom of Naples the nobility continued to control and 
even increase its power vis-à-vis the landless peasantry well into the 
nineteenth century. 
Linked with the weakening of the nobility’s hold on power was 
governmental promotion of members of the bourgeoisie to top posts in 
the administration and the military. The bourgeoisie also expanded its 
property by buying Church land, and their sons were the main benefici 
aries of the new secondary schools, which prepared them for public 
offices. Those benefits went hand in hand with Napoleon’s efforts to rally 
the propertied classes to his support. In northern Italy and the Rhineland 
a new elite, consisting of old nobles and bourgeois citizens, emerged 
under Napoleon, replacing the exclusive old nobility. In other words, 
Napoleonic rule provided momentum to social mobility and the advance 
of the middle classes. Increasingly, the criteria needed for social progress 
became wealth and merit rather than birth. Napoleon also created an 
economic environment that benefited merchants and industrialists, 
most notably with the formation of national markets. The authorities 
abolished internal tolls, constructed roads and canals, and established 
uniform weights and measures and a national currency. Entrepreneurs 
also benefited from contracts to supply food, clothing, and arms to the 
growing armies. No wonder, then, that the propertied classes were the 
principal supporters of Napoleon’s regime. 
Although the scope of the reforms was broad and government goals 
noteworthy, the extent of the reform policies as well as the rigor and 
success of their implementation varied from state to state. Generally, 
administrative, financial, judicial, military, and ecclesiastical reforms 
enjoyed a great deal of success, while socioeconomic reforms, like the 
abolition of seigneurial privileges, met with strong resistance from local 
elites and their implementation was inadequate. Paradoxically, Napoleon 
himself sometimes undermined his own reform policies, thereby reveal 
ing the contradictions in his policies. In a number of states, he compro 
mised with conservative elites, allowing them to preserve their privileges 
as long as they recognized his supreme position. In 1803, he enabled the 
Swiss elite to restore its power in return for recognition of his dominant 
position as “Mediator” and a pledge to provide him with Swiss troops. He 
allowed the Polish nobility to continue its control over the peasants, 
contradicting the new Constitution and Code Napoleon, as long as his 
supremacy was recognized and he received Polish military contingents. 