

42 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe enabled him to promote and reward military officers and civil servants and detach the old nobility from the Bourbons. Finally, forming an impe rial nobility and a court was in harmony with Napoleon’s imperial rule, aiming to place his regime on equal footing with other monarchies. At the top of the new nobility stood the Emperor’s relatives, the former Consuls Cambacérès and Lebrun, ministers, and 16 marshals. By 1814, Napoleon had created 3263 titles. A majority of 59 percent came from military officers, while 22 percent were top civil servants and 17 percent were other notables. 19 Socially, most imperial nobles descended from the bourgeoisie (58 percent), while 22 percent came from the old nobility and 20 percent were drawn from the popular classes.20 The creation of a national nobility constituted a departure from the ideals of the French Revolution. Critics of Napoleon viewed it as the restoration of one of the most offensive characteristics of the Old Regime. And yet the new Napoleonic elite differed from the Old Regime nobility in several significant ways.21 Service to the state, accumulation of wealth, and merit rather than birth constituted the new criteria for becoming a noble. The new nobility consisted of generals and top admin istrators rather than feudal lords with ancient ancestry. Unlike the old nobility, the new elite came from a variety of social origins, was an open elite, and received no tax exemptions or legal privileges. In sum, by form ing a nobility based on new criteria and by allying himself with the notable class, Napoleon helped to bury the old society of orders and consolidate the new social reality created by the French Revolution.

THE CONCORDAT

Bonaparte understood that reconciliation with the Church was a highly important step in delegitimizing the royalist camp and strengthening his rule. The French Revolution left a legacy of a divided Church, an alien ated Catholic population, and a deep crisis in relations between France and the Papacy. 22 The National Assembly had stripped the Church of its property and privileges and had turned the clergy into public servants, requiring them to take an oath of loyalty to the Revolutionary state, a most controversial legislation.23 Only seven bishops took it while the lesser clergy was equally divided between “constitutionalists” and “refractories.” The Revolution also introduced civil marriage and divorce, appropriated the registration of births and deaths, and emancipated Protestants and Jews. Refractory clergy then joined the counter-Revolutionary forces and

France 43

many priests were arrested and guillotined. The disruption of religious 
practices and public worship and the launching of “de-Christianization” 
during the Reign of Terror further exacerbated the tension between 
Church and State. The Directory launched additional measures against 
“non-juror” clergy and, in 1798, French troops helped to establish 
a Roman Republic and exile Pope Pius VI. 
Bonaparte viewed religion as a tool to assure social order and increase 
state power. His religious opportunism is best summed up in the state 
ment, “By turning Catholic I ended the war in the Vendée, by becoming 
a Moslem I established myself in Egypt, by becoming an ultramontane 
I won the Italians. If I were governing a country of Jews, I would rebuild 
the temple of Solomon.” Ending the religious conflict promised impor 
tant political advantages for Bonaparte, hence he offered to negotiate an 
agreement with the Pope soon after climbing to power. Peace with Rome 
meant papal recognition of his rule, bolstering his support among 
Catholics, undermining the royalist opposition, and inducing priests to 
serve the new regime. Through an agreement with the Pope, Bonaparte 
also wanted to reaffirm State authority over the Church. As Portalis, his 
minister of religion, put it, “The good order and public security do not 
permit that the Church institutions are left to themselves.” 24 He also 
wanted the Church to sanction the new owners of Church property 
and thus gain their support. Finally, an agreement with the Pope was 
intended to gain support in the heavily Catholic-occupied areas of 
Belgium, the left bank of the Rhine, and Piedmont. 
The First Consul initiated conciliatory steps toward the Church soon 
after the Coup of Brumaire. Celebrating the decadi was not enforced any 
more. He annulled the deportation of priests who agreed to cooperate 
with his government. Many churches that had closed during the 
Revolution were reopened. The new Pope Pius VII was also interested 
in resolving the conflict with France, hoping to restore the supremacy 
of the Catholic Church in France and reverse many of the Revolutionary 
changes. Bonaparte’s reconquest of northern Italy also induced Pius VII 
to begin negotiations because he feared a French invasion of Rome. 
In July 1801, after nine months of laborious negotiations, the two sides 
signed the Concordat. 25 It acknowledged Roman Catholicism as “the 
religion of the vast majority of French citizens.” Bonaparte successfully 
resisted papal demands to recognize Catholicism as the state religion, 
thereby preserving religious pluralism in France. The Pope recognized 
the new owners of Church property. French dioceses were reorganized 
and the incumbent bishops, both refractory and constitutional, were 