

32 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe imposed high duties on French goods. But even before the Russian withdrawal from the Continental System, it was the licensing system that demonstrated the inconsistencies of Napoleon’s anti-British policies and began eroding his own economic warfare. By allowing trade with Britain, the Emperor acknowledged his failure to enforce the blockade and hence his inability to win the economic war against Britain. The blockade stimulated much opposition to Napoleon in Europe and was regularly violated by smugglers and the British. Napoleon simply did not marshal the strength to eliminate these violations or to implement the blockade effectively.

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 33

3

France

THE COUP OF BRUMAIRE

Of all the Revolutionary governments, the Directory lasted the longest (1795–99).1 Although it had some successes, including the defeat of some royalist threats and the elimination of the public debt and the worthless assignats, the Directory’s rule was characterized by a great deal of corruption and instability, which precipitated its removal from power. Most importantly, the Directory failed to build a strong base of support to offset the opposition of the Jacobins and the royalists. Twice, in 1797 and 1798, the Directory staged a coup, annulling election results in which the royalists and Jacobins gained many seats, thereby discrediting the electoral process and unwittingly preparing the way for the use of force in changing the government. Another weakness was the persistence of crime and disorder, including peasant revolts in western France, known as the chouannerie. Harsh anti-religious measures added to the gov ernment’s unpopularity and deepened the religious schism in France. Although the Directory solved the public debt problem, it did so by canceling much of the national debt, thus alienating many lenders. Friction and rivalry among the five members of the Directory further weakened the government. Upon his return from Egypt (9 October 1799), Bonaparte found a French nation in deep crisis. A new European coalition had defeated France in Germany and had driven the French out of Italy. Several generals lost faith in the Directory’s ability to run the war effectively. More peasant insurrections broke out in the southwest. Most citizens grew tired of the instability that had resulted from ten years of Revolution

34

and war. Bourgeois property owners were seeking a strong government that would assure stability, law, and order, and guarantee their gains from the Revolutionary period. By late 1799, it became clear that the Directory was unable to solve the crises and that a political change was necessary. The Brumairiens, the group that conspired to overthrow the French government, consisted of former nobles, ex-clergymen, former members of the Convention, and some intellectuals. Among the conspiracy leaders were Emmanuel Sieyès, who joined the Directory in May 1799, Maurice Talleyrand, France’s foreign minister, Joseph Fouché, the minister of police, and Director Roger Ducos. The conspirators needed a popular general, however, to bring down the Directory. Bonaparte was not their first choice, but General Barthélemy Joubert had died in battle and General Jean Moreau refused to commit himself. The plot resulted in the coup of 18–19 Brumaire (9–10 November 1799). On the first day, using the threat of a fictitious Jacobin plot, Sieyès decreed the transfer of the Legislature to a suburb of Paris and called a meeting of both Legislative Councils for the next day. Bonaparte was charged with “protecting” the delegates. The next day, many suspicious delegates demonstrated hostility to the change of meeting place and to the troops who sur rounded the Assembly Hall. They angrily challenged Bonaparte to respect the Constitution. Some even demanded the young general be outlawed, forcing him to leave the Legislative Hall. The plot seemed doomed, but Lucien Bonaparte, one of the plotters who served as the president of the Council of 500, saved the day. He convinced the troops that General Bonaparte had been assaulted by the delegates and exhorted them to evict the representatives from the Assembly. The troops obeyed and cleared the chamber in no time. To legitimize the illegal change, the Brumairiens gathered a rump legislature later that evening to approve a new political structure. An interim executive consisting of three consuls – Bonaparte, Sieyès, and Ducos – replaced the Directory. France remained calm, which demonstrated how unpopular the Directory had become. Brumaire also signified the continuing depoliti cization of France, a process that had begun under the Directory and persisted under Napoleon. The coup of Brumaire marked the end of the Revolutionary period and the beginning of Napoleonic France. The Napoleonic period was divided into two parts: the Consulate (1799–1804) and the Empire (December 1804–14). During the Consulate, France officially remained a republic but it soon became clear that the coup had fundamentally transformed the nature of the French government. Napoleon Bonaparte