

France 35 concentrated the real power in his own hands, while public participation in the political process, which characterized the Revolutionary decade, dissipated. Bonaparte, who served as First Consul during the Consulate years, launched numerous dynamic changes aimed at consolidating the central state and establishing his authoritarian power. He constructed a strong executive and an effective administration, ended the conflict with the Church, stabilized financial conditions, established law and order and crushed the royalist opposition, introduced legal uniformity through the Civil Code, implemented successfully military conscription, and formed a central secondary education system. Indeed, the Consulate period was one of the most dynamic periods of change in French history. While the formation of the Napoleonic authoritarian rule constituted a departure from the ideals of the French Revolution, many of his reform policies were a continuation of programs and changes launched during the Revolutionary decade. To consolidate his power, Bonaparte allied him self with the propertied classes, who triumphed during the Revolution, and bolstered their achievements. In 1799, most people accepted his rule or remained indifferent to the new regime. In 1804, Bonaparte’s power reached new heights and his decision to become Emperor was virtually unopposed. This chapter will discuss Napoleon’s authoritarian rule and the reform programs he launched to modernize France.

FROM CONSUL TO EMPEROR

The interim executive was charged with preparing a new constitution. The Brumairiens’ principal objective was to prevent the return of royalists and Jacobins to power, consolidate law and order, and assure the interests of the propertied classes. Those aims, they believed, could be achieved by establishing a strong central government. Bonaparte insisted on entrusting one of the three consuls, the First Consul, with extensive authority. The Constitution of Year VIII, proclaimed on 15 December 1799, 2 reflected Bonaparte’s will and was characterized by a powerful executive, a weak legislature, and the virtual elimination of popular sovereignty. Bonaparte became the First Consul and possessed much wider power than the other two consuls, who had merely “consultative votes.” In effect, Bonaparte was the only consul who initiated legislation; controlled public finance, internal security, defense, and foreign policy; and appointed public officials. The First Consul chose the other two junior consuls: Jean Cambacérès, a former moderate Convention deputy, who remained very

36 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

loyal to Napoleon until the end of his reign,3 and Charles Lebrun, who 
had served under the Bourbons. 
Bonaparte retained the seven ministries that had existed under the 
Directory: war, marine and colonies, finance, foreign relations, interior, 
police, and justice. A treasury ministry and a ministry of ecclesiastical 
affairs were added in 1801 and 1804, respectively. The ministers pos 
sessed little autonomy. They advised Bonaparte, executed the law, nomi 
nated administrators, and supervised departmental officials. Bonaparte 
appointed as ministers trusted advisers and experienced officials who 
had served under the Old Regime and during the Revolutionary period. 
The most prominent ministers included Charles Gaudin, the minister of 
finance, who served during the entire Napoleonic rule; Talleyrand, 
who ran foreign relations until 1807; Lucien Bonaparte, who held the 
ministry of interior and was replaced by Jean Chaptal; and Fouché, 
the notorious minister of police. 
The First Consul initiated legislation by submitting proposals to the 
Council of State. That body further epitomized the centralization of the 
new regime; 4 its 30 to 50 members were chosen by Bonaparte, who also 
presided over its sessions. The Council of State served as an advisory body 
to Bonaparte and drafted legislative bills that were then presented to the 
Legislature. The Constitution weakened the legislative branch by dividing 
it into three chambers, each having a different role, and by depriving it of 
initiating legislation. The first chamber, the Tribunate, which consisted of 
100 members over the age of 25, discussed bills but had no authority to 
vote on them. The Legislative Body, which comprised 300 members at 
least 30 years old, voted on the bills without discussing them. Members of 
both institutions were appointed by the Senate, the third body of the 
Legislature, whose main role was to “conserve” the Constitution by review 
ing the constitutionality of the legislative proposals. The Senate consisted 
of 80 members (by the end of the Empire the number increased to 140) 
over the age of 40, and included generals, bankers, bishops, top officials, 
and some intellectuals. They held office for life, were chosen by the 
Consuls, and were co-opted by material benefits. 
The Constitution emptied popular sovereignty of any substance. 
It established a three-tier electoral process that effectively undercut 
the participation of most voters in the electoral system and guaranteed 
a conservative outcome. While universal male suffrage was established, 
most voters voted solely for a communal list that comprised one-tenth of 
their number. The government selected local administrators from 
this list. Members of the communal list then chose a departmental list of 