

44 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

replaced to the satisfaction of Bonaparte and Pius VII, who wanted 
a docile episcopacy. The First Consul was authorized to nominate new 
bishops and the Pope invested them with spiritual authority. The bishops 
nominated the lower clergy, although they needed government approval. 
The clergy continued to be paid by the State and swore loyalty to the 
government. 
The Concordat was highly controversial in France. Royalists and 
counter-Revolutionary ecclesiastical leaders were enraged because it 
sanctioned many revolutionary changes and legitimized Bonaparte’s rule. 
Anti-clerical revolutionaries opposed the restoration of the Church and 
the Pope to a prominent position. Bonaparte unilaterally added to the 
Concordat the “Organic Articles,” a list of 77 provisions designed to restrict 
the powers of the Pope in France and confirm the State’s supremacy over 
the Church. The Organic Articles revived some Gallican traditions: publi 
cation of papal bulls and the activity of papal legates in France needed gov 
ernment approval, as did the creation of new parishes and religious 
holidays. The Articles required the higher clergy to reside in their diocese, 
allowing them to leave only with the government’s permission. There were 
to be ten archbishoprics, 60 bishoprics, and 3000 parishes – one for each 
canton. The Legislative Body approved the Concordat in April 1802. 
A Department of Religious Affairs, headed by Portalis, was instituted in the 
interior ministry. Subsequently, several new laws elevated the status of 
Catholicism; for example, Sunday became a holiday for state officials and 
the Gregorian Calendar was restored as of 1 January 1806. 
The Concordat preserved several important changes established by the 
Revolution, including religious pluralism, state control over the Church, 
and the permanency of the sale of Church property. Bonaparte benefited 
from the Concordat in many ways. His regime was recognized by the 
Pope, government authority over the Church was confirmed, and he 
could expect the clergy to support his policies. The schism that had 
divided the French Church since 1790 ended, thereby reducing domes 
tic tension. Church support for the royalist opposition ceased and the 
refractory bishops, an influential source of opposition to Bonaparte, were 
dismissed. Finally, Bonaparte consolidated landowners’ support for his 
regime by receiving papal recognition of the new land titles. As for 
the Pope, his main achievements were regaining some control over the 
French Church and restoring its unity. 
Napoleon was also concerned with French Jews, aiming to regulate 
their economic activities and religious practices in order to accelerate 
their assimilation. He believed that this would turn them into useful 

France 45 citizens. In September 1791, the French Revolution proclaimed full equality for French Jews. In 1806, responding to complaints about Jewish money lenders, Napoleon issued a one-year moratorium on debts to Jews in Alsace. He then convened an Assembly of Jewish Notables to discuss the compatibility between Jewish beliefs and the duties of Frenchmen, and to transform Jews into French citizens. In 1807, the authorities assembled the Grand Sanhedrin, consisting of rabbis and laymen, which declared that Jews would fulfil their duties like any French citizen. In 1808, the regime organized the Jews in regional committees, called con sistories, to run the practice of Judaism, appoint rabbis, and collect com munal taxes. A central consistory in Paris with a chief rabbi would govern the whole system. Another decree, known as “the infamous decree,” established restrictions on Jewish lenders. To accelerate assimilation, the government required Jews to assume family names.