

THE OPPOSITION

Bonaparte tolerated no resistance to his policies. “There must be no opposition,” he commented. “What is government? Nothing, if it does not have public opinion on its side.” The formation of the Bonapartist authoritarian regime did not go unchallenged, however. During the Consulate years, the First Consul faced opposition from three groups: the liberal elite, former Jacobins, and the royalists. The liberal opposition consisted of middle-class intellectuals, support ers of Enlightenment ideas. 9 They were strong advocates of civic liberties and vociferously opposed Bonaparte’s rising dictatorial power. Many of

France 39 them, most notably Marie-Joseph Chénier, Pierre Daunou, Jean-Baptist Say, and the most outstanding among them, Benjamin Constant, were members of the Tribunate. Those “Ideologues,” as Bonaparte derogato rily labeled them, used the Tribunate to criticize the government and challenge various legislative proposals, such as the Concordat, the for mation of the Legion of Honor, and the restoration of slavery in the colonies. On a few occasions, the government was forced to alter and even withdraw its projects. Another prominent name in the liberal camp was Germaine de Staël, the daughter of Jacques Necker. Through her writings and her salon in Paris, she sharply criticized Bonaparte’s dicta torial ambitions. But the “Ideologues” lacked popular support and remained an ineffective opposition. In 1802, Bonaparte purged Constant and other opponents from the Tribunate and curtailed the powers of that body. In 1803, he exiled de Staël from Paris. While the liberals opposed Bonaparte’s regime through speeches and writings, other opponents tried violent means to topple Bonaparte. During the Consulate, assassination attempts and conspiracies against Bonaparte proliferated. It was primarily the royalists who tried those methods. The only attempt on Bonaparte’s life that almost succeeded happened on Christmas Eve 1800, when a bomb (machine infernal) exploded at rue Saint Niçaise while the First Consul was on his way to the opera. Although Fouché assured Bonaparte that royalists were behind that attempt, the First Consul exploited it to crush the left opposition and ordered the deporta tion of 130 Jacobin activists from France ( January 1801). The royalists posed the greatest threat to the Bonapartist regime. They supported the restoration of the Bourbon dynasty to the French throne. But Bonaparte rejected this aspiration and wrote Louis that his return to France would require him “to march on 100,000 corpses.” 10 The royalists constituted a particularly dangerous menace to the Consulate since they enjoyed widespread popular support in rural areas in western France and were assisted by the émigrés and England. The insurgency of the chouans in western France began under the Convention, largely as a protest against conscription.11 In 1799, during the Second Coalition, the chouannerie expanded. Armed bands of chouans, many of whom were deserters, attacked merchants, government officials, and buyers of national property. The clergy also contributed to the counter-Revolutionary agitation. Clearly, Bonaparte could not tolerate those violations of law and order and carried out a merciless military campaign to eradicate the chouans. He also undermined support for the counter-Revolutionaries among Catholics by signing the Concordat. The British stopped their