

30 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

guarantee its success and, equally important, establish French hegemony 
over Europe. 
The Continental Blockade hurt the British economy, which depended 
heavily on exports. In 1805, for example, one-third of all British exports 
went to Europe. The years 1808 and 1811 were particularly rough for 
Britain. Especially harmful was the loss of the Baltic trade, which supplied 
Britain with grain and vital naval products like tar and timber. Trade with 
Spain and the Italian Peninsula dropped substantially as well. British 
export of colonial goods to Europe was crippled. The blockade hit 
hard at British cotton, wool, and metallurgical industries. Production 
declined and piles of unsold textile goods accumulated in British facto 
ries. A shortage of raw material closed silk workshops in London. 
Unemployment increased and wages declined, particularly in the indus 
trial Midlands and the North, provoking social unrest, most notably the 
destruction of machines by the Luddite movement. 
Yet Napoleon failed to ruin Britain’s economy or force its government 
to sue for peace. Britain relentlessly continued to pursue its war efforts in 
Iberia despite its economic difficulties. Finding new markets to offset the 
losses in Europe helped Britain weather the storm. Lacking naval power, 
Napoleon was unable to prevent Britain from exporting its products 
to other continents. Most important for British exports were South 
American markets. British exports to South America increased from 
£8 million in 1805 to £18 million in 1809. 28 Britain also increased 
its exports to its own colonies, the Eastern Mediterranean, and the 
United States until 1810. 
Not surprisingly, Europeans resented the blockade because of its 
adverse effects on them. Consumers were deprived of British manufac 
tured goods as well as colonial staples like coffee and sugar. More signif 
icantly, the blockade harmed European textile industrialists by denying 
them essential raw materials like cotton and indigo. The blockade 
destroyed overseas trade and caused a drastic decline in maritime activity 
in European harbors, hurting merchants, industrialists, ship builders, 
and port communities. In the words of François Crouzet, “most of them 
[ports] had lost their position as international entrepôts and had become 
mere regional ports. As for their industries, they were relatively far less 
active.” 29 The blockade also hurt landowners who depended on the 
export of grain and other products to Britain and who witnessed 
a decline in agricultural prices. The Empire’s exports declined steadily 
from 456 million francs in 1806 to 330 million in 1809.30 At the same time, 
however, the Continental System benefited textile and metal industrialists 

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 31

in various parts of the Empire, including France, Belgium, and the 
Rhineland, by eliminating British competition. 
Extensive smuggling of British goods into Europe also helped Britain 
withstand the economic impact of the blockade. Napoleon was never able 
to hermetically seal the European coastline to British products, despite his 
numerous military and political moves. Widespread corruption among 
officials, who ignored the blockade’s rules in return for bribes, further 
undermined the blockade. British products entered Europe through 
many areas, including Iberia, Holland, Heligoland, Malta, and the 
Adriatic Sea. In an effort to fight smugglers, the Emperor tightened the 
blockade through the Fontainebleau Decree (October 1810), which stiff 
ened penalties, established rewards for information leading to the dis 
covery of smuggled goods, and, most importantly, ordered British goods 
to be publicly burned throughout the Continent. The authorities 
implemented this order rather harshly; between 16 November and 
3 December 1810, they made 56 bonfires in 45 locations. 31 Napoleon also 
increased the number of imperial troops and French customs officials in 
major ports. 
The French government encouraged the production of substitutes for 
colonial staples: chicory for coffee, beet sugar for cane sugar, woad for 
indigo. Cultivation of cotton was attempted in southern France and Italy. 
The quality of the substitutes was inferior, however, and the quantities 
produced were insufficient for Europe’s needs. In sum, demand for 
British and colonial goods remained high; France did not possess 
enough economic power to replace Britain and its colonies as the 
supplier of Europe. These shortcomings and the damage the blockade 
inflicted on the French economy caused Napoleon to compromise his 
own system. In 1809, he began selling special licenses to French mer 
chants, allowing them to trade with Britain, and in July 1810, he institu 
tionalized that license system through the Saint Cloud decree. Export 
licenses were designed to help landowners and merchants who 
depended on exports, particularly grain, wine, and silk. The sale of 
licenses also meant a source of income for the state and augmented cus 
toms revenues. Clearly, economic needs prevailed over political consid 
erations. In August and September 1810, Napoleon proclaimed the 
Trianon Tariffs, authorizing the entry of British colonial products into 
the Empire and imposing exorbitant duties on them. 
Officially, the Continental Blockade continued until 1813. But on 
31 December 1810, Alexander I inflicted a major blow on the Napoleonic 
economic warfare when he reopened Russian ports to British trade and 