

Land grants (dotations)

After 1806, Napoleon made numerous land grants, located in states like Westphalia, Hanover, the Duchy of Warsaw, and the Italian Peninsula,

28 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe to favorite military officers and public servants.24 Those land grants consisted of royal domains of toppled rulers or Church lands seized by Napoleon. By 1814, the Emperor made 4994 such awards, totaling 30 million francs. The largest part went to the military: 824 generals received 1261 grants worth over 16 million francs. They provided the recipients with economic security and social prestige and helped tie the interests of the new imperial elite to the future of the Empire. The largest recipients included Napoleon’s sisters, Pauline and Elisa, and his favorite marshals, Berthier, Ney, and Davout. In addition to the large grants, there were numerous small awards in the form of income deriving from Napoleon’s confiscation abroad. These dotations were exempt from taxa tion, thereby shrinking the tax base of the satellite states. In the case of the Duchy of Warsaw, the loss amounted to 20 percent of the state’s rev enues. These land grants also infringed on the sovereignty of local rulers and constituted one more proof of the control that Napoleon wielded in his satellite territories. Significantly, the receivers of these estates were able to retain the traditional seigneurial fees, thereby defying Code Napoleon. In the words of Stuart Woolf, “No better example could be given of the unresolvable contradictions between the modernizing ideals of integration of the French administrative class and the practice of exploitation that accompanied the expansion of the Empire.” 25

The Continental Blockade

The establishment of the Continental Blockade against Britain was the most important Napoleonic policy after 1806. On 21 October 1806, Napoleon issued the Berlin Decree, declaring that Britain was in a state of blockade. The decree prohibited all trade between Britain and Europe and ordered the seizure of goods originating from Britain or its colonies and the incarceration of all English subjects on the Continent. Britain was the most powerful and consistent enemy of France, and Napoleon forced the Continent to help him win his conflict with the British. By closing European markets to British exports, Napoleon aimed to stifle British commerce and industry, the two pillars of the British economy, bankrupt the government, create unemployment, and provoke social unrest in Britain. Ultimately, Napoleon expected that the ensuing crisis would hamper the capacity of Britain to subsidize anti-French coalitions and force Britain to sue for peace on his terms. Another important objec tive of the blockade was the protection of French industry against British competition and the establishment of France as the dominant economic

The Janus Face of Napoleon’s Rule 29 power in Europe. This goal was compatible with Napoleon’s policy of forcing his satellite states to favor the French economy. The economic warfare against Britain had its roots during the Revolutionary decade. The Convention and the Directory had prohibited British trade with France and its satellites, a policy that continued under the Consulate and the early Empire. Two important factors stimulated Napoleon to declare the blockade at the end of 1806: the defeat at Trafalgar made it abundantly clear that a French invasion of Britain was unfeasible; and secondly, the expansion of Napoleonic domination in Europe in 1805–6 and control of the northern coast of Europe, in par ticular, following the defeat of Prussia, enabled the Emperor to impose such an unprecedented system on the Continent. Soon the economic warfare escalated. The British, who had begun their own blockade against the French Empire in May 1806, retaliated against the Berlin Decree with the Orders in Council ( January and November 1807), order ing neutral ships to sail first to British ports and pay duties before con tinuing to the Continent. Napoleon countered with the Milan Decrees (November and December 1807), ordering the confiscation of ships that had stopped in British harbors. This escalation clearly rendered impossi ble maritime trade by neutral countries. The Continental Blockade became the linchpin of French international policy. 26 Extending the blockade to the entire European coastline and assuring its effective implementation became the principal goals of Napoleon’s foreign policy after 1806. Yet aside from launching economic warfare against Britain, instituting the blockade, as Paul Schroeder put it, aimed at establishing “[French] political control over the states of Europe, allies and neutrals alike.”27 In other words, imposing the blockade went hand in hand with Napoleon’s European imperial plans. To achieve both goals Napoleon used military and political means: he exerted pressure on other states to join the new system, invaded countries that refused to enforce the blockade and changed their governments, altered boundaries of his satellite states, annexed territories to the French Empire, and created new political entities. Under French pressure Russia, Prussia, Denmark, and Spain joined the Continental Blockade in 1807 while Austria adhered to it in 1810. The crowning of his brother Louis as the King of Holland (1806), the invasion into Portugal (1807) and Spain (1808), the annexation of the Papal State (1809) and Holland and the Hanseatic cities (1810), the formation of the Illyrian Provinces (1809), and finally, the invasion of the Grande Armée into Russia (1812) were all motivated by Napoleon’s desire to expand the blockade,