

40 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe financial support of the rebels when they realized that the movement was growing weaker.12 In 1802, the chouan revolt came to an end. When they recognized that their cause was losing, royalists Georges Cadoudal, an ex chouan commander, and General Charles Pichegru led a conspiracy to abduct Bonaparte and restore the Bourbons. In late 1803, the authorities discovered the conspiracy and arrested the accomplices. Pichegru was found dead in his prison cell and the authorities sentenced 20 plotters, among them Cadoudal, to death.

THE SOCIAL ELITE

Along with his unforgiving treatment of the opposition, Napoleon also 
exerted major efforts in building up support for his regime among 
the French population. He understood that in order to stay in power he 
needed to expand his social base of support beyond the Brumairiens. 
Gaining the backing of the notables, whom the Napoleonic regime itself 
helped to define and promote, constituted a key component in his drive 
to extend support for his government. 
This modern, progressive elite of wealth and talent demonstrated 
openness and left behind the privilege, exclusivity, and social pretension 
that characterized the nobility of the ancien régime. 13 Landownership 
constituted the main feature of the approximately 100,000 notables, 
whom Napoleon labeled the “masses of granite.”14 Some originated from 
the old nobility, although most came from the ranks of the Revolutionary 
bourgeoisie and the wealthy farmers who increased their holdings during 
the Revolutionary decade by purchasing confiscated land that had 
belonged to the Church and the émigrés. In the words of Jean Tulard, 
“At the beginning of the century, an elite could not conceive its own 
existence without landed property. It was still the possession of land that 
determined the hierarchy.” 15 Land provided security at a time of disas 
trous inflation of the assignats and constituted a source of social prestige 
and promotion. Aside from property owners, the notables included local 
administrators, officials in civil administration, free professionals, and 
wealthy entrepreneurs. 
The notables constituted Napoleon’s principal pillar of support. They 
wielded considerable local influence and helped him to implement his 
policies in their communities. Napoleon preserved their social and mate 
rial gains, making them the main beneficiaries of his rule. The French 
Consul made sure that the titles to their recently purchased property 

France 41

were recognized by the returning émigrés and the Church. Napoleon 
nominated them to administrative and judicial positions, assured their 
property rights through Code Napoleon, restored law and order, and 
guaranteed their sons education in the lycées. The notables continued to 
dominate French society until the 1848 Revolution. 
Along with his recognition of the power of the notables, Napoleon also 
created a new imperial nobility. Early on he took steps to accommodate 
the old nobility, primarily in order to weaken their support for the 
Bourbons. Shortly after the coup, the new regime rescinded two recent 
directorial laws that harmed ex-nobles: the Law of Hostages and the 
forced loan on the rich. The former threatened the arrest of relatives of 
émigrés and nobles in subversive regions. In October 1800, Bonaparte also 
lifted the sequestration of unsold property of émigrés and in April 1802, 
granted amnesty to émigrés provided they returned to France before 
23 September and agreed to swear loyalty to the new Constitution. Only 
the most extreme émigrés, not more than 1000, were denied amnesty. 
Émigrés who were able to recover their unsold property, as well as many 
nobles who never left France, remained the wealthiest landowners in 
their community, thereby regaining prestige and local influence. 
Napoleon continued to court the former nobles and appointed them to 
various high posts. One-third of his ministers and at least one-fifth of his 
generals were of noble extraction. 16 
In May 1802, Bonaparte took an important step toward the formation 
of a French aristocracy when he founded the Legion of Honor. It signi 
fied a departure from the Revolutionary policies that had abolished all 
exclusive orders and titles. That institution “was meant to consecrate the 
preeminent place of the army in society.”17 Of 32,000 members that 
Napoleon introduced into the Legion of Honor, only 1500 were civilians. 
Endowing senators with senatories, which included a residential palace 
and a substantial annual income, constituted another step toward the 
aristocratization of French society. Upon the creation of the Empire in 
1804, Napoleon granted the title of Prince and an annual endowment to 
each member of his family. Beginning in 1806, Napoleon awarded mili 
tary officers with hereditary fiefs in the Italian Peninsula, the Grand 
Duchy of Warsaw, and German states. 
In March 1808, Napoleon proclaimed the imperial nobility, establish 
ing a hierarchy of princes, dukes, counts, barons, and knights, and 
authorizing its members to possess a coat of arms. Through the imperial 
nobility, the Emperor aimed at creating “an elite with a vested interest in 
the preservation of the Empire and the Bonapartist dynasty.” 18 It also 