

STATE ADMINISTRATION

An essential component of the Napoleonic state was a streamlined, cen tral, and uniform administration designed to carry out government orders efficiently. The Reign of Terror instituted a centralized machinery that had persisted under the Directory. Bonaparte retained the Revolutionary division of France into departments; in 1799, France was divided into 98 departments, a number that steadily rose, reaching 130 at the peak of France’s territorial expansion in 1810. The First Consul appointed a hierarchy of officials to run the departments, elevating state centralization and administrative unity to new heights. The government’s chief representative in the department was the prefect, “the hallmark of his centralizing drive, and his prime instrument for pacifying the coun try.” 26 Many had served in Revolutionary assemblies while others had held positions in civil administration, the army, and the legal professions. Most prefects originated from the bourgeoisie, although Napoleon also appointed old nobles to this position. The prefects, who were sub ordinate to the Interior Minister, had extensive power; in the words of Jacques Godechot, the prefect was “a miniature emperor” in his department.27 They executed government orders and were responsible for public order, conscription quotas, a stable food supply, public works, budgetary issues, and proper tax collection. Prefects also provided the Interior Minister with vital information about the department’s condi tion. To assure their commitment to the State and prevent prefects from

46 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

developing local loyalties, Napoleon never appointed prefects to serve in 
their native departments, and he replaced them every few years. Prefects 
were assisted by a Council of Prefecture and a General Council, which 
convened for only 15 days a year to allocate taxes. They were also aided 
by a growing bureaucracy. 
Each department was divided into four or five arrondissements adminis 
tered by sub-prefects who were nominated by Napoleon from among the 
notable lists. At the municipal level, mayors ran cities and towns with the 
aid of advisory councils. Mayors of large cities were selected from 
the notables by Napoleon while prefects nominated mayors of small 
towns with fewer than 5000 inhabitants. 

THE POLICE

Securing law and order and suppressing opposition to his rule were two of Napoleon’s most important goals. The Ministry of General Police, which he inherited from the Revolutionary period, was designed to accomplish those objectives. In the words of Michael Sibalis, the police “did exercise tight control over all public expressions of opinion, did pay a network of secret agents to keep the nation under surveillance, and did detain the regime’s enemies in special state prisons without charge or trial.” 28 The Directory established the Police Ministry in January 1796, yet it remained ineffective until summer 1799 when Fouché became the Minister of General Police. An ex-terrorist, Fouché was in charge of the police for eight years (1800–02; 1804–10) and created a formidable machinery that constituted the first modern political police.29 Fouché himself possessed considerable power and was feared even by Napoleon. In 1802, Bonaparte abolished the Ministry of Police because of Fouché’s opposition to the Concordat and to Bonaparte’s bid for a life consulship. Soon, however, the royalist conspiracy of Cadoudal unfolded and Napoleon revived the General Ministry of Police ( July 1804), entrusting Fouché with broader authority. With the assistance of Pierre-Marie Desmarest, the head of the secret police, Fouché reorganized the police, centralizing it and bolstering his control over its personnel. He divided the French Empire into four dis tricts, three of them headed by councillors of state who reported directly to him. Paris and its surroundings constituted the fourth district, whose Prefect of Police possessed considerable power and was largely independ ent, reporting directly to Napoleon. In the major cities, Fouché appointed general police commissioners who were responsible to him. Napoleon was