

France 37 one-tenth of their number, and the authorities selected departmental officials from that list of notables. Finally, the departmental list chose one-tenth of its members for a national list of candidates eligible for pub lic office. The Senate selected tribunes and legislators from among these national notables. The Constitution of Year VIII made no mention of citizens’ rights, except for the prohibition of nocturnal house search, thereby further stressing the authoritarian nature of the new regime. To legitimize his power and the new political system, Bonaparte submitted the Constitution of Year VIII to a plebiscite. It gave lip service to popular will. In February 1800, the government announced that three million people had voted in favor while only 1562 rejected the constitu tion. In reality, Lucien Bonaparte falsified the plebiscite’s results, doubling the “yes” votes. 5 Significantly, most eligible voters chose not to vote, demonstrating their indifference to the new regime. Indeed, the plebiscite did not change the fact that the Constitution of Year VIII was imposed by force. Many former supporters of the Revolution approved that constitution because they were weary of the instability of the Directory years and entrusted the protection of their achievements to a general who would soon become a dictator.6 The establishment of Bonaparte as First Consul laid the foundation for his dictatorship. During the first two years of the Consulate, Bonaparte took advantage of his powerful position and introduced legal and institu tional changes designed to strengthen his rule. Most notably, he crippled the Tribunate, the most independent body of the Consulate period, by purging its most prominent members, who were critical of him, and by dividing that body into three sections. He also reduced the power of the Council of State, eliminating its control over the final drafting of laws. Bonaparte succeeded in changing the public mood from indifference to widespread support for his rule by achieving religious pacification through the Concordat, guaranteeing the property rights of buyers of Church land, and by ending the Second Coalition War. Bonaparte’s immense popularity explains the overwhelming majority that ratified his elevation to Consul for Life (August 1802). 7 The Senate declared the Constitution of Year X, which increased his power considerably. Bonaparte was authorized to name his successor and the other two consuls, conclude treaties, and select justices of the peace. Bonaparte also received the power to suspend the Constitution, disperse the Tribunate and the Legislative Body, and over rule their decisions, and legislate without first submitting new laws to the Council of State. The new constitution also changed the electoral system, entrusting more power to the wealthy. Cantonal assemblies selected

38 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

district and departmental colleges from among the 600 largest taxpayers 
in each department, who in turn nominated candidates for vacancies in 
the legislative bodies. The First Consul wielded much influence on the 
colleges through the appointment of their presidents and his ability to 
add members to them. In sum, as Jean Tulard concluded, the Constitu 
tion of Year X transformed the republic of Brumaire into a monarchy in 
all but name.8 
Less than two years later, on 18 May 1804, the Senate drew up the 
Constitution of the Year XII, proclaiming Napoleon as Emperor. Using 
the royalist conspiracy against Napoleon, the authorities decided to 
transform the Consulate into a hereditary Empire, thereby establishing 
the Napoleonic regime on a more permanent foundation. A plebiscite 
confirmed Napoleon as an Emperor, once again by a huge majority. On 
2 December 1804, with Pope Pius VII present, Napoleon and Josephine 
were crowned at the Cathedral of Notre-Dame in Paris in an ostentatious 
ceremony that was immortalized by the painter David. 
The formation of the hereditary Empire cemented the dictatorship of 
Napoleon, who found it unnecessary to call for more plebiscites. The 
moribund Tribunate became useless and was suppressed in August 1807. 
Likewise, the Legislative Body lost any power; its sessions became more 
rare, and after 1812 it ceased convening. The Senate remained completely 
subservient to Napoleon. The formation of a hereditary Empire was 
designed to discourage plots and internal opposition against Napoleon 
and strengthen the foundation of the Napoleonic rule. Externally, the 
imperial crown was intended to elevate Napoleon from the status of a 
general who seized power illegally to a monarch equal to other European 
dynasties. 