

France 47

highly interested in issues of law and order and police activities and met 
often with Fouché. 
The police arrested common criminals and smugglers, supervised 
highways and public places, checked workers’ passbooks (livret), and ran 
prisons. Yet Fouché’s primary goals were to repress any political opposi 
tion to Napoleon and to uncover conspiracies. He established a network 
of informers and agents throughout the Empire, spying on dissidents. He 
kept detailed files on thousands of citizens, including ministers, generals, 
and writers. The Ministry of Police was also in charge of censorship.30 
The French Revolution eliminated restrictions on printing, and in 1790, 
335 journals appeared in Paris alone.31 Napoleon tolerated no criticism, 
however. He closed down 60 of the 73 newspapers in the capital and 
ordered the rest to refrain from criticizing the government. In 1811, 
Jean-Marie Savary, Fouché’s successor, suppressed most of the remaining 
Parisian papers, allowing only four to continue to appear, with merely 
one newspaper per department.32 The bureau de presse in the Police 
Ministry was in charge of censoring the press; no political news could be 
published without the censor’s approval, while editors had to be con 
firmed by the government. Criticism of the Grande Armée and praise of 
the Bourbons or England were prohibited. The Moniteur, although pri 
vately owned, became the official paper of the regime. Printers and book 
dealers needed government licenses to operate and their activities were 
regulated. The government stopped the circulation of “dangerous” 
books. On the other hand, authors of books favorable to the regime 
received financial awards. 

THE JUDICIARY

Along with the new administration, the Constitution of Year VIII also estab lished the judiciary structure, 33 which Bonaparte viewed as essential for the maintenance of law and order. He followed the system formed during the Revolution, although as time progressed Bonaparte’s control over the judicial system increased. The hierarchical court structure certainly suited the centralized structure of the Napoleonic State. The First Consul and the Senate appointed their personnel from among departmental notables, except for justices of peace. All judges, aside from the justices of peace, held their office for life, which gave them independence, yet they depended on the government for their salaries and promotion. Bonaparte also appointed other court officials like notaries and procurators.

48 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Initially, each commune had a justice of peace who was elected for three years. They were the lowest level of justice available in small towns and were designed to resolve minor disputes promptly. In 1801, their number was reduced from 6000 to nearly half after their jurisdiction was changed from communal to the larger cantonal jurisdiction. Each arrondissement received a Court of First Instance, dealing with civil and correctional jurisdiction. Twenty-nine courts of appeal were established, on the average one for every four departments. Along with a criminal court in each department, they were supervised by the Court of Cassation. The law also provided for the retention of commercial, mili tary, and maritime courts. In February 1801, the State established several “special courts” to combat brigandage. In 1802, the election of the jus tices of peace was abolished, and from then on they were appointed by Bonaparte from a list of two candidates submitted to him by the Cantonal Assembly. As Emperor, Napoleon was also given the right to appoint the heads of the Court of Cassation. In October 1807, a senatus consultum enabled Napoleon to purge the membership of the courts, which he used to get rid of former Republican supporters.