

50 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

a legal contract on her own. The Code also made it easier for men to 
obtain a divorce than for women. 
Owing to its simple, concise, and coherent style, the Civil Code had 
immense influence and attraction outside France. Napoleon used the 
Code as a tool of domination and ordered its introduction in his satellite 
states,39 including Belgium, the Netherlands, parts of Germany, Italy, 
and Switzerland. It aided in rallying the local propertied classes to 
Napoleonic rule and helped to spread Revolutionary ideas throughout 
Europe. In the words of Godechot, “It constituted the most tangible and 
the most durable trace of the revolutionary expansion.”40 
The Civil Code was followed by other codes: the Code of Civil 
Procedure (1806); the Commercial Code (1807), which dealt with issues 
like bankruptcy law and commercial disputes; the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (1808), which retained trial by jury; and the Penal Code 
(1810), which preserved capital punishment and long prison terms with 
hard labor. 

MILITARY CONSCRIPTION

No other issue aroused as much opposition to the Napoleonic regime as military conscription. The Revolutionary governments laid the founda tion for national conscription. In March 1793, the Convention called up 300,000 new draftees, and in August it proclaimed the levée en masse. In September 1798, the Directory launched annual conscription through the Jourdan–Delbrel Law. Men between 20 and 25 years of age were eligible for four years of military service; exempt were married men, widowers with children, and the handicapped. Later, Napoleon author ized hiring substitutes, which favored the well-to-do. The Directory failed, however, to implement the conscription law effectively. Napoleon, on the other hand, put teeth into the conscription law, turning annual con scription into a routine and thereby amassing a huge army. Conscription became the most contested policy between State and society. 41 It fell largely to the rural population, which was unaccustomed to military service, disrupting its traditional way of life and separating recruits from their families and farms for years. It is no wonder, then, that conscription met with widespread opposition, resulting in tens of thousands of conscripts evading the draft. In the words of Woloch, “a general resistance to conscription remained the foremost domestic challenge to the Napoleonic state.”42 Desertion and draft dodging were

France 51

the most common methods of avoiding military service. In some regions 
they reached epidemic proportions. Deserters frequently received assis 
tance from family and friends. They drained military manpower and 
supplies, stealing clothing and weapons. A number of deserters joined 
brigand bands, although most tried to resume civilian life. Some eligible 
draftees married prior to the annual draft while others disqualified them 
selves from the draft through self-mutilation. Sometimes the well-to-do 
received undeserved medical exemptions through bribes. Clearly, the 
State could not tolerate such a challenge to one of its most important 
policies, thus it enacted harsh measures to suppress resistance to con 
scription. 43 The authorities tightened draft regulations, centralized the 
conscription bureaucracy, and imposed stiff penalties on fugitives. They 
billeted soldiers with families of deserters. The gendarmerie, national 
guard, and mobile columns were expanded and sent to pursue draft 
dodgers. The government also tried to lure deserters back to military 
service through amnesties. 
Ultimately, the Napoleonic regime won the conscription struggle. The 
number of refractory draftees declined in the final years of Napoleon’s 
rule and the draft proceeded more rapidly and smoothly. Indeed, the 
draft became an annual routine that most French learnt to accept. 
During 1800–14 Napoleon drafted more than two million conscripts. 44 
Enforcing conscription and strengthening its machinery contributed 
considerably to the build-up of the State’s power. Ultimately, it expanded 
state control over the everyday life of French citizens. Conscription offi 
cials penetrated remote communities and compelled their inhabitants to 
obey state laws. In sum, through the draft, more than any other policy, 
the central State increasingly became a reality the governed were unable 
to ignore. In the long run, military service was also an important way of 
promoting patriotic feelings and “making peasants into Frenchmen.”45 
For many young men, recruitment was the first time they came in contact 
with the State, heard nationalist propaganda, and met soldiers from 
other provinces, all of which enabled them to transcend their provincial 
identity and start viewing themselves as Frenchmen. 