

FINANCIAL REFORMS

The Directory left Bonaparte a legacy of chaotic financial conditions, including public debt, deficits, inflation, and depreciated paper money.46 A rise in prices of basic necessities provoked widespread discontent.

52 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

The Directory initiated several reforms to overcome the financial crisis. 
It removed the assignats from circulation and reimbursed creditors two 
thirds of the debt through bonds they could use to purchase national 
property. In practice, it amounted to writing off two-thirds of the national 
debt, which exasperated creditors. The Directory also proclaimed new 
indirect taxes and tried to improve collection of direct taxes. Yet property 
assessments were based on old, inaccurate surveys, thereby rendering 
taxes arbitrary, hence tax arrears remained an ongoing problem. The 
government also imposed a forced loan on the wealthiest citizens, but 
due to opposition, it recovered only a fraction of the amount it had 
hoped to collect. The insufficient internal revenues meant that the 
Directory depended upon contributions from occupied countries, which 
financed more than one-fourth of the 1798–9 budgets. 47 
The shaky fiscal conditions and the unpopular financial policies 
considerably weakened the Directory and contributed to its collapse. In 
late 1799, the state coffers were virtually empty.48 Bonaparte needed to 
stabilize fiscal conditions quickly. Finance Minister Martin Gaudin man 
aged public revenues, particularly tax collection, while a Ministry of the 
Treasury ran expenditures. Bonaparte aimed at augmenting state income 
and restoring public confidence in the financial system, particularly 
among the propertied classes. He proceeded with considerable caution, 
preserving noncontroversial parts of the Directory’s financial structure. 
The main financial innovations under Napoleon pertained to the credit 
system and the establishment of a more centralized and rigorous finan 
cial administration. 
Military expenses constituted the largest expenditure, amounting to 
more than half of the budget. Between 1805 and 1810, military costs aver 
aged 350 million francs annually, but with the Russian campaign in 1812, 
they jumped to 600 million. 49 Marine expenses reached 100–200 million 
annually. Public works rose from 25 million francs in 1803 to 154 million 
in 1811. The ministries of Foreign Relations, Finances, Treasury, Interior, 
Justice, and Religion had smaller budgets. 
Taxes constituted the principal source of state revenues. The First 
Consul added no new direct taxes to the ones set up during the 
Revolution. The land tax, created in 1791, was the principal direct tax, 
providing almost three-fourths of the government’s income from direct 
taxes. 50 Landowners complained that it was excessive and inequitably 
distributed, forcing Napoleon to reduce it. To establish real-estate tax 
on an equitable and uniform basis, Napoleon launched a land survey 
(September 1807).51 The French cadaster coincided with land surveys in 