

France 53

the Kingdoms of Holland and Italy. It was a gigantic operation that 
progressed slowly; of 47,000 communities, only 10,000 had been assessed 
by the end of the Empire. 
Tax on personal property was paid primarily by urban residents for 
their domestic servants, horses, carriages, and chimneys, and provoked 
much resentment among the well-to-do. The yield from personal prop 
erty tax diminished substantially after September 1803, as more and 
more municipalities replaced it with higher duties on consumer goods, 
to the benefit of the wealthy. Taxes on doors and windows and a license 
fee paid by entrepreneurs completed the list of direct taxes. 
State income from direct taxes was diminishing, and in 1813 it 
amounted to a mere 29 percent of the total revenues. To compensate for 
the declining revenues from direct taxes, the Napoleonic authorities 
gradually increased indirect taxes, restoring pre-Revolutionary tributes, 
despite their detrimental effect on the lower classes. In Napoleon’s opin 
ion, “the only quality of a good fiscal system was its yield. What had to be 
found were various taxes that were easy to apply and automatically pro 
ductive. The indirect tax under these conditions became the ideal tax.” 52 
The Revolutionary government had abolished many unpopular indirect 
taxes, most notably the salt gabelle. The Directory imposed duties on 
tobacco, playing cards, carriages, silverware, and alcohol. Napoleon 
increased alcohol duties several times. After Austerlitz he felt secure 
enough to create new indirect taxes and increase old ones. Particularly 
significant was the restoration of the hated salt tax (April 1806). In 
December 1810, the government reestablished state monopoly of the 
manufacturing and trade of tobacco. Those changes quadrupled rev 
enues from indirect taxes between 1806 and 1812. A third group of 
revenues consisted of customs, stamp fees, registry taxes, the lottery, and 
the post. The State also continued to draw income from the sale of 
national property. 
The principal innovation of the Napoleonic tax policies, however, was 
the establishment of an efficient tax-collection apparatus. 53 Under the 
Directory, tax collection was largely ineffective due to the absence of spe 
cialized tax receivers and the lack of government control. Soon after the 
coup of Brumaire, Gaudin created a new departmental collection appa 
ratus in each arrondissement. Collectors in towns where contributions 
exceeded 15,000 francs were appointed by the First Consul. Napoleon 
also increased the personnel engaged in indirect tax collection. In 1804, 
the authorities created a central body to levy the duties on alcohol, 
tobacco, playing cards, and carriages. 

54 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

In the monetary sphere, the Napoleonic innovations were designed to place the French currency on a uniform basis. In April 1795, the Directory had established the franc as the national currency and had fixed its metallic composition. Yet monetary disorder persisted; the old livre and foreign coins continued to circulate and shortage of species was rampant. Napoleon drew a lesson from the disastrous experience of the assignats and refused to issue paper money, basing French currency on metallic currency.54 In March 1803, the authorities established a new monetary standard, the franc de germinal, and regulated its content, size, and weight. For the first time, France possessed a currency whose real and face values matched. The new French currency became one of the strongest in Europe and lasted for the next 125 years. Tied to the monetary stabilization were the Napoleonic reforms in the area of public credit. The French ruler refused to borrow since he feared repeating the ruinous experience of the Old Regime. At the same time, Napoleon could not ignore the issue of credit since taxes were insufficient to cover all the regime’s expenses and because he had inherited debt from the previous governments. Founding the Bank of France constituted the most important reform in the area of credit. 55 The French Consul aimed at establishing a national bank that would furnish credit to the State and to entrepreneurs. Formed in February 1800, the Bank of France was privately owned and possessed an initial capital of 30 million francs. In April 1803, following a period of financial instability, the government increased the bank’s capital to 45 million francs and granted it the exclu sive right to issue bank notes. Later, the authorities doubled the bank’s capital to 90 million francs. In 1808, the Bank of France was authorized to set up branches in other cities. With the growing military expenses, the Treasury constantly resorted to short-term loans from the Bank of France. Yet the improvement in the French financial organization and the increase in revenues were insufficient to cover all the public expenses due to the escalating military costs. It was only thanks to taxes and requisitions from occupied territories, along with war contributions paid by vanquished enemies, that the Napoleonic regime was able to reduce the deficit.