

56 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe their mothers. Public education does not suit them, as they are not called into public life; manners are everything for them; marriage is their whole destination.”60 In May 1802, Antoine Fourcroy, a celebrated chemist and member of the Council of State, presented a program that laid the foun dation for a new educational system. The chief objective of the law of 1802 was the creation of 45 lycées, designed to train primarily sons of the well-to-do for state service. The four that opened in Paris were the largest; the Lycée Imperial had 1000 students while the Lycée Bonaparte taught 800.61 Napoleon aimed at regulating every aspect of secondary educa tion. As he put it, he wanted to be able to look at a clock at any time of day and know exactly what every pupil in France was studying. The cur riculum consisted of Letters and Science. The authorities nominated both teachers and administrators and controlled the process of student admission. They also provided 6400 scholarships, 2400 of them to sons of government officials and military officers. The remaining 4000 were filled through competition, although in reality preference was given to sons of wealthy families. 62 Military discipline prevailed in the lycées; stu dents wore uniforms, were divided into “companies,” and held ranks. Besides the lycées, there were also secondary schools run by the munic ipalities and the Catholic Church. Many bourgeois citizens resented the military regimentation and the irreligious environment in the lycées, and preferred to enroll their sons in these schools. In 1813, an official report indicated that 68,000 pupils studied in the lycées versus 47,000 in private institutions. This competition and the absence of uniformity among the different types of schools stimulated Napoleon to organize a new body, the Imperial University, a corporation of teachers “charged exclusively with teaching and public education throughout the Empire” in order “to direct political and moral opinions.” This central educational authority was designed to enhance uniformity and obedience to the Napoleonic regime. A 144-article decree, issued in March 1808, placed all secondary schools under its authority. The Imperial University awarded degrees while its Grand Master appointed and promoted teachers, opened new schools, and issued rules regarding teaching, discipline, and finances. In 1809, Napoleon instituted the baccalauréat, the national examination pupils had to pass when they graduated from the lycées, and necessary for admission to institutions of higher education. In the first year, 31 stu dents received the degree; in 1813, it was awarded to 1700. 63 In practice, however, the Imperial University was never as effective in imposing a uni form educational program throughout France as it was meant to be. For example, the clergy’s role in teaching and running schools actually

France 57

increased under Napoleon compared with the Revolutionary years, due 
to a shortage of qualified teachers. 
The Imperial University also controlled higher education, which con 
sisted of specialized schools and institutions. One of them was the École 
Polytechnique, founded in 1794 to train engineers, although during the 
Empire it trained predominantly military personnel. Special schools for 
law, medicine, physics, chemistry, and other disciplines were projected. 
In 1808, the École Normale was founded to train teachers. The graduates 
and teachers in these and other institutions became the intellectual elite 
of France. 