

THE EDUCATION SYSTEM

Napoleon’s educational reforms laid the foundation for two lasting lega cies: the French secondary schools, the lycées, and a centralized education system. Napoleon viewed state control of education, especially at the

France 55 secondary level, as essential for the consolidation of his rule. In 1803, Portalis wrote: “Public education belongs to the State, for individual families must be directed according to the plan of the great family which includes them all.”56 Napoleon set up a national education system char acterized by uniformity, a hierarchical structure, centralization, state control, and a standardized curriculum. Through the centralization and development of the education system, Napoleon expected to achieve two main goals. He clearly aimed at molding the minds of young Frenchmen, instilling in them patriotism, loyalty to his regime, and respect for social hierarchy and property. In 1805, he stated: “There will be no settled polit ical state, so long as there is not a teaching body with settled principles. So long as one does not learn from childhood whether to be republican or monarchist, Catholic or nonreligious, etc, the State will not form a nation; it will rest on a vague and uncertain base; it will be constantly exposed to changes and disorders.” 57 Secondly, he intended to train and prepare the students to become efficient and skilled bureaucrats, in response to the growing administrative needs of the French State. Under the ancien régime, education was not a primary concern for most people; neither did the State allocate any means to pay for it. The Church exerted considerable influence over education. During the Revolution, education became an important part of republican ideology and Revolutionaries viewed universal primary education as an essential fea ture of a progressive nation.58 In 1793, the Revolutionary government proclaimed new education programs, including free primary schools in every commune. Due to the war, however, it lacked the resources to implement this program. The Constitution of 1795 and the Daunou Law (October 1798) laid down the fundamental principles of a system of pub lic education, both primary and secondary.59 But the Directory had little success in primary education due to a shortage of teachers, insufficient resources, and the opposition of the rural population to republican education. It had more success with secondary education. In 1795, it instituted a nationwide secondary education program, establishing écoles centrales in various departments. Napoleon preserved some of the Revolutionary educational programs, establishing them on a more solid foundation. He paid little attention to primary schools, content to leave them in the hands of municipal author ities. Elementary education, in Napoleon’s view, was given to the poor with little beyond moral principles and good work habits. Likewise, Napoleon ignored education for girls, believing that they needed no formal education. “Girls,” he said, “cannot be brought up better than by