

CODE NAPOLEON

At St. Helena, Napoleon is reported to have remarked, “My glory is not to have won forty battles, for Waterloo’s defeat will destroy the memory of as many victories. But what nothing will destroy, what will eternally live is my Civil Code.” 34 Along with the secondary education system, the Civil Code was the most durable legacy of the Napoleonic period and laid the foun dation of national unity.35 It has remained the basis of French civil law to the present day and is known for its brevity, clarity, and accessibility. Pre-Revolutionary France contained hundreds of local codes and cus toms, many deriving from feudal jurisdiction. In southern France Roman Law prevailed, while Common Law dominated in northern France. The Revolutionary governments declared the need to unify the law and took some initial steps toward legal unification, most notably the revocation of feudal law. At the same time, however, they also proclaimed thousands of new laws, further complicating the legal system. Napoleon intended to replace this legal diversity with a uniform law code that would enhance national unity, strengthen the State’s authority, and benefit property owners. In 1800, the First Consul appointed four distinguished legal experts to prepare an outline for the new code. The Council of State, with

France 49

Bonaparte presiding over more than half of its meetings, examined that 
outline. The Code was also discussed in the Tribunate. On 21 March 
1804, the Civil Code, comprising of 2281 articles, finally appeared. For 
the first time, France possessed a clear, concise, and orderly civil code, 
which took the name ‘Code Napoleon’ in 1807. 
In the view of Jean Tulard, “The Civil Code legitimized the abolition of 
the Ancien Régime.”36 It Ratified important Revolutionary principles, 
including legal equality, careers based on merit, an end to feudal 
privileges, freedom of religion, secularization of the law, and freedom 
of occupation. Most significantly, the Code embodied a modern concept 
of property ownership. Its framers believed that property was the 
cornerstone of society, thus the Code guaranteed the gains made by 
property owners during the Revolution.37 It confirmed the right of 
proprietors to use and dispose of their possessions as they saw fit. In 
particular, land, the main source of wealth, was freed of the remaining 
feudal restrictions and could now be traded freely. The Civil Code also 
gave employers advantages over their workers. For example, it prohibited 
workers from organizing, a ratification of the Le Chapelier Law proclaimed 
in 1791. 
Family was the second important area in the Civil Code.38 It regulated 
family property, including the marriage contract and the division of 
property among heirs. It outlawed primogeniture, allowing all sons to 
become property owners. It permitted, however, one child to inherit a 
larger share of the property than other heirs, overruling the 
Revolutionary law that required an equal division of property among all 
heirs. Code Napoleon confirmed the secularization of marriage, thereby 
placing it under State jurisdiction. Divorce, prohibited under the Old 
Regime but legalized by the Revolution in 1792, was also permitted by 
Code Napoleon, but on only three grounds: ill treatment, criminal 
conviction, and adultery. These limits considerably reduced the number 
of divorces in comparison with the Revolutionary years. 
The Code significantly strengthened the patriarchal structure of the 
family. Napoleon believed that disciplined families and obedience to the 
father would extend to the political sphere and strengthen the head of 
state, create loyal citizens, and consolidate law and order. The father was 
the head of the family and controlled the family’s property. He decided the 
fate of the children, could veto their marriage, and was even authorized to 
send them to jail. The Code subordinated wife to husband. Article 213 
stated that “The woman owes obedience to her husband.” She had to 
follow her husband wherever he moved and was not permitted to sign 