

The Netherlands 61

What ultimately sealed the fate of the Patriot Revolution was foreign intervention. In September 1787, the Prussian monarch Fredrick William II, William V’s brother-in-law, sent 26,000 troops into the United Provinces to help the Orangists crush the opposition. The British subsi dized that invasion. The Patriots quickly surrendered and thousands of them fled into Austrian Netherlands and France. William V regained his authority and dissolved Patriot clubs and the militia.

THE BATAVIAN REPUBLIC (1795–1801)

Against this background, the French Revolution constituted an inspiring development for the Patriot exiles in France. When revolutionary France declared war on Britain and the Netherlands (February 1793), Patriot emigrants fought alongside the French. After defeating the Austrians at Fleurus ( June 1794), the French, under General Charles Pichegru, invaded the Netherlands. Numerous Patriotic clubs organized in large cities and armed themselves. The revolutionary movement of 1795 was a continuation of the anti-Orangist Patriots of the 1780s. 5 The French advance forced William V to flee to Britain and the French troops entered Amsterdam ( January 1795). These events launched a new Dutch Revolution. The Batavian Republic (1795–1806) replaced the United Provinces, becoming France’s first “sister republic.” Important reforms ended the ancien régime and laid the foundation for a new united state. Those changes did not come, however, without much upheaval and struggle that reflected the divisions within Dutch society and between moderate and democratic Patriots. The French added to the instability through their frequent interven tions, designed to shape the Batavian Republic according to their inter ests. Its coastal location and possession of considerable shipping and banking resources made the Netherlands an invaluable French ally against Britain. In May 1795, the Batavian Republic signed a treaty with France at The Hague. In return for French recognition, the Dutch agreed to pay France 100 million guilders and concede Maastricht, Venlo, and Dutch Flanders to France. A secret clause allowed 25,000 French troops to stay in the Netherlands at Dutch expense. These onerous obligations aggravated the financial condition of the Batavian Republic. Upon the formation of the Batavian Republic, the Patriots quickly removed the Orangist oligarchs from power. By March 1795, they held the municipal and provincial positions and dominated the Estates

62 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

General. Under the new system all males above the age of 20, except 
paupers, were eligible to vote. In January 1796, a new National Assembly 
was elected, consisting of mostly middle-class delegates, although clergy 
men and members of noble families were also elected. The Assembly voted 
to separate Church and State and granted equal rights to Jews.6 Drafting a 
constitution, however, was the Assembly’s primary and most controversial 
task. Delegates were divided on whether the new republic should stay a 
decentralized state or become a united republic. The Federalists rejected 
a strong central government and supported the retention of provincial 
autonomy. Support for the federalist position came mostly from 
moderate Patriots, chief among them Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck, 
a lawyer from Amsterdam. He believed that the unitary government 
should run foreign policy and leave internal administration to the 
provinces. Schimmelpenninck and the moderates also advocated a tem 
pered form of democracy, proposing a system of electors rather than 
direct elections. 
The Unitarists, largely democratic Patriots, advocated a strong central 
state and the elimination of the traditional sovereignty of the provinces. 
Prominent Unitarist leaders included Isaac Gogel, the future finance 
minister; Pieter Vreede, a wealthy cloth merchant; and Johan Valckenar, 
a law professor who had spent many years in France. They saw the elimi 
nation of provincial sovereignty as a way to undermine the powerful 
oligarchic families who controlled local governments. Moreover, a uni 
tary state was more conducive to the idea of all the Dutch becoming 
citizens with equal rights. A major goal of the unitarist program was to 
establish a national fiscal system and consolidate the provincial debts into 
one national debt. This favored the indebted provinces, most notably 
Holland. Democrats also strongly championed the separation of Church 
and State and the abolition of the slave trade. 
In August 1797, after a furious debate, the Assembly ratified a 918-article 
constitution. It was full of compromises, satisfying nobody. While it estab 
lished a united republic, it also confirmed the internal independence of 
the provinces. Voters decisively rejected the constitution in a plebiscite. A 
new National Assembly endlessly debated a new constitution. In addition 
to the political stalemate, economic difficulties and a Dutch naval defeat 
by the British at Camperdown (October 1797) further discredited the 
government. In January 1798, a French-supported coup, led by Unitarists, 
purged the Assembly of federalists. The Assembly then adopted a new 
unitarist constitution modeled on the French constitution of 1795 
with an executive of five directors. It replaced the provinces with eight 