

France 59

4

The Netherlands

THE NETHERLANDS IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

In the eighteenth century the Netherlands, known then as the United 
Provinces, constituted a loose confederation of seven sovereign 
provinces: Gelderland, Holland, Utrecht, Zeeland, Overijssel, Friesland, 
and Groningen. Each province had a vast autonomy that, in practice, 
belonged to an oligarchy of patricians. The United Provinces had a weak 
central government. The provinces nominated a central official, the 
Stadholder, whose executive authority was restricted to foreign policy, 
military, and naval command. The Stadholder position was monopolized 
by the Orange family. The provincial assemblies sent representatives to 
the Estates General, whose decisions were effective only if approved by all 
seven provinces. There was no Dutch citizenship and it was difficult to 
speak about a Dutch nation. 
Economically, the United Provinces suffered a decline in the 
eighteenth century. 1 The urban economy deteriorated and the popula 
tion of the cities shrank. Financially, the United Provinces lost its central 
place to London, its industry lagged behind that of Britain, and its 
international trade declined. Agriculture also experienced a crisis, 
although it began recovering in the 1750s. Yet despite the decline of over 
seas trade, the United Provinces remained an affluent society and 
an important maritime power. It possessed colonies, including Ceylon, 
Java, the Cape of Good Hope, and the West Indies islands. Dutch finan 
ciers subsidized large portions of the British and American national 
debts. 

60

THE PATRIOT REVOLUTION

In the 1780s, the Dutch experienced a major upheaval in the form of 
a civil war and revolution, precipitated by economic decline. Political 
tension was rising between the pro-Stadholder Orangist camp and the 
anti-Stadholder Patriot movement. Initially, the Patriot opposition 
consisted of conservative aristocrats who opposed the extensive power of 
Stadholder William V (1751–95), and prosperous burghers who resented 
their exclusion from political power. The Patriots denounced William V 
for eliminating traditional local liberties and for concentrating excessive 
power in his own hands. They demanded the restoration of those liber 
ties and the creation of a more open and broadly based political system.2 
Tension between the Orangists and the Patriots was exacerbated by 
the deterioration of relations with Britain. William V strongly supported 
Britain in its American war while his opponents, many of them mer 
chants, resented the British commercial competition and wished to 
restore Dutch power at sea. They assisted the Americans, thereby increas 
ing tension with Britain. In December 1780, Britain began the Fourth 
Anglo-Dutch War, inflicting a disastrous defeat on the Netherlands and 
paralyzing Dutch shipping.3 
The Patriots blamed William V for the defeat and for the severe 
economic crisis. One of their leaders, Joan Derk van der Capellen, 
denounced the Prince of Orange for suppressing the ancient Dutch 
liberties and urged the people to emulate the Americans and arm them 
selves to regain their freedom and establish a government dominated by 
burghers.4 In 1782, the Patriots began organizing armed civic militias. 
This agitation forced William V to leave the Hague (September 1785). 
Several provinces suspended the Prince as Captain General. The Patriots 
won their greatest victory in Utrecht, where the first democratic munici 
pality was elected in 1786. In the summer of 1787, they also gained 
control in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Delft. In many small towns, Patriots 
demanded the restoration of citizens’ control. A clash in May 1787, which 
left 80 dead, demonstrated the growing hostility between the Orangists 
and the Patriots. 
The Patriots were weakened, however, by a rift between moderates and 
radicals. The latter did not limit themselves to opposition to the 
Stadholder, but also targeted the entire ruling oligarchy and demanded 
the convening of a popular assembly. This alienated the aristocrats, who 
merely wished to reduce the Stadholder’s power and feared that radical 
reforms would undermine their power. 