

NAPOLEON’S LEGACY

The Napoleonic rule, along with the preceding Revolutionary decade, brought the Old Regime to an end and launched the modernization of French state and society. Napoleon destroyed the Revolutionary ideals of popular sovereignty and free speech, and restored monarchical rule. Yet at the time same, he consolidated many significant changes of the Revolution and established many of France’s laws and institutions that have lasted to the present day. In fact, Napoleon carried out many of the Revolutionary reforms more effectively than his predecessors and initi ated important innovations himself. Napoleon’s most important legacy was the creation of a strong central State. It went hand in hand with the formation of his authoritarian rule and the strengthening of the executive branch. The new State was a sec ular State, free of the divine ideology that had justified the ancien régime monarchy. The Concordat confirmed the State’s supremacy over the Church and the latter’s loss of property during the Revolution. State apparatus was based on a centralized, efficient, and hierarchical bureau cracy ranging from prefects to mayors. It was staffed by salaried and pro fessionally trained officials who, in principle, were appointed on the basis of their talent instead of birth and nepotism and operated according to fixed rules. French subjects became citizens equal before the law, and the government was now dealing with individuals directly rather than through intermediary bodies. This modern State was well informed, col lecting data on its citizens and the country’s general conditions, which helped it govern effectively. A powerful police force assured law and order and suppressed opposition. Napoleon stabilized public finances, establishing uniform taxes, initiating a land survey, and creating an

58 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe efficient tax collection, national currency, and the Bank of France, all of which lasted long after his fall. Military conscription constituted the basis for the creation of a modern national army, becoming an annual routine the French learnt to accept. The Civil Code, Napoleon’s most important and durable legacy, established legal uniformity and sanctioned legal equality and property rights and has remained the basis of French law until today. Likewise, the lycées, the core of Napoleon’s centralized education reform, exist to this day. Even the Bourbons, despite their con servatism and nostalgia for the ancien régime, recognized the benefits of the Napoleonic state apparatus and retained much of it. 64 Another important Napoleonic legacy was his ratification of the Revolutionary principle that grounded social mobility in wealth and merit instead of birth, thereby providing a boost to the development of nineteenth-century French bourgeois society. Napoleon helped to define and fully endorse the new elite of the notables, which consisted of landowners, professionals, entrepreneurs, and the educated classes. They constituted the backbone of the Napoleonic government, which, in return, protected their gains of the Revolutionary decade. Napoleon con firmed their land purchases, guaranteed their property rights, estab lished internal security, and appointed them to government posts. The old nobility, on the other hand, never regained their birth privileges, seigneurial rights, or sole grip over government positions. The Emperor replaced the old nobility with a new nobility that was based on wealth accumulation, skill, and service to the State. The obsolete society of orders had disappeared forever.