

70 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

mostly complacent in enforcing the embargo, effectively allowing British 
merchandise into their territory. Moreover, Louis was unwilling to 
enforce effectively the embargo against Britain, realizing how desperately 
his country needed that commerce. He delayed issuing royal decrees, 
interpreted imperial decrees loosely, and granted licenses for trading 
with England. 
The Emperor was dissatisfied with his brother’s close identification with 
the Dutch citizens and his failure to establish an army of 50,000 soldiers. 
Louis’s lack of compliance with the blockade and his failure to suppress the 
smuggling of British goods, however, constituted the most important 
reason for the growing tension between the two brothers. In October 1808, 
Napoleon accused Louis of not enforcing the blockade, insisting that 
“none of the laws of the Blockade is observed,” and that more than a 
hundred ships cross from Holland to England each month. 26 Nine 
months later, the Emperor reprimanded Louis: “Your customs regulations 
are poorly executed, and consequently all the connection of England with 
the Continent is made through Holland.”27 The strain in the relations 
between the two brothers came to a head during the British expedition to 
Walcheren.28 In August 1809, the British landed 40,000 men, the largest 
contingent they had sent to the Continent so far, in Walcheren, on the 
Belgian coast, aiming to open the River Schelde and attack Antwerp. Due 
to the incompetence of their commander, however, the British achieved 
none of these goals and, by late December, were forced to withdraw after 
losing 4000 men to an epidemic. Dutch troops participated in the defense 
of the Low Countries against the British. But they were few and did not 
perform well, giving Napoleon another opportunity to charge Louis with 
incompetence. On 6 September 1809, the Emperor wrote Louis, “you are 
not a King and you have no idea how to be one . . . You have neither army 
nor navy and yet you pretend to be a free and independent state.” He then 
added, “I shall always regret having given you a kingdom.” 29 Napoleon 
concluded that to stop the smuggling of British goods he would have 
to occupy the Dutch coast, and in February 1810 he ordered French 
regiments to occupy the southern provinces of the Dutch Kingdom. 
Annexation of the Netherlands to France was just a matter of time. In 
April, the French army occupied Rotterdam, The Hague, Leiden, and 
Utrecht. In June, after learning that French forces under Oudinot were 
ordered to enter Amsterdam, Louis announced his intention to defend 
the city. Most of his ministers insisted, however, that the city was indefen 
sible. Louis reacted by abdicating (1 July 1810) and left for Bohemia, 
where he received asylum from the Austrian emperor. 

The Netherlands 71

INSIDE IMPERIAL FRANCE (1810–13)

On 10 July 1810, Napoleon officially annexed the Netherlands to his 
Empire, appointing Charles Lebrun as Governor-General. Lebrun had 
overseen the incorporation of Genoa into the French Empire and was 
now charged with the same responsibility in the Netherlands. A council 
of high officials assisted him. A number of them had served under Louis, 
including Gogel and van Maanen, the chief judicial official. Devilliers 
Duterrage, the head of the state police, was responsible for enforcing the 
blockade and suppressing any opposition. These officials answered to 
a new office for the Dutch departments in Paris. A legislature consisting 
of notables was retained for decorative purposes. Prefects from France 
and Belgium headed the administration of the seven new departments. 
The Dutch establishment consisted of a typical Napoleonic amalgam of 
middle-class and patrician officials. 30 
Napoleon’s main goal in annexing the Netherlands was to assure the 
implementation of the blockade and put an end to smuggling. Under 
the watchful eye of Duterrage, the regulations were forcefully applied by the 
coast guard and customs bureaucrats. They often used needless brutality, 
carrying out arbitrary arrests and house searches and arousing considerable 
public hostility. At the same time, corruption, extortion, and demands for 
bribes by officials were rife. The severe new measures succeeded, however, 
in interrupting trade with Britain and reducing smuggling. 
Other Napoleonic policies during these final French years also led to 
much discontent. Napoleon preserved high tariffs on Dutch imports into 
the Empire, thereby arousing much resentment among Dutch industri 
alists. Prohibitions on imported salt, essential for the important salt-fish 
industry, remained in effect. Napoleon’s decision to annul two-thirds of 
the interest on Dutch public debt hurt people who had invested in it. 31 
The most unpopular policy, however, was the introduction of con 
scription, a step Louis had adamantly refused to take. Sporadic anti 
conscription riots erupted in 1811–12, but they failed to prevent the 
implementation of conscription. State officials were aware of the wide 
spread opposition to conscription and avoided the full enforcement of 
that policy. Between January 1811 and July 1812, they recruited less than 
half of the eligible conscripts. The well-to-do commonly bought substi 
tutes. Draft dodging and desertion rates were high. 
Once the magnitude of the fiasco in Russia, where most of the 14,000 
Dutch contingent perished, became known, opposition to the Napoleonic 
regime intensified. Napoleon was denounced as a tyrant, and support for 