

THE KINGDOM OF HOLLAND (1806–10)

In June 1806, Napoleon converted the Batavian Republic into the Kingdom of Holland and nominated his brother Louis as its ruler.16 Napoleon’s excuse for this change was the deterioration of Schimmelpenninck’s eyesight. More important, however, were serious disagreements between the Emperor and the Batavian government. Napoleon had nominated Schimmelpenninck to head the Batavian Republic “to do [his] bidding . . . without demur or procrastination . . . and to mobilize the whole of its naval and military forces in the next phase of the life and death struggle with Britain.”17 Increasingly, however, the Emperor feared that Schimmelpenninck was becoming too inde pendent. The Dutch demanded their naval force back after the plan to invade England was aborted, whereas Napoleon wanted still to use it against Britain. Louis, the Emperor believed, would be easy to control. To give the change an aura of legality, Napoleon demanded that a Dutch delegation present a formal request to Louis to become the “King of Holland.” A Franco-Dutch treaty guaranteed the territorial integrity of the Netherlands and its colonies. Schimmelpenninck opposed the change but remained isolated; he resigned on 4 June. A day later, a Dutch delegation submitted a petition requesting Louis as sover eign, which Napoleon “accepted.”

The Netherlands 67

Not quite 28 years old when he became a monarch, Louis stayed on the 
Dutch throne for four years (1806–10). Louis had participated in the 
Italian and Egyptian campaigns and the wars of 1800 and 1805, but 
showed no particular military talent. His unhappy marriage to Hortense, 
the daughter of Josephine de Beauharnais, produced three children, the 
third being Louis Napoleon, the future Napoleon III. 
Contrary to Napoleon’s expectations, however, Louis identified 
strongly with the Dutch people. He learnt Dutch and often traveled 
around his kingdom to better understand his new countrymen, gaining 
their affection and support. Louis’s advisers were mostly Dutch rather 
than French. He made great efforts to protect his kingdom from the 
harmful consequences of Napoleonic policies, most notably the 
Continental Blockade. 
Under the new monarchical system, Louis served as the executive. 
Dedicated to his duties, he worked assiduously. He presided over the 
Council of State and issued legislative decrees. Initially, his cabinet 
comprised eight ministers: finance, war, marine, interior, foreign affairs, 
justice and police, colonies, and a secretary of state. He later added 
a ministry for ecclesiastical affairs and one for water. 18 The legislature 
met twice a year, each session lasting two to four months. Louis submit 
ted many legislative proposals, and the final bills often reflected 
compromises between his motions and Dutch tradition. 
Louis continued carrying out Schimmelpenninck’s centralization 
policies, bringing to completion many reform projects. Initially, he also 
retained a number of the ministers and advisers from the previous 
regime, most notably Gogel. While he tried to balance the rival groups 
of republicans and conservative nobles, he gave preference to the latter, 
thus endorsing their return to power, which had already begun in 1801. 19 
In his Council of State, conservative aristocrats had a majority and he 
appointed many of them to head departments and municipalities. 
Significantly, however, they had to recognize the supreme power of the 
central State. 
Louis supported the local government law of 1807, which confirmed the 
increasing power of the State and the dissolution of the remaining provin 
cial autonomy. The Kingdom of Holland contained 11 departments, each 
run by a landrost nominated by the king and analogous to the French pre 
fect. The landrost selected a council of leading citizens to assist him. Every 
quarter was administered by a drost, the counterpart of the French sub 
prefect. Cities of over 5000 inhabitants were headed by a mayor. City 
officials reported to representatives of the king. The municipalities’ need 