

72 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe the restoration of the Orange dynasty increased. Riots erupted in vari ous cities, the worst in Leiden, which was invaded and plundered by thousands of peasants in April 1813. Lebrun reacted by subjecting the press to harsher censorship and burning nearly two million francs’ worth of confiscated goods. The courts imposed stiff penalties on offenders, including executions and deportations, which only increased the alien ation of the population. Following Napoleon’s defeat in Leipzig, French control over the Netherlands rapidly became untenable.32 Napoleon had to evacuate Germany and, in early November 1813, Russian and Prussian troops crossed the Dutch border and were warmly welcomed by the population. Amsterdam grew increasingly agitated and hostile to the French. On 15 November 1813, a crowd rose up and destroyed French residences, setting fire to customs houses, warehouses, and imperial symbols. Soon, Lebrun and the military government left Amsterdam, thereby confirm ing the end of French government in the Netherlands.

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

Meanwhile, at The Hague, Karel van Hogendorp, a major Orangist figure, formed a provisional government and invited Prince William VI, son of the former ruler, to assume power. On 2 December, the new ruler entered Amsterdam and was proclaimed sovereign of the Netherlands, assuming the name William I. In March 1814, William accepted a new unitarist constitution. In the Congress of Vienna, the Allies annexed Belgium to the new “Kingdom of the United Netherlands,” thus creating a powerful buffer state designed to resist French aggression. The Netherlands paid a heavy price for having been a French satellite state since the mid-1790s. It fell into a grave financial crisis as a result of Napoleon’s demands, its trade with England suffered a major decline due to the blockade, and thousands of young Dutch died in Russia. At the same time, as Simon Schama has stated, while the French period pro duced much discontent, “The experiences of the past twenty years . . . had wrought irreversible changes in the public life of the Dutch which King William, as much as anyone, acknowledged and legitimized.” 33 The Napoleonic legacy, in other words, paved the way for the establishment of modern Holland. The Batavian Republic and the Kingdom of Holland undermined the provincial autonomy and laid the foundation for a national state. The authorities created a new centralized state apparatus,

The Netherlands 73 including administrative and judicial organization, and competent and experienced Napoleonic officials continued to serve under William I. A new central fiscal system, comprising a modern tax structure, land registry, and a national debt, was instituted and the guilds were abol ished. Jews and Catholics received equal rights. The authorities set up a department of education and Dutch primary schools became a model for Europe. Louis also centralized the Dutch hydraulic policy and estab lished cultural institutions that exist to this day. In sum, the nineteenth century Dutch monarchy was the heir of the Batavian Republic and the Kingdom of Holland.