

The Netherlands 63

departments, proclaimed civil rights, granted male suffrage, and 
abolished restrictions on internal commerce. With the exclusion of 
Orangists and Federalists from voting, the electorate overwhelmingly 
approved the constitution. 
The new radical government lasted less than five months, however. 
The Directory increasingly resorted to authoritarian measures, including 
arrests of opponents and the purging of voter lists, which alienated many 
citizens. Discord within the radical camp also undermined the govern 
ment. In June 1798, General Daendels, the commander of the Batavian 
army, staged a coup supported by the French government, driving the 
radicals out of power. 7 A new Assembly, dominated by moderate Patriots, 
was elected in July 1798. The legislature kept the unitarist constitution, 
aiming to strengthen the central government and erase the autonomy of 
the provinces. 
Yet the continuous instability alienated many citizens from politics. 
Although they stayed in power for three years (until September 1801), 
the moderates accomplished little and failed to enforce the unitarist 
principles. Local officials, many of them old notables who had returned 
to power, successfully resisted the government’s efforts to turn them into 
simple executors of its orders. 8 Fiscal hardships and lack of adequate 
personnel also accounted for the authorities’ failure to enforce the laws. 
Economic difficulties persisted and the national debt mushroomed. To 
solve the problem of acute deficits, Finance Minister Gogel tried to pro 
duce a new national tax program, including an increase in direct taxes 
and the creation of a tax collection bureaucracy. Considerable resistance 
in the Assembly delayed the program’s ratification until March 1801 
when much of the unitary state structure had crumbled and the new plan 
remained a dead letter. A national system of poor relief and efforts to 
abolish the guilds also failed. In sum, while a unitarist constitution was 
adopted, and the departmental commissioners constituted the embryo of 
a unitary Republic, the Batavian authorities were unable and unwilling to 
carry out a significant centralization policy. 
Meanwhile, in 1799 the British government and William V tried to 
restore the House of Orange in the Netherlands. This was part of the 
Second Coalition campaigns. William V urged the Dutch people to revolt 
and reestablish the old Republic. In August 1799, an Anglo-Russian army 
landed in northern Holland and advanced toward Amsterdam. A sympa 
thetic revolt failed to materialize, however. In October, a Franco-Dutch 
army under General Brune defeated the British at Castricum, forcing 
them to retreat to England. 

64 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

THE BATAVIAN REPUBLIC (1801–6)

Additional progress toward a united Dutch state would have to wait until 
1805. Until then “subordination to central authority was more in name 
than reality.”9 The years 1801–4 witnessed a restoration of much of the 
traditional civic autonomy and the return of the urban patricians to lead 
ing positions. Bonaparte played an important role in this turn of events. 
He was hostile to the democratic principles and the electoral process in 
the Batavian Republic and was determined to abolish them. The First 
Consul also accused the Dutch Directory of incompetence for not 
preventing British merchandise from entering the Netherlands and for 
the failure of Dutch bankers to provide him with financial assistance in 
1800. No less important was Bonaparte’s desire to establish good rela 
tions with the Dutch elite, the wealthy burghers and the patriciate. With 
Talleyrand’s authorization, Semonville, the French ambassador, prepared 
a new constitution approved by members of the Batavian Directory. In 
September 1801, the legislature declared its opposition to the constitu 
tional changes but the French general Augereau dissolved that body. This 
was the third coup in the Netherlands since January 1798. The new 
constitution created an executive of 12 regents authorized to initiate 
legislation and nominate officials. The regents appointed a weak legisla 
ture of 35 members. The 1801 coup ended the representative system 
established in 1795. Conservatism and much of the traditional structure 
were restored. Numerous Patriots, unitarists, and democrats were purged 
from power while many aristocrats, who supported the Orangist party, 
returned to top positions. Provinces and cities regained much of their 
former autonomy. 
The main problem faced by the government remained the mounting 
deficit. The regents hoped that the peace of Amiens (1802), which 
returned all the colonies except Ceylon to the Batavian Republic, would 
stimulate trade and reduce its military obligations to France. Those 
expectations remained unfulfilled, however, for the peace was short-lived 
and Bonaparte did not let the Netherlands stay neutral. While preparing 
to invade the British Isles, the French Consul demanded that the Dutch 
Republic contribute 9000 troops and provide vessels to help transport 
the invading army. 
The increased military expenses aggravated the financial conditions of 
the Batavian Republic. Along with debt-service, those expenses caused 
a succession of high deficits after 1800. 10 The resumption of war deep 
ened the commercial crisis, diminishing the Republic’s ability to recover 