

The Netherlands 65

financially. The regents were unable to increase the State’s revenues and 
halt the fiscal deterioration. Napoleon was quickly losing faith in the 
capability of the Batavian government to rule the Netherlands effectively 
while serving his interests. The poor Dutch performance when con 
fronting the British in the colonies, and the ineffective implementation 
of the trade embargo against Britain, exasperated the French ruler. 
Moreover, Napoleon was convinced that, if left alone, the Netherlands 
would join France’s enemies.11 
In late 1804 Napoleon was ready to intervene and install a new, more vig 
orous government designed to implement a viable financial reform pro 
gram and respond fully to his political, military, and economic demands. 
In March 1805, he nominated the veteran politician Schimmelpenninck 
to head the Dutch Republic with the title of Grand Pensionary. A new con 
stitution entrusted Schimmelpenninck with broad executive power. The 
weak legislature, nominated by the Grand Pensionary, had no power to 
initiate legislation and could only debate legislative projects submitted by 
the executive. Once again, the small voter participation (4 percent) in the 
plebiscite on the new constitution demonstrated the public’s distance from 
the new system imposed by Napoleon. 
Schimmelpenninck stayed in power only until June 1806, but his 
reform policy swept away the organization of the past and laid the foun 
dation for the nineteenth-century Dutch nation state. 12 The power and 
range of responsibilities of executive officials and bodies, including the 
five state secretaries of war, marine, finance, interior, and foreign affairs 
(later justice was added), increased and they set national policies. A cen 
tral, uniform, and more specialized bureaucracy was created. Towns and 
departments became increasingly subordinate to The Hague. The gov 
ernment was authorized to nominate and terminate local functionaries 
while state officials were empowered to inspect poor relief and public 
works, formerly under the exclusive control of the provinces. Local 
communities had to abide by a growing set of national policies and 
regulations. They grew more dependent on the government’s financial 
support and were required to obtain permission from the executive to 
levy local taxes. 
Reforming the fiscal system constituted a major policy under 
Schimmelpenninck. Between 1795 and 1803, the national debt increased 
from 760 to 1126 million guilders. 13 A structural tax reform was essential 
to the Republic’s survival. Aiming to increase public revenues, Gogel 
submitted a major tax reform to Schimmelpenninck that took effect in 
January 1806.14 Gogel meant to achieve several goals with his General 

66 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Taxation Plan: replace the tax variations among provinces with a national tax system, establish tax payment in proportion to income, and save tax collection costs. Gogel viewed fiscal unity as a way to strengthen the national government and weaken the old oligarchies. His plan boosted direct taxes, including land tax and tax on rent, and sumptuary taxes on servants, horses, jewelry, and pleasure carriages. To establish a uniform and fair assessment of the land tax, Gogel created a Cadaster Commission to evaluate property.15 Gogel’s tax reform also abolished and lowered the duties on foodstuffs, thereby reducing the pressure on the poor. To centralize the new system, Gogel established a national tax bureaucracy whose members were to be appointed, supervised, and salaried by The Hague. To save on administration expenses, he curtailed the number of officials. Gogel proposed no tax on merchants, which explains the support the tax plan received in the maritime departments against the opposition of the inland departments.