

78 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

and enforced the republican calendar. Confiscation and sale of Church 
land persisted. 
Many Belgians resisted the anti-religious policies. They sheltered recal 
citrant priests and refused to use the republican calendar or attend 
republican celebrations. It was the introduction of military conscription 
in September 1798, however, that stimulated a serious revolt. The insur 
rection, known as “The Peasants’ War,” exploded in Flemish regions; it 
began in early October in Flanders and spread later to the German 
speaking part of Luxemburg. Thousands of rebels, mostly rural inhabi 
tants, roamed the countryside, toppled French symbols, attacked French 
sympathizers, and set fire to conscript rolls. While this revolt marked the 
greatest challenge to the French in Belgium, it was short-lived. The peas 
ants received no help from the nobility and bourgeoisie. By early 
December 1798, French forces were able to suppress the revolt and 
restore order. Repression was harsh; the authorities imposed martial law 
for about a year, arresting hundreds of priests and sentencing to death 
hundreds of suspected rebels. Conscription met with little success; by the 
end of 1799, the authorities had drafted only a quarter of the 22,000 men 
Belgium was ordered to provide. 9 

NAPOLEONIC BELGIUM

Belgians greeted the coup of Brumaire with apathy and accepted the new regime with resignation. Voter turnout in the 1800 plebiscite on the Constitution of Year VIII was lighter than in France. Few Belgians partic ipated in the plebiscites of 1802 and 1804 either. Many Belgian notables refused to serve in the Napoleonic administration. At the same time, the French grip on Belgium was further consolidated by the Treaty of Lunéville. Clearly, any aspiration to restore Belgian independence was unrealistic. Napoleon’s main goal was to strengthen Belgium’s union with France. To achieve that, he exerted efforts to restore public order and eliminate any vestiges of the old regional diversity, thereby enhancing administra tive centralization. The prefects served as his most important tool to achieve these objectives. All but two of them were French, reflecting his belief that his countrymen would carry out his orders more efficiently. Indeed, the prefects did execute the Napoleonic policy quite effectively. A number of Belgian officials also served as prefects in French depart ments. 10 Members of the Belgian bourgeoisie and some old nobles filled

Belgium 79

intermediary and lower administrative posts in Belgium. For example, 
Count de Merode and the Duke d’Ursel served as mayors of Brussels, 
while Baron de Selys served in Liège. Including Belgians in the adminis 
tration was obviously essential to acquire their support. The Napoleonic 
authorities also replaced the former diverse legal system with a uniform 
structure. The various Napoleonic codes entered into effect and the 
government set up the French uniform court hierarchy. 
Replacing the Dutch language with French as the official language in 
Flemish regions constituted another part of the government’s effort to 
strengthen Belgium’s merging with France. Until 1795 Dutch was used by 
the local administration of Brabant and Flanders, but then the French 
authorities abolished it as an official language, using French exclusively 
in government acts, official correspondence, and court verdicts. In an 
effort to “Frenchify” the Flemish regions, prefects prohibited printing in 
Flemish and closed Flemish newspapers. French became the language of 
public life throughout Belgium and the language of the well-to-do, who 
filled most official positions and were able to distinguish themselves lin 
guistically from the popular classes, who lacked education. 11 In reality, 
without knowing French one could not have a public career or expand 
one’s business. 
French was also the dominant language in the new school system. 
Lycées were established in major Belgian cities. Primarily, they served sons 
of the propertied classes who were trained to become state functionaries. 
In 1807, a school of law was set up in Brussels and two schools of medi 
cine opened in Ghent and Liège. The government paid little attention to 
elementary education. Most of the 350 primary schools for children aged 
six to ten were poorly equipped. Illiteracy was rampant among the rural 
population and the urban poor. 
As in France, the main beneficiaries of Napoleonic rule in Belgium were 
the propertied classes whose support Napoleon sought. They benefited 
from the buttressing of law and order, the guarantee of property rights, 
and papal recognition of the new owners of Church property. Buyers of 
Church property included French financiers and bourgeois landowners 
and administrators, who felt little or no religious qualms. After the signing 
of the Concordat, some small farmers also purchased national property. 12 
In the department of Jemappes, the bourgeoisie purchased 75 percent of 
the total national property.13 Wishing to gain the loyalty of the old nobility, 
Napoleon returned their confiscated land to some of them. 
The Napoleonic regime created a stimulating environment for the 
beginning of the Industrial Revolution in Belgium. Stability and peace 