

68 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

for financial help from the State enabled the government to increase its 
control over them. 
The severe financial crisis remained the kingdom’s main problem. 
Although the new tax system generated more income, it could not keep 
up with the rising military expenditures. Landowners protested the new 
property assessment, and the new tax collection met with opposition 
from the local authorities. The incompetence and dishonesty of financial 
officials compounded the problems. Economic hardships also made it 
difficult for many to pay taxes. The financial difficulties and the wide 
spread opposition led Louis to consider revisions in Gogel’s plan, which 
the finance minister resisted. Growing strain between the two led to the 
resignation of Gogel in May 1809. His frustrations and the kingdom’s 
mounting deficit notwithstanding, Gogel had laid the foundation of 
a unified modern fiscal system in the Netherlands. 
Another reform supported by Gogel was the abolition of the guilds, 
which he viewed as part of the oligarchies’ apparatus of social and eco 
nomic control. 20 He believed that stripping the guilds of their autonomy 
and monopolistic powers would strengthen the central administration. 
In January 1808, the legislature abolished the guilds, despite stiff resist 
ance. The opposition prevented the implementation of the measure in 
various communities, however, and it was only in 1818 that the existence 
of the guilds was actually terminated. 
Primary education constituted another important area of govern 
mental reform under Louis. Traditionally, communities ran elementary 
education. Increasingly, however, they needed the financial support of 
The Hague, which enabled the latter to gain more control over educa 
tion. In 1806, the experienced education official Adriaan van den Ende, 
who strongly believed in centralizing the education system, drafted the 
School Law, which extended the jurisdiction of the national government 
over primary education. The law established a set of basic educational 
standards for private and public schools. Teachers were required to have 
a certificate awarded after a standardized examination. Fifty-six inspec 
tors were in charge of supervising the schools. This emphasis on primary 
education in the Netherlands differed from other Napoleonic states 
where the emphasis was on secondary schools. Not surprisingly, “By 
1811, . . . the Dutch had organized the most effective and comprehensive 
system of elementary education in Europe.” 21 
The kingdom launched other important changes that strengthened 
and unified the Dutch State. In 1809, a unified Dutch law code took 
effect, replacing the various regional customary laws. To Napoleon’s 

The Netherlands 69

chagrin, the new code left out parts of his Code Napoleon, most notably 
civil marriage and divorce law. In 1810, the Napoleonic Penal Code was 
introduced, though not before it was amended to suit Dutch traditions. 
In March 1809, a uniform set of weights and measures was proclaimed. 
Louis paid much attention to hydraulic policy. Annual floods, 
especially a disastrous inundation in 1809, demonstrated the need for 
a national water program. He elevated the director of the Commission of 
Water, Twent Van Raaphorst, to minister and proclaimed national regu 
lations for the examination of local dykes. The king increased the budget 
for Waterstaat and completed projects initiated in 1804–5. Louis also 
encouraged the development of Dutch cultural institutions. The national 
archives, the Royal Library at The Hague, and the Rijksmuseum in 
Amsterdam were set up during his reign. 
As in other satellite states, Napoleon imposed military demands on 
the Kingdom of Holland, ordering Louis to expand the Dutch army 
to 50,000 men and build more warships. Louis refused to introduce con 
scription, however, insisting that it ran contrary to Dutch custom, and 
instead filled his army with volunteers and foreign mercenaries. 22 Dutch 
troops fought with Napoleon against Prussia and Austria and participated 
in the Spanish and Russian campaigns. 
Economically, the Kingdom of Holland experienced industrial and 
commercial decline. The war, and especially the Continental Blockade, 
hurt these two branches considerably. Shipbuilding and its related indus 
tries suffered in particular, but also textile, paper, and tobacco products 
deteriorated.23 The blockade deprived industries of essential raw materi 
als and drove their prices up, hurting Dutch competitiveness. It also 
prevented Dutch merchandise from reaching colonial markets. 
Moreover, in September 1808, the Kingdom of Holland lost important 
markets in France, Belgium, and Germany due to exports restrictions 
imposed by Napoleon. The blockade also caused maritime traffic enter 
ing the Netherlands to fall drastically, from 2700 vessels in 1805 to 259 in 
1809.24 The overall value of Dutch trade declined by about 30 percent 
during the Continental Blockade period. Many merchants evaded the 
blockade’s restrictions, finding new routes by which to ship their goods. 
In fact, the Kingdom of Holland provides the best example of disobedi 
ence by a satellite state to the blockade. Trade with England continued, 
some by special licenses, but mostly through smuggling. Shops in Leiden 
displayed without disguise quantities of British manufacture25 while ware 
houses in Amsterdam and Rotterdam were stuffed with colonial goods. 
The proximity to Britain facilitated the illegal traffic. Dutch officials were 