

80 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

increased entrepreneurs’ confidence and willingness to invest. The 
removal of internal customs and barriers and the opening of the French 
market created a larger market for Belgian products. The Napoleonic 
regime also stimulated Belgian industry by protecting it from British 
competition. It improved infrastructure, gave prizes to innovators, and 
established uniform currency and weights and measures. An abundance 
of cheap labor due to the growth of the Belgian population – by 1806 it 
amounted to 3,350,000 inhabitants – also favored economic expansion. 
Indeed, Belgium soon developed into one of the most advanced indus 
trial regions in the French Empire. 14 Textile entrepreneurs introduced 
innovations and production rapidly increased. In 1798, Lievin Bauwens, 
a tanner from Ghent, smuggled parts of a spinning jenny, the new spin 
dle machine, out of England and established two spinning mills, one at 
Passy, near Paris, and another one in Ghent, the first mechanical spin 
ning mills on the Continent. The number of workers in the cotton indus 
try rose from about 1300 in 1806 to almost 12,000 in 1816.15 Another 
businessman, English engineer William Cockerill, brought modern 
textile machinery to Verviers, in the former principality of Liège. By 
1810, 86 manufacturers in Verviers employed 25,000 workers and 
production was 88 percent higher than under the ancien régime. Indeed, 
during the French period Verviers and Ghent became major European 
centers of textile production. That prosperity, however, failed to improve 
the living conditions of textile workers, whose wages remained very low. 
Much of the workforce consisted of poorly paid women and children. 
Workers had to present to their employer the notorious livret, thereby 
placing themselves at his mercy. 
Coal mines in Hainault and Liège also developed, mostly through 
investment of French capital. Increasing demand from France and other 
parts of the Empire stimulated a growth in coal production. Mines in just 
four Belgian departments employed half of the Empire’s 70,000 coal min 
ers. 16 The Belgian departments produced almost half of the Empire’s coal. 
Metallurgical production also developed markedly; the number of blast 
furnaces increased from 59 to 87 (1789 to 1811). During the same period, 
production of pig iron rose from nearly 24,000 to 37,300 tons, while iron 
manufacturing expanded from 17,382 to 27,925 tons. Large orders from 
the French military stimulated the arms industry in Liège, which possessed 
the fourth largest arms industry in the Empire. Textile factories in Ghent 
and Hodimont also produced uniforms for the troops. 
Commercially, the port of Antwerp, inactive since 1585 due to the clos 
ing of the River Scheldt by the Dutch, experienced a revival during the 

Belgium 81

early years of Napoleonic rule. The French declared the Scheldt open to 
international navigation in the early 1790s, and in 1796 maritime traffic 
resumed in Antwerp. During the years 1800–5, harbor activity expanded 
considerably, with hundreds of ships arriving from different parts of 
Europe and America.17 This commercial boom came to an end with the 
Continental Blockade. Between 1808 and 1813, maritime traffic dwin 
dled drastically in Antwerp. After repelling the English invasion of 
Walcheren (1809), Napoleon ordered the construction of defensive 
works at that port and its development for the imperial navy and the 
construction of military ships. 
The improvement in relations between Church and State was highly 
significant in reconciling the Belgian population to the French regime 
and gaining support for unity between the two countries. 18 Bonaparte 
ended the Directory’s religious persecution. Many priests who had been 
condemned to deportation were released in November 1799, and 
a month later the authorities allowed the reopening of many churches. 
The government also replaced the Oath of Hatred of royalty with a plain 
promise of fidelity to the Constitution. It was, however, the Concordat 
that was the main instrument in rallying the Belgian clergy to the 
Napoleonic regime. Most clergymen accepted the Concordat and sup 
port for the First Consul increased among Belgians. Religious life in 
Belgium was largely normalized; crosses reappeared on churches, the use 
of bells was restored, priests again wore their robes in public, and 
religious ceremonies and processions resumed. In November 1801, the 
authorities changed the boundaries of the dioceses, replacing the nine 
old dioceses with five new ones, the first such change since the rule of 
Philip II (1559). The new bishops, all of them French and nominees 
of Napoleon, played an important role in reconciling the Belgian Church 
to the Napoleonic regime. They praised the Emperor and preached 
devotion to him. By 1803, most clergy had pledged fidelity to the 
Constitution. Still, some clerical opposition persisted, as will be explained 
later. 
Napoleon also ordered the Church to preach obedience to the con 
scription law. Indeed, Belgium had to provide thousands of conscripts 
annually. From 1798 to 1813, 216,111 conscripts (6.12 percent of the pop 
ulation) were incorporated into the Napoleonic army. 19 The number of 
Belgian casualties during those years amounted to 79,000, or 35 percent 
of the draftees.20 While the broad anti-conscription revolt of 1798 was 
never repeated, many Belgians evaded the draft through desertion, 
self-mutilation, and fraud. As in France, the authorities responded by 