

76 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

stiffened. In August 1789, a revolution expelled the Prince-Bishop from 
Liège and, in December, Brussels drove the Austrians out of the city. 
Belgium was now free of Austrian rule. 
In January 1790, the Belgian Estates General proclaimed the inde 
pendence of the “United Belgian States.” Soon, however, the coalition 
between conservatives and democrats dissolved. Van der Noot and 
the traditional elite assumed power and excluded the Vonckists from 
the government. The latter demanded the convening of a new national 
assembly representing the Belgian nation and not the Estates. In March 
1790, violence erupted and democrats were attacked; some of them 
were arrested, although most, including Vonck, fled to France. Belgian 
independence was short lived, however. In November 1790, with interna 
tional approval, the new Austrian Emperor Leopold II reoccupied 
Belgium. 
Meanwhile, in April 1792, the French government declared war on 
Austria and, on 6 November, French general Dumouriez, helped by 
about 2500 Belgian émigrés, defeated an outnumbered Habsburg army at 
Jemappes, thereby initiating the first French occupation of Belgium. 4 
Many Belgians, primarily in the cities, welcomed the French, hoping for 
the restoration of Belgian independence. Dumouriez supported Belgian 
sovereignty, hoping to become the head of such a state. 
On 15 December 1792, the French Convention declared the elimina 
tion of the vestiges of the Old Regime in territories under its control, 
including Belgium. It suppressed the tithe and seigneurial fees and priv 
ileges, and ordered the confiscation of Church property. Local authori 
ties opposed to the French were dissolved and new elections were 
announced, with the exclusive participation of supporters of revolution 
ary principles. Municipalities were ordered to provision the French army. 
The decree aroused a general protest in Belgium. Only Jacobins sup 
ported the French policy. 5 Two weeks later, the conservatives won an 
overwhelming victory in elections for the new Belgian Convention. To 
guarantee the new policy and prevent a counter-Revolutionary victory, 
France formally annexed Belgium (February 1793). 
French rule ended quickly, however. In March 1793, the Austrians 
defeated Dumouriez at Neerwinden and regained control of Belgium. 
They suppressed Belgian democrats and re-empowered the Statists, 
who reestablished the traditional local liberties and restored the 
tithe and seigneurial fees. Austrian rule lasted for only 15 months, 
however. In June 1794, after their victory at Fleurus, the French reoccu 
pied Belgium. 

Belgium 77

BELGIUM ANNEXED TO FRANCE (1795–1800)

This time French rule lasted for almost 20 years. For the first 15 months, the French government left most of the old Belgian structures intact. It imposed high war taxes – 80 million francs, six times more than the Austrians exacted annually 6 and heavy requisitions. Then, on 1 October 1795, France annexed Belgium. Economic benefits to be gained from this developed country, along with the wish to spread revolutionary ideology and sanction the possession of an area that France aspired to and fought over for centuries, accounted for the annexation.7 French authorities quickly established their revolutionary laws and insti tutions in Belgium. Much of this reorganization took place between late 1795 and early 1797. In the words of Henri Pirenne , “[during this period] Belgium passed from the Ancien Régime to the Revolution . . . All the national past was swept away.”8 Louis Bouteville, an energetic and experi enced official, ran the Belgian territories and played a key role in trans forming them. He abolished seigneurial rights, the tithe, noble privileges, and the guilds. The uniform French tax system replaced old taxes. Internal trade became free and tariffs between France and Belgium were abolished, opening the French market to Belgian entrepreneurs. Belgian citizens became equal before the law, and the French legal structure replaced the various Belgian judicial systems. Bouteville also restructured the Belgian administration, dividing the country into nine departments headed by prefects. Appointed mayors ran the towns. After December 1796, any new French legislation automatically became applicable in Belgium. Belgians were now considered French citizens. At Campo Formio, Austrian recognition of France’s annexation of Belgium made the unity between the two countries even more definitive. Support for the French policies came from some Vonckists and Jacobins. Most Belgians remained hostile to the new regime, however, abstaining in protest from the elections of October 1797. Those who did participate voted for oppo nents of the French government. Clergymen were at the forefront of the opposition, rejecting the enactment of freedom of religion and divorce. In September 1796, the government suppressed religious orders that provided no education or charity and sold their property; and, in September 1797, it obliged the clergy to take an “oath of hatred” of roy alty. Hundreds of priests who refused to comply were arrested and 35 of the most unyielding were deported to Guyane. The Directory also prohibited clerical robes in public, banned the ringing of church bells,