

74 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

75

5

Belgium

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY BELGIUM

Belgium, also known as the Austrian Netherlands, belonged to the Austrian Empire in the eighteenth century. The Habsburgs received the former Spanish Netherlands in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713) follow ing the War of Spanish Succession. The Austrian Netherlands compri sed ten provinces: Brabant, Luxemburg, Limburg, Gelders, Flanders, Hainault, Namur, Malines, Tournai-Tourmaisis, and West Flanders. In their midst was the large Bishopric of Liège, an independent member state of the Holy Roman Empire. Each province enjoyed a broad degree of self-rule based on traditional privileges and liberties. Until 1789, no common government or institution existed for all ten provinces, aside from those installed by the Habsburg rulers. Following the War of Austrian Succession, Maria Theresa con firmed provincial autonomy in return for higher taxes. The clergy and the nobility, the two upper estates, enjoyed many privileges and possessed con siderable wealth and political power. The Church owned more than half of the land and had considerable social and cultural influence. The nobil ity also owned much real estate. Urban guilds and corporations, the dom inant element in the Third Estate, also possessed important privileges and controlled the towns. The bourgeoisie, including lawyers, bankers, manu facturers, and merchants, was gradually expanding. The peasantry consti tuted the largest social group in this mainly agrarian country. Some were prosperous, although rural pauperism remained a major problem. All three estates were represented in the assemblies of Provincial Estates, yet no Estates General of all the provinces met between 1634 and 1790.

By the end of the eighteenth century, the population of Austrian Netherlands, including the Bishopric of Liège, had reached almost 2.7 million.1 These territories, with their commercial centers – most notably Brussels, Ghent, Antwerp, and Bruges – constituted the most prosperous part of the Habsburg Empire. The Belgian economy continued to expand during the long period of peace that followed the end of the Seven Year War. The introduction of new farming methods and the development of uncultivated land increased agricultural production. The launching of the Industrial Revolution expanded the textile sector in particular.

THE BELGIAN REVOLUTION

In the late 1780s, the Austrian Netherlands underwent a revolution. Sweeping reforms by the Austrian Enlightened Absolutist Joseph II (1780–90),2 which were designed to centralize his government, hurt powerful Belgian interests and caused much discontent. He attacked the influential Catholic Church by closing scores of “useless” monasteries and introducing the Patent of Toleration, aimed at guaranteeing equal rights for Protestants and Jews. The closing of the old theological semi naries and the opening of a new, state-controlled General Seminary in Leuven provoked considerable protest. In January 1787, Joseph II also reorganized the entire Belgian administrative and judicial system, replac ing the old provinces with nine new administrative districts run by inten dants appointed by him. Those changes, which reduced provincial autonomy, aroused wide spread resistance and led to a three-year struggle between Joseph II and the Belgian population. 3 The Austrians faced two opposition groups. The first party, the conservative Statists, led by Henri van der Noot, a lawyer from Brussels, sought to restore traditional Belgian autonomy and Estates privileges. The second opposition group, known as the Vonckists, or democrats, led by Jan François Vonck, advocated the expulsion of Austrian rule through popular revolution. Inspired by Enlightenment ideas and events in revolutionary France, the Vonckists supported legal equality and a new parliamentary system open to all citizens. Agitation spread throughout Belgium. The Estates of Brabant and Hainaut refused to approve taxes. In June 1789, Joseph II reacted by sup pressing the Estates of Brabant and abolishing the Joyeuse Entrée, the fourteenth-century charter guaranteeing their rights and autonomy. Encouraged by the revolutionary events in France, the Belgian opposition