

96 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

The Grand Duchy of Berg

Located in northwestern Germany, the Grand Duchy of Berg was the first 
satellite state that Napoleon created east of the Rhine.27 It was formed to 
increase French control over the region between the Rhine and the 
Weser, and better combat smuggling of English goods into the Empire. 
In March 1806, Napoleon announced the fusion of the Duchies of Berg 
and Cleves, which had belonged to Bavaria and Prussia, respectively, and 
appointed General Joachim Murat, the husband of his sister Caroline, as 
ruler of the new state. The Emperor later increased Berg’s territory, but in 
1810 annexed one-quarter of the Grand Duchy to his own Empire to 
reduce the smuggling of English merchandise across the Rhine. At its 
peak, Berg’s population reached one million. In 1809, after Murat left 
Berg to become the King of Naples, Napoleon appointed his four-year-old 
nephew, Prince Louis Napoleon, as the new Grand Duke of Berg, himself 
serving as the regent. 
The wide differences among Berg’s provinces necessitated an extensive 
reorganization to give the new state cohesion. In March 1809, 
Jean-Claude Beugnot, Berg’s chief official, described its diversity: “The 
Grand-Duchy of Berg has been made out of provinces formerly possessed 
by fifteen sovereigns holding various ranks in the political system of 
Germany. Each one of these provinces has preserved until now its pecu 
liar laws, statutes and customs supplemented by the Roman Law, the 
Canon Law, the feudal institutions, the doctrine of the universities, and 
the authority of commentaries.” 28 
Murat spent little time in his new principality due to his military 
campaigns, but he did begin laying the foundations of new political and 
administrative structures. His principal minister, Jean-Antoine Agar, ran 
the state’s finances; the Francophile Bavarian jurist Fuschius served as the 
Interior Minister. To increase state revenues, he abolished the tax exemp 
tions of the nobility. He also introduced conscription. Administratively, 
he divided Berg into six (later eight) districts, each run by a provincial 
councillor who resembled a prefect. A Supreme Court of Appeals was 
established in Düsseldorf, the capital, and a commission was appointed 
to adapt Code Napoleon to the Grand Duchy. Other reforms included 
the sale of ecclesiastical lands and the abolition of internal customs. An 
Assembly was established but Murat convened it only once. 
After Murat left, Beugnot became the principal official in Berg, while 
Fuschius and Count Nesselrode, a Saxon general and diplomat, served 
as ministers of justice and interior, respectively. Napoleon instructed 

Germany 97

Beugnot to accelerate Berg’s integration into the imperial system. The 
most significant reform was the abolition of feudalism (December 1808 
and January 1809). It was, however, “a modest” reform,29 for it obliged 
peasants to pay landlords compensation for the elimination of seigneurial 
fees and services. Most peasants were unable to afford such payments and 
so the seigneurial structure changed little. 
Administratively and judicially, Berg looked increasingly like a French 
province. Prefects ran its four departments and Code Napoleon entered 
into effect ( January 1810). The new legal system meant the loss of the 
nobility’s jurisdictional privileges. The authorities also established state 
control over the Church, suppressed religious orders, and sold their 
land. French coinage and tariffs were introduced as well. The govern 
ment also established three lycées, although a plan to set up a university 
in Düsseldorf remained unfulfilled. In May 1812, a 14-member Council 
of State was installed to examine legislation and budgets. Along 
with Berg’s territorial expansion, its military quota also rose, reaching 
8180 by 1811. Conscription proceeded smoothly despite popular 
resentment, but military costs burdened the state. To raise additional 
revenues, the authorities introduced a uniform direct taxation based on 
the French system. The implementation of the new tax system, particu 
larly the land tax, was hindered by the lack of an accurate land survey. 
Indirect taxes, including fees on salt and tobacco, also rose and, together 
with customs, tripled public revenues by 1813. In sum, Berg’s 
financial system was modernized, but it also imposed a heavy burden on 
the population. 
Even more aggravating than the rising taxes was the serious economic 
damage caused by the Continental Blockade and by French customs 
barriers. 30 Berg possessed the most prosperous industrial base in 
Germany, including flourishing textile mills, reputable metal manufac 
turers, and the Ruhr coal and iron mines. To prevent competition with 
French industry, however, Napoleon imposed high tariffs on their import 
into France and other satellites. Consequently, Berg’s exports declined 
from 60 million francs prior to the blockade to 11 million francs in 1811. 
The blockade also impeded the importation of cotton into Berg, which 
hurt its textile industry. As a result, numerous mills closed and thousands 
of skilled workers were dismissed and forced to emigrate. In the words of 
Eli Heckscher, “Berg, on the whole, suffered nothing but injury from the 
Continental System.” 31 Berg’s industrialists petitioned to be annexed to 
the French Empire in order to gain access to its large market, but to no 
avail. The same industries that crumbled in Berg flourished in the 