

Germany 87 had officially conceded the left bank to France and accepted the secu larization of the ecclesiastical states.

THE TERRITORIAL REORGANIZATION OF GERMANY UNDER NAPOLEON

In the Treaty of Lunéville (February 1801), Emperor Francis recognized 
France’s possession of the left bank of the Rhine and accepted the need 
to compensate German princes who had lost land there. Lunéville thus 
confirmed both France’s growing influence in Germany and Austria’s 
declining power there. It ratified the terminal conditions of the Holy 
Roman Empire and ushered in the radical territorial reorganization of 
Germany that had been initiated at Campo Formio.6 The Reichstag 
appointed a nine-member committee to draw up the plan of territorial 
changes and compensations. In reality, however, Bonaparte had the final 
say in the redrawing of the German map. German states sent envoys to 
Paris to negotiate with Talleyrand and offered him bribes to secure the 
lands of their choice. French decisions were incorporated into the final 
report of the Reichstag, the Reichsdeputationshauptschluss, and the Emperor 
proclaimed it as law in April 1803. 
The Hauptschluss radically transformed Germany’s map in response to 
two principles: “mediatization” and secularization. The former signified 
the subjugation of lesser territorial units to stronger states, while the 
latter meant the annexation of ecclesiastical principalities by larger secu 
lar states. The decree eliminated 112 small states, mostly free cities and 
ecclesiastical units. Of the 51 free cities, only six survived, and of the 
ecclesiastical states, only three endured. More than three million inhabi 
tants changed rulers. 
The main beneficiaries of this territorial reshuffling were Prussia, which 
received five times the territory it had lost on the left bank, and a number 
of middle-sized states, forming Third Germany: Bavaria, Württemberg, 
Baden, Hesse-Kassel, Hesse-Darmstadt, and Nassau. Bonaparte’s influence 
in Germany increased dramatically, and, owing their expansion to French 
pressure, the middle states remained dependent upon him. Austria, on the 
other hand, received only two small additional bishoprics, Brixen and 
Trent. Moreover, many of the abolished ecclesiastical states had tradition 
ally been strong supporters of the Emperor. The new territorial arrange 
ment did simplify the map of Germany. The Empire now became an 
entirely anachronistic organization whose formal dissolution seemed 

88 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

inevitable. Most princes no longer supported common imperial goals, pre 
ferring to profit from the growing weakness of the Empire instead. 
Napoleon continued to intervene in Germany. In May 1803, following 
the resumption of hostilities with England, he ordered the occupation of 
Hanover, which belonged to the English monarch.7 Hanover’s army was 
dismantled, its arms and revenues were transferred to France, and it was 
forced to maintain a French occupation army and close its borders to 
English commerce. In March 1804, Napoleon shocked many Europeans 
when he dispatched French troops into Baden to arrest the Duc 
d’Enghien, a Bourbon prince whom he suspected of participating in a 
conspiracy against him. Following a perfunctory trial before a military tri 
bunal, the prince was executed. Despite this violation of his territory, 
Duke Charles Frederick of Baden refrained from any protest. The other 
German states demonstrated similar timidity and refused to challenge 
the French ruler. 
During the last three years of its existence (1803–6), the Empire was in 
disarray, unable to deal with the changes imposed by Napoleon. The 
Reichstag was now an essentially moribund institution, engaging in 
endless and futile debates over how to restore parity between Catholic 
and Protestant states. The imperial knights came under attack by various 
rulers who dispatched troops to their lands and annexed them. In August 
1804, Francis himself placed another nail in the Empire’s coffin when he 
assumed the new title “Francis I, Emperor of Austria.” He clearly 
responded to the declining position of Austria in Germany, preferring to 
pay more attention to his own territories. 
Napoleon’s rising influence in Germany and other parts of Europe 
alarmed Tsar Alexander I, who shared with France the responsibility for 
Germany’s reorganization. Soon, Britain, Austria, and Russia formed the 
Third Coalition. In response, Napoleon signed treaties with Bavaria, 
Baden, Württemberg, and Hesse-Darmstadt. The French victories at Ulm 
and Austerlitz further eroded Francis’s position in Germany. In the 
Treaty of Pressburg he conceded the Tyrol and the city of Augsburg to 
Bavaria, and his three southern German allies were released from their 
ties with him. The rulers of Bavaria and Württemberg were elevated to 
kings while Baden’s ruler was promoted to Grand Duke, with Napoleon 
as guarantor of their new titles. 
Napoleon’s triumph in 1805 prepared the ground for yet another 
major territorial transformation in Germany. The new changes resulted 
in the demise of many smaller units that had been spared in 1803 and 
were now annexed by the middle states. The main casualties in the new 