

84 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

85

6

Germany

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY GERMANY

Early Modern Germany was a loose confederation of more than 300 states that constituted the main part of the Holy Roman Empire.1 That Empire, founded by Charlemagne in 800, also included non-German areas like the Austrian Netherlands (Belgium) and Bohemia. The Emperor, who was chosen by seven “electors” (in the eighteenth century the number increased to nine), had always, since 1436, come from the Habsburg dynasty. German states had long varied widely in size and power. In the eighteenth century, the strongest states were Habsburg Austria and Hohenzollern Prussia. Then came middle-sized states such as Bavaria, Saxony, and Hanover, whose rulers maintained armies, collected taxes, and played some role in German, and even European, politics. The rest of Germany consisted of ecclesiastic principalities (like Mainz, Cologne, and Trier), over 50 free cities (such as Hamburg and Frankfurt), and numerous smaller secular states, some covering merely a few square miles, ruled by imperial knights. Ever since the Peace of Westphalia (1648), when Europe was increas ingly dominated by absolute monarchies, the Holy Roman Empire (Reich) had seemed an aberration. In theory, the Emperor continued to com mand the allegiance of the German rulers. Yet in reality, the Emperor’s ability to enforce his will was nonexistent. The Empire possessed no central administration or tax structure, no effective army, no unified legal system, and conducted no foreign policy. The power of the emperors derived from their own Habsburg lands and not from the Empire itself. An Imperial Diet (Reichstag) continued to meet but its decisions had little authority in the various states. In sum, as the eighteenth century drew to a close, it became increasingly obvious that the Reich’s days were numbered. In the second half of the eighteenth century, Enlightened Absolutists such as Joseph II and Frederick II launched reform policies in the Austrian Empire and Prussia. Other German rulers also initiated reforms, trying to centralize their states and augment their revenues. These centralization efforts met with resistance from the nobility, the Church, and from cities, often forcing the rulers to make concessions. In Bavaria, for example, both Maximilian III and Charles Theodore tried to introduce new taxes and reduce the power of the Estates, who succeeded, nevertheless, in defending their rights. Charles Frederick of Baden was more successful with his enlightened reform policy. He applied physio cratic principles to the economy of his land and improved education. Of approximately 24 million inhabitants in Germany in 1800, 80 percent lived in rural communities. The nobility owned the largest portion of land, although their possessions varied from huge estates to modest domains. Other major landowners included princes and the Church. Nobles possessed privileges and held a virtual monopoly of top posts in the government, military, and the Church. In the eighteenth century, the ranks of the nobility were expanded by the addition of some urban bour geoisie who acquired land, offices, and titles. As for the peasantry, most owned insufficient land and lived on the margin of subsistence. Their conditions were worse east of the Elbe where serfdom still prevailed. But even in many western regions where serfdom had declined and peasants were freer and better off, they were often still subject to landlords to whom they owed seigneurial fees and labor obligations. In addition, they had to pay taxes and support their parishes and village communities.