

82 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

stiffening penalties and increasing the mobile columns. With time, 
Belgians became progressively more accustomed to the annual draft, and 
the conscription machinery operated increasingly smoothly. 
Aside from hostility to conscription, Napoleon also faced opposition 
from a dissident ecclesiastical group, led by Corneille Stevens, a priest 
from Namur, that resisted any compromise between Church and State. 
Persistent Napoleonic efforts to turn their Church into a state instrument 
following the Concordat and the addition of the “Organic Articles” 
provoked the formation of a dissident ecclesiastical group. The deterio 
ration of relations between the Emperor and the Pope turned Belgian 
public opinion increasingly against Napoleon, and a growing segment of 
the clergy refused to pray for him following the papal excommunication 
of Napoleon and the exile of the Pope from Rome in 1809. Stevens 
published anti-Napoleonic pamphlets; De Broglie and Hirn, the bishops 
of Ghent and Tournai, joined the opposition, were incarcerated, and 
later were forced to resign. Most priests in Ghent and Tournai refused 
to recognize the new bishops Napoleon had nominated. Napoleon 
reacted by arresting hundreds of recalcitrant priests. Economic difficul 
ties also added to dissatisfaction in Belgium. The war in Spain deprived 
Belgium of a major market for its cotton products. Increases in 
indirect taxes provoked indignation and the price of colonial foodstuffs 
became prohibitive. By 1813, the textile industries, which had 
previously prospered, entered a deep crisis and thousands of workers 
were laid off. 21 
The increasing unpopularity of the Napoleonic regime in Belgium in 
the later years was reflected in the hostile sentiments aroused by 
the Werbroeck affair. Werbroeck, a supporter of Napoleon and mayor 
of Antwerp, was suspected of fraud and involvement in smuggling and 
was removed from office. Napoleon put him on trial and his property 
was confiscated. Werbroeck was acquitted but Napoleon ordered 
a retrial and the defendant died in prison. The Belgian public 
viewed Werbroeck as a victim of injustice, perpetrated by an arbitrary 
regime. 
The débâcle in Russia and the successive defeats of 1813 further under 
mined Napoleonic rule in Belgium. By that time, only very repressive 
measures by the police and tight censorship kept the government in 
control. 22 In early 1814, the Allied forces swept through Belgium, and 
on 1 February 1814, the French evacuated Brussels. Only Antwerp, 
defended by Carnot, offered any resistance. Most Belgians greeted the 
end of the Napoleonic regime with relief. 

Belgium 83

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

Most nobles and clergy favored the return of the Old Regime under the 
Habsburgs, hoping to restore their privileges. They asked the Allies to let 
the Habsburgs return, but Metternich had already ceded Austrian claims 
to that region. Britain supported the idea of uniting Belgium with 
Holland to create a strong buffer state on the northern border of France 
to prevent French expansion. William I of Holland desired this unity, as 
did Belgian professionals and commercial classes, who feared the possi 
bility of the reestablishment of the Old Regime. The First Peace of Paris 
(May 1814) placed Belgium under the control of Holland. The Allied 
victory at Waterloo secured the new arrangement, which the Congress of 
Vienna approved. 
Belgium was the first country to be invaded and annexed by the French 
and it remained part of the French Empire for almost 20 years. Economic 
growth, the emergence of an entrepreneurial class, the Austrian reforms, 
and the Belgian Revolution created a receptive atmosphere for the 
Napoleonic reforms. Except for the peasant revolt in 1798, Belgium 
never challenged the French rule in any significant way. Still, many 
Belgians remained hostile to Napoleon’s Church policies, conscription, 
and high taxes. The French period irrevocably undermined the Old 
Regime and signified an irreversible transformation toward a modern 
Belgian society and state. Ecclesiastical power suffered a decline follow 
ing the confiscation of the Church’s property and its subjection to 
state control. Most importantly, the French regime destroyed the tradi 
tional provincial autonomy and paved the way for the formation of a 
centralized state, thereby opening up new perspectives of national inde 
pendence to the Belgians. A uniform bureaucracy, one legal code, and a 
single tax system replaced the old decentralized organization. Internal 
economic barriers and customs were abolished and a national market 
developed. The Napoleonic regime prepared many Belgians for service 
in post-Napoleonic governments, thus helping to lay the foundation for 
the administrative modernization of Belgium. The Emperor also encour 
aged Belgium’s industry by protecting it from British competition and 
opening the French market to its products. Napoleonic rule benefited 
the bourgeoisie through the sale of Church land, the opening of admin 
istrative positions, and the introduction of secondary education. The 
Napoleonic government also gave a major boost to the learning of the 
French language in Belgium. Belgium remained under Dutch rule until 
1830, when it revolted and gained its independence. 