

Germany 91

Holland

De n mar k

W estphalia

Prussia

Saxony

Bavaria

Kingdom of Italy

Illyria

Swiss Confederation

3

4 6

5 6

6

8

10

9

8

7

Annexed to France, 1810 Minor unnamed states 1 Oldenburg 2 Hansa and part of Hanover 3 Mecklenburg 4 Berg 5 Nassau 6 Hesse-Darmstadt 7 Frankfurt 8 Baden 9 Württemberg 10 Würzburg

1

2

Map 2 Germany, 1812

by Napoleon, his French representatives, German rulers, and their min isters. The creation of a central state administration, which aimed at inte grating their diverse lands and increasing their capacity to fulfil their obligations to Napoleon, constituted the most successful part of the reform policies. German governments also took some initial steps to open their societies, although these reforms were much less forceful and effective than their efforts to centralize their governments. Consequently, important parts of the traditional structure, particularly in rural areas, changed very little. Much of the rest of this chapter examines the reform policies, their causes, and their impact in the Rhineland, Hansa cities, and the Rheinbund.

THE RHINELAND

During the Napoleonic period, the left bank of the Rhine (the Rhineland) extended over an area of 21,000 square kilometers (8200 square miles) with a population of 1.8 million. Prior to its annexation by France, it consisted of as many as 101 small states, including the arch bishoprics of Mainz, Cologne, and Trier; the electorate of the Palatinate; the free cities of Worms and Speyer; and numerous petty secular and ecclesiastical principalities. France ruled the Rhineland for 20 years (1794–1814), longer than any other part of Germany. This region experienced the most radical changes in Napoleonic Germany. 10 On the other hand, as James Sheehan notes, “Nowhere were the tensions between emancipation and exploita tion more apparent than in the Rhineland.”11 This was certainly true in the 1790s; French promises of liberation were hard to reconcile with demands for high war contributions and provisions for the republican army, causing alienation among the local population. This contradiction became evident in Mainz after General Custine imposed requisitions and war contributions during the first French occupation in 1793.12 A local revolutionary club of German Jacobins had hailed the French as libera tors, but the bulk of the local population remained hostile to the French. The brief revolutionary experiment in Mainz ended when the Prussian army conquered the city in July 1793. Upon their return to the Rhineland in 1794, the French continued to force Rhinelanders to help maintain their costly armies, exacerbating popular discontent.13 A plan to create an independent Cisrhenan Republic (1797) remained unreal ized after its main supporter, General Lazare Hoche, died unexpectedly.

92 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Conditions in the Rhineland gradually improved following Campo 
Formio, as the French government became more confident that the 
Rhineland would remain under its rule. It launched reform programs in 
order to integrate the territory with France and replaced the military 
authority with a civilian administration, nominating François Rudler, an 
Alsatian, as Commissioner for the entire area. Rudler proclaimed impor 
tant reforms designed to eliminate the Old Regime and construct new 
social and political realities based on the French system. Rudler divided 
the Rhineland into four departments and replaced the diverse Rhenish 
laws and institutions with a uniform administration.14 He abolished 
the tithe, the seigneurial regime, the guilds, and internal tolls, and intro 
duced a uniform tax system. Effective implementation of some of the 
reforms met with difficulties, however, due to a shortage of competent 
administrators. 
The reaffirmation of the Austrian Emperor’s cession of the Rhineland 
in the Treaty of Lunéville was followed by the annexation of the 
Rhineland into France (22 September 1802). Greater political stability, 
improved law and order, and enhanced administrative and legal unifor 
mity characterized the Napoleonic period in the Rhineland and helped 
to improve the implementation of reform programs. Code Napoleon 
introduced legal unity, replacing the multiple pre-Revolutionary Rhenish 
laws. Frenchmen assumed the top administrative positions while lower 
level officials were all natives. Some came from the old nobility but in the 
cities businessmen played the leading role. All but one of the mayors of 
Aachen, Krefeld, and Cologne had a business background. 15 
The nobility lost its titles and privileges. Many German nobles had fled 
during the revolutionary wars and their property was now confiscated. 
Those who stayed were sometimes able to expand their possessions 
by purchasing confiscated Church land. The Catholic Church, which 
wielded considerable influence and owned much property in pre 
revolutionary Rhineland – 10 percent of cultivable land – was a major 
casualty of French rule. French authorities stripped the Church of its 
privileged position, dissolved monasteries and convents, sold their lands, 
and turned priests into salaried state officials. They also promulgated 
freedom of religion, introduced civil marriage and divorce, and granted 
Protestants and Jews equal rights. 
Under Napoleon, a new class of Rhenish notables consisting of old 
nobles and members of a nascent bourgeoisie emerged as the new elite. 16 
Some of them rallied to Napoleon out of enlightened idealism, 
although most supported his regime because it provided them with career 