

Germany 93 opportunities and the ability to enlarge their property. The expanded Napoleonic bureaucracy enabled this class to gain government positions. The Rhenish bourgeoisie expanded its property base by purchasing more than half of the émigrés and Church land placed on the market after 1803.17 The textile and metallurgical industries grew rapidly as their owners took advantage of free trade, access to the large French market, and protection from British competition. Peasants also benefited from the elimination of the seigneurial system and the tithe, and some of them were able to buy land. Along with these benefits, however, Rhinelanders also paid a price for their annexation by France. New tariffs disrupted traditional economic ties with the rest of Germany. Police surveillance was stepped up and cen sorship restricted their freedom of speech. Eighty thousand Rhinelanders were conscripted to the French army, and over half did not return home. 18 The tax burden was considerably heavier than under the Old Regime.19 French replaced German as the official language of the gov ernment and the education system. These disadvantages notwithstanding, Napoleonic rule never faced strong opposition in the Rhineland. Support of the notables, an efficient administrative system, suppression of crime and banditry, opportunities to expand economically, industrial develop ment, Code Napoleon, and the end of the seigneurial system all enhanced the stability and prosperity of the Rhineland, and made Napoleonic rule acceptable to most of the population.

THE HANSA CITIES

In December 1810, Napoleon annexed the Hanseatic cities of Hamburg, Lübeck, and Bremen to the French Empire in order to tighten the Continental Blockade. 20 Napoleon suspected that these cities were not enforcing the blockade. Hamburg was the principal distributor of English goods on the Continent and controlled the mouth of the Elbe River, while Bremen controlled the Weser. The wealth of these cities also motivated the Emperor to annex them. Napoleon ordered a wholesale introduction of the French system into these lands. The French divided the area into three departments, replaced the governing senates of the cities with a uniform administrative structure, and introduced Code Napoleon. Hamburg became the seat of a governing commission that ran all three departments. Its head, Marshal Davout, was uncompromising in implementing the new system. Since the three traditionally self-governing cities were unaccustomed to centralized government, Davout staffed his administration with French officials to

94 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe guarantee implementation of new legislation. French gendarmerie and troops enforced conscription and combated smuggling. The French rule harmed many interests in the Hanseatic cities and provoked widespread hostility. The local elite resented its exclusion from power, and conscription led to extensive desertion. Heavy fiscal impositions, which included new taxes and the upkeep of French troops, caused hardship for the lower and middle classes. French customs policy excluded entrepreneurs from French markets. The Continental Blockade hurt colonial trade, crippled the textile industry, and caused widespread unemployment. Effective enforcement of the blockade also disrupted the extensive smuggling of British and colonial goods in north ern Germany, causing hardship for those who had made their living that way. The French authorities punished smugglers harshly; in 1812 in Hamburg alone, they burnt British merchandise worth 555,000 francs. 21