

Germany 89 restructuring were numerous petty secular princes, including the houses of Schwarzenberg and Kaunitz, and numerous imperial knights whose territories were “mediatized” by larger states. In addition, Nürenberg was absorbed by Bavaria, while Frankfurt was given to Karl von Dalberg, the Archbishop-Elector of Regensburg and a faithful ally of Napoleon. The 1806 territorial reorganization of Germany continued the process begun in 1803, decisively eradicating the old political order. Out of more than 300 states, less than 40 survived the Napoleonic onslaught. Under these circumstances the Empire was doomed. In an effort to save it, Dalberg proposed that Napoleon himself assume the imperial crown, but the latter rejected the idea. Instead, Napoleon proposed the creation of a new confederation of German states, designed to consoli date his domination over Germany, provide him with military assistance, and serve as an effective counterbalance to Austria and a buffer between France and the eastern powers. The states of the Third Germany had lit tle choice but to obey him. 8 On 16 July 1806, 16 German states, includ ing Bavaria, Württemberg, Baden, and Hesse-Darmstadt, formed the Confederation of the Rhine (Rheinbund ) under French tutelage. By 1808, the number of the Confederation’s members reached 39. This new reality inflicted a death blow to the Empire. The constitution of the Rheinbund formally separated the member states from the Reich, and so rendered the imperial crown meaningless. As a result, Francis II, the 54th Holy Roman Emperor since Charlemagne, abdicated his imperial title on 6 August 1806, although he continued as Emperor Francis I of Austria. The 1006-year-old Holy Roman Empire thus expired. Its end, together with the establishment of the Confederation of the Rhine, marked another major victory for Napoleon and further consolidated his hegemony in Germany. During the years that followed, the French Emperor carried out additional territorial and political changes in Germany. Most important was his defeat of Prussia and its elimination as a key player in German affairs. The Tilsit Agreement stripped Prussia of all its territories west of the Elbe and most of its Polish possessions, reducing its area and population by half. Soon afterwards, Napoleon formed the Kingdom of Westphalia out of the western Prussian provinces. He also created the Grand Duchies of Berg (1806) and Frankfurt (1810). In 1810, in an effort to tighten the Continental Blockade, Napoleon annexed the entire German North Sea coast to his Empire, including Hamburg, Lübeck, and Bremen. During the years 1806–13, when Napoleonic supremacy in Germany was at its peak, the country was divided into four major parts: (1) areas annexed to the French Empire; (2) the Confederation of the Rhine;

90 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (3) Prussia; and (4) Austria. Aside from the territorial transformation of Germany, the Napoleonic period was also characterized by reform policies in all four segments. In the words of Thomas Nipperdey, “It was at this time that the foundations of the modern state and the modern society in Germany were laid.”9 The changes were imposed from above