

THE CONFEDERATION OF THE RHINE

By 1808, the Rheinbund consisted of 39 states and included an area of 
355,000 square kilometers (138,700 square miles) with a population of 
14 million.22 Only Prussia, Austria, Danish Holstein, and Swedish 
Pomerania remained outside the Confederation. Assuming the title of 
the Confederation’s “Protector,” Napoleon himself controlled its defense 
and foreign policies and appointed Dalberg as the Prince Primate of the 
league. As a French satellite, the primary purpose of the Rheinbund was to 
supply troops to Napoleon. In 1808, the Rheinbund committed to provide 
Napoleon 126,000 men.23 The Rheinbund also paid for the upkeep of 
French soldiers in Germany. 
The Rheinbund remained a rather loose confederation, frustrating the 
hopes of Napoleon and Dalberg that it would develop a strong central 
ized government. A central diet, which was supposed to regulate relations 
among members and negotiate with Napoleon, never met. The rulers of 
the individual member states were determined to preserve their inde 
pendence and resisted attempts by Napoleon to centralize the Rheinbund 
and weaken their authority. Napoleon did recognize their sovereignty 
and refrained from interfering with their domestic affairs, so long as they 
provided him with troops, abided by the Continental Blockade, and 
acknowledged his supremacy in Germany. 
At the same time, however, Napoleon’s dominant presence and the 
new reality he had created in Germany compelled most of the Rheinbund’s 

Germany 95

governments to introduce reforms designed to strengthen and centralize 
their states.24 External pressure and internal needs stimulated them to 
transform their political structures and, to a lesser degree, their societies. 
Napoleon encouraged development of a more cohesive and unified 
Rheinbund that would facilitate his domination in Germany and enhance 
his ability to exploit its human and fiscal resources. Napoleon’s military 
and financial demands forced these states to modernize and create more 
efficient administrative, fiscal, and military systems to meet those imposi 
tions. The acquisition of many diverse territories in 1803–6 created 
another incentive to German rulers to centralize and unify their states.25 
Besides modernizing their administration, German rulers tried to achieve 
these goals by reducing the power and revoking the privileges of corpo 
rate institutions and traditional elites, most notably the nobility, the clergy, 
and formerly free cities. Their attempts to transform their societies were, 
however, much less vigorous than their administrative and judicial 
reforms, and frequently remained incomplete. This was especially true in 
rural areas where nobles, many of them mediatized imperial knights, 
preserved their property and traditional status and were able to contest 
the peasants’ liberation from the seigneurial system. In the final 
analysis, these governments were unable and unwilling to strike at the 
heart of the interests of the nobility whose support they needed. Yet, how 
ever limited the actual changes were, they did mark the beginning 
of a break with traditional society and started paving the way for the 
formation of a modern bourgeois society of free property owners and 
citizens equal before the law. 
The extent and intensity of these transformations varied greatly from 
state to state, however, depending on local circumstances, the degree of 
opposition to reforms, the size and diversity of the newly annexed lands, 
and the amount of initiative shown by the governments. In fact, 19 of the 
states in the Confederation failed to launch any reforms at all. 26 
Rheinbund states can be divided into three groups with respect to the 
intensity and impact of reform. The first group consisted of states newly 
created by Napoleon: the Kingdom of Westphalia and the Grand Duchies 
of Berg and Frankfurt. They were controlled by Napoleon, who organ 
ized their entire state structures along French lines. A second category 
consisted of the expanded southern and western states like Bavaria, 
Württemberg, and Baden, where governments launched broad reform 
policies, selectively using the French model. A third group comprised the 
states in northern and central Germany that largely refrained from intro 
ducing reforms. 