

GERMANY DURING THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD

Most German intellectuals welcomed the French Revolution with enthusiasm 2 and viewed it as a new chapter in human history. The poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock called it “the century’s most noble deed.” Kant described it as a “moral act,” while Johann Gottlieb Fichte and George Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel considered it a source of inspiration and an “act of reason,” respectively. Some public unrest, sparked by the outbreak of the French Revolution, was quickly suppressed.3 Not surpris ingly, German governments were hostile to the Revolution and banned

86 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

secret societies and censored or closed newspapers. Bavaria banned the 
French Moniteur, while the Elector of Mainz reversed his enlightened 
reform policies and ordered his officials to monitor correspondence.4 
Rhenish rulers welcomed thousands of French émigrés. Koblenz, in the 
Electorate of Trier, became a center of counter-Revolution. 
In April 1792, after France declared war on Austria and Prussia, 
Prussian forces invaded France but were forced to withdraw after their 
defeat at Valmy (September 1792). Soon thereafter, French troops under 
General Custine invaded the Rhineland. The Convention declared the 
River Rhine as France’s “natural border.” In March 1793, the Reichstag 
joined the First Coalition but it was able to offer only limited help for the 
war effort. In July 1793, Prussia drove the French out of the Rhineland. 
By early 1795, however, the French reoccupied most of the Rhineland. 
Meanwhile, King Frederick William II of Prussia, who was more inter 
ested in assuring his share in the imminent Third Partition of Poland, 
withdrew from the war. In the Treaty of Basle he recognized French 
domination over the Rhineland. In return, France promised Prussia 
compensation on the right bank of the Rhine and recognized Prussian 
hegemony in northern Germany. In other words, Prussia was willing to 
sacrifice imperial interests and smaller German states for its own territo 
rial expansion. Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden soon followed suit, 
signing similar treaties with France. 
Hostilities between Austria and France continued in Germany and 
northern Italy, however, until the Treaty of Campo Formio. With respect 
to Germany, the treaty stipulated that a congress would convene at 
Rastatt (Baden) to negotiate peace between France and the Holy Roman 
Empire. Secretly, though, Emperor Francis had already recognized 
French control over the left bank of the Rhine and promised to make 
every effort at Rastatt to secure the cession of that territory to France and 
to compensate dispossessed princes with lands on the right bank. Austria 
itself was to receive the Bishopric of Salzburg. In other words, the 
Austrian Emperor, just like the Prussian monarch, sacrificed the 
Empire’s territorial integrity to advance his own interests. Campo Formio 
thus prepared the ground for the subsequent territorial reorganization 
of Germany and the end of the Holy Roman Empire itself nine 
years later. 5 
The Rastatt Congress convened in November 1797 but negotiations 
proved to be a farce due to German powerlessness vis-à-vis France. 
Bonaparte made a brief appearance, demanding the cession of the entire 
left bank of the Rhine to France. By early 1798, the German delegates 