

98 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Rhineland cities. No wonder, then, that those cities strongly opposed the 
annexation of Berg to the Empire.32 
One cannot end the discussion of Berg without mentioning the 
famous German poet Heinrich Heine, who was born in Düsseldorf in 
1797 and spent his youth under Napoleonic rule. He admired Napoleon 
and viewed him as a liberator who was responsible for spreading the ideas 
of the French Revolution throughout Europe.33 

The Kingdom of Westphalia

The Kingdom of Westphalia, which lasted slightly more than six years (August 1807–November 1813), was the largest of the new states created in Germany by Napoleon.34 Located in northern Germany, Westphalia consisted of Brunswick, Hesse-Kassel, and lands taken from Hanover, Prussia, and some smaller states. It extended over 43,500 square kilometers (17,000 square miles) and had a population of two million. Kassel was the capital and the seat of the royal court. Napoleon chose his youngest brother Jerome as the King of Westphalia. His youth and inexperience made it easy for Napoleon to control him. This was already obvious in 1803 when Napoleon forced Jerome to divorce his American wife, Elizabeth Patterson, and marry Princess Catherine of Württemberg in order to cement France’s relations with that state. Westphalia served much more than just a dynastic purpose, however, as Napoleon also intended it as a buffer state against Prussia. Moreover, the Emperor meant it to serve as a “model state,” based on the French system, for other German states. By demonstrating the superiority of the French system, Napoleon aimed to convince other rulers to follow the French example and thus bolster his own hegemony over Germany. In November 1807, he wrote Jerome, “It is necessary that your people should enjoy a lib erty, an equality, and a degree of well-being unknown to the people of Germany . . . What people would wish to return to the arbitrary govern ment of Prussia, once they have tasted the benefits of wise and liberal administration?” 35 The Napoleonic “model state” fell rather short of the Emperor’s plans, however. Fiscal deficits, as well as the nobility’s resistance to reforms, impeded the implementation of many changes. From the beginning, Napoleon and his representatives invested con siderable effort in creating a modern centralized state in Westphalia. As in Berg, this was all the more critical given the wide diversity of regions and the need to meet military and financial obligations. Before Jerome

Germany 99 even arrived in his new capital, Napoleon appointed a regency of four French officials to lay the foundations of the new state’s administration. In November 1807, a constitution modeled on French law was proclaimed under the auspices of Napoleon at Fontainebleau. It was the first modern constitution in German history. It declared Westphalia a hereditary king dom to be ruled by Jerome and his descendants. It promulgated legal equality and religious freedom, suppressed feudal privileges and corporate bodies, as well as their tax exemptions, and ended the nobility’s exclusive right to public office. The constitution also introduced Code Napoleon and an assembly of 100 representatives. Conscription was introduced and Westphalia was required to supply Napoleon with 25,000 troops. Jerome’s propensity for extravagance and his jovial character notwith standing, he took his duties seriously. Napoleon aimed at consolidating the legitimacy of the new monarch through the creation of an enlight ened state. But as with Napoleon’s other relatives who were installed in satellite states, Jerome was required to align his policies with French interests. Napoleon ran Westphalia’s foreign policy and French officials played a decisive role in running the new state. Justice Minister Joseph Simeon, an old and experienced jurist, was the principal minister. 36 French Generals Jean Baptist Eble and Valentine Salha held the war port folio in succession. Jerome appointed two experienced German adminis trators, Baron Ludwig von Bülow and Gustav von Wolffradt, to run finance and the interior. He also nominated middle-class people, albeit to lesser positions. One of them was Jacob Grimm, the co-publisher of the famous Grimm’s Fairy Tales, who held the position of court librarian. The Council of State, named by Jerome, drafted laws and advised the King. The Legislature was dominated by the nobility and consisted of 70 landowners, 15 entrepreneurs, and 15 members of the intelligentsia. They were named by departmental electoral colleges, which represented the wealthiest taxpayers. In reality, however, this legislature proved to be a farce. Not wishing to provide the conservative nobility with a forum to check his reforms, Jerome convened it only twice. Local administration in Westphalia was based on the French model but was staffed entirely by Germans. It consisted of eight departments run by prefects, mostly nobles, nominated by the king. Appointed mayors headed the towns. However, a shortage of competent local officials led to problems in implementing the government’s orders. Simeon worked assiduously to introduce a uniform legal system and court structure. Code Napoleon, translated into German, came into effect in 1808. The new judicial hierarchy was filled by Germans. The authorities also formed