

THE HELVETIC REPUBLIC

Berne’s collapse marked the dissolution of the Swiss Confederation. 
France’s decisive military strength easily defeated the old oligarchies and 
terminated the anachronistic Swiss system. The French Directory sup 
ported the establishment of a new Helvetic Republic, “one and indivisible.” 
On 12 April 1798, 121 deputies from ten cantons convened at Aarau, for 
mally proclaiming the Helvetic Republic, ratifying its new constitution, 
modeled on the 1795 French constitution. 
The new constitution laid the foundation of modern Switzerland. The 
executive consisted of a five-member Directory while the legislature com 
prised two chambers. The new constitution abolished all privileges and 
proclaimed legal equality, civic liberties, and the right of private property. 
It established, for the first time, a common Swiss citizenship, 4 and univer 
sal male suffrage. Internal tolls and customs were removed and uniform 
weights and measures were established. The cantons lost their traditional 
independence and became administrative units run by prefects nomi 
nated by the Directory. The former subject regions became cantons, 
thereby raising the number of cantons to 18. 
The new Helvetic government legislated a series of important reforms 
inspired by the revolutionary changes in France and intended to build 
a new state and promote national unity.5 It abolished feudal dues and 
ecclesiastical privileges and confiscated Church possessions, declaring 
them national property. Freedom of the press was proclaimed, torture was 
abrogated, and a unified penal code was introduced. The authorities 
created a single currency – the Swiss franc – and centralized the postal 
system. They reorganized the tax system, established a land tax, abolished 
a special tax on Jews, and rescinded guild restrictions. The minister of edu 
cation, Philippe Stapfer, modernized and secularized the school system. 
The new government, however, faced major difficulties in implement 
ing the constitution and the reforms. French plundering, war, economic 
hardships, and political divisions marked the five-year existence of 
the Helvetic Republic. The strongly entrenched sentiments of local 
autonomy stimulated strong resistance against the centralization efforts 
of the Helvetic Republic. Like the Italian and Batavian Republics, the 

Switzerland 115

Helvetic Republic was a French satellite. The French imposed heavy requisitions and levies to maintain the armée d’Helvétie. Brune confis cated Berne’s treasury of 16 million francs, soon to be used to finance Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt. The French also plundered the treas uries of Fribourg, Solothurn, Zurich, and Lucerne, and extorted contri butions from many cantons. Those burdens and the curtailment of the traditional sovereignty met with stiff opposition in cantons such as Schwyz, Uri, and Zug. Led by Alois Reding, an experienced officer from Schwyz, these cantons rose against the new government. 6 French troops crushed the uprising in early May 1798, however, forcing the rebels to accept the new system. The French commissioner Rapinat, who was most responsible for the French extortions, eliminated from the government the most anti French members and forced the appointments of Ochs and Laharpe. France then compelled Switzerland to sign an alliance treaty (August 1798); it guaranteed the Helvetic Republic its territorial integrity in return for Swiss troops, financial support, and free passage through its territory. In 1799, Switzerland became a theater of the War of the Second Coalition. Britain, Austria, and Russia aimed to expel the French from Switzerland. Swiss aristocrats and conservatives supported the coalition, hoping that it would restore the old regime. In early June, Austrian Archduke Charles forced General Masséna to evacuate Zurich and entered the city, to the joy of ancien régime partisans. Supporters of the old system returned from exile and prepared to reestablish the former Confederation. The Austrians were not eager, however, to get involved in internal Swiss politics, and after failing to dislodge Masséna from his position on the Limmat, Charles withdrew to Germany. Masséna then defeated Korsakov in the second Battle of Zurich (September 1799). The French victory over the Second Coalition saved the Helvetic Republic, and the French restored their domination over Switzerland. Switzerland paid a very high price for the war, however. The invading armies ravaged much of its eastern and southern territories, thereby com pounding the earlier French looting of cantonal treasuries. The Swiss population had to maintain the French army, 72,000 strong. Masséna imposed heavy taxes, aggravating the economic crisis and fiscal deficits, and spreading much discontent. Growing political instability also charac terized the next three years (1800–3). Divisions between the pro-French Unitarians, who advocated a united Swiss state, and the conservative Federalists, who favored a weak central government and the restoration of the cantons’ old powers, marked the political life of the Helvetic Republic. A series of coups and constitutional changes marked that period. In June 1799, Ochs was forced to resign as a director after being