

Other German states

Two other southern German states, Hesse-Darmstadt and Nassau, allied with France, increased their territories considerably, and initiated broad reforms. The Hessian Grand Duke dissolved the estates, centralized his administration, reformed taxation, and did away with many of the nobil ity’s fiscal privileges. He also introduced Code Napoleon and the French court system. Nassau, which consisted of numerous former imperial fiefs, underwent a rigorous centralization process led by Chief Minister Baron Ernst Marschall.51 He set up a uniform tax system based on real estate and income taxes, allowed no exemption, and expropriated monastic

106 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe lands. Serfdom was also abolished, Code Napoleon was adopted, and seigneurial payments and services were subject to state regulations. Most of the German states that failed to introduce major reforms, including Saxony and both Mecklenburgs, were located in central and northern Germany. Unlike the western and southern states, the size and composition of these states saw little or no change and so they saw no need to introduce deeper reforms. Saxony, for example, due to its com mon border with Prussia and Bohemia, was one of Napoleon’s most important allies in the Confederation. For this reason, Napoleon elevated its ruler, Frederick-August, to King, gave him some Prussian territory, and in 1807 made him ruler of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw. Saxony’s only major reform was the granting of civic equality to Catholics.

THE COLLAPSE OF NAPOLEONIC GERMANY

In early 1813, following the fiasco of Napoleon in Russia, Tsar Alexander I ordered his army to pursue the French into central Europe. Driving Napoleon out of Germany became one of the Tsar’s primary goals. The former Prussian chief minister, Baron Karl vom Stein, who had served as the Tsar’s adviser on German affairs, became Governor-General of the German areas liberated by Russian forces. Stein called for the establish ment of a united “Third Germany” alongside Austria and Prussia and hoped to see a popular uprising in support of this plan. But no such uprising erupted and the Allies, as well as the Rhenish Confederation’s rulers, were strongly opposed to the formation of a “Third Germany.” Prussia supported the Russian intervention in Germany. The Prussian authorities had responded to the decisive defeats at Jena and Auerstädt and the subsequent drastic reduction of Prussian territory at Tilsit with a series of reforms designed to modernize state and army. Ultimately, those reforms aimed at enabling Prussia to face France and restore its position as a major player in European affairs. 52 The reform policies, which were led by Stein and his successor, Karl von Hardenberg, included the eman cipation of the serfs, self-government in Prussian towns, the formation of a new cabinet of five ministries with well-defined functions and broad authority, tax reforms, abolition of the guilds and other restrictions on economic activity, and the revocation of limitations suffered by the Jews. Opposition by the nobility was unable to nullify the reforms but forced the government to scale them back. An important aspect of the Prussian changes was the military reorganization launched by Gerhard von