

Germany 107

Scharnhorst and Neithardt von Gneisenau. They were convinced of the 
need to merge the nation and the army and to have soldiers who were 
imbued with patriotic duty. They purged the army of many of the generals 
responsible for the 1806 disaster, convinced the King to establish a 
modern War Ministry and open military careers to merit thereby elimi 
nating the aristocratic monopoly over the officer ranks, and established 
new military schools. Prussia also introduced conscription and a popular 
militia (Landwehr), which expanded the armed forces quickly from 
42,000 to 280,000.53 
In February 1813, Frederick William III signed an alliance with the Tsar 
at Kalisch. A month later, the King issued the “Appeal To My People,” 
pledging that his army “will fight for our independence and the honor of 
the Volk,” and calling on Germans to join the struggle for the fatherland. 
The patriotic rhetoric used by Frederick William was an effort to capital 
ize on nationalist ideas advocated by a growing number of thinkers and 
societies who called for German unity and independence. In his 
“Addresses to the German Nation” (1807–8), Johann Gottlieb Fichte 
insisted that German political independence was indispensable to 
preserve the German language, the key to the nation’s identity. Fichte also 
supported Frederick William’s “Appeal.” Ernst Arndt tirelessly propagated 
the idea of German unification and called on the German people to rise 
up against Napoleon. Nationalist writers exalted independent medieval 
Germany, contrasting it with the divided Germany of their times. In 1813, 
a number of patriotic poems and articles calling for a struggle against 
France were being published and discussed in reading societies. Yet most 
Germans remained unaffected by these nationalistic ideas and failed to 
take part in what became known as the “War of Liberation.” Aside from 
Prussia, the population of the Rhenish Confederation remained indiffer 
ent to Frederick William’s “Appeal.” Even in the case of Prussia, popular 
mobilization derived from hatred of French exploitation rather than 
German nationalism. 54 Despite his patriotic rhetoric, the Prussian 
monarch was motivated primarily by traditional dynastic goals and terri 
torial ambition and not by the desire to establish a united Germany. In 
fact, Frederick William feared a popular uprising and, more than any 
thing, his “Appeal” was aimed at pressuring German rulers to abandon 
their alliances with Napoleon. In the final analysis, the German “War of 
Liberation” was fought by states and monarchs inspired by principles of 
state and dynastic interests. Their goal was the elimination of Napoleonic 
hegemony in Germany, dissolution of the Confederation of the Rhine, 
and the restoration of their own traditional powers. 

108 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

To be sure, anti-French uprisings did break out in various 
German states but they were stimulated primarily by economic hardships, 
high taxes, and opposition to conscription. In Berg, serious anti-French 
riots by armed textile workers succeeded in gaining temporary 
control of several towns in early 1813. They were ruthlessly suppressed, 
however, and 17 of the rebels were executed. In Westphalia Jerome 
spent much money in 1813 raising a new army, which aroused 
widespread resentment.55 A revolt broke out in Kassel and many of 
Jerome’s troops deserted to the Allies, although he managed to restore 
order with French help. In February 1813, Hamburg also erupted 
in revolt, which was suppressed only in May, while an uprising in 
Dresden, the Saxon capital, enabled the Prussians to occupy that city in 
the same month. 
In southern Germany, however, conditions remained calm. And, for 
the time being, most of the rulers of the Rhenish Confederation 
remained loyal to Napoleon. In May 1813, Napoleon defeated the Allies 
in Lützen and Bautzen but was unable to destroy their armies. In August 
1813, Austria joined the anti-French coalition after Metternich failed 
to convince Napoleon to make concessions and negotiate peace. In 
October, Bavaria became the first Confederation state to break with 
Napoleon when its king concluded the Treaty of Ried with Austria, 56 
under which he agreed to join the anti-French coalition in return for 
Austrian assurances that he would be able to retain his recent territorial 
gains. This agreement was highly significant since it effectively 
sanctioned the order Napoleon established in southern Germany 
and eliminated the possibility of restoring the old imperial territorial 
structure. 
In mid-October 1813, the Allied coalition defeated Napoleon in the 
Battle of Leipzig, forcing him to retreat beyond the Rhine. This marked 
the collapse of Napoleonic rule in Germany. The other members of the 
Confederation of the Rhine, including Württemberg, Baden, and Hesse 
Darmstadt, deserted Napoleon and rushed to join the Allies in return for 
guarantees of their territorial integrity. Westphalia, Berg, and Frankfurt 
were doomed. As the Russians were approaching Kassel at the end of 
October, Jerome fled and the Kingdom of Westphalia ceased to exist. 
Russian troops invaded Berg in November and placed the Duchy under 
Allied administration. The Grand Duchy of Frankfurt ended its brief exis 
tence when Dalberg left Frankfurt shortly after the Battle of Leipzig. The 
quick fall of those states demonstrated how little support the Napoleonic 
regime had locally. By late December, Prussian forces had crossed into 