

Germany 109 the left bank of the Rhine and Prussian officials soon replaced the Napoleonic administrators there.

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

In 1815, the Congress of Vienna had the task of reassembling Germany 
and determining its new features. Post-Napoleonic Germany became 
a confederation of 39 independent states, an organization that persisted 
with very few changes until 1866. Prussia was the biggest winner; its pre 
1806 position in northern Germany was restored. The Hohenzollern 
received almost half of Saxony, most of “Great Poland” (Poznania), 
Swedish Pomerania, and considerable new territory in western Germany, 
including most of the Rhineland and the former states of Berg and 
Westphalia. Prussia remained thus split into eastern and western parts. 
Austria won back Tyrol and received Salzburg. Bavaria received additional 
lands, most notably the Palatinate on the left bank of the Rhine. Hanover 
was restored and promoted to kingdom status and returned to the British 
monarchy. Hamburg, Lübeck, Bremen, and Frankfurt regained their free 
city status. Mainz was annexed by Hesse-Darmstadt. Most of the remaining 
small states in central Germany were left unchanged. 
Napoleonic rule had a greater impact on Germany than on any of his 
other satellites except for the Italian peninsula. Thomas Nipperdey 
summed up the Napoleonic legacy in Germany: “In the beginning was 
Napoleon. His influence upon the history of the German people, their 
lives and experiences was overwhelming at a time when the initial foun 
dations of a modern German state were being laid.” 57 Territorially, the 
changes were momentous. While the Congress of Vienna introduced 
some territorial changes and altered some of the boundaries that 
Napoleon had established, on the whole it was content to ratify his large 
scale revision of the German map: the abolition of the old Reich, the 
reduction of more than 300 pre-Revolutionary German states to less than 
40, the secularization of the ecclesiastical states, the mediatization of the 
imperial knights, the elimination of most of the free cities, and the 
expansion of the southern middle states. 
Aside from redrawing the German map, the Napoleonic period also 
launched the modernization of state and society, although the degree of 
change varied throughout Germany. In the annexed Rhineland, where 
changes were the most extensive, the seigneurial system was revoked, 
a new elite was created, the Church lost its property and much of its 

110 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe power, and French laws and institutions and a more egalitarian bourgeois structure replaced the old order. In the Rheinbund, the authorities of many states were most rigorous and successful in their efforts to centralize their states, establishing central bureaucracies and uniform legal and fiscal systems, and creating conscripted armies. They elimi nated internal tolls, paving the way for the formation of national markets. They curtailed the nobility’s power, abolishing their tax exemptions and their judicial power. They brought the Church under state control, sold its property, and eliminated the special status of free cities. Yet many shortcomings in this modernizing drive persisted. Ultimately, the attempts by German princes to transform their societies were more hesi tant and their implementation more limited than their centralization policies. Most importantly, the nobility preserved their property and local power and remained the predominant force throughout post-1815 Germany. They were thus able to prevent the elimination of the seigneur ial regime in the countryside and preserve its control over the peasants. While the nobility lost its monopoly over government positions, it continued to hold most of these posts, thereby limiting the access of non-nobles to prominent positions. Education reforms had few accom plishments and Jewish emancipation remained partial. These limitations notwithstanding, the Napoleonic period marked a challenge to the traditional political and social order in Germany and “created some of the preconditions for a capitalist society, legally equal, religiously tolerant and rationally governed bourgeois society.” 58