

Germany 111

7 Switzerland

PRE-NAPOLEONIC SWITZERLAND

On the eve of the French Revolution, the Swiss Confederation constituted a loose federation of small sovereign regions, surpassed in complexity and diversity only by Germany. The most powerful and privileged regions were the 13 cantons, all German-speaking: Zurich, Berne, Lucerne, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden, Glarus, Zug, Basle, Fribourg, Solothurn, Schaffhausen, and Appenzell. Essentially, each canton viewed itself as an independent state. They were bound through various agreements to a second type of Swiss polity known as “allied districts,” which included the Bishopric of Basle, the Abbey and town of St. Gallen, the Grisons, Valais, Bienne, and Mulhouse. A third form of territory, the “subject districts,” were ruled by other cantons or “allied districts.” For example, French speaking Vaud and a part of Aargau were governed by Berne, the largest and strongest canton; the Grisons dominated Valtelina and Chiavenna. In addition to this complex variation, the canton of Geneva, an independent republic, and Neuchâtel, a principality ruled by the King of Prussia, were linked to the Swiss Confederation through treaties, although neither constituted an official part of it. The Swiss Confederation possessed no central government, no uniform administration, and no unified law. Each province had its own govern ment, legal system, and administrative structure. A diet, with representa tives from various cantons and their allies, met to discuss issues of common interest, such as war, peace, and commercial treaties. Yet that assembly lacked the means to enforce its decisions, which were binding only when consensus prevailed. The Confederation possessed no army, leaving each

112

canton to establish its own armed force. Internal tariffs and the absence of a common currency impeded the formation of a national market. Urban oligarchies of various types dominated the cantons. Some, like Berne, Lucerne, and Fribourg, were ruled by aristocratic families. In Berne, for example, an oligarchy of 68 patrician families monopolized the governing institutions, while Zurich and Basle were dominated by the guilds. Other cantons, such as Uri, Schwyz, and Zug, were run by citizen assemblies. Feudal privileges persisted in many rural communities. Peasants owed the Church and landlords tithes, seigneurial fees, and labor services. Many Swiss lacked the freedom to settle where they wanted to or choose the occupation they desired. Throughout the eighteenth century, various groups and regions revolted in an effort to end their oppressive conditions, but the ruling elite suppressed those insurrections.

SWITZERLAND AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

Traditionally, the Swiss Confederation had close ties with France, and in 1777 the two countries renewed their alliance. Thousands of Swiss soldiers served in the French army and as guards in the Royal Palace in Paris. The French Revolution, then, aroused considerable interest in Switzerland. The cantonal governments and the urban elite reacted to the events in France with fear and suspicion, imposing censorship on revolutionary news and welcoming French émigrés. On the other hand, a group of Swiss exiles founded a revolutionary Helvetic club in Paris in 1790–1, 1 aimed at spreading the French Revolution into Switzerland. French reforms gained support, particularly in the subject districts, which wished to become independent. Revolutionary clubs were founded in French-speaking provinces, such as Vaud, whose population opposed Berne’s domination. In 1791, support ers of the Revolution in that area celebrated Bastille Day, despite its pro hibition by the Bernese authorities. Peasants in Schaffhausen, Valais, and St. Gallen demanded the commuting of feudal payments. In 1794, the inhabitants of the village of Staefa, in the canton of Zurich, published a memorandum calling for the elimination of privileges and the establish ment of a more egalitarian society. The authorities sentenced the leaders of the Staefa movement to life in prison. In December 1792, the aristo cratic government of Geneva was replaced by a revolutionary govern ment, and in July 1794, a brief Reign of Terror was unleashed in that city.