

104 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe a five-member central cabinet, abolished the towns’ autonomy, and divided Baden into ten circles, each run by a prefect-like Kreisdirector. Like Bavaria, Baden and Württemberg appointed members of the bourgeoisie to their bureaucracy. In the legal sphere, they eliminated the nobility’s courts and declared all citizens equal before the law. In 1808, Baden intro duced Code Napoleon, the first German state to do so, and it remained the basis of Baden’s judicial system throughout the nineteenth century. Reducing the nobility’s power and privileges was a crucial part of the centralization efforts. In all three states nobles lost their monopoly on public offices and army commissions. In Bavaria, Montgelas eliminated the nobles’ tax exemptions and their authority to operate judicial courts. In Württemberg and Baden the nobility lost their seigneurial jurisdiction. In the former the nobility also lost their fiscal exemptions. All three states also eliminated the independence and privileges of the formerly free cities, appointing state bureaucrats to run them. Municipal citizens now paid taxes and were drafted like the rest of the population. Urban guilds were undermined by new decrees guaranteeing freedom of occupation and trade. Similarly, all three governments subordinated ecclesiastical matters to the state. They abolished the clergy’s privileges and immunities, broke up monasteries, and sold Church property. Bavaria, where the Catholic Church had extraordinary influence, carried out a particularly rigorous secularization policy, 47 in part to solve its fiscal deficit. Churches in all three states lost their monopoly over welfare. Württemberg also abolished the monopoly the Lutheran Church had over education. States acquired a say in clerical nominations and training and regulated religious celebrations. The authorities decreed parity between Catholics and Protestants. Bavaria also allowed Jews greater freedom of worship and granted them state citi zenship, although some restrictions remained. Württemberg abrogated the special taxes on Jews and allowed them to own land and choose a trade.48 Baden proclaimed the most progressive Jewish legislation, although even here Jews were denied full equality. The Bavarian govern ment restructured the school system, including the secondary schools and the universities. Reitzenstein also reorganized the 400-year-old University of Heidelberg, laying the foundation for its future national role. The three southern German states modeled their armies on the French military structure and introduced universal conscription. They con tributed tens of thousands of troops to the Napoleonic campaigns. For example, Bavaria fought alongside France against Austria (1809) and provided 33,000 men to the Russian campaign. High military costs

Germany 105 caused budget deficits that required fiscal reforms. The abolition of tax exemptions was aimed at increasing revenues. In Bavaria, Montgelas ordered a new land assessment and introduced new indirect taxes. Nonetheless, the Bavarian public debt climbed to 118 million gulden in 1811. Aside from financial problems, the implementation of reform programs faced other difficulties that hampered their effectiveness. The nobility, including many mediatized imperial knights, not only retained their considerable property but were “never completely subject to the principle of equality before the law.” 49 Nobles still had greater access than non-nobles to public office. While Montgelas brought seigneurial jurisdiction under state supervision in Bavaria, he was unable to eradicate it. The Bavarian nobility, although less than 1 percent of the population, maintained strong local influence and were able to subvert many reforms at the local level. They were also strong enough to prevent the introduc tion of Code Napoleon. In Baden, noble opposition also hampered Reitzenstein’s efforts to unify that state as rigorously as he had hoped. Most significantly, in all three states the nobility’s resistance prevented the full implementation of agrarian reform. The abolition of personal serfdom meant little since very few serfs remained in these states. Seigneurial fees and obligations persisted since peasants lacked the means to pay an indemnity. For the most part, where nobles contested the abolition of fees or demanded higher indemnities, the courts ruled in their favor. And so, in spite of Montgelas’s great efforts to change rural society, Bavarian peasants remained economically dependent on their landlords until 1848. Aside from the nobility, towns and municipal cor porate bodies also added their opposition to the centralization efforts in ways that the new bureaucracies were not always able to overcome. 50