

Switzerland 113

The Swiss Confederation remained neutral during the First Coalition War. France honored that neutrality although it did occupy the Bishopric of Basle. The killing of hundreds of Swiss guards by Parisian crowds in the Tuileries Palace (August 1792) aroused much indignation in the Confederation, but caused no change in Swiss policy. After 1795, the Directory grew more aggressive and began to interfere in the internal affairs of the Swiss Confederation. The new policy was a part of France’s broader expansionist policy in Europe. Bonaparte urged the Directory to intervene in Switzerland in order to gain control over the Simplon Pass, so essential for communication with northern Italy. He also called for the formation of a united Switzerland as an ally of France. 2 The Directory also coveted the treasuries of several wealthy cantons, most notably Berne. Following the Coup of Fructidor (September 1797), Jean Reubell, who was hostile to Switzerland, became a Director, while Lazare Carnot and François de Barthélemy, both friends of the Confederation, were replaced. The Directory began exerting pressure on the Confederation, demanding the expulsion of French émigrés and of Wickham, a British agent and anti-French agitator. The French government also sent agita tors to various Swiss towns to incite revolutionary ideas. In October 1797, Bonaparte tore the three provinces of Valtellina, Chiavenna, and Bormio from the Grisons and annexed them to the Cisalpine Republic. This dam aged Switzerland strategically and exposed it to attacks in the southeast. 3 French intervention in Switzerland received ardent support from two prominent Swiss citizens who admired the French Revolution: Frédéric-César Laharpe and Peter Ochs. Laharpe, a native of Vaud and advocate of Enlightenment ideas, served for 12 years as a tutor of the future Russian Tsar Alexander I. He was an enthusiastic supporter of Vaudois independence from Berne. In 1797, he settled in Paris and strongly encouraged the Directory to invade Switzerland. Ochs, a distin guished citizen of Basle, served as a top official in that city and called for the establishment of a unified Switzerland. In December 1797, he met in Paris with Reubell and Bonaparte, urging them to intervene in Switzerland to help create a modern democratic state. Ochs also drafted a constitution for a united Helvetic Republic patterned after the French model. This context affected Switzerland, which soon underwent major changes. In early 1798, pressure from rural districts forced the authori ties in Basle, Zurich, Lucerne, Schaffhausen, and Solothurn to proclaim legal equality and a set of civic liberties. In January, Vaud revolted against Berne and declared its independence as the Republic of Leman. The French invaded Switzerland in support of Vaud, and in March 1798

114 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

General Brune occupied Berne, subjecting it, for the first time in its history, to foreign domination. In April 1798, Geneva was annexed to France and became the capital of the new French department of Leman.