

116 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe accused of transferring state secrets to France. Laharpe tried to strengthen his power within the Directory, but his adversaries forced him to retire. In early January 1800, they replaced the Directory with a provi sional Executive Commission of seven members. The Commission then replaced the two legislative chambers with a single body. Meanwhile, the independence of the Helvetic Republic was recognized at Lunéville. Still, Bonaparte was determined to preserve French control over Switzerland, so essential to retain the territorial link between Germany and Italy. In May 1801, he presented his own draft of a consti tution, the so-called Malmaison constitution, designed to reconcile Unitarians and Federalists. He divided power between the central govern ment and the cantons, a compromise that satisfied no one, and so the struggle continued. In September, the Unitarian majority in the diet strengthened the central government. A month later, the Federalists, receiving help from French envoy Raimond Verniac, gained control of the government and dissolved the diet. They appointed their own supporters to all the offices and altered the constitution. In April 1802, however, the Unitarians staged another coup, regaining power and issuing yet another constitution. Shortly thereafter, Bonaparte ordered French troops to withdraw from Switzerland, ostensibly out of respect for Swiss independence and to con vince the European governments of his moderation. 7 But the French Consul never intended to give up his dominant position in Switzerland and viewed the evacuation as temporary. The strategic value of Switzerland was too high and he had no intention of letting that country fall under the influence of another power.8 The French withdrawal deprived the Helvetic government of its main support and only increased the political turmoil in Switzerland. The Federalists, led by Alois Reding, took advantage of the French evacuation and revolted, forcing the central government to flee from Berne to Lausanne. Twelve rebelling cantons formed a new federal diet. Clearly, no solution to the Swiss crisis could be found but through French intervention.9 Sure enough, Stapfer appealed for French help, and in September 1802, the First Consul ordered French troops to return to Switzerland in support of the Helvetic government.10 Subsequently, the rebel diet dispersed and its leaders were arrested.

THE MEDIATION ACT (1803)

Bonaparte was now determined to impose a settlement that would assure stability and French domination in Switzerland. To Talleyrand he wrote,

Switzerland 117 “a stable and solid government, a friend of France, that’s my first wish.”11 In late November 1802, the Consul summoned to Paris the “Helvetic Consulta,” consisting of more than 60 delegates of both camps, to discuss his proposal for a constitution. What emerged from that meeting was the Mediation Act, which Bonaparte ratified on 19 February 1803. The Mediation Act ended the Helvetic Republic and its unitary structure and restored the federal system. Bonaparte believed that a stable Switzerland required the reestablishment of cantonal autonomy and the domination of the former ruling elite. To a disappointed Ochs, Napoleon retorted, “Mister Ochs, the revolution is over.” By endorsing the revival of the federal structure, the First Consul turned the powerful anti-French Federalists into his grateful supporters while the Unitarians, who had been dependent on the French all along, had no choice but to side with him. 12 Through the Mediation Act, Bonaparte restored the old auto nomy of the cantons and the power of the old elites who, in return, rec ognized his supremacy in Switzerland.13 The Mediation Act clearly demonstrated that he was willing to compromise with the ruling class and dilute the route of reform for the sake of guaranteeing his power. The Mediation Act recognized the existence of 19 cantons, including the 13 old ones and six new ones created from subject and allied territories: St. Gallen, the Grisons, Aargau, Thurgau, Ticino, and Vaud. Geneva, Bienne, and the Bishopric of Basle were annexed by France. Neuchâtel remained under the Prussian king while the Valais, where France had begun building the road over the Simplon, remained under French pro tection. The cantons recovered their autonomy and were free to reinstate their previous governments. Each canton had its own constitution. The cantons regained jurisdiction over customs, coinage, and post. A feeble Federal Diet constituted the central government. It consisted of representatives from all cantons with the six largest cantons having two votes each. But its authority was restricted to issues of foreign policy and war. The seat of government rotated annually among the six largest cities, the Vorvort. The mayor of the Vorvort became the Landamman, or the chief confederate magistrate. The Landamman conducted foreign policy, supervised the construction of roads and canals, and was in charge of internal security. Each canton provided a quota of troops according to its population and paid for the costs of the army and public works. Freedom of speech and faith were not included in the Act, yet it did preserve important elements from the Helvetic period. Most significantly, it main tained the former subject territories as equal cantons. The distinction between sovereign town and subject country inhabitants was replaced by