

102 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Westphalian nobles viewed Napoleonic rule as unshakable. In 1809, how ever, when Austria began a war against France, several insurrections broke out. The most famous of those revolts was led by Major Ferdinand von Schill, a Prussian officer who wished to expel the French from northern Germany. Seeking to exploit Napoleon’s preoccupation with Austria, Schill led a regiment into Westphalia (April 1809) and tried to incite a general uprising, but Jerome’s troops quickly suppressed his insurrection. Schill, who was killed in the battle at Stralsund, became a national hero.

The Grand Duchy of Frankfurt

Upon the establishment of the Rheinbund, Napoleon gave Frankfurt to 
Dalberg. In February 1810, Napoleon granted the city of Regensburg to 
Bavaria in return for its help in the war against Austria, and compensated 
Dalberg by handing him Fulda and Hanau and elevating his territory to 
a Grand Duchy. The small state had a population of 300,000 inhabi 
tants. 44 While Dalberg enjoyed some autonomy in running Frankfurt, the 
French resident there, Theobald Bacher, controlled his policy. The 
Emperor expected Dalberg to enforce the Continental Blockade, and, in 
late 1810, the authorities in Frankfurt burnt English goods worth more 
than 800,000 francs. Frankfurt provided Napoleon close to 7000 soldiers 
and paid for quartering French soldiers. 
The constitution of the Grand Duchy was modeled on that of 
Westphalia. Dalberg served as the executive and formed a Council of 
State to discuss reforms. The Legislature, which represented the wealthi 
est citizens, was convened by him only once. The state was divided into 
four departments and Code Napoleon came into effect in 1810. The gov 
ernment broke up guilds and established new taxation. Seigneurial dues 
and services were abolished, but as elsewhere, they persisted since peas 
ants had to buy their freedom. The Church was placed under state con 
trol, and monasteries were dissolved. Religious freedom was proclaimed, 
and in 1812 Jews became equal citizens, although they had to pay for 
their rights. 

Napoleonic German Allies: Bavaria, Württemberg, Baden

Aside from Berg, Westphalia, and Frankfurt, the governments of Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden launched the most extensive reforms in

Germany 103

Napoleonic Germany. As important allies of France they had been rewarded with substantial new territories. The Bavarian ruler, Max Joseph of the Wittelsbach dynasty, annexed no fewer than 80 different political entities. Baden’s gains were even greater relative to its size: it quadrupled its territory, thanks largely to the efforts of its representative in Paris, Sigismund von Reitzenstein. Frederick II of Württemberg roughly doubled his territory. In 1806, Napoleon elevated Max Joseph and Frederick II to royal status, and Baden’s Charles-Frederick to Grand Duke. To further cement his alliance with these states, the French Emperor arranged mar riages between his relatives and their dynasties: Eugène de Beauharnais married Max Joseph’s daughter Augusta; Stephanie de Beauharnais, Josephine’s niece, married the grandson of Baden’s ruler; and, as previ ously noted, Jerome married Catherine, Frederick’s daughter. The authorities of all three states needed to initiate extensive changes in order to integrate their new lands. Their greatest achievement was the formation of a strong central state. The chief minister, Count Maximilian von Montgelas, was the chief architect behind the reforms in Bavaria. 45 He was an experienced administrator, influenced by the Enlightenment and committed to the formation of a bureaucratic, centralized state. In 1806, Montgelas abolished the Bavarian Estates and constructed a central government of four ministries and an advisory Council of State. In June 1808, he replaced the old provincial governments with 15 administrative districts, each run by a Generalkommissar, similar to a French prefect. The new central bureaucracy, which consisted of professionally trained offi cials recruited from the nobility and the bourgeoisie, was subordinate to him. In May 1808, King Max Joseph proclaimed a constitution, the only one in the Confederation except for Westphalia. It ended serfdom and proclaimed legal equality, the right of private property, and freedom of religion. A new assembly, consisting of representatives of the largest tax payers, mostly nobles, was promised but was never summoned. In 1811, Montgelas abolished internal tolls and established uniform weights and measures. In Württemberg, King Frederick II was the main force behind the centralization efforts. Previously, he had to share power with a strong Landtag, but after assuming the royal title, Frederick abolished the old constitution and the diet and ruled as an absolutist monarch. He divided Württemberg into twelve administrative regions run by Landvogte subor dinate to him. In Baden, first the moderate minister Johann Brauer and then the more forceful von Reitzenstein pursued a reform program designed to centralize state bureaucracy and introduce administra tive uniformity into its 2000 communities. 46 Reitzenstein established