

100 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

a single market by removing trade barriers and introducing a uniform 
currency and a unified commercial code. 
Westphalia made the greatest progress among the Confederation’s 
states toward becoming a society of equal citizens. Jerome removed all 
the discriminatory laws against Jews in January 1808, including special 
taxes, residential and occupational restrictions, and exclusion from 
schools and the army. In sum, Jews became equal citizens as a result of 
the first complete Jewish emancipation in Germany.37 With the help of 
Code Napoleon, the new constitution, and an enlightened state bureau 
cracy, Simeon sought to destroy the nobility’s privileges and the old 
seigneurial structure. The nobility lost its monopoly of government and 
military positions, its tax privileges, and its right to collect tolls. The new 
regime also tried to subordinate the Church to the State; priests were 
required to preach obedience to the sovereign, read conscription 
decrees to their parishioners, and celebrate royal birthdays and French 
victories. The Church lost its tax exemptions, its control over education 
and welfare, and the right to fill ecclesiastical offices without state 
approval. The authorities also closed down many religious orders and 
confiscated their land. 
As in the other Napoleonic satellites, however, the Westphalian nobil 
ity remained the dominant class. 38 Nobles dominated the ranks of the 
prefects, military officers, and the legislature. As the largest landowners, 
nobles preserved their local influence. Most significantly, however, they 
were able to block implementation of decrees ending the seigneurial 
regime, the most controversial and important of Jerome’s reforms. A 
royal decree in January 1808 allowed peasants to own land and move 
freely, but while it abolished their seigneurial obligations, it also required 
the peasants to redeem them. As in Berg, emancipation remained a dead 
letter since most peasants lacked the means to pay for their redemption. 
Many landlords also retained sufficient local influence to obstruct imple 
mentation of the decree. 39 Moreover, Napoleon himself contradicted 
Code Napoleon by exempting from the seigneurial reform the estates he 
bestowed upon his favorites. On the whole, the Napoleonic regime was 
unwilling and/or unable to challenge the powerful nobility more effec 
tively. Seigneurial relations persisted in the Westphalian countryside, 
which exposed the contradictions of the Napoleonic system in that 
German “model state.” 
Financial constraints also kept the Westphalian authorities from 
accomplishing welfare and education reforms, thereby hampering 
Napoleon’s efforts to establish a “model state” in Westphalia. The 

Germany 101 government issued welfare regulations designed to reduce indigence, and established a central bureau of welfare to provide work for the poor and teach children a trade. Towns were charged with caring for their poor but most of them lacked the resources to do so. In fact, pauperism and vagabondage rose due to economic hardship caused by the Continental Blockade and by military requisitions. There was also little progress in the area of education. Reorganization programs for primary and secondary education remained largely on paper, and financial hard ship forced the closure of two out of the five existing state universities. Napoleon’s costly military demands constituted the main cause for the financial difficulties of Westphalia. In the words of Herbert Fisher, “Napoleon ruined Westphalia, treating the kingdom as a mere financial and military asset in his great game of politics.” 40 Westphalia was obliged to raise an army of 25,000 men and pay for the 12,500 French troops sta tioned in Westphalia.41 To achieve this goal Jerome introduced conscrip tion. Seventy thousand Westphalians were drafted and another 30,000 volunteered between 1809 and 1813. Indeed, Westphalia produced more soldiers per capita than any other Napoleonic satellite. Out of 22,000 Westphalians who marched into Russia, only 1500 survived. Military costs were the state’s largest expenditure. Servicing the huge debt inherited from the former rulers of this region and maintaining Jerome’s extravagant court expenditures also burdened Westphalia’s treas ury. Napoleon diminished Westphalian revenues by exempting from taxa tion the imperial fiefs that he granted to generals and aides. In the words of Helmut Berding, “No state suffered more the effects of those donations than the Kingdom of Westphalia.” 42 Economic difficulties shrank the Westphalian population’s capacity to pay taxes. The Westphalian economy suffered considerably from the Continental Blockade, which interrupted its commercial ties with England. Moreover, to prevent competition with its own products, France forbade the export of Westphalian goods into the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Italy. The authorities sought to meet their increased financial burden by establishing a more effective tax system. Most tax exemptions were abolished and the fiscal administration was improved. Land tax constituted the principal source of revenues. Since annual tax increases did not suffice to cover mounting expenses, the authorities resorted to the sale of national properties, forced loans, and suspension of payments to creditors. Still, the accumulated debt, estimated at 140–200 million francs in 1812, kept rising. 43 The high taxes and conscription aroused popular resentment. The army as a whole, however, remained loyal to Jerome, and most