

120 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

while others relied on volunteers. Schwyz drafted men who had derided 
religion and Solothurn supplied smugglers.20 Recruitment difficulties 
persisted and Napoleon consented to reduce the Swiss quota to 12,000. In 
1812, 9000 Swiss soldiers marched with Napoleon into Russia. Only 700 
returned home. 
The Swiss government sided with Napoleon until his defeat at Leipzig. 
The Diet then declared Switzerland’s neutrality and its withdrawal from 
the Continental System. Metternich wanted Switzerland to join the anti 
Napoleonic coalition, but most Swiss officials were determined to stay 
neutral. Only the most conservative forces gave the Austrian chancellor 
total support and appealed to him for help to eliminate the Napoleonic 
system. In December 1813, a large Austrian–Bavarian army invaded 
Switzerland, rendering any resistance hopeless. The Mediation Act’s 
regime collapsed. 

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

The patricians in Berne and other cantons wanted to restore the old Confederation, including “allied” and “subject” districts. This threatened to provoke a civil war. Under pressure by foreign powers, led by Tsar Alexander, the Bernese aristocracy yielded, and in April 1814 a diet with representatives from all 19 cantons convened in Zurich. In September, Valais, Neuchâtel, and Geneva, which had been part of the French Empire, were readmitted to the Confederation, bringing the total number of cantons to 22. In August 1815, after lengthy discussions, the Diet proclaimed a new constitution, the so-called Federal Pact, which largely restored the old system and which lasted until 1848. Most importantly, the principle of the federal system prevailed. The cantons gained full sovereignty and were free to negotiate agreements with foreign countries as long as they did not harm the Confederation. The Confederation had no permanent cen tral authority except for a diet that ran foreign policy and constituted the supreme military authority. The old privileged forces reinstituted their power in the various cantons. Swiss citizenship and freedom of occupa tion and worship were eliminated. The Congress of Vienna recognized Swiss neutrality and ratified the final cantonal borders. The reaction of 1814–15 was, undoubtedly, facilitated by the Mediation Act, which had entrusted considerable power into the hands of the can tonal traditional elites. At the same time, however, the Napoleonic period

Switzerland 121 laid the foundations of nationhood and the organization of modern Switzerland. The old subject districts retained their independent cantonal status and had equal representation in the diet. A federal army, supervised by the diet, was formed. Under the Helvetic Republic, Swiss citizens experienced unified institutions and laws for the first time. Vestiges of feudalism virtually disappeared while civic liberties and legal equality became a reality. Swiss citizens, especially in rural areas, who had previously been denied political rights became enfranchised. The Federal Pact stated that political rights were not to be the exclusive priv ilege of one class of citizens. The Swiss franc as a single currency, uniform weights and measures, and modern public education, all instrumental in modernizing and unifying Switzerland, date from the Napoleonic period. In 1848, following years of internal conflicts, Switzerland adopted a new constitution, which formed a powerful federal government and proclaimed many of the liberal reforms that had been first established during the French era.