

SPAIN AND REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE

Under Charles III, Spain and France had been allies, signing an anti British coalition, the third “Family Compact,” in 1761. The French Revolution alarmed the Spanish establishment and caused tension between the two countries. 4 French émigrés found shelter in Spain, exac erbating the poor relations. Prime Minister Floridablanca shelved reform plans, increased the number of troops in the Pyrenees, and imposed rigid censorship on news from France. Meanwhile, Charles IV appointed Manuel Godoy, a member of the lower nobility who served in the Royal Bodyguard, as the new prime minister.5 Godoy had close relations with the queen and owed his rapid rise to power to her. As France turned more radical, Charles IV became increasingly con cerned about the fate of his cousin, Louis XVI, and pressured the French Republic to spare his life. Two months after the execution of Louis XVI, France declared war on Spain, ending 60 years of alliance. The Spanish army invaded southern France and, with the British, occupied Toulon.

124 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

In April 1794, however, the French pushed the Spanish forces across the Pyrenees and occupied northern Spain. These losses stimulated Godoy to sign the Peace of Basle ( July 1795) with France, and the latter returned to Spain its territories. The Treaty of Basle provoked the British, who began attacking Spanish ships. A rapprochement between Spain and France followed and they signed the Treaty of San Ildefonso (August 1796), which placed Spanish troops and Spain’s navy under French com mand. Godoy hoped that the French alliance would bolster his political power in the court in the face of growing opposition to his rule. The alliance with France meant war with Britain, with dire economic conse quences for Spain. The British defeated the Spanish navy at Cape St. Vincent (February 1797), disrupted Spain’s trade with America and the flow of silver from its colonies, and seized the Spanish colony of Trinidad.

SPANISH ALLIANCE WITH NAPOLEONIC FRANCE (1800–7)

After Bonaparte’s rise to power, Spain was subjected to increasing demands from its northern neighbor and approached the status of a French satellite. This was evident in the second Treaty of San Ildefonso, signed in October 1800. Spain agreed to give France six ships and ceded to it the vast Louisiana Territory, which it had acquired only 40 years ear lier. In return, the First Consul agreed to create a new principality out of Tuscany for the Spanish rulers’ daughter Luisetta and her husband Louis. Bonaparte also demanded that his ally help compel Portugal to cut its ties with Britain and enter the French sphere of influence. Godoy, who had resigned in 1798 but returned to head the Spanish government in 1801, complied with the Consul’s demands, hoping that support from Bonaparte would consolidate his own position in Spain. In May 1801, Godoy led a Spanish army into Portugal in what became known as the “War of the Oranges.” The Portuguese quickly capitulated and, in the ensuing treaty, surrendered a small border area to Spain and pledged to close their ports to English ships. Following the Treaty of Amiens, Spain became neutral. When hostili ties between France and England resumed, Bonaparte insisted that Spain pay France a monthly subsidy of six million livres for recognizing Spanish neutrality. Spain was now in its weakest position vis-à-vis France since 1793. Its subsidy to France only aggravated Britain and, in October 1804, a British squadron intercepted four Spanish frigates carrying treasure from South America. Spain reacted by concluding a maritime alliance