

THE OCCUPATION OF SPAIN BY FRANCE

Napoleon’s brief expedition into Spain succeeded in securing the roads from the French border to Madrid and in providing the French with a wider territorial base. Marshal Victor defeated the Spanish army at Ucles in January 1809 and at Medellin in March. Marshal Lannes conquered Saragossa (February 1809), overcoming a heroic Spanish resistance in which 54,000 people perished and a third of the city was ruined. 22 The Spanish resolve was also obvious in Gerona, which the French occupied on their third attempt, but only after a seven-month siege (December 1809) that cost them 14,000 casualties. Meanwhile, however, the French suffered a setback in Portugal when Marshal Soult had to evacuate Oporto and retreat to Galicia (May 1809). In June, British General Wellesley invaded Spain and advanced toward Madrid. Joseph con fronted the British–Spanish–Portuguese army at Talavera, 70 miles southwest of Madrid. The two-day battle (27–28 July) was indecisive, but

132 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

exhaustion and fear of entrapment convinced Wellesley to retreat to 
Portugal. He was rewarded with the title Duke of Wellington for his stand 
at Talavera. The French failure to destroy Wellington’s forces was signifi 
cant. The British commander consolidated his position in Portugal and 
successfully resisted a major French invasion into that country in 1811. In 
1812 and 1813, he again invaded Spain and played a crucial role in 
expelling the French from Iberia. 
For the moment, however, the French were gaining the upper hand. 
The victory over the Austrians at Wagram enabled Napoleon to send rein 
forcements to the Peninsula. In November 1809, at the battle of Ocanˇa, 
the French inflicted upon the Spanish their worst rout of the war; Spain 
lost 10,000 dead and 26,000 prisoners. Ocanˇa shattered Spanish morale. 
Most significantly, Andalusia, the largest, most populous, and wealthiest 
Spanish province, now lay open to the French. Its capital, Seville, served 
as the temporary seat of the Junta Central. Joseph, who was in financial dif 
ficulty, could hope now to benefit from the riches of Andalusia. In 
January 1810, the French invaded Andalusia and easily captured 
Cordoba, Granada, and Seville. The Junta Central hastily left Seville and 
moved to the Isle of Leon in the port of Cadiz, where its members 
resigned after appointing a Regency. The new body would clear the way 
for the convening of the Cortes later that year. Cadiz was the only 
Andalusian city that held out, owing to the arrival of the Duke of 
Albuquerque with 12,000 soldiers. Soon, Marshal Soult began the long 
siege of Cadiz. For the rest of 1810 and 1811, the French continued to 
extend their military control over Spain, occupying Asturias, Valencia, 
and the southern coast of Catalonia, as well. 
But Napoleonic control of Spain was never secure and stable, despite 
his victories. No single national government was ever able to dominate 
the whole of Spain during the years 1808–13. A number of rivals, includ 
ing Joseph’s government, French generals, the juntas, guerrillas, and the 
Cortes of Cadiz vied for power and exerted varying degrees of authority in 
various parts of Spain. While the French occupied most of the country, 
they never pacified it. Spain’s large size and relentless guerrilla resistance 
prevented the French from controlling many regions, except when their 
troops were present. The British presence in Portugal constituted a 
constant threat to the French grip over Spain. Wellington and his Anglo 
Portuguese army intervened in Spain and maintained contact with 
Spanish rebels. In sum, the “Spanish Ulcer” would not heal; it constantly 
drained the human and fiscal resources of the Napoleonic Empire and 
contributed to its demise. 