

TOPPLING THE BOURBONS

Napoleon never entirely trusted the Spanish Bourbons, who were, after all, related to his enemies, the French Bourbons. In October 1807, Ferdinand appealed to Napoleon for support, offering to marry one of his relatives. Yet the turmoil within the Bourbon government and its earlier attempt to break away from the alliance with France convinced Napoleon that he needed to replace that dynasty with a more reliable regime. Using the Portuguese campaign as a pretext, he dispatched more French troops into northern Spain and occupied the cities of Pamplona, San Sebastian, and Barcelona. By March 1808, the French army in Spain numbered about 100,000 men 10 and was marching on Madrid. It soon became clear that Napoleon intended to occupy the entire Peninsula. The French occupation of northern Spain intensified the hostility against Godoy. In March 1808, a large crowd of Ferdinand’s supporters attacked Godoy’s palace at Aranjuez and arrested him. Two days later, a frightened Charles IV dismissed Godoy and abdicated in favor of Ferdinand, who was enjoying immense popularity. The latter succeeded to the throne as Ferdinand VII and appointed a new cabinet. Fearing that the popular Ferdinand would become too independent, Napoleon was determined to get rid of him. On 23 March, Joachim Murat entered Madrid with 40,000 soldiers. Meanwhile, Charles IV retracted his abdica tion, claiming that he had been forced to resign, and sought Napoleon’s

Spain 127 support. The following month the French Emperor invited the entire royal family to meet him at Bayonne, near the Spanish–French border, and forced both father and son to renounce the Spanish crown. He offered the throne instead to his older brother Joseph, the ruler of the Kingdom of Naples. Charles IV and Maria Luisa, as well as Godoy, spent the rest of their lives in exile. Ferdinand spent the next six years at Talleyrand’s estate at Valencay.

THE LAUNCHING OF THE SPANISH REVOLT (1808)

During this time, rough behavior by French soldiers in Madrid aroused general revulsion and increased tension in the Spanish capital. Anti French sentiment culminated on 2 May 1808 when the remaining mem bers of the royal family, including the youngest prince, were about to be escorted to Bayonne. Hundreds of Madrilenos, mostly from the lower classes, attacked Murat’s troops and fierce fighting persisted for the entire day. The next day, after Murat gained control over the city, the French executed many civilians. The Madrilenos suffered between 400 and 500 dead while the French had 14 fatalities. 11 Francisco Goya immortalized the fighting in Madrid and the executions the day after in two famous paintings, entitled Dos de Mayo and Tres de Mayo. The insurrection of Dos de Mayo marked the beginning of an anti Napoleonic uprising in Spain that would last until the expulsion of the French from Iberia in 1813. Indeed, when Murat boasted that suppress ing the insurrection in Madrid had delivered Spain to the Emperor, the Spanish War Minister Gonzalo O’Farril remarked with greater foresight, “You should say that it places Spain beyond his reach forever.” 12 The Peninsular War, also labeled “The Spanish Ulcer,” continuously drained the human and financial resources of Napoleon and was one of the major reasons for the collapse of his Empire. In St. Helena Napoleon himself acknowledged his difficulties in Spain when he told Las Cases, “I admit that I started off on the wrong foot in this whole [Spanish] busi ness . . . the whole thing remains ugly, since I lost out . . . .” Initially, however, Napoleon was confident that resistance to his rule would not last and that the propertied elite would support him. Indeed, the central government and some ecclesiastical leaders accepted the change of regime and many officials extended their allegiance to Murat. The Council of Regency even helped Murat restore order. Clearly, the elite in Madrid were more frightened of popular reaction than of the