

118 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe the reaffirmation of legal equality. Freedom of all Swiss citizens to dwell and own property anywhere in the confederation was recognized. Finally, the Act preserved internal free trade.

THE MEDIATION ACT PERIOD (1803–13)

During the Mediation Act period the cantons recovered their traditional 
authority at the expense of the weakened central government. The major 
cities regained their authority and privileged position vis-à-vis the coun 
tryside. The urban aristocracy secured its power in Berne, Lucerne, 
Fribourg, Solothurn, Basle, and Zurich by basing the franchise on high 
property qualifications and giving a larger number of seats to cities in the 
cantonal legislatures. In Berne, 21 out of 27 members of the city council 
were patricians. In Zurich, the Grand Council, under the influence of the 
aristocratic party led by Hans von Reinhard, reestablished high redemp 
tion fees for tithes and ground rents. This provoked a peasant revolt 
(March 1804), which was suppressed with the help of troops sent by 
Berne, Fribourg, and the central government. 14 Clearly, the ruling elite 
was determined to crush any challenge to its power. 
Conservatism prevailed in other areas, as well. In various cantons, con 
vent land confiscated during the Helvetic period was returned. Free press 
was suppressed and censorship was introduced. A standard currency was 
never established, leaving each canton to continue to mint its own coins. 
Internal tolls were reestablished in many areas despite the constitutional 
prohibition. The authorities intervened more forcefully to regulate the 
morals and private lives of their citizens.15 Zurich, for example, prohibited 
the inhabitants of Wintertur from completing construction of a theater 
begun under the Helvetic Republic, while Schaffhausen forbade its 
citizens to dance and ride their sleds on Sunday. 
On the other hand, the increased internal stability and autonomy 
secured by the Mediation Act enabled cantonal governments to launch 
various reforms. The new cantons guaranteed legal equality and allowed 
many of their citizens to participate in political life. Many cantons set up 
uniform administrative and judicial structures throughout their territo 
ries. They also managed welfare programs, established local police, main 
tained roads, stabilized their financial structure, and introduced 
important educational reforms. 16 The Swiss educational system was now 
viewed as one of the principal tasks of the State and became a model 
throughout Europe. Teaching methods and teacher preparation were 

Switzerland 119

enhanced. Higher education was reorganized, including the academy in 
Berne and the University of Basle. The school founded in Yverdun by 
Henry Pestalozzi gained considerable esteem, as did the elementary 
schools and methods established by Emmanuel von Fellenberg and 
Gregoire Girard. The government also launched important public works. 
In 1807, it began diverting the River Linth, leading to the draining of 
marshland, making it available for agriculture. 
While Switzerland remained officially independent and neutral, in 
reality it was a Napoleonic satellite. Napoleon had the right to intervene 
in its internal affairs. He nominated the first Landamman, Louis d’Affry 
of Fribourg, and controlled him and his successors. In September 1803, 
the Swiss Confederation was forced to sign another alliance with France, 
committing it to provide France with 16,000 soldiers. In 1809, Napoleon 
added to his title “Mediator of the Swiss Confederation,” which under 
lined his dominant position. 
Switzerland was increasingly subject to France economically. It had to abide 
by the Continental Blockade, despite the grave damage to its economy. 17 
The Confederation played an important part in that system because of its 
geographical location and the frequent use of its territory by smugglers of 
British goods. This was one of the reasons for the earlier annexation of 
Geneva into the Empire. In 1806, Napoleon threatened Switzerland with 
military occupation if it did not vigorously combat smuggling. The Diet 
obeyed and imposed severe penalties on smugglers. Not trusting the Swiss, 
however, Napoleon dispatched a French customs inspector to supervise the 
execution of the blockade in 1810. That same year, Napoleon ordered 
Eugène to occupy Canton Ticino, where smuggling was rife. In Basle, nine 
of the most prominent citizens were sentenced to prison for smuggling.18 
Many textile factories in eastern Switzerland, which depended on imported 
cotton, languished and more than 30,000 workers remained unemployed.19 
Napoleon further harmed Swiss industry by effectively barring its products 
from France and Italy through high customs. 
The Emperor also damaged the Confederation by amputating parts of 
its territory. In 1806, he gave Neuchâtel to Marshal Berthier as a fief. As 
mentioned earlier, he also ordered Italian troops to occupy Canton 
Ticino. To better control the Simplon Pass, Napoleon annexed the Valais 
to the French Empire (1810), turning it into the department of Simplon. 
In fact, many Swiss feared that the Emperor would annex the entire 
Confederation as he had done with Holland and the Papal State. 
As usual, conscription aroused much opposition, making it impossible 
for the Confederation to meet its quota. Some cantons recruited criminals, 