

128 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

French. Initially, the provincial authorities as well remained passive and followed the supine central government; they were overawed by the Napoleonic army and apprehensive of the masses.13 But the latter, including members of the urban middle and lower classes, as well as peas ants, soon pressured local leaders to form juntas and raised the banner of revolt. Asturias was the first region to declare independence and organ ize resistance. In Oviedo, the provincial capital, hundreds of peasants and students forced the authorities to defy Murat, and the regional assembly declared war on Napoleon. Other provinces, including Murcia, Valencia, Galicia, parts of Old Castile, Aragon, and Catalonia, also revolted against the French and established regional juntas. The Catalans forced the French to withdraw to Barcelona. Andalusia, with its rebellious cities of Seville, Cadiz, Granada, and Cordoba, constituted the most powerful region of insurrection. Only areas heavily garrisoned by French forces, including Madrid, remained calm. Clearly, Napoleon totally misread the mood of the Spanish people and their readiness to oppose his regime. Among all the Napoleonic satellite states, Spain demonstrated by far the fiercest popular resistance to French domination. The rebels comprised the entire spectrum of Spanish society. Members of the nobility, clergy, military commanders, and old adminis trators staffed the provincial juntas that led the uprisings. From the beginning, the Spanish uprisings proceeded along provincial lines. No central authority existed and every rebelling province created its own supreme junta. The juntas raised provincial armies, imposed taxes, and proclaimed laws. The common people, however, constituted the back bone of the insurrection and through guerrilla warfare wore down the French army, which was unaccustomed to this kind of relentless popular resistance. They reacted against French taxation, requisitions, and looting. The rebels were also stimulated by “Religion, Country, and King,” which symbolized a struggle on behalf of their communities and provinces, as well as for Spanish independence. Ferdinand embodied patriotic ideals for many Spaniards who viewed his forced abdication by Napoleon as a threat to their independence. The clergy played a prominent part in the uprising, appealing to their parishes to fight against the “Godless French.” The revolt drew upon patriotic sentiments that were tightly linked to the build ing of a Catholic nation during the Reconquista. In addition, the Spanish uprising can also be seen as a protest against an old regime that had vacil lated and failed to take a decisive stand against Napoleon. 14 Meanwhile, Joseph Bonaparte arrived at Bayonne ( June 1808). To legitimize the change of government, Napoleon assembled 150 Spanish

Spain 129

notables in Bayonne to meet his brother and draw up a constitution. 
Many notables refused to appear, however, most notably Gaspar Melchor 
Jovellanos, a leading writer and humanist. Still, among the 91 represen 
tatives who did show up, there were a number of ministers led by Mariano 
Luis de Urquijo. They recognized Joseph as King of Spain and approved 
a new Napoleonic constitution that left intact the fundamental principles 
of the Spanish Catholic and royal traditions. Conciliatory to the Spanish 
lay and clerical elite, the Constitution declared Roman Catholicism as the 
only legal faith and reaffirmed feudal privileges. Joseph also received the 
recognition of the Junta di Gobierno and the Council of Castile, the two 
principal bodies of the Spanish government. On 7 July Joseph was 
consecrated as King of Spain by the Archbishop of Burgos. He then 
appointed a government and left for Madrid. 
Joseph met immediately with a hostile Spain and asked Napoleon to 
send more troops. On 18 July he wrote in despair, “My position . . . is one 
in which a king never was before. I have not a single partisan.” 15 Fighting 
was already raging, although the French routed the new provincial 
armies, which were poorly trained, inadequately equipped, and lacking 
in discipline. Even regular Spanish troops were no match for the French, 
a consequence of the absence of military reform in previous decades.16 
Lack of cooperation among the provincial armies rendered them even 
less effective. During the first months of the war, the French won their 
greatest victory at Medina de Rioseco in the province of Valladolid. 
The sequence of Spanish defeats was broken on 19 July 1808, however, 
when an army led by General Castanos forced Dupont’s French army, 
20,000 strong, to surrender at Bailen in Andalusia. The defeat at Bailen 
was the first surrender by an imperial army, signifying the end of the 
myth of Napoleonic invincibility. It stimulated the Spaniards to stiffen 
their resistance, encouraged the British to increase their military force in 
the Peninsula, and, in 1809, helped to inspire the Austrians to confront 
Napoleon yet again. 17 The news of Bailen alarmed Joseph, who left the 
Spanish capital in panic after staying there for a mere 11 days. He 
retreated north and, by the end of August, the French withdrew from 
virtually all the territories they had gained south of the Ebro River. 
Madrid celebrated its liberation from the French. The Council of Castile 
proclaimed Ferdinand VII as the legitimate King of Spain. The sizeable 
territory of the Iberian peninsula and the fact that its provincial 
armies were so dispersed posed major difficulties for the French army, 
which could not defeat all the juntas and besiege all the rebelling cities 
at once. 18 