

130 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

In August, the French failed to conquer Saragossa, the capital of Aragon, after a two-month siege. Saragossa, which was heroically defended by its population under General Joseph Palafox, illustrated more than any other battle that the French were fighting against the entire civilian population and not just against an army. In the same month, French forces also suffered a major defeat at Vimiero, in Portugal, and were forced to evacuate that country. The French defeats and Joseph’s withdrawal stimulated resistance in Portugal and Spain. Many Spaniards believed that victory over the French was imminent. To achieve that goal, however, the provincial juntas needed to form a central government in order to coordinate their military efforts. Initially, the Council of Castile tried to assert its authority over the provin cial juntas, but they rejected the leadership of that obsolete and discred ited institution that had collaborated with the French. In September 1808, it was agreed that each provincial junta would send two delegates to Aranjuez to form a new Junta Central, called the Suprema. This new body consisted of 35 deputies, mostly conservative aristocrats and some liberals. Jovellanos, the most prominent member of the Junta Central, advocated a constitutional monarchy. The main objective of the Junta Central was to lead the military campaign and expel the French.

INTERVENTION BY NAPOLEON

The Spanish had every reason to feel confident in their ability to drive the French out. Following Joseph’s evacuation of Madrid, French domi nation was limited to the northeastern coast and to parts of Navarra and Aragon. A dispirited Joseph acknowledged the profound hatred of the Spanish people for the French and asked Napoleon to let him return to Naples. He warned Napoleon that if the French tried to reoccupy Spain, “Every house will be a fortress . . . Not one Spaniard will be for me . . . .” 19 The Emperor was determined, however, to erase the shame of Bailen and reverse the situation in Spain. He was furious with Joseph’s decision to evacuate Madrid and rejected his plea to abdicate. To regain Spain, Napoleon led 200,000 men of the Grande Armée into Iberia.20 The French forces were far superior to the Spanish troops. In early November, they defeated the armies of Blake and Palafox. On 30 November, French infantry and Polish cavalry overwhelmed the Spanish at the Somosierra Pass, north of Madrid, and, in early December 1808, Napoleon entered Madrid. The Junta Central fled south to Seville.

Spain 131

Thus the Junta Central failed quite miserably to accomplish its military goals; rather, its record was “one of unbroken defeat.”21 It lacked the means to implement its programs and had no real authority to enforce its will on the provincial juntas, which remained suspicious and hostile to it. Moreover, many Spanish officers were incompetent and poorly disci plined. They were often jealous of each other and so coordinated their actions ineffectively. Much of the Spanish army itself was insufficiently trained, inadequately supplied, and badly organized. Recruitment diffi culties and high desertion rates exacerbated its problems. In late 1808, the Junta Central could deploy only 150,000 soldiers, a far cry from the 500,000 it had initially projected. Consequently, by the time the Junta Central was dissolved in January 1810, much of Spain was once again under French military control. Napoleon stayed in Madrid for less than three weeks, because an English force under General John Moore was advancing from Portugal, threatening to cut his communications with France. As Napoleon left Madrid to face Moore, however, the latter retreated to the port of La Coruña in Galicia. In mid-January 1809, Napoleon finally departed Spain for Paris upon hearing that Austria was mobilizing for war. Napoleon never returned to Spain. Marshal Soult pursued Moore to La Coruña, and in the ensuing battle the British commander was killed while most of his army was safely evacuated in British vessels.