

122 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

123

8

Spain

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY SPAIN

The Spanish monarchy had reached a low point under its last Habsburg rulers in the late seventeenth century. Some slow improvement was taking place under the Bourbons, who rose to the Spanish throne in 1700. In the second half of the eighteenth century, the enlightened absolute monarch Charles III (1759–88), assisted by Ministers Conde de Aranda, Pedro de Campomanes, and Joseph de Floridablanca, launched an extensive reform policy aimed at strengthening the State and reviving the economy.1 The government stimulated commercial and industrial growth but accomplished little in the agricultural sector. Charles III expanded trade with the Spanish colonies in South America by abolish ing the monopoly held over colonial trade by the port of Cadiz and opening it to all the major ports. Internal free trade was also established. Following mercantilist principles, the government created state manufacturers of luxury goods, including wool, tapestries, and silk, and granted them monopolies and financial assistance. High tariffs protected Spanish industries from foreign competition. Charles also sought to subordinate the Church to the monarchy, gaining more control over the Inquisition and, in 1767, expelling the Jesuits from Spain. Despite those reforms, many of the old economic and social structures of Spain persisted. Facing strong opposition, Charles III never seriously challenged the wealth and privileges of the Church and the nobility. No new taxes were introduced and the autonomy of the powerful munici palities endured. Most importantly, despite much talk of agrarian reform and land distribution, little changed in the countryside. 2 Rural Spain,

where most people lived, continued to be sharply divided between 
wealthy landowners and poor peasants. Most peasants, especially in the 
center and the south, eked out a living and were burdened by high taxes, 
seigneurial dues, and the tithe. Subsistence farming and low productivity 
characterized much of the Spanish agriculture. The landlords showed no 
interest in agrarian improvement. A demographic rise in the eighteenth 
century increased demand for land and aggravated agrarian misery. 
The nobility, whose number increased through multiplication of the 
petty nobles (hidalgos), owned considerable property and continued to 
benefit from seigneurial privileges. The Church possessed extensive 
lands and wielded considerable influence. The number of monasteries 
and clergy was very high; in a population of 10.5 million inhabitants in 
the late eighteenth century, there were 2000 monasteries and 200,000 
clergy. 3 With the growth of overseas trade, banking, and manufacturing, 
the bourgeoisie in Barcelona, Cadiz, Seville, and Madrid did increase but 
its power remained limited. 
In 1788, Charles III died and his son Charles IV ascended to the 
throne. Charles IV showed more interest in hunting and carpentry than 
in state affairs and was influenced by his domineering wife, Maria Luisa. 
The Cortes recognized their elder son, Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias, 
as heir to the throne. Under the new monarch, Spain continued to face 
economic stagnation and budget deficits. 