

Spain 125

with France ( January 1805). Ten months later, Admiral Nelson destroyed 
the Franco-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar. This naval disaster and the forced 
subsidy to France increased opposition in the Spanish court to friendship 
with France. Even Godoy began looking for ways to break away from 
Napoleon and, during the Prussian campaign, sought to ally with Britain 
and Russia. However, Napoleon’s quick victory over Prussia persuaded 
Godoy to return to support France. In February 1807, Godoy declared 
Spain’s adherence to the Continental Blockade and sent 14,000 troops to 
serve under Napoleon in northern Germany. Yet the damage was done; 
Spain proved to be an untrustworthy ally. 
Meanwhile, Napoleon prepared to invade Portugal to force it to break 
its ties with Britain. Besides, occupying Portugal would have given him an 
opportunity also to intervene in Spain, topple the Bourbons, and install 
a more reliable regime. 6 Godoy collaborated with France, hoping to real 
ize an old plan to carve out a Portuguese principality for himself. In 
October 1807, he and Napoleon signed the Treaty of Fontainebleau, 
which permitted French troops to march through Spain and proposed to 
divide Portugal into three parts: the north for the now-displaced King 
and Queen of Etruria; the south for Godoy; and the center, including 
Lisbon, for France. Godoy also committed Spanish troops to assist France 
in conquering Portugal. In late November 1807, General Junot occupied 
Lisbon but the proposed partition of Portugal never took place due to 
the short duration of the French occupation. 
The agreement with Godoy notwithstanding, Napoleon concluded that 
the Spanish could not be trusted and that its army was unable to sustain 
a prolonged war. 7 Various economic and political crises also rendered 
the Spanish government unstable. Rising military expenditures and 
Napoleon’s own financial pressures had drained the Spanish treasury. 
Inflation further destabilized the economy and aggravated the conditions 
of the masses. Frequent agricultural crises during the reign of Charles IV, 
including a disastrous harvest in 1803–4, caused much misery.8 On top of 
this, Spain’s colonial trade was hampered by the British navy. 
The economic crisis required a serious reform policy. However, the 
growing opposition to Godoy’s policies and a bitter division between him 
and Prince Ferdinand overwhelmed the Spanish court and led to political 
paralysis. Ministers were busy assuring their political survival rather than 
thinking about the conditions of the State. Ferdinand resented his 
mother’s close relations with Godoy and suspected that they were conspir 
ing to exclude him from succession in favor of one of the infantes and to 
have Godoy serve as Regent. At the end of 1807, Count Tournon-Simiane, 

126 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe a French observer in Madrid, wrote to Napoleon, “All classes of society hate Godoy and accuse him of being the enemy of the country. The grandees, the nobility, the clergy, the merchants, the people, all see him as the coun try’s oppressor.”9 Godoy’s adversaries criticized his venality and begrudged his appointments of relatives and natives of his region to top positions. The high nobility resented their exclusion from power and Godoy’s tyrannical methods. Godoy also alienated the Church by selling extensive ecclesiasti cal properties in an effort to solve the state’s financial crisis. The military blamed him for appointing his favorites as officers, for placing Spanish troops under Napoleon, and for allowing the French army to cross into Spanish territory. Consequently, Ferdinand received support from a grow ing number of opponents of Godoy. Many Fernandists also favored close ties with Great Britain and wished to liberate Spain from its subjection to France. As the partido fernandista gained strength, Godoy’s position grew precarious and his dependence on Napoleon increased.