

Spain 133

JOSEPH’S RULE IN SPAIN

The victorious Napoleonic campaign in late 1808 enabled Joseph to return to the throne.23 In January 1809, he entered Madrid and, right from the beginning, exerted genuine efforts to be accepted by the citizens of his new kingdom, by learning to speak Spanish, for example. A man of liberal convictions, Joseph attempted to launch Napoleonic reform policies designed to modernize Spain’s administrative and judi cial structures and promote economic development. He revoked conces sions he had made to the Church and the nobility at Bayonne, abolishing seigneurial rights, eliminating the Inquisition, and suppressing two thirds of the monasteries and convents. Joseph tried to maintain his kingdom’s independence from Napoleon. He was aware of the fact that to stay in power he needed to satisfy the interests of the Spanish people. In late 1810, he wrote his wife Julie, “I can stay here only as long as I can make the Spanish nation happy.” 24 Yet for all his efforts and good inten tions, Joseph was unpopular among the Spaniards, who labeled him el rey intruso (the intrusive king) and derisively called him Pepe botellas ( Joe Bottle) for his supposedly excessive drinking habits. Joseph remained “a foreign prince reigning in their capital against their will, and kept there by foreign bayonets.”25 The heavy tax levies and requisitions imposed by French generals added to Spanish hostility. The Napoleonic constitution, which Joseph tried to enforce, established a government of eight ministries, and a Cortes, consisting in part of royal appointees and a majority of delegates elected by indirect election. It also proclaimed civil rights, legal equality, freedom of occupation, and a ban on arbitrary arrest. Joseph’s ministers were members of the Spanish elite who had served under the Bourbons. The most prominent figures included Count François de Cabarrus (Finance), Don Gonzalo de O’Farril (War), Mariano Luis de Urquijo (Secretary of State), Miguel de Azanza (Foreign Affairs), and Don Manuel Romero ( Justice). Joseph proclaimed a series of reforms modeled on the French system. To stimulate economic growth, the new ruler liberalized the economy by abolishing seigneurial privileges, eliminating the guilds and the Mesta (the powerful shepherds’ organization), and abolishing internal tariffs and royal monopolies. He also placed the land of suppressed monaster ies on sale. Modeled after the French administration, Romero drew up a plan to replace the old provinces with 31 departments and appointed prefects to run them. Romero also produced a uniform legal system that

134 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe introduced a modern law code and established a new hierarchy of courts. Joseph tried to improve education and founded several lycées and a school for girls. His most concrete achievement, however, involved construction projects in Madrid, including a new water supply system, covered sewers, new buildings and public squares, and funding for cultural activities. Joseph received support from the afrancesados (Frenchified). These collaborators, whose number is difficult to assess, included Spanish citi zens from all walks of life, including military officers and bureaucrats who kept their positions and now served Joseph. The afrancesados were considered traitors by other Spaniards, however. For this reason, thou sands of them escaped to France when Joseph’s rule collapsed in 1813. The afrancesados consisted of two main groups. The majority were passive collaborators who sided with Joseph, not for ideological reasons but sim ply because they accepted French occupation and provided some service to the new regime. A second, much smaller group of true afrancesados, also known as Josephinos, included primarily top officials and intellectuals who viewed France as the center of enlightenment and liberal principles and sincerely believed that close cooperation with Napoleon was the only way to guarantee the modernization of Spain. The Napoleonic regime, they felt, could carry out the necessary reforms in an orderly manner. Among the hard-core ideological supporters of the French were Juan Antonio Llorente, the former Secretary of the Inquisition, who was in charge of reforming the Church on the basis of the French Concordat, and Francisco Amoros, who served as state counselor. The afrancesados also supported Joseph because they feared the violence and disorder associated with popular resistance to Napoleon. They believed that opposition to Napoleon was hopeless and would only plunge Spain into disastrous chaos. Ministers like Azanza, Urquijo, Cabarrus, and O’Farril, who initially opposed the French, became supporters of Joseph as a way to preserve law and order. Other afrancesados, including mem bers of the propertied classes, regarded Napoleon as the guarantor of their property, as well as of stability. Finally, many afrancesados supported the French simply out of opportunism and hope for personal gain. Despite the support of the afrancesados and his own efforts to build a national government, Joseph’s effective rule was limited to Madrid and the surrounding area. He was unable to implement most of the reforms he had proclaimed. In a letter to Napoleon, Joseph acknowledged his limited power: “I have no real power beyond Madrid.” 26 Besides the strong opposition to his rule, Joseph faced chronic fiscal difficulties.27