

Spain 139

the medieval Cortes. The strength of the liberals in the Cortes became clear 
very quickly when, on its first day, the Cortes approved the principles that 
national sovereignty rested in the Cortes and that the government would 
be divided into three branches. After bitter debates, the Cortes passed the 
proclamation of free speech, the abolition of censorship, and the revo 
cation of seigneurial rights. To compensate the conservatives, the Cortes 
voted to preserve censorship in matters of religion and voted to indem 
nify the landlords. The Cortes also confirmed equal rights for Spain’s cit 
izens in the overseas colonies and outlawed oppression of the Indian 
population in America. 
The most important legacy of the Cortes was the 384-article 
Constitution, which was ratified in January 1812 after five months of 
debate. The Constitution proclaimed the Spanish nation as the sovereign 
and transformed Spain into a constitutional monarchy, thereby breaking 
with the long absolutist tradition. A unicameral Cortes constituted the leg 
islative branch, to be elected by universal manhood suffrage. Ministers 
were responsible to the Legislature. The Constitution established legal 
equality, progressive taxation, and primary education. Those changes 
meant the end of privileges, guilds, and the Mesta. Later, the Cortes 
revoked internal customs, torture, and the Inquisition. It established a 
uniform court system and made plans to create a new administrative 
structure. While the Constitution signified a victory for the liberals, 
it made an important concession to the Church by declaring that 
Catholicism was “the only true faith,” and by prohibiting the practice of 
any other religion. Obviously, this reflected the considerable influence of 
the Catholic Church. The changes proclaimed by the Cortes aroused 
strong opposition. The abolition of the Inquisition by the Cortes in 1813 
only added more fuel to the antagonism of the conservative elements. 
Many bishops disobeyed the Cortes’ order to publicize the abolition of the 
Inquisition, and the provincial juntas refused to enforce the changes 
enacted by the Cortes. 
The hope that the Cortes would be able to reorganize the army, reverse 
the tide of the war, and expel the French from Iberia remained unful 
filled. In 1810–11, while the Cortes debated the new laws and the 
Constitution, the Spanish armies remained poorly equipped and small. 
For the most part, they were unfit for any serious warfare. Adding to the 
difficulties of the regular army was the mistrust among the liberals in the 
Cortes, who feared that it would pose a threat to liberty and popular 
sovereignty. 40 Hence the liberals opposed the strengthening of the 
army, supporting instead the creation of a citizens’ army. The Spanish 

140 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe government in Cadiz also faced severe financial difficulties caused by its inability to collect taxes and a drastic decline of revenues from the rebelling Latin American colonies. Napoleon, on the other hand, dis patched major reinforcements into the Peninsula in an effort to end the fighting. By January 1812, French military control in Spain reached a peak; the only areas that were still free included Galicia, the hinterland of Alicante and Cartagena, the interior of Catalonia, and Cadiz.