

Portugal 151

10

The Italian Peninsula

PRE-NAPOLEONIC ITALY

Prior to the Napoleonic invasion into northern Italy in 1796, the Italian Peninsula was divided into ten states: the Kingdom of Sardinia, including Piedmont; the Duchy of Milan (part of the Habsburg Empire); the republics of Venice, Genoa, and Lucca; the Papal State; the duchies of Modena and Parma; the Grand-Duchy of Tuscany; and the Kingdom of Naples, which included Sicily. These states differed substantially from each other. Various dynasties and social elites ruled over them, and they possessed different legal systems, economic structures, administrative institutions, currencies, and spoken dialects. Provincial and municipal rivalries and competition between city and country intensified the diversity. In the second half of the eighteenth century, the gap widened between states that experienced enlightened reforms and states that failed to carry out such changes. 1 In Lombardy, Habsburg rulers Maria Theresa and Joseph II established a uniform land tax based on an accurate prop erty survey, centralized the administration, liberalized the grain trade, reduced the power of the clergy, and broke the Milanese patricians’ monopoly on power. These reforms created a more efficient machinery and encouraged agricultural growth. The reforms were strongly sup ported by important Milanese Enlightenment thinkers like Pietro Verri and Cesare Beccaria. In Tuscany, as well, Habsburg Grand Duke Peter Leopold implemented significant reforms. He eliminated internal tariffs, reduced ecclesiastical power, established a single land tax, and initiated reclamation of marshland. Yet opposition from nobles and the Church

152

limited the effectiveness of his reforms. In Piedmont, Venice, and the Papal State, conservative governments and ruling elites launched no such reforms. In Piedmont, the Savoyard dynasty established a strong abso lutist government but rejected any enlightened reforms. The nobility served the Piedmontese monarch in return for protection of its privi leges. Likewise, the Venetian ruling Patricians rejected any changes and that maritime republic continued its steady decline. Agriculture in those states remained backward, commerce declined, and opportunities for the emergence of a commercial bourgeoisie remained very limited. In the Kingdom of Naples, prominent Enlightenment thinkers such as Antonio Genovesi and Gaetano Filangieri advocated major reforms to revive Naples’ economy and transform its society. Yet the Bourbon rulers were unwilling and unable to pursue any serious reform policy that would challenge the feudal system and the barons’ power. Church power was reduced somewhat, although the clergy remained very influential. The conditions of southern peasants were the worst in Italy. In sum, the Italian Peninsula would have to wait for French rule to experience deeper transformations.

ITALY AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

Italians showed support and interest in the French Revolution. Enlightenment thinkers, disillusioned with the limited extent of change in their states, saw the French developments as proof that more radical reforms were feasible and necessary. Pietro Verri viewed the French Revolution as a safeguard against tyranny and proposed a constitutional project for his state, as did the Piedmontese Dalmazzo Francesco Vasco. In several Italian cities, political dissenters established secret societies that endorsed radical French ideas. The most prominent Italian revolutionary was Filippo Buonarroti, who participated in Babeuf’s Conspiracy in Paris 1796. In several states, including Piedmont and the Papal State, radical societies conspired to topple their governments but were quickly sup pressed. The Revolution also found popular support in the Italian coun tryside where agricultural commercialization, increasing poverty, and social tension were rising. In the early 1790s, discontented peasants in Piedmont and the Kingdom of Naples protested against the deterioration of their conditions and expressed the wish to “act like the French.” 2 Naturally, the Italian governments remained hostile to the French Revolution. The Papacy had broken off relations with France in 1791,