

Spain 143

9

Portugal

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PORTUGAL

By the beginning of the eighteenth century, Portugal had declined to a third-rate power. Its population numbered fewer than three million, mostly poor peasants burdened by feudal obligations. The nobility possessed much land and wielded considerable power along with the clergy, who numbered 200,000 and were among the most conservative in Europe. The ruling Braganza dynasty relied mostly on revenues from Brazilian gold and colonial trade and paid little attention to the devel opment of the domestic economy. Portugal had very close economic and strategic relations with Britain. British merchants purchased much Brazilian cotton, while a treaty between the two countries, signed in 1703, granted Britain the right to use Portuguese ports. In the second half of the eighteenth century, however, Portugal expe rienced a period of dynamic reforms launched by the enlightened Marquis of Pombal, chief minister of King Joseph I. 1 To strengthen the monarchy, he centralized the administration and taxation and weakened the nobility and the Church, the two main opponents of a powerful monarchy. He reduced the power of the Inquisition and, in 1759, confis cated the property of the influential Jesuits and expelled them from Portugal. Pombal then replaced Jesuit education with state-supported edu cation. He also initiated the reconstruction of Lisbon following a devastating earthquake (1755) that killed 30,000 (20 percent) inhabitants. To encourage economic growth and diminish British control over Portuguese commerce, Pombal established powerful Portuguese trade companies. He also subsidized wool, silk, and cotton factories to end

144

Portugal’s dependence on imported manufactures. To promote agricul tural growth, he encouraged concentration of vineyards in the hands of a small group of wealthy landowners. These reforms favored the forma tion of a wealthy bourgeoisie but ruined many small traders and peasants, provoking popular discontent. Pombal’s authoritarianism gained him many enemies and in 1777, Queen Dona Maria dismissed him.

FROM THE FRENCH REVOLUTION TO THE NAPOLEONIC INVASION

The Portuguese monarchy, just like its Spanish counterpart, watched the events in Revolutionary France with concern and tried to prevent revo lutionary propaganda from penetrating its borders. 2 The authorities expanded censorship and restored the old powers of the Inquisition. In 1792, Dona Maria ceased to govern due to insanity, and her second son John, Prince of Brazil, began his rule, serving as Prince-Regent until his mother’s death in 1816, when he became King John VI.3 France sought to convince Portugal to remain neutral in its conflict with the First Coalition, but in 1793 Portugal signed anti-French accords with Spain and England. In September of that year, Portuguese troops joined Spain in its invasion into southern France. Following Spain’s withdrawal from the First Coalition ( June 1795), France demanded that Portugal break with England and become neutral, pay indemnity, and grant France com mercial concessions. Portugal refused, however, due in part to English opposition, leading the French government to expel the Portuguese rep resentative from Paris. Later, however, Portugal and France resumed negotiations and in August 1797 agreed to restore peace between them and establish Portuguese neutrality. The British strongly opposed the treaty and forced the court in Lisbon to reject it. After the coup of Brumaire, Bonaparte, along with Spain, renewed pres sure on Portugal to break its ties with England and ally with France. Such efforts characterized the Napoleonic policy vis-à-vis Portugal for the next decade. In October 1800, France and Spain signed the second Treaty of San Ildefonso, demanding that it abandon its alliance with Britain, close its harbors to British ships, and make territorial concessions to Spain. 4 These demands clearly carried with them the germs of war since Portugal was dependent on Britain and unable to accept these conditions. Indeed, Bonaparte was clearly determined to wage war against Portugal if it refused to break with Britain. For his part, Manuel de Godoy,