

Spain 137 and guarantee highway safety, thereby dispersing French forces and diverting troops from fighting against the regular Spanish and British armies. Not surprisingly, guerrilla attacks demoralized French soldiers who were unaccustomed to this type of war. They were divided up into small units located in isolated places, which made them easy prey to guer rilla assaults. Secondly, the guerrillas helped to subvert Joseph’s authority. They perpetrated acts of violence against supporters of the king and local officials who served the French, thereby intimidating them and under mining the effort to rally the population to the French ruler. They also encouraged many other people to resist the French by disobeying the law. The incessant guerrilla operations prevented French authorities from ful filling their governmental duties and restoring normal life. Yet the partidas were unable to liberate Spain on their own. Most impor tantly, they operated only locally and lacked coordination with guerrillas from other regions. Many of them were also poorly trained and ill equipped. For the most part, they were also too weak to face a sustained counter-offensive by the French army. And yet, as the partidas began to pattern their formation and organization after the regular army, they did more effectively challenge large French forces. In 1812–13, as the French strength in Spain was declining, the guerrillas scored several major suc cesses. Among the guerrilla leaders, two stood out: Juan Martin Diez, also known as El Empecinado, was active in New Castile and led a substantial force that by the end of the war had reached 5000 men. The greatest guerrilla leader, however, was Francisco Espoz y Mina, who came from a well-to-do peasant family and battled the French primarily in Navarre, but also in the Basque provinces and in Aragon. The total number of men who fought under him reached an impressive 11,000. He blockaded important cities like Pamplona and Tudela and inflicted thousands of casualties on the French. Mina also ran a reasonably efficient adminis tration in the areas he controlled, collecting customs, drafting men, and enforcing the law. In sum, the guerrillas played a highly important role in helping to defeat Napoleon in Spain.

THE CORTES OF CADIZ

The dominant position of the French in Spain in 1810 did not prevent the establishment of a Spanish legislature that opened in Cadiz in September 1810. 38 During most of the three-year existence of the Cortes, Cadiz itself was under French siege, cut off from the rest of Spain except

138 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe by the sea. The city withstood the siege, owing to the presence of a powerful English–Spanish–Portuguese contingent and to supplies that arrived by sea under the protection of the British fleet. Convening the Cortes constituted the first time in history that Spain was represented by a national assembly. The Cortes was a unicameral assembly, initially com prising 104 representatives: one-third clergy, one-sixth nobles, and the rest representatives of the Third Estate. The number of delegates would more than double in later months and years. Areas free of French rule elected their delegates while deputies for Spanish America and territo ries occupied by the French were chosen by a special committee. The Cortes was sharply divided between conservatives (serviles) and liberals (liberales). The two camps were united in their opposition to French rule and they collaborated on the war effort. Their ideological differences became evident when they discussed their plans for the future of Spanish state and society. The liberals were influenced by the Enlightenment and French Revolutionary ideas and blamed the Old Regime for the humiliation Spain suffered in 1808. They insisted that the war must be followed by a profound transformation of Spain’s laws and institutions. This included the elimination of the privileged society and the establishment of a constitutional monarchy, legal equality, a uniform fiscal structure, a centralized administration, and a free press. Economically, they supported the elimination of restrictions on internal trade and land purchase. In sum, they advocated the creation of a liberal economy and a society dominated by bourgeois interests and values. 39 The conservatives, on the other hand, wanted the Cortes to concentrate on the war effort and on expelling the French from Spain. They advo cated only modest reforms and wished to preserve most of the old system. The liberal delegates had the upper hand. Meeting in Cadiz, the most progressive city in Spain, favored them. The prosperous mercantile class of Cadiz had been exposed to Enlightenment ideas and backed the liberal deputies during the deliberations of the Cortes. In addition to pos sessing a majority in the Cortes, liberals were better organized than their rivals and had an articulate leadership who possessed a clear idea of the reforms they supported. Standing out among them were Augustin Arguelles, a lawyer from Asturias and a gifted orator; Munoz Torrero, a clergyman who taught at the University of Salamanca and presided over the commission that drafted the constitution; and Count Jose Toreno, a young aristocrat from Asturias and a historian of the Revolution. The organization of the Cortes also reflected a liberal victory; the representa tives merged into a single assembly and were not divided by estate as in