

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

At St. Helena, Napoleon acknowledged that the war in the Iberian peninsula marked the beginning of the end of his Empire. 42 Indeed, Napoleon’s decision to intervene in Iberia was a fatal mistake. The Emperor expected to occupy Spain quickly. He underestimated, however, the extent of resistance his intervention and the removal of the Bourbons would arouse. In six years of fighting, Napoleon failed to bring the entire

142 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Peninsula under his control, largely due to the stiff guerrilla resistance. The Napoleonic army also had to face regular Spanish armies and, in particular, Wellington’s British–Portuguese army, which played a decisive role in expelling the French from Iberia. The incessant fighting and uncompromising opposition rendered impossible the rule of Joseph and the application of his reform policy in Spain. France suffered 300,000 casualties and spent huge resources on the Peninsular War.43 In sum, the “Spanish ulcer” contributed considerably to Napoleon’s downfall. The struggle against Napoleon extracted a very costly price from Spain. After six years of war, fought in every corner of the country, Spain was exhausted and devastated. Many of the cities were sacked or bombarded and parts of the country were depopulated. Trade and industry were paralyzed. With shipments of American bullion halted and the economy in crisis, the government was able to cover barely half of its expenses. The Napoleonic years also precipitated the collapse of the Spanish Empire in Latin America and the rise of independent nations there. The Napoleonic period witnessed the emergence of liberal ideas and politicians in Spain and attempts by both Joseph and the afrancesados and the Cadiz Cortes to transform state and society. The Cadiz liberal consti tution, the first of its kind in Spanish history, broke with the past and would serve as a model for revolutionaries in nineteenth-century Europe. Yet the liberal experiment also aroused strong opposition from powerful forces, including the nobility, the Church, and the army, as well as from many within the rural population. Leaders of the reactionary serviles, who were hurt by liberal reforms, convinced Ferdinand VII to revoke the Constitution of 1812 and the other progressive changes enacted in Cadiz. Upon entering Madrid in May 1814, Ferdinand restored the absolutist monarchy and the power of the Church. He turned down the Constitution, declared null and void the rest of the Cortes’ legislation, and imprisoned scores of liberal leaders. The Spanish monarch reestablished the Inquisition, invited the Jesuits back to Spain, restored seigneurial rights, and abolished free press. Reaction set in throughout post Napoleonic Spain. And yet, only six years later, Spaniards were the first Europeans to rise in the name of liberal principles against their king’s absolutism. Indeed, the Napoleonic years gave a boost to a secular and progressive camp that will challenge the absolutist and clerical camp in a long struggle over the future of Spain.