

Portugal 145

the Spanish prime minister, hoped to carve out for himself a principality 
in Portugal. 
In May 1801, Spanish troops invaded Portugal, thereby initiating the 
brief “War of the Oranges,” so named because Godoy sent the Spanish 
queen two orange boughs from Elvas. The Spanish conquered the bor 
der fortresses of Elvas and Juromenha and the town of Arronches, and 
the Portuguese requested peace. In September, Portugal had to accept 
the harsh Treaty of Madrid, which forced it to surrender border territory 
to Spain, grant France commercial concessions, pay a war indemnity, and 
close its harbors to British ships. 
It appeared that the French had finally succeeded in breaching the 
Anglo-Portuguese alliance. Bonaparte sent a new ambassador to Lisbon, 
General Jean Lannes, who tried to increase French influence in Portugal 
and even demanded changes in the Portuguese government. The British 
representative, Robert Fitzgerald, tried his best to keep Portugal within 
Britain’s sphere of influence. John, the Prince-Regent, responded with a 
policy of neutrality in an effort to preserve his country’s independence. 
In 1803, when war resumed between England and France, he again 
declared Portugal’s neutrality and closed his kingdom’s ports to warships 
of both powers. Bonaparte rejected this policy and compelled the 
Portuguese authorities to grant him commercial concessions and pay a 
monthly contribution of one million livres over the next 16 months. 5 In 
October 1804, Spain again joined France in an anti-British alliance and 
France invited John to adhere to this alliance. The Portuguese ruler 
rejected the proposal and reaffirmed his country’s neutrality. 

THE FRENCH INVASIONS INTO PORTUGAL

Once Napoleon proclaimed the Continental Blockade, he refused to tol erate Portuguese commercial ties with the British any longer. In July 1807, he wrote to Talleyrand, “It is necessary to close all the ports of Portugal to England without delay. Tomorrow, you will inform the Portuguese ambassador that all ports of Portugal are to be closed to England and its merchandise confiscated by the 1st of September or I will declare war on Portugal.” 6 In August, the French and the Spanish sub mitted an ultimatum to the Portuguese, ordering them to declare war on England, expel the British ambassador, arrest all Englishmen in Portugal, confiscate their merchandise, and close their ports to English shipping.7 Portugal wavered. The Council of State remained unwilling to break

146 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

relations with the old ally. In addition, the Portuguese foreign minister, 
Antonio de Araujo, received a promise from the British government to 
evacuate the royal family to Brazil should the French invade Portugal. 
After protracted negotiations, the Council of State agreed to close the 
ports to Britain but refused to arrest British subjects or confiscate their 
property. John also rejected Napoleon’s warning not to cooperate with 
France’s enemies. Napoleon decided to intervene in Portugal. Besides 
aiming to ensure that Portugal remained closed to British trade, the 
Emperor viewed such a campaign as an opportunity to intervene in 
Spain. On 1 October 1807, the French and Spanish representatives left 
Lisbon and Napoleon and Godoy signed the Treaty of Fontainebleau, 
which partitioned Portugal into three parts: central Portugal to France, 
northern Portugal for the displaced King of Etruria (Tuscany), and 
southern Portugal for Godoy. 
In mid-November 1807, a French force of 25,000 under General Junot 
began crossing the border from Spain into Portugal. It was the first 
of three Napoleonic invasions of that country. Britain was incapable of 
defending its ally, causing Prince John to depart for Brazil. Thousands of 
members of the Portuguese elite joined the royal house in exile. Before 
leaving, Prince John appointed a Regency Council to run Portugal and 
ordered it to collaborate with the French. Nonetheless, many Portuguese 
protested what they viewed as his abandonment of Portugal. 
A day after the Prince-Regent left, Junot occupied Lisbon, a city of 
200,000 inhabitants. In February 1808, Junot dissolved the Regency 
Council, declared the end of the Braganza dynasty, and established a new 
government comprised of French and Portuguese ministers subject to 
him. Junot also drafted a constitution proclaiming legal equality, reli 
gious toleration, and individual liberty. He dismantled the Portuguese 
national militia and the regular army and sent 6000 Portuguese soldiers 
to France. This “Portuguese Legion” later fought under Napoleon in 
Spain, Austria, and Russia. Junot also promised to foster education and 
launch economic growth through the construction of roads and canals 
and the improvement of agriculture and industry. 
Most Portuguese opposed Junot’s reforms, however. Nobles and clergy 
feared that they would undermine their privileges. Even officials who 
collaborated with Junot resented his actions, which they saw as a threat 
to Portuguese independence. The merchant class was naturally opposed 
to the Continental Blockade. Particularly aggravating was the brutality of 
the French occupying army, which plundered the country and levied 
heavy contributions. On his way to Lisbon, Junot had already met with 