

Spain 135

High military expenses, ineffective tax collection, and a war-disrupted 
economy caused insurmountable financial problems. The authorities 
launched a sale of confiscated Church and rebel holdings to pay the 
Bourbon debt and finance the Josephine reforms. Yet the sale was poorly 
managed and the notes that the government issued to be exchanged for 
the property began circulating as paper money and quickly lost much of 
their value. The French Imperial Treasury financed much of the military 
effort in Spain, but despite this help, the Spanish deficit kept mounting 
and, in January 1810, Napoleon complained to Berthier, “I cannot meet 
the enormous cost of Spain.” 28 
Napoleon and the French generals who served in Spain also posed 
serious barriers to Joseph’s authority. Napoleon resented Joseph’s com 
mitment to Spanish independence; he expected Joseph to fulfill French 
interests. To Count Roederer he wrote, “The King must be French. Spain 
must be French. It is for France that I conquered Spain.”29 Moreover, the 
Emperor had no confidence in Joseph’s military skills. French generals in 
Spain also shared Napoleon’s misgivings about Joseph’s governmental 
and military capability and frequently ignored him. 
In February 1810, Napoleon ordered that the northern Ebro provinces 
of Catalonia, Aragon, and Navarre be detached from Joseph’s rule and 
administered by French commanders. By mid-1810, he had placed most 
of Spain under a military government and had limited Joseph’s authority 
to New Castile, Avila, and Segovia. Commanders like Suchet, who gov 
erned Aragon, Valencia, and (after 1812) Catalonia, ignored Joseph’s 
orders and largely ruled their provinces as independent viceroys. In 
return for provisions for his army, Suchet allowed the upper classes in 
Valencia to maintain their feudal jurisdictions, contrary to Joseph’s poli 
cies. 30 French troops in Valencia even helped to collect feudal dues. The 
civil commissioners that Joseph sent to various provinces could operate 
only as subordinates of local generals. Having both military and civilian 
officials trying to govern and run Spain only increased the confusion and 
instability. Many generals squeezed the local population, enriching them 
selves while alienating Spanish citizens and compounding Joseph’s diffi 
culties. In April 1810, Joseph complained to his wife that the “provinces 
are given up to the discretion of the generals who tax them as they like, 
and are ordered not to attend to me.”31 Some of the civilian officials also 
ruled their provinces arbitrarily, causing additional misery and bitterness. 
In sum, the real power in much of occupied Spain was in the 
hands of military commanders and local officials who disobeyed and 
challenged Joseph’s power. 

136 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

GUERRILLA RESISTANCE

Aside from the Spanish regular armies, the French faced stiff resistance from numerous guerrilla bands, the partidas, which sprang up through out the country as soon as Napoleon invaded Iberia.32 The Spanish guerrilla struggle against Napoleonic domination constituted the first modern war of that kind. The guerrillas, more than anybody else, embod ied the Spanish resolve to resist French rule and “became Napoleon’s most deadly opponents in Iberia.”33 The mountainous terrain of the Peninsula was ideal for guerrilla warfare. They had been active since 1808 and were particularly significant in keeping the anti-French struggle alive in the years 1810–11, when regular troops suffered repeated defeats. One estimate put the number of guerrillas by the end of 1812 at 38,520, divided into 22 partidas throughout Spain.34 They were either civilians or came from among military deserters. Socially, most of them originated from the peasantry although they also included students, clergymen, and an occasional noble. Opposition to French requisitions, taxes, and loot ing by soldiers was the main motivation behind guerrilla resistance.35 Guerrillas were also stimulated to fight by the wish to defend the independence of their towns and provinces, their way of life, national sentiments, and the wish to defend their Church against the “Godless” French. Opposition by Spanish guerrillas also signified social protest against rural poverty and exploitation, as Italian General Caffarelli noted: “Properly speaking, it is the war of the poor against the rich.”36 The jun tas and the Church encouraged guerrilla activity while the local popula tion provided necessary support in the form of shelter, food, and intelligence. At times, though, the guerrillas also alienated their coun trymen by preying on them or imposing heavy requisitions on villages. Both sides committed numerous atrocities in what became the most horrendous war of the Napoleonic period. Goya captured the horrors of that war in his famous etchings entitled “The Disasters of War.” The rebels killed prisoners of war and mutilated the bodies of dead soldiers, while French soldiers sacked numerous cities and frequently executed civilians, tortured suspects, and raped women. Guerrilla activities hurt the French in two principal ways. First, it was owing to the guerrillas that “the conquest of Spain required a much larger army than Napoleon had been able to deploy there.” 37 They inflicted high casualties on the French, continuously intercepted mail, attacked French supply convoys, and harassed isolated posts. This obliged the French to allocate troops to pursue the guerrillas, escort messengers,