

Portugal 149

inevitable, proposed to defend the country by virtually transforming 
much of it into an armed camp. Unable to protect the entire border area, 
Wellington chose to fortify the hilly region around Torres Vedras, north 
of Lisbon, and so protect at least the Portuguese capital and the Tagus. 
It took 10,000 workers about a year to construct the impregnable Lines 
of Torres Vedras, which consisted of three fortified lines that extended 
29 miles from the Tagus to the Atlantic Ocean.11 These lines played a key 
role in defending Portugal when the final French onslaught began. With 
the support of the Portuguese War Ministry, Wellington also reinforced 
border fortresses, destroyed roads, and removed animals that could be 
used by the invaders. To deprive the French army of provisions, he 
imposed a “scorched earth” policy and ordered inhabitants of some areas 
to evacuate. This part of Wellington’s strategy was controversial, causing 
several members of the Regency Council to demand, in vain, that he 
defend Portugal at the border in order to spare the heartland from war 
and destruction. 
The French army began its third and largest invasion of Portugal 
in August 1810, a time when Napoleon had consolidated his control over 
most of Spain. 12 The Emperor appointed Marshal André Masséna to lead 
the army of Portugal. Masséna’s 65,000 troops outnumbered Wellington’s 
British–Portuguese army. Wellington obviously benefited from the reor 
ganization of the Portuguese army and the militarization of the society 
carried out by Beresford. He also used the ordenança, a traditional provin 
cial militia mobilized only during war and consisting of all men between 
the ages of 16 and 60. Masséna began the Portuguese campaign with the 
capture of the Spanish frontier fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo ( July 1810) 
and its Portuguese counterpart, Almeida (1810).13 He then advanced 
into Portugal and, in September, attacked Wellington’s allied army at 
Bussaco, a disastrous decision that ended with the loss of 5000 
Frenchmen.14 Wellington then withdrew into position behind Torres 
Vedras. In mid-October, Masséna attacked the formidable Lines but was 
repulsed. He requested reinforcements from Napoleon but received 
none. A month later, he and his troops retreated to Santarem, where they 
languished for almost four months. Finally, in early March 1811, as 
supplies became scarce, a disheartened Masséna, who lost half of his 
army to combat, disease, and hunger, ordered his starving army to retreat 
to the Spanish border. Wellington pursued the retreating army and, 
in May, defeated Masséna at Fuentes de Onoro. Portugal was finally 
free of French occupation; the rest of the Peninsular War would be 
fought in Spain. 

150 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

On 30 May 1814, France and Portugal signed a peace agreement. At the Congress of Vienna, Portugal received only a small amount of reparation that hardly compensated for the devastation caused by the long conflict on its territory. The Prince-Regent, who became John VI following the death of his mother in 1816, returned to Portugal from Brazil only in 1821. Of all the countries occupied by Napoleon, Portugal stayed under French rule for the shortest amount of time. The failure of Napoleon to occupy Portugal for any length of time was significant for two reasons: first, it enabled Wellington to gain a foothold in Iberia and use Portugal as the base for his victorious assault on Spain in 1812–13. Second, Napoleon’s inability to conquer Portugal demonstrated his incapacity to close Europe to British trade and contributed to the eventual failure of the Continental Blockade. Portugal, however, paid a heavy price for the failed Napoleonic ambitions. The French invasions, together with Wellington’s “scorched earth” policy, destroyed considerable infrastruc ture and much productive land. Industrial exports declined and, more than ever, Portugal became a British economic colony. The extraordinary military expenses caused a large fiscal deficit that would persist long after 1814. The French invasions also resulted in a peculiar political situation in which the Portuguese king lived in Brazil and a British general was endowed with supreme authority in Portugal. Worst of all, the war’s dev astation caused the already small Portuguese population to decline from 3.2 million in 1807 to 2,875,000 in 1811. 15