

Portugal 147

passive resistance in the form of deserted towns and the destruction of 
supplies essential for his troops. In December 1807, the first anti-French 
riots broke out in Lisbon, and in June 1808, stimulated by the eruption 
of the revolt in Spain, a more general uprising broke out. Oporto, where 
the merchant class was suffering from the Continental Blockade, led the 
way. An initial revolt in Oporto, led by army officers, failed, but a second 
uprising headed by Bishop Dom Antonio Jose de Castro, which enjoyed 
greater popular support, succeeded in expelling the French troops from 
the city. The French governor was arrested and a provisional junta under 
Bishop Castro was set up. Oporto’s success encouraged other communi 
ties in northern Portugal, like Braga, Braganza, and Viana to rise up, 
expel the French, and establish local juntas. By the end of June, northern 
Portugal was free and the southern Algrave soon followed suit. The 
French controlled only a few urban areas, including Lisbon, Elvas, and 
Almeida, where they had large contingents. 
In Oporto a supreme junta was established and the other insurgent 
juntas recognized its leadership and proclaimed their loyalty to the 
Prince-Regent. This obedience to a central authority contrasted with the 
Spanish revolt, where the provincial juntas showed no respect for the cen 
tral junta in Madrid. 8 The Portuguese juntas began raising troops and the 
supreme Junta appealed to England for assistance. The British blockaded 
the Tagus River and called on the inhabitants of Lisbon to rebel against 
French rule. In August 1808, Sir Arthur Wellesley landed at Mondego 
Bay, in the center of Portugal, with almost 10,000 men and marched 
towards Lisbon. He was joined by Portuguese troops and defeated Junot’s 
army at Vimeiro. Junot, demoralized and isolated, signed the Convention 
of Sintra, agreeing to evacuate Portugal. 
With the elimination of French control over Portugal, the British now 
had a foothold in the Iberian peninsula. Public discontent in Portugal, 
stemming from social and political causes, remained widespread, how 
ever. French plundering only aggravated the condition of the rural 
masses who had endured much misery before the French invasion. Many 
Portuguese were indignant that the French troops, who had devastated 
their country, were allowed to be repatriated, unscathed. The absence of 
the Prince-Regent and his court also added to the instability. Attacks 
were made on suspected pro-French elements, including commanding 
officers, Jews, and foreign merchants. 9 In September 1808, the Regency 
Council was restored. The conservative Regency feared further distur 
bances and moved quickly to restore order. Seizing upon the disorder, it 
launched a policy of repression directed especially against liberals and 

148 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

reformists, effectively eliminating progressive opposition to its rule and 
reasserting the old order. 
Subsequently, after 1808, the Portuguese government became increas 
ingly dependent on British political, military, and financial help. The 
Prince-Regent appointed the English general William Carr Beresford as 
commander-in-chief of the newly established Portuguese army, charging 
him with its reorganization. Beresford was a very experienced British 
officer who had commanded forces in wars in South Africa and South 
America and who served as viceroy in Portugal until 1814. Soon, 
Beresford became the most powerful figure in the country, effectively 
mobilizing Portuguese resources for the war effort. With the Portuguese 
minister of war, Dom Miguel Pereira Forjaz, Beresford introduced 
military conscription, commissioned new officers, set up a program 
of military training, and tightened army discipline. The new Portuguese 
army eventually numbered 30,000 men. Beresford played a crucial role in 
stabilizing the country but was also unscrupulous in aiding the Regency in 
its repressive policies. Indeed, the reorganization of the Portuguese army 
was intended not only to defend Portugal against Napoleon but also to 
secure the new authorities against internal opponents. 
The British government subsidized the Portuguese military build 
up. Its assistance proved insufficient, however. The Regency reformed 
the fiscal structure in an effort to increase revenues. It imposed an 
“Extraordinary Contribution for Defense” on the population, which 
amounted to a forced loan. 10 Prince-Regent John proposed additional 
fiscal reforms, including a stamp tax, sale of crown lands, and a lottery. 
The collection of rents from crown lands was also improved and proposals 
were submitted to increase land taxes and establish an income tax. 
The added revenues did not suffice to cover all the military expenses, 
however, and Portugal sank deeper into debt. 
Meanwhile, the French launched a second invasion of Portugal. In 
March 1809, Marshal Jean Soult marched through Galicia into northern 
Portugal and occupied Oporto. In April, Wellesley returned to Lisbon 
and advanced on Oporto. Beresford attempted to outflank the French 
and cut off their retreat to Spain. The French were able to withdraw to 
Galicia but only after suffering heavy losses. 
In the fall of 1809, after his victory over Austria, Napoleon considered 
another campaign to end the Peninsular War, occupy Portugal, and expel 
the British from Iberia. Clearly, as long as the British forces stayed in 
Portugal, Napoleon’s control over the Peninsula remained insecure. 
Wellington, certain that another Napoleonic invasion of Portugal was 