

THE COLLAPSE OF NAPOLEONIC SPAIN

Under such fiscal predicaments, the Spanish government became heav ily dependent on British subsidies. Even more important was the military role the British army played in liberating Spain. Masséna’s inability to expel the British from Portugal in 1811 proved highly significant since Wellington would play a decisive role in defeating the French in Spain in 1812–13. In early 1812 Wellington was ready to begin his offensive, 41 and in January and April he captured the two border fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz. Meanwhile, Napoleon pulled troops out of Spain for the Russian campaign, thereby weakening the French position in Iberia. This coincided with an expansion of the Anglo-Portuguese army. In July 1812, the British routed the army of Marshal Auguste Marmont in the Battle of Salamanca, and, on 12 August 1812, Wellington entered Madrid, which Joseph had abandoned. Madrid gave Wellington a hero’s welcome. Shortly thereafter, Soult lifted the siege of Cadiz to avoid being isolated and withdrew from Andalusia, placing his troops under Joseph. The formidable French army, more than 100,000 soldiers strong, regained control of the Spanish capital in early November 1812. Another French army drove Wellington from Burgos and forced his Anglo-Portuguese army to withdraw to safety in Portugal yet again. Only Joseph’s reluctance to pursue the retreating army saved Wellington. As it turned out, however, the Allied forces suffered only a temporary setback. The French had evacuated Andalusia, Extremadura, and Asturias in 1812 and never recovered those regions. Guerrillas, stimu lated by the Allied Army, intensified their campaigns in the northern regions of the Basque and Navarre. With the assistance of the British navy, guerrillas temporarily expelled the French from most of the Basque coast and occupied the northern port of Santander. In February 1813, Mina acquired siege weapons and forced the surrender of Tafalla, the most important fortification in Navarre, after Pamplona. In early 1813,

Spain 141

the French position in Spain grew weaker when the Emperor transferred 
more troops from Iberia to Germany. London sent fresh reinforcements 
to Wellington and, in October 1812, the Cortes appointed him as the chief 
commander of all the armies in Spain. Realizing his precarious position, 
Joseph left Madrid for France in March 1813, just as he had done in 1808. 
Thousands of frightened afrancesados accompanied him. Wellington’s 
Anglo-Portuguese army moved across northern Spain to block Joseph’s 
retreat. The final blow for Joseph came on 21 June 1813 at the Battle of 
Vitoria, where Wellington led his 80,000 men to a decisive victory over an 
outnumbered French army. Joseph escaped from the battlefield, leaving 
behind numerous state documents and his large art collection. At 
the end of June, Joseph crossed the Pyrenees into France with the rest of 
his army and numerous afrancesados. Napoleon appointed Soult as 
commander-in-chief of the French armies in Spain, but the latter could 
not prevent further losses by the French. Saragossa was liberated and 
Suchet evacuated Valencia and retreated north to Barcelona. Wellington 
captured San Sebastian and crossed to southern France in October 1813, 
a few days before Napoleon suffered his decisive defeat at Leipzig. 
Although the fighting would continue for a few more months, the war in 
Spain was essentially over. 
In November 1813, Napoleon proposed to recognize Ferdinand as 
King of Spain and to withdraw all French forces from Spain if the British 
would do the same. Through this plan, the Emperor hoped to avoid a war 
on two fronts and to release more troops for the defense of his Empire. 
Ferdinand was eager to gain his freedom and, in December 1813, he 
signed a secret agreement with Napoleon at Valencay, accepting the 
Emperor’s terms on the condition that the government in Madrid ratify 
the treaty. The Spanish Regency rejected the agreement, however. After 
being released in March 1814, Ferdinand returned to Spain and restored 
his reign. 