

The Italian Peninsula 163

and difficult. Melzi believed in the supremacy of the State over the 
Church, while Pius VII opposed any reduction of ecclesiastical power and 
the annexation of papal lands to the Italian Republic. The two sides 
finally signed a Concordat in September 1803. It was modeled after the 
French Concordat, proclaiming Catholicism as the state religion but con 
firming freedom of religion and authorizing the Republic to nominate 
bishops and the Pope to consecrate them. It also ratified the new owners 
of Church land. Bonaparte largely ignored the Concordat and persisted 
in strengthening the State vis-à-vis the Church. For example, the 
Emperor continued to confiscate and sell Church land and introduced 
civil marriage and divorce. Many clergymen remained hostile to 
Napoleon’s rule and refused to collaborate with the State; some even 
incited disobedience. 
The Napoleonic period also had a major impact on Italian Jews, who 
numbered about 30,000 at the end of the eighteenth century, half of 
them living in Rome. They lived in squalid ghettos and were subject to 
economic and legal restrictions. With the arrival of the French armies in 
the late 1790s, ghetto walls were shattered and Jews received equal rights. 
In the Republic and Kingdom of Italy, Jews left the ghettos, purchased 
land, acquired new occupations, entered public schools, and enrolled in 
the National Guard. Some rose to prominent positions in various munic 
ipalities and state administration. 
Economically, the government created a national market by eliminating 
internal tariffs and promulgating a uniform commercial code, a single 
currency (the lira), and unified weights and measures. Communications 
were improved through extensive construction of roads and waterways, 
most notably the road over the transalpine Simplon Pass, completed in 
1805. While military expenses burdened the treasury, much of the army’s 
equipment was produced in the Kingdom, which encouraged local industry. 
At the same time, however, French imperial policy damaged the 
Kingdom’s industry and commerce. Essentially, Napoleon wished to turn 
the Kingdom toward economic dependency on France. He ordered it to 
export raw silk exclusively to France and forbade the import of foreign 
industrial products into the Kingdom, except for French goods. In August 
1810, the Emperor wrote Eugène, “Italy has France to thank for so much 
that she really should not mind if France acquired some commercial 
advantages there.” 17 The Continental Blockade paralyzed the ports of 
Venice and Ancona and harmed maritime commerce, causing shortages 
of colonial goods. On the other hand, the elimination of British competi 
tion boosted wool and cotton industries. Moreover, the decline in 

164 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe commerce helped to shift resources to the agrarian sector, thus encouraging agricultural expansion. Landowners also benefited from the creation of a larger market, a rise in the prices of grain, rice, and wine, and the continuing sale of Church property, most of which was purchased by the well-to-do. While the propertied classes benefited from many of the Napoleonic policies, the conditions of the lower classes deteriorated in some important ways. They carried the main burden of conscription, experienced an increase in indirect taxes, and suffered from the ongoing agricultural com mercialization. Yet the Napoleonic regime never faced the kind of massive popular revolt that broke out in southern Italy. Popular opposition was mostly limited to resistance to conscription or to brigands, who disrupted law and order but posed no threat to Napoleonic rule. In the summer of 1809, however, revolts broke out in the Veneto and in Emilia-Romagna. The disorder in the Veneto was affected by the Austrian invasion into northern Italy during the Franco-Austrian War. It represented a protest against the demands of the Napoleonic State and a desire to restore the Republic of Venice, reflecting traditional city–country hostility. Thousands of peasant rebels threatened urban centers like Vicenza and Treviso. The authorities restored order only in late 1809. Another widespread rural revolt broke out in several departments in Emilia-Romagna in protest against a new milling tax. 18 The brigand-led rebels, many of whom were deserters, attacked numerous towns, destroyed government property and documents, and briefly threatened Bologna. The authorities held firm and suppressed the revolt, inflicting heavy casualties on the rebels. Still, under the influence of the revolt, Prina decided to revoke the milling tax. Clearly, the revolts and the ongoing brigands’ activity demonstrated the antago nism that rural Italy felt toward the rising taxes and conscription.