

168 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe from economic considerations, Murat wished to assert Naples’ independence vis-à-vis France. Delays in introducing Code Napoleon into the Kingdom of Naples, and Murat’s refusal to grant French prod ucts tariff exemption, increased the strained relations between the two. Developing a Neapolitan army was another significant reform. Joseph introduced annual conscription in 1806 but met with difficulties due to the Calabrian revolt, and it was not strictly enforced. Joseph took part of the troops with him to Spain, leaving his successor with only a small army. Murat exerted great effort to enforce conscription and build up a national army. Eventually, his army stood at 32,000 men, many of whom were con victs. Murat viewed the army as more than a military tool, and “from the outset intended to turn the army into his principal political base in the Kingdom and sought to use it as an instrument by which to forge an amal game between his own dynastic ambitions and the Neapolitan nationalism.” 28 Murat succeeded in gaining the loyalty of many civilian and military supporters although the army never provided an adequate basis for the transition to a new political system. Building the Neapolitan army was very costly, however, hampering the implementation of various reforms. Conscription provoked much discontent and fed brigandage. In 1808, Neapolitan troops captured Capri from the British. The Neapolitan army fought in Spain, Germany, and Russia, suffering high casualties.

THE ANNEXED TERRITORIES

The third part of the peninsula consisted of the northern and central regions that Napoleon annexed directly to France: Piedmont (annexed in 1802); Liguria (1805); Tuscany (1808); Parma and Piacenza (1808); and Umbria and Lazio, including Rome (1809). The Napoleonic author ities introduced the French administrative, fiscal, and judicial systems to these lands in order to integrate them with France. They divided them into departments, largely headed by French prefects, established Code Napoleon, imposed French taxation, and conscripted their men. Napoleon faced no major revolts here although his taxation and con scription policies provoked popular hostility. Opposition also came from the clergy. The propertied classes largely supported the Napoleonic regime and were rewarded with government offices and integration into a larger market. Piedmont was part of the Empire longer than any other Italian region. 29 Following their defeat at Marengo, the Austrians retreated from

The Italian Peninsula 169

Piedmont and Bonaparte reoccupied it. King Charles-Emmanuel IV abdicated in 1802 in favor of his brother, Victor-Emmaunel I, who stayed, however, in Sardinia under British protection until the end of the Napoleonic period. Bonaparte annexed Piedmont to France in September 1802. Its border with Lombardy and its wealth provided him with both strategic and economic incentives to do so. In neighboring Genoa, Napoleon restored the Ligurian Republic but then annexed it to France (June 1805) in order to gain close control of the port of Genoa. Napoleon divided Piedmont into six departments and Liguria into three more departments, appointing French prefects there. The traditional customs frontier between Piedmont and Liguria disappeared. In Piedmont, Napoleon established all the French laws and institu tions. The gendarmerie, police, and the army successfully fought many of the brigand bands. Subsequently, “there can be little doubt that the French had restored civil order in Piedmont by 1809, nor is it contestable that they made their rule effective.” 30 This was crucial in order to rally the Piedmontese propertied classes to the regime. Piedmontese nobles and members of the bourgeoisie also benefited from opportunities to pursue military and administrative careers, and from the sale of confiscated Church land. At the same time, some aristocrats and many intellectuals resented the introduction of the French language into the new adminis tration and their own loss of autonomy. Many also remained loyal to the House of Savoy. The Continental Blockade and French competition caused heavy losses and great dissatisfaction, especially among silk producers. To this must be added the lower class’s discontent provoked by higher taxes and conscription. Unlike Piedmont, Napoleon refrained from occupying Tuscany imme diately after Marengo. Instead, he transformed Tuscany into the Kingdom of Etruria in 1801, and through an agreement with the Spanish Bourbons, Louis, the son-in-law of the Spanish king, became the ruler of the new kingdom. When Louis died in 1803, his wife Maria Luisa, the Spanish Infanta, became regent of Etruria. Under the new rule, Etruria became a bastion of reaction. It also maintained a neutral foreign policy, and Livorno, its prosperous port, remained open to British goods. In 1807, Napoleon ordered French troops into Livorno to destroy English merchandise. In December 1807, the Emperor removed Maria Luisa and annexed Tuscany to the French Empire (May 1808). In March 1809, Tuscany was placed under Napoleon’s sister Elisa, already the ruler of Lucca and Piombino. In practice, however, Tuscany was ruled from Paris. It was divided into three departments. Since poverty fed banditry, which