

The Italian Peninsula 161

The authorities also applied the principles of centralization and 
uniformity to education. In 1802, Melzi projected the establishment of 
elementary schools in each commune and secondary schools in each 
department, along with vocational institutions, universities, and two acad 
emies of fine art in Milan and Bologna. The Interior Ministry ran and 
controlled all levels of public education. The language of instruction was 
Italian. The authorities devoted much more attention and resources to 
the secondary school system than to elementary schools. The latter had 
to wait until 1812 before the government finally proclaimed an organic 
plan of their organization. While the number of elementary schools 
increased, many of them suffered from a shortage of money and 
qualified teachers. As for secondary schools, the licei, the government 
laid the foundation of a modern secular system; it established a uniform 
curriculum, assigned books, and appointed teachers. Three universities 
operated in Pavia, Bologna, and Padua with a total enrollment of 1172 
students. 13 
The State’s increased effectiveness was best illustrated in the financial 
and military areas. With growing efficiency, the government extracted rising 
sums of money and conscripted thousands of men annually. The largest 
yearly expenditure of public funds, normally comprising 50 percent of 
the budget, was allocated to the upkeep of 25,000 French troops in the 
Kingdom, and to an expanding Italian army.14 Other major expenses 
included the construction and maintenance of roads and waterways, 
payment of the public debt, and administrative costs. The authorities 
liquidated the public debt by offering to creditors two types of bonds, 
one carrying 3.5 percent interest and the other one acceptable as 
payment for national property. 
Direct and indirect taxes provided the bulk of state revenues; they were 
supplemented by customs, the lottery, and sale of national land. To pay 
for the increasing Napoleonic impositions, Finance Minister Giuseppe 
Prina launched reforms designed to augment taxes and reorganized 
financial administration and tax collection. Prina was the only minister to 
retain his post throughout the entire Napoleonic period. The Emperor 
clearly appreciated his efforts and wrote Eugène in 1805, “There is no 
person who is more essential than the finance minister; he is a hard 
worker who knows his profession.” 15 To gain the landowners’ support, 
Prina kept property taxes, the largest source of the state’s income, at 
a relatively modest level. In return, he established a personal tax and 
increased indirect taxes, including salt, tobacco, and consumption 
duties. In 1807, Prina launched a property survey (catasto), thereby 

162 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

erasing differences among taxpayers. The survey progressed rapidly 
although it was completed only after Napoleon’s fall. Prina also tightened 
state control over taxation, creating a more orderly, uniform, and effi 
cient tax collection. In March 1804, he established new guidelines for tax 
collectors, aimed at a timely and accurate levy. These new policies, along 
with an increase in the number of taxpayers, almost doubled state 
revenues from 1802 to 1811. 
Yet the success of Prina’s financial policies had a price. The increasing 
efficiency of tax collection meant a rising fiscal burden on the population. 
The lower classes bore a proportionately heavier share of this burden, due 
to the augmentation of indirect taxes. This growing tax pressure con 
tributed to the population’s increased hostility toward the Napoleonic 
State, and Prina became the Kingdom’s most hated minister. He later paid 
with his life for his pro-Napoleonic devotion. Moreover, Napoleon’s 
increasing demands led to rising deficits in the last years of the Kingdom. 
In August 1802, the Republic had proclaimed a mandatory military 
draft, annually conscripting thousands of recruits between the ages of 20 
and 25 for four years’ service. 16 Conscripts could pay a substitute. Military 
conscription aroused widespread opposition, particularly among the 
rural population, who carried the lion’s share of the draft. They were 
unaccustomed to military service and resisted, not out of national senti 
ments but because of their desire to protect their economic basis and tra 
ditional way of life. Napoleonic conscription became the principal bone 
of contention between the State and civil society. Conscripts dodged the 
draft, deserted, attacked draft officials, and even revolted, often with the 
support of their relatives and communities. The government reacted by 
tightening the draft machinery, dispatching the gendarmerie, and pro 
claiming harsher penalties. The conscription system enabled state offi 
cials to move into remote areas and compel citizens to acknowledge the 
State and obey its laws. Indeed, those policies reinforced the State’s 
power. Despite popular resistance, the government drafted 155,000 men 
between 1802 and 1814, and expanded the Italian army to 70,000 men by 
1812. Italians fought in Spain, Germany, and Russia, suffering enormous 
casualties. Military service also inspired national consciousness, bringing 
together citizens from different parts of Italy to serve in Italian units 
under an Italian banner. It encouraged officers and some rank and file 
to transcend their regional origins and begin thinking of themselves as 
part of the Italian nation. 
Following the French Concordat (1801), Bonaparte instructed Melzi 
to reach a similar treaty with Pope Pius VII. The negotiations were long 