

The Italian Peninsula 157

THE NAPOLEONIC TRANSFORMATION OF ITALY, 1800–14

With the victory over the Austrians at Marengo, Bonaparte restored French domination over much of northern Italy. The Austrians recog nized this reality at Lunéville. Marengo thus marked the beginning of the second phase of French rule over Italy, which lasted until Napoleon’s fall in 1814. During the first decade of the nineteenth century, Napoleon gained control over the rest of Italy: Piedmont and Liguria (1800); Venetia and the Kingdom of Naples (1806); Tuscany (1807); the Papal Marche (1808); Rome, Lazio, and Umbria, as well as Parma and Piacenza (1808); and Trentino (1810). Only Sardinia and Sicily remained under their former rulers, who benefited from British protection.

158 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Swiss Confederation

Bavaria

Lucca

Corsica

Mediterranean Sea

Sardinia (Savoy)

Austria

OttomanEmpire

Adriatic Sea

Kingdom of Naples

Kingdom of Italy

Annexed to France Italian satellites

*Rome

Illyrian Provinces

Sicily(Bourbon)

Piedmont

Map 3 Italy, 1812

During this period, Napoleon reshaped the peninsula’s boundaries and created new states and governments at will. This reorganization aimed at strengthening his control and assuring the success of the Continental Blockade. Ultimately, Napoleon consolidated the peninsula into three parts: the (northern) Italian Republic, later transformed into the Kingdom of Italy; the Kingdom of Naples; and the areas annexed to imperial France. A second significant characteristic of Napoleonic Italy was the formation of the centralized state.5 The Napoleonic authorities launched the rationalization and centralization of the administrative, financial, judicial, and military structures, modeled on the French system. The new uniform legal, institutional, and economic organizations also enhanced the political unity of the peninsula. The alliance between the Napoleonic state and the new elite of nota bles constituted the third important feature of Napoleonic Italy. The notables were an amalgam of the nobility and the wealthy bourgeoisie. As in France, landowners constituted the most significant element in this elite, although the commercial, professional, and educated classes were also part of the notability. Napoleon rallied this elite around him and secured their support through important benefits, appointment to high positions, sanctioning their purchase of Church land, guaranteeing the right of private property, and securing law and order. Naturally, part of the nobility opposed or remained lukewarm to Napoleon, resenting the loss of traditional privileges, the increase in tax burden, and the assault on the Church.

THE REPUBLIC AND THE KINGDOM OF ITALY (1802–14)

In January 1802, Napoleon established the Republic of Italy. An assembly of Italian notables gathered in Lyons and elected the First Consul as the Republic’s president. In March 1805, after becoming Emperor, Napoleon transformed the Republic into the Kingdom of Italy (1805–14), with himself as its king. 6 Initially, the State consisted of Lombardy, the Novarese, and most of Emilia Romagna. In later years, Napoleon annexed to the Kingdom the Veneto and Istria (1806); the Marche, (1808); and Trentino, South Tyrol (1810). At its peak, the Kingdom covered an area of 89,600 square kilometers (35,000 square miles) and possessed 6.7 million inhabitants, about one-third of the peninsula’s pop ulation. Both the Republic and the Kingdom were Napoleonic satellite states. Their system was based on the French model, they paid for the