

166 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe intensive administrative and juridical reforms and the speed with which the French administration set about dismantling the Ancien Régime state was remarkable.”22 Yet the reform program in the Kingdom of Naples was less successful than in northern Italy. A shorter French rule and the fact that the south was not as developed and ripe as the north to absorb the Napoleonic reforms, account for the gap between the two states. Even more important was the stronger opposition the Napoleonic regime faced from the southern elite and the masses. Both Joseph and Murat tried to win over the propertied and educated classes but had only limited success.23 Finally, limited resources and a shortage of competent personnel also restricted the Neapolitan reform program. The most significant reform in Naples was the abolition of feudalism. In August 1806, the government suppressed feudal jurisdiction without compensation, declared feudal fees on land redeemable, and trans formed baronial land into private property, free of feudal restrictions. On 1 September 1806, it decreed the division of common lands between landlords and towns, ordering the latter to divide their share among local peasants. Two other reforms affecting the land regime stipulated the termination of entails and the sale of confiscated Church property. The abolition of feudal jurisdiction sought to weaken the power of the landed elite and strengthen the State. It was also designed to encourage land sale, spur agricultural development, create a substantial class of small and middle landowners, thereby generating a solid tax base, and reduce social tension. In 1810, Murat wrote Zurlo, “Without doubt, the greatest benefit of my reign will be the total abolition of feudalism.” 24 Despite these efforts, success of the reform was incomplete. Property division and the redemption of feudal fees aroused numerous disputes between feudatories and communities, requiring lengthy examinations of titles and deeds. A special Feudal Commission, set up in November 1807, operated until August 1810 and settled all the litigations submitted to it. However, the barons sought to prevent a prompt implementation of its decisions, and many were still outstanding a hundred years later. The Feudal Commission had no time to execute the complex reform of com mon lands partition, which remained mostly unsettled due to the land lords’ obstructionism. Where small peasants did receive some land, they often lacked the means to cultivate it and so lost it to large landlords. In sum, while the barons lost their jurisdictional rights and tax prerogatives, they gained full ownership of their property and remained the ruling group. The landed bourgeoisie also benefited by becoming free of feudal jurisdiction and appropriating part of the common lands. Both

The Italian Peninsula 167 the former feudatories and the bourgeoisie also increased their possessions by acquiring much of the confiscated Church property. The peasants, on the other hand, gained little. While freed of feudal duties, most remained propertyless, and now without their communal rights as well, they were dependent on the landlords. Their misery remained a major problem in the south throughout the nineteenth century. The abolition of feudalism in Naples formed the foundation for a uni form state administration. It eliminated the difference between the com munities subject to the State and to the feudi, and established legal equality. Joseph built a central administration modeled on France, dividing his kingdom into 14 provinces run by intendants. On the communal level, the authorities set up councils of decurioni chosen from among proprietors and professionals, who elected mayors. Due to incompetent personnel, how ever, “the objective of establishing efficient communal administrations and expeditiously enforcing laws, regulations, and instructions issued by the ministers . . . was never reached.” 25 The authorities instituted a court hier archy based on the French model but were unable to find suitable judges for all the new positions. Murat proclaimed the Napoleonic codes, yet instituting entails and divorce was ignored by the local elite and had little effect in Naples. The abolition of feudalism also paved the way for financial reforms. The authorities revoked tax privileges, hoping to increase tax revenues. The new government had inherited a huge public debt from the Bourbons of more than 130 million ducati. Military expenditures claimed almost 70 percent of the budget in 1812. 26 Rationalizing the tax system constituted an important part of the fiscal reforms. In August 1806, the new government replaced the numerous Bourbon direct taxes with a uni form property tax. In August 1809, Murat initiated a modern land assess ment although its implementation began only shortly before the end of his reign. The authorities abolished some indirect taxes but preserved state monopolies over salt and tobacco. Confiscated Church land – the State suppressed 1300 monasteries – constituted another important source of income. As in other parts of the peninsula, the wealthy were the principal buyers of these lands. The increased public revenues enabled Murat to reduce the deficit and balance the budget by 1813, 27 but to accomplish this he had to curtail his reform programs. The Continental Blockade harmed Naples’ economy, particularly the agricultural sector, which relied heavily on exports. Maritime trade was virtually paralyzed. Murat was reluctant, therefore, to enforce the Continental Blockade, which provoked tension with Napoleon. Aside