

The Italian Peninsula 153 while Piedmont and the Kingdom of Naples joined the anti-French coalition the year after. France quickly conquered Savoy and Nice. Most Italian governments ceased their reform programs, launched repressive policies, and tightened censorship. Upon uncovering the revolutionary conspiracies, they executed, jailed, or deported the leaders. Clearly, Italian revolutionaries needed outside help to effect change.

THE REVOLUTIONARY TRIENNIUM (1796–9)

Conditions changed significantly after Napoleon Bonaparte crossed the 
Alps in April 1796. This marked the beginning of two decades 
(1796–1814) of French hegemony over the Italian Peninsula. The 
Directory viewed the Italian campaign primarily as “a financial operation” 
designed to alleviate the fiscal crisis in France. 3 Bonaparte imposed 
heavy taxes and war contributions on the Italian population and sent 
money and confiscated art works to Paris. The French army looted and 
lived off the occupied lands, thereby provoking considerable popular 
resentment. 
Militarily, the Directory assigned the army of Italy a diversionary role in 
support of the French armies in Germany. However, Bonaparte’s rapid 
victories over the Austrians upset the original plan and transformed 
northern Italy into the main front. In April 1796, Bonaparte defeated the 
Austro-Piedmontese armies, forcing Piedmont’s ruler Victor Amadeus III 
to withdraw from the war. Bonaparte then occupied Milan and replaced 
the Austrian administration with a republican one. Soon, the French 
gained control of Verona, the Papal Legations of Bologna and Ferrara, 
and the Duchy of Modena. Pope Pius VI signed an armistice with 
Bonaparte. In July, the French began besieging Mantua and defeated 
several Austrian armies sent to lift the siege. On 2 February 1797, Mantua 
surrendered. Bonaparte then began marching on Vienna, forcing the 
Austrians to sign the Truce of Leoben (April 1797). The Italian campaign 
was over. In May, French troops entered Venice where the Senate had 
abdicated, and a new democratic republic was established. After long 
negotiations, France and Austria finally signed the Treaty of Campo 
Formio, officially ending the First Coalition (18 October). Austria recog 
nized the Cisalpine Republic, which Napoleon had created in northern 
Italy. In return, Napoleon delivered Venice to the Austrians, a cynical 
act that marked the end of the centuries-old Venetian Republic and 
horrified Italian patriots. 

154 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Bonaparte’s victories launched the “Revolutionary Triennium” (1796–9), the first phase of French rule in Italy and a period of transfor mation and lively debate. Italian Jacobins, calling themselves “patriots,” formed popular societies that championed national independence and social reforms. Melchiore Gioia reflected the opinion of most “patriots” by stressing his support for forming an Italian republic, “one and indivisible.” Only in a republic, insisted Gioia, could liberty and a demo cratic society flourish. The more radical “patriots” emphasized the need for social programs to benefit the popular classes. Those revolutionaries supported the new republican governments, which replaced the old regimes, and experimented with democratic systems. The French, how ever, closely controlled these “sister” republics, exerting fiscal pressure and interfering in their internal affairs. The French impositions and the fact that the new laws benefited mostly the propertied and educated classes provoked popular insurrections. When the anti-French offensive was renewed in 1799, this opposition would help to bring down the Italian republics. The first republic that Bonaparte founded was the Cispadan Republic, south of the Po. It consisted of Bologna, Ferrara, Modena, and Reggio Emilia (April 1797). In July, Bonaparte merged it with the Cisalpine Republic he had formed in Milan. Soon, he added to the Cisalpine parts of the former Venetian Republic. The Cisalpine, the most important “sister” republic, lasted for 22 months and possessed a national flag, an army, and a population of 3.5 million. Its constitution, modeled on the French Constitution of 1795, established a Directory and a bicameral legislature. It created a uniform administration, dividing the State into 20 departments. Other provisions abrogated entails and enacted military conscription, free internal trade, and equality between male and female heirs. Its government also established freedom of religion, abolished reli gious orders, and confiscated Church land, selling it mostly to the well-to-do. The independence of the Cisalpine Republic was largely nominal, however; the French were ultimately in control. Neither Bonaparte nor the Directory wished to see a powerful Italian state. They imposed terri torial limits that denied the Cisalpine access to the sea. Genoa, which became a separate Ligurian Republic, was never incorporated into the Cisalpine Republic. A treaty with France forced the Cisalpine Republic to maintain a costly army and pay for the upkeep of 25,000 French troops, quickly amassing a huge deficit. The French continuously intervened in the Cisalpine’s internal affairs. Bonaparte nominated the state’s directors and legislators to ensure the moderates’ control. Four coups by the