

170 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

was rampant in the countryside, the propertied classes responded 
favorably to the efforts of the new regime to restore order, and generally 
supported French rule. Yet the same groups also resented the blockade, 
which seriously hurt Livorno and the agricultural sector, which depended 
on export.31 As usual, taxation and conscription aroused resistance by 
the lower classes. 
The old Duchy of Parma and Piacenza were annexed, in all but name, 
to the French Empire in June 1805. Napoleon ordered the introduction 
of Code Napoleon there. In 1806, the rural population of the Piacentino, 
the mountain valleys between Parma and Genoa, revolted against French 
taxation and conscription, but the French ruthlessly suppressed it within 
a few weeks. The official annexation of Parma and Piacenza to the 
Empire came in 1808. 
Developments in the Papal States followed a similar pattern. The 
Papacy was plagued by numerous problems. Its economy was backward 
and the treasury suffered from chronic deficits. Few pilgrims now made 
their way to Rome, which hurt public revenues. The powerful clergy, 
which constituted a high percentage of the State’s population – 17,000 
out of 1.5 million 32 – headed all the ministries and the provincial admin 
istrations and blocked badly needed reforms. The ruling patricians failed 
to develop their huge latifundia, while the bourgeoisie remained small 
and the urban and rural lower classes languished in poverty. 
Despite the signing of the Concordat, relations between Napoleon and 
Pius VII gradually deteriorated. The Pope never approved of the loss of 
Bologna and Ferrara. He also opposed the organic articles in the Italian 
Concordat and the introduction of divorce and civil marriage into that 
state. Franco-Papal relations deteriorated further after the imperial coro 
nation. Pius VII’s neutrality during the War of the Third Coalition and 
his refusal to close his ports to British trade induced Napoleon to chip 
away at the papal territory. The French Emperor occupied Ancona and 
Civitavecchia in October 1805 and in May 1806, respectively. The Pope 
protested but Napoleon responded rather menacingly, “Your Holiness is 
the sovereign of Rome, but I am the Emperor and all my enemies have 
to be yours.” 
When the Pope persisted in his refusal to cooperate with Napoleon on 
the Continental Blockade, the Emperor ordered General Miollis to 
occupy Rome (February 1808). All cardinals not born in the papal terri 
tories were expelled. The Pope reacted by recalling his representative, 
Cardinal Caprara, from France. In May 1808, Napoleon annexed the 
papal Adriatic provinces of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata, and Camerino to 

The Italian Peninsula 171 the Kingdom of Italy, aiming to close the Adriatic Sea to British shipping. In May 1809, Napoleon officially annexed the rest of the Papal States, including the city of Rome, to the French Empire, thereby terminating the Pope’s temporal authority. Rome was to be “a free and imperial city, the second in the Empire.” Napoleon’s son would be given the title King of Rome. Pius VII retaliated by excommunicating Napoleon. In response, the Emperor exiled the Pope to Savona, near Genoa (June 1809), and later transferred him to Fontainebleau. The Papal State then became an integral part of the French Empire, and its territory was divided into two departments: Tiber and Trasimene. General Miollis served as the Governor General, and French prefects ran both departments. Relations between the Napoleonic regime and the population were tense. Only a few Roman aristocrats assumed adminis trative positions, mostly at the local level. The clergy was hostile to the Concordat, Napoleon’s treatment of the Pope, the dispersal of convents, and the dissolution of dioceses. 33 They obeyed Pius VII’s orders to refrain from swearing allegiance to the new ruler or to obey his orders and respect the Concordat. Many noble and non-noble families alike had close personal and economic connections with the clergy and hence remained hostile to the regime. The rural population resisted conscrip tion and many deserters joined brigands’ bands. Prefects resorted to ruthless measures aimed at suppressing opposition. The Roman masses also opposed the entire world of the Enlightenment that the French tried to introduce. They refused to attend official celebrations or have their children baptized by clergy who collaborated with Napoleon. In sum, the Napoleonic regime remained very unpopular in central Italy.