

THE KINGDOM OF NAPLES (1806–14)

In southern Italy, the six-and-a-half years between the collapse of the Neapolitan Republic and the Napoleonic occupation in 1806 were marked by profound crisis. The Bourbon monarchy was in serious fiscal difficulties. The feudal system persisted and the privileged nobility continued to exploit the rural masses and oppose any reform. The court also alienated the rural masses by imposing a heavy tax burden. In 1805, Naples signed a treaty of neutrality with France but, at the same time, joined the Third Coalition. After Austerlitz, Napoleon sought

The Italian Peninsula 165

to punish the Bourbons for their treachery. In December 1805, he 
announced that “The dynasty of Naples has ceased to reign.”19 In 
February 1806, Masséna occupied Naples, forcing Ferdinand IV and his 
queen, Marie Caroline, to flee to Sicily. The French rule in southern Italy 
lasted for nearly a decade (1806–14). Napoleon’s older brother Joseph 
ruled over the Kingdom of Naples and its five million people for the first 
two years; when he moved on to Spain (May 1808), Joachim Murat, 
Napoleon’s brother-in-law and one of his top generals, replaced him.20 By 
occupying southern Italy, Napoleon aimed to consolidate his domination 
over the peninsula, assure the success of his Continental Blockade, and 
challenge British supremacy in the Mediterranean. 
After easily defeating the Bourbon army, the French faced fierce 
popular resistance, the strongest such opposition they faced anywhere in 
Europe aside from Spain.21 Requisitions and looting by the French army 
provoked rural resistance, which the French suppressed. In July 1806, 
British forces landed in Calabria and defeated the French at Maida, 
thereby encouraging a widespread revolt that drove the French out of 
Calabria. The French campaign to reoccupy that region led to a brutal 
war. Brigands – most famous among them was the legendary Fra Diavolo – 
led the revolt, while many clergymen incited the rebels. By February 
1808, the French had regained control of Calabria, but brigandage 
persisted, fueled by military conscription and acute rural misery, and the 
authorities needed three more years to pacify the country. In this bloody 
conflict, some 20,000 French and many more Neapolitan citizens died. 
Like its northern counterpart, the Kingdom of Naples remained 
a Napoleonic satellite. The southern Kingdom was required to pay for 
the upkeep of the French army in Naples, provide the Emperor with 
troops and ships, and implement the Continental Blockade. Napoleon 
also demanded advantages for French imports. On the other hand, 
Joseph, and even more so, Murat, exerted efforts to remain independent. 
Joseph appointed the Frenchmen Antoine Saliceti, Pierre Roederer, and 
Mathieu Dumas as ministers of police, finance, and war, respectively. 
Under Murat, however, the Neapolitan ministers Giuseppe Zurlo (inte 
rior), Francesco Ricciardi (justice), and Maurizio Di Gallo (foreign) 
wielded the greatest influence. A State Council, consisting principally of 
Neapolitan nobles and bourgeoisie, served as a consulting body. In 1811, 
Murat even tried, albeit unsuccessfully, to require his French officials to 
assume Neapolitan citizenship or face dismissal. 
The Neapolitan rulers launched a broad reform policy designed to 
strengthen the central government. The French period “was one of 