

The Italian Peninsula 155

French purged radicals and opponents from the Cisalpinian legislature. 
Increasingly, the French established a more authoritarian system. In 
August 1798, French ambassador Charles-Joseph Trouvé proclaimed 
a new, less democratic constitution that increased the authority of the 
Directory. The latter suppressed journals and popular societies 
and arrested several “patriots.” Under such precarious fiscal and political 
conditions, the Cisalpine authorities were unable to consolidate the 
new state. 
Two other republics, the Roman and the Neapolitan, were created 
after Bonaparte left Italy in November 1797. The French occupied Rome 
and local revolutionaries proclaimed the Roman Republic (February 
1798), forcing Pope Pius VI to leave Rome. The Roman Republic was 
essentially a French protectorate during its 18-month existence. A French 
commission decreed a constitution modeled on the 1795 French 
Constitution. The French commander nominated government officials 
and issued laws. The Republic enjoyed the support of professionals, some 
aristocrats, and Roman Jews, who received equal rights for the first time. 
The Roman legislature abolished entails, sold Church land, and imposed 
limits on bishops’ incomes. Societies of Roman “patriots” had no influ 
ence over the government. Heavy impositions and plunder by French 
troops, along with ecclesiastical incitement, led to revolts in Rome and 
Umbria, which were quickly suppressed. 
In November 1798, the Bourbon monarch Ferdinand IV of Naples 
ordered an invasion into the Roman Republic. General Championnet 
soon expelled the Neapolitans and proceeded to occupy Naples, forcing 
Ferdinand IV to flee to Sicily. On 22 January 1799, Neapolitan patriots 
proclaimed the Parthenopean Republic. Championnet nominated a 
provisional government whose actions required his approval. Some of its 
members were “patriots” who had returned from exile. The Neapolitan 
Republic lasted less than five months. It faced serious fiscal difficulties 
and popular opposition. The French government opposed its formation 
and soon replaced Championnet, who supported the Republic, with the 
more malleable General Macdonald. The only effective law of the 
Neapolitan government was the abolition of entails. An administrative 
reform ended up altering only the provinces’ names. The authorities’ 
greatest failure, however, was their inability to abolish feudalism quickly 
and decisively, thus arousing widespread resentment among the 
rural population. In March 1799, they did abolish feudal jurisdiction 
payments, tolls, and monopolies. The French confirmed the law only at 
the end of April, too late to prevent a peasant revolt. 

156 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

In December 1798, the French also occupied the Kingdom of Piedmont, forcing its ruler, Charles Emmanuel IV, to abdicate. That state had been in deep crisis since its defeat in 1796. Economic hardship bred peasant unrest and brigandage, and French financial pressure and military plunder increased discontent. The authorities uncovered a conspiracy by “patri ots” in favor of an independent republic, and the French ruthlessly suppressed a peasant uprising in Monferrato. The creation of the Second Coalition in late 1798 signaled a counter revolutionary offensive in various European countries. Nowhere was that assault more successful than in the Italian Peninsula. Between February and September 1799, foreign armies and popular insurgents expelled the French from Italy and overthrew the “sister” republics, except for Genoa, which resisted until June 1800. Popular opposition to the French had already begun after their invasion in 1796. The insurgents, mostly peasants and the urban poor, often instigated by clergy, reacted against French looting and repression. In May, Bonaparte ruthlessly suppressed revolts in the Lombard towns of Pavia and Binasco, executing many of the rebels and burning Binasco to the ground. In June 1796, towns in Romagna revolted and a bloody uprising erupted in Verona in April 1797. Opposition to the French and their republican allies culminated, however, in 1799. The Cisalpine was the first republic to fall following the victory of General Suvorov over the French at Cassano d’Adda (April 1799). The Austrians established a new government in Milan. In May, General Suvorov conquered Piedmont. These victories provoked popular upris ings in northern and central Italy. Many Piedmontese peasants joined the Austrian army. In Tuscany, inhabitants of Arezzo, chanting “Viva Maria,” destroyed republican symbols and attacked “Jacobins.” In Sienna, insur gents killed many Jews. Revolts also spread to Lazio, Umbria, and the Marche. “Yet nowhere was the scale of violence of the counter-revolution greater than in the south.” 4 In February 1799, Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo headed an anti-republican army of thousands of peasants alienated by French plunder and, in particular, the failure of the Republic to abolish feudalism. In June, Ruffo’s Sanfedist army entered Naples, which had been abandoned by the French. The republican leaders capitulated after Ruffo promised to allow them to leave for France, but Ferdinand IV, who had returned to Naples, reneged on this agreement and ordered the execution of 120 republican leaders. In September, the Roman Republic also collapsed following the French withdrawal. The Revolutionary Triennium came to a close.