

The Italian Peninsula 159

upkeep of French troops on their territory, they provided Napoleon with 
soldiers, and they abided by the Continental Blockade. 
Napoleon transformed the Republic and the Kingdom of Italy more 
deeply than any other part of the peninsula, possibly even of Europe. 
This was due to the relatively long duration of French domination, the 
cooperation of the local elites, and the reforms that the Habsburgs had 
implemented in pre-Napoleonic Lombardy. Napoleon’s main accom 
plishment in northern Italy was the unification of these very diverse 
regions, formerly belonging to five different states, into a single central 
ized state, and the imposition of uniform and more efficient legal, 
administrative, and financial structures. The republican constitution 
launched the centralization process by creating a very powerful execu 
tive. Napoleon and his vice-president, Francesco Melzi d’Eril, had the 
final say on all internal policies, nominated top officials, and ran foreign 
policy. Seven ministers (of war, finance, treasury, interior, religion, 
justice, foreign relations) were responsible to them. In contrast, the 
legislature was divided into three bodies and had very limited power. 
The legislative body voted without discussion on laws prepared by a legisla 
tive council. An electoral body, consisting of three colleges of landowners, 
merchants, and the intelligentsia, elected the members of the legislative 
body. In other words, political participation was reserved for the proper 
tied and educated classes. 
Vice-President Melzi played a key role in running the Republic. 
A Milanese patrician, he held moderate liberal views, vehemently rejected 
Jacobinism, and staunchly defended the right of private property. His 
ultimate goal was an independent northern Italian state governed by 
a constitutional monarch. This aspiration, along with his demands for 
more autonomy in running the Republic, led to tension with Napoleon. 
When the Emperor set up the Kingdom in 1805, he appointed his faith 
ful stepson, Eugène de Beauharnais, as his viceroy in Milan, and moved 
Melzi to a ceremonial post. 
Napoleon’s rule was highly authoritarian. In July 1805 he ordered 
Eugène: “Even if Milan is in flames, you must ask for orders to extinguish it; 
you must let Milan burn and wait for orders.” 7 As King, Napoleon consti 
tuted the executive and initiated many laws. He introduced constitutional 
changes and established new political structures. The Viceroy and the seven 
ministers executed his orders and ran the daily government business. In July 
1805, Napoleon dissolved the legislative body after it had opposed a new 
tax. He replaced it with a Council of State and, later, created a Senate as 
well. The former consulted him and discussed legislative projects, while 

160 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

the Senate approved them. Neither body posed any challenge to 
Napoleon. 
In 1802, Melzi established the Republic’s central administration. He 
divided the Republic into 12 departments (24 during the Kingdom), with 
a uniform bureaucratic structure. The linchpin was the prefect, who ran 
the departments and constituted the necessary link between center and 
periphery.8 Vice-prefects managed the smaller districts, while podestá and 
sindaci (mayors) ran the comuni. Under the Kingdom, the prefects’ 
powers expanded while the comuni lost their autonomy. Greater central 
ization made the administration increasingly more efficient and depend 
able. An increasing number of administrators were selected on the basis of 
their competence and were gaining in experience and professionalism.9 
Administrative efficiency varied among departments, however, depend 
ing on the duration of French rule, the accessibility of a department’s ter 
rain to officials, the tradition of resistance, and the legacy of earlier 
reforms. The comuni frequently suffered from a shortage of qualified offi 
cials, and many local administrators fulfilled their duties inadequately 
due to favoritism and intimidation. All but one of the top officials in the 
Republic and Kingdom were Italian citizens. Melzi mostly nominated 
administrators of moderate views, while the Kingdom’s authorities 
appointed some bureaucrats who had a radical past. Most officials origi 
nated from the ranks of landowners. Out of 52 prefects who served 
in the Republic and Kingdom, 30 were nobles and 22 came from the 
bourgeoisie, 10 evidence of the Napoleonic amalgamation efforts. 
The State’s centralization and administrative uniformity were strength 
ened by the introduction of the French legal system. Napoleon ordered 
the translation of the French codes into Italian. They became the law of 
the land after 1806. The Civil Code reaffirmed legal equality, property 
rights, and civil marriage. The French court system was also imitated in 
the Kingdom: a justice of peace in every canton, a civil and criminal tri 
bunal in every department, a court of cassation in Milan, and courts of 
appeal in Milan, Venice, Bologna, Brescia, and Ancona. 
To maintain public order, the authorities instituted a regular police 
force. 11 The prefects were in charge of the police in their departments, 
and a Director General of police coordinated police activities throughout 
the state. The gendarmerie served as an elite corps of close to 2000 men, 
combating smuggling, desertion, and brigandage. During emergencies, 
the authorities also used regular troops and the National Guard. 
Yet despite progress in this area, a shortage of manpower remained 
a problem because of insufficient funds.12 