

178 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

establishment of an independent Poland within its old borders and the 
emancipation of the Polish peasants.6 
Wybicki and Dabrowski called on their countrymen to rise up. Many 
Poles, especially among the urban population and the petty gentry in 
western Poland, supported the proclamation and welcomed the French. 
The peasants hoped to be freed from feudalism. An insurrection quickly 
liberated western Poland from Prussian rule. In early November 1806, 
Marshal Davout seized Poznan and soon Dabrowski entered the city. 
He ordered conscription and assembled an army of 30,000 men. 
On 2 January 1807, Napoleon triumphantly entered Warsaw. Since 
many Polish nobles possessed land in Russian- and Austrian-ruled 
provinces, most nobles in the capital initially remained lukewarm toward 
the French. They were also suspicious of radical French slogans and 
reform plans. Many still hoped that the Russians would restore the Polish 
kingdom. Aware of the enormous power of the Polish nobility, Napoleon 
intended to acquire its support rather than rely solely on the masses. 
Indeed, rallying the Polish nobility around his rule was a major charac 
teristic of the Napoleonic government in Poland. The decision of Prince 
Joseph Poniatowski, the nephew of the last Polish king, to support 
Napoleon convinced the Polish nobility to side with the French. For the 
time being, the Emperor delayed his decision on the establishment of 
a Polish state. He did set up a provisional government, however, to organ 
ize the war effort and run the Polish areas conquered from Prussia. All 
seven members, except Wybicki, were influential aristocrats and opposed 
the peasants’ demands to abolish feudalism. 
Meanwhile, the war against Russia continued. Thousands of Polish 
troops fought with France at Eylau and Friedlander. Soon, Napoleon and 
Alexander I signed the Treaty of Tilsit, which included the formation of 
the Grand Duchy of Warsaw in Prussian Poland. Frederick Augustus, 
King of Saxony, and an ally of Napoleon, was appointed ruler of the new 
Polish state. The Russian Tsar, concerned about the existence of an inde 
pendent Polish entity next to his border, received Bialystok as a compen 
sation. By creating the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, Napoleon achieved two 
goals: he punished Prussia, drastically reducing its power and territory, 
and he paid a debt to the Poles for their military assistance. 

THE GRAND DUCHY OF WARSAW (1807–13)

The Grand Duchy spread over an area of 104,000 square kilometers (40,600 square miles) with a population of nearly 2.6 million. 7 Following

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 179

the Franco-Austrian war of 1809, in which the Duchy participated, the 
Habsburgs were forced to cede western Galicia and Cracow to the Duchy 
of Warsaw, thereby increasing its territory to 151,000 square kilometers 
(75,000 square miles) and its population to 4.3 million. In 1810 the 
Duchy consisted of a majority of Poles (79 percent) and minorities of 
Jews (7 percent), Germans (6 percent), Lithuanians (4 percent) and 
Ukranians (4 percent).8 
Nonetheless, Tilsit left nationalist Poles disappointed. The Duchy’s 
borders were artificial, its ruler was a foreigner, most of the old Polish 
State remained outside its boundaries, it was landlocked, and the name 
Poland failed to appear on the map. Moreover, it was a French satellite 
and, as such, had to abide by the Continental Blockade, contribute sol 
diers to the Grande Armée, and have no diplomatic relations with other 
states. Only France had a resident diplomat in Warsaw who possessed the 
power to intervene in Polish affairs. These shortcomings notwithstand 
ing, the Duchy of Warsaw did keep Polish national hopes alive: the 
Duchy’s administration was run by Poles; its official language was Polish; 
it raised a Polish army; and the Duchy included Warsaw, the capital and 
largest Polish city, and Cracow, Poland’s historical capital. 
In July 1807, Napoleon proclaimed an 89-article constitution for the 
Duchy. It was modeled after the French Constitution of 1799 but pre 
served certain traditional Polish parliamentary rules, most notably the 
division of deputies into nobles and non-nobles. It introduced Code 
Napoleon, abolished serfdom, and proclaimed legal equality but con 
tained no explicit guarantees of free speech or press. It declared Roman 
Catholicism as the state religion but also established freedom of religion. 
The charter also guaranteed Polish as the official language. Contrary 
to the old Polish constitution, the Napoleonic Constitution created 
a powerful executive and a weak legislature. It endowed the new ruler, 
Frederick Augustus, with broad executive authority, including the initia 
tion of legislation, convening the Sejm, appointing judges, and running 
foreign policy. In reality, however, Frederick Augustus was totally depend 
ent upon Napoleon, who ran the Duchy’s foreign policy. Besides, 
Frederick Augustus showed little interest in his new state, which he 
visited only four times in six years. 
The nobility dominated the State’s ruling institutions. Frederick 
Augustus nominated a seven-member Council of Ministers, all nobles. All 
the ministers had played important political roles in previous years, 
hence they did not owe their status to Frederick Augustus. They enjoyed 
broad authority, and the king’s absence from the Duchy only increased 