

182 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Many landless lower nobles lived in the cities and found employment 
in the new bureaucracy. Warsaw, in particular, became an important com 
mercial center. The Duchy included two other major cities: Cracow 
(24,000 inhabitants) and Poznan (18,000). Most other towns were very 
small, not much bigger than a large village. The Napoleonic reforms did 
offer some opportunities to members of the emerging middle class by 
opening positions for them in the bureaucracy and the legal profession. 
The formation of the Polish army also meant profits for military contrac 
tors. But while wealthy burghers received voting rights, the nobility dom 
inated social and political life, and the infant bourgeoisie had to 
follow its leadership. 
Jews comprised a sizeable percentage of the Duchy’s urban population. 
In 1810, 300,000 Jews lived in the Duchy, constituting its largest minority. 
Most earned a living from trade, innkeeping, or finance. The hopes 
of Polish Jews to become equal citizens remained unfulfilled. A decree 
in October 1808 suspended Jewish voting rights for ten years on the 
grounds that “Jews were not fully integrated into society.” They were 
barred from living on certain streets in Warsaw, holding official posts, or 
buying estates. Jews were subject to special taxes, including a fee on 
kosher meat. In 1812, the authorities barred Jews from selling alcohol 
and owning inns. Some Jews were exempt from those restrictions, owing 
to their wealth, education, or patriotic service. All of these anti-Jewish 
measures clearly violated the Constitution and Code Napoleon yet the 
persistent discrimination clearly reflected a long and deep hostility 
against Jews in Polish society. 
As with other satellite states, Napoleon imposed heavy military and 
financial burdens on the Duchy of Warsaw. Supplying conscripts and 
money were important parts of the Polish nobility’s obligations to 
Napoleon in return for his recognition of their authority. The Duchy pro 
vided France with more military support than any other satellite state. 12 
Indeed, the army constituted an extremely important institution in the 
Duchy since, after all, war had played an important role in its creation 
and expansion, and for many Poles military service and patriotism went 
hand in hand. The war minister, Poniatowski, participated in many 
Napoleonic campaigns and was the only foreigner to be appointed 
Marshal of France by Napoleon. Under the Constitution, the Duchy was 
committed to maintaining an army of 30,000 men. In 1809, the armed 
forces were doubled, and – in 1812 – their number rose to more than 
100,000 soldiers. Poniatowski introduced military reforms based on the 
French model, most notably annual conscription, which drafted men 

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 183

between the ages of 20 and 25 for six years. Despite the Duchy’s brief 
duration, it raised nearly 200,000 men. Poles fought in Spain, Russia, and 
Germany, suffering enormous casualties. 
Maintaining such a large army consumed two-thirds of the Duchy’s 
budget.13 The Polish population also supported Napoleon’s military needs 
by constructing fortresses and paying for the French army in the Duchy. 
Requisitions by the Grande Armée further exacerbated the military burden 
on the Duchy. Napoleon also granted Polish estates worth 20 million francs 
to French generals and dignitaries for their outstanding service.14 These 
tax-exempt donations, taken from crown lands, diminished the State’s 
revenues. The Duchy also became heavily indebted to France through 
the Bayonne Convention (May 1808). In 1807, Napoleon appropriated 
Prussian crown lands in the Duchy, insisting that the Duchy would have 
to buy them from him. The French then overestimated the property 
value, assessing them at 43 million francs. At Bayonne, Napoleon con 
sented to surrender these properties to the Poles for 20 million francs, 
payable in three installments beginning in 1809. To meet the Duchy’s fis 
cal obligations, the authorities introduced new taxes, most notably the 
personal tax, and increased existing taxes. The poor economy led to 
shortfalls in tax collection, however, and the Duchy continued to suffer 
from chronic financial difficulties until its collapse. 
Like other states, the Duchy of Warsaw had to abide by the Continental 
System – despite its adverse effect on the Polish economy. 15 Most impor 
tantly, it closed off the lucrative British market to Poland’s principal 
export, grain, causing a major fall in cereal prices, depreciation of prop 
erty values, and losses to landowners. Local markets were poor and inad 
equate to offset the losses of international trade.16 Consequently, the 
development of agriculture, by far the most important branch of the 
Polish economy, was halted. Rural regions suffered from the devastation 
of war, requisitions by crossing armies, and a crop failure in 1811. Many 
peasants died or migrated, causing some regions to become depopu 
lated. Preferential tariffs on imported French and Saxon goods hurt 
the development of local manufacturing. On the other hand, orders by 
the military helped the textile industry. 
The Duchy of Warsaw participated in the Franco-Austrian War of 1809. 
In April 1809, an Austrian army of 30,000 men under Archduke 
Ferdinand invaded the Duchy from Galicia. In the Battle of Raszyn, 
the Polish army suffered heavy losses and was forced to withdraw from 
Warsaw. Soon thereafter, Poniatowski launched a successful offensive 
into undefended Galicia, quickly occupied parts of it, was welcomed as 