

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

In February 1813, the Russians crossed the border into the Duchy and forced its Polish government to evacuate the capital. Alexander I estab lished a Provisional Supreme Council, and the Duchy continued to exist as a Russian protectorate for the next two years. The future of Poland became one of the most controversial issues at the Congress of Vienna. The main question was whether the Tsar would be allowed to rule over the entire Duchy, thus depriving Austria and Prussia of their former Polish lands. An Anglo-Austrian coalition, supported by France, opposed Russia on this question and even threatened a new war. Finally, however, the powers reached a compromise: Alexander I received most of the Duchy of Warsaw, which became the Kingdom of Poland; Prussia settled for the western regions, including Danzig; and Austria retained Galicia. Cracow became a free city under the joint protectorate of the three powers. The Congress also acknowledged the existence of a Polish nation, stipulating that Poles would have national representation and institutions, albeit subject to the approval of the three powers. The Duchy of Warsaw extended Napoleonic imperial power all the way to the Russian border. The Emperor drew important advantages from the Duchy, primarily in the form of the huge number of Polish conscripts who served in his army. The Duchy’s authorities also abided by the Continental Blockade, despite the losses to Polish agriculture, and let Napoleon grant Polish estates to his generals. In return, Napoleon rec ognized the political hegemony of the szlachta and allowed it to maintain its seigneurial practices even though they contradicted Code Napoleon and the Duchy’s Constitution. The nobility was able to increase its power over the peasants and preserve the old system for much of the nineteenth century. In reality, Napoleon had little choice in light of the considerable power the Polish nobility wielded. Indeed, the Duchy of Warsaw repre sents a prime example of the limits and contradictions of the Napoleonic

186 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

reform policy and of the Emperor’s inability to transform the society in 
the face of stiff opposition by the local ruling class. 
Despite those limits, the Napoleonic rule in the Duchy of Warsaw 
provided stimulation for political, judicial, and administrative modern 
ization. Napoleon introduced a modern constitution, judicial uniformity, 
a conscripted army, and a centralized bureaucracy, institutions that were 
nonexistent under the old Polish state. Those institutions largely contin 
ued during the new Kingdom of Poland.17 The new Constitution of 1815 
was based on the Duchy’s constitution. It guaranteed personal freedom 
and property rights and established a strong executive. The Sejm and the 
Council of State survived as well. The Napoleonic legal system, including 
Code Napoleon, and the administrative structure remained largely intact 
during the new Kingdom. The Duchy also opened positions to non 
nobles, thus giving some encouragement to the urban Polish middle 
class, and began the process of grounding the social hierarchy in private 
property. 
Even more significant was the stimulus the Napoleonic period gave 
to Polish nationalism. Despite its limits and short duration, the Duchy 
signified the revival of the Polish state and a reversal of the Partitions. 
The Polish army, the establishment of an administration staffed with 
Poles, the use of Polish as the official language, and the appearance of 
various national symbols in the Duchy all became a reality, strengthening 
Polish national sentiment. The preservation of the Polish army was the 
most significant factor that helped to maintain Polish nationalism. 
In sum, “the greatest legacy of the Napoleonic period was that it once 
again returned the Polish question to a central position in international 
affairs, while simultaneously reawakening hopes of the rebirth of a Polish 
state.” 18 