

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 187

12

The Illyrian Provinces

THE LAND AND ITS PEOPLE

Napoleon established the Illyrian Provinces after signing the Treaty of Schönbrunn with Austria (October 1809). Located on the eastern shores of the Adriatic Sea, the Illyrian Provinces extended over 55,000 square kilometers (21,500 square miles) and were named after the old Roman province of Illyricum. Previously they had belonged to various states: southern Carinthia and Carniola had been ruled by the Habsburg dynasty since the fourteenth century; Trieste, an active and ethnically diverse city, had belonged to the Habsburgs since 1382 and was the most important port of the Austrian Empire; Istria and Dalmatia had been a part of the Venetian Empire from the year 1000 until Campo Formio, when they were delivered by Napoleon to the Austrian Empire, along with Venice. Following the Treaty of Pressburg (1805), however, Napoleon transferred Istria and Dalmatia to the Kingdom of Italy. Ragusa (Dubrovnik), on the other hand, was an independent and prosperous Republican city-state that had managed to preserve its independence until the French occupied it in 1808. The Illyrian Provinces also included Croatia, south of the River Sava, and part of Tyrol, added in 1810. The main cities included the ports of Trieste and Ragusa, and Laibach (Ljubljana), which served as the capital. The Illyrian Provinces were an artificial creation of Napoleon, consist ing of regions that had little in common. In fact, the classical name Illyria was chosen by the French in order to provide a common denominator to otherwise heterogeneous provinces with little sense of collective

188

consciousness. Illyria was neither an independent state nor a satellite state, but just a minor appendage of the French Empire1 formed for economic and military reasons.2 Most importantly, the Emperor formed the Illyrian Provinces in order to tighten the Continental Blockade and close the Adriatic ports to British commerce. By 1809, his Italian satellite states controlled the western coast of the Adriatic Sea, and through the creation of the Illyrian Provinces Napoleon hoped to dislodge the British by turning the Adriatic Sea into a French lake. The creation of Illyria was also designed to secure a trade route with the Levant and guarantee the importation of cotton from the eastern Mediterranean for the French textile industry. Militarily, the Illyrian Provinces aimed at weakening the Austrian Empire; it cut Austria off from the sea and created a buffer zone against an Austrian invasion into the Kingdom of Italy. The poverty and heterogeneity of the Illyrian Provinces created an inhospitable environment for the implementation of Napoleonic reforms and the establishment of a coherent and effective government. Geographically, it was rather distant from the rest of the Empire. Topo graphically, much of the country was mountainous, not easily accessible to officials. As much as one-third of the Illyrian land was uncultivable. The population of the Illyrian Provinces comprised 1.5 million people of diverse nationalities: Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, Italians, and Germans. Five different languages were used in the new entity: Slovene, Serbo-Croatian, Italian, German, and French. Religiously, most Illyrians were Catholic while Greek Orthodox constituted a substantial 20 percent minority. Various legal systems coexisted in Illyria, including Austrian, Venetian, and Roman, as well as many local customs and practices. Socially, most of the population consisted of poor peasants subject to their lords, while a mercantile class was concentrated in the coastal cities.