

180 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

their autonomy. Three of them kept their positions throughout the 
Duchy’s existence: the justice minister, Feliks Lubienski; the war minister, 
Joseph Poniatowski; and the Secretary of State, Stanislaw Breza. A 
szlachta-dominated Council of State, which comprised ministers and 
other officials, drew up royal decrees and legislative drafts, managed state 
properties, received a yearly accounting from each ministry, and divided 
taxes among the departments. The Council also served as a court of 
appeal. 
The Legislative Assembly, the Sejm, was a bicameral body consisting 
of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. Senate members were 
appointed for life by the king, who chose them exclusively from the 
nobility. The Senate’s main function was supervision of the electoral 
system and citizens’ political rights. The nobility also dominated the 
Chamber of Deputies, which consisted of 100 representatives (after 1809, 
166 members) chosen for nine years. Sixty of them represented the 
nobility and 40 were commoners. Suffrage was based on property quali 
fications, which limited the number of voters to about 3 percent of the 
male population, mostly nobles and wealthy burghers. The king con 
vened the Sejm for a mere 15 days every two years. It had only modest 
power and was limited to voting on fiscal legislation and amendments of 
civil and criminal law. 
The French exercised considerable influence over the Duchy. For the 
first year, Napoleon left an occupying army in the Duchy under Marshal 
Davout, who had supreme command over the Polish armed forces and 
great authority over the government. The French ambassador (there 
were four in six years) intervened frequently in Polish domestic affairs. 
He sat on the Council of Ministers and supervised issues like censorship 
and French economic interests. 
The Duchy’s administration, organized according to the French 
pattern, was centralized, highly structured, and staffed by Poles. The 
Duchy was divided into six departments that were subdivided into 60 dis 
tricts (after 1809, ten and 100, respectively). Appointed prefects ran the 
departments while sub-prefects headed the districts. Departmental and 
district councils, whose members were chosen by the ruler, played an 
advisory role. Appointed mayors headed the large cities. The administra 
tion of the rural communities remained under the nobility’s control. The 
authorities also established a Directorate of National Education to run 
the school system. Hundreds of new primary and secondary schools were 
established and many new teachers were certified. In 1814, 50,000 pupils 
attended those schools. 9 

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 181

The Constitution established a judicial branch modeled after the French system. It was headed by Justice Minister Lubienski, a shrewd politician who was responsible for the modernization of the judicial structure. The judicial system was standardized, legal qualifications were increased, and new courts were set up. The new court hierarchy ranged from justices of the peace to the Supreme Court. Justices of the peace were elected while the king appointed the other judges mostly from the nobility or its nominees. Lubienski commissioned the translation of Code Napoleon into Polish and it entered into effect in May 1808. He also opened a new school of law. The Constitution and Code Napoleon met with resistance. The Church opposed divorce and civil marriage. More crucial, however, was the stiff resistance mounted by the landed nobility to the elimination of the feudal system. Article IV of the Constitution abolished serfdom and established legal equality. Code Napoleon formally abolished the lords’ control over their former serfs. Yet while the peasants were free to move, they did not gain ownership of the land they cultivated and thus remained totally dependent on their landlords. A new decree of 21 December 1807 stripped them of the traditional right to work and live on their landlord’s land. 10 Peasants who left their villages had to relinquish all claims to their land, livestock, tools, and crops. The property rights guaranteed by Code Napoleon enabled landowners to force their peas ants to sign new and more demanding contracts. Disobedient peasants could be evicted within a year after the edict’s proclamation. In practice, few peasants left their lands; they continued to live at the mercy of the landowners, perform onerous duties, most notably the robot (tradition ally, the labor obligations on a landowner’s property), and pay higher rents. In the words of Christopher Blackburn, “Polish landowners successfully worked through the Napoleonic constitution and legal code to rescind virtually all established peasant rights and legal protection, thus creating a new modern serfdom which would last well into the nine teenth century.” 11 In fact, the continuation of control over the peasants underscored, more than any other element, the powerful position of the Polish szlachta. Napoleon needed the nobles’ support in order to ensure his control over the Duchy. The Polish nobility recognized Napoleon’s supreme power and, in return, were entrusted with political authority and the power to preserve their traditional control over the peasants. Ultimately, the persistence of seigneurial obligations and legal inequality in the countryside signified the principal contradiction of the Napoleonic reform policies in the Duchy of Warsaw.