

184 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe a liberator by the population, and set up a provisional government. Archduke Ferdinand was forced to withdraw from Warsaw in order to defend Galicia. Meanwhile, the Russian Tsar, concerned about the Polish successes, sent an army into Galicia to prevent further Polish gains. Poniatowski found himself in a difficult situation, but the campaign was decided when Napoleon defeated the Austrians at Wagram. The Austrian army then retreated and Poniatowski occupied Cracow. In the Treaty of Schönbrunn, the Austrians ceded western Galicia to the Duchy of Warsaw. The 1809 war was the first time since the Partitions that a Polish army had liberated Polish lands. Russia was compensated with the district of Tarnopol in eastern Galicia. Napoleon also assured Alexander I that he would not restore the Polish state to its old boundaries. Meanwhile, tensions were rising between France and Russia. The Polish question contributed to the deteriorating relationship between Alexander I and Napoleon. The Tsar feared that the Duchy would develop into an independent Polish state and would claim the Polish ter ritories seized by Russia. It became apparent that a Franco-Russian war was inevitable when Russia withdrew from the Continental Blockade. With the assistance of his ally, Prince Adam Czartoryski, the Tsar tried to win over the Poles by promising to restore Poland in its old borders, but under his rule. Poniatowski mistrusted the Russians, however, and remained loyal to Napoleon. Meanwhile, Napoleon prepared the Grande Armée for the Russian cam paign. To spur enthusiasm in the Duchy he convoked a special session of the Sejm, declaring his support for the establishment of the Kingdom of Poland. Many Poles viewed a war against Russia as a war of liberation and were ready to fight. Napoleon’s splendid declaration proved meaningless, however. The real power remained in the hands of French ambassador de Pradt, and the Emperor remained uncommitted and vague concerning the future of an independent Poland. He feared that such a state would alienate Austria and Prussia, whose support he needed against Russia. Moreover, Napoleon’s grandiose proclamation differed greatly from the harsh economic reality of the Duchy, which was plundered by the Grande Armée in 1812. The Duchy’s treasury was empty as a result of military expenses and the need to support the Napoleonic army. With nearly 100,000 Polish soldiers participating in the Russian cam paign, the Duchy’s contingent was the largest among Napoleon’s allies. Poniatowski commanded the Polish Corps, 37,000 men strong. Poles fought with distinction in the battles of Smolensk and Borodino and entered Moscow with Napoleon. Polish casualties in the Russian campaign

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 185 amounted to a staggering 90,000 men. Of Poniatowski’s force, only a few hundred survived. Despite their high casualties in the Russian campaign, Polish troops continued to fight under Napoleon. Poniatowski himself led the reserves of the Duchy’s army into the Battle of Leipzig. Severely wounded, the Polish marshal galloped his horse into the River Elster in an attempt to cross, but drowned. Poles also fought for Napoleon at Waterloo.