

THE COLLAPSE OF NAPOLEONIC RULE (1813–15)

The debacle in Russia weakened Napoleon’s rule throughout Italy. The high number of Italian casualties – only 1000 soldiers returned from the original contingent of 27,000 sent by the Kingdom of Italy 34 – caused much discontent. The escalating financial and conscription pressures, the negative effects of the Continental Blockade, and the banishment of the Pope increased hostility toward the French. Brigand activity rose in the countryside. Advocates of independence formed secret societies, which benefited from British support and were designed to achieve those goals through conspiratorial activity.35 One of the main such societies, the adelfia in northern Italy, had its origin among Jacobin elements and in the Society of the Rays, which dissolved in 1802. In the south, the

172 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe carbonari (charcoal burners) formed the largest secret society, consisting mainly of army officers, soldiers, and some bourgeois. These secret sects posed no concrete threat to the Napoleonic regime, however, nor were they able to bring about Italian unity and independence. Meanwhile, the Kingdom of Italy came under attack by Allied forces.36 In October 1813, after occupying Illyria, the Austrians invaded northern Italy, forcing Eugène to retreat from Venetia into Lombardy. Despite the growing unpopularity of his regime and the fact that the State’s coffers were virtually empty, the Kingdom’s administration continued to stand behind Eugène and resisted the Austrians until the very end. However, by early April 1814, Eugène had lost most of his territory. On 16 April, Eugène and the Austrian General Bellegarde signed the Treaty of Schiarino-Rizzino that allowed the French troops to return to France. This agreement ended any prospect that Eugène would be able to stay as the ruler of the Kingdom of Italy. Besides, such an idea was opposed by prominent Milanese senators, some of whom supported the return of Austrian rule, while others, known as “Pure Italians,” wanted an inde pendent state under an Italian ruler. Anti-French sentiment culminated on 20 April 1814 when a Milanese crowd, agitated by a group of nobles, lynched Prina, the hated Minister of Finance. Eugène left Italy shortly thereafter and the Austrians entered Milan and reestablished their rule over Lombardy and Venetia. With the collapse of the Kingdom of Italy, Murat remained the only sur viving Napoleonic ruler in Italy. In January 1814, he had joined the Austrians and the British in an attempt to save his Neapolitan throne, hop ing to become the ruler of Italy. His position became precarious, however, at the Congress of Vienna, as the European powers supported the restora tion of the Bourbons in Naples. Following Napoleon’s flight from Elba, Murat declared war on the Austrians and led an army into central Italy. At Rimini, he issued his famous proclamation urging Italians to join his fight for Italian independence and unity (March 1815). His appeal fell flat, and in May 1815 he was defeated by the Austrians at Tolentino. He left for France and then Corsica. Meanwhile, the Bourbons returned to Naples. In October 1815, Murat, aiming to reoccupy his Kingdom, landed in Calabria but was captured by Bourbon forces and executed.