

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

The collapse of the Napoleonic regime paved the way for the restoration of most of the pre-Revolutionary Italian states. Napoleon had already

The Italian Peninsula 173 allowed Pius VII to return to Rome from Fontainebleau (January 1814) before his abdication. Shortly thereafter, the French administration left Rome and Florence, and the Austrians occupied Tuscany, Modena, and Parma. In May 1814, Victor Emmanuel I returned to Turin from Sardinia, restoring the Savoyard dynasty in Piedmont. As we saw, Ferdinand reestablished his rule in Naples. In the Congress of Vienna, the Allies rat ified the restoration of these states under the old dynasties. The Congress also reestablished the Papal State in its pre-Napoleonic borders. The two former Republics of Venice and Genoa were never revived, however. The Congress upheld the incorporation of Venetia, along with Lombardy, into the Habsburg Empire, and annexed Liguria into Piedmont-Sardinia. In sum, the Allies eliminated the Napoleonic organization of Italy and redivided the peninsula into eight states. Austria was the principal bene ficiary of the post-Napoleonic arrangement, restoring its hegemony in the peninsula. Aside from ruling over Lombardy and Venetia, the Habsburgs were related to the rulers of Tuscany, Parma, and Modena, and were the chief protectors of the Papacy. Their dominant position in the peninsula turned Austria into the chief opponent of Italian unification and independence. Italians paid a high human price under Napoleonic rule. Hundreds of thousands of them were drafted and many died in battle. Conscription constituted the most important reason for the hostility Italians felt toward the Napoleonic regime. The growing discontent and opposition during the final years demonstrated the limits of the Napoleonic system. Fiscal demands, economic impositions, and political intervention from Paris had undercut the efforts of the two Napoleonic Italian states to solidify their reform programs. This was particularly true in the Kingdom of Naples, where efforts to strengthen state power and transform society were less suc cessful than in the Kingdom of Italy. The Napoleonic regime in Naples failed to win the full support of the propertied classes, hence its ability to enforce its new laws remained inadequate. This weakness was particularly evident in the failure of the State to improve the conditions of the peasants through the abolition of feudalism. The barons lost feudal jurisdiction but remained the dominant class, in control over the peasants. Nonetheless, the two decades of French rule left significant legacies in the Italian peninsula. The Napoleonic period laid the political, institu tional, and ideological foundations for Italy’s unification and independ ence. By consolidating the ten pre-Napoleonic states, at least temporarily, into only three units, and toppling the old dynasties, Napoleon advanced the cause of national unity and launched the Italian Risorgimento.