

POLISH NATIONALISM DURING THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND THE CONSULATE

Following the elimination of Poland’s independence, Polish émigrés scat tered throughout Europe. Revolutionary Paris drew many of these exiles who hoped that France would help restore Polish independence. After all, France was fighting against two of Poland’s occupiers, Austria and Prussia. In Paris, Polish exiles formed two rival organizations, the Agency and the Deputation, both claiming to represent the Polish nation. The Agency, led by Franciszek Barss, an envoy of Ko´sciuszko in France, viewed itself as Poland’s diplomatic representative, advocating moderate liberal ideas. The Deputation, on the other hand, headed by the radical priest Franciszek Dmochowski, advocated radical republican principles, includ ing freedom for the peasants, and viewed an uprising as the way to regain Polish independence. Ko´sciuszko, who had been made an honorary citizen of France in 1793, also settled in Paris.

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw 177

Hoping to gain French support for the restoration of their homeland’s independence, Polish émigrés organized legions to fight for the French Republic.4 The main figure behind these battalions was General Henryk Dabrowski, who had fought in the insurrection of 1794. In early 1797, Dabrowski organized thousands of Polish soldiers to fight with Bonaparte against Austria in northern Italy. Many of them had served in the Austrian army and had been captured by France or had deserted from the Habsburg army. In April 1797, 6000 Polish legionnaires marched with the French army toward Vienna, hoping to liberate Galicia from Austria. Contrary to Polish expectations, however, Bonaparte never raised the question of Poland in his negotiations with Austria. In the final analysis, Poles interested the French general only as recruits for his army. This disappointment notwithstanding, thousands of Polish troops remained in Italy to help France conquer Rome and Naples, and later fought against the Second Coalition. Joseph Wybicki, a Polish writer and politician, was inspired by the Polish troops in Italy to compose what would become the Polish anthem, which opened with the line “Poland is not yet dead.” In 1800, Poles fought with distinction at Marengo and Hohenlinden. Once again, however, Poland was not even mentioned in the peace of Lunéville. In 1803, Bonaparte dispatched thousands of Polish legionnaires to suppress the revolt in Santo Domingo, where most perished of yellow fever.

FROM THE THIRD COALITION TO TILSIT

Although the Polish legions did not realize their hopes of liberating their homeland, they demonstrated that the Polish national spirit was alive. Hopes of restoring their national independence continued to stimulate thousands of Poles to fight under Napoleon when war resumed in 1803. Within the European context, however, “Polish affairs were completely subordinate to the rivalry between Napoleon and the Coalition.” 5 Shortly after his victories over Prussia, Napoleon invaded Prussian Poland. The Emperor invited Dabrowski and Wybicki to appeal to the Polish people to revolt but made no commitment to support Polish independence. He feared that such a promise would provoke Austria to rejoin the war and would intensify the fighting resolve of Tsar Alexander I, who opposed the restoration of a Polish state. Napoleon wanted Ko´sciuszko to endorse such a Polish revolt as well. The old Polish hero mistrusted Napoleon, however, and posed unacceptable demands, including the