

174 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Although Italy remained territorially and politically divided, and although major differences continued to exist among its regions, the entire peninsula came under a unified code of law, common administra tive organization, a single system of conscription, and a uniform tax struc ture, for the first time in many centuries. The Restoration’s regimes paid lip service to traditional ideology, yet at the same time, they adopted the Napoleonic administrative and legal tools that helped to centralize their governments.37 After 1815, Italians remained basically equal before the law, and the nobility and the clergy never regained the privileges and sta tus they had possessed under the Old Regime. The establishment of a centralized government, including a central bureaucracy, unified legal and fiscal systems, a national market, and state control over the Church was particularly evident in northern Italy, which constituted one of the most successfully transformed areas in Napoleonic Europe. Moreover, northern Italy experienced a successful amalgame between the old nobility and the wealthy bourgeoisie, which created a new elite that would remain in power throughout the nineteenth century. In the long run, the Napoleonic State came to serve as a model for the rulers of united Italy, and Code Napoleon served as the basis of its legal system.

The Italian Peninsula 175

11

The Grand Duchy of Warsaw

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY POLAND

In 1795 Poland ceased to exist as an independent state following the Third Partition of its territory by its three powerful neighbors, Russia, Prussia, and Austria. The first two partitions took place in 1772 and 1793. The Russian share, the largest of all, comprised most of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, Ukraine, and several provinces east of the Bug River. Prussia acquired so-called Royal Prussia (West Prussia and Ermland), Great Poland (Mazovia, including Warsaw). Austria seized Galicia. Prior to the partitions, Poland, with a population of 11 million, was one of the largest countries in Europe.1 Aside from Poles, its multiethnic population included Lithuanians, Belorussians, Ukrainians, Germans, and Jews. The Polish nobility, the szlachta, constituted the dominant class, benefiting from various privileges. In comparison with other European nobilities, it comprised a large share of the population – 7 percent.2 However, wide economic differences existed within the szlachta. The wealthiest group consisted of some 20 magnate families, most notably Czartoryski and Potocki, who possessed huge landholdings. Landlords who owned a village or two formed a larger section of the nobility, but more than half the Polish nobles possessed only tiny plots or were land less. Many lower nobles, seeking careers in the administration, army, and liberal professions, lived in the cities. Most landowners failed to improve their land and relied upon their peasants’ labor for their income.

176

Below the szlachta stood a small class of burghers. Most Polish towns were small, representing only 17 percent of the total population. Warsaw, however, experienced rapid growth in the second half of the eighteenth century, reaching 200,000 inhabitants in 1795. At the bottom of Polish society stood the peasantry, who comprised about three-fourths of the people. About two-thirds of these peasants worked on land belonging to the nobility while the rest cultivated Church and crown property. Under the onerous feudal system, peasants had no freedom of movement and owed their landlords a variety of seigneurial fees and labor obligations. The Polish nobility monopolized the political structure. 3 Only nobles sat in the Polish diet, or Sejm. They elected the kings and staffed the top positions. While other European states were moving toward absolutist monarchies, the Polish upper class used its command to weaken the Polish monarchs and increase its own power. Polish rulers possessed virtually no bureaucracy, suffered from insufficient revenues, and had only a small army. The Polish State was further crippled by the notorious unanimity rule, known as the liberum veto, which gave each member of the Sejm the right to veto any decision, preventing the passage of virtually any legislation. The impotence of this szlachta state enabled Russia, Prussia, and Austria to intervene in its affairs, and invade and partition it. A belated attempt to strengthen the State through the Constitution of 1791 failed to save Poland, as did a national insurrection in 1794 led by Tadeuzs Ko´sciuszko, who had fought in the American Revolution.