

196 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

197

13

The Collapse of the Napoleonic Empire

At the end of 1810, following the annexation of the Hansa cities and the Duchy of Oldenburg, the Napoleonic Empire reached its territorial peak. It spread over an area of 750,000 km2 (293,000 square miles) and had 44 million inhabitants. In March 1811, Marie Louise gave birth to an heir. The dynasty appeared secure. Yet beneath the apparent stability lay signs of weakness. Conscription and financial pressures continued to arouse resentment and increase Napoleon’s unpopularity. Similarly, the Continental Blockade stimulated much opposition and continued to be defied. The occupation of Rome, and particularly the banishment of Pope Pius VII in 1809, earned Napoleon the bitter hostility of devout Catholics throughout Europe. In France, too, there were signs of fatigue with the ongoing demands of war, and an overall crisis was looming. 1 Budget deficits and tax increases caused discontent, and a recession in 1810–11 hurt industry. The Continental Blockade continued to hurt French ports considerably 2 and caused a shortage of raw material from the colonies, which harmed industrialists. Grain shortages provoked bread riots and misery spread through many parts. French Catholics shared the anger other faithful believers felt about Napoleon’s treatment of the Pope. Napoleon was losing support among the notables, his main pillar of support, although opposition was mute. Internationally, the war in Iberia continued unabated and the “Spanish ulcer” persisted in bleeding Napoleon’s army. The French position dete riorated when Marshal Masséna failed to occupy Portugal and dislodge the British from that country. On another front, the problematic alliance between Napoleon and Tsar Alexander I was about to crumble.

THE RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN, 1812

Relations between Alexander I and Napoleon had remained uneasy ever 
since the Treaty of Tilsit. The central source of tension was the Duchy 
of Warsaw. It was a French satellite on the Russian border, which the Tsar 
viewed as threatening to Russia’s security.3 In 1809, during the Franco 
Austrian war, Prince Poniatowski had sought to raise a Polish revolt, not 
only in Austria but also in Russian Poland. The expansion of the Duchy 
of Warsaw in the Treaty of Schönbrunn heightened Alexander I’s suspi 
cion that Napoleon planned to incorporate Russian Poland into the 
Duchy and restore an independent Polish kingdom. Alexander I was also 
bitter that Napoleon had not given him a free hand to expand at the 
expense of the Ottoman Empire and had failed to support him in his 
attempts to occupy the Danubian Principalities (present-day Romania). 
The annexation to France of Oldenburg, which had dynastic ties to the 
Romanovs, was another of the Tsar’s grievances. 
Napoleon’s main dissatisfaction with Russia was its failure to enforce 
the Continental Blockade. While Alexander I declared war on Britain, 
Napoleon suspected that he never pursued the blockade rigorously 
enough. The blockade harmed the economic interests of Russia, reduc 
ing its exports and contributing to an increasing budget deficit. Russia 
also wanted to develop its commerce with neutral countries, which 
Napoleon opposed. Alexander I came under pressure by a powerful 
lobby in his court that opposed the blockade, and in mid-1810, began 
loosening the enforcement of the blockade by refusing to confiscate 
neutral ships. The final break between Russia and France came on 
31 December 1810 when the Tsar officially withdrew from the Conti 
nental Blockade. 
Both sides began preparing for war and seeking allies. Prussia and 
Austria pledged to contribute 20,000 and 30,000 soldiers, respectively, to 
Napoleon. The Swedish king, Prince Bernadotte, sided with Russia in 
return for the latter’s promise to assist Sweden in annexing Norway, ruled 
then by Denmark. Russia also ended its war with Turkey (Peace of 
Bucharest, May 1812) and concluded an alliance with Britain. 
Napoleon prepared for an invasion into Russia, aiming to force the 
Tsar to negotiate his return to the blockade. The invading Grande Armée 