

THE NAPOLEONIC REFORMS

In December 1809, Napoleon established a General Government, consisting exclusively of French officials, to run the Illyrian Provinces. The Emperor himself was the supreme authority in the new entity and appointed the top officials. Highest among them was the Governor General, who signed laws, appointed government administrators, super vised the civil and judicial officials, and was the commander of the military and police forces. The first Governor-General was Marshal Auguste-Frederic Marmont, Duc de Raguse, a veteran career officer who

The Illyrian Provinces 189 had served as governor of Dalmatia since 1806. Marmont held broad powers and hoped that the Illyrian Provinces would maintain a degree of autonomy and that his position would resemble that of Eugène, the Viceroy of the Kingdom of Italy. These aspirations evaporated in April 1811 when Napoleon created a more centralized, French-like govern ment in Illyria and Marmont resigned. His successor was another military officer, General Count Henri-Gratien Bertrand, who served until early 1813 when he was replaced by a third veteran, General Andoche Junot, who stayed in power only briefly due to poor health. He was replaced by Joseph Fouché, the former minister of police and the only civilian Governor-General. Aside from the Governor-General, the Illyrian gov ernment also included the Intendant-General of Finances, who was the chief of the civil administration and the Commissioner-General of Justice. Luc-Jacques Dauchy, an experienced bureaucrat, served as the Intendant-General of Finances under Marmont. He was replaced by André-Christophe Count Chabrol, who stood out by virtue of his hard work and dedication. While Bertrand concentrated on military affairs, Chabrol ran civilian matters and soon became the most influential official in Illyria. Initially, the authorities established a provisional organization dividing Illyria into ten provinces, each retaining the old structure. Napoleon appointed intendants to run these provinces but their powers and duties were not clearly defined, which caused confusion. 3 Fifteen months later, on 15 April 1811, Napoleon proclaimed a comprehensive organic decree establishing a permanent governing system in Illyria, most notably setting up a modern central bureaucracy and integrating Illyria into the French empire. It reorganized the Illyrian Provinces and established “a uniform system of administration, finances, and justice based largely upon the institutions then in effect in France.”4 The decree established six civilian provinces, as well as a seventh, the Province of Military Croatia. The civil ian provinces were divided into districts and, for judicial purposes, into cantons. Intendants, who had authority similar to French prefects, ran the provinces with the help of a council and reported to the Intendant General. All but one of the Illyrian Intendants were French citizens, selected from the ranks of the auditeurs of the Conseil d’État. Sub-delegates, mostly Illyrians, managed the districts. The 1811 decree also established a uniform municipal administration subject to the central government. The Emperor appointed the mayors of the major cities. Cities with rev enues greater than 10,000 francs had to submit their budgets to the Emperor for approval, and the Intendant-General supervised municipal