

Conclusion: The Legacy of Napoleon 205 culture, language, laws, and ways of running government. Ultimately, they wanted to create Europe in their own image. Napoleon’s most successful reform was the creation of the modern central state. The Napoleonic State possessed a central, uniform bureau cracy of professional and salaried administrators whose appointments were based, at least in principle, on skill and talent rather than on birth and family connection. This meant the opening of administrative, judicial, and military posts to non-nobles who demonstrated compe tence. The modernity of the new Napoleonic State was also marked by the unprecedented, broad array of areas that it controlled: finances, con scription, police, education, ecclesiastical affairs, justice, and welfare. Uniformity, efficiency, and direct and equal treatment of all citizens, without the mediation of corporate bodies, were the official goals of the new administration. New constitutions based on the French example pro vided coherent political and legal systems for the satellite states. State bureaucrats were ordered to collect data and supply detailed information about the conditions of their regions to the government, thereby provid ing the State with more power and giving rise to official statistics. Financial reforms revoked fiscal exemptions and created uniform and equitable taxation and efficient tax collection by state officials, who replaced the private tax farmers of the Old Regime. Property tax became the principal source of state revenue, and in France, the Netherlands, and the Kingdom of Italy, the authorities launched land surveys aimed at accurate and fair tax assessment. Annual conscription systems became the norm throughout the Empire and provided the basis for the crea tion of national armies. Competent military service, rather than birth privilege, was rewarded with promotion. The authorities expanded the police and gendarmerie to ensure internal security and stability and com bat brigandage, desertion, and smuggling. Code Napoleon, arguably Napoleon’s most influential and durable legacy, which proclaimed legal equality and guaranteed property rights, was introduced in various satel lite states along with the jury system, a uniform court hierarchy, and due judicial process. A generation of legal experts, whose entire experience was based on the new Napoleonic Code, was formed and continued to serve after 1815. The Code constituted the basis of the legal system in numerous countries in Europe and outside the Continent long after Napoleon’s fall from power. The States subsidized a system of secondary schools along the lines of the French lycées, aiming to train young men to become skilled and faithful bureaucrats. The authorities introduced uniform curricula, books, and examinations, and published a set of rules

206 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

for hiring teachers. The Napoleonic central state and the above 
mentioned institutions and tools remained models for future European 
governments to imitate long after the collapse of the Napoleonic Empire. 
The growing power and effectiveness of the State significantly changed 
the relations between State and civil society. The Napoleonic State became 
more intrusive and authoritarian, gaining more control over its citizens’ 
lives than the ancien régime had ever conceived of. State officials and police 
personnel frequently penetrated the most remote corners of the country 
and forced citizens to obey the law and acknowledge the State’s existence, 
thereby creating tension and arousing resistance to its policies. The 
Napoleonic State tolerated no criticism or challenge, and through the 
establishment of censorship and a network of spies, it stifled any form of 
opposition and free speech. The authoritarian structure that Napoleon 
set up in France was extended to his subject states. Clearly, under those 
conditions, political participation was nonexistent and depoliticization 
was rife. 
The lower classes paid a heavy price under the Napoleonic regime. 
They carried the main burden of the military draft and, with the rise of 
indirect taxes in many states, bore a high tax burden. They were unac 
customed to the new demands of the Napoleonic regime and to the effi 
ciency with which the State carried out its tasks. Many also distrusted the 
State because of its secular nature. The conflict between State and civil 
society was reflected most clearly in the realm of conscription, “which 
became the battleground, the ultimate contest of wills between individu 
als and local communities on the one hand and a distant impersonal 
state on the other.” 4 Conscription officials and the gendarmerie reached 
distant villages in search of draft dodgers and deserters and tried to force 
resentful citizens to accept an increasingly coercive system that took 
them away from their families and farms for many years. While thousands 
of recruits evaded the draft or deserted annually, the State ultimately won 
this battle and turned conscription into a routine the population learnt 
to accept. 
The successful consolidation of state power required the authorities 
to bring under control powerful forces like the Church and the nobility, 
as well as corporate bodies and free cities. The Napoleonic Empire was 
particularly successful in undermining Church power, thus contributing 
to the long-term secularization of European societies. Napoleon recon 
ciled with the Church through the Concordat but never yielded state 
supremacy over the Church. The Concordat and the Organic Articles 
confirmed state control over the Church and became the law of the land 