

THE FINAL CAMPAIGNS, 1813–14

It would be 15 more months before the allied armies entered Paris, forc 
ing Napoleon’s abdication. It is indeed surprising that the French were 
able to hold off their enemies for so long. In December 1812, Napoleon 
rushed to Paris, aiming to raise a new army. Besides, there had been an 
attempted coup against his government led by General Claude Malet. 
The well-oiled conscription apparatus enabled him to raise fresh con 
scripts and, together with the National Guard and troops he withdrew 
from Spain, the Emperor created a new army to fight in central Europe. 
In addition, he still had the loyalty of the rulers of his satellite states, 
including the Kingdom of Italy and the Confederation of the Rhine, who 
contributed fresh troops to his army. 
Napoleon’s past military successes were facilitated by the fact that his 
enemies were never fully united against him, and he fought against them 
one at a time. This scenario changed in 1813 when, for the first time, the 
European powers united and decisively defeated the Emperor, whose 
resources and trained manpower were nearing exhaustion. After forcing 
Napoleon to evacuate its territory, Russia decided to continue the war 
and expel Napoleon from central Europe. Alexander I believed that this 
was the only way to guarantee his country’s security. His goal was to build 
an anti-French coalition. The Russians invaded Poland and occupied 
Warsaw. In late February Russia and Prussia signed an alliance at Kalisch. 
It promised Prussia the territorial and financial strength that it had before 
1806. For Alexander I, the Treaty of Kalisch meant the “irrevocable 
decision to carry the war into Germany.” 7 

200 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

In May 1813, Napoleon beat the Russians and the Prussians at the battles of Lützen and Bautzen, forcing them to retreat beyond the Oder River. Austrian Chancellor Metternich, meanwhile, assumed the role of mediator, renouncing the Austrian alliance with France.8 His main goal was to ensure that central Europe would be free from French and Russian domination. He proposed an armistice to negotiate peace terms. Both sides needed a respite and accepted the proposal, using the time to reinforce their armies. The truce lasted until 10 August. In mid-June, Britain signed the Treaty of Reichenbach with Russia and Prussia, guar anteeing them generous war subsidies in return for the promised restora tion of Hanover. In late June, Metternich met Napoleon in Dresden, trying to convince the Emperor to agree to make territorial concessions and make peace, but Napoleon refused Metternich’s terms, vaguely offer ing Illyria to Austria in return for its neutrality. A day later, Austria agreed to join the Allies if Napoleon did not accept peace terms, namely the dis solution of the Duchy of Warsaw, the return of Illyria to Austria, the evac uation from Prussian fortresses, and the renunciation of the Hanseatic cities. France refused to accept those terms and, on 12 August, Austria joined the coalition of Russia, Prussia, Britain, and Sweden. Fighting resumed and Napoleon defeated the Allies at the Battle of Dresden (late August 1813), but this was his last victory on German soil. In the meantime, other French generals suffered a series of reverses. In early October, Bavaria, Napoleon’s long-time ally, abandoned France and joined the Coalition in return for a promise that it would be able to keep the lands it had received during the reorganization of Germany. The two armies finally met in the decisive Battle of Leipzig, also known as the Battle of the Nations, which lasted for three days (16–18 October). An Allied victory compelled Napoleon to withdraw beyond the Rhine, forcing France back to its former frontiers. Württemberg, Baden, and the rest of Napoleon’s German allies joined his enemies. Westphalia was over run by the Allies. In November, a provisional independent government was established in the Netherlands. At the same time, Napoleon also suffered a major setback in Spain. Joseph, whom Napoleon had appointed as commander of the armies in Spain, lacked experience and military talent and did not suit this posi tion. Moreover, Napoleon weakened the French forces in Iberia by with drawing some of them to Russia and in 1813 to his campaign in Germany. Meanwhile, the Spanish guerillas intensified their resistance and Wellington, now the chief general of the Allied forces in Spain, prepared to invade Spain from Portugal one more time. In June, the British