

192 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe to consist of 25 two-year gymnases and nine lyceés, where instruction was to be offered in French, Italian, and German, paid for by the parents. For higher education, the decree formed two central schools in Laibach and Zara. Implementing the plan, however, was impossible. Offering instruc tion in French, German, and Italian certainly limited the number of stu dents. In fact, the 1811 decree scaled down the number of lyceés to only two, plus a secondary school in each province, all to be organized accord ing to the French system. The 1811 decree made no mention of primary education, which remained sub-par due to a lack of teachers, inadequate buildings, and the almost nonexistence of textbooks in the Slovene lan guage. Most importantly, both the State and the communes lacked the resources to support elementary education, and so much of the original policy had to be abandoned. Conscription aroused the strongest anti-French feelings in Illyria. 11 Initially, the army of Illyria, which had been established before conscrip tion entered into effect, consisted of the Franco-Italian Army of Dalmatia, and at its peak stood at 28,562 men. The Governor-General was the chief commander. Conscription was first ordered in 1810, and the 1811 decree introduced the French system into Illyria. The Emperor established an annual quota and the Illyrian government divided it among the depart ments and communes. A drawing among eligible draftees determined who served in the army. In November 1810, the Emperor ordered the con scription of 18,000 soldiers, but during the next three years authorities called up only 3000 men each year. While the number of draftees was not very high, resistance to conscription among Illyrians, who were unaccus tomed to it and had no incentive to fight for Napoleon, was widespread. As usual, conscription fell mostly on peasants, many of whom evaded the draft by fleeing to the Austrian Empire or to coastal islands. Members of the urban middle class joined the National Guard rather than the army, and sons of nobles found “legal” ways to evade service altogether. The Jews of Trieste also petitioned Napoleon to allow Jewish recruits to find replacements. Anti-draft riots broke out in various communities and police were attacked. Hundreds of soldiers deserted and many joined bands of brigands. The authorities sent gendarmes and the National Guard to search for deserters and imposed stiff penalties, including the place ment of troops in the homes of conscription evaders, and in some instances even death. The authorities also required communes to replace their own draft dodgers. The government also tried to develop an Illyrian naval force to help challenge the British in the Adriatic Sea. In 1810, Marmont conscripted over 500 sailors. Naval service was as unpopular,

The Illyrian Provinces 193 however, as service on land. The construction of ships at Trieste also ran into difficulties and none had been completed by the time the regime collapsed. The decree of 1811 also established a military government for the province of Military Croatia. The French inherited this region from the Habsburgs, who had organized Military Croatia as a buffer against the Ottoman Empire in the 1530s. Marmont admired the Austrian system and convinced the Emperor to retain it. He reorganized the regiments in that region, incorporated them into the army of Illyria, and appointed French and Italian officers as their commanders. The French armed 6000 Croatians in that area and kept the border reasonably quiet. Illyrian and Croatian units fought in Russia and in the battle of Leipzig, but when the Austrians invaded Croatia in 1813, the Croatian forces failed to resist. Efforts by the Illyrian government to control the Catholic Church, the largest denomination in Illyria, and the introduction of the Concordat stimulated considerable antagonism among the powerful clergy and many parishioners in Dalmatia, Croatia, and Slovenia. 12 Marmont failed to heed the warnings of Italian officials not to introduce the Concordat into Dalmatia, where attempts to introduce such a policy before 1809 had been strongly resented. Trying to transform the clergy into loyal servants of the State was an important part of the government’s centralization policies. Marmont exerted much effort in introducing French ecclesias tical policies into Illyria and eliminating the influence of the Austrian Church. The General Government closed religious orders and confis cated Church property, sometimes converting it into military barracks. Marmont also abolished the tithe, which he viewed as incompatible with the new land tax. The Emperor nominated new bishops and the clergy were required to take an oath of loyalty to the new regime. The 1811 decree formally turned the clergy into officials of the State, which paid their salaries. These policies, along with the introduction of civil mar riage, the imprisonment of the Pope, and the elevation of the Orthodox Church to an equal status with Catholicism, further antagonized the Catholic clergy. The outstanding clerical opponent of French religious policy was the Franciscan friar Dorotich, who fled the country and waged an underground war from Bosnia and Albania until 1813. 13 Improvement in the status of the Orthodox Church, including the creation of a bishopric, failed to overcome its hostility to the Napoleonic secularization policy in Illyria. The approximately 2500 Illyrian Jews, who benefited from the French proclamation of their civic equality and the lifting of the old restrictions on them, were more supportive.