

190 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe finances. In sum, the new administrative hierarchy extended from the Emperor to the Illyrian mayors, establishing direct French rule over the Illyrian departments. The 1811 decree also replaced the previous diverse judicial system with a uniform organization based on the French model. The Commissioner General of Justice was in charge of reorganizing and supervising judicial affairs. Code Napoleon took effect in January 1812. The Illyrian territory was divided into 96 cantons, each with a justice of the peace. The rest of the judicial hierarchy consisted of 11 Tribunals of First Instance and a supreme court, comprising top government officials and presided over by the Governor-General. Marmont also created a local police force, a National Guard, and a gendarmerie to combat the endemic banditry and smuggling, hunt down deserters, and defend against English raids. Implementation of the new system in the Illyrian Provinces, however, ran into major difficulties. The authorities’ attempts to establish uniform and efficient administrative and judicial structures remained largely unsuccessful. The new entity was too heterogenous and its provinces were not advanced enough to absorb the French system. Moreover, French rule was too brief to implement the new organizations success fully, no matter how hard the French officials tried. Other factors also accounted for the failure: the ignorance of intendants regarding local conditions, culture, and languages; a shortage of qualified personnel; and the fact that most local functionaries understood no French and were ignorant of the French law. Efforts by the authorities to establish law and order were hampered, as well. The gendarmerie and communal police remained understaffed and unable to wipe out banditry and smuggling. The Napoleonic authorities also failed to eradicate the feudal regime in Illyria. 5 Napoleon had no intention of introducing radical social and economic changes, fearful of alienating the landowning class. Initially, the provisional government introduced small changes, such as the aboli tion of the corvée in civil Croatia and some private tolls. The 1811 decree stipulated that feudal dues could be redeemed and allowed labor services to be converted into payments in cash and in kind. However, the peasants pressed for complete freedom and refused to redeem their feudal obli gations.6 Yet their hopes that the French would abolish their feudal obligations remained unfulfilled; feudal fees remained high in many parts of Illyria, causing peasants to leave Carinthia and Carniola. Chronic deficits and inadequate revenues posed the most serious obstacle to implementation of the reforms. Rising military costs left inadequate funds for other branches of the government. The Illyrian government spent well

The Illyrian Provinces 191

over 50 percent of its budget on the military; in 1812, military and 
naval expenses rose to 9.9 million francs out of a budget of 13.5 million.7 To 
overcome the fiscal crisis, Napoleon brought expenditures under the 
control of the French ministries and reorganized the fiscal structure. The 
authorities replaced the diverse financial system with a uniform tax 
administration modeled on France. The chief financial administrators 
were the Intendant-General of Finances and the Treasurer-General. The 
Illyrian authorities centralized tax collection and adopted the French 
direct taxes, including property tax. Lacking a land survey, tax rolls were 
based on information supplied by landowners and needed to be 
approved by the Intendant. Indirect taxes included salt and tobacco 
monopolies and a stamp duty. The government also drew some income 
by selling confiscated colonial merchandise. 
Despite government efforts, “Illyria’s revenues never sufficed for the 
expenses of the General Government,” 8 and deficits remained the rule 
under Napoleon. The Continental Blockade hurt the economy consider 
ably, thereby hampering the ability of Illyrian citizens to pay taxes. The 
Illyrian population resented the imposition of new taxes, which were 
higher than under the Austrians, and the efforts of the authorities to 
collect them efficiently. Property tax rolls were based on inaccurate esti 
mates and lacked uniformity, thereby causing discontent and provoking 
protests by landowners. Many Illyrians, especially in poor Dalmatia, 
resented the personal tax and refused to pay it. Consequently, tax collec 
tion was slow and subject to delays. Tax personnel were inadequate and, 
at times, incompetent and dishonest. To assure the collection of taxes, 
the authorities sometimes used troops, as happened in June 1812 in the 
coastal islands of Dalmatia, 9 which naturally increased the regime’s 
unpopularity. Indirect taxes never provided as much income as the 
French had hoped. The prices of salt and tobacco rose but revenues did 
not increase by much. Revenues were also hurt by the smuggling of 
salt. In addition, Illyria suffered from a chronic shortage of coins and the 
government failed to establish a stable currency. 
Naturally, insufficient revenues hindered the implementation of 
reforms. No other area was as affected by the lack of funds as education.10 
In July 1810, the General Government proclaimed an ambitious educa 
tion reform program, aiming to establish a uniform school system in 
Illyria. It ordered the opening of elementary schools for boys in every 
commune and for girls in every canton and fixed a curriculum to be 
taught in the local language by lay teachers. Communes were charged 
with financing elementary education. The secondary school system was 