

The Collapse of the Napoleonic Empire 203

Conclusion: The Legacy of Napoleon

This study has attempted to demonstrate that to comprehend the Napoleonic policies, we must study them within a European context. As was recently pointed out, “Napoleon is a European figure, as much as or even more than a part of French history.”1 Secondly, this volume has emphasized Napoleon’s role as a modernizer, a harbinger of change in Europe. During the Napoleonic period, Europe made the transition from the ancien régime into the modern period. Creating a French Empire and establishing French hegemony over Europe constituted Napoleon’s most important and consistent objectives. Achieving these goals obviously signified that Napoleon himself would become the dominant leader on the Continent. To accomplish these goals, Napoleon launched numerous military campaigns, occupied many coun tries, and incessantly reshaped the map of Europe. He expanded the bor ders of France, abolished old states, and formed new satellite kingdoms. Increasing and diminishing borders of allies and foes whenever he deemed that French interests dictated these changes, he reorganized the territorial structure of foreign countries. Napoleon toppled old dynasties, replacing them with new governments, headed mostly by his relatives. Naturally, Napoleon expected the new rulers to serve French interests loyally, and he showed no hesitation in removing those who disobeyed his policies, as was proved by the case of his brother Louis, King of Holland. Reorganizing the maps of Germany and the Italian Peninsula constituted the two most impor tant territorial transformations that Napoleon launched. Through the for mation of the Duchy of Warsaw on Polish land seized by Prussia, Napoleon undid in part the Polish Partitions and extended his influence into eastern Europe. By creating the Illyrian Provinces he extended his domination to the Balkans, next to the Ottoman border. Ultimately, the Napoleonic Empire stretched from Madrid to Warsaw and from Hamburg to Naples.

204

In order to maintain his Grande Armée and sustain European expan sion, Napoleon needed to exploit the human and economic resources of his subject states, since France alone could not support his vast imperial enterprise. He recruited hundreds of thousands of European troops into his army, imposed high taxes, and requisitioned considerable quantities of supplies throughout occupied Europe. He tried to establish France’s economic supremacy by forcing European states to grant French indus try and commerce special favors. To win his economic war against Britain, his fiercest enemy, Napoleon coerced the rest of Europe to join the Continental Blockade, his most significant policy after 1806. Yet Napoleon was not merely a conqueror and an exploiting dictator. Indeed, it was Napoleon’s reform policies that left the greatest impact on the Continent. The uniqueness of the Napoleonic Empire lies more in his reform programs than in his exploitation and harsh domination. In France itself, Napoleon consolidated many of the Revolutionary changes, giving them 15 additional years of life beyond the Revolutionary decade, which was crucial in making it impossible for the restored Bourbons to turn the clock back. On a European level, “he also managed to dis seminate the Revolution through a policy of expansionism that the revolutionaries could not have conceived, and to bring the French administrative model to places where it would never have otherwise gone.” 2 To be sure, his reforms were tightly linked with his imperial exploitation of occupied Europe.3 His renovations aimed at strengthen ing his domination over Europe and increasing his ability to exploit its resources. Napoleon and his representatives in his satellite states over hauled the areas of military conscription and finance in order to draft soldiers and collect taxes more efficiently. He formed a professional bureaucracy in order to carry out those policies and introduced a uniform legal code that all citizens had to obey. Napoleon’s allies in Germany initiated changes in order to strengthen their governments, integrate the new territories they had recently acquired, improve their ability to raise the military quotas they owed Napoleon, and raise the taxes needed to pay for them. The reforms were modeled on the French system and were designed to integrate Europe and facilitate Napoleon’s domination over the Continent. The Emperor was confident that France possessed the best laws and institutions and that Europe would be improved by imitating the French example. French officials looked with disdain at the subject populations, viewing themselves as the sole repre sentatives of civilization. Obviously, this attitude provided them with the justification to impose their policy of “Frenchification” and spread French