

194 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

Aside from failing to implement much of their reform policy, the Illyrian authorities were also unsuccessful in enforcing the Continental Blockade and preventing the smuggling of British goods, which was, after all, the main reason for the formation of the Illyrian Provinces.14 Before 1809, the British used the ports of Trieste and Fiume to ship goods into the Austrian Empire. The Illyrian government now required merchants to declare any English merchandise at their disposal and punished those who provided false statements. Undeclared English products were seized and burnt publicly, while colonial merchandise was auctioned off. It was impossible, however, to close Illyria to British goods altogether, particu larly in southern Dalmatia and Ragusa. The rugged coastline, dotted with numerous small islands, as well as the inadequate number of customs personnel, many of whom were easily corrupted, facilitated smuggling. British naval supremacy in the Adriatic Sea posed another major obstacle to the prevention of smuggling. To sustain their control of the Adriatic, the British established a military base and commercial outlet on the island of Lissa, off the Dalmatian coast, which the French were unable to dislodge. Not surprisingly, the blockade had an adverse effect on the local economy. Maritime commerce declined drastically and Illyrian ships remained idle. The population in Illyrian ports took an active part in the smuggling activities, making it still more difficult for the State to combat them. Indeed, for many people smuggling was their only source of living during these times of economic hardship. In the words of Bundy, “smug gling and contrabanding took on the aspects of a national industry.” 15 Although local industry was protected from British competition, it too declined due to the overall economic crisis and a fall in exports. Factories closed and iron mining dropped. In sum, the blockade imposed sacri fices on Illyria beyond its capacity to bear. Paradoxically, then, “The Continental System, creator of Illyria, was also its grave digger.”16

THE AFTERMATH AND THE NAPOLEONIC LEGACY

By 1813, Napoleon realized that Illyria was of little value to him and, in negotiations with Metternich that year, offered it to Austria in return for Vienna’s neutrality. The negotiations failed, however. Napoleon recalled Fouché and ordered him to prepare Illyria for an Austrian attack. Eugène was in charge of the defense of the Illyrian Provinces. In August 1813 Austrian troops invaded Illyria, provoking anti-French insurrections in Croatia and other provinces. Numerous civil servants defected or left

The Illyrian Provinces 195

their posts. In late September the Austrians entered Laibach. The 
General Government withdrew to Trieste and then to Parma. The 
Congress of Vienna confirmed the return of the Illyrian Provinces to 
the Habsburg Empire. 
Few Illyrians regretted the collapse of the Napoleonic regime. There 
was only a small Francophile camp in Illyria, comprising some intellectu 
als and officials, and possibly the tiny, newly emancipated Jewish com 
munity. Otherwise, the financial burdens, the Continental Blockade, 
conscription, and the treatment of the Church provoked widespread 
alienation from the Napoleonic regime among Illyrians. The formation 
of the Illyrian Provinces was essentially opportunistic and it failed to 
achieve its main goal of blocking the entry of British goods. The reform 
policies barely got beyond the planning and proclamation stages because 
the region did not possess the necessary structural preconditions. Many 
of the reform policies were simply inapplicable to many areas. The 
French faced economic, political, and cultural obstacles that could not 
be overcome in the brief period they ruled over these diverse regions. 
Still, French rule left a few traces that deserve to be mentioned. 
Napoleonic authorities initiated the construction of important public 
works, including highways, bridges, and dockyards, and the draining of 
marshes. Most important was the construction of a highway, known as 
Route Napoléon, from Laibach to Ragusa. Despite the failure to apply 
much of the educational reform policy, the foundations were laid for sec 
ondary education, and the use of Slovene and Serbo-Croatian in primary 
schools was recognized for the first time. Finally, the Napoleonic period 
was the first time that Slovenes, Croats, and some Serbs were unified into 
one political unit outside the Austrian and Ottoman Empires; in this 
sense, the Napoleonic period may have provided some stimulus to 
the notion of South Slav unity. 17 In fact, a movement of intellectuals, 
advocating unity and a common language and known as the Illyrian 
Movement, operated during the Restoration period. 