

The Collapse of the Napoleonic Empire 201

commander scored a decisive victory against the French at Vitoria, forc 
ing Joseph and many of his Spanish supporters to withdraw to France. 
The Napoleonic rule in Spain essentially came to an end, and Wellington 
was now free to invade southern France. 
In Italy, too, the position of the French deteriorated at the end of 
1813.9 In August and September 1813, the Austrians conquered Illyria 
and then invaded the Kingdom of Italy, forcing Eugène to retreat to 
a line of defense on the Adige River and then to Mincio. In January 1814, 
Murat, hoping to receive the crown of Italy from Austria, defected to the 
Allies. Eugène, however, stayed loyal to Napoleon and continued to 
defend his Kingdom, despite attempts by the Austrians to persuade him 
to defect. 
In November 1813, the Allies submitted a peace plan to Napoleon that 
offered him France within its “natural frontiers” of the Alps and the 
Rhine. He refused the offer; the Allies and France prepared for war. 
General Blücher crossed the Rhine, Schwarzenberg advanced through 
Switzerland, and Bernadotte invaded France from the Netherlands. 
Wellington had already crossed the Pyrenees into southern France. 
Napoleon managed to fight a few brilliant defensive campaigns but his 
situation was desperate. In late March, Tsar Alexander and King 
Frederick William triumphantly entered Paris. Napoleon retired to 
Fontainebleau and, after finding that his marshals refused to resume the 
fighting, abdicated on 6 April 1814. Ten days later, Eugène and the 
Austrian commander Bellegarde signed the Treaty of Schiarino-Rizzino, 
essentially ending Napoleonic rule in Italy. 

FROM ELBA TO ST. HELENA

Upon Napoleon’s abdication, the younger brother of Louis XVI rose to the throne as Louis XVIII. In the Treaty of Paris (May 1814), the Allies treated France benevolently, allowing it to retain the borders it held on 1 November 1792. Napoleon himself was sent to the island of Elba, off the coast of Italy, where he was given sovereignty. He created a court, redeco rated several palaces, and for several months ran the island’s administra tion with a small budget. At the same time, he kept in touch with events in France, hoping for an opportunity to return. In late February 1815, Napoleon decided to set sail for France after hearing about the growing discontent with Louis XVIII and the news that the Allies were at odds with each other at the Congress of Vienna. Napoleon landed in southern

202 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

France on 1 March and made his way northward. The Bourbons 
expected the country to rise against the former Emperor, but instead, he 
encountered no opposition all the way to Paris, thereby forcing Louis 
XVIII to flee to Belgium. Napoleon proclaimed the restoration of his 
Empire. Thus began the Hundred Days, which lasted until Napoleon’s 
defeat at Waterloo in June 1815. 
In an effort to gain the support of groups that had formerly opposed 
his government, Napoleon adopted a new liberal face. He introduced 
universal suffrage and declared a new constitution, which the liberal 
Benjamin Constant had drafted. The new document established freedom 
of the press and retained a two-chamber parliament. 
News of Napoleon’s escape from Elba shocked Europe’s capitals. The 
Allies rejected Napoleon’s peace declarations and mobilized their forces 
to defeat him yet again. Napoleon conscripted a new army, and in mid 
June he crossed the Belgian border, seeking to meet Blücher’s Prussian 
army and Wellington’s army of British, Belgians, Dutch, and Germans. 
Initially, he forced Blücher’s retreat and then turned to attack 
Wellington’s forces near Waterloo, south of Brussels. The battle appeared 
deadlocked for a while, but the return of Blücher to the battlefield 
assured Napoleon’s defeat in what was to be his last battle. Four days later 
Napoleon abdicated again and surrendered to the British, hoping to end 
his days in Britain or the United States. Instead, the British exiled 
Napoleon to the tiny remote island of St. Helena in the South Atlantic, 
where he died in May 1821. 