

198 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe numbered more than 600,000 troops, the largest force ever assembled in Europe up to that point. It was a European army,4 for aside from French troops, it consisted of various nationalities including Germans, Dutch, Belgians, Italians, Swiss, and Poles. In June 1812, the Grande Armée crossed the Niemen River, which bordered the Duchy of Warsaw and Russia.5 The Russian army avoided a confrontation. It feared the numer ical advantage of the Napoleonic army and kept retreating eastward, forcing Napoleon to march deep into Russia. Advancing into Russia, Napoleon lost numerous soldiers to summer heat, disease, hunger, and desertion. Many of the horses died as well. In mid-August Napoleon occu pied Smolensk, 400 miles into Russia. He then made the fatal mistake of continuing his march on Moscow. His supply lines became longer and convoys had to be escorted all the way. On 7 September, Napoleon met the main Russian army under General Kutuzov at the battle of Borodino, outside Moscow. It was a bloody battle that left about 75,000 casualties altogether – 45,000 Russians and about 30,000 French. Both sides claimed victory but the battle proved to be indecisive. A week later the French reached Moscow but found it deserted. Within a few hours of their arrival, the city mysteriously began to burn, probably set afire by Russians on orders from Count Feodor Rostopchin, the governor of Moscow. The fire spread swiftly and within a week three-quarters of the city had burnt to the ground, making it impossible for the soldiers to find shelter. Napoleon remained in the ruined Russian capital for five weeks, hoping that Alexander would negotiate a truce with him, but the Tsar never responded to his messages. Meanwhile, cold weather began setting in and the conditions of the troops, who suffered from exposure and scarce supplies, rapidly deteriorated. On 19 October, Napoleon ordered his troops to withdraw from Moscow. It was a disastrous retreat. The Grande Armée was constantly harassed by Kutuzov’s Cossacks, and the cold weather caused enormous suffering for the beleaguered troops. The wounded and exhausted froze to death. Food and clothing were in short supply and discipline broke down. By the time Napoleon reached Smolensk, only 50,000 – half of his troops who had left Moscow – survived. The Napoleonic army faced another major obstacle when, in late November, it reached the Berezina River, which ironically thawed, thereby preventing the troops from easily crossing on ice. Subject to Russian attacks, thousands of soldiers drowned or were unable to cross the river. On 18 December, the last remnants of the Grande Armée crossed the Niemen River back to Poland. Only 100,000 of the 600,000 troops sur vived the Russian campaign; 400,000 died and 100,000 were captured. 6

The Collapse of the Napoleonic Empire 199

Launching the Russian campaign was a disastrous miscalculation of Napoleon’s strength and of Russia’s ability to withstand his assault. Despite the huge army that he assembled, the Emperor lacked the resources to conquer the vast Russian territory, much less to hold it. His supply lines were hopelessly long and Russia was too exhausted to sustain his large army, particularly during the retreat from Moscow. Napoleon’s plan to win a decisive battle or two and thus force the Tsar to sign a truce and return to the Continental Blockade never materialized. When the Tsar refused to negotiate, Napoleon had no choice but to retreat. The fiasco was compounded by the fact that the majority of the troops lost were Napoleon’s best soldiers. The Russian debacle marked the beginning of the end of Napoleon’s imperial domination.