

Conclusion: The Legacy of Napoleon 209

In terms of the effect of the Napoleonic reforms, Europe was divided into three parts: the “inner empire,” where reforms had a major impact and were implemented effectively, the “outer empire,” where application of the reforms was inadequate and left few institutional traces, and the “intermediate states,” which carried out the reform policies with limited degrees of success.6 A fourth part of Europe, most notably Russia and the Ottoman Balkan countries, was never occupied by Napoleon and remained completely outside the realm of his reforms. These differences were not surprising given the wide diversity of conditions that prevailed in the various countries at the time of Napoleon’s arrival, the differences in the duration of Napoleonic rule, and the degree of resistance the French faced. In the Low Countries, Western Germany, and Northern Italy, which comprised the “inner empire,” the Napoleonic years contin ued to be applied and leave their mark, while the administrators who grew up on the Napoleonic experiment continued to function there. This was not the case in the “outer Empire.” The Papal regions annexed to France and the Illyrian Provinces lacked the preconditions, such as a developed economy, a strong urban middle class, and a tradition of effec tive reforms, to implement successfully the Napoleonic reforms. Massive resistance in Spain played a major role in limiting the effect of the Napoleonic reform policies in that country. Opposition by the nobility in the Grand Duchy of Warsaw and the Kingdom of Naples, “two interme diary states,” prevented a meaningful emancipation of the peasants and restricted the impact of the Napoleonic reform policies there. Moreover, whenever faced with stiff opposition to the implementation of his reforms by local elites, Napoleon chose to make concessions and ignore the lack of application of his policies, as long they recognized his supreme position and provided him with the resources he needed for his campaigns. In 1815, the victorious Allies wiped out much of Napoleon’s territorial organization in Europe and deposed his governments, restoring many of the old dynasties. Yet they retained what was probably his most significant territorial legacy, namely the reorganization of Germany. The Congress of Vienna accepted the reduction of more than 300 pre-Napoleonic German states to fewer than 40, a structure that persisted until the 1860s. Gone forever were the hundreds of small, anachronistic, ecclesiastical, and imperial principalities and scores of free cities, all of which were inte grated into larger states. The Congress of Vienna also never revived the Holy Roman Empire. In the Italian Peninsula, the Allies restored all but two – the Republics of Venice and Genoa – of the ten pre-Revolutionary

210 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe

states and their rulers. However, most of those states, including the 
Papacy, remained weak and dependent on foreign help for their survival 
and would disappear when Italy was united 45 years later. In this sense, 
one could say that Napoleon had a better sense of future development 
than his conservative successors, although he, like them, rejected the 
idea of Italian unity. 
The legacy of the Napoleonic reform policy was also clear internally, as 
many Restoration governments retained certain Napoleonic reforms.7 
While the restored rulers viewed Napoleon as a usurper and expressed 
nostalgia for the ancien régime, they were pragmatic enough to keep the 
Napoleonic structures for raising taxes, recruiting soldiers, maintaining 
law and order, and dealing with the Church, once they recognized how 
much more effective they were than the Old Regime. Indeed, Napoleon’s 
victories and hegemony over Europe proved the supremacy of the 
French State and sent a clear signal to European rulers that moderniza 
tion of state apparatus based on the French model was indispensable if 
they wanted to survive and play a role in the international arena. A num 
ber of governments maintained the departmental administrative division 
and the position of the prefect, although they gave it a different title. 
They also kept the tax system and police structures created by Napoleon. 
Most European monarchs did not challenge legal equality and did not 
revive tax exemptions. The Bourbons entirely retained the centralized 
administrative-judicial structures in France. The Austrian Emperor 
Francis I kept the fiscal and administrative structures built by Napoleon 
in northern Italy, as did many other Italian rulers. Ferdinand refused to 
return to the Spanish Church its property that had been sold. Likewise, 
in the second half of the nineteenth century, European governments, 
such as the Italian Kingdom, continued to imitate the Napoleonic model 
of a central state in their effort to establish a powerful centralized 
government. In sum, an understanding of the Napoleonic legacy is essen 
tial for the comprehension of nineteenth-century European state and 
society. 