

Conclusion: The Legacy of Napoleon 207 in France and in occupied countries, where the clergy was forced to accept it. The Republic of Italy signed its own Concordat while in Spain Joseph abolished the Inquisition. Throughout Napoleonic Europe, states dispersed monasteries and confiscated Church property, which they sold primarily to wealthy proprietors. In Germany ecclesiastical princi palities lost their independence and were annexed to larger states. The authorities appropriated welfare and birth, death, and marriage registra tion, functions that had belonged to the Church for centuries. Moreover, Napoleon and other rulers expected the clergy to serve their politi cal objectives by preaching obedience to the regime to their flocks. Secularization was also enhanced by the establishment of freedom of reli gion, state control over education, and the introduction of civil marriage and divorce. In the Italian and German states, Jews were emancipated, although for the most part they did not become fully equal. In sum, under the Napoleonic Empire, the Church lost much property and its pre-Revolutionary privileged position, which it would never regain. The Napoleonic authorities also reduced the power of the nobility by breaking their monopoly on administrative and military positions and by abolishing their tax exemptions and seigneurial jurisdiction. The loss of noble power was most marked in Germany, where hundreds of imperial knights lost their tiny principalities forever. Yet the decline in the nobil ity’s power had its limits since they were able to keep their property and local influence. They remained the dominant class in much of Europe; many of the ministers and high officials continued to come from their ranks. Officially, the authorities abolished the feudal system, but in prac tice the nobility was sufficiently powerful to preserve its seigneurial priv ileges and prevent the full emancipation of the peasants. In the Duchy of Warsaw, the Kingdom of Naples, and various German states, peasants remained landless and had to redeem the seigneurial fees, which they were unable to do, and hence they remained dependent on the land lords. In Poland and Naples the nobility even increased its power over the peasants, who remained without the traditional seigneurial defenses. The persistence of the seigneurial regime in those countries contradicted Code Napoleon and constituted the greatest failure of the Napoleonic reform policy. While the nobility and the clergy lost power and privileges, the bour geoisie made progress in many parts of the Empire. In states like the Rhineland and the Kingdom of Italy, a new elite of notables, consisting of old nobles and members of the bourgeoisie, emerged, replacing the exclusive rule of the nobility. This class of property owners, entrepreneurs,

208 Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe professionals, and educated citizens was the main beneficiary of the estab lishment of legal equality and the opening of high bureaucratic posts to skill and talent. In France, the Rhineland, Holland, and the Kingdom of Italy, the governments appointed them to top offices in the administration and the military. They also profited from the sale of Church land and the elimination of restrictions on the purchase of property, and from the guarantee of property rights in Code Napoleon. Providing this class with these advantages was compatible with Napoleon’s policy of rallying the propertied classes to his support. They were the mainstay of the Napoleonic regime and were rewarded for their collaboration. In sum, the Napoleonic regime advanced the position of the middle classes and provided an impetus to social mobility on the basis of wealth, education, and merit, criteria that remained dominant in modern Europe. Another important Napoleonic legacy that favored the propertied groups was the establishment of national markets. The Napoleonic gov ernments revoked internal tariffs and proclaimed a single commercial code, uniform weights and measures, and a national currency. They also constructed roads and canals, which facilitated communication and shipping, and took steps to ensure safety on the highways. Napoleon never supported national goals of independence or unifica tion in any state included in his Empire. Nonetheless, “French rule did, however unwittingly, assist the development of the nation state in nine teenth century Europe.” 5 Indeed, Napoleon introduced structural changes that encouraged the rise of national ideology. The creation of administra tive and legal uniformity, economic unity, and the territorial reorganiza tion in various parts of Europe helped to stimulate national aspirations. Service in the national armies under a national banner, together with sol diers from other regions, also helped soldiers to transcend provincial loy alties and develop national consciousness. The reorganization of Germany, where the number of states was reduced from more than 300 to less than 40, and of Italy, where Napoleon consolidated ten pre-Revolutionary states into three parts, provided momentum toward unification and stimulated national sentiment. The formation of the Duchy of Warsaw helped to encourage Polish nationalism, while the struggles against the invasions by the French army in Spain, Portugal, and Germany in 1813 helped to spread anti-French patriotism, to a certain degree. The extensive impact of the Napoleonic reform policies on Europe notwithstanding, it is important to emphasize that his legacy on the Continent was uneven. The intensity and depth of the reform programs, as well as their application, varied greatly among the subject states.