

For his part, Napoleon seems not to have regretted Caulain- 
court’s exposure to the assault of Bourbon propagandists. Again 
according to Mme. de Remusat, Josephine took her husband to 
task for having added to the scandal of the Enghien affair by 
letting a former aristocrat be involved in it. “And what of 
that?” he answered. “If Caulaincourt is compromised, there’s 
no great harm; he will only serve me the better on that account.” 

That summer Napoleon became Emperor of the French, and 

INTRODUCTION 

xvu 

on July 10 Caulaincourt was appointed Grand Ecuyer. The 
Master of Horse was lodged by the Crown, received the first 
orders of the day, pulled out the Emperor’s chair for him at 
meals, had charge of all Imperial equipages, despatch riders 
and orderly officers. He saw to all journeys of the Household, 
and to the administration of headquarters in time of war, when 
also he rode into battle with the Emperor, prepared to surrender 
his horse to him in case of need. Thus Caulaincourt was organ- 
izer of the transportation service and planner of the schedules 
that made possible those sudden and disconcerting appearances 
of Napoleon where he was least expected to be. Thus also he 
viewed the great battles of Ulm and Austerlitz, Jena, Eylau, 
Friedland and afterwards Borodino, from his post at the Em- 
peror’s left hand. Incidentally, he supervised the Imperial 
stud-farm at Saint-Cloud, where were trained those famous 
chargers Coquet, Turcoman, Courtois, Emir and the forty-odd 
others, of which Napoleon often exhausted three or more in a 
day — as he did even at Borodino, when he is supposed to have 
been ill. 

In 1805 Caulaincourt was raised to general of division. And 
in that year he learnt the second of the two lessons mentioned 
above. Napoleon was laying plans for the divorce. The pro- 
cedure would cause as much scandal of that kind as a parvenu 
dynast could afford to have in his Court. Consequently, when 
Caulaincourt fell in love with Adrienne de Canisy, one of 
Josephine’s ladies-in-waiting, a married woman whose husband 
had left her, he discovered that the affair was hopeless. The 
Emperor would not hear of Mme. de Canisy’s divorcing a hus- 
band who was her own uncle, with whom she had been forced 
into marriage at thirteen in order to keep the family properties 
united. It seems likely that the great man’s opposition to 
Caulaincourt’s affair added not a little to the Grand Ecuyer’s 
resolution to pursue it. Until then his successes with women 
had been noteworthy, even in that society of inveterate amorists. 

xvin INTRODUCTION 

But after 1805 he was devoted to Mme. de Canisy alone. Not 
until 1814, however, in the last days before Elba, when all was 
lost, when he had nothing else to give, and when Caulaincourt 
almost alone of the glittering troupe had not betrayed him, 
would Napoleon consent to the marriage. 

Characteristically, it was through this affair that Talleyrand 
attempted, and with some measure of success, to shape the po- 
litical opinions of the Grand Ecuyer. Talleyrand represented 
himself as Mme. de Canisy’s friend. He let it be understood 
that he was using his influence with the Emperor to further the 
match. There was of course nothing that he could really do; 
hut he could enlist the outspoken Caulaincourt’s support against 
his own rivals for oflSce. More than that, he could help to keep 
Caulaincourt in a state of mind which would make the young 
diplomat eager to get through with any embassy the Emperor 
might send him on. In his eagerness to be called home, Caulain- 
court would then oppose Napoleon’s grandiose foreign policy. 
Instead, he would advocate Talleyrand’s pet doctrine of the 
Balance of Power, with no French intervention north of the 
Rhine. These terms, as Talleyrand foresaw, were the worst that 
France could be made to accept in case the Emperor fell. He 
wished to be on record as having advocated them all along. To 
Caulaincourt, on the other hand, this moderate foreign policy 
seemed the best way to protect the Emperor’s interests — if it 
could be followed before circumstances made its pursuit un- 
avoidable. Caulaincourt therefore tried to curb Napoleon, in 
the heyday of La Gloire, by advocating the course that was to 
destroy him when it was pursued too late. "Why that counsel 
of moderation was boxmd to fail, these Memoirs show clearly 
enough. But Talleyrand stood to win no matter how the cat 
jumped. 