

cast in with the new Empire. The soldier who wrote them was 
a statesman as well — ^a diplomatist of the school of Talleyrand, 
but without any of that strange creature’s womanish ways. He 
was also — and one often feels the lack of this quality in memori- 
alists who were near Napoleon — ^an administrator of sufficient 
skill to comprehend the Emperor’s plans, and to do justice to 
the recording of them. And finally, he was a man with physical 
energy enough to match, and on occasion to outdo, the Emperor’s 
own. 

For reasons that will be stated in due order, these commen- 
taries, though written more than a century ago, were first pub- 
lished in 1933; and none of them has ever appeared before in 
English. 

Armand-Augustin-Louis, Marquis de Caulaincourt in his own 
right, was bom at Caulaincourt, near Saint-Quentin in Picardy, 
December 9, 1773, and died in Paris at the age of fifty-four, 
February 19, 1827. He was thus four years younger than 
Napoleon, whom he outlived by six. 

The feudal tenure of Armand’s family to the lands of Caulain- 
court can be traced back to 1370 at least. He himself was the 
grandson and son of generals, and, with his younger brother 
Auguste, he was to complete the list of four Generals Caulain- 
court in three successive generations. Tradition bound him, 
then, to the profession of arms; and his personal virtues were 
those of his caste, whose duty it was to improve their lands in 
peacetime and to be sparing of their men in time of war. This 
latter attribute, this concern for winning campaigns less by kill- 
ing the enemy than by keeping his own men alive, was what 
chiefly distin g uis hed the professional soldier from the soldier 
of fortune, howsoever talented. It was largely through the ex- 
ercise of this concern, which with Caulaincourt was instinctive, 
that he was to retain Napoleon’s esteem without ever enjoying 
his favour. 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

At fourteen, Armand Caulaincourt passed from the hands of 
his tutor into the ranks of the Royal cuirassiers. Eighteen 
months later, when the events of 1789 had converted his regi- 
ment into the Seventh Cavalry, Caulaincourt was brevetted sec- 
ond-lieutenant. His father, Lieutenant-General Gahriel-Louis 
de Caulaincourt, had subscribed to the ideas of the Revolution — 
an example that was followed by the rest of his family, none 
of whom emigrated. Pleading ill-health, Gabriel-Louis resigned 
from the army in the face of the uncertainties of 1792, and 
afterwards went into hiding. His elder son weathered the storm 
in garrison-duty with the National Guard, and later by serving 
under Kleber and Hoche in the Vendee. While on the way to 
join his regiment there in ’ninety-three, Armand was denounced 
as an aristocrat and thrown into prison. Fortunately the gaoler’s 
wife was a woman whose poverty Caulaincourt’s mother had 
once relieved. Armand made his escape, disguised in the 
gaoler’s own clothes; and so the Western Army of the Republic 
missed losing a sub-lieutenant to the zeal of the Republican 
tribunal. 