

The exaltations of Tilsit were followed, in the autumn of 
1808, by the anticlimax of Erfurt. After that conference the 
two monarchs parted full of mutual distrust. Napoleon was 
growing impatient with his brother Alexander’s dilatory nature 
— ^and besides, his brother had shown himself tmwilling to see 
French and Russian troops co-operate unless he could have a 
share in the high command. This was unthinkable to the man 
who had said: “I go accompanied by the god of Fortune and of 
War.” The Continental System was not working weU, either; 
England was far from starvation; and Alexander was begin- 
ning to complain because Napoleon winked at French violations 
of the blockade, yet insisted that Russian ports be closed tighter 
than ever. Ironically, it now fell to Caulaincourt to try to patch 
up the alliance by arranging a marriage between Napoleon and 
one of the Tsar’s sisters. Nothing came of it; but the ambas- 

^ Biographical notes on the chief titled persons of the narrative -will he 
found on page 403 

INTRODUCTION 

sador managed the negotiations with such address that his 
master was spared an embarrassing rebuff. 

After the summer of 1809 Napoleon never wrote to Caulain- 
court except formally, through official channels. This was a 
strong hint for the ambassador to reply only in kind. Talley- 
rand had slipped from power, to be replaced later by the Duke 
of Bassano, Maret — ^that statesman who provoked a contempo- 
rary to remark that there was only one man in France stupider 
than Maret, and that was the Duke of Bassano. At the close 
of 1810 Mme. de Canisy was deprived of her Court duties and 
forbidden to enter Paris. Caulaincourt demanded his recall. 
He had long wished to leave St. Petersburg, where the Tsar, 
though affable as ever, would no longer discuss affairs with 
him. But by that time Napoleon could not replace an ambas- 
sador of Caulaincourt’s known opinions until he was ready to 
make an open declaration of French policy. , Instead, he con- 
tinued to keep his representative in the dark. 

In February, 1811, however, the Emperor felt that the time 
had come to declare himself. He then wrote to Alexander that 
the Duke of Vicenza was being called home because of his “poor 
state of health.” Caulaincourt, safe, sound and decorated with 
the Grand Cross of St. Andrew, arrived at Paris on June 5. His 
place at St. Petersburg had been taken by General Lauriston, the 
artillery expert. And so it went, in a fashion that can only be 
left for the Memoirs to relate. 

In 1821 Caulaincourt drew his will, stipulating that a con- 
siderable sum be put aside to finance the writing of a history 
of his life and times. He was living in complete retirement, 
broken in health and without access to the Bourbon Court. In 
the years after ihe return from Russia, he had twice served 
Napoleon as Minister for Foreign Affairs. Alone, he had ne- 
gotiated at Chatillon, trying to save the Emperor’s crown for 
him. He had been Napoleon’s informal ambassador from Fon- 