

It would be needless here to give in detail the account of 
Caulaincourt’s next few years. Suffice it to say that Hoche 
recommenced his promotion which, however, was yet further 
delayed; that he was employed on two minor diplomatic errands 
which brought him to the notice of Talleyrand; and that when, 
under the Directory, promotion did come to him, it was not 
in Italy or Egypt but in the armies along the Rhine. Conse- 
quently, his promotion to colonel kept him engaged in a sector 
where the glamour of Bonaparte’s first exploits was little felt 
and less appreciated. But even there, and especially by 
Caulaincourt, were felt the cross-currents of dissatisfaction that 
gave leeway to the Strong Man. Jourdan had fallen back before 
the Archduke Charles. The Directors, having pillaged the 
Treasury, were taxing the last private fortunes out of existence. 
The Duke of Enghien was in Paris, openly intriguing for the 

XIV 

INTRODUCTION 

Bourbons’ return. As the century was closing with peace no- 
where in sight, Armand wrote in a letter home: 

“The time has passed for this ridiculous love of royalty. 
Experience makes everyone think that the government offering 
protection is the government to he preferred. Everyone is at- 
tached to his native land when it offers him security and de- 
fence. Unhappily, private passions ever take the place of true 
love of country; the schemer displaces the honest man. From 
that proceed these grievous disturbances which are wrecking 
the public credit and destroying confidence. ... As for our 
armies, their courage is what it was, but no man is more than 
human when his adversary is as brave as himself. ... In a 
word, Mother, let our legislators give security to our families — 
let our parents look to them as to parents of their own — ^and 
we shall be victorious again; but may peace be the reward of 
our success. . . . Officers and men are at least what they were 
before: they want nothing but leaders worthy of them.” 

One wonders what had become of Barras’s censorship. 

With the Consulate, Jourdan’s place on the Rhine was taken 
by Moreau. Peace followed shortly after the appointment of 
that great strategist, so soon to be exiled; and Colonel Caulain- 
court returned to Paris. Immediately, on his commander’s 
recommendation, he foimd himself entrusted with a diplomatic 
mission to St. Petersburg. He went there to deliver a letter from 
the First Consul to the Tsar Alexander I. The process required 
six months. When he left Russia, Caulaincourt was given a 
present from the Tsar — ^a box with Alexander’s portrait on the 
cover, studded with diamonds. As long as he lived, Armand 
was to think of Alexander in terms of that likeness. 

In August, 1802, Caulaincourt was named eighth aide-de- 
camp to the First Consul. The number of Napoleon’s personal 
aides had been fixed at seven, but already the Consular en- 
tourage was taking on an Imperial tone. Caulaincourt was 
added to the staff to give it a flavour of the great days at Ver- 