

INTRODUCTION 

XV 

sallies, where much of his childhood had been spent, and also 
to show that the new order would care for the interests of men 
of the Old Regime. The job was no sinecure, however. Na- 
poleon’s aides followed him wherever he went — ^a task that was 
something of a career in itself — ^and at any moment the aide 
in special attendance was likely to be saddled with whatever 
remote or difficult commission there happened to turn up. After 
a year of it, and on the eve of his promotion to brigadier, 
Armand wrote to his aunt: “We don’t travel, ... we race — 
and not merely from one spot to another but from one handsome 
action to the next.” 

Caulaincourt was twenty-nine, a veteran who had seen fifteen 
years’ service, had made thirteen campaigns and had been twice 
wounded. His advancement had not been rapid, as careers went 
in those days. 

The yoimg aide-de-camp soon discovered that the pursuit of 
Glory might lead to actions far from handsome. He found out, 
too, that in the court of a dictator the Master’s conduct must be 
viewed as exceptional, not as a criterion. The learning of these 
two lessons left Caulaincourt still wishful to protect, as he 
worded it, “the interests of the Emperor’s peculiar Glory”; but 
by the time he had learnt them no other course was open to him. 

The Enghien afiair, and the part he was compelled to take 
in it, was a nightmare to him for the rest of his life and plagued 
his descendants as far down as 1890. Even to this day French- 
men breathe faster when that affair is mentioned — ^perhaps 
because it was one of the few instances of individual terrorism 
that Napoleon appears to have allowed himself. 

Henri de Bourbon, Duke of Enghien, was seized by French 
dragoons at Ettenheim, in Baden, at five in the morning of 
March 15, 1804. His kidnapping — or “extradition,” as it was 
called — was explained on the ground that he had been engaged 
in a widespread plot to murder the First Consul. He was smug- 

rvi 

INTRODUCTION 

gled across the French border, held at Strasbourg until just 
after midnight of March 17, and then sent under guard to Paris, 
presumedly for safe-keeping. There he was turned over to a 
military tribunal, convicted of treason, and executed in the moat 
at Vincennes at three in the morning of the twenty-first. Caulain- 
court, meanwhile, had been in command of a similar raiding 
expedition into Baden. He arrested a number of suspected 
emigres there, but never saw the Duke of Enghien. However, 
the order to send the Duke to Paris was relayed through Caulain- 
court’s hands. Bourbon partisans made the most of that fact. 
They accused Caulaincourt of treachery to his class, of delib- 
erate complicity in the Duke’s death, and even of having been 
present at the execution. As Mme. de Remusat put it: “Public 
opinion was roused against M. de Caulaincourt; in certain quar- 
ters, it let the Master off easily to crush the aide-de-camp.” 

Actually, Caulaincourt was sent to Baden because he was 
aide-de-camp on duty when the second expedition was projected. 
He did not return to Paris until the evening after the shooting 
at Vincennes. He first heard of it from Josephine when he 
reported at Malmaison; and he wept openly with chagrin at 
finding how he had been used. It is said that for a moment he 
was at the point of taking his own life. From that time on he 
treated Napoleon with what the diplomats call ‘’distinguished 
courtesy,” and always made it a point, moreover, to tax the 
great man frankly with what he thou^t were the motives behind 
each avowal of policy. 