

Such, then, were the forces at work in Caulaincourt’s mind 
in the summer of 1807, when the Tsar Alexander and the 

INTRODUCTION 

Tax 

Emperor Napoleon met on the raft at Tilsit and agreed to share 
the world between them. The scene is familiar: the old draw- 
ing in black-and-white has shown us the lords of East and West, 
advancing on tiptoe as though they were walking on eggs, hats 
off and arms outstretched, to embrace each other. It would 
seem that for once, though briefly, Napoleon was genuinely im- 
pressed by a man other than the one his mirror showed him. 
It is small wonder that five years earlier the youthful Caulain- 
court had been dazzled, too. 

The November after Tilsit, Caulaincourt was sent as ambas- 
sador extraordinary to St. Petersburg. Alexander was still in 
his early phase of liberal indecision, the lone and lofty Ro- 
mantic at the head of a vast folk to whom the Age of Reason 
was coming late. He professed to see in Napoleon his elder 
brother in Romance, the man whom Reason, speaking with the 
voice of an enlightened people, had made her chosen instru- 
ment. Between them, they would break England’s xmreasonable 
monopoly of world trade, bring peace and plenty to the Con- 
tinent — ^and meanwhile, if Russia should find occasion to seize 
Constantinople, on what grounds could the favourite child of 
Reason object? Napoleon’s enthusiasm, on the contrary, was 
already cooling. Not until St. Helena, perhaps, would he speak 
of the Tsar as “a Greek of the decadent regime”; but already 
he was prepared to say: “It would be difficult to have more in- 
telligence than the Emperor Alexander, yet I find a piece miss- 
ing there, somewhere — ^and I can’t discover what.” 

Here plainly was a balancing of power more precarious than 
any that a Talleyrand could imagine. Caulaincourt wrote his 
misgivings home to the Emperor as freely as he would have 
spoken them face to face. The prospect frightened him, even 
as he was charmed anew by Alexander’s fine familiarity. He 
had gone to Russia against his will, and the Tsar’s personal 
friendship was what chiefly reconciled him to remaining there. 
He was able, however, to live in the grand style, since it was 

xx 

INTRODUCTION 

part of his mission to impress the Muscovites by doing so. He 
hired the best chef in Russia and gave dinners with four hun- 
dred covers; and he compelled the Austrian ambassador to let 
him have precedence, on the ground that the Imperial title of 
the Hapsburgs was newer than Napoleon’s. He had been given 
two hundred and fifty thousand francs to establish himself with; 
his salary was eight hundred thousand francs. And in March, 
1808, he was decreed the title of Duke of Vicenza. Napoleon’s 
selection of that title for him seems to have been quite arbitrary. 
Unlike those given to many of the marshals — ^titles which 
Caulaincourt, as a man of the older nobility, often used when 
the Emperor forgot them — his title had no reference to his mili- 
tary career.^ It was of the sort given to ofiScers of administra- 
tion, who shared Italian and Peninsular honours amongst them, 
seemingly, at random. Thus Cambaceres drew Parma, and 
Fouche — shades of Horace Walpole! — was made Duke of 
Otranto. 