

INTRODUCTION 

tainebleau to the victorious leaders in Paris; and it was to him 
that the fallen Emperor had clung after taking poison. He had 
gone to meet the returning exile, had served in the ministry 
during the Hundred Days, and thus had closed public life to 
himself forever. Now, with his wife and two sons, he spent 
the winters on his estate, which Alexander, playing the generous 
conqueror, had prevented the Prussians from selling ofiE at auc- 
tion after Waterloo. In summer he went to Plombieres to seek 
relief from his malady, which in time proved to be cancer of 
the stomach. 

No memorialist had to be found for him, however. During 
the 1820’s several of his associates in the Russian campaign 
published their memoirs; and it appeared that nearly all of 
them, but notably Gourgaud and Fain, had written under the 
inspiration of Maret, Duke of Bassano. This was more than 
Caulaincourt could stand. He felt in better health, he found 
himself being misrepresented — ^and there, in his elaborate files, 
were copious notes of what he and the Emperor had said and 
done in the days of La Gloire. Without change or suppression, 
he had jotted it all down as soon as the great man’s study-door 
had slammed to, or beside bivouac fires outside the Imperial 
tent, or while the Emperor napped and the sleepless Grand 
Ecuyer kept watch during the long flight home from Poland. 
He would put his own notes in order, link them up just as they 
stood, and let posterity judge, shnply on the evidence thus pre- 
sented, between him and Maret. 

Caulaincourt’s method was happily chosen. To-day the dis- 
tinctions between him and the Duke of Bassano are a matter for 
formal scholarship. But what Caulaincourt has left us is the 
report of one of those advisers, useful, fascinated, yet without 
servility, such as the Strong Man sometimes keeps by him. At 
the crisis of Napoleon’s career, when there could have been no 
possibility of clairvoyance after the fact, Caulaincourt spoke 
at the Emperor’s elbow like the voice of history. The sounder 

INTRODUCTION xxiu 

his advice, the more readily it was disregarded; and in preserv- 
ing Napoleon’s replies, Caulaincourt has given us the self-por- 
trait of the man who was dictator par excellence. 

How, then, have these Memoirs gone so long unpublished? 
In large part, they were withheld for the very reason that led 
the first Duke of Vicenza to compile them. There had been an 
alliance between his descendants and the Duke of Bassano’s 
family. Moreover, sentiment about the Enghien affair, and 
therefore about the Grand Ecuyer’s part in it, lay outside the 
realm of reason. Publication would but have reawakened un- 
happy echoes. And it may be assumed, too, that the laws of 
libel were a factor to be reckoned with. The working of libel 
laws is as unaccountable in France as it is elsewhere; and for 
a long while an enterprising advocate might have done wonders 
with some of Napoleon’s remarks. The large number of First 
Empire commentaries that did not appear until the 1880’s is 
evidence enough to support this surmise. 