

My notes were made everywhere, at my desk and in camp, 
every day and at all times of day; they are the work of every 
moment. I have touched up nothing and disguised nothing, 
because although there were moments when the man showed 
himself, it was the demigod whom one recognized most often. 
More than once the thought occurred to me that this journal, 
written under the very eyes of the Emperor, might fall into his 
hands; but that reflection did not check my pen. This fact is 
an answer to those who have claimed that men could neither 
think nor speak nor write under his reign, and that the truth 
made him an irreconcilable enemy. No doubt the truth chilled 
his good will, but his strong and lofty character raised him 
above all criticisms made in good faith. I was confident that. 

4 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

as my notes were only the exact record of what I had said to 
him, they would seem to him injurious only if I published them 
as an attack on his policy and his fame. 

If these pages should some day he read and severity im- 
puted to me, I hope that allowance will be made for the hap- 
penings under the influence of which they were peimed. 

The Emperor was at Saint-Cloud. By eleven o’clock I was 
there. [Jime 5, 1811.] His Majesty received me coldly, and 
at once began heatedly to enumerate his imaginary grievances 
against the Tsar Alexander, but without reproaching me per- 
sonally. He spoke of the ukase prohibiting foreign imports,^ 
and of the admission of neutral and American ships into Rus- 
sian ports, which, he said, was an infringement of the Conti- 
nental System. He went on to say that the Tsar was treacher- 
ous, that he was arming to make war on France. The Emperor 
repeated all the fantastic stories which, to please him, were 
fabricated in Danzig, in the Duchy of Warsaw, and even in the 
north of Germany — stories the accuracy of which had been 
disproved time and again, sometimes by means of investigations 
carried out on the spot, sometimes even by the march of events. 

“Admit frankly,” said the Emperor Napoleon, “that it is 
Alexander who wants to meike war on me.” 

“No, Sire,” I replied once again; “I would stake my life 
on his not firing the first shot or being the first to cross his 
frontiers.” 

“We’re agreed, then,” the Emperor went on; “because I have 
no intention of going into Russia, nor any wish for a war or the 
re-establishment of Poland.” 

^ The ukase of December 31, 1810, which prohibited the entry of foreign 
merchandise and silks, was intended to remedy the falling rate of ex- 
change brought about by the constant drain of capital abroad to pay for 
imported goods, Russia being tmable to export anything herself. It was 
also intended to encourage the development of home industries. — Caulain- 
court’s note. 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

5 

“Then, Sire, you ought to explain your intentions, so that 
everyone may know why Your Majesty’s troops are concen- 
trated in Danzig and the north of Prussia.” 