

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

13 

Later, I saw the Duke of Bassano ® once more. He assured 
me, as the Emperor had done, that there was no question of 
wanting war; that Petersburg’s fears were groundless, and that 
the Emperor was not prepared now to reverse any of the 
measures he had thought it necessary to take. 

Henceforth I had small hope of seeing the Emperor change 
his policy; nevertheless I did not allow myself to be discour- 
aged. The situation in Spain, bad though it was, might pre- 
cipitate events which would induce a different political out- 
look. For two months past the tendency had been to carry on 
less agitation amongst the Poles, and to restrain the activities 
of generals and secret agents in Germany. The Emperor’s 
views remained, I think, the same; but the probability is that 
the course of events in Spain, and a realization of the probable 
consequences of his prospective policy and his vast xmderlaking, 
made him somewhat indecisive. Ostensibly, the government’s 
attitude was less aggressive, its object being to make the adop- 
tion of a pacific policy possible if developments made such a 
policy necessary, or if its wisdom became so apparent that the 
party favouring it triumphed. Meanwhile, military prepara- 
tions were completed; and no real steps were taken to prevent 
the outbreak of war. 

After my interview with the Emperor, it was some consider- 
able time before we had any private conversation. My posi- 
tion was uncertain. In public he treated me well enough. I 
did not cease my protests against the exile of Mme. de C — J 

® Hugues-Bernard Maret, created Duke of Bassano by Napoleon. Min- 
ister for Foreign Affairs, 1811. 

’’ Adrienne-Herve-Louise de Carbonnel de Canisy, 1785-1876. Ap- 
pointed lady-in-waiting to Josephine, 1805, and later to Marie Louise. 
Deserted by her husband, to whom she had been married at thirteen, she 
now wished to divorce him and marry Caulaincourt. But Napoleon, who 
feared that further divorces at Court would add scandal to his own, had 
refused consent; and so Mme. de Canisy had been in exile since the close 
of 1810. 

14 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Though I worried him with letters and petitions, the Emperor 
avoided speaking to me personally about the matter. At last, 
however, he granted me an audience and promised that she 
should be recalled, but without definitely authorizing it. I con- 
tinued with my campaign, until, having been told by Duroc 
at my request that unless he kept this promise I should ask 
to be retired. His Majesty once more promised to allow 
Mme. de C — to- return, and even obligingly said that she 
shoiild resume her duties at the Court, which was more than I 
had ventured to ask for. But next day it was clear that the 
Emperor had tacitly put a price on this mark of his favour, 
because, when I refused his request to tell Prince Kurakin® 
that in my opinion the Emperor had no intention of re-estab- 
lishing Poland nor any wish to see it re-established, and that 
he stood by the alliance and was arming only because Russia 
had mobilized, his promise to recall Mme. de C — remained 
unfulfilled, despite the fact that His Majesty had twice invited 
me to dine with him, and for eight days treated me in such a 
way as to suggest that he held me in great favour. During this 
time he had several long conversations with me at Saint-Cloud, 
and once, after dinner, at Bagatelle. In each case the conver- 
sation was about Russia. 