

“Alexander is ambitious. There is some hidden purpose 
which he hopes to achieve through war. He wants war, I tell 
you. Otherwise, why should he refuse every arrangement I 
put forward? He has some secret purpose. Can’t you see 
through him? No, he has larger motives than Poland and 
Oldenburg.” 

“These motives, and the fact that your army is at Danzig, 
are in themselves enough to explain the line he has taken; 
though naturally, like every government in Europe, he is un- 
easy about the change Your Majesty has made in your policy 
since Tilsit, and, more particularly, since the Peace of Vienna.” 

“What has all that to do with Alexander? It does not affect 
him. Have I not told him to take Finland, Wallachia and 
Moldavia? Have I not suggested that he should partition 
Turkey? Did I not give him three hundred millions for the 
Austrian war?” 

“Yes, Sire; but you would not expect such enticements to 
blind him to the fact that Your Majesty has since then marked 
out a quite new policy, whose execution begins in Poland — 
that is, in Russian territory.” 

“Like him, you are simply dreaming! Once more — do 
not want to go to war with him; but he must fulfil the commit- 
ments which he has undertaken, and enforce an embargo on 
English trade. What has he to fear from changes in my policy? 
What do such changes matter to a coimtry like Russia, away 
at the back of beyond?” 

“On that point he has never explained himself to me.” 

“I don’t prevent him from extending his dominions in Asia, 
or even in Turkey, if he wants to, so long as he does not touch 
Constantinople. He is vexed that I should hold Holland. That 
galls him because he needs foreign loans.” 

“The reimion of the Hanseatic towns, the establishment of 

9 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

the Grand Duchy of Frankfort, which means that Your Majesty 
intends to keep Italy; the giving of Hanover to Westphalia — 
all these changes, made in times of peace and simply announced 
by decree, alienate England and put obstacles in the way of 
making peace with her. Therefore they conflict with Russia’s 
best interests. Even so, it will not be on that account that she 
goes to war.” 

“And must I be dictated to by the English and by my 
brother [Louis of Holland?] just to please Alexander? Rumi- 
antsof * knows quite well that before taking these steps I did 
everything in my power to induce England to make peace. 
Labouchere has been to London several times, even on behalf 
of the Dutch. Am I to aUow the north of Germany to be flooded 
with English goods?” 

“Had one merely threatened to put those measures in force, 
that would have been good policy. The execution of those 
measures, however, plus the movement of whole armies to- 
wards the north — instead of a few battalions to put pressure 
on the customs officers — has aroused apprehension.” 

“You see no further than Alexander; and he is merely 
frightened. It is these very policies to which you object that 
are taking all the heart out of the English, and will force them 
to make peace.” 