

He continued in this strain for a long time. But discussing 
the same topic a few days later, the Emperor gave him reason 
to hope for a definite change in the near future. Duroc, who 
brought me this good news, again made me promise to be 
patient, and pointed out that as a soldier I could not leave the 
service before peace was concluded. He repeated that the 
Emperor would come round in time; that he was bitter, but 
always spoke of me with esteem. 

Realizing that I was achieving nothing by this means, I 
addressed myself officially to the Minister of Police, the Duke 
of Rovigo, who broached the question frankly with the Emperor, 
pointing out that there was no reason for continuing an act of 
severity which was making a bad impression, even from the 
political point of view. But he obtained no satisfaction on this 
occasion. 

It was at this period, I think, that the Emperor summoned 
one of his ministers ® to Saint-Cloud. After a few minutes of 
general business conversation, he said to him: “Let us go for 
a stroll.” When they reached a place on the terrace whence it 
was possible to see anyone approaching, and where no one 

® Identifiable as Lacuee Cessac, head of the ordnance department since 
January 3, 1810. 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

17 

could overhear them, he went on, “There is something I want 
you to do of which I have not spoken to a soul — ^not even to 
any of my ministers. In any case it has nothing to do with 
them. I have decided on a great expedition. I shall need 
horses and transport on a large scale. The men I shall get 
easily enough; but the difficulty is to prepare transport facili- 
ties. I shall need an immense amount of transport because I 
shall be starting from the Niemen, and I intend to operate over 
large distances and in different directions. This is why I 
need your help, and secrecy.” 

The minister remarked that the project would involve con- 
siderable expenditure; that he would carry out his part with 
despatch and aU possible discretion; but that he could not pre- 
vent people talking when they saw waggons being assembled, and 
so on and so forth. 

The Emperor, replying sharply to his first remark, said; 

“Come to the Tuileries the next time I go there. FU show 
you four hundred millions in gold.^“ Do not let the question 
of expense check you. We’U meet any outlay that will be 
needful.” 

Continuing the talk, the Emperor elaborated his policy, 
which was based on the necessity of crushing England by 
crushing the only Continental power still strong enough to join 
forces with her against h i m . He spoke of the usefulness of 
isolating the Russians from European affairs, and of establish- 
ing in Central Europe a state which should act as a barrier 
against invasions from the North, adding that the moment was 
opportune; that later there would be no time for such an 
expedition; and that it was essential to strike this last blow, 
in order to achieve a general settlement and years of peace and 
of prosperity for us and our children after all these years of 
glory, but of weariness and discomfort as well. 