

The Emperor listened to me with the closest attention, even 
with some astonishment. He appeared to be greatly preoccu- 
pied, and kept silent for a while. I thought I had made a deep 
impression on hhn, since his face, his whole bearing, which 
hitherto had manifested only an extreme severity, became open 
and friendly. He seemed to wish to encourage me to go on, 
not only by looks but by the questions he put. He spoke of 
society in Russia, of the army, of the administration, and even 
referred to the Tsar Alexander without manifesting his usual 
ill-humour at mention of this name. In fact, the Emperor gave 
every indication at this moment of being kindly disposed to- 
wards me, and referred appreciatively to the manner in which 
I had served him. I assured him that he was mistaken about 
the Tsar Alexander and about Russia; that it was of the utmost 
importance not to base his conclusions about that country on 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

7 

what certain persons told him, or about the army on what he 
had seen at Friedland; that, having been threatened for a year, 
it had been possible for the Russians to take account of all 
eventualities, particularly to take account of the possibility of 
our enjoying immediate successes. 

After listening to me attentively, the Emperor began enu- 
merating the troops and general resources at his disposal. 
When he reverted to this theme I realized that all hope of peace 
was at an end, since it was enumerations of this kind which, 
more than anything, intoxicated him. Indeed he ended by tell- 
ing me that one good battle would knock the bottom out of my 
friend Alexander’s fine resolutions, not to mention his sand 
fortifications, alluding to the defence works which were being 
thrown up along the banks of the Dwina and at Riga. 

He spoke of the situation in Spain, and complained irritably 
of his generals there and the setbacks they had suffered, ex- 
pressing his opinion that this vexatious state of affairs was 
due to the incompetence of the King, his brother [Joseph of 
Spain], and of the French generals, and annormcing his de- 
termination to make an end of it. He tried to persuade me 
that he could do this whenever he was so minded, but that the 
English would then attack elsewhere, perhaps even in France. 
Thus, he concluded, it was just as well — ^perhaps a positive 
advantage — ^for them to be in Portugal. Then he returned 
to the Tsar Alexander. 

“He is fickle and feeble,” he said once again. 

“He is obstinate,” I replied. “His conciliatory nature makes 
him give way easily when he does not feel the issues at stake 
to be particularly important; but nonetheless he draws a line 
beyond which he will not be pushed.” 

“He has the Greek character — he is untrustworthy,” the 
Emperor repeated yet again. 

“I woTild not suggest,” I said, “that he has always spoken 
everything that was in his mind; but whatever he has deigned 

2 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to say to me has proved correct, and whatever promises he 
has made to Your Majesty through me he has kept.” 