

This conversation continued for some time longer. The 
Emperor jumped from one question to another, and, at long 
intervals, returned to the same questions, no doubt to see if I 
kept to the same answers. To judge from his air of preoccu- 
pation, and from the long silences which broke up our five 
hours of conversation, it looked as if he were giviag more 
serious consideration to the matters under discussion than per- 
haps he had ever given them before. After one of these long 
silences, he said, “It is the Austrian marriage which has set us 

^ The Russian Foreign Minister. 

10 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

at variance. The Tsar Alexander was angry because I did 
not marry his sister.” 

I took the liberty of reminding the Emperor that, as I had 
formerly reported to him, Russia was not at all eager for such 
a marriage; that, although the Emperor had not been able to 
refuse outright to lend himself to the project, he would never 
have given way on the question of religion; that in any case 
there would have been a year’s delay, even if the Tsar had been 
able to obtain his mother’s consent; in short, that he had not 
committed himself in regard to the matter, and that Russia 
was rather pleased than otherwise to learn of the unexpected 
Austrian marriage having taken place,® notwithstanding our 
somewhat unceremonious manner of going back on the pro- 
posals of our own making — ^proposals which, happily, had not 
been accepted, but which, had they been accepted, would have 
made my position decidedly embarrassing. 

‘T have forgotten the details of the affair,” the Emperor re- 
plied; “but Russia was certainly angry about our rapproche- 
ment with Austria.” 

I pointed out that in fact, as everyone had realized at the 
time, and as was proved by conversations with the Emperor 
and Count Rumiantsof when the first overtures in regard to 
this matter were made, the immediate reaction in Petersburg 
was an agreeable sense of relief at the removal of a very deli- 
cate question between the French and Russian governments, and 
a still more delicate question between the Tsar and his mother 
and family. 

The Emperor Napoleon again repeated that he desired 
neither war nor the re-establishment of Poland, but that an 
understanding in the matter of neutral shipping and other 
differences was essential. 

'“Everyone’s very satisfied here; the master and the rest of them.” — 
Caulaincourt to Talleyrand, St. Petersburg, February 25, 1810. 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 11 

“If Your Majesty really desires an tmderstanding, it will 
not be hard to bring one about,” I said. 

“Are you sure about that?” the Emperor asked. 

“Quite sure,” was my reply. “But reasonable proposals 
must be put forward.” 

“What proposals?” the Emperor said, and urged me to 
enumerate them, 

“Your Majesty knows as well as I do, and has known for 
long enough, the causes of the present estrangement; and you 
know better than I do what you are prepared to do to remedy 
it.” 

“But what? What does he want me to do?” 