

The Emperor made no answer to this. He spoke of the 
Russian nobles who, in the event of a war, would fear for their 
palaces, and, after a good battle, would force the Tsar Alex- 
ander to conclude a peace. 

“Your Majesty is mistaken,” I replied, and repeated to the 
Emperor words used by the Tsar which had greatly impressed 
me in the course of certain private conversations I had with 
him after the arrival of M. Lauriston,* when my position no 
longer had any political significance; words which were merely 
a more emphatic expression of what he had led me to under- 
stand some time before. They impressed me so much that I 
noted them down on returning home, and quote them here with 
the certainty that, to the best of my knowledge, my recollection 
of them was substantially correct: 

“If the Emperor Napoleon makes war on me,” the Tsar 
Alexander said to me, “it is possible, even probable, that we 
shall be defeated, assuming that we fight. But that will not 
mean that he can dictate a peace. The Spaniards have often 
been defeated; and they are not beaten, nor have they sub- 
mitted. But they are not so far away from Paris as we are, and 
have neither our climate nor our resources to help them. We 
shall take no risks. We have plenty of room; and our stand- 
ing army is well organized, which means, as the Emperor Na- 
poleon has admitted, that we need never accept a dictated 
peace, whatever reverses we may suffer. What is more, in such 
circumstances the victor is forced to accept the terms of the 
vanquished. The Emperor Napoleon made a remark to this 
effect to Tchemychev® in Vierma after the battle of Wagram. 

^ Caulaincourt’s successor as French Ambassador to St, Petersburg. 

® The Emperor Alexander’s aide-de-camp- He was present at the battle 
of Wagram, and stood beside Napoleon, who decorated him with the Legion 
of Honour. 

6 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

He would not have made peace then if Austria had not kept an 
army intact. Results have to keep pace with his thoughts, be- 
cause, being often absent from France, he is always anxious to 
return there. This is the teaching of a Master. I shall not be 
the first to draw my sword, but I shall be the last to sheathe it. 
The Spaniards have proved that lack of perseverance has been 
the undoing of all the States on which your master has made 
war. The Emperor Napoleon’s remark to Tchemychev, in the 
latest war with Austria, shows clearly enou^ that the Austrians 
could have obtained better terms if they had been more perse- 
vering. People don’t know how to suffer. If the fighting went 
against me, I should retire to Kamchatka rather than cede 
provinces and sign, in my capital, treaties that were really 
only truces. Your Frenchman is brave; but long privations 
and a bad climate wear him down and discourage him. Our 
climate, our winter, wUl fight on our side. With you, marvels 
only takp! place where the Emperor is in personal attendance; 
and he cannot be everywhere, he cannot be absent from Paris 
year after year.” 