

An edition of the Memoirs was being projected when the 
World War put a stop to it. The Germans were at Saint- 
Quentin. The original manuscript was walled up for safe-keep- 
ing in the conservatory of the Caulaincourt chateau. In 1917, 
for some strategic reason or other, the chateau was mined by the 
invaders and totally destroyed. Nothing was left but a few 
standing columns and a rubbish-heap. 

It was not until some years after the War that another edi- 
tion was begun. Necessarily, this had to be prepared from a 
document of less certain authenticity than the original — ^a copy- 
ist’s work, which had been preserved in Paris. Only in August, 
1933, when the edition had gone to press, did the original draft 
come to light. Disordered, water-stained and enclosed in a 
battered tin chest, it had survived the bombing. When the ruins 
had been sorted over, the chest was left for worthless in a heap 
of tile and other such fragments. There it was discovered by 
M. Beloborodoff, the architect who had undertaken to rebuild 

xxiv 

INTRODUCTION 

the chateau. The original, with its revisions in Caulaincourt’s 
own hand, was thereupon put in order and compared with the 
copy in press. The differences were trifling, and there was time 
to note them in an appendix. 

Caulaincourt was still working on the Memoirs when his last 
illness overtook him. As he left them, they form two inde- 
pendent parts. One deals with his embassy and the Russian 
campaign, as hereafter presented, and the other covers the events 
from the spring of 1813 through Napoleon’s first abdication. 
The present volume has been prepared from the work of M. 
Jean Hanoteau, whose admirable French edition of the entire 
manuscript has put all confirmed students of the period, and 
the American editor in particular, in his debt. M. Hanoteau 
has been drawn upon freely for notes to elucidate the text, and 
for the materials of this essay. The text has been divided into 
sections and chapters as the nature of it suggested. Some slight 
transpositions have been made to preserve chronology; and the 
material has been cut only to avoid repetition or the recital of 
events in which Caulaincourt had no part. 

George Libaire 

PAKT I 

PREPARATION 

CHAPTER I 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

T he events in Europe leading up to 1812 had so great an 
influence on those which followed later, by placing the 
balance of Europe’s destinies into the hands of Russia, 
that I have felt it would be valuable to preserve the notes which 
I made regarding various circumstances of those days. In 
writing them my sole motive was to keep an account of my life, 
my impressions, and my conduct. Since then I have come to 
regard them as indispensable material for the completion of 
the official part of my correspondence as ambassador, and 
even, it may well be, for the history of that great epoch. 

My aim will be fulfilled if my notes help also to formulate 
opinion on the character and the political views of the Em- 
peror Napoleon. 