

“In regard to trade between the two countries, an arrange- 
ment should be made on a basis of reciprocal benefits, and 
a similar arrangement for merchant shipping in general. The 
admission of neutral ships into Russian ports should be counte- 
nanced, as long as we go on selling licences and allowing 
licenced vessels into French ports. The Prince of Oldenburg 
should be provided for in such a way that he is not, as at 
Erfurt, entirely dependent on you. An arrangement should be 
made about Danzig, another about Prussia, and so on. . . .” 

When the Emperor saw that I was touching on political 
matters the discussion of which would force him to commit 
himself probably more than he wished to, he said that M, 
Lauriston had heen made responsible for the carrying out of 
this policy — that I ought to take a holiday. 

I begged His Majesty to let me say one thing more. 

“Go on,” the Emperor said. 

“It is for you. Sire, to decide whether there is to be peace 
or war. May I beseech Your Majesty, when you make your 
choice between the certain good of the one and the hazards of 
the other, to take full account of your own welfare and of the 
welfare of France.” 

“You speak like a Russian,” replied the Emperor. 

12 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“On the contrary, like a good Frenchman — ^like one of Your 
Majesty’s most faithful servants.” 

“I repeat, I do not want war; but I cannot prevent the Poles 
from wanting me and expecting me. Davout and Rapp report 
that the Lithuanians are furious with the Russians; and that 
they are constantly sending delegates to them to urge us on, 
press us to make up our minds.” 

“You are being misled. Sire,” was my reply. 

I explained to the Emperor that, of the governments which 
had partitioned Poland, the Russian government was by its 
nature best suited to the Polish nobility; that they had been 
well treated by the Tsar Paul, and even better treated by Alex- 
ander; that I had met many land-owners from Polish Russia, 
and had found that, while of course they regretted their lost 
national independence, they had little stomach for a new ven- 
ture to recover it which might not, even if it succeeded, in- 
volve Poland’s being reinstated as an independent power; that 
the example of the Duchy of Warsaw, whose situation, from 
their point of view, was far from satisfactory, had not turned 
them in our favour so much as His Majesty thought; that the 
rivalries persisting between the great Polish families, no less 
than tibe natural instability of the Polish character, would al- 
ways hinder their common action. I added that the Emperor 
ought not to shut his eyes to the fact that it was only too well 
imderstood in Europe nowadays that, when he concerned him- 
self with the affairs of a country, it was to serve his own rather 
than its interests. 

“You think so, do you?” 

“Yes, Sire,” I replied. 

“You don’t believe in spoiling me,” he said jokingly. “It’s 
time to go to dinner,” he added, and withdrew. 

Thus ended a conversation which had lasted for five hours 
and left me with no hope that peace would be maintained in 
Europe. 