

The Emperor continued to assure me that he had no desire 
for war, and really had small regard for the Poles. “A trivial 
people,” he said, “and a State difficult to shape to any useful 
purpose. If the king I give them does not happen to suit, 
everything wiU go badly. And it is difficult to make a good 
choice. My family does not back me up. They are all in- 
stinely ambitious, ruinously extravagant, and devoid of talent.” 
For the rest, the remarks about Russian affairs in the course 
of my first audience with the Emperor on arriving in Paris were 
more or less repeated. 

The Emperor’s real desire was for me to persuade Prince 

® Russian Ambassador to France from 1808 to 1812. 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

15 

Kurakin that there had been a mutual misunderstanding; that 
both sides had become irritated without knowing exactly why; 
that he had no intention of attacking Russia, and only stood 
out for the upholding of the Continental System so far as it 
was directed against England, and that therefore a considera- 
tion of ways and means of upholding it, and an adjustment of 
existing differences, were necessary. But when I approached 
fundamentals, and began to discuss in detail the mutual con- 
cessions whereby this object might be realized, the Emperor 
changed the subject. Siace it was clear enough that he had 
not really altered his plans, but had, at the most, merely post- 
poned their execution, and that all he wanted of me was that 
I should allay Russia’s suspicions so that he might gain time, I 
avoided becoming his intermediary, and begged the Emperor to 
entrust M. Lauriston with any communications he might wish 
to make to the Russian government. This suggestion greatly 
displeased him, and brought our conversation to a summary 
conclusion. 

Henceforth the Emperor, besides persecuting my friends, in* 
dieted on me every sort of vexation which he could inflict on 
a State official, even to the extent of withholding payments to 
which I was entitled. He let slip no occasion to make me feel 
the weight of his displeasure, and replied to my complaints 
about my financial claims by pleading ignorance of the matter. 
My renewed solicitation to the Emperor in regard to Mme. 
de C — ^’s exile met with no success, no matter whether I 
broached it verbally, or by letter, or through the mediation of 
Duroc. Finally, I again raised the question of my retirement 
with the Grand Marshal. 

“Less than ever is this the moment to take such a step,” he 
s ai d to me. “You will lose your friends and ruin yourself. 
Have patience, and things will straighten out. Just now the 
Emperor is aimoyed with you; but he holds you in esteem; he 

16 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

is even fond of you. He takes a great interest in Mme. de 
C — . Things will straighten out, I tell you, if you do not lose 
your head and put yourself in the wrong. It is absurd of you 
to take the Russian business so much to heart. We can do 
nothing about it. Since you cannot hope to change the Em- 
peror’s plans, why irritate him? He has his point of view; he 
is aiming at some objective of which we know nothing. You 
can be certain that his policy is more farseeing than ours. In 
short, I strongly advise you as a friend to postpone your plans 
for retirement.” 