

This step, I told him, would conciliate general feeling towards 
him; this great political move ought to be made openly; and if 
this really was his object, it seemed to me so sweeping, so 
noble, so well calculated to immortalize his reign, that he ought 
to proclaim it, announcing his intentions to the world at large, 

30 WITH JNAFOLHUJN iJN KUSblA 

and leaving nothing vague or likely to cast doubts on his good 
faith in carrying them out. All the mysterious ways of our 
existing political system, I continued, all the pinpricks that were 
given, ostensibly to make one’s adversary explain his intentions, 
but really to force him into a comer and make him the aggres- 
sor, would then become out-of-date and useless; that in such 
an event I should esteem myself happy to be the agent, the 
verbal go-between for such a project; and I was prepared to be 
the intermediary at St. Petersburg, however little the cabinet 
there might relish the message I took them. 

I concluded by saying that such a purpose, worthy as it was 
of the Emperor’s genius, was the only thing which could make 
the Polish war intelligible to me. Otherwise it seemed quite 
unreasonable; for a war in Russia, without a previous declara- 
tion of the freedom of Poland, without the loyal aid of Austria 
previously recompensed for the loss of Galicia by the cession 
of Illyria, without the secret assent of England, would be a very 
risky enterprise, presenting nothing but difiEculties without any 
real advantage to compensate for them. A hundred Russians 
slain beyond the Oder did not appear to me sufficient compensa- 
tion for the death of a single Frenchman slain on the same field 
of battle. 

The Emperor listened to me with attention, but with occa- 
sional flashes of impatience. I paused often, hoping that he 
would answer me, and that in touching on various details of 
this great question he would come to the point. He answered 
only on the general lines of his previous remarks, adding iron- 
ically to his old refrain, “Austria ought to be delighted to hear 
what you say. In creating a kingdom for the King of Prussia, 
Alexander’s friend, I should rouse too much laughter among 
the English. Don’t you see that this would be playing their 
game?” 

“I have not mentioned the King of Prussia,” I answered. 
“The King of Saxony, or any other monarch, might rule this 

ON THE EVE; 1812 

31 

state. Who knows, in the arrangements for intervention, whether 
the powers would not consent to have on the throne some prince 
of the Confederation or some other person agreeable to Your 
Majesty?” 

Although my observations appeared to be little to the Em- 
peror’s taste, yet I reflected that I had already said too much to 
stop at that point, and that the Emperor would do well to realize 
that no one was hoodwinked by our policy. So I added: 

“If Your Majesty does not act on these lines, I ought to say 
frankly that everyone in Europe, as in France, will see that the 
war in Russia or Poland, for which you are preparing, is not 
in order to create a buffer state, as Your Majesty would have 
us believe, hut for some purpose for which that is merely the 
pretext.” 