

The Emperor seemed a little provoked and said, as he invar- 
iably did when a matter was broached that displeased him: “I 
am not asking your advice.” 

Nevertheless he led the conversation round to the topic of 
Russia. He went into each question in detail, spoke of every 
grievance as though he were going over each step with his 
cabinet and seeking to explain himself and win agreement. 

As the Emperor still seemed anxious that I should see Prince 
Kurakin, I told him that I would not be a party to deceiving 
anyone, least of all the Tsar, by taking a step that would amount 
to trickery, for I had no longer any authority to speak of affairs. 
All these preparations would be a misfortune for France and a 
matter for regret and embarrassment to the Emperor himfieK^ 
and I had no wish to give myself cause for reproach for having 
contributed to it. The Emperor turned his back on me, saying 
drily that I understood nothing about policy, and thereupon 
left me. 

I continued to live in retirement, maintaining the utmost re- 
serve. I saw no Russians, and even avoided meeting Prince 

32 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Kurakin. More than a month had passed without my seeing 
any of them, when the Emperor had another conversation with 
me, shortly before his departure. Once again he returned to 
his supposed grievances. This time his conversation seemed to 
show what was really in his mind. The Emperor could no 
longer make pretences about his plans for departure, but he 
still tried to persuade me that he neither wished to establish 
Poland nor to have any kind of war, but hoped that everything 
would be cleared up and arranged without coming to blows. 

We used the same arguments on each side and talked from 
the same premises. I further urged all my beliefs as to the 
inconveniences, not to say the dangers, of such a distant expedi- 
tion which would keep him away from France so long. I spoke 
of how he was continually being reproached for nmning such 
risks, for gambling with such splendid and mighty destinies, 
when he could exercise a great and powerful influence from his 
desk in the Tuileries. I mentioned the efiEect in France of risks 
forced on the youth of the nation — brisks no longer, as afore- 
time, confined exclusively to the lower orders of society. I 
represented to him how he had already been condemned in this 
connection for the war in Spain, and the danger of going far 
away before its termination. 

I told him that he should strike first in Spain, if he persisted 
in his desire for this unfortunate war with Russia. I described 
the country to him, the climate, the advantage the enemy would 
have in allowing him to advance and wear himself out by 
marching without the chance to fight. I reminded him of the 
words of the Tsar which I had already reported. I also re- 
called to him the privations and discontent of the troops during 
his last campaign in Poland. To all my arguments his reply 
was that I had turned Russian, and thai I understood nothing of 
great affairs. 