

I have often observed in him that care and persistence, and 
am far from flattering myself that I was the occasion of it. 
He acted so towards all whom he wished to persuade, and he 
was always wanting to persuade someone. 

I enter into all these details because they delineate his char- 
acter; that is my sole purpose. I will even add that his per- 
sistence arose, I think, from the habit that he had but too firmly 
contracted, whether by reason of his power or on account of 
the real superiority of his genius and the ascendancy that it 
gave him, of either communicating his conviction to others or 
of imposing it upon them. Certain it is that to the success 
which he was accustomed to obtain thus must be attributed his 
predilection for interviews with sovereigns, and his habit of 
dealing in any particularly delicate and important matters di- 
rectly with the ministers and ambassadors of foreign powers. 
When he so wished, there could be a power of persuasion and 
fascination in his voice, his expression, his very maimer, giving 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

27 

him an advantage over his interlocutor as great as the superior- 
ity and flexibility of his mind. 

Never was there a man more fascinating when he chose to 
be; to withstand him one had to realize, as I did, the political 
errors which lay concealed beneath this art. However pre- 
pared for him I might be — even when on my guard — he was 
often for a moment on the point of winning me to his opinion; 
and I only broke the spell because, like all curt and obstinate 
people, I remained on my own groTmd, maintaining only my 
own ideas and not heeding those of the Emperor. To avoid 
being carried away by the geniality which he often assumed 
when wishing to inspire confidence — to withstand the forceful 
arguments and reasoning of the Emperor, often specious but 
always clever and full of apt comparisons as useful to illus- 
trate his own ideas as to conceal the end he wished to attain — 
one had to behave as if one did not understand what he was 
saying, and to repeat diligently to oneself in advance: “This 
is just; this is right; this only is in the interest of France, and 
therefore in the true interests of the Emperor.” 

It was necessary to confine one’s attention to the question as 
it appeared to oneself, and not to stray beyond the circle thus 
traced; above all not to follow the Emperor in his digressions, 
for he never failed to shift the centre of argument when he 
encoimtered opposition. Woe to him who admitted a single 
modification, for the adroit interlocutor led from concession to 
concession to the end he had in view, casting up a previous 
concession against you if you defended yourself, and assum- 
ing that it consequently implied the point you refused to con- 
cede. No woman was ever more artful than he in making you 
want, or agree to, his own desire, when he thought it was to his 
interest to persuade, or merely wanted to do so. These reflec- 
tions call to my mind what he once said on a similar occasion, 
which explains better than any other phrase could have done 
the price he was ready to pay for success. 