

Actually there was at this time about three hundred and eighty mil- 
lions in the cellars of the Tuileries. — Caulaincourt’s note. 

18 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

One evening at a Court function [Tuileries, August 15, 
18X1] the Emperor came up to Prince Kurakin near the 
throne. He had a long conversation with him, and spoke so 
loudly that those about His Majesty felt it their duty to retire 
somewhat. At the same moment I was chatting with someone 
in the embrasure of a window. The Emperor was standing with 
his face towards me, at the left of the throne. All the des- 
patches of the time have reported this conversation. The 
Emperor Napoleon complained that the Tsar Alexander wished 
to attack him; that he was no longer in the alliance, since he 
admitted pretended neutrals [to his ports] ; that Russia was 
the scene of vast movements of troops. At the end of this 
conversation, which lasted for half an hour, the Emperor ex- 
claimed loudly enough for me to hear him from where I was 
standing: 

“According to Monsieur de CaiJaincourt the Tsar Alexander 
wishes to attack me.” 

The Emperor was so excited and spoke with such warmth, 
and his words came out with such rapidity, that Prince Kura- 
kin, standmg with his mouth open to reply, could not get a 
word in. Although they had withdrawn some distance, the by- 
standers were aU ears, especially those members of the diplo- 
matic corps who happened to be in the room. 

“M. de Caulaincourt,” the Emperor went on, “has turned 
Russian. The Tsar’s beguilements have won him over.” 

Leaving Prince Kurakin, the Emperor took a few steps to- 
wards the middle of the room, seeking to read in the bystanders’ 
eyes what impression he had made. Noticing me in the win- 
dow — ^for I had certainly not escaped his attention — ^the Em- 
peror came up to me and remarked peevishly: 

“You have turned Russian, haven’t you?” 

“I am a very good Frenchman, Sire,” I answered steadily; 
“and time will prove that I have told Your Majesty the truth, 
as a faithful servant should.” 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

19 

Seeing that I was taking the matter seriously, the Emperor 
then pretended that he had been joking. 

“I know well enough that you are an honest man,” he said; 
“hut the Tsar Alexander’s cajoleries have turned your head. 
In fact you have become a Russian,” he added, with a smile. 

He then turned away and began to speak to other persons. 

Next day, having failed to obtain a private audience with 
the Emperor, I made so formal a declaration to Duroc, for him 
to pass on to His Majesty, of my wish to retire from the Court — 
and at the same time I expressed myself so forcibly to the 
Minister of Police — ^that within twenty-four hours Mme. de 
C — had been granted permission to return from exile. 

On this point I must render the Duke of Rovigo the justice 
that many others beside myself owe him. He spoke frankly to 
the Emperor about this act of severity — ^as he did, indeed, 
about many similar affairs, seeking to delay action or even to 
bring about a reversal of his decision — without fearing the 
harsh and disagreeable consequences that he might bring on 
himself. Undoubtedly Savary told the Emperor the truth more 
than any other Minister of Police ventured to do. 