

“And yet. Sire, that’s the only compensation I can see for 
sacrificing the Russian alliance.” 

“I have no wish to sacrifice it. I am only occupying North 
Germany in order to strengthen the Continental System, and 
really shut out England in a strict quarantine from the rest of 
Europe. To do this I must be strong everywhere. My brother 
Alexander is obstinate; he sees diese measures as veiling some 
project of attack. He is wrong. Lauriston is constantly tell- 
ing him so; but when a man is afraid he sees double, and at 
St. Petersburg they can see nothing hut divisions on the march, 
armies standmg in readiness, Poland in arms. It is I who 
might take offence, for the Russians have moved up the divi- 
sions which they had previously brought from Asia.” 

After making many observations to prove to the Emperor 
that he could not deceive St. Petersburg regarding his real 
projects, I added that no political interest could justify a war 

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

23 

that would take him eight hundred leagues from Paris whilst 
he had Spain and all the resources of England against him. 

“It is because England is in Spain, and obliged to stay 
there, that I am not uneasy about her. You don’t understand 
politics. You are just like the Russians; you can see nothing 
but threats, nothing but war, whereas this is just a disposition 
of forces necessary to make England sue for terms before six 
months have passed — if only Rumiantsof does not lose his 
head.” 

The Emperor closed these conversations by a show of some- 
thing more than impatience. 

But returning to Duroc: he made me promise to see no more 
of Talleyrand, who, he told me, had been out of favour for 
some time with the Emperor for more reasons than one: 
notably on account of the reflections he had permitted himself 
to make regarding the war in Spain, notwithstanding the fact 
that he had been among the first to urge the Emperor to seize 
that throne. Duroc added that we did not know the Emperor’s 
wider projects nor his political views; he centred everything on 
the need of forcing England to make peace so that Europe 
might finally enjoy lasting tranquillity. All Duroc’s reflections 
were made in a spirit of kindness and concern for myself. 

CHAPTER II 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

T he winter wore on. Negotiations had already started 
with Austria for an offensive and defensive alliance to 
he imposed on Prussia. In all directions greater exer- 
tions than ever were being made to further the arrangements 
and dispositions for the Emperor’s great undertaking. We 
were approaching ihe denouement of the events for which the 
projected interview at Dresden was the intended prelude. In 
the meantime Paris and the Court were busy with parties and 
entertainments. 

Towards the end of winter and in the spring I had two further 
lengthy conversations with the Emperor, one of which took 
place very shortly after this interview with Duroc. They 
turned on political questions. In the first, the Emperor tried 
once again to persuade me that he no longer contemplated the 
restoration of Poland, and had no wish whatever to go to war 
with Russia; in a word, that he only wanted to force England 
to abandon her groundless pretensions and make peace, and 
to accomplish this it was essential that Russia should effectively 
close her ports to English commerce; whereas for a year past 
she had been admitting English goods under the American flag. 