

To this I objected that we ourselves had been admitting those 
same goods under licences — only of course such goods and 
licences were taxed double-rate. 

‘Tossibly so,” answered the Emperor, laughing. cannot 
go back on that, because of my maritime towns. Alexander 
has only to do the same himself. I would rather that Russia 

24 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

25 

and its treasury should reap the profit than that it should go 
to so-called neutrals.” 

He then returned to his old idea, that by impounding all 
neutral goods the Emperor Alexander would be doing immense 
good, and so on. 

“You may be sure,” he said, “that I have no intention of 
sacrificing such great interests for a speculative re-establish- 
ment of Poland.” 

“Undoubtedly Your Majesty would not make war on Russia 
solely for the sake of Poland,” I answered; “but rather that 
you should have no rival in Europe, and see there none but 
vassals.” 

I added that this occupied him much more than his Conti- 
nental System, which could have been put rigorously into force 
from Archangel to Danzig as soon as the Emperor had frankly 
imposed upon himself those privations and sacrifices which he 
wished to demand from others. Finally, I urged, he would 
not have gathered such forces in the North, to the detriment of 
the Spanish campaign, nor would he have spent so much money 
in all sorts of preparations, if he had not been resolved to put 
them to some use, either for a political end or to satisfy his 
fondest passion. 

“What passion is that?” asked the Emperor, laughing. 

“War, Sire.” 

He tweaked my ear, with weak protests that it was not so. 
He then gave me free leave to say whatever I desired, and 
accepted with the utmost good humour everything I said. WThen- 
ever I touched a sore spot he pinched my ear again, giving me 
a gentle tap on the nape of my neck — especially when I 
seemed to him to be going rather far. 

I told him that his desire was, if not for universal mon- 
archy, at least for a supremacy which should be more than 
primus inter pares, and should place him in the position of 
demanding from others sacrifices whidh he would not be called 

26 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

upon to make himself; and this without allowing them the right 
of complaint or even of comment. This could only appear of 
momentary advantage to France; it had already resulted, and 
in time to come would result yet more, in provoking hostile 
opinion — ^ill-feeling and jealousy which sooner or later were 
bound to end tragically for us, as a situation of this kind could 
not be forced upon the nations in the present century. He 
laughed heartily at what he called my philanthropy, and at my 
remarks about primus inter pares. He was in the best of 
humours, laughing very readily; he took no offence. He had 
the air of saying, “You’re quite right; you’ve guessed correctly; 
but don’t say anything about it. . . .” 

The harder the Emperor found it to persuade me, the more 
art and persistence he put forth to attain that end. His calcu- 
lated wiles, and the language he used, would have made anyone 
believe that I was one of the powers whom he was so much 
concerned to win over. 