

AMBASSADOR’S RETURN 

21 

an embarrassing position; but my silence in public on all these 
questions was my salvation. 

Bowing to the unjust severity of a sovereign, who can never 
give way to a subject, I refrained from my complaints regard- 
ing things that affected me personally; but I appealed direct to 
the Emperor, or through Duroc and the Duke of Rovigo, against 
the injustice dealt out to my friends, who were entirely igno- 
rant of my political views. My silence in public and my re- 
straint were noticed by the Emperor. According to what 
Duroc told me, he approved of my conduct; yet not for one 
moment did he modify his own. 

During the winter there were many festivities, full-dress 
balls and masked balls. At the state hall [February 6, 1812] 
I was the only high official not included in the grand quadrille 
with the Empress and the Princesses. I was likewise passed 
over, or rather I was the only high off cial not invited, to supper 
at the Empress’s table. So far as the supper was concerned I 
took this rebuff lightly, for it was possible to consider invita- 
tions to that as a personal matter; but as the quadrille con- 
cerned one of the prerogatives of my position and was much 
commented upon, I considered it my duty to lodge a complaint. 
The Emperor sent me word that the omission of my name had 
been a mistake; but I learned from Duroc, to whom he had 
dictated the list, that it had been intentional. 

Duroc even warned me, with that obliging friendliness which 
characterized him, not to mention for the moment the return of 
my friends to Court, adding that he did not know what I had 
done or said, but that the Emperor was more incensed against 
me than ever. He observed that I spoke too warmly against 
Polish affairs; that when the Emperor discussed business with 
me I appeared to be putting him in the wrong, and that this 
irritated him. He was doubtless alluding to two conversations 
the Emperor had had with me; one at the chateau of Loo, 
during our journey to Holland, and the other just two days 

22 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

before, in Paris. I will confine myself to but a brief summary 
of them, for with the exception of a few phrases which I will 
record, the conversations were on the same lines, and in almost 
the same terms, as what I have already reported. 

“This journey,” said the Emperor, “together with the meas- 
ures I am going to take against English commerce, will prove 
to the Tsar Alexander that I remain staunch to the System 
of the alliance, and am more concerned with the internal pros- 
perity of the Empire than with the warlike schemes attributed 
to me.” 

“In the meantime, the troops Your Majesty has assembled 
here are proceeding northwards. That does not seem to accord 
with the maintenance of peace.” 

“The Poles are calling me, but I am not thinking of the 
restoration of Poland; and although it would politic and even 
in the interests of civilization, I am not planning it. That 
would be too great an imdertaking, on account of Austria.” 