

“But if I understand nothing. Sire,” I retorted with a smile, 
“why does Your Majesty do me the honour of discussing policy 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

33 

with me? I can do nothing in this matter except through love 
of my country and attachment to your person. Such noble 
sentiments cannot lead me into error and keep me in error so 
long. Your Majesty is not so gracious towards those who are 
not of your opinion that you can imagine it is amusing to con- 
tradict you; indeed, such a course, so far as my friends and 
myself are concerned, has not been so successful as to encour- 
age me to continue it. It must therefore be a matter of con- 
science and conviction. Your Majesty is carried away by false 
reports. You are confused and deluded as to the dangers of 
the course you are taking. You think you are pushing forward 
to a great and politic objective, and I am convinced that you 
are mistaken.” 

The Emperor replied with warmth that it was the Tsar of 
Russia who desired war; M. Lauriston had informed him that 
all the Russian armies were on the march, even those from the 
Turkish frontier ; the soft words of the Emperor Alexander had 
befogged me. He said that he had known of Russia’s hostile 
intentions only when he sent another ambassador, who informed 
him by every courier that the English were trading openly in 
St. Petersburg, and that there had even been an attempt to rob 
M. Longuerue, the aide-de-camp, of the despatches which 
M. Lauriston had forwarded to him. 

The Emperor was doubtless imaware that I had seen young 
M. Longuerue and knew all about his adventure. 

This young officer, travelling as a courier in a heavy barouche 
which was making slow progress through the sand, had quar- 
relled with a Russian courier whose li^t kibitk overtook him. 
The Frenchman thought he had the same right in Russia as in 
France to stop the Russian from passing him; the other, staunch 
in his rights as a government courier, and with his lighter equi- 
page, mrged his postilion forward, easily overtaking and pass- 
ing M. Longuerue’s carriage, which was half stuck in the 
mud. In a fury, M. Longuerue fired his pistols at the Rus- 

34 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

sian, who paid as litde heed to the other’s shots as to his threats. 
At Riga the governor intervened, pointed out to the Frenchman 
the irregularity of his conduct, and, out of regard for his posi- 
tion as a hearer of government despatches, let the impetuous 
young man proceed. But the governor reported the matter to 
his Court, and M. Lauriston was so incensed at the conduct of 
his aide-de-camp that he dismissed him. This is what the Em- 
peror cited to me as an attack against one of his couriers for 
the purpose of robbing him of his despatches. 

During this conversation with the Emperor, I noticed that 
he was more thoughtful than usual. Some of my reflections 
seemed to have impressed him more than he was willing to 
show. The arrival of the Duke of Bassano, who was announced 
as bringing despatches from Vienna, interrupted this conversa- 
tion, which I felt that the Emperor wished to prolong. He dis- 
missed me, and doubtless resumed in another conversation the 
irresistible course of fatality which was drawing him forward. 