

28 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“When I need anyone,” he said, “I don’t make too fine a 
point about it; I would kiss his 

Once he had an idea implanted in his head, the Emperor 
was carried away by his own illusion. He cherished it, caressed 
it, became obsessed with it; one might say he exuded it from 
all his pores. By what means, then, did he strive to convey this 
illusion to others? If he sought to fascinate you, you could 
he sure he had already fascinated himself. Never have a man’s 
reason and judgment been more misguided, more led astray, 
more the victim of his imagination and passion than the reason 
and judgment of the Emperor on certain questions. He spared 
neither pain, care nor trouble to arrive at his end, and this 
applied as much to little things as to great. He was, one might 
say, totally given over to his object. He always applied aE 
his means, all his faculties, all his attention to the action or dis- 
cussion of the moment. He put passion into everything. Hence 
the enormous advantage he had over his adversaries; for few 
people are absolutely engrossed by the moment’s thought or 
action. 

I hope I may be pardoned these reflections. I return to my 
conversation with the Emperor. 

The Emperor’s endeavours to prove to me that all his wars 
were for political purposes, that his only aim was peace with 
England, that all his projects were conformable to this and 
aimed at that goal, induced me to touch once more on the great 
political questions relative to the project of war which I attrib- 
uted to him on behalf of Poland. I said that I understood as 
well as he did, and that I had written to him to that effect 
when he might have had Poland’s restoration in mind, that if 
it was to form a great buffer state in the centre of Europe, 
Poland was not in herself sufficient; it would be necessary to 
fashion that power on a proper scale, with boundaries, a polit- 
ical position, and an organization which would ensure general 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

29 

respect. I added that I understood perfectly well the utility of 
such a power, and that in consequence I considered any means 
admissible which would lead to that end, if he had had no other 
wars on his hands. This arrangement, I continued, could not 
hut be agreeable to the ideas of England and Austria, accord- 
ing to my views; the Tsar Alexander, although he could not 
publicly agree to this project on account of his Polish provinces, 
was a man who could appreciate the wise political scope of such 
an arrangement; interest and honour would prevent him from 
giving up his portion of Poland without a struggle; but this 
war, fought at some other time, and with the acquiescence of 
Europe, would soon be over; and if it were waged for that pur- 
pose, it must be made clear that such was its purpose, so that 
Europe would regard it only as a fight for security. 

It would be essential to make an authentic and positive dec- 
laration of his views and principles, and of the end he had in 
mind — ^to make Austria disinterested, moreover, by restoring 
her outlets to the sea — in short to refashion the States of 
Europe with reasonable boundaries. I added that it was essen- 
tial to take a fi.rm and definite attitude with regard to Prussia, 
and to come to an understanding with the great powers that the 
buffer state should be ruled by a dynasty neither French, Rus- 
sian nor Austrian: in fine, that this state should he entirely in- 
dependent in respect of its organization as well as its dynasty; 
and it seemed to me that a question of this importance, and an 
arrangement of this nature, would induce England to make 
peace more than would the Continental System, as offering a 
tranquil future to all cabinets, and so setting an example of 
moderation, even of sacrifice. 