

I had spoken to Duroc with the tone of a man who has made 
up his mind, and he came to see me on the following morning. 
He told me that the Emperor had not meant to say anything 
distasteful to me: he had merely said to Prince Kurakin what 
he had subsequently said to me, in order that the Tsar Alex- 
ander should know that I remained his friend; he valued me 
highly, but I ought to consider his susceptibilities more in some 
ways, and not fall out with him as I did when he discussed 
policy with me; it was easier to lead him by giving way on 
certain points than by ruiming directly counter to his views. 
He told me that I worried myself needlessly with matters 
which actually did not concern me, and by so doing harmed 
myself and my friends without benefit to policy or person; it 
Mme. de Canisy was permitted to return to Paris in August, 1811. 

20 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

was foolish to sacrifice oneself for high matters which one 
could in no way change, or when one had not armies to set up 
in opposition. It was a vain self-sacrifice. I tried unavailingly 
to explain my feelings to him. He joked about what I called 
doing my duty. He let me see, however, that at heart he agreed 
with me, but that it would be a waste of his time and devotion 
even to hope to persuade the Emperor to other political views. 

The journey to Boulogne, along the coast and down through 
Holland, which followed the Emperor’s round of visits to 
various palaces, put an end for a while — ^by taking us away 
from Paris — ^to the host of petty annoyances that plagued my 
life. But there was no alteration in the Emperor’s acerbity 
towards me, even when the almost superhuman achievments of 
my departments^ occasionally drew his involuntary though 
grudging praise during these astonishing journeys and im- 
promptu excursions. 

The maze of details connected with these journeys had ren- 
dered me indispensable to the Emperor. [September 19— No- 
vember 11, 1811.] Too just not to appreciate my usefulness, 
he was nevertheless brusque in his relations with me. Once 
back in Paris the Emperor seemed in no disposition to treat me 
better. 

Engaged m a matter that touched my honour, in that it con- 
cerned my country, and my self-esteem, in that I had no mind 
to be the agent of a policy of which I disapproved, I was in 

In peacetime Caulaincourt, as Master of Horse, was responsible in 
particular for the planning and conduct of all Imperial journeys. He also 
had charge of all couriers and despatch riders, and he commanded the 
corps of orderly officers. Those were hut a few of his duties which, in 
time of war, were greatly extended. He was then responsible for moving 
and provisioning the Imperial headquarters. His travelling carriage pre- 
ceded the Emperor’s; on horse he was on the Emperor’s left hand and 
accompanied him into battle; and his quarters were always as close as 
possible to the Imperial lodging, so that he could receive the first and last 
orders of the day. 