

The King of Naples, who had not received permission to re- 
pair to Dresden, ostensibly out of regard for the Emperor of 
Austria, was waiting there for the Emperor Napoleon. On the 
score that his father-in-law always had Italy much at heart, 
the Emperor pretended that he did not wish to mar the Emperor 
Francis’s pleasure at seeing his daughter again by the sight of 
a sovereign who would only recall painful memories. The 
truth is that that was a very convenient pretext. The Em- 
peror remarked, in confidence, that he did not want Murat to 
establish relations with the Austrians, with whom too many 
ties already existed between the Queen and Mettemich. 
“Murat’s head will be turned if the Emperor of Austria treats 
him well, and he will be certain to talk aU sorts of non- 
sense. . . .” 

The Emperor Napleon’s first words to General Rapp, Gov- 
ernor of Danzig, were: 

“What are your merchants doing with all their money? War 
is going to start. Now I will look after that myself.” 

40 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

In the course of a conversation after dinner he remarked 
to Rapp, the King of Naples and several other persons that the 
Prussians and even the Austrians would make common cause 
with us; that Alexander did not expect this, and would be 
greatly embarrassed, although he had wanted the war. He 
added that if Alexander really did not want war he could still 
avert it; but that the situation would be clarified in a few days. 
It could easily be seen that this talk was designed to be repeated 
by all the political echoes. The Emperor’s real wishes were 
expressed in the remarks, uttered in the presence of myself 
and several other persons, when he first saw Rapp. 

That evening and the next morning the Emperor complained 
much to me of the King of Naples, who, he said, was no longer 
a Frenchman and had forgotten what he owed to his country 
and his benefactor. On his side, the King complained to Ber- 
thier, Duroc and myself that the Emperor had made him merely 
a viceroy, an instrument for squeezing money out of his 
subjects, and so on. 

The Emperor welcomed the King quite cordially in public; 
but taking him aside, undoubtedly to forestall his complaints, 
he began by scolding and being angry with him. He expostu- 
lated with him for his ingratitude, and, at the close of the con- 
versation, he showed both vexation and sentiment — “both neces- 
sary in dealing with this Neapolitan Pantaloon,” he told me. 
“He has a good heart, and at bottom he likes me better than 
his lazzarone. When he sees me he is mine; but away from 
me, he sides, like all spineless men, with anyone who flatters 
or makes up to him. If he had come to Dresden his vanity and 
self-interest would have led him into countless follies in trying 
to manage the Austrians. His wife is ambitious, and has stuffed 
his head with foolishness. He wants to have the whole of 
Italy; that is his dream, and that is what prevents him from 
wanting the crown of Poland. 

“I would put Jerome on the throne and make a splendid king- 