

ON THE EVE: 1812 

41 

dom for him; but he would have to do something for it, for 
the Poles love true glory. Jerome cares for nothing but pag- 
eantry, women, plays and fetes. My brothers do not back me 
up. Their only princely quality is their foolish vanity; they 
lack talent and energy. I have to govern for them. Without 
me they would ruin the poor Westphalians to enrich their 
favourites and mistresses, to give fetes and build palaces. My 
brothers think of nothing but themselves, yet I set them a good 
example. I am the King of the people, for I spend nothing ex- 
cept on encouraging the arts and leaving memories that shall 
be glorious and useful to the nation. It can never be said that 
I endow favourites and mistresses. I give rewards only for 
services rendered to the country — ^nothing else.” 

Headquarters and the staff were moved to Thorn, whence 
everything was sent on to Insterburg, along with the Guard, 
on the morning after arrival. The Emperor joined head- 
quarters at Insterburg and followed its movement in the di- 
rection of Kovno, passing by Gumbinnen, Stalluppohnen, 
Wilkowischki and a forest road, leaving Mariampol on the 
right. The troops marching along the road were superb, and 
received the Emperor with real enthusiasm. The men of the 
First Corps [Davout’s] were noticeable for their fine bearing 
and general smartness. Coming from excellent quarters, fresh 
from the hands of a commander who had drilled them long 
and well, they could rival the Guard. All this mass of youth 
was full of ardour and good health. In their knapsacks the 
men of this corps carried rations for a fortnight. 

PART II 

ADVANCE 

CHAPTER III 

FIRST BLOOD 

T he Emperor came up with the Prince of Eckmiihl’s head- 
quarters at a spot two miles and a half from the Niemen 
and from Kowno. Day was breaking [June 23, 1812]. 
He immediately made a reconnaissance of the river banks 
and the whole terrain. He did not return till evening, when 
he spent two hours dictating orders. He then took horse again 
and made a reconnaissance by moonlight, nearer tlie bank, to 
decide on a place for the crossing. The whole lot of us were 
left some way behind, so as not to draw the attention of any 
Russian scouts who might be on the farther side. The Em- 
peror went up and down the bank, accompanied by General 
Haxo of the Engineers. Even that morning he had been obliged 
to wear a Polish soldier’s cloak, in order to attract less at- 
tention. 

When the reconnaissance was finished he rejoined his staff 
officers, and once more examined the different points to be oc- 
cupied by the troops. As he galloped through the wheat, a 
hare started out between the legs of the Emperor’s horse — 
Friedland — and made him swerve slightly. The Emperor, 
whose seat was poor, rolled to the groimd but got up so quickly 
that he was on his feet before I could reach him to give him 
a hand. He mounted again without saying a word. The 
ground was very soft and he was only slightly bruised on the 
hip. It struck me then that here was a bad omen; nor was 
I the only one to think so, for the Prince of Neuchatel in- 
stantly seized my hand and said: 