

I answered that I did not anticipate any pitched battles; 
that I thought, as I had always told him, that the terrain was 
so ample that they might yield a great deal, if only to lead 
him a long distance from his base and oblige him to divide 
his forces. 

“Then I have got Poland,” answered the Emperor briskly, 
“And in the eyes of the Poles Alexander has the undying shame 
of having lost it without fighting. To give me Wilna is to lose 
Poland.” 

He dwelt at some length on this point, on the deployment 
of his forces and their rapid movement; and he drew the con- 
clusion that it was impossible for the Russians to save their 
stores and artillery. He even believed that some of them 
would be destroyed through their inability to escape the speed 
of his movements. He counted and reckoned up the hours 
it would take him to reach Wilna, and plied me with questions 

48 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

as if I had done the journey — as if it were only a question 
of travelling there in a post-chaise. 

“In less than two months’ time,” the Emperor said to me, 
“Russia will be suing for peace. The great landowners will 
be terrified, some of them ruined. The Tsar Alexander will 
be in a very awkward position, for at heart the Russians care 
nothing for the Poles, certainly not enough to face ruin for 
their sakes.” 

To avoid being contradicted, the Emperor delivered a rapid 
fire of questions and of the answers that he wished to hear, 
preserving meanwhile the appearance of urging me to reply, 
and continually asking me — ^without giving me the chance to 
get in a word — whether I did not think as he did. 

When he had done speaking, my silence angered him. He 
wanted a response that would strengthen his preconcep- 
tions. . . . 

The Niemen was crossed by Morand’s division during the 
night [June 23-24, 1812]. The others followed; the pontoon 
detachments had been brought down ahead of time within 
reach of the stream. This operation was carried out in a few 
hours without the slightest difficulty, and without any opposi- 
tion, even from the Cossacks, small numbers of whom were 
on the farther bank and who only replied to our shots when 
our troops entered the first village on the other side, some dis- 
tance from the river. 

The Emperor crossed during the morning, as soon as the 
First Division was established; and he seemed greatly aston- 
ished to learn that the Russian army, which had been at Wilna, 
had retreated three days previously. Several reports had to 
be made, and various people who had come from there had 
to be brought to him, before he would believe the news. He 
followed the movements of the advance-guard for more than 
two leagues, hurried the whole army forward, and questioned 
all the countryfolk whom he could find, but obtained no posi- 

FIRST BLOOD 49 

live news; Poles were sent out in all directions to gather in- 
formation. 

The Emperor returned to Kowno, visited the town and its 
environs, and was occupied until nightfall in hastening the 
crossing of the Wilia, which was undertaken by some swim- 
mers, and by erecting a bridge for the passage of an army 
corps which was to operate on the other side of that river. 