

It was M. Gueheneuc who led a couple of hundred de- 
termined swimmers across the river. He turned back from 
his regiment of light infantry and leaped fully clothed into 
the stream to save a lancer who was being carried away by 
the current. The Emperor considered that this deed, praise- 
worthy enough in a civilian, was not appropriate to a colonel 
at the head of his regiment in the face of the enemy. He told 
him so. 

The Emperor spent the night at a Russian convent a quarter 
of a league from Kowno. There he stayed until the twenty- 
sixth to work out his plans, speed up the passage of the Nie- 
men, and accelerate the movement of the troops in every di- 
rection. He learned that the Russian army was in full re- 
treat; hut that as it covered too extended a front, the left, under 
Bagration, was so far away that it would have difficulty in 
keeping communication with the centre. 

“I will take a hand in it,” said the Emperor, “if the Rus- 
sians will not fight before Wilna.” 

The Emperor would gladly have given wings to the entire 
army. On the twenty-seventh he slept at Owzianiskai, and on 
the twenty-eighth arrived at Wihia at nine o’clock in the morn- 
ing. This rapid movement without stores exhausted and 
destroyed all the resources and houses which lay on the way. 
The vanguard lived quite well, but the rest of the army was 
dying of hunger. Exhaustion, added to want and the pierc- 
ing cold rains at night, killed off ten thousand horses. Many 

50 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

of the Young Guard died on the road of fatigue, cold and 
hunger. The leaders wanted these young men to rival the vet- 
erans who had survived so many toils, perils and privations; 
and the youth of the army was thus the victim of misplaced 
zeal. 

The Prince of Eckmiihl, who supported the advance-guard 
of the King of Naples, had announced that Lieutenant-General 
Balachof, chief aide-de-camp to the Tsar, had arrived at his 
headquarters with a letter for the Emperor. The Prince was 
ordered to invent some pretext to detain him. It was not until 
two or three days after his arrival that he was given leave 
to come to Wilna. Our advance-guard had had a lively en- 
gagement some leagues from the city, and another quite close 
to it. Our cavalry had not come off best, and M. Segur, 
captain of light cavalry, had been taken prisoner. 

The Emperor had definite information of the retreating 
movement of the enemy. He was amazed that they had yielded 
Wilna without a struggle, and had taken their decision in time 
to escape him. 

It was truly heart-breaking for him to have to give up all 
hope of a great battle before Wilna. ... He flattered him- 
self that the Prince of Eckmiihl would be more fortunate in 
his movements against Bagration, and that the corps which 
were to march on the Dwina would get into touch with the left 
flank of the Russians.^ His first question to any officer coming 
to headquarters from the various army corps was, “How 

^At the opening of the campaign the Russian forces on the Niemen 
were composed of three armies. The First Army of the West, commanded 
by Barclay, had its right -wing (Wittgenstein) on the Baltic, its left wing 
(Doctorov) in the environs of Grodno, its headquarters at Wilna. The 
Second Army of the West, under Bagration, was extended from Grodno 
to the Muchaviec, with headquarters at Wolkowysk. The Army of the 
Reserve, under Tormasov, was extended beyond the Wolhynian marshes, 
with headquarters at Luck. Opposite these forces the French army was 
divided into two parts. One part, composed of the corps of Davout, 
Oudinot, Ney, Eugene, Saint-Cyr, the Guard (Mortier) and Murat’s cav- 