

“Alexander is laughing at me. Does he imagine that I have 
come to Wilna to discuss trade treaties? I have come to finish 
off, once and for all, the Colossus of Northern Barbarism. 
The sword is drawn. They must be thrust back into their 
snow and ice, so that for a quarter of a century at least they 
will not be able to interfere with civilized Europe. 

“Even in the days of Catherine,” he went on, “the Russians 
counted for little or nothing in the politics of Europe. It was 
the partition of Poland which gave them contact with civiliza- 
tion. The time has come when Poland, in her turn, must drive 
them home again. Do the battles of Austerlitz, of Friedland, 
or the Peace of Tilsit give groxmd for the claims of my brother 
Alexander? We must seize this chance to cure the Russians 
of their curiosity about what goes on in Germany. I consent 
to their admitting the English to Archangel, but the Baltic 
should be closed to them. Why did not Alexander explain 

FIRST BLOOD 

53 

himself to Narbonne or to Lauriston, who was at Petersburg 
and whom he would not receive at Wilna? 

“Up to the very last, Rumiantsof has refused to believe in 
the possibility of war. He has persuaded Alexander that our 
movements were merely threats — ^that the maintenance of the 
alliance was too much in my own interest for me to be deter- 
mined on war. He thought that he fathomed me; that he was 
more subtle than I am diplomatic. Now that the Tsar sees it 
is a serious matter, and that his army has been cut in two, he 
is afraid and wants to come to terms; but I will sign the peace 
at Moscow. . . . Since Erfurt Alexander has become too 
haughty. The acquisition of Finland has turned his head. If 
he must have victories, let him defeat the Persians, but don’t 
let him meddle in the affairs of Europe. Civilization rejects 
these people of the North; Europe must settle its own affairs 
without them.” 

M. Balachof was well received by the Emperor, who invited 
him to dinner [July 1], together with the Prince of Neuchatel, 
the Duke of Istria, and myself. I was more than astounded 
at this compliment, but it could not have been paid me on my 
own accoxmt, the Emperor haAung long since accustomed me 
not to expect any favours which he could possibly refrain from 
granting to those in his entourage. 

The Emperor treated M. Balachof perfectly and spoke freely 
to himi' In the conversation after dinner His Majesty re- 
marked, apostrophizing me: 

“The Tsar Alexander treats ambassadors handsomely. He 
imagines that he can conduct diplomacy with blandishments. 
He made a Russian out of Caulaincourt.” 

It was the customary reproach. Since he could not harm 
me in the eyes of my countrymen, who knew me well enough 
to discount this kind of reproach as I did myself, I paid no 
heed to it. But when it was repeated with the obvious inten- 
tion of commending me to the good graces of the Emperor 

54 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Alexander, the words grated on me, and I could not refrain 
from answering the Emperor with some warmth: 