

45 

46 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“We should do better not to cross the Niemen. That fall is a 
bad sign.” 

The Emperor, who at first had kept a complete silence, 
though his private thoughts were doubtless no more cheerful 
than our own, presently began to joke with the Prince of 
Neuchatel and myself about his fall; but his bad temper and 
forebodings were obvious despite his efforts at concealment. 
In other circumstances he would have complained about the 
charger which had caused this foolish accident, and would not 
have spared the Master of Horse. Now, however, he af- 
fected the utmost serenity, and did all he could to dispel the 
misgivings which he sensed that everyone must have felt — ^for 
men are superstitious despite themselves, in such serious mo- 
ments and on the eve of such great events. 

Talk about his fall was general: some of the headquarters 
staff observed that the Romans, who believed in portents, would 
not have undertaken the crossing of the Niemen. During the 
whole of that day the Emperor, usually so cheerful and active 
when his troops were carrying out extensive operations, was 
very serious and preoccupied. 

There was no news from the other side of the river; com- 
munications had been interrupted for some days. 

The only sign of life on the opposite bank was an occasional 
Cossack patrol. During the day the Emperor inspected his 
troops and continued to reconnoitre the neighbourhood. The 
corps on our right knew no more than we did of the enemy’s 
movements. They had no news whatever of the Russians. 
Everyone was complaining that no spies came back, a fact 
which put the Emperor in bad humour. We only heard from 
Mariampol that a Jew, coming from the interior, reported that 
the Russian army was in retreat, and that we were faced only 
by Cossacks. The Emperor believed that the Russians were 
massing about Troki for the defence of Wilna. 

The Emperor sent for me after dinner and asked what had 

FIRST BLOOD 

47 

caused him to be thrown; he said he was scarcely hurt hut had 
got up so quickly that probably in the darkness no one would 
have noticed the accident. He asked if it was being talked 
about at headquarters. He then renewed several inquiries 
about Russia, the mode of life of the inhabitants, the resources 
offered by the towns and villages, the state of the roads. He 
asked if the peasants had any energy, if they were the sort of 
people to arm themselves and form bands like the Spaniards, 
and finally if I thought that the army had retreated and thus 
delivered Wilna to him without giving battle. He seemed to 
be very anxious that this should be so, but he argued to con- 
vince me that the Russian anny could not have retreated from 
Mariampol, as had been reported, and thus given up the capital 
of Lithuania [Wilna] — and in consequence the whole of Rus- 
sian Poland — ^without fighting, if only not to dishonour itself 
in the eyes of the Poles. He urged me to give him my opinion 
of this retreat. 