

M. Narbonne came to see me and told me what the Tsar 
had said to him, what he had observed, and what he had loyally 
reported to the Emperor Napoleon, who had instructed him to 
repeat it in part to the Emperor of Austria and M. Mettemich. 

I note, more or less, M. Narbonne’s exact words, for I 
wrote them down at the time; and this conversation having been 
repeated to me several times by him, I have been able to verify 
the accuracy of my notes. 

The Tsar Alexander had welcomed him cordially. He had 
been welcomed by everyone; their general bearing was appro- 
priate to the occasion, dignified but not boastful. He attended 
two reviews. The troops appeared to be a fine body of men. 
M. Rumiantsof was not there at the time of his arrival. 
From the outset the Tsar had spoken to him frankly: 

“I sliall not be the first to draw the sword. I have no wish 
to be saddled, in the eyes of Europe, with the responsibility of 
the blood that will be shed in this war. For eighteen months I 
have been threatened. Tke French army is three himdred 
leagues from its own coimtry and actually on my frontiers, 
whereas I am on my own territory. Vital points on my frontiers 
are being fortified and armed; arms are beiag sent up; the 
Poles are being incited; an outcry is being raised that I har- 
bour neutrals and admit Americans, while aU the time the 
Emperor is selling licences in France, admitting vessels that 
are being used to carry freight from England. The Emperor 
is swelling his fiscal receipts and ruining some of his imfortu- 
nate subjects. From the start, I have declared that I have no 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

37 

intention of doing this. I cannot take money from the pockets 
of my subjects to put into my own. 

“The Emperor Napoleon and his agents declare that I favour 
England and do not carry out the measures of the Continental 
System. If this were true, would sixty or eighty ships have 
been seized as contraband? Do you imagine that the English 
have not been knocking at my door in every way they could? 
Had I wished, I could have had ten English agents for every 
one that I have had; but I have not so much as listened to them. 
Three himdred thousand French troops are ready to cross my 
frontier, though I am still in the alliance and faithful to all 
the engagements I have made. When I change, I will do so 
openly. Ask Caulaincourt what I said to him when the Emperor 
Napoleon deviated from the alliance, and what I told him on 
his departure. Caulaincourt is a man of honour, and not a man 
to be imposed upon. As I was then, so I am to-day, whatever 
the Emperor Napoleon may have done to break our friendly 
relations. 

“He is raising Austria, Prussia, all Europe in arms against 
Russia; yet I am still in the alliance, so firmly has my reason 
forbidden me to believe that he would wish to sacrifice real 
advantages to the hazards of this war. I am under no illusions. 
I render too much justice to his military talents not to have 
calculated all the risks than an appeal to arms may involve for 
us, but, having done all I could to preserve peace honourably 
and uphold a political system which might lead to universal 
peace, I will do nothing to besmirch the honour of the nation 
over which I rule. The Russian nation is not one to shrink 
from danger. All the bayonets in Europe waiting at my fron- 
tiers will not make me speak otherwise. 