

FIRST BLOOD 

51 

many prisoners Lave been taken?” He was anxious for tro< 
phies, so as to encourage the Poles; and no one sent him any. 

The Duke of Bassano and Prince Sapieha undertook to or- 
ganize the country and raise the Poles in arms; but the in- 
habitants seemed little disposed to respond to the appeals made 
to their patriotism. The pillage and the irregularities of all 
kinds in which the army had indulged had put the whole coun- 
tryside to flight. In the towns the more respectable people 
kept within doors. Whatever the zeal of those Poles who had 
come with the army, the Emperor had to send for any of the 
responsible persons of Wilna whom he might require; for not 
a soul presented himself or offered his services. 

The Emperor decided to summon M. Balachof to Wilna. 
The way in which His Majesty spoke of M. Balachof’s mission 
made it seem a veritable trophy presented to the Poles, for 
he interpreted it as a proof of the Russian government’s em- 
barrassment, and a source of encouragement. I only learned 
of his arrival from the Prince of Neuchatel, who told me what 
he knew of this mission, from which we augured nothing likely 
to favour peace. The Emperor Napoleon said: 

“My brother Alexander, who showed himself so haughty 
with Narbonne, already wants a settlement. He is afraid. 
My manoeuvres have disconcerted the Russians; before a month 
is over they will be on their knees to me.” 

M. Balachof brought a letter from the Tsar Alexander, and 
also instructions in keeping with its contents, to demand the 

airy, was under the direct orders of the Emperor. The other, composed 
of the corps of Poniatowski, Reynier, Vandamme and the cavalry under 
Latour-Mauhourg, was commanded by Jerome. The left wing, under 
Macdonald, was at Tilsit with orders to operate against Riga; the right 
wing, under Schwarzenberg, was on the Bug. After the twenty-sixth the 
First Russian aimy heat a retreat from Wilna on to Drissa. The Second 
Russian army got into motion on the twenty-ninth and retreated from 
Wolkowysk to Nikoliaev. As soon as they had cleared the Niemen 
Napoleon sent Oudinot and Ney in pursuit of Barclay, and Davout in the 
direction of Minsk to separate Bagration from Barclay. — Clausewitz, La 
Campagne de 1812 en Russie^ Paris, 1900, 37 et seq. 

52 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

reasons for this invasion in peacetime and without any decla- 
ration of war. He was also to propose, in the absence of any 
known grievance caused by misunderstanding between the two 
States, to exchange explanations and to avoid war if the Em- 
peror Napoleon would retire to his positions behind the Nie- 
men, pending negotiations. 

It seemed, to the few who were initiated into the secret of 
this proposal, that the rapidity of our movements had from 
the outset disconcerted and upset the military dispositions of 
the Russians; and that now, embarrassed and doubtful whether 
he could rally Bagration’s corps in front of the Dwina, the 
Tsar Alexander was trying to delay our advance by any kind 
of palaver whatsoever. I am repeating what I heard said, for 
at the time I had no personal knowledge of the matter.' I do 
know, however, that in the presence of the Prince of Neuchatel, 
the Duke of Istria, myself and, I think, Duroc, the Empero: 
Napoleon said in a loud voice: 