

“My patience and moderation come not from weakness, but 
from the duty of a sovereign to heed no feelings of resent- 
ment — to envisage nothing but the peace and welfare of his 
people in questions of such far-reaching importance, and when 

38 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

he can hope to avert a struggle which must cost them so many 
sacrifices. Can the Emperor Napoleon, in all good faith, de- 
mand explanations when, in a time of total peace, he invades 
the north of Germany, when he fails to observe the engage- 
ments of the alliance and carry out the principles of his Con- 
tinental System? Is it not he who should explain his motives?” 

The Tsar, moreover, told him that at the moment of speak- 
ing he was under no engagement contrary to the alliance; that 
he was strong in the rights and justice of his cause; and that 
he would defend himself if attacked. He concluded by spread- 
ing out a map of Russia and pointing to the farthest limits of 
the country. 

“If the Emperor Napoleon is determined on war,” he said, 
“and if Fortime does not smile on our just cause, he will have 
to go to the end of the earth to find peace.” 

He then said once again that he would not fire the first shot, 
but also that he would sheathe the sword last. 

M. Narbonne further told me that during his stay at Wilna 
the Tsar Alexander had always spoken to him in this sense, 
unaffectedly and without ill-feeling, not even showing any bit- 
terness towards the Emperor Napoleon personally; he had also 
spoken of myself with great esteem and kindness. M. Nar- 
bonne seemed quite content with aU that the sovereign had said, 
and was convinced of the truth of his arguments. He added 
that the Emperor Napoleon seemed to be impressed by the report 
made to him, though he kept on complaining of the Tsar’s false- 
ness, and constantly returned to his chapter of grievances 
against him. 

The King of Prussia and the Crown Prince, whom the Em- 
peror had wished to meet in Dresden for the purpose of some 
kind of public reconciliation which would guarantee the satis- 
factory and free co-operation of Prussia, arrived in Dresden 
[May 26 ] . Some thought that the Emperor would not treat the 

ON THE EVE: 1812 

39 

King well, for he did not like him and always observed, when 
speaking of him, “He is merely a drill sergeant, a blockhead.” 
But the Emperor made his good-humour wait on his interest; 
and at the moment it was very much to his interest to persuade 
the King that he was admitting him freely into the political 
scheme of France, and had no hidden motives of hostility. 
The King and the Crown Prince went away delighted with the 
welcome they had received. 

The Emperor left Dresden on May 29; the Empress was at 
Prague, where she had gone to pass a short time with the Aus- 
trian Court. The Emperor stayed from June 7 to 10 at Danzig. 
That was the great army depot, the place where everything had 
been organized and prepared during the last two years, and 
to which the Emperor devoted the greatest attention; for it was 
the strong point which had to supply all his needs. 