

By this time the Emperor had already taken his decision. 
Austria had practically consented to become his ally, and Prus- 
sia had had no alternative but to lay up a rod for her own 
back. 

Some days after my last conversation with the Emperor he 
had sent o£E a portion of the Household. Horses and carriages 
were already on the way to Dresden, ostensibly for the interview 
with the Emperor of Austria. 

The Emperor left Paris on May 9. 

It is said that we went to Dresden by way of Bamberg to 
avoid the German princelings. The truth is that the Emperor 
wanted to avoid Weimar.^ He kept on saying, and the Court 
repeated it after him, that he did not want war. Rumours were 
purposely spread of an interview with the Tsar Alexander, and 
attempts were made to find confirmation of these rumours in the 
^Tjhe Grand Duke of Weimar was the Tsar’s brother-in-law. 

ON THE EVE: 1812 35 

mission of M. Narbonne, who was sent to that sovereign’s 
court. 

Dresden was reached on May 16. 

The Emperor and all those attached to the ministry were at 
pains to tinge our conduct, views and actions with moderation, 
in order to keep appearances on our side, and so impress 
Austria. To this end particular care was taken to appear con- 
ciliatory and moderate; efforts were also made to lull into a 
false sense of security those whom it was desired to attack. 

The Emperor had travelled with the Empress. For six weeks 
the whole countryside had been working to repair the roads we 
had to follow. The King and Queen of Saxony had preceded 
Their Majesties to Plauen. There was a torchlight procession 
at our entrance into Dresden, where the Austrian Court arrived 
two days later. Since politics was none of my business, I did 
not gather enough certain knowledge of what passed at that 
interview to enable me to relate it in detail. 

The Emperor set things in motion to circumvent M. Metter- 
nich — ^and especially to see that there should be echoes about 
his moderation and his anxiety to obtain, through M. Nar- 
bonne, the explanations which the Tsar of Russia had refused 
to Austria, so as to effect a general conciliation without recourse 
to hostilities. For the first, and perhaps for the last time, the 
Emperor spoke very well of M. Mettemich. 

Russia had indeed betrayed a certain arrogance in not enter- 
ing into explanations with the Viennese cabinet, which would 
gladly have listened to them. If this conduct showed a certain 
dignity it also showed clumsiness; for it strengthened our cause 
in the public view, and thus played into our hands. 

M. Narbonne, who had been sent to Wilna to the Tsar 
Alexander, arrived back at Dresden. The Emperor instructed 
him to see M. Mettemich and tell the Emperor of Austria what 
he wished to be known about his mission. 

The Emperor, who fiiought that the part he had taken in the 

36 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

marriage of the Archduchess Marie Louise, his reputation as a 
man of intelligence, and his relations with Prince Schwarzen- 
burg, would render M. Narbonne particularly agreeable to 
the Austrian Court, had chosen him expressly for this mission, 
thinking that whatever he said would have all the more effect 
on the mind of the Imperial father-in-law. 