

break [July 28] the certainty was borne in upon us that the 
Russian army had vanished and abandoned Witepsk. Not a 
soul was to be found, not even a peasant, who could indicate 
the direction taken by the enemy [Barclay], for he had not 
passed through the town. 

For some hours we had to act like huntsmen and follow 
up in every direction the track he had taken. What was the 
use? What route had his masses of men and artillery fol- 
lowed? No one knew, and for some hours no one could know, 
for there were signs of them on all sides. 

Moreover, the Emperor at first only sent out his advance- 
guards. He passed rapidly through the streets and outside 
the town, and then rejoined his Guard, which, like the rest of 
the troops, was already on the march along the road to 
Smolensk. The troops were constantly harassed. Many of 
the horses were unable to stand up through the charges the 
vanguard made; and so their riders were lost. The Emperor 
bivouacked at Lochesna with the Guard, and remained there 
through part of the following day [July 29] , waiting for news. 

But there were no inhabitants to be found, no prisoners to 
be taken, not a single straggler to be picked up. There were 
no spies. We were in the heart of inhabited Russia and yet, 
if I may be permitted the comparison, we were like a vessel 
without a compass in the midst of a vast ocean, knowing noth- 
ing of what was happening around us. At last it was learned 
from two peasants who were caught that the Russian army was 
far ahead of us, and that it had been on the move for four days. 

For more than an hour the Emperor remained undecided. 

“Perhaps the Russians want to give battle at Smolensk,” he 
said. “Bagration has not yet joined up with them; we must 
attack them.” 

CHAPTER IV 

SMOLENSK 

AT last he decided to give the army a much-needed rest. 

ZA Part of the cavalry was already worn out, the artillery 
•J- and infantry were exhausted, the roads were covered 
with stragglers who destroyed and wasted everything. It was 
essential to organize our rear and await the result of the 
operations undertaken by the corps that had remained on the 
Dwina. The certainty that the Russian army was going to 
escape him, and that he would not, for some time, obtain the 
battle he desired so keenly, cast the Emperor into deep gloom. 
Eventually [July 29] he resigned himself to the necessity of 
returning to Witepsk. 

As I have said, our cavalry and artillery had already suf- 
fered severely. A very large n umb er of horses had died. 
Many were lagging behind, wasting away, wandering at the 
rear; others followed their corps, to whom they were but a 
useless embarrassment. 

The King of Naples was better able to appreciate these 
troubles than anyone, and he told the rest of us about them 
when he chatted with us. He even ventured to make some 
remarks to this effect to the Emperor, but His Majesty did not 
care for reflections that ran conmter to his projects, and lent 
a deaf ear. He changed the subject; and the King of Naples, 
who above all wished to please him — and who flattered his 
own vanity at the same time, by so doing — ^kept to himself the 
wise reflections which he had voiced to us alone. He soon 