

To ensure that no indiscreet word should be uttered, the 
Emperor had consulted no one. Consequently our waggons and 
all our transport, built for metalled roads and to accomplish 
ordinary distances, were in no way suitable for the roads of 
the country we had to traverse. The first sand we came across 
overwhelmed the horses; for the loads, instead of being cut down 
in proportion to the weight of the vehicle and the distance to 
be covered, had been increased in the notion that the daily 
consumption would sufficiently lessen them. But in working 
out this scheme of daily consumption the Emperor had not 
taken into account the distance that would have to be covered 
before the point was reached when this consumption would 
begin. 

The men, lacking everything to supply their own needs, were 
little inclined to pay any heed to their horses, and watched 
them perish without regrets, for their death meant the break- 
down of the service on which the men were employed, and 
thus the end to their personal privations. There you have the 
secret and cause of our earlier disasters and of our final re- 
verse. 

Disorder reigned everywhere; in the town, as in the country 
around, everyone was in want. The Guard was no better 
provisioned than the other corps, and thence arose indiscipline 
and all its attendant evils. The Emperor was angry, and took 
the corps commanders and administrators to task with some- 
thing more than severity; but this did no good in the face of the 
continued failure to bring up rations. 

From a spirit of inexplicable and unpardonable meanness 
the provisioning of the ambulances had been inadequate. Even 
the personnel was too scanty. Never had carelessness been 
carried to greater extremes by the underlings of the adminis- 
tration: never had the courage of unfortunate men been more 

68 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

abused. The army surgeons and the administrative chiefs, 
as praiseworthy for their zeal as for their talents, were in de- 
spair at the state in which they found the hospitals. In vain 
did they endeavour to make up, by their care and attention, 
for whatever was lacking. We had got only as far as Witepsk, 
we had not fought a battle, and there was not even any lint! 

The Emperor was extremely preoccupied and, though such 
behaviour was by no means usual with him, was often in 
such surly humour that he was careless in the expressions he 
used towards those who displeased him. He was greatly struck 
by the departure of the townsfolk and the flight of the country 
people. This method of retreat opened his eyes, maybe, to 
the possible consequences of this war, and to the distance it 
might take him from France; but the thousand-and-one things 
that ought to have opened his eyes to his position vanished 
before the slightest incident which might revive his hopes. A 
captured Russian ofiicer brought to headquarters raised his 
spirits. He assured the Emperor that battle was certain to be 
given before Witepsk, that it had only been put off because 
a letter had been received on the twenty-seventh from Prince 
Bagration, containing news that he would not be able to join 
the army until they reached Smolensk. The Emperor flattered 
himself that as soon as the Russian army had joined up with 
Bagration it would make an attack. Full of hope, he immedi- 
ately recovered his good temper. 