

2 Alexander I, who held no actual command himself, left for Moscow on 
July 14 at the instance of his generals, who were apprehensive of his in- 
capacity. — Cf. K. Waliszewski, Le Regne Alexandre I, II, 59. 

FIRST BLOOD 

59 

as to the means he would employ, for the French and Germans 
were asked to desert their standards and settle in Russia. 

The Emperor appeared amazed at this. 

“My brother Alexander stops at nothing,” he said. “If I 
liked, I could promise his peasants freedom. He has been 
deceived as to the strength of his army, he does not know how 
to employ it and he does not want to make peace; he is not 
consistent. A man who is not the strongest should be the most 
politic; and his policy should be to make an end.” 

The Emperor was overjoyed when he learned of the evacua- 
tion of the camp at Drissa which the Russians had taken two 
years to fortify. Alexander’s departure thence seemed to him 
a great achievement. He rightly attributed it to his own rapid 
movements, which had prevented the joining up of the various 
corps of the whole army, and had obliged it to evacuate the 
camp without a battle in order to seek a rallying-point further 
away. Now, he said, he could choose between Moscow and 
Petersburg, if Russia did not sue for peace. 

By rapid manoeuvres he hoped to force the Russian army 
to give battle as he desired, or else to demoralize and under- 
mine them by continual retreat without fighting. He added 
that Bagration’s corps would not join the main army, that it 
would be captured, or anyhow he partially destroyed, and 
that this would cause a great sensation in Russia, as that gen- 
eral was one of Suvarof’s old comrades in arms. The Em- 
peror had quickly decided to move against Witepsk, in the 
hope of forcing the Russian army to fight in defence of that 
town and await Bagration, whom the Prince of Eckmuhl con- 
tinued to press so closely. 

His Majesty left Gloubokoje on the twenty-first, and slept 
at Kamen on the twenty-third. 1110 hussars of the Russian 
Guard suffered severely in an affair with our advance-guard 
near Beschenkowitschi [July 25]. It was on reaching that 
small town that the Emperor noticed what we had already 

60 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

observed for days past — ^tbat all the inhabitants had fled, leav- 
ing their houses absolutely deserted, and that everything went 
to prove that this migration was in accordance with a definite 
plan carried out under orders recently issued by the govern- 
ment. 

From Beschenkowitschi to beyond Witepsk we were always 
in bivouac or under canvas. 

The Emperor was so anxious for a battle that he drove the 
army forward with all his energy and all the brilliance of his 
genius. The battle of Ostrowno [July 26], after Beschen- 
kowitschi, was quite costly but sufficiently advantageous. It 
was nevertheless only a rear-guard action in which the enemy 
really obtained the result he desired, for he hindered our 
movement, forced us to make fresh dispositions, and in con- 
sequence delayed us several hours. 