

forgot them entirely. Always at the forefront of the skir- 

63 

64 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

mishers, and eager to thrust his ostrich-plumes and fantastic 
uniform beneath the very noses of the Cossacks, he succeeded 
in ruining the cavalry, ended by causing the loss of the army, 
and brought France and the Emperor to the brink of an abyss. 

One day, however. General Belliard, chief-of-stafE to the 
King of Naples, observed in his presence to the Emperor, who 
was questioning him: 

“Your Majesty must be told the truth. The cavalry is rap- 
idly disappearing; the marches are too long and exhausting, 
and when a charge is ordered you can see willing fellows who 
are forced to stay behind because their horses can’t be put 
to the gallop.” 

The Emperor paid no attention to these prudent observa- 
tions. He wanted to reach his prey; and in his view it was 
evidently worth paying any price to attain that object, for he 
sacrificed everything to gain it. 

While these events befell with the Grand Anny, the King 
of Westphalia was detached for the support of the Prince of 
Eckmiihl’s corps. Jerome had let his troops pillage the Duchy 
of Warsaw — of which he flattered himself he was the ruler — 
and had driven that loyal country into discontent. Like a 
good many other people, he imagined that Poland had been 
awarded to him — ^this Poland which the Emperor wished to 
revive and make into a buffer state. Accordingly, the King 
of Westphalia thought it beneath his dignity to serve vmder 
the victor of Auerstadt and Eckmiihl; so he left the army [July 
16] and returned to Cassel with his Guard. 

Such was the support given to the Emperor in sore straits 
by the brothers whom he had made kings. According to the 
Emperor, the King was the cause of the Prince of Eckmuhl’s 
failure to carry out his operations successfully, for he enabled 
Bagration to escape, and thus brought about the initial failure 
of the campaign. 

SMOLENSK 

65 

The Emperor had left the Prince of Eckmiihl only a portion 
of his corps. As soon as the Emperor understood the Rus- 
sian movements, and saw that Bagration’s corps had been sep- 
arated from the main army, he threw the Prince against Ba- 
gration’s army corps with the few troops left to him (a di- 
vision and a half), but at the same time informed him that 
he was putting the King of Westphalia and his corps at his 
disposal. 

The Prince, realizing the importance of the operation the 
Emperor had entrusted to him, pressed forward, knowing that 
Bagration had long and difficult defiles to traverse between 
extensive marshes; and he resolved to forestall the Russian at 
the end of these defiles, even if only with the head of his col- 
umn. He accordingly informed the King of his intended move- 
ment. However, not only did the King give a cold reception 
to the officer who handed him the orders, but he even permitted 
himself to pass unsuitable comments about them, and, as I have 
said, took himself off with his Guard. 

