As he had planned, the Prince fell on the convoys and parks 
that preceded Bagration’s march, captured a considerable part 
of them, took some prisoners, and continued his movement 
without encumbering himself with his captures, so as to be in 
position before the Russians could debouch. 

Not being in sufficient force, after the King’s departure, to 
give battle in open coimtry, he took up his position before 
Mohilew [July 20], towards which town Bagration was head- 
ing; for the King of Westphalia’s disobedience had saved him 
by facilitating his change of route. 

Knowing that he had only to deal with the weak corps hur- 
riedly mustered by the Prince, and that no one was pressing 
him, Bagration had the insolence to send an aide-de-camp to 
the Prince of Eckmiihl to say that for some days he had been 
deceived by the Prince’s activity, but that now he knew there 
was only the head of a column to oppose him; and to avoid a 

66 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

useless engagement he informed him that he intended to sleep 
the following night in Mohilew. Instead of replying to this 
boastful impertinence, the Prince strengthened his position as 
best he could. At the outset of the engagement success was 
evenly divided; but, though attacked with vigour, the Prince 
defended himself bravely [Salta-Nowka, July 23], eventually 
put four or five thousand of Bagration’s men out of action, 
and forced him to retire and change his direction during the 
night. 

When it is considered what an effect on subsequent events 
the destruction of Bagration’s corps might have had, and the 
result that might have been obtained at the outset of the cam- 
paign by this first manoeuvre of the Emperor and the masterly 
strategy of the Prince, it is impossible not to feel pity at the 
sight of that great captain betrayed by his own relations, be- 
fore being betrayed in the end by Fortune. 

On his return to Witepsk [July 29], the Emperor’s first care 
was for provisions and hospitals. I was given the duty of 
visiting them, distributing money to the wounded, consoling 
and encouraging them. Never was there a situation more de- 
plorable, or a spectacle more heart-rending for those who could 
think, and who had not been dazzled by the false glamour of 
Glory and ambition. 

With the exception of the chiefs, the indifference of the ad- 
ministrative officers was complete. The innumerable waggons, 
the enormous quantity of supplies of all sorts that had been 
collected at such expense during the course of two years, had 
vanished through theft and loss, or through lack of means to 
bring them up. They were scattered along the roads. The 
rapidity of the forced marches, the shortage of harness and 
spare parts, the dearth of provisions, the want of care, all had 
helped to kill the horses. This campaign at express speed 
from the Niemen to Wihia, and from Wilna to Witepsk, had. 

SMOLENSK 

67 

without any real result, already cost the army two lost battles 
and deprived it of absolutely essential provisions and sup- 
plies. 