

The army again began to advance, and on the morrow we 
found ourselves in presence of the enemy, who was occupying 
the heights crowning a great plateau in front of Witepsk. The 
Emperor was on horseback before daybreak [July 27], and 
the reconnaissances pushed as far as the Lutchiesa River found a 
strong body of enemy cavalry in position. Our infantry ar- 
rived. Two regiments had already crossed the bridge but were 
waiting on a plateau, a little in advance and to the right, until 
the artillery and the remainder of the cavalry should join 
them. The enemy deployed considerable masses of cavalry, 
which bore down on the weak regiments of light troops that 
composed our advance-guard, who were formed in two lines, 
to the left of the road and in front of the gully. Our cavalry 
regiments reached them, but could not form up quickly enough 
to make headway against the masses of men already engaged 
with our advance-guard, over which the enemy gained at the 
outset an easy success. 

During this time a company of light infantry, detached from 

FIRST BLOOD 

61 

our left to support the small force of our cavalry, proved 
what the resolution of this admirable branch of infantry can 
do, even when it is cut off. Placed along the stream and in 
some hushes and houses in front of the gully, these brave 
fellows were surrounded by a cloud of cavalry against which 
they fired at will in support of our feeble squadrons. They 
kept up a continuous fire, and emptied many saddles among 
the enemy, doing such damage that by degrees they forced 
him off the flank of our squadrons, which would have been seri- 
ously t h reatened from the onset of the attack had it not been 
for this valuable help. 

Several times we saw five or six of these light infantrymen 
assemble some fifty paces from the enemy squadrons, when 
a knot of horsemen was bearing down on them, and stand back 
to back, holding their fire and waiting till they had them at 
point-blank range. They even took some prisoners. This 
company played a great part in the events of the day. The 
Emperor said to several of them, who brought him prisoners 
and asked for the cross: “You are all brave lads, and you all 
deserve it.” 

The day was spent in manoeuvring, bombarding, and minor 
attacks to test and adjust our respective positions in prepa- 
ration for the great battle for which the Emperor and the 
majority of the French were hoping on the morrow. The Em- 
peror was cheerful and already beaming with pride, so confident 
was he of measuring his strength with the enemy and obtaining 
a result that should give some colour to his expedition, already 
too far-flung. He spent the day in the saddle, reconnoitred the 
terrain in every direction, even at a considerable distance, and 
returned to his tent very late, having actually seen and checked^ 
everything for himself. 

It is impossible to give any idea of the general disappoint- 
ment — especially the Emperor’s disappointment — when at day- 

62 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 