

“It is doubtless because my freedom of speech has too suc- 
cessfully proved to Your Majesty that I am a very good French- 
man that you can pretend to doubt it. The marks of kindness 
with which the Tsar Alexander so often honoured me were in 
reality addressed to Your Majesty. As your faithful servant. 
Sire, I shall never forget them.” 

The Emperor, observing my irritation, changed the subject, 
and shortly afterwards dismissed M. Balachof. 

M. Balachof having left the Emperor’s presence, His Maj- 
esty said to me jokingly that I was wrong to be incensed at 
his remarks about my having turned Russian; it was only a 
trick on his part to prove to the Tsar that I had not forgotten 
his tokens of goodwill. 

“You torment yourself,” added the Emperor, “by consider- 
ing the harm I shall do your friend. His armies dare not await 
us; they will no more save the honour of his arms than they 
will that of his cabinet. Before two months are out the Rus- 
sian nobility will force Alexander to sue me for peace.” 

To his usual grievances he added many other matters to 
prove to the Prince of Neuchatel, the Duke of Istria, Duroc, 
and (I think) one or two of his aides-de-camp who were pres- 
ent, that I opposed this war and condemned his System. 

So outraged was I at the reproach, “You are a Russian,” 
that I could not contain myself. I answered the Emperor that 
I was a better Frenchman than those who extolled this war; 
that I had always told him the truth when others, in the hope 
of pleasing him, merely told him tales to excite his feelings. 
I added that, knowing the respect I owed to my sovereign, I 
took his pleasantries in good part when only my countrymen 
were present, for I already possessed their esteem; but that 
it was an outrage to doubt my fidelity and patriotism before 
a foreigner. Since the Emperor had published the fact, I said. 

FIRST BLOOD 

55 

I was proud to be against this war — ^to have done all I could 
to prevent it — and I even felt honoured at the discomfort and 
vexation which my attitude had brought me. I concluded by 
saying that, having for a long time seen that my services were 
no longer acceptable to him, I begged permission to retire; 
but as I could not honourably go into private life while the 
war lasted, I begged him to give me a command in Spain and 
permission to start on the morrow. 

The Emperor answered me very quietly: 

“Who is doubting your fidelity? I know well enough that 
you are an honest man. I was only joking. You are too 
touchy; you know perfectly well that I hold you in esteem. 
Just now you are talking at random. I shall not reply to 
what you are saying.” 

I was, I confess, so beside myself that, far from growing 
calmer, I was on the verge of saying the most unbecoming 
things to the Emperor. 

The Duke of Istria pulled one tail of my coat, the Prince 
of Neuchatel the other, and between them they drew me aside 
and begged me to retort no more. The Emperor — ^who kept 
his patience and spoke, I am bound to admit, with the same 
kindness — seeing that I was beyond listening to reason, re- 
tired to his study and left me to those gentlemen, who tried 
vainly to lead me away and calm me. I had lost my head 
completely. At last I reached my quarters, firmly resolved 
to go. I did not retire to bed xmtil I had put all my affairs 
in order and left everything arranged for my departure. 