

The King of Naples, who, like the Emperor, had constantly 
been nibbling at the Russians, while doing ten or twelve leagues 
a day, and whose hopes for a success on the morrow had hin- 
dered him from calculating his daily losses, realized his weak- 
ness as soon as he was in position. He saw with apprehension 
the decreasing strength of his regiments, most of which were 
reduced to less than half their numbers. Forage and stores of 
all sorts were lacking, for his forces were always in close 

SMOLENSK 

69 

order and on the alert. Arrangements had not been made for 
rationing the men during the first few days, and the Cossacks 
were already hindering them from bringing up stores. The 
horses were not shod, the harness was in a deplorable state. 
The forges, like all the rest of the material, had been left in 
the rear. The greater number of them, indeed, had been aban- 
doned and lost. There were no nails, no smiths — ^and no sup- 
plies of iron suitable for making nails. 

For some days the men were turned to grinding com, and 
the ovens built by the Emperor’s orders were put into service. 
He strove to infuse everyone with his own activity, but every- 
thing proceeded listlessly. No amount of reasoning, not even 
the experiences he had met with since the Niemen, nothing 
could enlighten him as to the fatality looming ahead. If the 
Emperor occasionally saw the situation and the consequences 
of this war in their true light, if for a moment he spoke of it 
dispassionately, the next instant his conversation took an en- 
tirely different turn. He was obsessed once more by his old 
illusions and returned to his gigantic projects. The most in- 
significant skirmish, the arrival of reinforcements, the appear- 
ance of some ammunition waggons, a report from the King of 
Naples, a few cries of “Vive VEmpereurV’ at a parade, and 
above all the letters from Wilna,’’ were enough to turn his head 
once more. 

The Prince of Neuchatel was snapped at all day long, and 
overwhelmed with distasteful business in return for his free- 
dom of speech, his inconceivable activity, his imflagging de- 
votion. As a matter of fact, a number of things went wrong: 
the staff foresaw nothing. But on the other hand, as the Em- 
peror wanted to do everything himself and give every order, 
no one, not even the chief-of-staff, dared to assume the most 
trifling responsibility. The administration, deprived, as we 
have seen, of the means of execution and transport, was quite 

1 The Duke of Bassano, Minister for Foreign Affairs, was at Wilna. 

70 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

unable to produce the results demanded by the Emperor, or 
to carry out orders which he gave without troubling himself 
as to how they should he executed. 

The Prince of Neuchatel was not any more discouraged 
than myself or the rest of us. We made it a point to seize 
every opportunity of enlightening His Majesty about the real 
state of affairs — ^to allay that spirit of excitement which tended 
to drive us forward, trusting in luck alone. Never was the 
truth so dinned into the ear of a sovereign — ^though, alas, to 
no effect. But it is only fair to say that, if the Emperor was 
far from welcoming the truth because it ran counter to his 
wishes, he did not reject it violently. At bottom he was not 
even unduly aggravated with those who had the courage to 
veil it, perhaps because he attached no value to it. 