

Very early the next morning I asked Duroc to take over 
my duties and receive the Emperor’s orders. In vain did he 
remonstrate with me. A little later the Prince of Neuchatel 
and Duroc came in succession from the Emperor, who, not 
seeing me in the bedchamber at his rising, charged them to 
tell me that he did not want to hear any more about my going. 
But I persisted in my desire to be gone. Not seeing me when 

56 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

he mounted his horse, the Emperor sent for me twice; but I 
was not to be found. I wished to avoid the embarrassment 
of answering people with whom it was unfitting that I should 
enter into explanations of my refusal to attend His Majesty. 

Seeing that I did not appear, the Emperor, having taken 
some turns about the town and stopped by the bridge, gave 
orders that I should be foimd and told that his orders were 
for me to come speak with him. I could not refuse obedience, 
and I joined him whilst he was inspecting the outworks in front 
of Wilna. 

As soon as I presented myself he pinched my ear. 

“Are you mad to want to leave me?” he said. “I esteem 
you, as you know, and have no desire to hurt your feelings.” 

Whereupon he galloped off, pulled up soon afterwards, and 
began to speak of many other matters. Neither Duroc nor 
I could come to any other decision or say anything else, ex- 
cept that it was impossible to leave him. 

The Diet of Warsaw, which met on June 24 as a general 
Confederation, had called the Poles to arms and summoned 
them to desert the standards of the oppressors whom they were 
serving. It sent a deputation to Wilna to lay its wishes and 
desires before the Emperor, and also to stir up the Lithuanians. 
The Emperor’s reply to their address [July 11, 1812] treated 
Galicia as no part of Poland, and was so evasive that it chilled 
and dissatisfied the most zealous. 

The Emperor showed incredible activity during his stay at 
Wilna. Twenty-four hours did not give him a long enough 
day. Aides-de-camp, orderly officers, staff officers, were con- 
stantly on the roads. He waited with growing impatience for 
reports from the corps on the march. His first words to all 
who arrived were invariably, “How many prisoners have been 
taken?” 

The Emperor’s plans were taking shape, and late at night 

FIRST BLOOD 

57 

on July 16 he left Wilna to join his Guard at Swenziany. 
There the Emperor received despatches from the King of 
Naples giving details of a check to his cavalry. At the same 
time the King announced the evacuation by the Russians of 
the entrenched camp at Drissa, and the general retreat of the 
Russian army, which had abandoned all its positions and the 
works upon which it had been labouring for two years. This 
was inevitable, for Bagration would have been cut off from 
Barclay and the Southern provinces if he had not hastened to 
take this step. The Emperor had long predicted it, and it 
augured well; the news went to his head, and at the same time 
kindled the enthusiasm of those who were coldest towards the 
Polish Cause, as it was called at headquarters. 