

His Majesty at once decided to go to Gloubokoje, and the 
Guard was immediately despatched towards that place. The 
Emperor spent twelve hours at Swenziany to dictate orders, 
and marched the whole of that night in the hope that, by the 
rapidity of this movement, he could make contact with the 
Russian army. In the morning he arrived at Gloubokoje, a 
fine monastery in a very fertile stretch of country. This as- 
tounding march from Wilna to Gloubokoje proved that horses 
well ridden can cover a surprising distance, for the mounted 
chargers and the animals laden with heavy packs left Wilna 
at six o’clock in the morning, reached Swenziany at eight 
o’clock in the evening, and by noon of the following day were 
at Gloubokoje, having thus covered forty-eight leagues. The 
saddle-horses made the journey of thirty-four leagues from 
Swenziany to Gloubokoje in eighteen hours without one fall- 
ing sick. 

The King of Naples, who commanded the advance-guard, 
was on the Dwina. Various cavalry skirmishes with mixed 
success had followed that ill-performed reconnaissance which 
had cost us General Saint-Genies and many officers. The 
Russian army, having concealed its line of retreat, was able 

58 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to effect it without being harassed; but the Marshal-Prince of 
Eckmuhl, by his rapid march on Mohilew, had cut off the re- 
treat of Prince Bagration, who engaged in a lively battle with 
the advance-guard at Salta-Nowka in a vain attempt to reopen 
his communications. 

Having failed to do this, after futile efforts in which he 
lost from four to five thousand men, he decided to attempt a 
new detour to get into touch with the main army, but was not 
able to rejoin it until they reached Smolensk. This affair was 
very costly in men, principally to the Russians — ^though very 
few prisoners were taken. 

It was ascertained at the same time that the Tsar Alexander 
had left Polotsk on July 18, and his army some days previ- 
ously; also that he had gone on to Moscow to call the nation 
to arms.^ It was thought that he had left the army in order 
to escape the responsibility of subsequent military reverses — 
since its earlier movements had been unfortunate, in that the 
forces had been separated and obliged to evacuate the great 
entrenched camp at Drissa, which was looked upon in Russia 
as an invincible barrier if held by sufiScient troops. Every- 
thing seemed to indicate that the corps were far from being 
up to strength, as was supposed, and as they might easily have 
been if, as the Emperor said, the Russian chiefs and commis- 
sariat had not put a quarter of the army into their own pockets. 

It was also learned that a ukase had been issued for call- 
ing to the colours one man in every hundred, as well as two 
proclamations by the Tsar Alexander, one to the Russian na- 
tion and the other to the people of the city of Moscow, which 
could leave no manner of doubt as to the desire to make the 
war a national one. Printed notices, signed by Barclay and 
tossed to our outposts, proved that he was not even scrupulous 