

Some believed that the burning of the cities and market- 
towns which we entered was due as much to the disorders of 
our vanguard as to the Cossack rear-guard, who cared little for 
Russia. I confess that at first I shared this opinion, not com- 
prehending what object the Russians could have in destroying 
all their public buildings of a non-military character, and even 
private houses, which could not, after all, be of great service to 
us. Several persons spoke to the Emperor about these fires. He 
ordered my brother ^ to take a strong detachment of the Guard 
[August 29] near Wiasma and press the enemy so closely as 
to enter the town on the heels of their rear-guard, thus finding 

^ Auguste- Jean-Gabriel de Caulaincourt, younger brother of the Duke 
of Vicenza. Bom September 15, 1777 — killed September 7, 1812, at 
Borodino. General-officer of the Imperial cavalry since 1808: now aide- 
de-camp to the Emperor. Auguste Caulaincourt was promoted general 
of division in 1809, after he had distinguished himself during the crossing 

BORODINO 

85 

out at first hand what really happened and whether the Russians 
actually started any fires. The Emperor instructed my brother 
to keep order in the town, and not let a single straggler remain 
there. 

These orders were obeyed to the letter. The enemy rear- 
guard was in position, but evacuated the town after a hot en- 
gagement. My brother entered Wiasma in hot haste with some 
sharpshooters. The town was already on fire in several places. 
He saw Cossacks set light to inflammable material, some of 
which he discovered in various quarters where fire broke out 
later, before the last Cossacks had to flee. He set our troops 
to subdue the fire; everyone worked his hardest and some 
houses were saved, together with supplies of grain, flour and 
brandy. At first everything was saved from pillage, but that 
did not last long. 

It was ascertained, from particulars supplied by some of the 
inhabitants who had stayed in their houses, that complete ar- 
rangements had been made by a detachment of Cossack rear- 
guard long before our arrival, and that the place had been set 
on fire as soon as we came in sight. Everyone was taken aback, 
the Emperor as well as his men — though he affected to turn 
this novel method of warfare into matter for ridicule. He 
often spoke to us jokingly about what he called “A people viho 
bum their houses to prevent our sleeping in them for a night.’* 

In spite of these fires, after leaving Dorogobouje those who 
were first on the spot found plenty of food, brandy, and even 
wine. The horrible spectacle of this dreadful destruction was 
therefore less staggering to men who found something to put 
into their stomachs — ^not to mention their knapsacks and can- 
teens. There had been such desperate want and privation, such 

of the Tagus at Arzobispo. He had been invalided early the next year, 
but was recalled to active service in the Russian campaign. Since July 7, 
1812, he had been commandant of the Imperial general headquarters; 
and it was said (cf. p. 140) that the Emperor was grooming him to re- 
lieve Murat in command of cavalry. 