

86 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

exhaustion, and Russia had appeared at first such a forbidding 
country, that for most men the belly had become the sole barom- 
eter of feeling, belief and judgment. 

In Poland everything had been lacking; at Witepsk, by dint 
of infinite pain and care, we had fared meagrely; at Smolensk, 
by searching the countryside, we had found standing crops, 
grain, flour, cattle, and even forage, but no brandy or wine. 
After Dorogobouje all was in flames, but the shops and cellars 
were well stocked, even to the point of luxury. The houses 
were soon found to contain hiding-places where abundance of 
everything was discovered. The soldiers pillaged; nor could 
this be stopped, since there was no issue of rations, nor, as we 
were marching without transports and living from hand to 
mouth, could there be any such distribution. 

Most of the men fared well, even very well. It was the 
officers alone who sometimes suffered privation, for they did 
not enter houses until after the ransacking, and so could not 
share in the plunder. Thus the general or senior officer would 
be eating a piece of black bread at some soldier’s camp-fire 
where fowls were roasting alongside sheep, where ham was 
among hundreds of eggs. The luxury, frequency and 
size of the houses — ^all signs showed that a great capital was 
near. Once again the soldiers became indefatigable. 

The King of Naples, who was in command of the advance- 
guard, often covered ten or a dozen leagues a day. The men 
were in the saddle from three o’clock in the morning until ten 
at night. As the sun never sank beneath the horizon, the 
Emperor forgot that the day contained no more than four-and- 
twenty hours. 

The roads were littered with dead horses, but every day and 
every moment the Emperor flattered himself that he was about 
to make contact with the enemy. He needed prisoners at any 
price; they were the only source of information about the 

BORODINO 

87 

Russian army, for spies had become useless from the moment 
we crossed on to Russian soil. The prospect of Siberia or the 
knout cooled the zeal of the cleverest and most intrepid spy; 
besides, it was extremely difficult to penetrate into the country 
and even more so into the army. The only information re- 
ceived was by way of Wilna; nothing came to us direct. 

By the end of the day our horses were so weary that a mere 
skirmish would cost us several brave fellows, their horses not 
being able to stand the pace. When our squadrons were re- 
called we saw troopers on foot, in the midst of the fray, drag- 
ging their horses by the bridle, and others obliged to abandon 
them altogether and escape on foot. 

The Prince of Neuchatel, Counts Durosnel and Lobau, and 
some other brave men in the Emperor’s entourage, were con- 
tinually presenting him with a picture of what was going on, 
and urging him to husband what resources he had left, if, as 
he said, he desired to meet the enemy in battle or to push for- 
ward to Moscow. The Emperor listened to us; but, since he 
always hoped to have on the morrow what escaped him that 
day, he was led on and on despite himself, and was forced to 
cover a dozen leagues when he had intended to make only five. 