

The Emperor planned to fight a big battle and drive back 
the enemy so that he should be able to rest his army and or- 
ganize the country for winter-quarters, while his corps on ihe 
Dwina should act with the same end in view. He was still fixed 
in his original purpose. He desired to reorganize everything 
so as to be in a position to march on the capitals when the 
spring campaign opened, if the measures he hoped to take — 
and the consequent embarrassment of the Russian government 
— did not induce the Petersburg cabinet to make peace during 

® The Russians had actually decided to take the offensive, in thiee col- 
umns, on August 7. They gave up this plan on the eighth. 

74 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

the ■winter, or even before. The Emperor counted on this out- 
come more eagerly than ever; for he was already tired of the 
war and, as he said, would not raise diflEculties in the matter 
of peace conditions. 

The next morning [August 14] he was in the saddle at day- 
break. When night fell the Emperor returned to the Guard’s 
bivouac near Liadou'i. The information obtained from some 
wounded prisoners put an end to all the Emperor’s uncertain- 
ties and confirmed his knowledge of a movement by Barclay 
de ToUy on the right bank, which he had been led to suspect 
since midday by the report of a reconnaissance. All corps were 
ordered to press their march on Smolensk. The Emperor set 
out with the Guard before daybreak, hoping to reach the place 
in advance of the Russian army, in front of which we had 
unknowingly defiled in going to Rossasna by way of Babino- 
witschi. 

Very early in the morning of the fifteenth he galloped off 
to the advance-guard, at the gates of Smolensk. Having in- 
vested the town closely, he quickly recoimoitred the environs. 
The enemy appeared in force, our troops came up, and die 
day was passed in bombardments and minor attacks to 
straighten his positions and get as near the town as possible. 

On the morrow the investment was made yet closer; a ceme- 
tery and several houses which commanded the plateau on which 
the town is built were destroyed. That evening the Emperor 
brought some guns into position to bombard the bridge, which 
could be seen plainly enough to observe troops defiling across 
it, some entering the town, others marching out. 

A litde later it was seen that these were Barclay’s last corps 
arriving, and that part of the garrison had been relieved by 
them. What was the reason for this change? Did it foreshadow 
yet another retreat? The Emperor was puzzled, and at once 
became annoyed at the idea of having to march on and move 
yet further from his base, so as to come up with this army 

SMOLENSK 75 

which he could have forced into giving battle had he attacked 
forty-eight hours earlier. 

He asked me what I thought of these movements of troops. 
He tried to make me say that the Russians would hold and 
fight a battle, which was what he wanted. He was like a man 
in need of consolation. I thought, on the contrary, that since 
the Russians no longer held the initiative and were therefore 
unable to choose their ground, they would prefer to retire; 
and I said so very plainly. 