

SMOLENSK 

77 

The night was cold. I drew near to a fire burning before the 
Emperor’s tent, on the side facing the town, and was growing 
drowsy as I sat before it, when His Majesty came up with the 
Prince of Neuchatel and the Duke of Istria. They gazed at the 
flaming town. It lit up the whole horizon, already studded 
with the sparkle of our own bivouac fires. 

“An eruption of Vesuvius!” shouted the Emperor, clapping 
me on the shoulder and waking me from my stupor. “Isn’t 
that a fine sight. Monsieur le Grand Ecuyer?” 

“Horrible, Sire!” 

“Bah!” he said. “Gentlemen, remember the words of a 
Roman Emperor: ‘A dead enemy always smells sweet!’ ” 

We were all taken aback. For my own part, I at once re- 
called what the Prince of Neuchatel had said; and this and the 
Emperor’s remark long haunted my inmost thou^ts. I looked 
at the Prince — and we exchanged glances, as men who under- 
stand each other without speaking. . . . 

At four o’clock in the morning [August 18] some mauraud- 
ers, who had been on the watch, made their way into the town 
through old gaps that the enemy had not so much as repaired; 
and at five o’clock the Emperor learned that the place was 
evacuated. He gave orders that the troops should not enter 
except in formation ; but the men had already got in by several 
loopholes which they had opened and scaled. The Emperor 
mounted his horse, reconnoitred the enceinte on the east, and 
entered the town by an old breach in the wall. He went all 
round the city at once, and eventually stationed himself at 
the bridge, where he spent ihe day hastening its repair. 

The buildings in the public square and the finest houses in 
the town had been but little damaged. The arsenal was intact, 
though not much of anything was left in it. Every quarter of 
the town had suffered; the inhabitants had fled with the army, 
the only people left being some old folk of the lowest classes, 
a priest and an artisan. They told us all they knew about what 

78 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

had happened in the town, but could give no information con- 
cerning the army, not even what its losses had been. The 
Emperor seemed well satisfied, even triumphant. 

“Before a month is out,” he said, “we shall be in Moscow; 
in six weeks we shall have peace.” 

Marshal Ney had made all preparations for crossing the 
Dnieper a league from the town, in order to follow up the 
Russians, whose rear-guard only was in sight; pursuing the 
enemy [August 19], he found them in position at Valutina. 
General Borrelli, who was attached to the staff of the King 
of Naples, came to inform the Emperor of this. 

He refused to believe that they would offer any resistance, 
or that anyhow there was more than a rear-guard in position; 
but successive reports convinced him that it was a more con- 
siderable corps. He proceeded thither himself and immediately 
sent several officers to the Duke of Abrantes and even the 
Prince of Neuchatel, with orders to advance and engage the 
Russians, without letting a single man escape. In the meantime 
Marshal Ney had attacked and overthrown the enemy with 
his usual boldness; but a grenadier division, sent to reinforce 
the rear-guard, held the position despite a fresh attack by 
Gudin’s division. This general, one of the most distinguished 
in the army, was mortally wounded at the start of the action, 
and lived but a short while. He died esteemed by the whole 
army and mourned by all who knew him. This occurrence 
did not hinder the troops from taking the first position. But 
the enemy were successively reinforced, and the Duke of 
Abrantes, who was to have outflanked him and turned his left, 
did not come up in time; ^ so the Russians held the crest of 