

But these hopes were too sanguine, and accorded too well 
with the Emperor’s own views, not to sweep him off his feet. 
He left Smolensk in all haste [one A.M., August 25]. The 
Guard moved ahead in echelon to support the King of Naples 
if necessary, and was ordered to press forward; and once again 
the Emperor was running a blind risk, to some degree against 
his will. Readiing Dorogobouje on the twenty-fifth, he stayed 
there through the twenty-sixth. 

Once more the gaimtlet was flung down, and the Emperor 

82 

BORODINO 

83 

was not the man to turn back. The sight of his troops and all 
the warlike bustle exalted him. As soon as he found himself 
amidst these elements, the wise thoughts he had entertained in 
Smolensk yielded to ihe enticements of Glory. It was said that 
we should overtake the enemy forces on the morrow; they were 
hard-pressed; they could not always escape, at the rate they 
were being driven. It was useless to expect real rest until a 
battle had been fought; otherwise we should be kept constantly 
anxious. In short, as many good reasons were found for push- 
ing forward as had been discovered, forty-eight hours earlier, 
for staying at Smolensk; and once again we set off in pursuit 
of the glory, or rather the fatality, which relentlessly prevented 
the Emperor from holding to his good intentions and wiser 
projects. 

The news of a success obtained by Prince Schwarzenberg 
[Austrian] over the Russians revived the Emperor’s hopes. 

“This gives colour to the alliance,” he said. “That gunshot 
will re-echo in Petersburg, in my brother Alexander’s throne- 
room. It is a good example for the Prussians. Maybe it will 
put them on their mettle.” 

He asked me if Prince Schwarzenberg was well-known at 
Petersburg, and whether his connections were with the most 
exalted personages of the Court. He granted him a second 
sum of five hundred thousand francs on account of secret ex- 
penses, and instructed the Prince of Neuchatel to send him the 
bond. 

Several corps received bread at Dorogobouje — ^an unusual 
occurrence. 

Confirmation was had there of details about the Tsar’s arrival 
at Moscow on July 24, of which we had known little and had 
not even heard until after our arrival in Smolensk. We learned 
that he had convoked the nobility and townsfolk; that he had 
not concealed the true condition of the State, and had asked 
the various governments for aid. Moscow had offered eighty 

84 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

thousand men, and the others in proportion. Little Russia had 
given him eighteen thousand Cossacks; and private individuals 
had supplied battalions, squadrons, and companies all fully 
equipped. To give this armament a national and religious 
character. Archbishop Platow had ofEered the Tsar the miracle- 
working ikon of St. Sergius, which His Majesty in turn had 
given to the Moscow Militia. In short, a crusade was being 
preached against the French. 

From Dorogobouje the army marched almost in line, the 
King’s cavalry, the Guard, the First Corps and Marshal Ney’s 
corps on the road, the Poles on the right, the Viceroy [Prince 
Eugene] on the left. We fotmd ourselves on the highest plateau 
in Russia, the watershed from which the Volga flows into the 
Caspian Sea, the Dnieper into the Black Sea, and the Dwina 
into the Baltic. Since crossing the Dnieper the troops and the 
artillery had become exhausted by the sand; but Barclay’s 
supposed readiness to give battle made us hold to what sem- 
blance we could of mass formation. 