

The Emperor had changed the national character. The 
French had become serious; their bearing was grave; the great 

72 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

questions of the day preoccupied all minds; petty interests 
were subordinated; the general sentiment was, one may say, 
patriotic; one would have blushed to show any other. The 
men who surrounded the Emperor prided themselves on not 
flattering him. Some even paraded the need of telling him 
the truth at the risk of displeasing him. It was the spirit of 
the time. 

This reflection cannot have escaped those who had eyes. 
Opposition, as the Emperor noticed, did not cause the zeal or 
devotion of anyone to relax. He paid little attention to it and 
attributed it in general to narrow views, and to the fact that 
few people were capable of grasping bis great projects in their 
entirety. It is certain that this opposition, if I may judge from 
my own case, arose solely from the wish to protect the interests 
of the Emperor’s peculiar Glory. What personal sentiment or 
interest could have held sway amid such a unanimous con- 
cert of devotion? Who could then foresee what has since hap- 
pened? 

I can assert that no one was moved except by the interests 
of France and the need of preserving the prodigies of the 
Emperor’s Glory. Only this twofold interest could be opposed 
to the inordinate ambitions of that Glory, all the dangers of 
which a secret instinct seemed now to be revealing. This en- 
thusiasm of the Emperor — ^this ambition that induced him to 
run such hazards so far from France — certainly grew more 
noticeable to everyone as soon as the trend of events began 
to breed doubt of its success. Moreover, everyone condemned 
it in him, privately. But Peace, always rejected by England 
and forever represented by the Emperor as the motive of all 
his enterprises, justified him in the eyes of a nation over which, 
for some time to come, power and imagination would still hold 
more influence, and even more dominion, than reason and ex- 

perience. 

SMOLENSK 

73 

Only ten days had elapsed after our arrival at Witepsk be- 
fore it became necessary to send ten or twelve leagues for fod- 
der. The inhabitants who had not fled were everywhere in 
arms; consequently it was impossible to find any means of 
transport. Horses already in need of rest were further en- 
feebled by having to go in search of food, and were exposed, 
together with the men, to the danger of being caught by the 
Cossacks or slaughtered by the peasants, as frequently hap- 
pened. 

Having no further hopes that the enemy might attack him, 
as he had made himself believe when he knew that Prince 
Bagration had joined up with the main army [August 4], and 
on the other hand being unable to give his own army the rest 
it needed so long as the enemy was in force so close at hand, 
the Emperor decided on the tenth to follow him; he announced 
his intention of moving his right across the Dnieper at Ros- 
sasna, while the Russians, with the same object in view, would 
be carrying out the same movement in order to attack us on 
the right bank of that river.® The Emperor left Witepsk on 
the twelfth at eleven o’clock in the evening. On the morning 
of the thirteenth he was at Rossasna on the left bank of the 
Dnieper; the Guard arrived during the day. A very weak 
garrison had been left at Witepsk with the sick and wounded. 