

“If that is so,” answered the Emperor, in the tones of a man 
who had suddenly reached a decision, “by abandoning Smo- 
lensk, which is one of their Holy Cities, the Russian generals 
are dishonouring their arms in the eyes of their own people. 
That will put me in a strong position. We will drive them a 
little farther back, for our own comfort. I will dig myself 
in. We will rest the troops; the coimtry wiU shape up around 
this pivot — and we’ll see how Alexander likes that. I shall 
turn my attention to the corps on the Dwina, which are doing 
nothing; my army will be more formidable and my position 
more menacing to the Russians than as if I had won two bat- 
tles. I will establish my headquarters at Witepsk. I will 
raise Poland in arms, and later on I will choose, if necessary, 
between Moscow and Petersburg.” 

Delighted to find the Emperor embued with such good and 
sound ideas, I applauded his resolution; he seemed to me sub- 
lime, great, far-seeing, as in the day of his most splendid vic- 
tory. I told him that this plan would really lead to peace, 
for it would strengthen him step by step as he advanced, and 
would deter him from running too great risks. The Russian 
plan of campaign proved that they wished to draw him into 
the interior of the country, lead him further from his base, and 
shut him up amid the ice. It was imperative not to play their 
game, I added. 

His Majesty seemed to approve my reflections highly, and 

76 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to have made up his mind at last. I hastened to report my con- 
versation to the Prince of Neuchatel, so that he should do his 
utmost to hold the Emperor to his wise resolutions; but the 
Prince seemed to be doubtful whether they would survive the 
taking of Smolensk. Alas, how right he was! In my joy at 
what I heard, I too had let illusions run away with me. 

On the seventeenth the Russians were compelled to evacuate 
all their positions outside the walls. The Emperor brought 
up the siege batteries and placed thirty pieces to break down 
the bridge, which was plainly visible now that we were close 
to the town. This battery so harassed the enemy that his col- 
umns defiled across it at the double. They were clearly in 
full retreat. Wishing to launch an assault, the Emperor, some 
engineer ofiBcers, and some of the staff decided to reconnoitre 
the enceinte, but they had no scaling ladder. Finally, the re- 
ports which he received made the Emperor decide to abandon 
that project. Towards evening the enemy’s retreating move- 
ments were unmistakable. The town had been on fire since 
morning, and the flames, fed by the enemy themselves, showed 
no sign of abating. 

During the night the conflagration grew worse. It was a fear- 
ful sight — ^the cruel prelude to what we were to behold at 
Moscow. Unable to sleep, I walked about (it was two o’clock 
in the morning), reflecting mournfully on the consequences 
that must ensue from this war if the Emperor did not hold to 
the good intentions he had shown on the previous day. These 
scenes of horror and devastation inspired in me, I believe, a 
presentiment of those of which I was later to be the unhappy 
witness. My conversation with the Emperor continually came 
to my mind, and consoled me a little; but the Prince of 
Neuchatel’s observations were no less insistent, and past expe- 
rience inclined me all too strongly to share his opinion and his 
apprehensions. 