

He had ordered several reconnaissances of the fortress and 
the environs. General Chasseloup [of the engineers] having 
come to him with an account of what had been done, the Em- 
peror remarked jokingly, “Wouldn’t you like to make another 
Alexandria of the place and eat up another fifty millions of 
money? Russia is not worth that.” 

General Chasseloup was proposing nothing of the sort; 
he only wanted to erect some outworks in order to form a point 
of defence on the Dnieper. The next day [August 20] the 
Emperor stopped all the work in hand, appearing to have no 
wish to go beyond Smolensk. 

This retreat of the Russians, without any possibility of say- 
ing where they would halt, the increasing certainty that they 
themselves had set fire to Smolensk, and this war of mutual 
destruction with no result beyond the gaining of ground, — all 
these circumstances gave food for serious thought to the Em- 
peror, and confirmed his desire to go no further smd to do his 
best to bring about negotiations. The following details can 

SMOLENSK 81 

leave no douBt of his intentions, which he openly explained to 
the Princes of Neuchatel and Eckmiihl. 

After his arrival at Smolensk the Emperor enquired whether 
there was any slightly wounded oflGicer or any man of some 
standing in the place. The only person they could find was a 
Russian officer, who had come, I believe, with a flag of truce, 
and for some reason or another had been detained. The Em- 
peror interviewed him and, after a few insignificant questions, 
asked him if there was going to be a battle. He added that 
honour required the Russians not to yield their country with- 
out giving battle — ^without even once measuring strength with 
us. Thereafter it would be easy to make peace, as between two 
champions reconciled after a duel. The war, he said, was only 
a matter of politics. He wished for nothing better than that 
the Tsar Alexander should feel as little resentment as he did. 

The Emperor added later that he was going to send this 
officer back to his own army, on condition that he would repeat 
to the Tsar what he was going to tell him: namely, that he, the 
Emperor Napoleon, wished for peace; that he had wanted 
nothing better than to reach an understanding before war had 
broken out. 

The officer promised to convey these messages, but at the 
same time observed that he did not think peace possible so long 
as the French were on Russian soil. 

CHAPTER V 

BORODINO 

T he Russian army marched in good order, without undue 
haste, like men intent on abandoning nothing and pre- 
pared in case of necessity to stand their ground. The 
King of Naples believed that their good marching order 
showed their intention of giving battle. He even had the idea — 
it is not known why — ^that Barclay de Tolly had taken up his 
position behind the Ouja, and that he was establishing entrench- 
ments in front of Dorogobouje in preparation for this battle. 

The King thought this might be the battle for which the 
Emperor had expressed so many hopes, and that if we gained 
it the army could be ensured of a long rest in billets without 
being forced to leave its base too far behind. Our numerical 
superiority and our habit of success justified us in believing 
that we should gain a victory. The King of Naples poured 
forth his dreams and hopes to the Emperor. I call them 
dreams, for Miloradovitch’s reinforcements had not come up, 
and the Russians were in no position to give battle. 