

Those who had access to the Emperor were worried as much 
over the state of irritation engendered in him by the annoyances 
of the campaign as they were by the intoxication arising from 
his illusions — ^which last were encouraged by the very small 
number of persons who still shared them. The detractors of 
this great epoch may say what they like; never was sovereign 
surrounded by more capable men, men who were honest before 
all else and not mere courtiers, however strong the admiration 
and attachment which they professed for the Great Man. In 
spite of the varying shades of character and habits of each of 
them, wherever the Emperor cared to probe he was sure to 
find, if he wanted it, a sterling and even disagreeable truth 
rather than mere flattery.^ Whether because there had been 

2 It is interesting to compare this passage with what Segnr says : “Each 
of these ministers and generals, in whatsoever concerned his own depart- 
ment, did not conceal the truth from the Emperor. If he then grew angry, 
Duroc, without yielding, wrapped himself up in a cloak of impassiveness; 
Lobau became rude; Berthier groaned and went away with tears in his 
eyes; as for Caulaincourt and Daru, one pale and the other flushed with 
anger, they vehemently repelled the Emperor’s denials, the first with im- 
petuous doggedness and the other with cold and dry firmness.” — Segur, 
Histoire et M4moires, IV, 93. 

SMOLENSK 

71 

a surfeit of Glory, or because common sense had taught us to 
distrust its glamour, the fact remains that no one was intoxi- 
cated with it. We remained moderate, and good Frenchmen 
above all. 

It must be credited to the honour of the Emperor that his 
principles, his impartiality, the staunchness of his confidence 
which kept the spirit of intrigue at arm’s length, had all con- 
tributed to the birth and growth of these noble sentiments. 
The master’s well-known dislike of any change [among his 
entourage] gave everyone a sense of security which proved 
greatly to the advantage of truth. His strength of will had 
united all opinions and checked all private ambitions. France 
and the Emperor were blended in a glory which had become 
common to both. He had subjugated all minds and, without 
their knowing it, had bent the wills of all men to co-operate 
in the accomplishment of his own. 

Who has not been carried away by the ascendancy of that 
superior genius, by the pre-eminently sovereign qualities, by 
his good-nature which was that of a private man in his own 
intimate circle? Who has not admired in him the great cap- 
tain, the legislator, the restorer of social order— the man, in 
short, to whom the country owed its internal prosperity and 
the end of civil war? The Revolution checked; religion re- 
established; our laws, our administration, our industry in- 
creased a hundredfold; the prosperous state of our finances — 
was not all this a constant proof to us of our debt to the Em- 
peror, and of what we could still hope for from him? If 
some persons, however, perceived the dangers of a collapse, 
when such continual success and glory were likely to delude 
the good sense of the majority, their foresight only applied 
to the particular situation in which they found themselves. 