

^ Junot, ill and discouraged after crossing the Dnieper at Prouditchevo, 
had been seized with a fit of indecision from which Gourgaud, sent to him 
by the Emperor, was unable to rouse him. — Cf. Gourgaud, Napoleon et la 
Grande Armee en Russie^ Paris, 1825, 172. 

SMOLENSK 

79 

their position until nightfall. When the Emperor reached a 
point which gave him a view over the whole countryside, he 
again sent orders to the Duke of Ahrantes to act with vigour. 

“Barclay is mad,” he said. “That rear-guard is ours, even 
if Junot only marches here at ease.” 

The Emperor learned of the end of the affair before he 
reached Valutina, and returned to Smolensk highly incensed 
with the Duke of Ahrantes, who had not acted with the vigour 
he had shown on previous occasions. The Prince of Neuchatel 
and the Dukes of Istria and Elchingen reproached him for not 
having marched up fast enough; for his part, the Duke of 
Ahrantes, whose corps was composed of foreign troops, con- 
tended that, since he was obliged to march in close order so 
as to run no risks, his movement had been delayed by obstacles 
which forced him to bear to the right. 

From what the Prince of Neuchatel and the King of Naples 
said, no such obstacles existed. I remember the different re- 
ports that were made to the Emperor. At the sound of gunfire 
the King of Naples went in person to the Duke of Ahrantes, 
whose corps was in front of his own. Seeing how useful, and 
indeed how glorious a diversion he coxild make, the King 
pressed him to hasten his movements. 

“You are annoyed at not being a marshal,” he said. “Here 
is a fine chance! Take it! You are sure of winning yoxu: 
baton.” 

While waiting for his cavalry to come up, the King placed 
himself at the head of the Wiiittemhergers who formed the 
Duke’s advance-guard, with the object of beginning and press- 
ing on the advance, at the same time making the Duke promise 
to support him. When the King put this cavalry to the charge, 
they would have distinguished themselves and driven back the 
Russians, but the Duke of Abrantes’s corps did not follow up, 
and the King was obliged to slacken his movement for fear of 
being cut off; he had to wait for his own troops, who, still at 

80 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

some distance, were moving up at the trot. The Emperor’s 
anger can readily be imagined, when he received several re- 
ports of what had taken place. 

“Junot has let the Russians escape,” he said bitterly. “He 
is losing the campaign for me.” 

At that instant he followed up this reproach with the severest 
strictures and threats; but as usual the memory of good ser- 
vices in the past outweighed the faults of the moment, and his 
discontent had no sequel. 

The Emperor busied himself with making Smolensk what 
he called his pivot — a safe stronghold for his communications, 
in the event of his being reluctantly forced to push on further. 
He worked night and day in attending to all the administrative 
details, notably for provisions and the requirements of the 
hospitals. 