

At daybreak [September 6] the Emperor went once more 
to the principal redoubt; and under cover of the wood, the 
whole of which had been occupied during the night, he and the 
Prince of Neuchatel and I approached very close to the enemy 
position. His Majesty then traversed the whole extent of the 
line, more particularly the centre and the left, which he recon- 
noitred as far as the outposts. He returned once again to the 
centre accompanied by the King of Naples, so that he could 
explain all his dispositions on the spot. 

He then visited the extreme right, which was under the com- 
mand of Prince Poniatowski, who had fought a brilliant en- 
gagement at the head of his Poles on the previous day and had 
gained much ground. The resistance of the Russians at this 
point was not what it ought to have been, nor what it had been 
elsewhere. The Emperor hesitated whether he should make a 
large movement on his right to turn the enemy position and 
partly avoid his redoubts, or whether he should simply take 
advantage of the two redoubts he had captured and engage 
their centre from the front and flank by launching an attack 
with our right. He was apprehensive lest the first of these 
plans, which would have threatened the enemy from the rear, 
would decide the Russians to make another retreat, especially 
as the loss of the redoubts which had been captured the pre- 
vious day had greatly weakened their position. These consid- 
erations determined him to adopt the latter plan. 

BORODINO 

95 

Seeing the enemy at ease in their positions, the Emperor 
decided to let the army rest during that day. This would also 
give him an opportunity of bringing into line the artillery re- 
serves, and whatever had got slightly to lie rear. He also 
thought — and this last consideration determined him — ^that the 
enemy, who had come at nightfall to retake the redoubts essen- 
tial to the support of their left, would make some efEorts during 
the day to recapture that position, or at least make some efEorts 
to recover the ground gained by the Poles. If they did this, 
the Emperor hoped for an engagement which would produce 
exceedingly advantageous results for himself; but the day was 
spent on both sides in observing one another, except on the part 
of the Poles, who gained a little more ground, thus allowing 
us a very advantageous deployment on the enemy’s flank for 
the morrow’s attack. 

Seeing that the Russians had not stirred, the Emperor came 
to the conclusion that they had constructed new fieldworks to 
replace those they had lost the previous day. About Aree 
o’clock it was even thought that they were retiring, and the 
Emperor, who was constantly watching them, was on the point 
of launching an attack; hut upon a closer inspection from places 
which permitted the movements of the Russians to be better 
understood, it was ascertained that they were in their same 
positions. That evening the Emperor returned to his tent. 

M. Bausset [Prefect of the Palace] had arrived during 
the afternoon. He brought letters from the Empress, whom he 
had accompanied as far as Prague on the way from Dresden, 
and he was also the bearer of a fine portrait of the King of 
Rome, by Gerard. The Emperor found this portrait hung in 
his tent when he returned from reconnoitring the enemy posts. 
The aide-de-camp of the Duke of Ragusa had arrived at the 
same time with reports of the bad state of afEairs in Spain. 
The courier from Paris had brought the Emperor advance news 
of this some days previously. But Russian matters were too 