

“It will lose me a lot more than that if I have no artillery 
tomorrow,” answered the Emperor. 

Straw and wood had to be fetched to start the fire. "While 
this was going on he had the caleche dismantled, and a light 
van following it was consigned to the same fate. As soon as 
the fire was lit the Emperor galloped off, and the drivers, I 
tbink, salvaged their somewhat singed vehicles. 

“I wish it had been your carriage,” said the Emperor to the 

BORODINO 

93 

Prince of Neuchatel. “That would create more effect; and 
you deserve to lose it — ^I’m always running into it.” 

“Behind Your Majesty’s carriage,” answered the Prince. 

“That is Caulaincourt’s fault,” rejoined the Emperor. “Any- 
how, I have promised him I’ll bum it if I come upon it. Do 
not be put out at my threat, for I will show no more mercy to 
my own carriage than to anyone else’s. I am commander-in- 
chief, and I must set an example.” ® 

On the fourth, headquarters were in bivouac near Prokofewo, 
and on the fifth near Borodino. The Emperor stayed only a 
moment in his tent, which was pitched, as usual, in the middle 
of the Guards’ square, but set off at once towards the attack 
which our right was making against two redoubts supporting 
the enemy’s left. 

This attack was carried out with such vigour that we were 
masters of the forts in less than an hour. The troops were or- 
dered to remain in position and the infantry in sqpiare. This 
was a wise act of foresight on the part of the Emperor, because 
half-an-hour after dusk, and long after the action had taken 
place, Russian cuirassiers supported by infantry charged on 
our squares with great vigour, making for the redoubts, which 
they hoped to force us to evacuate and allow them to occupy 
during the confusion of a night attack. 

The first square, taken unawares, lost its artillery and some 
men; the others, put on their guard by the firing, held firm, 
and the Russian cuirassiers, badly mauled by our guns and 
musket-fire and ill-supported in their attack, were obliged to 
retire and leave us these redoubts, which were the key of their 
position. Our troops even gained a little ground when they 

® It is to be observed that Caulaincourt makes no mention of Napoleon’s 
violent rating of Berthier, which took place at Ghjat, and as a result of 
which the chief-of-staff ceased to take his meals with the Emperor until 
they reached Mojaisk, This is related in several contemporary memoirs, 
notably by Denniee, Jtinercdre, 62 . 

94 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

pursued them in the dark, and we established ourselves at the 
edge of a wood which it was of the utmost importance for the 
enemy to retain, if only to delay our attack and afford a post 
from which to observe our movements. 

During the night the Emperor went through our encampment, 
inspected the captured redoubts, rode several times up and 
down the line to judge with his own eyes as to the enemy posi- 
tions and their strength at each point. At the same time he 
visited his troops, as was his custom on the eve of battle. 