

“We shall win the battle,” he said. “The Russians will be 
crushed, but it will not be conclusive if I do not take prisoners.” 

He showed signs of anxiety. Between noon and one o’clock 
the Emperor ordered the Viceroy to resume the offensive and 
support the left of Marshal Ney, who was already supporting 
General Junot. The right, reinforced by the Young Guard, 
likewise had orders to push forward. The enemy, smashed by 
the guns and pressed simultaneously on all points, massed 
their troops and held firm despite the ravages made in their 
ranks by the guns. The Emperor then climbed into the redoubt 
to follow with his own eyes and direct the general movement 
he had ordered all along the line. 

Our troops redoubled their efforts without gaining ground. 
The fire increased to greater intensity; we were at grips at all 
points. It was at this moment that my brother, having put in 
motion two of his divisions supported by two battalions of in- 
fantry, placed himself at the head of the Fifth Cuirassiers to 
lead the troops under his command on the Great Redoubt and 
thus ensure the success of this attack, already attempted in 
vain several times. He drove out the enemy, and from that 
moment the battle was won, as the Emperor himself said, for 
the Russians at once began a general retreat. 

I think it was about three o’clock when an aide-de-camp 
arrived in hot haste to tell the Emperor that the Great Redoubt 
had been taken by my brother and that the enemy was retiring 
at all points. An instant later M. Wolbert, my unfortunate 
brother’s aide-de-camp, who had not quitted his side, brought 
the Emperor the details of this affair, and told him that my 

100 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

brother had been killed by a bullet below the heart, just as 
he was coming out of the Redoubt to pursue the enemy who 
had rallied at some distance and were advancing to retake it. 
I was at the Emperor’s side when this report was brou^t.' 
I need not attempt to describe my feelings. 

“He has died as a brave man should,” said the Emperor, 
“and that is in deciding the battle. France loses one of her 
best officers.” 

His Majesty immediately set off at a gallop in front of the 
cavalry, to join the King of Naples and make such dispositions 
as he considered necessary to assure and follow up this suc- 
cess. Marshal Ney and the Viceroy had supported the decisive 
movement of General Caulaincourt. The enemy’s counter- 
attack on the Great Redoubt was in vain, and the Russians were 
forced to retreat along the whole of their front. 

One redoubt still remained to them, as well as a little field- 
work that commanded the Moscow road; and it seemed as 
though they wished to hold them. A thin wood covered their 
march and concealed their movements from us at this point. 
The Emperor flattered himself that the Russians were going to 
hasten their retreat, and he reckoned on hurling his cavalry 
on them in an attempt to break them. The Young Guard and 

® Writing of these events, S6gur says: “Messengers were hastened to in- 
form the Emperor of this victory and this loss. The Master of Horse, 
brother of the unfortunate general, heard the news. At first he was over- 
come, but he soon steeled himself in face of this misfortune and, save for 
the tears that rolled silently down his cheeks, he appeared impassive. The 
Emperor said, ‘You have heard the news; would you like to retire?’ He 
accompanied these words with an exclamation of sympathy. But at that 
moment we were advancing against the enemy. The Master of Horse 
made no reply; he did not retire, he merely lifted his hat slightly as a 
token of his gratitude and refusal.” — ^S6gur, Histoire de Napoleon et 
de la Grande Armee, Paris, 1925, I, 401. Castellane {Journal, I, ,150) 
confirms S6gur’s account: “His brother, the Duke of Vicenza, learned the 
news in a cruel manner. He was at the Emperor’s side; and an aide-de- 
camp came up sobbing, to announce the death of his general. The Em- 
peror turned round and said to the Duke of Vicenza, ‘You have heard the 
sad news; go to my tent.’ The Master of Horse remained in the saddle.” 