

BORODINO 

91 

ago. It is the Cossacks who do all the fighting; it is always 
their turn. While llie Russians sleep the Cossacks keep watch. 
The Cossacks will defend Moscow because of Alexander, who 
is a good prince, though his ministers and generals are de- 
ceiving him. His generals only fight when they have to; they 
have given up Smolensk the Holy and that is a had sign. If 
Moscow is taken and the French enter the Cossack country, 
Russia is lost. Cossacks are good soldiers; they will do their 
duty to the very last, and then they will side with Napoleon. 

“Napoleon is a great general; Alexander is a good Tsar. If 
he liked, Alexander would be the best general in Russia. Rus- 
sian generals are too fond of their ease; they sleep too much; 
they must have cushions and every comfort; they only think of 
themselves, not of their soldiers’ needs. The French fight well, 
but they do not keep a good look-out. They like to pillage; 
they slip away from their units to hunt through houses, and 
the Cossacks profit by this and capture large numbers every 
day, and recover their booty from them. Had it not been for 
the Cossacks the French would have been in Moscow, in Peters- 
burg, even in Kazan. It is the Cossacks who hold them up 
every day. 

“The Cossacks like the King of Naples, who makes a fine 
show, for he is a brave fellow and always the first to come 
under fire. Word has gone round that he is not to be killed, but 
they do want to take him prisoner.” 

We found Ghjat [September 1] partly burned and still 
smoking. They had been caught at work sooner than at 
Wiasma. Attempts were made to stop the fiure. The Emperor 
made an extended reconnaissance in front of the city and all 
round it; he visited the hospital, which lay at the town gate 
and had not been burned. He speeded up the rebuilding of 
the bridges and the crossing of the troops. He did not return 
until very late. The time had come at last for the battle he so 

92 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

ardently desired. He went over with relish all he had heard, 
adding the following reflections; “The new general cannot con- 
tinue this plan of retreat, which is condemned by national 
opinion. He has been summoned to command the army on 
condition that he fights; therefore, the system of warfare pur- 
sued hitherto must be changed.” 

These considerations decided the Emperor to prepare like- 
wise for action. He spent the second and third at Ghjat in 
order to collect his troops and give the cavalry and artillery 
a little rest. 

Feeling it needful to bring some order among the convoys 
that were blocking the roads, and thus give the artillery a 
chance of getting to the front in time for the battle which he 
deemed imminent, the Emperor ordered the burning of all 
vehicles that were jammed in front of the convoys. “I will 
even have my own carriage burned,” he said to me next day, 
“if it is out of its proper place.” 

"While proceeding on horseback, the Emperor came across a 
number of carriages that were being driven out of column, 
alongside an artillery train. He made the chasseurs of his 
bodyguard stop them, leaped from his horse, and ordered the 
leading one to be burned. There were objections; and M. 
Narbonne [whose carriage it was] pointed out that this might 
leave some officer stranded, should he lose his leg on the 
morrow. 