

His chronic sufferings often made him desire death; did 
they now conjure up in him this mournful presentiment? Or 
was it possibly the heat of the action? I do not know, but I 
could not rid my mind of this ominous farewell until an even 
more fatal event occurred to confirm the foreboding which 
had overtaken me. 

Supported by part of the Viceroy’s corps, Marshal Ney was 
backing up the right, and by ten o’clock the enemy had lost all 
the ground in front of the Great Redoubt at their centre. They 
had consequently lost the position on the left and the village 
that supported their centre [Borodino] ; but their reserves were 
coming up. For a moment success hovered between the two 
sides towards our right, and we even had to draw in our ad- 
vance-troops to the main body while falling back on the cap- 
tured redoubts. 

A formidable array of guns spat forth death in every direc- 

98 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

tion; the Russian infantry made fresh efforts to regain their 
lost ground. The Great Redoubt belched out a veritable hell on 
our centre. In vain did Marshal Ney and the Viceroy combine 
lieir forces to attack it; they were repulsed. Returning to the 
attack a second time, they were no more fortunate, and Ney 
even lost a little ground. A section of the Guard, who had 
followed by echelons the movement of the corps which united 
the centre to the right, took up a position from which, if neces- 
sary, they could support this corps if the momentary forced 
retirement should become more serious. But our artillery 
checked the dash of the enemy, who for a long time stood firm 
under the fire of a devastating bombardment. Finally they were 
forced to yield the groimd which we had previously taken from 
them. 

All this time the Emperor was watching the movements at 
the centre; he had stationed himself opposite the last redoubt 
we had taken, and he gave a general order to halt for the 
moment and hold ihe positions we occupied, so as to give the 
artillery time, he said, to demolish those masses of infantry 
which stood motionless. It was then nearly eleven o’clock. 
Shortly before this, Lieutenant-General Likatcheff and some 
fifteen prisoners taken in the redoubt were brought to him. 
The officer in charge of them told the Emperor that they had 
put up a gallant defence. The Emperor received the general 
well. Seeing that his prisoner was without a sword, he ex- 
pressed regret that he had been disarmed. 

“I respect the courage of the unfortunate too much, sir,” he 
said, “not to give myself the pleasure of returning his arms to 
a brave man.” 

With that he handed the general his sword, and asked him 
some questions. He then gave orders that the other prisoners 
should be questioned, taken care of, and treated, as the general 
had been, with the utmost respect. 

This capture gave the Emperor great pleasure; but it seemed 

BORODINO 

99 

inconceivable to him that so few prisoners had been taken, 
when these redoubts had been captured in such a rush and en- 
tirely surrounded by the King of Naples’s cavalry. He com- 
plained bitterly and asked a great number of questions about 
it, not concealing the fact that he had desired and hoped for 
other results. 