

While we were following the Russian army, powerless to 
obtain the least information about it, great changes were taking 
place in its formation. General Kutusof, who had been sum- 
moned to the command in deference to the opinion of the nobles, 
joined it at Tsarewo, between Ghjat and Wiasma, on the twenty- 
ninth, without the Emperor Napoleon being aware of the fact. 
We were threatening the capital city; the Holy City was burnt 
down and occupied by the French; we were at the gates of 
Ghjat; and the Tsar, who had sent M. Balachof to Wilna, now 
vouchsafed no answer to overtures. 

At last, about two leagues in front of Ghjat, the advance- 
guard captured a Cossack whose horse had been killed, and 
shortly afterwards a negro who called himself the Hetman 

88 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Platow’s cook.® This latter fellow was taken as he was leaving 
a village where he had been pillaging. The King of Naples 
sent them both to the Emperor, who plied them with questions. 
Their replies struck me as so pointed that I made rather full 
notes. 

The negro gave us particulars of the mode of life of his gen- 
eral, upon whom he always waited at table. He thus heard 
the conversation that went on, and was able to recount the rival- 
ries of some of the generals, who were jealous of one another; 
but he knew nothing of the army’s marching movements. He 
kept on asking to whom he was talking — ^before whom he had 
been brought — and at the same time making the most comical 
grimaces and contortions. He and the Cossack had to be told 
again and again that it was the Emperor himself who was inter- 
rogating them. Neither would believe that it could be the 
Emperor Napoleon marching with the vanguard and so near 
their Cossack friends; for they could not believe that the Tsar 
would he so near the enemy. 

“Platow sometimes comes to the vanguard,” said the negro, 
“but he does not march with them like this; nor does he stay 
with them. As for the Russian generals, they never go with 
the Cossacks, nor even with the Russian troops. If the Rus- 
sians were to be in the van with the Cossacks, the French would 
not he at the gates of Ghjat, for there are many more Russians 
and Cossacks than there are French, and the Cossacks are not 
afraid of the French.” 

When told once again that it was the Emperor he was 
speaking to, he bowed, prostrated himself several times, eind 
then began to dance, sing, and make every imaginable contor- 
tion. This negro had assured the King of Naples, who had no 

2 Count Matthew Ivanovitch Platow, general of cavalry and ataman of 
the Don Cossacks. Thiers, who was acquainted with this incident, con- 
fused the Cossack and the negro and combined them into a single per- 
son, whom he made “a Cossack, gunner in Platow’s corps.” — ^Thiers, XIV, 
288 . 

BORODINO 

89 

guide, that he knew the entire countryside, so His Majesty 
ordered the man to he sent back to him; and this was done. 

The Emperor then had the Cossack brought before him. He 
had been kept to one side while the negro was being questioned; 
he was a man between thirty and thirty-six years of age, dark, 
five feet tall, with quick eyes, an open and mtelligent face and 
a serious air; and he was apparently much distressed at find- 
ing himself a prisoner. He was especially troubled at having 
lost his horse, his money, and what he called his little pack- 
age — ^that is to say the effects he had taken or stolen, which 
he carried on his saddle and used for padding out his seat. 
The Emperor told me to give him some gold pieces and lend 
him a horse from the stables; this consoled him, and his con- 
fidence was soon restored; he then talked as much as was 
wanted. 