

Never had a battle cost so many generals and officers.*^ Suc- 
cess was hardly won, and the fire was so murderous that gen- 
erals, like their subordinate officers, had to pay in person for 
victory. We did all we could for the wounded whilst the bat- 
tle was raging and during the night that followed, but most of 
the houses in the vicinity of the battlefield had been burned 
during the day, and in consequence many casualty stations 
passed the night without shelter. 

There were very few prisoners. The Russians showed the 

but historians have attributed it either to the state of Napoleon’s health, 
or to the impression created in his mind by the hecatomb of the battle- 
field. It is clear that Berthier and Murat themselves judged it useless and 
dangerous to order the intervention of the Guards which was the only 
corps left intact to enable the Emperor to consolidate his victory. 

“The returns I compiled from reports sent to the major-general by the 
chiefs-of-staff of the different army corps . . . showed forty-nine general 
officers killed and wounded,” — ^Denniee, Itineraire^ 80 . 

BORODINO 

103 

utmost tenacity; their fieldworks, and the ground they were 
forced to yield, were given up without disorder. Their ranks 
did not break; pounded by the artillery, sabred by the cavalry, 
forced back at the bayonet-point by our infantry, their some- 
what immobile masses met death bravely, and only gave way 
slowly before the fury of our attacks. Several times the Em- 
peror repeated that it was quite inexplicable to him that re- 
doubts and positions so audaciously captured and so doggedly 
defended should yield us so few prisoners. Several times he 
asked, of the oflScers who came with reports of our successes, 
where the prisoners were who ought to have been captured. 
He even sent orderlies to the various positions to make sure 
that more had not been taken. These successes, yielding neither 
prisoners nor trophies, made him discontented. Several times 
he said to the Prince of Neuchatel and me: 

“These Russians let themselves be killed like automatons; 
they are not taken alive. This does not help us at all. These 
citadels should be demolished with cannon.” 

That night the enemy began their retreat in plain view. 
Orders were given for the army to follow their movements. 
At dawn on the following day [September 8] there were only 
Cossacks in sight, and they were five miles away from the 
battlefield. The enemy had taken with them the great part of 
their wounded; and we had only the few prisoners I have men- 
tioned, twelve guns from the Redoubt captured by my unfortu- 
nate brother, and three or four other pieces taken in the line 
by our troops during their first attack. 

From early morning the Emperor was out in all parts of the 
battlefield, supervising with the utmost care the collection and 
removal of the wounded, Russian as well as French. Never 
was a battlefield so thickly strewn with dead. In the village 
round which the attack had centred, the Russian dead lay in 
heaps. On the plateau behind it the groimd was covered with 
the corpses of Litowski’s and Ismaelowski’s Guards, slaughtered 