

Attached to the rear-guard, he had seen nothing of the main 
army since Smolensk; it had suffered greatly in what he called 
the battle, that is to say at Smolensk. It would fight another 
battle in front of Moscow. The Russians complained bitterly 
of Barclay, who, they said, had prevented them from fighting 
at Wilna or Smolensk by shutting them up in the town. Kutusof 
had reached the army to replace Barclay two days previously. 
The Cossack had not seen him, but a young staff-ofi&cer had come 
on the previous day to speak to the Cossack officer and had 
disclosed this news, adding that the nobles had forced the Tsar 
to make this change, and that it was warmly welcomed by the 
army. 

This news, which seemed highly probable to the Emperor, 
afforded him the greatest pleasure, and he repeated it to every- 
one. Barclay’s temporizing nature was wearing him out. This 
retreat, in which nothing was abandoned despite the inconceiv- 
able activity of the pursuers, gave no hopes of obtaining from 
such an adversary the result he so much desired. 

(“This plan of theirs,” the Emperor would sometimes re- 

90 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

mark, “will give me Moscow. But a good battle would finish 
the war sooner and lead us to peace — and that is how we are 
bound to finish it, anyway.”) 

On learning of Kutusof s arrival, he immediately observed 
with an air of satisfaction that the Russian general could not 
have come for the purpose of continuing the retreat. He would 
certainly give battle; he would as certainly lose it, and deliver 
Moscow to us, for he was too near the capital to save it. Thanks 
were due to the Tsar for having made this change at such a 
moment, which could not have been more propitious. The 
Emperor commended Marshal Kutusof on the score of his in- 
telligence, but spoke of his ineptitude at Austerlitz and of his 
manoeuvres there and in Turkey, adding that, with the fimest 
army the Russians had ever had on the Danube, be had not 
been able to make peace at the gates of Constantinople, or to 
seize Wallachia. With an enfeebled and demoralized army he 
would certainly not prevent the French from reaching Moscow. 

Kutusof would have to give battle in order to please the 
nobles, and in a fortnight the Tsar would have neither a capital 
nor an army. True, this army would have had the honour of 
not yielding the ancient capital without a struggle, and this was 
probably the Tsar’s intention in making this change in the 
command, as he could then make peace without incurring the 
reproaches and censure of the high nobles who had chosen 
Kutusof, and upon whom, in consequence, could be imputed 
the effects of any reverses they might encounter. Undoubtedly, 
this had been his motive in yielding to his nobles. 

The Emperor continued to question the Cossack, whose an- 
swers were all given with spirit, and showed a degree of in- 
telligence remarkable in a common soldier. 

“If Alexander’s Russian soldiers, especially his generals, 
were like the Cossacks, you and your Frenchmen would not be 
in Russia,” he told the Emperor. “If Napoleon had had Cos- 
sacks in his army he would have been Emperor of China long 