

96 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

serious at the moment for him to pay much attention to the 
Duke of Ragusa’s reverses in the Peninsula. 

“The English have their hands full there. They cannot 
leave Spain and go to make trouble for me in France and Ger- 
many. That is all that matters,” he said to me next day. 

On the seventh, before daybreak, the Emperor was at the 
redoubt by our right, and, together with the Prince of Eckmuhl, 
Berthier, and myself, went to the edge of the wood in front. 
As soon as daylight came, the Emperor’s order of the day was 
read to the troops. It was brief but forcible, like all those 
written by himself on great occasions,^ 

The Poles, the King of Naples with his cavalry, who were on 
the left, and the Prince of Eckmuhl’s troops, were in motion 
before daybreak. Their attack was impetuous, and the defence 
stubborn. Prince Bagration, facing them, resisted vigorously 
and tenaciously, but our troops were so full of enthusiasm that 
nothing could stop them. General Compans, who was wounded 
in these first attacks, was replaced by General Rapp, who 
shared a like fate at the head of the same brave fellows. Gen- 
erals who were killed or wounded were replaced without the 
least sensation being caused, without the action being in the 
least delayed, even when the Prince of Eckmuhl himself was 
hit. 

Marshal Ney overwhelmed and broke up the advance corps 
of the centre with his usual boldness. At seven o’clock there 

^ Correspondance^ 19182. 

At the Imperial camp on the heights of Borodino. 

September 7, 1812, two o’clock in the morning. 

Soldiers! — ^this is the battle that you have longed for. Victory now de- 
pends on you: it must be ours. It will bring us abundance, good winter- 
quarters and a quick return home. 

Do as you did at Austerlitz, at Friedland, at Witepsk, at Smolensk; and 
may your conduct to-day be spoken of with pride by all generations to come. 
May it be said of you: He was at that great battle beneath the walls of 
Moscow! 

BORODINO 

97 

was at this point a cannonade and a roar of musket-fire such 
as has not often been heard. In the meanwhile, the King of 
Naples backed up with his cavalry the impetuous attack of 
the infantry on the right, and of the Prince of Eckmiihl’s 
corps; and the two remaining fieldworks on the Russian left 
were taken. 

At eight o’clock the Emperor was informed that Montbrun, 
general of division and commanding the First Cavalry Corps, 
composed of three divisions, had been killed. He recalled my 
brother, whom he had sent to the attadc on the right, and who 
came up a moment later to aimormce the taking of the two 
redoubts and the subsequent successes. 

“Go and take command of the First Cavalry Corps,” the 
Emperor said to him. “Do as you did at Arzohispo.” 

The Prince of Neuchatel drew him up a written order to 
show to the generals of division. My brother seized my hand, 
saying, “With things this hot, I don’t suppose I shall see you 
again. We shall win, or I shall get myself killed.” 