

BORODINO 

101 

the Poles were already on the march towards these outworks 
which the Russians held. In order to make out their move- 
ments the Emperor went with the sharpshooters. Bullets 
whistled around him; hut he had made his escort stay behind. 
Seeing me at his side, the Emperor told me to go back. 

“It is over,” he said. “Go and wait for me at headquarters.” 

I thanked him but remained with him. The Emperor was 
certainly running a great risk, as the fusillade became so 
lively that the King of Naples and several generals hurried up 
to urge him to retire. 

The Emperor tken went in front of the columns that were 
coming up. The Old Guard followed them; the carabineers 
and the cavalry marched in echelon. The Emperor seemed de- 
termined to carry these last Russian fieldworks, but the Prince 
of Neuchatel and the King of Naples pointed out to him that 
the troops were marching thither without any commander; that 
nearly all the divisions in the army had likewise been deprived 
of their commanding officers through death or wounds; that the 
regiments of cavalry and infantry were, as he could see, greatly 
reduced in strength. They added that it was growing late; and 
that though the enemy were certainly retreating, they were 
doing so in good order and showing an inclination to dispute 
every inch of the ground tenaciously, whatever the havoc 
wrought in their ranks by our guns. 

They also urged that the only chance of success was to use 
the Old Guard for the attack, and that in the existing circum- 
stances success at such a price would really he a check — ^while 
failure would be a reverse that would coimterbalance the entire 
success of the battle. Finally they urged him not to engage 
the only corps in the whole army which remained intact and 
ought to be kept so for future occasions.® The Emperor hesi- 

® It would be superfluous to emphasize the importance of Caulaincourt’s 
testimony on the subject of the intervention and opinion of Berthier and 
Murat. The Emperor’s hesitation at this juncture surprised all observers, 

102 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

tated; lie went forward once more to observe for himself the 
enemy’s movements. 

Meanwhile the King of Naples and the Prince of Neuchatel 
had, in difEerent directions, reached the walls of these redoubts. 
They rejoined the Emperor, whom they assured that the Rus- 
sians were in position and far from retreating — ^that several 
corps were massing, with the look of men determined to retreat 
no longer. All the successive reports represented our losses 
as very considerable. The Emperor came to a decision. He 
suspended the order for an attack and contented himself with 
sending up supports for the corps still engaged, m case the 
enemy should be planning a counter-attack. This was unlikely, 
for their own losses were also immense. 

Nightfall put an end to the fighting. Both sides were so 
weary that in several places firing ceased without orders having 
been given. At night the Emperor established his headquar- 
ters at the spot where he had taken up his stand at the beginning 
of the battle, on this side of the redoubts. 