

The troops were imder arms; the few remaining inhabitants 
were fleeing their houses and gathering in the churches; there 
was nothing to be heard but lamentation. Search had been 
made for the fire-engines since the previous day, but some of 
them had been taken away and the rest put out of action. From 
different houses officers and soldiers brought houtecfmicks 

118 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

(policemen on point duty) and moujiks, who had been taken 
in the act of setting fire to inflammable material which had 
been laid in houses for the purpose of burning them down. 
The Poles reported that they had already caught some incendi- 
aries and shot them; and they added, moreover, that from these 
men and from other inhabitants they had extracted the in- 
formation that orders had been given by the Governor of die 
city and the police that the whole city should be burned dur- 
ing the night. These reports seemed incredible. The arrested 
men were put under guard, and fresh search and increased 
watchfulness were enforced. Pickets had already been sent 
to those quarters of the town which were not already in flames; 
and the further particulars which continued to arrive con- 
firmed our gravest suspicions. 

The Emperor was deeply concerned. Towards half-past 
nine he left the courtyard of the Kremlin on foot, just when 
two more incendiaries, caught in the act, were being brought 
in. They were in police uniform. When interrogated in the 
presence of the Emperor they repeated their declarations: 
their commanding officer had ordered them to bum every- 
thing. Houses had been designated to this end. In the dif- 
ferent quarters everything had been prepared for starting the 
fire — in accordance with orders from Governor Rostopchin, so 
they had been told. The police officers had spread their men 
in small detachments in various quarters, and the order to 
carry out their instructions had been given in the evening of 
the previous day and confirmed by one of their officers on the 
following morning. They were relucant to tell the name of 
this official, but one of them did so at last: he was a mere 
underling. They could not or would not indicate where he 
was at the moment, nor how he might be found. Their replies 
were translated to the Emperor in the presence of his suite. 
Many other depositions confirmed immistakably what they 

THE FIRE 

119 

said. All the incendiaries were kept under observation; some 
were brought to judgment and eight or ten executed. 

The conflagration continued to spread from the borders of 
the boroughs where it had started. It had already reached 
the houses around the Kremlin. The wind, which had veered 
slightly to the west, fanned the flames to a terrifying extent 
and carried enormous sparks to a distance, where they fell 
like a fiery deluge hundreds of yards away, setting fire to 
more houses and preventing the most intrepid from remaining 
in the neighbourhood with safety. The air was so hot, and 
the pine-wood sparks were so numerous, that the beams sup- 
porting the iron plates which formed the roof of the arsenal 
all caught fire. The roof of the Kremlin kitchen was only 
saved by men being placed there with hrooms and buckets to 
gather up the glowing fragments and moisten the beams. Only 
by superhuman efforts was the fire in the arsenal extinguished. 
The Emperor was there himself; his presence inspired the 
Guard to every exertion.* 