

As I have already remarked, the well-to-do inhabitants had 
fled; aU the authorities had left the place, which was entirely 
deserted. There was no possibility, even, of getting together 
any kind of administrative service. No one remained but a 
few outchitets (French tutors), a few foreign shopkeepers, the 
servants in some of the hotels, and for the rest, people of the 
lowest classes of society. 

THE FIRE 

113 

It would be difficult to describe the impression made on the 
Emperor by this news. Never have I seen him so deeply im- 
pressed. He was already greatly disturbed and impatient at 
having had to wait for two hours at the city gate; and this 
report undoubtedly plimged him into the gravest reflections. 
His face, normally so impassive, showed instantly and unmis- 
takably the mark of his bitter disappointment. 

Count Durosnel had kept sending information to the Emperor 
as fast as he gathered it, and this completely confirmed what 
had already come through. M. Rostopchin, the Governor of 
Moscow, had not left the city until eleven o’clock that same 
morning, after having sent off the officials, the whole adminis- 
trative staff and the population. A very small number of 
householders and some thousand or so of people of the lowest 
classes had stayed behind, simply because they did not belong 
to overlords, and because their ignorance prevented them from 
knowing where to go. Most of the houses were as deserted as 
the streets. The Governor had kept from the inhabitants any 
news of the loss of the battle, and bad not even said anything 
about the projected evacuation of the town imtil the last mo- 
ment. Only a small portion of the archives and valuables could 
be taken away. Some arms remained in the arsenal and a few 
soldiers and militia were hidden in the houses; these men were 
armed and the militia were little better than savages. Durosnel 
accordingly urged the Emperor once again not to enter the 
city yet, especially as the difficulty of making oneself imder- 
stood and even of finding guides or obtaining intelligent in- 
formation involved the waste of considerable time. He stayed 
near the bridge all night, his headquarters being established in 
a mean tavern built of wood at the entrance to the suburb. 

The King of Naples, who was in pursuit of the enemy, sent 
word to the Emperor that numerous stragglers were being 
caught, that they all said the army was being disbanded, that 
the Cossacks openly declared they would fight no more, and 

114 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

tibat the army was heading for Kazan. He confirmed what had 
been learned in the city; that Kutusof had kept silence as to the 
loss of the battle and the retreat on Moscow until the previous 
day, and that the authorities and inhabitants of the city had 
taken to flight that same evening, and even on the day of our 
arrival. He told us that the Governor, Rostopchin, had not 
heard of the loss of the battle until forty-eight hours before 
our entry into Moscow; that up to that moment Marshal Kutusof 
had talked of nothing but success, of his skilful manoeuvring 
and the damage he had done to the French. The King of 
Naples confidently expected to seize part of the enemy convoys, 
and felt certain of being able to break up their rear-guard, so 
completely disheartened did he believe the Russians to be. He 
repeated these particulars in all his despatches, and likewise 
insisted that the Cossacks were demoralized and were on the 
point of quitting the Russian army. 