

To what he had already told us he now added, in confirma- 
tion of what several other incendiaries had informed us, that 
on the day before Governor Rostopchin’s departure several 
police officers were summoned to a particular locality which 
he designated (other depositions confirmed this), where they 
received orders to prepare for burning the city; that they had 
been instructed to be ready to carry out this order as soon 
as the signal was given; and that subsequently, after every 
meeting, the chiefs of police named a new rendezvous where 
their subordinates were to make their reports. On the ap- 
pointed day each senior officer had received the order at a 
time decided on by the Governor and had transmitted it to 
the subordinates in his district, for them to carry out. The 
fire-engines had been taken away by the firemen, and those 

THE FIRE 

123 

that they had not been able to harness up had been deliber- 
ately made unfit for action and hidden away. 

Before entering Moscow, the Emperor had intended not to 
take up his residence in the city. The fire, and the consequent 
destruction of part of the supplies, seemed likely to make him 
follow this first impulse. In fact everything was ready for 
a withdrawal, and for a time the Prince of Neuchatel imagined 
that this would be carried out. But the successive reports 
from the King of Naples as to the breakdown of the Russian 
army, and despatches in which he drew pictures of the results 
which he hoped for and promised because of it, soon made 
the Emperor modify these arrangements. 

The King always saw the Russian army in flight along the 
Kazan road, the men deserting, disbanding in troops, the Cos- 
sacks ready to leave the army, some even disposed to make 
common cause with the victorious French. The Cossack chief- 
tains overwhelmed the King of Naples with continual flattery, 
and he never ceased to give them tokens of his munificence. 
The vanguard had no need to fight; the Cossack ofl&cers took 
instructions from the King as to the direction in which he 
wished to march, and where he desired to establish his head- 
quarters. From the moment his outposts arrived they were 
practically taken care of, to see that nothing went amiss. Out- 
and-out blandishments were resorted to, to gratify the King, 
and those marks of deference delighted him greatly. 

Accordingly the Emperor put small faith in his despatches; 
those marks of deference looked suspicious to him. He saw 
that the King was being made a fool of, and he told him to 
distrust Kutusof’s pretended march on Kazan. The Emperor 
could not fathom this movement of the enemy. This afEecta- 
tion of regard for the King — these exaggerated accoimts of 
the enemy’s breakdown and the discontent of the Cossacks — 

124 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

appeared to him as proofs of underhand work. Although 
such circumstances — if true — would have delighted him, he 
saw them for what they were: blinds to deceive the King as 
to what was really afoot, or baits to draw him into some trap. 
On September 18 the Emperor returned to the Kremlin. 
His departure from Moscow had been the signal for outbreaks 
of the gravest disorder. Such houses as had been saved from 
the fire were pillaged. Such unfortunate inhabitants as had 
remained were ill-treated. Shops and wine-cellars were forced 
open; and thence flowed every excess, every crime that can 
result from the drunkenness of soldiers who have got out of 
their superiors’ control. The city rabble, taking advantage of 
this disorder, began pillaging, too, and led the troops to the 
cellars and vaults and anywhere else that they thought might 
have been used to conceal property, in the hope of sharing the 
pillage. Those army corps not actually in the city sent in 
detachments to secure their portion of the victuals and booty. 
The result of this systematic search can be guessed. All kinds 
of supplies were found, and plenty of wine and brandy. The 
grain and fodder warehouses along the quays had escaped the 
fire. The army horses had been so short of provender between 
Smolensk and Ghjat, and from the battle until we reached 
Moscow, that everyone hastened to forage for them and got 
enough hay, dmring the two days of the fifteenth and sixteenth, 
to last several months. Part of these provisions were consumed 
in the houses as they were found; and it was thanks to the 
surplus that we were able to live in abundance until our de- 
parture from the city, and even to keep the men and horses 
alive during part of the retreat.® 