

On the thirteenth, when the whole army was again on the 
move, the Emperor halted aU the columns. Our cavalry were 
so exhausted that they could not push their reconnaissance to 
any distance, and at the moment we knew so little of the enemy’s 
movements that, doubtful as to the direction taken by Kutusof, 
of whom there was no news, the Emperor judged it advisable 
to pause. He had not received any reports from Prince Ponia- 
towski on our right, and was for a moment imeasy about him, 
since he felt that the Russians might have taken advantage of 
our rest to fall upon us from that side and threaten our flank 
and rear in the hope of stopping, or at least delaying, our 
entry into Moscow until they had received replies from Peters- 
burg. The Emperor still inferred that the enemy desired to 
propose a settlement whilst offering battle too. 

Officers were sent out one after another in all directions. 

The King of Naples was ordered to make a strong reconnais- 

109 

110 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

sance along the Kaluga road- At last the Emperor was re- 
assured, and the army resumed its march. He was delighted 
to learn that the enemy, encumbered with wounded and hag- 
gage, were taking the Moscow road, where, according to vari- 
ous reports, outworks had been thrown up in preparation for a 
second batde. . . . The Prince of Neuchatel told me that the 
Emperor was amazed at the King of Naples’s receiving no pro- 
posal from the enemy, who, notwithstanding their reinforce- 
ment by the militia and recruits, had done nothing to put them- 
selves in an attitude of defence. From that he inferred, and 
he repeated it more than once, that the Russian army had lost 
far more heavily at Borodino than had been supposed, and 
that it would be in no position to continue the campaign that 
year. Since the battle the Emperor had spoken to scarcely one 
of his entourage; he seemed to be in continual anxiety. 

At ten o’clock in the morning of the fourteenth the Emperor 
was on the heights overlooking Moscow, called the Sparrow 
Hills, when he received a note from the King of Naples in- 
forming him that the enemy had evacuated the city and that a 
Russian stafiE officer had been sent with a flag of truce to ask 
for a suspension of hostilities while the troops were crossing 
the city. The Emperor agreed to this, but ordered the King to 
follow the Russians step by step — ^to force them as far away 
as possible, once they were outside the barriers. He likewise 
enjoined him not to enter the city, but to go round it if he 
could. He instructed the King to send him as soon as might be 
a deputation of the city authorities, who were to meet him at 
the city gate. 

Shortly afterwards he ordered General Durosnel, whom he 
had appointed governor, to enter the city with as many picked 
gendarmes as he could muster, establish order there, and take 
possession of the public buddings. He urged him particularly 
to maintain order, to guard the Kremlin, and to keep him sup- 
plied with information. The general was especially enjoined 