

I hastened to the Court stables, where some of the Emperor’s 
horses were stabled and the coronation coaches of the Tsar 
were kept. The utmost zeal, and, I may add, the greatest 
courage on the part of the coachmen and grooms, were neces- 
sary to save the place; they clambered on to the roof and 
knocked off the cinders that feU there, whilst others worked 
two fire-engines which I had had put in order during the night. 
(They had been totally dismantled.) I may say without ex- 
aggeration that we were working beneath a vault of fire. With 
these men’s help I was able to save the beautiful Galitzin Pal- 
ace and the two adjoining houses, which were already in flames. 
The Emperor’s men were ably assisted by Prince Galitzin’s 

^‘The gunners and soldiers of the Guard, apprehensive at seeing Na- 
poleon expose himself to such great danger, only added to it by their eager- 
ness. General Lariboisiere begged the Emperor to go away, pointing out 
to him that his presence was making the gunners lose their heads.” — 
Fain, Manuscrk de 1812. II, 91. 

120 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

seivants, who displayed the utmost devotion to their master’s 
interests. Everyone did his best to further the measures we 
took to check this devouring torrent of flame, but the air was 
charged with fire; we breathed nothing but smoke, and the 
stoutest lungs felt the strain after a time. The bridge to the 
south of the Kremlin was so heated by the fire and the sparks 
falling on it that it kept bursting into flames, although the 
Guard, and the sappers in particular, made it a point of hon- 
our to preserve it. I stayed with some generals of the Guard 
and aides-de-camp of the Emperor, and we were forced to 
lend a hand and remain in the midst of this deluge of fire in 
order to spur on these half-roasted men. It was impossible 
to stand more than a moment in one spot; the fur on the grena- 
diers’ caps was singed. 

The fire made such progress that the whole of the northern 
and the greater part of the western quarter, by which we had 
entered, was burned, together with the splendid playhouse and 
all the larger buildings. One drew breath in a sea of fire — 
and the westerly wind continued to blow. The flames spread 
continuously; it was impossible to predict where or when they 
would stop, as there was no means of staying them. The con- 
flagration passed beyond the Kremlin; it seemed that the river 
would surely save all the district lying to the east. 

About four o’clock in the afternoon, while the fire was still 
raging, the Emperor began to think that this great catastrophe 
might be connected with some movement of the enemy, even 
though frequent reports from the King of Naples assured him 
that the Russians were still retreating along the Kazan road. 
The Emperor therefore gave orders to leave the city, and for- 
bade anything to be left within its walls. 

Headquarters were established at the Petrowskoi'e Palace, 
on the Petersburg road, a country mansion where the Tsars 
were accustomed to take up residence before making their 
solemn entries into Moscow for their coronations. It was im- 