

THE FIRE 

111 

to hasten the deputation of city authorities which the King of 
Naples was to collect. This, the Emperor said, would give the 
inhabitants of the town the best possible guarantee for their 
tranquillity. 

Not imagining for a moment that this deputation would fail 
to appear, or that he would receive no news — a natural omis- 
sion, considering the distance to be covered — ^the Emperor 
reached the barrier of the moat at noon and dismounted there. 
He grew impatient. He sent out fresh ofBcers every minute, 
and kept calling for a deputation or some citizens of note. At 
last, one after the other, reports came from the King and Gen- 
eral Durosnel. Far from having found any of the civic authori- 
ties, they had not discovered so much as a single prominent 
inhabitant. All had fled. Moscow was a deserted city, where 
one came across none but a few wretches of the lowest class. 

Step by step the King of Naples followed the retreat of the 
enemy’s rear-guard,^ and the Russian ofiScer in command could 
not speak highly enough of his courage, though he protested 
against His Majesty’s temerity. “Such is our admiration of 
you,” he said, “that our Cossacks have passed word round that 
no one is to fire a shot at so brave a Prince. However, one of 
these days,” he added, “you will meet with misfortune.” He 
urged the King to be sparing of courage so fine as his. A 
certain amount of time was gained in the exchange of such 
compliments, and they were dispensed all the more lavishly as 
the King seemed to welcome them. Wishing to make some gift 
to so courteous a foe. His Majesty asked his staflE if one of them 
could not lend him some piece of jewellery. M. Gourgaud, the 
orderly officer who was attending him in order to carry out the 
Emperor’s scheme of liaison, offered his repeater which the 
King hastened to present to the Cossack officer. 

While waiting for information the Emperor had spent his 
^ Murat entered Moscow at midnight, September 14, 1812. 

112 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

time in reconnoitring, in various directions, the hills which 
commanded Moscow on that side. When he returned to the 
gate of the city he ordered me to write to the Archchancellor 
in Paris and to the Duke of Bassano at Wilna, informing them 
that we were at Moscow, and dating my letter from that city. 
He placed pickets to prevent any soldier from entering the 
place, hut there were so many gaps in the walls that this pre- 
caution was of little avail. In the town itself a few shots were 
exchanged with armed peasants, stragglers from the Russian 
army and Cossacks who were met with everywhere. 

As was the case in most of the private palaces, nothing had 
been disturbed in the Kremlin; even the clocks were still going, 
as though the rightful owners were in occupation. A few Rus- 
sian stragglers caused some disorder; men were constantly 
being caught, but the gendarmes at M. Durosnel’s disposal were 
quite insufiScient to cope with them, so he confined his attention 
to the Kremlin and the Orphanage, which he kept intact. He 
asked the Emperor for more troops, informing him that all 
the houses were full of stragglers and deserters, and that, in 
view of the great size of the city, he must not think of making 
an entrance until a number of the houses had been searched 
and a proper system of patrols established in every quarter. 
The Emperor instructed him to apply to the Duke of Treviso, 
whose corps was to occupy the town. But the Duke’s forces 
were greatly reduced in strength, and, as he did not see the 
need of scattering his men so soon, and at nightfall besides, he 
sent only a meagre and insufficient number to Durosnel. 