

THE FIRE 

121 

possible to proceed thither by the direct road on account of 
the fire and the wind; one had to cross the western part of 
the town as best one could, through ruins, cinders, flames 
even, if one wanted to reach the outskirts. Night had already 
fallen when we got there; and we spent the following day in 
the palace. Meanwhile the fire continued with renewed vio- 
lence, but a part of the quarter between the Kremlin and 
Petrowsko’ie, where headquarters and the Guard were billeted, 
was saved. The Emperor was deep in thought; he spoke to 
no one. 

The existence of inflammable fuses, all made in the same 
fashion and placed in different public and private buildings, 
is a fact of which I, as well as many others, had personal evi- 
dence. I saw these fuses on the spot, and several were taken 
to the Emperor. Tliey were also found in the quarter by 
which he entered the city, and even in the Imperial bedroom 
in the Kremlin. M. Durosnel, the Duke of Treviso, Count 
Dumas, and many others observed them on their entrance, but 
paid no further attention, for they were far from thinking 
that the Governor and the government had any ambition, as 
the Emperor said, to go down to posterity as a modem Eros- 
tratus. 

The examination of the police rank-and-file, and further 
admissions by the police officer who was caught on the day 
we entered the city, aU proved that the fire had been prepared 
and executed by order of Count Rostopchin. This police of- 
ficer, whom Baron Lelorgne had discovered in the city while 
looking for the deputation His Majesty had expected, was a 
simpleton who knew all that was afoot and was very candid 
in all his avowals, as was proved by many reports. He sup- 
plied details about the preparation for that fire which left no 
further doubt as to the Governor’s orders, and in time shed 
the fullest light on the matter. Of the various incendiaries 
who were brought to judgment some were executed and others 

122 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

left in prison, hapless victims of their obedience to their su- 
periors and the orders of a madman, as the Emperor said. 

Baron Lelorgne’s police officer — from whom at first, for lack 
of a better, he had drawn a thousand bits of information — 
was so terrified at the outset that he appeared to be slightly 
deranged. Such at least was the impression left by his state- 
ments. His revelations seemed to be th'e delusions of a de- 
mented man, and at the time no heed was paid to them. This 
unfortunate fellow kicked his heels for some time in the cus- 
tody of the guard where he was left when he was no longer 
needed. After the outbreak of the fire his first statements were 
recalled. It was also remembered that when he had seen ihe 
first small fire break out, which was attributed to some camp 
fires having been lit too near the wooden houses of the quarter, 
he had announced that before long there would be many other 
outbreaks; and when the main conflagration started he ex- 
claimed that the whole city would be burned, orders having 
been issued to that effect. In fact, all that we had imputed 
to a disordered mind actually came to pass; so he was ques- 
tioned anew. 