

104 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

by our guns. The Emperor carefully examined every portic 
of this battlefield, the positions of each corps, the movemen 
they had made, the difficulties they had had to overcome. I 
each point he demanded minute details of everything that ha 
happened, dealt out praise and encouragement, and was greete 
by his troops with all their wonted enthusiasm. 

The Emperor took stock in detail of all the works thrown u 
by the Russians. I cannot describe my feelings as I passe 
over the groimd which had been dyed by my brother’s bloo( 
If the eulogies and the justice rendered by an entire army 1 
the memory of a brave man could have consoled me, I oug] 
to have had peace in my heart. . . . 

After completing his reconnaissance, the Emperor gallope 
off to the advance-guard. According to reports which he ha 
received that morning from the King of Naples, there were nor 
but Cossacks to be seen. A very small number of straggle] 
were rounded up ; the enemy had not abandoned so much as 
cart. The King coimted on passing Mojaisk, and made the En 
peror agree to establish headquarters there that evening; bi 
when he arrived before the town he found it strongly held h 
enemy infantry and a large body of cavalry. A late start ha 
been made, and the day was declining. Not being able 1 
reconnoitre the position, we were obliged to come to a hal 
The Emperor established himself in the village in front < 
Mojaisk; the enemy evacuated the town during the night, an 
our troops entered it the next day at dawn. 

The Emperor went into the town towards noon. He w£ 
very much preoccupied, for affairs in Spain were weighing hii 
down just when those in Russia, despite this victorious battl( 
were far from satisfactory. The state of the various corj 
which he had seen was deplorable. All were sadly reduce 
in strength. His victory had cost him dear. When he ha 
come to a halt on the previous evening, he had felt convince 
that this bloody battle, fought with an enemy who had abai 

BORODINO 

105 

doned nothing in their retreat, would have no result beyond 
allowing him to gain further ground. The prospect of enter- 
ing Moscow still enticed him, however; but even that success 
would be inconclusive so long as the Russian army remained mi- 
broken. Everyone noticed that the Emperor was very thought- 
ful and worried, although he frequently repeated: 

“Peace lies in Moscow. When the great nobles of Russia 
see us masters of the capital, they will think twice about fight- 
ing on. If I liberated the serfs it wotild smash all those great 
fortunes. The battle will open the eyes of my brother Alex- 
ander, and the capture of Moscow will open the eyes of his 
nobles.” 

PART III 

MOSCOW 

CHAPTER VI 

THE nRE 

M ojaisk was nothing hut a vast hospital. Generals, of- 
ficers, privates, all arrived there seeking the help 
which none could give. 

The army continued its movement until September 11. 
Marshal Ney, in command of the advance-guard, was five 
leagues from Mojaisk along the road to Moscow, and the King 
of Naples a little further on. This retreat resulted in only a 
few prisoners. The Emperor had halted to give the troops 
some rest, and to carry out the reorganization necessary in case 
there should he a second battle. 