

116 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

as he had left the Tsar up to the very last moment: for in 
Moscow as in Petersburg a Te Deum had been sung for the 
supposed victory of the Russian arms. We heard that the 
first convoy of woimded arrived on the twelfth [from Boro- 
dino] ; that on the thirteenth rumours of a defeat began to 
spread, though they were discounted; that even on that and 
the following day some of the city militia were sent out to join 
the main army. In short, even persons in authority were to- 
tally in the dark as to what had happened imtil the day before 
our entry. 

Much of the information we received was contradictory, and 
proved that those who had left the city had not confided their 
intentions to those who remained, even at the very last. An 
aged French actress repeated so often a conversation she was 
supposed to have had with a certain General Borozdine, that 
the Emperor expressed a wish to see her. According to the 
general — or according to this actress — disaffection towards 
the Tsar and the popular dislike of this war over Poland had 
reached such extreme lengths that the Russian nobility, threat- 
ened with the loss of their property and the greater part of 
their fortunes, were anxious for peace at any price and would 
force the Emperor Alexander to come to terms. Kutusof had 
deceived the court at Petersburg even as he had deceived the 
public and the Governor of Moscow. Everyone imagined that 
he had been victorious. The precipitate evacuation of the city 
would ruin the Russian nobility and force the government to 
sue for peace. The nobles were enraged with Kutusof and 
Rostopchin for having lulled them into a false sense of se- 
curity. 

At eight o’clock in the evening flames broke out in one of 
the suburbs. Assistance was sent, without more attention being 
paid to the matter, for it was still attributed to the carelessness 
of the troops. 

THE FIRE 

117 

The Emperor retired early; everyone was fatigued and as 
anxious to rest as he was. At half-past ten my valet, an ener- 
getic feUow who had been in my service during my embassy 
to Petersburg, woke me up with the news that for three-quarters 
of an hour the city had been in flames. I had only to open 
my eyes to realize that this was so, for the fire was giving off 
so much light that it was bright enough to read in the middle 
of my room. I sprang from bed and sent by valet to wake 
the Grand Marshal [Duroc], while I dressed. As the fire was 
spreading in the quarters farthest away from the Kremlin, we 
decided to send word to Mortier, to put the Guard under arms, 
and to let the Emperor sleep a little longer, as he had been 
extremely tired during the past few days. 

I moimted my horse hurriedly to go and see what was hap- 
pening, to gather what assistance I could muster, and to make 
sure that everyone connected with my own department, scat- 
tered throughout the city as they were, were running no unneces- 
sary hazards. A stiff wind was blowing from the north, from 
the direction of the two points of conflagration that we could 
see, and was driving the flames towards the centre, which made 
the blaze extraordinarily powerful! About half-past twelve 
[September 16] a third fire broke out a little to the west, and 
shortly afterwards a fourth, in another quarter — ^in each case 
in the direction of the wind, which had veered slightly towards 
the west. About four o’clock in the morning the conflagration 
was so widespread that we judged it necessary to wake the 
Emperor, who at once sent more officers to find out how things 
really stood and discover whence these fires could be starting. 