

All these details delighted the Emperor and restored his 
cheerfulness. He had not received any proposals at the gates 
of Moscow, but the actual state of the Russian army, its dis- 
couragement, the discontent of the Cossacks, the impression 
certain to be caused in Petersburg by the news of the occupa- 
tion of the second capital of Russia, aU the happenings which 
Kutusof had doubtless concealed from the Tsar just as he had 
kept them from Rostopchin, — all these things, said the Emperor, 
must surely lead to peace proposals. He made no comment on 
Kutusof’s march on Kazan. 

About eleven o’clock in the evening news came that the 
Bazaar was on fire. The Duke of Treviso and Count Durosnel 
went to the spot, but in the darkness it was impossible to cope 
with this conflagration, for there was nothing at hand and no 
one knew where to find pumps and hoses. The inhabitants and 
soldiers pillaged such shops as fbipy had time to enter. 

During the night there were two small outbreaks of fire in 
the suburbs also, at some distance from that where the Emperor 

THE FIRE 

115 

was quartered; but they were attributed to carelessness in 
lighting camp fires, and orders were given to redouble vigilance. 
These accidents having no immediate sequel, little importance 
was attached to them. The Guard was ordered to furnish 
sentry-posts for the various points. The Duke of Treviso and 
M. Durosnel, who were constantly in the saddle, did all they 
could to ensure the tranquillity of the vast city. 

Finding himself without sufficient means to maintain order, 
Durosnel came in person to report to the Emperor in the morn- 
ing, and suggested that the command of the city should be en- 
trusted to the Duke of Treviso. Mortier’s troops [the Young 
Guard] were occupying the place, and he could therefore take 
the situation in hand. The Emperor approved this proposal; 
and Coimt Durosnel himself delivered to the Duke the order 
to assume responsibility for the government of Moscow. 

The Emperor went to the Kremlin at noon [September 15] . 
A gloomy silence reigned throughout the deserted city. Dur- 
ing the whole of our long progress we met not a single person, 
The army took up its positions round the town, and some corps 
were billeted in the barracks. At three o’clock the Emperor 
mounted his horse, made a tour of the Kremlin and the Or- 
phanage, went to see the two principal bridges, and then re- 
turned to the Kremlin, where he had installed himself in the 
apartments of Tsar Alexander. 

Various reports said that Kutusof and Rostopchin had met 
to discuss affairs on the day before the evacuation. Rostopchin 
was said to have proposed the destruction of the city, but 
Kutusof had been opposed t6 this step, and had been so in- 
dignant at the suggestion and at the other measures desired 
by the Governor that he had gone away in a rage. From other 
details it seemed that these^ two personages, who disliked each 
other, rarely met; that Kutusof had left Rostopchin as ignorant 