

As soon as he returned to Moscow the Emperor gave orders 
for parades to he held in the court of the Kremlin. A cook- 
house service had been organized and great activity expended 
on building ovens. The defensive works were pushed forward 
vigorously, and a portion of the Prince of Eckmuhl’s corps 
was quartered in the city. The immense fields of vegetables, 
especially cabbages, surrounding the town were carefully cut; 
numerous stacks of hay were also brought in, and the potato 
fields within a radius of two or three leagues were cleared. 
The transport waggons were in constant use. I organized a 
body of men to run a mill for the Emperor’s Household, as 
floiur was beginning to be scarce. I had a large supply of 
biscuits baked, and a considerable number of sledges con- 
structed. In short, I had everything in readiness for either a 
prolonged sojourn in the city or an immediate departure. 

The hospitals were well organized; I established one for 
the Household in a wing of the Kremlin. A great number of 
unfortunate fellows, who were already enfeebled by excessive 
fatigue, had been attacked by nervous fevers. 

The overtures for peace which M. Toutolmine had for- 
warded to Petersburg were considered there as proof of the 
state of embarrassment in which the Russians already suspected 
we were. While the proposals were imder discussion, the Em- 
peror busied himself, as I have said, with all his wonted ac- 
tivity; night and day were one to him. Paris and France were 
the object of all his thoughts, and couriers were constantly 
setting off with decrees and decisions dated from Moscow. 

Accustomed as he was to dictate peace on his arrival at 

INDECISION 

133 

the palaces of the sovereigns whose capitals he had conquered, 
he was amazed by the silence of his adversary. The more this 
silence testified to the enthusiasm of the Tsar and the exaspera- 
tion of his people, the more the Emperor Napoleon was con- 
vinced that peace could only be made at Moscow. His modera- 
tion ought to conciliate everyone; he had cleared himself of 
blame for the fire; he had even done all in his power to arrest 
the disaster. “It is diflScult to see,” he said, “any special mo- 
tive for animosity that should prevent us coming to an under- 
standing. Having reached the ancient capital of Russia, it 
would seem a political defeat to leave it without having signed 
the preliminaries for peace, no matter how advantageous an- 
other position would be from a military point of view. Europe 
is watching, and would regard [our waiting for] a sure suc- 
cess in the spring as sure proof of a reverse to-day. That 
might entail grave consequences.” 

The Emperor was from that time prepared to evacuate Rus- 
sia and content himself with enforcing some measures against 
English commerce to save the honour of his arms. He hoped 
to win over the Emperor Alexander afresh by giving him, as 
though it were a voluntary sacrifice which he could not have 
expected, an arrangement that would justify the Tsar person- 
ally in the eyes of his people. Imbued with this idea, and dis- 
missing from his mind the importunate memory of the steps 
already taken, Napoleon determined to write directly to the 
Tsar, and M. Lelorgne was ordered to search the hospitals, or 
amongst the Russian prisoners, for some senior officer who 
might be sent to Petersburg. He found the brother of a Rus- 
sian diplomatic agent in Germany. 