

Reluctant to place himself at too great a distance, and doubt- 
less not realizing the importance of the Emperor’s orders,^ 
the King acted in a leisurely way and made but slight daily ad- 
vances, merely changing his position from one place to an- 
other. (I am repeating what I heard at the time from the 
Emperor.) To justify his slowness the King repeated that he 
was humouring the Cossacks, who no longer wished to fight 
against us; that he might have attacked them, though they 
would not fire on our troops; in short, that they were no longer 
defending themselves, but were actually on the point of leav- 
ing the Russian army. He added, moreover, that he found 

1 Napoleon ordered Murat to proceed from the Riazan road to the Toula 
road and to advance until he had obtained some news of Kutusof. 

136 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

the peasants very discontented, and many of them already talk- 
ing of gaining their freedom. 

The Prince of Neuchatel showed me two of these letters; 
the Emperor let me see three of four more, all containing the 
same details, and asked me what I thought. 

“I think they are fooling the King of Naples,” I said. 

The Emperor and the Prince thought likewise. 

Seeing the uselessness of his repeated orders to the King 
that he should push the enemy vigorously and send reconnais- 
sances to find out where Kutusof was and unmask his move- 
ments, the Emperor formed a corps for the Duke of Istria, 
composed of Davout’s infantry and the cavalry of the Guard, 
to which he joined La Houssaye’s division. 

The King of Naples, who fimally had recognized his error, 
began to carry out the movement on Kaluga ordered by the 
Emperor. Up to this time he had kept in constant touch with 
the Cossacks. Having given them his watch and his jewels, 
he would even have given them the shirt ofE his back, had he not 
discovered that the good Cossacks were playing with him and 
keeping him on the Kazan road while the Russian army, 
masked by their manoeuvres, had been on the Kaluga road 
for five days. They had made their march at night, lit up by 
the flames of the burning capital. 

By September 23 our convoys were already somewhat dis- 
turbed; the pourparlers between our advance-guard and the 
Cossacks were stiU being carried on; and the Emperor was 
so displeased that he forbade their continuance. The purport 
of these conversations was repeated in Moscow and came back 
to the Emperor; and the matter seemed so grave that he gave 
it his particular attention. He was especially suspicious of 
what was talked about with regard to General Sebastiani’s 
corps. 

“These communications,” said the Emperor, “are made for no 
other purpose than to alarm the army about its remoteness 

INDECISION 

137 

from France, and the climate, and the winter. I know it is 
being said that this is an imjust war, that it is impolitic, and 
my attack on the Russians an act of iniquity. My soldiers are 
being told of the peaceful aims of the Tsar, of his moderation 
and his liking for the French. By their smooth speeches the 
Russians are trying to turn our brave fellows into traitors, to 
paralyze the courage of stouthearted men, and to gain partisans 
for their cause. Murat is the dupe of men far more astute 
than himself. ... I will have the first man who speaks with 
the enemy shot, even if he be a general.” 