

The Emperor repeated to him exactly what he had said to 
M. Toutolmine. He put forward the same views on reconcilia- 
tion and peace; but this officer respectfully expressed his 
doubts as to the possibility of coming to an understanding so 
long as the French remained in Moscow. The Emperor paid 

134 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

little heed to his observations at the time, but sent the oflEicer 
away with his letter, still deluding himself that the silence of 
the Petersburg cabinet was caused only by their belief that 
he would demand too much. He thought that they would 
eagerly seize the opportunity of profiting by his avowed mod- 
eration. It was this fatal belief, this unfortunate hope, that 
made him stay on in Moscow and brave a winter that exacted 
a greater toll than any plague could have done. 

This move was at the time known only to the Prince of 
Neuchatel, M. Lelorgne and myself, and remained secret for 
a long while, as the Emperor desired. 

I return now to the King of Naples, who had confidently 
followed up the Russian army along the Kazan road. He came 
to pass a night at Moscow, saw the Emperor, and next day 
returned to the advance-guard. 

While the King was in Moscow the Viceroy, the Princes of 
Neuchatel and Eckmiihl, and His Majesty happened to be all 
four with the Emperor; the Emperor raised the question 
whether it would not be sound policy to march at once on 
Petersburg. According to the King the Russians were in full 
flight, in a state of complete disorder and discouragement, 
while the Cossacks were ready to leave the army at any mo- 
ment. Did the Emperor really believe in the possibility of 
such an expedition? Did he imagine he would have time to 
carry it out before the hard frosts set in? Did he think the 
army in a fit state to carry it out? From what he said pre- 
viously and afterwards to the Prince of Neuchatel, it was clear 
to me that he never reaUy entertained this project, imprac- 
ticable in view of the state of our artillery and cavalry, while 
Kutusof was so close to us with a well-organized army and 
numerous cavalry. 

The Viceroy and the marshals were less deluded than the 

INDECISION 

135 

King regarding the supposed disorder of the Russians. They 
dwelt on our army’s need of rest, and on the necessity of en- 
suring, as soon as possible, good winter-quarters for its re- 
organization. 

The Emperor would have liked to give a turn to the opinion 
held by the army, to distract it from its losses by persuading 
it that it was still fit for any undertaking. He would have liked 
to disperse the echoes from Petersburg which lingered in Mos- 
cow, and was anxious to know what was in the minds of the 
intelligent men in the army. There was no further question 
of this project and we stayed in Moscow. 

The Russians diverted the King with talk, paralyzed his 
activity by their solicitous attentions, and the advance-guard, 
wholly occupied in the exchange of compliments, made 
scarcely any progress from day to day. This was all the more 
to the taste of our troops, who regretted every step that took 
them further from the Moscow cellars and all the good things 
that were being enjoyed by those who remained in the city. 
Thanks to their nearness to the capital, they were still able to 
participate every day in these things, for it was possible to 
send in daily messengers to procure provisions. 