

INDECISION 

139 

of such insignificance that they had long since ceased to be 
connected with the government. The Emperor wished to em- 
ploy them in the administration of the city, and later hinted 
that he would like to see them; but they refused to undertake 
any function, and declined the honour the Emperor wished to 
do them — ^for the very just reason that they had no clothes to 
wear. It is impossible to conceive the state of their destitution. 

I never left my own quarters except to accompany the Em- 
peror on horseback. I read much and had no lack of books, 
although the Galitzin residence where I had established my- 
self and my stafE, with the carriages, had been completely 
ransacked during the night we had gone to Petrowskoie. In 
the TCrcmlin I occupied two small rooms opening on the south- 
ern terrace. With the exception of the state apartments noth- 
ing was furnished, and we were obliged to buy furniture sal- 
vaged from burning houses or from abandoned joiners’ shops. 
In this way I bought, for a few napoleons, portraits of the en- 
tire Imperial family of Russia which the troops were using 
as screens in their bivouacs. 

The weather was so fine and the temperature so mild that 
even the natives were amazed. It seemed as if even the sea- 
sons were conspiring to deceive the Emperor.® Every day His 
Majesty remarked very pointedly, when I was present, that the 
autumn at Moscow was finer and even warmer than at Fon- 
tainebleau. He rode horseback every day, and I do not think 
he once went out without ironically comparing the weather and 
the temperature with that of France, or without adding, as he 
hummed one of the old airs to which he adapted catch-phrases 
or apt verses: “A traveller lies with the greatest of ease” — 
A beau mentir qui vieiU de loin. Then, for fear that this al- 
lusion was not sufficiently pointed, he would sometimes add, 
remarking on the bright sunshine, “So this is the terrible Rus- 

* “Magnificent weather; the inhabitants say: ‘God must be with you, it 
is usually much colder.’ ” — CasteUane, Journal, I, October 8. 

140 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

sian winter that Monsieur de Caulaincourt frightens the children 
with.” 

We had been three weeks in Moscow, and since the battle 
the Emperor had not mentioned to me the loss of my brother, 
although he had been most honourably mentioned in the bul- 
letin. 

“What can I do for your brother’s aides-de-camp?” were 
his first words about a loss which had been very painful to 
me. “They must be fine ofiicers, for their general was a splen- 
did man. He would have gone far.” 

I answered His Majesty that, when he would permit me, I 
would present several proposals for promotion and reward for 
them, and for all the officers of my brother’s staff, as well as 
his orderly officers, for whom nothing had been done. 

“Let me have it to-day,” was the Emperor’s reply.* His 
silence about my brother arose solely from his irritation with 
me, for he spoke well of him to the Prince of Neuchatel and 
to Duroc. 