

Indeed, orders were promulgated absolutely forbidding any 
intercourse with the enemy sous peine de mort; and to spare 
the susceptibilities of the King of Naples this order was ad- 
dressed to General Sebastiani. 

Matters had reached such a point that a sort of tacit armi- 
stice was in operation with the advance-guard, and the enemy 
profited by this to lull our suspicions and send parties to 
Smolensk, where they burned fifteen of our ammunition 
waggons which they were unable to carry away. These parties 
delayed the couriers, made the rear posts of the army uneasy, 
and caused the Emperor one of the greatest aimoyances he 
suffered during the whole of the campaign. This mania for 
fraternizing with the enemy spread now to the troops under 
the command of the Duke of Istria. The Emperor was so vexed 
that he even disapproved of two flags of truce having been re- 
ceived and forbade the Duke to admit any more, ordering him 
to have any further letters from the enemy accepted at the 
outposts and handed back, in order to avoid any personal con- 
versations. 

“An this talk imder flags of truce,” he said to Berthier in 
my hearing, “does good only to those who began it. It in- 
variably turns out to our disadvantage.” 

He ordered Berthier to send this message to Marshal 
Bessieres. 

138 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Almost every day the Emperor rode out to visit the different 
quarters of the city, and inspected the surrounding convents, 
whose high walls gave them the appearance of small citadels. 
He worked all day and part of the night. France was ad- 
ministered, Germany and Poland felt the impulse of his mind, 
just as if he had been at the Tuileries. Every day couriers 
brought despatches and went off with orders to France and 
Europe. This courier service had become so regular that 
despatches arrived every day about two o’clock. 

After dinner the Emperor received the marshals, the Vice- 
roy, and such generals of division as could leave their com- 
mands for a brief period. Three or four times a week he had 
some of them in to dine with the marshals. In the conversa- 
tions that followed the meals the Emperor steered the opinion 
of those present in the direction he desired, and indicated the 
political angle he wished handed on to the army. 

The Emperor would have liked to put some prominent Rus- 
sian at the head of the municipal administration, if only m 
the interest of the wretched inhabitants who were left. Search 
was made for such a man, but M. Toutolmine was the only 
person suitable, and he was too badly needed at the head of 
the Orphanage to accept other functions. 

As it was long since the Emperor had discussed matters 
with me, and as the Prince of Neuchatel at the outset had but 
a very imperfect knowledge of the negotiations which the Em- 
peror had tried to open up, I only got to know of them later. 
Having invariably found my opinion opposed to his own, the 
Emperor was so frequently out of humour with me that I did 
not venture to see even M. Toutolmine. As to M. Zagriaski 
and the other Russians whom I had taken under my protection 
during the catastrophe, I had to request the Grand Marshal 
to make my action known to the Emperor lest it should be mis- 
interpreted. In any case, they were all old men, and people 