

128 

INDECISION 

129 

or bad humour. It was the same with all of us, for everyone’s 
happiness depended on the news from France. 

Small consignments of wine and other objects arrived. Of- 
ficers, surgeons and administrative ofiicials also came to join 
the army. The reports from officers in command of the prin- 
cipal points in our lines of communication were reassuring. 
It was as easy to travel from Paris to Moscow as from Paris 
to Marseilles. Yet everyone was loath to resign himself to 
passing the winter so far from France, whither all eyes and 
thoughts continually turned. We had been spoiled by the 
Emperor’s previous campaigns, when peace had always been 
bought with a few months’ toil. Except in the Prussian and 
Polish campaigns, winters had always been spent in France; 
and recollections of Osterode and Giittstadt, of the snows of 
Pultusk and Pratznitz [campaign of 1806-7], brought only 
sombre reflections. 

Some, myself among the first, doubted whether the Emperor 
really intended to pass the winter at Moscow. The immense 
distance between ourselves and Poland would give the enemy 
too many opportunities of harassing us; and there seemed a 
thousand other considerations against carrying out this plan. 
On the other hand, the Emperor busied himself with so many 
precautions, discussed them in such positive terms, and seemed 
to regard them as so essential to the success of his enterprise 
if peace were not secured before the winter, that the most in- 
credulous among us ended by believing that he intended to 
go through with his plans. At that time even the Grand Mar- 
shal and the Prince of Neuchatel seemed convinced that we 
should remain in Moscow. Everyone laid plans accordingly, 
and collected furniture and anything else abandoned in the 
city that might be useful for consolidating his domestic ar- 
rangements. Wood and forage were collected; in short, every- 
one acted as though he would certainly have to pass in Moscow 
the eight months that must elapse before spring. 

130 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

For my part, I must confess that in the Emperor’s glibness 
in talking of this plan, as well as in the measures he took for 
carrying it out, I saw only the desire to give a turn to public 
opinion, to ensure the collection of provisions, and, above all, 
to support the overtures he had made. Nobody knew of these 
overtures. M. Toutolmine had kept the secret as faithfully 
as M. Lelorgne, who had been entrusted with a second attempt. 
But the Emperor let fall a few words to the Prince of Neu- 
chatel as to the nature of his proposals. 

As he later admitted, the Emperor felt certain that his over- 
tures, made partly to emphasize the fact that the French had 
had no hand in the burning of Moscow and had done all in 
their power to check its ravages, and partly to prove his readi- 
ness to enter into an agreement, would elicit a reply and even 
proposals for peace. The burning of Moscow had roused seri- 
ous reflections in his mind, though he did his utmost to banish 
from his thoughts the consequences implicit in such action on 
the part of the Russians, and the scant hope that the Russian 
government was disposed to make peace. He was always 
eager to believe in his Star, and that Russia, wearied of war, 
would seize any occasion to bring the struggle to an end. 