

I think, indeed, that the Emperor Napoleon would have been 
very amenable in the matter of conditions at that moment, for 
to make peace was the only way out of his predicament. He 
made his advances as if actuated by generosity, under the 
impression that he was outwitting Petersburg as regards his 
true motives. He tried to make believe that the fear of his 
proving too exigent had prevented proposals reaching him. 
In this way he hoped to extricate himself from the embarass- 
ing situation in which he had placed himself. It was in this 
hope of an imminent peace that he prolonged his unfortunate 
sojourn at Moscow. 

The splendid weather and the mild temperature that con- 
tinued so late that year helped to mislead him. Perhaps it 

INDECISION 

131 

had also been his intention to ma£e his winter-quarters in 
Russia before his rear should be threatened and attacked. In 
that case, as he said, Moscow was by its name a political posi- 
tion, and by the number and nature of its still extant buildings 
and resources a military position preferable to any other, if 
he remained in Russia. 

In his intimate circle ih'e Emperor conversed, acted, and 
issued orders all on the presumption that he was going to 
stay in Moscow, so that even those most closely in his confi- 
dence entertained no doubt on the matter for some time. 

Such was our situation ten or twelve days after our arrival, 
and everybody believed that we were staying in Moscow up 
to the very moment when our artillery convoys were attacked 
and our couriers delayed. 

At last, seeing the season so advanced and still no prepara- 
tion made for our departure, I, too, doubted whether Moscow 
would be evacuated voltmtarily. To me it seemed impossible 
that the Emperor should even think of a retreat when the frost 
set in, especially as no measures had been taken to cross the 
ice — ^although some idea of what a Russian winter meant could 
have been gleaned from what had happened at Osterode and 
in Poland. And besides, the memory of 1807 furnished an 
idea of the Emperor’s tenacity of purpose. 

Every day some discovery was made of shops and cellars 
where stuffs, cloths, and furs were concealed; and everyone 
purchased what he thought necessary for the winter. This 
precaution proved to be lie salvation of those who took it. 

I paid the wages of all those employed in my department 
and issued orders that all their greatcoats should be lined 
with fur, or at least provided with fur collars if they could 
not buy large enough pelts. I also gave orders that fur hats 
and gloves should be made. On my arrival, too, I organized 
a number of workshops for adding to the means of transport 

132 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

of biscuits and fodder. I had a large stock of horseshoes 
made up sharp for travel on ice. In a word, I took every 
possible precaution against such difficulties as might he en- 
countered in winter operations; and to these measures I owed 
the satisfaction of being able to transport my sick and my 
vehicles in safety as far as Wilna. 