

As soon as he returned to Moscow the Emperor began to 
busy himself with clearing the French army, in the eyes of 
Petersburg, from the odium of having caused the fire, which 

® Larrey (Chirurgie Militaire, TV) estimates that the provisions found in 
Moscow would have been sufficient to feed the whole army for six months. 

THE FIRE 

125 

they had done their utmost to extinguish and from which self- 
interest alone was sufficient to exonerate them. 

He instructed M, Lelorgne to find some Russian to whom 
all the details of the affair could be confided and who would 
relay what he was told to the proper quarters. M. Toutolmine, 
head of the Orphanage, had stayed courageously, like a good 
father, at the head of that establishment, although most of the 
foundlings had been evacuated; and he seemed eminently 
suited to fill the part. His position as head of one of the 
dowager Empress’s institutions would lend authority to his 
report in the eyes both of the upper and lower classes in Peters- 
burg. He appeared before Napoleon, and M. Lelorgne imder- 
took the duties of interpreter. 

The Russian was profuse in his gratitude for the help and 
protection accorded to his establishment. The Emperor as- 
sured him that he had undertaken this war from purely politi- 
cal motives and from no spirit of animosity. Peace was his 
primary aim, as he had explained on more than one occasion. 
He added that he had been forced to come to Moscow in spite 
of himself; that he had done everything at Moscow, as else- 
where, to protect property and to suppress the incendiarism 
started by the Russians themselves. 

As soon as M. Toutolmine’s letters were ready he was given 
a passport and every other facility to enable one of his em- 
ployees to act as courier to Petersburg. 

With the exception of the King of Naples’s corps, the entire 
army was in the town or quartered close at hand. Fugitives 
from the fire had sought shelter in churches, cemeteries, or 
wherever they felt secure from annoyance by the troops. The 
churches, which for the most part stood in the clear on public 
squares, had offered also greater security from the ravages 
of the flames. Many of these unfortunate refugees had made 
their way out to Petrowskoie. We did what we could for 

126 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

them. I housed some two dozen of them in the Galitzin man- 
sion, and among the number was M. Zagriaski, Master of Horse 
to the Tsar, who had hoped, by remaining in Moscow, to save 
his house, the object of his lifelong care. There was also a 
major-general, German by birth, who had gone into retire- 
ment in Moscow after long service with the Empress Catherine. 
These unhappy men had lost everything; nothing remained to 
them but the greatcoats which they wore. 

Our return to Moscow was no less gloomy than our depar- 
ture. I cannot relate all that I had suffered since the death 
of my brother. The sense of these recent events was the last 
straw; the horror of all that was going on around us added 
to my grief at his loss. True, one cannot nurse one’s personal 
troubles exclusively in the midst of so many public disasters — 
but one is only the more wretched on that account. I was over- 
whelmed. Happy are they who never saw that dire spectacle, 
that picture of destruction! 