

A greater portion of the city was reduced to ashes; the 
northern district, nearest the Kremlin, had been saved by the 
wind shifting to the west; some isolated districts to windward 
had not suffered at all. The splendid mansions all round the 
city had escaped the plans for their destruction; only that of 
M. Rostopchin, the Governor, had been burned to the ground 
by its proprietor. He had posted up a notice of his intention, 
unquestionably very patriotic in his eyes, on the signpost that 
marked the road into his estate at Womzowo, a short distance 
from Moscow. This notice was brought to the Emperor, who 
turned the whole thing to ridicule. He joked a lot about it 
and sent it to Paris, where doubtless it produced, as it had in 
the army, an impression quite contrary to what His Majesty 
expected. It had a profound effect on every thinking man, 
and won the Governor more admirers than critics — ^though 
only, of course, for the patriotism he had shown in sacrificing 
his house. This is how the notice was worded; 

THE FIRE 

127 

Fot eight years I have improved this land, and I have lived 
happily here in the bosom of my family. To the number of 
one thousand seven hundred and twenty the dwellers on my 
estate are leaving it at your approach, while, for my part, I 
am setting fire to my mansion rather than let it be sullied by 
your presence. Frenchmen! — in Moscow I have abandoned to 
you my two residences, with furniture worth half-a-million 
roubles. Here you will find only ashes. 

CHAPTER Vn 

INDECISION 

S OME days after his return to the Kremlin, the Emperor 
announced openly that he had resolved to take up his 
winter-quarters at Moscow, which, even in its present 
state, would furnish him with better accommodations and more 
supplies than any other place. He therefore put the Kremlin 
and the monasteries and convents round the city into a state 
of defence, and ordered several reconnaissances in the neigh- 
bourhood with an eye to establishing a plan of defence for the 
winter. 

The Emperor took many other measures in anticipation. He 
announced that he was ordering fresh levies of men in France 
and Poland; that he was preparing the organization of the 
Polish Cossacks, “for which orders have already been issued,” 
he said. Reserves had instructions to join us, and all the re- 
inforcing detachments, which had been echeloned in their 
advance, were detailed to safeguard our rear, protect convoys, 
and keep open communications. 

The post-houses were fortified; the courier service which I 
had organized at the start of the campaign was given special 
attention. The despatch-case for the Emperor and his head- 
quarters arrived regularly every day from Paris in fifteen — 
often fourteen — days. The Emperor was always impatient for 
the arrival of his courier; he noticed the delay of a few hours, 
and even grew anxious, though this service had never suffered 
any breakdown. The Paris portfolio, the packets from War- 
saw and Wilna, were the thermometer of the Emperor’s good 