

On the evening of the battle he had said to the Prince of 
Neuchatel, speaking of my brother; 

“He was my best cavalry officer. He had a quick eye, and 
he was brave. By the end of the campaign he would have 
replaced Murat.” 

The Emperor granted all the promotions I suggested to 
him, particularly those for my brother’s aides; but he never 
spoke another word to me about him. 

All the reports that reached the Emperor were grave; every- 
thing was done to make him sense the difficulty of his posi- 
tion. But the greater the difficulties the more determined he 

® To make this passage clear I ought to observe that the orderly ofScers, 
all the aides-de-camp of generals on the Emperor’s staff, interpeters, and 
all generals or officers attached by the Emperor to his headquarters, were 
under the orders of the Master of Horse. — Caulaincourt’s note. 

INDECISION 

141 

was to overcome them. . . . For the most part the corps had 
reserves of supplies, hut the services which a proper adminis- 
tration ought to supply were gravely menaced, there being 
neither soldiers nor transports to bring them up. The Em- 
peror had thought that here, as in other campaigns, he would 
meet with concerns which for gold, or preferably paper, would 
deliver what was required; but where there was no proper 
administration there could be no contractors. Undaunted by 
difficulties, and, as usual, always seeking to evade what he 
could not surmount, he thought it would be practicable to make 
use of the most destitute refugees, for he imagined that the 
Cossacks who were harassing our own lines of supply would 
take pity on their compatriots, and thus supply their needs and 
part of what we ourselves wanted. He therefore ordered the 
formation of a Russian company to go out into the villages to 
purchase food; but no one dared to volunteer for it, although 
they were promised payment in ready cash, for they knew 
perfectly well that the Cossacks would treat the inhabitants 
of Moscow no better than they treated its garrison. 

On October 2 or 3 the Emperor, who had not discussed 
affairs with me for a long time, asked me whether I thought 
that the Tsar would be disposed to make peace if overtures 
were made to him. He did not tell me of those which he had 
already attempted. I answered frankly that it seemed to me 
that the sacrifice of Moscow argued a disposition far from 
pacific; that the more the season advanced the greater were 
the chances in favour of Russia; in a word, that it was scarcely 
probable that the Tsar would have set fire to his capital with 
the object of signing a peace among the rums. 

“Would you go to Petersburg?” the Emperor asked me. 
“You will see the Tsar Alexander. I shall entrust you with 
a letter, and you will make peace.” 

I answered that it would be useless to send me on such a 
mission, as I should not be received. Assximing a jocular and 

142 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

kindly air, the Emperor told me that I did not know what I 
was saying; for the Tsar would be all the more eager to profit 
by the opportunity given him to enter into negotiations, inas- 
much as his nobles, already ruined by the war and the burn- 
ing of Moscow, were anxious for peace. He was certain of 
it. “That fire,” he added, “was the sort of folly of which a 
madman might boast when he kindled the flame, but which 
he would repent next day. The Tsar Alexander sees quite 
well that his generals are incapable — ^that the best of troops 
can do nothing under such leadership.” 