

The Emperor listened. I perceived that it was witi im- 
patience, but at least he let me speak. This time, it seemed 
to me, what I implied with thoughts of retreat in my mind 
irritated him no less than my words lull and difficulties. He 
was above all upset at having been foimd out. 

“So you think I am leaving Moscow?” he demanded. 

“Yes, Sire.” 

“That is not certain. Nowhere shall I be better ofE than in 
Moscow.” 

The hardships of winter, the total lack of all precautions 
against cold, and so forth, did not enter into his calculations. 

“You do not know the French,” he said to me. “They will 
get all they need; one thing will take the place of an- 
other. . . . The extreme rigours of winter do not come on 
in twenty-four hours. Although we are less acclimatized than 
the Russians, we are fundamentally more robust. We have 
not had autumn yet; we shall have plenty of fine days before 
winter sets in.” 

“Do not trust to that. Sire,” I answered. “Winter will come 
like a bombshell — ^and you caimot he too apprehensive, con- 
sidering the present state of the army.” 

This conversation shows all too clearly the Emperor’s hopes, 
desires, and wishes; it would be superfluous to add further 
details. In the event of not meeting with the success he an- 
ticipated in his attack on Kutusof, the Emperor considered 

156 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

himself in a fit state to keep the field, and imagined that the 
temperature would allow him to do so for some time yet. He 
intended to make no movement without having previously 
beaten Kutusof; but should he decide to retire on Witepsk he 
wanted at the same time to arrange everything in Moscow, so 
that if necessary the winter could be passed there, and so that 
he could retain the means of keeping the place if he decided 
to hold that line. In the event of a withdrawal, he considered 
that he would have time and the means to withdraw the Mos- 
cow garrison when he wished to do so. 

Such was the reasoning upon which the Emperor based his 
conduct and his prolonged stay in Moscow, waiting for a reply 
which never came and could not come. 

Since October 3 our troops had been ordered to concentrate, 
and on the fifteenth or sixteenth the Emperor seemed inclined 
to evacuate Moscow and move his headquarters to Witepsk, 
keeping Smolensk as an advanced post or, perhaps, as head- 
quarters if he did not deem it necessary to establish himself 
at Witepsk to be nearer the Dwina. He complained more bit- 
terly than ever that the King of Naples was losing his cavalry. 
On the evening of the fourteenth he had ordered him to make 
ready for a possible attack on Kutusof, and relying on details 
the King had supplied as to the state of the cavalry, daily 
losses, and the difficulty of finding provisions, had authorized 
him to take up his position at Woronovo for the time being, 
as he would there be covered by infantry. But the tacit armis- 
tice which had existed for some days made the King decide 
to stay where he was. 