

150 WITH NAPOLfiON IN RUSSIA 

discouraged. He questioned the accuracy of the calculation 
and grew very angry, as if Count Dumas could have shortened 
the distance. 

The overtures made to Petersburg remained tmanswered, 
and the Cossacks continued to harry the fringes of Moscow. 
They liad even penetrated the suburbs, and seized men and 
horses who were out foraging. Strong escorts of cavalry and 
infantry were required for their protection. 

Although he dropped no hint as to plans for a retreat, not 
even to the Prince of Neuchatel, I think it was at this juncture 
that the Emperor decided to evacuate Moscow and retire to 
Witepsk, there to take up the line he had formerly wished to 
hold and to place his troops in winter-quarters. But although 
he had resolved to do this, he unfortunately continued to delay 
the execution of his plans, however much he realized the ur- 
gency of the matter, because he liked above all else to imagine 
tha t what he desired would be successful. He could not admit 
to himself that Fortune, which had so often smiled upon him, 
had quite abandoned his cause just when he required miracles 
of her. 

A new convoy of artillery had been attacked and several 
ammunition waggons captured near the manor of Wezianino, 
where the Emperor had slept before entering Moscow. Any- 
one could see, in these preliminaries, signs of a new system of 
warfare designed to isolate us. It would have been impossible 
to devise a plan that could have given the Emperor more 
trouble or have afEected his interests more severely. We dis- 
cussed it with him — ^the Prince of Neuchatel, the Viceroy and 
myself. 

Matters seemed to me to be taking so serious a turn that I 
felt it my duty to throw ofi the reserve which 1 had so long 
imposed upon myself. I requested an audience with the Em- 
peror. As I saw him daily and always accompemied him 

NO TRUCE 

151 

wherever he went, he seemed astonished at my formal request, 
and, granting it immediately, commented: 

“Well, what is so urgent? Anything out of the ordinary?” 

My observations on the dangers of a protracted sojourn at 
Moscow, and of the winter, if we marched during the cold, 
were received most graciously, though at the moment they 
evoked no reply or hint which could give me any indication 
of his intentions. 

“Caulaincourt is already half-frozen,” he said to Duroc 
and the Prince of Neuchatel, when telling them what I had 
done. 

The Prince and the Viceroy had themselves pointed out to 
the Emperor all the inconveniences and even dangers that 
would arise from a more prolonged stay in Moscow. The care- 
lessness and negligence of our troops in looking after them- 
selves added to the misfortunes of our situation, and I have no 
doubt that the Emperor saw and thought as we did. But the 
difficulty of getting out of his embarrassing position gave fresh 
food to his hopes of entering into negotiations, and held him 
virtually a prisoner in the Kremlin. 

About September 24, the Mojaisk road being entirely cut 
oS by a corps of Russian dragoons and Cossacks, the Emperor 
sent some squadrons of chassetirs and dragoons of the Guard, 
and they had several skirmishes with the Russian cavalry. 
Our dragoons, having pushed a successful charge too far, were 
surrounded by superior forces and obliged to yield. Major 
Marthod, a few officers, some dragoons and part of two squad- 
rons were taken prisoners. Although the utmost bravery had 
been shown, this slight reverse suffered by a corps of the Guard 
irritated the Emperor as much as the loss of a battle would 
have done. But it must be remembered that at the time this 
incident impressed everyone more than had the loss of fifty 
general officers at Borodino. 