

On Lauriston’s return the Emperor had spoken to me of his 
mission; and on this occasion he discussed matters in a friendly 
tone to which I was unaccustomed. 

“The Emperor Alexander is stubborn,” he said. “He will 
regret it. Never again will he be able to obtain such good 
terms as I would have made now. He has done himself no 
end of harm by burning his towns and his capital — ^what more 
could I have asked of him? It would not have cost him that 
much to confiscate English shipping. If the Poles do not rise 
en masse to defend themselves against the Russians, France 
has sacrificed enough for them so that I can close out and make 
peace, at the same time looking after their particular interests. 

154 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“I am going to attack Kutusof. If I beat him, as is probable, 
the Tsar runs grave risks. He can stop it to-day by a word. 
Who can tell what will happen in the forthcoming campaign? 
I have money, and more men than I need. I am about to 
get six thousand Cossacks; in the next campaign I shall have 
fifteen thousand. I have learned much from this war; my 
army is getting to know the country and the troops confront- 
ing them. These are incalculable advantages. 

“If I make my winter-quarters here and at Kaluga, even 
at Smolensk or at Witepsk, Russia wiU be lost. Having of- 
fered here, as at Osterode,^ all the concessions that I can be 
expected to make, I shall have no choice but to pursue the 
interests of my System, to pursue the great political aim which 
I have set for myself. If the Tsar would only use his intelli- 
gence, he would realize that he could go a long way with a 
man of my character. Now I will have nothing more to do 
with him because he won’t reply to any of my overtures. You 
were right,” added the Emperor, “when you did not accept 
that mission; you would have made them see when they were 
well off.” 

I answered him, as on other occasions, that I should have 
met with no better hearing than M. Lauriston . . . that all 
these fine phrases might merely be a sort of game to foster our 
hopes of a speedy settlement: in other words, to lull the Em- 
peror into a false sense of security while he was in Moscow, 
since at Petersburg they realized their advantages and our 
difficulties. 

At the words lull and difficulties the Emperor gave a start. 

“"What do you call our difficulties?” he asked, with an air 
of irritation. 

“The winter. Sire,” I answered, “is a big difficulty, to begin 
with; the lack of stores, of horses for your artillery, of trans- 

^ Februairy 21 to March 31, 1807. An allusion to the offers of alliance 
made to Russia before the Friedland campaign. 

NO TRUCE 

155 

port for your sick and wounded, the poor clothing for your 
soldiers. Every man must have a sheepskin, stout fur-lined 
gloves, a cap with ear-tabs, warm boot-socks, heavy hoots to 
keep his feet from getting frost-bitten. You lack all this. Not 
a single calkin has been forged to rough-shoe the horses; how 
are they going to draw the guns? There is no end to what I 
could tell Your Majesty on this subject. Then there are your 
communications; the weather is still fine, but what will it be 
in a month, in a fortnight, perhaps in even less?” 