

Meanwhile the Emperor once again sent Lauriston to Rus- 
sian headquarters to propose an armistice, and to ascertain 
whether any reply had come from Petersburg. The King of 
Naples was instructed to forward Lauriston’s despatches as 
rapidly as possible, for the Emperor awaited them with all 

NO TRUCE 

157 

the more impatience because he realized that the season was 
passing. The Prince of Neuchatel wrote in this sense to Kutusof 
on the sixteenth, urging him to make war in such a way as 
to keep the country in hand rather than devastate it. He pro- 
posed certain measures to this end. On the twenty-first (after 
his success at Woronovo), Marshal Kutusof replied: “A people 
that has not seen an enemy on its soil for three centuries is 
unable to make the distinction which frequent occupations and 
familiarity with the customs of modem warfare have estab- 
lished in civilized nations.” 

The Emperor considered this a worthy reply, and after read- 
ing it, observed: 

“These people have no wish to treat for terms. Kutusof 
is courteous because he wants to finish the war, but Alexander 
has no such desire. He is pig-headed.” 

The King of Naples had already proposed this armistice 
desired by the Russian generals, and only refused by them 
because the Tsar had not authorized it. It was on this occasion 
that the Tsar remarked, on receiving the despatches and pro- 
posals from headquarters: 

“Now is the moment when my campaign opens.” 

Some days later (after the affair of Woronovo) it was 
learned from the Russians that the Tsar had expressly for- 
bidden the marshal and his generals to consent to any armis- 
tice or cessation of hostilities. Lauriston came back on the 
seventeenth, while Kutusof was preparing for the next day 
the surprise which was to disillusion everyone so cruelly. 

At this time, while searching for food and wine, some sol- 
diers discovered cellars in which a prodigious quantity of furs 
had been concealed, and all who could afford it bought them. 
The bearskins were too costly for junior officers, but I pur- 
chased one for a few napoleons. 

By October 18 ever 3 ^ing was ready to move on Kaluga 
on the twentieth. The Emperor had decided to leave part of 

158 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

his Household at Moscow and had given me orders to that 
effect. At one in the afternoon, as he was holding a review 
of Ney’s corps after parade, he received news of the King 
of Naples’s defeat at Winkovo. The Emperor decided on the 
spot to hasten his own movements and advanced everything 
by a day. The entire Household and all his carriages were 
ordered to start, and even as many of the sick as could be 
moved. The Emperor’s first words to the Prince of Neuchatel 
and to those to whom he issued orders in person were: 

“We must wipe out the effects of this surprise. It must not 
be said in France that a check like this has forced us to retire. 
What folly of the King! No one takes proper care. This up- 
sets all our plans; it spoils everything. The honour of our 
ar ms must be re-established on the battlefield. We will see 
if the Russians carry matters off there as they did in this sur- 
prise. Anyhow, it looks as if the King has done them some 
damage, for they dare not follow him. In any event, we must 
march to his help and avenge him.” 