

Both the Prince of Neuchatel and the Duke of Friuli re- 
peated to me what I am about to recount as proof that the 
Emperor, who was detained at Moscow by his hopes of con- 
cluding a peace, had no illusions as to his position, although 
he tried to impose them upon many other people, especially 
myself. He admitted from the very outset, to those persons 
whom he honoured with his more intimate confidence, that 
Moscow was a bad situation, and that he could remain there 
only long enough to reorganize; that the Austrians and Prus- 
sians, the allies entrusted with the defence of our rear, would 
become our most dangerous enemies if we met with the slight- 
est reverse. 

However clearsighted he may have been on this point, his 
enthusiasm was such, and so eager was he to nurture the il- 
lusions and hopes raised in his own mind, that he cherished 
the hope of receiving a reply from the Tsar, or at least ne- 
gotiations for an armistice with Kutusof, which should lead 
to further results. It might almost be said that he was carried 
away by the very difficulty of his situation and blinded as 

146 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to his perils, so that every development combined to close his 
eyes and push him further into the path of danger. 

The Prince of ISIeuchatel had received, together with a des- 
patch from Prince Schwarzenberg, a letter which gave him 
food for thought no less serious than it did Daru, Duroc 
and myself, to whom he showed it. Prince Schwarzenberg’s 
loyalty and honourable sentiments lent especial value to this 
letter. Here is the tenor of it: “The position is already em- 
barrassing, the situation may become graver; anyhow, what- 
ever happens, I assure you [Berthier] of my personal regard 
and of the value I place and shall always place on my re- 
lations with you.” 

Discussing this letter with Berthier, the Emperor said: 

“This gives warning of defection at the first opportunity. 
It may even have started already. The Austrians and Prus- 
sians are enemies behind our backs. The die is cast. . . 

He paused, thought a moment, and added: 

“Du destin qui fait tout, telle est la loi supreme.” 

Berthier urged the instant necessity of pursuing his original 
p lan as soon as possible, which was to leave Moscow and move 
hack towards Poland, as this would circumvent all their malice 
and double the strength of our forces. 

“You are anxious to go to Grosbois and see Madame Vis- 
conti,” ® was the Emperor’s reply to him. 

Seeing that he had hurt him, the Emperor added: 

“This letter is sentimental nonsense. Schwarzenberg is mak- 
ing up to you because he prefers shooting your pheasants at 
Grosbois, or his own in Bohemia, to being worried every 
morning by Tormasov. Maret, however, is very pleased with 
him. He knows all that is going on. All is well at Vienna, 
and even the Prussians are fighting perfectly. If there were 

'The beautiful Josephine Carcano, -wife of Frangois Visconti, was 
Berthier’s mistress; and the chateau of Grosbois, near Boissy Saint-Leger, 
was Berthier’s estate. His hunting parties were famous. 