

He continued to press me with arguments to convince me 
of what he said, and to induce me to accept this mission. 

In vain did I repeat all the objections I have mentioned 
above. The Emperor replied that I was mistaken. He had 
just heard from Petersburg that they were packing up in the 
utmost hurry; that the most valuable effects had already been 
sent into the interior and even to England. The Tsar was 
labouring under no further illusions, for he saw his army 
diminished and disheartened while the French army was aU 
ready to march on Petersburg. The season was still favour- 
able, added His Majesty; and by such a march the Russian 
Empire would be lost, for a defeat would gravely embarrass 
the Tsar. He would therefore seize with eagerness any over- 
ture made by us, as it would furnish him with an honoureible 
way of getting out of the unforttmate position in which he was 
placed. 

Finding that he was unable to shake my resolution, the Em- 
peror added that, beginning with myself, everyone who had 
been in Russia had told him fairy-tales about the climate. 
He then insisted anew on his proposals. The Emperor thought 
that perhaps my distaste came only from such embarrassment 
as I might feel about going, at a moment when Russia was 
being thus ravaged, to Petersburg where I had been so well 
treated; and he said; 

INDECISION 

143 

“Very well! Just to Marshal Kutusof’s headquarters.” 

I replied that either attempt would be equally unsuccessful, 
and added that I recalled what the Tsar Alexander had said 
to me on another occasion, and that I knew his character and 
was refusing this mission because I was certain he would never 
sign a peace in his capital. As this overture of ours, I con- 
cluded, could achieve nothing, it was advisable not to make it. 

The Emperor turned on his heel abruptly, saying: 

“Very well, I shall send Lauriston. He shall have the hon- 
our of making peace and saving your friend Alexander’s 
crown for him.” 

Shortly afterwards,- indeed, the Emperor entrusted M. 
Lauriston with this mission. 

Lauriston presented himself at the Russian field headquar- 
ters on the fourth and fifth, and was handsomely received. 
Kutusof had refused to let him proceed; but it seemed to him 
that everyone was anxious to put an end to this struggle, of 
which the Russians appeared even more weary than we were. 
It was said that a reply would shortly be received from Peters- 
burg; and this delighted the Emperor, who hoped and desired 
a suspension of hostilities while terms were being made. He 
supposed that, as was customary in similar circumstances, 
there would be nothing to do but settle the lines each side was 
to preserve while the negotiations were going forward.^ 

From what the Prince of Neuchatel and Duroc told me, 
the Emperor attributed the silence of the Russians regarding 
the overtures made at Smolensk and since our arrival in Mos- 
cow to the conviction, held by them since the return of Bala- 
chof from Wilna, that His Majesty would consider no arrange- 
ment that did not have the restoration of Poland on some scale 