

The King had lost several pieces of artillery, a number of 
excellent and gallant oflBcers had been kiUed, others captured 
and many wounded. He lost also a number of his prisoners, 
and the greater part of his own carriages and those of his army 
corps. 

The King had carried out his retreat in good order and with- 
out annoyance from the Russians, of whom only a few corps 
had crossed the Tchernitchnia. Kutusof had only intended 
this skirmish to be an affair between out-posts, a snatched ad- 
vantage. He contented himself with this small success and 
did not trouble to risk the advantage he had gained. Unwill- 
ing to nm the hazards of a battle, he halted, resumed his posi- 
tion on the Nara, and left only Platow, supported by some 
regular troops, to pursue the King of Naples. With soldiers 
of different calibre, serving under a different chief, few of 

NO TRUCE 159 

our men would have escaped. Prodigies of valour were per- 
formed. 

The Emperor blamed the King, and especially General 
Sebastian! who had sufEered the surprise, for not having sent 
out-posts or continual patrols into the small wood that dom- 
inated the position at General Sehastiani’s right; for it was 
from this position that the Russians, more alert and active than 
ourselves on this occasion, were able, as the Emperor said, to 
observe all Sebastiani’s movements, even to what went on in 
his own quarters. 

The Emperor was all the more displeased that he should 
have to blame his generals for having been taken by surprise, 
because this same place had been attacked by the Cossacks 
early in October and from the same wood ; this, he considered, 
should not have escaped the notice of those in command. The 
Emperor did not fail to reproach himself for having stayed 
in Moscow without inspecting this position. 

“It means that I must see everything with my own eyes,” 
he said. “I cannot rely upon the King. He trusts in his own 
bravery; he leaves things to his generals and they are careless. 
The King performs prodigies of valour. Without his presence 
of mind and courage everything would have been lost, and he 
himself jeopardized — had the Russians been better led.” 

If this surprise attack was proof of our lack of watchful- 
ness, the way we fought, although far fewer in numbers, must 
have shown the Russians that fatigue and privations had by 
no means diminished our courage. The entire success of the 
enemy was attributed to the Cossacks, whose activities engaged 
only too much of our attention. Our men were doubtless very 
brave, but they were careless and lacking in vigilance, which 
arose as much from their character as from lack of order and 
discipline. 

This was frequently the subject of serious reflection on the 

160 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

part of the Prince of Neuchatel and other generals about the 
Emperor. There were too many young officers in the corps. 
Dashing courage was valued above aU else; method, foresight, 
and even a love of discipline were underestimated. At all 
his reviews the Emperor made everything of audacity, courage 
and luck. 