

* In his interview with Lauriston, Kutusof refused any kind cf armistice ; 
but he had agreed that the advance-posts should cease fire. Kutusof re- 
served his freedom of action, however, in the two extreme wings, thus 
leaving the field free to the raids of Cossacks. 

144 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

as its basis. The Emperor began to think, however, that the 
course of events and the burning of the countryside had turned 
their heads, and that the destruction of Moscow had, for the 
time being at least, carried them away with enthusiasm. He 
even doubted whether they would receive his plenipotentiary; 
and on the night before Lauriston’s departure he wrote to the 
King of Naples telling him to announce to the Russians that 
one of the Imperial aides-de-camp was being sent, and to make 
sure in advance that he would be received. 

At heart he still flattered himself that negotiations would 
be opened; at least he said so, and he must be believed, since 
he stayed at Moscow in spite of his overtures remaining un- 
answered — and although the lapse of time since his first en- 
deavours, and his reason itself, must have cried aloud that 
Alexander had no wish to treat. None the less, he stubbornly 
set to work on fresh approaches. 

Like everyone else, the Emperor must have realized that 
the repeated messages, indicative of his embarrassment, might 
only confirm the enemy in their hostile intentions — ^yet he 
went on sending them. For a man of such fine political sense, 
of such careful calculation, how blind must have been his 
faith, his confidence in his Star! What blindness or feeble- 
ness he must have attributed to his foes! With his eagle eye 
and his pre-eminent judgment, how could he have entertained 
illusions on such a point? I leave these reflections to observers 
of human nature; for such opposities in so great a character — 
this tendency of the heart to believe what it most desires even 
in face of all improbabilities — ^would be a great reproach in 
a man of the Emperor’s exalted judgment, were not this strange 
contradiction a part of our nature, and were not this hope a 
man’s last consolation in adversity. 

(The King of Naples, despite all orders to the contrary, 
continued to treat with the enemy. . . . The Cossacks were 
accustomed to notice him on account of his singular uniform. 

INDECISION 

145 

and, seeing him the bravest man in the midst of his gallant 
skirmishers, they always refrained from shooting in his di- 
rection. Their officers came to compliment him, assuring him, 
as before, that so highly did they admire his bravery that they 
were resolved never to fire on him but to content themselves 
with making him prisoner. One day, however, a Cossack who 
had evidently been imperfectly coached in this new system of 
advance-guard politics, fired a pistol almost point-blank at 
him while His Majesty was chattering and strolling about. 
Happily he was not hit. Instantly an officer came up to offer 
excuses and to assure His Majesty that this disloyal enemy 
would be punished. One good resulted from this incident. 
The King lost something of his confidence, and was less in- 
clined to believe in the pacific dispositions of these gentry.) 