

INDECISION 

147 

anything to all this, Maret has every means of information 
at hand and would know about it. He is satisfied — ^he tells 
me that all is well; and we will wait at Moscow for Alexander’s 
reply, for he is much more embarrassed than I am — ^with his 
Senate and the Kutusof they have forced upon him.” 

CHAPTER Vin 

NO TRUCE 

W wTT.F. headquarters were dreaming dreams of negotia- 
tions and peace, the Cossacks were harrying our for- 
agers daily and seizing prisoners almost at the very 
gates of the city. They also appeared between Mojaisk and 
Moscow. A few isolated men were chased and captured; one 
courier was delayed fifteen hours, and this worried the Em- 
peror extremely. Every quarter of an hour he sent to ask 
me, and the chief-of-staff, too, whether we had learned any- 
thing of the cause of this delay. I profited by the occasion 
to renew the demand I had been making ever since our arrival 
for an escort for the courier, even if only a couple of men; 
but to establish this at all the relays would have entailed a 
considerable detachment of troops, and the cavalry was already 
greatly reduced in strength. So the Emperor thought to dis- 
miss the matter by saying that it was an unnecessary precau- 
tion — ^that the road was perfectly safe. 

Three days later the postilion driving the courier to Paris 
was shot at beyond Mojaisk, and was chased for five miles. 
Thereupon the Emperor lost no time in sending out the de- 
tachments I had asked for. As I have said, the slightest delay 
in his communications with Paris irritated and disquieted the 
Emperor, though the enemy could have obtained no real ad- 
vantage by seizing the despatches, as all important papers were 
in cipher. But it was disagreeable to him to see his communi- 
cations with France threatened, nor did he wish the news to 

be known there, or in Europe, that the enemy was at our backs. 

14S 

NO TRUCE 

149 

The Emperor became very preoccupied, and undoubtedly 
began to consider inwardly the inconveniences of the situation 
which he had hitherto sought to conceal. Neither his losses 
in battle nor the state of his cavalry had perturbed him so 
much as the appearance of a few Cossacks on our rear. Dur- 
ing his conversations while he took his walk, or at the recep- 
tion after dinner where his marshals and generals were in- 
vited along with the principal personages of the Household, 
the Emperor always talked of the fine weather, of how the 
winter could be spent in Moscow. . . . The Emperor likewise 
openly announced his intention of marching against Kutusof 
to drive him further away and thus give the army some repose. 
He talked of the news he had received from the Duke of Bas- 
sano, of the considerable levies that were to be made in Poland, 
and the expected arrival of six thousand Cossacks from that 
country. 

It was at this time that the Emperor instituted means for 
the evacuation of generals and wounded officers imable to re- 
join their units at once. To these were added men of the rank 
and file who had lost limbs, as well as cadres of non-commis- 
sioned officers, taken from all the regiments, who were to or- 
ganize the new corps that were being trained in France. Every- 
one was required to supply horses and carriages, the Emperor 
himself setting an example. The ambulance administration 
no longer existed save on paper: Lieutenant-General Nansouty, 
himself wounded, was placed in command of this convoy 
[October 10], which crossed the Niemen before the extreme 
cold set in, and luckily reached France in safety. In prepara- 
tion for this evacuation, the Emperor required from the intend- 
ant-general [Dumas] a report as to the time it would take to 
reach the Niemen, and was much upset at the estimated number 
of days [fifty], either because he did not like to think he was 
so far from his point of departure, or because he thought that 
others, making the same calculation for themselves, would be 