

Also other points on the Smolensk road were taken over by 

152 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

enemy parties; with the result that all certain communication 
with France was cut oflf. Wilna, Warsaw, Mayence, Paris were 
no longer in daily receipt of their orders from the Sovereign 
of the Grand Empire. In Moscow the Emperor waited in vain 
for despatches from his ministers, reports from his governors, 
news from Europe. From the expression on our faces one 
might have thought that the possibility of such an interruption 
had never entered anyone’s head. It was all right to have to 
fight in order to get a crust of bread, to risk being taken pris- 
oner for the sake of a truss of hay, to nm the chance of being 
frozen to death by staying in Russia; everyone was familiar 
with such possibilities — or rather probabilities; but the idea 
that an expected letter from France might not arrive was a 
quite different matter. General Saint-Sulpice was sent with 
a second body of mounted Guard, and re-established our com- 
munications. 

At the end of this month so rashly passed in Moscow, the 
French army was composed of an active force of ninety-five 
thousand men. Of the five hundred guns that the army still 
possessed more than half might have been limbered up. 

Come what might, the Emperor was desirous of sending to 
Paris some trophies of his sojourn in Moscow, and so he made 
enquiries as to what should be sent to France as tokens of the 
success of his arms. He visited every part of the Kremlin 
himself, as well as the church of Ivan Veliki and the other 
church alongside it. 

The Poles had always mentioned the church of Ivan Veliki 
as being the object of the Russians’ devotion, and even super- 
stition. The iron cross surmounting the belfry, the Emperor 
was told, was venerated by all the Orthodox. As far as I can 
recollect, a Russian proclamation that had been shown to the 
Emperor, or some report that he had received, spoke of the 
cross of Ivan Veliki as one of the sacred objects in the hands 
of the enemy, the recovery of which should be the first aim 

NO TRUCE 

153 

of all the faithful. This fixed the Emperor’s determination: 
he gave orders that it should be taken down. The diflSculty 
was to do this, as no workmen could be found to c limb to such 
a height. 

The Prince of Neuchatel, like everyone else, was reluctant 
to deprive an already ruined city of part of the sole monument 
left intact within its walls. The Emperor repeated his order, 
and specially charged the sappers of the Guard with the exe- 
cution of it. From that moment there could be no more talk 
of difficulties; hut the cross, partly dismoxmted, was not so 
much taken down as dropped to the ground. To this iron 
cross were added various objects which were believed to be 
used at the coronations of the Tsars, and two old cannon asked 
for by the Poles, as having formerly been taken from them by 
the Russians. But the cannon remained in position, for, as 
not one horse was left in the whole country to replace our own 
losses, and we had not enough to harness to our artillery, we 
could not spare any for taking away trophies. So the Poles 
had to content themselves with some old standards which the 
Russians had formerly captured from them and had left in 
the arsenal. 