

The Emperor, however, was still resolved to go until one of 
the Viceroy’s aides-de-camp arrived to announce that, tliough 
nothing could be seen of the enemy but the fires of the Cos- 
sacks, some peasants and soldiers had just been taken who con- 
firmed the news of their retreat. These particulars made the 
Emperor decide to wait; but a half hour later his impatience 
drove him to start. 

Dawn was hardly showing, and three-quarters of a mile from 
headquarters we found ourselves face to face with some Cos- 
sacks belonging to a troop of which the greater part, who were 
ahead of us, had set upon an artillery park where they heard 
some guns moving. They had carried off several pieces. It 
was stiU so dark that we were warned only by their shouts, 
and were almost upon them before we could see them. It was 
so unexpected to find them inside the lines where our Guard 
were bivouacked that (I must admit) we paid little heed to the 
first shouts. It was only when the shouting increased and closed 
in around the Emperor that General Rapp (who was ahead of 
him with Lauriston, Lobau, and Durosnel, the orderly officers 
on duty, and the advance-guard of the picket) came badk to 
the Emperor eind said: 

173 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

“Halt, Sire! The Cossacks!” 

“Take the chasseurs of the picket,” he answered, “and go 
forward.” 

The chasseurs, only ten or twelve of whom had so far joined 
us, were already moving forward unbidden to join the advance- 
guard. The light was still so poor that nothing could be seen 
more than twenty-five yards away. Only the clash of arms and 
the shouts of the men fighting indicated the direction of the 
skirmish, or even that we were at grips with the enemy. M. 
Emmanuel Lecouteuk, the Prince of Neuchatel’s aide-de-camp 
on duty, had a sabre run clean through his chest by a trooper 
of the Guard who mistook him for a Russian.^ 

The Emperor was left alone with the Prince of Neuchatel 
and myself. All three of us held our swords drawn. As the 
fighting was very near and shifting closer towards him, the 
Emperor decided to move ofi several yards, on to the crest of 
the rise, so as to see better. At this moment the remaining 
chasseurs of the picket caught up with us; and the squadrons 
in attendance, to whom the Emperor had not given time to 
mount horse before he set out, came up immediately after. 
Guided by the shouts of those already engaged, the first two 
squadrons to arrive charged and broke up the foremost Cos- 
sacks. The two other squadrons, who were close behind, 
headed by the Duke of Istria, came up in time to support the 
first two, who were hard pressed and surrounded by a swarm 
of the enemy. By this time daylight was near enou^ to light 
up the scene. The plain and the road were alive with Cossacks. 
The Guard recaptured the guns and the few artillerymen in 

2 Dennite (Itineraire, HI) is probably more exact when he says: “It was 
in this skirmish that Emmanuel Lecouteulx, aide-de-camp to the Prince of 
NeuchStel, armed himself with a lance snatched from one of the Cossacks: 
whereupon a mounted grenadier of the Guard, deceived by his appearance, 
pursued him in turn and wounded him with a sword-thrust. By a miracle, 
the blade went under his collar-bone without damage to the artery.” Le- 
couteulx lived until 1844. 