

Those who organized, trained the men at the bases, and kept 
things going, obtained no recognition if they were no longer 
with the Grand Army or had not taken part in such-and-such 
a battle. No commanding officer was ever brought to book 
for the losses occasioned by his negligence, his lack of order 
and discipline, even if two thirds of his force had been wasted 
from these causes. If he led a gallant charge at the head of 
the himdred men left him on the day of battle, he obtained 
whatever he desired — ^and nothing was given to the brave 
lieutenant-colonel who, after fighting his twenty campaigns, 
was back in the depot organizing and drilling the detachments 
that were to reinforce the Army. He was forgotten, because 
he had had no chance of contributing any brilliant deeds to 
the successful affair of the moment. 

Far be it from me to say that the Emperor did not reward 
the old soldiers. There are too many instances to prove, on 
the contrary, that they were the objects of his solicitude when 
they remained with the army or were invalided out; but let 
them remain in the depots even in the interests of the service, 
and they could obtain no promotion until they returned to the 
fighting line. 

Undoubtedly this system had the advantage of making all 
officers anxious to get back to the front, but it was really detri- 
mental to the service and to the best officers as well; for the 
depots were only given to the most capable men. Any honest 
investigator who would compare the conditions of his corps 
at the beginning of the campaign with its state at the end, seek- 
ing the causes of loss and wastage, would certainly find that 

NO TRUCE 

161 

it was not the enemy’s guns which had done the most damage 
to our cavalry. The fine state in which some corps were main- 
tained to the very last moment, compared to the disorder and 
destruction suffered by others that had seen no longer service, 
proves that our greatest foe was lack of discipline; and the 
disorders that followed in its train originated in the negligence 
of the commanding officers. 

For his headquarters the Emperor had altogether seven hun- 
dred and fifteen saddle and draught horses in Russia to draw 
the waggons loaded with provisions of all kinds as well as a 
great outfit of tents. As his headquarters were always the last 
to arrive, and that invariably in a place already laid waste 
because the whole army had already passed by, it was neces- 
sary to carry everything with us or seek what we needed from 
a distance. (It must also he observed that the general service 
of supply did not furnish in all a thousand pounds of bread, 
a hundred trusses of hay, nor a particle of oats to the Em- 
peror’s Household throughout the campaign.) I have, there- 
fore, had experience of what can be done by method and care 
in supplementing the provender both in kind and quantity. 
All persons attached to headquarters were in the same plight, 
but as none had more than a few horses it was much easier 
for them to find and provide fodder. It is also an admitted 
fact that the mounts of the Emperor and his suite made much 
longer and faster rides than other horses. Yet on reaching 
Wilna on December 8, during the retreat, only eighty horses 
had been lost out of the seven hundred and fifteen with which 
we had started the campaign. 