

I enter into these particulars in order to answer in advance 
all the fables that have been told, and that will yet be told, 
as to the effects of the cold, the lack of provisions, and so 
forth. During the retreat horses fell and lay by the roadside 
chiefly because they were not properly shod to keep their foot- 
ing on ice, and once down, and vainly having attempted to 

162 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

rise, they ended by lying where they fell, and were cut up for 
food before they were even dead. With proper shoeing and 
the exercise of a little care, the greater number would certainly 
have been saved. 

Before leaving the subject of Moscow it is essential that I 
should say something about its administration. The Duke of 
Treviso had been charged with the government of the city; 
and M. de Lesseps, formerly consul-general at Petersburg, 
had been placed at the head of the administration. This es- 
timable gentleman was on his way back to Paris with his wife 
and eight children when a courier caught him up as he was 
disembarking at Danzig, and handed him imperative orders 
to proceed at once to Imperial headquarters, then at the gates 
of Moscow. Despite his urgent request to be excused from all 
duties, after a week the Emperor appointed him intendant. 
This excellent man did all he could. Like a true governor, he 
put a stop to many evils, among them the issue of forged 
papers, the loss of many billions by pillage, and the destruc- 
tion of such archives as had been saved from the fire. 

It was the honourable and worthy Lesseps who raised more 
opposition than anyone else to the proclamation for the libera- 
tion of the serfs; it was he who collected, sheltered, nourished, 
and in fact saved, quite a number of unfortunate men, women 
and children, whose houses had been burned and who were 
wandering like ghosts amid the ruins of the capital. On diis 
occasion he showed that he had not forgotten the thirty years’ 
hospitality he had met with in Russia. I was an eye-witness 
of this estimable man’s efforts; he often confided in me his 
disappointments and all the sorrow that so much distressed 
him. It is only right that I should render justice to the hon- 
ourable sentiments that have been his invariable guide. 

The Emperor had had prepared a proclamation to give the 
serfs their freedom. This was early in October. Some dregs 

NO TRUCE 

163 

of the lowest classes of society, and a few firebrands (German 
artisans who made themselves the mouthpiece for these people 
and egged them on), had raised an outcry and demanded that 
this should be done. These same men had persuaded the Em- 
peror to begin the proclamation by announcing that hopes of 
freedom were germinating in every peasant’s head; that, there- 
after, instead of finding himself surrounded by enemies, the 
Emperor would have millions of auxiliaries. Yet was not this 
measure radically opposed to his acknowledged principles? 
He felt, and some time later observed to me, that the prejudice 
and fanaticism excited against us in the minds of the populace 
would prove a great obstacle, for some time at least, and that 
consequently he would have to bear all the odium of that meas- 
ure without reaping any of the benefits. 