

The disorder and pillage which inevitably followed our 
forced marches had caused the initial damage and alienated 
the peasants. The fires that had been so skilfully started, for 
which the peasants blamed the French; the different language; 
the crusade preached against us by the Russian clergy — all 
had combined to make that superstitious folk regard us as 
barbarians who had come to overturn their altars, steal their 
goods, ravish their women and children, lead them into cap- 
tivity, And so they fled from us as from wild beasts. 

It would have taken time to re-establish our relations with 
the inhabitants. You have to confer before you can agree. 
As matters stood, there was no one to confer with. The Rus- 
sian government had been wise to send away the inhabitants 
before the French arrived. In those grave circximstances — 
now it can be said — ^the Russians lacked neither talent nor 
forethought. This being the case a proclamation which, apart 
from anything else, was not in accordance with the Emperor’s 
views, could have served no purpose; for it would have had 
no effect, and would have imparted to the war a revolutionary 
cheiracter which would have been highly unseemly in a mon- 

164 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

arch who, with reason, prided himself on having restored social 
order to Europe. So the preparation of this proclamation was 
merely a threat; it deceived nobody who really knew the Em- 
peror. 

It was one of those countless gestures he made to see if a 
threat would produce any effect. He wished, if possible, to 
intimidate. It was some of that avenging thunder of his — 
that heat-lightning which never struck. He left nothing un- 
tried to bring about the negotiations he desired, but this procla- 
mation was not a device that entered into his political scheme, 
although he spoke as if it were a definite project. 

One day the Emperor even said to me: 

‘‘Like you, Lesseps is against emancipation. Yet there are 
some, who know as much about the Russians as you, who think 
differently. You’re opposed to it because it would not be play- 
ing fair with your friend Alexander. But those fires were 
not fair either. They would fully justify reprisals. Other- 
wise, I think exactly as you do about this emancipation. It 
is impossible to tell where such a measure would lead. Up 
to the present, except that Alexander has burned his towns to 
prevent us from occupying them, we have played the game 
with each other. There have been no offensive proclamations, 
no insults. He is wrong not to come to terms now that our 
duel is over. We should soon be in agreement and remain 
the best of friends.” 

PART IV 

RETREAT 

CHAPTER DC 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

T he Emperor and the Guard did not leave Moscow until 
about noon on October 19. Then, since the successive re- 
ports of the King of Naples confirmed the retreat of the 
enemy, the Emperor took his whole establishment with him. 
Numbers of refugees followed the army. On the road we met 
many of the wounded from Woronovo, the full details of which 
encounter the Emperor learned only now, when he was already 
on the march. We slept at the manor house of Troitskoie 
where we stayed during the whole of the twentieth to rally our 
forces, for many men and transports had again fallen behind. 