

169 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

appeared to be spreading. A month earlier I bad directed the 
officer in command of each relay post to make a note of what 
was going on in his district on the covering sheet of the des- 
patches, where the time of arrival and departure were always 
entered. These reports from the road I passed to the Emperor 
daily, and he used to read them before an3rthing else. At this 
time they indicated movements of peasants and the presence 
of Cossacks at every stage; and they made a great impression 
on the Emperor, who said to me, as early as the twenty-first: 

“We shall be without news from France; but the worst of 
it is that France will have no news of us.” 

He instructed me to advise anyone writing home to write 
with great discretion, since any letter might be intercepted. 

The Emperor reached Borowsk on the twenty-third. In spite 
of the very bad weather, in the afternoon he reconnoitred the 
neighbourhood of the town and the banks of the river [Protva] 
for a good distance out. But it was not imtil the morning of 
the twenty-fourth that he went forward to within a quarter of 
a league of Malo-Jaroslawetz, where Delzons’s division had 
been fighting since daybreak against Doctorov’s corps. 

While waiting for the arrival of the Viceroy, Delzons ac- 
complished marvels. The Viceroy hurried to his support as 
soon as he knew how much superior were the forces by which 
he was engaged; but Delzons was killed in the midst of his 
men. General Guilleminot took his place and renewed the 
engagement. Like the experienced soldier he was, he occupied 
and fortified a church and two houses which flanked our de- 
fence and which prevented the Russians, although they were 
greatly superior in numbers, from passing beyond those points 
in their different attacks. These fortifications gave the lead- 
ing division of the Fourth Army Corps time to come up and 
relieve him. At the same time Kutusof’s advance-guard came 
up with Doctorov; and the fresh troops put in on both sides 

170 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

not only made the engagement brisker hut turned it into a 
battle. 

The Emperor, who arrived by eleven o’clock, ordered the 
Prince of Eckmiihl to quicken his march and move to the right 
of Prince Eugene, whom the Guard were also ordered to sup- 
port. The First Army Corps went into the line about two 
o’clock. We could see perfectly the movements of the Rus- 
sians, and expected that Kutusof would take full advantage of 
this very strong position^ to block our advance and himself 
take the offensive; but the Fourth Army Corps proved sufficient. 
Davout was hardly engaged. We had at least four thousand 
men put out of action, and a remarkable number of Russians 
were killed. 

That night and the following day, together with the Emperor, 
I went over the battle-ground most carefully. We blamed 
Kutusof for sacrificing a good number of men, only to be beaten 
in the end and fail of his object — ^for since he defended his 
position, he must have intended to hold it at least till nightfall. 
The truth is that Kutusof, having learnt of the Emperor’s move- 
ments only on the twenty-third, was taken by siurprise. The 
successive bodies of troops which arrived later to support Doc- 
torov were only put into action to cover the retreat of his army 
upon Juchnow, for he was unwilling to run the risks of a pitched 
battle. The general opinion was that Kutusof might have bet- 
ter defended his position. For our part, we had to leave it 
in the hands of a small rear-guard. 