

It was here that the Emperor finally decided to abandon 
Moscow. He was forced to this decision by the losses incurred 
at Woronovo, the reports about the state of our cavalry, and 
the realization that the Russieins would not come to terms. He 
was still determined, however, to attack Kutusof; and to that 
end he speeded up his advance. It was his intention, if his 
success were such as he hoped, to push beyond Kaluga and 
destroy the ordnance establishment at Toula, which was the most 
important in all Russia. In any case, he was resolved to direct 
his forces upon Smolensk, which he wished to make his prin- 
cipal outpost. The Duke of Treviso was ordered to evacuate 
Moscow on the twenty-third if he did not in the meantime re- 
ceive other orders. He was to make ready, also, for blowing 
up the Kremlin and the barracks. 

Several detachments of Cossacks appeared on our flank, but 

did not venture to cross our line of march. I had arranged, 

167 

168 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

by sending out detachments, that the couriers from Paris should 
come direct to us from the second relay station before Moscow. 
The Cossacks, however, controlled that point and delayed the 
couriers, so that none reached us for three days. As usual, 
this worried and annoyed the Emperor more than I can ex- 
press. On the second day he said to me: 

“I see it will be absolutely essential to be in closer touch 
with my reserves. It will be useless to drive off Kutusof and 
force him to evacuate Kaluga and his entrenchments: the Cos- 
sacks will keep interrupting my communications so long as I 
haven’t my Poles.” 

The weather was bad [October 21-22] and the ground so 
sodden with rain that we had great difficulty in making Borowsk 
in two marches across country. The draught horses were fin- 
ished. The cold nights were too much for them; and already 
we were beginning to abandon ammimition-cases and trans- 
ports. It was on the evening of the previous day that the Prince 
of Neuchatel told me how for the first time the Emperor, m 
discussing the army, its movements, and the possible issues, 
had made no reference to his former project: the scheme of 
holding Moscow while we occupied the “fertile province of 
Kaluga,” as the Emperor called it. This province must have 
been the apparent rather than the real object of our expedi- 
tion. . . . The Emperor was more than ever set upon driving 
Kutusof from his position and forcing him to an engagement, 
not wishing it to be thought that the unfortunate skirmish at 
Winkovo had compelled him to retire. At no matter what cost, 
there must be some incident in the bulletin to balance the de- 
feat of the King of Naples and prevent Kutusof from flattering 
himself that our retreat was the immediate consequence of it. 

The belated couriers arrived, but only to inform us that a 
body of Cossacks, together with a great number of peasants 
armed and organized as a militia, were cutting off our com- 
mimications beyond Ghjat; and that the range of their activities 