

Some Cossacks appeared that evening on the right of 
Ghorodnia, where headquarters had been established [in a 
weaver’s hut]. They were thought to be a party that had lost 
their way and would blunder into our outposts. We paid less 

^ “Malo-Jaroslawetz stands on heights at the foot of which the river Luja 
runs through a marshy hed. The French, coming from Moscow, had to 
cross the river, then climb the heights, and maintain themselves in Malo- 
Jaroslawetz. The Russians, marching on the other side of the river, had 
merely to enter the town.” — Thiers, XIV, 476. 

171 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

attention to them than we might have done, because about noon 
in the same district, but on the left of the road, we had chased 
off some new Cossacks wearing crosses on their caps. They 
were mounted troops founded on the model of the Don Cos- 
sacks, and named after the provinces that provided them. 

Two army corps were drawn up beyond the town; but the 
roads were so broken up that only one section of the artillery 
had been able, and that with difficulty, to reach their position. 
The Emperor moved back to spend the night [October 24-25] 
in a hut near the bridge at Ghorodnia, a small hamlet one league 
from Malo-Jaroslawetz. Nearly all of us camped in the open. 
The Viceroy’s success had got us nowhere. We held the field, 
but Kutusof had given us the slip. Our situation was there- 
fore unchanged; and the army was not in a position to pursue 
the enemy. 

The Emperor spent the night in receiving reports, issuing 
orders, and, on this occasion, discussing his difficulties with 
the Prince of Neuchatel. He sent for me several times, and 
also for Duroc and the Duke of Istria, and discussed matters 
with us, but without reaching any decision. Should he follow 
Kutusof, who, having abandoned an impregnable position, had 
probably eluded us? And what route should he take to Smo- 
lensk if he did not find the enemy drawn up beyond Malo- 
Jaroslawetz? He had to make up his mind; and the course that 
drew the Emperor away from his enemy, whose measure he 
so much wanted to take, was always the one that came hardest 
to him. 

An hour before daybreak the Emperor sent for me again. 
We were alone. He looked very preoccupied and seemed anx- 
ious to relieve himself of the thoughts that oppressed him. 

“This is a bad business,” he said. “I beat the Russians every 
time, but that doesn’t get me anywhere.” 

172 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

After a quarter hour of silent pacing back and forth in his 
little hut, the Emperor went on: 

“I’m going to find out for myself whether the enemy are 
drawing up for battle, or whether they are retreating, as every- 
thing suggests. That devil Kutusof will never make a fight ol 
it! Fetch the horses — diet’s be ofE!” 

As he spoke he picked up his hat to go. The Duke of Istris 
and the Prince of Neuchatel, who luckily happened to enter 
just as the Emperor was starting out, joined me in trying to 
persuade him to wait until dawn. They reminded him that 
it was very dark — ^that he would reach the outposts before it 
was light enough to see — and that, as the Guard had taken up 
their positions by night, no one was certain where the corps lay. 