

The Guard had been in advance throughout that day, and 
so were obliged to fall back later on in order to take up posi- 
tion. Not having bivouacked until after dark, they did not 
themselves know where they were, or what was the lie of the 
land, but must have thought themselves still in the midst of 
the army. They put out no patrols. They felt secure in the 
belief that the rest of the troops were covering headquarters 
from a distance, and did not trouble even to make contact with 
them. In fact, the Guard and the headquarters took no ac- 
count of anything that went on outside their own area. One 
battalion of the Guard was bivouacked barely three hundred 
yards from the spot, on the same side of the road, where the 

176 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Cossacks had spent the night, and whence they came upon the 
Emperor. 

By night or by day, the Emperor would mount his horse 
without warning: he even took pleasure in going out all of a 
sudden and throwing everyone ofE the scent. His saddle-horses 
were divided into troops. Each troop consisted of two horses 
for himself, one for the Master of Horse, and as many as were 
necessary for the other officers on duty with the Emperor. 
Throughout the whole twenty-four hours there was always one 
troop of horses saddled and bridled. Every olEcer had also 
to have a horse bridled; and the picket on duty, which consisted 
of an officer and twenty light horse, was always saddled and 
bridled. The squadrons in attendance provided and relieved 
the picket. On the other campaigns there was one squadron 
in attendance, but on the Russian there were four — ^half light 
cavalry and half grenadiers and dragoons. The picket never 
left the Emperor. The squadrons followed in echelon forma- 
tion, and saddled only when the Emperor called for his horses. 
As he did so in haste and without warning, he always set out 
with only two or three other persons. The remainder caught up. 

After Moscow, and indeed after Smolensk, the same squad- 
rons remained in attendance for two or three days running: 
men and horses both were worn out. The Emperor usually 
returned to his quarters very late, after nightfall. The squad- 
rons in attendance bivouacked as best they could, hurriedly 
and in the dark. When the Emperor mounted his horse in 
the field he usually set out at the gallop, if only for two or 
three hundred yards. However keen and alert they were, 
therefore, it was difficult for a troop to be actually alongside 
him from the very start. This explains how the Emperor came 
to be almost alone at one moment on the day of this scuffle. 

The Prince of Neuchatel and I were always close behind 
the Emperor’s horse. The general-in-command of the Guard 

177 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

who was then on duty® rode at our side; but during the Rus- 
sian campaign the generals of the Guard all had other com- 
mands, and the Master of Horse then fulfilled their duties by 
right. When mounted, we rode in the following order: an 
advance-guard of four light horse, three orderly ofiicers, two 
or four aides-de-camp — ^this group eighty paces forward; 
the Emperor; behind him the Master of Horse, the Guard’s of- 
ficer of the day, the chief-of-staff; behind these several aides, 
if the Emperor so commanded, and six staff-officers from the 
Emperor’s staff, two other aides-de-camp, and two officers at- 
tached to the chief-of-staff; then the officer and chasseurs con- 
stituting the picket; and then, five hundred paces behind, the 
squadrons in attendance. If we were riding easily, they fol- 
lowed. If the Emperor galloped, they trotted. These details 
show how small was the Emperor’s escort, and bow far he was 
from surrounding himself with a whole host of men, as some 
have asserted. . . . 