

174 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

the enemy’s hands, and forced the Cossacks to recross the river; 
but we were left with many wounded. 

It is clear that if the Emperor had set out, as he had wished, 
before dawn, he would have found himself in the midst of this 
swarm of Cossacks with only his picket and the eight generals 
and officers who accompanied him. If the Cossacks, who came 
face to face with us and at one moment surrounded us, had 
shown more courage and fallen upon our route silently, instead 
of shouting and wrangling at the side of the road, we should 
have been carried ofi before the squadron could rescue us. 
No doubt we should have sold our lives as dearly as one can 
by hitting out blindly with a light sword in the dark, but the 
Emperor would certainly have been either killed or captured. 
No one would even have known where to look for him, in a 
wide plain dotted all over with clumps of trees under cover 
of which the Cossacks had been able to hide within musket- 
shot of the road and the Guard. 

If these details had not the testimony of the army and of 
so many trustworthy men to confirm them, they might be called 
in question. And how, indeed, can anyone believe that a man 
of such foresight, a sovereign, and the greatest commander of 
all time, could have been in danger of capture five hundred 
yards from his headquarters? — on a high road, the route of 
march of the whole army, and among the bivouacs of a con- 
siderable guard both of cavalry and infantry? Is it credible 
that a thousand men could have lain in ambush and passed the 
night within the range of three or four musket-shots from our 
headquarters without being discovered? But this is all ex- 
plained and proved by the following particulars, which I have 
summarized with care as being illustrative of the Emperor’s 
habits. 

We had very few light-armed troops left. They had not been 
spared, and were sorely harassed; and since they had been sent 
that same day to other points, this section of our position was 

175 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

poorly covered. In general our men fought well but kept a 
poor look-out. In no other army can the duties of reconnais- 
sance have been so neglected. At nightfall they set up a few 
sentry-posts hither and yon, so as to have time to mount be- 
fore the enemy might arrive; but they seldom took the trouble 
to cover rear or flank. 

The Emperor only selected his headquarters at the last mo- 
ment. Two considerations had led him to form this habit: 
first, a measure of wise prudence; and second — ^he admitted 
this himself — ^the advantage of having the whole of his entou- 
rage at his call until the very end of the day, thus keeping every- 
one on the alert. 

He used sometimes to say to me: “If you make ever3rthing 
difficult, the reaUy hard things seem less so.” 

Officers and men sometimes suffered from these practices, 
no doubt. But that did not trouble the Emperor, who looked 
only to the main result and, being in the midst of his army and 
of a considerable guard, gave little thought to the organization 
of detail. Ever intent on taking the offensive, he failed to 
notice the trouble the Cossacks gave, now that the odds were 
against us. 