

The Emperor wavered for some time [October 25]. The 
fight at Malo-Jaroslawetz was, in his opinion, not enough to 
counterbalance the defeat of the King of Naples. Moreover, 
at the moment he wished to put himself in the right about that 
morning’s escapade. It was only after long insistence on our 
part — and after he had weighed the probability that Kutusof, 
if he would not stand and fight in an excellent position such 
as Malo-Jaroslawetz, was not at all likely to join battle twenty 
leagues further on — ^that we were able to persuade the Emperor, 
in this unofficial sort of council, to take the road to Borowsk. 
There part of the troops, the greater part of the artillery, and 
all the carriages were already stationed. In view of the state 
of the horses, this last was a weighty consideration. 

Did the Emperor wish it to seem that he was yielding only 

®The Guard had four generals-m-command: Gouvion Saint-Cyr (cuiras- 
siers), Eugene (chasseurs), Baraguey d’Hilliers (dragoons), and Junot 
(hussars). 

178 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to the convictions of others? Or did he really believe that he 
might yet break the Russian army and at last turn the whole 
campaign to his advantage before he decided on his winter 
quarters? I cannot say. But it is certain that the same ques- 
tion had been urgently presented to him during the night by 
some of the same people, and that he had resisted every con- 
ceivable argument brought forward to persuade him. He 
merely postponed his decision until he could see for himself 
whether the enemy had really escaped him. It was for this 
reason that he had wished to set out before dawn. 

He came hack to Ghorodnia, and from there sent out his 
orders. Next day the army marched towards Borowsk, where 
the staff slept on the night of the twenty-sixth. A few inhabit- 
ants had returned to the town. It might be thought that when 
he left Moscow the Emperor had somehow anticipated the course 
of events, for he had ordered various precautionary measures 
against the Cossacks. But, as we have seen, they were unavail- 
ing. Nobody was used to keeping good guard, and all were 
too much disheartened and too exhausted to change their ways. 

Every man’s first thought on arrival was to find food for 
himself and his horses; and this could only be done by going 
off the main road, and so risking capture by Cossacks or mur- 
der by peasants. The marches were too hard, and the cavalry 
too few and exhausted, for adequate detachments to be sent out 
on reconnaissance or to cover our flanks. We made light, as 
far as was possible, of the risks run by the Emperor in the 
scuffle with the Cossacks, but within forty-eight hours the whole 
army knew the story; and the impression made was regrettable. 
This incident should have served as a warning to everyone, 
proving as it did our want of vigilance; but the lesson passed 
unnoted. At the same time it reflected no credit on the daring 
or courage of the Cossacks, who allowed themselves to be driven 
off, and yielded their gains to two or three hundred horsemen. 