

The following day, the twenty-eighth, we passed within sight 
of Mojaisk but did not enter it. On his way by, the Emperor 
halted beside the road to obtain some account of the evacuation 
and of the distribution of supplies that he had ordered for 
the wounded.® He himself took part in placing many of them 
in his own carriages, and in any that passed. In spite of all 
warnings that this would inevitably mean death, the unfortunate 
men who had left the field hospital to drag themselves along 
the road were placed, by his orders, wherever they could hang 
on — on the covers of waggons, and even in the forage-carts, or 
in the back of vehicles already crowded with the sick and 
wounded from Malo-Jaroslawetz. And in due course they were 
the victims of the Emperor’s good intentions, who had thought 
to remove them from any danger they might nm through the 
barbarity of the Russian peasants. Those who did not die of 

® When they left the sick-ward they were given provisions for two days. 
This was a quite insufficient supply, since those to whom the wounded were 
given in charge, having for the most part no provisions themselves, could 
not come to their help. Moreover, a considerable number, hurrying to get 
away and reach those fatal transports in which they thought they saw their 
salvation, and already greatly inconvenienced by being outside the town, 
did not take these rations. They soon regretted them; for though on the 
first and second day some of them moved men to pity, they were not long 
in learning that hunger makes those who suffer it insensible to aU humane 
feeling. — Caulaincourt’s note. 

188 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

exhaustion, through the discomforts of their position, either fell 
victims to the cold nights or died of hunger. The wounded 
of the Guard, and those who were in the Emperor’s carriages, 
were nourished and cared for . . . hut of the rest, since all 
the other carriages were lost, not a score of them reached Wilna. 
Men in the best of health could not have endured this mode 
of travel, and could not have held on to the vehicles in the 
positions in which most of them were placed. So one can 
imagme the state of these unhappy men when they had covered 
a league or two. They had to endure jolting, fatigue, and cold 
all at once. 

The carriages, drawn by tired and underfed horses, were 
travelling fourteen and fifteen hours of the twenty-four. They 
kept to Ae road, and found no place that afforded them any 
supplies. During the halts the drivers went aside from the 
road with some of their horses in search of food and fodder, 
however poor, in the deserted villages and encampments. 
Being uncertain as to what they would have to-morrow, they 
kept whatever they found carefully to themselves. Often they 
had not even time to start a fire. Never was there a sadder 
fate, a more wretched or hopeless position. Inevitable death 
seemed to beset us on all sides. The surgeons and doctors, 
with neither food nor physic nor bandages, and having for the 
most part not even bread for themselves, were forced to shun 
the hapless sick or wounded, to whom they could no longer be 
of any service. 