

At Ghjat we found the remnant of a consignment sent from 
France for the Emperor’s household in the charge of two foot- 
men. Part of the consignment had been pillaged by the Cos- 
sacks, Having no means of transport for these supplies, we 
distributed them all round, and there was abundance at head- 
quarters. Clos-Vougeot and Chambertin were the common 
drink. We stored up strength and a sense of well-being against 
the days of real privation just ahead of us. Everyone still had 
a few provisions. There was a small ration of biscuit. The 
men endured the long marches well, in spite of die cold nights 
and several bad patches of ground which a brief thaw had made 
very rough going. It was otherwise with the horses. All but the 

strongest died. The reserve horses were harnessed up; and 

194 

HUNGER 

195 

as there were no longer enough of them, we were already be- 
ginning to abandon some of the vehicles. 

So far the Cossacks following our rear-guard gave very 
little trouble. The state of the cavalry and the speed of our 
march prevented us from sending out scouting parties — Whence 
we had no news of the enemy. However, as there were no 
Cossacks alongside our route, the raiding parties from the head 
of the column went out and returned, seeing only a few peas- 
ants who fled at our approach. This easy foraging had one 
great disadvantage, in that the sense of security thus created 
increased the number of stragglers. Since there was no food 
without raids, everyone wanted to raid. The raiders and strag- 
glers of the rear-guard were not so fortunate. The enemy cap- 
tured a good number of them every day. Satisfied no doubt 
with this accomplishment, they seldom ventured within range 
of our muskets. 

On the thirtieth, we made Weliczewo our headquarters for the 
night. This fine manor, however, had not a single rafter left, 
and we had difficulty in collecting enough material from the 
wreckage to patch up one room for the Emperor and one for 
the chief-of-staff. The billiard-table was the only piece of 
furniture still intact. Here we received the delayed despatches. 

On the following day, the thirty-first, the headquarters and 
the Guard were stationed at Wiasma, where we stayed through 
the first of November. The Emperor did not even make a guess 
at Kutusofs march; and Kutusof left us very quiet. The 
weather was fine. The Emperor repeated more than once that 
the Russian autumn was like the autumns at Fontainebleau; 
and judging what the weather would be like in ten days’ or a 
fortnight’s lime by what it was on that particular day, he said 
to the Prince of Neuchatel that this was just the weather one 
had at Fontainebleau around St. Hubert’s day, and that the 
stories people told about the Russian winter would only scare 
children. 

196 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

On the second we halted at Satnlowo; on the third at Slaw* 
kowo, where we had the first snow. It was the general opinion 
that the security of our flanks during the preceding few days 
the enemy having barely kept up with our rear-guard ^was 
only a ruse to foster confidence and to bring about, somewhere 
near Borodino, another skirmish on the lines of Woronovo. 
But Kutusof s weak pursuit was actually due, as we afterwards 
discovered, to his uncertainty regarding our movements. He 
did not know definitely until the twenty-seventh that our march 
against him had been only the prelude to a retreat. On the 
twenty-eighth he directed Miloradovitch, to whom he attached 
a strong body of infantry and cavalry, to attack us and cut off 
our rearward divisions before we reached Wiasma. 