

The Emperor, more and more annoyed, was raising his voice 
to the point where the picket could hear him. From the first 
his personal officers had withdrawn a little. Everyone was on 
p ins and needles. Glancing at each other, we could see in every 
eye the distress caused by this painful scene between a sovereign 
ruler and a captured officer — for of course what Wintzingerode 
had done at Moscow was not worth a second thought. 1 kept 
on talking to the Duke of Piacenza [then Charles Lebrun], 
who, like myself, commented very unhappily on the scene that 
was taking place. The Prince of Neuchatel was even more 
uncomfortable, as he had remained close to the Emperor. We 
could see this in his expression, and his remarks confirmed it 
when, on some pretext, he was able to move away and join us. 
The Emperor called for guardsmen to remove M. Wintzingerode. 
When no one passed on this order, he called again in such loud 
tones for guardsmen that the two attached to the picket came 
forward. The Emperor then repeated to the prisoner some of 
the charges he had already made against him, and added that 
he deserved to be shot as a traitor. At this word M. Wintzinge- 
rode, who had been listening with eyes on the ground, stood 
erect, raised his head, and, looking straight at the Emperor and 
at those standing nearest to him, said loudly: 

“As whatever you please. Sire — ^but not as a traitor.” 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 183 

And he walked away by himself, ahead of the guards, who 
kept their distance. 

The King of Naples, who had joined the Emperor a few mo- 
ments before, tried in vain to calm him, as did also the Prince 
of Neuchatel. He was walking to and fro with hurried, nervous 
steps, summoning now one of us, now another, to vent his anger. 
He met only with silence. I have never seen him so angry. 
The poor Prince of Neuchatel was beside himself. He came 
to talk with me, and sent one of his aides-de-camp to instruct 
the guards that they were to treat the prisoner with considera- 
tion.® He directed his own officers to supply him with anything 
he required. Meanwhile, to various people, the Emperor was 
telling all over again the tale of his grudges, both old and new, 
against this general. Some dated from earlier, even, than the 
war-before-last against Austria. The Prince of Neuchatel, like 
myself, had never seen the Emperor so completely lose control 
of himself. 

A little way o£E we could see a fine large house. The Em- 
peror, whose nervous irritability had not passed off, sent two 
squadrons to sack and fire it, adding: “Since these barbarians 
like to hum their towns, we must help them.” 

The order was all too well obeyed. It was the only time I 
ever heard him give such an order; as a rule, indeed, he tried 
to prevent destruction which would damage only private in- 
terests or ruin private citizens. He returned to Wereia before 
nightfall. Not one inhabitant remained. 

I called for the Prince of Neuchatel as we had agreed, and 
together we went to the King of Naples to make him undertake 
to speak to the Emperor about M. Wintzingerode. We had ob- 
tained information from him about his family and the exact 
date when he had left Germany; and the Prince of Neuchatel 