

In this conversation with the Emperor I brought in, as we 
had agreed with the Prince of Neuchatel, the plea that in the 
interest of French prisoners some consideration should be shown 
this man. 

“That will not be the reason,” replied the Emperor sharply, 
“for my showing him mercy; his behaviour has put him outside 
ordinary rights. It is because I never really wanted to do him 
any harm; and though the Emperor Alexander is at fault in 
making such a man his aide-de-camp, I wiU not be likewise at 
fault in ill-using a man who is particularly close to him. I 
shall send him to France, with a good escort, to prevent him 
from intriguing throughout Europe with three or four other 
firebrands of his sort.” 

186 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

The Emperor, in dismissing me, told me again not to mention 
as yet his good intentions toward M. Wintzingerode. I con- 
fined myself to telling the Prince of Neuchatel that he could 
be easy about the fate of his prisoner, and he went with the King 
of Naples to dine in the Emperor’s quarters, intending to obtain 
a definite decision in this matter. A moment later the Emperor 
sent for me again, just as we were having dinner, and questioned 
me about the family and mode of life of young Narishkin. He 
directed me to tell Narishkin, as though it were from myself, 
that he wanted peace; that it rested with the Tsar to make an 
honourable one; . . . that his position was very favourable, 
and enabled him to offer good terms to the Tsar Alexander, 
because it was clear that no military reverse compelled him 
to it; that the moment was no less favourable to Russia, as the 
movement of the French army, being in some sort a retreat, 
counterbalanced the constant advantages our troops had ob- 
tained, and put both governments in a position to negotiate with 
honour; . . . that the Emperor would possibly send him, 
Narishkin, back to the outposts because he knew that his family 
were particularly close to the Tsar and he did not wish the Tsar 
to remain any longer in anxiety about Narishkin’s safety. . . . 

I went back to M. Narishkin, who had dined with us; I re- 
assured him as to his general’s fate, and carried out all the 
Emperor’s instructions. 

Meanwhile the King of Naples and the Prince of Neuchatel 
talked to the Emperor with their usual amiability. M. Winfr 
zingerode was regarded as a prisoner and sent to France — 
and M. Narishkin with him. I gave M. Narishkin some money 
and, after overtaking our carriages on the following day, sent 
him an overcoat, as he had only his uniform. My body-servant 
found them marching with the head of our column, which they 
followed as far as Ghjat. Thence they were started off to Paris 
with an officer and a guardsman as escort. Chance served them 

187 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

well, for they were set free by M. Tchernychev [and a troop 
of Cossacks], who fell in with them beyond Borissow. 

The Duke of Treviso had evacuated Moscow on the twenty- 
third, after blowing up the Kremlin and the barracks in accord- 
ance with the orders he had received. On the twenty-seventh 
he was at Mojaisk. From there, for several days, they had 
been sending back the wounded by the scanty means of trans- 
port they had been able to get together. Some consignments 
of rice had arrived there, and the Duke of Abrantes had es- 
tablished depots which supplied the needs of the first arrivals. 