

As far as Orcha we had to cross a veritable desert. The 
country on either hand of our route had been marched over, 
eaten out, and left bare, by the army and by the detachments 
that joined us. The plight of the carriages can be imagined. 
Having left Moscow with us, already full of refugees, women, 
and children, they had had to take up the men wounded at 
Winkovo and Malo-Jaroslawetz; and to these, as I have said, 
were added also the wounded at Mojaisk. They were put on 

189 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

the top-seats of the carts, on the fore-carriage, behind on the 
trunks, on the seats, in the fodder-carts. They were even put 
on the hoods of the waggons, when there was no room under- 
neath. One can imagine the spectacle our convoys presented. 
At the least jolt those who were most insecurely placed fell 
off; the drivers took no care. The driver following, if he were 
not distracted or in a stupor, would not he minding his horses; 
or even, for fear of stopping and losing his place in the line, 
he would drive pitilessly on over the body of the wretch who 
haii-fallen. Nor did the other vehicles coming behind pay any 

My eyes never saw a sight so horrible as the march of our 

army forty-eight hours after Mojaisk. Every heart was closed 

to pity by the fear of starving, of losing the overladen vehicles, 

of the horses die, already exhausted by toil and starva- 

. 4*' 'jf still shudder when I say that I have seen men deliber- 

drive their horses at speed over rough ground, so as to 

etnu'sf the unfortunates with whom they were over-weighted; 
r6 

ind although they knew that hoofs would mutilate them or 
tfieels crush them, they would yet smile triumphantly when 
i iclt freed them of one of those wretches. Every man thought 
' ofaimself, and of himself alone. Every man fell that his life 
(|)ended on the preservation of his little vehicle with its few 
r visions, and would have sacrificed twenty lives to spare the 

/ f hacks that drew this last treasure. Each heartened him- 
grj i willi the thought that in front of him he would find food- 
‘.f uffs; but except in some large towns, such as Smolensk, which 
jVi-few stores, they found nothing. The horses were fed 
CO rotting com and straw from old encampments, except when 

ey were driven off from the road for at least a league’s dis- 

^ nee, at die risk of capture and massacre. 

s On the twenty-eighth the headquarters staff hailed at Ous- 

^^‘Snskeie Fa ruined manor house between Mojaisk and Boro- 
set ^ ^ 

va»no]. At two in the morning the Emperor sent for me. He 

190 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

was in bed. He told me to see that the door was well closed, 
and come and sit close to the bed; this was not his habit. He 
then spoke to me about the situation in general, and about the 
state of the army, whose extreme disorganization he still did 
not or would not admit. He ended by bidding me speak to 
him frankly, and tell him what I myself thought. I did not 
have to be pressed, but gave the Emperor my opinion in full 
on the consequences that would ensue from the disorganization 
of the army, and especially on the miseries that would be 
caused by the severe cold. I reminded him of the reply which 
the Tsar Alexander was reported to have made when he re- 
ceived, through Lauriston, the proposals of peace sent from 
Moscow: “My campaign is just beginning.” I told him that 
he must take this reply literally: the further the season ad- 
vanced, the more everything would favour the Russians and, 
above all, the Cossacks. 