

Some of the soldiers, taking him for a mere townsman, let 
hiiTi run on without paying much heed to him or his talk. A 
more perspicacious hussar, having heard some of his final re- 
marks, kept him under observation. Shocked by his sugges- 
tions, he arrested him and took him to the guard-room. From 
there, in spite of his protests and objections, he was taken be- 
fore the officer in charge of the city. When he was recognized 
as a Russian officer, he vainly tried to plead that he had come 
to parley. The story would not hold water. He was kept under 
arrest and taken to the Duke of Treviso, who treated him with 
consideration, but as a prisoner of war, being unable to accept 

181 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

the pretence by which M. Wintzingerode wished to extricate 
himself; for he had come secretly, in disguise, in an attempt 
to suborn our soldiers, and had not been announced by a trum- 
peter as an emissary. 

M. Narishkin, son of the Grand Chamberlain and aide-de- 
camp to M. Wintzingerode, waited at a distance with a few 
Cossacks. Not seeing his commander return, he enquired of 
the townsmen what had happened, and they reported that he 
had been taken under arrest. Then, without giving notice, with- 
out sotmding any bugle or calling an ofiEcer or sergeant to a 
parley, Narishkin went over to the French outpost and simply 
gave himself up, holding it a point of honour not to abandon 
his chief. This filial devotion on the part of an officer com- 
manding a troop of men excited some surprise. The young 
man was sent to the marshal under guard. 

The Emperor, to whom the capture of these officers was re- 
ported, ordered them to he brought to him. They arrived just 
as we did at the spot on the road where the Emperor chose to 
dismoxmt. M. Wintzingerode was brou^t to the Emperor by 
himself; and the Emperor reproached him for serving with the 
Russians when he was bom in Germany, the subject of a country 
either ruled by France or allied with her. He added that, M. 
Wintzingerode being one of his subjects, he would have him 
tried by a court-martial, which would also charge hhn with 
espionage; and that he would he shot as a traitor to his country. 
The more M. Wintzingerode tried to justify himself, the more 
angry the Emperor became. He reproached him with having 
been for a long time in the pay of the English, with having taken 
part in all the plots against him and against France, with trying 
to suborn the soldiers at Moscow, urging them to desert, and 
advising them to commit acts of cowardice, in the name of a 
sovereign who would have despised them for it. M. Wint- 
zingerode replied that he was not bom in a coxmtry belonging 
to France; furliiermore, that he had not been in his own country 

182 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

since childhood, and that he had been in the Russian service for 
many years on account of his attachment and gratitude to the 
Tsar Alexander, who had befriended him. 

Then, attempting to put a different colour on his actions at 
Moscow, for which the Emperor justly rebuked him, he went 
on to say that he parleyed to avoid useless bloodshed, and above 
all to avoid further misfortune for the town; that since the 
French were going to evacuate it, he limited himself to the sug- 
gestion that they should do so without fighting — a suggestion to 
their common advantage — ^and so forth. 