

They are certainly the finest light troops in the world for 

179 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

guarding an army, scouting the countryside, or carrying out 
skirmishing sallies; but whenever we faced up to them, and 
marched against them boldly in a solid body, they never ofEered 
resistance, even when they outnumbered us by two to one. 
Attempt to attack them singly, or charge them in scattered 
formation, and one is lost. They return to pursue as quickly 
as they withdraw from attack. Being better horsemen, and 
mounted on more responsive horses than ours, they can escape 
us when necessary or pursue us when it suits them. They spare 
their horses: they may sometimes race them, or set them to long 
and exacting rides, but they generally spare them the futile 
running to-and-fro by which we wear out our own. 

On the twenty-seventh the Emperor passed the night at Wereia, 
to give the artillery and other horse-drawn equipment time to 
take the lead. Having started very early, he reached the town 
during the morning, passed straight through, and did not halt 
until he was half-a-league beyond, on the road to Mojaisk, at 
the top of a rise overlooking the country round. There he 
stayed to watch the troops and convoys pass; and there they 
brought him Lieutenant-General the Count of Wintzingerode,* 
aide-de-camp to the Tsar. He had commanded a body of light 
troops stationed on the road to Tver in order to cover Peters- 
burg and keep watch on Moscow, where he was taken prisoner. 

As divergent accoxmts of this affair have been told since the 
war, I shall give here the particulars I noted down, from the 
reports made to the Emperor, at the time it took place. Having 
probably learnt that the French army had gone, M. Wintzinge- 
rode, who was near Moscow, went into the suburbs and entered 
into talk with some of the inhabitants. Several slight attacks 

^ Ferdinand Charles Frederic Guillaume de Wintzingerode, bom at Allen- 
dor£, near Gottingen in Wiirttemberg, on Febmary 15, 1770, died at Wies- 
baden on June 17, 1818. He had been one of the authors of the Coalition 
of 1809. 

180 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

by the Cossacks or by armed peasants had forced the Duke of 
Treviso to draw in his small forces so as not to expose them to 
danger in that large city. Our troops being concentrated round 
the Kremlin, M. Wintzingerode came disguised into the town 
as far as our outposts; and he entertained the hope of carrying 
out some military operation which should force the Duke of 
Treviso to evacuate, or else of achieving the same result by 
suborning our soldiers; which the inhabitants thought would 
be easy, as they believed the men to be discontented. Our 
troops were guarding only the Kremlin and our line of com- 
munications to Mojaisk, which led also to the army. M. Wint- 
zingerode, wearing a civilian top-coat over his uniform, got into 
conversation with the soldiers at our furthest outpost. He was 
accompanied by several of the townspeople who also spoke 
French, and, following his example or instructions, these men 
talked informally to the soldiers about what was going on — 
the set-backs we had experienced, the privations ahead of us, 
the useless dangers we were running, the goodness and gener- 
osity of the Tsar Alexander, his kindness toward foreigners, his 
liking for soldiers, the uselessness of fighting now that the Em- 
peror Napoleon was in retreat, how advantageous it would be 
to lay down arms and live in peace until the end of the war in 
a country so ready to welcome them, and so forth. 