

“Your prophet Alexander has been mistaken more 
once,” he said; hut there was no lightness in the ton^.-x his 
reply. 

The Emperor did not seem convinced of the truth of my fore- 
cast. He flattered himself that the superior intelligence of 
troops would enable them somehow to safeguard themselws 
against the cold — ^that they would take the same piecautioas 
as the Russians, or even improve on them. He did not questio' 
that the army would establish its winter-quarters at Orc})?f‘’or 
Witepsk. He would not yet admit that he might be .forced to 
retire behind the Beresina. . . . The arrival of the Polish Co' 
sacks, of whom he still expected to find fifteen hundred.„**i^*^((, 
thousand in a few days, ought, it seemed to him, ei-iirely tcs 
change the situation and the state of our affairs; for they woulc 
guard the army and give our soldiers time to rest and fcec 
themselves. Since Malo-Jaroslawetz these wretches had lived or 
horseflesh and a little mouldy flour paste. And this latte.Jf'ridur- 
ishment was had only by those who had gone on marauding or- 

191 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

peditions; for the rest, they lived on grilled horseflesh alone. 
Horses that fell in their tracks were carved up while still alive.’^ 

After an hour’s conversation about the army, about Russia, 
Poland, the prosperous state of France, and the means of mak- 
ing good his losses, the Emperor reached the main question, 
about which he had sent for me, and to which he had led up 
with this introduction. He told me it was possible — it was even 
probable — ^that he would go to Paris as soon as he had estab- 
lished the army in some definite position. He asked what I 
thought of this proposal: whether it would make a bad im- 
pression on the troops; whether it would not be the best way 
of reorganizing the army, and thus of holding Europe with a 
firm hand and keeping everything quiet; and whether, finally, 
I foresaw any difficulties about crossing Prussia without an 
escort. 

He added that in a week’s time the Russian army would be 
in no better slate to give battle than his own. They too needed 
rest and reorganization; it froze as hard for the Russians as 

^In another connection, Caulaincourt wrote of these scenes; 

• . Bad luck for the horse that fell! It was pounced on at once, and 
its driver could seldom protect it. The first-comers attacked the rump. 
The more expert cut open the flank and took the best morsel, the liver, 
which was of course the tenderest. While all this went on, no one ever 
thought to knock the poor beast in the head; everyone was too anxious to 
g5ft back on the march. 

“The most fortunate stragglers made gruel, if that name can be given to 
dirty flour — ^more often it was bran — ^that was swept up from the dust of 
granaries and mixed with water. Lucky for those who had saved any kind 
^ f utensil to cook it in. Such men went pot in hand, and treasured their 
i^.^iets more carefully than their cash. But since we had to laugh despite 
oiir iii* *y, the wretches who marched with skillets were called the pastry- 
cooks; aiJi even those who were starving joked at the expense of the clever 
fellows who had saved the means of keeping alive. If you were one of 
the pastry-cooks, and came up to a fire to cook your gruel, men who had 
no pot queued up behind you to get the loan of yours. Anyone who found 
some potatoes was the object of universal envy. Once we were in Poland 
the big estates offered a plentiful supply, but they were remote and widely 
scattered, and none wished to stray so far off the road. Master and ser- 
vant, colonel and private — all alike lacked everything.” 