

192 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

for us. Moreover, the way in which Kutusof was following 
us without embarking on any major operation proved that he 
lacked the necessary strength. We had travelled so slowly, he 
said, and with so many stops, that it should have been easy 
for him to get ahead of us; Kutusof must know we were march- 
ing in column of route; yet we heard nothing of him. He said 
further that we should find a fresh and well-organized army 
at Smolensk, and another on the Beresina. . . . 

I told the Emperor that, since our plight seemed to me more 
precarious than he could see or believe, I felt no hesitation 
about the remedy. There was but one: that he should date his 
orders of the day, like his decrees, from the Palace of the 
Tuileries. 

I told him that I would not be restrained by minor considera- 
tions, such as what might be said or thought in the army, when 
the question really was what might be attempted in Europe. I 
added that what he had thought of doing was the one thing 
which could be really useful, the one thing which a faithful 
servant could advise. He had no need to hesitate: he needed 
only to choose his moment carefully. As to the danger of 
crossing Prussia, it could be avoided by travelling under an- 
other name. Since nobody would know of the journey in ad- 
vance, the possible dangers could be classed with the thousand 
risks to which one is exposed every day. 

I tried to open the Emperor’s eyes to the real state of the 
army, pointing out that the evils of its disorganization were all 
the more diflScult to check because discouragement on the part 
of certain leaders was one of its causes. They were indeed let- 
ting their units break up entirely, and would do nothing to 
keep the soldiers in hand, lest they should have to give battle 
with the men, too few in number, whose loyalty had made them 
stay with the colours. I told the Emperor what impression I 
thought would be made, not only in France but in Europe, by 
the news of his retreat, and, even more, by the news of those 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 193 

disasters in which he was still reluctant to believe; and I drew 
the conclusion that his return was necessary to offset this. 

The Emperor, in the end, seemed less sceptical about my 
forebodings. He thought that only his presence [at Paris] 
could adequately hasten the mustering of all the forces needful 
to give us an army in three months. He ended by asking if I 
did not think that overtures to the Tsar Alexander, now that 
the Russian provinces would be evacuated, might not lead to 
peace. 

“No more than at Moscow,” I replied. “The news of our 
retreat will have made everyone exultant.” 

It was half-past five when the Emperor dismissed me. He 
told me to think over what he had said, and that he would dis- 
cuss it with me again after he had talked to the Prince of 
Neuchatel. 

CHAPTER X 

HUNGER 

O N the next day, October 29, we were at Ghjat. The cold 
was already intense. The despatches, which were now 
more frequent as we were going to meet them, had again 
been interrupted; since the previous day enemy parties had 
appeared on our line of communications. The latest despatches 
from Paris were dated in September. At Borowsk we had 
begun to feel the cold. Only the surface of the ground was 
frozen. The weather was fine, and the nights were quite en- 
durable in the open if one had a fire. Here at Ghjat the winter 
was already more noticeable. Since leaving Wereia, I had 
taken to travelling on foot, I made the daily marches of the 
army and found it beneficial, for I did not suffer from the cold 
and felt no indisposition during our long retreat. 