

“The Emperor’s violence “was disapproved; no one took any notice of it, 
but on the contrary everyone hastened to wait upon the captive general to 
reassure and condole with him.” — Segur, Histoire de Napoleon, II, 145. 

184 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

had already taken an opportunity, on the way back, of explain- 
ing to the Emperor that M. Wintzingerode was not one of his 
siibjects. I was easy about the outcome of this affair in propor- 
tion to the Emperor’s annoyance; for princes, like other men, 
have a conscience which bids them right the wrongs they have 
done. But as the hours seem long to prisoners, we were im- 
patient to obtain the decision, which we could foresee, but which 
alone could remove all anxiety. 

The Emperor sent to me to enquire if I had news of the 
courier. This order seemed to me to promise well, for it was 
much earlier than he could possibly arrive. The Emperor, 
although considerably calmed down, still needed to vent his 
spleen. I listened, and agreed that M. Wintzingerode’s be- 
haviour at Moscow had been irregular; that he had made him- 
self liable to trial and judgment by the corps which had taken 
him; but I concluded by saying that the Emperor could not 
have sent for him and spoken to him himself merely in order 
to show him a pointless severity — ^for the Emperor, I said, had 
used his prisoner so sternly in words that no further punish- 
ment was needed. I added that severity would now look like 
personal vengeance, and an act of malice against the Tsar 
Alexander, whose aide-de-camp the prisoner was; and that rulers 
had no need, after so many cannon-balls had been fired, to 
come to grips with each other in person. 

The Emperor began to laugh, and pulled my ear affection- 
ately, as was his habit when he sought to tease people. He said: 

“You’re right; but this Wintzingerode is a bad character — 
a schemer. Is it proper for a man of his rank to go about suborn- 
ing soldiers? — ^to lower himself to play the spy, the pimp? — 
to allow himself to use his sovereign’s name to incite soldiers 
to cowardice and mutiny? I shall send him to France. . . . 
I would rather they had taken a Russian: these foreigners in 
the service of the highest bidder are poor booty. ... So it’s 

185 

SAUVE-QUI-PEUT 

for Alexander’s sake that you take an interest in him? Well, 
well, we won’t hurt him.” 

The Emperor gave me a little tap on the cheek, his signal 
mark of affection. From the first I had seen that he only wanted 
an excuse to go back on his words. 

I did not wait for dismissal to go off with such good news; 
but the Emperor called me back and instructed me to persuade 
M. Narishkin to dine with us. He added that he would send 
him back to the Russian outposts in a few days, but that I was 
not to mention it. 

“As to M. Wintzingerode,” the Emperor said to me jokingly, 
“you don’t take so much interest in him because he isn’t a 
Russian.” 

Then he began again the tale of all his faults: 

“He is a secret agent of ihe London government. He was 
a spy in Vienna, a spy in Petersburg. He is a framer of in- 
trigues wherever he goes, and doesn’t deserve the least con- 
sideration — certainly not, on any grounds, the post of aide-de- 
camp to the Tsar Alexander, for close personal duties of that 
kind belong only to bom subjects, honourable men against 
whom there is no political scandal.” 