

HUNGER 

211 

he would be able to put the army into quarters as soon as he 
had joined the Volhynia and Dwina corps. He was expecting 
the arrival of the Polish Cossack levies which he had announced 
we should find near Smolensk. Was he misled in this respect, 
or did he promise this reinforcement to create an illusory hope 
in the minds of the rest? I do not know. The fact remains, 
however, that in Poland they were not busying themselves over- 
much about these levies. Our communications had been in- 
tercepted for several days; we had no news from France, from 
Wilna, or even from the Dwina corps. 

These circumstances were among the Emperor’s chief cares; 
he showed, however, a firmness of character and an impassi- 
bility which sometimes irritated those who approached him, but 
were calculated to encourage those who were most downcast. 
All those who had money (and everyone had a certain amount) 
found supplies at Smolensk. Provisions had arrived there from 
France for the Emperor’s household, together with rice and 
many other foodstuffs for the army. The Emperor’s wine- 
merchant, who had imported into Smolensk as a speculation a 
great quantity of wines, brandy and spirits, sold his entire stock 
for its weight in gold- We had already suffered so much that 
even the rank and file spent all they had to procure a bottle 
of brandy. 

CHAPTER XI 

ICE 

T he Emperor left Smolensk on November 14, after ensur- 
ing a sufficient supply of flour for the Duke of Elchingen, 
who, acting as rear-guard, was due to arrive that same 
night. We halted at Korytnia [fifteen miles on], where we ar- 
rived quite early. The road was very hilly, and so difficult 
that we outstripped the carriages, which had left the day before. 
It was simply a sheet of ice; and the steep slopes, frequently 
found in that part of the country, were already littered with 
abandoned horses that had been unable to struggle to their feel. 
The leaders were so irresponsible, the riders and drivers of 
the waggons so tired, and their time so filled with marching 
and searching for food, that the artillery, like the cavalry, had 
not had a single horse shod for ice. 

An hour after we arrived at Korytnia we learnt that, one 
league from where we were, the Cossacks had just attacked a 
small artillery park and the convoy of soldiers who were bring- 
ing back the trophies from Moscow.^ Moreover, the Emperor’s 
carriages, which we had passed, had just joined this park. The 
Cossacks had taken advantage of the moment when, the column 
having halted in order to double-up the teams for the ascent 
of one of those mountains of ice, there was a space between 
the front and rear of the column, so that the small detachments 
guarding it could not defend the whole of it. The Cossacks 
captured about ten horses and some of the Emperor’s trans- 

1 Among the trophies lost was the cross of Ivan Veliki, which Napoleon 
had intended for the dome of the Invalides. — CasteUane, Journal, 1, 187. 

