

198 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

flattering himself that he would be able to take up a position 
at Smolensk. 

The danger, however, was not in the attacks of the Cossacks, 
which our soldiers, when in platoons, never feared and had 
always repulsed when they were so minded. The danger lay 
in hunger, in the lack of provisions, and in the absence of any 
organized service of supply, which led to the disorganization 
of all the units — an inevitable consequence of the speed of the 
march and the devastation over this line of country. It would 
have been necessary to limit the march to three or four leagues 
a day, measured along the route, in order to cover as much 
ground again in collecting food on our flanks. In this way the 
soldiers would have followed the flag, and would nearly all 
have been saved. The enemy, however, would have gained 
the lead, or else overtaken us and attacked us from all quarters: 
and to obviate this danger, it was held, the other disadvantages 
had to be endured. 

The Emperor, thinking that this attack by the Russians was 
a general movement of their whole army, decided to halt. By 
massing his troops near Slawkowo he hoped to have a good 
opportunity of falling unexpectedly upon the enemy, who 
thought they were only following up a rear-guard, and so of 
making them regret their rash pursuit. But, in consequence 
of the disorder of the First Corps, Ney made so discouraging 
a report on the events of the day before that any man but the 
Emperor would have abandoned this idea of a surprise attack. 
Ney announced that he was occupying the narrow passage of 
a wood behind Wiasma, but that, on account of the withdrawal 
of the First and Fourth Corps, he would have to continue his 
retreating movement before dawn in order not to risk the loss 
of his troops. He added that the behaviour of the First Corps 
on the previous day had set a bad example to all the troops, 
and had had a dangerous effect on them. 

This report, however, which arrived in the middle of the 

HUNGER 

199 

morning, did not change the Emperor’s dispositions. He still 
believed that all the Russian army was massed together, and 
that a lively and sudden attack on this cumbersome body of 
troops would have a glorious result. He stayed at Slawkowo, 
hoping for a thorough revenge, throughout the fourth. The 
enemy, however, attempted nothing. Ney’s discouraging re- 
ports followed one upon another; and so did the arrival of the 
various corps, who threw each other into confusion. On the 
fifth the Emperor had to resume his march. Junot led off, fol- 
lowed by the Young Guard and the Second and Fourth Cavalry; 
then the Old Guard, Poniatowski, Eugene, and Davout, whose 
corps was disintegrated. Ney conducted the rear-guard with 
a vigour worthy of his courage, and infused his own energy 
into all aroimd him. 

On the fifth, we spent the night at Dorogobouje. The des- 
patches continued to arrive regularly. The weather, which had 
been milder for thirty-six hours before, became suddenly 
colder. There was no news of the enemy. Was Kutusof fol- 
lowing behind? Or was he ahead of us? This uncertainty 
added further to the Emperor’s difficulties and anxieties. On 
the sixth, headquarters were at Mikhai'lewska. It was a day 
of bad news. The Emperor was first much concerned about 
the details he had learned of the retreat of his troops on the 
Dwina, which occurred just when he most needed their suc- 
cess. Then he was greatly perturbed by the first news he re- 
ceived of Malet’s conspiracy. 