

Malet, a former general, who was held prisoner in a private 
asylum, had formed the scheme of starting a republican revo- 
lution by means of a forged decree of the Senate and an en- 
gineered rumour of the Emperor’s death. On the evening of 
October 22 Malet escaped; and he gained such influence over 
certain public officials and over the troops of the Paris garrison 
that he succeeded in paralyzing the government from midnight 

200 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

until nine in the morning. During this time he placed the 
Minister [Savary, Duke of Rovigo] and the Prefect of Police 
[Pasquier] under arrest, and seriously woimded General Hulin, 
Commandant of Paris. 

This conspiracy was foredoomed to failure; at the same time 
that the Emperor learned of it he learned also that all the con- 
spirators had been arrested and brought to trial. Nevertheless 
the daring of the attempt, carried out at the very seat of gov- 
ernment, made a remarkable impression on him. He was not 
reassured as to its consequences, nor convinced that the govern- 
ment held all the guilty parties and all the threads of the affair 
in their hands, until three or four more despatches had come 
in. There were no private letters of that date, and so we knew 
of the affair only from the Emperor, who spoke of it as insig- 
nificant, the action of a madman. On that particular day he 
discussed it intimately with none but the Prince of Neuchatel; 
and in that discussion he did not spare the Minister of Police. 
He was of the opinion that this incident, a lunatic’s undertaking, 
had few if any ramifications. 

Malet had put his scheme into action on the night of October 
22-23 by forging orders to the Prefect of Police, the troops, 
and the warders of the gaols where the men were held whom 
he made his tools — Generals Lahorie and Guidal. According 
to the minister, these men, who were themselves deceived by 
the conspiracy at first, went to the barracks; and the Prefect 
of the Seine [Frochot] was foolish enough to prepare a council 
chamber for the new government. Colonels Soulier and Rabbe 
and a few other officers had been imposed upon in their turn, 
and had brought out their troops, thus making it possible to 
arrest the Minister and the Prefect of Police. The former had 
been taken in his bed . . . while . • . Malet went to the 
quarters of the Commandant, General Hulin, who offered re- 
sistance and had his jaw shattered by a pistol-shot. However, 
Colonel Laborde and certain other officers, recovering from their 

HUNGER 

201 

first surprise and seeing how few the conspirators were, put 
themselves at the head of some troops and released the Minister 
of Police and the Prefect from confinement. From that mo- 
ment the government regained the control it ought never to 
have lost, and the three conspirators were arrested. At Paris 
the incident was hardly noticed. By ten o’clock in the morning 
order was everywhere restored. 

According to the reports made to the Emperor, the conduct 
of the Prefect of the Seine, M. Frochot, was blameworthy, and 
later information confirmed this opinion. 