

This was the common view. One can imagine the effect of 
that temper upon the unavoidable difficulties of our predica- 
ment, and can judge how our troubles were increased by the 
general unwillingness to cope with them. One would have 
thought from the way many officers conducted themselves that 
la legon, as they called it, could not be too severe. No one, 
seeing them so callous, would ever have guessed that the Em- 
peror was learning his lesson at the price of Frenchmen’s blood. 
The Emperor could see our sorry plight; he was living and 
marching in the midst of disorder and desolation; therefore 
even the most public-spirited held themselves excused from rea- 
soning with him, or indeed from admitting that disaster was 
upon us. 

Alas, the Emperor deluded himself; and our ruin followed 
on his misfortune. The leaders saw safety for the future in 
the very extremity of our reverses: the Emperor saw those re- 

210 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

verses much smaller than they were. He still actually believed 
that he was coming to the end of his losses, that he would be 
able to halt and reorganize the army. This is amply proved 
by his fatal insistence that everything should be brought away 
and everything preserved, which only resulted in everything 
being lost. Fortune had so long showered him with favours 
that he could not believe she had now deserted him. 

During this time I was employed night and day in reorganiz- 
ing the Emperor’s carriages. I had sent ahead orders for the 
forging of shoes with three calkins for all the horses. By means 
of a heavy payment I was even able to employ the workmen 
of the arsenal on this work during the night. By day they were 
working for the artillery. I stocked the carriages with all the 
provisions I could obtain for ready money. I had a great num- 
ber of carts and carriages burnt — a measure I had been gradu- 
ally carrying out for the last ten days, as the horses died off. 
In this way I spared the reserves. The Emperor found it very 
hard to consent to this; and seeing his reluctance, I no longer 
told him anything. I took everything upon myself, and I pre- 
served only one carriage over and above the transports for 
food and wounded . . . only the carriage which carried MM. 
Beauvau, Mailly and Bausset. This last-named had the gout. 
I had set the example; everyone abandoned his lame or ex- 
hausted horses. In the end, after a stay of forty-eight hours, 
the carriages were lined up for the march in fairly good order. 

During his stay in Smolensk the Emperor rode out each day, 
visiting the town and its surroundings as though he would have 
liked to preserve them also. He was already gravely con- 
cerned, and became more so after the Viceroy’s setback. The 
state in which he saw the army in its march through the town 
convinced him, I think, that our plight was worse than he had 
been willing to admit to himself. However, he still took heart 
by thinking that the consequences would not be so gloomy as 
at that time they were expected to be. He did not doubt that 