

The Minister for War took a different view of this conspiracy 
from the Minister of Police. 

“Clarke,” the Emperor remarked, “is convinced that this 
is a wide-spread conspiracy, and that it has other and more 
important leaders. Savary says the opposite. At first, the 
rumour of my death made everyone lose his head. The Min- 
ister for War, who parades his devotion to me, did not stop 
to put on his boots before running to the barracks to take the 
oath to the King of Rome and get Savary out of prison. Only 
Hulin showed any courage, and only Laborde any presence of 
mind. The behaviour of the prefect and the colonels is beyond 
understanding. What reliance,” he added bitterly, “can one 
put on men whose early training does not confirm them in prin- 
ciples of honour and loyalty? I am disgusted at the feebleness 
and ingratitude of the prefect, and of the colonel of the Paris 
regiment, one of my old soldiers, whose fortune I have made.” 

These early particulars made the Emperor eager for the next 
despatch, to discover the result of the enquiries they were con- 
ducting. 

“This revolt,” he said, “cannot be the work of one man.” 

On the way to Pnevo [November 7] he was repeatedly ask- 
ing me if I couldn’t see the coxirier. The details that came in 
confirmed what the Duke of Rovigo had reported. General 
Clarke, however, continued to see behind this incident a wide- 

202 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

spread conspiracy; and it was his reports that occupied the 
Emperor’s mind. The behaviour of those involved in the af- 
fair so exasperated him that he talked of it continually. 

“Rabhe is a fool,” he said to me. “A mess of print with 
a seal on it would take him in. But Frochot is a man of brains 
and quick intelligence. How was he tricked and dragged into 
it? He’s an old Jacobin. The Republic must have tempted 
him again. He is used to revolutions — I don’t suppose this 
one surprised him any more than the ten he’s seen already. 
My death may have seemed quite probable to him; and he would 
consider how to keep his post before he thought of his duty. 
He must have taken twenty oaths of allegiance; and he forgot 
the one that hound him to my dynasty as he forgot the others. 
But to be the chief magistrate of Paris, and yet prepare a 
council chamber for the conspirators, without protest, in the 
Hotel de Ville, in his own ofBcial quarters — ^not make a 
single enquiry, not take a single opposing step, not even make 
a gesture to uphold the authority of his lawful sovereign — ^he 
must be in the plot! Such credulity would be incredible in a 
man like Frochot. Cambaceres and Savary made a great mis- 
take in not having him arrested. He is more of a traitor than 
Malet. Malet was always hatching plots; I have pardoned 
him four times already. With him, plotting is a vocation; my 
mercy weighed on him; he is a madman."^ 

“But Frochot — ^he sits on the Council of State, he is chief ad- 

^Iii June, 1804, when Malet commanded the troops at AngoulSme, the 
prefect requested that he should be cashiered. The First Consul was con- 
tent to change his station, and sent him to Sables-d’Olonne. — On March 2, 
1805, Malet was put on the retired list, on account of further brushes with 
the oral authorities of the Vendee. He appealed to the Emperor, who re- 
called him to active service on August 26. — On May 31, 1806, he was re- 
tired on account of financial irregularities, but this decree was never put 
into force and Malet continued to draw his active service pay. — For at- 
tempting a conspiracy against the Emperor in 1808 he was detained as a 
political prisoner at Sainte-Pelagie; and thence he was transferred, in June, 
1810, to Doctor Dubuisson’s private asylum. 