

Nearly everybody travelled on foot. The Emperor followed 
the march of the Guard in his carriage, accompanied by the 
Prince of Neuchatel; but he got down two or three times a day 
and went on foot for a while, leaning sometimes on the Prince’s 
arm, sometimes on mine, sometimes on one of his aides-de- 
camp. llie road and the strips beside it were covered with 
the bodies of wounded men who had died of cold and hunger 
and want. No field of battle ever bore so fearful an aspect. 
Yet, as I say, in spite of our misfortunes and these scenes of 
horror, the sight of the spires of Smolensk, showing through 
clear weather and lit with sunlight, had put heart even into 
those most weighed down with misery. 

It was on the ninth, about noon, that we came once more 
within sight of Smolensk. The Emperor, who had already ar- 
ranged in advance the dispositions of troops which the circum- 
stances demanded, busied himself with the distribution of ra- 
tions that was to be made to the army. Unfortunately the state 
of the stores bore no relation to his hopes or to the general need; 
but so few men had rejoined their units that we were able to 
satisfy all who had done so. That was what really mattered, 
for these brave men deserved every encouragement. Their 
number, alas, was not very great. The Governor [General 
Charpentier], who had known of our retreat only five days be- 
fore, had done all he could to bake for the rear-guard and sup- 
ply their other needs; and everything had been sent to them 
as fast as it was made up. ... He had few bakers, and the 
rapid movement of the army had prevented his executives (who 
in any case existed virtually in name alone) from making ar- 
rangements for baking in advance; thus we could not take full 
advantage even of such resources as the town could have fur- 

HUNGER 

207 

nished. Everyone thought of his own safety; and to march as 
quickly as possible seemed the great secret of escaping danger. 
Many officers, even those of high rank, quite destitute, set an 
example in this general rout, and, leaving their units, ran by 
themselves to the head of the column to get something to eat. 

Our arrival and stay at Smolensk were notable for the fresh 
disasters which befell the Emperor and the army. For one 
may justly call disastrous an affair which, in addition to ex- 
posing our flank, deprived us of the reinforcements of fresh 
troops which should have restored the morale of our men and 
have checked an enemy as exhausted as ourselves. The Em- 
peror must have been counting on Baraguey d’Hilliers’s corps, 
which, come fresh from France, he had ordered to take up a 
position on the road to Yelnia. But the advance-guard of this 
army occupied a weak position at Ljachewo, under the com- 
mand of General Augereau, who had made a bad survey of 
his ground and a worse disposition of his troops. He was sur- 
rounded [on November 9], attacked, and taken prisoner. See- 
ing that he had put out no guards, the enemy, who had had 
him under observation and were also kept informed by the 
peasantry, took advantage of this omission; and General 
Augereau, with more than two thousand men, surrendered to an 
advance-guard of the Russians, of which he should have taken 
more than half as prisoners if only he had remembered the 
name he bore. 