

The news of grave events which arrived to beset the Emperor 
at Mikhailewska have interrupted my account of the military 
dispositions which he ordered. He had directed the Duke of 
Belluno to recapture Polotsk, and had announced his own in- 
tention of taking up a position at Smolensk. On the sixth the 
Emperor, as part of this plan, had moved Eugene off the route 
and sent him towards Dukhovtchina, so that he should later find 
himself in line; but Platow was following Prince Eugene, and 
Kutusof, as we learned at Smolensk, was marching parallel with 
us, by Ermakova, towards Yelnia. For several days the Em- 
peror had discussed his plan of going into quarters at Smolensk; 
but on that day he announced openly that the army would do 
so at Wilepsk and Orcha. 

HUNGER 

205 

On the seventh, we were at Pnewo. The cold was becoming 
more and more intense, but everyone thought we were coming 
to the end of want, and so to the end of our worst misfortunes, 
when we reached the stores of Smolensk and the quarters that 
the Emperor promised. Every face looked brighter. The sight 
of a consignment of provisions on its way from Smolensk to 
Ney’s rear-guard reminded us of happier days and happier 
outlooks; it lifted the hearts of the most discouraged. Every- 
one believed there was plenty at Smolensk, and that we were 
making harbour. The Emperor most of all flattered himself 
with this idea, and spoke of it several times. He already 
imagined his army in line. 

The cold had been severe, and continued so, but the weather 
was clear and the sun shone. Yet all the way from Mikha'i- 
lewska the sight of the road was made horrible by the bodies 
of the wounded who had been sent back, numbers of whom 
were found dead of cold or hunger, or abandoned by those 
charged with moving them. The road was also covered with 
stragglers, though on this day there was less disorder. Some 
of the soldiers rallied round their flags so as to share in the 
anticipated distributions of rations. The Emperor observed 
this, and it gave him a momentary consolation. Late in the 
day the weather became damper and it looked like a thaw, 
which made the way harder for the artillery and the transports. 
Luckily the frost set in again; for they would all have been 
bogged if the road had broken up. Meanwhile the Viceroy, 
marching towards Witepsk, was close pressed by Platow and 
his horde of Cossacks. 

On the eighth, headquarters were at Beredikino. For a mo- 
ment the Emperor thought of pushing forward as far as Smo- 
lensk himself; but the surface of the snow had been first melted 
in the thaw and then frozen when the frost set in again, and 
this made the road impracticable, particularly in the dark. 
The fear that by leaving he might draw swarms of stragglers 

206 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

after him, and so cause disorder in the night at Smolensk, made 
the Emperor decide to wait till the following day; and in this 
he was well-advised, for even those on foot were hard put to 
it to hold the road. 