

HUNGER 

203 

ministrator of the principal Department of France, he is a man 
on whom I have loaded honours. In him such baseness and 
treachery are revolting! He did not have to fear starvation 
if he lost his post. Now he has lost his honour. Does he 
value that less than his post? Even if Malet had made him 
prime minister, it wouldn’t have saved him from the disgrace 
of having betrayed his duty and his benefactor. I know that 
one cannot always rely on men who turn the profession of arms 
into a trade, a speculation, and will serve any man at all who 
pays them with office for the dangers they run; but this man 
is a leading magistrate, a man with a position, a man with 
children to whom he should be a model of that loyalty to one’s 
sovereign which is ffie first duty of all! I cannot believe in 
such baseness.” 

Plainly, the Emperor was cut to the heart. 

“The French are like women,” he added. “You must not 
stay away from them too long. It’s a fact; you can’t teU what 
schemers may get to them, or what may happen, if they go too 
long without news of me. Yet go too long they will if the Rus- 
sians have any common sense.” 

Judging by other remarks that the Emperor made to me (and 
by what he said to Duroc and Berthier, who repeated it to me), 
he had revised his opinion about the Minister of Police, and 
understood, perhaps better than it was understood in Paris, how 
Rovigo came to be surprised and carried off even though the 
conspiracy had been conceived and executed only by Malet. 
Clarke continued to suspect the existence of conspirators in all 
ranks; and the name of Frochot, now compromised, gave some 
weight in the Emperor’s mind to this opinion also. 

The Prince of Parma [Cambaceres] and the Duke of Rovigo 
were fortunately of the opposite opinion. The latter continued 
to represent Lahorie as a dupe, who knew nothing of the affair 
until they came to fetch him from prison. The reports of the 
Prefect of Police, and of several others, were to the same effect. 

204 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Although all the guilty were brought to trial and the affair 
was ended, the example of daring given by Malet and the be- 
haviour of the Prefect of the Seine gave the Emperor much 
matter for reflection. He was particularly concerned about the 
inevitable effect of the incident in Europe. The demonstrable 
possibility of such an attempt, even though its outcome had also 
shown that it could not succeed, seemed to him in itself a seri- 
ous blow to his authority, a source of trouble and further at- 
tempts on the part of a few hotheads in English pay. At Paris, 
he would have forgotten the matter in a day; at six hundred 
leagues’ distance, and at a moment when the world might be 
for some time without news of him or of the army, the affair 
was bound to cause anxiety. Other intriguers might be tempted 
when they saw what one man, his plans laid in the solitude of 
his prison, could achieve within a quarter of an hour of leaving 
it, with no help but a false rumour, and in the heart of the 
capital, under a stable government and an alert administration. 
Such were the thoughts which crowded upon the Emperor’s 
mind, and upon ours; and our circumstances were bound to 
give them added importance. 