

This reverse was a disaster on more counts than one. Not 
only did it rob us of a needed reinforcement of fresh troops, 
and of the stores collected at that point, which would have been 
very valuable to us; but it also encouraged the enemy, who, 
despite our misfortunes and the privations our exhausted men 
had suffered since leaving Moscow, were not accustomed to 
such successes. The officers who had been on the spot spoke 
very bitterly of the affair and made no excuse for the generals. 
As for the Emperor, he laid upon this incident the responsibility 

208 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

for the continued retreat which he perceived was necessary, 
and for the abandoning of Smolensk, where, until a few days 
or perhaps even a few moments before, he had hoped to estab- 
lish the main base of his advance-guard while he was in winter 
quarters. 

From that moment he realized the impossibility of going into 
quarters at Witepsk and Orcha, as he spoke of doing up to 
forty-eight hours before. He learned also that the rear-guard 
under Marshal Ney had been hotly engaged by the Cossacks 
before Dorogobouje. Everything seemed to fall upon the Em- 
peror at once, as though to crush him, during his halt at Smo- 
lensk. As the incidents I have just mentioned forbade his 
carrying out the plan of going into quarters there, he had to 
recall the Viceroy. 

He did everything possible to reorganize the different units 
without delaying the march of the army as a whole. Many ra- 
tions were distributed, and steps were taken for further dis- 
tributions at Orcha and the other places which the Emperor 
thought were better stocked with provisions. He also busied 
himself with removing the little there was in the arsenal, as 
though the army had not already more equipment than the teams 
could draw, and as though these trophies, as he called what- 
ever we abandoned, if they were left at Smolensk, would have 
more value for the enemy than what we strewed every day 
along the roads. Clinging still to the idea that he was going 
into quarters, the Emperor could not or would not show a trace 
of foresight. There is no doubt that we should have preserved 
much more undamaged if we had made the necessary sacri- 
fices in time. But to two or three unfortunate horses we al- 
lotted guns and waggons that needed six; and by not abandon- 
ing one or two guns and waggons at the proper time, we lost 
four or five a few days later. We planned for the day only; 
and because we refused, as the saying is, to give the devil his 
due, we paid heavily in the end to the enemy. 

HUNGER 

209 

It seemed as if the Emperor were expecting some miracle 
to alter the climate and end the ruin that was descending on 
us from every side. He gave his whole attention to the Guard, 
whom he hoped to save from the general disaster because they 
were still holding together. One of the generals commanding 
the artillery of this corps made so hold one day as to suggest 
the sacrifice of a few guns, in order not to exhaust the teams, 
already overdriven and reduced below the number needed. But 
he was not listened to. The generals and officers saw how des- 
perate the situation was, but, just because they could see no 
way out of it, they did nothing to preserve for a few days 
longer what they knew must in a few more days be lost. Speak- 
ing generally, they were so tired of war, craved so much for 
rest, for the sight of a less hostile country, for an end to these 
far-flung expeditions, that most of them let themselves be 
blinded as to the present fruits and future consequences of our 
disasters, which — so they thought — would prove a useful lesson 
to the Emperor, and one that would cool his ambition. 