

The Emperor learned of this attack on the third, at Slawkowo. 
He learnt that the Viceroy, Prince Poniatowski, and Elchingen 
had had to support Eckmiihl . . . who commanded the rear- 
guard, and whose progress was slowed up and hindered by the 
large number of stragglers whom hunger and sickness already 
had separated from their units. He was still a good distance 
from Wiasma when the Russian infantry appeared. Not hav- 
ing a strong force, the marshal had to hasten his march. Mean- 
while Marshal Ney was encamped before Wiasma. The Vice- 
roy and Prince Poniatowski had known since the previous day 
that the enemy was closing in on the Prince of Eckmiihl, and 
had consequently slackened their advance. They also took up 
their position before Wiasma in order to await him. 

The Cossacks swarmed over the countryside, and constantly 
cut off communications between our corps, however close they 
were to each other. The fight went to our advantage, once we 
were m battle order; but it was unfortunate that the Emperor, 
not expecting this renewed activity on the part of Kutusof, and 
thinking that the Russian general would try to get ahead of us 
rather than harass us, was at Slawkowo on that day — and the 
Guard with him. As nobody held supreme command, there 

HUNGER 

197 

was no unity in the dispositions made. Our men fought bravely 
for six hours, but solely on the defensive. The enemy were 
thus made to pay dearly for their daring attempt, and lost a 
great number of men; and for this they achieved nothing ex- 
cept that they inflicted severe damage on the First Corps, in 
which some disorder was shown when it passed ahead of the 
Viceroy’s army. This disorder was still greater at the cross- 
ing of the bridge [over the Wiasma]. 

Until then — as long, that is, as it had to withstand alone the 
attacks of the enemy — ^the First Corps had maintained its hon- 
our and reputation, although it was fi.ercely attacked and its 
formation broken by the artillery. This momentary disorder 
was conspicuous because it was the first time that these gallant 
infantry broke their ranks and compelled their dogged com- 
mander to give ground. I have related these painful details 
because from this incident must he dated our disorganization 
and misfortunes. The First Corps, which on taking the field 
was the largest and finest, a rival to the Guard, was thence- 
forward the hardest hit; and the evil spread. Poniatowski, the 
Viceroy, and Ney all fought as in the days of our success. 

The Emperor had to give the command of the rear-guard to 
Marshal Ney, whose energy and courage increased with his 
dangers and difficulties. The Emperor busied himself drawing 
up a body of instructions on the manner in which the retreat 
should be conducted. This, he thought, would put right all the 
troubles of which we complained, arising from the attacks of 
the Cossacks. He likened them to the Arabs, and directed that 
we should march, as in Egypt, with the baggage in the centre, 
a half-battalion at the front and the rear, and battalions in file 
on the flanks. In this way we should be £ible to direct our fire, 
in case of need, on all sides, like a square. The units could 
march, he said, at a short distance from each other, with ar- 
tillery between them. He talked a great deal about these dis- 
positions, which he regarded as a sure safeguard for the army. 