

It is impossible to describe the unbridled rage and fury that 
everyone showed towards Marshal Eckmiihl. Marshal El- 
chingen was the hero of the campaign — ^the general whom every- 
one felt anxious about. So universal and so warm was the 
interest in Ney’s predicament that no limits were observed in 
speaking of Marshal Eckmiihl, and scarcely any even when 
he came into the presence of the Emperor, or when anyone met 
him face to face. The Emperor and the chief-of-staff were 
the more eager to saddle him with responsibility for the tragic 
event they feared had come to pass, because thereby they might 
justify themselves for having left so large an interval between 
the departure of the two columns. . . . 

The interval left between the departure of the various corps 
. . . proves the extent to which the Emperor deluded himself 
in regard to the army’s situation and the dangers that threatened 
it. Did he flatter himself that he would once more bend For- 
tune to his use, and bring the cold within the compass of his 
will as he so often had brought victory? Things had come to 
such a pass that resignation was demanded by the force of cir- 
cumstance. To have waited at Krasnoe would have jeopardized 
the army without serving any useful purpose; to return there, 
as was proposed by certain persons, when the First Corps was 
known to have arrived and the Third to have been abandoned 
to itself, would have been futile. Nevertheless, such a project 
was the expressed wish of many. Cooler heads saw, of course, 
how absurd that was; for Marshal Elchingen’s fate was in fact 
already decided one way or the other, when, so far away from 
him, extravagant plans were being considered for his rescue. 
The General Staff said openly that, when he learnt what had 

ICE 

227 

happened, the Emperor ordered Marshal Eckmiihl to go back 
and march at the head of the corps which he should have sup- 
ported. Such an order, however, was given on the impulse of 
the moment, and with the certainty that it could not be carried 
out. 

The Emperor hoped (at least, so he said) that Marshal 
Elchingen would have known or have found out that the pace 
of the retreat had been accelerated, and would accordingly 
have accelerated his own pace, even though the orders to this 
effect had not reached him. He added that Marshal Elchingen 
was known to be not far from Marshal Eckmuhl’s hindmost 
troops. But what was the point of such speculation? The 
Russian army was between him and us; and we were too far 
away to be able to help him, or for him to be able to make a 
sudden break through to us. The Emperor fixed all his hopes 
on Marshal Elchingen’s rare courage and presence of mind. 
The army did likewise. Despite this legitimate confidence in 
his hero, the Emperor never ceased to lament his loss, which 
he regarded as virtually inevitable. 

“He will attempt the impossible,” he said, “and lose his 
life in some desperate attack. I’d give the three hundred mil- 
lions in gold I’ve got in the Tuileries vaults to save him. If he 
is not killed, he’ll escape with a few brave men. But the odds 
are heavily against him.” 