

At first the Emperor was inclined to believe that this attack 
was an offensive on the part of the whole enemy army. But 
Miloradovitch’s indecision, and his withdrawal as soon as we 
took action, persuaded him that it was merely the skirmishing 
of an isolated body of troops, and was intended to harass and 
delay us whilst Kutusof was bringing the whole strength of his 
army against us. On first sighting the enemy, the Emperor had 
sent orders to Marshals Eckmiihl and Elchingen to quicken their 
pace. He repeated these orders, and made up his mind to stop 
his retreat until he had more certain information about Kutusof’s 
movements, and about the movements of our own troops still in 
the rear. 

Reports about the enemy forces facing us indicated to the 
Emperor that they were considerable; reports reaching us from 
the lines of march proved that our communications were fre- 

ICE 

217 

quently being cut by Russian contingents. We even knew from 
information given by stragglers that villages on our left, at a 
short distance from the road, were occupied by enemy infantry. 
All these facts determined the Emperor to stay at Krasnoe on 
the sixteenth, and prepare for a battle. Convinced that the only 
way to drive the enemy ofE and prevent them from continually 
harassing us — and also to rescue his own troops in the rear — 
was by taking a vigorous offensive against the Russians and 
thus proving to them that neither our courage nor our bayonets 
had been frozen, the Emperor decided on a surprise-attack 
by night. 

His first intention was to put General Rapp in charge; and 
he even gave him his instructions. Later, however, he changed 
his mind. He entrusted the direction of the expedition to 
General Roguet, who attacked Ojarowski’s forces two hours 
before daybreak on the sixteenth, killed or took prisoner most 
of his infantry, and drove him as far as Lukino. This success- 
ful and daring action forced the enemy to withdraw; but the 
Emperor, having gathered from prisoners that the whole Rus- 
sian army was in the vicinity, decided to take the offensive, there 
being no other means of safeguarding the Viceroy and the corps 
that followed after him. The Emperor, who was in the plain 
with the troops, was uneasy about Prince Eugene’s failure to 
arrive; his instructions had been to follow on behind us. But 
he had only been able to set out from Smolensk late on the 
fifteenth . . . and had made contact with Miloradovitch’s 
forces drawn up for battle on the sixteenth. Stragglers, thrown 
back on to his vanguard by this enemy force, had been the first 
to inform him of its existence. 

The Emperor knew, from the sound of fiirmg and from strag- 
glers, of the attack directed against the Viceroy, whose delayed 
arrival made him uneasy. He ordered General Durosnel, one 
of his aides-de-camp, to take two battalions of light infantry 
from his Guard, with two cannon, and go ahead of him so as 

218 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to help the Viceroy make his way through. General Durosnel, 
at the head of this body of troops commanded by General Boyer, 
had barely passed the Emperor’s rear-guard emplacement when 
he came in contact with a horde of Cossacks, who made ofE at 
his approach. He was marching to the left of the road in order 
to carry out his manoeuvres more easily. Halfway to Katowa 
he saw within cannon-range a strong line of cavahy drawn up 
for battle on the other side of the road. Following suit, he 
formed his men into a square, and fired a few cannon-shots to 
find out the intentions of this force, which replied to his fire 
but took no other action. General Durosnel, aware of the im- 
portance of the diversion he had been instructed to carry out, 
and full of confidence in the veterans he commanded, had no 
hesitation in continuing with his march and leaving this body 
of enemy cavalry behind him. 