

“All the Cossacks and Russians in the world,” he exclaimed 
when he received Marshal Eckmiihl’s last message, “shall not 
prevent me from rejoining the army.” 

He was as good as his word, and proved that the impossible 
itself is subservient to courage like his. 

The various considerations which led the Emperor to believe 
that haste was necessary have been pointed out above, as well 
as the course of action he adopted on a basis of these considera- 
tions. He believed that, by forcing the enemy to withdraw from 
the road, he had done everything a general could do in so 
difficult a situation. Obsessed with the idea that Kutusofs 
object was to steal several marches on him, and that therefore 
die general good demanded that he should accelerate his own 

222 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

progress, he rejoined the Guard and his staff headquarters at 
Liadoui. . . . 

The Emperor summoned me at four o’clock in the morning 
[November 18]. After repeating what he had already told 
us several nights before, and having reiterated the various con- 
siderations that led him to take his decisions, he expressed re- 
gret that he had allowed a gap of twenty-four hours between 
the departure of one regiment and another from Smolensk, and 
that he had not ordered Junot and a section of the Guard to 
start their march earlier, so as to cover Orcha. His announced 
intention was to speed up the pace of the retreat. 

“Right now,” said the Emperor, “I could be made a fool 
of in several ways.” 

The forces left in position to cover Krasnoe had orders to 
await the arrival of Marshal Eckmiihl’s column. It was as- 
sumed that, in view of the last orders sent to him, he would only 
march in conjunction with Marshal Elchingen. Communica- 
tions had almost broken down; the despatch of orders and re- 
ports was next to impossible, or took place so slowly that they 
rarely arrived in time to be useful. Staff officers, having for 
the most part lost their horses, went on fool; and even those 
who had kept their horses were unable to make them travel 
on ice, and so arrived no sooner than the others. The frost was 
more severe than ever, and the road therefore more difficult. 
The coimtry was more hilly; the steep descents had become im- 
practicable. It is impossible to form any idea of the diffi- 
culties that the artillery and transport had to surmount on this 
march, or of the number of horses lost by the former. We 
had reached our destination [Liadoui] by a road that descended 
so steeply, that was so sunken, and a part of whose frozen 
surface had been so polished by the large number of horses 
and men who had slipped on it, that we were obliged like every- 
one else to sit down and let ourselves slide on our posteriors. 
The Emperor had to do likewise, for the many arms that were 

ICE 

223 

offered to him provided no adequate support. That fact will 
give some idea of the plight of soldiers with their rifles and 
equipment — of artillerymen and transports — ^but especially 
of the horseman, who risked being crushed by the weight of his 
faster-rolling mount. 