

Notwithstanding these reflections, the Guard had been or- 
® Junot, marching on Orcha, formed the advance-guard of the column. 

220 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

dered to move back along the Smolensk road; strong batteries 
had been placed in position, and everything was prepared for 
a battle on the seventeenth. Although he had less than twenty 
thousand men, the Emperor had decided to come to grips with 
the enemy, and was full of confidence in his “old moustaches” 
whom he had doubtless kept in reserve for some such desperate 
venture as this. He had no doubts about his success, and be- 
lieved, as in happier times, that his luck would hold. 

On the seventeenth, however, he returned to his original plan. 
He ordered the Duke of Abrantes and the Viceroy to march on 
to Liadou'i, whilst he arranged demonstrations which he hoped 
would make it possible for his marshals to get clear of the 
enemy. . . . 

But, while the Emperor was defying adversity at Krasnoe, 
and while the Russians were profiting so little from their ad- 
vantages, Marshal Elchingen, in command of the rear-guard, 
where there was fighting every day, had only arrived at Smo- 
lensk on the fifteenth. He found that Smolensk had been 
looted — according to his account by soldiers of the First Corps, 
and according to Marshal Eckmuhl’s account by stragglers. The 
fact is that the soldiers of the Third Corps, who counted on find- 
ing bread, found only disorder; shops practically empty, pro- 
visions scattered about the streets, the town full of stragglers 
who had just finished ransacking it, no one in authority, and 
no preparations made for feeding the rear-guard troops. In 
consequence of all this, no one wanted to remain there. The 
commissariat authorities had fled with the staff headquarters, 
and had even abandoned five or six thousand sick or wounded 
who, as we found out later, fell victims to the fury of the Rus- 
sians when the Third Corps left. 

Marshal Elchingen, who had been instructed to destroy the 
artillery abandoned at Smolensk and to blow up the ramparts, 
had now to find means of ensuring the subsistence of his troops 
as far as Orcha. This vital consideration, which inevitably 

ICE 

221 

prolonged his stay in Smolensk, could not in the circumstances 
be subordinated to any other. It must be home in mind that 
his troops, obliged to fight every step of their way, had nothing 
to hope for from the places they would pass through; every- 
one else had been there before them. It should also be realized 
that the rear-guard had to march amidst the fires and general 
destruction which everywhere marked the track of our strag- 
glers. 

Such was the situation facing Marshal Elchingen. He had 
received the Emperor’s various orders, and, in the evening, a 
last letter from Marshal Eckmiihl, who advised him of what 
was happening on the road, and informed him that, in order 
not to jeopardize his own troops and give the enemy a chance 
of rallying, he proposed to speed up his march — ^and that he, 
Elchingen, would be well advised to do likewise. Marshal 
Elchingen, however, could not start before nightfall. Threat- 
ened on the one hand by the very real danger of his troops 
being demoralized through lack of food, and on the other of 
being attacked by superior enemy forces, he decided on the 
course of action most in keeping with his own daring and with 
the proved courage of his men. 