

Since the Viceroy had rejoined us, we had marched in single 
column and by the same road. One can imagine the confusion 
wherever the way grew narrow. The zigzag road was a sheet 
of ice on which even men on foot could hardly stand upright. 
Every moment carts and waggons were capsized on the ice, and 
blocked the road. Everyone was in a hurry and no one troubled 

ICE 

215 

to maintain proper order. Sure of faulty obedience, and cer- 
tain that any method they might establish would be hut mo- 
mentarily observed, the General Staff issued no instructions. 
As always, every freedom was allowed to the discretion of the 
commanding officers, except that orders issued by them could 
be countermanded at need. The ofiicers saw the evils of the 
situation but did nothing to correct them, since, so they assumed, 
demoralization would immediately break out again. 

How, indeed, could one exact service, or any test of endur- 
ance, from a man whom one had to let starve, in weather that 
froze his fingers if he left them exposed to the air? How make 
any dispositions whatever during an unceasing march, and 
when the staff officers have lost their horses and must go on foot 
to deliver the orders they carry? When all are crowded on to 
tlie same road, and flanked by Cossacks who hardly let them 
get ahead out of their sight? There remained not a single 
brigade of cavalry in a fit state to cover our movements. The 
exhausted, unshod horses could go no further unless men 
dragged them by the bridle. Without drawing upon the Guard, 
who were themselves much reduced, we had not sufiicient cav- 
alry to carry out a reconnaissance far enough or boldly enough 
to give us definite news of the enemy’s position. Indeed we 
did not attempt it — ^not even though the Emperor had antici- 
pated since the night before [November 13] that the enemy 
were moving into action against us. 

We could not find a single peasant or man of any kind to 
act as guide. We had no means of information. Some de- 
tachments of Poles and of the Guard were sent out to scout, 
and returned after putting to the sword a few Cossacks whom 
they drove back upon a larger body, by which they were them- 
selves obliged to retreat. They did not bring back a single 
Cossack to give us information about the troops in our neigh- 
bourhood. Like men in close confinement when they are al- 
lowed to take the air, we could make no sense of what was 

216 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

going on around us. The Emperor had remarked to us as early 
as Smolensk that the success of the Russians against Baraguey 
d’Hilliers would go to their heads, and that Kutusof would be 
forced out of his inaction. He was not mistaken; but the unity 
and soldierly conduct of the Guard reassured him as to the 
consequences of an engagement, of whatever kind it might be. 

As we approached Krasnoe, we came into contact with 
Miloradovitch’s army, which consisted of Ostermann-Tolsto'i’s 
and Ojarowski’s divisions with the addition of some cavalry, 
and which had taken up its position near the village of Merlino 
on the left of the road. The Young Guard and the Dutch division 
of the Old Guard under the command of the Duke of Treviso 
were sent to oppose this force. They checked the Russians, 
and held them off so successfully that our progress along the 
road was not interrupted. The Emperor made for the place 
where this engagement happened, remaining there as long as 
things looked serious. M. Giroud, my aide-de-camp, was mor- 
tally wounded by a bullet that hit him in the upper part of 
his thigh. 