

On the nineteenth, headquarters was established at Orcha, 
where the Emperor was relieved to find that his vanguard had 
arrived. Our troops had the bridge well in hand. We had 
relied on the local shops, but these served only to supply the 
needs of headquarters and the Guard. The countryside, how- 
ever, provided further substantial resources, which, though cer- 
tainly a boon to the army, were not an unmixed blessing; for 
large numbers of men, who hitherto had kept their ranks, left 
them when they found themselves amidst abundance. Of the 
many who went after food, but few returned. A deserter’s 

228 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

existence which held out to the men the hope of getting plenty 
to eat, of being free, of having a roof over their heads instead 
of bivouacking nearly always without rations, of obtaining rest 
and warmth during the night instead of duties in the bitter cold, 
— all these temptations were more than they could resist. Cos- 
sacks and armed peasants captured many of those stragglers 
from day to day; for most of them had carelessly thrown away 
their arms in order to get along more easily — and also to escape 
being forced back into the ranks, where their lack of arms 
made them useless. 

But not even the pleasure of seeing an inhabited coimtry- 
side with a few resources distracted attention from Marshal 
Elchingen, who all this time was the object of common concern. 
The Prince of Neuchatel, as if he wanted to clear himself in 
advance of any responsibility for whatever happened to Mar- 
shal Elchingen, showed everyone the orders given to Marshal 
Eckmiihl by the General Staff. He showed them to me. The 
outburst of fury against Marshal Eckmiihl was the more general 
because the Emperor publicly charged him with being respon- 
sible for all the dangers that the Third Army Corps might have 
to run. The fact is, of course, that the pace shoidd have been 
accelerated all along the line, and that Marshal Elchingen 
should have left Smolensk on the sixteenth; but the Emperor 
never could make up his mind when it was a question of or- 
dering a retreat. 

It should he pointed out, to the glory of Marshal Elchingen, 
that the army was of one opinion about him. To overtake us 
by way of the Krasnoe road was regarded as an impossible 
task; but if anyone could do the impossible, then Ney was the 
man. Every map was in use; everyone pored over them, trac- 
ing the route that Ney would follow if courage could open a 
way for him. “Once they’ve got rid of their artillery, the good 
old infantry will come through anything with a leader like that. 

ICE 

229 

He’ll bring them back through Kiev rather than surrender” — 
such was the general sentiment. 

From the troopers to the Emperor, nobody doubted that if 
he were still alive he would bring his corps in. There was but 
one misgiving: that he might think we were waiting to second 
his efiEorts the moment we heard his guns, and so might find 
a glorious death in trying to cut a way through ihe enemy. 
What finer tribute could be paid to a soldier than this universal 
confidence that he would successfully carry out what most men 
would hardly dare even to attempt? 