

At Liadoui there were inhabitants and some food supplies. 
Chickens and ducks ran about in the courtyards, to everyone’s 
great astonishment. We had seen no such signs of plenty since 
crossing the Niemen; and every face cheered up, and every- 
one began to think that our privations were at last at an end. 
I mention these details in the course of describing our grave 
situation, because they bear on it, and because small things 
have a great influence on Frenchmen, whose spirits are quick 
to rise and fall. In the eyes of men accustomed since Moscow 
to find only uninhabited places, devastated houses, corpses in- 
stead of living men and women, it was a great event to come 
upon occupied houses with something to eat for supper. The 
modest resources of Liadoui, combined with what money would 
buy in its neighbourhood, enabled a good number of men to 
take the edge off their appetites — ^men who scorned every sort 
of danger, but who were reluctant to die of himger, and wanted 
to live, if only to be able to face new perils. 

Cossacks kept up perpetual raids along the road, which they 
constantly crossed between one division and another — or even, 
when there was a gap, between one regiment and another. 
Three determined men armed with rifles, however, were suffi- 
cient to keep them at a respectful distance. But wherever there 
was no shooting to' fear, wherever transport waggons were mov- 
ing along in disorder, or unarmed stragglers were making their 
way as best they could, the Cossacks improvised sudden at- 
tacks, killing and wounding, robbing all those whose lives they 
spared, and looting waggons and carriages when they came 
upon them. 

It is not difficult to imagine the perturbation spread by such 

224 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

tactics, and their effect on the army’s morale. What was worse, 
they made commtmication extremely diflScult, not only between 
one corps and another, but between one division and another. 
The General Staff, as I have already explained, received no 
reports; its orders either did not arrive at their destination, 
or arrived too late to be of any use. Staff officers, who braved 
every sort of danger, were frequently captured. To make any 
progress at all, they had to join up with some detachment, halt 
when it halted, and go forward when another detachment came 
by. Then there was the ice! Officers who had kept their horses 
were unable to make them move. They dragged them along 
behind, finding that they made better progress on foot. To 
form a true idea of this tremendous drama, it is necessary 
to have been present when it happened, to have taken part in 
it. Without exaggeration, the simplest things became almost 
insurmountable difficulties. ... As dangers multiplied and, 
at the same time, difficulties were augmented, all eyes turned 
towards Orcha, which the Emperor, like everyone else, con- 
sidered to be an important base. He had ordered the advance- 
guard to reach it as soon as possible, and had given instruc- 
tions for the bridge-head to be strongly occupied. 