

Having come within sight of the Russians, General Durosnel 
had barely time to fire a round from each of his cannon, and 
to form his men again into a square, when he was heavily at- 
tacked by cavalry and artillery fire. The cavalry vainly at- 
tempted to break up his formation; their charges were repulsed 
with as much coolness as bravery. The enemy, however, were 
continually being reinforced, and had spread over the whole 
countryside. It was thus impossible to delay a retreat without 
risking six hundred men belonging to the Guard, the only force 
left intact in the whole army. Durosnel therefore began to 
retreat in good order. Although vigorously attacked, and pur- 
sued for a league, he carried out his movement slowly, and 
in so orderly a manner that at last the enemy cavalry ceased 
their attacks. Cannon-fire cost him several men. 

He rejoined the army just when General Latour-Maubourg 
was setting off with his cavalry regiment, under instructions 
to relieve him. The Emperor, perturbed at the thought that 
a part of his Guard was in action and cut off from the main body 
of the army — ^no reconnoitring party sent out had been able 

ICE 

219 

to break through to General Durosnel’s contingent — ^was de- 
lighted at the safe return of this detachment. He was even more 
delighted at the arrival of the Viceroy, who had been helped 
to extricate himself by the diversion created by General Duros- 
nel; and he invited him to supper, as well as the general, whom 
he praised several times. 

This turn of events, which upset all the Emperor’s calcula- 
tions, and which, if the enemy had had even a little determina- 
tion, might on the lowest estimate have endangered all our 
troops in the rear, would have overwhelmed any other general. 
But the Emperor was stronger than adversity, and became the 
more stubborn as danger seemed more imminent. Bracing him- 
self against his bad fortune, he resolved to fight rather than 
abandon Marshals Eckmiihl and Elchingen. He reiterated his 
earlier orders to quicken their pace. But was the road free? 
And if the orders reached them, would they arrive in time? 

The Emperor had expected some sort of partial attack, and 
could not imderstand the Russian tactics. 

“Kutusof would never make the mistake of following behind 
me along a devastated road if he had not some big project up 
his sleeve,” the Emperor told us. “If Miloradovitch had any 
kind of force at hand, he wouldn’t have given way before a 
few battalions of the Young Guard. . . . The distance between 
Junot® and the rear-guard,” he added, “is so great that it is 
impossible to give any real help. If we stop and wait when 
there’s nothing to eat, we risk everything — or rather lose every- 
thing, for we can’t possibly gain our point in that way. How 
will we keep the troops alive, now we’ve halted them? We’ve 
been here twenty-four hours already, and everyone is dying of 
hunger. If I take the offensive against the Russians, they will 
withdraw. I shall have wasted my time, and they will have got 
ahead of us.” 