

We made our way from Liadou'i to Doubrowna. There on 
the following day [November 19], in the morning, just when 
we were about to set out, the Emperor learned that the First 
Corps had joined the troops he had left at Krasnoe . . . and 
that consequently this corps had passed through Krasnoe on 
the seventeenth, the day on which it was possible that Marshal 
Elchingen had just left Smolensk. We knew nothing definite 
about the Third Corps, of which the First had had no news 
since the sixteenth.® Not a single despatch officer had returned. 

8 Davout with the First Corps passed through Krasnoe on the seventeenth, 
in the evening, on, his way to Liadou'i, following behind Mortier. He biv- 
ouacked between the two towns. Ney with the Third Corps left the out- 

ICE 

225 

Had any of them ever got through? The Emperor was lost in 
conjectures. Miloradovitch’s remaining in his original posi- 
tion, and the departure of our own troops, made us realize all 
the dangers to which Marshal Elchingen was exposed. 

Ilxe grave reproaches that the two marshals have levelled 
against one another, the severe judgment of headquarters and 
the whole army in regard to one of them, make it incumbent 
on me to report in this connection only the Emperor’s own ex- 
pressions, the Prince of Neuchatel’s private opinions, and de- 
tails openly given to headquarters by trustworthy persons. The 
Emperor and the Prince of Neuchatel said again and again 
that the two marshals ought to march in concert and support 
one another; that, as Marshal Elchingen made the progress 
of his retreat depend on the obstacles with which the enemy 
confronted him. Marshal Eckmiihl should have modified his 
pace accordingly. But the two marshals did not lilce one an- 
other, and, having had a violent difference of opinion about 
the looting of Smolensk, they had ceased to co-operate. 

The following details represent the facts of the case as re- 
counted by the Emperor and the Prince of Neuchatel at the 
time. The First Corps, aware of the dangers threatening the 
Viceroy, who was ahead of it, quickened its pace, keeping Mar- 
shal Elchingen informed of its movements but not bothering 
about whether he was able to follow. The harder the Russians 
pressed and attacked, the faster the First Corps marched, thus 
carrying out the orders which Marshal Eckmiihl had received. 
Those orders he had passed on to Marshal Elchingen, assum- 
ing that the latter . . . would act on them, and hasten his pace 
also. No one expected a persistent attack, or was made anxious 
about the Third Corps by the wild shouts of the Cossacks. 
Marshal Eckmiihl argued that any other policy would have 
vainly jeopardized the shattered regiments that still remained 

skirts of Smolensk early on the seventeenth. Thus, at this time, there was 
a considerable interval between the two marshals. 

226 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

with him. He could not have helped Marshal Elchingen, he 
said; for the First Corps would have been destroyed or taken 
prisoner before it could have got back to Marshal Elchingen 
or been overtaken by him. This version of the affair was given 
out during the day. 