212 

ICE 

213 

ports. These were simply robbed of their contents, because the 
drivers in panic had upset them into a ravine. The waggon 
containing the maps was among them. The artillery lost half 
its teams; and most of the of&cers attached to headquarters, 
myself amongst them, lost their personal effects. 

The loss of the maps was just the thing to throw the Emperor 
into a rage, yet he showed no displeasure — ^not even with his 
own servants. This incident made everyone more cautious, 
and served at least to bring back to the road, for some forty- 
eight hours, many of those who had straggled off after food. 
Our situation was such that one is forced, however, to question 
whether it was really worth while to raUy-in wretches whom 
we could not feed! 

During the night the Emperor sent for me, and spoke to me, 
as on an earlier occasion, about the necessity of his return to 
France. He again brought up all the questions he had already 
put to me concerning the army, the journey across Prussia, and 
the rest, and asked me if I had given thought to the plan. He 
was beginning to realize the disorganization of the army, but 
heartened himself by thinking that contact with the corps which 
we should find on the Beresina would quickly restore order; 
for those troops, which were well-organized, would act as a 
rear-guard and hold our position while he rallied the troops 
from Moscow. He talked to me again about those Polish Cos- 
sacks who should, he said, join us within a few days. The Em- 
peror still flattered himself that he could get the situation in 
hand, and that he could even assume a commanding attitude 
as soon as he had control of the stores at Minsk. 

“With every step I lake, I shall find reinforcement,” he told 
me; “while Kutusof, who will likewise be worn out with march- 
ing, will be getting further away from his reserves. He will 
be left in a countryside which we have exhausted. Ahead of 
us there are supplies in store. The Russians will starve to 
death back here.” 

214 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Although he tried to convey a difEerent impression to others, 
the Emperor was painfully disturbed. The lack of news from 
France caused him the greatest annoyance, and this he did not 
disguise from me. We were reduced to sending off little notes 
to Wilna every day or two by the hand of Poles, or by other 
people whom we did our best to bribe into reliability. Often 
we asked no more of them than to take a trifling note to some 
posting-station whence communications with Germany were still 
open. One day we paid a Jew two thousand five hundred francs 
to send a brief message through to the Archchancellor. M. 
Daru, who sent it off, took advantage of the opportunity to write 
a few lines at the same time to his wife. Only that note ar- 
rived. How? The Coimtess herself did not know. She had 
a letter from her husband, while the Empress had not a word 
from the Emperor. The Police and the Post Office were thrown 
into a state of agitation. M. Daru’s letter, which, as one would 
expect, was very reassuring, first delighted his family and then 
created a sensation in Paris. Mme. Daru showed it round, and 
her husband’s handwriting was too well known for any question 
to be raised about its authenticity. Guesses ran wild. Of the 
many despatches sent off by the hand of officers in disguise or 
natives of the country, only one or two reached their destina- 
tion. As public affairs were mentioned only in cypher, the 
Emperor attached no importance to these letters except for the 
purpose of giving news to people in Paris and Wilna about the 
army and their relatives there; and they did not receive the 
news. 