

kept in touch with what was happening — would catch the in- 

239 

240 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

spiration of his genius; that they would take advantage of these 
successes to come to our aid; and that their manoeuvres would 
extricate us and even give us a chance of snatching a victory 
of sorts, in which he could show to advantage. Along with 
such splendid talents, with a character so finely tempered, with 
a soul strong enough to dominate all misfortune, he had as great 
fondness as he had little need to indulge in self-deceit— the 
refuge of the weak. 

His confidence, his boundless optimism, was greater still 
in the morning [November 25] when he received the Duke of 
Reggio’s report announcing the defeat of Tchitchagoff’s advance- 
guard. Under the command of General Pahlen, the Russians 
had ventured as far as Niemanitza, and had lost, the marshal re- 
ported, a lot of prisoners and all the equipment they had been 
foolish enough to bring to this side of Borissow.^ A great deal 
was made of this success, and we set out for Borissow at once. 
Detachments were sent to points above and below, where they 
were to reconnoitre the enemy’s position and create diversions 
at the crossings. 

Marshal Reggio informed us of the return of General Cor- 
bineau, the head of his light cavalry. Thai general had just 
carried out a careful reconnaissance of the Beresina’s other 
bank, and had been forced by recent events to swim across the 
river. 

These bits of information — ^but more especially the assur- 
ance that Kutusof was a long way behind us — ^put the Emperor 
at his ease. Confident that he was three days ahead of the Rus- 
sian commander-in-chief, he knew for certain that the issue was 

1 On November 23, Tchitchagoff started from Borissow in the direction 
of Bobr. He believed that there was only Dombrowski’s division in front 
of him. His advance-guard, commanded by Count Pahlen, came in con- 
tact with Oudinot’s corps near Losnitza, was thrown into confusion, and was 
driven back to the right bank of the Beresina by the Fourth Cuirassiers, 
who recaptured Borissow. It was found that the better part of the bridge 
there had been destroyed. 

THE BERESINA 

241 

in his hands, and that he was in a posture to face all dangers 
and surmount all difficulties. 

Here, in order to clear up certain circumstances that bear 
on the disastrous crossing of the Beresina, it is necessary to 
enlarge on the events referred to just above. 

General Corbineau, in command of the Sixth Cavalry Brigade 
of the Second Army Corps under the Duke of Reggio, had been 
detailed off with the Bavarian division near Gloubokoje. On 
the seventeenth. General Corbineau was ordered to make con- 
tact with the Moscow army, there having been no news of it 
for three days. He reached Plechnitsie on the twentieth. M. 
Tchernychev, with a thousand Cossacks, turned up there a short 
while afterwards, but withdrew for a mile or so. (On his 
march, quite by chance, M. Tchernychev had met and rescued 
General Wintzingerode and M. Narishkin, whom two guards- 
men were taking to France as prisoners of war.) On the twenty- 
first the French brigade proceeded, with the intention of cross- 
ing the Beresina at Borissow. 