

The Emperor again went into great detail about his position 
and about the project of which he had spoken. I had a con- 
versation later with Duroc, who told me what the Emperor had 
said to biTti and Daru. We agreed that henceforth everyone 
who fed in the Emperor’s Mess should be responsible for his 
own cup, plate and cutlery if he wanted to keep them. The 
pretext we gave was that the canteen mules were giving out. 

Although the cold was still severe enough, the weather was 
overcast and threatened a thaw, or snow at the least. The sick 
and wounded froze during the night near the bivouacs. Care- 
lessness, and the difficulty of finding fodder and, above all, 
water, caused many of the horses to perish. To water them, 
it was necessary as a rule to go a fair distance, and to break 
the ice. Then there had to be a vessel of some sort to draw 
the water, since the banks were not everywhere fordable. We 
arrived in the night: where was there a river or a well? The 
surface of water was dirt-coloured; the frost had toned every- 
thing drab. The ice, which had been broken with difficulty in 

ICE 

237 

the evening, would be frozen hard again the next morning; 
fresh efforts had to be made; to break the ice at all, an axe 
or an iron rod was necessary — and there was a shortage of 
every sort of instrument. When he arrived in the evening, a 
driver, half-dead with cold, would be afraid of getting lost. 
He would try and find some means to light a fire, to shelter him- 
self, and to get hold of something to eat. When he was not 
too much overcome, or if it were not too dark, he would try 
and do what he could for the horses. More often than not, 
however, when the weather was bad, he just left them where they 
stood; and we set out next morning without the wretched ani- 
mals having been unharnessed. 

M. Giroud, my aide-de-camp, who had been in my carriage 
since he was wounded at Krasnoe, died during the night [of 
the twenty-second]. He had been unconscious for two days. 

From Tolotchine to Bobr, where we arrived on the twenty- 
third, the road was even more thickly covered with dead horses 
than on preceding marches. There were many human corpses, 
too; and at every bivouac one saw large numbers that had died 
of suffocation from the fumes of the fires, because they had 
dragged themselves too close when already frost-bitten and half- 
frozen. Others still moaned but could not drag themselves 
away, either because they were too weak or because their hands 
and feet were frozen. This horrible sight made a profound 
impression on everyone. It was impossible to convince a poor 
wretch numbed with cold that fire was fatal to him; that the 
only remedy was movement, dry friction, and, even better for 
the hands and feet, friction with snow. As the Emperor passed 
through that ill-starred multitude, there was not a murmur or 
a groan to be heard. How generous those Frenchmen were 
in their misfortune! They cursed the elements, but had not a 
word of reproach for La Gloire. 