

“Shall we get there in time?” he said to me. “Will the 
Duke of Belluno take the offensive soon enough to divert Witt- 
genstein? If the Beresina crossings are closed to us, something 
may turn up — something unforeseen, some setback — so that 
we’ll have to cut our way out with the cavalry of the Guard. 
How far could I get with them in five or six days, with their 
horses in the state they’re in now? — ^how far, without letting 
the weakest fall by the wayside? With my Guard and the braTr= 

ICE 

233 

men that turn up, it’s always possible to break through. I must 
find out what my corps on the Dwina are up to — and Schwarzen- 
berg. Maret, with every means of information open to him, 
has certainly warned them of the admiral’s movements.” 

The Emperor then spoke to me about his journey to France 
as of something already settled, and told me that I should ac- 
company him; that he had no need of another captain of escort. 

It was now behind the Beresina that the Emperor thought 
he would be able to take up his position; the supplies in Minsk 
were to provide the wherewithal to rally and feed the army. 

“The Reggio and Belluno corps,” he said to me, “will be 
covering the retreat within a few days; the men from Moscow 
will be stationed in the second line, and the stragglers will be 
rallied.” 

There was still no news from France. It was this privation 
that the Emperor felt most. He scarcely dared even to hope 
that the Polish officers and men sent to Wilna had been able 
to get through, and the Duke of Bassano thus enabled to send 
reassuring news to France. The Emperor realized all the un- 
fortxmate consequences that such a silence might have; and this 
realization but added to the chagrin he was to feel over the 
next piece of news that came in. . . . 

On the twenty-second he stopped at Tplotchine, in a convent 
of some kind. It was there he found out that Minsk had been 
evacuated, and that General Lambert, commanding Admiral 
TchitchagofE’s advance-guard, had occupied the town on the six- 
teenth. The Emperor was momentarily dismayed; to him this 
news meant the loss of supplies — of all the resources he had 
counted on, since leaving Smolensk, to rally and reorganize 
the army. Moreover, and worse than that loss, he now had to 
face the disturbing certainty that the Moldavian army was not 
moving to join forces with Kutusof and the main Russian army 
on our flank, as he had hoped all along, but was massing instead 
to cut off our retreat. 

234 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

The Emperor’s character, like steel hy fire, was tempered 
anew by these reverses of circumstance and this vista of danger. 
He immediately made up his mind to quicken the retreat — ^if 
possible, to reach the Beresina before Kutusof arrived there — 
and to fight and vanquish whatever stood in his way. He 
adopted instantaneously the notion and the line of reasoning 
that would console him by putting his situation in the best 
light; he decided, in short, that Schwarzenberg and Reynier, 
f ull y informed as to what had happened, must already have 
moved, thus altering the whole state of affairs. In any case, 
so he thought, the concentration of all the forces he had in 
that district would inevitably occur at Borissow. He looked 
forward to that concentration as a great advantage from the 
point of view of safeguarding the army’s retreat — ^which he 
now realized could not be stopped before Wilna. He was con- 
fident of finding the Borissow bridge well guarded. That was 
the main thing. Its defence had been arranged for some time; 
troops were available for the purpose, and, judging by what 
he was gracious enough to say to me as well as to the Prince 
of Neuchatel, he had no misgivings about the matter. 