

The Emperor was convinced that Kutusof’s irresolution, and 
the time lost by Miloradovitch in waiting for Marshal Elchingen 

238 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

on the Krasnoe road, had put us several days ahead of the 
Russian main body; and that therefore we should have time 
to cross the Beresina, After what had happened at Minsk, 
that crossing had been a good deal on his mind. 

It was at Losnitza, where we were the next day, the twenty- 
fourth, that we learnt of the skirmish [three days earlier] at 
Borissow. There the bridge-head, occupied by a Polish bat- 
talion, had been surprised and abandoned to a detachment of 
Cossacks. However, the gallant General Dombrowski . . . 
had forced a way back to the bridge-head with his division, 
and had held out valiantly for ten hours against three divisions 
of Russians. But, so we learned at the same time, the press 
of superior numbers had compelled him to cross back again 
at nightfall. His movement had been carried out with the best 
possible order; and he had taken up his position opposite the 
bridge-head, at Niemanitza. 

This imexpected news, robbing us of our only means of re- 
treat — of the sole properly constructed way, for a great stretch 
up and down, of crossing this river lined with steep banks and 
marshes — ^was the worst the Emperor could have received. The 
details given with it confirmed the news itself, and also certain 
other particulars implicit in it. There could no longer be any 
doubt, for instance, about the arrival of the Moldavian army, 
which the Emperor had so long believed was coming to re- 
inforce Kutusof. 

CHAPTER XII 

THE BERESINA 

I T looked as if we were fated in this cruel campaign to suffer 
all the most infuriating reverses of which Fortune is ca- 
pable. Everything best suited to upset the Emperor’s plans 
came then in quick succession. After having had to face the 
loss of all the supplies on which he had counted to meet the 
army’s needs and to provide for its reorganization, he now 
lost, when no other hope remained to him, the one assured 
means of crossing the Beresina. Anyone else would have been 
overwhelmed. 

The Emperor rose superior to the mischances which had be- 
fallen him. These reverses, instead of disheartening him, 
brought out more than ever his characteristic energy; he showed 
what sublime cotirage and a brave army are capable of, when 
they have to contend against the worst that misfortune can do. 
One thing is certain: the Emperor showed himself a match for 
each emergency, and therefore fitted to prevent them all — if 
only he could have presumed no further upon Fortime, Glory, 
and Mankind. But hope, the merest inkling of success, elated 
him more than the severest setback could depress him. The 
indirect news, whidh he received almost at lie same time as 
the other, of successes contrived by the Prince of Schwarzen- 
berg on the sixteenth and seventeenth, revived his spirits. He 
had so often been loaded with Fortune’s favours in Ae most 
desperate of circumstances that he hoped, and was soon quite 
confident, that the Austrians — ^whom his ministers must have 