

That evening, when the Emperor had lain down, and had, 
as so often happened, kept Count Daru and Duroc to talk with 
him, he fell into a doze; and these gentlemen, waiting until 
he was well asleep before they withdrew, began chatting to- 
gether. After a quarter of an hour the Emperor woke up and 
asked what they were saying. 

“We were wishing that we had a balloon,” M. Daru replied. 

“What for?” 

“To carry Your Majesty away.” 

“Good God! — ^things are bad enough now. You’re afraid, 
then, of being taken prisoners of war?” 

“No, not prisoners of war, because they won’t let Your Maj- 
esty off so lightly as that.” 

“The situation is very grave; that’s a fact. The issue is 

ICE 

235 

growing more complicated. Just the same, if my leaders set 
a good example, I am still stronger than the enemy. I can 
very well afford to disregard all the Russians, if their troops 
are all that stand in the way.” 

It was on the next day [November 23] that the State Secre- 
tariat burnt its papers.® M. Daru had been asking to do this 
ever since we had left Ghjat, where the destruction of equip- 
ment began. 

The Emperor sent for me in the small hours of the morning, 
and told me of the bad news he had received: 

“This is beginning to be very serious,” he said. 

He asked me whether it was freezing enough for the rivers 
and lakes to be frozen hard, and whether the artillery could 
pass over the ice. 

“I am inclined to think not, at least as far as the rivers are 
concerned,” I replied. 

“You don’t know what you’re talking about. Didn’t Ney 
cross the Dnieper over the ice, after leaving his cannon behind, 
when it wasn’t so cold as to-day? It’s going to freeze, and we 
shall cross the Beresina marshes. Otherwise, we should have 
to break through the enemy, and then make a big detour. How 
many days of forced marches will it take to reach Vileika or 
Gloubokoje? The position is likely to turn critical if Kutusof 
has manoeuvred skilfully; and if Wittgenstein is ready to sup- 
port him, or has joined forces with the admiral. This damned 
sailor [Tchitchagoff] brings me nothing but bad luck. As for 
Kutusof — ^he knows nothing about war. He is brave enough 
when he comes to grips in a fight; but he knows nothing about 
strategy.” 

‘^What was called the State Secretariat’s correspondence was very con- 
siderable; the mere administrative details of the army during the campaign 
amounted to a mass of papers. In addition, there were all the reports and 
projected decrees of the various French ministries — the portfolios, so- 
called — ^work that an auditor brought in each week. There were twenty- 
seven unreturned portfolios that had piled up. — Caulaincourt’s note. 

236 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

The Emperor told me what Daru and Duroc had said to him. 
“Their balloon would not be de trap” he added jokingly. “This 
is one time when only the brave can escape. If we can get 
across the Beresina, I can control the issue, because the two 
fresh corps that I shall find here, with my Guard, are adequate 
to defeat the Russians. If we caimot cross, we shall try what 
our pistols can do. Consult with Duroc about what we could 
take with us if we had to cut a way out ’cross coimtry, without 
transport. We must be ready in advance to destroy everything 
so as to leave no trophies for the enemy. I would rather eat 
with my fingers for the rest of the campaign than leave the 
Russians a fork with my crest on it. So come to an imder- 
standing with Duroc about what belongs to his department — 
but keep it quiet. I have spoken only to him and to you. We 
should also make sure that my weapons and yours are in good 
condition, for we may have to fight.” 