

Realizing that to break through was hopeless, he resumed 

ICE 

231 

his original position, continuing to fight until ten o’clock in 
order to force the enemy to keep their forces concentrated at 
that point. Firing then ceased, and General Miloradovitch sent 
a second messenger * (this time a major) with a flag of truce, 
to propose that the marshal should surrender. He, however, 
had already laid his plans, and had sent out reconnaissances 
to explore the dictrict as soon as he had become convinced that 
we were no longer near enough to help him. The marshal was 
confirmed in his intentions by hearing from this Russian oflScer 
that the whole French army had left Krasnoe, and was already 
a long way off. He kept the major with him, and continued 
in absolute silence to prosecute the movement he had already 
begun for crossing the Dnieper, up and down which he had 
reconnoitred the evening before. Although at several places 
along its margin the ice was scarcely formed, few lives were 
lost. It was even possible to save the hulk of the horses. 

When day broke, the Russians found only our spiked guns, 
and imderstood what one brave man can do with Frenchmen 
behind him. The marshal, having reached the other bank of 
the river, sent out small detachments to go to Orcha with word 
for the Emperor. Only one of these arrived, to give the Vice- 
roy the first news of what had happened. Platow, coming from 
Smolensk by the right bank and flooding the country with his 
swarms of Cossacks, had learned of the marshal’s crossing. He 
mustered aU his men, surrounded the marshal, harassed him 
continuously on his march, and forced him to form squares al 
every moment to resist attacks from the enemy and to protect 
the stragglers, refugees and such wounded as he had been able 
to bring with him. The efforts of all the Don Cossacks were 
vain; Marshal Elchingen’s six thousand brave men kept their 
formation, nor were they stopped even for a moment. 

This daring retreat was freely compared with what was 

^ The j&rst messenger had been sent on the same day, just when the fight- 
ing had begun. 

232 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

called the “prudence” of Ney’s colleague; and the comparison 
made all the more talk because Marshal Eckmuhl was unpopu- 
lar. Everyone, high and low, availed himself of the oppor- 
tunity to throw stones at Davout, without considering whether 
the orders he had received, the instructions he had given Mar- 
shal Elchingen, the circumstances in which he had found him- 
self, were not sufficient to justify the course he had taken. 

Marshal Elchingen’s return restored the Emperor’s confidence 
in his Star — a confidence by now too inveterate to be good for 
him or us. 

On the twenty-first, headquarters were at Kamienska. On his 
way there the Emperor received word a second time about the 
progress of the Moldavian army. He had it from Count Daru, 
who had been following at some distance behind the Emperor, 
and had kept himself occupied by helping the sick that en- 
cumbered the road or were crammed into the few remaining 
houses. He had [thus] met a Polish officer, who had asked 
him to carry the word to the Emperor until such time as he 
could confirm it himself — for at the moment his horse could 
go no farther. The Emperor peppered Co\mt Daru with ques- 
tions — ^as he did the Pole, later on — ^but there was nothing to 
be learned except that Admiral Tchitchagoff’s Moldavian army 
had moved upon Borissow. This information roused the Em- 
peror to anxious thought; and that evening he told us all about 
it. 