

The Emperor set off again two hours before daybreak [No- 
vember 26 ] to join the Duke of Reggio at Wesselowo. He ex- 
amined the banks of the Beresina, and placed strong artillery 
on the side we occupied, which dominated the other side across 
the whole stretch of marshland. This marshland bordered 
the river, and was a good five hundred yards wide. He had 
soundings taken in the ford. The river had subsided through 
freezing, and so there was no great depth except for a stretch 
of twenty or thirty feet, across which the horses had to swim 
to gain the other bank, which was rather steep. On our side 
the water only came up to the horses’ bellies. A number of 
light cavalrymen — our fearless Poles — crossed and recrossed 
without difficulty, and drove away some Cossacks prowling on 
the other bank, who never fired a shot until they had been driven 
beyond the marshland. Later on there was a small engage- 
ment between the advance-guard of Dombrowski’s division and 
a party of sharpshooters, infantry, hussars and Cossacks from 
Tchalitz’s division, who were in the houses of the village of 
Brillowo, but who retired. 

Meanwhile active work was being carried on to complete the 
trestles begun by General Corbineau; and material was collected 
to make two bridges — one for artillery and one for infantry. 
Threats of crossing were kept up all along the line. The army 
mustered in strength at Borissow, and then made in succession 
for Wesselowo. The Duke of Reggio’s corps crossed the bridges 

246 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

before nightfall. General Dombrowski was wounded in a 
trifling engagement between his division and Tchalitz’s, which 
had been attacked in the rear and driven out of Brillowo. The 
Third (Ney) and Fifth (Poniatowski) Army Corps crossed 
during the night on their way to support the Duke of Reggio, 
who, it was then thought, was going to be vigorously attacked 
by the admiral. 

The Emperor was at the bridge all day. His presence en- 
couraged the sappers and the pontoon-men, who showed real 
devotion by getting into the water every other minute to mend 
a matchwood bridge which broke down imder every gun- 
carriage and half-company of men. The Emperor inspected 
the marshland along the other bank of the river, and in the 
afternoon took careful observations of this position. It was 
long past nightfall when he returned to Studianka, where he 
slept on the twenty-sixth. 

He was back at the bridge at daylight. The crossing pro- 
ceeded slowly. So as not to impede the troops and artillery, 
stragglers and camp-followers were stopped from slipping over 
the bridge, as they would readily have done in the intervals. 
Wesselowo was thronged with them. The Guard and the trans- 
port-waggons crossed on the twenty-seventh, in the daytime, and 
took up a position at Brillowo, on the other bank. 

While all this was going on, the Duke of Belluno, who was 
covering our manoeuvre, was getting into position at mid-day 
in front of Wesselowo with the Daendels and Girard divisions; 
Partouneaux’s division, which he had left in front of Borissow, 
was to join him during the night. The inaction of the admiral, 
who had received orders from Kutusof to alter the direction of 
his march, baffled everyone. Nor was it any easier to under- 
stand the slow pace of Wittgenstein’s pursuit. How had it come 
about that the admiral, who had been able to observe our tac- 
tics for thirty-six hours past, had not burnt or dismantled the 
Borissow bridge, and thus had that, at least, off his mind? 