

After his arrival at Orcha on the nineteenth, the Emperor 
had spent part of the day on the bridge. He had inspected the 
environs as if there were still some chance that the town could 
be held. Although there was no news of Marshal Elchingen, 
we continued to hope. Every delay made our plight worse, and 
so the retreat continued. The Viceroy was put in charge of the 
rear-guard; and on the twentieth, in the afternoon, headquarters 
were transferred to the manor-house of Baranou’i, a short way 
beyond Orcha and a quarter of a league off the road. 

Here the Emperor learnt from a Polish civilian of the Mol- 
davian army’s march on Minsk. His informant, however, was 
unable to tell him exactly when it had started or how far it had 
progressed. All he knew was hearsay, picked up from someone 
else. 

“Tchitchagoff intends, no doubt, to join Tormasov,” the Em- 
peror said to me; “and they’ll send an army to the Beresina — 
or more likely to reinforce Kutusof here on the uplands. As 
I’ve always thou^t, Kutusof is leaving us alone now in order 
to head me off and attack me when this reinforcement has 
joined him. We must hurry. Time has been lost since we left 
Smolensk, although if my orders have been carried out I’ll also 
have my forces mustered on the Beresina. We must hurry to 
get there, for that’s where great things may happen.” 

The Viceroy, who had remained in Orcha, announced soon 

230 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

after the Emperor’s departure that Marshal Elchingen had 
crossed the Dnieper near Variski on the night of November 18- 
19, over barely formed ice; and that he had with him, besides 
his own army corps, four or five thousand stragglers and refu- 
gees from Moscow who had sought shelter within his squares. 
The Viceroy was given orders to move towards Marshal El- 
chingen and help him rejoin us. He had, in fact, already done 
so by sending back one of his divisions. 

Never has a victory in the field caused such a sensation. 
The joy was general; everyone was drunk with delight, and 
went nxnning to and fro to spread the news; it was impossible 
to resist telling everyone you met. It was a national triumph, 
and you shared it even with your grooms. Officers, soldiers, 
everyone was convinced now that we could snap our fingers 
at Fortune and the elements alike — ^that Frenchmen were in- 
vincible! 

Here are the full details, as given later by the marshal him- 
self: 

In the afternoon of the eighteenth a thick mist prevented him 
from seeing an inch in front of him, and his advance-guard ran 
headlong into Russian batteries. There were three enemy corps 
with formidable artillery on both sides of the Krasnoe road 
and on the road itself. When he heard firing, he closed up 
with his advance-guard, which he overtook at five o’clock. Be- 
lieving that we were waiting for him, and tliat the cannonade 
would be the signal for a general attack on our part, he renewed 
his own attack several times in the hope of breaking a way 
through the enemy. His troops fou^t with remarkable bravery 
despite a murderous fire from all quarters. After breaking 
through two ranks, Ney’s men seemed doomed to die under 
the cannon-fire of a third, without being able to overcome all 
the obstacles that the Russians had prepared and now opposed 
to their valour. 