

On arriving at Zembin the general heard a cannonade, and 
was attacked at the same time by Cossacks. However, his 
rear-guard checked them sufficiently to let him keep moving. 
Further on, peasants told him that the Borissow bridge-head 
had been surprised, that the Polish general had not even de- 
fended the town, and that he had abandoned the bridge. This 
gave the Moldavian army control of both banks of the Beresina, 
safeguarded its communications with the Wittgenstein by the 
only bridge in the district, and put the French brigade between 
it and Tchemychev’s Cossacks. 

Hearing that General Tchernychev was coming from Lepel, 
where he had been in commtmication with Count Wittgen- 
stein, for whom he was probably acting as advance-guard. 
General Corbineau realized how vitally important it was to in- 
form the Duke of Reggio of what had happened. Consequently, 

242 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

lie made up his mind to take any risk in attempting to make 
contact with the Duke, rather than to seek his own safety else- 
where. He halted at the first defile on the Borissow road, and 
set watch on the roads from Minsk and Zembin that were oc- 
cupied by Cossacks. By good luck the officers and patrols 
whom he had sent out managed to get hold of a peasant com- 
ing from Borissow, who had crossed the Beresina near Wes- 
selowo. Chance favoured General Corbineau’s devotion. He 
decided on his tactics then and there. That night he ordered 
the guide to take him to the place where he had crossed the 
river; and at midnight, on the twenty-first, he crossed at the 
point where, though he did not know it at the time, he was 
going six days hence to show the French army a means of es- 
cape. (It was the very spot where Charles XII had crossed 
the Beresina, thus extricating what remained of his brave army 
after his Ukrainian expedition.) The current and the floating 
ice, difficult to avoid in the darkness, made him lose about 
seventy men, even though his brigade was in compact forma- 
tion and marching eight abreast. 

General Corbineau had successfully surmounted one stiff ob- 
stacle; but Tchitchagoff’s army, patrolling the river bank on 
horseback, faced him with other dangers. Fortune was kinder 
to him than he would have dared to hope. He avoided Plitsche, 
where the Russians were, and moved upon Kostritza. A Cos- 
sack regiment had just left there when the French advance- 
guard galloped in, at four in the morning of the twenty-second, 
and took possession of its equipment and servants. Continu- 
ing his march with the same good luck. General Corbineau 
came to a Russian nobleman’s residence which had a good 
bridge over the Natcha. It was the last obstacle he had to 
overcome before reaching the Smolensk road, where, to his great 
astonishment, he ran into the Second Corps a short distance 
from Kroupki. 

If the French army had taken the same road as he did, what 

THE BERESINA 

243 

misfortune would tave been avoided! How many lives would 
have been saved! But either the Duke of Reggio attached no 
particular importance to the details of the reports that General 
Corbineau made to him, and so did not pass them on to the 
Emperor, or else the Emperor did not consider it expedient 
to take General Corbineau’s route. The fact is that, if we had 
taken it, we should have gained two marches. By screening 
our movement with a mere feint towards Borissow, our passage 
of the Beresina could have been kept from the admiral’s notice 
altogether; and so all our losses would have been prevented. 
General Corbineau felt this so strongly that, not content with 
simply making a report to the marshal, he drew his attention 
once again, during the course of the twenty-third, to the advan- 
tages of the route he had taken. If the Emperor did have 
knowledge of all these circumstances, everything suggests that 
he must have been determined to carry out the general move- 
ment upon Borissow for the sake of putting Admiral Tchitcha- 
goff wholly on the wrong scent. It is possible, of course, that 
Pahlen’s defeat and other considerations led the Emperor to 
believe that a straightforward attack would enable him to get 
control of the Borissow bridge, and thus to cross the river more 
easily. On the whole, though, the probability is that he knew 
nothing of General Corbineau’s suggestions at the time they 
were first made, since he never spoke of them, and even de- 
plored the inconvenience of having to take the artillery and 
the baggage-train on such a long detour to reach Wesselowo. 