

The Emperor sent for General Corbineau on the twenty- 
third, but, as a result of one of those trifling occurrences which 
often have so much influence over great events, the general did 
not receive the order till the twenty-fifth. It is said that the 
Duke of Reggio’s aide-de-camp, M. Cramayel, pocketed the 
order and forgot about it. 

By the time General Corbineau saw the Emperor, to whom 
he gave an account of aU the circumstances of his adventure — 

244 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

and pointed out, moreover, that precious time was being lost 
by making a useless detour — ^the columns had already passed 
the road that ought to have been taken. The Emperor did not 
pause when this observation was first made. (He reverted to 
it later, and traced out General Corbineau’s route on a map; 
but it was too late. He then spoke of it to me, as well as to 
the Prince of Neuchatel, and took occasion to complain that 
he never was told about things in time.) After chatting for 
a few moments with General Corbineau, he sent him to Wes- 
selowo to prepare whatever was necessary in the way of bridge 
construction. Without tools, without iron, with virtually no 
material — ^he had to pull down houses to get wood — his zeal, 
aided by the tireless energy of Colonel Chauveau of the artil- 
lery, triumphed over all difficulties. After having arranged 
everything and put all to work, he reported to the Emperor at 
Staroi-Borissow. There His Majesty had stopped for a few 
hours to give orders [eleven p.m., November 25]. He had 
reconnoitred Niemanitza, the banks of the Beresina, the country 
above and below Borissow, and its environs as well. The Em- 
peror and I had even gone on foot to the end of the remaining 
quarter of the bridge. 

The Emperor had hesitated about where to cross the river- 
He still had his heart set on Minsk; the more especially, since 
he hoped that the Prince of Schwarzenberg would have made 
his way there, and that, by means of a double manoeuvre, lie 
Russians would not have been given time either to remove or 
destroy the supplies. He therefore summoned the commissary 
officer who had been in charge there, so as to get exact infor- 
mation about the supplies likely to be available, the nature 
of the country, and recent events. He also made thorough en- 
quiries about the route through Ukoloda; but the reports of 
General Corbineau, who arrived in person towards one o’clock, 
and further particulars from the Duke of Belluno about the 

THE BERESINA 

245 

extraordinary tactics of Wittgenstein, who restricted himself to 
following his movements, decided the Emperor. He sent Gen- 
eral Corbineau back to hurry up the bridge construction, with 
orders to return immediately. . . . General Corbineau joined 
us again in the night, and the artillery, baggage and various 
army corps were directed to advance on to Wesselowo and 
Studianka. The last-named was a manor house, to which the 
Emperor proceeded with the Guard during the night. General 
Corbineau acted as guide. 