

The Emperor stopped for a little while at the crossing of 
the Villia, in the midst of a bodyguard and on an eminence 
overlooking a fairly wide reach of the road. I stood apart to 
watch the debris of our army file past. It was from here that 
I saw what stragglers had reported for several days past, and 
what we had refused to believe. Cossacks, tired of killing our 
stragglers, or of taking prisoners whom they were obliged to 
march to the rear, thus depriving themselves for a time of the 
chance of daily booty, were robbing everyone they came across. 

260 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

They were taking their clothes, if they had decent ones, and 
sending them away practically naked. I have seen cases in 
which they gave in exchange inferior clothing which they had 
taken from someone else, or from some poor wretch dead by 
the roadside. Every one of these Cossacks had a pile of old 
clothes — some under their saddles like pads, others over them 
like cushions. They never had ridden such high horses before. 
I spoke with some of the unfortimate stragglers whom I had 
seen robbed quite near the bridge, and with others who had 
been stripped farther away. They confirmed the particulars I 
have given, and added that the Cossacks, when no superior of- 
ficers were about, drove them along in front of them like a 
herd of cattle. 

On the third, we reached Molodetchna, where fourteen des- 
patches from Paris were received all at once, as well as des- 
patches from all along the line and the Duke of Bassano’s news 
about the Austrian advance. ... He had no encouraging in- 
formation to give about the levies of Polish cavalry. Cossacks 
were out of the question. The Duchy was exhausted — ^particu- 
larly its funds; and the Emperor, whose object was to spend as 
little as possible, was for this reason deprived of the Cossacks 
on whom he had been counting, and whom he had daily been 
expecting to meet. 

Lithuania had no more resources than the Duchy. Laid waste 
by war, it was barely able to fulfil its first quota of troops. We 
lacked Lithuanian Cossacks, as we lacked Cossacks from the 
Duchy, as we lacked all the other supports on which the Em- 
peror had counted. Henceforth, it was clear that neither Wilna 
nor even the Niemen would be the end of the army’s retreat, 
and therefore the end of our troubles. 

On that same day, three Russian peasants threw the whole 
transport section into a panic. However, when a number of 
infantrymen rallied, they made off, after looting two carriages 
belonging to generals. As for the Cossacks, they never ap- 

THE BERESINA 

261 

peared where there were five or six bayonets near each other. 

The Emperor was very busy reading his despatches from 
France, and everyone was glad to have news from home. In 
Paris there had been some imeasiness about the interruption of 
news from the army, but no conception of the extent of our 
disasters. The memory of the Emperor’s exploits maintained 
confidence, and caused such a sense of security that the sensa- 
tion produced by this long silence had been less marked, less 
disturbing, than there had been reason to fear. 