

THE BERESINA 

247 

How was it that he had not made a quick sally with eighty or 
so of camion, and knocked us to bits while we were crossing 
the river? Was he waiting for Wittgenstein? Had Kutusof 
joined forces with him? Was he manoeuvring in our rear? 
We lost ourselves in conjecture; and, it must be admitted, there 
was ample ground for doing so. 

Before sending the transport-waggons into the marshland, I 
had personally examined all the paths through it in the morn- 
ing. If the cold, which had diminished during the three pre- 
ceding days, had not become very much sharper again the day 
before, we should not have saved a single gun-carriage, as the 
soil was miry and trembled beneath one’s feet. Although the 
path along which they were taken was constantly changed, the 
last ammimition waggons got bogged, because they cut or broke 
through the crust of hard frozen grass which served as a sort 
of bridge. The wheels had nothing to grip, and sank into the 
bottomless mud. It required all the perseverance, all the in- 
telligence of which the men in charge of the convoys were ca- 
pable, to deal with so awkward a situation. It can be said with 
truth that Fortune was never kinder to the Emperor than on 
these two days: had it not been for the intensity of the cold, 
he could not have saved a single cart. 

The Emperor, who during the day had inspected Brillowo 
and the road leading thence to Borissow as well, returned to 
Wesselowo to view the Duke of Bellimo’s position. His Maj- 
esty had personally supervised the Guard’s crossing of the 
Beresina, and did not return until a late hour to Brillowo — a 
miserable hamlet where headquarters had been established. It 
was ascertained from several marauders that Cossacks, from 
whom they had escaped, had appeared at Studianka in the 
afternoon and captured some stragglers. In the Emperor’s 
opinion, these were Wittgenstein’s advance-guard. Was he 
manoeuvring in concert with the admiral to attack us on both 
sides? If so, it was too late for him to be successful. . . . 

248 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Since the condition of the cavalry made it impossible for us 
to send out strong reconnoitring parties, we could not ascertain 
the enemy’s movements. Also, even though thus far our troops 
had crossed the Beresina without being troubled by a single 
rifle shot, and although ever5lhing suggested that the crossing 
would be completed with equal success, the Emperor’s atten- 
tion was fixed on Kamen. It was along this road that the enemy 
could stop our march and bar our way with obstacles far more 
difilcult to surmount than the Beresina. The Emperor had just 
learnt from a peasant, and the report was verified by some of- 
ficers who had travelled along the Kamen road, that it was 
constructed on a large number of bridges built over countless 
small streams which traversed it; that one of these bridges, over 
an impassable swamp, was more than a quarter of a league 
long. A light put to a bunch of straw would be sufficient to 
deprive us of this means of retreat. 