

From Kamen we proceeded to Plechnitsie, where the General 
Staff slept on the thirtieth. The Beresina had swept away a 
large number of our strays and stragglers, who had been loot- 
ing everything and thus depriving the brave fellows who re- 
mained in the ranks of the supplies which they so hadly needed. 
However, that was no gain, for, after the crossing, bands of ir- 
regulars formed in full view of everyone, with the object of re- 
cruiting still more stragglers. All that remained of the First 
Corps was its colour-guard and a few commissioned and non- 
commissioned officers surrounding their marshal. The Fourth 
was worse than weakened, and the Third, which had fought 
so valiantly against the Moldavian army, had been reduced by 
more than half its strength after that affair. The Poles were 

THE BERESINA 

555 

in no better case. Our cavalry, apart from the Guard, no longer 
existed except in the form of parties of stragglers, which, al- 
though the Cossacks and peasants attacked them savagely, over- 
ran the villages on our flanks. Hunger proved an irresistible 
force, and the need to live, to find shelter against the cold, made 
men indifferent to every sort of danger. The evil spread also 
to the Duke of Reggio’s corps — ^now joined on to Marshal El- 
chingen’s — and even to the Duke of Belluno’s divisions, which 
formed the rear-guard. 

Cavalry officers, who had been mustered into a company 
under the command of generals,® dispersed also in a few days, 
so wretched were they, and so tortured by hunger. Those who 
had a horse to feed were forced, if they did not want to lose 
it, to keep some distance away, as there were no supplies at 
all along the road. The Guard also lost more stragglers after 
Kamen; but this body of men — ^who of course grumbled a little, 
though always under their breath, and who got whatever sup- 
plies were going — still made an excellent impression by virtue 
of their general appearance, their vigour and their martial air. 
These veterans cheered up as soon as they caught a glimpse of 
the Emperor; and the battalion each day on guard-duty kept 
up an astonishing standard of smartness. 

Thinking of the wonderful smartness of the Guard puts me in 
mind of the contrast between our men from Moscow and the 
troops from the Dwina [Victor and Oudinot], at the time when 
we joined forces with them. Our men, emaciated, bloodless, 
grimy as chimney-sweeps, enfeebled, were like spectres, al- 
though vigorous enough on the march and full of dash under 
fire. The others, less exhausted, better fed, less smoked by 
bivouac fires, seemed to us like men belonging to another race. 
They were alive, we were shadows. The contrast in the horses 

' Napoleon had just formed what was called the escadron sacri, less to 
furnish himself with a personal bodyguard than to provide a centre for 
rallying the officers who had no longer any men under them 

254 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

was even more striking. The artillery of those two corps was 
superb. The generals and oflScers were well mounted, had all 
their equipment, and had been enjoying all the good things that 
can be got on campaign. At Wesselowo the officers of the Em- 
peror’s General Staff— Duroc and myself, for instance — ^made 
more than one visit to the Duke of Reggio’s kitchen, so great 
had been the privations to which all ranks in the army had Been 
subjected. In the engagement against the Moldavian army, our 
worn-out fellows from Moscow were not behind their comrades 
as far as courage was concerned. In fact, as was said every 
day, our soldiers had more courage than strength. 