

As may well be imagined, there was little inclination to 
spare General Partouneaux, to whose surrender this misfortune 
could largely be attributed. The Emperor and the General 
Staff, the marshals and officers, the whole army, were more than 
severe in their judgment on him. “His lack of foresight,” 
everyone agreed, “is unpardonable. The surrender of his di- 
vision without a fight is shameful.” The word “cowardice” was 
used, and his surrender was compared with Marshal Elchingen’s 
brave determination. 

“When d’Assas faced certain death,” the Emperor said, “he 
cried: Follow me, men of Auvergne! If generals lack the cour- 
age to put up a fight, they might at least allow their grenadiers 
to do so. A drummer could have saved his comrades from dis- 
honour by soimding the charge. A canteen-woman could have 
saved the division by shouting, ‘Same qui peut!’ instead of 
surrendering.” 

There is no doubt that, apart even from the very fair chance 

252 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

we had, of getting across the Beresina before the enemy started 
to attack, this surrender had a powerful and unfortunate in- 
fluence on the whole course of events; and that the Duke of 
Belluno, with one division too few in his hands, was thereby 
put at great disadvantage in defending his position. 

While all this took place on what was now the farther bank 
of the Beresina, the First and Fourth Corps were moving upon 
Kamen. That, along with our success against the admiral, was 
some consolation for the day’s disasters; and the Emperor was 
greatly comforted to feel sure that our progress, which could 
so easily have been stopped by the burning of a few bridges, 
would meet with no further impediment. . . . Whatever was 
left of the artillery and the carriages was also going on towards 
Kamen. But headquarters were maintained at BriUowo for 
one day more, the twenty-eighth, so as to oversee the reorganiza- 
tion of the corps that had been hard hit, and to set a good ex- 
ample to the troops. Their morale had crumbled visibly under 
the strain of the past few days. 

On the following day, the twenty-ninth, the Emperor pro- 
ceeded to Kamen, where General Lansko'i, sent there by the 
admiral, had appeared about noon. He had surrounded a house 
in which were the Duke of Reggio, General Legrand and other 
wounded generals and ofiicers, as well as two oflScers from the 
Emperor’s personal suite sent ahead to arrange accommoda- 
tion.* All the servants were assembled, with a number of sol- 
diers who had gone ahead of the main army; and this handful 

^ Caulaincourt is mistaken: cf. Fain, Manuscrit de 1812^ II, 409; Castel- 
lane, Journal, II, 199; Denniee, Itineraire, 163; Lejeune, Souvenirs, II, 441. 
All agree that this episode took place at Plechnitsie (Plaszczenitzy) , not 
at Kamen. Caulaincourt is, therefore, confused in his recollection of some 
of the events of the two days November 29-30. — ^The Duke of Reggio had 
taken a bullet in his side on the twenty-eighth. Lanskoi’s bombardment 
wounded him again; a cannon-ball came through the roof, sending a splin- 
ter into his thigh. Oudinot was wounded thirty-four times during his 
military career. 