

When we reached Kamen [Plechnitsie?] the Emperor spoke 
again with me about his journey to France. He did not antici- 
pate any further obstacles to prevent the army from reaching 
Wilna, where he considered that it would be as good as saved, 
and sure of a chance to recuperate. He hoped to come upon 
his despatches from Paris within forty-eight hours, and to get 
news of the troops which ought to be coming from Wilna to 
meet us. We were almost in communication with the Bavarians. 
The arrival of the Polish Cossacks, whom he took to be only 
a few marches away, was his chief concern. He continued to 
count on the Prince of Schwarzenberg’s advance, which he 
hoped would divert the enemy’s attention from our retreat, and 
give us a chance to take up a position in cantonments. He ex- 
pected frequent attacks from Cossacks, but regarded them as 
unimportant, since our latest stragglers had organized them- 
selves into powerful squads, under leaders, to repel them and 
to awe the peasants. It was common enough to see one of 
these small detachments of fifteen or twenty men chasing one 
hundred and fifty or two hundred Cossacks in front of them. 
The Emperor, then, considered himself to be out of reach of 
Wittgenstein and Kutusof; and the admiral could only follow 
along in our tracks — ^that is, unless he made a detour which 
would lose him two marches. 

THE BERESINA 

257 

On December 1, headquarters were at Sta'iki. We had not 
hitherto had such a bad lodging. Staiki was nicknamed 
“Miserowo,” The Emperor and the chief-of -staff each had a 
little niche seven or eight feet square. All the rest of the staff 
were crowded together in another room. It froze so hard that 
everyone sought shelter in this cubby-hole. We had to lie on 
our sides so as to save space. We were packed so tight together 
that a pin could not have been dropped between us. 

Going out in the darkness, someone trod on the foot of M. 
de Bausset, who had been following us in a carriage ever since 
Moscow, suffering horribly from gout. The wretched cripple, 
suddenly awakened by the sharp pain that this clumsiness caused 
him, began to shout: “It’s terrible! — it’s murder!” Those who 
were awake shouted with laughter, which awoke the sleepers; 
and everyone — serious and lighthearted alike, the imfortunate 
sick man himself — ^paid tribute to this momentary nonsense 
with roars of laughter. I describe this scene to show how man 
is capable of accustoming himself to the most wretched circum- 
stances; and how, just as the most trivial thing will distract him, 
so he can witness the greatest misfortunes almost unmoved. 

After crossing the Beresina, our faces were less careworn. 
For the first time, Poland seemed delightful to everyone. Wilna 
had become a promised land, a safe port that would shelter 
us from all storms, and the end of all our troubles. The past 
seemed a dream; and the prospect of a better lot already made 
us forget, almost, the disasters that had come upon us. Weari- 
ness, the privations of the moment, the sight of poor devils 
dying every instant of cold and exhaustion — all this counted 
for little with the naturally gay and careless French soldier. 
Danger makes men egotists. Those who had survived were ac- 
customed to seeing pain and destruction all around them. The 
strongest characters refused to succumb to misfortune, and tried 
by their cahn to strengthen others who were weaker. We suf- 
fered terribly, of course; we had before us a constant spectacle 