

THE BERESINA 

253 

of brave men sufficed to drive away the detachment of Cossacks. 
Finding that he was unable to capture the occupants of the 
house, Lanskoi bombarded it. Two persons close to the mar- 
shal were wounded. When our advance-guard arrived on the 
scene, the Russians decided to rest on their laurels for that day. 

As the peasant had reported, and various officers confirmed, 
at a distance of half a league out of Brillowo, and for a stretch 
of about two leagues, the road is a causeway through a marsh. 
The way is so insecure that the greater part of it is constructed 
of wooden bridges, two of them nearly a quarter-league in 
length. Numerous others cross the little streams, which traverse 
the marsh here, there and everywhere. How could so easy a 
means of impeding our progress have been overlooked by the 
Russians? Six Cossacks with torches would have sufficed to cut 
us off from this means of retreat. 

None of the deductions to be made from this strange lack of 
foresight on the part of the enemy escaped the Emperor. He 
was all the more infuriated by General Partoxmeaux’s manifes- 
tation of that same lack, which, as he said, had cost us so dear, 
when he reflected how easy it would have been, but for this, 
to make the crossing of the Beresina one of the most perfect 
and illustrious military operations ever undertaken. He added 
that the Russian generals had not yet carried out a single genu- 
inely military operation, not one useful manoeuvre, without its 
having been worked out for them by their government. The 
Emperor’s opinion of Wittgenstein, whom he had considered 
the most tenacious, and, during the Dwina campaign, the most 
capable of the Russian generals, steadily declined in conse- 
quence of his muddled tactics, his indecision and the deliberate 
slowness of his operations in order not to risk being isolated 
from the admiral. He had been saying ever since Polotsk that, 
given the circumstances in which we were placed, we might 
consider ourselves lucky in not having more capable adver- 
saries. . . . 

254 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

On the way from Brillowo to Kamen two of the Emperor’s 
transport-mnles, which had fallen behind the others, were stolen 
while their driver was some little way off. No one knew who 
had got them. I mention this insignificant fact because, in spite 
of the prevailing misery, it was the only incident of the kind 
that took place during the campaign. The respect in which the 
Emperor was held, the devotion to his person, was such that 
no one belonging to his suite, not even one of his servants, was 
ever insulted. Not one murmur agaiast the Emperor was heard 
in the whole course of this disastrous retreat. Soldiers were 
dying by the roadside, but I never heard a single grumble; and 
my testimony in this respect is worth something, because after 
Wereia I always marched on foot, sometimes with the Emperor, 
sometimes in front of him, sometimes behind him, but always 
amongst groups of men, in uniform, without my riding coat and 
wearing my full-dress hat. Any discontent amongst the men 
would have manifested itself most readily, no doubt, in the 
presence of a general in full uniform. The individual behavi- 
our of these unfortunate soldiers, who, lacking all the necessi- 
ties of life, froze to death by the roadside, often astonished me, 
I admit; and I was not alone in admiring it. 