

250 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

stein’s force, which had been drawn up facing the Duke of 
Bellxmo since the evening before, was seen to be preparing for 
an attack. Even then, the rear-guard battalion had arrived 
without difficulty; no sounds of fighting had been heard; the 
road, according to a reconnoitring party which had returned, 
was still free. Thus, no one imagined that a division com- 
manded by experienced generals could conceivably have sur- 
rendered without putting up a fight. Even supposing that Gen- 
eral Partouneaux had been attacked by the main body of Witt- 
genstein’s forces, there was nothing to prevent him from strik- 
ing out, with his infantry and cavalry, for the river bank; that 
route was still open. Was he still fighting? The battle that 
was about to begin would show him that they were waiting for 
him, and would serve him as a useful diversion. It was on 
this supposition that, far from speeding up the passage of the 
troops already delayed to await the missing division, reinforce- 
ments, including even a detachment from the Guard, were sent 
back to support Marshal Bellimo. He was vigorously attacked 
about eleven o’clock while we were engaged in fighting Tchi- 
tchagofi. 

The Emperor did not hear of the surrender of Partouneaux’s 
division until one o’clock. The notable success scored against 
the admiral compensated somewhat for this misfortune, which 
was kept as secret as possible at main headquarters, but which 
was made known at the headquarters of the Duke of Bellimo, 
who at the time was severely pressed by Wittgenstein’s army. 
None spared himself in the effort to hold this position at least 
until nightfall; but at last the marshal was compelled to cross 
the Beresina in order to save his corps from total destruction. 

It is impossible to conceive the appearance of the village of 
Wesselowo and that bank of the Beresina after his withdrawal — 
everywhere troops, stragglers, refugees, women and children. 
The camp-followers, who were unwilling to abandon their wag- 
gons, had not been permitted to cross the river — ^the bridges. 

THE BERESINA 

251 

and the paths through the fields, had been reserved since the 
evening before for the passage of the Duke of Belluno and the 
troops detailed to support him. The Emperor hoped up to the 
last moment that the position could be held until dark, in which 
case everything would have been saved. But when a retreat 
was decided on, the Wesselowo bank at once became a scene 
of horror, of indescribable carnage, especially when the Rus- 
sians’ repeated attacks on the last troops to cross the river had 
driven the crowd of non-combatants to the river’s edge. Every- 
one then rushed the bridges, which were soon broken down, as 
much by the disorder as by the fugitives’ weight. We French- 
men, unhappy and helpless spectators of these scenes of horror 
and cruelty, were able from our side of the river to gauge 
roughly the number of the victims of Russian barbarism. Ten 
thousand lives were lost. This estimate of the number of un- 
armed stragglers, camp-followers, refugees, women and chil- 
dren is not exaggerated. 