

The Emperor instructed me to send M. Anatole de Montes- 
quieu, the Prince of Neuchatel’s aide-de-camp, to Paris to give 
word of him verbally to the Empress. His object was to pre- 
pare public opinion, by the details that this officer would give, 
for the bulletin on which he had been occupied since we crossed 
the Beresina. 

The despatches from Paris revived the topic of the Malet 
affair. The Emperor always joked about the capture of the 
Minister and of the Prefect of Police. He appeared to be quite 
satisfied with the state of public opinion since this conspiracy, 
particularly during the interruption of news from the army. 
He was satisfied with all the details about the administration, 
with everything in general, and said as much to the Prince of 
Neuchatel, who repeated his remarks to me that same evening. 

The Emperor was occupied with the famous bulletin. He 
was still determined to hide none of his disasters, so as to im- 
press them on everyone before his arrival. Then, he said, his 
presence would both calm and reassure public opinion. The 
more overwhelming our disasters were, and the more they were 
multiplied with every day that passed and every step we took, 
the more indispensable became his return to France. He sum- 
moned me one evening, and repeated to me what I had already 
heard from the Prince of Neuchatel. 

“In the existing state of affairs,” he said to me, “I can only 
hold my grip on Europe from the Tuileries.” 

262 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

As usual, however, in spite of any remarks I might make to 
him, he let there be no doubt that the army was to take up its 
position at Wilna, and would have its winter quarters there. 
He counted on being able to set off in less than forty-eight hours; 
as soon, in fact, as he was in contact with the troops coming 
from Wilna, whereafter, in his opinion, the army would nm 
no more serious risks. He was eager to start so as to forestall 
the news of our disasters. It is to be noted that, for the most 
part, nothing was known about them. Confidence in his genius, 
and the habit of seeing him triumph over even greater obstacles, 
were such that public opinion tended to minimize rather than 
exaggerate whatever news of our disasters was received. The 
Emperor was in a hurry to start. He thought that communica- 
tions would be easier and surer at once rather than a few days 
later, because Russian partisans would not yet have had time 
to try attacks from the rear, as they certainly would do while the 
army was getting into position. He allowed me to make certain 
preliminary arrangements so that nothing should delay his de- 
parture when once it was decided upon. 

The Emperor again asked me whether I thought he ought 
to give command of the army to the Viceroy or to the King of 
Naples. I said, as I had in previous conversations, that, with 
all due respect to Murat’s courage. Prince Eugene was the more 
popular with the army and enjoyed more of its confidence. I 
added that the King of Naples, though a hero on the battlefield, 
was generally thought to possess neither the force of character, 
the sense of order nor the foresight necessary to save the re- 
mains of the army and reorganize it; that, without for a mo- 
ment overlooking his services at Borodino and on other occa- 
sions, he had been accused of having an insatiable appetite for 
glory, of having instigated His Majesty to undertake the Mos- 
cow expedition, and of having lost the magnificent force of 
cavalry which started on the campaign. It was no longer a 
question of charging the enemy, I told him; the present need 