

258 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

of fearful misery, of overwhelming distress; hut the instinct 
of self-preservation, the feeling of national pride, and the desire 
to uphold national honour prevented us from taking full account 
of this excess of adversity. Our spirits were exalted; and we 
did not know, or rather did not wish to believe, all that subse- 
quently transpired. Yesterday’s dangers, then, like to-day’s 
and to-morrow’s, meant no more to our imagination than risks 
in a battle constantly renewed. Since we were all in it together, 
we were generally gay, careless, even full of raillery, as one 
is the day before, or the day after, or the very day of, a battle; 
dest la guerre. Unquestionably, despite our sufferings, our 
headquarters were in as good a humour as were the Russian 
headquarters. 

We were approaching Wilna; we were in Poland, and stiU 
no despatches had arrived. The Emperor could not understand 
this delay, as we were very near the Bavarian Corps, then sta- 
tioned at Vileika. This corps, under the command of General 
Wrede, should have left the Gloubokoje district and advanced 
on to Bunilowice after the Second Corps’ retreat; but it had re- 
turned after the nineteeenth, and was defending Wilna. This 
lack of letters from France, and especially the thought of the 
probable effect there, as well as in Europe, of the absence of 
all news about the army, was of greater concern to the Emperor 
than anything else. He prepared a bulletin [the famous Bul- 
letin 29] giving an account of the course events had taken, and 
of our latest disasters. He said to me: 

“I shall tell everything. It is better that these particulars 
should be known through me than through private letters. Full 
details now will mitigate the effect of the disasters which have 
to be announced later to the nation.” 

Headquarters were established on the second at Selitche, al- 
most as uncomfortable as the day before. But we found a store 
of potatoes. It is impossible to describe the joy that everyone 

THE BERESINA 

259 

felt at being able to eat his fill. The cold was so intense that 
bivouacking was no longer supportable. Bad luck for those 
who fell asleep by a camp-fire! Furthermore, disorganization 
was perceptibly gaining ground in the Guard. One constantly 
found men who, overcome by the cold, had been forced to drop 
out and had fallen to the ground, too weak or too numb to 
stand. Ought one to help them along — ^which practically meant 
carrying them? They begged one to let them alone. There 
were bivouacs all along the road — ought one to take them to 
a camp-fire? Once these poor wretches fell asleep, they were 
dead. If they resisted the craving for sleep, another passer-by 
would help them along a little farther, thus prolonging their 
agony for a short while but not saving lliem; for in this condi- 
tion the drowsiness engendered by cold is irresistibly strong. 
Sleep comes inevitably; and to sleep is to die. I tried in vain 
to save a number of these unfortunates. The only words they 
uttered were to beg me, for the love of God, to go away and 
let them sleep. To hear them, one would have thought this 
sleep was their salvation. Unhappily, it was a poor wretch’s 
last wish; but at least he ceased to suffer, without pain or agony. 
Gratitude, and even a smile, was imprinted on his discoloured 
lips. What I have related about the effects of extreme cold, 
and of this kind of death by freezing, is based on what I saw 
happen to thousands of individuals. The road was covered with 
their corpses. 