

On the twenty-eighth, in the morning,® the Duke of Reggio’s 
advance-guard was attacked so vigorously by Admiral Tchitcha- 
goff that the Third and Fifth Corps had to come to his support. 
Several hours passed with honours more or less even. The 
Duke of Reggio was wounded. The Emperor, who was pres- 
ent at the engagement, at once replaced him with Marshal 
Elchingen. A charge of cuirassiers, carried out by Doumerc’s 
division, decided the affair in our favour. In a felled wood 
the Seventh Regiment, which had taken its place at the head 
of Berckheim’s brigade, charged upon a column of infantry 
in close formation and dispersed it. The resulting disorder 
forced the Russians to retreat, leaving behind more than fifteen 
htmdred prisoners, whom I saw. These prisoners were all sol- 
diers from the Moldavian army. 

This check to ihe admiral would have decided the hazardous 
operation of crossing the Beresina wholly in our favour, but 
for one of those events which no plans made by a human being 
® At seven a.m. Battle of the Beresina. 

THE BERESINA 

249 

can take into account, as they are outside all reasonable proba- 
bilities. There can he no doubt that the rest of the army would 
have crossed the river without difficulty, and so been saved, if 
Partouneaux’s division, which had remained at Borissow and 
which was to join the Duke of Belluno during the night, had 
not in the darkness mistaken the way where the roads from 
Studianka and Wesselowo diverge. General Partouneaux and 
a party of staff ofiicers, thinking that they were on the right 
road and that the Duke of Belluno was ahead of them, were 
marching confidently at the head of the division so as to be 
able to observe in advance the position it would take up, when 
they found themselves in the midst of the Russians, and were 
taken prisoner. The enemy, warned ahead of time of the mis- 
take these officers were making — ^and the division after them — 
had arranged matters in such a way that they would he allowed 
to advance. The general of division was captured; the division 
itself surrendered, acting under orders of Generals Le Camus 
and Blanmont. These particulars were learnt afterwards: at 
the time, what was a consequence of disastrous imprudence 
was considered to be due to stupidity and cowardice.® 

The arrival of this division’s rear-guard battalion, which had 
taken the right road, leaving Staroi'-Borissow last, and had 
caught up with the Duke of Belluno during the night, increased 
the uneasiness to which the division’s delay had already given 
rise. This battalion had seen and heard nothing, and had found 
the road free. Marshal Victor did not doubt but that the di- 
vision had got lost during the night, and would join him at 
daybreak. Everyone was constantly expecting to see it appear; 
and uncertainty ceased only about nine o’clock when Wittgen- 

® The Emperor was very hard on Partouneaux. In Bulletin 29, he said 
of him; “Rumours are current that the general of division was not with his 
troops, and had been marching on his own.” Later on, however, Napoleon 
forgave Partouneaux; for on July 14, 1813, while their father was still in 
captivity, he decided that the general’s three sons should be educated at the 
State’s expense. 