

THE BERESINA . 263 

was to keep the army alive so as to reorganize it, and to hold 
the enemy in check. 

The Emperor seemed to find my observations sound. He 
even subscribed to the opinion generally held about the King, 
but pointed out that his rank made it impossible for him to be 
put under the orders of the Viceroy. Thus he was obliged to 
give the preference to Murat, who would have left the army 
if the supreme command had been entrusted to Prince Eugene. 
He added that the Prince of Neuchatel took the same view; that 
he was leaving him to see to everything, and that he, Berthier, 
preferred the King, whose rank, age, and reputation would be 
more imposing in the eyes of the marshals, and whose proved 
courage counted for something where the Russians were con- 
cerned. Certain other remarks which the Emperor had made 
formerly, and which I recollected because they cropped up 
again in the course of this conversation, gave me the idea (at 
least I fancied I could trace such a thought) that he would pre- 
fer to leave to his brother-in-law the honour of rallying the 
army, and that he did not care about his step-son having credit 
for this further achievement in the eyes of the army and of 
France. With all his greatness of character, this distrust of 
his relatives — ^and, in general, of everyone who had acquired 
personal renown — ^was entirely in keeping with the Emperor’s 
general attitude. 

He spoke to me again about the persons he would take with 
him. His choice was limited to myself, who was to start with 
him, to Duroc and Count Lobau, who were to follow after 
him, and to M. Wonsowicz, a Polish officer who had been 
through the whole campaign, a man of proved courage and de- 
votion. It was arranged that the Emperor’s other aides-de- 
camp and the officers of his suite should follow him in suc- 
cession: each week the Prince of Neuchatel was to send two of 
his orderly officers along to him. He was to have an escort only 
as far as Wilna. This would be provided by the Neapolitan 

264 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

cavalry, which was attached to Loison’s division. Beyond 
Wilna he would travel under the name of the Duke of Vicenza. 

I gave orders, therefore, to the post-stages, under the pretext 
of making sure that there were facilities for the use of despatch 
officers. Our troops soon disorganized these relays, however, 
and it was necessary to make other arrangements by sending 
ahead several transport detachments whose horses would serve 
our purpose. Our situation was such that the smallest acci- 
dents were liable to put obstacles, even insurmountable obsta- 
cles, in our way, unless steps were taken long in advance. For 
instance, we should not have been able to make use of our 
relays to get along the road, which was like a sheet of glass, 
if I had not kept under lock and key a sack of coal for the 
purpose of forging shoes for the horses which were to pull us. 

We could do our smithing only at night because the supply- 
waggons were on the move for twelve or fifteen hours each day. 
The cold was so severe, even by the forge fire, that the farriers 
could only work in gloves — and then they had to rub their 
hands every minute or so to keep them from freezing. These 
particulars, quite insignificant in any other circumstances, give 
some idea of the causes of our failure, and of all that would 
have had to been foreseen in order to avoid it. Our failure, 
for the most part, was due rather to such unconsidered trifles 
than to exhaustion or the enemy’s attacks. 