

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

281 

benefit would be still more perceptible a little later. In less 
than three years the Rhineland, Germany, the very coimtries 
which were most hotly opposed to the prohibitions, would do 
justice to his foresight and his achievements. To have taught 
the French and the Germans that they could themselves earn 
the money which English industries had previously drawn out 
of the country, was a great victory over the London govern- 
ment. This result alone would immortalize his reign, through 
the internal prosperity it would bring to France and Germany. 

The Emperor concluded from this that what I referred to as 
the colossus of the power of France was, at that time, a state 
of affairs wholly advantageous to Europe, since it was the only 
way to check the excessive pretensions of the English. England, 
he added, by the very fact that she weighed less heavily than 
he upon the chancelleries of Europe, weighed all the more 
heavily upon the people. For she seized for herself alone all 
the benefits of industrial development. As an island, she doubt- 
less excited less jealousy and anxiety in the minds of govern- 
ments that had no coast-lines. Her maritime ascendancy seemed 
for this reason less burdensome to the governments of Europe 
than the ascendancy of France. Her situation precluded the 
danger of territorial disputes with them. But her exclusive 
commercial policy was nonetheless damaging to individual 
interests. This fact was not willingly recognized at the present 
time because the various governments found it convenient to 
go to London for subsidies when they wanted them; and it 
mattered little to them if the cash they received had come from 
the pockets of their own subjects — or rather, had been earned 
at the expense of these subjects, whose industries would never 
be able to develop so long as the English monopoly continued. 

The Emperor admitted that the annexation of Hamburg and 
of Liibeck,® towns whose independence was useful to commerce, 

® The decree of the Senate dated December 13, 1810, in. addition to regu- 
larizing the annexation of Holland, had joined with France the Hanseatic 

282 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

must have alarmed the traders as well as the governments of 
Europe because these changes were thought to indicate a policy 
which would be continued. 

But he justified these measures of expediency by the neces- 
sity of confronting England, along that coast, with our own 
rigid system of prohibition of imports. He added that, as he 
was in conflict with the actual trade of the towns, he must win 
over the sentiments of all thinking persons in the population. 
Constitutional govermnent and our code of laws would bring 
about that change. Being unable to maintain an army of 
twenty-five thousand men in the new Departments, he had in-' 
stituted govermnental reforms to ensure us the confidence of 
the inhabitants. This step, he added further, which was wholly 
advantageous to the greatest number and in the true interest 
of the landowners, already counter-balanced the opposition of 
the maritime trading interests, which could not be expected to 
become friendly so long as they could not resume their activi- 
ties and find outlets for their capital. 