

At Rumsiszki we found a regiment on the line of march. On 
the way from Wilna to Kowno the Emperor again raised the 
problem whether he should take, as he had first intended, the 
direct route through Konigsberg. Would it be prudent, with 
the possibility that some incident would lead to his recognition, 
to cross the whole breadth of Prussia? We had a commandant 
in every town, but apart from the regiments on the line of march 
we had no troops. 

On the other hand there was so much snow that we might be 
seriously delayed if we followed a less frequented road, on 
which there were no post-horses. These considerations made us 
hesitate to take the road through the Duchy of Warsaw, which 
from other points of view was the safer. If we were not to 
be delayed, however, it was necessary to make up our minds, 
so that we could order the horses. After weighing again the 
advantages and disadvantages of each arrangement, we came to 
a decision. I say we, because the Emperor refused to judge 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

275 

the question and insisted that I alone should decide — ^which, I 
confess, seemed to me a heavy responsibility, and worried me 
considerably. I took a chance, and sent [word] forward along 
the road to Konigsberg, but left myself free to change direc- 
tion at Mariampol if I heard that the roads through the Duchy 
were passable. 

Fagalde was sent in advance as far as Gumbinnen [on the 
road to Konigsberg]. It was not without some difi&culty that 
we climbed the almost perpendiculalr slope which one must sur- 
mount on leaving Kowno for Mariampol. We were forced to 
get out and walk. As the horses were falling or losing their 
foothold at every moment, the carriage was several times on 
the point of running backwards and tumbling over the preci- 
pice. We heaved at the wheels, and at last reached Mariam- 
pol. I held a consultation with the master of the posting-house, 
an honest fellow full of zeal and good feeling. He assured 
me that the roads were passable, and that if we gave him two 
hours’ start he would undertake to arrange relays of horses for 
us as far as Warsaw, going by Augustowo. The desire to meet 
his despatches from France en route made the Emperor incline 
a little toward the road by Konigsberg; but he left the final 
choice to me. I did not hesitate. I sent instructions to Fagalde 
to rejoin us at Posen; and I sent the post-master along the road 
to Warsaw with instructions to order horses in my name as far 
forward as Pultusk, where he was to wait for us. He had seen 
the Emperor before, and so recognized him when we first ar- 
rived; he promised me, however, not to mention his name, and 
he kept to his word. The Emperor spoke to him, which de- 
lighted him. 

We set out an hour behind him, and fotmd peasants’ horses 
everywhere; but, as our carriage was on wheels and there was 
no time to fit numers on it, we were unable to get through the 
snow, which was piled up everywhere to a considerable height. 
The couriers’ sleighs, on the other hand, flew over the surface. 