

The Emperor was well satisfied with the particulars trans- 
mitted to him by the Duke of Bassano regarding the tactics 
that he had just instructed Prince Schwarzenberg to carry 
out. Generally speaking, he was pleased with everything this 
minister had done and ordered whilst communications were 
interrupted. He did not, however, refer with the same satis- 
faction to what had been done in regard to raising the levies 
he had ordered in Poland. In this respect, he complained a 
great deal about M. de Pradt and about all his agents at Wilna 
and Warsaw. The promised Cossacks had not even been re- 

THE BERESINA 

265 

cruited — a fact which upset the Emperor the more in that he 
had been openly attributing all his defeats since Smolensk to 
the lack of light cavalry, . . . The news from France, on the 
other hand, was a real consolation. The Emperor spoke of this 
with the utmost satisfaction, and with high praise for the Em- 
press’s conduct, for her prudence, and for the attachment that 
she had shown to him. 

“These difficult circumstances,” he went on, “form her power 
of judgment, and give her assurance and far-sightedness which 
will win the nation’s heart. She is just the woman I needed, 
kind, good, loving as German women are. She doesn’t busy 
herself with intrigues. She has a sense of order, and concerns 
herself only with me and her son.” 

On the fifth, headquarters were at Smorgoni. There a mem- 
ber of the Wilna government and Count van Hogendorp, aide- 
de-camp to the Emperor and governor of the town, awaited him. 
The Emperor interviewed them, and sent them off again at 
once. He then sent for me to take the dictation of his final 
orders: 

Smorgoni, December 5, noon. 

The Emperor leaves at ten o’clock to-night. 

He is to be accompanied by two hundred men from his 
Guard. Beyond the Smorgoni-Oschmiana relay station, as far 
as Oschmiana, by the infantry regiment that halts for the night 
fifteen miles from here; orders to this effect to be given by 
peneral van Hogendorp. 

One hundred and fifty good horses belonging to the Guard 
to be sent to a point one league from Oschmiana. Staff of- 
ficers from the infantry regiment and the squadron of lancers 
from the Guard to be placed in relays between Smorgoni and 
Oschmiana. 

The Neapolitans, who are bivouacking to-night between 
Wilna and Oschmiana, to arrange for one hundred horses to 
be at Miedniki and one hundred at Rumsziki. 

266 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

General van Hogendorp ... to instruct the Duke of 
Bassano to wait upon the Emperor immediately at Smorgoni. 

The Emperor to start with the Duke of Vicenza in His 
Majesty’s carriage; M. Wonsowicz in front, a footman 
behind. . . . 

The Master of Horse to notify the King of Naples, the 
Viceroy and the marshals to be at headquarters at seven 
o’clock. 

The Master of Horse to get from the chief-of-sta£f an order 
to proceed to Paris with his secretary Rayneval,® his couriers 
and his servants. 

The Emperor then repeated what he had already said in the 
morning . . . that the Prince of Schwarzenberg was on the 
move forward . . . that various regiments were arriving at 
Wilna and others on the Niemen; that the Wilna shops, and 
even the Kowno shops, were well supplied, and that the troopers, 
once they got hold of food and clothing, would soon rejoin the 
ranks. There could be no doubt, in his opinion, that the retreat 
would be over when there was no more privation. 