

“I could treat them like conquered countries, hut I administer 
them like Departments of France. It is wrong of them to com- 
plain. It is the checks on trade that irk them. But those de- 
pend on considerations of a higher order, to which the interests 
of France must also yield. Only peace with England can end 
those inconveniences and their complaints. They need only 
be patient. Two years of persevering effort will bring about 
the fall of the English government. England will he forced 
to conclude a peace consistent with the commercial rights of 
all nations. Then they will forget the inconveniences they com- 
plain of; while the consequent prosperity, and the state of af- 
fairs that will then be established, will for the most part pro- 
vide means for the prompt repair of all their losses.” 

The Emperor complained that in these days everyone ob- 
stinately refused to look beyond the little circle of his own 

280 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

diflEculties. Even the most capable men held to this narrow 
range of vision. Whereas it needed no more than a little good- 
will to realize all the advantages they were on the point of 
enjoying as a result of a larger view. All the sacrifices had 
been made; it needed only patience to gather in the harvest. 
It was not given to everybody to judge the new road he had 
pointed out. The System he had been forced to adopt against 
England could be judged, together with everything that fol- 
lowed from it, only after the passage of some years. It ran 
counter to too many habits, and damaged too many petty in- 
terests, not to stir up discontent in a lot of people. And it was 
of these malcontents that the forces of stupidity and blind hate 
were now taking advantage. 

He added that the Continental System was nonetheless a 
great conception, and was destined to win the voluntary con- 
sent of every people; for it was as much to the interest of in- 
dividuals as it was to the interest of the Continent as a whole. 
Prohibition against prohibitioners was common justice. More- 
over, in his desire to establish on the Continent industries that 
would make it independent of England, he had had no choice 
of means; he had adopted the sole method which would really 
hit England’s prosperity. It was a great undertaking; and only 
he could carry it out. If the present opportunity were allowed 
to pass, another would not come; for the enterprise had needed 
just that combination of circumstances which had in fact ob- 
tained in Europe during the last few years. He already had 
proof that he had not been mistaken, and could cite in support 
of his plea the flourishing condition of industry, not only in 
the original territory of France but also in Germany — and that, 
too, even though the wars were still going on. 

The Emperor inferred from this that the Continental System 
had built up the industries of France and Germany. It would 
therefore, he said, be a source of wealth which would replace 
the foreign trade which we were at present missing. The 