for disorder, which might well complete the process of disor- 
ganization. At bottom, however, he was far from foreseeing 
what actually happened, although the troops from the Dwina 
and Belluno’s men were going to pieces more every day. 

The King of Naples, the Viceroy, the Marshals, the Dukes 
of Elchingen, Treviso, Istria and Danzig, the Prince of Eckmiihl 
— all of them with the exception of the Duke of Belluno, who 
was in command of the rear-guard — arrived in turn. They con- 
stituted a sort of council to which the Emperor announced his de- 
termination to go to Paris. His manner was that of someone 
submitting a project for their opinion on it; and they were 
unanimous in urging him to go. 

PART V 

FLIGHT 

CHAPTER XIII 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

W E set out at exactly ten o’clock in the evening. [Decem- 
ber 5, 1812.] The Emperor and I were in his sleeping 
coach; the gallant Wonsowicz was on horseback, riding 
beside the carriage; and Roustam also was mounted, along with 
the outriders Fagalde and Amodru. One of them went ahead 
to order post-horses at Oschmiana. Duroc and Count Lobau 
followed in one caleche, Baron Fain and M. Constant in a 
second.^ The necessary preparations had been so carefully 
made, the secret so well kept, that no one had the least suspicion 
of what was happening. With the exception of the Grand Mar- 
shal and Baron Fain, even those who set out on this journey did 
not know of it until seven-thirty, when the marshals were noti- 
fied. 

The Emperor reached Oschmiana about midnight. Loison’s 
division and a detachment of the Neapolitan cavalry had taken 
up their position there during the afternoon. It was freezing 
hard. The troops were full of confidence, in the belief that 
they were covered by the main army; consequently the outposts 
were badly placed, and in addition badly manned. The main 
body of the division was quartered in the town, where every- 
one shut himself indoors to escape the cold, which was extreme. 
Shortly before the Emperor’s arrival, a Russian commanding 
some irregular troops had taken advantage of this confidence 

^ If one could put any faith in the spurious memoirs of Constant 
{Memoir es. III, 472), one would have to believe that he travelled alone and 
arrived in Paris five or six days after the Emperor, 

272 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to carry out a raid through the town with Cossacks and hussars. 
The slaughter of a few sentinels and the capture of a few men 
were the only result of his expedition. A fusillade from every 
house soon forced the Russians to beat a hurried retreat, where- 
upon they took up a position overlooking the town, which they 
bombarded for some time. This was the state of affairs when 
the Emperor arrived. M. van Hogendorp, who carried the 
orders dictated by the Emperor, and even the ordinary courier, 
had barely preceded us, so that we had to wait for the horses 
and the Neapolitans. 

The Emperor hesitated a moment in favour of waiting till 
daylight. The caleche following us had not yet arrived. We 
held a sort of council to decide also whether it would not be 
well to send a few squads of infantry to keep the road open, 
in case the Russians tried to occupy it. This precaution, how- 
ever, would have delayed us, and might have informed the 
enemy of the Emperor’s departure.^ We therefore decided to 
put along the road a small advance-guard composed of the 
moimted Neapolitans. We sent two further advance-guards to 
follow them in echelon. The rest were divided, half going in 
front of us and half behind. The Emperor’s saddle-horses, 
which had followed us from Smorgoni, were ordered to come 
on as far as Miedniki. The cold was increasing, and the horses 
of the escort cotild not keep their feet. Of all the detachments, 
there were not fifteen men still with us when we reached the 
relay, and hardly eight, including the general and some officers, 
as we approached Wilna. 