

Having tried on previous occasions to explain the real state 
of affairs to the Emperor, and what I foresaw would come to 
pass, I listened this time without making any reply. 

“Why don’t you answer? . . . What is your opinion, then?” 
“I have grave doubts. Sire, as to whether the Niemen will 
be the end of disorder and as to whether the army will rally 
there. All the fresh troops ought to be sent to take up their 
positions wherever Your Majesty thinks we can really stop, 
since contact with our disorganized forces will spread disorder 
amongst them, and thus lose us everything.” 

“So you think that Wilna ought to be evacuated?” 
“Unquestionably, Sire, and as soon as possible.” 

®The Emperor was going to travel under the name of Count F, J. M. 
Gerard de Rayneval, at that time first embassy secretary attached to the 
Duke of Vicenza. 

THE BERESINA 

26 ? 

“You make me laugh! The Russians are not in a fit state 
to proceed there now, and you know as well as I do that our 
stragglers don’t give a f for the Cossacks.” 

The Emperor was convinced that more supplies could be got 
together in eight days at Wilna to resist the Russians than they 
would be able to collect in a month. In his mind’s eye he saw 
Poland arming all her peasants to drive away the Cossacks, 
the French army tripling in size because it had food and cloth- 
ing, and because its reinforcements were now within reach, 
whereas the Russians were leaving theirs farther and farther 
behind. The Emperor, as at Moscow, refused to take into ac- 
count the fact that the climate favoured the Russians more than 
us. Already he saw our cantonments, even our advance-posts 
protected by the Poles, who were acclimatized and ready, with 
infantry as well as cavalry, to defend their country and their 
homes. He even saw our infantry, when once it had eaten its 
fill, less than two weeks hence, braving the cold and chasing 
away the Cossacks. The Emperor seemed to have no doubts 
about it all; and if I failed to alter his opinion by frankly ex- 
pressing an opposite one, at least my doing so did not irritate 
him, since he discussed the situation for a long while with me. 

The Prince of Neuchatel was greatly upset at having to re- 
main behind, although the Emperor, in accordance with his 
wishes, had made the King of Naples commander-in-chief. 
Berthier was consoled by the thought that he would be able to 
be of real service to the Emperor by remaining with the army, 
and that the presence of someone accustomed to being obeyed 
was necessary for the maintenance of good morale. His de- 
votion and attachment to the Emperor were heartfelt. He, too, 
saw how many difi&culties there would be in rallying the army, 
not because of any lack of fresh troops (he had enough at his 
disposal, and the Guard still formed a satisfactory basis for 
reorganization), but because the Emperor’s departure, which 
otherwise he believed to be necessary, would provide a pretext 

268 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

