

276 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Qiance led me to discover a covered sledge at the first relay- 
station. This was a piece of good fortune, in view of the 
Emperor’s impatience to reach his journey’s end. The gentle- 
man who owned the sledge was glad to let me have it for a few 
gold pieces. The Emperor and I took our places in it. We 
left the carriage in charge of the footman, who had gallantly 
stuck by it, seated on the flunkey’s step. The Emperor hardly 
gave us time to transfer our rugs and arms; for lack of space 
in die sledge, he was even forced to abandon the toilet equip- 
ment which was so useful to him.® The seats were uncomfort- 
able, we were poorly supported against the jolts of the road, 
and the air was close; the Emperor, for the sake of arriving 
sooner, had sacrificed everything which makes a long journey 
endurable. Henceforward we travelled much more easily; we 
even made time. The Grand Marshal, who had again caught up 
with us at Mariampol, now fell behind us in tlie first mile we 
covered beyond the town. Thereafter we never saw again either 
a carriage or a man of all that had left Smorgoni with the 
Emperor. 

The Emperor had become very cheerful as soon as we en- 
tered the Duchy and had been talking incessantly about the 
army and about Paris. He had no doubt that the army would 
remain at Wilna, and did not in the least recognize the extent 
of his losses. 

“Wilna is well stocked with food, and will put everything 
to rights again,” he said to me. “There are more supplies than 
it will take to stop the enemy. The Russians will be at least 

* “The berime [mounted on sleigh-runners] -was harnessed without delay, 
and the Emperor took his seat in it, together with the Duke of Vicenza and 
Count Wonsowicz. The Mameluke [Roustam] was put on the driver’s 
seat. . . . General Lefebvre-Desnouettes alone was able to follow, in a 
little sleigh which he had promptly obtained.” — Bourgoing, Souvenirs, 194, 

^ The Emperor had entered the Duchy of Warsaw by crossing the Nie- 
men at Kowno. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

277 

as tired as we are, and suffer just as much from the cold; they 
are certain to go into cantonments. Nothing will he seen of 
them hut Cossacks. The orders and recommendations I left 
with M. Bassano will anticipate everything that can come up. 
Maret is confident of Schwarzenberg’s sense of honour, and 
says he will hold his position and defend the Duchy. M. Bas- 
sano has written to him, as well as to Vienna and Berlin.” 

The Emperor was anxious only about the effect that our 
reverses had had upon those two courts. He felt, though, that 
his return to Paris would restore his political ascendancy. 

“Our disasters,” he said, “will make a great sensation in 
France; hut my arrival will counter-balance their bad effects.” 

He planned to take advantage of his passage through War- 
saw to bring the Poles to life. 

“If they really want to be a nation, they’ll rise in a body 
against their enemies,” he added. “And if they do, I shall take 
up arms to defend them. Later on I should be able to grant 
Austria those concessions she has so much at heart; then we 
could proclaim the re-establishment of Poland. Austria has 
a greater interest in that than I have, because she lies nearer 
to the Colossus of Russia. If the Poles don’t do as they should, 
that will simplify things for France and for everyone else; for 
peace with Russia will then be easy.” 