

He chose to believe, or at least tried to make me think so, 
that all the cabinets of Europe, even those most wounded in 
pride by the power of France, were anxious that the Cossacks 
should not be allowed to cross the Niemen. 

“The Russians should be viewed by everyone as a scourge,” 
he said further. “The war against Russia is a war which is 
wholly in the interests — if those interests are rightly judged — 
of Old Europe and of civilization. The Austrian Emperor and 
M. Metternich realize this so well that they often said as much 
to me at Dresden. Emperor Francis xmderstands perfectly the 
weak and shifty character of Tsar Alexander, and mis trusts 

278 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

him, having already been deceived by his protestations and 
tricked by his promises. The Viennese government understands 
perfectly that, apart from Russian contact with Austria over a 
long frontier, and aU the divergent interests arising from such 
a situation, Russia’s designs upon Turkey made her doubly dan- 
gerous. The reverses that France has just suffered will put an 
end to all jealousies and quiet all the anxieties that may have 
sprung from her power or influence. Europe should think of 
only one enemy. And that enemy is the Russian Colossus.” 

I answered the Emperor frankly. 

“As a matter of fact, it is Your Majesty they fear. It is 
Your Majesty who is the cause of everyone’s anxiety and pre- 
vents them from seeing other dangers. The governments are 
afraid there is going to be a World State. Your dynasty is 
already spreading ever3rwhere, and the other d3masties are 
afraid they wiU see it established in their own countries. Even 
now all the German interests are being hurt by the system of 
taxation adopted three years ago. And the political inquisi- 
tion set up by certain tactless representatives ofiends national 
opinion, wounds everyone’s self-respect, and nms counter to all 
their habits of thought. All these causes and considerations, 
which are perhaps partly hidden from Your Majesty, make 
their hatred of you a national force. And what has stirred up 
the people, even more than it has the governments, is the mili- 
tary regime imposed upon Germany under the administration 
of the Prince of Eckmiihl.” ® 

The Emperor was so far from checking my frankness that 
he listened and replied not only without anger but with sly 
good-humour. From the way in which he received and dis- 
cussed several of my remarks, one would have thought they 
did not touch him at any point. He smiled at the things which 

® Since J anuary 1, 1810, Davout had been in command of the Army of 
Germany which, after November 1, 1811, was called the Army of Observa- 
tion of the Elbe. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 279 

came closest to him, and kept up the air of taking them in 
good part and of wishing to encourage me to say all I had on 
my mind. At the things which doubtless seemed to him rather 
strongly expressed, he tried to tweak my ear; hut he could not 
find it under my fur cap, and so my neck or my cheek received 
the pinch — a kindly rather than an irritable one. He was in 
such a good mood that he admitted the truth of some of the 
points I brought forward. Others he refuted. Concerning still 
others he remarked that particular interests might here and 
there have been disturbed by police measures, or by combina- 
tions of circumstances which had nothing to do with the end 
he had in view. The people, however, were too enlightened, 
he said, not to see, from the very administrative system of the 
countries he had merged together, that our laws, under which 
they now lived, offered real guarantees to every citizen against 
all arbitrary action. He insisted that our administration was 
based upon principles that were broadly conceived, noble, 
adapted to the ideas of the century, and suited to the real needs 
of the people. He went on to say: 