

At a league’s distance from Miedniki and at the break of 
day we met the Duke of Bassano, who took my place beside 
the Emperor. Since His Majesty did not wish to enter the town, 

2 Cf. Bourgoing, Souvenirs, 178. One should bear in mind that for this 
period the Souvenirs militaires du Baron de Bourgoing are especially valu- 
able because the author had before him an unpublished account, prepared 
by Wonsowicz himself, from which to draw his history of the Emperor’s 
journey. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 273 

I went ahead in M. Bassano’s carriage to carry the orders to 
the government and make further arrangements for our jour- 
ney. It was well that I went to Wilna myself; for M. van 
Hogendorp, who had just arrived, had so far been able to get 
nothing prepared. He had had to awaken people who had just 
got home from a ball at M. Bassano’s. They danced while 
others froze to death. The inhabitants of Wilna had no con- 
ception of our situation, of what had already happened, or of 
what was to come. I mustered a dozen men for the escort. 
There were no post-horses. I had to take M, Bassano’s for the 
second relay. No one had any suspicion that the Emperor was 
so near. 

The Emperor stopped to change horses in the suburbs of the 
town. I arrived there at almost the same time, and we set out 
immediately. In Wilna I had bought fur-lined boots for aU 
the travellers of our party; and they thanked me for them more 
than once when we met later in Paris, for they would certainly 
have arrived there with a frost-bitten limb or two if it had not 
been for this precaution. Duroc and Coimt Lobau arrived as 
we were leaving. The Neapolitans, who were still acting as 
escort, had their hands or feet frost-bitten. I found the com- 
manding officer with both his hands pressed against the stove. 
He expected to relieve the acute pain, and I had great difficulty 
in making him realize that he was risking the loss of his hands, 
and in making him go out and rub them with snow — a treat- 
ment which so increased his sufferings that he was not able to 
keep it up. 

M. Wonsowicz, who had no more lead-horses and was tired 
besides, took the footman’s seat of the Emperor’s carriage. We 
reached Kowno two hours before dawn [December 7]. The 
courier had had a fire lit in a kind of tavern, kept by an Italian 
scullion who had set himself up there since the passage of 
the army. The meal seemed superb because it was hot. Good 
bread, fowl, a table and chairs, a table-cloth — all these were 

274 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

novelties to us. Only the Emperor had been well served 
throughout the retreat: that is to say he had always had white 
bread, linen, his Chambertin, good oil, beef or mutton, rice, 
and beans or lentils, his favourite vegetables. The Grand Mar- 
shall and M. Lobau rejoined us here. 

I do not remember that I ever sufEered so much from cold 
as on the journey from Wilna to Kowno. The thermometer had 
gone to twenty below. Although the Emperor was dressed in 
thick wool and covered with a good rug, with his legs in fur 
boots and then in a bag made of a bear’s skin, yet he complained 
of the cold to such an extent that I had to cover him with half 
my own bear-skin rug. Breath froze on the lips, and formed 
small icicles under the nose, on the eyebrows, and round the 
eyelids. All the clothwork of the carriage, and particularly 
the hood, where our breath rose, was frozen hard and white. 
When we reached Kowno the Emperor was shivering as with 
the ague. 