

I replied that to change the ruling house, if he mistrusted it, 
was undoubtedly preferable to depriving Europe of a State 
whose power would continue indispensable to him, even if he 
insisted on taking that power out of the hands of the house of 
Brandenburg. The Emperor answered that it would have been 
difficult to make the Tsar Alexander take that view, though 
more on account of the King than on account of the country; 
and at that time his main and absolutely necessary object had 
been to close the Continent against the English. It was to 
achieve this that he had made the concession. 

The Emperor complained yet again of his brothers. I pointed 
out that it was difficult not to desire complete independence 
from the moment that one became a king. Moreover, it was 
often necessary for their popxilarity in their own countries that 
they should resist the Emperor’s demands. As my frankness 
did not seem tmpalatable, I said that his intention was indeed 
to create kingdoms, but that in fact he only allotted his kings 
extended prefectures in place of independent States; and that, 
his kings being mere proconsuls, their position did not match 
with their title and the condition of their affairs. The Emperor 
smiled as though he found my remarks correct. 

Probably the conversation did not displease him; he reverted 
to it five or six times during the journey, and I needed no urg- 
ing to repeat the same views. The Emperor nearly always tried 
to bring me to his own opinion. He put patience and detailed 
care into the endeavour, discussing and reasoning as though I 
were some foreign power whom it would be to his advantage 
to persuade. Though his reasoning brought me to share his 
view on one or two points, in the main I held to my own. I 

298 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

noticed that he passed lightly over points which he did not wish 
to explain. Then if I came back to them, he would say: 

“You see things as a yoimg man; you don’t understand.” 

He also said at times, when my opinion was too much at 
variance with his: 

“You don’t understand anything about public affairs.” 

Often he would not agree that things were as I represented 
them. In answer to the remarks which most directly attacked 
his ambition and his passion for war, he smiled, joked, and 
tried to get hold of my ear and pinch it — ^an action which my 
fur bonnet always made difficult. He would give me several 
friendly taps on the neck, and say jokingly: 

“They’re wrong! I’m not ambitious. Long nights, fatigue, 
war — ^I’m too old for all that. I like my bed and my rest as 
well as anyone; but I want to finish my work. In this world 
there are only two alternatives: command or obey. The atti- 
tude of all the governments towards France showed me that she 
could count on nothing but her own power: which means, on 
force. So I’ve been obliged to make her powerful, and to 
maintain large armies. I did not pick a quarrel with the Aus- 
trians, when they grew alarmed about the fate of England and 
forced me to leave Boulogne and fight the battle of Austerlitz. 
I had not been threatening the Prussians, when they forced me 
to go and dethrone them at Jena. But in any case, what is this 
power they talk about? Nothing! The power of the whole 
Continent is nothing so long as the flag does not protect trade. 
The passports of the Duke of Gotha are respected at Paris as 
they are at Weimar, hut the Austrians cannot send out a felucca’ 
loaded with Hungarian wine without the permission of the 
Court of St. James. 