

“Poland must be made into a powerful state by the addition 
of further provinces. It must have Danzig, and a coast-line, 
so that the country may have an outlet for its produce. And 
it must have a foreign king. A Pole would create too much 
jealousy. To name this king in advance would have cooled 
the zeal of the Poles, for they are none too sure themselves what 
they want. The Czartoriskis, the Poniatow^is, the Potockis, 
and a host of others, are full of pretensions. Murat would have 
suited them, but he has so little sense! Jerome, of whom I 
had thought, has no other quality but vanity; I’ve had nothing 
but blunders from him. He left the army because he would 
not serve under Davout, as though he did not owe his throne to 
the Battle of Auerstadt. His behaviour in the Duchy when he 
Constance Poniatowska, niece of King Stanislas. 

296 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

passed through was regrettable. My family have never backed 
me up. My brothers are as full of pretensions as though they 
could say “The King, our father . . .” 

Breaking off suddenly, the Emperor asked me: 

“Whom would you have made king?” 

I replied that as I had never made any kings, I was not pre- 
pared to answer him ofihand. 

The Emperor laughed, and said the choice was very difficult. 
I replied that I thought, even more definitely than he, that to 
establish his own dynasty on that throne would create yet an- 
other cause of anxiety in Europe; that it seemed to me very 
difficult even to hope for such a thing in the present state of 
affairs; that in any circumstances a member of his family on 
the throne of Poland would have been yet another obstacle to 
peace with the English, although in itself the creation of this 
buffer state would have suited their policy. 

“In that regard you are quite right,” the Emperor said. 

The conversation gradually turned to past events, to Prussia 
and the Peace of Tilsit. I told the Emperor that, instead of 
destroying Prussia, it seemed to me he should have recon- 
structed it — even perhaps under the name of the Kingdom of 
Poland, if he thought it useful to revive that power. I said 
that he had there broken down the very buffer state which it 
was so useful to have in the centre of Europe; and that in his 
place I should freely have pardoned the Prussians, and reor- 
ganized their power on a larger scale and without the inter- 
vention of the Russians, in order to bring them within my 
system of alliances — a result which would certainly have fol- 
lowed from making Prussia Polish. 

“The policy of the Prussians has always been so tortuous,” 
said the Emperor, “and they have always shown such bad faith 
towards everyone, and have been so clumsy, that no government 
was genuinely interested in them. I hesitated for a moment 
whether to declare that the house of Brandenburg should no 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 297 

longer reign; but I bad used the Prussians so severely that some 
consolation had to be left to them. And then Alexander took 
so much interest in the fate of that family that I gave in to his 
requests. I made a serious mistake; for I left the King enough 
power to keep him mindful of the power he has lost.” 