

284 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

good of that Europe which seems to envelop her with goodwill 
counts for nothing with the merchants of London. They would 
sacrifice every State in Europe, even the whole world, to further 
one of their speculations. If their debt were not so large they 
might be more reasonable. It is the necessity of paying this, 
of maintaining their credit, that drives them on. Some day 
they will certainly have to do something about that debt. Mean- 
while they sacrifice the world to it. The world will realize that, 
in time; men’s eyes will be opened; but it will be too late. If 
I triumph over them, Europe will bless me. If I fall, the Eng- 
lish will soon drop their mask. The world will see that they 
have thought of nothing but themselves; that they have sacrificed 
the peace of a continent to their momentary interests. 

“The Continent cannot— or rather, should not — complain of 
measures that aim at closing it, for the moment, against Eng- 
lish trade. The annexations that have provoked such an outcry 
are temporary measures”; so he told me in confidence. They 
are designed to inconvenience the English, to wreck their trade, 
to break off their trade relations. They are pledges which I 
hold in exchange for our colonies, or those of the Dutch, or 
certain claims which the English must give up for the general 
good.” 

Since peace could last and could promise a future for every- 
one only if it were general, it was wrong, according to the 
Emperor, to complain of all his efforts to achieve it. Clear- 
sighted people and real politicians well knew what was his aim. 

The Emperor asked me several times during the journey if 
I thought that Russia would make peace. He added that it 
would be wise of the Tsar Alexander to conclude it while he 
was enjoying some measure of success. I replied that I stiU 
doubted if he would negotiate so long as we were within his 
territory, and that the reverses we had suffered would not in 
the least incline him towards peace. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

285 

“So you think he is very proud?” 

“I think he is obstinate. He may well be a little proud of 
having to some extent foreseen what has happened, and of hav- 
ing refused to listen to any proposals while we were at Moscow.” 

The Emperor took up the point: 

“The burning of the Russian towns, the burning of Moscow, 
was merely stupid,” he said. “Why use fire, if he relied so 
much on the winter? He has arms and soldiers for fighting. 
It is madness to spend so much money on them for nothing. 
One should not begin by harming oneself more than if one were 
beaten by the enemy. KutusoTs retreat was inept as it could 
be: it’s the winter that has been our imdoing. We are victims 
of the climate. The fine weather tricked me. If I had set out 
a fortnight sooner, my army would be at Witepsk; ’’ and I 
should be laughing at the Russians and your prophet Alexander. 
He would be regretting that he did not negotiate. All our 
disasters hinge on that fortnight, and on the failure to carry 
out my orders for the levies of Polish Cossacks. 