

The Emperor’s opinion was that, far from giving way on 
some points, he ought to strengthen every measure that might 
force England to make an earlier peace. He thought it better 
to suffer severely all at once than to suffer over a long time. 
Since the English tried every means to evade the prohibition 
of imports, in order to support their industries and uphold their 
credit, it was his duty to do all he could to triumph over their 
cunning, and force his enemy to yield. 

“It is a battle of giants,” he went on to say. “The seaport 
merchants are caught between the two champions. How could 
anyone help being jostled in the fight? But this fight to the 
death is in the interests even of the men who grumble. They 
will be the first to gather the fruits. The English have driven 
me, forced me, to every step I have taken. If they had not 

towns and a large strip of territory extending as far as Liibeck. These 
annexations had been divided into ten Departments of France. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 283 

broken the Treaty of Amiens, if they had made peace after 
Austerlitz, or after Tilsit, I would have stayed quietly at home. 
Fear for my commercial capital would have kept me in check. 
I should have undertaken nothing outside France, for it would 
not have been to my advantage. I should have grown rusty and 
easy-going. Nothing could be more delightful. I am no enemy 
to the pleasures of life. I am no Don Quixote, with a craving 
for adventures. I am a reasonable being, who does no more 
than he thinks will profit him. The only difference between 
me and other rulers is that difiiculties can stop them. But I 
like to overcome diflSculties whenever it is clear to me that the 
end in view is a great and noble one, worthy of myself and 
of the people over whom I rule. 

“If the English had let me,” he repeated, “I would have lived 
in peace. It is in their own interests alone that they have car- 
ried on the fight, and refused offers of peace; for if they had 
acted in the interests of Europe they would have accepted them. 
Holding Malta in the Mediterranean, and being in a position 
to protect other points necessary for the safety of their trade 
and the victualling of their fleet, what other claim could they 
advance? What further security could they want? But it is 
their monopoly they want to keep. They need an enormous 
volume of trade if their customs-houses are to pay the interest 
on their public debt. If the English were acting in good faith, 
they would not so consistently have refused to negotiate. They 
are afraid they would have to explain themselves, and they dare 
not admit their designs. If we negotiated, they would have to 
put their cards on the table. And then the world would see 
which side had been acting in good faith. 

“They say — and you are the first to say it, Caulaincourt — 
that I abuse my power. I admit it, but I do it for the good of 
the Continent at large. Now England thoroughly abuses her 
strength, the power that comes from standing isolated among 
the tempests. And she does so for her own good alone. The 