

since their trade had ramifications everywhere, he had to pur- 
sue them everywhere. He said it was the intrigues of the Eng- 
lish, what he called fides Punica, which had continually forced 
him to extend his sphere of operations. He spoke of how need- 
ful it would always be for him to maintain a considerable 
army, as long as the struggle with the English continued, be- 
cause their government was always working to stir up Europe 
against him — ^and so forth. 

I spoke of the impression produced, even in France, by these 
frequent annexations of provinces and by these changes of al- 
lies which disturbed the loyalties of the people. I told the 
Emperor that instead of looking on these things as advantages, 
people were disturbed by them, and were made anxious about 
the future. And I added the following reflections on these 
points. These amazing extensions of power were, I thought, 
destructive to the feeling of stability, and actually prevented 
that feeling of confidence throu^ which institutions acquire 
their sanctity. Even those who flattered him felt that while his 
genius might make these new structures last for his lifetime, 
they would never last beyond it. People did not dare to tell 
him so, but they thought so; and this opinion was all the more 
strongly held for being suppressed. It was felt that he was 
creating great difficulties for his son. He was arming Europe 
in advance against the King of Rome, and even against his 
family; and it was a pity, when founding a new dynasty, to 
give room for a growing expectation of some change. No one 
would be able to support the burden of that colossus which the 
course of events and the vigour of his rule were now setting in 
motion. These diverse nations would never make Frenchmen; 
the Rhinelanders already were finding it hard to persuade 
themselves that they had become French. 

The Emperor admitted with absolute frankness the justice of 
my remarks. He did, however, rebut several of them: 

“I shall create institutions,” he said, “to strengthen the or- 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

291 

ganization I have set up. No one can foretell what sacrifices 
I might not make — and even gladly — to secure such a state of 
affairs in Europe as would guarantee a lasting peace to all 
people, and which would guarantee to the French, and to the 
Germans, domestic prosperity such as the English enjoy. They 
are a worthy people, the Germans,” he added. “They must he 
repaid for the sacrifices they have made. I am not clinging 
to Hamburg, or to any other place in particular. I am not one 
of those narrow-minded men who see things from only one point 
of view and are obstinate on a question. There will be many 
ways of arranging things as soon as the English make up their 
minds to peace, and agree to concede to others those rights and 
privileges which Heaven never intended for them alone. We 
can never make peace with the English unless we have compen- 
sations to offer them, because among them the ministry have 
a responsibility toward the people about which they must be 
set at rest. They cannot take so decisive a step as making peace 
with France unless they can say to the nation: ‘We have made 
a certain sacrifice for such and such reasons; but here are the 
compensations made to us, and the advantages we have gained.’ 
There is a delicate and difiicult relationship between the coun- 
try and the ministry, and still more so, therefore, between the 
ministry and myself. Without this English peace, however, 
all others are merely truces. The English are playing for too 
high stakes to give way lightly. They know very well that I 
shall take advantage of a peace to establish a navy — that I 
shall not allow ourselves to be robbed again of our commercial 
capital during a state of peace. They know that a navy in my 
hands could do them considerable damage. If they were sure 
I should live only three or four years more, they would make 
peace to-morrow; for the difficulty of the question lies in the 
navy that I shall have — ^that I shall build up within a few 
years.” 