

®TMs was precisely the prize promised to the Austrians in the Treaty 
of Paris, March 14, 1812, as compensation for Galicia in the event of the 
restoration of Poland. 

294 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

gallant spirit more than prosperity. He intended to speak 
to that eJffect at Warsaw. He would teU the Poles all our mis- 
fortunes, and even all the dangers in which they stood. But 
he would tell them also all that he hoped for, if they, as a 
nation, would second him. 

I pointed out to the Emperor that the lack of unity and zeal 
of which he complained on the part of the Poles was surely 
due to his leaving them in too great imcertainty about their 
future. In practice there was no limit to the sacrifices asked 
of them; the unfortunate Duchy, after furnishing supplies for 
everything over a long period, seemed now to be exhausted, 
and even the richest no longer had a penny to their names. I 
reminded him that I had always appreciated the advantages 
of this restoration, for it would form a buffer state; and held 
that this motive was sufficient, as I had had the honour of telling 
him in other circumstances, to justify the war against Russia. 
But for several years, I, like many others, and even like some 
of the Poles, . . . had seen in his references to Poland and 
in the measures he had taken, only a method of arriving, 
through that restoration, at a different goal. In fact, Poland 
had become a military and political stepping-stone. 

Moreover, I pointed out to him jokingly that everything he 
told me about his conversations at Dresden with the Emperor 
Francis, about his refusal to give up Illyria to the Austrians, 
and indeed about all that had passed between M. Bassano and 
M. Metternich, showed me that he wanted to hold over Austria 
his power of giving or refusing, according to circumstances. 
He wished always to be able to make use of the Poles, I told 
him; to stimulate them with hopes, but not to make any under- 
taking so definite as to inconvenience his further plans or pre- 
vent him from adapting his course of action to future events. 
I added that when Poland was once restored, the Poles would 
show scant eagerness to supply us with troops to fight in Spain. 
In fact it was perfectly plain that if he really had been guided 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 295 

by those broad European considerations that demand a buffer 
state, he would at once have indemnified the Austrians for the 
loss of their Polish interests and proclaimed the restoration of 
Poland. 

The Emperor replied with a smile: 

“You make the same political calculations as the English.” 
Then he added sharply: “But how was I to make peace with 
the Russians if they would not cede Lithuania? I could not 
bind myself to be at war all my life for this object. I certainly 
did want a restored Poland, but not a Poland whose king would 
tremble before the Russians and after a couple of years put 
himself under their protection. Under an elected king, the 
state could not maintain itself. It would be out of tune with 
the rest of Europe. Under a hereditary monarch the jealousy 
of the great houses would again have brought about its dis- 
memberment. Do you suppose, for instance, that the Lithu- 
anians would have reconciled themselves to a Poniatowski? 
The condition of the Court at Petersburg, and the protection 
of the ruler of a great empire, would always have suited them 
far better than the petty court of Mme. Tyszkiewicz at Warsaw.’^® 