

He added further that he had greater need of peace than 

292 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

anyone, and frankly desired it. How could anyone doubt that? 
He did not live under canvas for his own pleasure. It was 
the English who would not decide upon peace and who, ac- 
cording to him, might not be in a position to decide upon it, 
being afraid of the future. The English ministry included some 
clever men, who could not have overlooked any of the major 
considerations of which he spoke. He was well aware that 
the institutions of France were incomplete. He did not disguise 
from himself that peace alone would put him in a position to 
give them their full development. And who could doubt that 
he desired peace, when only peace could consolidate this 
achievement? In the forefront of those institutions he put the 
Senate, which by no means enjoyed the independence it must 
have if it were to command respect enough to influence the 
opinion of the country. He told me that he woidd raise it to 
the status of a Chamber of Peers. 

The Emperor pointed out that the failure of this campaign 
was an obstacle to everything. There had to be a buffer state 
as an outpost against irruptions from the North, and to exercise 
a moderating influence on the ambitions of other powers. 
Europe owed its misfortunes to the weakness of the Bourbons 
in allowing a partition of Poland. The Emperor of Austria 
and the King of Prussia fully realized the mistake that had been 
made. They had, quite openly, entered the war against Rus- 
sia solely because they were the people most interested in the 
creation of this barrier. The Austrians expected through these 
arrangements to obtain a redistribution of territory which 
would give them necessary outlets for their trade. The King 
of Prussia flattered himself perhaps that the new state would 
come under his ride. 

The Emperor added further that the silence maintained by 
the Russians towards the Austrians when the latter attempted 
mediation, before the opening of the campaign, had left the 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

293 

Emperor Francis in no doubt as to the ambitious mtentions of 
the Tsar Alexander. Francis had told him so several times 
at Dresden. The Russian government snatched with both hands, 
from friends as much as from enemies. Everything looked 
good to them. After Tilsit they had profited at the expense of 
their allies the Prussians; after the war against Austria they 
had accepted a portion of Galicia. No delicate scruples ever 
hindered the Tsar from rounding off his territory. 

The Emperor put forward the reflection that the Tsar, with 
his gentle methods and air of moderation, had done more for 
the interests of Russia than the ambitious Catherine whom they 
idolized; and that Finland was of far greater importance to 
an empire whose capital was at Petersburg than the uninhabited 
Crimea and all that which Catherine had conquered from the 
Turks. 

The Emperor kept reverting to the idea that the Austrians 
desired the restoration of Poland, and that they were by no 
means set on retaining what remained to them of Galicia, add- 
ing that, at the Peace of Vienna, they would gladly have smr- 
rendered their millions of Galicians for a part of Illyria, no 
matter what, or for a few fragments of territory on the Inn. 
This arrangement could be made, therefore, whenever he 
wished.® His father-in-law had urged it upon him at Dresden, 
and indeed had probably come there in the hope of concluding 
the matter. He, however, had wished to be sure of the attitude 
of the Lithuanians, and to see for himself whether the Poles 
were capable of becoming and remaining an independent coun- 
try. The result of this policy was that he had not yet set all 
the Poles free; and events were proving him right. He would 
soon be able to see whether they were as worthy of independence 
nationally as they were individually; for adversity steels a 