

“That Cossack at Ghjat was right when he said that the Rus- 
sian generals valued their comfort and didn’t know how to fight 
properly. One must do justice to the Cossacks. It is they who 
have achieved all the Russian successes in this campaign. They 
are certainly the best light troops in existence. That army 
might go a long way if the Russian soldiers had someone else 
to lead them.” 

At various times the Emperor discussed with me the sacri- 
fices that peace would involve, and what the Russians would 
probably demand on behalf of the Duke of Oldenburg. 

“They will want to re-establish him in his possessions,” he 
said. “Alexander takes the matter very much to heart because 
of the dowager Empress.” 

Since he had asked my opinion, I put it to him that I found 
it difficult to suppose the Russians would not try to profit by 
the occasion, to the extent of obtaining the evacuation of Dan- 
zig and the other positions in the North which we had used as 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

289 

starting-points against them. I said that if we were obliged 
to abandon the Niemen, as I expected we shoidd be, their de- 
mands would surely include the surrender of our fortified po- 
sitions on the Oder. At this the Emperor cried out in protest 
that he would then lose all the advantages he had so far ob- 
tained against the English; that die main issue still was to force 
them to make peace, for without that there could be no lasting 
tranquillity. I replied that it might be possible to maintain 
the customs-organization in the ports and along the coast with- 
out turning them into French citadels. 

“And the Russians?” he asked. “What attitude will they 
take with regard to England?” 

“Your Majesty is in a better position to pronounce on that 
question than I,” I replied. “But certainly you will not per- 
suade them to put themselves in the same position that they 
were in before. I doubt if even the Tsar could do that.” 

“Then peace is impossible,” the Emperor replied sharply, 
“if it is not to be general. One must not deceive oneself.” 

The conversation later turned on the situation in France and 
on the imeasy state of Europe, which I attributed to the in- 
vasions that had taken place. I suggested to the Emperor that 
a system of more modified power within more restricted limits 
would bind our allies to us, and even those States which would 
remain outside the system. I pointed out to him that from the 
Duke of Gotha to the Emperor of Austria, all the governments 
were frightened by the expansion of our political system; that 
they saw it as a step towards a universal monarchy, for which 
the war with England seemed to them a pretext. 

The Emperor listened to me attentively, joked about my 
moderation, and repeated to me what he had said on other oc- 
casions about his intentions and his motives. He tried to prove 
to me that he was far from having in view those ends with which 
he was credited. He was working against the English alone; 

290 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 