

“Those prophetic proclamations of his were all nonsense. If 
they had wanted to draw us on into the interior they should 
have retired in the first place and not have endangered Bagra- 
tion’s army by spreading their forces over a line which, being 
too near the frontier, had to be too long. They should not have 
spent so much money building card-castles along the Dwina. 
They should not have collected so many stores there. They 
have been planning from one day to the next without settled 
scheme. They have never been able to fight to any purpose. 
But for the cowardice and stupidity of Partouneaux, the Rus- 
sians would not have captured a single waggon from me at the 
crossing of the Beresina; and we should have cut off part of 

^ Napoleon was to return to this line of reasoning at St. Helena. On Sep- 
tember 29, 1817, he said to Gourgaud: “My great mistake was in staying too 
long in that city [Moscow]. But for that, my undertaking would have been 
successful in the end.” — Gourgaud, Sainte-Helene, Towrnal inedit de 1815 
i 1818, edited by Grouchy and Antoine Guillois, H, 337. 

286 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

their advance-guard, taken eighteen hundred prisoners, and, 
with an army of wretches who had nothing left but their lives, 
we should have won a battle against the pick of their infantry, 
which has fought against the Turks. Actually, though, when 
the wreck of our army was surrounded by three of theirs, what 
did they do? They picked off the wretches who were dying 
of cold or whom hunger forced to break away from their units!” 

On another occasion the Emperor remarked to me that if 
the Russians had really intended to draw him into the interior, 
they would not have marched to attack him at Witepsk; that 
from the beginning they should have harassed our flanks more. 
He said they should have waged only this guerilla warfare, 
intercepting our despatches, our smaller detachments, the of- 
ficers who came out to join us, and the raiding parties. He 
regarded it as a serious fault to have given battle so near to 
Moscow. 

“Everything turned out badly,” the Emperor said to me on 
another occasion, “because I stayed too long at Moscow. If 
I had left four days after I occupied it, as I thought of doing 
when I saw the town in flames, the Russians would have been 
lost. The Tsar would have been only too glad to accept the 
generous peace which I should then have offered from Witepsk. 
Even from Wilna, if the cold hadn’t robbed me of my army, 
I should have dictated the terms of peace; and your precious 
Alexander would have signed them, if only to be rid of the 
military guardianship of his boyars. It was they who thrust 
Kutusof upon him. And what has Kutusof done? He risked 
losing his army on the Moskowa, and brought about the burn- 
ing of Moscow. During the retreat when he had nothing to 
fight against but lifeless troops, nothing but walking ghosts, 
what did he attempt? He and Wittgenstein permitted the 
crushing of the admiral. 

