“AU the other Russian generals were worth more than that 
old dowager Kutusof. ToUy did at least spare the army: he 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

287 

did not fight with a capital at his back. Even Wittgenstein, 
who had just committed so many blunders so as not to put him- 
self under the orders of the admiral or Kutusof, was far su- 
perior to him. If the King of Naples plays me no foolish tricks, 
if he supervises the generals and stays at first with the vanguard 
so as to encourage the younger troops, who will be a little 
scared, things will soon be righted again. The Russians will 
halt, and the Cossacks will keep their distance as soon as they 
see us show our teeth. If the Poles support me and the Rus- 
sians don’t make peace during the winter, you will see what 
has happened to them by July. 

“Everything has conspired to cause my failure. I was not 
well served in Warsaw. The Abbe de Pradt was afraid: he 
played the busy-body instead of the grand seigneur. He looked 
after his own interests, and chattered in drawing-rooms and 
newspapers. But in public affairs — ^nothing. He roused no 
enthusiasm in the Poles. The levies were not made; I got noth- 
ing from all the resources I should have been able to rely on. 
Bassano bungled things in Poland as he did in Turkey and in 
Sweden. I was wrong to be angry with Talleyrand. The 
boudoir intrigues of the Duchess * irritated me against him; 
and now my affairs have miscarried. He would have given a 
much more definite direction to Polish effort. As it is, the Poles 
have immortalized themselves in our ranks, as individuals, but 
they have done nothing for their country. Everyone lauded 
this Abbe de Pradt to me. He has intelligence, but he’s a 
muddler.” 

On another occasion the Emperor said to me, speaking of 
the Tsar Alexander: 

“He is an intelligent prince, and full of good intentions. He 
is more capable than all his ministers. If he were less distrust- 

* The Emperor was referring here to the Duchess of Bassano, as is proved 
by a later passage. She had indeed done everything possible to prevent 
Talleyrand from being appointed to the Embassy at Warsaw. 

288 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

ful of his own powers he would be better than all his generals. 
He needs only decisiveness to be very capable indeed; but he 
is not master in his own house. He is continually hampered 
by a thousand petty considerations on account of his family, 
and of individuals, too. Although he takes a close interest in 
the army and gives a good deal of attention to it — ^perhaps 
more than I do, to questions of detail — ^yet he is deceived about 
these very things. Distance, custom, the opposition of the no- 
bility to recruiting, and the interest that ill-paid commanders 
have in drawing pay and rations, all combine to keep the army 
from being up to strength. They had been working ceaselessly 
for three years to bring it up to strength; and as a result they 
had less ^an half the number of men under arms that they 
were supposed to have had before the day of battle came. You 
must admit you thought yourself that the army was much 
stronger than it was. I always thought you overestimated them, 
but you never would believe me. 