

Returning to the affairs of Spain in general, the Emperor 
said that intelligent people, those who knew something of him, 
would never suspect him of having wished to debase the sov- 
ereign authority. 

“I look at these things from a higher standpoint,” he went 
on. “I am too conscious of my strength to stoop to such in- 
trigues, so far beneath my character. I proceed more frankly. 
It would he a more reasonable reproach, perhaps, to say that 

312 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

I shape my policy as a torrent shapes its course. While you 
were at Petersburg, you must have heard the details of the re- 
volt from the Russian envoy to Madrid, and from Tchemychev, 
who came to Bayonne; for the Emperor Alexander, who for 
a long while refused to recognize King Joseph, did in time 
come to realize that I had nothing to do with those intrigues. 

The Emperor discussed M. Talleyrand: 

“He boasts that the disfavour in which he thinks himself held 
arises from his supposed opposition to the war in Spain. In 
truth, he didn’t urge me to it at the moment when it began, for 
I was myself far from seeing the events which afterwards took 
place and which brought it about; but no one was more con- 
vinced tlian he that the co-operation of Spain and Portugal and 
even the partial occupation of those States by our troops was 
the only way of forcing the London government to make peace. 
He was so strongly of this opinion that that was his object in 
negotiating with Isquierdo the treaty Duroc signed at Fontaine- 
bleau. Talleyrand was the moving spirit of those negotiations, 
although he held no office. This method of forcing the English 
to make peace — ^peace with the object of securing the evacuation 
of those States — seemed to him imperative. 

“He brought great energy to bear on the situation, too, when 
the departure of the Court of Lisbon for Brazil altered all our 
plans. It was he who sent Isquierdo to Madrid. If it were not 
that he had a great interest in the success of that journey, I 
should have suspected him of contributing to the anxiety that 
came upon the King when his agent arrived at Madrid. 

“Talleyrand, realizing later that he had been mistaken in 
the hopes of fortune and influence that he had built upon these 
treaties, and realizing that I was doing without him, thought 
him self tricked- Being a clever man, he has since attempted 
nothing but to justify himself in the eyes of the public for the 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

313 

part he is known to have taken in this affair; and he has con- 
stituted himself the apostle of discontent. 

“He forgets that he also conceived the idea, previously, of 
deposing the dynasty in Spain as we had done in Etruria. I 
am far from reproaching him for that. He has good judgment. 
He is the most capable minister I have ever had. Talleyrand 
was too well-informed about public affairs, and too good a poli- 
tician, to admit that the Bourbons could return to Madrid when 
there were no longer Bourbons at Paris or Naples. Time might 
perhaps have brought about this change without violence; the 
interests of France, and even those of Spain if rightly under- 
stood, pointed in that direction. There was never anything 
settled on the point: an infinite range of conjecture, as on aU 
the more far-reaching political questions — ^and that was all. 