

“In English affairs,” he said, “everything depends on an 
imaginary factor. Their credit rests upon confidence, since 
they have nothing on which to secure it; although I admit the 
government has something even better, since all individual for- 
tunes are wrapped up with those of the State. The system of 
continual borrowing, which continually links the present with 
the past, does in some degree compel confidence in the future. 
By involving everyone’s fortunes in the fortunes of the State, 
their government has gained something better than the actual 
security it lacked; for by that means it has created an unlimited 
security in the shape of individual self-interest. That,” the 
Emperor added emphatically, “is why we must have persever- 
ance. The time is not far off when the ministry will not be 
able to raise loans so easily — or at least not such big ones. 
Then they will not be able to grant their subsidies, which have 
a great influence on the Continent. For, apart from France, 
the States of the Continent possess nothing but worthless paper; 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 301 

only at London and Paris is there any money or any credit. 
At this moment, English affairs are at a crisis. Their trade 
is damaged. Doubtless the Russians, by opening their ports 
to them, are delaying the effect of the depression; but since the 
cause continues the evil hour is only postponed. The English 
have, it is true, considerable resources yet; but since with them 
everything depends upon confidence, the least thing may par- 
alyze, endanger, and even destroy their whole system, in spite 
of the fact that there are among them some very capable men 
and citizens moved by a true love of their country.” 

The Emperor returned continually to the subject of England, 
which occupied his mind above everything else, and during one 
of our conversations he said to me: 

“The people of Europe are blind to their real dangers. 
They pay heed to nothing but the inconvenience ffiey feel on 
account of the war at sea. One might think that all the politics 
and all the interests of this unhappy Continent are bounded by 
the price of a cask of sugar. It is pitiable: yet that is how things 
stand. They protest only against the French, and refuse to see 
anything but the French armies — as though the Englidi also were 
not present on every side, and more threatening by far. Heligo- 
land, Gibraltar, Tarifa, Malta — ^aren’t all those English citadels? 
Don’t they threaten the trade of all the powers much more than 
Danzig threatens the trade of Russia? Yet if I gave the people 
of Europe their head, they would deliver themselves into the 
hands of the English. Next day they would let the English 
have Corfu — ^yes, and Madeira — just as they have already given 
them the Cape. Yet from the rocks of Malta the English al- 
ready control Turkey, and consequently the Black Sea and Rus- 
sia also. At Gibraltar they hold the entrance to the Mediter- 
ranean. If they could seize Corfu they would have a foothold 
in Greece, and be masters even of the gulf. [The Adriatic.] 