

310 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

roots in the land; neither reason nor policy would allow of it. 
He made a sacrifice of Spain in order to continue the favourite; 
and the Spanish sacrificed themselves in order to be revenged 
on him and on those whom they wrongly believed were his sup- 
porters. In a state of revolution, rumour and popular hatred 
can strike roots. Once the first gun is fired, there are no more 
explanations; passions rise and men who cannot agree kill each 
other.” 

[Here the Emperor reviewed the story of the intrigues, 
French, Spanish and Portuguese, which led to the removal of 
the Bourbons from the Peninsula, and to the placing of Joseph 
Bonaparte on the Spanish throne. The Emperor’s argument 
was that he never had wished to deal with the quarrelling Bour- 
bons — Charles IV and Marie-Louise, and their son Ferdinand — 
at Bayonne in 1808, nor thereafter to compel the abdication of 
their rights.] 

. . There were three courses I might have followed in 
this affair. I chose the one which was indicated to me by my 
concern for the well-being of Spain and our own interests. Of 
the others, the second would have made me accessory to a crime, 
and the last accessory to the humiliation of a nation which was 
trying to throw off the disgrace of the previous reign. I could 
not hesitate over the choice; and it was these considerations 
that prevented me from sending those princes back to Spain, 
as my own interests advised. Ferdinand would soon have ex- 
hausted the enthusiasm of the nation; and his father’s return 
w'ould have humiliated him so badly that he would certainly 
have turned to me and called me to his aid within six months. 
But C and M thought it would be best to take advan- 

tage of the moment when everything was ripe, and the change 
all the easier to bring about, because the Bourbons had sue- 

Only these initials appear in the manuscript. It is safe, however, to 
read them as Champagny and Maret, of whom the first was then Minister 
of the Interior and the second Secretary of State. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

311 

ceeded in discrediting themselves at Bayonne — even in the eyes 
of those Spaniards who were most devoted to their cause. Murat 
told me fairy-tales, which also led me into error. I thought to 
cut short the misfortunes of the country: I was mistaken. If 
I had followed my own instinct, I should have sent those princes 
home. To-day, Spain would have been at my feet. 

“I was misled — or rather, the course of events defied all 
human foresight. Could one have foreseen that Murat would 
commit nothing but stupidities, and Dupont an act of coward- 
ice? [The surrender at Baylen, July 22, 1808.] The Spanish 
will one day regret the loss of the constitution I gave them. It 
would have given the country new life. It was Dupont’s greed, 
his grasping spirit, his desire to preserve at all costs his ill- 
gotten fortune, which led to the Spanish revolt. 

“The surrender at Baylen ruined everything. In order to 
save his waggons of booty, Dupont committed his soldiers, his 
own countrymen, to the disgrace of a surrender which is with- 
out parallel — and to the disgrace, so damaging in its effect on 
the Spanish people, of giving proof of the acts of sacrilege and 
church-robbery that their general had tolerated in order to cover 
his own depredations. When Dupont stipulated that the soldiers’ 
packs should be examined and his own waggons go untouched, 
he wrote his own shame into the pages of history forever. These 
are the Caudine Forks of our history. The sight of the stolen 
objects was the signal for the rising; and the ring-leaders made 
use of them to incite the superstitious people to vengeance.” 