

“It is easy to pronounce judgment upon what is past; and 
easy to exalt as heroism what pertains to causes that are in 
truth hardly honourable. The heroism with which, in their 
hatred of France, they now credit the Spaniards, arises simply 
out of the barbarous condition of that half-savage population 
and out of the superstitions to which the mistakes of our gen- 
erals have given new vigour. It is out of laziness, not out of 
heroism, that the Spanish peasant prefers the dangers of a 
smuggler’s life, or a highwayman’s, to the labours of cultivat- 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

307 

ing the soil. The Spanish peasants have seized the opportunity 
of taking up this nomadic, smuggler’s existence which is so 
well suited to their taste and to the relief of their extreme pov- 
erty. There’s nothing patriotic about that.” 

The Emperor cited, in support of his dictum, that armies of 
fifty thousand Spaniards gave ground and took to flight before 
much smaller forces, because the Spaniards would only go into 
danger where there was hope of booty. 

“The Romans and the Spartans,” he added, “had other aims. 
They faced death for other motives. The land of their fathers 
meant something to them; but the wretched Spaniard is only 
moved by the attractions of booty. Anything is better than the 
miserable existence he leads in his own village. It is nothing 
but bias that has pompously ascribed nobility to a course of 
action whose objects have never been honourable, although the 
result may be useful at the moment to the cause they think the 
Spaniards are defending. The Spaniard of to-day is still the 
same as in the time of the Romans; like a savage, he hates the 
foreigner — or, rather, whatever is unfamiliar to him. He hates 
anything that tends to bring him out of his state of barbarism. 
The Spanish peasantry have even less share in the civilization 
of Europe than the Russians. 

“It is true,” he went on, “that the proximity of the Spanish 
Bourbons to my own dynasty, whidh sits on the throne of Louis 
XVI, seemed to me a state of aflCairs which was likely to prove 
inconvenient. I often discussed it with Talleyrand, as I did so 
many other questions which are involved in the broader interests 
of the world. For a long time, however, I did not think that 
it bore directly upon the affairs of the moment; for it seemed 
to me very clear that the obstinate stupidity of the King, con- 
trolled as he was by Godoy, the ‘Prince of Peace,’ would keep 
the country from any development that might cause me anxiety. 
Accordingly I had no other intention than to make Spain use- 
ful to me against the English. The weakness of the King — 

308 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

combined with the interests of his favourite, who would wish, 
I thought, not to be in bad odour with the French — suited my 
policy too well for me to have any thought of other arrange- 
ments. And then suddenly, roused no doubt by the mutterings 
of Castilian pride which had been woxmded by some proposal, 
or by some clumsiness on the part of our diplomatic representa- 
tives, the King felt the moment favourable to regain the respect 
of the Spaniards by calling them out against me, to whom he 
was thought to have sold himself. The fool! At the moment 
when his favour was disappearing in a general outcry against 
RiTn, he thought to save himself by rousing tbe nation in the 
very direction of its discontent; and in trying to save himself 
he lost Spain. And Murat, in his turn, lost Spain for me by 
trying to save the favourite. For in the Madrid rebellion the 
nation was angry only against Godoy; they only looked upon us 
as enemies because Murat tried to save him and by this tactless- 
ness gave the nation ground for believing what ill will whis- 
pered against us: that we were partners with Godoy, or he with 
us.” 