

“If thirty thousand English landed in Belgium,” he said to 
me, “or in the Pas-de-Calais, and requisitioned supplies from 
three hundred villages — ^if they were to go and bum the chateau 
of Caulaincourt — ^they would do us much more harm than by 
forcing me to maintain an army in Spain. You would make 
a much worse outcry, my good Master of Horse! You would 
complain much more loudly than you do when you say that I 
aim at universal monarchy! The English are playing into my 
hands. If the ministry were in my pay, they could not act in 
a way more favourable to me. You must take good care not 
to repeat the ideas I express to you; for if the idea entered 
their heads to make expeditions against my coasts, now at one 

304 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

point and now at another — ^to re-embark as soon as forces were 
collected to fight them, and go at once to threaten some other 
point — ^the situation would be insupportable. 

“As it is,” he added, “the war in Spain costs me no more 
than any other war, or any other compulsory defence against 
the English. So long as peace is not made with that power, 
there is not much difference in cost between the present state 
of affairs in Spain and an ordinary state of war with England. 
In view of the great length of Spain’s coast-line, and with the 
situation as it now stands, we must limit ourselves to keeping 
the English under observation — ^unless, indeed, they should 
march into the interior, or unless a highly favourable oppor- 
tunity should arise for giving battle; for if we forced them to 
re-embark at one point, they would disembark again at another, 
since they would always be sure of finding auxiliaries. 

“The marshals and generals who have been left to look after 
themselves in Spain might have done better; but they will not 
come to an agreement. There has never been any unity in 
their operations. They detest each other to such an extent that 
they would be in despair if one thought he had made a move- 
ment that might reflect some glory on another. Accordingly 
there is nothing to be done except hold the country and try to 
pacify it, until I can myself put some vigour into the operations 
there. Soult has ability: but no one will take orders. Every 
general wants to be independent, so as to play the viceroy in 
his own province. In Wellington,” he added, “my generals 
have encoimtered an opponent superior to some of them. More- 
over, they have made childish mistakes. Marmont shows a 
really high quality of judgment and logic in discussing war, 
but is not even moderately able in action. In fact, our mo- 
mentary reverses in that war, which delight the city of London, 
have little effect on the general course of affairs — ^and cannot 
indeed have any real importance, since I can change the face 
of affairs whenever I please. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 305 

“Events at present,” he said, “are giving Wellington a repu- 
tation ; but in war men may lose in a day what they have spent 
years in budding up. As to the outlet for English trade which 
the war has created in the Spanish colonies, I admit that that 
is certainly tmfortunate; for within two years those outlets may 
counter-balance our prohibition of imports on the Continent.” 