

“The situation leaps to the eye; yet the Austrians will not, any 
more than the Russians, admit the dangers that threaten them. 

302 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Jealousy of France is stronger than reason. They refuse to 
exercise any foresight. But for me, the European governments 
would grant the English to-morrow the supremacy they desire. 
When all trade protection is subject to the whims of the Lon- 
don government — ^when we are forced to eat no sugar but of 
their selling, and to wear only stockings and cloth of their manu- 
facture — then Petersburg, Vienna, and Berlin will grasp the 
fact that the English have a monopoly. Until then they will 
shut their eyes to it, for fear of recognizing that I am defend- 
ing the interests of all of us alike. The fact is plain to people 
of goodwill. But where is there any goodwill? The blindness 
of European politics is pitiable.” 

The same trend of conversation led us on another occasion 
to discuss the outlets that the English had secured for their 
trade; and the outlets they were seeking, and would secure, in 
the Spanish colonies brought us finally to the war in the Penin- 
sula. 

“Doubtless it woxild have been better,” the Emperor said to 
me, “to have woimd up the war in Spain before embarking on 
this Russian expedition — ^though there is much room for dis- 
cussion on the point. As for the war in Spain itself, it is now 
a matter only of guerilla contests. On the day the English are 
driven out of the Peninsula, there will be nothing left of the 
war but isolated bodies of rebels; and one cannot hope to clear 
a country of those in a month or two. 

“Since the opposition to the new regime comes from the 
lower classes, only time and the conduct of the upper classes — 
assisted by a strong and cautious government which has the 
support of a national gendarmerie and, at the same time, of 
the presence of some French troops — ^will calm the storm. Their 
hatred will wear out when they see that we bring them only 
wiser laws; a code more liberal, and better suited to the times 
in which we live, than the ancient customs and the Inquisition 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 303 

by which the country used to he governed. At present the Span- 
iards are fighting because they still believe that we want to 
make Frenchmen of them. Everything will settle down as soon 
as we can persuade them that it is to our interest that they 
should continue to be Spaniards. But for the disasters in Rus- 
sia the time would be drawing near when the French troops 
would not need to occupy more than a few fortified points in 
certain provinces. If the peasants saw no more French troops 
about the countryside, if they were governed only by their own 
governors and controlled only by Spanish police, confidence 
would be established, and this would lead to a spread of peace 
and reconciliation.” 

According to the Emperor the presence of the English army 
was the greatest obstacle to the pacification of Spain; but he 
would rather see it in that country than be threatened with it, 
at any moment, in Brittany or Italy, or anywhere, in fact, where 
the coast was accessible. As it was, he knew where to look for 
the English; whereas if they were not occupied there he would 
be forced to prepare for them, and hold himself ready for de- 
fence against them, at every point. And that would use up 
many more troops, give him much more anxiety, and possibly 
do him much more damage. 