

“I have more foresight than the other rulers,” the Emperor 
added. “I want to take advantage of this opportunity to wind 
up the old quarrel between England and the Continent. Similar 
circTimstances wiU never occur again. What seems to offend 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

299 

no one but me to-day will offend the other rulers before long. 
Emotion and habits of thought are against me. The ministries 
are blinded hy prejudice and favouritism. After a few years 
of harmful peace the nations and their rulers would realize 
their need. I am the only one who can see it now because the 
others are determined to shut their eyes to it. The power of 
the English, as it is at present, rests only upon the monopoly 
they exercise over other nations, and can be maintained only 
by that. Why should they alone reap the benefits which mil- 
lions of others could reap as well? The proof that they ex- 
ploit for themselves what should belong to others lies in the fact 
that they live only by their customs-houses, by their trading, 
and that their population cannot consume all that pays tax to 

them. Why should what others consume pay dues to London? 

“If I were so weak as to give way on certain points in order 

to make an improper peace, the Continent woxild blame me for 
it within four years. There would be no time to change it 

then. All our wealth would be at sea; and the English — ^who 
would have taken advantage of the truce to fill their coffers 
and get their breath — ^would confiscate it all if we showed the 
least sign of provocation before certain governments had been 
roused by the howling of their merchants. Then ten years of 
war, of trouble and misfortune, with three or four coalitions 
formed and broken up, might not take us even so far as the 
point we have reached to-day. But posterity sums up without 
favour and will judge between Rome and Carthage. The ver- 
dict will be for the French. They are fighting now, whatever 
the world may say, only for the general good. It is therefore 
just that the flags of the Continent should stand in line with 
ours. The Frendi are fighting for the most sacred rights of 
nations: the English are only defending their self-assumed priv- 
ileges.” 

Returning later to this subject, the Emperor remarked to me 
that the more he studied the government of England the more 

300 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

innately vigorous it seemed to him. It had all the advantages 
possible to an oligarchy. It was strong in wealth and influence; 
it ruled the country with the support of the public opinion which 
it created itself through its many connections. He considered, 
moreover, that it drew added force even from the opposition — 
which, according to him, grew weaker every day because it 
only served to show the strength of its adversaries. According 
to the Emperor the ranks of the opposition would be still further 
thimed; for men starting on a career would for their own ad- 
vantage take the side of power, which is also the side of Fortune. 
He was of opinion that, if the war continued, the English would 
fall within two years into a kind of bankruptcy, by reducing the 
rates of interest. And if peace were made, this bankruptcy 
would come within ten years unless the new conditions, which 
would follow on the great changes now about to take place in 
the New World, should offer the English an enormous outlet 
for their trade. 