

“Talleyrand saw and pointed out to me aU that intelligent 
people were thinking and that policy demanded. In a difficult 
position, in a war against a section of Europe, could the French 
take the risk of having a hostile dynasty on their flank? Talley- 
rand, who is among those who have done most to establish my 
own djmasty, was too much concerned in its maintenance, too 
clever, too far-seeing, not to advise ever3rthing which would tend 
to its preservation and to the preservation of tranquillity in 
France. He sided against that war only because he was not 
made a minister with plenary powers, as he had hoped. For- 
getting then that it was French blood which was being spilt in 
Spain, he began, like a bad citizen, to preach against the affair 
more loudly as he saw it taking a bad turn. With him, as with 
many people, one would need to be always successful. I knew 
what he was up to — ^and I made him feel that I did — ^because 
his ill will began with the defeat of Dupont. Like a coward, 
he threw stones at me when he thought I was beaten. 

“Everything that has been done against the Boxirbons has 
been done under his ministry and at his suggestion. It was he 
who kept preaching to me about how necessary it was to take 

314 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

all political influence away from them. It was he who per- 
suaded me to have the Duke of Enghien arrested, to whom I 
did not give a thought until the prefect Shee and the English 
intrigues of Drake [at Munich] drew the attention of the police 
upon him. At the time I was far from attaching the least im- 
portance to his stay on the banks of the Rhine, and conseq[uently 
I was far from having any settled intentions with regard to 
him. It was either Moncey or Shee who then told me that he 
often came to Strasbourg. I had not known of it. Berthier 
and Cambaceres were doubtful about having him arrested, on 
accoxmt of the court of Baden. Talleyrand insisted: and so did 
Murat and Fouche.“ 

“Taken in by the revolutionaries, and urged on by them, 
Murat, alarmed by Fouche and Roederer, saw no safety for 
himself or for me, as soon as he heard of the Duke’s arrival 
in Paris, except in his execution. To listen to him, one would 
have thought the government was threatened and the Comman- 
dant of Paris in danger. He’s a brave man on the battle field, 
Murat, but he has no head. He likes only intriguers, and is 
always taken in by them. All the men who had taken part in 
the Revolution — ^the generals, the men bred in republican ideas 
— ^were disturbed by my advance to power. The royalists, in- 
triguing still and clumsy, spread the rumour, without giving 
much thought to it, that I was going to play the role of Monk. 
I was not steady in my seat. To hear Murat, Fouche and the 
rest, one would have thought that public opinion was drifting 
out of my control; that in this imcertainty no party supported 
me; that the weak royalist party regarded me as only a tran- 
sitional figure. No party, moreover, coiJd achieve anything. 
The nation then would be against me; the revolutionaries were 