

The Emperor discussed Godoy’s insolent proclamation to the 
Spaniards — the proclamation of October 3, 1806.^* 

“The behaviour of the favourite,” he said to me, “seemed a 
linlft suspicious even before Jena. It would have seemed 
thoroughly suspicious if my ambassador had been a capable 
mflTi and had kept me informed of what was happening in 
Spain; but I was not well served. Amazed to find then an op- 
position to which I was not accustomed in that cabinet, I was 
on my guard. This change of policy even made me wish to 
arrange the differences which had arisen with Prussia, although 
otherwise I should have made haste to pick up the gauntlet 

12 In this proclamation Godoy, the “Prince of Peace,” summoned the 
Spaniards to arms without, however, telling them what enemy threatened 
them. Cf. Geofiroy de Grandmaison, FEspagne et Napoleon, Paris, 1908, 
I^ 67 . — Godoy’s proclamation was not posted in Madrid until October 15, 
the day after the battle of Tena. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

309 

which the Prussian court threw down at such an ill-judged mo- 
ment. I could see there was some discontent among the Span- 
iards but I thought only their vanity was wounded, which I 
could have soothed at a later date; and I confess I was a long 
way from thinking that I should receive a declaration of war 
from the favourite. I though him better advised.” 

The Emperor added that he had been amazed at receiving, 
after Jena, this strange proclamation, by which he was not mis- 
led for a moment. He went on: 

“Not being able to disguise from myself the intentions of 
this new enemy, I disguised my attitude from him. Although 
the success I had just gained stood me in as good stead as I 
could have wished, and although, being more subtle in politics 
than Godoy, I had myself provided him, for the moment, with 
the means to explain everything to me so as to think me satis- 
fied, yet I promised myself to take a startling revenge upon 
him at the first opportunity, or, at the least, to put the Spanish 
court in such a position that it could not prove an embarrass- 
ment to me on any future occasion. 

“This behaviour opened my eyes,” the Emperor remarked 
to me more than once; and he added: “The ‘Prince of Peace’ 
might have caused me some grey hairs on the day before Jena, 
but on the day after I was master of the circumstances. For 
a moment I thought the Spaniards more decided than they 
seemed and my ambassador their dupe; but that anxiety didn’t 
last. Godoy was more fatal to Spain on the one occasion when 
he showed some energy than by all his weakness, and the dis- 
honour with which publicly, and for years, he had stamped 
his master. He did not stop to realize that when a man in his 
position draws his sword against a sovereign ruler, he must 
conquer or die; for though kings may forgive each other their 
injuries, they have not and should not have the same indul- 
gence towards subjects. He should have seen that there could 
be no possible pardon for a man, who, like himself, had no 