

The Emperor saw, in the separation of these colonies from 
their mother country,^^ an important development which would 
change the politics of the world, which would give new strength 
to America, and in less than ten years would threaten the power 
of the English — ^which would be a compensation. He did not 
question that Mexico, and all the major Spanish possessions 
overseas, would declare their independence and form one or 
two nations under a form of government which would force 
them, in their own interests, to become axixiliaries of the United 
States. 

“It marks a new era,” he said. “It will lead to the inde- 
pendence of all other colonies.” 

The changes that would arise from this development he re- 
garded as the most important of the century, since they would 
shift the balance of commercial interests and, in consequence, 
alter the policy of the different governments. 

“AU the colonies,” he said, “will follow the example of the 
United States. You grow tired of waiting for orders from five 
thousand miles away; tired of obeying a government which 
seems foreign to you because it is remote, and because of ne- 
cessity it subordinates you to its own local interest, which it 
cannot sacrifice to yours. As soon as colonies feel strong 
enough to resist, they want to shake off the yoke of those who 
created them. One’s coxmtry is where one lives; a man does 

Mexico in September, 1810, Venezuela, New Granada, Chile, and the 
Argentine, in 1810 or 1811, had all gone into more or less open revolt 
against the dominion of Spain. Paraguay had declared its independence 
in 1811. 

306 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

not take long to forget that he or his father was born under 
another sky. Ambition achieves what self-interest has begun. 
They want to have a standing of their own; and then the yoke is 
soon thrown off.” 

I spoke to the Emperor of the moral effect which the resist- 
ance of the Spanish nation was having on people in general, 
and suggested to him that he was mistaken in attaching no im- 
portance to the example they were setting. I reminded him of 
the remark of the Tsar Alexander, which had struck me and 
which I had repeated to him on my return: “You have beaten 
the Spanish armies but you have not subdued the nation. The 
nation will raise other armies. The Spaniards, without any 
government, are setting a noble example to other nations. They 
are teaching the sovereigns what can be accomplished by per- 
severance in a just cause.” 

The Emperor treated as a joke what he called “the maxims 
of the prophet of the North.” He added, however: 

“Although he made many mistakes — or, at least, allowed his 
generals to make them — ^the Tsar Alexander is the only one 
[among the rulers] who has shown good judgment, and made 
a sound estimate of his position and of the course of events. 
That prince has more intelligence than men think; and he has 
good judgment. His misfortiuie lies in being so poorly sec- 
onded.” 

Returning to affairs in Spain, the Emperor said: 