

I hurried up the dinner and returned to the room adjoin- 
ing the Emperor’s, to send off a courier to Wilna and an out- 
rider to precede us to Posen. As the door between the two 
rooms closed imperfectly, I could not help hearing the Emperor 
heaping on his ambassador all the reproaches he had already 
enumerated in his conversations with me. He concluded by 
saying that neither his tone, his conduct, nor anything about 
had been French. He reproached him with making plans 
for a campaign, with acting the soldier when he knew nothing 
about military matters, and added that he ought to confine him- 
self to politics and saying his Mass. He had been sent to War- 
saw to represent France honourably, and not make petty econ- 
omies and lay plans for a fortune for himself, which would 
have been assured him had he performed his duty as he ought. 
But as it was, he had achieved nothing but blunders. 

M. de Pradt tried to justify himself, protesting his devotion, 
his zeal, his regret for any errors he had committed, his desire 
to do better. He defended and justified Poland for not having 
done aU the Emperor desired for the success of the Russian 
expedition. He enumerated the sacrifices she had made, the 
forces she had raised, which he placed as high as eighty thou- 
sand men. He declared that everyone was ruined, that not a 
crown-piece could be found in the whole country, that financial 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

329 

help would have to be given if anything at all was to be done. 
The more M. de Pradt justified himself, the angrier the Emperor 
became. He blamed him for the incalculable consequences that 
must ensue from his neglect to call up the levies, and added 
that, from the ambassador’s own words, it was plain that he 
was courting foolish popularity; that a clever man like himself 
ought to have seen, and made the Poles understand, that to 
prolong the struggle by withholding the means of bringing it to 
a speedy end would merely injure themselves. 

The Emperor called me in; he seemed bored to death with 
the ambassador’s presence. His gestures, the way he shrugged 
his shoulders, showed his mood so clearly that I really shared 
the embarrassment of his victim, who was in an agony of morti- 
fication. I felt I should be doing them both a kindness by 
going out for a moment, and returning an instant later to inform 
His Majesty that dinner was served. But he had again started 
his tale of reproaches and went on, now with vehemence, now 
with cold disdain, until, seeing a card on the mantelpiece, he 
stopped suddenly in the middle of a sentence, snatched it up, 
wrote a few words on it, and handed it to me.“ 

All this time M. de Pradt was trying to get in a few words 
in self-defence, casting blame on all the French authorities, of 
whom he complained bitterly, as well as of the generals, and 
so forth. It seemed to me that, on some grounds, his remarks 
were not without reason. 

This criticism of the military aspect annoyed the Emperor 
still more; he would not even permit any comments on the 