

324 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

325 

Vicenza’s horses for Glogau, for it was always I who was the 
distinguished traveller, and the Emperor simply my secretary, 
under the name of M. Rayneval. 

Having established the Emperor in front of a poor fire in a 
room on the ground floor at the end of the courtyard, I made 
my way to the ambassador’s residence, which was near at hand 
in the Saxony Palace. On entering the house I encountered 
M. Rumigny, one of the secretaries of the legation, who had 
been with me at St. Petersburg, and whom I was delighted to 
meet again. He announced me to the ambassador, who was 
not a little astonished to see me, especially dressed as I was,^ 
but who was even more amazed, believing neither his ears nor 
his eyes, when I said that the Emperor was at the Hotel de Saxe 
and was asking for him. 

“The Emperor!” he repeated again and again in astonish- 
ment. 

"When he had somewhat recovered from his surprise, he said: 

“How does he come to be here. Your Grace? How is the 
Emperor?” 

These were M. de Pradt’s first questions. 

“The Emperor is on his way to Paris; we have left the army 
at Smorgoni; by now it must be in position at Wilna,” 

“The Emperor would have been more comfortable here than 
at the hotel.” 

“He wishes to remain incognito; we are starting again at 
once.” 

“Will you not take something, if only a plate of soup. Your 
Grace?” 

“I am taking luncheon with the Emperor at the hotel. But 

2 M. de Pradt, who has travestied this interview of December 10 into a 
caricature, in his Histoire de Vambassade, 207, says: “The doors of my 
room were flung open and gave entrance to a tall man who stalked in, 
supported by one of my embassy secretaries. ‘Let us go; come, follow 
me!’ said tlds phantom. His head was enveloped in a sUken shawl, his 
face lost to sight in the depths of the fur in which he seemed buried, his 
gait hampered by fur-lined top-boots. It was a kind of ghost-scene.” 

326 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

send a bottle of Burgundy there. His Majesty prefers that 
wine; and as he has been unable to obtain any on the road, 
he will be very glad to find a good glass.” 

“Is the Emperor’s health good? What state is the army in?” 

“The army is in a dire plight, overwhelmed by misery, hun- 
ger and cold. Only the Guard still looks like a body of troops.” 

“M. Bassano writes of nothing but successes. . . .” 

“Actually we have beaten the Russians everywhere, even at 
the crossing of the Beresina, where we took sixteen hundred 
prisoners, as I counted myself.” 

“M. Bassano said six thousand.” 

“The fact remains that we beat the Russians, who ought to 
have beaten us.” 

“Why make out that we have taken six thousand prisoners? — 
and why, in such grave circmnstances, when it is essential that 
he should know the truth, write to an ambassador as if he were 
the editor of the Moniteur?” 

“The number of prisoners is of little matter, as we cannot 
keep them.” 

“What is to hinder us?” 

“How are we to feed prisoners when our own men are litter- 
ing the roadside, dying of himger?” 