

“This haste on the part of Murat,” the Emperor continued, 
“was the reason why the police had no time to question Enghien, 
and therefore missed some important intelligence concerning 
other branches of the conspiracy. Berthier and Cambaceres 
would have preferred that he not be arrested at aU, and above 
all that he not come to Paris, since they felt that, directly he 
was there, the situation would become awkward and even em- 
barrassing for me, faced as I was by the nation whom I must 
leave in no doubt as to my intentions. Their common sense 
told them that I should have to show severity, and at the same 
time they veered towards leniency. Talleyrand, more politic 
than they, was quite properly in favour of the arrest. No ac- 
count was taken then of what effect the execution would have 
upon the people; nothing was seen but some conspirators who 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

317 

wanted to assassinate the First Magistrate of France, and so 
deserved the same fate. 

“Although there was a good deal of gossip in Paris about 
the whole business, I should do the same thing should a similar 
case arise.^® 

“All the same, it is possible that I might have shown mercy 
had Murat let me know of the Prince’s request. Enghien cer- 
tainly would not have perished if I had received it, even though 
the law was mandatory that condemned him, no motive being 
strong enough to authorize his conspiracies on our frontier and 
his hiring sixty ruffians to have me murdered. It is not I who 
have dethroned the Bourbons; they really have no one but them- 
selves to blame. Instead of chasing them out and ill-treating 
their friends, I have offered them pensions and paid off their 
servants. They have answered my kindness by arming assassins. 
Blood calls for blood. However, I have always rejected the 
proposals made to me. At a million a head I could have found 
people who struck with greater precision than their conspira- 
tors; but such methods were beneath me. Had I known of a 
plot against their lives, I should have had them warned. I 
showed mercy to Polignac and Riviere because they were con- 
spirators by nature, and because public morals had been suf- 
ficiently avenged by the execution of mere assassins. 

“It is not I, it is not even the leaders of the Revolution, 
whom the Bourbons should blame for their expulsion; Coblentz 
was the cause of the King’s death. There are documents in 
the archives which leave no doubt on that score. They disclose 

^®It is known that even in his testament (April 15, 1821) Napoleon 
maintained this statement. “I had the Duke of Enghien arrested and sen- 
tenced because it was necessary to the security of the French people, in 
the interest of whose honour it was done. ... If a similar circumstance 
arose, I should do the same thing again.” — ^After these phrases, quoted by 
Montholon, there is an added note by the latter: “This passage was written 
in between two lines after he had heard read, from an English review, an 
article in which the Dukes of Vicenza and Rovigo were outrageously at- 
tacked.” — Montholon, RecUs de la captivite, II, 510. 