

318 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

plots compromising to none but the principal emigres. No 
doubt the execution of the King was a great crime. That ca- 
lamity was none of my work — ^ihe Bourbons have no right to 
conspire against my life on account of it. If I were not occupy- 
ing the throne it would be occupied by another; for the nation 
did not want them in any case.” 

The Emperor returned to M, Talleyrand. 

“He is your friend,” he told me, adding: “He is a bom in- 
triguer, and quite immoral, but he’s very witty and certainly 
the most capable of all the ministers I have had. We were on 
very cool terms for a long time, but I am no longer angry with 
him. He would still be minister if he had wished to be, I 
thought before the campaign of sending him to Warsaw, where 
he would have been very useful to me; but monetary intrigues 
on his part, and bedroom intrigues on the part of Mme. Bas- 
sano, prevented this. The Duchess, seeing in his entry into 
politics the probable removal of her husband from the oflSce 
of Secretary for Foreign Affairs — ^husband and wife both clung 
to that, above everything — she did all she could to get M. Talley- 
rand out of the way. Having started an intrigue with one of 
her friends, they contrived to make me so annoyed with M. 
Talleyrand that I was on the point of having him arrested. I 
found out the truth too late, from the police. 

“It was this intrigue,” added the Emperor, “which led to the 
Abbe de Pradt’s nomination, of whom Savary and Duroc were 
so loud in their praises — ^as Maret was, too, who thought him 
a prodigy of nature because he had the gift of gab and wrote 
articles for the papers. Choosing him lost me my campaign. 
. . • Talleyrand would have done more there, through the 
medium of Mme. Tyszkiewicz’s salon, than Maret and the Abbe 
de Pradt with their fret and gossiping and all their dealings 
with Poland from which, thanks to them, I got nothing I could 
turn to any account in the Russian business, even though that 
was realty Poland’s affair.” 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 

319 

On another occasion the Emperor, in repeating to me what 
he had already said about M. Talleyrand, added that it was 
his inveterate longing for grandeur which had lost him the 
ministry; that he had wanted to be a great dignitary, a prince, 
and, above all, Archchancellor of State; but that he, the Em- 
peror, had never wished it, partly because the office of Secretary 
for Foreign Affairs could not be occupied by two people, and 
partly because it would have been distasteful in the extreme 
to the Duke of Bassano, who was accustomed to his own manner 
of working and did his job perfectly. 

“He understood me, which is the privilege of very few peo- 
ple,” added the Emperor. “As for Talleyrand, he has always 
regretted his loss of the ministry because to him it represented 
a means of getting money, of which he and those around him 
are always in need. I would, however, give him back the office 
if he would consent to separate from his wife. It isn’t fitting 