

The soup and coffee were slow in coming, and the Emperor, 
numhed by the cold and the growing heat of the fire, fell asleep. 
I seized the opportunity to make notes. When he awoke, his 
sorry meal was soon swallowed and we clambered into our 
sledge again. 

Although the snow was knee-deep, the Emperor visited the 
defences of Sierock and Prago. We shook the snow off as best 
we could before re-entering our cage, for such was exactly the 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 323 

shape of the ancient box in which we were. It was so cold, 
and we were so pleased at having found this means of progress, 
in spite of the depth of snow everywhere, that the Emperor’s 
vanity did not assert itself until we reached the gates of War- 
saw. On reaching the bridge over the Vistida, we could not 
repress a humble reflection on the modest equipage of the King 
over Kings. The aged box, which had once been red, had been 
mounted on a sled, and had four large windows — or rather 
panes of glass set in worm-eaten sash-frames, which did not 
close properly. The joints of this wreck, three-quarters rotten, 
gaped on aU sides and gave free access to the wind and snow. 
I had to he sweeping out the interior of our domicile constantly, 
to keep us from getting soaked through by snow melting on the 
seats. 

CHAPTER XIV 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

I N spite of all these vexations the Emperor continued very 
cheerful. He seemed delighted to find himself at Warsaw, 
and was very curious to see whether he would be recog- 
nized. I think he would not have been sorry to have met some- 
one who guessed his identity, for he traversed the city on foot 
and we did not take our seats on our humble sledge until we 
had crossed the main square. It was so cold that no one who 
could keep warm within doors set foot abroad, and the Emperor’s 
green velvet cloak with gold braid only attracted the attention 
of a few humble passers-by, more eager to regain their own 
firesides than curious about the names and quality of the travel- 
lers, whose costume, however, engaged their attention. They 
turned to glance, but did not stop. Anyhow, it would have 
been difficult to recognize the Emperor, for the fur cap he wore 
covered half his face. 

At eleven o’clock we alighted at the Hotel de Saxe,^ where 
Amodru had arrived only a few moments previously. I at 
once sent to the director-general of posts to order the Duke of 

^ Caulaincourt is mistaken in this. Chambray, Bourgoing, Countess 
Potocka and de Pradt {Histoire de Vambassade dans le grand-duche de 
Varsovie en 1812^ 209) agree in saying that the Emperor put up at the 
Hotel d’Angleterre, and not the Hotel de Saxe. — ^The Abbe de Pradt, whose 
hatred and dishonesty render his narrative so suspect, cannot, however, have 
had any inducement to be other than truthful when he described the Em- 
peror’s apartment in the following terms: “He was in a low-ceilinged little 
room, freezing cold, with the shutters half-drawn to prevent his being 
recognized. A wretched Polish maidservant was on her knees pufiSng at a 
fire of green wood which rebelled at her efforts, sputtering out more damp 
into the chimney than heat into the room.” 