

In the Council held on March 9, 1802, at •which were present the three 
Consuls, the Chief Justice, Talleyrand, and Fouche, “the two leaders of 
the opposing parties were M. Talleyrand and M. Cambaceres. M. Talley- 
rand advised the utmost rigour against the Prince.” — ^Pasquier, Memoires^ 
I, 178. 

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 315 

afraid of me, but still more afraid of the Bourbons. They 
scared Murat, and made him lose his head. 

“For my own part, they made no great impression on me. I 
protected them because it is the duty of the government to pro- 
tect everyone, without distinction. I myself looked at things 
from a higher standpoint than the rest, and was no more in- 
clined than usual to seek support among the parties; but I felt 
that France needed a government which would embody the re- 
sults of her sacrifices and the glory she had won — ^a government 
whose concern it would be to create confidence and security 
for all the nation’s interests, within and without the country. 
I felt that I was the Strong Man, designed by my nature to pre- 
side over these great destinies. I was not so foolish as to work 
for others when I felt myself the only man equal to the demands 
of the French people. I had read my history; and I was no 
more eager to put France at the mercy of vengeful emigres than 
I was to raise to power men who would show no gratitude — 
not when I knew myself competent to keep everything in hand. 

“So I took a stand. I prepared everything for the reorgani- 
zation of a monarchy. It is the only form of government suit- 
able for France, and the only one which can keep the European 
monarchs quiet. They needed me; experience had proved to 
me that I was not mistaken there. As for the Duke of Enghien, 
I believed him of no great importance at the time I sent Ordener 
to arrest him. I thought they would take Dumouriez as well, 
which was of more concern to me; for his name lent the air 
of a major conspiracy to the plot. I was within my rights, 
because the Bourbon Prince was conspiring against me, as were 
Georges Cadoudal and the others. All these intrigues were 
interconnected. 

“They caught Enghien fifteen miles beyond my frontier, 
flagrante delicto, while the assassins hired by his family, urged 
on by him and by the English minister at Stuttgart, were ar- 
rested in France, sword in hand. You ought to know this, 

316 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Caulaincourt. Weren’t you instructed to effect a reconcilia- 
tion between ourselves and Baden over the violation of the ter- 
ritory?” 

I answered yes, and that some charitably minded people had 
even attributed lie Prince’s arrest to me. 

“That is notoriously untrue,” replied the Emperor. “The 
chief of the gendarmes even denounced you at the time as hav- 
ing secretly warned the Prince that Ordener intended to arrest 
him, and as being the cause of his having tried to shoot Ordener 
and nearly killing him. I didn’t believe a word of it.” 

The Emperor added that, having given orders for the Prince 
to be brought to Paris, he was rather undecided as to what 
policy he should adopt. However, Murat, urged on by the revo- 
lutionaries, had so impressed upon him that aU would be lost 
if he did not make an example, that, without giving his positive 
consent, he had sent orders that the prince should be tried by 
a military commission. This, he reflected, was only a legitimate 
precaution on his part. The Prince asked to see him, and even 
wrote asking for an audience, but he only learned this after 
sentence had been carried out. 