

that the diplomatic corps should associate with that b . I 

have no desire that my affairs should be put up for auction by 
her.” 

I observed that M. Talleyrand was not on sufficiently good 
terms with his wife to warrant any suspicion of his confiding 
in her, or the belief that he would be susceptible to the least 
influence from her. He would, I said, fall into disrepute if 
he were to leave her now to enter into politics; that such a con- 
dition made the whole thing impossible — ^which was unfortu- 
nate, since choosing him would appear to all the cabinets to in- 
dicate moderation, and would even seem to be a preparatory 
step towards peace. Something of that sort was necessary at 
this juncture to satisfy public opinion in Europe and in France. 
I added, furthermore, that I failed to understand the importance 
which he laid on Mme. Talleyrand’s removal, since she had 
already done the honours of her husband’s house and had even 
been received at Court several times. 

To this the Emperor replied with spirit that Talleyrand 

320 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

would have to change some of the company he kept; besides, 

that he would have to get rid of his m and his ; and 

he told me that I had no idea of what went on in that house. 
When Talleyrand was minister the salon was an auction-room 
with his supposed friends as the brokers; and he wanted no 
more scandal of that sort. Talleyrand had believed, moreover, 
that he could not do without him and that he would, in conse- 
quence, make him Archchancellor and leave him to look after 
everything; whereas in such an arrangement the Minister for 
Foreign AfFairs would have been merely a head clerk — and 
Talleyrand had probably forgotten that the Emperor did not 
want two authorities in the State; that it was the Emperor who 
was governing. . . . 

I pointed out to the Emperor that the general esteem did not 
seem to me to have grown with his power during the past two 
or three years; indeed, that in my view we were declining even 
as we expanded. I paid tribute to the noble qualities of M. 
Bassano ; and this seemed to please the Emperor. But I pointed 
out to him that amongst the general public his minister was 
more blamed for having been a supporter of this war, and gen- 
erally for not opposing His Majesty’s warlike zeal, than for 
the Turkish peace and the Russo-Swedish alliance, because 
everyone knew that the Emperor ruled singlehanded, and that 
his ministers were neither accustomed nor able to settle prob- 
lems out of hand, to dispose of millions, or to despatch, on 
their own authority, agents with the power to do so. M. Bas- 
sano, being his sole confidant, had had plenty of other resources 
at his disposal. To my expressions of doubt regarding this 
assertion, the Emperor replied to me peevishly: 

“When I tell you a thing, you’ve got to believe it.” 

The conversation was interrupted by our arrival at a stage, 
where supper had been ordered. The Emperor seemed dis- 
pleased with me. He was tired, and his displeasure was hei^t- 