

BY SLEDGE TO WARSAW 321 

ened by the fact that he could not shave, as he wished to do, 
because Roustam had not arrived. He lay down as usual, on 
the long couch which is generally to be found in Polish houses, 
and rested there for an hour. Supper restored his good humour. 
That evening we were very well entertained. Was it in my 
honour? Or had the postmaster, as he approached the end of 
his course, been less afraid of indiscretion? I cannot tell. The 
fact remains that we were in an excellent house, enjoyed an 
excellent supper, and that the masters of the posting-house did 
the honours with much care and discretion, if they really did 
know that this was the Emperor. 

Every morning between eight and nine o’clock, when coffee 
could be obtained at a stage, the Emperor drank a cup with 
milk, sometimes without emerging from the sledge. At night, 
between five and nine, according to the particular stage, the 
courier ordered supper for us. We rested then for an hour, 
sometimes an hour and a half when the meal was slow in com- 
ing, so that M. Wonsowicz and the courier could also have time 
to eat. On arrival the Emperor sometimes made his toilet. He 
bathed his eyes, and stretched out on a couch — for after we 
left his carriage he could no longer sleep en route. I took 
advantage of this time to make hasty notes of our conversations, 
at least of the matters which seemed to me to have some interest. 

On [December 10], two hours before dawn, we reached 
Pultusk, where I dispensed with the services of our worthy post- 
master, whom the Emperor suitably rewarded. While the 
horses were being changed, the Emperor, feeling chilled, en- 
tered the local postmaster’s house, he being away from home. 
His young wife made haste to light a fire and to prepare the 
coffee and soup which we asked for, as we had suffered severely 
from cold during that night. A Polish servant-girl, half dressed, 
poked and blew the flames as well as she could, and nearly 
scorched her eyes out over the poorest fire that ever was made. 
The Emperor inquired what this poor girl earned. It was so 

322 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

little that he remarked that the sum would hardly pay for his 
woolens. He bade me give her a few napoleons and tell her 
they were for her dowry. The poor child could not believe her 
eyes, and it was not, I think, until after our departure that she 
realized her joy and her small fortune. 

The Emperor remarked that, in that class, it was possible 
to make many people happy with very little money. 

“I am impatient, Caulaincourt,” he added, “for the day of 
a general peace, so as to get some rest and be able to act the 
good man. We shall spend four months in every year travelling 
without our own frontiers. I shall go by short stages with my 
horses. I shall see the cottage firesides of our fair France. 
I wish to visit the Departments which lack proper communica- 
tions, to build roads and canals, to help commerce and en- 
courage industry. There is an enormous amount to be done 
in France; there are Departments where everything has to be 
built up from the heginning. I have already busied myself 
with many improvements, and through the Ministry of the In- 
terior I have collected very valuable information. In ten years’ 
time I shall be blessed as wholeheartedly as I am hated to-day. 
In some seaports commerce is selfish to the point of injustice, 
constantly anxious to profit, heedless if others lose. Whatever 
happens, it is I who have created industry in France. A few 
more years of perseverance, a few more bivouacs, and Mar- 
seilles and Bordeaux will soon be gathering in the millions 
they have failed to win.” 