

®This paper, as it transpires later, was an order to instruct Maret to 
arrange lie immediate replacement of M. de Pradt. The latter had ob- 
served the incident; at a later period VitroUes, who enjoyed his confidence, 
was to write: “While the Archbishop was carrying on his impertinent dis- 
course, Bonaparte took up a pencil as though to write some urgent order, 
and passed over to M. de Caulaincourt a paper on which he had scribbled, 
‘Delivrez-moi de ce faquin* The Master of Horse left the room as though 
to carry out the order, and shortly afterwards called the Archbishop and 
sent hiiTi away, I know not on what pretext.” — ^VitroUes, Memoires, I, 195. 

330 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

operations undertaken by Prince Scbwarzenberg. As for the 
tactics of the troops in the Duchy of Poland, of which the 
Emperor actually approved no more than did the ambassador, 
he told him sharply that he would not allow a priest to pass any 
judgment on the matter. The Emperor spoke of the defence of 
the Duchy, which he considered would be a simple matter if 
the levies were raised, although the ambassador held that the 
country was unprotected and in great peril. The Emperor al- 
ways argued on the hypothesis that the army would remain at 
Wilna, and that Schwarzenherg would do what was expected of 
him. He anticipated holding and defending the Duchy by Pol- 
ish levies, and by a general mobilization. He even wished 
to cover his army quarters by a screen of those Polish Cossacks 
of which he was never tired of talking, though, for lack of 
money, they had not yet even been collected into depots. 

The discussion had by now taken a turn for the better and 
was no longer disagreeably personal, and M. de Pradt, zealous 
in military controversies, adopted a rather dogmatic tone in 
refuting, with some reason as it seemed to me, what the Em- 
peror laid down in the tone of a master who expects silence 
rather than disagreement. The ambassador even seemed to 
allow hims elf more freedom in his observations than would 
have been permissible in private conversation. He saw safety 
only in what we no longer possessed — well-organized and well- 
paid armies; and he asserted that without money not a horse 
nor a man could he hoped for in the Duchy. 

“Then what do the Poles want?” the Emperor demanded 
sharply. “It is for them we are fighting, for them that I have 
lavished my treasure. If they mean to do nothing for their 
own cause, it is useless for them to work up such a passion for 
the restoration of their independence.” 

“They want to be Prussian,” answered the ambassador. 

“Why not Russian?” rejoined the Emperor indignantly. 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

331 

He turned his back on M. de Pradt, telling him to return in 
half an hour with the ministers who had been summoned. 

When M. de Pradt had gone the Emperor launched into a 
long and violent tirade against him, accusing him of being 
afraid of the Russians; of having, throughout the campaign, 
frightened rather than reassured the Poles; and of having ruined 
all his plans in Poland. 