

“Have we suffered heavy losses?” 

“Too heavy,” I answered, with a deep sigh. “These dis- 
astrous results are well worthy of those who urged this war. 
What folly!” 

“Not everyone urged it. Not everyone has deceived the 
Emperor as to what would happen. But what does it matter? 
Your Grace will have justice done you now, for it is well known 
that you did your best to prevent it. As for me, I have not 
hesitated to displease the Emperor by exposing the true facts 
of the situation and the state of Poland. I continually write 
to the Duke of Bassano; but he only replies by sending accounts 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

327 

of victories which deceive nohody here. This country is ruined. 
It has been crushed.” 

I stopped the conversation by leaving the ambassador to 
change his clothes, and returned to the Emperor. He was all 
the more impatient to see M. de Pradt because, being dissatisfied 
with him, he was anxious to show his displeasure. Ever since 
leaving Sierock the Emperor had grown more excited as the 
moment of meeting the ambassador drew nearer, and he re- 
peated again and again what he had already said about him. 
For this reason he did not alight at his ambassador’s house, 
which I had suggested as more comfortable and convenient for 
seeing various members of the Polish government whom he 
wished to interview. 

“I refuse to stay with a man whom I am going to dismiss,” 
he said. “He has given me too much cause for complaint.” 

I shall omit what the Emperor added to this speech, and so 
often repeated in the access of his ill-humour. He blamed 
M. de Pradt for meanness, for lack of tact, for misdirecting the 
zeal of our adherents. 

“He has ruined all my plans with his indolence,” said the 
Emperor. “He is a chatterbox, and nothing more. I have often 
wished Talleyrand here.” 

The ambassador arrived just when these last words were 
uttered. The Emperor received him coldly. M. de Pradt came 
forward eagerly, and asked how His Majesty was. His words 
had the ring of genuine interest; but this seemed to he even 
less in his favour. The Emperor would rather have been 
blamed, even criticized and found fault with by any other man, 
and was ill-disposed to tolerate this man-to-man air of interest 
on the part of one against whom he was deeply incensed. Per- 
ceiving the effect he had produced, M. de Pradt became colder 
and more reserved.' These preliminaries showed me clearly 
that I should be doing the ambassador a service by leaving him 
with no witness, and so giving him an opportunity of private 

328 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

conversation with the Emperor; and I left the room. But the 
Emperor by the same token desired the presence of a third party 
to increase M. de Pradt’s discomfiture, and he bade me remain. 
When I explained, however, that certain orders had to be given 
for the continuation of our journey, and that I had to buy him 
an extra cloak, he let me go, bidding me send for Count Stanislas 
Potocki, as well as the Minister of Finance. He added that I 
was to get everything ready for a speedy departure, and to 
return immediately. I bought the cloak for the Emperor, who 
suffered severely from the cold at nighttime, although I covered 
him with half my own cloak, thereby almost freezing myself. 