

The most diflScult part of our journey had certainly been 
accomplished, but we had still to cross the little strip of Prus- 
sian territory after Glogau; and this worried the Emperor more 
than all the rest of his journey. We travelled at great speed, 
but when a shaft of our sledge broke we were obliged to stop 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 335 

at Kutno to have it mended, which delayed us more than two 
hours. 

The sub-prefect recognized the Emperor, and gave him the 
best reception that lay in his power. His wife and sister, two 
pretty Polish girls, were thrilled with excitement at having His 
Majesty under their roof, and were delighted beyond measure 
at seeing him in good health. No physiognomy is so expressive 
as the Polish. The Emperor appreciated the warmth of his 
reception, hut had so much business on hand that there was no 
opportunity for chatting with the ladies or the sub-prefect, and 
he employed his time in dictating orders for the Duke of Bas- 
sano and for Warsaw. He instructed his minister to hurry on 
the levies and the arming of the Duchy, informing Maret of 
what he had granted the Poles and ordering him to send a fresh 
courier to Vienna and to Prince Schwarzenberg. He also is- 
sued orders to Lauriston, who was to go to Warsaw, instructing 
him to remain there, to assume command of the entire army, 
to arm Modlin and Sierock. To General du Taillis, whom he 
had seen at Warsaw, he confirmed in writing the orders he had 
given him verbally: that he was to keep all the troops passing 
through the city, and to organize and arm the National Guard. 

The Emperor grew impatient with my slow writing, my fin- 
gers being still numb with cold, and decided to write himself 
while I made drafts of what he had already dictated. But his 
own fingers were stiff, his handwriting was at the best illegible, 
and after writing two letters which he could not even read him- 
self he was obliged to dictate fresh ones to me. Dinner put 
a stop to this correspondence. I preserved the two historic let- 
ters written in the Emperor’s own hand, and sent off the des- 
patches while he dined. By this time the sledge was repaired. 
His Majesty barely took time to eat; I managed to snatch a 
piece of bread with which to make my meal as we went on our 
way. The Emperor was deeply touched by ihe reception he 

336 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

had met with at Kutno, and instructed me to tell Duroc, when 
we arrived in Paris, to send a gift to the sub-prefect’s wife. 

During the journey from Warsaw to Kutno, the Emperor had 
spoken of England, of the difficulty of forcing her to make peace 
unless some financial crisis or internal embarrassment forced 
the hands of the cabinet. At the moment he seemed to regret 
that his idea for the restoration of Poland had embroiled him 
with Russia. He agreed that she was of great importance in 
the Continental System. 

“Rumiantsof,” he went on, “was aware how advantageous 
this alliance would be to me. He was no genius, but he was 
a man of sound judgment, with a thorough understanding of 
the European situation as it developed after Tilsit, and as we 
envisaged it at Erfurt. He also realized so fully the advan- 
tages we should draw from the alliance in France’s relation 
to England, that he would not even believe in hostilities until 
we had crossed the Niemen. He always doubted my real in- 
tention of attacking Russia. He thought my object was to make 
them shut their eyes to what had happened, and that my hostile 
demonstrations were only to force Russia not to receive neutrals 
and to consider herself fortunate that I stopped at threats. 