

® Bulletin 29, dated from Molodetchna, December 3, and sent direct from 
Smorgoni to Paris, appeared in the Moniteur Universel of December 16, 
1812. 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

345 

I am like Louis XV, and that he has to get round me and be 
agreeable to me. If I kept mistresses he would be their most 
devoted servant. He considers the Malet afEair a great con- 
spiracy with many ramifications. He would like to have many 
Jacobins arrested — and even some public figures. But I think 
Pasquier and Savary are right in judging that that insolent at- 
tempt was simply hatched in the minds of a few idiots. It was 
quite right not to arrest any prominent men, for rigorous action 
causes irritation. If there are any guilty parties at large they 
will not escape the police, and it would not do to have the 
government betraying unwarranted suspicion. In the eyes of 
Europe as of France, it is preferable that this conspiracy should 
appear as nothing more formidable than a madman’s escapade. 
Savary iinticipated my wishes perfectly by adopting this atti- 
tude.” 

On our arrival at Glogau that evening the general in com- 
mand was not a little surprised to discover that the Master of 
Horse was none other than the Emperor himself. His Majesty 
went closely into the state of the place and the condition of 
the coxmtry, issued various orders, and barely took time to sup, 
so anxious was he to be on the way once more. We set off in 
the carriage offered by the general and accepted by the Em- 
peror, who was very tired from being unable to lie at full length 
in the sledge. 

Certain as I was that the snow would prevent us going far 
on wheels, I took the precaution of having our faithful sledge 
follow us; and it was as well that I did so, for, being unable 
to proceed in the carriage at more than a walking pace, we had 
not left Glogau far behind when we transferred into our less 
comfortable conveyance. Half frozen in this modest vehicle, 
which we should have done well not to leave, the Emperor was 
unable to sleep, and began to talk of the army, of which, 
owing to the rapidity of our movements, we could have no news. 

346 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

He longed to get into Saxony. He did not like having to cross 
Prussian territory, and this led to the following conversation. 

“If we are stopped, Caulaincourt, what will they do to us? 
Do you think I shall be recognized, that it will be known that 
I am here? You are popular enough in Germany, Caulain- 
court; you speak the language; you protected the postmasters 
and took all my gendarmes to furnish them with escorts. They 
would never allow you to be arrested or ill-treated.” 

“I do not suppose they will have very grateful memories of 
a protection that did not hinder their being piUaged.” 

“Bah! They may have suffered for twenty-four hours, but 
you had their horses given hack to them. Berthier never 
stopped talking of your claims on their behalf. Have you ever 
been in Silesia?” 

“Only with Your Majesty.” 