

“I am not afraid of energetic men; I know how to use and 
guide them. Besides, I can do nothing which is opposed to 
equality; and youth, like the nation, clings to equality. If you 
have talent I can push you forward; if you have merit I can 
protect you. This is recognized, and it is very useful to me. 
Fontanes would have reared marquises for me. Their only 
place is on the comic stage — ^though the taste of to-day has 
really dethroned them there, since Mole quit the scene and 

®In 1806 Fontanes, at that time president of the Legislature, had in- 
serted in the Mercure de France the advance notice of a book he had writ- 
ten in support of absolute monarchy. It was this that drew the reply from 
Napoleon quoted here. 

342 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Fleury broke down. I need councillors of state, prefects^ of- 
ficers, engineers, professors. Therefore the scope of our in- 
struction must be broadened, to season these young heads full 
of Greek and Roman ideas. It is important to give a monarchic 
turn to the vitality of those traditions; for that is history. I 
shall give my first attention to education; it will be my first care 
as soon as peace is established, for it is the safeguard of the 
future. I want all instruction to be public — even my son’s, in 
part. I have a great plan in that connection.” 

To my great regret this conversation was interrupted by our 
arrival in the early hours of the morning [December 12] at the 
Hotel de Saxe, at Posen. 

^^Give me my despatches,” were the Emperor’s first words. 

In accordance with my orders the director of posts had kepi 
the two which came through.^ The Emperor’s impatience -was 
such that he would have ripped open the cases if he had had 
a knife at hand. Numb with cold, my fingers were not quick 
enough for him in working the combinations of the padlocks. 
At last I handed him the Empress’s letter, and one from Mme. 
Montesquieu enclosing the report on the King of Rome. This 
was the first news since leaving Wilna, for luck had been against 
us; we had met no courier between that town and Mariampol. 
The Emperor had never ceased to speculate on the impression 
that would be caused by the total lack of news of the army, 
so it can easily be imagined with what eagerness he read the 
despatches from the Archchancellor and the other ministers. 
I could not tear the envelopes open quickly enough to keep pace 
with his impatience. He scanned the pages rather than read 
them, to obtain a general idea of their contents. After this 
hasty review he settled down to perusing carefully those des- 
patches which had struck him as being the most important. 

^At Posen tlie Emperor regained the line of communication between 
France and the army, which he had left at Mariampol. 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

343 

He did me the honour of reading aloud the letters from the 
Empress and Mme. Montesquieu. 

“Haven’t I got an excellent wife?” he said. 

The particulars that the Empress gave him about his son, 
all of which were confirmed hy the governess, delighted His 
Majesty. Notwithstanding that he was so preoccupied with af- 
fairs, in this moment he was just a good husband, indeed the 
best of husbands, and the fondest of fathers. I camiot describe 
my pleasure in contemplating hi m at such moments. His joy, 
his happiness, glowing in every feature, went to my heart. 