

He made me read the Archchancellor’s letters, as well as 
communications from the Ministers of Police and War. I 
took advantage of the momentary freedom afiorded me, while 
the Emperor was going through his correspondence, to give 
orders for the continuation of our journey. The travelling car- 
riage had been unable to catch up with us, and, as the Emperor 
had given me no time to take money out of it when we parted 
from it, all my funds were exhausted. I had the director of 
couriers fetch me some money. I notified the general in com- 
mand in Glogau that I should be arriving, and that he was to 
have the city gates ready [to open], and supper prepared. I 
then employed the two hours left before our departure in put- 
ting my notes in order, and completing the particulars I had 
taken of our last conversation since leaving Warsaw. 

The Emperor took an hour’s rest. He lunched, and we then 
took to the road again. We were now meeting the bearers of 
news, and the further we proceeded the shorter we made the 
intervals between receiving despatches. In this manner we were 
able to receive in one day’s journey our friends’ letters cover- 
ing three or four days. Every letter received was a source of 
fresh happiness to the Emperor. He made me read most of 
his despatches, except those in the post [censorship] packet. 
Only once did he give me a few extracts from this to read, say- 
ing, as he did so: 

344 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“What imprudence! What fools men are! I have not suffi- 
cient opinion of Mankind to be malicious, as they say I am, 
or eager for revenge!” 

The Emperor’s observation was very just. The imprudence 
and impudence expressed in some of these intercepted letters 
afforded opportunities for incontestable proof that His Majesty 
was neither malicious nor vindictive; for in the circumstances 
he might justly have been severe, whereas when I reached Paris 
I saw the two persons who had given occasion to these observa- 
tions, and they had not been in the slightest degree molested 
or reprimanded. One of them occupied a position at Court. 

The Emperor was highly satisfied with the particulars he 
received as to the situation in Paris and in France. Everyone 
was so accustomed to seeing him triumph over difficulties, and 
even extract some advantage from events which seemed the 
most contrary to his interest, that public confidence had been 
hut little shaken by the long silence of which people complained. 
This interruption in commimications had not produced exactly 
the effect that he had anticipated. 

“In the actual circumstances,” the Emperor said, “this sense 
of security is rather a pity, for, when it comes, the army bulletin 
will upset confidence.® A certain disquiet would have been 
preferable; it would have prepared the groimd for bad news.” 

Speaking of the Minister of War [Clarke], he called him a 
typical courtier, the most conceited man he had ever met: 

“The greatest happiness that could befall him would be if 
he could persuade everyone that his grandfather had come out 
of the Ark. He is an honest man, of mediocre talents, without 
character, and so addicted to flattering that one never can tell 
how much reliance to place on any opinion he may express. 
He does not know me yet,” added the Emperor. “He imagines 