

“Carry out at once the order I gave you,” he said sharply, 
referring to what he had written on the card which he had 
handed to me in M. de Pradt’s presence. It said: “Send Maret 
word that fear of the Russians has made the Archbishop of 
Malines lose his head — ^that he is to dismiss him and put some- 
one else in charge.” 

I had thrust the card in my pocket. At the moment I con- 
tinued pacing up and down with the Emperor, without answer- 
ing or executing his orders. 

Noticing his silence, I reminded him that dinner had been 
growing cold for some time, but he paid little attention to this, 
directing me again to carry out the order. After a moment I 
pointed out to him that this change would produce a bad effect 
on the Council at Warsaw. 

“If M. de Pradt,” I said, “has, as Your Majesty thinks, 
played up to the members of the Council, he will be all the 
more acceptable to them at a moment of difi&culty. No harm 
wiU be done by leaving him here for some time. He will do 
his best to remedy his errors, and circumstances will stimulate 
his zeal. He will even do better than a new man could do. If 
you dismiss him, he will say it is for having protected the 
interests of the Duchy, and that will have a bad effect.” 

The Emperor then enumerated the different orders which 
the Duke of Bassano had given M. de Pradt concerning levies. 
He went into lengthy details as to the means placed at the dis- 
posal of the ambassador and the Duchy, and concluded by say- 
ing: 

6S2 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“You shall write from Posen. Now let us dine, so that I 
can see the ministers and then start off.” 

To keep the Emperor from going back on his decision, I 
threw the card in the fire in his presence. Preoccupied by 
affairs, anxious to see the ministers and be on the road again. 
His Majesty did not remain long at table, although the cup of 
coffee we had snatched at Pultusk had refreshed us but little. 

“Business nourishes me,” said the Emperor, “and I have a 
surfeit from discontent. This priest has annoyed me. What 
impudence! He complains of everyone, criticizes everything. 
What has he ever done to entitle him to blame others? He is 
losing this campaign for me.” 

The Emperor also received Count Taillis, lieutenant-general 
in command at Warsaw, who had nothing to say in praise of 
the ambassador’s behaviour in the moment of crisis. 

The Emperor accorded a good reception to the ministers who 
accompanied M. de Pradt. These gentlemen spoke of the dan- 
gers His Majesty had run, and their happiness in seeing him 
in such good health. His mere presence was to them a guaran- 
tee of better days to come . . . and so forth, and so on. The 
Emperor brushed aside the idea that he had ever run any risks. 
He laughingly observed that rest and quiet were the lot of none 
but sluggard monarchs, adding that he thrived on fatigue. He 
told them that the army was still strong in numbers, with more 
than one hundred and fifty thousand men, which was hardly 
the truth. The Russians, according to him, were not holding 
out; they had been beaten in every direction, even at the Bere- 
sina. These Russians were no longer the men of Eylau and 
Friedland. Before three months had elapsed he would have 
as strong an army as he had when he opened the campaign. 
His arsenals were full, he had all the essentials in equipment 
and troops to make a splendid army. From his private study 
in the Tuileries he cotild impose his will on Vienna and Berlin 
better than from army headquarters. “I carry more weight 