

“But,” he added, “he had received orders to attend the exe- 
cution, and, being commandant of the picked gendarmerie, it 

® In the Convention, Cambaceres voted “Yes” on the question of the guilt 
of Louis XVI, but on the question of the application of the death penalty 
he voted for a reprieve until the cessation of hostilities. 

340 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

was his duty to be there. Anybody else would have obeyed 
orders exactly as he did. He was a much better man, much 
less of an inquisitor than Fouche. It is now the fashion to 
laugh at Savary. It was, indeed, ridiculous that a divisional 
general. Minister of Police, should be taken from his bed and 
whisked off to gaol by a madman just escaped from a limatic 
asylum. This [Malet] incident very naturally made all Paris 
roar with laughter; and ridicule is more fatal to those in au- 
thority than their mistakes.” 

Turning later to the Duke of Otranto [Fouche], he said: 

“The man is merely a schemer. He is prodigiously clever 
and facile with the pen. He is a thief, and steals anything he 
can lay hands on. He must be worth millions. He was a great 
revolutionary, a man of blood. He thinks he can atone for 
his misdeeds, or anyhow cause them to be forgotten, by play- 
ing up to the relatives of his victims and making himself out 
to be the protector of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. He is a 
man whom it may be useful to employ, for he is still the fugle- 
man of many revolutionaries and is, besides, exceedingly ca- 
pable. But I can no longer place any confidence in him.” 

The Duke of Gaeta, who appeared next in this review, was. 
His Majesty said, a good financier, a man of method and 
probity, who had rendered great services in his sphere. M. 
Barhe-Marbois, whom he named next, was a schemer with 
the appearance of a Quaker and a deceptive resemblance to 
an honest man. 

“I was duped by him for a long time,” he said, “for he pro- 
fessed a certain rigour in his principles and a severity of judg- 
ment on other people, and on events, which made me think he 
would be no more indulgent to himself. He is discontented 
with everything, fondling power, detesting it and belittling it. 
He is, at heart, an unprincipled man, full of envy and fault- 
finding, devoid of capacity. Thinking him a man of talents, 
I placed great confidence in him for some time, only to dis- 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

341 

cover too late that I was mistaken. I paid dearly for the error. 
He is safe in the Court of Accounts; he cannot make blunders 
there, and he is obliged to carry out his new functions with the 
probity for which he is renowned.” 

Upon my observing that he had the reputation of being vir- 
tuous and unimpeachably honest: 

“Oh, he is honest enough,” replied the Emperor. “As for 
being virtuous, that is simply a part he plays; at heart he is 
a rascal.” 

Of M. Fontanes the Emperor said: 

“He is too much of a sycophant. He has great talent. He 
serves me with zeal and for the moment is directing public 
instruction very competently. The Revolution has made us too 
full of the Greeks and Romans; we must give our children mo- 
narchical ideas, and that is quite in accordance with Fontanes’s 
opinions; or so he proclaims, at least. If I allowed him, he 
would go too far in that direction. He is a man of parts, but 
his head is small. If I had not checked him, he would have 
given us an education of Louis XV’s style. He thought it would 
please me, but I stopped him. One day I said to him: ‘Mon- 
sieur de Fontanes, at least leave us the Republic of Letters!’ ® 
Those words put him back on the right road. 