

“Then you are not known here?” 

“No, Sire.” 

“I did not reach Glogau until after the gates had been closed 
for the night. Unless the general or the courier have been 
chattering in front of the postilion, it is impossible that any- 
one should know I am in Prussia.” 

“That is true; and no one would imagine that it was the Em- 
peror travelling in this sorry vehicle. As to the Master of 
Horse, he is not of sufficient importance for the Prussians to 
compromise themselves by arresting him. Your Majesty’s 
journey has been so speedy that no one on the road so much 
as knows about it. Some sort of plan would have to be arranged 
before any attempt could be made on us; even a spiteful and 
determined man must get three or four kindred spirits to help 
him.” 

“If the Prussians were to stop us, what would they do to us?” 

“If it was the result of a definite plan, not knowing what 
to do with us they would loll us. So we must defend ourselves 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 347 

to the utmost extremity. We may be lucky; there are four of 
us.” 

“But if they take you alive, what will they do to you, my 
good Duke of Vicenza?” said the Emperor jokingly. 

“If they take me it will be because of my secretary, in which 
event I shall be in a bad way.” 

“If we are stopped,” rejoined the Emperor briskly, “we 
shall be made prisoners of war, like Francis I. Prussia will 
get back the millions she has paid, and will ask for millions 
more.” 

“If they dared strike such a blow. Sire, we should not get 
o£E so cheaply as that.” 

“I think you are right. They fear me too much; they would 
want to keep me.” 

“That is highly probable.” 

“For fear I should escape, or that some terrible reprisals 
would be undertaken, the Prussians would hand me over to the 
English.” 

“Possibly!” 

“Can you picture to yourself, Caulaincourt, the figure you 
would cut in an iron cage, in the main square of London?” 

“If it meant sharing your fate. Sire, I shoxdd not complain.” 

“It is not a question of complaining, but of something that 
may happen at any moment, and of lie figure you would cut 
in that cage, shut up like a wretched negro left to be eaten by 
flies after being smeared with honey,” rejoined the Emperor, 
with a laugh. 

And there he was for a quarter of an hour, laughing at this 
foolish notion, and the idea of that man in the cage. 

Never had I seen the Emperor laugh so heartily, and his 
gaiety was so infectious that it was some time before we could 
speak a word without finding some fresh source of amusement. 

It was with considerable relief that the Emperor reflected 
that nothing could be known of his departure and that the 

348 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Prussians, even if they did learn about it, would not dare take 
any action against him while their troops were in the midst of 
ours and we were as strong as they imagined us to be. 

“But a secret assassination, an ambuscade would be easy,” 
said His Majesty, thus betraying his lively desire to be across 
this strip of Prussian territory, which gave him food for such 
serious as well as amusing reflections. 