

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

333 

when I am on my throne in the Tuileries than when I am lead- 
ing my army,” he said. He spoke of Marengo and Essling, 
battles that had been almost lost yet which, a couple of hours 
later, had placed Austria at his disposal.* 

I went into the other room to make certain that everything 
was ready. The sledges were drawn up before the door. I 
paid the hotel-keeper, gave a few directions, and made notes of 
the strange conversation I had just heard. After dinner, while 
the Emperor was at his toilet, I had jotted down particulars of 
what I had said to the ambassador and of his conversation with 
the Emperor. As soon as I was able to pay attention to what was 
being said now, I heard the Emperor attributing his reverses 
solely to the climate, and admitting that he had possibly stayed 
too long at Moscow because, having sent Lauriston to Russian 
headquarters, he had hoped to be able to conclude a peace. He 
said that Wilna would be held, but agreed that the Russians had 
shown strength of character, and that they loved the Tsar 
Alexander. The burning of Moscow, he acknowledged, had 
upset his plans. He emphasized the fact that it was the Rus- 
sians who had set fire to their own capital. He spoke of the 
need for showing strength of mind on our side, adding that even 
grave reverses might lead to astounding successes. He talked 
with eagerness of the levies to be raised, especially of the in- 
dispensable Polish Cossacks. 

The ministers emphasized the distress of their country. The 
Emperor did not seem to pay attention to this. M. de Pradt 
supported them generously when they asked for money. The 
Emperor granted some millions from the Courland assessment 
and from an issue of copper coinage, and concluded by an- 
nouncing the imminent arrival of the diplomatic corps from 

^ See Countess Potocka’s account {Memoires, 332 ) of the interview be- 
tween Napoleon and Potocki. Her concluding remarks are: “The fascina- 
tion that this extraordinary man exercised over all who heard him was so 
powerful that my father-in-law, who had been in the depths of gloom when 
he left us, returned full of hope.” 

334 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

Wilna. He then started to talk of his journey, and then I en- 
tered the room. The ministers urged the Emperor to rest for 
a few hours while relays were being organized along the road. 
They enquired whether he would take the Silesia route by 
Glogau. 

“Yes, by Prussia,” answered the Emperor. 

This crossing of Prussian territory, short though it was, wor- 
ried him. He told them, questioning me as he did so, that I 
had given all the necessary instructions for relays, and that he 
was about to start at once. He then dismissed the ministers 
very graciously, amid their renewed expressions of devotion, 
in which they were all joined by M. de Pradt, who seemed to 
have forgotten the rebukes administered before dinner. 

We mounted our sledge without further delay [about seven 
P.M., December 10], and once again the Emperor gave vent 
to his spleen against M. de Pradt. He passed the most bitter 
comments on the Archbishop’s terror when the Russians had 
nearly reached the Duchy, and on the bad example given by his 
behaviour on that occasion. He spoke of his breeding and his 
manners, which were out of keeping. His Majesty said, with the 
education he had received, with the company in which he must 
have mixed, particularly with the religious calling he had 
chosen. The Emperor kept on alleging that M. de Pradt had 
lost him Poland and ruined his campaign. It had been a mis- 
take to pay heed to foolish intrigues and not send Talleyrand, 
who would have served him well, as he had previously done at 
Finckenstein [April-May, 1807]. 