

“I make myself out to he worse than I really am,” he said 
to me laughingly; “for I have observed that the French are 
always ready to eat out of one’s hand. They lack seriousness; 
consequently, that quality impresses them most. I am supposed 
to be severe, even hard! So much the better! It saves me 
from having to he so! My firmness passes for insensibility; 
and it is partly to this impression that we owe the existing state 
of good order, although the Revolution is so recent, and al- 
though we have a generation among us reared in disorder and 
with no conception of morality or religion. So I do not com- 
plain of my reputation. Believe me, Caulaincourt, I’m only 
human! Whatever some people may say, I have a tender 
heart — ^but it is the heart of a sovereign. The tears of a duchess 
move me to no pity whatsoever, but I am touched by the woes 
of peoples. I want to see them happy; and the French shall 
be so. If I live ten years, there will be contentment everywhere. 
Don’t you suppose I enjoy giving pleasure? It does me good 
to see a happy face; but I am compelled to defend myself 
against this natural disposition, lest advantage be taken of it. 
I found that out more than once with Josephine, who was always 
begging me for things, and could even cry me into granting 
what I ought to have refused her.” 

The Emperor often asked me if I too should not be delighted 
to see my loved ones again. This good and natural manifesta- 
tion of His Majesty’s real feelings refreshed me more than I 
can say. I should have liked the ears of all Europe to hear his 
words, and every echo to repeat them. I am positive that I 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

339 

lost not one syllable of this conversation, which I would gladly 
have prolonged indefinitely. 

The Emperor was most anxious to meet his couriers in order 
to get the eagerly awaited letters from France — ^the first we 
had received since Smorgoni. He accordingly hastened our 
journey as much as he could. At Posen we would regain the 
road the army had taken on its way to Konigsberg. 

Meanwhile the Emperor reviewed his cabinet. He praised 
Archchancellor Cambaceres as a man of prudent coimsel and 
a great lawyer. His equitable and singularly clear judgment 
had thrown much light upon several articles in the Code, notably 
those presenting the greatest difficulties. AUuding to the death 
of the King, “Only fear,” he said, “prevented him from voting 
his acquittal.” ® Cambaceres, he added, was far from being a 
revolutionary. He was a man worthy of confidence and in- 
capable of abusing it; he had always made the best use of the 
trust given him; his high repute was most justly acquired. 

The Emperor cited the Duke of Rovigo as a man entirely 
devoted to him, a man of strong character and independent 
viewpoint. He had a kind heart, he said; he was thoroughly 
good-natured, even obliging. He would often have been duped 
if the Emperor had not stopped him. But he was too self- 
interested, and this displeased His Majesty, who had decided 
to deprive him of the gaming monopoly, for he was incessantly 
asking for money, although he had already been given large 
sums, and his fortune, since he became a minister, had risen 
to five or six millions. As for the rest, the public was unjust 
in its opinion of him. It was held up against him that he had 
been present at the execution of the Duke of Enghien. 