

“I could not permit this admission of pretended neutrals,” 
the Emperor continued, “as it furnished the English with a 
means of eluding the Continental blockade. But I would have 
passed it over, and we should have reached an understanding 
if I had been able to entertain any hope of persuading the Tsar 
Alexander to organize a great expedition on India. At the 
point we had reached in our struggle with England, whose cab- 
inet was staking its all, this would have been the only way of 
alarming the London merchants. The nation would have forced 
the government to treat for peace. But after Erfurt I felt sus- 
picion in the air. For my part, affairs in Spain were more or 
less spoiling my other projects. Alexander and Rumiantsof 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

337 

did not incline so much as I had expected to the partition of 
Turkey, and thus all my plans made at Tilsit had to be modi- 
fied. I may be obliged to look at things from another angle. 
By some means or other we must get out of the rut we are in, 
find some means of forcing England to make peace, weaken 
Russia, solve the problem of Europe by creating a great buf- 
fer state. It would be a splendid and noble thing to rob Eng- 
land of any hope of forming a new coalition, by sapping the 
strength of the only great power which could still be her ally.” 

The Emperor told me that he had long thought that Con- 
stantinople was coveted by Russia. In the hope of an expedi- 
tion, or at least a demonstration, against India, he had planned 
another expedition by sea (possibly independent of the land 
operation), to which he would have been able to furnish a 
strong contingent if he could have persuaded the Russians to 
allow a French corps to march through their country. But 
from what he knew, and from what the Tsar and Rumiantsof 
had told him, this would have been difScult to negotiate. 

The Emperor appears to have planned his expedition against 
India in the following manner. He had obtained from the navy 
all the necessary information. It seemed to him that the main 
obstacle was the impossibility of carrying sufficient water for 
twenty-five or thirty thousand men for such a long voyage. 
Otherwise he had found no insuperable difficulty. He would 
have directed the expedition against Surat — a landing to be 
made at some point on the Mahratta coast, where the people 
were natural enemies of the English and ready at any moment 
to take up arms against them. The expeditionary force would 
have been thirty thousand strong. They would put in at only 
one port, Mauritius, to water and take on board provisions 
and leave their sick. These latter would have been replaced 
by two or three thousand negroes for whom the colonists would 
be paid in ready money. 

338 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

France, the Empress, and the King of Rome were subjects 
of daily conversation. His Majesty never wearied of exclaim- 
ing how glad he would be to see them again, and expressed the 
most tender affection for them, nie Empress he praised con- 
stantly, talking of his home life with a feeling and a simplicity 
that did one good to hear. Of France and the French he spoke 
with an enthusiasm which was consoling after so many sacrifices. 