

It was his intention to summon to the peerage all the chief 
men of note, so that the French people, whom he had been the 
first to proclaim as a great nation, should feel itself honoured 
in the selection of its most distinguished men, who would, more- 
over, have sufficient means to be independent; for those who 
are governed have no guarantee of safety if their representa- 
tives lack the first element of independence, especially in a 
country like France where property must necessarily be the 
first condition for any form of eminence. 

He went on to say that many people thought him violent 
and despotic because he had an adamantine will; yet at the 
Council of State, when the Code was being discussed, he had 
been the most moderate of all those present. It was to him 
that France owed the Code which would be her eternal glory, 
the envy of all other peoples and the object of admiration to 
posterity. He might have let things remain in the chaos in 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 363 

which they had heen left by the Old Regime and the Revolution, 
and ruled the country as he pleased. As it was, no one could 
deny that France was governed by law. 

“That is suflScient answer to make,” he said, “to those who 
construe my firmness of will as despotism.” 

The Emperor cited several examples of officials and magis- 
trates being dismissed and censured for having been drawn into 
taking measures or making arbitrary decisions through a mis- 
taken zeal or ill-considered notions of government. He said 
once again that his principle of government, his own tendency 
and that of his Council of State, was to uphold, so far as jus- 
tice allowed, the weak against the strong, and, as a corollary 
of this, the private individual against the authorities, who, hav- 
ing power on their side, were prone to encroach and carry off 
things with a high hand. As a broad principle, he exhorted 
his ministers to be vigilant — to prevent evil rather than be 
obliged to punish it. The people who observed and were in 
a position to judge of his government realized perfectly well 
that the repute in which his strength of wiU was held served 
him more than his reputation for severity. 

“Everything goes to prove this,” he went on. “It is said 
that I love power. Well, has anyone, in any department, cause 
for complaint? Never have the prisons been so empty. Does 
anyone complain of a prefect without obtaining justice? Forty- 
five out of every fifty complaints are decided against the pre- 
fects. The government is strong, my hand is steady, and the 
officials are sensible that I shall not slacken the reins. So much 
the better for the people, for while this system traces out a 
definite path for each to follow, my watchfulness inspires the 
authorities with vigilance; officials fulfil their duties; all citi- 
zens and all forms of property are equally well-protected. 
The roads have never been safer. Thanks to me there are no 
more squabbles, no more petty spites, no more parties. Such 
things are no longer known in France. I have never wished 