

356 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

he condemned not only its excesses, but also its mistakes, with 
more severity than one would have expected from one of his 
age. Although he was without any experience himself, the con- 
duct of the Court seemed to him ill-chosen, perfidious and, 
above all, weak. He was no Republican; he wanted a consti- 
tutional monarchy; he would have defended the King if the 
King had wished to be defended, although Louis and his Court 
did not appear to be acting in good faith. Like so many even 
among the ardent royalists, the young Corsican wished to have 
the way of promotion opened to merit, to have advancement pos- 
sible without distinction of class, without the necessity of being 
the relation or friend of someone in high places or of invoking 
the patronage of a lady entitled to demand favours. He was 
quite imable to understand how the Princes of the Blood and 
the nobility could take refuge outside France while abandon- 
ing the King to danger. He was disgusted at the way the 
emigres wandered about Europe exhibiting their incapacity and 
immorality, instead of putting themselves at the head of a 
party in France or forming one that would rally the waverers 
to their side. 

The Emperor would have ranged himself on the side of the 
emigres, he said, if they had raised their standard in France 
and chosen prudent leaders to unite the ranks. 

“The French,” he went on, “never forgive cowardice; and 
it is cowardice to fly from danger and go begging foreigners 
for help against one’s country when there is such a noble cause 
to fight for at home. One should never wash dirty linen in 
public.” 

He had always been sorry for the King. All his concern 
was for him; he would have liked to have been able to defend 
him when his life was threatened. 

“His death,” said the Emperor, “seemed to me a disgrace 
to the nation, though, so far as that goes, the nation was inno- 
cent of the crime, for it was Coblentz that killed him. As for 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

357 

the King’s judges,” he went on, “with many of them it was fear 
rather than hatred or spite that inspired their sentence. What 
I have already done at Saint-Denis, and what I count upon 
doing at the Madeleine, will prove that I have always considered 
his death a crime, and that I thought so before I became a 
sovereign myself. Since I have worn a crown I have shown 
clearly enough that I mean to close the doors against revolu- 
tion. The sovereigns of Europe are indebted to me for stem- 
ming the torrent of revolutionary spirit that threatened their 
thrones; but to prevent the evil breaking out again it is useless 
to rake up the memory of wrongs done at a time of general 
upheaval. People must be induced to forget, or remember 
only in order to prevent a recurrence. I am far from being 
an advocate of the Convention; but if anyone is to be called 
to account for the evils done at that time, it is not the men of 
the Convention, who were carried away by the frenzy of the 
moment, but the Revolution which had been brought about by 
the Court itself. As a matter of strict justice the reckoning 
for our past misfortunes should be laid to the Princes and men 
of the Court who caused the Revolution. The Montmorencys, 
the Lameths, the d’Aiguillons, the Talleyrands, the Lafayettes, 
the Rochefoucaulds, Monsieur (the King’s brother), and many 
others were the real malefactors. 