

He asked me to look about for a tutor. He passed in review 
nearly all the men in official positions or at Court, even those 
of little prominence. The way he spoke of several confirmed 
in me more than ever the belief that, in general, he had but a 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

353 

poor opinion of Mankind. It seems to me that this explains 
the absence of any animosity towards various persons who had 
done him real injury; he had every reason to heap reproaches 
on them, but he contented himself with dismissing them at once 
and not saying a word. He seemed to place great value on 
the delicacy of mind and honourable sentiments inculcated by 
good training in early years. 

“It corrects the most vicious traits in a man’s character,” I 
have heard him say more than once. “The man who has not 
been well brought up has a certain uncouthness, a basis of 
egotism that makes it difficult to rely upon him. Self-interest 
is his only criterion. He lacks a sense of restraint, and this 
makes him prone to do anything.” 

He mentioned several notable men whom he employed in 
very responsible situations, adding that he did not trust them, 
that they were capable of betraying him at the first opportunity 
when they considered it in their interest to do so, although they 
owed everything to him. According to the Emperor, the bind- 
ing nature of an oath, fidelity in the execution of the functions 
or service in which one is employed, the sense of honour that 
makes it impossible to betray the man one serves, meant nothing 
to these men: religion and fidelity were sentiments wholly lack- 
ing in their natures. 

“Even patriotism,” he went on, “is a word that conveys noth- 
ing to them if it is not consonant with their own interests. . . . 
When certain people meet with the slightest disappointment, 
such as the refusal of a post they have requested for some rascal 
who happens to be a relation, they turn against me; some are 
even ready to plot against me if I put a stop to their pecula- 
tions and open pillage.” 

In this connection the Emperor mentioned certain names so 
prominent that I dare not commit them to writing. I have no 
wish to tarnish the glory of these names, which will go down 
in history. 

354 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

“But these men,” the Emperor added, “are heroes nonethe- 
less.” 

He concluded these reflections by observing that some people 
were wrong in complaining that he did not fill up all the ap- 
pointments in his gift. Not wishing to exclude any who might 
claim preferment by right of their eminent services, he chose 
rather to leave the whole question to be solved by time, which 
would settle many things. 

“By then,” he said, “the children will be well educated and 
will make their start in life at a period of peace and calm; 
they will not have their fortunes to make, and I will give them 
the recompense earned by the good services of their fathers.” 

This conversation led the Emperor to speak of various epi- 
sodes in his life. It was with pleasure that he recalled some 
of the incidents of his youthfiil days — his success at the mili- 
tary academy — ^his family, which had met with so little favour 
from Fortune, though of distinguished rank in Corsica. He 
spoke of various affairs of gallantry, of the preference that 
some society women had shown him above that granted to com- 
rades who were at that time more conspicuous than himself,^® 