

This thought so preoccupied him that he asked if our pistols 
were in good order, at the same time making sure his own was 
ready to hand. I had inspected them at Posen, so we firmly 
made up our minds to give a warm reception to the first person 
who interfered with us. Any inquisitive fellow who had thrust 
his head in at our door that night would have fared ill. 

The change of relays interrupted our conversation. As the 
Emperor had not wished the courier from Glogau to be more 
than an hour ahead of us, and as he had travelled slower than 
we had, he was only a short distance in front, and the relay 
horses were not ready. The Emperor could think of nothing 
hut this delay. Accustomed to having everyone at his beck 
and call, he could not understand that it should take more than 
the half hour, which was all the advance-notice the courier 
could give, to have his horses ready. We were at a Prussian 
posting-house, and what I attributed to nothing but the habitual 
slowness of Prussian postmasters seemed to him intentional 
delay. I had satisfied myself as to the real causes of this de- 
lay, but had not succeeded in arousing the postmaster from his 
imperturbable nonchalance; nor had I been able to urge on 
the postilions who, according to their wont, harnessed their 
horses as slowly as possible so as to leave them time to feed. 
I spent my time going to and fro between the stables and the 
sledge where the Emperor sat, shivering with cold. To while 
away the time he asked for some tea, which can be had at any 
posting-house in Germany. Two cups warmed him up a little, 
but they did not seem to allay his impatience, which increased 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

349 

every instant. He asked if our escort had followed us. Of 
the six gendarmes we had taken from Glogau only the two were 
left who sat at the back of the sledge, and they were half-dead 
with cold. At last, after waiting for an hour, we took the road 
again. 

We passed one of the most painful nights on the whole jour- 
ney. The change of vehicle had frozen us. For my own part, 
it was thirty-six hours before I was warm again. 

“I thought,” said the Emperor laughingly, as soon as we 
were on the move again, “that the curtain was rising on the 
first act of the cage play. How was it possible to take two 
hours to harness four horses, or even six, which were waiting 
in the stables?” 

But ill fortune dogged our steps. Our sledge broke down, 
and this made our progress slow. However, we reached Buntz- 
lau ® where we had to stop to have it mended. We took advan- 
tage of this delay to have our breakfast. The Emperor chatted 
with the inn-keeper, a worthy German. I acted as interpreter. 
His Majesty asked him as to the state of the country, taxation, 
the administration, and what they thought of the war. Taking 
us for simple travellers, the inn-keeper replied to aU his ques- 
tions with the utmost candour. The less his replies were made 
to please the Emperor, the more the latter plied him with ques- 
tions, often observing to me with a smile: 