

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

361 

then put into execution will distract public attention. The Sen- 
ate will become a Chamber of Peers, but in a truly national 
spirit. All things being so bound up together and simultane- 
ously intermingled, no one will feel that his sensibilities have 
been wounded.” 

The Emperor envisaged the peerage in the following manner. 
He had drawn the families of the old aristocracy into his ser- 
vice so that names that were famous in history, appearing side 
by side in our ranks with those associated with our modern 
glory — ^taking the same chances with them and encountering 
the same dangers — should no longer be objects of jealousy 
with the old campaigners. His purpose had been to identify 
the youth of the old families with the glory and great deeds 
of modern days, and thus bind the new and old names to- 
gether by means of a personal pride in the most recent events. 
He wished to place them in such a situation that he might with 
justice mend the fortunes of several who had fallen on hard 
times. It was contrary to his wishes for a Montmorency to be 
poor when Ney was rich. It was not right that the nephew of 
Cambaceres, if he should come into the title and fortune of his 
uncle, should splash a d’Aguesseau or a Mole with the mud 
from his carriage wheels. . . . 

But time was necessary for him to make the fortunes of 
those who had the right to a peerage and were not wealthy 
enough to keep up the position. He spoke of men of the old 
stamp and of the new stamp. All the notabilities would be 
admitted to the peerage. It was for this purpose that he would 
retain his “extraordinary domain” and devote the annual 
revenue from it to increase the capital: for he did not intend 
th is Chamber of Peers to be a charge on the State. The peer- 

isThe “extraordinary domain,” created by the Senatus Consultus of 
January 30, 1810, consisted of the portable and fixed valuables acquired by 
conquest and treaty. The Emperor disposed of the revenues according to 
his sovereign wiU, either on the army, or for the encouragement and re- 
ward of eminent civil or military services rendered to the State. 

362 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

age would carry no privileges outside the Chamber nor would 
noble rank give any, the social distinction being nothing but 
a question of title and thus in no way oflEensive to national 
ideas. The law must be the same for all. Otherwise the idea 
of a peerage would so shock public opinion that it would rather 
bring down on its recipients a torrent of public hatred than 
confer on them the distinction of holding a title. The door of 
promotion to all posts and fimctions being open to merit, no 
matter what a man’s extraction or condition of life, the nation 
would be less offended by his creation of titles. There could 
be no question of the need for instituting this distinction, yet 
no act of his had made him more enemies. 

As the career lay open for any soldier to become a general, 
a baron, a duke and then a marshal; or for the son of any 
peasant, schoolmaster, lawyer or local mayor to become coun- 
cillor of state, minister and duke, this peerage would, in time, 
cease to offend any susceptibilities, as it would afford a means 
of rewarding everyone impartially. 