

The Emperor often spoke of the effect that would be pro- 
duced by his return. 

“The nation needs me,” he said. “If it responds to my at- 
tentions all will soon be put right.” 

The news from Paris did not make him forget the army. He 
was more certain than ever than it would hold Wilna, and based 
all his calculations on this hypothesis. For my own part, I 
reckoned aloud the days it would occupy in its retreat, as far 
as the Vistula at least, without arousing the Emperor’s annoy- 
ance. 

“You see the black side of everything; you are not encourag- 
ing,” was his remark. 

What I had observed in the Duchy of Poland left me with 
no doubts as to the abandoning of Wilna. 

“If there are no Polish Cossacks there can be no rest for 
your army,” I said to the Emperor, who agreed that this short- 
age of cavalry somewhat changed the situation. 

He would not, however, admit of tie necessity for evacuating 
Wilna. He enumerated his forces, from tihe Prince of Schwar- 
zenberg’s corps to that of the Duke of Taranto, and was no 
doubt justified in thinking that numerically he had more men 
than were necessary to stop the Russians, provided that every 
one of them had done his duty. He thought that the sense of 
discouragement in the army had been allayed as soon as they 

352 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

got into touch with the stores at Wilna, and he tried to persuade 
himself that the levies were already raised, or at least were 
being collected while we were on our way to Paris. To hear 
him, one might have imagined that no more need be done but 
march them from the barracks to the frontier. Not admitting 
the need for the evacuation of Lithuania, he also refused to 
admit the existence of those almost insurmountable obstacles 
which the near approach of the enemy and the fear of invasion 
would place in the way of raising the levies. 

Thus the Emperor journeyed on towards his capital, cherish- 
ing illusions such as these and in no way put out with me for 
not shari ng in them. As was natural, our conversation con- 
tinually reverted to the army, to politics, to the administration, 
to men we knew, to various institutions, to what he would do 
to better these, and to his son. He asked me once more who 
could be entrusted with his education; and added that France, 
so rich in talent, was yet poor in superior men, when it came 
to making a choice like that. 

“Are you not hard put to it, Caulaincourt, to name a single 
one? — ^to make a choice, even from amongst all the people we 
have discussed?” “. . . Fontanes,” he said, “is too much the 
man of letters. Since he is head of the University, that choice 
would be pleasing — ^the more so because he directs pxiblic in- 
struction in the right spirit. Though distinguished for his great 
gift of eloquence, he is not gifted with great ideas; with the 
broad grasp of politics and administration that constitutes the 
statesman. Besides, he has extolled me so highly that the 
public would not fail to say that I was setting my most con- 
firmed flatterer to be preceptor for my son.” 