

“The reading of history,” he said, “very soon made me feel 

Later, in reviewing these traits of the Emperor, Caulaincourt wrote: 

“. . . He often referred, and with a certain air of affectation, to the fine 
company he had kept in his youth. He loved to talk about his successes 
with women. In short, if this great and astonishing character had a flaw, 
it was through the conceit of past achievements; as though so much glory 
and such genius had need of antecedents.” “. . . It is incorrectly thought 
that he had many mistresses. His head was turned sometimes, no doubt; 
but for him love was seldom a necessity, or perhaps even a pleasure. He 
lived too much in the public eye to give himself over to private distractions 
which, in reality, amused him little and lasted but a moment. He was, 
however, actually in love with Mme. D[uchl.tel] for a few days. As a 
pastime, and to break with the Empress Josephine, he devoted himself 
between the divorce and the Archduchess’s arrival to Mme. Gazfzani] and 
Mme. Mat [his]. During the last years of the Empress Josephine’s sway 
he had Mile. George and several other women — though more out of curi- 
osity than to avenge the jealous scenes which these infidelities provoked. 
MUe. Wal[ewska] gave in to him at Warsaw. He had a child from that 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

355 

that I was capable of achieving as much as the men who are 
placed in the highest ranks of our annals, though I had no goal 
before me, and though my hopes went no further than my pro- 
motion to general. All my attention was fixed upon the great 
art of warfare, and on increasing my knowledge of that branch 
in which I believed my destiny to lie. I was not long in dis- 
covering that the knowledge I had set out to acquire, and had 
hitherto regarded as the end I needed to attain, was very far 
short of the distance to which my abilities might carry me. So 
I redoubled my application; what seemed to present difficulty 
to others to me appeared to be simple.” 

Of a serious nature, and inspired with a thoughtful turn of 
mind by love of his profession, the future Emperor sought in 
every direction for knowledge, and for the development of the 
ideas and views germinating in his head, principally by convers- 
ing with those of his senior officers and comrades in whom he 
had remarked some superiority of intellect. The Revolution 
marched forward with giant strides; its ideas began to seethe 
in his young head as in many others. The corps in which he 
served was, by its composition and instructional training, pe- 
culiarly susceptible to new impressions and notions. He 
watched the progress of the Revolution with enthusiasm, though 

affair, and felt more sentimental attachment for it than for all the rest. But 
none of these passing fancies ever occupied him enough to divert him for 
a moment from affairs of State. 

“His haste to recount his successes was so great that one would have 
thought he pursued them merely to make them public. The Empress was 
always his first confidant. Woe to the beauty who had surrendered, unless 
she were the Venus de’ Medici’s equal; for not the least items escaped 
sither his appraisal or the pleasure he took in going over them with several 
people, in whose presence he enjoyed the retailing of his bonne fortune. 
losephine had, on the very night, full particulars of the conquest of Mme. 
□ [uchatel]. The morning after the fibrst rendezvous the Emperor also told 
me all about it, without omitting a thing that would have flattered or hurt 
the lady’s self-esteem. That grenadier at the Boulogne encampment was 
not far wrong, when he replied to one of his comrades who asked him if 
the Little Corporal had any children: ‘F — ! Don’t you know that all his 
loves are in his own head?’ ” 