

“These men,” he went on, “ought to have laid down their 
lives on the steps of the throne instead of attacking it. Speak- 
ing generally, the nobility ought to have fought to the death 
instead of saving themselves by flight abroad, which was noth- 
ing but a convenient way of escaping danger by professing a 
false devotion. As for the others, those called revolutionaries, 
they belonged to a lower class which naturally wanted to raise 

Napoleon had undertaken the restoration of the basilica in 1805. 
After the violation of the royal tombs during the Revolution, the church, 
robbed of the lead on its roof, had served as a storehouse for wheat and 
flour. 

358 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

itself. They looked after themselves, and circumstances proved 
stronger than they were. Those who carried on intrigues abroad 
did more to bring about the death of the King than the Con- 
vention. To be perfectly just, it is impossible to say who is 
to blame for that death which is now known as the Cause of 
Sovereigns. The two million individuals who clamoured for 
it in the addresses they sent up to the Convention were more 
guilty than many of those who were frightened into voting for 
it by the knives of the Paris Jacobins. My government has 
always acted on the principle that what happened prior to its 
establishment did not take place, always making an exception 
of services rendered. That is the principle to adopt in order 
to avert reaction, to quench all hatred and stifle revenge. The 
greatest seigneurs of the Old Regime, the leaders of the Emi- 
gration, those whose families have perished by the axe of the 
Revolution, dine with the Duke of Otranto and even have re- 
lations with him and Merlin, not to speak of other revolution- 
aries. My government has brought about this fusion. Incom- 
plete though they are, the institutions guarantee the existing 
state of affairs and are made for the benefit of the sovereign 
as much as of the people. 

“I am, however, designing a monument which, without 
woimding the living, will honour the names of the dead, and 
will keep alive in the minds of our children sufiicient memories 
of the unhappy times we have passed through so that they shall 
know that kings are not to be killed, and that monarchs are 
not to be buried like private individuals.” 

The Emperor then asked me if I shared the general opinion 
that the Madeleine was meant for a temple to La Gloire. 

“You are the first,” he told me, “to know all my ideas for 
this scheme. I have raised too many monuments to the im- 
mortal glory of the French for there to be any need thus to 
consecrate the Madeleine. I am not a pagan monarch. I have 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

359 

given enough proof of that, for none of the Kings of France, 
not even the most pious of them, did as much for religion as 
I have done. The re-establishment of the Church is due to 
me; only power and a will like mine could have brought this 
about. Although I am not always in political agreement with 
the Pope, I venerate him from a religious point of view. I 
respect his character. I have great projects. Give me a year 