

“He is right: he has more common sense than many a man 
at the head of affairs. He isn’t merely a courtier.” 

The kindliness and sincerity of this inn-keeper delighted the 
Emperor. His place was taken by a seller of glass beads who 
forced her way into the Emperor’s room. The confiding nature 
of this woman, who did not know in the least who we were, 
yet wanted to let him have the whole of her stock on trust, 
without receiving any money or even giving any indication of 

® On the Bober, in Silesia; the morning of December 13. — ^The whole of 
this account famishes hitherto unknown details as to the Emperor’s journey. 

350 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

why she placed this confidence in us, amused him very much. 
He bought some necklaces, rings, et cetera, and said to me: 

“I will take them to Marie Louise as a souvenir of my jour- 
ney. It is only fair, Caulaincourt, that we should divide them 
between us. You must give some to the lady of your heart. 
Never had man such a long tete-a-tete with his sovereign as 
you have had. This journey will be a historic memory for 
your family. The Emperor wiU never forget all the care you 
have devoted to him.” 

He was so good as to give me half of what he purchased, 
instructing me to pack up the other half for the Empress. He 
then threw himself on a hard bed, telling me to let him know 
as soon as the sledge was ready. While the Emperor rested I 
hurried up the repairs to the sledge, and occupied myself 
with the continuation of my notes, from the time we left Posen. 

All the Emperor’s remarks showed that his mind was con- 
tinually occupied with the army, and that he persisted in be- 
lieving it could be rallied at Wilna. His opinion did not 
change. He made all his arrangements and based all his plans 
on this presumption. 

“The had effect of our disasters will be balanced in Europe 
by my return to Paris,” he said. 

The consolation afforded by reflections such as these made 
our journey a happy one. The nearer we got to France, where 
all his hopes were centred, the less did the Emperor seem pre- 
occupied and careworn. 

“Schwarzenberg is a man of honour,” he said. “He will 
keep his corps in readiness. He has no wish to become a 
traitor at the first moment Fortune turns her back on us. 
The Prussians will model their conduct on that of the Aus- 
trians. I shall be at the Tuileries before anyone knows of my 
disaster or dares to betray me. My cohorts make an army 
of more than a hundred thousand men, well-disciplined soldiers 
led by war-trained officers. I have the money and arms to 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

351 

form excellent cadres, and before three months have passed I 
shall have conscripts and five hundred thousand men under 
arms on the banks of the Rhine. The cavalry will take the 
longest to collect and form, but in the coffers of the Tuileries 
I have the wherewithal to do everything.” 

The further we went, the more snow we found. The gales 
that had been blowing continuously for some days had caused 
such drifts in several places that the diflSculties of the road 
made our progress too slow even for the liking of our phleg- 
matic Saxon postilions and horses. 