

of peace, and the development of my plans will amaze , 

as it will these upstarts who date everything from their own 
time and dislike to hear their predecessors mentioned. I will 
exhibit the glory of ancient France beside that of modern France 
— ^her old civilization with her new — ^her sciences and arts, 
which are the oldest in Europe, along with her present-day mar- 
vels; in a word, I will exhibit her kings along with her Em- 
peror. All her illustrious men, of all ranks, of all conditions 
and all ages, belong to the fair France of to-day. They must 
mingle and speak to our children, calling forth their admira- 
tion as much as that of the rest of the world. 

“I want no idols made of me, nor even any outdoor statues. 
It was to my great disgust, and without consulting me, that 
Denon had my statue made for the column in llie Place Ven- 
dome. Indeed, it is very likely that I shall change this ar- 
rangement, although the publicity already given to the plan 
may make it inconvenient to make any alterations. They 
can do what they like after I am dead. If France attains to 
the summit of glory and prosperity that I purpose for her, they 
may decree a statue in my honour if they feel like it. If I 
succumb in the carrying out of my enterprises, it is better that 
there should be nothing left exposed to the criticism of the 
world. I want no homage in the form of flattery, nor, as hap- 
pened to Louis XV, a statue subjected to ptiblic ridictile.^* A 

It had been said about the equestrian statue of Louis XV, with its 
pedestal adorned with female figures representing the cardinal virtues; 
“The Virtues go on foot. Vice on horsebacL” 

360 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

nation, like history itself, rarely takes account of anything hut 
success.” 

The Emperor went on to say it would be impossible to raise 
a Temple of Glory in a Christian country. Having achieved 
more than all the other generals or statesmen, and being Em- 
peror, people would not be slow to say, and perhaps with some 
degree of justification, that he had raised a fane in his own 
honour — ^that he was the real object of worship within it, under 
the conventional name of Glory. He repeated his words that 
that Glory was the heritage of all Frenchmen, that he would im- 
mortalize its memories in every monument, every establish- 
ment of public utility which he had created or was yet to create. 
It was upon reminders such as these that he rested his im- 
perishable fame. Had he annotmced, in advance, the project 
of raising an expiatory monument to all the victims of the Revo- 
lution, especially to the most distinguished, he would have 
awakened unhappy memories and given offence to many men 
who, when the Revolution was finished, rendered eminent ser- 
vices to France, and to whom — it ought never to be forgotten — 
France owed the honour and glory of having resisted the power 
of aU Europe. Her legal codes and her good administration 
were partly their work. 

“It is to the energy shown by several of their number that 
France owes the conclusion of the Reign of Terror,” he said. 
“By hurting the feelings of some of these men I should likewise 
wound the self-respect of their families and connections. Ulti- 
mately this would wound the susceptibility of the nation. Time 
brings things to pass imperceptibly; the great art is to act op- 
portunely. As the monument of the Madeleine will take some 
years to complete, I have time to make such preparations as 
shall ensure that its inauguration will fulfil my purpose with- 
out giving offence to anyone. From now on we shall enjoy 
peace. Our internal situation thus permitting me to complete 
our institutions, the great changes that I plan and that I shall 