

“Thus it is that the most insignificant incidents can change 
the fate of the world, just as the mistakes of our enemies often 
serve them to better purpose than the talents of their generals 
and lead us into even greater errors ourselves. I was wrong in 
not remaining at Witepsk to organize the country, or in not 
leaving Moscow a week after I entered the city. The re- 
verses I have met with are due solely to that. I thought that I 
should be able to make peace, and that the Russians were 
anxious for it. I was deceived and I deceived myself. Then, 
Maret and the Abbe de Pradt have not turned Poland to ac- 
count. I expected to find it in arms, and it was asleep. Maret 
beguiled the Poles, the archbishop discouraged them. I could 
not have made a worse choice or entrusted my affairs to a less 
capable man. I have been deceived by his cleverness. He 
knows how to argue and flatter, hut he is incapable of showing 

378 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

action. The most insignificant of my secretaries would have 
done better. 

“Men of his stamp, belonging to the Old Regime, are usually 
worth more than that. They are not liked in the army or the 
Court; yet look at Narhonne! Never did leader inspire more 
zeal in his men; despite his age he undergoes fatigues and 
privations like a young man. Yet he is upheld solely by a 
sense of honour. You men of the old army do not like these 
new adherents; in general, you do not like the emigres. Every 
time I admit one, whether to the Court or to the army, I find 
grumbling and sulking. The bolder spirits take umbrage; it is 
not so long since they were even ready to rear like a horse an- 
noyed by the bad hands of a poor rider.” 

I maintained that the opposition of which he spoke was well- 
foimded so far as some people were concerned, for they but 
little merited the personal benevolence he showed towards 
them; though so far as M. Narboime was concerned, he was 
universally liked and appreciated. 

“This even applies to you, Caulaincourt,” he said. “Al- 
though you have risen from the ranks like the rest, though you 
are a soldier and your success the fruit of your own labours, as 
is the case with all my generals — ^yet your birth and your posi- 
tion as a nobleman arouse jealousy. I have had to uphold you, 
and on more than one occasion have been obliged to defend 
you. You are an object of envy; I have often received accusa- 
tions against you; they tried to discredit you in my eyes after 
Moreau’s trial, because you continued to see him, even after 
the days of the army of the Rhine.® It was but a pretext; your 
real fault, in the eyes of those zealous souls, lies in the fact 
that you are of noble birth. I was not taken in. These preju- 
dices are shared by many honest men. Having brought about 
your downfall they would have attacked Duroc and Lauriston. 

® As Colonel of the Second Carabineers, Caulaincourt had made the cam- 
petign of 1800 in the army of the Rhine, under the command of Moreau. 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 