

Instructions had already been given for the continuation of 
our journey through Saxony. Our sledge was not in a fit state 
to proceed farther,^ so the King lent the Emperor his berline 
fitted with runners. After I had had the honour of accompany- 
ing the King to his carriage the Emperor told me that he would 
start at five o’clock, and bid me awake him at half-past four, 
in time to sign his letters before taking his seat in the carriage. 
At his orders I wrote to Baron Saint-Aignan, his minister at 
Weimar, instructing him to prepare his carriage and have it 
ready at Erfurt. For two relays we were drawn by horses from 
the Court, and near Leipzig we passed the couriers who had 
been sent on to have horses ready for us in my name. So we 
were obliged to stay in that town to let them get ahead of us. 
Dusk was falling. While supper was being prepared the Em- 
peror had the curiosity to stroll about the square and in the 
gardens outside the city. We stayed outdoors for a couple of 
hours; the cold was much less intense than in Poland. 

During the journey that we had just made the Emperor talked 
again about the Tsar Alexander, Erfurt, the Duke of Abrantes, 
the peerage and the hatred in which the nobility were held. 
What I am about to record is the gist of several conversations 
in the course of which he repeated the same things. He spoke 
in praise of Coimt Daru. 

^ When I returned to Dresden in 1813 I was assured that an Englishman 
had bought it as a historical relic, and that everyone had come to look at 
it, when the Allies were in occupation. — Caulaincourt’s note. 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 375 

“He works like a horse,” he said; “he is a man of rare ca- 
pacity, my best administrator. He has never asked me for any- 
thing. He administered Prussia and the conquered territories 
with a tact and delicacy of feeling of which he alone has given 
the example. In an enemy country he lived at his own expense, 
not even benefiting by the advantages enjoyed by others, and 
which he was entitled to claim. I took care to recompense him 
for his disinterestedness.” 

The Emperor returned to the subject of Tilsit. There he 
had found the Tsar Alexander an ideologist full of ill-digested 
notions as to his situation, but actuated by excellent intentions, 
though he lacked experience. The emotions which estranged 
him from his wife ^ had filled him with false ideas, even as to 
the need experienced by nations and great States for an heir to 
the dynasties which ruled over them. These notions had ap- 
parently carried him to the length of admitting advantages in 
an elective monarchy that placed merit on the throne — ^whereas 
hereditary succession commonly placed there an incapable, ill- 
trained fool. The Tsar Alexander felt no regret at his Empress’s 
having borne him no children. In general, he substituted all 
the virtues of good nature for those resulting from clear reason. 
He was a conscientious private individual, not a prince. In his 
childlessness he saw only one responsibility the less, and a re- 
sponsibility which by his love of what was right seemed to him 
a serious burden. He was apparently imbued with the idea 
that monarchs ought to govern for the people, and are insti- 
tuted for the people. 