

“The Legion of Honour,” he said, “is the finest of my in- 
stitutions. It is, with all due deference to poor Moreau and 
his dreams, one of the greatest conceptions of modem times 
and as well suited to the needs of the Throne as to those of the 
people. It establishes a fraternity of honour between the civil 
and the military, between the marshal and ihe private, between 
the peasant and the duke. 

“I am the only man alive who knows the French thoroughly, 
as well as the needs of the peoples and of European society. 

366 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

The Old Regime was full of excellent things which now need 
only to be adapted to modern conditions. Those people who 
think that they have a right to interpose themselves between 
the people and the Emperor do as much harm as the Jacobins, 
who desired no government of any sort, or at best an authority 
so split up that it was tantamount to none at all, our habits 
and failings being what they are. If I had accepted the beliefs 
of the Jacobins I should have founded a government on the 
lines of that established in the United States; but I knew France 
too well not to see that such a thing would be impossible. The 
lessons we have learned from the Directory have shown this 
clearly enough. Others, such as Lannes, who had no fixed 
ideas, would have liked liberty for themselves and their friends, 
but none for those who held opposite views. The security of 
the Consul or President would have depended on the loyalty 
of the Guard. Pretorian guards are greedy, insatiable, and 
are a heavier drag on the people than on the sovereign. I did 
not consider that method of governing suitable. Relying on 
the support of partisans, one becomes a despot despite oneself; 
and this form of power was repugnant to me. I threw off that 
yoke soon after I was named First Consul. My eyes were 
opened to the embezzlement carried on by the Guard. It is 
impossible to give any idea of what was going on. Being un- 
able to obtain any accounts, I dismissed the chiefs who tried 
to hamper me by forming round me a ring of apparently de- 
voted men, as though one could govern France by such means.” 

Reverting to the subject of the Senate, the Emperor said that 
it was composed of nothing but spent torches or dark lanterns 
which would lead the country on the wrong road, even if it 
overcame its greater difficulties. The greater part of the Sena- 
tors would, if the occasion arose, imitate Frochot, who liked 
the Emperor, if the Duke of Bassano was to be believed, but 
who had nonetheless shown not the slightest objection to having 
a room in his house prepared as the coxmcil chamber for the 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

367 

government that was to be set up by Malet and Lahorie. What 
Frochot wanted was to remain Prefect of the Seine. (The con- 
tinual changes of government since the Revolution have made 
men too familiar with such a state of things. This is an evil 
which only time will cure.) 

“Not only does Frochot owe everything to me; he has also 
sworn fidelity. Yet, when he believed that I was dead, he was 
faithless to my son and to his oath — ^and still thought himself 
an honest man thereafter. If he had promised you a hundred 
millions he would have paid you on the appointed day. Noth- 
ing would make him fail his given word, yet he broke his oath 
without the slightest scruple. Such are the men and the notions 
begotten by the times we live in. Who is to be trusted?” 