

“Did it not reach the point of risking our fame just for the 
sake of ruining such-and-such a general or minister, without 
a thought of the blood that this treasonable behaviour would 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

369 

cost France and the consequences that a defeat might bring 
upon the country? Robbery was carried on with impunity in 
those days, if one had a certain amount of credit and the sup- 
port of a few men in office. The entire Court, even the Princes 
of the Blood, were interested in business enterprises or took 
allowances from contractors. Money was made out of every- 
thing. The streets of Paris were badly swept and even worse 
lighted because the Princes, notably the Count of Artois and 
the highest of the nobility, accepted commissions or pensions 
from the scavenging and lighting contractors. I have the 
proof of it in my possession. 

“Such an abuse as this,” he continued, “is unknown in my 
government. There are no gratuities, so far as I am aware. 
Men are paid good salaries, they are paid regularly, and it is 
well known that I should show no mercy on swindlers, still less 
to officials who did business on their own account. Never has 
the Treasury been in such good order. It has been necessary 
to make examples. Sometimes the delinquents have been men 
who were connected with prominent personages; but I have 
stopped for no considerations of that sort. Feeling myself 
strong enough to do what was right, I have gone on to my goal 
allowing nothing to turn me aside, paying no heed to the out- 
cries of various cliques. 

“Who makes an outcry in France? A few salons; a few 
people who have soon forgotten their debt to me for the posi- 
tion or fortune they now enjoy; others whom I have brought back 
from exile and restored to their property, which they would 
never have recovered but for me; a few obscure lordlings who 
are discontented at no longer being sprinkled with holy water 
on Sundays; a number of self-centred shopkeepers who are 
under a cloud at the moment because they can find no scope 
for speculation; some army contractors, veritable bloodsuckers 
whose ill-gotten gains I have made them disgorge. These are 
the people who cry out against me. The great mass of the 

370 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

nation is just: the nation sees that I am striving for its gooc 
fame, its happiness, its future. 

“What can I personally wish for? Born of a distinguishec 
class, though of an unlucky family, I now occupy the greatesi 
throne in the world. I have given law to the whole of Europe, 
To make the fortunes of those who have served France well, 1 
have furnished millions without touching the State revenues, 
In my privy purse, and in the ‘extraordinary domain,’ I possess 
all the money and treasure that a man could possibly desire: 
but I have no need of money for myself. No one is less oc- 
cupied than I in personal affairs. 

“That France should prosper under my government is the 
object of my desires, of my ambition, of my entire attention. 
It is I who have re-established order, regulated finance, paid 
the country’s debts. I am becoming too heavy and stout not to 
like rest or have need of it — ^not to feel a great weariness of the 
constant movement and activity demanded by warfare. As 
with all men, my physical condition affects my mental state. 
You tell me, and everyone likes to believe it, that I love glory 
and war, that I envisage what you call universal monarchy. 
But this universal empire is a dream, and I have awakened 
from it. If, once upon a time, I might have been carried away 
by this warlike passion, it would, like all passions, have misled 
me for but a moment.” 