

364 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

to be anyone’s man, I have never sought support from public 
opinion nor from any class of men. I rely on myself, on the 
results of what I have successively created in the interests of 
France, on my institutions, on the moral effect of a government 
that is not swayed by outside opinions. 

“Whether as First Consul or as Emperor, I have been the 
people’s king; I have governed for the nation and in its in- 
terests, without allowing myself to be turned aside by the out- 
cries or the private interests of certain people. This is well 
known throughout France, and the French people love me. I 
say the French people, and by that I mean the nation, for I 
have never shown undue favour to the class that some folk 
understand by the word ‘people’ — ^the dregs of the populace. 
Nor have I shown favour to the landed gentry, for if the un- 
enlightenment and miseries of the former make them very prone 
to creating disorders, so do the pretensions of the latter render 
them quite as dangerous to those in authority. Constantly 
restive against any sort of power that does not emanate from 
themselves, if they dared they would be in a continuous state 
of revolt. Are they not always preaching, in every salon of 
the undisciplined Faubourg Saint-Germain, the revolt that they 
dare not raise? It is the same now as in the days of the League. 
The leaders of the Vendee fought better for their own privileges 
than for the rights of the Crown. The unfortunate people is 
always the dupe. It was the pretensions of the petty squires, 
even more than those of the greater gentry, that kept that war 
going. An aristocracy is necessary for France, but it must be 
on a different basis from that of the old one, which has be- 
come incompatible with the new regime. 

“Woe to the sovereign who delivers himself into the hands 
of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, for it has not changed its na- 
ture! Into whatever excesses the Revolution may have been 
swept, the populace has generally been found to have bowels 
of mercy. The Faubourg Saint-Germain has none. It wants 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

365 

to reconquer an influence which it imagines belongs to it by 
right. In its opinion, kings are its own choice, the people are 
its vassals. Kings must govern by its authority and in its in- 
terests, and the people must obey. That is the limit to which 
the grands seigneurs would permit the king to go, if the good 
old times were ever to return. At one time the Faubourg 
thought I was its Messiah and would have taken me up. I am 
stiU acceptable in their eyes for lack of a better and because 
they hope my son will prove more manageable than myself. 
Not daring to rise in revolt, they have submitted without being 
converted. It matters little to me. As the children of this old 
aristocracy grow up they will form fresh ideas, they will see 
that what I offer them is more suitable to the present age than 
that which their fathers want to restore. The small country 
landowners, too, will find it advantageous to submit, and my 
institutions will do the rest. Some of them, perceiving that I 
want to be a protector to all classes, have withdrawn apart. 
They will come back, for above all else they like power and 
the Court. If they keep up their attitude they may find it too 
late. At the moment these folk are almost ready to make com- 
mon cause with such hare-brained visionaries as Lafayette and 
Tracy, who cry out against despotism as though the very fact 
that they can protest, intrigue, and criticize at their ease were 
not proof enough that no such thing as despotism exists in 
France. 