

My remarks directed the conversation to various things that 
had caused discontent in France, notably conscription, into 
which the needs of continual warfare had swept all those who 
compose the classes liable to service. The Emperor replied: 

“I agree that conscription is a law that bears harshly upon 
families, on account of the frequent calls which circumstances 
have caused me to make; but it is national, because it allows 
of neither privilege nor exception. In times of peace it will 
even become popular, for the French love the career of arms, 
and as the door to promotion is open to ability and courage, 
an honourable career will thereby be opened to many young 
men. In this, as in so many things, the appreciation of prin- 
ciples of equality gives strength to the government and ensures 
success to the levies. If I granted exemption to one single con- 
script, if there were a single privilege granted to anyone, no 
matter whom, not one man would obey the order to march. 

“The notions of equality that made the Revolution are to-day 
an integral part of the government’s strength. It is because 
no one anticipates or suspects any preferential treatment and 
because it has no interest in showing favouritism that the gov- 
ernment inspires no distrust. Public confidence in the justice 

368 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

of its dealings gives it as much authority as the exercise of its 
power. That is the secret of my success. It is said that I love 
war, hut as its charges are laid upon all alike, as I show no 
preference for anyone and reward all alike if they show cour- 
age, everyone submits to it. To inspire people with supreme 
confidence in my sense of justice — ^to convince them that I 
favour no man’s interest above that of his neighbour — ^there 
lies the grand secret of how to govern the French. That is my 
all-powerful lever.” 

The Emperor made another remark to the effect that a French- 
man is a fault-finder by nature. 

“Society in the salons,” he said, “is always in a state of hos- 
tility against the government. Everything is criticized and 
nothing praised. Although society men and women are in gen- 
eral courtiers, and the greater numbers of them frankly flat- 
terers, even in their chattering they are nonetheless inimical 
to the government in power. There was a great outcry because 
I happened to banish from Paris for a few months certain per- 
sons who would have had to be arrested a fortnight later if I 
had not sent them out of the country in time and had not in 
that way brought their intrigues to naught. Tfiat is what they 
call my tyranny. I am said to be a tyrant because I will not 
allow a few schemers and fools to get themselves talked about 
as conspirators; their plots make me laugh, and I would let 
them come to a head if it did not mean that I should have to 
exercise severity; whereas it is my desire to be firm, not harsh. 
Under the Old Regime no one at Versailles was willing to obey. 
This sort of privilege ruined and discredited the Court. Mis- 
tresses and favourites were all intriguing to make or unmake 
ministers, for they knew that the sovereign was weak; this was 
actually conspiring against his authority. 