

379 

The men who are so proud of bearing a tide to-day, not so long 
ago were bitter against those who had one. Junot alone does not 
share this weakness. He considers himself more a marquis, 
more of a great nobleman than the Beauvaus; but Lannes and 
Bessieres and Lefebvxe were eaten up with resentment. If I 
did the slightest thing for a man of noble birth, even if his 
claim to a title extended to no further than his father’s purchase 
of it, they talked to me as though I were acting against my own 
interests; but I saw through them. Fortunately I have never 
had a favourite, but if I had singled out any particular person, 
if I had favoured anyone of noble birth with my confidence, it 
would have made some men actually ill. By consolidating all 
interests, by mingling all classes and fortunes, time will exhaust 
these jealousies.” 

The Emperor spoke well of various persons, especially of 
Marshal Bessieres, upon whose attachment he relied. He 
praised his integrity, and his effective administration of the 
Guard. 

“I was obliged to take it from Lannes,” he said. “The itch 
to amass a fortune, and the advice he took from some knaves 
who made him their dupe, would have ruined him had I not 
removed him from that administration. No man,” he repeated, 
“has ever been or still is * more attached to me than Lannes is 
at heart. More than once he has given me proofs of this by 
exposing himself in perilous circumstances, but he loves me 
as a man loves his mistress and wants to manage me, or at 
least influence me, in order to obtain what he wants. Having 
been often refused, for his demands are in favour of schemers, 
he loses his temper; and being passionate by nature, he is then 
capable of anything. More than once, in such moments, he has 
done me a wrong which might have proved serious to anyone 

* Lannes had died May 31, 1809. The Emperor’s use of the present tense, 
as recorded by Caulaincourt, must be the result of an error on. the part of 
whoever copied the MS. 

380 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

else, if he had to do with a sovereign of a different nature from 
mine, or one who held the human race in greater esteem.” 

After mentioning several acts which had led him to forbid 
Lannes for a time to appear at the Tuileries, the Emperor went 
on to say that this marshal had a strain of opposition and cen- 
soriousness in his character which blinded him and outweighed 
his attachment to his person. He was indiscreet and immod- 
erate. To support this assertion he told me of a certain person 
to whom the marshal had boasted of what he had said to the 
Tsar of Russia, shortly before the last war with Austria. At the 
time of the Erfurt interview the Emperor had accredited Lannes 
to meet the Tsar, and as he travelled in the carriage with that 
monarch, he told him that the Emperor Napoleon meant to de- 
ceive him, that his ambition knew no bounds, that he breathed 
only war as the means of reaching the end he had in view, and 
that he, the Tsar, should know better than to trust him. Lannes 
even bragged of having added various intimate details and 
cited facts to enlighten the Tsar, as he called it, and prevent 
his becoming the Emperor’s dupe. 