

“That is also my maxim,” added the Emperor, dwelling on 
this principle as if he suspected me of doubting it, and wished 
to convince me. “Instead of enjoying it, the Tsar appeared to 
me to be weary of sovereign power and a monarch’s life, with 

^ An allusion to Alexander’s passion for Marie-Antovna Narishkin. Ac- 
cording to the Grand Duke Nicolas Mikhailowitch [VEmpereur Alexandre 
1^, I, 48, 56), the affair lasted from 1804 until 1818. 

376 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

its round of exacting duties for the man who regards the hap- 
piness of his people as a sacred trust held by him from Provi- 
dence. Alexander is very religious. He is too liberal in his 
views and too democratic for his Russians. He will be the 
victim of this: that nation needs a strong hand. He would be 
more suited to the Parisians, he is just the sort of king the 
French would like. Gallant to women, flattering with men, even 
with those towards whom he ought to show his displeasure (for 
he knows better than anyone else how to hide his feelings), his 
fine bearing and extreme courtesy are very pleasing. Your 
good Frenchman loves flattery. He does not like my serious 
mien, and my firmness often proves irksome to him. 

“Our conversations at Tilsit, his relations with you, and what 
passed at Erfurt have all combined to form the Tsar’s opinions. 
He is clever. Nothing escapes him and his memory serves him 
perfectly. Since that time his own reflections and the course of 
events have furnished him with the experience that he previously 
lacked. He came to Erfurt quite a different man from what he 
appeared to be at Tilsit. I noticed at Erfurt that he was de- 
fiant and unspeakably obstinate. He wanted to treat with me 
as between equals. As a matter of fact, circumstances were in 
his favour and he took advantage of them. He might have ob- 
tained much more, but fortunately he only paid attention to the 
effect that would be produced ia Russia by the hope of getting 
Wallachia and Moldavia; he did not insist upon the evacuation 
of the forts on the Oder and of part of Prussia. More fortu- 
nately still, Austria exhibited some ill-humour and distrust. If 
the man she sent to Erfurt had been enabled to explain openly 
the views held by his Court, and to show some interest in Prussia, 
it would have made some impression on Alexander. I should 
have been placed in a very awkward situation: but even Prussia 
only sent an incapable fellow, and no one profited by the occa- 
sion. 

“Anyhow, I was prepared for whatever might happen. I 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

377 

still had my troops at hand; the sacrifice in Spain was three- 
quarters made; I should have crushed Austria before anyone 
could have stopped me. The Russians had not got over their 
defeat and were in no condition to make war. One might even 
have done me a service hy forcing me to leave Spain; though it 
would have been disagreeable, after the reverses we had met 
with there, and especially to have left the English in the field. 
Threatened by Austria, I should have evacuated a great part of 
Prussia and retained only a fort on the Oder, as security for 
the assessments. It is probable that such an arrangement would 
have caused many changes. We should not he here now. Other 
combinations would have been necessary in order to establish 
a buffer-state. With Prussia liberated, restored and re-estab- 
lished, all political combinations would have been modified. 
Perhaps things would have been better and more advanced, for 
I should have been obliged to pay more attention to my war in 
Spain; I should have induced Russia to maintain the alliance 
and carry out the Continental System against England. 