

The conversation reverted to the subject of England. 

' “If it were possible to have a three or four years’ truce,” he 
said, “Europe would feel soon enough the unparalleled and 
hostile sway of that power’s commerce, and the intolerable 
burden her monopoly imposes. Before long we should see the 
petitions of Germany asking to have back the prohibitive Sys- 
tem that is followed to-day with such repugnance, and demand- 
ing vengeance on this foreign government that proves such an 
enemy of any kind of industry — on this colossus of commerce 
that cannot exist save at others’ expense, and can only meet the 

WARSAW TO DRESDEN 

371 

interest on its debts, pay its subsidies and confront its own 
cost by the monopoly it enforces against other nations. But 
by then it will be too late. Europe will never again be situated 
so favourably as to-day. The period of quiet will only render 
these sacrifices more painful. The capital that has been 
amassed as a result of peace will be put in jeopardy and, to 
avoid losing it all, we shall have to resign ourselves to our 
painful lot. I seized the only available instant. I acted as a 
wise and far-seeing policy dictated. Had I done otherwise, I 
should have earned the undying reproaches of posterity and 
history.” 

The Emperor insisted at some length on the possible advan- 
tages of the situation created by the events that had ranged the 
United States against England.^* He had no doubt that the 
actual struggle would end to the advantage of the former. He 
considered this to he the real turning-point of their political 
emancipation and their development as a great power. He 
talked of the respective methods of aggression and defence, as 
well as of the endeavours that England might make; but he 
came to the conclusion that reverses at some points, where they 
might be caught unawares, would simply arouse the Americans 
and temper the national spirit. 

“The English,” he said, “will end by subscribing to all that 
the Americans desire, and the American government, placed 
in the hands of able statesmen, will gain increased strength. 
It will profit by the opportunity to make ihe nation give it the 
means of organizing and maintaining a larger army, of form- 
ing the nucleus of a permanent force, and will obtain more 
facilities for assembling and forming a militia. If the Amer- 
icans are wise they will build forts, even strong fortresses, at 

United States declared war against England on June 18 , 1812 . 
The cause of this war was the refusal of the English Cabinet to abolish the 
Order in Council which made it necessary for aU neutral vessels to call in 
at London or Malta for permission to navigate. 

372 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

certain important points, and this will be of the utmost service 
to them in the future. This juncture,” he said, ‘Vill give the 
United States an anti-English turn that will strengthen our 
French system, and in the future that country will be England’s 
most powerful adversary. Before thirty years have passed it 
will make her tremble.” 