

This conversation, from my record of which I have sup- 
pressed many details of less importance than the points I have 
noted, brought us to Gorlitz. From that town I sent Amodru 
in advance to warn Baron Serra, our minister at Dresden, of 
our approach. I told him that the Emperor would sup and 
sleep at his house, and that he was to inform the King of Saxony 
that His Majesty would go to see him incognito. The snow had 
drifted to such depths in the valleys that our progress was slow. 
When, at last, we reached the posting-house of Bautzen, we 
were kept waiting so long for fresh horses that I had to alight 
from the sledge and go in person to ascertain the reason of the 
delay. This was occasioned by nothing more than the habitual 
dilatoriness of the postmaster, and the prevalent bad habit of 
giving the horses their feed just when the traveller arrived. In 
vain did I urge the postmaster to hasten matters. There was 
nothing to be done but exercise patience and get warm while 
waiting. The Emperor took the opportimity to snatch a nap 
for three-quarters of an hour; for my part, I made notes of the 
interesting conversations I had just had with His Majesty. 

CHAPTER XV 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

W E did not reach Dresden until midnight. [December 
13-14.] Our postilion, who had assured me that he 
knew where the French minister lived, spent so long 
driving us up and down the town without finding it that at last 
I grew impatient and ordered him to stop and make enquiries. 
But everyone was asleep. The whole place was in darkness 
and we had to go on a long way before we could see a lighted 
window. The postilion knocked at the door and rang the bell 
for some time before a man, wearing a nightcap, put his head 
out of the window and asked what we wanted. Upon our asking 
him to direct us to the French minister’s house, the doctor (for 
such he was, as I subsequently learned) shut his window with 
a bang, evidently considering that he was under no obligation 
to expose himself to the cold by talking to people in good 
health. So we had to resume our exploration of the town for 
some considerable time in search of a constable. Luckily we 
met a Saxon who proved more obliging than the doctor. He 
conducted us to M. Serra’s door, and there we found everything 
ready, as though he had been waiting for us. 

The Emperor started work at once. He dictated to me des- 
patches to the King of Naples and the Prince of Neuchatel, 
several orders for Warsaw and a despatch for Vienna. When 
he had finished his correspondence the Emperor left us the 
task of sending it off. He supped and went to bed, telling me 
to wake him when the King of Saxony arrived — for that 
sovereign did not want His Majesty to be put to the trouble of 

374 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

going to the Palace. While he took his rest M. Serra helped 
me send off the despatches. 

The Emperor had been asleep for an hour when the King of 
Saxony appeared [three A.M.], accompanied by Counts Loss 
and Marcolini. He insisted on His Majesty’s receiving him in 
bed; consequently I had the honour of taking the King im- 
mediately to his apartment. The two sovereigns were together 
for three-quarters of an hour. 