

This delay annoyed the Emperor, who would have liked the 
publication to have preceded his arrival by some days. He 
had travelled more rapidly than he realized. Habitually so 
calm and impassive. His Majesty was now agitated by so many 
diverse emotions, regrets and hopes, he had such happiness 
before him and had left such misery behind, that he could not 
hide his feelings. After talking for some considerable time 
about the various things that filled his mind, he returned for 
the third time to our adventure at Eisenach. He could not 
understand the behaviour of the postmaster, who had been 
warned a long time in advance, and knew that the horses were 
for a distinguished traveller. The place, the hour, everything 
rendered his conduct suspicious. The Emperor ordered me to 
write to Baron Saint-Aignan, instructing him to obtain precise 
information regarding the motives for the man’s behaviour, and 
to complain to die government if necessary. He was to make 
his report at once. 

“As it is a personal matter,” added the Emperor, “I do not 
wish the postmaster to be arrested now, nor to be dismissed. 
But it would be satisfactory to know there was no intrigue at 
the back of it.” 

The conversation returned to affairs in general. What the 
Emperor had said to me about the King of Naples’s schemes 
[for a United Italy] gave me a chance to speak of Rome and 
the Pope. I deprecated the latter’s captivity,® which, I told him, 
created a bad effect everywhere, even though Christendom no 

« Pius VII, arrested at Rome on July 6, 1809, had been held prisoner at 
Savone for three years and then transferred to Fontainebleau in June, 1812. 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

391 

longer drew the sword to back up the thunders of the Vatican. 
The Emperor agreed that it was an unpleasant business. He 
said: 

“In removing the Pope from Rome for the time being, I had 
thought to get him away from some bad advice. I should 
perhaps have done better to leave him there; my government is 
strong enough in Italy to make even the priests feel it. To this 
coup d’etat, nonetheless, I owe the tranquillity that that country 
has enjoyed for the past year. The English have not stopped 
pouring money in there, to start at least partial insurrections; 
and they have miscarried. Not even the most timid consciences, 
if their owners wished to be fair-minded, could find anything 
more than a political difference in my disputes with the Pope. 
The Church has me to thank for the re-establishment of the 
True Faith in France — perhaps for its survival in Europe — and 
I am surely as good a Catholic as Charles V was, who also 
carried off a Pope without becoming a heretic in consequence. 

“If I had followed the advice of several very enlightened men 
at the moment when I restored religion, I should not have made 
myself dependent upon Rome. They suggested alternatives to 
me. I might have done like the Tsars; have created a sort of 
Patriarch, and made myself head of the Church, or at least its 
protector, as the King of Prussia is of Protestantism. (Speak- 
ing of that, everybody is Protestant now, since no one goes to 
confession any more.) The other alternative was to form a 
permanent council or committee of bishops for the administra- 
tion of matters spiritual — in fact, a Gallican Church. That 
would have changed no usages, and so would have offended 
none of the devout; for no one would have known the nature 
of my accountings with Rome. 