

“I heard this in confidence,” said His Majesty; “and it ex- 
plained Alexander’s conduct and his distrust at Erfurt. I did 
not mention the matter to the marshal; it would have compro- 
mised the man who reported it to me, and I might have had 
further occasion for his services. Nothing I could have said 
to the marshal would have changed him. Had he found him- 
self unmasked he would have become an irreconcilable enemy, 
whereas he subsequently behaved like an honest fellow. Besides, 
in other circumstance he had made a rampart of his body in 
my defence and he died a hero’s death, though his conduct had 
been that of a traitor; for his mission to the Tsar was simply 
a matter of courtesy and he had not been called upon to express 
any opinion on me or my affairs. He was not proof against 
flattering remarks or the confidence that Alexander pretended to 
place in him; still less was he able to forget an old grudge he 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

381 

had against me — I do not know on what score — for he was as 
violent in his feelings as he was impetuous on the field of battle. 
In his latter years he had an admirable coolness and had be- 
come as distinguished a general as he was audacious as a 
leader. He was one of my best generals, perhaps the most 
efficient on the battle-field. Men are like that, Caulaincourt,” 
said the Emperor. “I am condemned for holding them in slight 
esteem. Am I wrong? Should I ever grant pardon, should I 
ever forget, if I expected them to be better than they can be or 
than they really are?” 

I return once more to the inn at Leipzig where, by the time 
we returned, the stove had become red-hot to warm us. Our 
dinner or supper, whichever you like to caU it, was not yet 
ready, so the Emperor stretched himself on some chairs which 
I had placed together near the fire, and I seized the opportunity 
to continue my notes. At last supper was served. Extremely 
impatient to be on the road again. His Majesty cut the meal as 
short as he could. 

Just as he was going downstairs a young Frenchman, who 
said he was a staff officer and was staying at the hotel, presented 
himself to the Emperor for the purpose of giving an account, as 
he said, of a secret mission on which he had been sent by the 
general of the staff. I was habitually so close to the Emperor 
at any time he was likely to be accosted, that I found myself 
between him and this officer, who was so eager lliat he jostled 
us. A crowd had collected, attracted by the splendid appear- 
ance of the King of Saxony’s sledge. The Emperor was hurry- 
ing to reach this vehicle and for the moment paid no attention 
to the man, but, struck by his manner rather than by his in- 
sistence, His Majesty paused. Then, guessing that it was prob- 
ably a spy — or worse — ^posing as an officer, he promptly dis- 
missed him. The whole bearing and appearance of this officer 
appeared to me suspicious. As we left the town I looked behind 
the carriage, for I had a presentiment that he was following us. 