

When we had reached the farther side the Emperor went on 
foot to the posthouse, while his carriage was being ferried over 
and disembarked. I never remember seeing the Emperor so 
light-hearted. Setting foot once more on French soil made 
him forget all his weariness, and perhaps even his misfortunes, 
for a moment. When he reached the posting-house the post- 
master recognized him. Marshal Valmy, for whom he sent and 
to whom he talked while the horses were being harnessed, could 
not believe his own eyes. We were on the road again before 
seven o’clock. Fagalde, who had been sent by way of Gum- 
binnen and had rejoined us at Glogau, had acted as courier,® 
together with Amodru, since we had left Dresden. They con- 
tinued their duties now that we were in France. 

Fresh despatches from Paris led the conversation to the Malet 
affair and elicited from the Emperor several observations that 
. . . seemed to me worth recording. 

“Observe,” said the Emperor, “how the Revolution and the 
confi.rmed habit of changing governments have destroyed aU 
idea of order and stability. There is still much for me to do 
towards re-establishing the social order. . . . When my death 
was announced, not one of those soldiers or officials gave a 

“ The meaning of the word “courier,” as it is used here, has become a 
little obscured. In the days of stage-coaches it was applied to the man 
who went ahead to prepare the changes of horses and see to the travellers’ 
accommodation. 

386 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

single thought to my son. The idea of the King of Rome did 
not even occur to Frochot. It seemed to him simpler to have a 
fresh revolution than to maintain the established order of things. 
But when I get to Paris everyone will boast of his own devotion 
to me, and Frochot with the rest of them, if I admit him to my 
presence. An example must be made, for fidelity is perhaps a 
more sacred duty in a magistrate than in a soldier, who has 
only to obey the orders he receives without questioning them. 
Errors committed by magistrates are serious matters; for they 
are expected to set an example. How blind men are, even where 
their own interests are concerned! . . . France needs me for 
another ten years. If I were to die there would be general 
chaos; every throne would collapse if my son’s collapsed; for 
I perceive that all I have done still is very unstable.” 

“Our institutions and organizations are not completed,” I 
said. “All the powerful interests of the country must be en- 
listed for the preservation of the existing — ” 

“You need a peerage,” the Emperor interrupted briskly; “an 
aristocracy adapted to the time we live in ; but with the fickleness 
of this nation and the pretensions of the generals it will be a 
good ten years before those new institutions will exercise suflSi- 
cient influence. If there were more talent among the army 
commanders, they would be like Caesar’s lieutenants and divide 
the world among themselves; but none has the genius necessary 
to accomplish a revolution so great as this, though it might save 
you in the event of my dying. ... If I were to die, the danger 
would lie in the weakness of the Regency and the intrigues of 
the generals who want all the interest, all the places, and espe- 
cially all the money. You would not pull through, particularly 
if you failed to take immediate steps to decrease the numbers 
of the Guard. Observe that I, myself, have not put all arms 
of that service under the same commander. A very firm will 
is needed to keep the Guard in hand. 