

All the postilions ran up as soon as they saw me in the 
stable. I ordered them to harness the horses and put them to 
the carriage. At this they tried to make off, but I stopped three 
of them and called to the gendarme, whom I saw beneath the 
archway, to hold the others. Warned by one of the postilions, 
the postmaster hastened up and forbade his horses to be used. 
Upon this a great turmoil ensued. When I saw that the best 
reasons in the world failed to move him and that the postilions 
dared not disobey, I grabbed him by the collar and forced him 
into a corner of the stable, ordering him to have the horses put 
to instantly. He resisted, and I saw that the noise of our 
struggle had already attracted a small crowd. Also, the gen- 
darme was having trouble detaining the postilions, who were 
trying to make their escape. I drew my sword, presented the 

384 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

point to the postmaster, and told him that if anyone came in 
from outside or made a movement, or if the horses were not 
harnessed in five minutes’ time, I would run him through. 
Thanks to the sword point, which made him realize that I was 
a man of my word, this argument proved as irresistible to him 
as to his postilions. The horses were harnessed in the twinkling 
of an eye. One of the postmaster’s friends, who called himself 
a counsellor of ihe Duke, appeared on the scene and at the be- 
ginning of the discussion was inclined to take his part, but I told 
him so curtly to mind his own business that he went off without 
another word. The postmaster’s wife appeared when she saw 
their horses being led out. Learning what had happened, she 
ran weeping to the Emperor and stammered in broken French 
that her husband was being ill-treated. The Emperor came up 
just as the last horses were being led across the courtyard. I 
followed them with the postmaster, to whom the Emperor handed 
over his loving wife, telling them that they had done wrong to 
treat travellers in such a manner. 

The Emperor did not know what to make of the postmaster’s 
behaviour. The delay had startled him, and we remained on 
the alert all night. [December 15-16.] Never, I think, was I 
so glad to see daybreak, for never had the Emperor been in any 
situation that worried me more. It was bitter cold. We 
travelled rapidly, despite the bad Westphalian roads. A clumsy 
postilion managed to snap the carriage pole, but a couple of 
straps sufficed to mend it and we lost no more than half an hour. 
The Emperor stopped at Hanau and sent for M. d’AIbini, min- 
ister of the Prince Bishop, to whom he talked while at his break- 
fast. This gentleman was not a little surprised to see His 
Majesty, especially with such a modest suite. 

A league before reaching the Rhine we met M. Anatole 
Montesquieu, whom I had despatched from Molodetchna. He 
was on his way back from Paris, where he had stayed but a few 
hours. The news he had carried thither would have prepared 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

385 

the public for the bulletin. He brought word of the Empress, 
and was, I assume, very agreeably surprised to meet the Em- 
peror and thus have his journeying brought to so speedy a con- 
clusion. His Majesty asked him about the Empress and his 
son, and then started him off for Paris at once with news of 
us. But we met him again on the banks of the Rhine which, by 
reason of the floating ice, had to be crossed by boat. Thereafter 
he followed us. 