

“. . . Now,” the Emperor added, “it is indispensable to 
establish the Pope in France, and to bring the cardinals there, 
so as to have the Sacred College under one’s influence. This 
preference belongs to France; her papist population forms the 

392 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

largest clientele the Pope has. He would then find himself in 
the midst of his flock. Where should I be now if the Pope had 
died, and this sensible, moderate successor to the Chief Apostle 
had been replaced by an Austrian or an Italian, angry and 
ultramontane — as would inevitably have been the case? 

“. . . The clergy,” he said, “is a power that never is quiet. 
Against you unless it is for you, it serves none free of charge. 
You cannot be under obligations to it, wherefore you must be 
its master. . . . Before it can be the auxiliary of government, 
it has to be its friend; and to secure that, the clergy must have 
its rights clearly defined. With me its pretensions can come to 
nothing; but after me they could cause disorder. God has 
given me the strength to undertake great things, and to delight 
in them. I must not leave them incomplete. The clergy must 
be restricted to reconciling us with heaven — ^to consoling our 
women and us, when we grow old — and must surrender to us 
the power of this world: Roi dans le temple, sujet a la poite.” 

The army and Poland furnished inexhaustible topics of con- 
versation. Two army couriers, with news of the happenings 
during the sixty hours that succeeded our departure, reached 
us one after the other. The King of Naples and Berthier re- 
ported that the rout continued; the intensity of the cold had 
caused many to desert the colours, even many of the Guard; 
but there was nothing to prepare us for the events that were to 
follow — ^nothing even that might have made us foresee them.’ 
The Emperor was well aware that his departure would have in- 
creased the disorder to some extent, and that it would affect the 

’’ The final disasters were in progress while this conversation took place. 
As Caulaincourt has noted, the thermometer was falling when the Emperor 
started from Smorgoni on December 5. Two days later it had reached 
34° F. below zero. The King of Naples then kept himself as warm as he 
could in "Wilna, and left the troops to do likewise. Wilna was evacuated in 
panic on the tenth; Murat and the generals rode on ahead; and two miles 
beyond the town what remained of the artillery and supply-waggons was 
abandoned in a great dump. None even paused to set fire to it, though the 
enemy was off guard; only the Treasury funds were salvaged on horse- 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

393 

Guard more than the other corps, but as Wilna was the goal that 
everyone was striving for, it mattered little to him whether the 
men reached there singly or with their units. As the issue of ra- 
tions and clothing were only to be made to men with the colours, 
he appeared certain of being able to rally the army. His des- 
patches confirmed him more than ever in the opinion that the 
army would hold Wilna. It was in vain that I combated this 
view. He jested and laughed at my arguments, which he called 
misgivings. 