

“Malet is a lunatic. He must be, if he believed he could 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

387 

overturn a government just by suspending the activities of the 
police and hoodwinking some senior ofl&cers and a prefect for 
a matter of three hours, when there was an army of two hun- 
dred thousand men abroad and he had not one accomplice in 
high ofl&ce nor in the provinces. He is a man who wanted to 
get himself shot by getting himself talked about, but his action 
has proved conclusively what I had partly suspected — ^that no 
great faith can be put in mankind. The men of the Old Regime 
were unruly and factious. They rose in revolt when they 
dared, but they would not permit an underling to rebel and 
they were faithful to their oath. The notions of monarchy and 
hereditary titles — ^the desire to preserve the existing order of 
things — ^these belong to a new language which is to be learned 
by the rising generation; but they will never be in the dictionary 
of the men of to-day. They have already forgotten the mis- 
fortunes of the Revolution. 

“Clarke boasts of his devotion, of what he did and the orders 
he gave, possibly after the event; but he did not even put on his 
boots to go to the nearest barracks and make sure of the troops. 
... He saw Jacobins everywhere. We will see who is right. 
To ensure that the thing shall be Tmravelled I have not even 
changed the Minister of Police; for he is more concerned than 
anyone else in repairing the harm brought about by his lack of 
foresight. 

“Savary clings to his ministry and the salary. He is afraid 
of losing his post, although, so far as that goes, he no longer 
needs it, as I have given him plenty of money. He has at least 
five or six millions. Whether as aide-de-camp or as cabinet 
minister, he was always asking me for money, and this dis- 
pleased me. Not that he was alone in this, for never did Ney 
or Oudinot or many another open or finish a campaign without 
coming to me for cash. Savary had no fortune; he has children 
and an extravagant wife. I must, however, do him the justice 
to say that he serves me with zeal. He has a fine appearance. 

388 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

and this is essential in Paris. His squabbles with Maret weary 
me. He is always at odds with him. I do not like this bicker- 
ing; they are jealous of each other. Savary thinks that I prefer 
Maret to himself. Do you know who put them against one an- 
other?” 

“I do not know at all.” 

“Probably their wives: they would embroil empires. My 
other ministers never bother me on that score. They understand 
one another and do not weary me with their petty jealousies or 
dislikes. Sometimes I have wanted to get Cambaceres married, 
but, when all is said and done, it would have been a nuisance. 
Women have pretensions, and the wives of functionaries have 
always been a nuisance at Court. One does not know where to 
rank them, nor what precedence to give them when there are 
foreign ladies present. 

“Poor Savary is not treated well by the Paris correspondents. 
Everyone ridicules him. It is always a stroke of luck for many 
conspirators when a Minister of Police gets the worst of it, 
though another comes to take his place. Savary’s fall appears 
certain, and it seems as if everyone wants the honour of dealing 
him the first blow.” 