

“That is one reason, Sire, why you should stand up for him 
and keep him, for, as you say, he will now do better than an- 
other. If there has been no conspiracy, if Malet is the sole 
author of this folly, Savary is justified.” 

“You are right, but I can scarcely believe it is so. Savary is 
the dupe of some conspirators who have blinded his eyes, or this 
would have slipped out to Pasquier, who is a good observer. 
We shall know all about it — ^tell me, in how many hours?” 

“In forty-four hours. Sire.” 

“I say in thirty-six.” 

Upon this the Emperor made me relight the candle; and he set 
to work reckoning alternately by the map and the road-book how 
many hours it would take us. After disputing about minutes, as 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

389 

if it lay in my power to prolong our journey, he then spoke of 
his anticipated joy at seeing the Empress and his son, and then 
began to tease at my ear and joke about the eight hours that he 
was obliged to add to his calculations — ^which he spent a couple 
of hours in going over again. Each stage, each quarter of a 
stage, each quarter of an hour, each minute, was reckoned up. 
Our inevitable halts, our moments of rest, all were curtailed; 
the difficulties and delays of the road were whittled down to a 
minimum. The Emperor forgot Malet, the police, all his 
troubles. By daylight his expression showed me that he was 
already dreaming of the Tuileries, where I was as anxious to 
see him safely installed as he was to be there. He seemed so 
confident and happy that for me, also, this was one of the 
pleasantest moments of our journey. 

The following day the Emperor supped at Verdun. [De- 
cember 17.] Having resumed a wheeled carriage at Erfurt, we 
had to stop twice a day to grease the axles, and we took ad- 
vantage of this forced delay to eat. After leaving Dresden the 
Emperor spoke of nothing but Paris, of the Empress’s surprise 
at seeing him, of how everyone would be astonished. From 
Frankfort onwards he calculated the hour of his arrival in 
Paris and at each stage confirmed his certainty of reaching 
there before midnight, if nothing delayed us. The more fre- 
quently he met the couriers, the more avid he was for details. 
He was more satisfied than he had expected to be with the atti- 
tude of public opinion, and with its reception of the news of 
our retreat from Moscow, coupled with the interruption of all 
communications, but he was much concerned with the effect the 
bulletin would have caused, and was surprised at getting no 
news of it, especially as M. Montesquieu, who preceded his 
messenger, had rejoined us. Judging by private correspond- 
ence, every family was too occupied with its own stake in 
Russia to pay great attention to public affairs. It was not 

390 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

thought that there could have been a battle; the Russians were 
supposed to be in no condition to fight. This opinion made 
any disquietude less lively. Our disasters were entirely 
ignored. As we subsequently learned, it had not been possible 
to publish the famous bulletin which depicted them so tragically 
until the sixteenth, two days later than the Emperor thought. 