

Without being told to do so, and before the mounted sentinels 
had time to challenge him, the postilion drove at a gallop 
through the Arc de Triomphe.® 

“That’s a good sign,” the Emperor said to me. 

Safe and sound, he got out at the main gateway just as the 
clock was striking the quarter before midnight. [December 18, 
1812.] I had unbuttoned my overcoat far enough to show the 
braid of my uniform. The sentries, taking us for despatch 
officers, let us pass; and so we got through to the door of the 

* Right of way through the Arc de Triomphe was reserved for the Em- 
peror’s carriage. 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

395 

open gallery that overlooks the Gardens. The porter, who 
had gone to hed, came out with a lamp in his hand, and dressed 
only in his shirt, to see who was knocking. Our faces looked 
so strange to him that he called his wife. I had to repeat my 
name three or four times over before I could persuade them 
to open the door. Nor was it without difficulty and a lot of 
blinking — she stuck the lamp right into my face — ^that either of 
them knew who I was. Then she unlocked, while he was calling 
one of the regular footmen. The Empress had just retired. 
I asked to be shown into the quarters of her ladies-in-waiting, 
ostensibly to give her word that the Emperor woidd follow me, 
as our custom was. All this time the porter and the rest of them 
were looking over the Emperor from head to foot. “It’s the 
Emperor!” one of them shouted. I cannot tell you how 
pleased they were. They could scarcely contain themselves. 

The two ladies-in-waiting on the Empress came out of her 
apartment at the very moment when I came into theirs. My 
two-weeks’ heard, the state of my clothes, my fur-lined boots, — 
all this, I imagine, struck them as unfavourably as it had the 
porter; for I had to repeat the good news of the Emperor’s 
arrival over and over before I could stop their fleeing from the 
ghost they thought they saw. Finally the Emperor’s name re- 
assured them, and helped them to recognize me. One of them 
announced me to the Empress. Meanwhile the Emperor, who 
had scarcely been able to hide his impatience, brought my 
errand to an end by coming into the Empress’s apartment and 
saying to me: 

“Good-night, Caulaincourt. You need some rest, too.” 

I went immediately to the Archchancellor’s, as the Emperor 
had instructed me to do. The Prince had little thought that 
the despatch he sent off by the eveniag post would reach its 
destmation so quickly. If I had not come by the post-chaise — 
if a footman in the palace livery had not come with me, and the 
postilion’s uniform had not been my passport — ^I diould have 

396 

WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

had trouble again in being admitted at the Archchancellor’s. 
I could have got nowhere on my looks. The Court footman 
had more or less to stand sponsor for me, for the Prince’s serv- 
ants looked me over and did not know for sure what to make 
of this figure that none of them recognized or would announce. 
M. Jauhert, of the Bank, and a number of others who were in 
the Prince’s salon, stood as though petrified at this apparition. 
Everyone looked at me without saying a word. None knew 
what to make either of my arrival or of this figure that seemed 
not to fit the name which had been announced. After the first 
impression produced by my attire and my beard, the same 
thought came to them all: 