

“You see everything in its worst light,” he said. 

Nothing hut the actual outcome of events was able to unde- 
ceive him. At that moment he was more than ever filled with 
hopes. To find himself back in France seemed to signalize the 
return of his good fortune. He had a presentiment that his 
Star was again in the ascendant, and, certain of being able to 
control events, he could think no more about the disasters which, 
forty hours previously, he had been able to face as clearly as 
I did. 

Towards Harville we overtook Fagalde, one of the grooms, 
who had not been able to get beyond Mars-le-Tour. At Saint- 
Jean the front axle-tree of our carriage broke, some five hum 
dred paces from the posthouse. The Emperor took his place 
beside me in a little open cabriolet which had served for the 
courier who had followed us. We had to give up our heavy- 
cloaks, as there was no room for them. Since leaving Fulda 
we had noticed a great difference in the temperature. It was 
in this croquant that we drove into Meaux. Only Amodru had 

back. Kowno was pillaged on the twelfth. On the fourteenth, four days be- 
fore Napoleon reached Paris, all that was left of the Grand Army had 
crossed the Niemen into East Prussia. Berthier fell ill of exhaustion, and of 
chagrin at having seconded the King of Naples’s appointment. The rout 
continued. On January 16, 1813, at Posen, Murat left the army without a 
commander and fled in disguise to Naples. When orders had had time to 
come through from Napoleon, Prince Eugene rallied the remnant of the six 
hundred thousand that had entered Russia the preceding June. Of the sui 
vivors, a thousand men of the Guard eventually reached Paris in formation. 

394 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

remained with us; and he still had the energy to ride ahead of 
us and order horses, though we were driving as though the 
devil were behind us. 

The Emperor had been recognized at Mayence; the postilions 
told everyone who he was, but the postmasters would only be- 
lieve it when they saw him for themselves. As for the postil- 
ions, they whirled us onward like men certain in advance of 
the napoleon that I was to give to each. It is impossible to 
convey any idea of the eagerness exhibited by the stable hands 
and postmaster, immediately on our arrival at the beginning 
of a stage, when they heard from the men who had brought us 
that it was the Emperor himself and not merely the Master of 
Horse, as our advance-courier had announced. From Metz 
onward we thought we had come into spring; the ice had given 
place to horrible mud. At Meaux the postmaster gave us his 
own chaise that closed properly and took us right to the 
Tuileries. Since leaving Claye poor Amodru, overcome by 
drowsiness rather than by fatigue, kept swaying in the saddle, 
and I had to encourage him every moment. At the sound of 
my voice he would wake up with renewed energy. At last the 
moment arrived when he was to ride ahead into the courtyard 
and hand us out at the Tuileries. 