

382 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

There he was, in fact, seated beside our courier, telling him tha 
he had been ordered to accompany us. I ordered him to ge 
down, but it was not easy to make him obey. 

Beyond Lutzen there was so little snow in certain parts oi 
the road that the runners of the berline broke. After leaving 
Auerstadt we had to abandon the King’s fine sledge; and W€ 
entered Vigenov at daybreak [December 15] in the courier s 
modest caleche. The postmaster, who knew me, came to chal 
while the relay was being put to, and I believe he recognized 
the Emperor, although he gave no sign of having done so. His 
Majesty partook of coffee without alighting from the carriage. 
At Erfurt we found Baron Saint-Aignan at the posthouse. 
The Emperor breakfasted with him, spoke of affairs and issued 
various orders to him and to the commandant of the place. 
After an hour we started again, in a landau that M. Saint- 
Aignan had caused to be fitted up so that the Emperor could lie 
‘at full length in it. His Majesty was delighted with this, and 
several times said that a good carriage, at the end of a long 
journey, gave greater pleasure than a comfortable bed after 
three months under canvas. He made me get rid of the Saxon 
gendarme who had been on the seat behind us since we had 
left Dresden, and we took a French one in his place. 

When we reached Eisenach the horses were not ready, al- 
though it was more than two hours since they had been ordered. 
Tired of waiting in the carriage, after half an hour the Em- 
peror alighted and entered the posting house to warm himself 
and chat with the postmistress, a very pretty young woman. 
Her husband made us the deepest of bows, but without putting 
himself to the trouble of getting us on our way. Seeing that 
the horses he said he had requisitioned from the inhabitants did 
not appear, and that my repeated demands evoked nothing but 
Gleich (immediately), it was clear that nightfall would find us 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

38S 

in the difficult defiles of mountain and forest, so I left the Em- 
peror and went out to make enquiries. 

All I could learn was that the horses ought to arrive. My 
mind was filled with the idea that perhaps it was known that 
the traveller was none other than the Emperor; that they were 
deliberately delaying us until nightfall with the intention of 
setting an ambuscade. I was surprised, moreover, that a post- 
house which I knew to he so well supplied with relays should 
have to requisition horses when they had been warned in ad- 
vance of our coming. As we had met no travellers on the road, 
I was anxious to speak to someone and assure myself that there 
really were no posthorses. I went into the courtyard to find 
out why the horses requisitioned in the town had not come, and 
talked to a postilion as my eyes wandered round looking for die 
stables. I enquired whether the postmaster had no horses. He 
stealthily pointed with his finger to the stables, which were 
closed. I tapped on the door softly, saying in German Mach auf 
( Open ! ) . Mistaking my voice for one of his fellows’, a postilion 
opened the door immediately. I found ten excellent horses 
which were being reserved, no doubt, for some better occasion. 