

From the very first the complexion of Paris had looked cheer- 
ing to him. His return had produced a tremendous effect. The 
Emperor sensed as much; and after the second day he felt re- 
assured about the consequences that his losses might entail. 
The losses at Wilna did not alter his opinion. 

“The terrible bulletin has had its effect,” he said to me; “but 
I see that my presence is giving even more pleasure than our 
disasters give pain. There is more affliction than discourage- 
ment. This state of mind will communicate itself to Vienna; 
and all will be retrieved within three months.” 

If I have omitted many things from the details here given of 
the conversations I had with the Emperor during our long tSte- 
a-tete, I can at least guarantee the accuracy, for the most part 
down even to the very words, of what I do record. Neither 
conscience nor memory has played me false. I had long been 

400 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

in the habit of telling the Emperor candidly what I thought, 
without fear of offending him; and I owe it to him to declare 
that, during this journey, he more often requested me to speak 
out boldly than to mind what I was saying. He encouraged 
me especially by the frankness of his discourse and of his con- 
fidences. He proved to me what I had already believed: that 
he did not always love the plain truth, but that he esteemed those 
who spoke it plainly. 

Under other circumstances, if the conversation touched on a 
matter he would not discuss, he broke it off somehow or other. 
If he were at home he would leave or dismiss you, or would 
interrupt with an order foreign to the subject at hand. Some- 
times, too, he would say: “You know nothing about that.” 

In the sledge, on the contrary, he always prompted. Did he 
feel himself hurt? — ^he joked about it. More than anything, he 
showed the need of unburdening himself. If certain topics were 
too displeasing to him, he would change the subject momentar- 
ily. But that day or the next he would revert to the same ques- 
tion. I venture to assert that during this journey the Emperor 
was kind enough to hear me without taking offence; and I say 
once again that I was able to convince myself, from the nature 
and frankness of his conversation, that one could lay many 
claims to his confidence who could lay none to his favour. 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

ON THE MOST IMPORTANT MEN ASSOCIATED WITH NAPOLEON 
ABRANTES, Duke of. See Junot. 

BASSANO, Duke of. See Maret. 

BEAUHARNAIS, Prince Eugene de. Viceroy of Italy: born in 
Paris, 1781. Son of Josephine, and step-son of Napoleon. Resented 
his mother’s second marriage; aide-de-camp to Napoleon in Italy and 
Egypt; with his sister, Hortense, helped to reconcile Napoleon and 
Josephine in 1799. Granted two hundred thousand francs yearly, and 
title of Prince, after the Empire was established; Viceroy of Italy, 
with large administrative powers, after Napoleon became King there 
in 1805; married Princess Amelia Augusta of Bavaria the same year, 
by Napoleon’s arrangement; Grand Duke of Frankfort, 1810. Com- 
manded the Fifth Corps in the Russian campaign, and distinguished 
himself at Borodino and Malo-Jaroslawetz. — ^Eugene, despite the 
favouritism shown, in his rapid advancement, was one of Napoleon’s 
ablest officers, civil or military. He rallied what was left of the 
Grand Army in February, 1813, following Murat’s abdication of 
command. After Napoleon’s downfall Eugene retired to live in 
Munich, under the titles of Duke of Leuchtenberg and Prince of 
Eichstadt. He died in 1824. 