

“Where is the Emperor? What’s the news? Can something 
have happened to him?” 

That was what everybody said, without being able to utter a 
word. The terrible bulletin had come out; none had awakened 
that morning with pleasant impressions. They felt glum. None 
Icnew the Emperor was in Paris; why was the Master of Horse 
there? Why had he left the Emperor? The hour, the pale 
lamp-light, the uncertainties they had been through, the melan- 
choly details they had learned and those for which they were 
waiting, — all this filled their minds with gloom and inclined 
them to sad forebodings. Such was the state of those in the 
salon, while I stood there waiting for the footman to return 
from announcing me in the Prince’s study. That dumb show 
cannot be described. All stared at me without the power to 
speak: they seemed to be holding their breath. Each tried to 
read his own sentence in my glance — and the expression of all 
their faces betrayed more fear than hope. I had spoken to M. 
Jauhert; when his first astonishment had worn off, he exclaimed: 

“And the Emperor, Your Grace — ?” 

He could not finish his question. Each repeated those words 
with an air of dismay: 

“And the Emperor? Where is he?” 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

397 

“In Paris,” I answered. 

At that all their faces brightened up, and I went in to see 
the Prince. He greeted me with the same exclamation, which I 
broke in upon to give him reassurance. I conveyed the Em- 
peror’s orders, chatted a few minutes, and enjomed upon him 
to have the cannon announce the Emperor’s return at dawn. 
He was also to advise the ministers and the Court that levee 
would he held at eleven o’clock, and so on. 

On reaching my quarters I ordered that a page be sent to 
Madame Mere and to each of the Princesses at eight in the 
morning, to announce the Emperor’s arrival to them. I wrote 
the Lord Chamberlain concerning the palace staff. . . . 

On the morrow [December 19] the Emperor ordered me to 
take over the portfolio of Foreign Affairs during the Duke of 
Bassano’s absence, and to bring him certain parts of the 
Viennese correspondence, together with the latest treaties with 
Austria and Prussia. I was wearied from the fourteen nights 
I had spent on the qui vive, without a wink of sleep, and in a 
measure depressed by the sense of the responsibilities that such 
a journey, made under such circumstances, had heaped upon 
me. Apart from that, moreover, I had been heavily preoc- 
cupied lest something happen to the Emperor, who had entrusted 
himself to my care and good faith. All these recent impres- 
sions had induced such a state of nervous exhaustion that I 
needed some repose. I therefore requested the Emperor to 
excuse me from this task, and to turn it over to M. de la Bes- 
nardiere. He acceded. 

At eleven o’clock I was at the Tuileries for the levee. The 
ministers and many of the Household officials (the chamber- 
lains in particular) were at hand. They crowded around and 
made much of me, as though I had been a favourite — ^as though 
I were a mem with influence, who had just spent fourteen nights 
and as many days tete-a-tete with Authority. 