

410 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

returned to Poland and fought against the Russians in 1792; later 
commander-in-chief and Minister of War for the Grand Duchy of 
Warsaw. Organized the Polish forces for the campaign of 1812, 
and commanded the Fifth Corps of the Grand Army; refused all offers 
to desert Napoleon thereafter; made the campaign of 1813, in com- 
mand of the Polish contingent. — ^Poniatowski had been unwilling to 
accept French honours, since he did not wish his countrymen to think 
him forgetful of their cause. Against his wishes, however, Napoleon 
created him a marshal of the Empire, October 16, 1813. Two days 
later Poniatowski, wounded in three places, was drowned while trying 
to swim the Elster. The Emperor, retreating from Leipzig, had left 
him and the Polish remnant to hold back the entire allied advance, 
and had blown up the bridges without waiting for him. 

REGGIO, Duke of. See Oudinot. 

ROVIGO, Duke of. See Savary. 

SAVARY, Anne-Jean-Marie, Duke of Rovigo: born at Marcq in 
the Ardennes, 1774. Attended the College of St.-Louis at Metz; en- 
tered the army, 1790; squadron-leader, 1797; Egypt; attracted the 
First Consul’s notice at Marengo, and thereafter was put in charge of 
the Consular gendarmerie. Commanded the troops at Vincennes at 
the Duke of Enghien’s execution; general of division, 1805; ambas- 
sador to St. Petersburg, 1807, and soon after to Madrid; succeeded 
Fouche as Minister of Police, 1810, and as such attended to the ex- 
iling of Mme. de Stael and the destruction of her works. — Savary was 
Caulaincourt’s predecessor at St. Petersburg. He was recalled from 
Russia, partly of his own motion, because the post required someone 
with a better knowledge of the great world. Later, he was one of the 
few who stayed with Napoleon at Fontainebleau, and, following the 
second abdication, he attempted to follow him to St. Helena. However, 
he was sent back from Plymouth, afterwards regained his civil rights^ 
and died in Paris in June, 1833. 

TREVISO, Duke of. See Mortier. 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

411 

VICEROY, the, of Italy. See Beauharnais. 

VICTOR (ne Perrin), Claude, Duke of Belluno; bom at La 
Marche in the Vosges, 1764. Son of a process-server. Joined the 
army at seventeen; brigadier, 1793; was noticed by Bonaparte at 
Toulon; general of division, 1797; made both Italian campaigns, and 
commanded the vanguard in the second; distinction at Marengo. Cap- 
tured in the Prussian campaign, and exchanged for Bliicher at Fried- 
land; marshal of the later creation, and Governor of Berlin after 
Tilsit; corps-commander in Spain with some success, but was de- 
feated by Wellington at Talavera. Commanded the Ninth Corps in 
Russia, and bore the brunt at the Beresina crossing. — ^Victor was one 
of the first to go over to the Bourbons, and so was made chairman of 
the military commission appointed to try Ney and other recidivist 
officers after the Hundred Days, In 1821 he served the Bourbons as 
Minister of War, and in 1823 he went into Spain as second-in-com- 
mand of their Peninsular expedition. Habits acquired during the 
great days in the Peninsula were too strong for him, however; he 
had to be recalled on suspicion of complicity in fraudulent contracts. 
Victor lived until March 1, 1841. 