

398 WITH NAPOLEON IN RUSSIA 

The dreadful bulletin had appeared in the Moniteur on the 
sixteenth. We had had word of that from the last despatch we 
met along the way. It had produced so strong an impression, 
even upon the most subservient, that they too sought to read 
from my expression some news of their dear ones. None dared 
to ask me for it. The bulletin alone had arrived; not one 
private letter had been given out. I had the satisfaction of 
setting many peoples’ minds at rest. But there were, alas, many 
whom I saddened — even though, after Malo-Jaroslawetz, the 
army had been so disordered and strung out that the General 
StafE was unable to give reports about many officers, even of 
the highest rank. They, unhorsed and in total want, had had to 
seek their subsistence by following the gangs that ranged along 
the flanks of the column, now towards the head and now towards 
the rear. The most resolute were reduced to this cruel neces- 
sity; for a whole handful of gold, even before the Beresina, 
would not have procured a crust of bread. . . . 

I return to the attendance chamber, before concluding what 
relates to the campaign and the Emperor’s journey. As I was 
saying, the bulletin had produced so woeful a sensation that 
none dared question me. The lone servant [Roustam] who had 
accompanied us was sleeping, and had been forbidden besides 
to tell anything in his conversation. The Emperor spoke out as 
frankly about our reverses as the bulletin had done. As yet, 
however, no news could be had of the army’s arrival at Wilna; 
and consequently he, like everyone else, knew nothing of the 
worst disasters. His legs were a little bloated, his eyes were 
puffy, and he had the hue of one whose skin has been tanned 
by the cold. Otherwise he appeared in good health. He was 
so happy to find himself in Paris that he did not need to com- 
pose his coxmtenance in order to appear satisfied and not at all 
downcast. He worked the whole day and even part of the 
night, sending out orders and imparting to all branches of 
administration the impulse he wished them to have. He 

DRESDEN TO PARIS 

399 

seemed to me well content with the state of opinion and of 
public spirit since the printing of the bulletin. His arrival 
had calmed many fears and allayed the greatest anxieties — 
though unhappily without drying the tears of families that had 
losses to weep for. 

The Emperor spoke of his disasters, of the mistake he had 
made by staying at Moscow, as a stranger might have done. 

“The venture failed by a week’s time,” he said. “Every- 
thing in the world depends on that. The right moment, timeli- 
ness, those are everything.” 

In receiving MM. Deeres and Cessac, his first words were: 

“Well, well, gentlemen, Fortune dazzled me. I let myself be 
carried away, instead of following the plan I had made and 
that I spoke of to you. Monsieur Cessac. I have been to Mos- 
cow. I thought to sign peace there. I stayed there too long. 
I had thought to gain in a year what only two campaigns could 
achieve. I have made a great blunder; but I shall have the 
means to retrieve it.” 