

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

407 

court as Secretary for Foreign Affairs, when the events of 1813 began 
to take shape. (The Grand Ecuyer was thought to be more devoted to 
the cause of peace, and more personally acceptable to the Tsar Alex- 
ander.) Following the second Bourbon restoration the Duke of 
Bassaino retired to Gratz, where for five years he was engaged in 
literary work. He was made a Peer of France upon his return there 
in 1820, and he died in Paris in 1839. 

MORTIER, Edouard-Adolphe-Casimir-Joseph, Duke of Treviso: 
born at Chateau Cambresis, 1768. Entered the army as sub-lieutenant, 
1791; served in the Netherlands, and on the Meuse and Rhine, 1792-3; 
promoted to brigadier and the general of division for service against 
the Second Coalition, 1799. Commanded the French occupation of 
Hanover, and was made a marshal of the original creation, 1804; 
corps-commander in the Ulm campaign, and at Friedland; was created 
duke, and led two campaigns in the Peninsula, 1808-9. Led the Young 
Guard in Russia, and again in 1813; rejoined Napoleon after the 
return from Elba; was given the high command, but fell ill at the 
opening of the Waterloo campaign. — ^Mortier, after his readmission to 
the Chamber of Peers in 1819, served the Bourbons as ambassador to 
St. Petersburg, as Minister of War and as President of the Council. 
Along with eleven others, while in attendance upon Louis-Philippe, he 
was killed by a bomb-thrower’s attempt to assassinate the King in 
Paris, July 28, 1839. 

MURAT, Joachim, King of Naples: born at La Bastide-Fortuniere 
(Lot), 1757. Younger son of an innkeeper. Obtained a bursary to 
study for the priesthood at Cahors, and later at Toulouse; after dissi- 
pating his allowance, he joined the cavalry; dismissed for insubor- 
dination, 1790. After various abortive efforts at a military career, 
he met Bonaparte in Paris, 1795; obtained the guns for the ‘Vhiff of 
grapeshot”; Italy, 1796; general of division, 1799, following the 
battle of the Pyramids; returned to France with Bonaparte; led the 
grenadiers into the Council of Five Hundred at Saint-Cloud, thus im- 
plementing Napoleon’s coup d’etat. Commandant of the Consular 
Guard thereafter; married Caroline Bonaparte, 1800; Governor of 
the Cisalpine Republic; Duke of Berg and Cleves, 1806; commanded 
the cavalry at Jena, Eylau, Friedland; general-in-chief in Spain, 1808, 

408 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

whereafter he expected to be made king there. Became Joachim 
Napoleon, King of Naples, after Joseph Bonaparte’s transfer to the 
Spanish throne; took Capri from the British. Commanded the cav- 
alry in Russia; was left the high command after the Emperor re- 
turned to Paris; fled to Naples in disguise, February, 1813, after his 
mismanagement had destroyed the remnant of the Grand Army. 
Made the second campaign of 1813 with Napoleon, but concluded 
a separate peace after Leipzig; joined the allies by treaty in 1814, in 
an effort to keep his throne. — ^Murat, who introduced shock-tactics 
into cavalry warfare, was one of the greatest leaders of all time in 
that branch. He had a photographic eye for the contour of terrain; 
blunders such as that of the sunken road at Waterloo were unknown 
under his generalship. In other capacities, however, he was worse than 
useless to Napoleon after the coup d’etat. He thought himself a states- 
man ; he seized the occasion of the return from Elba to lead Neapolitan 
forces against the north of Italy, which he hoped to make into a 
united kingdom; and thus he provided the overt act which set the 
allies in motion and compelled Napoleon, who had refused his serv- 
ices, to undertake the Belgian campaign. After Murat’s troops had 
been scattered by the Austrians at Tolentino, King Joachim attempted 
to regain Naples, but was captured, tried by court-martial and shot, 
October 13, 1815. 