

DUROC, Geraud-Christophe-Michel, Duke of Friuli: bom at Pont 
a Mousson, 1772. Son of an army officer. Gazetted second-lieutenant 
of artillery, 1793; aide-de-camp to Napoleon, 1796; Italy; seriously 
wounded in Egypt; first aide-de-camp, 1798, and brigadier two years 
later. Grand Marshal of the Palace, in charge of the Household ad- 
ministration and of the Emperor’s personal safety. Employed as 
diplomatist in forming the Confederation of the Rhine; Senator after 
the Russian campaign. — Duroc was mortally wounded at the battle of 
Bautzen, May 21, 1813, and died two days later in a near-by farm- 
house. Napoleon bought the farm and erected a monument there. 
The Grand Marshal was buried in the Invalides. 

ECKMtfHL, Prince of. See Davout. 

ELCHINGEN, Duke of. See Net. 

406 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

FRIULI, Duke of. See Duroc. 

ISTRIA, Duke of. See Bessieres. 

JUNOT, Andoche, Duke of Abrantes: bom at Bussy-le-Grand 
(Cote d’Or), 1771. A law student at the outbreak of the Revolution; 
joined a volunteer battalion; served Bonaparte as secretary during the 
siege of Toulon, and as aide-de-camp in Italy; gravely wounded at 
Lonato. Brigadier in Egypt; wounded again, in a duel on his com- 
mander’s behalf; was left in Egypt to recover, and fell into British 
hands on his way home. General of division and Commandant of 
Paris; Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour when his associates be- 
came marshals. Ambassador to Lisbon; deserted his post to serve 
with distinction at Austerlitz; created duke for his brilliant but vain 
effort to seize the Portuguese fleet in 1807. Governor of Portugal; 
his weak administration compelled the French evacuation of that 
country; served under Massena in Spain, 1810-11; seriously wounded 
again. Corps-commander in the Russian campaign; Governor of 
Illyria thereafter. — ^Junot is thought to have suffered from nervous 
instability consequent upon his first wound. His uncertain temper 
£ind his extravagance made him difficult to employ in peace-time; he 
was always bitterly resentful over not being made a marshal; and he 
was one of the few reputed lovers of Pauline Bonaparte who pro- 
cured no advancement in that way. His growing derangement dur- 
ing the Russian campaign made a scapegoat of him, and put an end 
to his days of active service. On July 29, 1813, in a seizure of 
insanity, he threw himself from a window at Montbard. 

MARET, IIugues-Bernard, Duke of Bassano: born at Dijon, 1763. 
An advocate and publicist. Helped to publish the debates of the 
First National Assembly in the Moniteur universel; served in Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs, 1792; appointed ambassador to Naples; captured 
by the Austrians and held prisoner for thirty months. Secretary to 
Napoleon, 1799, and editor of the Moniteur; created count, 1807, and 
duke, 1809. Minister for Foreign Affairs, 1811; served at Wilna 
as link with the home offices during the Russian campaign; again pri- 
vate secretary to Napoleon, 1814-15. — ^Maret was replaced by Caulain- 