

BELLUNO, Duke of. See Victor. 

BERTHIER, Louis- Alexandre, Prince of Neuchatel; chief-of- 
staff: born at Versailles, 1753. Son of an officer of the Engineers 
Corps. Entered the army at seventeen, after instruction by his father; 

403 

404 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

went to America with Rochambeau in 1780, and returned a colonel. 
Protected the aunts of Louis XVI in 1791, and aided their escape; 
served in the Vendee, 1793-95; general of division, Army of Italy, the 
year following. Thereafter Napoleon’s chief-of-sta£E in every cam- 
paign until Fontainebleau; a marshal of the original creation; Prince 
of Wagram, 1809; married the King of Bavaria’s niece. — ^With Mar- 
mont and Murat, Berthier made up the chosen three whom Napoleon 
met at the siege of Toulon and took to Italy with him in 1796. He 
abandoned the Emperor before the first abdication. The manner of 
Berthier’s death, on June 1, 1815, is imcertain. He had gone to 
Bamberg at the start of the Hundred Days; and there he either was 
assassinated by secret agents, or threw himself from his window when 
he saw Cossacks on their way into France. 

BESSIERES, Jean-Baptiste, Duke of Istria: born near Cahors, 
1768. Served first in the Constitutional Guard of Louis XVI; captain 
in the Italian campaign of 1796; went to Styria with Napoleon in 
command of the Guides, from which the Consular, later the Imperial, 
Guard was built up. Brilliant service with the cavalry at Marengo; 
general of division, 1802; marshal, 1804; at Wagram, his horse was 
killed under him. Replaced Bernadotte as head of the Army of the 
North; commanded the Guard Cavalry at Borodino and during the 
retreat from Russia. — Bessieres was put in command of the fifteen 
thousand cavalry that Napoleon was able to muster in the spring of 
1813, Three days after the campaign opened, he was killed by a 
musket-ball while reconnoitring the terrain at Posema-Rippach. 

CAMBACERES, Jean-Jacques-Regis de, Prince of Parma: born 
at Montpellier, 1753. Descended from a well-known family, noblesse 
de la robe. Accepted the ideas of the Revolution in 1789, after prog- 
ress towards the magistracy of his province; deputy to the Convention, 
1792; voted the King guilty, but suggested withholding sentence; Pres- 
ident of the Committee of Public Safety, 1795; Second Consul in 1799. 
Adviser in the drafting of the Napoleonic Code; helped the First 
Consul obtain appointment for life; disapproved of the Duke of 
Enghien’s execution. Appointed Vicechancellor, prince of the Em- 
pire, and President of the Senate in perpetuity. — Cambaceres was re- 
nowned as much as anything else for his fine table, which Napoleon 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

405 

took advantage of for diplomatic purposes. After the second abdica- 
tion the Duke of Parma was exiled, but afterwards regained his civil 
rights and lived in retirement until his death in 1824 

DAVOUT, Louis-Nicolas, Prince of Eckmuhl: born at Annoux 
(Yonne), 1770. Son of a nobleman. Entered the army as sub- 
lieutenant at eighteen; already a brigadier at the Revolution, he 
embraced its ideas but was removed from the active list; reinstated 
under the Directory; on the Rhine, 1794-97; Egypt; held command in 
the Consular Guard, 1801; created marshal at Napoleon’s accession, 
and later Duke of Auerstadt for his defeat of the main Prussian Army 
in the battle of that name. — ^Davout was the strictest disciplinarian 
amongst the Imperial marshals, to which fact, and to the consequent 
employment of his corps for arduous duties, he owed his general un- 
popularity. After the first abdication he retired to private life. He 
reorganised the army for the Hundred Days, held Paris with the re- 
serves during Waterloo, and thereafter threatened to make a campaign 
of his own unless the Allies signed a general amnesty. He was de- 
prived of his titles after the amnesty was violated, but later he re- 
gained them, was admitted to the Chamber of Peers, and died in Paris 
in 1823. 