

NAPLES, King of. See Murat. 

NEUCHATEL, Prince of. See Berthier. 

NEY, Michel, Duke of Elchingen: born at Saarlouis, 1762. Son 
of a cooper. Enlisted in a hussar regiment at Metz, 1788; first com- 
mission, 1792; general of division, 1799. Begged Napoleon to make 
himself Emperor, 1803; marshal of the original creation; commanded 
the Grand Army at Elchingen, where his victory insured the Austrians’ 
surrender at Ulm, and whence his title, 1808; Jena, Eylau, Friedland; 
with Napoleon to Spain; Peninsular War, 1808-11. In 1812, com- 
manded the centre at Borodino, and was created Prince of the Moskowa 
that evening; in charge of the rear-guard at start and end of the retreat 
from Moscow, Corps-commander in the campaign of 1813; protested 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

409 

devotion to the Bourbons upon Napoleon’s return from Elba; was sent 
to bring the returning exile back to Paris “in an iron cage,” but let his 
men go over in a body to the Imperial recruits at Grenoble; received 
a command on the eve of Waterloo, where he led the last charge of 
the Old Guard. — ^Ney, who received the epithet “bravest of the brave” 
from Napoleon himself, appears, like many others who made that 
campaign, to have been a little “touched” after his return from Rus- 
sia. His conduct at Waterloo was most erratic. There, in the midst 
of the action, he beat fieldpieces with the flat of his sword. On 
August 5, following — ^his spirit broken — ^he allowed himself to be ar- 
rested, and demanded that his trial for treason be conducted before 
the Cha mb er of Peers. Despite the general amnesty which Davout 
had exacted, the younger Bourbons were determined to make an ex- 
ample of Ney, who had made them ridiculous at Grenoble. (Two of 
them were to have got credit there for Napoleon’s capture, after Ney 
had done the work.) The Marshal-Prince of the Moskowa, sentenced 
to death by a body which included even a few of his former brothers- 
in-arms, was shot in the Luxembourg Gardens, December 7, 1815. 

OUDINOT, Charles-Nicholas, Duke of Reggio: born at Bar-le-duc, 
1767. Son of a bourgeois family. Entered the army at seventeen, but 
withdrew three years later with rank of sergeant because none but a 
noble could go higher. Elected lieutenant-colonel, volunteers of the 
Meuse, 1792; brigadier, 1794; general of division and chief-of-staff, 
1799; Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour when his associates were 
made marshals; divisional commander of grenadiers at Hollabriinn, 
Austerlitz, Ostrolenka, Friedland. Governor of Erfurt and count of 
the Empire, 1808; marshal, 1809, and Duke the year following; ad- 
ministrator of Holland, 1810-12; corps-commander in Russia; de- 
feated at Gross Beeren, and afterwards superseded by Ney, in the last 
Napoleonic drive on Berlin. — ^After Fontainebleau, Oudinot stood by 
the Bourbon government. Louis XVIII made him a peer, and he died 
governor of the Invalides, September 13, 1847. 

PARMA, Duke of. See Cambageres. 

PONIATOWSKI, Prince Joseph: bom in Warsaw, 1762. Nephew 
of the last King of Poland. Entered the Austrian service at sixteen; 