## 1 Guerrilla Country

NAVARRE LIES IN the shape of a rough diamond wedged between France to the north and Castile to the south. To the east is Aragon and to the west the Basque provinces. From the northern tip of Navarre to the southern measures just under 100 miles, and at the widest point from east to west the distance spanned is about 75 miles.1 Despite its limited size, Navarre possesses a more varied landscape and climate than many larger territories. Spain is famous for its continental variety, from the cool, moist mountains of Cantabria and the chill plateaus of Castile to the gardens of the Levant and the deserts of Murcia. Navarre mirrors these vast differences and concentrates them even further within its small territory, a fact that has earned the province the nickname “Little Spain.” The modern visitor to Navarre can in an hour’s drive go from green hills and leaden skies in the Northwest to brown lands under a high canopy of blue in the South.

For administrative purposes, Navarre under the old regime was divided into five merindades, roughly equivalent to counties, but geographers customarily divide Navarre into two regions, the North, or Montaňa, and the South, or Ribera. (The merindades were Pamplona and Sangüesa in the North, Tudela and Olite in the South, and Estella, which lay partly in the Montaňa and partly in the Ribera.) Topography is the foundation for this division. The Pyrenees and the eastern marches of the Basque-Cantabrian mountain range create distinct northern and southern hemispheres in Navarre. The line running from the Sierra of Leyre in the East through the Sierras of Izco, Alaiz, Perdón, Andía, Urbasa, and Santiago de Lóquiz, and terminating in the Sierra of Codés in the West, defines the boundary between the “Two Navarres.” North of the Leyre-Codés line the land is typically over 2,000 feet above sea level, in some places as high as 7,000 feet. To the south the mountains flatten out into a gentler landscape of valleys and plains.

The elevation of the Montaňa does not make it particularly remarkable: even Madrid is as high. But Madrid lies in the center of a high plain, whereas the Montaňa of Navarre is a land of dramatic precipices, gorges, hidden valleys, and box canyons with their secret exits. This land, so suited to the requirements of partisan warfare, was the first of many factors that made northern Navarre, together with contiguous and similar areas of northern Aragon and the Basque provinces, a nightmare for French troops. Mountains provided a last refuge to the guerrillas, who could always seek temporary asylum in heights that were impassable to French cavalry and artillery units. Geography thus partially negated the technological and organizational superiority of the French. By guarding key passes and occupying strategic heights, the guerrillas could even eliminate the numerical advantage enjoyed by their enemies. By contrast, the French could more easily hold the open landscape of southern Navarre, which gave the edge to cavalry and artillery.2