

The mayorazgo allowed nobles (as well as wealthy commoners) to protect properties from seizure, sale, and division. These entails varied in size from great latifundia in Andalusia to small plots in the Basque country.18 As with the señoríos, the greatest number of mayorazgos in Navarre as well as the largest and most valuable existed in the Ribera, whereas in the Montaňa they were of little consequence. For example, a survey conducted in 1802 revealed no mayorazgos in the valley of Ergoyena just northwest of Pamplona. In the village of Echarri-Aranaz, also in the Northwest, there was one “very old and poor” entailed estate, whose exact location, size, and value nobody seemed to recall.19

Finally, senores in the Montaňa tended to lease their land to peasants at very low prices. The reasons for this are simple. Since there was little commercial development in the Montaňa due to an absence of urban markets, and since excess population tended to migrate from the region, land values remained steady, and there was no pressure to raise rents. Indeed, tenants sometimes paid entirely symbolic sums to their overlords, as if in mere memory of ancient señorial ownership, and typical rents in the region ran between 2 percent and 6 percent of the value of an average harvest.20 This was one of the reasons why the Bonapartes’ abolition of señoríos in 1809 received less than an enthusiastic response in the Montaňa.21

The situation in the Ribera was entirely different. In the city of Tudela, 77 individuals, mostly nobles, in a population of 7,572 controlled all of the land. They directly exploited 67 percent of the arable land, some 7,400 acres, and leased out the remaining 3,000 acres to 250 individuals. About 11 percent of this total (1,180 acres) was locked up in 23 entails owned by 19 nobles.22 In Corella, 16 nobles held 445 acres in entails, amounting to 12.5 percent of all the arable land. The remaining 3,112 acres was shared between these and 49 other proprietors, and most was exploited directly.23

Urban property in the Ribera was also concentrated in few, usually noble, hands. In Corella the noble family of Virto de Vera owned 11 percent and the Marqués de Santa Cara 5 percent of all urban dwellings. Most remaining houses were owned by just a handful of people, many of them interrelated, and this forced the vast majority of the population to rent.24 In the Montaňa, on the other hand, many more dwellings were occupied by their owners. For example, only ten individuals in the village of Echauri owned more than one house, and over 42 percent of the dwellings were occupied by their owners.25

The weakness of the señorial regime and the lack of correspondence between nobility and wealth in the Montaňa narrowed the fundamental social division between commoners and nobles so characteristic of the old regime in the Ribera and in most of Europe. Few peasants paid any form of feudal rent; those who did paid low rents; and in some areas, most peasants were themselves nobles. Noble privilege had been exploited by Napoleon to divide conquered peoples in Europe and to help consolidate a ring of satellite kingdoms around France.26 This same strategy was also effective in much of Spain, including the Ribera of Navarre, where elites feared the mob more than the French and were easily induced to collaborate.27 Mina recalled in his memoirs that he had received no help from any titled noble, owner of a mayorazgo, or wealthy individual.28 In the Montaňa, however, where mayorazgos were rare and where most nobles did not even have officially executed titles much less vast property or wealth, Mina found many supporters. Thus, the nature of nobility in the Montaňa allowed the area to meet the challenge of the French occupation from a position of unity and strength.