

The French never felt secure in the Montaňa, where straggling or drawing duty in a foraging detachment could bring an inglorious death.3 Rough terrain, though, was just the beginning of their difficulties. The Montaňa possessed a particular demography, economy, politics, culture, and even language (the Leyre-Codés line corresponded to the southern limit of Basque) that set it apart from the Ribera and from most of Spain and that gave the region special motives and aptitudes for guerrilla war.

The origins of the Montaňa’s peculiarities are partly climatic and partly historical. The climate in Navarre is, of course, intimately linked to physical relief, for the mountains do more than create a broken terrain; they also act as a barrier to the moisture-laden breezes blowing from the Cantabrian Sea. Against this wall, the wet ocean air exhausts itself, giving northwestern Navarre, parts of which receive seventy-nine inches of rainfall a year, a maritime climate. South of the mountain barrier, in the rain shadow of the Cantabrian massifs, southern Navarre is a dry plain, receiving only fifteen inches of rain a year in some places and depending on irrigation from the Ebro River and its tributaries. In few areas of the world does such a strong pluviometric contrast occur over such a small distance.

Immunity to drought and proximity to the sea had helped to preserve the population of the Montaňa from the demographic setbacks of the seventeenth century, and by 1808 the merindades of Pamplona and Estella were among the most densely settled rural areas in Spain.4 By that date, however, the population of the Montaňa had ceased to expand. Partly, this was the result of the disruptions caused by the French occupation of 1795 and the economic dislocations of the war with England.5 The essential reason for demographic stagnation in the Montaňa, however, was that the region had experienced no fundamental social and technological change to raise agricultural or industrial productivity. Steady growth had, therefore, created a condition of overpopulation relative to the Montaňa’s fixed resources.6

Indeed, to maintain its vital equilibrium, the Montaňa had begun to export people. Under the prevailing system of rigid primogeniture, younger children had to emigrate or accede to life under the tutelage of an older sibling. In this system, young men were especially likely to emigrate—to America, to Madrid, and to the agro-towns of the Ribera, where paid agricultural labor was seasonally available.7 The English blockade of Spain and Spanish America after 1796 had curtailed the option of emigration to America, and the economic contraction caused by the blockade made work in Madrid and the Ribera more difficult to find as well. What the French found in the Montaňa in 1808, therefore, was densely populated, rugged country full of young men with no prospects. Thus, the availability of men for Mina’s army of guerrillas was the result, in part, of a particular economic and demographic conjuncture in the Montaňa.