

In the Montaňa people lived in caseríos, the typical dwelling of the Basques.9 The caserío was a large house, usually built of stone. It was designed to contain the family, the animals, the tools, the harvest—in fact, everything belonging to the household. In the Pamplona and Lum- bier basins, the heart of the Navarrese Montaňa and of the guerrilla war, caseríos tended to be grouped in hamlets and small villages. CaseríOs are impressive structures, even today. They can seem more like fortifications than homes, and, to French soldiers, the caseríos lent the Montaňa the appearance of a country covered with innumerable small citadels.10 In fact, they could be and were converted to this use by both the guerrillas and the French.

The dispersion of the population in small villages and hamlets gave the Montaňa an important fighting edge.11 To tax this population, the French had to send small detachments into each village, but this made them vulnerable to guerrilla attack. The solution was to send in a larger force, but this was not cost effective, given the limited money and goods that could be raised in a small municipality. Thus, the French never succeeded in maintaining their presence in the land of the caserío, which was so well suited to the guerrilla strategy. On the other hand, dominating the Ribera, where the population was concentrated in a handful of towns, was an easier task. Even areas of the Ribera that did contribute volunteers to Mina’s army, could not themselves, by the very nature of their human geography, be the site of armed guerrilla struggle.

Another of the Montaňa’s assets for war was the relative lack of social differentiation that existed there. One indication of this was, paradoxically, the large number of nobles in the region. The census of 1796-97 counted 19,010 nobles in Navarre, equal to 7-8 percent of the population, a high figure by almost any standard. The vast majority of these nobles lived in the Montaňa. West of Pamplona, in the valley of Larráun, for example, 80 percent of the population was noble; to the north of the capital, in the valley of Baztán, the figure was 60 percent, and in the Pyrenees of Sangüesa around 30 percent. In the Ribera, on the other hand, only about 1 percent of the population was born noble.12

The value of a thing, however, falls when it is superabundant, and in northern Navarre, thousands of hidalgos, the lowest degree of noble, were barely distinguishable from the peasant commoners among whom they lived. In the Ribera, a hidalgo normally possessed enough property to avoid engaging in trade or manual labor. In contrast, the hidalgos of the Montaňa (and of the northern Spanish littoral generally) worked as tavernkeepers, cobblers, blacksmiths, and carpenters.13 Foreigners readily noticed the lack of social stratification associated with nobility in the region. The muddling of the line between nobles and commoners inspired one French observer to ask whether the institution had any purpose in a region “where a crowd of muledrivers is noble; where domestic servants, when they come of age, display the pedigrees of their ancestors.”14