

The church in Navarre occupied a position similar to the nobility. It had less wealth and property but a heavier presence, especially in the Montaňa, than the church in the rest of Spain. For this reason, the church in Navarre, like the noble estate, produced less social division than it did in the rest of Spain. Navarrese clerics enjoyed the same valuable privileges, including exemption from some taxes, as clergy elsewhere. However, the two greatest sources of revenue for the church—the tithe and rents from property—were much less lucrative in Navarre than in Castile and Aragon.

It has been estimated that in nineteenth-century Spain the church skimmed off half of the net agricultural product in the form of the tithe.29 In addition, the Spanish church not only preserved its medieval jurisdictions or señoríos ecclesiásticos, it had, like the nobility, taken advantage of the penury of the Hapsburg monarchy in the seventeenth century to acquire new ones. A total of 9 cities, 375 towns, and 2,299 villages and hamlets were señoríos of the church, the equivalent of 14 percent of all Spanish municipalities, a large figure by European standards at the time and a source of chagrin to reformers in Madrid.30 The church possessed 16,000 square miles of land, or fully 8 percent of the entire surface area of Spain and 18 percent of the arable. These properties generated 565 million reales a year in rent, the second largest item of income in the church’s budget after tithes.31

The considerable resources of the church corresponded to the important role it played. Hospitals, charity, and education absorbed a large part of the total income. What remained provided a livelihood for 16,675 priests (.16 percent of the population), 39,489 other secular clergymen (.38 percent), and 71,487 members of the regular clergy (nearly .69 percent), for a combined total of 1.23 percent of the population.

The church in Navarre supported a larger proportion of clerics, especially parish priests, than the church in Spain as a whole. In 1786 there were 762 priests, accounting for more than . 34 percent of the population, over twice the proportion of priests in the rest of Spain. An additional 1,748 other secular clergymen, many of whom performed little or no function within the church, made up another .77 percent of the population, also more than twice the national average. And 1,875 members of the regular clergy, most of them men and 70 percent of them mendicants, accounted for another .82 percent, a figure close to the Spanish average. Thus, ecclesiastics were almost 2 percent of the population in Navarre, a proportion half again as high as that for Spain.32

Despite the number of people it supported, the church in Navarre absorbed a considerably smaller percentage of the agricultural product and owned much less property, proportionally, than it did in the rest of Spain. Tithes brought 17.2 million reales in an average year between 1803 and 1807, equivalent to 11 percent of Navarre’s agricultural product.33 The church possessed señorial rights over only three towns and one village in Navarre. The regular clergy owned 22 square miles of land, and the secular clergy owned 9 square miles, less than 1 percent of the surface area of Navarre, compared with 8 percent in all Spain.34