

Climatic differences also helped to create a very particular type of agriculture and human geography in the Montaňa favorable to guerrilla war. The wet, steep land of northern Navarre was ideally suited to small farms. On a small plot in the Montaňa, intense labor combined with generous rainfall could redeem the intrinsic deficiencies of the terrain. The tendency was, therefore, toward small, subsistence holdings, which, in turn, helped to disperse the population over the countryside. Indeed, the town—with the exception of Pamplona—was a structure historically alien to the area, and people lived instead in small settlements and even in isolated farmhouses. The Montaňa contained 700 individual poblaciones,almost as many as in all Andalusia (753). An average of 207 people lived in each of the settlements of the Montaňa, and hundreds of villages had populations of 50 or less.

In contrast, small holdings could not compete well in the dry Ribera, since farmers of small plots had difficulty surviving even a single year of drought. The solution there, as in most of Spain, was extensive agriculture, the construction of irrigation projects, and the application of paid gang labor, all of which encouraged a concentration of landowner- ship.8 This agricultural regime, by requiring concentrations of labor and by generating commercial surpluses, encouraged the growth of towns. The Ribera merindades of Navarre were even “urban” by contemporary standards. In Tudela, for example, 28,112 people lived in only 27 towns, an average of 1,041 in each. The city of Tudela had a population of 7,295, Corella 3,935, and Tafalla 3,347, and 25 other towns had populations between 1,000 and 3,000.

The suitability of the Ribera to large estates had been reinforced by historical circumstances. As they had done in all the territories of the Western Empire, the Romans brought a system of production based on slave labor and latifundia to the Ebro basin, which was the northern borderland of effective Roman power in the region. Urban life followed the latifundia, as estate owners and their laborers lived in cities. This system was maintained by successive Visigothic and Moslem conquerors, whose political power always closely followed the old parameters of urban settlement established by Rome. The Reconquest of the Ribera in the Middle Ages by the Kingdom of Navarre increased the concentration of landownership and the growth of towns in the region. In the lands taken from the Moslems, the Navarrese monarchs, unhindered by a concern for the inhabitants, parceled out vast estates to the nobles and church. Thus, the urban pattern of settlement created by Rome and favored by the climate survived into the Napoleonic era. Great lords, residing in the towns, owned all of the land. Also in the towns, though in less comfortable surroundings, were the propertyless agricultural laborers.

These historical pressures had, to a large degree, passed over the Montaňa. In the foothills of the Pyrenees and the Cantabrian mountains, Rome had encountered the decisive boundary to the expansion of the slave economy. (Pamplona was an outpost in the unsubdued Basque Montaňa.) Neither had the Visigoths and Moors been able to absorb the Basque people. Even the medieval monarchs of Navarre had failed completely to transform the tribal Montaňa into a feudal society. Thus, while a system of large estates based successively on slave, serf, and paid labor had existed in the Ribera since ancient times, the Basques in the Montaňa had been left to achieve a system of landownership centered on the small, family-sized exploitation.