

As in the matter of noble status, religious differences between the Two Navarres, Montaňa and Ribera, mirrored the differences between Navarre, as a whole, and the rest of Spain. In the Montaňa, priests formed a relatively large proportion of the population (. 5 percent), but the presence of the regular clergy was light (.3 percent). In the Ribera, the reverse held true: priests were rare (.1 percent of the population), while the presence of monks and nuns (1.3 percent) was everywhere evident. So common were regular clerics in the merindad of Tudela that they almost equaled the number of regular clerics in all the rest of Navarre, excluding the city of Pamplona.

The Ribera also supported a large proportion of “other” secular clerics (.8 percent of the population), which doubtless included some genuinely pious men and women, but which in large part consisted of hundreds of people who performed little discernible function in exchange for their tax-free status and other benefits.35 This class of clergy appeared as parasites and served to cast doubt and discredit on the truly devoted servants of the church. In the Montaňa only .4 percent of the population fell into this category.36

These figures on the distribution of the clergy within Navarre are not without implications for patterns of piety in the province. In the Montaňa an unusually large priesthood administered the sacraments. In the Ribera there were simply too few pastors to say mass, a circumstance that must have resulted in a lack of even the rudiments of Christian instruction for many people, a situation not uncommon in other European nations, where churches failed to keep pace with growing urban populations. At the same time, regular and “other” secular clerics, who in the popular imagination were often depicted as burdens or parasites on society, led to anticlerical sentiment in the region.37 The call to arms in defense of the church was, therefore, less likely to receive a response in the Ribera than it was in the Montaňa.

In addition, the church, like the nobility in Navarre, possessed more land in the Ribera than in the Montaňa. In Tudela, for example, 4 percent of the arable was owned by six convents for men and four for women, and almost 20 percent of the urban dwellings were in the hands of the clergy. In Corella 10 percent of the arable was owned by two convents for men and two for women.38 Between the convents and the cathedral chapter, 10 percent of the urban property in Corella was also in the hands of the church.39 It is no shock, then, that the city of Tudela favored the seizure of convent property in order to release land on the market. French reforms that promised to do just that could hardly inspire resistance. On the contrary, some Ribereños, at least, had long fought for a repartition of church lands.40

In contrast, the church owned proportionally less property in the Montaňa.41 In the village of Echarri-Aranaz, for example, there was only half an acre belonging to the church, and in the valley of Ergoyena the clergy had not a single acre.42 Sometimes villages in the Montaňa even maintained control over part of the clergy’s income. In Echauri, the priest accepted what he was given from the rental of four acres of municipal land specifically set aside for the support of the parish.43 The point is, most people in the Montaňa did not have contact with clerics who were also their landlords, and this made it easier to imagine defending the spiritual church.