

It would have been more fruitful to ask what purpose nobility in the Montaňa did not serve. It did not, for example, serve as an important source of discontent as it did in the Ribera and in most of Spain south of the Ebro-Duero demarcation. In these regions nobles were a special interest attracted to the French government by promises to quell popular revolution and to redistribute upward the spoils of war.15 In the Montaňa this tactic was not possible. The hidalgo of northern Navarre was farther from the rich noble of Madrid or Seville than he was from a common peasant.

In these conditions the concept of derogation—the loss of nobility through the exercise of ignoble trades—had little meaning. Nobility was not always defined by an officially executed title, nor was it so easily lost. The Montaňa, like much of the Basque-Cantabrian region, had remained free from “contamination” by the Moors, and nobility was considered to pass through the blood and to belong inalienably to all native inhabitants, regardless of their economic role or station in life. In the Montaňa entire villages, even whole valleys were populated almost exclusively by the noble born. As a result, the people developed a sense of racial and moral superiority to other Spaniards, and this sense of distinction helped to engender a strong feeling of community. Put another way, the Navarrese hidalgo’s primary allegiances were likely to run vertically into the local community rather than horizontally across the noble estate. This fact is extremely important. At decisive moments, fear and loathing of the populace brought Castilian and Aragonese nobles together in solidarity against the resistance movement and in favor of the regime imposed from above by the French. The nature of nobility in the Navarrese Montaňa prevented this from happening.

There were additional reasons why noble status distinguished its owner less in the Navarrese Montaňa than elsewhere. It is true that even the poorest hidalgo in Navarre enjoyed certain privileges that set him apart from commoners, including the right to be addressed as Don or Dona and to display coats of arms, the privilege of carrying weapons in public, exemption from arrest for nonpayment of debts, and access to certain offices. These rights were not inconsiderable. However, the main institutions from which nobles drew their wealth and power—the seigneurial jurisdiction, or señorío, and the entail, or mayorazgo—barely existed in northern Navarre. The number of señoríos was high in Spain, amounting to some 50 percent of all municipalities.16 Around Madrid and Valencia señoríos accounted for between 60 percent and 70 percent of all towns and villages and for 86 percent in the province of Guadalajara. In Navarre, however, property burdened with señorial dues and rents was extremely rare. Only thirty-eight towns and forty-three villages, amounting to 10 percent of all settlements, fell under señorial jurisdiction in Navarre. In addition, most of these señoríos were extremely small, often amounting to no more than one or two dwellings. Thus, señoríos accounted for 10 percent of all villages, but less than 1 percent of the population lived under señorial jurisdiction.17