

One of the most important facts about the laya was that it required communal labor. Two or more families including several generations of men, women, and children worked together, first on one family’s land, then on another’s. This communal arrangement placed a premium on interfamilial cooperation and helped to knit communities together in ways nothing else could.13

A further important attribute of the laya was the way it helped to empower women. Since Roman times, visitors to the Basque region had remarked, with either pleasure or horror, that women there seemed to have a great deal of power. Some scholars have even called Basque society “matriarchal,” though this doubtless overstates the evidence. However, it is reasonable to say that the laya removed some of the obstacles for women in agriculture. Although using the laya was extremely arduous, it did not require the same kind of strength or the domination of animals that plowing did. The control of draft animals and tillage is an important factor in man’s dominance of woman in agrarian societies. Women in the Montaňa faced no such labor disadvantage, and this may have helped to confirm their equality in other spheres as well—for example, in inheritance customs.

Peasants in the Montaňa practiced strict primogeniture. This meant that the eldest child, whether male or female, inherited. Thus, women had equal access to the land.14 Moreover, even after marriage, a woman retained control over her property. When she died, her landed possessions, minus the funeral expenses and any dowry she had brought to her husband’s family, reverted to her parents, sisters, brothers, or other relations.15 The most important aspect of the laya and of women’s place in Basque society from the perspective of the guerrilla war was that women in the Montaňa were accustomed to inheriting land and taking an active part in all of the processes of production, including tillage. Therefore, the absence of a large number of men—whether they were working in the Ribera or fighting the French—did not entail the disruption of agricultural production. The situation in the Ribera was very different. There was almost no wage work for women and children in the agro-towns of the Ribera. If the young men from such communities had suddenly taken to the hills, it would have spelled economic collapse and brought disaster to those left behind.16 In other words, the labor system in the Montaňa favored guerrilla war, whereas that in the Ribera discouraged it.

Primogeniture had other favorable effects on the Montaňa. Regions that did not practice primogeniture often suffered from extreme mini-fundism, as had occurred in Galicia, where land was divided, leased, and subleased to so many heirs that most peasants there had barely an Irish level of subsistence. In Navarre primogeniture preserved a relatively prosperous peasantry with good-sized estates. The Mina family, for example, possessed a house and outbuildings with eighty-eight acres of land.17 Of course, younger children, unless they could marry an heir or heiress, were disinherited by this system and had to emigrate, join the clergy, or turn to other pursuits outside agriculture, including war.