

The fueros of Navarre originated in the Middle Ages as a pact between the king and the “people” for military service and contributions in the effort to oust the Moslems from the Ebro valley. In return for this service, the monarchs pledged to maintain Navarre’s extensive privileges, including important customary laws and the right to protest the least infraction of any of these laws. In practice this meant that Navarre possessed institutions empowered to negotiate a social compact with each successive monarch, who had to pledge fidelity to the fueros in return for continued contributions from Navarre.

Navarre was governed by a viceroy, Royal Council, Cortes, and Diputación. The viceroy was named by the king and exercised the king’s executive functions in Navarre.28 The Royal Council was Navarre’s judiciary. The seven members maintained, in consultation with the Cortes or Diputación, the right of sobrecarta, a kind of veto power over royal measures deemed to be contrafueros, that is, violations of the fundamental law of Navarre. Since by law four of the seven councillors had to be Navarrese, the Royal Council, though an appointive body, could defend Navarre’s interests against Madrid.

The Cortes was divided into three estates: ecclesiastics, nobles, and commoners. The three met together for debate but voted in separate chambers. Resolutions required majority passage in each chamber, thus practically ensuring the veto of any resolutions that threatened to disturb established power relationships. The popular branch was formed of the thirty-eight municipalities (nominally representing 36 percent of the population of Navarre) that, through their size, wealth, and importance, merited a seat in the Cortes. They were far outnumbered by the members of the clergy and nobility with seats in the Cortes, so that the balance of power lay not in the cities but in the first two estates. This ensured that representation from the Montaňa dominated proceedings.

Most of the time, the powers of the Cortes, including the right to collect taxes and to recruit for the army, were invested in the Diputación, a permanently standing committee elected by each Cortes upon its dissolution. The Diputación was presided by the bishop of Pamplona, and included six other representatives: two from the noble estate, two from the city of Pamplona with one vote between them, and two from other municipalities, again with one vote. This structure ensured that urban interests got a hearing while at the same time reserving final power for the nobles and the bishop of Pamplona, whenever they should wish to operate in concert. In the Diputación, too, representatives from the Montaňa had the final word.

One of the most valuable foral rights was control over taxation. The Diputación levied taxes and disbursed most of the revenue locally, helping to create the appearance of prosperity and order for which Navarre was famous.29 Madrid received its revenues from Navarre in the form of an annual gift. Before granting the gift, however, the Navarrese could raise grievances over contrafueros. Once these were rectified, it would put the machinery of tax collection into motion. Spanish monarchs, so as not to threaten the already thin flow of money from Navarre, were careful to avoid contravening the Navarrese fueros. The exception proves the resilience of the foral constitution. In 1796 the Spanish government initiated an offensive against the taxing powers of Navarre, but this was so ineffective that during the first decade of the nineteenth century the crown actually spent more in Navarre than it extracted. In effect, Navarre was exempt from its fiscal duties toward the central government at the time of the French invasion.