

Sheep were important in both the Ribera and the Montaňa.6 In the Ribera, however, sheep were kept by relatively few individuals in vast flocks, whereas in the Montaňa many peasants had small flocks. For example, in Corella four nobles owned almost half of the total number of sheep in the city, and sixteen individuals owned 95 percent of the sheep.7 In contrast, the top four ranchers in Echauri controlled only one- fourth of the stock of sheep, while there were dozens of individuals with small herds.8

Despite the subsistence orientation of farming in the Montaňa, social and technical factors peculiar to the region had created an efficient agriculture there. As seen in the previous chapter, most families in the Montaňa had access to land. Peasants owned, or more rarely rented, land in small strips located in different, open fields. This ensured each family the opportunity to plant a variety of crops in different soils and locations and prevented any one person from monopolizing the best land or losing everything in an extremely localized disaster—the unpenning of sheep, for example. The division of the land in this way was a reasonable and time-honored system. While agricultural reformers were trying to increase productivity by enclosing land and by introducing new techniques, peasants in the Montaňa, maintaining their primitive land distribution and employing ancient methods, farmed more efficiently than most in Europe. Seed yields on the best land were 1:8 or higher, and average yields of 1:6 were reported in Echarri-Aranaz.9 By comparison, average yields in France were on the order of 1:5, in Germany 1:4, and in White Russia 1:3.10

Climate was partly responsible for this high productivity. Steady rainfall and mild weather meant that two crops could be grown each year. By alternating crops of wheat and maize with crops of legumes, it was less necessary to rest the land. And the large numbers of livestock provided the fertilizer necessary to replenish the soil.11 These advantages were reinforced by the social organization of labor. Widespread private ownership in small communities had produced a hardworking peasantry notable for its devotion to the land and its use of cooperative labor arrangements.12 It was this social advantage, above all else, that helped produce such high yields in northern Navarre, not the application of capital or any technical advance.

Indeed, peasants in the Montaňa employed the most ancient agricultural implement in Europe, the neolithic laya, a kind of spade, rather than (or in addition to) the plow. The laya was used exclusively by the Basques. The small size of the plots and the steep terrain made this ancient technology more practical than the plow. The Romans in their day had already viewed the laya as an atavism, yet the advantages it offered ensured its use right into the twentieth century. For one thing, the laya was cheap. Anyone could own a set of them. Access to costly plows and draft animals was one factor that had worked to stratify European peasants, but in the Montaňa the laya allowed poorer peasants to compete with their richer neighbors, and this reinforced the egalitarian tendency of society in the region.