

Artisans were overrepresented in the Ribera. The Ebro valley produced textiles, soap, aguardiente, and licorice, on a scale that employed significant numbers of people. Of course, the Montaňa was not devoid of industrial activity. Textile production was important in Estella and Sangüesa, and the mining of iron and copper had been carried out on a small scale for centuries in the region. But fewer people in the Montaňa, especially in the merindad of Pamplona, made their primary living from mining or manufacturing.55 Indeed, there were even some rather large villages in which almost nobody seemed to work outside of agriculture. For example, in Echarri-Aranaz there were only 14 people working full time in industry in a population of 774.56

Industry was not really booming anywhere in Navarre. The crafts used old techniques, shops were small, productivity was low, and Navarre exported almost nothing.57 An indication of the primitive nature of Navarrese industry was the preponderance of master artisans over apprentices and other employees by a ratio of two to one. Especially in the Montaňa, manufacturers were normally craftsmen employing one or no apprentice and producing for small local markets.58 The guild organization was as yet unchallenged in the Montaňa. Neither the horizontal integration of the putting-out system nor the development of factories had any place in the region. There was, in other words, nothing like an industrial proletariat or even a proto-industrial work force in the Montaňa.

Instead, most people in the Montaňa were peasant farmers who owned their own land. In Navarre as a whole, labradores, or peasants who worked their own or rented land, outnumbered jornaleros, or day laborers, by three to one. This already made Navarre unusual. In Spain as a whole there were more jornaleros (53 percent) than labradores (48 percent). Looking more closely at the figures for labradores in Navarre, one finds that 70 percent owned the land they worked, while only 30 percent were leaseholders. This situation was reversed on the national level, where some 60 percent of the labradores rented land and only 40 percent were proprietors.59

These figures become even more suggestive when they are broken down within Navarre. For example, while the ratio of landed peasants to day laborers (3:1) was remarkable enough at the provincial level, in the Montaňa the proportion rose to 9:1. In the merindades of Pamplona and Sangüesa only 7 percent of the active population was identified as landless laborers.60 In many areas there were no landless peasants. Aspiroz, a village of 298 inhabitants in 1786, showed 298 peasant proprietors, 205 of whom were nobles. (It is notable that women and children were listed as nobles and proprietors.) In the village of Echauri 98 percent of the arable land was worked by its owners. There were a few leased properties, but these were small plots at prices averaging between 2 percent and 6 percent of the value of the harvest. With land so easy to come by, landlords could not charge more to their tenants. There were no day laborers in Echauri.61 When one considers that most of the over 14,000 nobles in the region were socially in the same class as peasant proprietors, it becomes clear that the Montaňa of Navarre was the land par excellence of the small farmer.