

All of these factors created in the Montaňa a prosperous peasantry that produced rich harvests of grains and livestock, and sufficient oils and wine to meet its own needs. The region could have exported some crops, but actually exported very little. The wide distribution of property ensured this. Neither feudal nor market mechanisms for extracting surplus production, in the form of rents or underpaid labor, respectively, had ever really penetrated the Montaňa. With the products of agriculture distributed among 100,000 independent producers and among myriad sites of production, most of Navarre’s agricultural wealth was consumed at or near the production site.18 There was, then, little means for extracting wealth from the peasants in the Montaňa.19

This feature of the Montaňa was one of the greatest obstacles for the French regime and a great source of strength for the guerrilla movement. The peasants’ control of production placed them in direct conflict with the taxing and requisitioning apparatus of the French government. In the Ribera, the French could force taxes and requisitions from a few big landowners. These collections cut into profits, but they did not threaten the lives of the landed elite. Moreover, the French compensated landowners in the Ribera with access to power and nationalized properties. In the Montaňa, the French were forced to send agents with armed escorts into hundreds of villages to raise contributions. What they exacted from such villages directly affected the subsistence of individual property holders. As will be seen, the initial point of attack for the guerrillas was against French requisition parties in villages in the Montaňa, and it was by protecting such villages from French exploitation that the guerrillas gained the allegiance of the peasantry.

Peasants in the Montaňa not only had motives for resisting the French, they also had the means. Because the Montaňa lay outside feudal and market systems of extraction, the cost of living was lower there than anywhere else in Spain. Wine, for example, cost 4 reales a cántaro, the lowest in the whole country, where the average price was 13 reales. The price of wheat in Navarre from the 1780s to 1807 ranged from 7 to 25 reales per robo, again the lowest in Spain, where the average (in 1799) was 48 reales.20 The limited profits that could be obtained from agriculture also depressed the price of real property. Grain land around Pamplona could be paid for with the income from two harvests.21 And the price for an acre of tierra blanca (unirrigated, unplanted, open-field land) could be as low as 20 to 30 reales, a few weeks wages for a day laborer.22 The price of housing, the greatest cost for most peasants, was much lower in the Montaňa than in the Ribera. Many Montañeros owned their homes, and those who rented did not pay much. In the valley of Echauri the average rent for a house was 88 reales, compared with 170 reales in Corella and 253 reales in Tudela.

In this situation, peasants were able to preserve their real property and to accumulate movable property at a remarkable rate. On 30 January 1800 officials in Echauri, on a writ from the Royal Council in Pamplona, entered the house of a local proprietor, Francisco Azanza, in order to seize his remaining property in payment of a debt he owed to another proprietor. Azanza owned a large array of furniture: fourteen chairs and two small benches, two large tables, four chests, and one mirror, among the items remaining in the house. He even possessed five paintings, items of impossible luxury for peasants in most of Spain (and the highest priced goods in the house). In the kitchen were a large number of pots and pans, ceramic casseroles, pitchers, plates, cups, utensils, and a tablecloth.23