## 2 Economy and Politics in Navarre

AT THE TIME OF the French invasion Navarre possessed a rich agricultural economy. Relative to its size, Navarre ranked second out of thirty-three Spanish provinces in the volume of its wheat harvest. It ranked first in the production of wine and spirits, with one-fourth of all the liqueur, or aguardiente, produced in Spain coming out of Navarre. It was the thirteenth largest producer of vegetable oils and ranked ninth in the value of its livestock.1 Industrially, Navarre was less developed than most Spanish provinces, ranking twentieth among thirty-three provinces in manufacturing. Moreover, most of Navarre’s manufactures served strictly local markets. In general, Navarre exported raw materials and imported finished goods, especially from France, a sign of the province’s quasi-colonial subordination to the French economy.2

Industry was more important in the economy of the Ribera towns than it was in the Montaňa. As already seen in the previous chapter, the Montaňa supported few full-time workers in industry. As a result there was little craft specialization, and manufactures in the Montaňa were too shoddy to compete even in very local markets. The Ribera, on the other hand, produced textiles, liqueurs, and other products for local markets, and a small but significant portion of the population made its living from industry, broadly defined. Thus, manufactures generated 1,190 reales of income per person in Corella, but only 95 reales in Echauri.3

A comparison of agriculture in the Montaňa and the Ribera also reveals interesting differences. Ribereños had more contact with regional markets and tended to specialize in fewer, more commercially viable products, whereas people in the Montaňa grew a wider variety of crops as a way to ensure local food supplies. Wheat was the main product in both regions. In the merindad of Tudela the wheat harvest accounted for 63 percent of all crop production, and barley made up another 28 percent. In the merindad of Pamplona, on the other hand, wheat made up only 48 percent of all crops. The Montaňa also produced less rye, barley, and oats, but grew a number of lesser grains, fodder crops, and legumes whose cultivation was almost unknown in the Ribera. Maize, which was not used in the merindad of Tudela at all, was almost as important as wheat in the Pamplona region.

Then, as now, most of the wine produced in Navarre came from the Ribera, but areas of Pamplona from which the vine has retreated in modern times also produced important quantities of wine and aguardiente. The Ribera was the source of most of the olive oil in Navarre, but even here small quantities were produced in the Montaňa for local use. The importance of chestnuts in the Montaňa—in the merindad of Pamplona the volume of chestnuts harvested was larger than any crop but wheat, maize, and beans—indicated the survival of sylvan modes of production long since lost in the Ribera.4

The Montaňa, just as it produced a greater variety of crops than the Ribera, also had more kinds of livestock and in greater numbers. Most families kept pigs, the commonest source of meat, and goats, which could convert leavings and the grasses of the mountains and commons into milk, cheese, and meat. There were also a large number of cattle and oxen, used for milk, meat, and labor. By contrast, pigs and goats were rare in the Ribera, and oxen were practically unknown. In the valley of Echauri there was an ox, cow, horse, goat, or pig for every 1.5 people, compared with one of these animals for every 13 people in Corella.5