

At the same time, the absence of regular orders and greedy “other” secular clergy, as well as the scarcity of church lands in the Montaňa, had not generated the kind of anticlerical sentiment that was already evident in the Ribera and in many other areas of Spain. The French program to dissolve monasteries, abolish whole categories of clergy, and seize church property would not have been understood in the Montaňa, where most people knew the church through their priest, who was no more than the “first among the parish poor.”53 In this situation, French reforms could only have appeared as vandalism and an offense to piety.

The nature of the nobility and clergy in the Montaňa was conducive to social cohesion, and this helped the region produce a guerrilla insurgency. More important, however, was the character of the rest of the population. In Navarre, 91 percent of the population belonged to the so- called third estate, a term that expressed a legal distinction rather than a social reality, since within the third estate there existed the greatest variety of conditions.

Most people in both the Montaňa and the Ribera depended on agriculture. Excluding nobles and clerics, whose numbers and resources— also mainly agricultural—have been considered apart, 68 percent of the remaining population that had an occupation in Navarre either exploited a plot of land directly, worked for wages on land belonging to someone else, or raised livestock. About 17 percent of the active population comprised artisans, and just over 9 percent worked in domestic service. Those constituting the remaining 6 percent were divided among military and government personnel (1 percent each), doctors, lawyers, and other professionals (2 percent), commerce and industry (1 percent), and students (1 percent).

These figures show that Navarre did not deviate much from the Spanish norm. The percentage of people in agriculture was identical; the proportion of artisans, students, merchants, and manufacturers was slightly smaller; and the proportion of domestic servants was a bit greater. How-ever, the distinguishing mark of Navarrese society was, once again, the absolute difference between the Montaňa and the Ribera in terms of the social and occupational structure of the population.

The proportion of students, merchants, professionals, royal servants, and military personnel was 2 percent lower in Navarre than in Spain as a whole. It was lowest of all in the merindad of Pamplona, somewhat higher in Sangüesa, Olite, and Estella, and approached the national average in Tudela. The weakness of these professions in the Montaňa meant that clerics, as sources of information and leadership, had few rivals in their communities. On the other hand, the relative strength of these groups in the Ribera supplied a natural constituency to the collaboration, for the professional classes, including officers in the Spanish army, were everywhere in Spain among the first to pledge allegiance to the French government. As will be seen, in Tudela, men like the erudite and flexible José Yangüas y Miranda would quickly make peace with the occupation, in the hopes of reaping political and economic rewards from the Bonaparte regime.54