

One of the mechanisms that kept land prices down in the Montaňa and helped to underpin the wide property distribution was an arrangement known as the carta de gracia. Through the carta de gracia peasants were able to supplement their own ancestral possessions by acquiring the usufruct of others in exchange for the payment of onetime “purchase” prices.62 The true owner of a plot sold in carta de gracia was allowed to recover his property by refunding the usufruct owner the cost of the land plus improvements. This, however, occurred much less frequently than might be expected.63 There was little incentive for landowners to spend money reconstituting their estates from lands previously sold in carta de gracia. Stagnant or declining population and the absence of markets for agricultural products made commercial exploitation of land unattractive in the Montaňa. And because so many people owned land outright, it was difficult to find tenants for leaseholds: people were unwilling to pay rent for any but the very best plots of land.64 Proprietors with more land than they could work directly or with widely dispersed lands that could not be leased were therefore satisfied to obtain what they could from sales in carta de gracia, which at least allowed them theoretically to recover ownership at a later date.

The contrast with the Ribera could not be starker. Day laborers there far outnumbered peasants who owned or leased land, by as much as 4:1 in the merindad of Tudela, where 50 percent of the active population was listed as jornaleros. There were tenant farmers, but land was hard to come by and prices were relatively high, so that even tenants were forced to work as day laborers to supplement their income. In Corella, where a few families controlled almost all of the land, there was not a single case of a leasehold peasant who did not also have to work at least part of the time as a day laborer on one of the big estates.65

The nature of the Ribera made it easy for the French to dominate. A handful of families owned all of the land. The French squeezed these families for taxes and requisitions and rewarded them with church property and a measure of public power. In contrast, the average person in the Ribera had nothing. Men worked for a wage, either in industry or agriculture. To such a person, it was irrelevant whether wages were supplied by a pro-Bourbon or pro-Bonaparte boss or landlord. Most men were jornaleros, unemployed for months at a time, begging or tramping great distances to find work in agricultural slow seasons.66 Such men were extremely vulnerable. What could make them risk everything to defend the order of things against the French? The church was not likely to inspire Ribereños to die for it, and even if someone wanted to resist the French, with what resources could he do so? Most Ribereños faced the French occupation naked, and only extraordinary circumstances could have led such people into the guerrilla movement.

Things were quite different in the Montaňa. Here most people owned enough land outright to avoid working for a wage or renting. Industry was primitive, almost nonexistent in places, so few people depended on wages. Thus, there had been no developments in industry or agriculture to occasion any significant social differentiation. Almost everyone was a farmer or dependent of a farmer. The nobility was not a class apart that could be used by the French to control the population, nor were most people conscious of vassalage as a burden to be removed. The church was represented for most people by the parish priest, who lived and worked among the peasants as an equal. Thus, there was nothing in the French program to attract peasants in the Montaňa or induce them to collaborate.