

The French had arranged to send an unarmed requisition party every four days to the gate of the Ciudadela, which possessed a flour mill and bakery large enough to meet the French troops’ requirements. This circumstance provided the opening D’Armagnac required. On the morning of 16 February, sixty men, weapons hidden inside their cloaks, approached the fortress to collect bread. That night a heavy snowfall had blanketed the city. Some of the requisition party, while waiting outside the fort, feigned joy at the sight of the fresh snow and engaged in a vigorous snowball fight. The Spanish guards were enthralled with the sport and failed to notice that some of the French now stood upon the lowered drawbridge. Quickly, they entered the gate and disarmed the Spanish guards. During the night, D’Armagnac had secreted an additional 100 grenadiers inside his house. These men now rushed to the Ciudadela, took the armory with 10,000 muskets, and brought to a conclusion the first hostile action of the Spanish war. The most important fortress in north-central Spain had fallen to a handful of French troops armed with snowballs.

A few hours later, D’Armagnac had the following announcement posted in the streets: “Inhabitants of Pamplona: Do not interpret the recent alterations as a sign of treason or perfidy, but an act dictated by necessity for the security of my troops. Napoleon, my lord, who has signed a treaty of alliance with Spain, will back up my words.” At the same time, in the cynical manner of imperial communiqués, he assured the municipal government and the Diputación of his good intentions, writing: “This act must be considered a new tie of friendship.”5

The initial reaction in Pamplona and elsewhere to this treachery was hostile, and in some provinces there was talk of a general rising. In Valladolid a French soldier was cut down in the streets by armed citizens when the bad news from Pamplona arrived, and in an ensuing fight, two more Frenchmen were wounded.6 In Pamplona an angry mob led by students occupied the city streets. At first, D’Armagnac cleared them with troops, but soon the crowds were augmented by armed peasants from the countryside. D’Armagnac had to withdraw to the Ciudadela, leaving the streets in the hands of his enemies. On 18 February the court finally sent Vallesantoro instructions to keep the French out of the citadel, and secretly Madrid went even further, sending a special agent whose task was to prepare Pamplona for an uprising. Of course, these efforts were too late.7 The Ciudadela was in French hands, and D’Armagnac could congratulate himself for having acted in the nick of time.

The general’s celebration was premature. Soon he found himself playing Remirro de Orco to Napoleon’s Caesar Borgia. The deceitful means used to occupy the citadel had made D’Armagnac an object of loathing in Navarre and had, moreover, left a bad taste in the general’s mouth. Expressing a sentiment that would become a common refrain among French officers in occupied Spain, D’Armagnac wrote that he would prefer “a state of open war” to the hypocritical situation in which he found himself. Having made the mistake of expressing disgust for his “vile mission,” as he called it, D’Armagnac became disposable. When the general persisted in filing discouraging reports on the situation in Pamplona and requested additional troops, the emperor replaced him with General D’Agoult.8 Napoleon branded D’Armagnac an inexperienced commander who had acted contrary to orders, and rumors were spread in Navarre that the emperor would rectify the situation.9