

Thus, the foral constitution both empowered the Navarrese and gave them something worth defending. In addition, the foral government ensured its own popularity through specific legislation to control prices and commerce. Among other things, Pamplona limited the extraction of grains and other staples from Navarre. When harvests fell short in Spain, Navarrese producers felt great pressure to export cereals to Castile and Aragon, where dearths generally hit harder, causing prices to rise more than in Navarre. The Diputación, however, prohibited grain exports in bad years, consistently favoring consumers over the big producers in the Ribera.36 In this way, the government acted to close the door on the acquisitive spirit of landowners and merchants who could have gouged consumers in both Navarre and in the rest of Spain during times of shortage.

Local governments too were able to control the price of staples. During shortages, they fixed prices locally. They used public funds to purchase cereals from abroad and prohibited local farmers who had good harvests from selling outside of the community.37 These controls on industry and commerce were a constant source of irritation to big landowners and merchants in the Ribera who saw the future of Navarre as a supplier of cash crops for export.38 But such measures also buttressed the position of small farmers and landless laborers, ensuring the popularity of the foral government among most people.

Aside from the material advantages they afforded, the fueros also had a strong emotional appeal in Navarre. In the abstract, they had few detractors. Even those Ribereños who would have liked to see a free market in grains and the opening of trade with Castile and Aragon agreed with the small farmer of the Montaňa on the value of exemptions from royal taxes. Equally important, Navarrese believed that the constitution of Navarre, in which the king governed by compact with the Navarrese people, was a model for all Spain. The Navarrese were proud of this fact. In 1811, a Navarrese representative in Cádiz extolled the constitution of Navarre as the embodiment of the popular sovereignty missing in the rest of Spain since the time of the Hapsburgs. All Castile and Aragon had to do was to reclaim that which the Navarrese had never lost, their natural and legitimate right of self-government.39 In reality, the vaunted sovereignty of the Navarrese people did not go very far. Yet, what mattered was that people believed in the idea of a sovereign Navarre. In the struggle with France, the Navarrese had more to defend than other Spaniards, for among other things they were fighting for an ancient and tested constitutional government.

The strength of the foral issue in Navarre was not fully understood inside France, where opinion was from the first in favor of the abolition of regional privileges. When it leaked as early as the spring of 1808 that the French had designs on Navarre and that they would certainly abolish the foral system, there was immediate reaction from Navarrese leaders. Miguel Izquierdo wrote to Madrid in the spring of 1808 describing the horror Navarrese would feel should they lose their traditional liberties.40 Joseph Bonaparte’s advisers warned him that Navarre would fight if its fueros were threatened. In 1810 Miguel Azanza, a Navarro and the most important member of Joseph’s entourage, even made a special trip to Paris in part to warn Napoleon against consummating his plan to make Navarre another French department. In the War of Independence, where the combatants fought for a complex of personal, religious, dynastic, national, and regional issues, it is difficult to sort out and assign values to the various motivating factors. The trepidation of Spanish collaborators over the French plan to abolish the fueros, however, argues strongly for the influence that the foral and regional question had among the Navarrese.41