## 3 The Invasion and Revolution of 1808

ON THE MORNING of 9 February 1808 General D’Armagnac, at the head of 2,000 French infantrymen, entered Pamplona through the northern city gate known, ironically, as the Portal de Francia.1 Two days earlier the French had crossed the Spanish border at Roncesvalles. Twenty feet of snow in the mountain pass had forced D’Armagnac to proceed without his artillery, and he feared for the survival of his small army should Pamplona resist.

D’Armagnac had cause for alarm. Officially, France was still Spain’s ally, and Madrid accepted the presence of French troops in Spain as a security measure against their common enemy, England. However, many Spaniards had come to mistrust the intentions of Napoleon, and in Pamplona crowds filled the streets, fired by orators who spoke of driving the French from Navarre.2 The garrison was called to arms inside the city’s fortress, or Ciudadela, which was surrounded by a mob of people blocking the entrances. On 10 February an assassin knifed a French soldier to death in the street. D’Armagnac wrote to Paris that Pamplona was against him and that “the merest spark would set all Navarre ablaze.”3 The hostility of the Navarrese was justified, of course, for D’Armagnac carried secret orders from Napoleon to seize the Ciudadela.

Since the incorporation of Navarre into the Spanish monarchy in 1512, Pamplona had been one of the key points of Spanish defense against attack from the north. In 1571 Phillip II had ordered the construction of a fortress in the city to be built on a scale commensurate with his vast empire. The Ciudadela took over a century to complete and incorporated the finest elements of what would come to be called the Vauban system. Almost as large as Pamplona itself, the Ciudadela presented an impregnable face of moats, walls, towers, parapets, and glacis to the attacker. The fortress was supposed to enable even a small garrison to hold out for months against a siege. As events turned out, however, the people of Pamplona labored to build and maintain this impressive fort for nothing. The Ciudadela, which had never had its ability to withstand a siege really tested, fell in 1808 to a simple ruse without a shot being fired.

The day after his arrival, D’Armagnac asked the viceroy of Navarre, the Marqués of Vallesantoro, for permission to enter the Ciudadela with 400 men in order to reinforce the Spanish garrison. Once inside, the French could have easily overcome the 300 troops of the garrison, many of them invalids and inexperienced militiamen. Vallesantoro knew this and wisely refused to allow entry to his French “allies” until he received specific orders from Madrid. While Vallesantoro waited for guidance from the court, D’Armagnac settled into a house that stood just outside the main gate to the Ciudadela, a location that would eventually prove useful to him.4 There he began to consider what might be done to pacify the city. The French position in Navarre was perilous. D’Armagnac, in the midst of an unfriendly population, had no artillery, few men, and little ammunition. Without access to the citadel, his men were dangerously exposed. In this situation, D’Armagnac could not wait for permission to enter the Ciudadela, and he engineered such a subterfuge to take the fortress as might have made Odysseus blush.