

The March revolution surprised Napoleon and filled him with foreboding for the future of his enterprise in Spain. The “people” had shown itself less somnolent than the government and army. Roads suddenly became unsafe, and French soldiers were instructed to act as if they were in hostile territory. Around the western Pyrenees it was as if war had already been declared.18 The irony of Aranjuez, however, was that it placed on the throne a prince no less subservient to Napoleon than Godoy and Charles had been. For the past year, Ferdinand had been trying to gain Napoleon’s friendship, and he redoubled these efforts once he came to power, despite the opposition of many of his supporters, who would have liked to see him steer Spain’s foreign policy on a more independent course. Thus, when Napoleon summoned Ferdinand to Bayonne for a conference in early April, the young king decided to make the trip against the wishes of his advisers. Ferdinand departed Madrid on 10 April, leaving behind a junta to govern in his absence. When he arrived in Bayonne on 20 April, he was arrested and told of the emperor’s intention to take possession of Spain.

Over the next two weeks, Napoleon pressured Ferdinand to abdicate the throne back to his father. Charles had already declared the events at Aranjuez illegal. On 30 April Napoleon arranged a meeting between father and son at which Charles, following a script prepared in Paris, demanded that Ferdinand relinquish the throne. Maria Luisa applied additional pressure, but Ferdinand refused to step aside.19 A few days later, impelled by a dangerous turn of events in Madrid, Napoleon personally asked for Ferdinand’s abdication, but again the young king proved unwilling. According to witnesses, the emperor’s “request” then took a more direct form. “It is necessary,” he told Ferdinand, “to choose between abdication and death.”20 On 5 May, Ferdinand chose to abdicate to his father. Charles then abdicated to Napoleon, and the emperor turned Spain over to his brother, Joseph Bonaparte.

As this drama in Bayonne unfolded, events in Spain once again outpaced Napoleon’s capacity for planning. The revolt at Aranjuez had raised hopes of long overdue change, and Spaniards, as a result, became more truculent and less willing to accept the insults of French troops stationed in the country. In Madrid there was a wave of violence in the streets between French soldiers and Spaniards that threatened to degenerate into open warfare.21 On the night of 25 March Spanish troops killed one French soldier and wounded two others as the three tried to force their way into a brothel on the rough Calle de San Antonio. In early April a French soldier refused to remove his hat for a religious procession, and the devout beat him severely. The violence escalated further when rumors of Ferdinand’s arrest in Bayonne reached Madrid in late April. On 26 April three soldiers assassinated and robbed a civilian, and in the evening one of Murat’s aides killed another Madrileño in a street battle. The next day a merchant stabbed and gravely wounded a soldier, and that evening seven French soldiers were set upon by patrons of a cabaret they were attending. Three fell seriously wounded. In all, according to General Grouchy’s reports, the French troops garrisoning Madrid suffered twenty-three casualties in March and April.