

The fueros exempted the Navarrese from war except in defense of Navarre. In 1803 and again in 1806, after heated battles with Madrid, Navarre was finally forced to relinquish this privilege and accede to military levies. Nevertheless, the full levy, by which the government was supposed to be able to recruit one out of every five men of military age, was not obtained from Navarre. In 1803, the province contributed 800 men, and in 1806-7 another 1,498 men, the only “blood contribution” made by Navarre to the Spanish military in the prewar era. Again, any threat to this fuero, whether from Madrid or Paris, was likely to meet staunch resistance.

One of Navarre’s most valuable privileges was its separate customs border. In the rest of Spain, the Bourbons had created a single, national market, and they had restricted the importation of finished manufactured goods and the exportation of raw materials in an attempt to encourage industrial development. Navarre, however, controlled its own borders and was exempt from these restrictions. Thousands of Navarrese depended on the sale of raw materials, especially wool, to France. Thousands more made money by importing finished goods from France and reexporting them (illegally) to Castile and Aragon. The export of wool was particularly important to the monasteries of the Montaňa, which enjoyed enormous power within the Cortes and the Diputación, and could veto any proposed change in the constitution. Drovers depended on the carrying trade, and consumers in general benefited from cheaper French manufactures. The city of Pamplona, well represented in the Cortes and Diputación, was one of the great entrepôts for French goods in Spain and stood opposed to any reform of the customs border. Finally, the foral government as a whole grew fat on its tariff revenues and was unwilling to give them up.30 In short, there were powerful interests in Navarre prepared to defend any threat to its foral right to a separate tariff border. As a result, the Bourbons avoided threatening this aspect of the foral constitution.

Again, the exception proves how important the separate customs system was to the Navarrese. In 1717 the Bourbons had tried to extend Spanish customs to the Pyrenees. However, within a few years, as harassment of royal customs officials reached warfare proportions and smuggling absorbed previously legitimate trade, the customhouses along the Pyrenees border of Navarre cost more money to defend than they were able to collect. In 1722 Madrid admitted defeat and returned the operation to the Navarrese, withdrawing Spain’s customs border back to the Ebro River.31 This was a sign of the power of foral issues in Navarre.

Those who profited most from the separate customs were the Navarrese engaged in the illegal transit of French products into Spain. The number of people who made their living from smuggling, while impossible to count accurately due to a lack of documentation, was probably higher than in any other Spanish province judging from police records and from the observations of contemporaries.32 One result of smuggling was the widespread availability of weapons, though this was no doubt also related to the continued economic importance of hunting in much of Navarre.33 In the early nineteenth century Navarre had more guns per capita than any other province. The availability of weapons also had its effect on the rate of crime, which was higher in Navarre than in any province except Madrid and Logroño.34 Indeed, in border regions of Navarre, like Roncal and Salazar, there existed a frontier atmosphere in which a large part of the population handled firearms and lived outside the law, either smuggling or having economic relations with smugglers. The possession of small arms and the habituation to lawlessness was an important resource for the guerrilla resistance after 1808, when being an outlaw and a patriot became one in the same thing. In the guerrilla army of Navarre, smugglers acted as soldiers, guides, and, ironically, as Mina’s own customs officers.35