

The array of powers possessed by municipalities was truly astounding. Local governments selected their priests and arranged for their payment. They controlled settlement and residence within the municipal boundaries, denying communal privileges to anyone they felt might upset the community. They allocated the tax burden communicated by the Diputación and handled conscription locally. They regulated planting and the harvest, dealt with local disturbances, and jealously controlled the ability of travelers to enter the village freely, especially vagabonds, gypsies, or other outsiders.46

These extensive powers were possible because of the large financial resources available to the municipalities. The first set of resources comprised the town rents. Local governments auctioned off some community services and properties in a procedure that had changed little over many generations. In Echauri, these included the mill, the bakery, the fish market, the butcher shop, the inn, the wineshop, and a fishing concession in the river Arga. When it came time to renew a license, the municipality placed notices in all the villages of the valley of Echauri. The auction lasted as long as it took to burn three candles. At each new bid, the price of the service rose one ducado (eleven reales). As a result, the rental income of the village could vary widely from year to year. In the first decade of the nineteenth century Echauri took in a minimum of 1,000 to 1,200 reales a year from these rents.47 Larger towns and cities supplied many more services. Corella rented concessions for the sale of olive oil, salt, beans, licorice, and sausage. The city got about 24,000 reales a year from these sources during the decade before the French invasion, and another 1,500 to 2,000 reales worth of wheat from the in-kind rental of three flour mills.48

The second set of resources comprised the town lands. Echauri rented land to raise the priest’s salary, kept pasture aside for the butcher to use for fattening livestock, and rented other properties to meet ordinary expenses. A final resource was the huge common lands. In the Montaňa these lands were still normally exploited communally, usually for pasture and firewood, although governments sometimes rented pieces to individuals on a temporary basis as a way of raising extra funds.49 Large commons in the Montaňa helped to preserve the poorest members of the community from destitution, since they could keep a few animals without actually owning their own pastures. In the Ribera, on the other hand, municipalities routinely rented out commons, and communal usage had fallen into disfavor. The poor in the Ribera were, therefore, entirely dependent on wages.50

The democratic structure of municipal government in the Montaňa naturally affected decisions on the raising and allocating of funds and on such crucial issues as conscription and the use of the commons. In 1807 the Diputación finally acceded to a military levy in Navarre after a long struggle with Madrid over the issue. Communities reserved the right to pay for exemption from this requirement, and they usually raised the money through a head tax. The valley of Echauri’s contribution was set at thirteen individuals.51 All the villages in Echauri agreed that such a levy was out of the question, since there were no vagrants to impress into service.52 Instead, Echauri raised the 15,600 reales needed to buy exemption from military service. The government raised the money by taxing the adult male population, by taking an advance from the parish, and by utilizing surpluses in the treasury.53 In the end, the valley fell short of the sum required, and two young men were supposed to be selected at random for the army (though no evidence exists that this actually took place).54