

In Cádiz, too, the mob seized power when the Marqués del Socorro, captain general of Cádiz, hesitated to declare Ferdinand king. Exasperated rebels took over the artillery park and armory, stormed the house of the Marqués, dragged him to the center of town, and executed him. They trained the artillery on the fashionable homes of the Calle de la Caleta, and the violence might have gone further but for the intervention of Capuchin monks, who succeeded in quieting the crowd. By then, however, the rebels had established a new junta in the city and had proclaimed war against France. During the next six years the people of Cádiz were principal actors in the defense of the city and nation.32

On 24 May new juntas took control in Zaragoza, Cartagena, and Badajoz. And in the following week Seville, Cordoba, Leon, Mallorca, Granada, and La Coruña, among the major population centers in Spain, formed governments of resistance. By mid-June, each province was governed by its own revolutionary junta, and by summer’s end these sent representatives to a Central Junta for all Spain. The mobilization against France brought new men into government. These men, through the juntas, conceived the idea that the Spanish nation, through the process of resistance, had recovered its primitive sovereignty. The juntas were the first popularly chosen authorities in Spain, and they placed new ideals and programs on the political agenda, from which they would never be entirely erased, even during the darkest moments of reaction in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The juntas gave birth to liberal, constitutional government and to the modern concept of nationhood in Spain. This was the Revolution of 1808, the beginning of contemporary Spanish history.33

The revolutionary climate brought out the best and the worst instincts in people. The nation had been prepared for a xenophobic explosion by a century of French cultural and political domination, and when Spain woke in 1808, it was to the sound of hateful tirades against France. The Central Junta engaged in the most inflammatory rhetoric in proclamations intended to mobilize the Spanish people:

What sort of thing is a Frenchman? A being monstrous and indefinable: a being half created. There is nobody who does not have the right to kill these ferocious animals. Therefore, fellow countrymen, let us hunt these creatures; let us pursue them day and night by sea and on land through many years of blood and fire until we rid the universe of this barbarous, brutal, lascivious, and libertine people, along with its wicked leader, until we are purified of this damnable race of monsters so noxious to the human species.34

The ugly propaganda produced results. Anyone who had been associated with the pro-French regime of Godoy or who chose to support Joseph, anyone who even dressed or acted French, was liable to become the victim of popular wrath. Yet, without this climate of national chauvinism, the explosion of popular energy and the reforging of the Spanish nation in the summer of 1808 would have been inconceivable.