## 4 The Failure of Revolution in Navarre

DURING THE SUMMER of revolution in 1808 Navarre was one of the quietest provinces in all Spain. The city of Pamplona was incapable of producing a revolt like the dos de Mayo in Madrid or a revolutionary movement like that in Valencia. The conservative bourgeoisie, resident nobility, and rich clergy of the viceregal capital made spontaneous disorder of any kind difficult to sustain.1 In addition, the presence of some 2,400 French troops and their Spanish auxiliaries entrenched in the Ciudadela discouraged resistance.2 Finally, the collaboration of government officials in Pamplona robbed the rebellion in Navarre of any central direction. The viceroy and provincial government, or Diputación, followed French directives with unnecessary relish in 1808, functioning as the nexus between the occupying power and the people and calling for cooperation with France in achieving the “regeneration” of the nation.3

Outside of the capital, there were some signs of resistance. The town of Estella, in particular, was the scene of an early uprising against the French. On 25 April Estella learned of Ferdinand’s predicament in Bayonne. Crowds appeared in the streets wearing the red cockade, but, as elsewhere, it was news of Ferdinand’s abdication that precipitated open rebellion. On 1 June a mob forced the city council to dissolve, and two days later a new council purged of collaborators circulated a proclamation to the surrounding countryside calling on people to rally to the defense of Estella.4 The viceroy in Pamplona sent in constables to arrest the rebel leaders, but they were driven off, after a short skirmish in which one of the constables was killed.

Meanwhile, Estella’s plea for support from its neighbors received little response. In Viana, a special junta of priests and other leaders sidetracked popular demands for a distribution of arms.5 In Corella, the “lower orders of the city” and “people without education” tried to overthrow the municipal government in the first week of June, but a group of “enlightened subjects” was able to reestablish order. The role of Corella’s clergy in calming the populace was especially noteworthy, once again illustrating the ambiguous role of the church in the Spanish resistance.6 Officials in a number of other towns also took active measures “to impede the mobilization and arming proposed by the city of Estella” and proudly reported the fact in letters to Pamplona.7

The failure of revolution in the rest of Navarre condemned the efforts of Estella to isolation and collapse. Estella finally raised three companies of men, armed with shepherds’ hooks, old swords, and some rusty firearms. Barricades were erected in the streets, and all was made ready for a French response.8 By itself, however, Estella was not a worthy military target, and the French ignored the city. Thus, there was no revolution of 1808 in Navarre, and effective rebel leadership had to come initially from outside the province, especially from nearby Zaragoza.