

The situation in the Aragonese capital was very different from that in Navarre. In the first place, Zaragoza was still free of French troops in the spring of 1808. Also, Zaragoza had long been a bastion of support for Ferdinand, and the city had greeted the fall of Godoy and Charles at Aranjuez with jubilation.9 In late April and early May, news of Ferdinand’s mistreatment in Bayonne produced profound resentment in Zaragoza and generated an insurrectionary climate in the city.

Zaragoza, like much of Spain, was gripped by a millenarian mood, rooted in a profound sense of national decadence, the result of economic contraction, bad harvests, and military and political humiliation.10 People believed that evil was afoot and that only Ferdinand, like a modern Moses, could lead the country to better times. On 17 May a miracle in the cathedral of Zaragoza galvanized the city. At the midday mass a crown appeared—some said out of a cloud above the cathedral, others said surrounded by palms above the altar—with the unlikely inscription: “God supports Ferdinand.” The clergy took advantage of the miracle to incite the populace to insurrection. They proclaimed the miracle a sign that the Holy Virgin of the Pilar of Zaragoza had granted protection to patriots. Any soldier wounded fighting the French was ensured 100 years relief from purgatory. Anyone killed would be reborn three days later in paradise. Murat was said to have been arrested in Madrid, and Ferdinand was rumored to have returned in disguise to lead a holy war against France. The day of deliverance was apparently at hand.11

On 24 May Ferdinand’s abdication became public knowledge in Zaragoza. Students and clerics called for an uprising, and a mob wearing cockades and led by a local surgeon took the military governor hostage and seized the castle of the Aljaferia, which contained an enormous arsenal of 25,000 rifles and 80 pieces of artillery. On 26 May the armed crowd marched to the country estate of José Palafox y Melcí, a longtime supporter of Ferdinand, and brought him back to Zaragoza as their leader. Palafox was installed at the head of a governing junta drawn from members of the old government, the military, and the clergy. The junta adopted the red cockade, defusing its revolutionary symbolism and identifying the new government with the insurrection. During the following days retired officers and soldiers as well as new recruits poured into Zaragoza. By 29 May 4,500 troops were drilling on the outskirts of town, and thousands more joined this force in the first days of June.

Meanwhile, the French had prepared a force of some 4,000 men under General Lefèbvre-Desnüettes to deal with the Zaragozan rebels. To reach Zaragoza, the French had to pass through Tudela, the second city of Navarre, located on the Ebro River fifteen miles north of the border with Aragon. Palafox hoped to check the French advance at Tudela, and on 31 May he offered to send men and arms to the city. The gift was at first rejected by the municipal government, which had no wish to be sacrificed for the good of Zaragoza.12 There were some in Tudela, however, who desired a battle, and when the details of Palafox’s offer leaked to the public on 2 June, a crowd formed in the streets and demanded that the municipality put up a fight.13 The mob forced city officials to retreat to the house of a town notable, José Yangüas y Miranda. There a special junta of community leaders was convened. On 3 June this junta apparently yielded to the revolutionaries and promised to accept Palafox’s aid and attempt to block the passage of the Ebro.