

The fall of the old regime and the breakdown of order also led to a significant degree of class and regional conflict. In each provincial revolution patriots had first to deal with collaborators and shirkers among the local elites before they could mobilize people to the resistance. The class warfare of the summer of 1808, evident in places like Valencia and Cádiz, less obvious in the case of Asturias, preceded the national war and was its precondition. When local notables could not be enrolled in the popular cause, they had to be circumvented or replaced. The collaboration and inaction of the Spanish elites created the opportunity for numerous incidents of popular violence. The Conde de Aguila, the Conde de Torre del Frasno, and the Marqués de Perales were among the prominent nobles who lost their lives to the popular revolution. Generals Borja, Trujillo, Saavedra, Filangieri, and San Juan and Colonel Cevallos were among the military officials who died at the hands of their compatriots. The revolution claimed the captains general of Cartagena and Cádiz, the governors of Tortosa and Castellon de la Plana, and the intendants in Cuenca and Salamanca. City officials were sacrificed in Cuenca, Reinosa, Jaen, La Carolina, Talavera de la Reina, and many other municipalities.35

At times, rebellion against France and French sympathizers spilled over into a general hostility toward all government, all nobility, all elites, even those who stood at the heart of the revolutionary impulse. The Cádiz newspaper, El Robespierre español, expressed the class animosity felt by many in the patriot movement. Spaniards fighting for the French should be captured, burned alive, their ashes scattered, and their goods confiscated, wrote the editors. Grandees who were merely sympathetic with the French should suffer the same fate. Neutral nobles might be spared, but their property should be taken anyway, and even nobles fighting with the patriots should have three-fourths of their land expropriated.36 Thus, the revolution threatened to destroy itself, in a massacre or alienation of some of the very people who were needed to give it direction.37

Even in Galicia, where the uprising seemed nearly unanimous to the French, the insurgency received little help from the bourgeoisie and almost none at all from ecclesiastics and nobles. One Galician patriot recalled that the resistance in Mondoñedo in 1809 was made difficult due to the lack of cooperation by local elites: “I will not say that the nobility has generally distinguished itself here, nor supplied aid, nor inspired anyone as patriotic examples. . . . Also, generally speaking, members of the clergy haven’t lent themselves [to the resistance].”38 Officials in Galicia tried to impede the rebellion. In El Ferrol, the governor-general refused to recognize Ferdinand until a mob of women burst into his quarters on 1 June, seized the armory, distributed 30,000 rifles and other weapons to the people, and forced the general to declare himself willing to die for Ferdinand.39