

Ecclesiastics were specially suspect in Galicia, and the local junta kept a watch on them to prevent them from aiding the French.40 This detail is an important feature of the uprising, because the Spanish war is perceived by many, especially in France, to have been a religious crusade led by priests and monks.41 The clergy did play a leading role in mobilizing people in some places, but not everywhere. The activity of clerics in Valencia has been mentioned. In Logroño on 31 May a mob drove the mayor from power and handed the city over to the archbishop. When Logroño fell a week later almost all of the regular clergy were taken with arms in hand, according to D’Agoult’s information, and the general predicted that France would have to do something about the “frocked canaille” of Spain.42 Priests in the Basque country circulated missives calling for war against France, and in Madrid after 2 May clergymen began propagandizing among Spanish and Portuguese troops attached to imperial armies, encouraging them to desert or sell their weapons, apparently with a degree of success.43 On the other hand, the bishop of Pamplona collaborated willingly with the French, as did many others.44 Even the bishop of Calahorra, who had been acclaimed leader of the Logroño insurrection, had actually been forced into accepting the position after the crowd had flushed him out of hiding.45 In Cádiz, the Capuchins aided the revolution, but by demobilizing the mob rather than joining it. In the end, a majority of the church hierarchy in Spain sided with the Bonaparte regime, either out of necessity or out of preference, but the incidence of collaboration varied greatly from province to province.46 It is evident, therefore, that the role of the church and of religion in the insurgency was complex and must be handled with great care.

Another feature of the urban risings of 1808 was the reign of local patriotism over national unity, a harbinger of the cantonalism that would continue to undermine national revolutionary movements in Spain, as it did in 1868-74 and 1934-39. In the early days of the insurrection, the juntas of Asturias, Valencia, and Seville declared themselves sovereign. The Sevillan junta narrowly rejected a proposal to invade and subdue Granada, which had refused to recognize the superiority of the Sevillans.47 In the province of Murcia juntas in Lorca, Cartagena, and Mazarrán simply ignored orders from the junta of Murcia, for a time effectively eliminating concerted government at the provincial level.48 In the North, Puigcerda practically came to blows with Urgel in a battle over which junta should claim precedence.49 Local juntas fought not just among themselves but also with the military commanders and representatives of the Central Junta.50

Yet, the particularism that threatened to dissolve patriotic unity in 1808 was also, in a strange way, one of the great strengths of the patriots. For centuries, neither the Hapsburgs nor the Bourbons had been able fully to implement the absolutist program in Spain. Resistance to central control was an honored tradition that took on various and complex forms, from movements for outright provincial or regional independence, to the squirreling by peasants of their savings in hollow walls and false rooms hidden from the tax collectors, to the smuggling and brigandage endemic to mountainous and border regions of the country. The Spanish people, especially in some peripheral provinces, including Navarre, had been left with a freedom and autonomy surprising to foreigners accustomed to thinking of Spain as a nation under the yoke of despotism. Napoleon’s troops contrasted their experience in Spain with that in the occupied countries of northern Europe. Germans and Austrians, conditioned by militarism and centralization, had proved unable or unwilling to act without the permission of their superiors. Against the German princes and against Prussia and Austria it had been enough to win a major battle to gain a favorable peace.51 Even the vaunted mobilization of the German people in 1813 was at best partial and anemic. In Spain, however, Madrid had never entirely succeeded in gaining control over provincial and municipal bases of power and leadership. This dispersal of authority gave Spaniards the ability to generate resistance from dozens of separate centers in a whirlwind uprising that effectively isolated the French in a few major capitals and military encampments.