

Finally, the government in Pamplona showed itself an eager participant in the suppression of rebellion. In other provinces battles had first been fought with local elites, either to co-opt them into new power structures or to oust them entirely from the government, before revolutionary juntas could be installed. In Navarre this civil struggle was resolved in favor of old Godoyites and supporters of the French regime, as in Corella and Tudela, due to the presence of French troops and the successful action of collaborating officials, or afrancesados. As a result, no alternative leadership developed in Navarre until the middle of 1809, when guerrilla armies learned to act on their own authority. In the meantime, however, the initiative to resist France had to come from outside Navarre, especially from Zaragoza.

After the fall of Tudela, Zaragoza was the only center of serious resistance in north-central Spain. From mid-June to mid-August, French troops laid siege to the city. Zaragozans knew that the key to raising the siege lay in Navarre. The forces sent against Zaragoza entered Spain through the Navarrese towns of Irún and Roncesvalles and fed upon the rich grain lands of Navarre before descending to the Ebro River valley. To interdict these supply lines, the junta of Aragon tried to organize guerrilla resistance in Navarre.

In the mountains of Roncal and Valcarlos there had already been signs of unrest, triggered by mounting French requisitions. Working the western Pyrenees and the Aragonese border around Sangüesa were half a dozen armed bands, led by men with colorful pseudonyms like the Pesoduro and the Malcarado.17 None of the Navarrese parties was strong enough, however, to accomplish more than hit-and-run operations against French stragglers and small convoys, and the junta of Aragon decided to send its own agents to Navarre to try to provide the rebels with better leadership.

In July the Aragonese junta dispatched Andrés Eguaguirre and Luís Gil to organize Navarrese volunteers whose task would be to divert French troops from the siege of Zaragoza.18 Gil conducted a small operation in Ujüé, near Sangüesa. Ujüé, a remote village atop a dry plateau in eastern Navarre, was especially suited to Gil’s purposes. The place had become an unlikely center of rebellion after a group of peasants from Ujüé robbed a French officer and his wife near Tafalla. Later, the officer’s description of the crude mountain people he had seen and of their coarse language left no doubt that he had been accosted by people from Ujüé. On 17 July a French column arrived to punish the village. However, the local population had escaped into the deserted mountains that surround the village. Remaining behind was the priest of Ujüé, Casi-miro Javier de Miguel, who used his knowledge of the French language to preserve himself from harm and to persuade the French not to set fire to the village. He was not, however, able to protect five other individuals, people too old or too sick to flee. Four were run through and killed and one wounded by the French troops, who were infuriated by the desolation that greeted them in Ujüé.