

Despite an initial period of rapid enlistment into the Mobile Musketeers, Eguaguirre’s unit soon disintegrated. Eguaguirre was too weak to face the French and he responded to attacks by hiding in mountains too barren to support his troops. The formula had still not been discovered that would allow irregular forces to disperse and hide in their homes when faced with superior French numbers and to reassemble as quickly when the time was right. Eguaguirre could not send his troops home, because he had no confidence that they would ever return. Indeed, his men had come to hate Eguaguirre almost as much as they hated the French.

Eguaguirre created enemies of the Navarrese because he relied on force to obtain supplies from villagers and terror to enlist men into his army. The use of violence and terror against civilians who show a preference for the enemy or who remain neutral is a necessary component of guerrilla warfare. However, this violence must be combined with a demonstrated ability to defeat enemy forces, defend friendly territory, and protect villages from the troops and tax collectors of the occupying power. The Mobile Musketeers, however, could barely protect themselves much less the civilian population. As a result, most Navarrese were unwilling to offer Eguaguirre their support, which Eguaguirre interpreted as treason.20 Finally, terror became Eguaguirre’s preferred method for enforcing his authority, a sign of the imminent dissolution of the movement. Some towns even sought French aid against the Mobile Musketeers.21

On 11 July Eguaguirre attempted to enlist the city of Tafalla in the patriot cause. Tafalla had shown no interest in resisting France, probably due essentially to its location on the main north-south route through Navarre and the concomitant heavy presence of French troops.22 After meeting with officials from Tafalla in a hermitage located outside of town, Eguaguirre found that the city was unwilling to offer him any support. Eguaguirre expressed his disgust with the “complete lack of energy” on the part of the city and threatened: “what I request today through political channels I may achieve when I return in a few days time through the use of force.”23 The town of Leiza went so far as to betray the Mobile Musketeers to nearby French forces. Eguaguirre caught wind of the treason and, before his troops were driven off by the French, shot up the town. Eguaguirre promised the leading citizens that he would return, that Leiza would be burned down and that many “heads would roll.”24 Fortunately for Leiza, the colonel’s days as the commander of Navarre were numbered.

With little support in Navarre, Eguaguirre turned to robbery and extortion to supply his needs, becoming, finally, what the French claimed every guerrilla was, a bandit. Even larceny proved insufficient to satisfy Eguaguirre’s wants, however, and throughout the life of the Mobile Musketeers troops were poorly clothed, underfed, and unpaid. The colonel soon faced widespread insubordination and desertion. He attempted to maintain control over his recruits through rituals of public humiliation, forcing volunteers to kneel and swear oaths while he had guns pointed at their heads.25 These methods naturally proved unproductive. By the end of September his force had declined to a mere 280 individuals. The first inauspicious experiment with guerrilla warfare in Navarre came to an end in October, when the Mobile Musketeers were trapped and defeated in Sangüesa. After the battle, those who escaped fled across the border into Aragon, where some were incorporated into regular Spanish units, which had by then advanced into the region.26