

More promising, in the long run, were guerrilla parties formed by civilians. It is true that in 1809 many civilian guerrillas were barely distinguishable from bandits. One of the most infamous of the privateers of 1809, Don Antonio Temprano, a monk of the order of Mercenarios Cal-zados, openly disavowed higher motives. He assiduously avoided French troops, preferring instead to terrorize and loot villages around Madrid, telling his men that the nation had entered an “epoch of every man for himself.” Temprano’s career was not an isolated exception. Saornil in Zamora, Piloti near Madrid, and a number of others also degenerated into mere criminals.13

It is also true that in most of Spain, guerrilla parties were small and of little military value.14 In northern Spain, however, some of the guerrillas did raise large and effective forces as early as 1809. The priest Merino, after killing a French soldier in revenge for a slight suffered in the first days of the occupation, took to the hills to escape French justice and formed a guerrilla band in Biscay. Julián Sánchez, after failing to stop French soldiers from murdering his family, took up arms in the region of Salamanca. Juan Martín, the famous “Empecinado,” raised an army in Old Castile.15

Guerrilla warfare also reappeared in Navarre in 1809. Zaragoza capitulated on 23 February, and some of the Navarrese fighting in Aragon returned to Navarre. On 21 March the French took the fortress at Jaca, eliminating the last regular force within striking distance of Navarre. The night before Jaca fell a group of Navarrese who had formed part of the city’s garrison escaped over the walls. Among the refugees was a very new recruit named Francisco Espoz Ilundáin, the future Espoz y Mina. In Jaca and Zaragoza men like Mina had learned the use of arms, how to load and fire in twelve counts, and how to face the enemy. Now they returned to Navarre and became the basis for a new guerrilla movement.16

Soon there were dozens of small bands roaming the countryside, sometimes attacking French stragglers and mail couriers, but for the most part offering little challenge to the occupation. In the far North the priest of Valcarlos had a small following. In Baztán Antonio Zabaleta operated a band that roamed as far south as Estella. Bands under Sarto, Fidalgo, Marcaláin, Juan Ochotorena, Manuel Gurrea, Félix Sarasa, Juan de Villanueva, Vicente Carrasco, Pascual Echeverría, and the priest Hermenegildo Garcés de los Fayos were just some of the other guerrillas harrying the French. Yet, none of these bands was large enough to have much effect. And some were falling into Eguaguirre’s trap, alienating rather than gaining adherents. Others began to act like Temprano’s men, avoiding conflict with the French and robbing Spanish civilians instead.17

What Navarre required was a unified command to establish discipline among the guerrillas. The Central Junta tried to provide it by appointing the priest of Ujüé, Casimiro Javier de Miguel é Irujo, to organize Navarre. Miguel had saved Ujüé from French troops in June 1808 and had aided Gil in July. In 1809, with the help of the priest of Alaiz and the priest of Lárraga, he set up an intelligence network of agents (who were often also priests) in Pamplona, Zaragoza, Paris, Bayonne, and in villages on both sides of the national frontier. Miguel’s system of espionage was facilitated by the common Basque language of the peasants on both sides of the Pyrenees. It was said that Miguel knew “by noon each day all that had been said the night before at the table of General D’Agoult,” the French military governor of Pamplona.