## 5 The Land Pirates

IN NOVEMBER 1808 Napoleon intervened in Spain with his veteran troops and soon erased the shame of Bailén. The French took Biscay in a few days and entered Burgos on 11 November, dispersing Joaquín Blake’s Army of the Left. In late November the French recaptured Tudela and drove the Army of the Center under Castaños out of the Ebro valley, while Palafox was forced back inside Zaragoza, which faced another siege. On 3 December Napoleon entered Madrid. The rapid defeat of Spain’s armies imperiled the 34,000-man English expeditionary force in Spain, which was compelled to make an epic retreat through the snow-covered mountains of Galicia to escape encirclement by General Soult. On the morning of 18 January the last of the English army was evacuated.1

With the defeat of the Allied regular forces, Spaniards turned in 1809 to guerrilla warfare as the only available means of resistance. Galicia became the setting for the first widespread guerrilla insurgency in Spain. After driving the English from Galicia, Soult found himself in the midst of a hostile population. It seemed that everyone in Galicia, groaning from the depredations of retreating English and victorious French troops, was disposed to resist. When the French approached villages, peasants fled to the hills with their livestock and goods, returning to their homes only after the French had departed. French officers likened the march through Galicia to “the progress of a ship on the high seas: she cleaves the waves, but they close behind her, and in a few moments all trace of her passage has disappeared.”2

The people of Galicia seemed to take up guerrilla warfare by second nature.3 The priest of Couto, Mauricio Troncoso y Sotomayor, fled before Soult’s men on 9 February 1809, gathered a small band of supporters, and that same day attacked a French detachment, killing fifteen and capturing fifty-one. Within a month, Sotomayor stood at the head of the “Division of the Mino,” an army of several thousand peasants. This force came to dominate the Galician countryside, and even captured the French-held city of Vigo, together with 1,300 prisoners.

By late spring, the guerrillas in Galicia came under the command of General La Romana, who still had a few thousand regular troops around Astorga. In June La Romana led this combined force to victory at the bridge of San Payo, ejecting the French from the region of Santiago de Compostella. Marshal Ney, who had been left with half of Soult’s original force, while Soult himself advanced into Portugal, was incapable of pacifying Galicia. Indeed, by late June Ney had lost half of his men. Meanwhile, Soult had insufficient numbers to fight the English and the Portuguese in Oporto. Thus, both Ney and Soult were outmatched, and they had to abandon Portugal and Galicia.4

The events in Galicia taught Spanish leaders a new respect for the effectiveness of guerrilla warfare. In concert with Wellington’s and La Romana’s regulars, guerrillas had helped to liberate Galicia and Portugal. The Spanish government learned that, despite the loss of urban centers and the destruction of its armies, rural Spain could still be defended. Through the strategy of guerrilla warfare, it was possible to spread French forces so thinly that they became vulnerable to attack. And by eliminating collaboration, the guerrillas confined the occupation to areas physically controlled by French troops.5