

In the aftermath of Bailén, with Spanish armies in Aragon and southern Navarre, it became possible for members of the Navarrese Diputación, who had by then become disgusted with French rule, to flee behind the Spanish lines drawn up north of Tudela.27 Soon after arriving in Tudela, the deputies rediscovered their patriotism. In October and November the Diputación proclaimed a return to that “happy epoch” in which the “valiant and generous Navarrese” could speak in “the language of honor.” Defense of religion, king, and nation “demanded revenge,” while the “constitution of Navarre and the venerable authority of its ancient Fuero” required the arming of all able-bodied men.28

The Diputación even flirted with the idea of forming its own volunteer army, projecting four battalions of 1,200 men each. Municipal officials in liberated southern Navarre formed lists of men eligible for military duty. However, fewer than 1,800 names were submitted, and some of these individuals were listed as cripples, missing persons, and men already enlisted with the Aragonese.29 Ultimately it did not matter how limited the number of eligible men was. The Diputación did not have the resources with which to organize even a fraction of them. Three things made the Diputación’s project impossible. First, most of Navarre still lay in French hands, and by mid-October there were some 100,000 French troops in Navarre preparing to retake Spain.30 Second, liberated southern Navarre suffered from a swarm of Spanish units that exacted arbitrary requisitions as burdensome as those of the French. Third, both occupied and unoccupied Navarre had already suffered the devastation of over six months of war. The usual sources for taxes, loans, and gifts in a province used to exemption from contributions had run dry. In the end, the Diputación scraped together 250,764 reales in loans and 72,366 reales in gifts, less than 4 percent of the government’s usual haul from customs tariffs before the war and certainly not enough to equip an army. In any case, the “battalion” of volunteers that joined the deputies in Tudela consisted of only eleven men and six chaplains.31

The legitimate government of Navarre, already tainted by months of collaboration, was quite evidently not equipped to rouse the province. Municipal officials, with the exception of those in Estella, where a new junta had been created, feared the revolutionaries more than they feared French reforms and were also incapable of leading a rebellion. Outside agitation from Aragon alienated rather than inspired the Navarrese. The revolutionary potential of Navarre did not lay in volunteer armies organized by the Aragonese and the Diputación, nor could it be found in Pamplona and the other cities of Navarre, where a stupor reigned after the defeat at Tudela. The power of Navarre was in its villages, and it would take a new kind of military leadership and strategy to mobilize it.32 Beyond the reach of the Diputación, the urban elites, or, indeed, the French, profound disturbances were brewing in rural Navarre, as the peasantry prepared to enter the political and military stage. First, however, Spain’s regular armies were to experience the humiliation of utter defeat at the hands of Napoleon, who personally led the reconquest of Spain in the late fall of 1808.