

The collapse of Spain’s regular armies in 1808-9 meant that the Spanish road to victory would not be trod by conventional forces. Yet, anarchic guerrilla warfare was never much more than a nuisance to the occupation. Guerrilla parties everywhere in Spain only became really effective to the degree that they established discipline and order. In 1810, the Navarrese Men of the Idea lacked discipline, and they had little military impact as a result.

The discipline of Javier’s corso had been rooted in the social background of its personnel. The rank and file comprised “honorable farmers” from the villages around Pamplona, which was their main theater of operations, rather than Ribereños.71 The men of the Montaňa tended to stay in line because they were property owners operating in their home territory. Men cannot be asked to sack their own and their neighbors’ homes. Even so, Javier Mina had to work hard to establish military discipline among his troops.

In contrast, the Men of the Idea who succeeded the corso were entirely lacking in discipline, indeed, opposed to it. Most of the new leaders were from the Ribera, like Pascual Echeverría, the butcher of Corella, or were “foreigners” from Aragon and Castile. Many had deserted their regular formations or were running from personal difficulties and were primarily intent on enriching themselves at the expense of the population. The most infamous of such bands was run by Echeverría, a man who “never sought battle with the French” and who was filled with every vice imaginable, according to Mina.72 With his praetorian guard of deserters from the imperial armies, Echeverría became as feared a presence as the French, even in Estella, a region that had already proved its loyalties.73 Two other important figures from this period were Miguel Sádaba, who ran a band partially dependent upon Echeverría, and Juan Hernández, who had taken with him the greater portion of the cavalry of the former corso. These were the figures most wedded to the “Idea” of 1810, for it gave them an excuse for their inability to face the French in combat and a justification for their attacks on civilians.

The Central Junta in Cádiz investigated the “Idea” and tried to stop the guerrilla parties inspired by it. The junta discovered that such parties had no other purpose than to “frighten and sack villages according to a well-arranged formula.” The guerrillas would choose a village in the path of French troops, and, “shooting off their guns and riding through the streets,” they would pose as an “advance guard of the enemy.” The guerrillas would then establish a cordon to prevent inhabitants from escaping to save themselves or to seek French help. These security measures fulfilled, the guerrillas would proceed to attack the village. In one incident a band sacked at least seven towns and villages according to this pattern in a single night. The guerrillas “instead of being the support and consolation of the people were taking advantage of the conflict and desperate situation” created by the occupation to rival the French in “barbarism and ferocity.”74