

Napoleon asked Dufour to accomplish two interconnected objectives within his new satrapy: to make an end of the resistance and to generate more revenue. Although he was destined to succeed in neither task for very long, Dufour did disrupt the insurgency as long as he ruled Navarre. Only three weeks into his tenure, on 28 March, his troops wounded and captured Javier Mina in Labiano. Dufour was one of the most formidable opponents, and certainly the most fortunate, that the Navarrese would face.39

Dufour proclaimed civilian resistance to be the work of a few rabble-rousers and criminals. If only these could be captured, he thought, then the misguided peasants who had followed them would lay down their arms. Already during the previous summer, D’Agoult had offered a prize for the capture of Javier Mina, hoping to achieve through the betrayal of the guerrilla chieftain what he had not been able to do in battle.40 D’Agoult had gained nothing by this tactic, but Javier’s capture in Labiano made Dufour optimistic that Navarre might finally be pacified.

There were some in the French administration, including Napoleon, who called for Javier Mina’s blood. Suchet announced the guerrilla leader’s capture with a casual mixture of inaccuracies, lies, and imperial barbarism: “The highwayman Mina has been made prisoner in the woods of the Carrascal [Labiano is far north of the Carrascal],” wrote Suchet. “He thought to make his escape by offering a sack of gold and an expensive watch, but it had no effect on our valiant soldiers. The people have demonstrated their happiness at seeing the province freed from such a scourge. A trial will be held, and . . . he will be hanged, drawn and quartered, and exposed on the public roads.”41

Fortunately for Javier, the desire for revenge was not consistent with Dufour’s strategy for pacification. The new governor realized that he could turn Javier’s capture to greater profit if he could induce the guerrillas to lay down their arms in exchange for their leader’s life and a general amnesty. On 2 April Dufour offered amnesty for anyone who gave up his weapons or joined a French militia.42 Some of the volunteers, according to Espoz y Mina’s recollections, accepted the offer, though most simply evaporated (with their weapons) into the general population.43

Similar French initiatives to disarm or to enlist civilians had met some success elsewhere in Spain.44 In New Castile, La Mancha, and Andalusia Joseph Bonaparte had been able to “seduce the people” by sending collaborators to enlist local officials in the French cause or to set up new municipal corporations. Joseph even formed several imperial regiments from Spanish recruits.45 The French also succeeded for a time in organizing some civil guards and counterguerrilla units made up of Spanish traitors, especially in Andalusia, Aragon, and Catalonia.46

In Navarre, none of these measures to gain collaborators had much effect. For example, when the French tried to raise a civic guard in Estella, the municipal government simply delayed supplying lists of people eligible for duty until the guerrillas liberated the town.47 There was no way to protect sympathizers where the population was dispersed among more than 700 villages. And without the promise of French protection, very few individuals proved willing to work with the French. Indeed, outside of the Ribera, every attempt in Navarre to raise an urban militia failed.