

A military solution having failed, the French government again attempted to enlist civil officials in the destruction of the insurgents. On 10 January 1810 the Duke of Mahón, who had replaced Vallesantoro as Joseph’s viceroy during the previous year, offered rewards for information leading to the arrest of the guerrillas. When this failed to produce results, the royal court at Pamplona joined its voice with Mahón’s in a more threatening circular dated 25 January. Municipal officials were directed to produce lists of those who had left their houses vacant or who had recently returned, along with the names of all of their relatives. Towns were to inform the government whether the clergy had preached in favor of order and peace or had served to inflame the inhabitants against the French. Those who failed to carry out this order or who were found protecting insurgents would be taken to Pamplona for execution.33

This was a critical moment for the insurgency in Navarre, and the French knew it. They attempted to exploit the corso’s discomfiture to make their presence felt once again at the village level. Yet, they could not come to grips with Javier’s band itself, and they did not have sufficient forces to maintain such a heavy presence in Navarre indefinitely. Suchet’s troops returned to Aragon, D’Agoult’s men to Pamplona, and Javier took advantage of the respite to reunite a portion of his followers.

Reynier, shortly to be given authority over Navarre, was already the commander in Álava. He had just congratulated himself that the Navarrese had not been able to disturb his troops in Vitoria, when Javier decided to extend the war into that province. In mid-January, based upon information that a column of some 300 French troops from Vitoria would seek to requisition supplies in villages near the Navarrese border, Javier ordered his troops to reassemble in Santa Cruz de Campezo, in Álava. There, he drove the enemy back to Vitoria, killing 50 and wounding 100, before ordering another dispersion in anticipation of renewed French pursuit.

Reynier sent 20,000 men after the corso, but far from catching it, they ended up spending the next month in vain pursuit, delaying their real mission to reinforce French troops in western Spain.34 Reynier’s forces were joined by those under Suchet, who entered Pamplona on 20 January determined finally to come to grips with Javier after the disgrace at Santa Cruz. The two commanders intended to pacify Navarre with overwhelming force. Javier responded by ordering some of his dispersed troops to take secret paths to Aibar, on the other side of Navarre, where a small force was again reunited. In Aibar Javier learned that he was required to appear in Lérida to receive instructions from the Spanish government. In early February, therefore, Javier departed for Catalonia, and command of the guerrillas was turned over to Gregorio Cruchaga.

Cruchaga, due to the presence of so many enemy troops, had no alternative but to order another complete dispersion of the corso. During the first three weeks of February, therefore, the corso did nothing. Toward the end of the month, however, Cruchaga reunited 300 troops and attacked the 100-man garrison of Burguete, causing 28 casualties, taking 30 prisoners, and forcing the remainder to flee to Roncesvalles. On 6 March Cruchaga turned south again and attacked the garrison of Lumbier, forcing the entire force of seventy troops to surrender. The prisoners were sent to Lérida just as Javier Mina made his return.