

The second requirement for the guerrillas was superior numbers in any given engagement. The corso had neither the training nor the munitions to hold off a force larger than itself in a lengthy, ordered retreat should a battle develop unfavorably. Therefore, when the French approached with large columns, the guerrillas avoided battle by dispersing or hiding in the mountains, making use of their knowledge of the country and of the sympathy of the populace to escape.

Attacks were normally ordered only when a numerical advantage could be ensured. The insurgency had to make up for a lack of munitions by using its excellent intelligence network and mobility to achieve surprise. The dispersed insurgents were given the message to descend by various routes upon a prearranged point, where Javier expected some convoy or French detachment would pass. The guerrillas massed superior numbers, positioned themselves for ambush, fired a single volley, and charged immediately with the bayonet. The spirit behind this style of fighting is often associated with French Republican armies, but by the time Napoleon had occupied Spain, the élan was all on the Spanish side. For this reason, there was always a disproportionate number of dead among the French casualties, and the guerrillas took large numbers of prisoners by overcoming their opponents in hand-to-hand combat. Casualties in battle on the Navarrese side were customarily low, although the French made good this deficit by executing civilians and captured guerrillas and by the horrendous slaughter that occurred on the few occasions when the guerrillas were surprised by overwhelming forces of mounted enemies in the plains of southern Navarre and Castile.

On 28 November, soon after the battle of Sansol, Javier united his corso once again with Cuevillas and, reinforced by one of Porlier’s cavalry squadrons, invaded Tudela. The garrison took refuge behind fortifications, but the Tudelans were not so lucky. Despite the efforts of Cuevillas to control Javier’s undisciplined peasants, the soldiers of the corso devoted themselves to plundering the population rather than to engaging the French. The guerrillas took horses and a large number of sheep. They stuffed their pockets and knapsacks with money, silver, and anything they could find of value in the houses and retired to nearby Corella, where they fought over the spoils and ultimately disbanded. On 29 November General Buget—the garrison commander in Tudela— rode into Corella with his cavalry and killed twelve of Javier’s men who had tarried there.

It was as important for the French as it was for the guerrillas to demonstrate that they could protect the towns and villages that had shown adhesion or at least acquiescence to their rule. This the French had failed to do at Tudela. As a result of the corso’s incursion, Suchet began to lobby for the dismissal of D’Agoult, who was officially relieved at the end of December, though his replacement wasn’t appointed until the end of January. During the next six months a succession of four generals ruled Navarre, as Napoleon searched vainly for the right commander to pacify the province. General Reynier took command of Navarre and the three Basque provinces at the end of January. In February Reynier was replaced by Dufour, who was relieved on 28 July by General Reille, Napoleon’s aide-de-camp. Since each new appointee altered and countermanded his predecessors’ policies, however, the rapid turnover merely served further to hamper antiinsurgency efforts in the province.