

Nevertheless, Francisco’s life in Idocín was hard. His father died in 1796. His older brother, Clemente, left home for Pamplona and the priesthood when Francisco was a child. As the only male remaining in the house, Francisco would have had a disproportionate burden placed upon him to help support his mother, Maria Theresa Ilundáin, and his two sisters, Vicenta and Simona.

In 1800 Vicenta married. As the eldest child in the family, she inherited the house and lands. Simona, the youngest, married soon after and removed to Pamplona. Francisco was still just eighteen years old when these events passed, and he remained in the house working for Vicenta, his new brother-in-law, and his mother, who maintained usufruct rights until her death. This was customary in Navarre. A young man like Francisco was likely to spend his life working in a subordinate position within the household of his extended family. For Francisco, therefore, the French invasion presented an opportunity as well as a threat.9

Mina’s early life was hard in another way too. As a child he witnessed a dramatic crisis in Idocín. In the 1790s the population of the village declined from 107 to 71 individuals. Idocín suffered cruelly in the war with the French Republic, and recovery was slow. Idocín was one of the richest villages in the region, but in a subsistence economy, where there was no wage work, there was nothing to attract new residents.10

Despite these difficulties, Mina remembered Idocín as a happy place, where he enjoyed “the most profound peace and perfect tranquillity” until the French invasion of 1808.11 However, his was not the nostalgia of a false pastoralism, for Mina was personally acquainted with the hard work required of a peasant farmer. As Mina later recalled, he and his associates were men who “knew nothing more than the use of the laya, the hoe, and the pruning knife, and no more business than that of gathering in the fruits” produced by their lands.12 It is hard to know how seriously to take Mina’s characterization of himself. Mina understood the value of propaganda to his own legend. As governor-general of Galicia in 1821, Mina took time out to help the peasants with the harvest, or at least made certain that such stories circulated among his troops. And in his last years he secured his personal layas for preservation in museums in Madrid and Pamplona.13 Certainly, Mina was not above self-conscious posing, but there was also clearly some truth in the legend of the layador, even if the Mina family never suffered from real poverty.

The market was Mina’s connection to the larger life of the city and kingdom. Saturdays Mina sold produce in the capital. Unlike his brother or his relation, Javier Mina, however, Francisco was not meant for the university. In fact, he must have appeared the least adventurous member of his family, for he had been entirely devoted, from a very early age, to the labors of the farm.

Mina could neither read nor write Castilian and was truly fluent only in Basque, the language spoken in the Mina household. Not that this was a liability. Indeed, Mina’s followers would likely have seen it as an asset, since they too were mostly illiterate Basque peasants. Francisco learned well enough how to sign his name with a flourish during the war, but in many respects he was something of the bumpkin depicted by both his enemies and supporters.14