

Another rival, Juan Hernández, who had emerged from the breakup of Mina’s army with the bulk of the cavalry, fled to Rioja in order to escape a similar fate. Within a few months, though, Mina arrested and executed Hernández, who had foolishly moved north with thoughts of making peace with the ruthless layador. Hernández’s men thereafter formed the core of Mina’s cavalry.28

No sooner had Mina eliminated Echeverría than an even more dangerous rival arrived on the scene. In the first week of August, Casimiro Javier de Miguel, the former priest of Ujüé, returned after a long absence carrying orders from the government in Cádiz to take command of the guerrillas in Navarre.29 Ever since April, when his brother, Clemente, had been dispatched as an emissary to Cádiz, Mina had been trying to gain the approval of the government. During the summer of 1810, however, Mina was entirely cut off from the rest of Spain. His only contact outside Navarre, and that back in May, had been with the junta of Aragon, which had named him to head the guerrillas even though it had no mandate in Navarre. As for his brother, Mina received news much later that he had been killed by bandits in Portugal without successfully completing his mission. It was therefore a severe blow when Miguel, now made a colonel, arrived to relieve him of a position so recently consolidated. With the presence of Miguel, Mina no longer had a legitimate claim to authority.

Initially, Mina’s followers were filled with enthusiasm. The priest of Ujüé had some reputation in the province; he brought official standing to the guerrillas; and he might just succeed in convincing the new French commander, General Honoré Charles Reille, to stop the summary executions of captured guerrillas; finally, Miguel promised to get economic assistance from the government in Cádiz. Outmaneuvered, Mina was forced to recognize the legitimacy of Miguel’s claims and turn over command of the corso.30

On 4 August, just as Miguel arrived, the guerrillas were camped in the area of Estella, while French troops, recently increased to the levels of the previous winter, approached from several directions. In this situation, the priest’s lack of military experience was quickly manifest. Miguel panicked and ran to Estella along with a dozen followers. There he decreed a monthly tax on Navarre and attempted to collect the first payment from the city.31 In this situation, Mina reassumed command, and extricated the troops from encirclement. Later he arrested Miguel and deported him to Valencia, where in 1812 he fell sick and died.32

In the month of September Mina’s emergence as the “little king” of Navarre received formal recognition from the Regency in Cádiz. Ironically, it arrived during one of the most difficult moments for the guerrillas. After the successes of the summer, the corso found itself hounded from one end of Navarre to another beginning in September.

Mina’s success in the summer of 1810 drew the attention of Napoleon in Paris. The guerrillas’ ability to penetrate the French border had forced Napoleon to reinforce the frontier troops and to raise the number of gendarmes in Biscay, Navarre, and Aragon.33 Dufour, who had assumed command in March with such high hopes, had taken to skulking in Pamplona, as Napoleon saw it, and had displeased the emperor by failing to make an end of the “banditti.” So Napoleon replaced Dufour with his aide-de-camp, General Reille.34 Reille arrived on 27 July with 8,000 men determined to pacify the province.35