## 6 The Division of Navarre

IN APRIL 1810, of the 900 soldiers who had been serving in the corso, only Francisco Espoz y Mina (at the time still going by his given name, Francisco Espoz Ilundáin) and 6 others remained to call themselves the “partida of Mina.” The rest had returned to their homes or joined one of the other bands fighting in Navarre and neighboring provinces.1 In his memoirs Espoz y Mina identified four of these initial followers: Manuel Gurrea, natural of Olite, who early in 1809 had operated his own party supplied out of Ujüé; Tomás Ciriza, a labrador from the village of Azcarate on the Guipúzcoa border; Luís Gaston, a youth from Tafalla and a close friend of Espoz y Mina during and after the war; and Pedro Miguel Sarasa, a wealthy labrador from Aibar, a village situated between Ujüé and Sangüesa. These men from the Montaňa met near Idocín and agreed that Francisco Espoz should succeed to the command of a revived corso terrestre and that he should adopt the name of Mina as a sign to everyone of his intention to follow in the footsteps of his famous “nephew.”2 From that time forward, Espoz became known as Espoz y Mina, or simply as Mina.

Mina first needed to reenlist troops. The quickest way to do this was by taking over some of the already existing bands that had been formed out of the dissolved corso terrestre. Mina first targeted a party led by Miguel Sádaba, with whom Mina had been friendly in the corso. Sádaba had 120 men in the area of Echarri-Aranaz, where his name was becoming anathema due to his reliance on extortion and violence to raise supplies. Officials in Lacunza, a village near Echarri-Aranaz, gladly in formed Mina of Sádaba’s approach, and with only his six companions, Mina was able to ambush Sádaba as he rode in ahead of his troops. With Sádaba in custody, Mina harangued his rival’s troops, condemning them for the crimes they had committed against the peasants. Through bluff, not letting on that his own following amounted to a mere handful, Mina gained the allegiance of Sádaba and his entire band. Mina stood at the head of his own small army for the first time.3

This success was an early indication of two factors that worked in Mina’s favor. First, Mina enjoyed the collaboration of municipal authorities and parish priests against the pretensions of other rivals. By Mina’s account, village elders supported him because he scrupulously avoided direct taxation, in contrast to other guerrillas, and because he requisitioned goods and services only in areas that he had some hope of defending from the French. The second factor working in favor of Mina at Lacunza was his capacity for bluff. Over the course of the war, Mina blustered his way through a number of similarly tense situations, and his personal bravery, which bordered on a fanatic belief in his own invulnerability, turned many an opponent into a devotee.4

After Lacunza Mina circulated a notice of his “appointment” as chief of the revived corso. In fact, Mina did not receive official recognition from any higher authority until 13 May, when the junta of Aragon recognized his preeminence. By then, however, his circular had achieved the desired effect, causing a number of guerrilla parties superior in size to his own to submit to Mina’s rule. Among these parties was that of Lucas Górriz, a labrador from Subiza (near Otano) and the eldest of three Górriz brothers who would serve under Mina. Górriz was the first important leader to join Mina voluntarily, and he was rewarded with the command of the third of three battalions that were formed later that year.5