

By this time, Mina’s army numbered 3,000 men, too unwieldy a force to operate always together under the conditions imposed by guerrilla warfare. Therefore, on 8 August Mina created three battalions, the first commanded by himself, the second by Cruchaga, and the third by Lucas Górriz. As yet, however, these commanders had neither official recognition of their rank nor subordinate officers through which they issued orders. Instead of a chain of command, each battalion chief depended on his own prestige with the troops for his authority.42 This almost tribal organization had terrible disadvantages, above all when one of the leaders was hurt. In May 1812 Mina was shot in the leg while returning from an expedition to get supplies on the Cantabrian coast. Mina kept vital information, like the names of spies and the location of caches to himself. More important, his personal influence was crucial to the fighting spirit of the troops. As a result of his absence, therefore, the corso was crippled from May to July 1812. As will be seen, whenever one of the guerrilla leaders was injured or killed, it caused confusion or even dissolution.

Reille finally got the fillip of troops he had requested when Pannetier joined him in August and some of Marshal Masséna’s troops were diverted from the Army of Portugal in September. Reille had almost 15,000 men prepared to battle the 3,000 men of the corso, about the odds regular troops require to deal effectively with guerrillas. As a result, Mina’s men became so hard pressed that they scarcely stopped running from late August to December.43 By following their movements, we can appreciate, aside from the sheer stamina of the men under Mina, the areas that served as refuge to the guerrillas when they were forced into a defensive posture.

From Puente, the insurgents escaped to their favorite base of operations, the region around Lumbier and Sangüesa. There they were forced to separate into battalions in order to divide their pursuers. The first battalion under Mina moved a few miles west to Monreal, a village known to Mina from childhood. The second battalion went south to Ujüé and the third back to the Andía mountains north of Estella, two other favorite bases of the guerrillas. On 28 August the corso reunited in the mountains of Ulzama, north of Pamplona. Pursued closely, they fled further north to Baztán, and from there west to the rough country along the Guipúzcoa border.44 In all this time, Mina was able to avoid battle. As Reille complained, “the great difficulty [was] not fighting them but finding them.”45

September brought the corso back to the mountains of Andía, where the men were finally able to rest for four days. At the end of this time, they discovered that they were hemmed in by 12,000 enemy troops. French columns had occupied Estella and the valleys west of Estella; Echauri and Puente to the east were guarded; the region of Echarri- Aranaz to the north was under firm control; and the Vitoria plain to the west was a death trap for unsupported infantry. The commander of the third battalion recalled thinking that his military career had come to an end. However, superior knowledge of the country and the collusion of the population allowed the corso to escape unharmed even from this trap. The French were fed false intelligence that the guerrillas were planning to break out in the direction of Estella, and they left the strategic bridge over the Arga in the valley of Echauri lightly guarded. The corso passed over, taking seven prisoners in Belascoáin before marching all night to the other side of Navarre and the mountains of Alaiz. The French pursued and again surrounded the guerrillas by occupying Unzüé, Monreal, and Lumbier. Once again, however, false information caused the French in Monreal to march east, while the body of the corso, under the command of Cruchaga, passed north right through Monreal to the refuge of the Salazar valley and the high Pyrenees. Meanwhile, the cavalry and 200 infantry led by Mina were sent to Soria in the hope of diverting French pursuit from Cruchaga.