

Of even more importance than the adherence of Górriz, was Mina’s absorption of Cruchaga’s band from Roncal and Salazar, which had become by mid-April the most effective of the parties then left in Navarre. Cruchaga was the only man whose military prowess had rivaled that of Javier. Because of his reputation for fair dealing, he was also the only leader who had been as popular as Javier. Cruchaga, with some 100 followers, met Mina, escorted by 50 foot soldiers and his small cavalry, in early May in the town of Aoiz, the site of the corso’s disintegration in March. There they decided that Mina should continue as head of the corso, with Cruchaga as his second in command. The addition of Cruchaga’s men brought Mina’s force to 500 troops, the largest concentration of guerrillas in Navarre at the time.6

At first glance, the rise of Mina to the command of the largest guerrilla party in Navarre within such a short time appears inexplicable. Mina had attained only a subaltern rank in Javier’s cavalry, and upon the dissolution of the corso he had a mere six backers compared with the hundreds who had remained loyal to Echeverría, Hernández, Sádaba, and Cruchaga. What impelled Mina into the spotlight?

Mina suffered scurrilous attacks from the moment he began his military career until his death on Christmas Eve in 1836. It is difficult to separate the truth about Mina from the lies spread by his detractors and from his own propaganda. Mina’s greatest literary enemies, Puigblanch and Saint-Yon, believed he was a brute, whose great leadership qualities amounted to ruthlessness combined with a generous portion of luck.7 There was some truth in this assessment, though these two qualities need not detract from the reputation of a soldier. Mina promoted an image of himself as a simple peasant who had fame thrust upon him. There is also some truth in this. Yet, Mina’s ability to turn an unruly mob of half bandits into a disciplined army suggests that underneath the simple and rustic peasant from Idocín there lay dormant a complex and powerful individual in charge of his own destiny.

Mina was born in 1781, the youngest of four children. His family, well-to-do peasants, lived in Idocín, a small village of eleven houses huddled in the narrow cleft of the Ibargoiti River, surrounded by mountains, and lying halfway between Sangüesa and Pamplona. In 1800 the family estate encompassed eighty-four acres of arable planted in wheat, oats, maize, alfalfa, and beans, a garden of one acre, and just over four acres of vineyards. The house, with communal rights attached to it, included corrals, granaries, a large wine cellar and press, and an impressive stock of furniture: eight benches, twenty-four chairs, seven tables, eleven beds, and an array of linens and kitchen utensils that included an antique set of silver. There were pictures and laminations in each bedroom and a statue of Christ in the main room. One of the clearest indications of the family’s wealth was its livestock. The Mina estate counted 6 oxen, 6 mules, 10 pigs, and 143 sheep and goats.8 Thus Francisco and his family were not quite the simple rustics portrayed in memoirs and admiring biographies.