

On 17 November Mina attacked a group of thirty-three gendarmes escorting cartloads of munitions through the pass at Carrascal. While Mina’s previous actions were greater symbolic coups and certainly contributed to his ability to reinitiate recruitment, the capture of this munitions convoy was in many ways the most important achievement in this period. The guerrillas had almost no ammunition. In fact, the magnitude of the loss at Belorado had stemmed, in part, from a shortage of shot and powder. As the unarmed and dispirited remnants of the Division filtered back into Navarre and rejoined the Division, it became imperative to find arms and ammunition to equip them. The ambush in the Carrascal occurred just at the perfect moment and allowed Mina to reoutfit his men.26

Mina spent late November and December rebuilding his shattered force. The enemy troops that had harassed the Division since August finally departed for Portugal, too late, however, to have an impact on events there. Reille’s own forces were as exhausted as the guerrillas and unable to continue the war. As a result, Mina succeeded in establishing a headquarters in Lumbier and attracting hundreds of new recruits as well as volunteers dispersed in September and October. This pattern repeated itself several times during the next two years: intense periods of persecution by the French were followed by periods of inactivity in which the insurgency was allowed to revive.

Mina used the respite to eliminate his rivals and to chasten his more unruly troops. He executed Juan Hernández, his old cavalry commander in the corso terrestre, who (according to Mina) had continued to alienate the civilian population with his “ferocious brutality.”27 He also rid himself of “Belza,” one of the first guerrillas to operate in the far northwest.28 However cruel and unjust, the Belza operation did allow Mina to begin recruiting heavily in Baztán, Cinco Villas, and the Guipúzcoa borderlands. Within a month he raised a fourth battalion of 800 men in the region.

Mina also gained the confidence of his rebellious followers through less violent means than those used against Belza and Hernández. It was the style at that time for men pretending to independence and authority to wear their hair long. A closely shaved head was a sign of humility. Army conscripts had their hair shorn; officers kept their hair long. Naturally, for the Men of the Idea only long hair would do, braided or held behind the ears and sometimes complemented by muttonchop sideburns. By his own admission, Mina was as devoted as anyone in the corso to this vogue, which must have made the unwashed volunteers as lice-ridden as they were picturesque.

In early December 1810, when the morale of the guerrillas had reached its nadir, Mina employed a brilliant exercise in authority to clean up the appearance of the men, reimpose their submission, and instill confidence. Against the protests of his subalterns, who worried that they might not be able to control the troops, Mina ordered everyone under his command to receive a haircut. Once the mutinous troops had been shorn and their submission assured, Mina allowed his own hair to be cut in a public ceremony. Afterward, his troops were given new clothes and embarked on one of the most successful campaigns of the war.29 The result of Mina’s efforts was that by the end of December the Division once again numbered 3,000 men, and in January Mina added the 800 men of the fourth battalion. Despite all of the hardships of the war, the Navarrese had rallied once again to the resistance.