

In late December Mina finally drew the attention of General Reille again. Reille sent one column of 700 men from the west and a second of 1,700, many of them drawn from Suchet’s garrisons along the Ebro, from the southeast to trap Mina in Lumbier. However, this force, which in November could have overwhelmed Mina’s men, was already too small to do the job in December. Mina ambushed the first column in Idocín on Christmas Eve, killing forty-eight and capturing seventy, twenty of whom were shot as renegade Spaniards. On the day after Christmas, Mina ambushed the second column in a gorge near Lumbier. The guerrillas, aided by dozens of local peasants, rained stones and shot upon the enemy and chased them all the way back to Caparroso on the northern fringe of the Ebro plain. The French reported the loss of 112 men killed and captured in these battles in the official report of 1 January 1811, with another 46 dying in the hospital in Pamplona during the following two weeks. An unofficial French source came up with a similar estimate of 162 men lost, while Spanish sources claim to have killed and captured 200 men. Navarrese losses in both ambushes were small. With these two engagements, the guerrillas announced their complete recovery to the world.30

For almost two weeks Reille again allowed the guerrillas to rest in Lumbier. Mina used the time to establish hospitals in the valleys of Ron-cal, Salazar, and Aézcoa in the Pyrenees. He sent the fourth battalion to Echarri-Aranaz and the Araquil valley to train and to recruit more men. It has already been noted that the fourth battalion drew heavily on the populations of the northwest. The battalion’s commanders, Ramón Ulzurrún and Francisco de Asura, were themselves from the villages of Asiáin and Amezqueta, respectively. Asiáin was located a few miles north of Echauri, and Amezqueta was the last Guipúzcoan village before the Navarrese border and the mountains of Aralar. It was in these areas that the battalion sought to fill out its ranks.

The other battalions had been recruited in a similar fashion. The first battalion, led by Mina, relied heavily on Monreal and the villages west of Sangüesa, Mina’s backyard. The second battalion was commanded by Cruchaga and later by Antonio Barrena, the first from Roncal and the second from Salazar, and it drew on those populations. Finally, the third battalion was commanded by the Górriz brothers, from the village of Subiza, located south of the capital not far from the Carrascal. This battalion included many men from the Pamplona basin and Estella. Mina also set up, or rather absorbed, a fifth battalion in the month of January 1811. This battalion consisted mostly of Alavese who were already integrated into the guerrilla party run by the Alavese patriot Sebastián Fernández. All of the battalions were thus made up of men from the Montaňa. When united, which it never was at this time, the full Division could well have approached the mark of 5,000 men.31

In the middle of January, however, there began another round of pursuit. The French had recently cleared Upper Aragon of guerrillas, and Suchet, who had just seen some of his troops massacred at Lumbier, decided to intervene again in Navarre. He dispatched General Harispe to hunt down Mina. On 12 January 5,000 French approached Lumbier only to find the bridge into the city cut and the far bank of the river Irati defended. Mina held an advantageous position, and his men defended the city until their ammunition ran out and they had to flee into the Pyrenees. Losses on both sides were minimal, the French suffering twenty-three deaths and the Navarrese four, according to Andrés Martín. The French reports recorded greater losses than the Navarrese: eighteen killed, thirty-one taken prisoner, and five deserted.32 After chasing Mina a short way into the mountains, the French returned to Lumbier, sacked the town, and killed sixteen civilians who had been foolish enough to remain behind.33