

If such proportions were to hold for other areas not represented in the Recoletas data, then the global numbers for people imprisoned or deported by the French would be enormous indeed. Unfortunately, compliance with the survey was uneven. In the merindad of Pamplona 56 percent of the communes responded, representing 53 percent of the population. In Estella 49 percent of the population was represented in the responses, in Sangüesa 44 percent, in Tudela 42 percent, and in Olite only 31 percent. Flawed though the survey was, careful handling of the data on its own terms does produce certain trends and conclusions about the nature of the French repression.

The essential feature of the repression, like the intelligence upon which it was based, was its unevenness. Some areas, like the region of small villages along the Araquil River and its tributaries northwest of Pamplona, saw almost a third of their population carted off by the military police. In most towns and villages, however, the number of detainees was small. If the French suspected a village of helping the Division, they usually detained only the priest, regidor, or some other community leader. Even if an area was merely in arrears on its taxes, it was cause enough to arrest the regidor, and most communities that reported civilian incarcerations noted the loss of at least one regidor. As targets of the police, priests came in a close second to regidores. The French removed dozens of priests for reading Mina’s proclamations to their parishioners or for sheltering wounded guerrillas.13 Yet, the constant threat of guerrilla attack prevented Mendiry from maintaining a regular police presence outside Pamplona and a few other towns. As a result, much of rural Navarre escaped the French terror.

However, regidores, and less frequently priests, were also subject to reprisals by the guerrillas, for Mina expected local officials to act as adjuncts to the Division, ready to sacrifice their persons and property to the cause. When he was disappointed in his expectations, Mina was not reluctant to brand, blind, cut ears from, or kill collaborating regidores. Thus, local elites who escaped Reille’s terror might still be caught by Mina’s.

Although the mass of the population was not, of course, normally subject to imprisonment, there were significant exceptions. Mass detentions were carried out by Reille as a last resort against municipalities that had proved themselves committed to the insurgency. Mass arrests took place mainly in the merindad of Pamplona, to a degree in Sangüesa, Estella, and Olite, and hardly at all in Tudela. It is also apparent from the responses that the towns and villages that suffered most from mass arrests were those that had repeatedly given information and supplies to the guerrillas or those known to have contributed a large number of volunteers. If a French force was ambushed in or around a particular village or town, all of its inhabitants were liable to suffer for not having given warning of the presence of the guerrillas. Cáseda was sacked in December 1810 because the guerrillas had surprised a detachment near the town.14 In Monreal, one of the insurgent strongholds near Idocín, the French burned down the houses of seventeen patriots in a town of eighty-four houses.15 Elsewhere, the French were less selective. Noain, strategically located midway between the Carrascal, Pamplona, and Monreal, was completely destroyed by the French in 1812.16 And the valley of Roncal must have produced an almost continuous plume of smoke. The French burned 311 houses in Roncal during the course of the war. Isaba, which lost 153 houses, and Burgui, which lost 126, were at times practically erased.17