

To carry the terror to civilians, Reille required a more effective police force and military tribunal. He established both under the direction of Jean Mendiry. On 18 August 1810 Mendiry’s competence was outlined in a decree published and posted throughout the province. Mendiry was to have authority over “crimes against the state,” which covered a broad range of activities, including the expression of opinions or the publication of works antithetical to the regime. Cooperation with the insurgents or communication with them in any form also came under the purview of the new organization, as did the “seduction” of imperial troops and “any deed or word” that denoted “disaffection, disapproval, or disobedience” to the government.7 Mendiry placed agents in churches, taverns, handball courts, and street corners. He became the most hated symbol of the occupation.8

Reille put his new mechanism of repression to work immediately in a series of punitive expeditions against civilians. Reille had two sources of intelligence to aid him in this project. He benefited from the returns of the demographic and economic surveys begun under his predecessors. As one would expect, the surveys were never completed for every locale, but they nevertheless constituted powerful tools in the hands of the police. An even more important source of information, one of Reille’s own projects, was a community-level survey of men who had been absent from their homes without explanation. These lists, again missing for most communities, began to reach Reille’s hands in late 1810 and early 1811. The arrest of civilians by the French police followed.

There are two sources of information that make it possible to quantify the police repression to a certain extent. The first is the prison entry book kept in Pamplona’s Recoletas convent, which had been converted into a prison during the war. This book showed that 2 percent of the population of Navarre had passed through the Recoletas. Almost 80 percent of the prisoners were eventually released, 17 percent were deported to France, and 2 percent died in jail or were executed. The jailer recorded the place of origin for 48 percent of the inmates. Most (82 percent) of these prisoners came from the Montaňa. The French hit especially hard in Estella, Falces, Huarte, Lárraga, Mendigorria, Olite, Pamplona, Puente la Reina, and Sangüesa. Only 2 percent of the prisoners came from the merindad of Tudela.9

As large as the total number (3,323) of prisoners is from the Recoletas, it represents only a fraction of those detained by the French. Suspects were sent not only to the Recoletas but to prisons located in Logroño and Zaragoza, and it is likely that some Ribereños, in particular, would have been incarcerated there. There were also a number of smaller jails in places like Irurzun. Fortunately, the Recoletas data can be supplemented by a second source of information. In 1817 communities in Navarre were asked to complete a survey indicating, among other things, the numbers of civilians arrested by the French during the war. The responses are startling.10 We know, for example, that in the valley of Echauri, which showed only 8 inmates in the Recoletas, the French actually imprisoned, deported, or killed 259 people.11 Similarly, Erroz was supposed to have lost 7 of its residents to the Recoletas, but local data show that 38 people were actually incarcerated either in Pamplona or Irurzún.12