

From 24 December through January the Division altogether killed or captured 341 French combatants and wounded hundreds, especially in the battles of 24 and 26 December. French totals do not differ significantly, showing 338 killed, captured, or deserted, with no estimate of the numbers wounded. In return, the French had been really effective only against the unfortunate civilians in Lumbier. Such a stain on French military honor had to be rectified, and the French once again poured overwhelming forces into Navarre beginning in the middle of January. Generals Cafarelli and Chlopiski joined Harispe and Reille in the pursuit of Mina. Together they had some 13,000 troops, reinforced in Aragon and the Ebro valley by another 9,000 troops, forcing Mina once again to disperse his Division in order to save it.34 Mina took the bulk of his troops across Navarre to the mountains of Andía in early February. There they were divided further. The first and second battalions fled to the relative safety of the Pyrenees and were cantoned in the valleys of Roncal, Salazar, and Aezcoa in the east and Baztán in the west. The third and fourth battalions occupied the mountains of Estella and Santa Cruz de Campezo on the border with Álava. Reille’s information coincides roughly with that provided by the guerrillas and again supports the idea that the guerrillas were men of the Montaňa. On 1 March Reille’s spies placed the guerrillas in four bases: Goñi, Lecumberri, and Baztán, all in the northwest, and Aoiz, in the eastern Pyrenees.35

The Division remained in this dispersed state in the Montaňa until the end of May, with the following exceptions. In the space of one week in late March, the guerrillas united to kill or capture 46 men of the Estella garrison without suffering any loss, fought off a column of 3,300 stationed in Los Arcos, inflicting 38 casualties, and surprised and captured a requisition party of 90 men in Aragon. They then melted away before the French could respond.36 In April Mina again united part of his force, captured ninety-eight muskets and a convoy of munitions in Azagra, and surprised the 150-man garrison at Exea de los Caballeros in Aragon, which he took after killing 71 French troops and capturing the rest.37

In May, after months spent in fruitless pursuit of the Division, Harispe and his men evacuated Navarre. Still, Reille counted 4,700 men under his command together with 2,400 men under General Cafarelli. Mina’s full Division came to some 5,000 men at this time, each of five battalions counting approximately 1,000 troops and the cavalry about 150. However, the fifth “Alavese” battalion rarely operated in conjunction with the first four Navarrese battalions. The French thus enjoyed a significant numerical advantage over the guerrillas. However, this apparent advantage was eliminated by the requirements of garrisoning the countryside. Of Reille’s troops, 2,700 were in permanent garrison duty, leaving him a field force of 2,000 men. Even when united with Cafarelli’s 2,400 men, therefore, Reille could only match numbers with the guerrillas.38 The dispersion of enemy resources in occupation duties is, of course, one of the desired results of guerrilla warfare. In the peninsula as a whole, it was what allowed Spanish and English regular armies to survive against the French. Inside Navarre, it gave Mina the ability to unite his troops for campaigns in the knowledge that Reille, without Harispe or some other outside help, could not overwhelm the Division.