

In mid-November, as the guerrillas attempted to reenter Navarre at Logroño, they were sighted by a column of 7,000 French infantry and 1,100 cavalry, which chased them deep into Old Castile and cornered them there. In the fields of Belorado the Division lost almost 500 killed, a third of the troops remaining active at that date. Many of those killed were bayoneted as they lay wounded or were taken prisoner and executed later. It was the greatest French victory yet over a guerrilla force.48

It may be asked what Mina was doing operating outside of Navarre at this time. Guerrilla armies in Galicia and elsewhere had shown themselves notoriously incompetent and rebellious outside of their home provinces, and the south bank of the Ebro was not well known to Mina or to any of his officers, who were all men from the Montaňa. Tarrazona, the object of the one offensive operation in the midst of months of retreating, had a strongly fortified garrison, lay within striking distance of thousands of troops stationed in Tudela, and was situated in a plain affording perfect conditions for French cavalry and artillery. Despite all this, Mina attacked.

It was a piece of news Mina received while in Molina that caused him to risk a frontal attack on Tarrazona. In the first communication he had received in months from Cádiz, Mina learned that he had been granted the rank of colonel, even though his troops were not yet accorded the status of regulars. At the same time, he was also informed that the troops chasing him were intended for the relief of Masséna in Portugal and that more of Masséna’s men would be passing through Navarre during the weeks to come. By diverting these forces, Mina could contribute dramatically, in his first action as a colonel, to the wider Allied strategy. Such a prospect no doubt appeared irresistible to Mina. It was a constant struggle to convince the politicians in Cádiz, most of whom were skeptical of or downright opposed to guerrilla operations, that the Navarrese volunteers should be recognized as a regular division. What better way to persuade them than to thin the ranks of Wellington’s opponents? For political reasons, therefore, Mina attempted to convert his guerrillas into a regular force. His men could do many things, but unfortunately for Mina they could not fight a regular campaign in strange, open country. Thus, Tarrazona and Belorado were the result of Mina’s loss of faith in the guerrilla strategy. Only after rededicating his force to a guerrilla campaign inside Navarre was he able to rebuild the movement.