

Now, however, the coordination and resolve of the French in the aftermath of Arlabán caught the guerrillas by surprise. Mina had learned that a column of 2,000 French was stationed just across the Alavese border in Santa Cruz de Campezo, and he set out in pursuit. But this force was nothing more than bait, and as Mina marched his men further into Álava, he became aware that Pannetier had not remained in Estella but, after receiving reinforcements, had begun to close on the Division from the rear. Following his usual methods, Mina sought to escape the difficulty by doubling back in order to cross the plains of central Navarre at night to reach the mountains of Sangüesa.

On this occasion, however, a misfortune of nature thwarted Mina’s plans. During the night march, the weather became so bad that his men could see only by the flashes of lightning. Mud sucked the shoes from their feet, and heavy rains rendered their weapons useless. The Division, which had set prodigious records for endurance, marching some eighty miles in twenty-four hours on one occasion, made only a few miles the entire night, placing it underneath the noses of Reille’s column of 5,000 infantry and 500 cavalry in Los Arcos.

For reasons perhaps associated with Cruchaga’s injuries, Mina, Cruchaga, and a small escort abandoned the Division in this hour of desperation and fled to the north. They left it to the third in command, Barrena, to cross the plains of Navarre with the barefoot and disarmed men under the eyes of a far superior enemy well supplied with artillery and horse. In the hills near the city of Lerín, the guerrillas were surrounded and annihilated. The French killed 400 and captured 200, while losing very few against the defenseless Navarrese. Many who escaped smashed their useless weapons and returned to civilian life.52

After Lerín Reille attempted to divide the guerrillas by renewing offers of amnesty, by placing prices on the heads of Mina, Cruchaga, and the other commanders, and even by attempting to bribe Mina. This last effort resulted in a peculiar episode in which Mina seemed for a while on the verge of accepting a French offer of employment in exchange for demobilizing the Division. After an exchange of letters with the government, Mina agreed to meet a party of two Navarrese merchants and a Frenchman sent by Reille in a safe village chosen by Mina. Once the parties had come together, though, Mina promptly took them hostage. Perhaps he had sensed a trap. More likely, however, Mina had only agreed to the charade in order to obtain a cease-fire as a condition for negotiation. This he achieved, and the Division, or what remained of it after Lerín, gained a much needed rest from pursuit. The fact that the envoys, some of whom were later revealed to have performed services on the sly for Mina during the war, were quickly allowed to “escape” from their captors, demonstrates that Mina did not suspect their patriotism or hold the affair a failure.53

Until the middle of October what remained of the Division was sent, in the last great dispersion before the end of the war, to the Pyrenees and the mountains west of Estella, and to Álava and Guipúzcoa, where the guerrillas began to make the life of Thouvenot, the commander in Álava, miserable. Recovery began almost immediately. In early October, the Division counted only 950 men.54 The battalions were soon filled out, however, from two sources. First, the complete destruction of organized resistance in Catalonia and most of Aragon during 1811 resulted in a flood of men from these areas joining up with Mina in the fall.55 Second, Mina circulated an order that all of those volunteers who had returned home were required to rejoin the Division. Anyone discovered to have accepted the French amnesty would be shot together with his parents or three other relatives.56