

In March, however, the French finally responded to Mina with overwhelming force. Napoleon reorganized and consolidated the military government in northern Spain under the unified command of Dorsenne, and he brought back Reille to command a special Army of the Ebro in order to clear Navarre and Upper Aragon of insurgents. Reille was assigned fifteen infantry regiments, four cavalry regiments, an artillery train and engineers, and thousands of gendarmes, for a total of over 36,000 men. In addition, he was supposed to have access to other troops in Catalonia and Aragon. In reality, however, the troops from Catalonia never participated in the venture, and Suchet, far from contributing to the Army of the Ebro, borrowed almost a third of Reille’s troops for new operations south of Valencia. Even so, Reille brought 25,000 men into the chase.23

In a response by now familiar, Mina sent half of the Division west to the Estella region, the other half to the mountains of Roncal and Upper Aragon. This time, however, even with his main force divided and in hiding, Mina continued to dominate Navarre. There was no need to demobilize in the spring of 1812, nor was there any sign of popular disaffection as there had been in the summer of 1811. People realized that this wave of French pressure would recede, as others had, and that the guerrillas would remain. Mina had indeed become the “little king” of Navarre, dominating the province wherever the French were not physically present. His superior intelligence network made it easy for the guerrillas to avoid unfavorable encounters and to strike quickly against exposed French units. Casualties from this period, especially for the guerrillas, are impossible to calculate because of gaps in the records. It seems likely that they were low, however, since there were no major battles, despite the number of troops engaged.24 Casualties, though, were not the only measure of the guerrillas’ success. It was precisely during the spring of 1812 that the Division tightened its economic control of Navarre, blockaded Pamplona, and began the most spectacular period of recruitment in areas previously outside of its sphere of influence.

In December 1811 Mina had declared an economic blockade of Pamplona, and in the early months of 1812 the city was cut off from the rest of Navarre. Mina forbade anyone to carry money, food, or commodities to within a mile of the capital. The inhabitants of Pamplona were declared enemies for the duration of the war. People could leave the capital to take up residence in guerrilla territory, but nobody could reenter the city. Stones were fixed around Pamplona, marking the line of blockade, and Mina placed a twenty-four-hour guard on all of the roads leading into the city. Article 10 of Mina’s decree read: “The detachments stationed to observe the line will, if they see anyone approaching, fire without delay, communication, or orders; and whether the culprit is wounded or not, he will be hanged immediately in a tree.”25