

Mina responded to this situation by reuniting his four Navarrese battalions in late May in Estella. Mina heard from Fernández in Álava that a column made up of 100 carriages of French wounded and sick, 1,070 Spanish and 58 English prisoners, and an enormous amount of booty, including personal effects of Marshal Masséna and possibly the oneeyed marshal himself, was to depart Vitoria on 25 May. Mina decided to strike. In two days he marched his men fifty-three miles to the pass at Arlabán, on the Álava-Guipúzcoa border, where the French column had to pass. At Arlabán Mina employed his usual tactic, firing once and attacking with the bayonet. The results were familiar. Of the 1,650 men who made up the escort, 240 were killed and 160 taken prisoner. The rest fled to Vitoria, warning Masséna, who had lagged behind in the city. The money, weapons, and other goods captured provided the biggest payday ever enjoyed by the guerrillas. Arlabán was Mina’s Bailén. It was the greatest single victory yet by a guerrilla army. Most important was the rescue of all but 150 of the Allied prisoners, for it spread the fame of Mina and the Division of Navarre throughout Spain.39

The surprise at Arlabán finally forced Cádiz to alter its perception of Mina. The government had repeatedly denied recognition to the Division. Although Mina had sent representatives to Cádiz, they had been dismissed. The government felt that the Navarrese troops were still half bandits, and Mina was forced to keep the content of the rejection letters he received from Cádiz secret in order not to demoralize his men.40 It is true that there were some inside the government who had become disgusted with the performance of the regular Spanish armies and who had begun to listen with sympathy to Mina’s case. The junta of La Mancha, in hiding at this time, argued in favor of Mina in the first number of its official organ: “This Navarrese hero knows the art of winning battles and not being beaten,” wrote the editors of the junta’s newspaper, alluding to the failure of Spanish armies to protect La Mancha. “It matters nothing to the nation that he is ignorant of the tactics of the [military] academies.”41After Arlabán the Regency agreed with those who advocated guerrilla war as the path to liberation, finally recognizing the personnel of the Division as regular troops on 5 June 1811.42

Mina quickly evacuated his troops from Arlabán to avoid pursuit by a column dispatched from Vitoria. The fifth battalion remained in eastern Álava. The third and fourth battalions were sent north, where they drove the force stationed in Irún across the Bidasoa to Hendaye, briefly sealing the French border and seizing a valuable stockpile of cotton cloth and indigo before retreating south into the Pyrenees. The rest of the Division crossed Navarre to the Carrascal.43

The French tried everything to control the guerrillas. They set up a system of fortifications and towers in Álava and Navarre to link the cities of the interior to the coast. Ten towers were erected between Vitoria and Irún, and others were created on the Irün/Pamplona/Tudela highway. The towers communicated with each other through a semaphore system “to give notice of what is going on in the mountains” to the forces in Vitoria, Irün, and Pamplona before they ventured out into guerrilla territory. Ideally, the forts would both warn columns of the presence of guerrillas and serve as refuges for ambushed convoys and detachments. The forts were never effective in carrying out the first task. As islands of darkness in a countryside dominated by the insurgents, they received no intelligence and were no help to the garrisons in the cities. They did, however, afford secure havens to French troops isolated in the mountains. One fort built in the fateful pass at Arlabán saved hundreds of French soldiers in 1812, though it could not prevent a recurrence of another surprise attack.44