

The battle of Rocaforte initiated a new phase in the guerrilla war. Operating by themselves, the French forces in Navarre could no longer take the offensive. Indeed, they could barely garrison Pamplona, Tafalla, Tudela, and the five other places they still held after abandoning the regions of Estella and Sangüesa. After Rocaforte, the French were the quarry rather than the hunters, French guards had to remain constantly alert in their posts even on the outskirts of Pamplona, and mail couriers had to be sent out with escorts of 600 men.6

Mendizábal was witness not just to an important victory but also to the greatest atrocity ever perpetrated against the French by Mina. There were no prisoners at Rocaforte, because Mina had them executed on the spot. The number killed in this way is not recorded, nor is Mendizábal’s reaction, though judging from his subsequent enthusiasm in Mina’s behalf he could not have been too dismayed. Indeed, as a result of the battle of Rocaforte and Mendizábal’s lobbying for Mina, the government raised him to the rank of field marshal soon afterward.

The order to kill captives had been issued by Mina on 14 December 1811. It read, “French officers and soldiers captured with arms or without them in the course of battle or not will be hanged and left along the main roads.”7 Rocaforte was the first chance to implement this new policy. It had been common practice for the guerrillas to execute captured Spanish traitors, and the French had frequently killed captured insurgents, but the execution of French captives was not normal for Mina. Previously, captured French were taken to prisons in Valencia. Mina’s new policy of rigor, however, was a response to the escalating ferocity of the French regime as it entered its death throes.

After the disaster of Lerín, the French operated with impunity against demobilized partisans and their relatives and sympathizers. On 8 July Reille had forty imprisoned volunteers executed in Pamplona in reprisal for Mina’s execution of captured “chacones,” as the guerrillas called Spaniards serving under French colors. In August Reille had twenty-two “brigands” and their “ferocious” captain executed in Pamplona. Larrode’s fate in Exea has been recounted already, but sixty-nine men captured with him were also executed. On 27 October sixteen guerrillas captured in Araquil were shot in the field. We will never know the true number of volunteers shot in this way by the French. The mass graves depicted in Goya’s etchings suggest that many insurgents must have disappeared without a trace.8

Noncombatants also suffered from the terror. In Tafalla eleven “bad subjects” were shot that fall, and in Pamplona fourteen priests, monks, and other “bandits” faced the firing squad on 2 October. In Aibar the priest and five others were shot, eight died in Sangüesa on a single day in October, and twenty-two were hanged or shot in Estella, atrocities all recorded by Reille.

Many more were arrested than were executed, of course. As early as August Reille had complained that his jails were too full, that at most he needed to keep 200 prisoners on hand for public executions. But the arrests continued. From early September to mid-October Reille arrested nearly 600 parents of guerrillas, and planned to “burn their houses” and have “some of the worst shot.” The jails became overcrowded, and Reille had to begin the mass deportation of prisoners. Over the next few months hundreds were sent to prisons in France. On a single day in October Reille deported 300 civilians, who he suggested should “finish their days in some distant dungeon,” because they were bandits and would always be enemies of France.9