

By this measure, Mina required full belligerency from the civilian population. Villagers within walking distance of the capital who depended on the Pamplona market for earnings were asked to forgo this outlet. Thus, the blockade threatened economically to ruin not just the French and the Pamplonese, but everyone in the Pamplona basin. Mina was aware of the economic hardships he had created, but he did not hesitate to penalize those who broke the blockade. As he said in his memoirs, he “did not institute these measures just to see them evaded.”26 He seems to have been more lenient in practice than in his decree, at times allowing his men to cut off the ears of an offender, rather than shooting or hanging him. Mina also had violators’ noses cut off or their foreheads branded with the emblem “Viva Mina.” Another common penalty was tarring and feathering.27

These strict dealings with the civilian population were nothing new. Navarrese and other Spaniards serving in any capacity with the French had always been executed immediately upon capture. Even more passive forms of collaboration brought severe penalties. Buyers of properties seized by the French state, for example, were singled out for retribution by the insurgents.28 And peasants in Estella, forced in 1811 to carry mail for the French garrison, were beaten, branded, shot, or lynched for a collaboration that had been forced upon them.29 What was different in the spring of 1812 was that what had once been the threat of reprisal by the guerrillas had become a certainty.

José Yangüas y Miranda, the wealthy Tudelan afrancesado, personally attested to the insurgency’s control over the province. In January 1811 Mina had tried to lay a contribution on Tudela, but the city fathers, Yangüas among them, thought they could still afford to ignore Mina’s demands. On 20 May 1812 Yangüas paid for this defiance. On the Val-tierra road, just north of Tudela, Yangüas and two companions were captured by Mina’s men. As evidenced by the sack of Tudela in 1809, there was no love between the armed peasants of the Division and the bourgeois of Tudela.30 Mina kept Yangüas hostage for two months, creating an inveterate enemy. Yangüas later recalled that by 1812 “the entire province, aside from the places fortified by the French, was under the absolute dominion of the guerrillas of Navarre, who had forbidden any communication with the enemy, under pain of death. . . . Justice was meted out in the field of honor, without the least formality of a trial. And there was no compromise, but only cutting off ears, execution, or complete liberty, if the accused had the fortune to persuade [the guerrillas] of his innocence.”31

Among those who suffered the ultimate penalty were the alcaldes of Berriosuso and Orcoyen, villages located too close to Pamplona to escape French entanglement yet outside of the circle of the siege and therefore subject to Mina’s law. The French ordered these villages to cart fodder into the city, but the alcaldes themselves had to fulfill the order because nobody else would. Mina could not prevent them from completing the delivery and returning home, but his watchdogs later stabbed the two men to death in their sleep in retribution.32