

Mina could not always exchange prisoners for supplies but had also to make cash payments to the English. The money was plentiful, though, since by 1812 Mina had nearly absolute control over the Navarrese border crossings and customhouses, except Irün, which was heavily guarded by the French. Mina estimated that he had 200 men working for him in these border posts.18 Their initial task, under Félix Sarasa, the well-connected farmer from Artica, was to eliminate smuggling and banditry.19 Smuggling was easily ended, because some of the guerrillas had themselves been smugglers and knew how and where to interdict illegal trade. Banditry was eliminated after Mina defeated the Men of the Idea in the spring of 1810. Indeed, it appears that Mina succeeded in controlling the borders and highways of Navarre to a degree only dreamed of by Spanish governments both before and after the war. By 1811 commerce within Navarre had become safer than anywhere in the peninsula, provided one paid Mina’s tolls. The Division earned about 3 million reales a year from its tolls, enough to pay for its uniforms and ammunition as well as to pay the troops’ salaries.20

The fall of Valencia freed up Suchet, and this was potentially a much greater threat than the loss of supplies from the city. Immediately, Suchet dispatched a column of 1,800 infantry and 50 cavalry under General Soulier, who swept into Sangüesa in early February. Soulier’s column, known as the “Infernals” to denote their effectiveness in counterinsurgency, had already fought a successful campaign against the Empecinado. Soulier expected to cut down the insurgents in Navarre as he had in Castile and southern Aragon. Mina, however, could reckon almost 7,000 men by February. Even discounting those operating in Álava and Aragon, he was still able to bring 4,000 troops against Soulier. On February 5 the Division attacked the Infernals in Sangüesa, forcing them to form square and retreat to Sos, the fortified birthplace of Ferdinand the Catholic just across the border in Aragon. The French suffered 600 casualties before finding refuge inside the fortress.21 An intercepted letter from Soulier to Suchet described the state of the Infernals after the battle, as well as the quality of the Navarrese troops. Soulier reported that his column had “lost over 600 men and is no longer able to do battle with the insurgents of Navarre. I confess to your excellency in all honesty that the brigands of this kingdom merit the name of veteran soldiers. They can compete with the best of our armies, for the continuous battles and victories have made them lose their fear of us.”22

From Sos the Division descended on Tafalla, occupied by a French garrison of almost 500 men. The guerrillas still lacked siege weapons to take the fort, and all they could do was occupy the town for a few days, confiscating French stores and pressing the inhabitants for contributions before moving on. Nevertheless, Mina had achieved nearly complete control in Navarre.