

Abbé only increased the terror when he took command in November. On 3 December Abbé announced that twenty “bandits” held in Pamplona, together with all of the imprisoned relatives of the insurgents, would be executed. On 4 December twenty-two people were hanged in Pamplona, and on the following day eleven more were executed in Estella for the crime of being related to volunteers. Four days later Mendiry had seventeen more soldiers and seventeen relatives of insurgents shot. Their bodies were hung on either side of the Tafalla road at a point a few miles south of Pamplona.10

It was in response to all of this that Mina decreed his own brand of terror. Before the killings at Rocaforte, Mina had established a prison for French captives in the valley of Roncal. These men became the scapegoats of the guerrilla terror. When the French executed a Navarrese official, four French officials died. When they killed an enlisted man, Mina had twenty French soldiers executed.11 The actual number of French prisoners killed in this way is unknown, but the atrocities, according to Mina, achieved their purpose: they caught the attention of General Abbé. Inspired no doubt by the knowledge that many more of his men were falling into the hands of the resistance than the other way around, Abbé finally stopped treating the men of the Division and their relations as if they were criminals. Mina thereafter returned to the system of giving quarter to captured enemy troops, lessening the climate of barbarity (at least between the combatants) during the last year of the war.12

As a result of the battle of Rocaforte, Mendizábal became a believer in Mina and his Division, obtaining for him official recognition of his growing sway over Álava and Upper Aragon.13 With Abbé confined to Pamplona, Mina could now station his troops safely in Estella, Lumbier, and Puente la Reina, where they rested for fifteen days and attracted new recruits. Meanwhile, however, events elsewhere threatened to undermine all of these achievements.

On 9 January Suchet finally took Valencia. This was potentially a great blow to the guerrillas, for by 1811 they obtained much of their weapons and ammunition from Valencia. In the early days of the movement, in 1809 and 1810, guns and munitions stolen from the French or smuggled out of Pamplona had been enough. Shops were set up to make repairs to the weapons as needed, and Mina established “factories” in the Pyrenees to produce extra shot and powder, but the insecurity of these operations prevented them from expanding to cover the needs of the Division as it grew in late 1810 and 1811. The Spanish forces in Valencia, however, had managed to supply Mina’s thirst for weapons. Indeed, Mina’s contacts with Valencia were for months at a time his only connection to the wider war. Now that Valencia was in enemy hands, the supply line of both weapons and information was severed.14

Fortunately for Mina, he found a new source of munitions almost immediately. As early as 1810 the British Royal Navy had turned the Bay of Biscay into an English preserve, making coastal traffic almost impossible for the French.15 The English were able to make occasional drops to the guerrillas in Asturias, Santander, and Vizcaya in exchange for prisoners. Mina had already tested this source of supplies once in 1811, and now he established regular contacts along the Biscay coast.16 Through the small ports at Motrico and Zumaya the Division began to acquire the weapons and ammunition it needed to nearly double in size after 1812. As for clothing, the Division supplied its own picturesque uniforms throughout most of the war. The guerrillas wore brown pants and jackets and high top hats. Then in March 1813 the English also began to supply uniforms.17