

After the first surprise at Arlabán, the French had quickly retaliated in Navarre with stepped up police measures and punitive fines. This time around they could do nothing. In fact, with Wellington finally making threatening movements into Castile, the French were forced practically to evacuate Navarre. Only the troops under Abbé, increasingly locked into Pamplona, Tafalla, Tudela, and the border garrisons, remained. As a result, Mina achieved perfect control over much of Navarre at this time, even appearing in the outskirts of Pamplona, now isolated in a sea of insurgency, to taunt the garrison inside.36

In May the Division once again sought contact with the English. Mina’s men were loaded down with prisoners from Arlabán, and a flood of new recruits made it imperative to obtain rifles and ammunition. A drop was arranged at Zumaya, but as the Division headed through Guipúzcoa to the rendezvous, Mina learned that an artillery train—a prize too important to let go—would pass near to his position on its way to Vitoria. Before the Division could engage the convoy, however, the French used their cannon to punch holes in the infantry, and one ball struck Gregorio Cruchaga, crushing both of his hands. He was evacuated to an iron foundry hidden in the mountains of Aralar. Mina completed the mission at Zumaya, but by the time he returned Cruchaga had died of gangrene.37

Cruchaga, second in command of the Division, was probably a more capable field officer than Mina. He had been wounded several times as a result of his insistence on leading his men in bayonet charges. His loss was a blow to the morale of the men and of Mina. Even more important than his military talents was Cruchaga’s prestige with the volunteers from Roncal, who formed much of the veteran core of the Division. It was Cruchaga who had kept the volunteers together at the worst times. When he died, the despair among the soldiers caused some to desert. It was imperative that someone comparable be found to replace him as quickly as possible. It is highly significant that Mina selected Juan José, Gregorio’s brother, to fill the gap.

Juan José Cruchaga was only twenty-one years old, with no previous experience in the resistance. He had spent the war years up to then caring for the family’s sheep in Roncal.38 Mina only selected him because, as he admitted in his memoirs, Juan José looked more like his dead brother than any other member of the Cruchaga clan. This incident illustrates the degree to which leadership in the Division was still based on personality rather than military rank. Gregorio Cruchaga’s power to lead men stemmed from his connections to Roncal and from his own personal aura. He had become a fetish to the men of the second battalion, ensuring their victory. Only another Cruchaga could serve as replacement.39

In late May the Division engaged the French in three minor actions around Santa Cruz de Campezo just across the border in Álava. In the last of these occurred an event that proved once again how discipline still depended on personal influence and how this dependence could cripple the insurgency in the event one of the leaders became injured. In a fight with 2,000 French troops from Álava, Mina received a serious bullet wound to the calf. As had occurred in the past when a commander fell in combat, the battle degenerated into another Iliadic struggle for the body of the fallen hero. Similar breakdowns had occurred in the battle of Tarrazona, when both Cruchaga and Mina had been wounded, as well as in the battle in which Cruchaga lost his life. After each such incident, the guerrillas seemed to lose direction, opening the way to defeat. The defeats at Belorado and Lerín occurred when Mina and Cruchaga were absent after serious injuries to one or both of them. This time too, although the Division was able to hold its ground and continue to operate in a limited way during the month of June, the guerrilla offensive stalled.40