

Wellington, who was rapidly advancing east through Castile, had asked Mina to occupy Clausel and prevent him from reinforcing Joseph Bonaparte. The Division was still outmanned, however, and could not remain united. To fulfill Wellington’s request, Mina directed his battalions to operate separately. The first and second fought in Álava, the third, fourth, fifth, and eighth in Navarre, and the sixth and seventh battalions in Aragon. The French were again able to requisition widely. They even penetrated Roncal with 14,000 men, burning and looting, forcing Mina to evacuate his hospitals, and bringing back another contribution to Pamplona. In all this time, however, Clausel gained no glory in battle. The guerrillas were adept at avoiding Clausel’s main force, and were deadly against detachments and stragglers. The Division killed or captured 414 enemy troops in late April and May, and Clausel’s total losses in Navarre numbered some 2,500 men.

Clausel had seen enough. Already on 4 May he had written to Joseph complaining that he would need a minimum of 20,000 and perhaps as many as 25,000 troops—aside from those assigned to garrison duty— to defeat Mina. Realizing that in the present conditions he would not receive this level of reinforcement, he suggested, as Bessières had before, that Navarre be evacuated. “I see everything lost in Navarre,” wrote Clausel. “[There is] no hope of success. I am going to abandon it.”50 He did not receive his wish until months later, so that he was still in Navarre when the battle of Vitoria took place on 21 June. Mina had succeeded in occupying 19,000 troops that could have turned the tide against Wellington. Another 35,000 troops in Aragon had been similarly entertained both by the guerrillas of the Division and by those fighting under other commanders.51

After Vitoria, the French abandoned Tudela and Zaragoza, leaving behind a token force of 500 to 600 men inside the fort. Zaragoza would have to face another siege. Mina brought his troops up in front of the walls on 4 July, but was then forced to wait almost a month for artillery. Finally, in late July the bombardment began. On 2 August his cannon exploded powder inside the fortress, and the 405 French troops remaining alive surrendered. On 23 August the garrison at Mallén surrendered with the loss of forty-three men. San Sebastian and Pamplona were also besieged, the first surrendering on 17 October and the last on 31 October.

That fall the guerrillas began the sieges of Jaca and Monzón, the two least brilliant actions ever undertaken by the Division. A ninth battalion, the third in Aragon, was formed to help clear the last French troops from Spain. These troops were as successful as ever at punishing the French when they tried to requisition or pasture their animals outside of their compounds, but actually taking the remaining citadels was beyond their capacity.52 Monzon did not surrender until 15 February 1814, and the Jaca garrison gave up two days later, after withstanding almost six months of blockade and a series of halfhearted assaults. In these sieges and in the other actions Mina was called upon to undertake, the French lost 1,206 killed and captured.