## 9 Why Navarre Fought

BETWEEN 1808 AND 1814, the French apparently destroyed the guerrilla movement in Navarre four times, only to see it reborn with greater strength than before. Eguaguirre and Gil were driven from Navarre in the fall of 1808, but were replaced by Javier Mina early in 1809. Javier’s corso terrestre dissolved after Dufour captured its leader in March 1810. In turn, Francisco Espoz y Mina replaced Javier in the spring of 1810. Twice in the next two years, at Belorado and at Lerín, Mina’s Division of Navarre was practically annihilated, but each time the guerrillas recovered quickly. After December 1812, Mina’s guerrillas were strong enough to take over Navarre, Upper Aragon, and parts of the Basque provinces. What were the reasons for the resilience and ultimate success of the guerrilla movement in Navarre?

To explain the guerrilla victory it is not enough to consider the strengths of Mina and his men. It is also necessary to consider the weaknesses and errors of the French government, for the French made many political mistakes that ensured the continued hostility of the Navarrese peasants, without which the guerrillas of Navarre could not have survived.

The French failure in Navarre (and in Spain generally) stemmed in part from the personal inadequacies of French officers and soldiers. The men Napoleon sent to Spain between 1808 and 1814 were not inspired by any revolutionary impulse or ideal but by the promise of booty.1 Napoleon regaled his servants with fiefs and endowments carved out of conquered lands, and by the time he took Spain, such rewards were an expected part of a systematic neofeudalism that generated its own momentum for further aggression. From the beginning, therefore, intervention in Spain went hand in hand with visions of plunder.2

French officials had been groomed to fit this imperial system. The military schools at Saint-Cyr and Fontainebleau trained good officers but not idealists, liberals, or even patriots.3 Men like Soult and Victor were more concerned with robbery than with war. Their one object was to extract as much for themselves from the territories under their command in as little time as possible.4 In Marshal Masséna’s estimation it was the rapacity of the French generals that ensured the failure of the occupation. When the war was over, Napoleon, seconding Masséna’s opinion, expressed regret at not having shot some of his generals, especially Soult, “the most voracious” of them all and a man who shipped some of Spain’s most valuable art treasures back to France.5

Navarre had no Murillos to steal, but the French governors in Pamplona could still extract fantastic sums from the population, and they were creative when it came to finding ways of tapping the springs of popular hatred. The lower echelon officers employed as garrison commanders were, if anything, worse than the generals. Many had entered the service in the hope of amassing a fortune in foreign lands. These were the men who, implementing the day-to-day business of the occupation of Navarre, “rendered the French name hateful to the foreigner.”6