

While Mina recovered in the monastery of Irache, the guerrillas skirmished with the French on numerous fronts. The French forces in Pamplona numbered some 4,000 infantry and 500 horse at this time. In addition, garrisons had been reestablished or reinforced in Arriba, Caparroso, Irurzun, Lecumberri, Tafalla, and Tudela, and there were additional garrisons stationed along the French border in Burguete, Elizondo, Fuenterrabia, Irún, Maya, Orbaiceta, Roncesvalles, Santesteban, and Urdax. However, Abbé could not easily borrow troops from these garrisons. Those stationed in the Ribera were particularly important to the occupation, since they secured Abbé’s supply route to the agricultural riches of the Ebro valley. The Ribera garrisons were also frequently Abbé’s only source of intelligence from the rest of Spain. As a result of these constraints, the French could place no more than 4,000 men in the field at a time, and usually the columns sent out from Pamplona numbered closer to 2,000 men.41 Thus, even during the period of Mina’s convalescence, the French were unable to retake the offensive.

In comparison, the Division numbered about 8,000 men, all of them effectives, since intelligence, supplies, and other essential services were by now provided automatically by civilians. At full strength, each infantry battalion had 1,200 troops, and the cavalry about 800. This meant that a single battalion of war-hardened Navarrese could almost match the less experienced troops normally fielded by Abbé. Accordingly, though they still lacked Mina to coordinate their actions, the battalions began to operate independently or in conjunction with companies borrowed from other battalions. During June 1812, the first, second, third, and fifth battalions were stationed in the far west, sometimes in Álava, sometimes in Estella, or along the Guipúzcoa border. These regions now became impassable to the French for long periods at a time. The third battalion with some of the cavalry beat off an attempt by a column of 2,000 French to requisition in the valley of Lana, a guerrilla stronghold of supply depots and safe houses near Estella. The fourth battalion patrolled the road between Pamplona and Roncesvalles, making communication with France difficult, isolating the garrisons inside Roncesvalles and Burguete for days at a time, and generally hampering requisitions in north-central Navarre. The sixth battalion, now on its feet in Aragon, began forcing the French garrisons there to remain inside their forts.42 As a result, a whole range of Aragonese towns previously dominated by the French escaped their tax obligations for the first time. By June Bena-varre, Barbastro, Tarrazona, Borja, and Jaca could no longer be taxed, and by the fall the list expanded to include Teruel, Daroca, Alcañíz, and Calatayud.43

Mina returned to action in the first week of July, taking half of his force to Vitoria, where he besieged the city and sealed Cafarelli’s division inside, while other guerrilla units retrieved another shipment of weapons on the Biscay coast. The French in Vitoria actually possessed a slight superiority in numbers over the guerrillas, and they attempted to do battle in the plains outside the city. But by this time they were no match for the Division even in a regular battle. The French lost 300 killed in a “slaughter” that lasted five hours, before the French commander called his troops back into the city. It was the first time the people of Vitoria had seen a Spanish force defeat the enemy, and it brought the population to the walls for a view of the action.44