

Yet, even after the Russian disaster, when troops of the Army of Spain had to be called back to France, Napoleon was still unwilling to go so far as to abandon Navarre. As a result, the French troops languishing inside Pamplona, though no match for the Division, were soon forced to attempt to break through the blockade in order to keep from freezing and starving. On 28 January Mina caught Abbé (now dubbed the “woodcutter” by the guerrillas) between Pamplona and Tafalla trying to gather fuel and food for the capital, and on 7 February they stopped another expedition in the town of Tiebas. In these actions, the guerrillas inflicted some 1,100 casualties.

The most important event from this period, however, was the acquisition by Mina of siege weapons. The English landed two large cannon at Zumaya on the coast of Guipúzcoa on 1 February. A small detachment of Mina’s men spent the next week carrying the precious weapons over the most difficult and remote paths imaginable, while the bulk of the Division spread out in every direction to provide a security net for the operation. On 9 February the cannon were wheeled into place facing the fortifications in Tafalla. After Pamplona, Tafalla was the most important fortified place in Navarre. The French had spent years reinforcing the castle and turning a convent into a fort with fosses and outer walls. The garrison, usually consisting of 400 to 500 troops, was the linchpin of French communications between Pamplona and the rest of Spain. The thousands of lives Abbé had sacrificed in expeditions to Tafalla for supplies and intelligence provided evidence of the place’s importance. Now, having just been defeated in the plains south of the city and forced to retreat behind the walls of Pamplona, Abbé could do nothing as the bombardment of Tafalla began.

After a day of shelling, a breach was opened in the outer wall of the compound, and Mina attempted to storm over it. Like Wellington, Mina found that his particular talents and those of his men were not suited to siege operations, and the fosse soon became filled with Navarrese dead. Mina called the action off and sent an embassy to suggest surrender. The French refused at first, since they thought Abbé would be coming to their aid at any moment. On the following day, however, they realized that there would be no rescue this time, so they surrendered. Of the defenders, 330 marched out to lay down their weapons, 52 were hospitalized, and 30 had died in the siege. The guerrillas destroyed the fortifications, including a castle that had been one of the jewels of medieval architecture in Navarre.

Mina quickly took his new weapons and 1,400 men to Sos, which possessed one of the strongest citadels in Aragon. The two twelve-pound cannon and two four-pounders destroyed part of the old town wall, and the guerrillas took Sos by storm. The fortress itself, however, was too strong for this artillery. A mine was blown, but even that had little effect, perhaps because the Division still had no engineers to conduct siege operations. For six days Mina blasted away at the stones of Sos fortress. On the seventh General Paris arrived from Zaragoza with 3,500 infantry and 250 cavalry. Strangely, instead of engaging the guerrillas, who were overmatched and had withdrawn to a height not far away, Paris simply evacuated the garrison. Thus, the purpose of the expedition was achieved even though the siege failed. Out of 160 men in the Sos garrison 32 died. During the evacuation Mina attacked Paris’s rear guard, inflicting another 150 casualties.49 It was now March. A second Aragonese battalion was being formed and another was begun in Álava—the seventh and eighth in the Division—so that Mina’s army numbered around 10,000 men. From Aragon, Álava, Guipúzcoa, and Navarre came reports of engagements, not all glorious, but all costly to an occupation that was beginning to show signs of collapsing.