

Thus, French personnel were inadequate to the task of occupying Navarre. An even greater problem for the occupation, however, was the political program that the French tried to implement, especially in the Navarrese context. The military governors in Pamplona attacked seigneurialism, the church, and privilege in Navarre, just as French reformers did everywhere. In Navarre, however, such reforms alienated most people. SeñoríOs were unimportant, as seen in an earlier chapter, so attacks on the señorial regime were viewed as arcane. Above all, the French attack on the church and on regional privileges could not but generate opposition in Navarre, where “feudalism” in the form of the foral constitution was valuable to everyone and worth defending and where the population was wedded to the Catholic cult.

### Defense of the Church

The French pursued their assault on the church with great consistency and vigor in Navarre. Of course, the looting by soldiers of churches and convents in Navarre was no different in kind from that long practiced among the soldiery of Europe. One need only recall the excesses of the Thirty Years’ War or the looting of the Palatinate in 1688 by Louis XIV’s troops. What was new was the extent of the French anticlerical fury. The anti-Catholic disposition of the generation of 1789 made the persecution of the church seem reasonable and progressive to the French. In a place like Navarre, however, where ecclesiastics had maintained much of their power and prestige, such persecution was bound to generate resistance.

Indeed, French anticlericalism dramatically affected the public spirit in much of Spain. As early as July 1808, Joseph complained to Napoleon that the troops’ unbridled attacks on churches and convents were making Spain ungovernable.7 In later years, when Madrid was faced with crushing deficits, Joseph became less fastidious in his dealings with the church. In June 1809, Joseph shut down many religious orders and required most members of the regular clergy to reestablish residence in their home parishes, where their movements could be monitored. The property of religious orders was expropriated and sold at public auction. Clerics caught preaching against the government or “in any way inciting the people to disobedience” were taken to Madrid for military trials.8

The church in Spain was divided in its response to the French government. Much of the church hierarchy collaborated, and even many priests and monks obeyed Napoleon when he reminded them that their mission was wholly spiritual. However, the rigor of French policies against the church forced many clerics to adopt a posture of active resistance to the regime. For example, French troops burned or destroyed thirteen Capuchin convents in Andalusia, and by 1814 only a few properties remained to the order. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that many Capuchin monks lent assistance to the juntas in southern Spain. They had no other employment.9

Politicians in the Central Junta were happy to accept any assistance the church could provide, but at first they were unwilling to see the clergy armed. Indeed, the government circulated instructions insisting that clerics might resist so long as they stopped “short of spilling blood.” The bishops forbade members of the clergy to use weapons or to take lives.10 Despite such discouragement, however, some priests and monks joined guerrilla bands in 1809. Finally, in December 1809, the Spanish government decided to recognize this fait accompli and set about regulating the clerical guerrilla movement, or Crusade. It was a sign of how desperate the government was at the end of 1809 that it directed “all ecclesiastics, even parish priests, to consider taking up arms.”11