

The “patriotism” of the Navarrese clergy was rooted in its close integration into the rural environment. Observers agreed that clerics in the Montaňa were “less aristocratic” than in the rest of Spain. Indeed, most priests were hardly distinguishable from the peasant proprietors among whom they lived. Priests usually had relations in their parishes, they understood the daily struggles of their parishioners, and they “knew how to speak the language” of the people.23 In small villages, there was no alternative to clerical leadership, since the priest was likely to be one of only two literate individuals, the other being the notary. The priest had more experience with the outside world than any of his flock. He interpreted the actions and words of the government into the language of the people and easily assumed political direction in times of crisis. Although guerrilla-priests like Merino were the exception, the average parish priest was uniquely placed to foment rebellion and to inspire others to take up arms. In the War of Independence, as in the Carlist wars, priests were inspirational leaders willing to sacrifice themselves for their calling and their parishes.24

The French were deluded by vocal Spanish anticlericals into thinking that most Spaniards would support the expropriation of the church. However, it was one thing for Spanish luces in Madrid to write about such projects, it was another to put them into practice in a place like Navarre. The French found that when they closed convents in Navarre, the people responded by taking defrocked regulars into their homes, hardly the result desired.25 The anticlerical legislation of Spanish liberals later in the century produced similar results and created the same popular opposition. The clerics of Navarre were the “spiritual chiefs” of the land, and even if they did not become the “political chiefs,” as Desdevises thought they did, they nevertheless served to arouse popular sentiment against the French.26

Despite all of these considerations, it is doubtful that defense of religion, by itself, motivated the people of Navarre to join the resistance. Nor is it self-evident that the Navarrese needed much spiritual encouragement from their pastors to take up arms. The French had damaged most people in material ways that allowed the resistance in Navarre to dispense with religious justifications. In the language used by the diarists and chroniclers of the war in Navarre, the religious theme came up less than the defense of national and provincial rights and far less than issues of personal freedom and economic survival. The preface to the account given by the third regiment of the Division of Navarre speaks of the “small but loyal” kingdom of Navarre, “constant” and “faithful” to its sovereigns. It parades the “privileges and fueros” as “proof” of Navarre’s historical bravery and devotion to its kings. And it dwells on the physical and financial suffering of individuals. But it never mentions the defense of religion.27 The text left by the second regiment speaks more specifically of loyalty to the person of Ferdinand VII and generally about the defense of the nation, but only mentions religion as an aside.28 Similarly, the account left by Iribarren, the commander of the Division’s cavalry, dwells on the qualities of the Navarrese, but only mentions personal, provincial, and national goals, never religious ones.29 The only person who seems to have placed defense of religion high on the list of motives for the resistance was Andrés Martín, but he was a priest and a chaplain in the Division, and even he intoned the crusading spirit in a perfunctory, formulaic way, while he seemed most sincere when writing of the “noble” and “warlike” people of Navarre.30 Mina explained the motives of his soldiers and supporters in entirely unideological terms. According to Mina the main reason for the French failure to gain adherents in Navarre was “the exorbitant contributions apportioned to the towns and the brute force used to extract them.”31