

Religious houses paid heavy taxes and fines to French, Spanish, and insurgent forces, and these alone were enough to ruin many orders in Navarre. For example, the Monastery of Fitero reported that it had paid 129,896 reales to Spanish forces in 1808 and during the last months of the war, and 175,558 reales to the French. In addition, it owed 254,418 reales for the repair of damages to its buildings. As a result of these costs, some convents and monasteries voluntarily sold off portions of their property during and immediately following the war in order to meet debts, and from these alienations some orders never quite recovered.17

The confiscations of capellanías, obras pías, and lands belonging to hospitals, initiated under Godoy, continued under the French. The city of Tudela and surrounding municipalities felt the disentailment more than anywhere else, though the impact was also great in and around the cities of Pamplona and Estella. Some rich individuals gobbled up enormous estates, but there were also dozens of smaller landowners who purchased one or two plots taken from the hospitals and lay religious organizations.18

The actual sales resulting from the suppression of the religious orders were of comparatively little importance in Navarre. Legislation in 1809 paved the way for precise inventories of the monasteries and convents, and detailed plans were made for their alienation. However, lack of confidence in the French regime’s survival was such that only forty-four buildings and 150 acres were actually sold, mostly in Pamplona.19

This religious persecution profoundly disrupted the church in Navarre and generated hostility in a province that took pride in its historic devotion to Catholicism. Nevertheless, the Crusade in Navarre attained nothing like the development it did elsewhere. A few monks from Pamplona resident in Seville planned partidas de cruzada, but these never materialized. Clerics never formed a guerrilla party in Navarre nor contributed significantly to the corso or Division. The only clergymen in Mina’s army were the chaplains. Miguel, the priest of Ujüé, played an independent role in the resistance, but he failed miserably during his brief stint as leader of the guerrillas. Moreover, his example was offset by the collaboration of other prominent Navarrese clerics in the Josephine government. Thus, the most successful guerrilla army in the peninsula, the Division of Navarre, was thoroughly secular. The case of Navarre stands as warning against arguing that it was the clergy that filled the ranks of the guerrilla armies, as some have.20

It is another matter, however, to consider the influence disgruntled priests exerted from their pulpits. The clergy in some Ribera towns aided the French in quelling rebellion, as has been seen. In most of Navarre, however, priests and monks supported the guerrillas, at least in theory, and suffered greatly at the hands of the French. While there is no sure way to quantify the ideological support lent by the clergy to the guerrillas, laws passed to prevent priests from speaking against the regime and the large number of priests arrested in Navarre argue for an important clerical role in fomenting resistance. After the regidores and alcaldes, it was the parish priests who suffered most at the hands of the French police. From village after village, especially in the Montaňa, priests were among the first to be hauled away to Pamplona or France.21 One author estimated that as many as 300 priests were either sent into exile or imprisoned during the war.22