

It is no surprise, therefore, to find peasants flocking to Mina’s standards in the winter of 1811 when he began to operate again after the disaster at Lerín. For one thing Mina could provide protection from French tax collectors and requisition parties, especially after December 1811. Thus, less than 29 percent of the “Territorial Contribution” of 1811-12 was ever collected by the French, a figure that fell to 10 percent for the contribution of 1812-13.47

It is not possible to arrive at any global figure for the value of requisitions collected by Mina’s Division and by the other guerrilla parties in Navarre. However, partial data, compiled by Joseba de la Torre, do make it possible to compare the weight of French and guerrilla exactions in certain locations.48 The evidence leads to several important conclusions. First, in the 116 towns and villages for which accurate data are available, the French collected more than seven times as much as the guerrillas. Moreover, only 7 percent of the value of guerrilla requisitions was collected by force, without receipts, while 93 percent of the value of French requisitions was carried out by force.

A second conclusion is that the guerrillas had almost no presence in the Ebro valley, which contributed only 430,000 reales worth of goods to the guerrillas, while supplying the French with some 9 million reales worth. In fact, the guerrillas were never on good terms with Tudela, which was considered pro-French. Mina sacked it in 1809. Durán (the Aragonese guerrilla) sacked it again in 1812. Mina even held three Tudelan officials hostage in 1812 to punish the city for paying French taxes.49 In contrast, the guerrillas collected some 3 million reales in specie in the Montaňa. The value of French exactions in the Montaňa came to 17 million reales.

Third, the importance of Estella to the insurgents stands out. Eight percent of the Division’s resources originated in the city of Estella. The French also milked Estella for over 7 million reales in specie.

Fourth, the French requisitioned most heavily in areas close to Pamplona or to some other large city, garrison, or major road. For example, Villava, a small town in 1808 and today practically a suburb of Pamplona, contributed 57,000 reales to the French and only 4,376 reales to the guerrillas. The upper Arga and Erro valleys, on the road between Pamplona and Roncesvalles, contributed more to the French than to the guerrillas, and the small village of Iriberri, off the Pamplona-Irurzun road, gave more per capita to French requisition parties than almost any other locale for which records exist.50

Fifth, the guerrillas were generally more successful collecting rations and supplies in small villages, while the French dominated larger towns. Even Sangüesa, an insurgent town of some importance for most of the war, contributed twenty-four times as much to the French as to the Division.51 The guerrillas drove out the garrison and tried on more than one occasion to defend the city, but its size made it worthwhile for the French to send in large columns periodically to extort contributions and taxes. Only in small and remote villages did the Division truly have the upper hand in terms of its ability to tax the population. Zugarramurdi gave six times as many rations to the guerrillas as to the French and had no money requisitioned. Sada, in the mountains west of Sangüesa, and the valleys of Aézcoa, Ulzama, and Atez also gave much more to the guerrillas than to the French.52 Evidently, the “congenial sea” that supplied Mina’s troops lay primarily in remoter regions of the merindades of Pamplona, Estella, and Sangüesa. In such areas the dispersion of the population made it impossible for the French to requisition effectively, allowing the guerrillas to establish themselves in the vacuum.