

Moreover, the comparatively subtle diplomacy of the Directory had been replaced under the empire by brute force. The imperial regime in Navarre had made it clear from the beginning that the region would have no say in its political future and that the slightest disobedience would be met with Mongolian justice. From the time of Bayonne, it had been understood that France would strip Navarre of its traditions of autonomy and privilege. Indeed, Napoleon planned to annex Navarre together with Catalonia, parts of Aragon, and the Basque provinces. Some Spaniards were already aware of these designs. Miguel Azanza, for one, warned Joseph as early as June 1808 that any change in Navarre’s foral constitution would be dangerous.36

In fact, the French attack on the fueros had already begun even as the Bayonne assembly got under way. The foral government first lost its judicial functions. In the month of June 1808 conflicts between civilians and French soldiers caused General D’Agoult to usurp the prerogatives of the Royal Council and the court in order to try suspects deemed dangerous to the French regime in a military tribunal.37

Representative government lasted a few months longer. The Diputación, after a period of indecision, fled Navarre at the approach of the Spanish armies in August 1808. D’Agoult immediately appointed new deputies, but they never sat. Some, like the deputy from Lumbier, emigrated, while others provided personal excuses for failing to respond. The Diputación then ceased to exist until it was revived as an unrepresentative, appointive body by Reille. The Cortes was, of course, never allowed to sit.38

The French also curtailed the powers of the viceroy. Joseph protected the viceroys’ prerogatives as long as he could in order to have a counterweight to the military governors. Individuals he dismissed, but he protected the institution. The Marqués de Vallesantoro was deported to France for disloyalty in September 1808, but Joseph immediately sent a replacement in Francisco Javier Negrete, who served until April 1809, when the Duke of Mahón succeeded him. Mahón, a French-born military careerist, remained in the post until 1810, when the last vestiges of the viceregal regime were eliminated by Napoleon. On 8 February 1810 the emperor established an autonomous government in Navarre (and in other northern Spanish provinces) preparatory to full annexation. The real power in Navarre was henceforward the military governor. Indeed, this had always been the case, and the measures of 8 February merely formalized an already existing situation. This was the condition of Navarre when the city of Pamplona surrendered to Spanish forces in October 1813.

Through these rough dealings with their traditional institutions, the Navarrese became aware that their homeland was scheduled for annexation to France. As early as the summer of 1809 the French were forced to deny rumors that Napoleon planned to annex Navarre, a sign of how serious such rumors had become. The stories continued, however, as true stories often do. In October 1810 Napoleon warned Cafarelli in Biscay and Reille in Navarre to keep the plans for annexation secret, but the ultimate purpose of the French could no longer be doubted.39 In February 1812 Catalonia became a French department. By then it was evident that a similar fate awaited Navarre and that only military difficulties (by 1812 the French barely held on to Pamplona) delayed annexation.