

In contrast, the city fathers of Corella sought to protect their own interests and to shift the weight of the occupation onto the poor. Judging from the number of land sales, the war seems to have caused no more disruption to private fortunes in Corella than it did in Echauri.64 While global figures on the amount of land changing hands in Corella are lacking due to poorer record-keeping by the notaries, the examples of land sales that do exist suggest that big landowners released small parcels, probably the minimum required to cover their tax obligations. There seems to have been no great change in landholding patterns.

This is not surprising, since wealthy landowners made up the municipal government in Corella, and they would do anything to protect their fortunes. There was no chance that they would tax wealth, as occurred in Echauri. On the contrary, the city fathers’ first resort was to an excise tax on the most common items of consumption, a procedure Echauri never employed. Nor was it likely that the city council would tax rents or income, against the wishes of the men who elected it. Instead, Corella’s officials taxed all households regardless of income.65

Corella, like other municipal corporations in the larger cities, also chose to dip early and frequently into the reserve of community properties, selling them at auction to whomever could afford to buy. As early as July 1808 the city decided it was justified in alienating its assets, “however privileged they may be,” in order to pay the French. In 1810 the city began systematically to sell off its properties, both those long since assigned to municipal use and those leased out of the commons.66

Dealing with the debt crisis in this manner was profoundly inegalitarian. Like taxes on items of consumption, it made the landless poor and smallholders pay the bill. In most of Navarre, common lands were still generally used in common.67 As a result, small owners and landless laborers, who used the commons for firewood and fodder, stood to lose most from the sale of common lands, while the same men who were eagerly snatching up the seized church lands were glad to see communal properties on the block. Popular displeasure with the sales could be delayed for several years, until the full impact of the loss of commons and the services that could no longer be provided by the city government began to be felt. Besides, the powerless proletariat in Corella was not capable yet of threatening the social order.

The men who framed the plan for the alienation of municipal property drafted by Corella in 1810 said they were acting in the interests of the community as a whole. It is not just that they wanted to raise quick money to pay the French, nor were they simply after community lands for private gain. In the fashion of the political economists, they also claimed that their new possessions would lead to a more prosperous commercial agriculture, and that this would ultimately enrich the entire community.68 This physiocratic idyll was not put to the test immediately, because the sale of the commons was cut short by the ouster of the French a few years later. Still, it is significant that the project was attempted. Rich Corellans had a vested interest in French success, for they knew that only under a French government could they proceed with the spoliation of the community’s assets. Is it any wonder that Corella remained loyal to the French or at least passive during the war?