

To complete the picture of who fought with Mina as much as possible it is necessary to consider those men from outside Navarre who fought in the Division. In 1811 and 1812 hundreds of Catalonians joined Mina, and the Aragonese and Basques in the Division numbered in the thousands.75 There were also volunteers from farther afield. One important source of volunteers was the prison convoys that passed through the region on their way to France. In the spring of 1811 the 600-man garrison of Tortosa captured by Suchet made it as far as Burdeos before the prisoners overpowered their escort of 300 men. The refugees made their way back across the Pyrenees and some eventually joined up with Mina’s forces.76

The Division also attracted a number of deserters from the imperial ranks. Germans and Italians were particularly susceptible. Germans in the garrison of Pamplona deserted in 1809-10 in groups of ten to fifteen with all their baggage and arms. The guerrillas generally placed such deserters among the front ranks to ensure that they fought, and according to Andrés Martín they acquitted themselves well. Mina placed Charles Hohenstein in charge of the German volunteers. In a formal letter, Baron Hohenstein called upon Germans to desert the French side “to take up service with the Spanish. Many of your comrades are already in my company,” he wrote. “Here you will find a better life. You will receive a salary of ten sols, and bread, wine, and meat in abundance.”77

Italian troops were also attracted by the high pay and generous rations offered by the guerrillas.78 During August and September 1812, while passing through Navarre, half of the third battalion of the Sixth Italian Regiment deserted to Mina, adding over 200 troops to the Division.79

By the time the Division was disbanded at the end of the war it comprised four Navarrese infantry battalions, two regiments of Navarrese cavalry, and two companies of light cavalry attached to the first battalion. In addition, there were two Alavese and three Aragonese infantry battalions. The total number of troops fighting under Mina came to 11,000 men, not including the hundreds of men working in the customs service and in the munitions and uniform factories. The Navarrese contingents remained the core of the Division throughout its life, however. They were men of the Montaňa, likely to be landowners with both the resources and material motives to resist the occupation. They lived in small villages and towns, which the French could not steadily occupy, and they loved their clergy and fueros, both attacked by the French government. They were the basis of the most successful guerrilla movement in Spain, and a most important strand in the “fatal knot” that destroyed the French Empire.