

There are several additional sources for testing this hypothesis. First, the narratives left by the guerrillas together with some French proclamations and letters revealed the identity and background of a certain number of volunteers. Second, the French police generated some sketchy data on volunteers and their families. The third and most important source of information about the guerrillas is the set of records left by communities about their involvement in the war.71 Considered together, this evidence strongly supports the notion that the guerrillas were mainly from the Montaňa.

When the war ended, the Diputación in Pamplona solicited each community for responses to the following questions. Who joined the guerrillas? Who died at the hands of the French? Who was imprisoned? According to the available data, 3,477 men from all Navarre volunteered to fight either with Eguaguirre, Javier Mina, Francisco Espoz y Mina, or one of the other bands. Clearly, in six years of war, the number of guerrillas from Navarre was much higher. In fact, since only 40 percent of the communities surveyed by the Diputación actually responded, the data are incomplete. Nevertheless, by handling the data carefully, we can attempt to create a profile of the volunteers.

Two observations about the way the records are skewed must be mentioned. First, the records do not tell us anything about the Alavese, Aragonese, or Guipúzcoans who fought under Mina. There were five “foreign” battalions—Basques and Aragonese—in the Division at war’s end. These battalions formed about half of the final strength of the Division, though some became active only at the very end of the war. Thus, the records do tell us a great deal about the core battalions: the first, second, third, and fourth, composed of veteran Navarrese troops.

Second, and more significant, the data are not complete even for Navarre. In Pamplona, 60 percent of the municipalities responded, accounting for an equal proportion of the population. In Estella the analogous figures were 46 percent and 62 percent. Sangüesa and Tudela trailed behind, with 22 percent of the communes (44 percent of the population) reporting in Sangüesa, and 30 percent of the communes (42 percent of the population) reporting in Tudela. Olite supplied the least information of all, since only 19 percent of the municipalities (accounting for 31 percent of the population) completed the surveys.

It is important to consider some of the reasons for these partial returns. Although only 40 percent of the communes in Navarre responded, they represented 52 percent of the total population. This indicates that the data are systematically skewed toward larger communities, which tended to be more faithful in completing and returning the forms.

Some communities probably failed to comply with the survey because there was nothing to report or because a full account would have shown that the community had failed to contribute significantly to the resistance. This may explain the lack of data for Corella, Tafalla, Vera, and a number of other large towns that were almost constantly subjected to French control. Conversely, the epic accounts left by Estella, Ujüé, Roncal, and some of the other towns most involved in the war were certainly inspired by local pride.