

During July the reinstalled Diputación and the military governor in Pamplona, Antonio Rosello, instigated another conflict with the Division. A royal order of 25 June 1814 required that offices and governing bodies not extant in 1808 should cease in their functions. Based on this order, the Diputación sought to reacquire all of its prerogatives, even against the still functioning administrative bodies set up by Mina. The first area of conflict was over the administration of justice.

As the guerrillas had extended their influence in 1812, the French courts had ceased to function in most of Navarre. Mina had therefore created a special Tribunal to take over judicial responsibilities. The primary task of the Tribunal had been to enforce the blockade of Pamplona, but it had also taken over all of the other duties normally carried out by the royal courts in peacetime. In July 1814, despite the royal order of 25 June and the complaints of the Diputación, the Tribunal continued to operate. This particularly dismayed the towns formerly dominated by the French, where the justice administered by the Division tended to be both cruel and swift. The Diputación began to receive complaints against the Tribunal and decided to order Mina to dismantle it. In justification of its continued activity, the Tribunal sent a long letter to the Diputación and Rosello on 28 July. All the towns and villages “including the city of Tudela,” added the author of the letter, “have recognized this Tribunal as supreme and legitimate.” Almost everyone with a seat in the Cortes, as well as most alcaldes had come to the Tribunal to settle disputes since 1812. Surely, thought the judges, these facts justified the court’s continued existence.4

As the Diputación was quick to point out, however, these circumstances justified nothing. Only the king in Cortes could legitimately establish a new judicial body. And on 2 August 1814, Ferdinand had issued a direct order disbanding the Tribunal. Thus, the Diputación felt justified in rejecting the “long-winded” and “weak” excuses of the Tribunal, and it once again ordered its dissolution. The correspondence makes clear that both the deputies and the men appointed by Mina knew quite well that at stake was the question of who or which bodies could claim sovereignty in Navarre.

Despite the hostility of both the king and the provincial authorities, the Tribunal continued to operate in August on direct orders from Mina. Among its other “crimes,” the Tribunal sought to punish municipal officials who neglected to deliver requisitions to the Division and to collect debts left over from the war.5 These activities resulted in a flood of letters demanding that the Tribunal be outlawed. On 18 August the Diputación wrote a furious letter to Mina. “With what right” did his court function? asked the deputies. “Under the rights granted by yourself. And how and from whom did you obtain this attribute of sovereignty?”6 The issue had been placed squarely in front of Mina, and he found himself unable to answer the Diputación. In the face of opposition from Madrid, Pamplona, and dozens of municipalities, Mina finally ordered the dissolution of the Tribunal on 22 August.