

Echauri, like most communities in the Montaňa, at first sought to meet French demands by tapping its normal revenues, which were sizable.56 But these were not ordinary times, and by September 1808 Echauri was already taking special measures. One way of raising money was to alter the system by which public services were rented. Instead of one-year arrangements, concessions could be leased for two or three years, resulting in immediate windfalls to the community. Echauri also diverted to the French the proceeds from a portion of public land normally used to pay the tithe to the parish priest. The woods in the Sierra de Andía were logged to raise money, and portions of the enormous but relatively infertile community lands known as the baldios were leased to individuals. They could be expected to produce a few normal harvests before losing their vitality, but, in the meantime, the community could at least collect a few years’ rent.57

All of these operations taken together still created only a paltry breathing space. Soon Echauri had to turn to loans to raise required money. The community raised a forced loan of 20,000 reales from its parish church.58 Echauri also borrowed money and grain from neighboring villages and wealthy landowners. It took many years to recover from these debts. As late as 1828 Echauri still owed 8,500 reales from the war.59

The impact of all of these forced loans and taxes was less devastating to individuals than might be supposed. Only some fifty privately held acres changed hands during the war. Moreover, there were no special winners or losers in this minor land shuffle, so that it is safe to say that the war years did not alter landholding patterns in Echauri.60 Individuals preserved their private fortunes in Echauri because the government found ways to buffer residents, especially the poor, from contributions. First, the valley began to assess taxes proportional to income, something that was not a normal practice. This made it less likely that the poor would have to sell off their land to meet obligations, and indeed the biggest landowners had to sell more property than they were able to buy in the war years.61

Echauri, like municipalities throughout Navarre, also had large corporate holdings that could be used to pay taxes. Normally, municipal and communal property was untouchable. In the entire decade from 1797 to 1807 Echauri sold only two plots of municipal land, each under one-eighth of an acre, to two landowners. This was a pattern common to most communities in the Montaňa.62 Then, from 1807 to 1822 Echauri sold 381 acres of communal and corporate property. Still, this equaled only 6 percent of the privately held land in the valley. Moreover, Echauri saw to it that the land was sold in small plots at prices affordable by dozens of people. Indeed, the records show that eighty individuals made 116 purchases from sixty-eight different sellers. Thus, even the pressure of war did not cause any significant concentration of landownership.63 The open council of Echauri could not sell assets to the richest residents or to outsiders, and it could not get away with regressive or heavy personal taxes. When faced with outside aggression, Echauri, because of the relatively democratic nature of its local government, sought collective solutions to its problems.