

At the same time, however, the valleys of Burunda and Ergoyena, among other areas that we know from the narrative sources to have been heavily committed to the guerrillas, also failed to report, leaving us with a serious underestimate for the merindad of Pamplona. Even more serious, the valley of Ibargoiti, including Monreal and Mina’s own village of Idocín, together with the entire eastern half of the Pamplona basin, including Otano and Badostáin, did not leave any records. These lacunae are certainly troubling, since we know that the area was at the heart of the insurgency. This region gave birth to Javier, Mina, the Gorriz brothers, and Andrés Martín, among others in the Division. The totals for the merindad of Sangüesa would be much higher if a complete set of data for the area was available.

It may be that some communities failed to respond to the questions of the Diputación out of fear. The Restoration government did not look kindly on the guerrillas, especially on those who had shown themselves too devoted to the Constitution of 1812. This might explain the lack of information about Ibargoiti, since it is likely that many of the volunteers from Mina’s home followed their leader in his attempt to overthrow the Restoration and restore constitutional government in 1814. Unable to follow him into exile, these volunteers may have wished to remain anonymous. If this occurred, it would help explain the lack of information on areas we know to have been guerrilla strongholds.

With these distortions in mind, it is still possible to glean a few conclusions from the data. In the merindad of Pamplona, 3 percent of the surveyed population fought with Mina. The highest percentages of involvement occurred in villages just west and north of the city of Pamplona, in the region of Echauri and Juslapeña. The merindad of Estella also contributed 3 percent of the population surveyed to the insurgency, with one village, Guirguillano, reporting that 11 percent of its residents fought in the war. Fully 4 percent of the surveyed population in the merindad of Sangüesa joined the insurgency, and this is without any data for Monreal or Ibargoiti, Mina’s home. The data for Olite are particularly unsound, but approximately 4 percent of the surveyed population in that merindad also joined the Division, including 7 percent of the population in Ujüé. In Tudela, 3 percent of the surveyed population fought, though most of them came from the city of Tudela only at the very end of the war.

Overall, the data once again highlight the importance of the Montaňa as a supplier of volunteers to the guerrilla army. The merindad of Pamplona supplied over a third of the volunteers, Sangüesa one-fourth. Moreover, over two-thirds of the volunteers reported from Estella originated in the northern sections of the merindad and must be counted as men of the Montaňa as well. All together, something like three-fourths of the volunteers came from the Montaňa. It is possible to identify three areas that supplied the bulk of the volunteers. In first place is the band of territory running from northern Estella to the Pamplona basin. In second place are the districts of eastern Sangüesa, along with the easternmost portions of Olite, including Ujüé. Missing data for the eastern reaches of the Pamplona basin, including Idocín, Monreal, Otano, and other important insurgent centers conceal the importance of this region to the resistance. If complete data were available, it would probably show one solid band of guerrilla territory encompassing the entire region of small villages that stretches across north-central Navarre, with islands of French control in the cities of Pamplona and Tafalla. A third important source of volunteers was the city of Tudela, though it is certain that the insurgents from this region were most active either early in the war— prior to the fall of Zaragoza—or later, after May 1812. In addition there were important outposts of resistance in Roncesvalles, Viana, and other places.