

This argument was insufficient, however, to reanimate most of the volunteers. At around six o’clock on the morning of 26 September, most of the men returned to Puente. At nine o’clock a courier reached Pamplona from Puente to tip off the viceroy, the Conde de Ezpeleta, of Mina’s plans. Shortly afterward, Mina and his remaining followers attempted to enter Puente in order to try once again to gain the confidence of the rebellious troops. Only when the men fired upon him from the windows did Mina realize that the game was up. He fled to France, which, ironically, was now willing to shelter him. In the days that followed, the goods belonging to the Division were seized by the government.

Mina’s lieutenants either fell into the hands of the police, fled across the border, or proclaimed themselves for Ferdinand VII. On 3 October Cruchaga submitted with the cavalry and Barrena with the second and sixth battalions. In Aragon, the third battalion submitted a few days later.13 The history of Mina’s rebellion helps to illustrate an important point about the guerrillas who became Liberals under the Restoration. There is nothing inherently Liberal about any of the demands made by Mina and his officials, either with regard to the Tribunal, the right of the guerrillas to continue requisitioning, or the status of the Division as a regular corps. In the history of the guerrilla struggle, the men of Navarre had not demonstrated a knowledge of any ideological program, unless the “Idea” of 1810 can be considered an ideology. Yet, the claims made by Mina in 1814 struck at the heart of the monarchy. Mina and the other guerrillas had performed a military role of transcendent importance to the very existence of the Spanish state, and they perceived compensation in the form of pay and honors as their just reward. In the case of the dispute over the Tribunal, this compensation was even to include political privileges. Perhaps, under the influence of years of Liberal propaganda, Mina’s men thought they had a right to political power.

Such an attitude went against everything for which Ferdinand VII stood. His government was based on the absolute sovereignty of the king, constrained only by those customary institutions and laws that had existed before the War of Independence. The mobilized, armed peasants of Navarre, with a court and a system for collecting contributions, were a threat every bit as serious as the Liberal politicians who were being purged with such cruelty during this very period. The guerrillas were therefore spurned as a danger to the closed society Ferdinand was attempting to constitute. Most of the guerrillas were happy to return to their prewar occupations, especially since the regular pay, booty, and rations of wartime were not forthcoming in peace. For Mina this was not an option. Having tasted absolute power, he could not return to a life as a simple layador working on his mother’s (later his sister’s) estate. As a result, he fell by default into the Liberal camp. During the next twenty years, his services to the Liberal cause meshed with his struggle to regain the status he had briefly enjoyed during the War of Independence. And the acceptance of much of the Liberal program during the reign of Queen Cristina in the 1830s spelled his own triumph and the rehabilitation of the guerrillas’ reputation.