

In the second phase of the war, from December 1811 to the battle of Vitoria in June 1813, the guerrillas could usually match or surpass the enemy in numbers, and Mina went on the offensive. Although there were still difficult moments, by the middle of 1812 the French had become hostages within the fortified cities of Pamplona, Tudela, and a few frontier forts, barely able to venture out for supplies, cutting down trees in the municipal parks for firewood, and burning sticks of furniture when the trees were gone. The insurgents succeeded in isolating the French from the countryside, thereby undermining the basis of the occupation at its source, destroying the resolve of the French, and hastening the end of the war.

The final phase of the war began with the irruption into the province of Spanish and English armies in July 1813. After this date, the guerrillas had to learn to operate as adjuncts in regular offensive operations, mostly outside of Navarre. The guerrillas played important but uncharacteristic roles in a series of sieges at Zaragoza, Jaca, and other forts, and they played a small part in the campaign in southwestern France, before being disbanded by the thankless Restoration government.

A complex set of structural and contingent factors determined the success of the Navarrese insurgency. First, the geopolitical position of Navarre made it the nexus for communications between France and the peninsula. This gave the insurgents obvious targets and an early strategy: to attack supply columns, prisoner convoys, and stragglers. In the Montaňa, the geography provided the ideal setting for irregular warfare, attenuating the numerical, material, and technological superiority of the French. But there were other mountainous regions in Spain that were also of geostrategic importance where guerrillas did not achieve the kind of success they did in Navarre. The difference in Navarre was the human geography and social structure of the Navarrese Montaňa. This was its decisive edge in guerrilla warfare.

Among such factors favoring the guerrillas, the dispersion of the population in hundreds of small villages and towns figured strongly. This dispersion limited the ability of the French to dominate the population with garrisons. Moreover, to tax the population in the Montaňa, the French had to maintain their presence in hundreds of villages. And because of the democratic nature of local government in the Montaňa, the French were unable to dominate municipalities by controlling a few pliant elites.

The widespread ownership of land in the Montaňa was another key. In the first place, it was the precondition for the democratic town council. Second, the tools, animals, and products of Navarre’s agricultural economy were distributed among thousands of proprietors. This made tax collection a war in itself and gave the peasants all the motive they needed to take up arms.

It was also important that peasants constituted the leadership as well as the rank and file of the guerrilla movement in Navarre. The strategy of defending villages from French extortion came naturally to such men. And it was this strategy that undermined the occupation at its base. Likewise, only a popular army could have collected the requisitions and custom duties that were the lifeblood of the resistance, and only a popular Tribunal could have enforced compliance with the blockade of Pamplona that ultimately brought Abbé’s troops to their knees.