

The next dispute involved the right of the Division to collect contributions in Navarre and ultimately to remain in existence. The government in Pamplona had already denied its responsibility to help the guerrillas obtain supplies. Now, on orders from Madrid, it required that the civilians mobilized in irregular formations during the war be dispatched to their homes.7 Mina chose to interpret this order as not applying to himself and his men, since the wartime government had recognized the Division of Navarre as a regular formation. This was open defiance of the government, which specifically denied the Division regular status. Mina dispatched officials to reenlist his dispersed troops, not only in Navarre but in Álava, Guipúzcoa, and Aragon. Officials there suddenly found their territories “invaded” by a force from Navarre, which began forcibly to impress young men. The foral government of Álava wrote to the Navarrese Diputación complaining that “Marshal Mina, who must be aware of these sovereign decisions [the king’s order demobilizing guerrillas], is bent on evading them and breaking them through armed force.” He was insisting that the men of his Division “were not included under the rubric of partisans or guerrillas but were reputed to be regiments of the line and light infantry.” This showed that “Marshal Mina still maintains his spirit of domination from the war.”8

With feeling in the province, and now even in neighboring provinces, turning against Mina, more and more towns denied requisitions to the Division’s agents. With the Tribunal disbanded, draconian justice was meted out to such recalcitrant municipal officials as if they were “collaborators.”9 In August and September from Milagro, Villafranca, Andosilla, and Mendigorría—Ribera towns that had escaped guerrilla control during most of the war and that had received rough treatment by Mina after the war—complaints poured in about the extortions carried out by the Division.10 Things were quickly coming to a head.

In September a royal decree sought to defuse the situation by ordering Mina to evacuate his troops into Aragon. But the corresponding instructions from Pamplona to Mina’s superiors never reached their destination. The Diputación’s courier was waylaid by Mina’s men outside of Olite on the night of 25 September. That night Mina decided to strike against Pamplona.11 A large portion of the Division had been reassembled, and the majority was placed in Puente la Reina. From Puente Mina marched north with the first battalion and elements of the fourth. This time, however, not all of his troops were willing to follow him. The soldiers given the task of carrying the ladders that were to be used to scale the city walls were the first to realize what their objective was. Officials in these units began to call on their men to desert. Mina sought to defuse their rebellion by appealing directly to the destitute troops, bypassing their unwilling company commanders. He explained that his efforts to obtain recompense for them had failed with the viceroy and the minister of war. They would have to take by force what was their due. “Take heart, boys,” Mina announced, “we’re going to get rich.”12