

Napoleon’s “open wound” in Spain had been inflicted through a combination of English, Portuguese, and Spanish efforts. But it was the insurgents, and among them especially the Division of Navarre, who ensured that the wound did not heal over. Combat against the insurgent population of Navarre was an extremely bloody and demoralizing affair. Forcing much of the population to adopt a belligerent attitude, especially with the declaration of the blockade of Pamplona in December 1811, the guerrillas raised the violence in Navarre to a level that brutalized the French occupier. In Spain, as in other colonial encounters, the occupation troops forced to attack or despoil hostile civilians eased their consciences by convincing themselves that they were at war with a racially and morally inferior opponent. The enemy was rendered subhuman in the French propaganda, authorizing individuals to perpetrate barbarities they would never consider normally. Military rules were forgotten in a war of extermination, and sound military judgment was sacrificed. Thus, unchecked French violence fed the hatred of the population, securing a never-ending source of insurgents.

The guerrilla war in Navarre destroyed French morale in a number of other ways as well. Those assigned garrison duty in Navarre lived in constant hunger, fear, and frustration. Fantin des Odoards, garrison commander at Puente del Arzobispo, expressed the predicament faced by all garrisons stationed in guerrilla country. According to Odoards, “only the same hunger that drives the wolf from the woods” could convince his men to venture out in search of supplies. When an isolated garrison finally received the help needed to track down and overwhelm its antagonists, the guerrillas were able to resume a faceless existence, melting into the local population. Among such people, there was for the French “neither winter quarters nor any secure haven” and “rest [was] possible only for the dead or the victorious.”16 As a result of these factors, the level of French casualties from disease, exhaustion, and sheer depression was extremely high in Navarre.

The use of terror against the enemy is normally considered an integral part of guerrilla tactics. In fact, however, it belonged as much to the tactical repertoire of the counterinsurgency forces as it did to the guerrillas. The insurgents were always anxious to obtain the enemy’s recognition as legitimate military personnel in order to secure the right of quarter. Thus, for example, they were always more likely than the French to provide medical treatment for enemy wounded and take prisoners for later exchange. Only for a few months after December 1811 did Mina systematically execute captured combatants, until he had convinced Abbé to grant consideration to captured guerrillas. The guerrillas did, however, use terror against collaborators. The “chacones” who fought for the French were summarily executed, and even civilians forced to supply services or information to the French faced draconian justice. From this point of view, the guerrilla war was really a civil war fought within the War of Independence.