

Guerrillas played a major role in the defeat of Napoleon in Spain. The contribution of the guerrillas of Navarre by itself had an enormous impact on the course of the war. For those who measure military success by a body count, a simple total of the French troops killed or captured by the Navarrese is impressive enough. The French lost hundreds of men to the first guerrillas, especially to Renovales and the Roncalese. These last, by themselves, inflicted over 1,000 casualties in the summer of 1809. The corso terrestre under Javier Mina accounted for at least 358 killed or captured. And under Mina the guerrillas killed or captured at least 16,745 the enemy, and the total number of French losses including those wounded during six years of fighting could not have been less than 50,000.14 This figure is about three-fourths of the number of casualties produced by Wellington in all of his battles. Clearly, if the object of war is to inflict as many casualties as possible on the enemy, then the guerrillas of Navarre played a key role.

Casualties in battle, though, do not begin to tell the whole story of the insurgents’ contribution. The primary purpose of the guerrillas was not to inflict casualties. Nor was it to perform auxiliary tasks for regular units, however indispensable such services may have been in particular situations. The function of the guerrillas was to occupy French troops in duties far from the main battlefields. The guerrillas did not necessarily seek to achieve this objective by presenting themselves for combat. Instead, they denied the French access to the resources of the countryside and forced most of the occupation troops to struggle for mere survival. In guerrilla country, the French were kept busy wresting rations and fodder from a sullen and hostile population. It was the objective of the guerrillas to protect these civilians, to channel their hostility, and to engage their services, as spies, couriers, and volunteers.

The people of Navarre had ample reason for hating the French government. The French taxed and requisitioned in a way that ensured popular hostility. In addition, France threatened to destroy the church and the foral government, institutions that were both generally popular and, in the latter case, of economic benefit to the majority of the population. Guarding villages from French columns sent to gather supplies was an important part of the guerrillas’ strategy. As part of this strategy, the insurgents had to discipline individuals and towns that were discovered collaborating, thereby ensuring the belligerency of most of the population. In performing this task, the guerrillas functioned as much like a police force and a judiciary as an army.

The success of the guerrillas in Navarre was not the result of a unanimous patriotic or religious impulse. During the first year of the war, Navarre was one of the quietest provinces in Spain as most provincial and municipal officials chose to collaborate with the French. It was only during the summer of 1809, after the old elites had been eliminated from the scene and the predatory nature of the French government had become evident, that the insurgency became really widespread in Navarre.