

48. The amount of such property sold by the state from 1805 to 1808 came to about 30 percent of all church lands in Navarre, a figure twice as high as that for Castile. Mutiloa Poza, La desamortización, p. 263. See also Herr, Rural Change, p. 128. In Corella, for example, over 100 acres of arable church property, plus numerous vineyards, houses, and corrals, all from obras pías and capellanías, were sold during the three years preceding the French invasion.

49. French seizures were actually smaller than those that had been carried out under Godoy. In Corella the French government seized and sold 142 acres of church land, the equivalent of 4 percent of the arable. AMC, legajo 81. In both cases, the buyers of church land tended to be local notables who owned depreciated government bonds known as vales reales and who were allowed to redeem their worthless paper for land. Mutiloa Poza, La desamortización, p. 263.

50. Gómez Chaparro, La desamortización civil, p. 11.

51. In the northern merindades even the regular clergy remained relatively popular. Unlike monks in most of Spain, those in the Montaňa had fewer aristocratic connections and represented more of a cross-section of society. Desdevises du Dezert, L’Espagne de I’Ancien Régime, 1:56-60.

52. Blaze, Mémoire, p. 3.

53. Desdevises du Dezert, L’Espagne de I’Ancien Régime, 1:46.

54. “Relación de las ocurrencias en la ciudad de Tudela.” AGN, Guerra, legajo 19, car. 38.

55. According to the breakdown in the census returns for 1786, 32 percent of the active population in the merindad of Tudela were artisans, compared with 19 percent in the merindad of Pamplona. These figures were both skewed upward considerably, because the census failed to count domestic servants, who accounted for 9 percent of the total work force in Navarre. This means the number of “total active” people was too low, so the percentage of people in any occupational category was inflated. The point, however, is that nearly twice as many people, proportional to the active population minus domestic servants, were artisans in Tudela than in Pamplona.

56. Clearly, many peasants who were primarily farmers must have found additional work in industry without it showing up in census figures. In fact, in Echarri-Aranaz one source reported that women and children were expected to spin wool and hemp, and that men, after working their lands, went to earn extra money in nearby iron mines. García Sanz, La respuesta, pp. 122, 136. Similarly, in the village of Echarri, the census turned up only one master weaver who had no employees, but a police report showed he employed three youths at night. (These three had caused a disturbance one night after work, thus the record of their existence.) APN, Pamplona, Velaz, legajo 88, no. 33. Yet, the point remains that industry did not provide full-time employment to any sizable number of people in the Montaňa.

57. These were the complaints of commercial interests in the Ribera. Rodríguez Garraiza, Tensiones de Navarra, pp. 71-73.