

17. For example, the señorío of Elio, estate of the Marqués de Vessolla, was of little importance next to the other villages in the valley of Echauri. Elio amounted to fewer than 66 acres and supported a population of only 15 people. Elio was dwarfed by the nine other villages in the valley, which supported a population of 1,780 cultivating 6,091 privately owned acres. The señorío was leased out at low prices and was not commercially developed. The four leaseholders who worked Elio were themselves substantial landowners in the valley of Echauri. They paid rent to Vessolla equal to just 6 percent of the value of the harvest that could be obtained from the property. This lack of commercial rents in an area close to Pamplona indicates that the Montaňa was many years away from an agricultural revolution. Only in Vizcaya, where there were no señoríos, and in Guipúzcoa, where 4 percent of all settlements belonged to senores, did the weight of the señorial regime press more lightly. Data are from the censuses and surveys in AGN and from APN, Pamplona, Velaz.

18. Artola, Los orígenes, pp. 61-64.

19. García Sanz, La respuesta, pp. 76, 114.

20. Rents could also be low on señorial lands in the Ribera. The Marqués de Santa Cara, the biggest landowner in the region of Corella, renewed fifty leases in 1811 at prices originally set in the early eighteenth century or late seventeenth century, with one dating from as early as 1636. APN, Tudela, Laquidáin. The same was true throughout Navarre. In Echauri the average price of leased arable land was set at between 2 percent and 6 percent of the value of the harvest. APN, Pamplona, Velaz. It was also true of the other Basque provinces. In Álava, for example, rents were said to amount to an average of about 2 percent of the annual income from the harvest. Desdevises du Dezert, L’Espagne de I’Ancien Régime, 1:261.

21. Señorial rents were low in much of rural Spain, but especially in the North, even in Galicia, where señoríos were common. Pardo de Andrade, Los guerrilleros gallegos,p. 40. In such areas, French land reform schemes promised to hurt, rather than help, the small renter. Land to be seized by the state from entails and sold on the market was likely to rise in price. The new owners, to recover the high purchase price, were likely, in turn, to raise rents. Moreover, the expectation of such reforms was that new owners would put capital into agriculture and farm at least some of the land directly, removing a portion of arable from the rental market and creating additional upward pressure on rents. These dynamics were not mysterious to farming communities and are sufficient explanation for their opposition to agrarian reform.

22. García Sanz, La respuesta, pp. 76-77, 114.

23. “Interrogators político,” AMC, legajo 81, no. 3. Plot size was calculated on the basis of leases recorded between 1806 and 1816 in the city of Corella, APN, Tudela, Guesca y Alfaro, Laquidáin, Resa.

24. “Rolde de los propietarios,” AMC, legajo 85, no. 32.