

30. Andrés Martín, Historia de los sucesos militares, pp. 48-49.

31. Areizaga had been a retired colonel living in Goizueta (northwestern Navarre) at the time of the French invasion, and Javier established contact with him in the fall of 1808.

32. In the summer of 1809 there were garrisons at Alsasua, Burguete, Caparroso, Espinal, Huarte, Huarte-Araquil, Irurzun, Lecumberri, Lumbier, Monreal, Orbaiceta, Pamplona, Sangüesa, Tafalla, Tudela, Urroz, Valtierra, and Zubiri. Other garrisons added later or in some cases replacing these were at Aoiz, Argüedas, Arriba, Biscarret, Bocal, Elizondo, Estella, Fuenterrabía, Irati, Irún, Lodosa, Los Arcos, Mendigorría, Olcoz, Peralta, Puente la Reina, Roncesvalles, Santestebán, Tiebas, Urdax, and Villa-franca. AAT, C8, 377, 387.

33. The circulars are printed in Olóriz, Navarra en la Guerra de la Independencia, pp. 28-32.

34. Correspondence of Reynier, AAT, C8, 252.

35. “Relación de Ujüé,” AGN, Guerra, legajo 21, car. 22.

36. These figures are not inclusive. French casualties in three engagements are listed merely as “some” or “unknown number” killed and wounded. In addition, there were no doubt other skirmishes of which the writer of the regimental diary was unaware. These missing numbers are probably balanced, however, by the tendency to exaggerate enemy losses, which the insurgents could not possibly have known with any precision, since they were forced to retreat rapidly after most engagements due to the approach of French relief columns. Finally, it was the tendency on both sides to minimize one’s own losses. Casualties among the guerrillas were no doubt higher than admitted by the chronicler of the second regiment and those for the French lower. Unfortunately, French figures that might be used to check or correct those supplied by the guerrillas are not available until the spring of 1810, after the destruction of the corso. AAT, C8, 387. The first complete report is given by Dufour on 1 April 1810.

37. Correspondence of January and February 1810, AAT, C8, 252.

38. There are two works on French taxes and other exactions in Navarre. Torre, Los campesinos navarros, supersedes Miranda Rubio, La Guerra de la Independence en Navarra. The amount of the tax may be appreciated by comparing it with the extraordinary 6,821,000 reales in taxes sought by Godoy in 1799. At the time, Godoy’s tax had seemed so high and generated such resistance that it could never be fully collected.

39. Mina later recognized Dufour’s merits as an opponent. Espoz y Mina, Memorias,p. 13.

40. The offer was in the form of a proclamation, an extant copy of which was issued by the municipal government of Tudela, announcing that the French had put up reward money (the amount is not given) for the capture of “a certain Javier Mina, of Jewish origin.” Popular anti-Semitism was always an easy card to play. The resistance also took advantage of it to brand Napoleon the “protector of the Jews,” because of the laws passed granting Jews civil equality. AGN, Guerra, legajo 19, car. 38.