

70. Andrés Martín, Historia de los sucesos militares, p. 62.

71. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, pp. 15-16.

72. Ibid., p. 14.

73. AGN, legajo 21, car. 21.

74. AHN, Estado, legajo 42, no. 38.

75. Semanario Patriótico, 9 May 1811.

76. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, p. 15.

77. Ibid., p. 14; Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el guerrillero, p. 104.

78. Ayerbe, Memorias, pp. 220-50. These details are taken from testimony offered after the war by Ayerbe’s guide, the third man in the party, whom the assassins allowed to escape. The evidence is appended to Ayerbe’s memoirs. In one version of the Ayerbe murder, written by Antoni Puigblanch, Espoz y Mina was said to have ordered the execution in order to eliminate a rival. Puigblanch, Opusculos, pp. xxxv-xli. Puig-blanch’s version does not correspond, however, with evidence from official testimony nor with the subsequent actions of Mina, who carried out his own investigation of the rumored murders. Above all, the Puigblanch story does not accord with the logic of the situation, in which Mina had many more serious rivals for the leadership of Navarre.

79. Adjutant I., Souvenirs de la Guerre, pp. 109-20.

### Chapter 6

1. Another attempt in April 1810, by Francisco Glaria, a cleric from the valley of Ron-cal, to recreate a unified command in Navarre failed. Glaria applied for and received approval of his status as leader of the guerrillas of Navarre from a junta that still operated secretly in Lérida. However, in what must be considered a transcendental accident, Glaria was killed in battle before he learned of his approval. His death opened the way for Espoz y Mina. “Relación del tercer regimiento,” AGN, Guerra, legajo 17, car. 51.

2. Espoz y Mina, Memories, p. 14; Andrés Martín, Historia de los sucesos militares, 1:61. Mina was cousin to Juan Martín de Mina, Javier’s father, making his relationship to Javier Mina less close than is normally realized. APN, Pamplona, Peralta, legajo 50, no. 90.

3. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, p. 15. These events occurred on 10-11 April.

4. In April 1812 Mina’s bravado saved him at one of the most dangerous moments in his career. In Robres, in Aragon, a detachment of French cavalry, tipped off by a traitor, surprised Mina while he was alone in his lodgings. As the French tried to force their way through the front door, Mina emerged holding a staff and, while buffeting his nearest enemies into submission, shouted: “Lancers, to the rear! Cavalry sergeant, take the first squadron to the left!” The French thought themselves the victims of a doublecross and withdrew just long enough for their intended victim to escape on horseback. Andrés Martín, Historia de los sucesos militares, 2:53-54.

5. Espoz y Mina, Memorias, pp. 17-18; “Relacion del tercer regimiento,” AGN, Guerra, legajo 17, car. 51. Even this junta had no legitimate authority in Navarre, which was under the jurisdiction of the newly installed Regency in Cádiz.

6. “Resumen del segundo regimiento,” AGN, Guerra, legajo 21, car. 20. In the mountain village of Zuriain, in one of his last independent actions in April, Cruchaga killed or captured all 104 men in a column traveling between the French border and Pamplona. Many of the captives were badly injured and, despite the summary executions meted out by the French to captured insurgents, Cruchaga allowed the injured French soldiers to be returned to Pamplona for medical attention. This incident was taken by Mina as a sign of Cruchaga’s humanity.