

(2) Once we settle on the appropriate purposes of counterfactual infer-
cence, what criteria should we use to distinguish plausible from implausible,
insightful from vacuous arguments? Although we recognize the need for
somewhat different criteria for distinctive “ideal-type” functions of counter-
factuals, we see an even more pressing need to be explicit about the stan-
dards that scholars use in evaluating competing claims. There is an unfortu-
nate tendency in the scholarly literature to oscillate between the extremes of
dismissing dissonant counterfactuals as hopelessly speculative and of pro-
claiming favorite counterfactuals as self-cvidently true, indeed as factual.
reaction is understandable, but unhelpful. The choice is typically not
dichotomous; as we shall see, counterfactuals vary along a plausibility (or, if
you are a Bayesian, subjective probability) continuum. If debates over com-
ppeting counterfactuals are not to reduce to expressions of theoretical or ideo-
logical taste, we need to articulate standards of evidence and proof that
transcend rival schools of thought. In this spirit, we advance a provisional
list of six standards for judging counterfactual claims, illustrating each stan-
dard with examples drawn from later chapters.

‘The final section of this chapter shifts the focus from “how should we
generate, use, and judge counterfactual arguments?” to “how do we gener-
ate, use, and judge counterfactual arguments?” One key cognitive-science
question concerns when people are prone to think about possible worlds. Of
the infinity of past events that people could “mentally undo” and insert as
antecedents into counterfactual arguments, why do they devote so much at-
tention to certain causal candidates and so little to others (Kahneman and
Miller 1986; Commentary 2, Olson, Roese, and Deibert)? A natural next
{question concerns when people are likely to be persuaded by counterfactual
claims concerning the consequences of altering particular antecedents. Given
that people have no way of directly determining what would have happened
in these hypothetical worlds, why do they defer to some counterfactual argu-
‘ments but disdain others (Commentary 1, Turner)? Finally, we explore the
potential for double standards in so subjective a domain as thought experi-
‘ments. Is there evidence of cognitive and motivational biases in how people
judge claims about possible worlds, tendencies to raise standards of evi-
dence and proof for dissonant counterfactuals but to lower standards for
claims consonant with one’s beliefs and goals?

