4 P. E, TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

ling narrative can be “noncausal,” this prohibition would prevent us from
drawing the sorts of “lessons from history” that scholars and policy makers
regularly draw on such topical topics as the best ways to encourage eco-
nomic growth, to preserve peace, and to cultivate democracy. Without coun-
terfactual reasoning, how could we know whether state intervention acceler-
ated growth in country x, whether deterrence prevented an attack on country
_y, or whether the courage of a young king saved country z from sliding back
into dictatorship? Counterfactual reasoning is a prerequisite for any form of
learning from history (cf. Tetlock 1991). To paraphrase Robert Fogel’s
(1964) reply to the critics of “counterfactualizing” in the 1960s, everyone
docs it and the alternative to an open counterfactual model is a concealed
one.

This volume surveys the many roles that counterfactual arguments play in
the study of world politics. A useful place to begin is by clarifying what we
‘mean by counterfactual reasoning. A reasonably precise philosophical defi-
nition is that counterfactuals are subjunctive conditionals in which the ante-
‘cedent is known or supposed for purposes of argument to be false (Skyrms
1991). As such, an enormous array of politically consequential arguments
qualify as counterfactual. Consider the following rather representative sam-
ple of counterfactuals that have loomed large in recent scholarly and policy
debates:

If Stalin had been ousted as general party secretary of the communist party of the
Soviet Union, the Soviet Union would have moved toward a kinder, gentler form
‘of communism fifty-five years before it actually did;

If Yeltsin had followed Sachsian fiscal and monetary advice in early 1992, Russian
inflation in 1993 would have been a small fraction of what it was;

If the United States had not dropped atomic bombs on two Japanese cities in
‘August 1945, the Japanese would still have surrendered roughly when they di

If all states in the twentieth century had been democracies, there would have been
fewer wars;

If Bosnians had been bottlenosed dolphins, the West never would have allowed the
slaughter of innocents in the Yugoslav civil war to have gone on so long.

‘The contributors to this volume approach counterfactual inference from
both normative/epistemological and descriptive/cognitive science perspec-
tives. The normative issues—which we explore in the next two sections of
this chapter—focus on how students of world politics should use and judge
counterfactual arguments. We break these issues into two categories:

(1) In what ways do counterfactual arguments advance our causal under-
standing of political events? Are such arguments—as the skeptics insist—

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS. s

merely forms of rhetorical posturing? Or can such arguments sensitize us to
historical and theoretical possibilities that we might otherwise have ignored?
Although we do not doubt that true believers often use counterfactuals to
justify predetermined conclusions, it is a mistake to dismiss all such argu-
‘ments as thinly veiled tautologies. We advance a provisional taxonomy of
five constructive functions of counterfactual arguments in world polities,
illustrating each with examples drawn from chapters in this volume.