398                                Jarosław Czubaty

coordinated control over its territory and to stimulate a new cultural integration
resulting from the developing national awareness of the inhabitants. They also
include the willingness of the ruling elite to undertake initiatives promoting civ-
ilizational transformations and changes in the social structure and mentality —
recognized as important criteria of modernity.
     In trying to answer the question whether the Duchy of Warsaw was the first
modern Polish state, the author draws on previous studies of the subject. He analy-
ses the impact on its political system made by the traditions of the Constitution of
3 May 1791, Prussian models, and French solutions that were included in the consti-
tution of the Duchy imposed by Napoleon. He indicates changes in political mental-
ity of a large part of the Polish elites which occurred in the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth century and made it possible for them to accept the political system of
the Duchy despite its differences from the tradition of the Constitution of 3 May.
He also analyses expectations present in sources formed in the context of modern-
ization discourse known before the partitions, and critical voices on the function-
ing of the Duchy’s administration modelled on the centralized Napoleonic state.
     Confrontation of legal and political models with the reality of their functioning
within the social environment shaped by the conditions of estate divisions and
actions undertaken by the authorities leads to the conclusion that the Duchy of
Warsaw should be regarded as the first Polish modern state, although it was of
limited modernity. More visible in the sphere of political system and institutions,
modernity was restricted in the area of their operations or social and political
practices, where it was modelled on habits developed in the political mentality of
the nobility, which hampered a swift and full implementation of Napoleonic legal
and political models. To a certain extent, it was slowed down also by the social
and civilizational realities in which those models were to operate.
                                                          Translated by Grażyna Waluga



                                    Bibliografia

Cichoń Paweł, Rozwój myśli administracyjnej w Księstwie Warszawskim 1807–1815, Księ-
     garnia Akademicka, Kraków 2006.
Collaboration and Resistance in Napoleonic Europe. State-Formation in an Age of Upheaval,
     c. 1800–1815, red. Michael Rowe, Palgrave, Basingstoke–New York 2003.
Czubaty Jarosław, Księstwo Warszawskie 1807–1815, Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu War-
     szawskiego, Warszawa 2011.
Czubaty Jarosław, Zasada „dwóch sumień”. Normy postępowania i granice kompromisu
     politycznego Polaków w sytuacjach wyboru (1795–1815), Neriton, Warszawa 2005.
Gałędek Michał, Miejsce resortu spraw wewnętrznych w administracji Księstwa Warszaw-
     skiego, „Krakowskie Studia z Historii Państwa i Prawa” 6 (4), 2013, s. 405–422.
Giddens Anthony, Konsekwencje nowoczesności, Wydawnictwo UJ, Kraków 2008.
Goclon Jacek A., „Polska na królu pruskim zdobyta”. Ustrój, administracja i sądownictwo
     doby Komisji Rządzącej w 1807 r., Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Wrocławskiego,
     Wrocław 1999.
