

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 38

panoply of possibilities and conditions for their occurrence. This cognitive
analysis helps us to explain an otherwise paradoxical pattern in expert judg-
‘ment: bold counterfactuals and timid forecasts. Experts often assert that they
know what would have happened in the past but modestly demur on what
will happen in the future.

Motivational Biases

Thus far, we have focused on only cognitive sources of bias. People are not,
of course, just information-processing devices; they are animated by wishes,
hopes, and fears that shape their perceptions of what might or could or
should have been (Commentary 2, Olson, Roese, and Deibert). These emo-
tional needs can take many, sometimes conflicting forms (Tetlock and Levi
182. Consider the following possibilities suggested by the psychological
literature:

(1) Needs for predictability and controllability: On the one hand, people
might allow their desire to believe that the world is fundamentally predict-
able to rule out butterfly-effect counterfactuals, which imply that, no matter
how hard we try, itis in principle impossible to anticipate the future because
so much hinges on small causes that are beyond our measurement grasp. On
the other hand, people might allow their desire to believe that the world is
controllable to rule out “inevitability” counterfactuals, which imply that, no
matter what people do, our fates are ultimately under the sway of powerful
geopolitical, macroeconomic, and technological forces beyond individual
mastery. Indeed, this psychological need to believe in a “controllable world”
‘may lie at the heart of Kissinger’s conversion from his belief as an academic
observer in deterministic arguments that minimized policy makers’ latitude
to influence events, to his world view as a policy maker which assigned
much more prominent role to individual human beings who could be per-
suaded—through the right combination of arguments and inducements—to
‘change their minds (Chapter 3, Breslauer; Kissinger 1993).

(2) Needs to avoid blame and to claim credit: On the one hand, people
might allow their desire to avoid blame for bad outcomes to override their
desires for predictability and control. In such cases, people will argue that
they should not be blamed for having failed to foresee the unforeseeable or
having failed to control the uncontrollable. On the other hand, people might
allow the desire to claim credit for good outcomes to enhance the plau-
sibility of counterfactuals that take the form “had it not been for my superior
predictive ability and courageous willingness to act on the basis of that in-
sight, this good outcome would never have occurred.”

(3) Needs for consolation and inspiration: People might use “downward”
counterfactuals to comfort and console themselves (“Things may not be

