

West Indian Doctresses Army doctors were not the only source of treatment for soldiers in the West Indies. Local women, who practised traditional herbal remedies, were hailed by doctors and soldiers alike as making excellent nurses and many soldiers recovered under their care. Many of these doctresses, if they were free women, ran their own boarding establishments where men could recover. Mary Seacole, for her contributions during the Crimean War, is the most famous West Indian doctress, and she learned her craft from her mother, who ran a boarding establishment in Jamaica.

The interior of an early 19 th Century Caribbean Rum distillery

the reality. Army Doctor George Pinckard described scenes in Southampton before a large expedition left for 
the West Indies in 1794, with people saying how they pitied the men and that they expected them never to 
return. The Caribbean acquired the nickname of the ‘White Man’s Grave’. Men were afraid to take the King’s 
Shilling for fear that they might be sent to the West Indies. However, there was still a need to defend the 
colonies and so the Army and Government began to look at ways in which the West Indies might be better able 
to defend themselves through the recruitment of West Indians, particularly those of African descent or origin. 
The furore surrounding the creation of the West India Regiments will 
be dealt with elsewhere, but from a medical perspective they were as 
successful as had been hoped, which was confirmed in a study conducted 
by Henry Marshall and Alexander Tulloch for the Army and Ministry 
of War in the 1830s. Examining reports from over a twenty year period, 
they discovered that the observations of earlier doctors were largely 
accurate and black troops were indeed much less likely to die from fevers 
and, on the whole, they were far less likely to succumb to disease than 
European troops. Some officers thought this was, in part, due to them 
drinking considerably less than white soldiers. However, it was noted 
that they were more likely to suffer fatally from respiratory ailments than 
their European counterparts, although their overall death rate was much 
lower. 
This study also identified that certain diseases were more 
likely to be contracted on individual islands; diseases of 
the lungs were more prevalent in Barbados and diseases 
of the liver in others, notably St. Vincent. Marshall and 
Tulloch’s report overturned some popular perceptions 
in medicine, including what necessarily constituted a 
healthy location for a military station. They noted that 
Fort Augusta in Jamaica, that was surrounded by marshy 
ground, was no less healthy than the base at Stoney Hill, 
which had traditionally been regarded as a much more 
salubrious site. The researchers did conclude that the 
belief that outposts at higher altitudes were healthier 
was true, so long as such outposts were built above 2000- 
2500 feet above sea level. This may have been because 
above these altitudes, mosquitoes are rarely found. 
They recommended that more elevated stations should 
be built, which eventually led to the construction of 
Newcastle Hill Station in the Blue Mountains of Jamaica. 
Although over time matters improved as medical understanding developed, the heavy death toll in the Caribbean 
meant that, whilst a military threat to the British West Indies remained, the British Government and Army 
wanted to find ways of reducing the death toll from disease. This meant placing an increasing responsibility for 
the defences of the region on the islands themselves, notably recruiting from the local population, who proved 
more resistant to the effects of the local diseases. 