---
source_url: "https://westindiacommittee.org/historyheritageculture/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/WIS-Disease.pdf"
final_url: "https://westindiacommittee.org/historyheritageculture/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/WIS-Disease.pdf"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "3c63a912d113b1cd3afa366673445e4b0f81649195528abd9bf51f52b2cfa8f3"
title: "Diseases and Medicine"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Diseases and Medicine The greatest threat that the British Army faced in the Caribbean was not from the enemies they fought, but from disease, particularly the dreaded ‘fever’. This ailment frequently struck people who were recently arrived in the West Indies from Europe and often proved fatal. Thousands of British troops perished from disease over the course of the seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Many of those who did not die were so weakened by illness that they were rendered unfit for service and had to be shipped home to Britain as invalids. 
Between December 1799 and January 1803, the rate of death and invalidity caused by disease was such that 
it was calculated that the entire British garrison in the Windward and Leeward Islands would need to be 
replaced every six years. In times when there was a large number of troops in the region, such as the French 
Revolutionary Wars, the death toll could register tens of thousands within the space of a few years. By October 
1796, Sir Banastre Tarleton MP claimed, in the House of Commons, that everyone in Britain knew someone 
who had died serving in the Caribbean. 
Whilst by no means proven, his claim 
is supported by huge fatalities amongst 
the regiments, with the 32 nd Regiment of 
Foot losing 32 officers and almost 1,000 
other ranks to disease within the space 
of a single year of service in what is now 
Haiti. 
With the limited medical knowledge 
of the time still reliant on the writings 
of such ancient authors as Galen 
and Hippocrates, there was little 
understanding of how diseases spread 
and how they could be prevented or 

Yellow Fever This disease is normally found in tropical climates, although is now far less prevalent worldwide than it once was and has largely been eliminated in the Caribbean. True Yellow Fever is caused by bites from infected mosquitoes and is believed to have first been introduced to the Caribbean from Africa via captive African slaves. Symptoms can include a high temperature, nausea and headaches. In advanced cases, which can be fatal, symptoms can include haemorrhaging blood and jaundice of the skin, which gives the disease its name. Due to limited medical knowledge in previous centuries, many different illnesses were lumped together under the generic disease of ‘fever’, although all presented similar symptoms and, in many cases, proved fatal.

A 1800 cartoon showing opposing features of life in Jamaica, relaxation and the demons of disease waiting beneath © The Wellcome Library (CC BY 4.0)

cured successfully. Some doctors tried a wide array of treatments, which we now know to prove harmful to the 
healing process: bleeding patients or treating them with such poisonous substances as mercury. Other doctors, 
more in line with today’s medical thought, believed that these were of little benefit or indeed harmful. Yet not 
all treatments were damaging; the use of quinine, often known as ‘Jesuit’s bark’ successfully treated malaria, 
although there was a mistaken belief in some circles that it could treat all types of fevers. Preventative medicine 
was also adopted, with the Army adopting inoculation against diseases like smallpox during the American 
Revolution, and the benefits of citrus fruits were known in preventing certain diseases, such as scurvy. 
There were many diseases that could prove debilitating or even fatal. 
These ranged from ‘Barbados leg’, a form of elephantiasis, to the lethal 
dangers of a variety of fevers. To attempt to ward off infection, doctors 
made many suggestions. Due to the contemporary belief about the 
nature of diseases, which was before the widespread acceptance of the 
existence of illness-causing bacteria and viruses, much medical advice 
featured the need to avoid the swampy areas that are common in parts 
of the Caribbean; there was a prevailing conviction that swamps and 
exposed muds produced a miasma, which carried disease. To that end, 
they recommended that barracks and bases should be built away from 
these areas, in places with a good breeze to promote air flow. Such 
doctors as John Rollo, who served with the British Army on St. Lucia 
in the late 1770s, recommended that, if it was necessary to have a base 
or camp near a swampy area, fires should be lit between the camp 
and the swamp so that the miasma would be burnt off. If this proved 
unfeasible, then fires should be lit near the doorways of the barracks 
or tents to similarly burn off the miasma and such doorways should 
be built or erected facing away from the swamp. In the same vein, they 
also suggested that smoking, a common practice amongst soldiers of 
the time, could help to ward off these miasmas. 
Although modern medicine largely disproves such ideas, many of these doctors nevertheless advocated good 
common-sense measures that we would commend today, such as ensuring that items should be kept clean, that 
men should wash regularly and that eating and drinking should both be in moderation. They also lamented the 
state of much of the barrack accommodation in the Caribbean, which was overcrowded and in poor repair and 
could often leave the men, both in the ranks and the officers, far more exposed to the elements than desirable. 
Many medics developed the opinion that military camps at higher altitudes were healthier and thus regiments, 
which suffered badly from outbreaks of disease, were often sent to mountain stations, if at all possible, in the 
hope that they could recover their health. 
The Army’s doctors themselves were as naturally vulnerable to disease as the soldiers and many of them also 
met their deaths, a situation that exacerbated matters, resulting in a lack of medical personnel to treat the 
men, a problem which was no doubt much more acute in the remoter postings in the region. Thomas St. Clair 
recalled meeting an assistant surgeon who had fallen ill with fever 10 days after his arrival in the Caribbean 
and died 3 days later. Women and children accompanying both officers and regular soldiers also suffered from 
the ravages of disease and perished. In 1819, during a fever epidemic in Jamaica amongst the 92 nd Regiment of 
Foot, 4 out of the 5 officers’ wives, 29 amongst the 60 wives of the rank and file and 33 of the 50 children died. 
One observer, Richard Wyvill, reported, “I have been quite shocked at seeing three English ladies, wives to some 
of the officers here, who only three months ago had come to this country as fair as lilies, blooming as roses, now 
pallid, sallow, and sickly, with the appearance of being ten years older than they really are.” 
Hospital buildings were often hard to obtain in the Caribbean, and also tended to suffer from the same lack 
of healthy conditions as other military buildings in the area. Many soldiers who served in the region dreaded 
being sent to the hospital for a ‘minor’ ailment in case they caught one of the dreaded fevers and died. George 
Pinckard, serving as a doctor and the Army’s Inspector of Hospitals in the recently surrendered Dutch colonies 