

A 1784 sketch of Mr. Daniel Massiah suffering from ‘Barbados Leg’ © The Wellcome Library (CC BY 4.0)

of Berbice and Essequibo during the French Revolutionary Wars, in a letter to Britain, recounted an incident in 
which a soldier named Chapman, who was quite clearly very ill, insisted that he had no more than a headache 
and did not want to go to hospital. Pinckard attempted to make the man as comfortable as possible in ordinary 
quarters, giving him a hammock in which to sleep in a peaceful place, but Chapman unfortunately soon passed 
away. 
There was also a belief amongst many people that alcohol could ward off disease, which led a large number of 
soldiers to drink copious amounts of rum, not only as a social relaxant but in an attempt to prevent themselves 
contracting the dreaded fever. Some doctors also prescribed alcohol as a preventative measure and even as 
a curative, with Doctor George Pinckard drinking both old wine and port when he fell ill with fever whilst 
serving in Guiana. Although Pinckard survived, the drinking of rum in large quantities did in fact lower the 
resistance of the men to disease and, in many cases, by drinking regularly to vast excess, led to diseases of the 
liver. Several doctors realised this and therefore recommended moderation, not just in drink but also in foods 
eaten. In order to maintain the health of officers living in the West Indies, John Rollo produced a guide and 
commented that, “living well and living regular are far from being incompatible. A tasty and nourishing diet, even 
a generous allowance of wine, may not only be used, but are absolutely necessary to answer the purposes expressed. 
The moment, however, you go beyond the cheerful glass, that instant you expose yourself, as has been already 
observed, to every cause capable of producing disease.” 
This was made worse by the fact that soldiers were largely 
only able to get their hands on so called ‘new rum’, i.e. 
rum which had not been properly aged by leaving it in 
a cask for a sufficient period of time. This new rum was 
far more hazardous to human health than proper rum, 
being essentially moonshine. There is now evidence to 
support the theory that many cases that were believed to 
be some form of fever were in fact lead poisoning. Much 
‘new rum’ was distilled using equipment made of lead, 
which seeped into the liquid during the process, making 
it poisonous for those who drank it. For years, the Army 
tried in vain to reduce the dependence of the men on 
‘new rum’, but were thwarted by a variety of factors; these 
included a lack of a safer replacement drink and dishonest 
commissaries who were in league with ‘new rum’ makers 
and kept purchasing it to fill Army stores, often in defiance of instructions. Both officers and men in the 
ranks continued to drink themselves into sickness or death and intoxication also led to several incidents of 
indiscipline amongst both classes. In one case, Lieutenant Dudgeon of the 4 th West India Regiment, stationed 
at Fort Andrews in British Guiana, was reported to go to bed at night drunk and turn out to morning parade 
just as intoxicated; he died after six months. Doctors also called attention to soldiers’ diets, namely the heavy 
reliance on salted meat. Thus, there was a drive 
to improve this unhealthy fare, with more fresh 
meat being introduced over time, as well as an 
attempt to ensure that plain, simple, healthy and 
nourishing meals were produced. 
By the time of the wars against France in the 
1790s, it was clear that this situation could not 
continue; not only were men dying in their 
hundreds, or being rendered permanently unfit 
for service, but such deaths were also affecting 
the number of recruits that the Army could raise. 
The British public’s view of the West Indies as a 
hotbed of disease was perhaps even worse than 