

of every dispatch that Board received. We have the Minutes of the Board itself for a part of
the period and the log of every ship in commission. We have so much material that we scarcely
know where to begin—and almost as much again, perhaps, in Paris, Madrid and the Hague.
Nor is this all. For work in the political, diplomatic and economic aspects of this period has
given us a background knowledge of the wars which, illuminating the documentary sources,
should long since have given us a new narrative of the war at sea.
   Some day I may have the opportunity of attempting to write what is so evidently needed.
In the meanwhile, this present work is at least some contribution towards that greater theme.
My account is based on the correspondence of the successive commanders-in-chief, taken
together with such French sources as were available to me. I have used as background my own
previous work, Trade in the Eastern Seas, 1793—1813, without writing which I should scarcely
have understood campaigns which, without their commercial context, might have been
meaningless.
   If I was qualified in any way to write this book, and if I may be thought qualified to attempt
its greater sequel, it is the result of a long apprenticeship. Any feeling I may have for the
realities of history I owe, in the first place, to Mr. E. Welbourne, the present Master of
Emmanuel College, Cambridge. My first introduction to the French Wars was under the
guidance of the late Sir John Clapham. To naval history I was led by the late Sir Geoffrey
Callender, with whom I worked for three years at Greenwich. On my return to Cambridge
I came under the influence of Sir Herbert Richmond, a former commander-in-chief on the
East Indies Station. To all of these scholars I am indebted, as also to Professor Mark Thomson
of Liverpool, for giving me the opportunity of teaching to others something of what I had
tried to learn. The recent war, moreover, did more for me than merely interrupt my studies.
Any understanding I have of the basic problems of time and distance and supply I owe to
the senior officers under whom I worked when attached to the Royal Air Force and when
serving, later, on the General Staff. Any knowledge I have of the Royal Navy I owe to those
with whom I served at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth; and not least to the cadets
themselves.
  In the actual preparation of this book for press, much of the burden has fallen on my
secretary, Mrs. Y. J. G. Lawton, to whom I am deeply grateful for her assistance. I owe the
material in Appendix E to Captain J. W. Rainier, R.N., who has been most helpful in every
way. The maps were efficiently drawn by Mr. J. M. Taylor, and owe any defects they may
have to me rather than to him. To M. Pierre J. Charliat, the distinguished French historian,
I owe, among many other kindnesses, my introduction to the French naval archives. To my
brother, Mr. R. C. Parkinson, late R.N.V.R., I owe several extracts from the logs of East
Indiamen; logs to which distance prevented me referring in person. To my sister-in-law, who
was Miss Pamela Willoughby, I hope to owe forgiveness for anything I may have written
about the faults of Sir Nesbit Willoughby. To my publishers I am indebted for their patience
with an author who lives so near to the scene of his story and so far from everywhere else.
Above all am I beholden to the person to whom this book is dedicated, without whose
encouragement it would never have been finished.
                                                             C. Northcote Parkinson.
University of Malaya,
    Singapore.