                            P 2 2_


)WING TRACKS
: FRENCH
USERS
 -1806




ONE & HALF DECREE CHANNEL
War in the Eastern Seas
         Edited by C. Northcote Parkinson
               THE TRADE WINDS
A Study of British Overseas Trade during the French Wars
                      lJ93~t8l5
 plate i. Admiral Peter Rainier (i74i?-i8o8)
Commander-in-Chief on the East Indies Station
 WAR IN THE
EASTERN SEAS
          i793'18i5


   C. Northcote Parkinson   i-
         Raffles Professor of History
            University of Malaya




      George Allen & Unwin Ltd
RUSKIN HOUSE • MUSEUM STREET • LONDON
             FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1954



This hook is copyright under the Berne Convention.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of
private study, research, criticism or review, as per¬
                                   ,
mitted under the Copyright Act, 1911 no portion may be
reproduced by any process without written permission.
       Enquiry should be made to the publisher.


                                       1




                       FOR

                      ANN




            PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

               in 12 point Fournier type
           BY UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED

               WOKING AND LONDON
                                         PREFACE



 T     "^ he naval wars of 1793-1815 have been called, and with some reason, the classic age of
       British Sea Power. But this classic age has not been recorded by historians with anything
       like the care which its importance would seem to merit. During that great conflict, or
fairly soon after its conclusion, appeared the works of Steel, Ralfe, James, Brenton and
Ekins, together with a spate of biographies. Of these contemporary or nearly contemporary
works, that by William James, The Naval History of Great Britain (1826), is by far the most
valuable. James himself, however, in defining his field of study, was careful to disclaim any
intention of writing what we should now regard as history. ‘It appeared to me,’ he wrote in
his preface, ‘of little consequence whether an action, purely naval, was fought off the North
Cape or the coast of Peru.’ To the historian the place of conflict is of the greatest consequence.
James emphasizes further that he had ‘neither the talent nor the inclination to descant on the
consequences’ of any combat and that he deliberately ‘left the field of politics open to those
who know better how to traverse it....’ To the historian the consequences are seldom without
interest, and James left it to the historian to discover what the consequences may have been.
   Many years were to pass before any historian made the attempt. At last, in 1892, there
appeared The Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire, by Captain A. T.
Mahan of the United States Navy. Mahan had the advantage of having already written The
Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660-1783. Added to this he had naval experience in sail,
a general knowledge of history and something like genius in comprehending the strategic
problems of the past. It is true that his knowledge of the sailing ship is no longer wholly an
advantage—for he naturally refrained from telling his contemporaries what he and they already
knew—but it is also true that he brought the French Wars into some sort of perspective. Our
current version of what happened is very largely his. And while there has been published since
1893 a wealth of detailed studies and a mass of documentary material, no revised naval history
of the period has as yet appeared.
  Sixty years would be a long period for a historical work to hold the field even if its original
conception and execution had been faultless. In fact, however, Mahan’s work was imperfect
in two major respects. He did not use the original sources. He did not continue the story after
1805. His rate of compilation would have been inconsistent with actual research even had the
naval archives been available to him as a serving officer. And then, Mahan was too impressed
by the Nelson legend to pay much attention to events between 1805 and 1812. From 1812
he could fairly allow his interest, like his sympathy, to centre upon the United States Navy,
so that the main naval war of 1805-15 was closed to him and has since remained virtually
closed to everyone else. To such of Nelson’s contemporaries as were still at sea in 1815 this
historical treatment of the war would have seemed grotesque, but for these last ten years no
history has been written, not even such an undocumented history as Mahan provided for the
period 1793—1805.
  To describe a history as undocumented is no criticism if the documents do not, in fact,
exist. But the documentary evidence relating to the Royal Navy in this period is daunting in
its mere bulk. We have copies of every operation order issued by the Board of Admiralty and
                            WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN        SEAS