

of these went to the Isle of France, for there was a similar demand for
slave-labour at Muscat and in certain parts of India. It is clear, nevertheless,
that the numbers imported annually by the French were very considerable.
They were paid for, it seems, in cash rather than in goods; which brings
us to the question as to how the Isle of France could maintain a balance
of trade, a question which can be answered only after some attention has
been given to her seaports.
   When La Bourdonnais was choosing a position for his capital, he had
two alternatives open to him. There was the harbour to the south-east
where the Dutch had made their settlement, and the harbour to the north¬
west, facing the trade wind. Only at these two points could a seaport be
founded, as the rest of the island is almost unapproachable, the coast being
everywhere fringed with coral reefs. His temptation was to follow the
example of the Dutch, the south-east side of the island being the pleasanter
and the harbour affording easy ingress before the wind. In resisting this
temptation he was guided by strategic considerations. The harbour on
the leeward side of the island, being more difficult to enter, was so much
the more easy to defend. For an enemy seeking to attack the port the
wind was always blowing the wrong way except during the hurricane
season when it was rash to be near the island at all. It was possible, of
course, to work up the channel into the harbour by a process of warping
and towing, provided only that the garrison did not object. But to have
attempted such a slow approach under the fire of the batteries would have
been virtual suicide. La Bourdonnais was too good a seaman not to realize
how easily the north-west port could be rendered impregnable.
   Port Louis was the name given to the town which grew up round the
north-west harbour, but the inhabitants, at the time of which we are
speaking, still called it ‘The Camp/ Built at the head of a triangular bay,
at the foot of the mountains, Port Louis depended on trade for its prosperity.
It owed much to a resourceful officer who had enlarged the harbour. This
was M. de Tromelin, a retired naval captain. He obtained the sanction of
the Due de Praslin and then proceeded forthwith to deflect the course of
the silt-bearing streams which tended to fill up the harbour. That done,
he dredged out the channel. The coral basin known as Trou Fanfarron
was then a sort of lagoon, unconnected with the harbour. By dredging
and by explosives, Tromelin managed to add this basin to the harbour,
breaking down the reef which had lain between. Thus was formed a
safe and capacious port, capable of sheltering upwards of fifty large
vessels. The commercial future of the island, if not assured, became
possible.

                                      17
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

       As to the town, or camp, it is composed of wooden houses, which have
    only a ground floor, on account of the winds and the heat. They are separated
    from each other, and surrounded with palisadoes. The streets are tolerably
    straight, and it were to be wished, that rows of trees were planted to render
    them cool. . . . The town has no regular fortification, but to the left of it in
    looking towards the sea, there is an intrenchment of dry stones, extending
    from the mountain to the harbour. On the same side is Fort Blanc, which
    defends the entrance; ahd opposite to it, on the other side, is a battery on
    the island of Tonneliers. . . .
                    (Charles Grant, Viscount de Vaux, History of Mauritius.')