

The Mauritius had been first colonized by the Dutch, who, however,
abandoned it in 1712 on account of a plague, it is said, of locusts and rats.
Some Frenchmen had settled in Bourbon as early as 1664, so that it was
not long before the neighbouring island also came into their hands. The
first settlement was in 1734, when the French East India Company sent
out M. Mahe de la Bourdonnais as the first governor. La Bourdonnais
was an exceedingly able man, a good sailor and a skilled engineer. The
development of the colony was almost entirely due to him, and it may
be said that the island bears the impress of his character to this day.

    ... the island is indebted to him, and to him alone, for its aqueducts, bridges,
    hospitals, and principal magazines. In short, every thing useful that still
    exists there is the work of that truly great man. La Bourdonnais had a

                                        15
                      WAR   IN THE     EASTERN     SEAS

    very extensive knowledge of those mechanic arts which are most common
    and most necessary for our wants. Often was he seen by the break of day,
    at the head of his labourers, driving a wheel barrow, or handling the trowel
    and the compass, merely with a view to excite and keep up a spirit of emula¬
    tion. After the example which he himself gave, it was hardly possible for
    any one not to concur, as far as he was able, in promoting the public
    advantage. Whatever, therefore, he planned or undertook for the benefit
    of the colony, during the twelve years of his administration, was always
    attended with speedy and complete success.
              (Alexis Rochon, A Voyage to Madagascar and the East Indies.)

   The only serious mistake made by the early settlers was in destroying
too great an extent of the forests, and thus lessening the rainfall. Despite
this blunder, however, it was found possible to put about a third of the
land under cultivation. The chief crops were wheat and maize, grown
alternately, but efforts were also made in other directions. Coffee, sugar,
indigo, cotton and spices were all grown with varying success, and the
rearing of sheep and cattle was not wholly neglected. From the first, the
French settlers depended on slave labour, and it was La Bourdonnais who
introduced, from Brazil, a crop intended for the feeding of slaves. This
was the manioc (sometimes spelt manihot or magnoc), a plant from the
root of which a kind of bread is made, called cassada or cassavi. In its
green state this root is poisonous, but it is made edible by being dried
over a fire and grated into powder. The French sometimes called it
Madagascar bread. This, with grain, coffee and sugar, formed the chief
product of the island.
   The population of the Isle of France was estimated in 1799 as consisting
of 10,000 white men and mulattoes, and 55,000 slaves. At a later date,
the average population over the period 1804-25 was stated as being over
82,000. The exact figures were as follows: 7,108 white men, 9,416 free
people of colour, and 65,633 slaves. These slaves were nearly all negroes
brought from Madagascar, Anjouan, Quiloa, Zanzibar and, above all,
Mozambique. To keep up their numbers, a yearly supply was necessary.
To maintain this supply a regular trade existed, mostly in the hands of
the Portuguese, which the French referred to as ‘La Traite.’ The Portuguese
and French traders used to pay from 30 to 80 piastres for each Mozambique
or Madagascar slave; those from Quiloa and Zanzibar being somewhat
cheaper. The market prices at Zanzibar were said to range from 50 dollars
for a prime slave to 4 dollars for a child; young girls, on the other hand,
sometimes fetching as much as 60 dollars. The export trade from Zanzibar
alone was estimated at some 10,000 slaves a year. Only a proportion
                                      16
                               INTRODUCTION