

its harbour was not. To put it more exactly, there was no harbour at all;
just an open roadstead, a dangerous lee-shore for half the year and an
inconvenient landing place during the rest. Bombay, on the other side of
India, was of less importance as a town but of greater use as a port. Here
there was, and still is, a deep natural harbour, well sheltered and with
sufficient tidal range for docking Indiamen and men-of-war. Here was
stationed the East India Company’s own Navy, the Bombay Marine, used
for police-work on that side of India. Through Bombay was organized
the Overland Mail, by which European news, via Constantinople, might
arrive in as little as three months—half the normal time. Here again, the
settlement was, in some sort, an outpost of Bengal, a defence of western
 India. And this was the base to which the Navy resorted during the north¬
 east monsoon. The Coromandel coast had no comparable seaport except in
 Trincomalee, which belonged to the Dutch and lacked any hinterland from
 which a squadron might draw supplies.
     One lesson of the recent war had been that Trincomalee, in French
 hands, could be a serious menace. Another lesson had been that Calcutta
 and the whole Bay of Bengal was vulnerable to a naval foe operating
 during the north-east monsoon from a base to the eastwards. Thus, Suffren,
 in the winter of 1782, had been not at Mauritius (where, in all reason, he
 should have been) but at Acheen in Sumatra. His presence had been so
 inconvenient that the question arose as to whether there should not be
 a British base in that area. This was one motive behind the foundation
 of Fort Cornwallis, on Prince of Wales Island, in 1786. There was, it is
 true, an almost simultaneous inquiry (in about 1788) into the possibilities
  of New Harbour, near Calcutta itself. But, by 1791, the strategic value
  of Fort Cornwallis, now called Penang, was recognized and even, soon
  afterwards, overestimated. Penang is an island in the Straits of Malacca,
  separated from the mainland of Malaya by the strait which forms its
  excellent anchorage. The island is mostly mountainous and the fort was
  built close to the shore on the eastern side. As a fort it came in for a good
  deal of criticism, especially from the future Duke of Wellington. It was
  easy to bombard from the sea, it was alleged, and houses masked what
  should have been its field of fire on land. As against this it might be urged
  that—unlike most rival fortifications—it is still there. And if insufficiently
  open to the public view, that is merely because it is still, up to a point,
  operational. At the time this story opens Penang was rapidly growing,
  with a population that was to total ten thousand by the turn of the century.
  The settlement owed its existence mainly to Francis Light, the first
  governor, who was still in office when war began but who died in 1794.
                                       12
                               INTRODUCTION

It owed something, incidentally, to Lieutenant Home Popham, who
surveyed the South Channel in 1791—92 and showed it to be practicable.
It was, as a settlement, rather isolated and vulnerable. But an attack by
the Sultan of Kedah had been beaten off in 1791 and future danger was
more likely to come from the Dutch or the French.
  Still more isolated than Prince of Wales Island was the settlement at
Bencoolen (or Benkulen), officially known as Fort Marlborough. Although
near the Straits of Sunda it was badly placed from the point of view of
local trade. It produced pepper but its importance lessened as that of Penang
increased. Like Penang, it lay on the route to China. It was in China, at
Canton, that the purely commercial interests of the East India Company
centred. At Canton there was no settlement but merely a factory—one
among several European factories—and that used only in the trading
season. This establishment was governed by the Company’s supercargoes,
who bought the tea and saw it shipped each year and then withdrew—as
compelled by Chinese regulation—to Macao. From a strategic point of
view, Canton needed no protection. On the other hand, the China fleet
of Indiamen, especially on the homeward voyage, was extremely important
and fairly easy to waylay on a known and largely inevitable route. From
the French point of view, several of the English trade routes were vulnerable.
By contrast, any attack on Calcutta would have been almost impossible,
and an attack on Madras or Bombay would have needed larger forces than
could easily be embarked. Penang and Bencoolen were easily assailable
but offered relatively little to the captors.
  As against British India the French had only the most trifling footholds
on the mainland. Besides Pondicherry, their capital, they had the isolated
factory of Mahe on the Malabar Coast, Chandernagore and two or three
villages in Bengal. Pondicherry, it is true, was fortified and even capable
of standing a short siege; but it was scarcely tenable unless the French
should be able to establish a naval superiority in the Bay of Bengal. The
town was surrounded by a nearly circular line of ramparts, weaker only
where the sea aided the defence. Unfortunately, however, for the garrison,
the fortifications were too extensive, being designed to encircle the whole
town instead of merely the white quarter. The thirteen bastions and twelve
ravelins implied a larger garrison than the settlement could ever maintain.
Grandpre, like his hypothetical ancestor mentioned by Shakespeare, ‘a
valiant and most expert gentleman,’ did more than ‘measure the ground.’
He drew conclusions from what he saw. ‘That unfortunate town,’ he wrote,
‘was destined to become a school of fortification; for the Dutch and
English have never failed, when they got possession of it, to raze every-