

                                       13
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

thing at all connected with military defence; so that, when ceded to France
after a war, it was always to be rebuilt.’ The Chevalier de Fresne, its last
rebuilder, had perpetuated its too extensive system of fortification, so that
Pondicherry could not be taken very seriously as a fortress. As a trading
port it was even less likely to inspire respect, having little to boast of
except a traffic with Bengal in salt and blue dye. The trade with France,
such as it was, centred rather on the factory of Yanaon on the coast of
Golconda. This place, however, like Mahe and Chandernagore, included




no stretch of territory. As for the factories in Bengal—Balasore, Patna,
Dacca and Chatigam—these were trifling possessions, as impossible to
defend as Karikal or the French part of Masulipatam. Taken together, these
footholds gave the French a certain scope for trade or even for intrigue
with the native powers; but as bases for any military operation, they
amounted to little or nothing.
  The French policy of self-effacement in India did not apply to all French
possessions east of the Cape. Although Suffren had tried to carry on the
war in the Bay of Bengal he had been based, ultimately, on the Isle of
France, otherwise known as Mauritius. With that island the French also
held the neighbouring island of Bourbon, two or three settlements in
Madagascar and several outposts in the Seychelles. All these were subor¬
dinate to the Isle of France, which was the stronghold, the naval base,
and the seat of government. Implicit in the theory that Pondicherry was
not to be held in force was the corollary that the Isle of France was to be
held to the last man and the last round. Held in force, this island might

                                       14
                                INTRODUCTION

constitute an active menace to the English trade passing the Cape and
a base also for raiding any part of the Indian Ocean. For these purposes
the Isle of France was very well fitted indeed.
  Mauritius was sometimes called ‘the Gibraltar of the East’; not inappro¬
priately, either as regards its position or its natural strength. Lying centrally
between what used to be the two main trade routes by which the Indian
Ocean was entered from the westward, Mauritius takes the form of a rocky
island, ‘an irregular oval somewhat more than eleven leagues in its greatest
length, and rather more than eight in its greatest breadth.’

       The land gradually rises from the shore, towards the centre of the island,
     which is a woody plain, elevated about 200, or 250 fathoms above the level
     of the sea. In the middle of this plain is a very sharp conical mountain,
     which, from its situation, is termed the middle peak. The other mountains,
     which are separated from each other are, the Montagne de Faience, Grand
     Port, Savane, Riviere Noir, Riviere Rampart, Corps-du-Garde, and the
     Ponce. Of the last-mentioned chain, Piter Bort, says M. Bory de St. Vincent,
     is the most elevated point; and according to the Abbe de la Caille, it is 424
     fathoms perpendicular height above the level of the sea. Its summit, generally
     covered with snow, is formed by an enormous and inaccessible rock, bearing
     a striking resemblance to a head and distinguishable at a great distance
     out at sea. . . . Another chain, in the course of which is a very large and
     remarkable roundish rock, termed Morne des Pretres, runs in a direction
     towards the north: it is the Montagne Longue, on the extremity of which
     are signal posts, elevated 2,400 feet above the level of the sea.
       The isle of France is watered by above sixty rivulets, some of which
     deserve the name of rivers, but others do not contain any water in the
     dry season. . . .
                                               Naval Chronicle, Vol. 25, p. 144.