

   Batavia, being at the western end of Java, had a strategic position close
to the Straits of Sunda. This, together with an excellent harbour, gave
the town its unquestioned predominance in the East Indies.

       The city of Batavia, which was the capital of the Dutch possessions in
    the East, as well as of the Island of Java, lies ... on the northern shore of
    the empire of Jacatra, in the deepest part of a bay formed by the points
    of Ontong, Java, and Crawang; from the former of which it lies about four
    Dutch miles south-east, and from the latter about five miles south-west.
    Ten or twelve small islands, at the distance of from two to four leagues
    from the city, shelter the bay from north-west to north by east from the
    swell of the sea; the road is between a quarter and half a league from the city.
    The ground upon which the city is built, bears evident marks of having
    been left, or thrown up by the sea; as is the case with a great extent of the
    land on each side, the shore of which is chiefly soft mud, which increases
    every year. Above, or to the south of the city, towards Tanabang and
    Weltervreeden, the ground rises by degrees; and the soil becomes firmer
    and dryer on approaching the mountains, which lie twelve or more Dutch
    miles inland. . . .
                                              (Naval Chronicle, Vol. 27, 1812.)

   In the low-lying situation of Batavia the Dutch had what they doubtless
valued, a splendid opportunity to reproduce Holland. The proper approach,
however, to Batavia is by sea, and it is as a seaport that it must first be
considered.
   The roadstead at Batavia was exceptionally sheltered, being surrounded
by a number of islands, all of which served as breakwaters. On one of the
islands, Onroost, the Dutch East India Company had its dockyard. Of
Onroost Captain Cook said ‘there is not a marine yard in the world where
a ship can be laid down with more convenience, safety and despatch, nor
repaired with more diligence and skill.’ It may be added at this point that
Java furnished all, and more than all the timber needed for shipbuilding
and repairing. Into the basin formed by the islands, including Onroost,
there flowed the River Jacatra. Unfortunately, this river tended to silt up
the harbour, so that the anchorage, as time went on, became more distant
from the town. When the first settlement was made a fort had been built
at the point where the river entered the sea. By the end of the eighteenth
century, however, the mud banks had grown to such an extent that the
nearest place for a ship to drop anchor was far out of range of the guns.
It had therefore ceased to be a place of safety for shipping in time of war.
The difficulty of transporting goods between the ships and the wharves
was met by prolonging the banks of the river by brick piers stretching
                                       23
                     WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

out seawards for three-quarters of a mile. Nevertheless, the river itself
having become shallower, only '•small vessels could lie alongside the piers