

for in dollars and small-arms. Grain, on the other hand, was so plentiful
that quantities were exported to-the Isle of France. The relationship between
the two colonies was, to some extent, that of town and country. Taken
together, it would probably be true to say that they were essentially self-
supporting. Considered separately, the Isle of France was not altogether so.
   In 1799 the population of Bourbon was estimated at fifty-six thousand; of
which number some eight' thousand were white men or mulattoes and the
remainder slaves. There were two towns on the island, St. Denis, the capital,
and St. Paul, which had the better harbour. Neither could be said to be very
important in a commercial sense. There was a trade with France, coffee and
cotton being exchanged for slave-trade goods. There was the slave-trade;
and, finally, there was the trade with the other French settlements, and
more especially with the Isle of France. The public revenue of Bourbon
was derived chiefly from import duties. The island had its own Government,
which was subordinate, however, to the governor either of Pondicherry
or the Isle of France. During the period with which we are concerned the
government-general was vested almost continuously in the latter adminis¬
tration; necessarily, in that Pondicherry was only momentarily in French
hands.
   Of the settlements subordinate to Port Louis, perhaps the next to con¬
sider should be Roderigue or Rodriguez, known formerly as Diego Rais.
This is a small island lying 375 miles to the eastward of the Isle of France.
       Roderigue is situated in lat. i9°4i'S., long. 63° io' E. by the best accounts,
    the variation 13' W. in 1802. It was the practice, when navigators had no
    means to correct their longitude but the variation, for ships bound to
    Mauritius to get a sight of Roderigue, and then steer westward for their
    port; such circuitous tracks are no longer requisite, since marine chrono¬
    meters and lunar observations are in general use ... [at Roderigue] This
    road or harbour (called Matheuren Bay) is safe when you are in, but the
    channel is intricate.. .. There is a small level spot of land between two hills,
    with some houses, where a resident and some soldiers are stationed, with
    a few slaves, who collect land and sea turtle; these are carried to Mauritius
    in vessels employed constantly on this service. . . . The only inducement a
    ship can have to touch at this place is the want of fresh water, there being
    plenty of this necessary article in the harbour, and also wood for fuel. Fish
    may be caught in abundance, but some of them are of a poisonous quality....
                                               (Naval Chronicle, Vol. 28, 1812.)

   The inhabitants of Rodriguez seem to have numbered about twenty.
A little market gardening was done, mainly for the benefit of such shipping
as should put in there. The importance of the island lay in its position to
                                        20
                              INTRODUCTION