

                                        25
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    and dispatch. The government of this island is under the master carpenter,
    and his situation is reckoned a very profitable one.
       Edam is about three leagues N.N.E. from Batavia; it is very woody,
    and has abundance of large and ancient trees. The Company have some
    warehouses on this island for salt; but the chief use they make of it, is as a
    place of exile for criminals, who are employed in making cordage, and
    over whom a ship’s Captain is placed as commandant.
       Cooper’s Island is about 1,600 yards from Onrust, and about one-third
    less in size. The Company have several warehouses upon it, in which coffee
    is chiefly laid up. There are two pier-heads, where several vessels may load
    and discharge at its south side. There are two batteries mounting 12 guns
    on this island.
       The Island of Purmerend is to the eastward of Onrust, and about half as
    large again. It is planted with shady trees, and in the centre is a large building,
    which serves for a hospital, or lazaretto. . . .
                                             (Milburn, Oriental Commerce, Vol. II.)
   Beyond the islands, with their wharves and workshops, and beyond the
mud-flats which cumbered the river mouth, lay the city of Batavia itself.
It was thought to be ‘among the neatest and handsomest cities in the world,’
rivalling even Calcutta in the amount of its trade though not in size. The
population, to be exact, was estimated at 116,000 in 1793, at 160,000 in
1805. The former figure, taken from John Barrow’s Voyage to Cochin
China, may be an underestimate. Accounts agree, as to the latter figure,
that the Europeans numbered between 1,200 and 1,500, that there were
100,000 Chinese, and that the remainder consisted of Javanese, Armenians,
Parsees, Hindoos, Persians and Arabs. Barrow makes the white population
number about 9,000, but he is probably including half-castes. These were
said to be numerous, owing to the shortage of white women. The mass
of the population lived in the suburbs which had grown up outside the
fortifications. Most of the more prosperous Europeans, whether officials
or merchants, had country houses to which they could retire when hours
of business were over.
   Batavia was roughly oblong in shape, the River Jacatra dividing it
longitudinally into two tolerably equal parts. A moat, connected with the
river, surrounded the whole. Coming into the city by boat from the sea,
one saw, first of all, the castle or citadel, defended by its own moat, to
the left; the dockyard, on the opposite bank, to the right. As if a slow-
moving and tidal river, together with the moats of the city and castle, did
not provide stagnant water enough, a series of canals had been dug, both
inside and outside the ramparts, most of them being either parallel with
or at right-angles to the course of the Jacatra. These canals had streets on
                                         26
                               INTRODUCTION