

windward of the Isle of France. When ships sighted Rodriguez before
steering for Port Louis it was to avoid the risk of falling to leeward of the
latter place. In time of war this island was found to have its uses.
   In Madagascar the French had, it seems, only one settlement. This was
Fort Dauphin, a harbour which the French had sought to develop in the
seventeenth century. In 1805 the ruins of the old fort were still to be seen,
the gate carved with the words ‘Etablissement de La Compagnie des indes
en 1661, sous La Regne de Louis 14... .’—the rest of the inscription having
been obliterated by time. At that time the station consisted of about a
dozen cottages under the rule of a certain M. Ykel, who had been there
for sixteen years. He had under him a clerk, some coopers, carpenters and
slaves. His duty was to supply French ships with water, rice, cattle, goats,
turtle and fruit. As the former French settlers had been massacred by the
natives, M. Ykel was fortunate in having secured their confidence. French
vessels would sometimes call at other points on the coast of Madagascar,
St. Augustin Bay, Foul Point or Tamatave. At this last-named place, also
called Tamatava, the French had a fort, at any rate during the later years
of the war; but this may have been but a temporary measure. There was
no settlement at St. Augustin; this was merely a harbour where friendly
natives would supply cattle, sheep, goats and poultry in exchange for
bottles, hardware, old iron, bad powder and unreliable muskets. The more
fierce of the Madagascar tribes lived, apparently, on the other side of the
island, so that there was no serious difficulty in arranging this traffic.
   The remaining French possessions east of the Cape were in the
Seychelles. These islands, over 800 miles to the north of the Isle of
France, were described as ‘a cluster of nearly twenty islands and rocks,
all dependencies of Mauritius, and absolutely necessary for some of her
commercial purposes.’ Most of these islands were uninhabited, but there
was a tolerable anchorage between two of them, St. Anne and Mahe, and
on the latter a settlement had been formed. In 1805 there were about two
hundred white men living there, mostly deported convicts, and nearly
twice as many slaves. Coffee and cotton were grown, turtle were caught
and business was done with ships in the slave-trade. As a useful port of
call, and undefended, Mahe was always changing hands. English cruisers
took possession of it from time to time in the course of the war, and French
cruisers repossessed themselves of it as regularly. It was merely a matter
of hoisting flags, the same resident being willing to govern in the name
of either country. A formal agreement of neutrality was once drawn up
by the islanders, but it was cancelled by the governor of the Isle of France.
Men-of-war used to approach the Seychelles cautiously, not knowing
                                     21
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

whether the enemy might be there. The southernmost of this group was
called Frigate’s Island. Midway between the Seychelles and the Isle of
France are the Galega or Agalega Islands. They were described as ‘two
patches of earth, rocks, and a scanty vegetation. . . . The largest is about
six miles in length. . ..’ These islands were at this time wholly uninhabited,
but cruisers sometimes called there for coco-nuts and fish. They were of
some little use to navigators voyaging from one to another of the scattered
French possessions.
   No attempt has yet been made to describe the strength, the strategic
value or the garrison of the French Islands. Such military considerations
may well be postponed until a later page, leaving us free at this point to
survey the eastern dependencies of Holland. The Dutch, if inferior to the
French in sea-power, were commercially far more important. Their
principal possessions were Java, the Spice Islands and the Cape of Good
Hope. Java was the centre of the Dutch East Indies. It was there that the
Dutch had established their capital and it was from there that the Dutch
maintained a sphere of influence extending to Borneo, Celebes, Ternate,
Ceram, Timor and Sumatra. Of the islands actually occupied by them the
Dutch valued most the Spice Islands; that is to say, Amboyna and its
dependencies together with the Banda Islands. To Amboyna they had
confined the cultivation of cloves, and to Banda the cultivation of nutmegs.
By thus limiting the supply and by garrisoning their outposts such as Fort
Nassau and Fort Belgica, the Dutch East India Company contrived at
least partially to retain a monopoly in spices. Their efforts were directed
more towards excluding interlopers than towards developing the trade.
Java itself produced, not spices, but pepper, rice, sugar, coffee, salt, cotton-
yarn and indigo. A part of the exports from the Dutch East Indies were
derived from the native rulers, some of whom were compelled to deliver
produce at a fixed price; at a price, indeed, so low as to make the transaction
a thinly disguised paying of tribute. Thus, the Kingdom of Bantam yielded
six million pounds of pepper annually; but, although it was ‘esteemed
second in quality to that grown on the coast of Malabar,’ the buying price
was fixed at twopence-halfpenny a pound. Spices and tin were obtained
elsewhere on similar terms. Besides the clusters of islands from which the
Dutch drew their merchandise, Holland had another possession of impor¬
tance in Malacca, which was held for strategic and political reasons. The
ancient Malay capital, situated in the straits which take their name from it,
Malacca had a special value in the eyes of the native. Like the other Dutch
towns and forts, however, it had small commercial value when compared
with Batavia, the capital of Java and of the whole Dutch East Indies.
                                      22
                               INTRODUCTION