




and the carrying of merchandise to and from the city was left to a type of
flat-bottomed craft designed for the purpose.

       Batavia ... is considered one of the best harbours in India, having a
     number of small islands about two or three leagues from the city, which
     shelter the bay from N.W. to N.E., the principal of which are Onrust,
                                     24
                               INTRODUCTION

    Edam, Cooper’s Island, and Purmerend. Large ships generally ride at single
    anchor in the roads, at about ilr miles from the shore, in six fathoms, the
    dome of the principal church bearing about south; but smaller vessels
    approach within a mile of the shore.
       Fronting the small river, or canal, which leads to the city, there is a bar,
    on which there are about three feet at low water. The channel for boats to
    enter, is to the eastward of the bar; and as there is at times a surf upon it at
    low water, when blowing strong in the N.W. monsoon, strangers ought
    not to send their boats to the river, as many have been overset upon the
    bar, and the crews devoured by alligators, which are of a large size, and
    very numerous. . . . The breadth of the river within the city is about 180
    feet; it runs into the sea, past the Castle and the Admiralty Wharf. On both
    sides of the mouth are long piers of wood and brick-work, about 3,800 feet
    in length, taken from the moat of the city. The vessels belonging to the
    merchants are laid up and repaired between these piers, on the west side;
    but along the east side, the passage is kept open for the lighters, which go
    in and out of the city with the cargoes of the ships. At the outward point
    of the eastern pier there is a shed, which serves for a stable for the horses
    which draw the small vessels and boats up and down the river. Opposite
    this is a homwork, called the Water Fort, built at a considerable expense.
    It is constructed of a kind of coral rock, and defended by heavy cannon;
    within it are barracks for the garrison, and there is no other approach to it
    than along the western pier. . . .
                                          (Milburn, Oriental Commerce, Vol. II.)

   The Water Fort and the older fort in the town itself, known as the
castle or citadel, were sufficient to defend the Dutch capital and even
to protect such of the shipping as could run between the piers. But they
afforded no protection to large vessels in the roadstead, which were
undefended except by some batteries on the islands.
       The island of Onrust is about three leagues N.W. from Batavia, and is
    nearly round. It rises six or eight feet above the surface of the sea, and is
    of small extent.... In the centre of the island, and within the fort, consisting
    of four bastions and three curtains, stand the warehouse and other buildings.
    ... On the north side of the island are two saw-mills; and on the south side
    there is a long pier-head, on which are three large wooden cranes, erected
    for the purpose of fixing or unstepping masts. Three ships can lie here behind
    each other, alongside the pier, in deep water, to be repaired, or to receive or
    discharge their cargoes. There is another pier, a little more to the westward,
    called the Japan pier, where one more ship can lie to load or unload. There
    are 20 or more feet of water against the piers, and it rises about 5 feet once
    in 24 hours. All ships that require it, are hove down at the wharfs along
    the piers, and receive every necessary reparation with convenience, safety,