

Ships came to Batavia from all over the world, making the city a market
in which all kinds of goods were sold. Piece goods, drugs and opium came
from Bengal in exchange for spices, coffee and arrack. There was a brisk
trade with America, mixed cargoes from thence, including specie, being
exchanged for spices, sugar, coffee, rice, and goods from China. In general,
the staple exports of Java were pepper, spices, sugar and coffee; while a
very important import came in the form of bullion from Europe, amounting,
it was said, to upwards of £500,000 a year. Two vital branches of trade
were those with China and Japan. Each year, in November and December,
junks would arrive from China with raw silk, nankeen, paper, tea and
tutenague, loading for their return voyage with arrack, birds’ nests, pepper,
spices, sandal-wood and sago. The Dutch themselves sent four or five ships
annually to China, laden with tin, lead, pepper and spices. The cargoes of
these vessels were supposed to value £250,000; half of that amount,
however, being in silver, either in bars or Spanish dollars. Realizing on
these goods a profit of about £60,000, the Company’s agents at Canton
bought tea, silks, nankeen and china-ware, the ships returning therewith
to Batavia. The Dutch alone were allowed to trade with Japan and, to
maintain this privileged position, the nature of the traffic was for long kept
a profound secret. In 1790, John Meares confessed to an all but complete
ignorance of the details of the Japan trade.

       It is well known that the only European nation which enjoys a commercial
    connection with the Japanese, are the Dutch. Four Dutch ships are annually
    dispatched thither from Batavia, and each of them pays an hundred thousand
    dollars for the privilege of this profitable traffic. . . . The Dutch are too
    sensible of the advantages of this monopoly, not to clothe the whole in all
    possible secrecy, or to colour it with every kind of fallacious description.
    But, however ignorant we may be of their particular imports, exports, and
    mode of trade, we cannot but know that it is extremely advantageous to
    them, and would, consequently, prove of equal, if not superior benefit
    to us. . . .

  No other account mentions this payment of 100,000 dollars, nor
is it clear by whom and to whom Meares supposed this sum to have been
paid. Whatever may be the truth of this, however, the Japan trade, when
its nature was revealed, proved to be nothing very extraordinary. Two or
three Dutch ships would leave Batavia each year in June or early in July
—two ships being apparently the normal—and would make their way to
Nagasaki. Arriving about the middle of August, they would sail again after
the change of the monsoon, usually before November 25th. On the outward
voyage they were laden with a mixed cargo, including spices, pepper, ivory,
                                      30
                                INTRODUCTION

lead, tin and piece-goods. On the homeward voyage they carried, princi-
pally, copper; and it was said that these returning ships were worth half
a million sterling. In time of war the Dutch sometimes sought to protect
these valuable cargoes, as also those in the China trade, by entrusting them
to neutral vessels. A better protection, however, lay in the doubts prevalent
as to the exact route they took.
   In Java the Dutch had one or two garrisons in addition to that of
Batavia, though none of comparable importance. Eastwards of the capital,
along the coast, lay Cheribon, Samarang and, lastly, Sourabaya. Only the
last-named of these deserves particular notice.
        The channel, or strait, of Madura, sometimes called Manara, dividing
     the island of the former name from Java, is from three to six or seven miles
     broad. By the eastern outlet, large vessels have not sufficient depth of water
     to go through; here likewise it is narrowest, and Sourabaya is built. . . .