

    The straits of Madura, being impossible to enter at the eastern end—as
far, at least, as ships of any size were concerned—formed a sort of cul-de-sac,
narrowing towards the farther extremity very much in the manner of an
estuary. At the highest point to which ships could ascend there was a river
flowing into the straits on the Java side. Straddling this river was the town
of Sourabaya. Fifteen miles below Sourabaya, nearer the entrance to the
harbour, was a smaller town called Griessie or Gressec. Batteries were
mounted there and at Sambelangan on the island of Madura. Defended
thus the Dutch merchantmen commonly anchored opposite Griessie, which
was also the Dutch naval base. At a later period another fort was built,
lower down still, so as to command the approach to the harbour. This
was Fort Lodowic, built in the channel itself on piles and rocks, but only
late in the war and after the Dutch had already learnt by disaster. The
whole strait, from the point where Fort Lodowic was built to Sourabaya,
was a large and secure harbour, with six or seven fathoms of water through¬
out. At the actual harbour entrance, the channel was much narrower and
little more than three fathoms deep. This depth was, of course, insufficient
for the largest ships, but the mud at the bottom was so light that a way
could be forced through it bodily. Such difficulties as there were about
entering this sheltered roadstead added something to its comparative safety
from attack. Although less fortunate than Batavia in strategic position,
Sourabaya offered at once a better climate and a greater degree of security.
       . . . Sourabaya may be considered the eastern capital of Java, as Batavia
    is the western; for though only of modern date, it is rapidly rising into
    consequence. The distance between these two places somewhat exceeds

                                        31
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    500 miles. The new city, however, though much less extensive and populous,
    is more handsome, healthy and pleasant, than the old: it is, besides, situated
    on a fine river, and has likewise the very superior advantage of a harbour
    which may be rendered the best either in this or in any of the neighbouring
    islands. . . .
       The European town lies on the right bank of the river; the Chinese
    and native Campongs.on the left: They are united by bridges, up to which
    coasters with merchandise may ascend. . . .
                         (James Prior, Voyage in the Indian Ocean, 1810-11.)

  Batavia and Sourabaya were the principal Dutch towns in the East
Indies. The other possessions there of Holland and their sphere of influence
are best understood from a map, and to such a map the reader is referred
rather than to any list of names. (See page 24.)
  The next Dutch possession to consider is the Cape of Good Hope. The
Cape, in those days, was considered mainly as a port of call; and as such,
apart from its position, it was not much admired. Of the colonial possi¬
bilities of South Africa very little was thought. As late as 1800 Sir Roger
Curtis could write thus to Lord Spencer: ‘Speaking of the country at large,
it is I think physically impossible it can ever be fruitful or produce articles
of any consideration, the exportation of which would render it a prosperous
and rich colony. ... To me therefore it appears clearly that this colony,
merely as a colony, can never be of any advantage to Great Britain. . . .’
Captain Robert Percival’s account of the Cape, published in 1804, did much
towards correcting this misconception. In the meanwhile, however, partly
as a result of the English undervaluing the country, the Cape remained in
Dutch hands for a part of the period with which we are concerned.
  Regarded almost solely as a port of call, as a source of fresh provisions
and a break in the long voyage to the East, the Cape lacked any outstanding
advantages. To begin with, there was no real shelter there, and but two
places to which ships could go for supplies.