

   At the hottest time of year the water in the canals at Batavia dwindled
until there was practically no current and but one or two feet in depth.
In the absence of any system of sanitation, all the filth and refuse in the
city were thrown into the canals. The situation was not much improved,
from the point of view of health, when the latter overflowed in the rainy
season, flooding the lower parts of the town and polluting afresh the houses
of a none too cleanly population. The chief diseases which resulted were
dysentery and malaria.
       The diseases prevalent in Batavia are chiefly of a putrid nature. The
    disorder most common is a tertian ague, which, after two or three paroxisms,
    becomes a double tertian, and then a continued remittent, which frequently
    carries off the patient in a short time. In many instances, even the most
    hale and robust men are attacked, and taken off in a few hours, in consequence
    of the rapid progress of putridity in the viscera. The most efficient means
    of preserving health are, to avoid the night air, to eat and drink very
    moderately, and to take much exercise on horseback. [Prior],

   Java as a whole was not particularly unhealthy and it was thought by
many that Batavia would be greatly improved if the canals were filled in.
It must, however, be remembered that the soil was wet and marshy in any
case, and that the mud-flats round the river mouth collected most of the
sewage of the town.
  In the eyes of other nations, and especially the English, Batavia was a
mere graveyard. This reputation was very largely based on a reading of
Captain Cook’s voyages. In his circumnavigation of 1768-70, Cook had
called there to refit, losing a great many men from disease out of an other¬
wise healthy crew. This made a great impression, particularly because of
Cook’s reputation for a knowledge of hygiene. The impression was con¬
firmed by the experiences of other ships. Batavia was thought to be
exceptionally unhealthy and it was often asked why the Dutch did not
remove their capital elsewhere. Even the Chinese and Malay troops
employed to man the batteries were decimated by disease, it was said,
needing perpetual recruitment to maintain their numbers. In short, ‘Batavia
has generally been regarded as one of the most unwholesome spots on the
face of the globe.’
                                         28
                              INTRODUCTION

   It would seem that the city’s evil reputation was greatly exaggerated,
probably because visitors there suffered more than did the actual residents.
 Of the white inhabitants it was said than io per cent died each year. This
was, roughly speaking, the rate of mortality in Bengal; so that the English
had very little ground for self-congratulation in comparing Java with India.
It is true that ships calling at Batavia had to moor opposite a pestilent
swamp, very likely with an off-shore wind blowing; but then, ships putting
into the Hooghli had to do just the same and with very similar results.
From the Dutch point of view, the legend about Batavia, partly false as
it was, had its usefulness. It remained for many years the city’s chief
protection against attack. Enemies might make light of the Dutch batteries,
but it was long before they could make up their minds to face a tertian
ague, knowing how likely it was to become successively a double tertian
and a continued remittent. When the English finally took the risk they
found Java (Batavia excepted) rather healthier than Bengal.
   Batavia was ruled by a council under the presidency of the Governor-
 General of the Indies. This powerful official, appointed by the Dutch East
India Company, lived in very considerable state. ‘When he appears in
public,’ wrote Duclos, ‘he is accompanied by guards and officers, with
far more pomp than any European monarch.’ With one exception, all
Dutch possessions east of the Cape were under his control. The exception
was the Dutch factory at Canton, which was, and had long been, directly
controlled from Holland. Under the Government of Batavia was a host
of Dutch officials in the Company’s employ. They were all, by the standards
of British India, absurdly underpaid. As all Dutch policy was grounded
on the determination to maintain a monopoly in the spice trade, and as
such a monopoly needed above all for its preservation a set of incorruptible
customs officers, it may be questioned whether higher salaries might not
have justified themselves. Here it must be remembered, however, that the
Dutch (unlike the English) East India Company was a commercial concern
and bound to show a profit from year to year. It drew no great riches in
the form of revenue from conquered provinces, but had to make its dividend
by trade and by trade alone. To this end the Company retained the
monopoly of the trade in spices, pepper, opium, tin, coffee, salt and timber.
Many of these products were sent to Batavia in exchange for rice grown
in Java. A trade was also maintained with Europe, India, America, China
and Japan.
   From Holland there sailed every year some twenty Indiamen, according
to Duclos, laden with European goods, returning in the end with cargoes
consisting of the produce not only of the Dutch Indies but of all Asia.
                                     29
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS