

either bank, the town having been regularly planned in a chess-board
fashion.
   The digging of the canals, which dated from the middle of the eighteenth
century, had been part of a conscious effort to reproduce Holland. This
effort, in other respects as well as in this, was remarkably successful. The
houses were in the Dutch style, built for the most part of brick, stuccoed
and white-painted on the outside, with sash windows and mahogany or
green-coloured woodwork. Intersecting each other at right-angles, and
made very broad, the streets (like the canals) were everywhere lined with
rows of trees. To save walking in the heat, the white inhabitants were
conveyed about the town in gondolas. The general effect seemed to most
visitors very attractive.
       . . . The streets are broad and airy . . . and planted with trees along the
    canals as well as the foot-paths which adjoin the houses; between these
    rows lies the carriage-road; and, notwithstanding the stigma sometimes
    cast on Dutch taste for the intermixture of vegetation, I own I admire the
    arrangement. I will not, however, say so much for the style of Dutch
    architecture. The houses, indeed, are commonly large and roomy, sub¬
    stantially, though not perhaps very elegantly built; within, they possess all
    the conveniences adapted to the national taste in this climate; without,
    they sometimes look heavy, although in extent frequently trenching on the
    outline of palaces. . . .
       . . . There is, after all, something neat in the aspect of a Dutch town;
    it may sometimes want animation and variety . . . yet fine houses, with
    wood and water intermixed, ought, when tolerably arranged, to please
    even a fastidious eye. . . .
                                     (James Prior, Voyage in the Indian Ocean.)
   English visitors to Batavia, whether or not possessed of a fastidious eye
for architecture, usually boasted a fastidious nose for drainage. It was here
that the Dutchman’s copy of his native land broke down. Risks can be
taken with stagnant water in the Netherlands which will only produce
disaster in the tropics. Prior, as a surgeon, regarded the canals of Batavia
as little better than cesspits; while even the trees were to him objects of
great suspicion.
       They (the canals) are about thirty feet broad, and two or three deep;
    some have a languid stream, others scarcely any; but all crowded with the
    very germ and soul of putrefaction, to which the sun speedily gives life
    and action. In the Chinese suburb, one or two were completely stagnant,
    the surface covered by decomposed animal and vegetable matters, converted
    into the usual green scum of such filthy places. . . . Over these are several
    small bridges, not at all of a piece with the other buildings of the city, the

                                       27
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    inhabitants being too fond of boats to care much about bridges. Some
    bad qualities are attributed to the trees that line the streets, such as preventing
    a free circulation of air, and forming a receptacle for the concentration of
    the noxious vapours arising from the filthy pools around them; to these I
    may add the doctrine of the vegetable physiologists, that they give off
    carbonic acid gas during the night. . . .