

   Port Louis was an unattractive town and so uncomfortably hot in the
warmer months that most of the white inhabitants sought refuge elsewhere.
The business done there was of two kinds. First, there was the exchange
of commodities with Europe and with other parts of the East. Sugar,
coffee, cotton, indigo and cloves were exported to France and all the
necessities of a civilized life were imported from thence. Slaves, as we
have seen, were imported from Madagascar and East Africa. Cotton cloth
was imported from India, and grain occasionally from the Cape of Good
Hope. From Batavia came rice, arrack, cordage, oil and wood. Second,
and distinct from the exchange of produce, was the business done with
foreign ships calling at the island. These were sometimes supplied not
only with provisions and water, but also with a market and even a cargo.
American ships, for example, when first tentatively rounding the Cape,
would often find all the Eastern goods they wanted at the Isle of France,
and so would spare themselves the trouble of going further afield. By
1790, it is true, many American ships had found their way to China, but
the habit of calling at Port Louis remained with them. Danish ships were
apt to do the same, and there was more than a tendency for the Isle of
France to become a regular market and exchange for the products of East
and West. During the war circumstances greatly intensified this kind of
business while discouraging any other type.
   Most of the trade, of whatever description, centred on Port Louis. The
harbour on the south-east side of the island, called Grand-Port because
of its larger expanse of water, was regularly used only by smaller craft.
Under stress of weather, however, ships often put in there for temporary
shelter. A town grew up there, becoming second in importance to the
capital.
  Revenue of the Isle of France was derived from a customs levy of from
5 per cent to 10 per cent on imports—especially foreign imports. Some
200,000 piastres were raised annually in this way—the Spanish, coinage
                                         18
                               INTRODUCTION

 was the most widely used in the East—and with this, the equivalent of
 between £40,000 and £50,000, the expenses of administration were met.
 This financial basis was sound so long as no considerable garrison was
 needed. As soon as it became necessary to support a body of regular
 troops, the island was run at a loss and became, theoretically, a drain on
 the mother country. The word ‘theoretically’ is used because the French
 Revolutionary Governments were apt to lose sight of the colony’s existence
 for years at a time, which usually prevented the troops being paid at all.
    To what extent the Isle of France was self-supporting in the matter
 of food, it is very difficult to determine. In normal times foodstuffs were
 imported, as we have seen, from Java, the Cape and elsewhere. Subsequent
 events, moreover, proved that a cutting off of these supplies produced
 a real shortage, though no actual famine. When the island was under a
 close blockade there were instances of its coffee and sugar being used as
 manure. The rendering valueless of its exports, however, caused only
 financial difficulties. It is far from clear that there was any real starvation.
 What the shortage amounted to was probably this, that the more prosperous
 inhabitants had to pay very high prices for their food, some of them being
 ruined meanwhile by the failure of their business, while the poorer white
 inhabitants had to submit at times to an unaccustomed diet of turtle and
 manioc. Before the war ended the Government must often have had reason
 to feel grateful to the great La Bourdonnais, not only for introducing the
 manioc plant but for compelling every planter to cultivate 5,000 square feet
 of it for each slave he kept.
    In discussing this question of the degree in which the Isle of France
 was felf-supporting, no account has so far been taken of the part played
in its economy by the neighbouring island of Bourbon. This island lies
about 130 miles south-west of Port Louis, a distance which would be
thought considerable in many parts of the world, but which dwindles into
insignificance when compared with the 3,000 miles separating the Isle of
France from the East Indies or with the 2,000 miles between it and Ceylon.
Bourbon is somewhat larger than the Isle of France and has been defined
as ‘a circular volcanic mountain intersected by fertile valleys.’ It had,
during the period with which we are dealing, a more agricultural character
than the Isle of France; chiefly through the absence of an adequate harbour.
The chief products of Bourbon were coffee and cotton, cloves also having
been grown with success since 1770. The foodstuffs cultivated were wheat,
maize, potatoes, manioc and yams—both the last being intended for the
slaves. Fruit was plentiful but cattle scarce, owing to lack of pasture. Most
of the island’s supply of meat and rice came from Madagascar, being paid
                                       *9
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS