

                                      33
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

  The only places of importance at the Cape were the two towns corre¬
sponding to the two bays, Capetown and Simon’s Town.
       Cape Town, the capital, is pleasantly situated at the head of Table Bay....
    the town, consisting of about eleven hundred houses, built with regularity,
    and kept in neat order, is disposed into straight and parallel streets, inter¬
    secting each other at right angles. Many of the streets are open and airy,
    with canals of water running through them, walled in, and planted on
    each side with oaks; others are narrow and ill-paved. . . .
                                       (Tuckey, Voyage to New South Wales.)
  At Capetown, as at Batavia, the Dutch had been at pains to reproduce
the architecture of Holland; the result being one of the handsomest colonial
towns in the world, built of brick and kept very clean. The defences of
the place consisted of a strong citadel and three forts, made so as to bring
their cannon to bear upon the roadstead. Of the public buildings the chief
was the palace of the Prince of Orange, the official residence of the Governor,
which was surrounded by gardens and approached by fine avenues of trees.
This palace was on the landward side of the town and consequently on
the lower slopes of Table Mountain. The gardens, which were public,
included a menagerie, of which the Dutch were very proud, having stocked
it with lions, zebras and many rare beasts and birds. A second spectacle,
to which all visitors went, was the famous vineyard called Constantia.
Situated between Capetown and False Bay, the Groot Constantia was an
object of pilgrimage, partly for its beauty and partly as the only patch of
earth at the Cape which would produce a really good wine. The colony
as a whole could produce about seven hundred pipes or leaguers of wine
(each pipe consisting of 154 gallons) each year. Of this by far the most
valuable portion came from the one vineyard of some six acres in extent.
The French used to call this wine ‘Le vin des tetes couronnes,’ the wine
of kings. In England it was known simply as constantia.
  Simon’s Town lay at the foot of the mountains surrounding False Bay.
The settlement consisted of about a hundred houses, a barracks and hos¬
pital. It had an excellent water supply, of which ships could make use, but
offered little otherwise to the voyager. It came to be used, to a certain
extent, as a naval base, despite the poor facilities there for refitting and
repair.
  The last Dutch possession to demand attention is Ceylon. Unlike the
Dutch East Indies, unlike the Cape, Ceylon was and had long been coveted
by the English. Consequently when it fell into their hands, very early in
the war, it was never restored. For nearly the whole of the period we are
dealing with, Ceylon is to be considered as an English possession. It need

                                       34
                             INTRODUCTION