

       One or two small settlements on the coast have residents, supported by
    soldiers, appointed by the Governor of Mosambique. . . . The Portuguese
    dare not venture far from their own immediate territory, the real traders
    in the inland parts being people of colour, born in the vicinity of the white
    settlements, or natives whose nation and language are, perhaps, but little
    known, who come from a great distance . . . [from Sofala] Slaves, ivory,
    gold-dust, and rice are annually exported to Mosambique. The port is
    difficult of access to vessels of burden, on account of sand-banks; the trade,

                                       37
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    therefore, is confined to small vessels. Refreshments are also difficult to
    procure, and from these reasons, ships passing through the channel, bound
    to India, never approach this shore, so that several of the small ports on the
    coast are less known than might be expected. . . .
                           (Prior, Voyage Along the Eastern Coast of Africa.)

  The East African Portuguese were jealous of foreigners to an extra¬
ordinary degree. In 1812, the only Englishmen who had ever been up the
Zambezi as far as Senna were two officers who had been wrecked in the
H.C.S. Winterton in 1792. But for this, the English might not have known
of that town’s existence. As it was, they scarcely knew its exact position.
Prior, however, learnt the following facts about the place,

       It is said to be a considerable town, well inhabited, protected by some
    works and native soldiers, and having a governor, second only to that of
    Mosambique. ... To this mart the native traders, from the interior, repair
    in July, August, and September, with slaves, ivory, gold-dust, and medicinal
    herbs, gums, and roots, taking back in return woollen and cotton cloths,
    rude trinkets of various species, hard-ware, fire-arms, powder and shot. . . .
                                                                      (Prior.)

  Concerning Mozambique, which he visited in person, Prior is more
exact and less dependent on hearsay.

       The population of Mosambique, that is, Europeans and their descendants,
    may be about six hundred; free people of colour nearly as many; slaves,
    between four and five thousand, besides those kept for sale. . . .
       The value of gold-dust annually exported, may amount to about £16,000.
    . . . But the most valuable branch of trade has been in slaves. Formerly,
    Mosambique exported about ten thousand annually supplying several parts
    of South America, and almost all the islands in the Indian Ocean; indeed
    throughout the East, the common term for an African is Mozambiquer. . . .
                                                                       (Prior.)

   Unlike the minor settlements on the coast, which were sometimes raided
by pirates from Madagascar, Mozambique was fortified.

       The defence is a square fort, with bastions and outworks on projections
     of the rock, and, at the time of its construction, must have been formidable;
     but it is now dilapidated, and has neither bombproofs nor casemates.
     There were about fifty-seven brass guns mounted, and twenty unanimated
     embrazures; the ordnance was old, and of all sizes, from a forty-two to a
     four-pounder, with most of their carriages decayed; nor have they any iron
     shot for those above nine-pounders, several stone balls being placed near
     each gun in lieu. The fort is large and roomy, and has good quarters for its