

    The last European possessions in the East to be considered are those of
 Denmark. These were very trifling in extent, comprising little more than
 the town of Tranquebar, south of Pondicherry on the Coromandel Coast,
 and the factory at Serampore on the Hooghli. Tranquebar had a population
 of about ioo Europeans and 8,000 natives, with a small garrison of 100
 Europeans and 800 sepoys. This town tamely surrendered to the English
 whenever Denmark found itself involved in the European conflict, being
 afterwards as regularly restored. The importance of Denmark in the East
 was not very well represented by the small extent of the Danish possessions,
 for there was, at various times, a considerable amount of trade under the
 Danish colours. During the period 1770-84 numbers of Danish vessels
 traded with China, their return cargoes consisting mostly of tea. The tea was
 sold to smugglers who found means of conveying it to England without
 paying the heavy customs duties which the English East India Company had
 to pay. The demand for tea in England was three times as great as in the
 rest of Europe put together. This smuggling trade largely died out when the
 duties on tea were repealed in 1784; and its disappearance was a severe loss
both to Denmark and Sweden. Their trade, however, continued both with
India and China. The Danish trade with India, moreover, was on the
increase because English Civil Servants in India often preferred to transmit
 their fortunes to England in the form of goods conveyed in foreign
vessels. They thus evaded the East India Company’s monopoly, while
hiding from their employers the full extent of their gains. Danish ships
were among those engaged in this business. The trade of the Danes with
 China fluctuated considerably on the other hand. Until 1784 there had been
three or four Danish ships at Canton each year, loading with anything up
to 5,500,000 pounds of tea. After the lowering of the duties a single ship
was very often the extent of their enterprise. Trade revived for them
in 1796, and there were five ships loading with nearly 3,000,000 pounds of
tea in the season 1798-99. Then the trade dwindled again in 1800 and was
just beginning to recover when war with England put an end to it in 1807.
In their better years, as in 1797, the Danish East India Company paid a
dividend of as much as 12 per cent. Until 1804-5 the Danish trade was
often exceeded by that of Sweden, while there was not wanting a certain
amount of competition from Prussians, Hamburgers and Americans. In
1808, however, there were none but English and American ships at Canton,
and it does not appear that the Scandinavians recovered their trade until
the end of the wars.
  In a political sense, Tranquebar had a certain importance during the
years when England and France were at war and when Denmark was
                                     44
                                   INTRODUCTION

neutral. At such times the Danes were apt to act as go-betweens. It was
from Tranquebar that the French heard the news of India, and it was
through that settlement that the French agents communicated with such
native princes as they thought to bribe. The proximity of Pondicherry
and Tranquebar was of great use to the French, for the former town had
French inhabitants even when actually occupied by English troops. In
much the same way the English had their news of the Isle of France from
the Danish merchantmen returning from thence.
     On the whole, the Danes profited by the war until the time came when
they were involved in it. Their trade with the French islands was a sort
of monopoly, shared only with the Americans and other neutrals. Their
trade with Bengal must have been very profitable, judging from the amount
of goods they exported from there; although it must be remembered that
Anglo-Indian capital was behind most of their undertakings.
     The United States had, at this time, no territory in the East. American
merchantmen, however, were numerous and ubiquitous and impossible to
ignore. It was in 1784 that the first American ship reached Canton, bearing
the United States consul. The next year found this number increased to
five, laden on their homeward passage with 880,100 pounds of tea. Thence¬
forward, until       1793,   the Americans imported annually about   1,500,000
pounds, this quantity being greatly exceeded as soon as the war began.
In    1804   there were thirty-six American ships at Canton, the largest of
600    tons, but the majority of from 200 to 400 tons. Of these, nine had
sailed from Boston, seven from New York, and the others from Providence,
Nantucket, Salem and Philadelphia. This trade reached its peak in        1806,
when the United States’ importation of tea amounted to 9,644,667 pounds.
As a principal article of export to China, the Americans frequently loaded
their vessels with ‘ginseng.’ This was a root growing wild in American
forests and greatly prized by the Chinese for its imaginary medicinal
qualities. A trade based on the exchange of worthless rubbish for tea could
hardly fail to be profitable.
     With India, the American trade began at the same time as the traffic
just described with China, in       1784.   By the orders of Lord Cornwallis’s
Government, issued in 1788, ships from the United States were given ‘most
favoured nation’ privileges, and these were confirmed and enlarged by
treaty in    1794.   The American trade with Calcutta accordingly tripled in
extent between 1795 and 1800. The American exports consisted of dollars,
with a few coarse goods, wines and spirits, and were so trifling in value
that there was an average yearly balance of trade in favour of Bengal of
over half a million sterling. This state of affairs was possible because the