

  The register ships were not very heavily armed, although commissioned
                                       42
                              INTRODUCTION

as men-of-war; but, in time of war, they normally had naval escort. Con¬
sidering, however, the enormous value of these vessels, and the fact that
their route was perfectly well known, at least in outline, it is surprising
how seldom they were successfully intercepted. The English seem to have
taken only five in the course of two hundred and fifty years. Cavendish
captured one in 1587, Rogers in 1709, Anson in 1743, Parker in 1762 and
Rainier in 1807. This comparative immunity of the register ships was due
perhaps, partly, to navigational difficulties in the Philippines, partly to the
distance of both Manila and Acapulco from any hostile naval base.
   One result of the dependence of the Philippines on a yearly subsidy
from Mexico was that it rendered the settlements all but immune from
foreign conquest. Regarded from a strategic point of view, Manila was
a potential menace to the English trade with China. A hostile squadron
based on Cavite might, at least temporarily, have put an end to the China
trade; and this possibility was present in the minds of English strategists.
Their fear was that the Spanish would allow the French to make use of
Cavite as a naval base. On strategic grounds alone there was therefore a
strong case for conquering the Philippines. What made statesmen hesitate
was the thought of the annual deficit incurred by the colony. This was,
in fact, Manila’s chief defence. A settlement run at such an appalling loss
was tolerably safe from annexation. No other country could be eager to
take over such an enormous liability. The English, indeed, under Admiral
Cornish and Colonel Draper, took Manila in 1762; but they almost instantly
regretted it. In Spanish hands, Manila supplied the whole East with its
currency—the English settlements included. Following the conquest, this
source of specie suddenly dried up. No longer able to depend on Manila
for their silver, the governor and Council of Madras found, to their horror,
that they were actually expected to furnish that colony with the very article
they were themselves beginning to lack. With a fine gesture, not perceptibly
spoilt by any unseemly haste, Manila was handed back to Spain. Oddly
enough, there was, as we shall see, a scheme to capture the Philippines
again in 1797. It was wisely abandoned and, better counsels prevailing, it
was never revived.
   A peculiarity of the Philippines was that, having been settled originally
by an expedition which had crossed the Pacific, the local calendar differed
from that of the other European possessions in the East. The fact was
significant, for the colony had, in many respects, what might be called
a west-about outlook. It had little direct connection with Spain. To the
Spaniards the Philippines lay rather beyond the isthmus of Panama than
beyond the Cape of Good Hope.
                                      43
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS