

                                       38
                                INTRODUCTION

     garrison; this at present may consist of about five hundred men, of all colours
     except white; in short the Nisus would make nothing of it. But notwith¬
     standing its fallen condition, it retains an air of magnificence, and is a proof
     that the Portuguese were once a great and enterprising people.
                                                (Smyth, Life of Captain Beaver.)

     Of the Portuguese in general it may be said that they were, on the
  whole, friendly with England. In their sympathies, however, there was to
  be observed a certain divergence; for the Portuguese of East Africa were
 closely connected by trade with the Isle of France; while those elsewhere
 were too much in the power of the English to be other than friendly. The
  Portuguese of Macao, moreover, had trade relations- with Bengal, often
 enjoying English protection—partly, perhaps, because the Calcutta mer¬
 chants had taken shares in their ventures. In general, the Portuguese of
 India and China could not afford to quarrel with England; and when they
 did so it was not through any French sympathies. Indeed, at Macao, the
 French (not being tea drinkers) were seldom seen in peace time, and never
 while at war with the English. A French agent, it is true, once sent Napoleon
 a parcel of tea, but he had to send it in an English Indiaman.
    Apart from their own colonies, the Portuguese were to be found all
 over the East, distinguishable from the natives more by their religion than
 by their colour. They had permeated the trading classes in a dozen unlikely
 places, in a way no other European nation had done. They were to be
 found at Calcutta, Rangoon, Colombo and Muscat. Bombay, in our period,
 was still a Portuguese town in appearance, owned by Parsees and only
 incidentally governed by the English. In Ceylon, too, the Portuguese had
 left their mark. The citadel at Trincomalee belied its Dutch name by
enclosing a church, which the English were afterwards to use, characteristi¬
cally, as a tennis court. Portuguese, again, was the language in which the
Dutch of Ceylon addressed their servants. So widely, indeed, was it spoken
in India and elsewhere that English chaplains learnt it on their outward
voyage to India in preference to any native tongue.
    Less extensive than the Portuguese possessions, but as important in their
way, were the Spanish colonies; that is to say, the Philippines. Manila, in
the island of Luconia, was the capital of the Spanish Indies. The only
other town of importance was Cavite, the naval port and arsenal. As for
the interior of the island of Luconia, it had never been completely conquered.
       The town of Manilla, from its peninsular situation, having on one side
    the sea and on the other a deep and rapid river, with strongly-fortified ditches
    across the isthmus, ought to be, with a proper garrison, very defensible,
    for there are no commanding heights in its immediate vicinity; but their