

was in this no very high degree of mercantile enterprise; and, since the
Philippines themselves were not remarkably productive of wealth—their
cordage manufacturers being still mainly a thing of the future—it is not
surprising to learn that the Spanish settlements incurred a heavy annual loss.
  The deficit in the revenues of Manila was made up by an annual subsidy
from Mexico of at least 1,000,000 dollars. One or two vessels known
as ‘register ships’ or ‘galleons’ went each year to Acapulco, laden with




                                      4i
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

piece-goods, chinaware, silk and spices, returning with a mixed cargo of
which the most valuable part consisted of silver. The specie—for the silver
came in the form of Spanish dollars—was worth far more than the goods
exported from Manila; and it was by this influx of dollars that the colony
was kept alive. The ships measured from 1,200 to 1,500 tons and were
built at Cavite. They generally sailed about the middle of July and reached
Acapulco in January, sailing again for Manila three months later. On her
return voyage, carrying perhaps a million and a half in Spanish dollars,
a register ship was a prize for eighteenth-century seamen to dream of. The
ordinary educated man of the present day, seeing the words ‘Spanish
Galleon,’ as for example on a public-house sign, thinks at once of the
Armada. But the galleon of English legend does not date from the sixteenth
century. The galleon of Elizabethan times was, on the whole, more likely
to be English than Spanish. It was not, by any means, a type of ship peculiar
to Spain. No, the galleon of ballads and legend, the galleon of the inn-sign
and of romance, dates from the eighteenth century. It was not associated
in men’s minds with hard fighting in the Channel but with easily appro¬
priated booty in the Pacific. Why it should have become the custom in
Europe to describe the register ships as ‘galleons’ is not very clear; but
it is manifest, at any rate, that the word and all it connoted had a great
appeal to the imagination. Among those to whom the word appealed was
the Abbe Raynal, who was at pains to write an account of the galleon and
its habits.

        The departure of it is fixed for the month of July. After having cleared
     a multitude of islands and rocks, which are always troublesome, and some¬
     times dangerous, the galleon steers northward as far as the 30th degree of
     latitude. There the trade-winds begin to blow, which convey it to the place
     of its destination. It is generally thought, that if it proceeded further, it
     would meet with stronger and more regular winds, which would hasten
     its course; but the Commanders are forbidden, under the heaviest penalties,
     to go out of the track that hath been marked out to them.
        This is undoubtedly the reason that hath prevented the Spaniards, during
     the course of two centuries, from making the least discovery upon an Ocean,
     which would have offered so many objects of instruction and advantage
     to more enlightened and less circumspect nations. The voyage lasts six
     months, because the vessel is overstocked with men and merchandize, and
     that all those that are on board are a set of timid navigators, who never
     make but little way during the night-time, and often, though without
     necessity, make none at all.