

        False Bay and Table Bay; the one washing the southern, the other the
     northern shore of the isthmus, are the usual resort for shipping trading to,
     or calling for refreshments at the Cape of Good Hope. During the summer
     season, when the S.E, winds are predominant, which may be reckoned
     from September till May, Table Bay affords the most secure shelter; and
     Simon’s Bay, a cove or indent on the western shore of False Bay, for the
     rest of the year, when the northerly or north-westerly winds are strongest.
     In neither of them is there any sort of security or convenience for heaving
     down and repairing ships.
              (Barrow’s Travels, quoted in the Oriental Voyager, J. Johnson.)

                                       32
                              INTRODUCTION

  Seamen were, in general, emphatic in their distrust of False and Table Bays.
Captain Basil Hall, for instance, regretted that the ‘Cabo de Tormentos’ had
been given what he called ‘its present spoony title.’ Captain Beaver wrote:

       The Cape may be a capital colony, but its bay is an infernal one; it is
    safe against no wind, and its sea is worse than the wind. You have generally
    a great swell, and even in the fair season, the S.E. winds frequently blow
    so strong, that you have no communication with the shore for two or three
    days together. But a north-wester, after the middle of May, shows Table
    Bay in all its malignancy; and he who is fool enough to anchor there of his
    own accord, may either part or founder as luck shall befall him. . . .
                         (Captain W. H. Smyth, The Life of Captain Beaver.)

  Besides these disadvantages, Table Bay had a very bad holding ground,
so that ships were liable to drive on shore in any westerly gale. So little
security was there for half the year that vessels at anchor kept themselves
in constant readiness to sail at a moment’s notice in case of bad weather.
Simon’s Bay seems to have been a little safer in that respect. On the
other hand, its vast extent was littered with dangers, most of them being
invisible. Bellows Rock, Anvil Rock, the Noah’s Ark, the Roman Rock,
Seal Island, the Francis and Whittle Rocks—the navigator had to take all
these submerged perils into account. Nor was the entering of either harbour
much simplified by the westerly current which sweeps round the Cape
throughout the year. It was sometimes proposed that Saldanha Bay should
supersede the two existing anchorages, but nothing came of it, partly
through the lack there of a sufficient fresh water supply.
  To set against the objections frequently made to Table Bay and False
Bay, the fact remained that there was no alternative. On the voyage from
Europe to the East, especially, there was no other port of call between
Madeira or Rio de Janeiro and the Indies themselves.

       ... No ships, but those of England, can attempt a voyage to the East
    Indies, on account of its length, without some such convenient place as
    the Cape of Good Hope to stop at for refreshment. To English sailors,
    from their habitual hardiness, and from the peculiar advantages which they
    enjoy respecting the plentifulness and superior quality of their provisions,
    such a half-way port might not perhaps be of much consequence; but as
    our ships have frequently a number of Lascars, or unseasoned troops
    on board, it becomes highly necessary for their relief . . . the mildness
    of the climate renders the Cape a wholesome and commodious station,
    for forces that may be destined for the East or West Indies. ... In a
    commercial point of view, this settlement is of less consequence, though
    capable of much improvement. .. .             (AW Chron icle, Vol. 28.)