

not, therefore, have any very full description here, its importance being
apparent from the narrative. Suffice it now to say that Ceylon had
never been thoroughly conquered and that successive European forces had
succeeded only in occupying a narrow strip of coastline joining the capital,
Colombo, with the harbour on the other side of the island, Trincomalee.
The interior was still an impenetrable and unhealthy jungle with a native
king of Kandy ruling somewhere in the middle of it. The coastal strip
and the two strongholds had been held at first by the Portuguese, then
by the Dutch. Sir Edward Hughes had taken it in 1782, almost instantly
losing it again to the French under Suffren. Restored to the Dutch at the
end of the war, it was still a Dutch possession in 1793. From this rather
chequered history alone it would be possible to guess at the importance
attached to the island. And a study of the map is enough to show where
its importance lay. Trincomalee was the only real harbour on the west
side of the Bay of Bengal.
  The two bays at Trincomalee provided shelter throughout the year. Fort
Ostenburg and the adjacent batteries could protect the anchorage, so that,
given an adequate garrison, Trincomalee was, in many respects, a perfect
naval base. Its defect lay in the barren hinterland of eastern Ceylon. There
was an ample supply of water and fuel but a great deficiency of food. This
detracted from the value of the place in two ways. In the first place, a
squadron could not completely refit there. In the second place, the garrison
was always too small, and necessarily so unless regularly supplied from
the mainland or elsewhere. As had often been the case in the past, the
Dutch garrison in 1793 was wholly unequal to holding what should have
been an almost impregnable stronghold. It may be added that the revenue
of Ceylon, where there was little trade, could not support any great number
of troops; and that, even when inadequately garrisoned, the Dutch settle¬
ments in the island failed to pay their way.
   Among the European powers in the East, the next in importance to the
Dutch were the Portuguese. Although these had been of consequence in
the Eastern Seas for a longer period than their rivals, they were no longer
taken very seriously in a military or naval sense. The Portuguese capital
was at Goa, the settlements subordinate to that Government being as far
apart as Macao and Natal. Goa was remarkable in being what might be
called a medieval European city.
       The city of Goa, is of all those either on the coast of Malabar or Coro¬
    mandel, the most handsome and well built, and approaches most nearly
    to the model and beauty of the city of Venice, than any city in India. On
    the S.W. side of the harbour, stands a stately and conspicuous monastery,

                                      35
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

     and on the N.W. side, a very large and formidable fort.—It has upwards
     of 80 spired churches, many whereof belong to the Protestants. . . .
                                       (Silas James, Narrative of a Voyage.)