

   Silas James visited Goa somewhere about the year 1782 and noticed,
apparently, no particular signs of decay. It is clear, nevertheless, that the
settlement was then declining and was, in the next twenty years, to decline
still more. Later visitors gained from it the impression of a faded gentility,
even going so far as to describe the city as ‘almost in ruins.’ There was a
trade between Goa and Surat and a certain amount of trade with Macao,
East Africa and Bengal. Some two ships came out from Portugal, it was
said, each year, laden with iron and other civilized necessities, together
with a quantity of specie. Like so many other settlements, Goa was a
losing concern, supported by this annual subsidy. The local produce was
pepper, sandalwood and raw cotton, much of which went to China in
exchange for Chinese goods, and the remainder to Europe. With what
revenue could be derived from this not very enterprising trade, together
with help from Portugal, a garrison was maintained of about two thousand
ill-paid and ill-disciplined Europeans. An anonymous English writer of the
period expressed some wonder that Portugal should take the trouble to
maintain Goa at all: ‘... unless it is as a banishment for criminals,’ he wrote,
‘of which the Garrison of Goa is mostly composed, it is difficult to account
why the Ministry at Lisbon maintain their Settlements in India.’ The plural
is used here because there were two other towns, Diu and Demaun,
subordinate to Goa and in no better state, whether as regards trade or
defence.
   In itself a place of no very great importance, Goa was sometimes a
source of anxiety to others. British India relied for its safety on the total
exclusion of foreign European troops. Experience in the past had shown
that the merest handful of French officers, with a battalion or two of
white troops, could stiffen a native army so as to make it as formidable
as the native armies similarly organized by the English. It was therefore
a principle of British policy to hold the greater part of the coastline of
India, with a view to preventing the foreigner landing. Every seaport on
either coast which was not actually in English hands was a potential leakage,
however neutral its Government. Goa was a particularly dangerous gap in
the British harness because it lay perilously close to the Mahratta country,
the last centre of native resistance to British rule. Peace had, it is true,
been made with the Mahrattas just before war broke out in Europe between
France and England; but there was no knowing what the native powers
might do if promised French assistance. And such assistance, if it came,
                                      36
                               INTRODUCTION

might easily take the form of a landing at Goa, Diu or Demaun; not with
Portuguese connivance but in the absence of effective means of defence.
For this reason, the English regarded the Portuguese towns with some
suspicion.
  Macao was the Portuguese settlement in China, the only European
settlement the Chinese would tolerate and a Christian town since 1586.
Like Goa, Macao smelt of the Middle Ages. The total population numbered
about four thousand white inhabitants, with seven thousand Chinese and
a garrison composed of half-breeds and negroes. This slender community
contrived to support a bishop, thirteen churches, three monasteries and a
convent. To have a settlement in China was a peculiar privilege, but the
Portuguese derived no great profit thereby. Two ships arrived each year
from Portugal, perhaps calling at Goa or Calcutta in the course of their
voyage; that was almost the whole of their China trade. Macao, like Goa,
was the object of English fears. In the hands of the French it might have
been used to intercept the English trade with Canton. It was looked upon,
therefore, with covetous eyes.
  In East Africa the Portuguese maintained a number of settlements, and
claimed generally to rule the coast from Delagoa Bay up to somewhere
in the region of Cape Delgado. In actual practice, they held several isolated
points, north and south of their capital at Mozambique, and made no
attempt to extend their territory inland. The governor of Mozambique was
supreme over these trifling coastal possessions, and also over a subordinate
Government at Senna, up the Zambezi. His authority extended no farther,
and the interior, like most of the Natal coast, was as unexplored as in the
days of Vasco da Gama. Indeed, the country did not invite exploration.
Prior, who was there in 1812, described it as being ‘low, destitute of
vegetation, and faced with sand-hills, having higher land behind. Few
places are more repulsive.... There are no harbours in the colonial territory,
but three roadsteads or bays—Mossel, Plettenberg, and Algoa. ... They
are all insecure for shipping.’ Of the Portuguese settlements Prior wrote
as follows: