

                                        39
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    soldiers consist almost entirely of mulattoes and blacks, and seem to be in
    a very lethargic state of discipline. . . . The Spaniards appear not to be fully
    in possession of Luconia at the present day. They may be said, indeed, only
    to be masters of the ground they occupy, in a military point of view; for,
    by their own accounts, it is not only dangerous to travel without an escort
    in the country, but it is not safe for a Spaniard to walk out singly after dark
    about the suburbs of Manilla. . . .
                             ,                 (J. M’Leod, Voyage of the Alceste.)

  In Manila itself there was, in 1800, a population, it was said, of five
thousand, with another twenty-four thousand in the suburbs; mostly
consisting of Indians, Chinese and half-castes. The Spaniards were nearly
all creoles; they had been born, that is to say, in the East, though often
of white parentage on both sides. They were therefore acclimatized and
unlikely to perish from disease. Manila had the reputation of a healthy
town, partly for this reason—a reputation none too common among the
European settlements in the East.
  Compared with Manila, Cavite was of small importance. It had formerly
been a place of some size, but an earthquake had destroyed the greater
part of it, including the fortifications. As rebuilt, it was an ill-planned town
of some three thousand inhabitants, a third of them being Chinese, and
another five thousand, mostly Indians, in the suburbs. It was a wooden-
built collection of houses, with but small means of defence and a Mexican
regiment and some native troops as the sole garrison. Occasionally during
the war the Spaniards had at Cavite a strong squadron; at one time as
many as four 74-gun ships and five frigates, or so the French asserted.
At Manila, for defensive purposes, there was a fleet of thirty gun-boats,
flat-bottomed so as to operate near the shore, and each armed with a single
24-pounder in the bows. This flotilla belonged, of course, to the colony,
whereas any men-of-war at Cavite would belong to the Spanish Navy. The
regular troops at Manila and Cavite amounted only to a few hundred.
Thanks, however, to a reorganization carried out by Raphael d’Aguilar,
the governor, in 1790, there was a militia of three thousand, capable of
expansion to twenty thousand in an emergency. The Indians were said
to make very good soldiers, better than Sepoys and without the vices of
the Malays. The Europeans in this army numbered rather less than three
hundred, presumably all officers.
  The Philippines seem to have had comparatively little trade. Chinese
junks came there with goods from China, and a Spanish ship was sent
each year to Amoy to fetch silks and other goods destined for Spanish
America, together with China grass cloth for the use of the Indians. There
                                        40
                              INTRODUCTION