

    In contrast to such cities as Goa and Batavia, the English strongholds
 had very little resemblance to anything in Europe. Least of all were they
 reminiscent of anything in England. ‘Fort William,’ ‘Fort St. George,’
 ‘Fort Marlborough’—the names alone are suggestive of anything rather
 than an English town. In designing these places with their bastions and
 counterscarps, as in building their houses with verandahs and porticoes,
 the English provided in some sort for their safety and convenience; but
 they never tried to convince themselves that the result looked even remotely
 like England. They were less homesick than other people, simply because
 they all intended to go home.
    This peculiarity of the English possessions in the East may appear
 trivial. Architecture, however, is seldom without significance. This per¬
 petually alien character of the English, well preserved by the individual’s
 impermanence of tenure, was the secret of their ascendancy. By refusing
 to settle, the English remained European and therefore formidable. It was
 what the Portuguese had failed to do, and what the Dutch were failing
 to do. With the Portuguese before them as a warning, the English were
firmly resolved not to make the same mistake. In no circumstances would
 they marry native women. Half-breeds might come into existence, but that
 did not matter so long as the half-breed was classed as a native. In thus
refusing, in any sense, to make India their home, the English were able
to confine themselves almost entirely to the two trades they knew—that
of the seaman and that of the soldier.
    The decadence produced among white men by a permanent settlement
in the East was the constant theme of English travellers and moralists. In
this they were not only indulging a national failing; they were also uneasily
trying to guard themselves and their countrymen against a similar downfall.
The temptation was always present and seldom resisted with entire success.
One candid observer wrote, of Bombay, that ‘There is languor and lethargy
... here to which I never elsewhere saw any approach....’ Even the English
succumbed to a certain extent, it is clear, but never in such a degree as
to become altogether unwarlike. With an average service abroad of about
ten years, there was always a large proportion of newcomers among them.
It is impossible not to distrust the horrified comments made by English
visitors to the foreign settlements; and yet a certain contrast there must
have been. Captain Beaver, for example, who visited Mozambique in 1812,
was assured that the Portuguese governor, Don Antonio Manoel de Mello
Castro e Mendoca, had never stirred out of his house during three years
of office. Of the same port Beaver wrote that the slave trade was the sole
activity. ‘Villainous traffic! Every thing else is neglected: all is ruin, and
                                     49
                     WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

dirt, and devilment. . .    He also repeated a saying of ‘Bombay Jack’—
an envoy sent to the Cape by „the King of the Comoro Islands: ‘Portugee
hab too much black wife: he no work, no fight, no do nothing.’ Of the
Englishman in the East it might at any time have been said that he would
not work, but he never at this period reached a state in which he would
not fight. The indignation aroused in Captain Beaver by the Portuguese
of Mozambique was felt fin various degrees by English visitors to other
foreign settlements. According to Maria Graham, the officers returning
from the capture of the Isle of France said that the inhabitants were
‘profligate and immoral beyond even the vulgar notions of French licen¬
tiousness.’ By other accounts, the Dutch in Java were idle and gluttonous,
the Spaniards of Manila superstitious and inert.
   There may, admittedly, have been a great deal of prejudice and mere
misunderstanding in the English attitude towards their rivals in the East.
But what is certain is that, decadent or not, the foreign settlements had
all developed a colonial spirit which greatly lessened their effectiveness in
war. The Portuguese governor mentioned above astonished Captain
Beaver by omitting to ask for news of Portugal: ‘one would have supposed
that he had forgotten there was a portion of the globe called Europe; or
that he was totally indifferent whether the country of his birth yet retained
its independence, or was devastated by a relentless enemy.’ The Dutch
at the Cape, less distant from that portion of the globe called Europe,
had so far lost interest in Holland that many of them welcomed the English
conquest as likely to improve trade. Such an attitude made the conquest
far easier. Similarly, during the early years of the French Revolution, the
inhabitants of the Isle of France made it clear that they would sever all
connection with France rather than emancipate their slaves. In the time
of Decaen, indeed, the settlers so objected to taxation that a considerable
party among them wished to surrender the island to the English. Napoleon’s
victories were too distant and legendary to make much impression on the
islanders, who never, in consequence, acquired much enthusiasm for the
Empire. It was for this reason that Decaen never counted on the assistance
of the local militia; and events proved him right, for the English troops,
when they landed, met with no resistance except from the few regular
units. The Spanish at Manila showed, on the whole, as little devotion
to Spain as the French at Port Louis showed to France. One who visited
that town in 1816 remarked that the colony would be an easy conquest
for another power, but that ‘the Court of Spain, at present, seems to have
most to fear from those sentiments of independence which have extended
from Buenos Ayres to Manilla. . . .’ Whether afflicted with decadence, with
                                     50
                               INTRODUCTION