

     Army under the Command of Colonel Brathwaite, having made no resistance
     after our Batteries were opened.
          (Cornwallis to Admiralty, ioth September, 1793. P.R.O. Ad. 1/167.)

    The surrender of Pondicherry was, on the whole, a tame affair. The
 French there were outnumbered and without hope of reinforcement. Had
 the French Admiral known it, though, the game was in his hands. With his
 four frigates he might not only have raised the blockade but also have done
 enormous damage elsewhere. He seems, however, to have been unaware
 of his opponent’s weakness. His ship, La Cybele, came alone on the scene,
 having sailed without any definite information that the war had begun.
 Finding what she took to be a formidable squadron off Pondicherry, she
 fled. As a matter of fact, the landing of troops, ammunition and stores
 could have delayed the fall of Pondicherry for only a few days or weeks.
 The fate of that unfortunate town was not, after all, a matter of the first
 importance. It would have mattered far more if the French squadron,
 coming on the coast in force, had taken the Minerva and bombarded Madras,
 proceeding afterwards to blockade the Hooghli. That nothing of the sort
 took place was due less to the efforts of the armed Indiamen than to French
 ignorance of the situation.
    Lord Cornwallis originally intended to direct the siege of Pondicherry
in person. Realizing that it would be unsafe to proceed there in a merchant
 ship, he seized a French vessel, the Bien Aime, which was lying in the river,
and equipped her as a man-of-war. She was a Bristol-built ship, mounting
eighteen 6-pounders, and had once been in the Navy. Despite unfavourable
reports that she was not copper-fastened, the Governor-General equipped
her and then lent her to the Navy. He made no use of her himself, in the
end, because Pondicherry fell before Bien Aime was ready to take him
there. On hearing the news, he concluded that there was nothing further
to detain him in India. As his brother, the Admiral, thought it his duty
to remain on the station for the present, Lord Cornwallis decided to go
home in the Swallow, packet, availing himself of the Minerva s escort for
a part of the way. He duly sailed in September, the Swallow being convoyed
by the Minerva and Bien Aime until October 24th, on which date the
Admiral headed for Bombay, calling on the way at Diego Garcia in search
of French privateers. Finding nothing there but a small brig, he went on
northwards and called at Tellicherry on December 4th, for news.

      . . . One of the Company’s ships was just arrived from England but I
    could not learn that any of His Majesty’s Ships were going to India. I
    proceeded immediately on to Bombay, where I arrived the nth of December
                                     62
                 CORNWALLIS RETURNS TO ENGLAND

      —Accounts overland were received a few days after from England, as far
      as the end of August, and from other parts of Europe of a much later date,
      by which it appeared, that there was a probability of the War with France
     being soon over. I determined to get the Minerva docked, and the damaged
      part of Her Bottom repaired, as soon as possible, in the Mean time I sent
      the Bien dime to cruize upon the Coast. I could not learn that there were
      any Privateers out belonging to the Enemy. The French Frigates do not
     appear to have acted since the Commencement of Hostilities, except the
      Cybele which had attempted to throw supplies into Pondicherry, as related
     in my former Letter. To the Eastward about the Straits of Malacca seems
     to be the only place where the French Privateers have had any succejs, and
      it appeared that the Government at Bengal had equipped several ships, and
     sent them for the Protection of the Trade in that part of India. Such being
     the state of affairs, as it appeared from Public Reports, for (except a Letter
      which I found upon my arrival at Bombay, acquainting me, that upon the
    ■Departure of Lord Cornwallis, Sir John Shore and Sir Robert Abercromby
     had taken upon themselves the Stations to which they had been appointed)
     I did not receive a line from the Supreme Government upon the subject,
     and having no Naval Force to command in India or Information of any
     coming out; The Minerva having been docked, I sailed from Bombay
     the 12 of January determined to proceed Home, unlejs I should receive
     any Intelligence of Importance before I left the Coast. I thought it best to
     leave Captain King in the Bien Aime with directions, if he should not hear
     from me before the sailing of the next India Ships, to deliver the Bien Aime
     up to the Government and repair Home in those Ships with His Officers
     and Men. . . .
              (Cornwallis to Admiralty, 21st April, 1794. P.R.O. Ad. 1/167.)