

feelings of profound indifference towards Europe, or with sentiments of
independence, all the foreign colonies were but in doubtful alliance with
their mother countries. They none of them desired an active share in the war.
   A second generation of colonists rarely shows much interest in Europe.
This was the weakness of the foreign settlements in the East, and it was
a weakness which the English in India did not share. There was no true
second generation of Anglo-Indians. They remained English, or nearly so,
through having spent their boyhood in England and through planning to
spend their later years there. It was to this national spirit, which colonization
would have undermined, as well as to the evidently profitable nature of
Indian government, that England owed her ascendancy in the East.




                                        5i
         ,■



    tv

              .



*
PART ONE
                                CHAPTER I


     Cornwallis Returns to England

 T    ~\he War in the Eastern Seas began with no dramatic overture, no
       sudden challenge to the English arms. The faintest of rumours, a
       whispered possibility, a strong expectation; these were the steps
 which led at last to some tentative hostilities. Perhaps the story should
 begin on 31st January, 1790, the date on which the news of the French
 Revolution came to the Isle of France. There were developments, beginning
 with the election of a Colonial Assembly and ending, for the time being,
 with the lynching of the naval commander-in-chief. This officer, the Comte
 de Macnemara, was an unpopular newcomer, suspected of being both an
 aristocrat and a traitor and guilty, very likely, of being an Irishman. The
 governor, a M. Conway, having been superseded on similar grounds,
 though without having been shown to be a Welshman, it became apparent
 that the colonists were willing to follow the French example, at least up
 to a point. There was even, later on, some talk of a guillotine. Where a
 trace of uneasiness crept into the Assembly’s discussions was with reference
 to the institution of slavery. Agreeing, in the abstract, with revolutionary
 principles and ready to applaud, in a general way, all sentiments about
 Liberty and Equality, the slave-owners could not but feel that these
 admirable notions might perhaps be carried too far. Locally, at least, there
 were practical considerations affecting the issue; considerations that it
would be unwise to overlook. In such doubts as these was the seed of
future trouble. For the moment, however, minds were set at rest by
the decision of the National Assembly—to which the island had sent
deputies—that the emancipation of slaves was to be at the discretion of
local authorities. All was therefore comparatively quiet when a French
squadron arrived in July 1791. The squadron consisted of four frigates,
La Cybele, L’ Atalante, La Cleopatre and La Resolue, the first bearing the
flag of the Rear-Admiral, M. de Saint Felix. La Resolue went straight on to
India, followed in due course by Saint Felix himself. During his absence, in
January 1792, an epidemic of smallpox broke out in the Isle of France.
The infection came with a cargo of slaves brought from Mozambique, and
                                     55
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS