

some four thousand inhabitants died during the next three months. For
the time being the colonists had other things to think of besides the
possibility of war with England. Nevertheless, that possibility was by no
means remote and seemed, at one time, in India, even more imminent than
it was. To grasp this, it is necessary to consider certain events in India,
going back for the purpose to December 1789. It was in that month that
Tippoo Sultan attacked Travancore, the capital of one of the East India
Company’s native allies. The resulting conflict occupied Anglo-Indian
attention almost up to the very eve of the war with France.
   Eighteenth-century England was governed less by solemn councils and
public offices than by casual conversations in the country houses of the
great. It was typical of the friendly arrangements thus reached that the
 Governor-General of the time should have been able to secure his brother’s
appointment as the naval commander-in-chief on the station. It was again
typical that the arrangement worked very well. Commodore William
 Cornwallis received his appointment in November 1788 and actually sailed
for India in H.M.S. Crown (64) on 9th February, 1789. With him went
the Phoenix, Perseverance, Atalanta and Ariel', this squadron being joined
later by the Vestal, Minerva, Leopard (Captain Blankett) and Thames
 (Captain Troubridge). Cornwallis reached Madras on September 3rd and
 Calcutta—or rather Diamond Harbour—on the 18th. He thus arrived in
Indian waters rather more than three months before the storming of
Travancore and so was able to blockade Tippoo’s coastline almost as soon
as the campaign began.
    Commodore Cornwallis, who shortly became Rear-Admiral, was generally
 thought ‘an odd fish.’ Although undoubtedly a very able officer, he was an
 eccentric, a woman-hater (so it was said) and given at times to unreasonable
 favouritism as well as to unreasonable enmity. He had a nickname, ‘Billy
 Blue,’ and was more popular with the seamen than with his officers. For a
 nephew of the Archbishop of Canterbury, his manners were rather uncouth.
 Hickey, who met him at Calcutta, seems to have taken instant dislike to
 him; a dislike which he did not fail to record in his memoirs. He wrote
        Commodore Cornwallis, Commander-in-Chief in the Eastern Seas and
     brother to the noble Governor-General, though very unlike him both
     in person and manner, came to visit his lordship. The Commodore was
     a living Trunnion, but more of a brute than Smollett made his hero.
     After a sojourn of three weeks in Calcutta, during which he abused or found
     fault with everybody and everything, he took his departure. . . .’
  Making all allowances for Hickey’s malicious style, it is evident that
Cornwallis was out of place in a drawing-room. He practically said as
                                      56
                 CORNWALLIS RETURNS TO ENGLAND

much in a letter to Nelson, remarking that he took every opportunity for
exploring, ‘which I prefer to being stuck up in a pompous style’ ashore.
This is a reference, of course, to the custom which prevailed for the Admiral
on the East Indies station to spend most of his time at an official residence
provided for him at Madras. Having inherited a secure social position as
an ‘Honourable,’ the Commodore was far more averse to pomp than were
many of his brother officers.
   It was a fortunate circumstance for the East India Company that Tippoo
Sultan should have begun the war when he did. For whereas, in the past,
he had received help from the French, it was unlikely that he would obtain
any active assistance from them at a time when the French were so engrossed
in their own affairs. Lord Cornwallis, however, the Governor-General,
provided against the possibility of French help by urging his brother to
search any French merchantmen found on the Malabar coast. Should he
find any carrying troops, arms or military stores ‘under pretence of going
to their settlement at Mahe,’ he was to make it clear to them that they might
proceed to Pondicherry but that they might not land on the west side of
India. This advice was dated in February 1790, by which time the
Commodore was already on the Malabar coast with a small squadron.
   The Governor-General’s supposition that the French would not assist
Tippoo was justified to this extent, that they did, in fact, advise the Sultan
against making war at that time. Once he had committed himself, however,
they seem to have sent him such supplies as they could spare. During
the year 1790 Commodore Cornwallis was continually at sea on one coast
or the other, but without intercepting any military stores destined for
Tippoo. Any French frigates which appeared were carefully shadowed as
long as they remained on the coast. In August 1791, news having come
of an American vessel sailing from Ostend laden with arms, a fresh order
was issued to the cruisers to detain any vessel found carrying warlike stores,
except Dutch or Portuguese ships actually bound for Cochin or Goa. In
the course of this year the squadron was reinforced, so that the Commodore
was able to spare four ships to cruise on the Malabar coast; the Minerva (38),
the Thames (32), the Phoenix (36) and the Vestal (28); to which number
he later added the frigate Perseverance and the sloop Atalanta. The searching
of French ships caused a great deal of friction, and in 1792 actually
occasioned bloodshed.
   It will be remembered that, of the French squadron which came out
in 1791, one frigate, La Resolue (36), went straight on to India while the
remainder put in to the Isle of France. On 18th November, 1792, La
Resolue was at Mahe on the Malabar coast. Two French merchantmen