

    station, and if the war with Tippoo had not obliged us to go to the coast
    of Malabar during the whole of the North East monsoon I should have
    Liked it much better as it would have given me an opportunity of seeing
    a great Deal more of it, and I think it may be useful to our young folks
    in future, but except from necessity, or the purpose of exploring I am against
    keeping men of War in this country, which in general is distructive to officers,
    and to the Younger part in particular, where nothing is heard of but making
    of money, and Yet I' hope it has been Less practiced of Late Years than
    formerly, there are nevertheless many able and worthy men who would
    do credit to any country and situation.
                          (The Life and Letters of Admiral Cornwallis, p. 172.)

   Cornwallis, as we have had occasion to notice, was a somewhat eccentric
officer; and one of his oddest peculiarities was a strict, an almost fanatical
honesty where the public purse was concerned. He seems to have worried
about his officers’ money-making almost as much as about his seamen’s
scurvy. He had convinced himself, moreover, from either line of reasoning,
that India was no place for the Navy in time of peace. He discarded his
forces, therefore, with all the more readiness. Writing to the Admiralty,
from Calcutta, on 22nd March, 1793, he reported that the Perseverance
and Swan (Captain Elphinstone) had sailed for England from Bombay in
January, and that the Phoenix had followed on February 23rd. The Minerva,
his own ship, would follow suit as soon as the Governor-General was
ready to embark.
   At the date on which Cornwallis was writing the above dispatch the
war with France had already begun—had been raging, indeed, for seven
weeks. Some rumours of the probability of war reached India shortly
afterwards, causing both brothers to postpone their sailing for England.
The Admiral must, by this time, have been distinctly anxious. The situation
might at any moment become very serious. The French had at least four
frigates in the Indian Seas whereas Cornwallis had no ship but his own.
There was talk of an impending attack on Pondicherry, and here was the
East Indies Squadron practically non-existent. Definite news of the outbreak
of war was long in coming. The Admiral, who had gone to the Dutch port
of Trincomalee, received there, on June 19th, his first official notification
on the subject. This was a letter from Mr. Baldwin, the Company’s agent
at Alexandria, sent on to him from Madras. This letter was too explicit
to leave any doubt about the matter. As England was now at war with
Holland as well as France, Cornwallis hastened to leave Trincomalee, where
the Dutch were still unaware of the situation, and proceed off Pondicherry
in time to capture a French merchantman bound thither with a cargo of
                                       60
                 CORNWALLIS RETURNS TO ENGLAND

ammunition for the garrison. Being in need of supplies, and wanting to
concert measures with the Indian Governments, he went on to Madras.
What followed may well be given in his own words: