

                                      57
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

appeared off that port, whereupon the Phoenix and Perseverance sailed from
Tellicherry to examine them. The French frigate sailed simultaneously,
apparently to prevent them being examined. The result was a brisk action
between the Phoenix and La Resolue, which ended in the former losing
seven killed and nine wounded and the latter hauling down her colours.
As this occurred in time of peace, the captain of the Phoenix, Sir Richard
Strachan, released the French frigate and refused to accept her surrender. It
so happened that Commodore Cornwallis was himself at Tellicherry at this
time, with his flag in the Minerva, and it was he who carried on the
subsequent correspondence with the French captain, who refused to're-hoist
his colours, claiming to be a prisoner-of-war.
   The situation was awkward, and might even have been made an occasion
for war. Writing to the French captain Callamand, Cornwallis urged him
not to ‘carry on the Farce’ of considering his ship a prize. ‘Whether you
hoist your Colours or no,’ he wrote, ‘seems to be of little consequence.’
He ended by pointing out that ‘As this must be settled by higher Powers,
it is useless for us to write any more upon the subject.’ The discussion
was not, however, at an end, for a further incident occurred to embitter it.
The French Admiral, Saint Felix, was on his way to India in the wake
of the Resolue. On 4th January, 1792, off Tellicherry, he fell in with
Cornwallis himself in the Minerva. As a signal that he wished to speak
with the Frenchman, the English Commodore fired a gun, afterwards
sending a boat on board him. The officer in charge of the boat brought
back a message that if another gun was fired, the French would reply with
a broadside. A correspondence ensued from which it appeared that the
French Admiral denied Cornwallis’s right to search French merchantmen,
or at any rate such as were escorted by men-of-war. To act on any such
pretended right was a ‘violation in plain peace to all the Treaties, to all the
Customs, and to all regards due to the Flags of Sovereigns’ and tantamount
to a declaration of war. To this outburst Cornwallis made no reply, merely
issuing orders that French merchantmen were to be searched as before,
whether with escort or without. At one point in the discussion, Saint Felix
actually gave orders, it was said, for beginning hostilities; orders which
his men, children of the Revolution, flatly refused to obey, probably because
they felt themselves outnumbered.
   Curiously enough, it never became clear whether the French merchantmen
were carrying supplies to Tippoo, or whether they were merely bound,
as Saint Felix alleged, for Mahe. About those particular ships the truth
remains obscure to this day. On the other hand, that Tippoo did in
fact, at some time, receive help from the French seems highly probable.
                                      58
                    CORNWALLIS RETURNS TO ENGLAND