

He could buy up the plunder at anything from a third to two-thirds of
its cost price, and at the same time save himself the trouble of going farther
afield. The goods would sell in America or at Hamburg or Dunkirk,
and then would often end up at their original destination—London. The
Americans, it will be seen, played an essential part in the French privateering
activities. Without their coming to.purchase the booty, privateering would
scarcely have paid.
    In concluding this brief survey of the rivalry encountered by the English
in the East, it may be as well to emphasize the factors which underlay
the ultimate English success. When comparing the English possessions in
the East with those of the other territory-owning powers, it is impossible
not to observe two vital differences—differences which were the root and
cause of military success or failure. The first point of difference was that
England had what no other nation had—a profit-yielding territory. The
French Islands barely paid their own expenses. The Dutch profited, when
they profited at all, by commerce so that their government and military
strength was an overhead charge on the spice trade. When a zealous
Governor tried to put Java in a proper state of defence, he plunged the
colony into financial ruin, from which nothing but an English occupation
could extricate it. The Philippines, as we have seen, were a mere drain
on the resources of Spanish America. Even the Government at Goa was
unable to pay its way without a subsidy from Portugal. But the English
had, in Bengal, a tract of territory which yielded a revenue. This revenue
was large enough to support what must have been one of the largest standing
armies in the world, and still leave a surplus of tribute. To maintain this
army was to be the strongest power in the East. Wherever the French
might have established themselves, they could never have afforded to keep
a force of that size. It would never have been worth their while to do so,
and the same would be true of the Dutch, Spanish and Portuguese. European
Governments were not in a position to pay subsidies on that scale. Indeed,
no English Government showed very much inclination to spend large
sums on the defence of India. Had India been expensive to govern or
garrison, the East India Company would have abandoned its territory and
confined itself to the China trade, ft could at that time expect little help
from England, where imperialism had scarcely begun to bud. India, however,
was not costly to defend. It paid for its own defence on a scale which
dwarfed that of every other European power in the East. During the period
with which we are concerned the burden of armament had, it is true, more
than swallowed up all surplus revenue. This was a circumstance known
only in times of war, however, and the loss in financial stability represented
                                      47
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

an immediate gain in military strength and an eventual gain in territory.
When to this augmented military strength was added an overwhelming
superiority at sea, the other European powers could not but feel their
comparative impotence.
    The second point of difference is less easily explained and less obviously
vital; and yet it is, properly considered, as significant as the first. One
might put it briefly thus: ydiereas the French and the Dutch, the Spanish
and Portuguese all formed colonies, the English only built forts. It has
been said that the English make good colonists. This may be true, but
much of the English power in the East plainly depended on their being
very bad colonists indeed—or, rather, on their not being colonists at all.
It was the deliberate policy of the East India Company to prevent coloniza¬
tion in any shape or form. In Ceylon, indeed, a crown colony, this rule
was eventually relaxed. Elsewhere, however, under the Company’s rule,
and especially in India itself, all colonization, all European landownership,
was forbidden by law.
    The chief outcome of this policy was that the Englishman in India
remained, as he still remains, an exile. He might die in India, and in fact
he usually did, but he never settled there. He had always before him the
prospect of returning to England. This difference between the English and
their rivals is most clearly illustrated by their styles of architecture. To
take the Dutch first, it would be true to say that Batavia was a Dutch
town, or as near to being one as its situation allowed. It was intersected
with canals, planted with rows of trees, and adorned by a Protestant church
with a dome. The houses were all gabled seventeenth-century buildings
with heavy carved staircases, as if transported bodily from Holland. It
was an astonishingly beautiful place. Capetown was built in the same
fashion, though not so finely. Goa, again, was a Portuguese town, famous
for its cathedral and churches; while Macao, with its own bishop, was
as typical on a smaller scale. Manila, with its monasteries and noblemen,
was an obvious offshoot of Spain, though all its inhabitants had been born
there in Luconia. Port Louis, even, in the Isle of France, is a French town
to this day. In all these places the settlers had done their utmost to reproduce
the homes they had left, and to which they would never return. They had
tried to create their own atmosphere. Paradoxically enough, however, so
permanent a settlement is bound to produce a local attachment, and from
that there springs a colonial spirit or sentiment fundamentally hostile to
any other allegiance. The forces which have tended to reproduce the
mother country are the very forces which subsequently tend to sever all
connection with her.
                                      48
                              INTRODUCTION