

 And the knowledge of this may well have weakened the position of the
 French diplomats. At any rate, much to the relief of Sir Richard Strachan,
 the captain of the Phoenix, nothing came of the affair. Probably through
 being otherwise occupied, the French Government allowed the matterto drop.
    While Cornwallis was maintaining his blockade and trying to keep the
 French from overt interference, the campaign ashore was slowly reaching
 its climax. Throughout 1791 operations continued and then, in February
 1792, little more than a month after the arrival of Saint Felix in Indian waters,
Lord Cornwallis defeated Tippoo and soon afterwards stormed Seringa-
 patam. Peace was made on February 23 rd and the dispatches announcing
 it reached London on July 25th. Another event which took place in
 February 1792, was the promotion of Commodore Cornwallis to Rear-
 Admiral of the White, leave being given him to return home. Simultaneously,
 his elder brother was to leave India in triumph, his main task at an end,
 and it was naturally planned that he should take a passage in the Minerva.
 This plan might even have been carried out in 1792, when the two brothers
met at Madras on May 31st, had not the Rear-Admiral betaken himself
to the Andamans with the object of investigating the possibilities of the
group as a naval base to windward of the Bay of Bengal. He was there
or in the Straits of Malacca, inspecting the existing base at Prince of Wales
Island, during the latter part of 1792. He returned to Madras in December
and there heard the first rumours of impending war in Europe, which he
entirely discredited. So confident was he that the rumours were baseless
that he sent nearly all of his squadron back to England. Some ships, indeed,
had gone the year before, as soon as peace was made with Tippoo. ‘As
the squadron are likely to go home soon,’ he wrote on 20th September, 1792,
‘I did not think that it was necessary for them to compleat their complements,
and I gave orders . . . accordingly.’1 The Phoenix was leaking badly, the
Dispatch was in a bad state of repair and the Minerva herself nearly sank
in being heaved over. The Phoenix and others were now dispatched home
successively, and he himself, with the Minerva, went to Calcutta to fetch
the Governor-General, meaning to sail with him for England, leaving the
Indian Ocean without any naval protection at all. It was his theory that
India was a country for the Navy to avoid as far as possible; and it appears
that the Admiralty had accepted his views on this subject. What these views
were may be gathered from the following letter, written in 1790:
        . . . The seamen are more subject to the scurvy here than in the West
     Indies. For myself I like it very well, there is a great variety upon this
  1 Ad. 50/31. It is interesting to see that his squadron included, at one time or another,
Elphinstone, Troubridge and Blankett, all of whom will figure later in this book.

                                            59
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS