

                                         45
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

Americans were in reality employed to convey private Anglo-Indian
fortunes to Europe. For this purpose their ships were well suited, enjoying
as they did a neutral status with consequently lower rates of insurance;
a status which at the same time gave them access to ports from which
the English were excluded. ‘These advantages/ Milburn wrote, ‘with that
of their speaking the same language, and their social intercourse in the
British settlements, render them the most formidable rivals of the English
in the trade with the East Indies/
   American merchantmen in the East did not trade exclusively with China
and India. The encouragement they met with at the hands of the English
did not prevent their receiving equal encouragement from the French and
the Dutch. Indeed, most of their voyages were triangular and involved
dealings with more countries than one. Of the American ships at Canton
in 1804, five had called at the Isle of France, three at Batavia, one at Manila,
five in the South Seas and two at Port Jackson in Australia. From 1795
onwards a number of United States vessels began to trade in pepper with
Sumatra, lading on their outward voyage with brandy, gin, tobacco, iron
and dried fish. Others, ostensibly engaged in whaling, smuggled largely
among the Spice Islands. The Dutch were always justly suspicious of
people found looking for whales off Timor or Ceram. This did not, however,
prevent the Americans from trading directly with Batavia. In exchange for
the spices, sugar, coffee, rice and China goods they wanted, they would bring
cloth, hats, stationery, wine, beer, Seltzer-water and specie. After the wars it
was the American trade which largely restored the prosperity of Batavia.
   The increase in American trade during the wars was partly due to the
safety derived from neutrality. Of that there can be no doubt. But it was
also partly due to the function the Americans assumed as receivers of
stolen goods. Such piracy as they engaged in was on a small scale, carried
on in the Pacific under British colours. Privateering, again, was only
possible after 1812. But from the privateering of the French they were
able to profit far more than did the privateers themselves. Their route
to China or India lay nearly always round the Cape of Good Hope—it
was mostly their fur-traders who crossed the Pacific—and it usually led
them near the Isle of France. In time of war many of them began to find
it more profitable to stop and do their trading there. The privateers were
always overstocking the market at Port Louis with their plunder, so that
goods there were often cheaper than at Canton or Calcutta. This was of
necessity the case in that the cargoes of English prizes were often quite
useless to the colonists, who had, moreover, no means of sending them
to Europe. This was where the American captain could drive his bargain.
                                      46
                              INTRODUCTION