

                                                          25th February, 1794.
             You are hereby required and directed to proceed with the Ship
          and Sloop under your command and the East India Company’s Ships
          under your convoy, as expeditiously as possible consistently with
          their security towards the Places of their Destination: detaching the
          Sampson and Argo to St. Helena at the most proper time for their
          making the speediest Passage to that Island, and directing the Senior
          Captain of those Ships to take all possible care to arrive there in the
          first or second Week in May next or the 20th of that month at the
          latest, and to take under his Convoy such of the homeward bound ships
          belonging to the East India Company as may be then and there
          assembled and ready to come away. . . .
                                      67
                          WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

                 Having detached the Sampson and Argo to St. Helena as above
              directed, you are to pursue your voyage with the Suffolk and Swift
              Sloop and the East India Ships under your Convoy, making the best
              of your way off the Cape of Good Hope, where you may expect to
Centurion     find His Majesty’s Ships named in the margin which have been sent
^Resistance   to cruize off that Cape under Orders from Rear-Admiral Gardner,
              a copy of which you will receive herewith; and upon joining those
              Ships, or any of them, either there or elsewhere, you are to take them
              under your Command (their Captains being hereby directed to follow
              your Orders) and to prosecute your Voyage to the East Indies,
              proceeding to Madras and using your best endeavours to see the East
              India Company’s ships thither, or as far as your way and theirs may
              lie together; and having delivered to the Honble Rear Admiral
              Cornwallis, Commander-in-Chief of His Majesty’s Ships in the East
              Indies, or forwarded to him wherever he may be on that Station,
              the Pacquet you will herewith receive bearing his address, put yourself
              and the ships and sloop which may be with you, under his Command,
              follow his Orders for your further Proceedings.
                 But if on your arrival in the East Indies you shall not find the above-
              mentioned Rear-Admiral, or any other officer of His Majesty’s Ships
              senior to yourself on that Station, you are in that case to employ the
              Force under your Command and such others of His Majesty’s Ships
              and Vessels as you may find there, or as may join you afterwards, in
              such manner as, upon consultation with His Excellency the Governor-
              General, or the Governor and Council of Madras, shall be judged
              best for the Protection of the Trade and Settlements of His Majesty’s
              Subjects and His Allies in the East Indies, until you receive further
              orders.
                 In case you should not fall in with the Centurion, Orpheus and
              Resistance off the Cape of Good Hope when you arrive there, you
              are not to make any delay in looking out for them, but to leave in
              the Hands of the English East India Company’s Agent resident in
              the Cape Town, Orders for the Commanding Officer of those ships
              to follow you to Madras with all possible expedition.
                 Given etc.                                     Chatham
                                                                Arden
              (Ad. 2/1347).                                     P. Affleck