

    the Mauritius will be tempted to proceed to the Straits of Sunda rather than
    to the eastern Entrance of the Straits of Malacca, and the Cruise which
    I have recommended is equally calculated to protect the Straits & the
    returning Indiamen from China.
       Whilst the Season permits, no station appears to me so proper for the
    purposes of general protection, as one of the French Islands, for the purpose
    of intercepting their Cruisers either proceeding or returning, as well as
    supplies of Provisions to the Islands. . . .
       (Sir J. Shore to Commodore Rainier, 15th October, 1794. Ad. 1/167.)

  In making these suggestions, admirable as they may have been, Sir John
Shore had rather lost sight of the actual number of ships at the Commodore’s
disposal. Rainier, however, did his best, and the Governor-General after¬
wards approved of what he had done.
  Holland was, at this period, on the English side, and Rainier, when at
Penang in December, received urgent requests from the Dutch for his
protection. Through their subordinates at Malacca, the rulers of Batavia
informed the Commodore that their capital was about to be attacked by
a fleet of frigates and privateers from the Isle of France. As it was then
the sickly season at Batavia, it may be doubted whether anything could
have induced Rainier to go there, whatever the emergency. In this case,
however, he doubted the whole story. In reply, he said that the French
frigates could not come as the French colonists would not let them. He
added that, by this time, his ships were blockading the Isle of France and
could be depended upon to discourage any such expedition. He ended by
asserting that he could not spare the necessary ships. This last plea was the
more justified in that the country ships returning from China were giving
him a great deal of trouble. They would not keep together, but appeared
in groups of two and three despite the efforts of the Orpheus and Swift
to herd them into regular convoys. The last day of December found Rainier
still struggling with them and it was not until 23rd January, 1795, that
he reached Madras in company with the Orpheus and Swift. The Resistance
he left to escort the country trade bound for Bombay.
   It was probably before his return to Madras that Rainier had news of
the Centurion and Diomede. These had sailed from Madras on 30th August,
1794, watered at Trincomalee, called at Rodriguez and begun to blockade
the Isle of France on October 13th. Being apprehensive of an English
attack, and worried at the possibility of a slave revolt, Malartic had by this
time put the island into a state of defence. The inhabitants were under
arms and all the batteries considerably strengthened. The prospect, however,
of a blockade was, at that time, particularly unpleasant because there was

                                        74
                       RAINIER     SAILS   FOR   INDIA

a food shortage already. Rice alone was plentiful, and no prizes of any
value had recently been taken. Meat was rationed, even as things were,
and the cutting off of further supplies was only too likely to produce a
famine. With the negroes on the verge of rebellion—twelve of them were
executed at about this time—and trouble impending with France over the
slavery question, a famine might easily have destroyed the colony. The
senior naval officer, Jean Marie Renaud, realized this and decided that, at
all costs, the blockade had to be raised. Besides the two frigates, Cybele (40)
and Prudente (32), he had under his orders the Coureur brig (16). To these
he added the Jean-Bart privateer (22), pressed into service for the occasion.
Reinforcing the crews of these ships with soldiers and volunteers, he put
to sea with Malartic’s blessing on October 19th, by French reckoning. On
the 22nd, by the English calendar, he fell in with the Centurion and Diomede
and instantly gave battle. The action which followed was indecisive. Both
sides lost heavily, the casualties being mostly in the Cybele, Prudente and
Centurion. These three ships also sustained a great deal of damage in their
masts and rigging. The Diomede took no very active part in the conflict,
and had no casualties. As a result, the French squadron escaped, the crippled
Cybele being towed out of action by the Prudente, and all four ships returning
safely to port. This engagement was fought by the French in a very
republican spirit. Thus, Caraud, the commander of the Coureur, reported
of his crew that ‘tous les jours l’hymne de la liberte chantee sur le pont
produisait de nouveau Elan,’ and in the action he found ‘que ne sont plus
des hommes mais des furieux que je conduit a l’ennemi.’ His seamen cried
‘Vive la Republique’ and served their guns ‘avec une celerite encroyable.’
They could do so without much interruption for they were under fire only
from the Diomede and were little the worse for it.
  As the French had four or five times as many casualties as the English,
and as it was they who broke off the action, Captain Samuel Osborn of
the Centurion might perhaps have claimed a sort of victory. Had he,
moreover, been supported by his consort, one or two of the French ships
might have been taken. Even with some such loss, however, the French
object would have been gained. Whether as victor or vanquished, the
Centurion needed repairs and so could not maintain her station off the
French islands. To have left the Diomede alone would have been dangerous,
so that there was nothing to do but raise the blockade. The Centurion
sailed at once for Bombay, the frigate being sent to Madras. Captain Smith
of the Diomede was court-martialled and dismissed the service for his part
in this affair. There was some satisfaction in this, and yet the fact remained
that the first encounter of the war between French and English in the East