

  Thus it came about that India was left without a single man-of-war
except such as the Indian Governments could themselves provide. At the
time the Minerva sailed none but the Admiral knew her destination, even
the men on board supposing that he would hardly return home without
being relieved. His doing so was a source of some surprise ashore in India
as soon as it was generally realized. Sir John Shore provided for the defence
of the settlements as well as he could by arming Indiamen as need arose.
The Triton, Royal Charlotte and War ley, the ships present at the siege of
Pondicherry, were apparently relieved by three others, the William Pitt,
Britannia and Houghton. These took over the duty of commerce protection,
forming a single squadron under the command of the senior captain,
Mitchell, who was afterwards knighted for his services. As for Admiral
Cornwallis, he passed the Cape on February 25th, called at St. Helena in
March and by April was entering the Channel. It was an unhappy voyage,
                                       63
                          WAR     IN      THE   EASTERN    SEAS

Captain Whitby proving inexperienced in his handling of the crew.1 But
it was redeemed by a picturesque incident in the Channel where, on
April 15th, the officers of the Minerva sighted four frigates standing across
their bows. These ships were distant and were shortly afterwards hidden
by fog.

        Next morning we saw four more, who would not let us escape. The
     first that came up was the Arethusa, Sir Edward Pellew . . . who, seeing
     our flag, brought to and came on board, and told us the other three frigates
     were the Flora, Concord and Melampus, all under the command of Sir John
     Borlase Warren. When he was told we had passed four English frigates
     yesterday (he very near committed himself for swearing), he said, with an
     oath that there were not four British frigates together in the Channel but
     themselves. Therefore the others must be French; so hastening to his ship
     he gave us a salute, then bore down to his Commodore, gave his news, and
     off they all set in search of the other four frigates. . . .

   What is more, they caught them on the 23 rd, taking three of them in
a running fight near the French coast, south-west of Guernsey. Cornwallis,
meanwhile, after his fortunate escape, pursued his way up Channel and
came into Spithead on April 22nd.

  1 This, at any rate, was the opinion of William Richardson, who was one of the crew.
  ‘The Minerva was under good discipline, and, had we had an experienced captain to carry
on the duty, should have been more comfortable; but he was too young—had come out with
the Admiral on this station a midshipman, and in the course of three or four years had got
made a post captain, when only nineteen years of age; he could work the ship very well,
but that was all. Not a word was to be spoken in wearing or tacking the ship except from the
commanding officer. . . .’ A Mariner of England, p. 105.