

                                     7i
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

more popular than his predecessor. A guillotine had been built by this
time at the Isle of France, and it looked as if the suspects were likely to
forfeit their lives. Malartic could do nothing for them except by delaying
the trial. However, on August 29th, a ship from Bordeaux brought the
news of the Convention’s Decree (16 Pluviose, An 2) abolishing slavery
in all French colonies. In the resulting excitement both prisoners and
guillotine were forgotten*. The latter, having only once been tried (success¬
fully) on a goat, was dismantled; and the former were eventually released.
Owing to Malartic’s moderation, no great harm was done in these civil
dissensions; and the question of slavery did not come to a head until 1796.
The tribulations of the Admiral, however, prevented any very enterprising
naval operations. Indeed, except for the Cybele and Prudente, all the French
frigates seem to have returned to Europe. Renaud, who succeeded Saint
Felix as commander of the squadron, had thus only a single frigate and
a brig. Nor was the colony in a position to assist him very much, as the
local paper money was rapidly becoming valueless. The most he could do
was to defend the islands against English cruisers; and this, it will later
be seen, he did most effectively. All offensive action against enemy
commerce was left to privateers.       Of these, two, at the      outset, fell
a prey to Commodore Mitchell in the China seas. The others, unaware
of the English weakness, seem to have taken no great advantage of the
situation.
   Of this political situation Rainier was reasonably well informed. Prisoners
taken in the two privateers captured by Mitchell agreed that there were
two frigates at Port Louis, together with an armed brig and some six or
eight privateers getting ready for sea. Some of the prisoners said that the
frigates were destined for a raid on Bencoolen, but others said that the
inhabitants of the Isle of France would not let them put to sea at all. All
agreed that the island was feeling a shortage of provisions. News came
from other sources that the French had captured a Portuguese ship from
Lisbon with 600,000 dollars; as also a ship belonging to the Imam of Muscat
with half that sum. There was no information of any French activity on
the Indian coasts, but the French had ‘taken two Junks from the Malays
and ill-treated the Crews, by which means they have most impolitically
made themselves implacable Enemies. . . .’ From all this Rainier concluded
that the initiative lay with him. His freedom of action, however, was
reduced by the fact that the Diomede (44) and Centurion (50) had already
sailed—by order of Captain Newcome of the Orpheus—for blockade duty
off the Isle of France, while the Resistance (44) had been similarly dispatched
to the China Seas. As the blockade of the Isle of France was the only type

                                       72
                        RAINIER     SAILS    FOR   INDIA