

   Here at last was the material for an East Indies Squadron. The partial
destruction of the Toulon fleet had increased the margin of British naval
superiority and allowed now of measures hitherto thought inadvisable. Even
so, the ships sent were those most readily spared. The Suffolk (74) had
been launched in 1765 and the Centurion (50) and Resistance (44) were of
                                            68
                        RAINIER     SAILS   FOR   INDIA

a class of ships more or less obsolescent. The Orpheus (32) was more
generally useful, however, being a typical 12-pounder frigate, built as
recently as 1780.
     The Suffolk had been with the Channel Fleet since March 1793, and was
still under Earl Howe’s command when the above order was written.
Rainier was a senior captain and was intended to succeed Cornwallis in
course of time. He had thus every motive for escaping from the Channel
Fleet as soon as possible. But he could not sail without the East India
convoy and that in turn would have to wait for other convoys bound for
the West Indies, Quebec and the Mediterranean. They would all sail in
approximately the same direction and it would fall to the Channel Fleet
to see them out of the Channel—a major operation which in this case
led indirectly to the Battle of the First of June. All this took time to
organize and Rainier was still at Spithead on 22nd April, 1794, and
still armed with the Admiralty letter addressed to Cornwallis at Madras.
He must therefore have been mildly astonished to see the frigate Minerva
entering Spithead under a Rear-Admiral’s flag. It was Cornwallis himself
who was now saluting the Union Flag with fifteen guns. The Commander-
in-Chief, East Indies, and his successor were both at Spithead and India
was almost without naval protection. To the directors of the East India
Company it all seemed very odd indeed; and most, most undesirable. It
is   probable   that Rainier had a     few words with     Cornwallis, perhaps
ashore at the ‘George.’ But it might not be much more than that for
Cornwallis struck his flag at sunset on the 24th and was in London by
the 27th.
     If the directors of the East India Company expected           to hear of
Cornwallis’s court martial for deserting his station without being relieved,
they were disappointed. And indeed a quick reference to their own files
might possibly have told them that he was entitled to come home when he
liked. The fact is that Cornwallis had explicit instructions dated 7th May,
1791, and signed by Chatham himself, ordering him to leave India when
he thought proper.

         In case upon the receipt hereof and after consulting with the Governor
      General of the British Settlements in India you shall be of opinion
      that, from the circumstances of affairs your Presence shall be no longer
      necessary in that Country, you are hereby required and directed to return
      as soon as possible to this (without waiting to be relieved) bringing with
      you the whole or such part of the Squadron under your Command as may,
      under the existing circumstances of affairs in India, appear to you most
      conducive to his Majesty’s Service, and repairing with them to Spithead
                                       69
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS