

    where you are to remain till further Orders, sending to our Secretary an
    account of your arrival and proceedings.
                                                (Adm. Sec. Letters 2/1344.)
  If their Lordships were annoyed with Cornwallis—as they may well
have been—they had not a leg to stand on. He had had his orders and was
very virtuous to have remained at his post as long as he had. Had he
consulted the Governor-General (his brother)? Of course he had! Had
the war altered the situation completely? Then their Lordships could have
cancelled their order of May 1791—which they had never done. Was India
exposed to attack? Then their Lordships should have sent him ships with
which to defend it. Cornwallis was in a strong position.
  Rainier was now more definitely the commander-in-chief designate.
He was authorized to hoist a broad pendant as Commodore as soon as
he parted company with a flag officer, and appoint an additional lieutenant
to his ship at the same time. Lord Howe finally sailed with his convoy
on May 2nd, parted from the merchantmen on the 4th, but detached a
squadron under Rear-Admiral Montagu to see them past the latitude of
Finisterre. There were one hundred and eighty-four sail of the convoy in
sight of the Suffolk on the 6th. The Straits and Quebec convoys parted
company on the 10th and finally Rainier’s East Indiamen detached themselves
under his guidance on the nth, the Admiral having made a signal to that
effect. With only the Swift in company and the Indiamen, Rainier hoisted
his broad pendant, simultaneously appointing his nephew (Mr. J. S. Rainier)
into the lieutenant’s vacancy he was authorized to fill. The other events of
the voyage were perhaps less satisfactory. Sailing with Indiamen was all
very well from the point of view of hospitality. It meant endless invitations
to dinner so long as the weather was fine, and the dinners were good. But
it was endlessly irritating in other ways. The commanders of the Indiamen
had their own ideas on the best route. Rainier, who had been a lieutenant
under Hughes, would of course stand no nonsense of that kind. But two
of them wanted to put into Rio de Janeiro for repairs (so they said) and
water. This he could not well refuse, but others parted company without
permission; four of the big China ships at that. Then a wretched ship called
the Harriet sailed badly and ‘prolonged the passage at least a week,’ while
the commander of the Rose ‘twice attempted to leave the convoy’ and on
the third occasion pleaded the loss of a topmast. These unauthorized
separations apart, Rainier successively discarded the Bombay ships (in
370 46' S. and 350 23' E., on August 8th) and the China ships—or the five
that remained—in 36° 27' S. and 64° 07’ E. on the 15th. With the remaining
twelve ships bound for the coast and bay he reached Madras on Septem-
                                       70
                       RAINIER    SAILS   FOR   INDIA

ber nth, and found the Orpheus (32) and Heroine (32) already there. He
was on his station and his proper task had begun.
  No campaign is properly conducted that is not founded on an appreciation.
Rainier may or may not have recognized this fact, but he was an able and
experienced seaman, who had once been in the merchant service; a heavy,
middle-aged and unromantic figure, wholly lacking the social position of
his predecessor. His appreciation, assuming him to have made one, would
be founded, like any other, on information. And, at this juncture, informa¬
tion about his French opponents was plentiful, if confused. It came from
exchanged prisoners and ‘cartel’ vessels which carried them and did some
spying at the same time. He thus learnt of the arrival at the Isle of France
(in 1792) of the new governor, Anne Joseph Hippolyte Maures, Comte
de Malartic, sent to impregnate the colony with the latest revolutionary
doctrines. To have found a man less suited for the purpose would have
been extremely difficult. His appointment had been one of the last acts of
Louis XVI and it can only have been through oversight that Malartic was
not soon afterwards recalled. He seems to have been politically adaptable,
serving one Government as readily as another. Apart, however, from this,
he personally represented all that was best in the old regime. He was a
polished, benevolent and fatherly ruler who talked in a friendly fashion
to all and gave away his income in charity. With his old-fashioned sword
by his side, he was to be seen going to church each morning and accosting
his neighbours in the street. He was conciliatory to the political extremists
and scrupulously civil to the enemy. He, more than any other, was respon¬
sible for saving the Isle of France from internal disorders.
  On landing from the frigate Fidele, on 16th June, 1792, Malartic had
found the colony in difficulties. There were financial troubles and the troops
were refusing to accept their pay in paper money. A shortage, almost
amounting to famine, began in September 1792, and recurred in August
and September 1793 and again in March 1794. In the meanwhile, during
1793, came news of the King’s execution, of the Terror and the Jacobin
triumph. The movement spread, in some degree, to the French colonies
and led to the formation in the lie de France of a Colonial Assembly on
more or less revolutionary lines. The Admiral, Saint Felix, fresh from
his argumentative encounter with Cornwallis, had returned to the island
on 24th June, 1792. It was local political activity which had then prevented
him doing anything further. The Colonial Assembly, buzzing with argu¬
ment and naturally eager to be in the fashion, demanded, and obtained, the
arrest of Duplessis, governor of Bourbon, as a suspected royalist. This was in
1794. At the same time the Admiral himself was arrested, being scarcely