

      Accounts having been received that War was declared at Paris on the
    2nd inst. by the National Convention of France against Great Britain and
    Holland; Rec’d, in pursuance of the King’s Pleasure signified by Mr. Dundas,
    one of his Maj.’s Principal Secretaries of State, in his Letter of this day’s
    date, that Orders be sent to the Commanders in Chief of His Majesty’s
    Ships at home and abroad and to the Captains of all the Ships & Vessels in
    Commission, to seize or destroy all ships or vessels belonging to France,
    which they may fall in with. . . .

  On the nth was read the King’s message to Parliament, notifying the
Commons of the war and assuring them that:
       . . . His Majesty has taken the necessary steps to maintain the Honour
    of his Crown; and to vindicate the right of his People: and His Majesty
    relies with confidence on the firm and effectual support of the House of
    Commons and on the zealous exertions of a brave and loyal people in
    prosecuting a just and necessary war, and in endeavouring under the blessing
    of Providence, to oppose an effectual barrier to the further progress of a
    system which strikes at the security and peace of all independent nations,
    and is pursued in open defiance of every principle of moderation, good
    faith, humanity and justice. ... 1

   Thereafter, orders and appointments were made almost daily. Frigates
were sent to warn homeward-bound merchantmen. Rear-Admiral Gardner
was sent—no doubt on his own advice—to command on the Leeward
Islands station. The captain of the Niger was ordered (April 18th) to
reconnoitre Brest. Captain O’Brien Drury was to proceed to the African
coast to protect the slave trade. On May 18th Lord Hood was appointed
commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean and given detailed orders,
presumably drafted by himself. On July 3rd Admiral Earl Howe was
ordered to sea, to the westward, as soon as he had fifteen sail of the line
                       1 House of Commons Journal, 1793.

                                      66
                      RAINIER     SAILS    FOR   INDIA

in readiness. By September their Lordships were receiving Hood’s account
of his surprising occupation of Toulon, and of Captain Elphinstone’s
valuable services there ashore. By November they were ordering Vice-
Admiral Sir John Jervis, K.B., to proceed with an expedition to the West
Indies. The war, in short, had fairly begun. But there was one possible
theatre of hostilities in which members of the Board showed, apparently,
no interest. That was the East Indies station.
   It is not quite true to say that the East Indies were forgotten. On
March 7th, for example, orders were given for the Thetis (38) and Leopard
(50) to meet the homeward-bound Indiamen while the Powerful (74) was to
escort six of those outward bound as far as Latitude 370 or 38° S., proceed¬
ing with Rear-Admiral Gardner’s flag as far as the Cape Verde Islands. But
these measures of trade protection applied only to the Atlantic. The Indian
Ocean was evidently assumed to be safe. For this assumption several reasons
can be assigned. In the first place, the French colonies were known to be
in a state of disorder. In the second place, the French had no ship of the
line east of the Cape and none could sail for the East without being reported.
In the third place, war in India seemed unlikely, if only because it had just
finished. And, lastly, Admiral Cornwallis was in India and doubtless had
the situation in hand. It was not, therefore, until 25th October, 1793, that
Captain Smith, of the Diomede (50), was ordered to sail for Madras and
report there to Cornwallis. Smith was provided with a copy of the
H.C.S. Houghtons log of 1769-70, evidently the classic example of an
East India voyage, and told what to do if Cornwallis were not to be found.
A single 50-gun ship was no great reinforcement for a station of such vast
extent. It was February 1794, nevertheless, before anything further was
done. Action then took the form of the following order addressed to Peter
Rainier, Esq., captain (as we have seen) of the Suffolk: