




                                     'i




                                                64
(T




     plate ii. The Rt. Hon. Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville   The Rt. Hon. second Earl Spencer (1758—1834)
     (1742-1811) Secretary of State for War and President of                       by J. S. Copley
            the Board of Control, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
                                CHAPTER II


               Rainier Sails for India

'X'YT^Xar had been waged in India from 1789 and ended in 1792.
 \ \ /But these were years of peace in England, of peace disturbed
   V Vonly by news of extraordinary events in France. The news
became steadily more grave until it was known, by the end of 1792, that
war was imminent. Even then, the naval preparations were not marked
by any unseemly haste. They may be traced, day by day, in the Admiralty
Board Minutes, which are pervaded with a due sense of dignity, deliberation
and calm. The Board Room still exists and it is easy to people it anew, in
fancy, with men who used to meet there. The room is panelled with
mahogany, part of a consignment from Jamaica in 1719, the rest of it going
to the house of the Countess of Suffolk at Richmond—mistress of the
future George II, a lady whose garden was laid out by Pope, whose cellars
were stocked by Dean Swift. Against this dark background, redolent of
Josiah Burchett if not of Samuel Pepys, moved the powdered heads of their
lordships. They would sit round the polished table, gaily dressed, cravatted
and urbane. There was the Earl of Chatham, Pitt’s brother, as First Lord.
There was Lord Arden. There were the two naval members, Lord Hood
and Captain Gardner, and there was the Hon. Mr. Townshend. There was
Mr. Pybus. There was Mr. Smyth. These, or most of them, met daily in
the spring of 1793 and it is possible to know what each day they agreed.
Thus, on January 8th, they commissioned among other ships the Suffolk (74),
to be commanded by Captain Peter Rainier. On January 31st they appointed
the Rt. Hon. Captain Lord Cranstown to the Raisonable (74) and—what
was   that   other   man’s   name?—yes,   Captain Horatio   Nelson   to   the
Agamemnon (64). They took due note, on February 1st, of a discovery
applicable to making cordage and ironwork, as also of Captain Pakenham’s
invention for steering a ship after the tiller in the gun-room had been shot
away. But Lord Chatham arrived late on that day and informed the Board
of the King’s pleasure that the Rt. Honble. Richard, Earl Howe, be appointed
to command the Channel Fleet, with the union flag at his main-topmast-
head. This was, in fact, George Ill’s own decision and Lord Hood, who
                                     65                                   c
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

had hoped for that command, was furious. On the same date their Lordships
applied for an Order in Council empowering them to issue press warrants.
At a second meeting, later that day, Lord Chatham signified to the Board
that His Majesty had directed certain promotions, including Lord Hood’s
own promotion as Vice-Admiral and the promotion to Rear-Admiral of,
among others, the Hon. William Cornwallis and Captain Alan Gardner.
   All this time war had not actually begun. It came nearer on February 8th,
when warnings of a probable rupture with France were sent to commanders-
in-chief in the Mediterranean, Jamaica, Leeward Islands and Nova Scotia.
It began, for naval purposes, on the following day, the 9th, when: