

                                     75
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

had resulted in what was tantamount to a defeat for the latter. Without
the loss of a single ship, and despite a virtual inferiority in force, the French
had done what they set out to do. They had driven off the blockading
ships and saved the Isle of France from something approaching famine.
  On his arrival at Madras, Rainier was met by petitions from the merchants
for further naval protection in the Straits of Malacca; petitions which were
supported by a request Rom the Governor-General. He accordingly gave
orders for the Diomede and Heroine to take up a station between Malacca
and the north-west end of Banca Island and remain there until all the trade
from the eastward had passed. They were then to return, the one by the
Straits of Sunda and the other by the Straits of Malacca. These two ships
sailed from Madras on February 5th, the Swift being sent soon afterwards
with a convoy bound for the Arabian Gulf. Rainier himself, with the Suffolk
and Orpheus, remained on the coast, where he was joined in March by the
Resistance, from Bombay, and at the beginning of April by the Centurion.
   In these early months of 1795, the Commodore’s immediate problem
mainly concerned the French islands. Was he to renew the blockade or
not? In this connection he had to consider, first of all, the suggestions of
the Governor-General contained in a letter dated February 6th.

        The situations of risque from an Enemy during the S.W. Monsoon which
     prevails from March to August may chiefly be confined to three.
        1st. The Island of Ceylon
        2nd. The Streights of Malacca
        3rd. The Streights of Sunda
        The Island of Ceylon is usually made, I understand, from the month
     of March to the beginning of August by Vejsels from Bombay to the coast
     and to China, and in June & July by Ships from the Eastward & those from
     Bengal to Madras. It is also made by the Ships from Europe to Madras & Ben¬
     gal. On these grounds this seems a proper Station for a Cruize until August.
        A Station between Acheen and Pulo Penang seems calculated to protect
     the entrance into the China Seas through the Streights of Malacca, and a
     Station at the Streights of Sunda is also adapted to secure the pajsage into the
     China Seas, and the Trade to & from Batavia. It may I imagine be pojsible
     to establish a communication between this last place and Fort Marlbro’.
        I have already exprejsed my sentiments on the importance of Stationing
     a Force off the Isle of France as equally calculated to confine their privateers
     in Port & to cut off their supplies of provisions from Madagascar & com¬
     munication with Europe. In this Station I think the most respectable Force
     should be employed as necejsity will naturally induce every exertion on
     the part of the French to repel it.
      (Governor-General to Commodore Rainier, 6th February, 1795. Ad. 1/168.)
                                         76
                        RAINIER      SAILS   FOR   INDIA