

of offensive open to him, Rainier had perforce to concentrate his remaining
ships for the defence of trade.
  Rainier’s own immediate movements were dominated by the need to
leave the coast before the breaking of the monsoon—before, that is to say,
about October ioth. His first move was to send the Orpheus and Swift
to cruise off Friars Hood and between Point Pedro and Tranquebar. His
next move was to follow with the Suffolk, join the other two ships, and
take all three with him to Penang. His object was to protect the country
ships due about then from China and bound for India by the Straits of
Malacca—‘which being a very rich convoy and but indifferently protected,
may be expected will be attacked.’ He expected to return to the coast
towards the end of December, in time to protect the homeward-bound
Indiamen sailing from Bengal. At about the same period, the Centurion
and Diomede might be expected from the southward—since it was not
practicable to blockade the French islands for very long at a time, nor
advisable to be there at all during the hurricane months—and the Resistance
from the eastward, where she had been cruising in the China Seas. These
three ships would all probably have to go to Bombay for repairs and refitting.
  The above arrangement of his forces gave Rainier the right to claim
that he had, at least to some extent, satisfied the many requirements of
commerce protection. The Governor-General, Sir John Shore, voicing these
various needs, asked for a force to be stationed off Achin, another in the
Bay of Bengal, another in the Straits of Malacca and yet another off the
French islands.
        From the middle of December until the end of February, the Country
     Vejsels sail from Bengal to the Eastward with valuable Cargoes of Opium;
     the China Ships generally enter the Eastern Entrance of the Straits of Malacca
     early in December on their return to Bengal, Madras & Bombay, and the
     latest seldom beyond the ioth of Jan’y. The returning Frigate from the
     China seas will, I conclude, clear the Straits of Malacca of any of the Enemy’s
     Cruisers which may be found there. This protection may be supposed to
    extend to the end of December, after which the pajsage of the Straits will
    require farther Protection, the Enterprises of the Enemy have hitherto
    been made to the Eastward.
        Under these Circumstances I submit to your Excellency the propriety
    of detaching such force as you may deem fit through the Straits of Malacca
    so as to arrive at the eastern extremity of them by the middle of December,
    and after remaining there to the end of the month, to proceed Southerly
    through the Straits of Dryon or Sunda, and return to Fort St. George
    by the West Coast of Sumatra, calling at Bencoolin, I cannot but think
    it probable that such of the French Cruisers as may find the means of leaving
                                        73                                     c*
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS