

                                        77
                              CHAPTER III



            Danger from the Dutch

R     ainier’s first thought was of Trincomalee. It had once been held by
       the French in Suffren’s time and he did not want to see them there
      ^ again. His second thought was of Malacca; again, not for its own sake
but as a place which must not fall into French hands. Orders came from
England to occupy both Malacca and Ceylon, but they were hardly neces¬
sary; both ships and troops were in motion before the dispatches could arrive.
‘The importance of getting possession of Malacca was so obvious/ Rainier
admitted, ‘that my idea of it was anticipated by Lord Hobart and Colonel
Brathwaite before I arrived.’ This evidently showed just how obvious the
idea must have been. But even obvious plans are not always easy to execute,
and in this instance there was an immediate difficulty in the lack of tonnage
at Madras. Providentially, the Diomede and Heroine had returned from the
eastwards, however, and these, with the Suffolk and Centurion, sufficed, with
some country ships, for the expedition to Trincomalee. Captain Pakenham,
with the Resistance and Orpheus, was to occupy Malacca. With hastily
chartered transport vessels, both expeditions sailed from Madras on July 21st,
parting company the same day. Rainier’s three larger men-of-war each carried
upwards of three hundred white troops, and the transports carried a further
number of sepoys. Flat-boats for a landing were carried, together with field
artillery, mortars, shot and shell. The military commander, Colonel Stuart,
and his staff were with the Commodore in the Suffolk. After calling at
Negapatam, the expedition arrived off Trincomalee on August 1st.
  It must be understood that the English quarrel was not with the Dutch but
with a Holland under French control. The Prince of Orange was an ally, so
that this expedition to Ceylon took the form of a peaceful occupation. Armed
with letters from the Prince, the English merely asked that the Dutch forts
should admit an English garrison to assist in their defence. There was at this
time no question of annexation. As for the local Dutch officers, their views
were undecided. Those who were loyal to the House of Orange objected,
nevertheless, to surrendering their batteries to those who looked uncommonly
like enemies. They were in a dilemma. The English proposals had been sent
                                     78
DANGER   FROM   THE   DUTCH




          79
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

beforehand to the governor at Columbo who decided to obey the Prince’s
orders and accordingly sent instructions to the Commandant at Trincomalee
to admit the English troops. When, however, these instructions were pre¬
sented, the Commandant found a flaw in the wording and made it a pretext
for disobedience. Nearly two days were spent in argument before it was
decided to make a landing. When the ships moved in for the purpose, the
Diomede grounded on a rock and sank almost instantly, the crew and troops
being saved by the boats of the squadron. This delayed the landing for
another day. However, in the end, the soldiers landed without opposition
and laid siege to the forts. Eight days after the opening of the trenches, and
after a brisk bombardment, the lower fort and town surrendered. On
August 31st Fort Ostenburg capitulated and passed into English hands
without any further fighting. In his report Rainier dwelt on ‘the great advan¬
tage of obtaining pofsejsion of so important a fortification in an uninjured
state’ as well as on ‘the acquisition of the only safe Harbour on this side of
India.’ The taking of Trincomalee was certainly of vital importance, for it
rendered more or less impossible any repetition of the campaigns of Suffren.
Useful as the harbour might be, the real point in securing Trincomalee was
to prevent it falling into the hands of the French. The subsequent fall of the
other Dutch settlements, both in Ceylon and on the mainland, was of
comparatively small importance.
  What was true of Trincomalee was equally true of Malacca. The chief
object in occupying it was to prevent the French coming there. Rainier made
this clear in his orders to Captain Newcome of the Orpheus. After taking
Malacca, he was free to attack any other Dutch settlement ‘that may, if they
are hostile, annoy the trade to China.’ He was also to ‘lose no time in pushing
on to Malacca’ in the first instance, remembering ‘how exceedingly detri¬
mental it will be ... should the Enemy get the Whip hand & be there before
you.’ Thus encouraged, Captain Newcome crowded sail for Malacca, losing
his squadron on the way but arriving in person as early as August 15th.
The Resistance appeared two days later, and Newcome at once began opera¬
tions without waiting for the last stragglers. Troops were landed and the
Dutch capitulated almost without firing a shot. Leaving an English garrison
in possession, Newcome went with his two men-of-war to escort the China
convoy through the straits, afterwards returning to Penang to refit.
  While ordering the occupation of Ceylon and Malacca, it is not to be
supposed that the English Government had lost sight of the existence of
a Dutch colony at the Cape of Good Hope. The strategic considerations
which suggested the occupation of the first two settlements were equally
imperative in the case of the last. With the Cape in the hands of the French—
                                        80
                       DANGER      FROM     THE   DUTCH