

the moment, it is true, but, as will be seen, there were privateers at sea
Elphinstone began to hear accounts of them.
      The Enemy’s Cruizers have been troublesome and succejsful, but the
    extensive range of Coast requiring protection, the various services on
    which the ships are indispensably engaged, the expeditions undertaken,
    some remote, the lojs of the Diomede and Defects of the Sphynx all unite
    to counteract the inclination and duty I feel to protect our trade & prevent
    annoyance. It is my intention as soon as the Season admits the ships return,
    to collect a force and cruize closely off the Mauritius, the most probable
    means of intercepting the Enemy’s Vefsels. . . .
           (Elphinstone to Admiralty, 23rd February, 1796. P.R.O. Ad. 1/55.)
  It will be seen that Elphinstone was not impressed by Rainier’s assurances
that Java, ‘the Bengal of the Dutch,’ would be an easy prey. Whether
convinced of the fact or not, he evidently thought that the French islands
merited prior attention; possibly because of the recent captures, possibly
on general principles of strategy. Neither for the first nor last time, the
Isle of France was in some danger of a hostile visitation in force. It was
saved by a belated Dutch effort to recapture the Cape. Some rumour of
the Dutch intention reached Madras while Elphinstone was still waiting
for the return of his forces. He waited no longer, but decided to return
at once to the Cape in person, leaving orders for some of his ships to
follow. Sailing on March 23rd, with the Monarch and Sphynx, he came
into Simon’s Bay on May 23rd. Commodore Blankett was there and had
seen no sign as yet of a Dutch squadron. On the other hand, he had ample
information from Europe that the squadron was to be expected.
   Perhaps no force ever went to its doom so inevitably as did the Dutch
squadron under Rear-Admiral Lucas. Its destination was known to the
British Government about a month before it sailed. It was seen and reported
in the North Sea. It was seen again and reported between Madeira and the
Canaries. It was sighted once more off the Canaries. The news of its coming
was brought to the Cape successively by a fast-sailing frigate and a neutral
merchantman. For a part of its voyage the squadron was shadowed by
another frigate, which finally outstripped it and arrived beforehand with
the news of its approach. Then again, the Dutch ships progressed in so
leisurely a fashion that the English Admiralty had ample time to reinforce
the squadron at the Cape with two more sail of the line, a 50-gun ship
and transports enough for some thousands of troops. Indeed, the forces
which Rear-Admiral Lucas ultimately encountered had been collected to
receive him from places as remote as the North Sea and the Coromandel
coast. A secretly prepared and rapidly developed attack might perhaps have

                                       85
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

had some effect. It might have reached the Cape at a time when Elphinstone
was elsewhere, cruising off the French Islands or Batavia. There was little
to be said for the management of an expedition which allowed its object
to be known at Madras almost as soon as the squadron had sailed.
   On his arrival at the Cape, Elphinstone found there, with Commodore
Blankett, the America (64), Ruby (64), Princess (26) and a sloop called
the Hope. Five days later, on May 28th, there arrived the Sceptre (64) and
Crescent (36) with six transports. On July 21st, there being still no sign
of the Dutch, Rear-Admiral Pringle came in with the Tremendous (74) and
Jupiter (50). On the same day the Moselle (28) arrived. This was the frigate
which had been watching the Dutch. She had fallen in with them off
Madeira; four sail of the line, three frigates and a sloop, heading eastwards.
Following on this definite news of the enemy’s whereabouts came still
further reinforcements, the Trident (64) and, finally, the Stately (64) with
the two sloops Echo and Rattlesnake; these last three coming from India
in obedience to Elphinstone’s orders left at Madras.
  A question which naturally arises is how the Dutch squadron contrived
to spend so long on the voyage. James, the naval historian, could find no
explanation. ‘Where the Dutch admiral had passed the spring and summer,’
he wrote, ‘no one could tell.’ All that we now know is that he spent all
those months at sea. He called, it is true, at La Luz in the Canaries, and
again at Porto Praya in the Cape Verde Islands; but he made no long
stay at either. Nor did he put into any port in Brazil, although he was off
that coast by the end of June. Calms and contrary winds and (possibly)
bad seamanship seem to have been the sole causes of delay. As remarkable,
almost, as this incredible passage was the fact that Lucas received no sort
of warning of his danger. Had he, during all those months, fallen in with
any friendly outward-bound neutral, he could scarcely have failed to hear
of the English preparations. He appears to have heard nothing.
  Elphinstone, although fully prepared, had serious doubts as to whether
Lucas was really bound for the Cape. He assumed that the Dutch would
learn the strength of his squadron and go elsewhere, to relieve or retake
Colombo, to attack the Portuguese at Goa, or to recover Malacca and
save the Spice Islands. Accordingly, he tried to keep his ships at sea, ready
to intercept them. Unfortunately, the weather did not favour this plan.
He presently had to report ‘the most tempestuous weather’ he had ever
experienced. Returning, sorely battered, to Simon’s Bay on August 12th,
he was informed that the Dutch squadron had been in Saldhana Bay since
the 6th. The wind rose at this point to ‘a perfect tempest’ which nearly
wrecked the Tremendous. There was delay, consequently, in putting to
                                     86
                       DANGER     FROM     THE   DUTCH