

  The Governor-General also proposed that convoy should be given to
the Bombay cotton trade, sailing for China at the end of May. Rather
unexpectedly, this proposal was rejected by the merchants themselves.
Headed by Forbes,        Smith   &    Co., Alexander Adamson and            Bruce,
Fawcett & Co., they signed a petition on February 22nd, representing
to Rainier that ‘the sailing of their ships in Convoy is detrimental to their
Trade on account of a Glut in the Cotton Market at China.’ All they asked
was to have cruisers stationed off Ceylon and in the Straits of Malacca.
  It will be seen that Rainier’s disposition of his forces corresponded fairly
closely to the suggestions both of the merchants and the Governor-General.
Where he ultimately had to differ from the latter was over the question
of the blockade. In this he was influenced by the news, brought by a neutral
vessel to Tranquebar, that the French were sending four sail of the line,
accompanied by frigates and carrying troops, to strengthen their forces at
the Isle of France. With this information, which afterwards proved false,
there came the further and more definite news that American ships had been
supplying the French islands with provisions brought from Madagascar.

     . . . this news has only probability to support it, however it leads me to be
     of opinion that sending ships from hence to cruise off those Islands does not
     appear a measure of expediency, with the small force I have, as their Lordships
     must know that His Excellency the Governor General who suggested it
     does not, that I have no authority to stop Neutral Ships entering those
     ports with provisions only, that it is a Voyage of seven or eight weeks there,
     as many back again, and dangerous entering the harbour of Diego Royes
     to water; and but a short time left for Cruising without being able to form
     a regular relief; besides, in case of distrejs the Cruisers may be obliged to
     bear up for the Cape of Good Hope, so that I dont think at present of
     sending Ships that way, as the Service requires Cruisers in the Streights of
     Malacca, off Achen and Ceylon, for the protection of the trade of the Country
     which may be pa/sing those situations during the SW Monsoon & of the
      Company’s Ships that may be expected from Europe during that Season also.
                    (Rainier to Admiralty, 19th April, 1795. P.R.O. Ad. 1/168.)

   The Commodore’s reasons for not continuing the blockade of the French
islands were convincing enough. The need remained to capture them. In
the meanwhile, however, came the important news of the annexation by
France of the United Provinces. If the Dutch were now actual or potential
enemies, the whole situation in the East was radically altered. Hearing the
news in July, while cruising off Ceylon with the Suffolk, Resistance and
Orpheus, Rainier returned at once to Madras to concert measures with Lord
Hobart. They would clearly have to act quickly.