

Elphinstone made his final arrangements. The plan for the conquest of the
Isle of France having been abandoned, he thought it best to institute a
blockade, which was to continue until the approach of the hurricane months.
For this purpose, he sent a detachment under Captain Fosack, consisting
                     ,         ,
of the Jupiter, Braave Sceptre Sybille and Sphynx. The Braave was one of
the captured Dutch ships, of 40 guns. The Sybille was another 40-gun ship,
which arrived on September 18th with troops from Gibraltar. The Trident
and Fox (32) sailed to strengthen the East Indies squadron, then weakened
by the disablement of the Orpheus and the Heroine during bad weather
in the Bay of Bengal. On October 5th Elphinstone addressed to Pringle
a long letter of instructions and advice, and then, on the 7th, sailed for
England with the Monarch and Daphne (20). His departure restored Rainier
to his former independence.




                                     90
                               CHAPTER IV



        Sercey at the lie de France

C      ommodore rainier returned
       the capture
                                            to Madras (September 21st) after
                      of Trincomalee, without waiting for the fall of
       Colombo. In fact, operations in Ceylon continued, with naval
co-operation, well into 1796. It was not until February 15th that Colombo
capitulated—not for nothing is its present shopping centre called the Fort
—with profit to the captors amounting to £300,000. The naval commander
was Captain Alan Hyde Gardner—the Admiral’s son—and the Swift
sloop (16) was commanded by Captain James Sprat Rainier who had just
been appointed to a death vacancy. But the elder Rainier, in September
1795, had already been planning the next move. With no news as yet of
the success of the expedition to Malacca, but assuming its success, the
Commodore was thinking of the Spice Islands. Troops might be lacking
for an assault on Batavia itself, but what of (say) Amboyna? The Dutch
had always been very secretive about their eastern empire. The time had
come, perhaps, to inspect it. The result of discussion with Lord Hobart
was a Letter in Council to Rainier dated September 29th.

    To His Excellency Commodore Rainier,
        Commander-in-Chief, etc.
    Sir,
             In consequence of the communication our President had with you,
    upon your arrival from Trincomalee, and a conversation from Colonel
    Brathwaite upon the same subject, we have given orders for two Companys
    of Europeans and a Battalion of Sepoys to be in readiness to embark imme¬
    diately and to consider themselves under your orders. We conceive that
    the first object which will engage your attention will be that of proceeding
    to Malacca with a view to inform yourself of the situation of affairs there,
    and, if that place should not have been subdued, to give such aid as may
    appear to you necessary for its speedy Reduction. The orders from home
    having particularly directed that we should, in the first instance, turn our
    attention to Trincomalee, and afterwards progressively to the Molucca
    Islands, we shall take the liberty of submitting to your consideration the
    advantage that would result from an early possession of Amboyna, which