

        Upon this consideration the Isles of Mauritius offer themselves as most
     conveniently situated for our operations and the Major General having
     exprejsed his ability to furnish 5000 men for the purpose with every requisite
     appendage and the necejsary implements, I have consequently determined
     in concert with the Major General that no time should be lost in preparing
     to undertake an Attack against those French Isles, and every exertion is
     now making for this desirable attempt and I hope little doubt is to be
     entertained for succejs should it be put into execution.
        The Mauritius is the only place in these parts in the pojsejsion of the
     French, its present utility to them is therefore considerable, and affords
     every refuge and shelter to their Cruizers in these Seas, by which the British
     Commerce is greatly annoyed; upon these grounds the subduction of it
     becomes an important value to His Majesty’s Service. . . .
        But, altho’ the proceeding has been thought advisable, and engages my
     most sanguine wishes, I have counciled with the Major General on the
     indispensable duty incumbent on us to suffer no dazzling expectation of
     conquest to relax our using every endeavour for the certain security of our
     pojsejsion obtained, upon this Colony, to which every other consideration
     must yield, and nothing be attempted which could probably afford a distant
     hazard of its being attacked by the Enemy. . . .
                 (Elphinstone to Admiralty, 30th July, 1796. P.R.O. Ad. 1/55.)

   The Admiral and General agreed that nothing should be attempted unless
it were possible to leave the Cape with an adequate garrison and adequate
naval protection. The ships were sufficient as soon as reinforcements had
come from India and England. The troops were available because the army
at the Cape included forces actually destined for India, forming no part
                                        88
                       DANGER      FROM        THE   DUTCH

of the intended garrison of the colony and easily spared, therefore, for
other purposes. There was also agreement between the commanders-in-
chief on another point, namely, that nothing should be done until after
the Dutch effort to recapture the Cape should have failed. The whole
question had to be shelved during Lucas’s tedious progress towards disaster.
For six wearisome months Elphinstone could do little but wait, spiderlike,
for his unpunctual victim. On the other hand, once the prey had appeared,
the Admiral had other things to attend to. With a captured squadron of
nine ships on his hands, he was busy improvising crews and announcing
his success. He was even, perhaps, a little impatient to return home and
enjoy his laurels. At any rate, there was no more talk of attacking the
French islands; and, indeed, after the middle of September it was getting
rather late in the year to undertake any such operation.
   One result, and that not the least important, of Admiral Lucas’s expedition
was the separation of the Cape and East Indies stations. However fortunate
the event may have proved, the Admiralty had to observe that, when the
Cape was first threatened, its naval defender was at Madras. The decision
seems, in fact, to have been made in February 1796, as soon as the Dutch
designs were known. In a letter to Elphinstone of the 25th, their Lordships
announced their intention, ‘not doubting’ they added, ‘but you will see
the propriety of this arrangement when you consider the importance of
that settlement and the necessity of employing all your attention in
endeavouring    to   secure   to   this    country   that   valuable   possession.’
Elphinstone, in his reply dated June 25th, strongly opposed this arrangement.
He argued that it was impossible to keep on both stations a force equal
to any the enemy could send. If, he pointed out, the flag-officer at the
Cape, with the larger force, knew that an enemy squadron had passed him,
bound for Goa or Batavia, he would ‘not be at liberty to depart himself
or to detach a Force for encountering their Designs’; which designs might
very probably include the recapture of any Dutch settlements annexed by
Rainier, and the intercepting of the China trade. He begged leave to
suggest that the Cape and East Indies stations should remain united and
that the Cape should be ‘the common Rendezvous for the Superior
Commander.’ He ended with the words ‘as the objects of the Expedition
entrusted to my Conduct have been accomplished, my only Wish is now
to return to Britain; and on the continuance of hostilities to be employed
in my former Station under the Command of Earl Howe.’ The Admiralty
had given him leave to return home when he saw fit, and it was not long
before he availed himself of this permission. Admiral Pringle, it will be
remembered, was already there, ready to take his place. Before his departure,
                                          89
                     WAR      IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS