

known it, they might have taken, successively, the Orpheus and Resistance       ,
then bound separately for Malacca on an expedition already referred to.
As it was, these ships had, unknown to themselves at the time, a narrow
escape. The Resistance recaptured one of the French prizes and went on
her way. The French frigates, unaware of their opportunity, sailed for their
base. On his return to Madras from Trincomalee on September 21st, Rainier
was ‘agreeably surprised to learn by a Ship lately arrived from the Streights
of Malacca that the French frigates had disappeared’ and that the expedition
to Malacca was likely to succeed. Rainier accordingly determined to proceed
in force to exploit any success, carry reinforcements, and ‘attack the Spice
Islands or otherwise act’ as he thought ‘most conductive to the execution
of His Majesty’s Commands.’ For this purpose he divided his forces into
two parts, one to accompany him and the other to remain on the coast.
His force had been augmented by the Governor-General’s putting under
his orders several of the cruisers of the Bombay Marine. This enabled him
to take with him nearly the whole of the King’s ships; that is, the Suffolk ,
Centurion and Hobart, together with the sloop Swift. On the coast were
to remain the Heroine (32), the Company’s frigate Bombay (32), and the
Company’s sloop Swift (18). Two other sloops of the Bombay Marine,
the Queen and Drake, were to aid the above vessels in what was to be
their principal task, the blockade of Colombo, in which town the Dutch
wrere still holding out.
   On receiving Elphinstone’s dispatch, Rainier did not alter his immediate
plans. He felt, indeed, all the more ready to leave India comparatively
unprotected, supposing as he did that Elphinstone would presently arrive
on the coast. As his orders implied nothing to the contrary, he meant to
proceed as planned, strengthened in his resolution by the advice of Lord
Hobart and the ‘authentick Intelligence that the Dutch at Batavia have
armed five of their large ships carrying from 50 to 60 Guns.’ Although the
activity of the Dutch was due, doubtless, to a fear that Batavia would
otherwise share the fate of Capetown, Rainier had to remember that the
beginning of the next year would see the Indiamen and country ships
returning from the China Seas. He hoped to be able to return to India
shortly although, as he wrote, his movements would have to be uncertain.
As he expressed it, ‘’tis not po/sible to say what my detention there may be,
which must be regulated by the force of the Enemy in those seas and
existing circumstances.’ Just before sailing, Rainier received news of the
surrender of Malacca in a dispatch from Captain Newcome dated August 31st.
He reported this to Elphinstone and left at Madras a number of papers
addressed to the Admiral, whom he knew to be on the point of coming

                                     83
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

to India. In these he described his plans, touched on various administrative
matters and finally urged Elphinstone to proceed against Batavia, which
might well, he thought, be the next prey. ‘Batavia,’ he wrote, ‘is represented
to me as easily to be taken, from the abhorrence the Natives, both Chinese
and Malays, have of the Dutch, and the weaknejs of the Fortifications,
relying much on the protection of the Ships in the Road. . . .’ Rainier
sailed for Malacca on October 15th, partly to protect the China trade,
partly to further his designs on the Spice Islands.
  Elphinstone, meanwhile, as Rainier supposed, was planning to visit India.
The Cape was, apparently, in no immediate danger and so he felt justified
in taking with him the greater part of his squadron. First of all, on
October 27th, the Stately (64) and Victorious (74) were sent to cruise off
the French islands for three weeks and then proceed to Madras. Then,
on about November 13th, he sailed for Madras himself with the Monarch (74),
Arrogant (74), Echo (sloop) and Rattlesnake (sloop). At the Cape he left
Commodore Blankett with the America (64), Ruby (64), Princess (26) and
Star (18). The Admiral reached Madras with his own contingent on
15th January, 1796, and was joined four days later by the Stately and
Victorious and a few weeks later by the Sphynx (24)—a newcomer sent
on from the Cape. This detachment was completed by the Prince of IVties,
an armed transport. Some time was spent in refitting the ships, making
sails and repairing the Sphynx, and then most of the men-of-war sailed
                                        ,
‘on various services.’ The Rattlesnake Echo and Prince of Wales were sent
to join the Heroine off Colombo. The Arrogant was detailed to cruise off
Point de Galle on January 25th, and the Stately sailed for Trincomalee
four days later. The Victorious was dispatched to Penang on February 4th,
leaving the Monarch and Sphynx at Madras, the former being the flagship
and the latter still unfit for service. The ships sent on these various errands,
although ‘completely stored and victualled for four months’ were under
orders to return to the coast in the course of a month. Elphinstone was
trying to combine trade protection with full control of the squadron. He
complained, indeed, that Rainier had made this latter part of his task more
difficult; ‘another arrangement,’ he hinted, ‘might have retained the Naval
Force more collected and prepared for Services not so remote. . . .’
   What other plans Rainier could have made Elphinstone omitted to
suggest. Hampered as he was by the need to blockade Colombo and by
his orders to occupy Malacca, it is not clear what else he could have done.
A weakness, however, in his dispositions; and a weakness which Elphinstone
did not correct, was the lack of naval protection in the Bay of Bengal. This
lack had already begun to be felt. The French frigates were not active at
                                        84
                      DANGER      FROM      THE   DUTCH