

for that is virtually what its continuance under Dutch rule would mean—
all communication with India would become hazardous. There was no
alternative but to strike swiftly and vigorously before the French could have
time to act. This was accordingly done. A squadron under Sir George Keith
Elphinstone, consisting of three sail of the line, a frigate and a sloop sailed
from St. Helen’s on 3rd April 1795, joined forces with another squadron of
three sail of the line and a sloop under Commodore Blankett, off the Cape,
and dropped anchor in Simon’s Bay on June 10th. The squadron carried a
detachment of troops under General Craig, but it was hoped at first that no
hostilities need take place. As at Trincomalee and Malacca ‘liberal offers’
were made; offers of alliance and protection against the French. And for
some weeks friendly relations were maintained, though with difficulty,
between Dutch and English. Negotiations broke down, however, in the
end, and a landing was made on August 7th. Skirmishing went on for the
remainder of the month, but on September 4th a fleet of Indiamen arrived
with General Clarke and a larger body of troops. On the 15th, overawed
by these reinforcements, the Dutch governor capitulated and the whole
colony passed into English hands. All this took place in what was still
technically a time of peace. As Admiral Elphinstone wrote on August 10th,
‘The Dutch are obliged to obey the Orders of the National Convention,
and we are no doubt at war with them, although I do not know it officially.’
   The Cape was not at this time regarded as a particularly valuable
acquisition. As a naval base, indeed, it had many disadvantages. Neverthe¬
less, it became necessary to station a considerable squadron there, if only
to prevent the Dutch or French retaking it. This squadron was far larger
than that based on India. Consequently, when it was decided at the
Admiralty that the Cape and the East Indies should form one station under
one commander-in-chief, it was naturally agreed upon that the Admiral
at the Cape should be the one to command the whole. Accordingly, the
dispatch in which Admiral Elphinstone informed Rainier of his success at
the Cape contained the following unwelcome passage:

       Agreeable to the directions of the Right Honble Henry Dundas, one of
    his Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, on my arrival here upon the
    10th I took upon me the Command of His Majesty’s Ships & Ve/sels
    employed on a particular service including all the Indian Seas, by which
    you will be pleased to govern yourself and the ships with you.
       All promotions will of course from that date rest with me, and in the
    mean time you will give Acting Orders when there shall be occasion, a/suring
    yourself that your wishes will at all times have great weight with me. . . .
       I fear the Season will be too far advanced to get on the Coast with safety,
                                       81
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS