

                                      91
                       WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    we understand to be one of the most valuable; but as we are extremely
    deficient in point of information with respect to the strength or value of
    the Dutch Spice Islands; and as so much must depend on the Intelligence
    you may receive either at Prince of Wales’s Island or at Malacca, we should
    not wish to dwell on any particular object—Satisfied as much of your Prudence
    and Discretion as we are of your Gallantry and Zeal, we are persuaded that
    every Exertion that is practicable will be made, and that in whatever way
    the Troops under your'Command may be employed it will equally redound
    to your credit and the advancement of the Public Service. . . .
               We have the Honour to be
                    With great regard and esteem
                         Sir
                    Your Excellency’s most obedient humble Servants,
                                                            Hobart
                                                            Edward Saunders
                                                            E. H. Fallofield
    Fort St. George,
    29th September
    1795.                                                       (Ad. 1/168.)

    This was, from Rainier’s point of view, very satisfactory. The troops
were put under his command and he could do very much as he liked with
them. It is observable that the emphasis has now moved from strategic
dangers to a question of which islands were ‘most valuable.’ No one, after
all, could pretend that Amboyna was a threat to the China trade or a likely
centre for French intrigue. There is no mention, even, of the possibility
of the Dutch at Amboyna turning out to be adherents of the Prince of
Orange and therefore allies. The object of the expedition was, manifestly,
loot. The fly, however, in the ointment was in the superscription ‘Com¬
modore . . . Commander-in-Chief.’ For Rainier was not commander-in¬
chief. He was Commodore and since May 6th—though he only knew it
on the date of the above letter—had been authorized to appoint a captain
under him. But two days before, on the 27th, he had received the unwelcome
news of Elphinstone’s assuming the command. To make matters worse,
Elphinstone had been commander-in-chief since August 12th and so would
share even in the prize money for Trincomalee—let alone for Colombo
and the Moluccas. There were flag officers who would have renounced the
Admiral’s share in such circumstances but Elphinstone—a Scotsman—was
not one of them. It was all very exasperating. Consolation came before
very long in the shape of his promotion as Rear-Admiral, although it was
months before he heard of it.
   One advantage resulting from the operations against Trincomalee was
                                        92
                         SERCEY      AT    THE      ILE   DE   FRANCE

that Rainier’s squadron was well concentrated on the coast. The loss of
the Diomede was partly made good by the purchase of a French-built 400-ton
ship which was renamed Hobart and commissioned as an 18-gun sloop,
with seamen from the Diomede. The rest of the frigate’s crew was divided
between the other ships from which fifty-eight seamen and marines had
recently been invalided, many from scurvy. On October nth Rainier
reported to Elphinstone that he was about to sail for Malacca with the
Suffolk (74), Centurion (50) and Swift (16), expecting to find there the
Resistance (44) and Orpheus (32). For trade protection in the bay he left
only the Heroine (32), the Hobart (18) and the Company’s cruisers Bombay
Frigate (32) and Swift (18). Of these last he had, incidentally, the poorest
opinion. (‘There is something in the management of those ships that
disgusts British Sailors’.) He was running rather a risk, but had heard
nothing of the French frigates since the beginning of August and now
learnt (October 12th) that they had been seen in Lat. io° S. on their way
back to Mauritius. This account was in fact true—they had been frightened
away by a copy of the Madras Gazette in which mention was made of the
expected arrival of the Sceptre (64). Malacca had fallen, meanwhile, to
Captain Newcome, news of which reached Rainier on October 15th, the
day on which his expedition sailed.1
   Rainier did not expect any resolute resistance from the Dutch. They
had only two men-of-war (as he knew) and were divided among themselves
on the political issue. His main opposition would come from uncharted
waters, short supplies and disease. He reached Penang on November 14th
with his men-of-war, three transports, troops totalling 317 Europeans and
596 Indians and artillery comprising four 18-pounders, two 8-inch mortars
and two 6-pounder field guns. There he made careful inquiries about the
Dutch Indies and decided to approach Amboyna via the ‘Straits of Sinca-
pour.’ He next went to Malacca, where he found, to his annoyance, that
the Dutch governor had been left in office by the military commander,
Major Brown. Rainier dissolved the Government at once and appointed
Brown as governor; but finding him too lenient in confiscating public
stores, allowed him to resign the office. He reported to Elphinstone
(27th December, 1795) that he was sending the former Dutch governor
to Madras
      . . . which was becoming necessary from the great influence the Dutch
      had acquired, and were allowed to go on to increase in the plan of Govern¬
      ment Major Brown seemed disposed to adopt. The removal of the Governor,
  1 See Journal of a Voyage through the Straits of Malacca by Captain W. C. Lennon, 1796-97.
Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, June 1881.