

sea; and it was not until the 15th that the English squadron sailed. Elphin-
stone might reasonably, by that time, have expected to find Saldanha Bay
empty. With that fatality, however, which attended his operations, Lucas
had been holding councils of war. Despite some military opposition, he
had managed to water his ships at least sufficiently to enable him to reach
the French islands. Even after having decided to go there, on learning of
the strength of the English army ashore, he allowed himself to be detained
from day to day, partly out of consideration for the sick men he had been
forced to land. He was on the point of sailing, on August 16th, when
Elphinstone appeared with seven sail of the line, a 50-gun ship, three
frigates and three sloops. Now, the Dutch squadron consisted of the
following ships: the Dortrecht (66), Revolutie (66), Tromp (54), Casthor
(44), Braave (40), Bellona (28), Sireene (26), Havich (sloop) and Maria
(storeship). The force included, that is to say, but two ships of the line,
and these of inferior force; scarcely the material, Elphinstone thought, for
a naval battle. ‘Perceiving,’ as he afterwards wrote, ‘their numbers very
inconsiderable in comparison with the Force under my command,’ he sent
an officer with a flag of truce. After an exchange of messages during the
night a Dutch officer came on board the flagship at daybreak and presented
proposals for a capitulation. Terms were agreed upon at 5.0 p.m. that day;
terms which amounted to an almost unconditional surrender. The Dutch
ships were handed over on the 18th and Elphinstone commissioned them
all, asking the Admiralty to send out the necessary personnel. The official
reply was to the effect that this proceeding was utterly irregular.
  The peerage which Elphinstone received as reward for his part in the
capture and defence of the Cape was, on the whole, easily earned. He was,
no doubt, a very able officer; but, in this affair with the Dutch Rear-
Admiral, his success was mainly due to chance. Only after the surrender
of Lucas’s squadron was it made clear why the Dutch had put in at the
Cape at all. With the French co-operation which had been originally
promised, something might have been done; but what could be the point
of landing a few hundred men on a shore bristling with English bayonets ?
Lucas was, as we have seen, more or less ignorant of the English prepara¬
tions. What caused him, however, to bring his squadron into Saldanha
Bay, without even a preliminary reconnaissance, was, more than anything
else, shortage of water. He had been at sea for months and could not, in
any case, have gone any further without replenishment of supplies. He
was also, however, belatedly, in pursuit of the Sceptre and her convoy
which he had sighted on August 1st. Why he failed to put to sea again
sooner than he did is, in some degree, mysterious; but why he surrendered
                                      87
                       WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

so tamely afterwards became apparent—his men had refused to fight. In
many respects, then, Elphinstone can be said to have been exceedingly
fortunate; in the ample warning he received, for instance, and in the failure
of the Dutch to escape from Saldanha Bay before he arrived.
   Oddly enough, dismal as was Lucas’s failure from the Dutch point of
view, his expedition was of definite use to France. By distracting
Elphinstone’s attention at a critical moment, Lucas may almost be said
to have saved the French islands; no mean achievement, although not
exactly what he had set out to do. The fact was that, in July, before Lucas
appeared, Elphinstone and General Craig had been discussing the possibility
of an expedition against the Isle of France. Indeed, the discussions had
taken place even earlier, giving way in July to actual preparations. In a
dispatch to the Admiralty, Elphinstone began by pointing out that there were
troops at the Cape which might with advantage be employed elsewhere.