

    unlefs you have been so fortunate as to obtain po/sejsion of Trincomale;
    but either there, or on the other coast I hope to see you as soon as circum¬
    stances will admit—the expectation of a French Squadron will make me
    inclined to keep all the large Ships as compact as pojsible. I am not without
    hopes of hearing from you at this place, and request you will not fail to
    write me by any safe opportunity; you may expect to Fear from me as often
    as pojsible.          t
              (Elphinstone to Rainier, ioth August, 1795. P.R.O. Ad. 1/168.)

  The above letter, carried by H.C.S. Arniston, reached the Commodore
at Madras on September 27th. Any annoyance he may have felt he forbore
to express. That the Cape was now in English hands was, of course, good
news. What had been ‘a feather in the hands of Holland’ would have
become ‘a sword in the hands of France’; and the occupation of the Cape
was clearly, therefore, a wise move and well calculated to check any French
designs on India. Again, the Cape would not only cease to supply the
French islands but would also serve as a convenient base for a squadron
detailed to blockade them. On the other hand, grateful as Rainier may
have been for this lightening of his task, he must have resented his loss
of independence. Moreover, he must have known that the new arrangement
was unworkable. It was difficult enough for an officer at Madras or Bombay
to dispose his forces in accordance with such information of the enemy
as might reach him from the China Seas, the Red Sea, the Straits of Malacca
and the Isle of France. But at least his position was reasonably central and
reasonably convenient for concerting measures with the Indian Presidencies.
At the Cape there was neither of these advantages. To try to direct opera¬
tions from a station on the extreme verge of an enormous field of activity,
spreading into three oceans, was to attempt the impossible. Elphinstone,
it is true, approved and defended the scheme; but then it must be remem¬
bered what consequence it gave him. There was, in reality, so little to be
said' for it that the Admiralty very shortly reversed its own decision. In
the meanwhile, however, Rainier had to content himself with his subordinate
position and report to Elphinstone instead of directly to the Admiralty.
  Rainier’s position on September 27th, when he received the dispatch
from the Cape, was complicated by the recent news from the eastwards.
In the course of July the French frigates La Cybele and La Prudente ‘had
dashed thro’ the seas between the Streights of Sunda and Western entrance
of those of Malacca & took several prizes, English, Dutch, Portuguese &
Spanish, about 9 in all’ (Rainier to Admiralty, 9th October, 1795). The
French frigates, accompanied by Le Coureur brig, seem to have made this
attack without very much information concerning their enemy. Had they
                                        82
                       DANGER     FROM    THE   DUTCH