

addressed to the Colonial Assembly. They were accompanied by fervent
appeals signed by the colony’s own deputies in the National Convention
and directed to the troops and the national guard. The brave citizens were
urged, in these appeals, to enforce the Decree of 16 Pluviose, An 2. There
would be opposition, it was admitted, from slave-owners and from the
rich generally; but, in that case, all the citizens had to do was to treat them
as public enemies. As it happened, these appeals never reached the people
to whom they were addressed. The Colonial Committee of Public Safety
read the documents and arranged that they should go no farther than the
Colonial Assembly; first trying, indeed, to prevent them going as far. It
was then decided to ignore the Decree and shelve for the present all the
papers relating to it. In view of the fact that both the Committee and
Assembly were mainly filled by the wealthy slave-owners who were to be
dealt with so severely, this decision was not surprising. As a conciliatory
step, however, and to soften their opposition on the main point, the
colonists agreed to abolish the trade in slaves, as opposed to the ownership
of those already in the islands.
  The Convention which originally passed the Decree might perhaps have
overlooked the colonists’ inactivity in this matter, but the Committee of
Public Safety was made of sterner stuff. It was decided to follow up the
Decree by a mission sent to see that the settlers obeyed it; a mission to
consist of two fully-empowered agents and an escort of troops. The agents
chosen were MM. Baco and Burnel. Baco was an honest man and an ardent,
if not particularly tactful, republican. Burnel was the Directory’s authority
on the affairs of the Isle of France, he having lived there for four years
as editor of a local newspaper. He had the reputation of a local politician
given to intrigue. The two agents, with their secretary, sailed from Rochefort
on 4th March, 1796. With them went four frigates under Rear-Admiral
Sercey and a body of troops under General Magallon de la Morliere. It
was fortunate for the British that this squadron was as small as it was. The
frigates were originally to have numbered six. Then, in May 1795, Rear-
Admiral Kerguelen suggested that the frigates should be followed up by
two 74-gun ships, a suggestion which was negatived (Archives Nat. BB4 86).
Possible commanders whose names were put forward were Vanstabel,
Bouvet and Lacrosse. But the Marquis Pierre-Cesar-Charles-Guillaume de
Sercey was, on the face of it, a better choice. He had been born in the
He de France, to begin with, and had served in the Indian Ocean in 1767-70.
He had become captain in 1791, Rear-Admiral in 1793, and had been at
St. Domingo during the risings there, being instrumental in saving six
thousand colonists. After a period in prison he had been reinstated (on

                                      97                                   D
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

