

 through the Straits of Bali. This decision was forced on them, to some
extent, by Rainier, who called at Macao on December 30th, with the Suffolk
and Swift, and collected there four East Indiamen and two other ships.
These he escorted through the Straits of Malacca, without waiting for the
other six Indiamen expected. This may have been because his ships needed
refitting or because the six East Indiamen preferred' their own route. It
seems more than probable that Rainier expected trouble, if any, in the
Malacca Straits and thought the Bali route safe. Unfortunately, Sercey heard
of this plan and, while Rainier escorted one small convoy through the
Straits of Malacca, Sercey was waiting for the others off the east point of
Java. He was none too sure, however, of the intelligence he had received,
and half-expected Rainier to appear, after all. Having had one encounter
with two 74-gun ships, the French Admiral was in no mood for another.
The sequel was an instance—and not the last to be here recorded—of an
intelligent plan being ruined by an excess of imagination. Apart from that,
however, Sercey had no orders to seek and destroy the enemy—quite the
reverse—and he had just seen his squadron immobilized for three months
as the result of an action forced upon him. He was, therefore, in cautious
mood.
   Captain Lennox may have sensed what Sercey’s anxiety would be likely
to be. At any rate, on sighting the French, he formed a line of battle, hoisted
a Rear-Admiral’s flag and ordered the other Indiamen to hoist blue ensigns
and naval pendants. When Sercey detached the Cybele to reconnoitre the
enemy, Lennox followed suit with two ships—which would, of course,
prevent the French frigate having too close a view of the Woodford and
Ocean. In rough weather and a bad light they sufficiently looked the part,
and Captain Therouart reported to his Admiral that he had recognized
two ships of the line and four frigates. Sercey believed this report and made
sail away from this evidently superior force. Nor was his action altogether
unreasonable. He would have learnt at Batavia all about Rainier’s opera¬
tions in the Moluccas. There was nothing, he knew, inherently unlikely
about finding a British Rear-Admiral in the Straits of Bali. If Rainier had
completely ignored the duties of commerce protection, he might have
returned by that route. In fact, however, on January 28th, Rainier was at
Penang. By February 13th he was at Madras. Sercey, meanwhile, returned
to the He de France, closely pursued by the story of how he had been
chased by the merchantmen. That had certainly been a wasted opportunity
and a source of mirth to the enemy. But his whole cruise had been, in a
sense, a wasted opportunity. He had approached India when most possible
naval opponents were off the Cape or in the Moluccas. He had been driven
                                     106
                   SERCEY AT THE ILE DE FRANCE

from the Coromandel coast by a false report, driven from the Straits of
Malacca by two 74-gun ships and finally driven from Java by a piece of
bluff. The Dutch empire had been ransacked while he was fighting with
shadows.
  When compared with that of the French privateers, Sercey’s achievement
appeared even more meagre than it was. For the opportunity afforded in
1796 was not neglected by everyone. It was not overlooked by Robert
Surcouf, for example, of St. Malo. Whereas, in general, any detailed account
of privateer activities must be deemed impossible, to ignore Surcouf is
equally impossible. Of his contemporaries one may say that the facts about
them would be difficult to verify; and, once established, more difficult to
present. It would be like chronicling the morning’s activities of eight or
ten blue-bottles; and rather secretive blue-bottles at that. But more is known
of Surcouf than the rest. We know, for example, that he was born in 1773,
the son of a Breton noble and a descendant of Duguay Trouin. He came
out to the lie de France as a boy of sixteen, and served in a slaver called
the Aurore, which stowed as many as six hundred slaves. Four years later
he was commanding a small slaver called the Creole and continued to do
business after the trade was officially abolished. The resource he displayed
in evading punishment for this offence so impressed two local ship-owners
that they offered him the command of a ship called the Modeste. This
vessel, mounting fifteen 6-pounders and manned by thirty men, had
apparently been built originally as a privateer. Although measuring only
180 tons, she had performed successful voyages under Guerroniere of Nantes
and Le Vaillant of Bordeaux—the latter being now one of her owners. She
came out from France before the war began and, after refitting, was
eventually renamed VEmilie and equipped once more as a privateer. Seven
or eight letters of marque seem to have been issued early in the war, and
Malartic refused to issue any more, explaining that applications were
numerous and that some must be refused if the island were not to be left
defenceless, without male inhabitants of military age. Surcouf sailed,
nevertheless, without letters of marque, partly in order to fetch supplies
for the lie de France, then suffering from         shortage.   This   was   on
3rd September, 1795. Calling at the Seychelles early in October, he sailed
from there for the Bay of Bengal, making his way northward by coasting
the Nicobars and the shores of Pegu. Taking an English vessel called the
Penguin laden with timber, which he sent back to the Isle of France, he
went on and arrived off the Sandheads in January 1796.
  In contrasting, as one cannot avoid doing, the comparative success of
cruiser and privateer, one must remember that a man like Surcouf had
                                     107
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS