

                                    95
                       WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

blockading, or ultimately capturing, the French islands. He was back at
the Cape by May 23rd. Six days later he heard that a French frigate squadron
had entered the Indian Ocean. The information was quite definite, for the
Sphynx (28) had been chased by them off the False Cape. More than that,
the French ships had taken the whaler Lord Hawkesbury on May 15th in
Lat. 310 S. and Long. 8° E. A prize crew of thirteen men was put on board
and only two of the English crew retained. These, Robert Morrow and
David Laing, being allowed to take their spell at the wheel, put the
vessel on shore about      150 leagues to the eastward of Simon’s Bay.
       The information from the several Persons saved from the wreck of the
     Lord Hawkesbury does not afford a certainty of the present Track of the
     Frigates, or I should have dispatched some of His Majesty’s Ships in pursuit
     of them, and the very tempestuous weather prevailing has also tended to
     prevent the attempt; but I shall use every endeavour to counteract their
     Designs, and if they remain in these Parts I hope to be able to transmit
     welcome accounts of them.
                       (Elphinstone to Admiralty, 24th June, 1796. Ad. 1/55.)

  Elphinstone was still, it must be remembered, waiting for his unpunctual
Dutch opponent, and so unable to weaken his own squadron materially.
Rainier was out of touch. Of his disposition Elphinstone had written
plaintively: ‘. . . the object of the Rear-Admiral will doubtless be conducive
to the British Interest; but another arrangement might have retained the
Naval Force more collected and prepared for Services not so remote’
(23rd February, 1796, Ad. 1/55). This was profoundly true, but the fact
remained that the French had possibly eight large frigates and two corvettes
in the Indian Ocean, with very little (if they but knew it) to oppose them.
Of the two English flag officers one was at the Cape and the other in the
Moluccas. Elphinstone considered the idea of attacking Mauritius. Then
he abandoned that plan and reverted to the idea of a blockade. But how
could he maintain a blockading squadron superior to the force they were
now to blockade ? He asked the Admiralty for reinforcements but was well
aware that the damage might be done before they could arrive. The next
move lay with the French.
  Fortunately for Elphinstone and Rainier the settlers at the Isle of France
were not at this moment pondering how best to attack British India. They
were rather planning how to defy Republican France in the matter of the
abolition of slavery. Developments were slow, however, and it was not
until 21st September, 1795, a year after the first news came of the threatened
change, that the colonists had any definite orders to defy. The orders,
moreover, when they came, were easy to set aside as irregular in not being
                                        96
                   SERCEY     AT THE       ILE   DE   FRANCE