

steered for Ceylon before the monsoon and sighted it on August 14th.
It does not appear that Sercey had any inkling of his opportunity. He could,
had he known it, have raided Madras or blockaded the Hooghly. He was
heading for a vast gap in the English defences and could have safely swept
the Bay of Bengal for a month. It was natural, however, for him to assume
that the bay must be defended and his first need was to find out where its
defenders lay. He sent the Alerte to find out, cruising off Ceylon to await
her return. Drieu, however, the commander of the Alerte, was a born
privateersman and wanted not information but prize money. On the night
of August 19th he attacked a supposed Indiaman, which turned out to be
the Carysfort (28). The presence of this frigate was more or less accidental
—she had just brought out dispatches from England. The Alerte, when
taken, was found to contain papers giving full details of Sercey’s intended
cruise; papers which Drieu had not the sense (or perhaps the time) to
destroy. It was, for Sercey, an extraordinary misfortune. As for Captain
Alexander, of the Carysfort, he had a difficult problem and no Admiral
nearer than Capetown to whom to report. His solution was as good as
any. He ‘planted’ on Sercey, presumably in some native vessel, the informa¬
tion that there were four ships of the line at Madras. As a result, the French
Admiral ventured no farther north than Tranquebar—which two of his
frigates raided—and presently sailed for the Straits of Malacca.
  Sercey’s object was to raid Penang. Given a stronger squadron and some
troops, he would have been glad, no doubt, to capture the island and use
it as a base. Francis Light had been nervous in 1794 that such an attempt
would be made.1 But Sercey was not in Suffren’s position. He had no ships
of the line and, much as he might have desired a forward base against India,
he had no means of holding it. Penang was in no state, however, to resist
a raid, being almost unfortified at this period and far from any other settle¬
ment. As for naval protection, Rainier was still in the Moluccas, as Sercey
no doubt eventually realized. Sercey was off Sumatra on September 1st
and took several prizes in the roads at Acheen. He had just added a country
ship, the Favourite, to his score and was relieving her of stores when, on
the 8th, two large ships were sighted to leeward. That Sercey was unlucky
must be allowed. They were two 74-gun ships, the Arrogant and Victorious      ,
and their presence there was almost by chance. Admiral Elphinstone, in
quitting India, had made arrangements (see page 90) for blockading Batavia
and protecting the China trade. These had coincided with Rainier’s demands
for supplies, with the result that the Victorious had sailed to escort a trans¬
port round Acheen, bound for the eastwards, and the Arrogant (one of
            1 See Malay s First British Pioneer, H. P. Clodd, London, 1948.

                                         IOI
WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS