

                                      99
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

scenes of tumult, while the troops in barracks were surrounded by the
National Guard and threatened with cannon. The corvette Moineau, in
which the agents had taken refuge, received orders from Malartic to sail
at once under sealed instructions. These instructions, when opened, directed
the captain to proceed to the Philippines. Under threats from the agents,
however, the captain disobeyed orders and took his two passengers back
to France. They fully expected to be able to return at the head of an army.
Instead, however, they found the political situation altered, and a new
Government in office which felt no inclination to interfere further in the
matter.
  Elphinstone had early information of the above events, if only in outline,
for the Moineau fell in with and pillaged a vessel belonging to the East
India Company called the Lady Shore. This vessel was released and reached
the Cape on July 21st, bringing the news of the agents’ discomfiture.
It was this news which filled the Admiral with ideas about conquering the
French islands, for he and General Craig were partly convinced that the
inhabitants would, at this juncture, welcome British protection. Some such
offer seems, in fact, to have been sent to the islands; only, of course, to
be refused. Nevertheless, while in no mood to admit an English garrison,
the colonists were for a time very anxious about their relations with France.
They were, moreover, expecting an attack from the Cape, as Elphinstone
learnt from prisoners. From the same source he gathered that the settlers
might accept British rule ‘if their property were secure,’ but that they ‘did
not much like accounts of what the English did at the taking of Martinico.’
Altogether, this was an anxious period at the Isle of France. There seems
even to have been a certain shortage of provisions there; a shortage which
would have been more serious but for the frequent arrival of American
merchantmen. Many vessels, it may be added, came from India ‘under the
Colors of various Eastern Country Powers and other disguised preten¬
sions.’ These were often commanded by British seamen and, very prob¬
ably, it was thought, owned by British merchants, who were always apt
to do business ‘to the Destruction of their Country’s Interests.’
  Sercey, now rid of the two deputies, turned his attention with relief to
his proper business of commerce destruction. He now felt the loss of his
two corvettes and requisitioned, in their place, a privateer schooner called
VAlerte. With this vessel to do the scouting, he sailed on 14th July, 1796
(after refitting) with a squadron of six frigates—Forte (44), Prudente (40),
Seine (44), Regeneree (36), Cybele and Vertu. The Preneuse and Brule-
Gueule (32) he sent to cruise in the Mozambique Channel and Coureur (20)
apparently left behind, perhaps as being too slow. The French squadron
                                     100
                    SERCEY      AT   THE    ILE   DE    FRANCE