




                 102
                   SERCEY     AT   THE   ILE   DE   FRANCE

Elphinstone’s ships from the Cape) sailed from Madras on July 31st, partly
to escort transports and partly to protect ships bound to China from
Bombay. Captain Lucas, of the Arrogant, had reached Penang on August 3rd,
to find there the Centurion and Orpheus but not the Victorious, which was
escorting a transport back to Madras, The Orpheus had been crippled in
a gale. Lucas, acting apparently on some rumour of the Trench approach,
succeeded in recalling the Victorious, ‘Thinking it of the greatest consequence
to collect all the Lorce I could,’ but did not think himself justified in
detaining the Centurion, which was wanted to escort the China ships. On
August 25th the Hobart sloop arrived from Bengal with dispatches from
Elphinstone and the Governor-General, addressed to Rainier. These Lucas
opened and learnt of the danger, or as he put it, ‘found the situation I was
in with so small a Lorce.’ The Orpheus at that moment was without fore¬
mast, mizzen-mast and bowsprit, and the Hobart scarcely to be kept afloat
in harbour. Lucas had accordingly decided to sail for Trincomalee and
Madras, hoping to refit, revictual and return with reinforcements. He had
sailed on September 1st, and now sighted Sercey’s squadron at daybreak
on the 8th.
  It would probably be true to say that neither side was very keen to
fight. The issue of an action between two 74-gun ships and six frigates
would be doubtful, depending much on the weather. Sercey was bent on
commerce destruction and did not want to see his frigates crippled. He
would have avoided action if he could. Lucas, on the other hand, was aware
of what might happen if Sercey sailed on his way unopposed. He went in
pursuit, explaining afterwards.
       The critical situation I now found myself in and the advantage they might
    take, it being doubtful my falling in with them again, and the probability
    of their meeting the Centurion on her return thro’ the Streight and believe
    me, Sir, Rear-Admiral Rainier’s critical situation to the Eastward was not
    forgot: nor the protection of the different Settlements in this Country,
    all these circumstances determined me to risque an action. . . .
                        (Lucas to Elphinstone, 17th October, 1796. Ad. 1/168.)
  The settlement immediately to be considered was Penang, with the
crippled Orpheus and Hobart. Given such full information as the Trench
might obtain, say, at Malacca (after capturing it), there was nothing to
prevent them going eastwards and catching Rainier with his sickly crews
and dispersed ships in the Moluccas. Lucas had no alternative but to fight.
He followed the French frigates throughout the 8th, watching for a
favourable opportunity; attempted to cut off their two rear ships (without
success) on the morning of the 9th, and shortly afterwards (at 7.20 a.m.)
                                      103
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS