Robespierre’s fall) in 1794 and was now chosen as a rising officer and a
native of the island he was to save from the enemy.
   It was, no doubt, disconcerting for Sercey to learn from the Minister
of Marine and Colonies (Vice-Admiral Truguet) that he was virtually under
the orders of the two agents.
       ‘Ces agents’ [wrote Truguet firmly] ‘etant revetus d’une autorite superiure,
    je leur ai communique les Instructions qui vous ont ete expediees afin de
    leur faire connaitre l’objet et les details de la mission dont vous etes charge
    —Vous vondriez bien sommettre a leur approbation les mesures que vous
    croiez convenable prendre, non seulement sur l’emploi des forces navale
    qui vous sont confiees mais encore sur les differents objets de service que
    vous devez remplir. J’attend de votre zele et de votre patriotism ... a
    executer leurs ordres, vous donnerez l’example des egards et de la deference
    qui sont dus a leur caractere et a l’autorite que le Directoire leur a
    deleguee.’
                                                       (Archives Nat. BB4 86.)

  Sercey had been too recently under the shadow of the guillotine to look
too dubiously at orders like these. He looked perhaps with more concern
at the agents themselves. He hoisted his flag, nevertheless, in the Forte (44),
and assumed command of a squadron comprising the Regeneree (36) and
Seine (36), with two corvettes, Bonne-Citoyenne and Mutine. The Vertu (40)
was to follow and did so. With General Magallon went eight hundred troops,
two companies of artillery and a quantity of munitions and equipment for
the He de France. As Malartic pointed out, the colony had received no
men, money, supplies, arms or ammunition since January 1793; so this aid
was, if anything, overdue. The squadron sailed on 4th March, 1796.
   The voyage was not, from Sercey’s point of view, a particularly happy
one. He rather liked Baco but found Burnel extremely tiresome. The former
used to explain to him that his colleague was very good-hearted, really,
but that authority had gone to his head. Later in the voyage the two agents
quarrelled with each other in ‘scenes bien scandaleuses’ and all too public.
From verbal abuse, on one occasion, they went on to fisticuffs and ended
by trying to throw each other overboard. Sercey, who would by then have
been glad if they had both succeeded, separated them with difficulty and
vented his annoyance in a private letter to Truguet (Archives Nat. BB4 86).
In reality, the Admiral would have had more cause for anxiety if the
agents had been more dignified. For he thoroughly disliked their mission
and wanted, if he could, to procure its failure. For a raid on the Bay of
Bengal Sercey was well chosen. For assisting to abolish slavery in the
lie de France he was unsuitable. For one thing, he was an aristocrat and
                                       98
                   SERCEY    AT   THE   ILE   DE   FRANCE

a native of the island, brought up among a slavery in which he thoroughly
believed. For another, he had seen, at St. Domingo, exactly what was likely
to happen when the slaves should be freed. Those scenes he did not wish
to see again. From this point of view, the agents’ behaviour (which he
possibly exaggerated) was playing into his hands.
  Both Sercey’s sloops parted company from him, crippled by bad weather
in the Bay of Biscay, and both were captured by a British frigate squadron,
the   Mutine   while on her way back to France.          The three frigates,
however, reached the Canaries where the Vertu (40) joined them. Sailing
thence, Sercey captured the Lord Hawkesbury, as we have seen, followed
by a Portuguese Indiaman, chased the Sphynx, took another prize, the
Montrose, and, on June 18th, reached Port Louis in the lie de France. The
Prudente (36) and Cybele (40) were there and the British ships which had
been blockading them had withdrawn. It was a ‘decadi,’ the republican
sabbath, and the principal inhabitants were mostly out of town. They
reassembled, however, in Port Louis as soon as the news came, and three
delegates were sent on board the flagship as soon as the squadron dropped
anchor. Ascertaining something of the purpose of the agents’ coming, these
delegates sent one of their number ashore, ostensibly to arrange for an
official reception. The other two tried to gain time by raising intricate
points of etiquette. The Colonial Assembly, they insisted, liked to do things
with all proper solemnity. In point of fact, the arrangements for the official
reception included the drawing up of troops along the shore, and the
sounding them as to their willingness to fire on the squadron. It seems
more than likely that it was Sercey who warned the delegates of the agents’
intentions and hinted at his own sympathy with the colonists. He and
Malartic moved very circumspectly. Sercey may, however, have persuaded
Magallon to place himself under Malartic’s orders and so avoid taking sides.
The attitude of the troops proving ambiguous, the envoys were, very
reluctantly, allowed to land. The troops from the squadron were also
allowed to land on the following day. Baco and Burnel, once ashore,
lectured the Assembly, disclosed dictatorial powers and threatened the
Colony with dire penalties for disobedience. After talking of dissolving
the Assembly, deposing the governor and deporting all who opposed them,
the agents heard of a plot to assassinate them and hastily took refuge in
the barracks. The Assembly having flatly refused to obey the Decree, the
agents tried to persuade Magallon to use force. That astute officer referred
them to General Malartic, his senior in rank. As for Malartic, his conduct
appears to have been non-committal. Events then followed swiftly. Narrowly
escaping being shot, Baco and Burnel were hustled on board ship amidst