

range when Sercey broke off the action at ii.o. The Victorious was too
crippled to pursue and Lucas ordered Waller to steer for Penang.

      ... am sorry to add’ [concluded Lucas] ‘by that officer’s imprudence in
     getting her head a different way from the Arrogant exposed the ship to the
     whole of the Enemy’s Fire, which rendered her incapable of renewing the
     action when every advantage might have been taken; the enemy having
     got their sweeps out and making off by every possible means they could use.
        In bringing the said ships to action, I am happy to say, it proved so far
     fortunate as to oblige them to give up their expedition and quit the Straits
     of Malacca and I have every reason to suppose they were sick of the business.
     Two of them were so much disabled as to be obliged to steer with sweeps,
     they afterwards were taken in tow and appeared to make a great deal of
     Water; they made all the sail they could to get off.’

                                                                           (Ad. i/ssO
   It was an unsatisfactory action from the British point of view and the
Victorious had suffered fairly heavy casualties (17 killed and 55, including
two officers, wounded). On the other hand, the French frigates had 42 killed
and 104 wounded between them, with enough material damage to compel
them to refit. For this purpose Sercey went to the Mergui archipelago and
did not sail again until early October. His immediate mission had failed.
   The French Admiral could obtain only a partial refit at Ue-du-Roi, his
Mergui anchorage. He managed there to replace masts and spars but two
of his frigates needed docking. When he sailed again, therefore, in early
October, he made but a short visit to the Bay of Bengal—during which
he took nothing—and then made for Batavia, arriving there at the end of
November. He expected to find there a Dutch squadron with which to
co-operate. He also wanted still more urgently docking facilities, cordage
and sailcloth. Dutch naval co-operation was not forthcoming, but he did
obtain at Batavia the stores he needed with a promise of rice for the lie de
France. He was there for two months altogether and then on 4th January,
1797, sailed to intercept the homeward-bound China fleet. On January 28th
he met his prey off the east end of Java. The Select Committee of Super¬
cargoes at Canton had heard, of course, of the French Admiral being at
Batavia and had decided not to let the returning Indiamen risk the Straits
of Sunda. Their precise orders for the ships to use the Straits of Sapi or
Allas were addressed to Captain Lestock Wilson,1 who is not mentioned,
however, in James’s account (Vol. II, p. 89) of the sequel, perhaps because
of a change in plan. It was Charles Lennox, it seems, who led the Indiamen
  1 H. B. Morse. Chronicles of the East India Company Trading to China, 1635-1834, Vol. II,
Oxford, 1926, p. 291.
                                           IO5                                       D*
                       WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS