

engaged the enemy squadron at an opening range of 240 yards. The
Victorious was then close astern of the Arrogant and their immediate
                                                   ,      ,
opponents were the four heaviest frigates (Vertu Seine Forte and Regeneree)
sailing in line ahead.
   In considering the accounts of the action which followed, two factors
seem so far to have been insufficiently stressed. First, the French flagship,
the Forte, was an exceptionally large frigate—in fact, an 80-gun ship
cut down, mounting thirty 24-pounders with fifty-two guns in all (enough,
Sercey found, to strain her timbers). She was something equivalent to the
British Indefatigable and Lucas, in fact, mistook her at first for a ship of
the line. The second factor to be noted is the mishandling of the Victorious
as apparent from the Arrogant's log.

    ... at 6 the Enemy showed their colours, same time showed ours, the Enemy
    wore and stood towards us forming the Line of Battle ahead—10 Ms. past 7
    perceiving the Victorious lower Deck Guns not run out, hailed Captain
    Clarke ‘and desired him to run them out as the Enemy had attempted to
    fire several Guns but they would not go off.’ His answer was ‘that he wished
    to wear and stand in shore upon the other tack to examine him, as he was
    afraid they were in the same state’—assented to it, but 6 Ms. after hailed
    Captain Clarke and informed him we should not have time to wear . . .
    therefore desired him to haul his, wind again upon the Starboard Tack
    and keep close under our stern, which he did—at 20' past 7 four of the
    Enemy’s Ships being with their heads towards us, we began to engage,
    dist. about 1 cable length and fired two broadsides into them before they
    could get a gun to bear upon us ... received several shots from the Victorious,
    one of which was between wind and water. At | past 7 it fell quite calm. . . .

  Now, it is understandable that powder should become moist in the
Straits of Malacca. But the Victorious had been in the presence of the enemy
since the day before. Thus, the Arrogant had cleared for action soon after
9.0 a.m. on the 8th—as soon as the private signal was not answered. Here,
however, was a ship with her lower battery unready for action ten hours
later. Note, too, that the accidental hits scored on her consort were not in
the heat of a confused action but almost before the battle had begun. At
about 8.0 Captain Clarke was wounded and Lieutenant Waller, taking
command, allowed the Victorious to become separated from the Arrogant.
As Captain Lucas reported of Waller ‘he wore without any Signal or Order,
by which means he got the ship raked by most of the Enemy’s ships as
they passed.’ Worse than that, the Victorious was becalmed in the midst
of the enemy squadron and the Arrogant unable to help her. Indeed, at 9.30,
the Arrogant reopened fire at a range of one mile and was still at extreme
                                       104
                      SERCEY AT THE ILE DE FRANCE