

                                               93
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    tho’ oppressive to my own feelings, appears to me a measure of unavoidable
    expediency to convince the Inhabitants, particularly the Chinese and Malays
    and the traders from the Eastward, that the Settlement is under his Majesty’s
    Dominion. . . .
      Allow me with all due respect to suggest that should circumstances
    admit, there is little doubt but the Island of Java, the Bengal of the Dutch,
    will be an easy capture. . . .
                                                                  (Ad. 1/168.)

  However other people might view the matter, Rainier regarded himself
as at war with the Dutch; and there can be no doubt that, for all practical
purposes, he was right.
  No account seems readily available of the means by which Rainier reached
Amboyna. That he had Dutch pilots seems more than likely, and he is
known to have had valuable assistance from Captain Page of the Hobart,
and a pilot called Mr. Shaw. He certainly chose the right season for his
expedition when the north-east monsoon would help him, and chose the
right time again for his return.     He must, nevertheless, have been relieved
to find himself off Amboyna on February 16th with his squadron intact
and ready to avenge the massacre which took place there in 1623. He
found, as he had expected, that the Dutch were in no position to resist
him. They had received no reinforcements from Holland for some years
and little news, even, since 1794. The European population of Java was
said to number about two thousand, a third of them sick. To them in
December had come the news of peace with France, brought simultaneously
by an American brig from Europe and by messengers from the lie de
France. The governor had shut himself up and failed to appear in Council
for over a year, it was said, and then came down heavily on the French
side. There was endless quarrelling among the higher officials, ending in
the governor’s removal. But the pro-French party came into power with
the news of the peace. At one stage they were sending envoys to the Sultan
of Java with the unhopeful mission of explaining to him the principles
of Equality and Fraternity. Their crestfallen return did not perceptibly
damp the democratic ardour of dieir friends but left no one in any doubt
as to what the Sultan thought of liberalism. He was, it seems, against it.
  Upon this disorganized Dutch Empire Rainier fell on 16th February,
1796, landing and taking possession of Amboyna, capital of the Moluccas.
The occupation was complete by the 18th. Having thus cornered the bulk
of the world’s supply of cloves, Rainier went on to Banda which he reached
on March 7th and occupied by the 9th after some slight resistance. The
garrison of Amboyna numbered 841, that of Banda 432, with no less than

                                        94
                   SERCEY   AT   THE     ILE   DE   FRANCE

260 cannon. The booty came to about 184,000 rix-dollars, apart from
the spices at Banda. The Banda warehouses were chiefly stored with nut¬
megs and mace but Rainier now learnt, to his surprise, that there were
more nutmegs and cloves on Ternate. He was planning how to secure
these when news came (about the first week in April) ‘of an almost general
Insurrection among the Natives ... [in Amboyna] . . . not without the
stimulus of some opium sold by the Armenia Transport.’ Rainier quietened
this revolt but immediately heard of the intended rebellion of a Moslem
Rajah whose general intention was to exterminate the Christian Rajahs,
‘particularly the one most attached to us of any.’ Rainier found himself
becoming involved in commitments which he had not foreseen. He could
not simply destroy the Dutch power, collect the booty and sail for India.
He had, besides, trouble in procuring supplies and sent to Canton for,
among other things, cordage, sugar, rice and cocoa. He offered to pay for
them, as well he might, in spices. The upshot was that he was detained
among the islands for nearly the whole of 1796, not sailing from Amboyna
until December 1st. On the 8th he issued his final instructions to Captain
Pakenham of the Resistance, a ship which had recently been crammed with
nutmeg and mace but was now to remain with the Amboyna brig and the
H.C. Frigate Bombay. Pakenham was to defend the captured islands and
add Great Timor to them. He was to do surveying work and see whether
the shoals were as laid down in the Dutch charts. He was to watch out
for any hostile armament. Rainier, meanwhile, would call at Macao and
collect the homeward-bound Indiamen before returning, via Penang, to
Madras. It was none too soon for, other considerations apart, the Suffolk
had 200 men sick out of 481, and the Swift 41 men sick out of 107. To
set against that, the captains’ prize money was reputed to be about £ 15,000
each and Rainier’s more in proportion. For the first time, moreover, since
the seventeenth century, England had a footing in the Malay Archipelago.
  Rainier had left Madras on 15th October, 1795. He returned there on
13th February, 1797, to find himself once more commander-in-chief and
now, in addition, a Rear-Admiral of the Blue. It was a long period of
absence and much might have happened in the meanwhile. Much, indeed,
had happened. It is fair to remember, however, that Elphinstone made a
brief visit to Madras on 15th January, 1796, with the Monarch (74),
Arrogant (74), and the sloops Echo and Rattlesnake. He remained there
refitting his ships and arranging for trade protection until March 23rd,
when he sailed for the Cape. He left orders for two ships of the line and
two frigates, when available, to blockade Batavia and protect the homeward-
bound China trade. For the rest, he was chiefly interested in plans for