

great opportunities for gaining information. Formerly a trader himself, he
knew by what routes merchantmen would pass and when. He knew whom
to question and how much to believe. It was more probably from design
than luck that he arrived off the Hooghly when Elphinstone was at Madras
but shortly due to sail for the Cape. It was certainly no accident that brought
him there during the north-east monsoon when no French privateers were
expected. And, once these, he did not waste his opportunity. He began
by taking two merchant ships, the Russell and Sambolasse, together with
a pilot brig. Transferring himself with twenty-three men to the brig, which
he renamed the Cartier, he sent VEmilie home with the prizes.
  In the brig Cartier Surcouf had the perfect privateer; perfect, at least,
for the station on which he was now cruising. It was the privateer’s object
to avoid fighting, it must be remembered, and especially to avoid cannonad¬
ing. A prize with her masts and rigging shot to pieces was not easy to
remove from the scene of the capture. It was by boarding, therefore, that
the privateer captain liked to seize his prey; and boarding necessitates either
a stealthy approach or an approach in disguise. In a pilot brig off the
Sandheads, Surcouf was disguised to perfection. Not only was his appearance
above suspicion, he could also be sure that his victims would seek him
out. The Cartier s first prize was a Bengal rice-ship, the Diana, taken off
Point Palmyras on January 28th. On the following day the H.C.S. Triton
appeared, bound from Madras to Bengal. What followed may best be
gathered from two contemporary accounts which appeared in the Calcutta
Gaiette. The first, from Captain Tapson, of the Diana, relates in turn the
capture of that ship, and then the affair with the Triton. The second is
based, apparently, on first-hand evidence taken from the Indiaman’s crew.

       On the 28th ultimo, about half past seven P.M., we were on larboard
    tacks (wind at south south-east), and discovered a ‘Snow’ on the weather-
    bow close to us. I took no notice of her, as she passed without hailing;
    about twenty minutes after, it was perceived that she had tacked, and was
    close under our lee quarter. I consequently concluded it was an enemy,
    and immediately altered my course to north-west with the intention to run
    the ship on shore, if possible, and began trimming the sails to that course.
       She then hailed me in broken English, ‘What ships that hoa ?’ I answered
    in English ‘Man of War.’ I was then told with harsh language to haul down
    my colours and strike. I desired them to wait a little, and I would tell them
    a different story, on which she gave us a volley of musketry and guns from
    the side next us and passed ahead. The shot went through our sails and
    topmast rigging. That myself and two mates were left to ourselves is not to
    be wondered at, as I had a most wretched crew. Whilst the privateer was
                                      108
                SERCEY AT THE ILE DE FRANCE