

     most of the King’s Ships were detached on a service so distant, if attacked
     by two such formidable Powers. . . .
                                                                 (Ad. 1/168.)

   The news from Constantinople was of the preliminaries at Leoben in
July which led to the Treaty of Campo Formio in October. The effect
in India was instantaneous and inevitable. It was, however, a sad moment
from many points of view. While it is clear that the surprise achieved in
1762 would not have been gained in 1797, the destruction of the Spanish
squadron was not impossible. The squadron was supposed to include three
74-gun ships and four frigates—a fifth having been lost in a typhoon. This
would have been a useful success and Rainier and Craig may have remem¬
bered wistfully that Admiral Cornish and Colonel Draper had each, in
1762, made over £122,500 in prize money—even the seaman or marine
receiving £3 14s. 9fd. The captured colours would not, in 1797, have
gone—as had Draper’s—to King’s College, Cambridge. But Rainier might
have been made a baronet and his sailors (in the year of the Mutiny) would
have appreciated some ready money. On th§ other hand, the expedition
might quite possibly have failed. The Spanish squadron, dismasted (except
for one frigate sunk) in a typhoon, had been laid up at Cavite, as floating
batteries, their sides protected by fascines of rattan, 18 inches thick. They
were supposed to have 150 gunboats with 8,000 regular troops, 10,000
militia and 2,000 cavalry. An informant at Canton predicted complete
success for an invading force of 10,000 or 12,000, but it is fair to remember
that no such army was to have been sent. The attempt, anyway, was never
made. Events in Europe had saved Manila from attack. It should be noted,
however, that events in India had played their part—how large a part will
presently be shown.
  With the situation suddenly altered, Admiral Rainier was thrown on
the defensive. The Spaniards, he realized, would soon hear of the expedition
being abandoned. That would leave them free to join forces with Sercey
and attack the China fleet in overwhelming strength. Sercey, even without
the Spanish, might gain contact with Tippoo Sultan. There were all sorts
of dangers to be averted and no excuse now for failing to avert them.
Rainier began a rapid redeployment of his forces, beginning with a recall
of the ships already at Penang. Captain Clark was ordered on August 30th
to bring the King’s ships and transports back to India, and detain or recall
the Fox until the Svbil/e and Trident arrive as escort for the China trade.
A by-product of the transports being collected at Penang was the Memo¬
randum on that settlement which the younger Wellesley took the oppor-
                                      119
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN       SEAS

tunity to write—‘Memorandum on Pulo Penang’1—probably cut short by
this hasty recall. Captain Cooke of the Sybille was to proceed with the
Fox and Trident to Macao and thence return with convoy. The Hobart was
to escort some supply ships to Amboyna. Pakenham was to be relieved
of his duties at the Moluccas and transferred to the Trident. Rainier himself,
with the Suffolk, Arrogant and Carysfort would cruise between Trincomalee
and Negapatam until the middle of October and then sail for the Malabar
coast so as to prevent, if possible, any French contact with Tippoo. The
Orpheus, with probably the Heroine, was ordered to cruise off the Sandheads
and the Resistance would have to be docked at Bombay. All offensive plans
had been tacitly abandoned.
  The English instinct in thus cancelling what seemed a promising enter¬
prise in the autumn of 1797 was essentially sound. The year 1797, with
the naval mutinies and the threat to Ireland, had seemed full of peril. But
the threat to India, made possible by the British withdrawal from the
Mediterranean in 1796, coupled with the French success in Europe of 1797,
was to develop in 1798. The men who then ruled England and India sensed
the danger even before they had evidence of it. Dundas was warned by
the Chairman of the East India Company, Stephen Lushington, in February
1796, that India might be attacked overland via Egypt.2 Dundas kept the
possibility in mind and was able to take swift action when the moment
came—his best work, as some believe, throughout the war. In arousing the
suspicions and the caution of the authorities in India, the French of
Mauritius played a certain part. Guiltless in this respect was Admiral Sercey.
To have saved Manila, had that been thought an object, his best policy
would presumably have been to appear near Mangalore and attempt to
open negotiation with Tippoo Sultan. He did not do that, and indeed his
operations in 1797 were mostly defensive, and governed by the idea that
the French islands might be attacked. His problem was, in the first instance,
one of supply. For the lie de France was still rent by political conflict,
and a majority in the Colonial Assembly was opposed to allowing the
squadron any provisions. Apart from that, there was a shortage of seamen;
few came from France and those in the island all preferred privateering.
First victim of these circumstances was the Cybele, which Sercey sent back
to France in March or April, partly no doubt for repairs. For the rest, his
operations involved little more than taking the Forte, Vertu and Seine to
the Seychelles in May while the Regeneree and Brule-Gueule reconnoitred