

veering, I prevailed on a few to come on deck, and by the time she came
abreast of us again, we had the sails trimmed to a fine breeze. My people
then went below. I asked the chief mate M. Strange whether he or I should
take the helm; he went to it cheerfully, and I pointed out to him a prospect
of our reaching the shore. She then gave us the other broad-side and the
musketry: the second mate and myself stood by the capstern; the shot came
pretty thick, several struck our sides, and one lodged in the capstern.
   She dropped so far astern before she wore the second time; that if the
Diana had been a better sailor, we should have escaped.
   Before she came near us again, I sounded in twenty-seven fathoms, got
a light and a compass in the gun room, and cut the tiller ropes; as we could
steer and manage the ship below, we all left the decks.
   When they got alongside us again, they hailed us, and threatened to put
every man to the sword if we did not strike. I went on deck, but gave no
answer; perceiving them close under our lee bow, we had nothing left but
to give them the stem: and disable both ships. I consequently called to
the mate below to put the helm hard a-port, and we ran on board her abreast
the main mast. We had not weight enough to run her down, but carried
away our jibboom.
   Our bowsprit was then lashed to their main mast, and they came on board,
on which I told them not to commit murder, the ship was theirs. I was at
the juncture particularly fortunate in talking French. The Frenchmen
behaved gallantly to a man, and did not offer to ill-treat us.
   As soon as the ships were disentangled from each other, the Captain
desired the man that had charge of the Diana to send me and my two mates
to him: we accordingly went and found her to be the Cartier, a prize to the
enemy’s privateers of the Mauritius, and commanded by M. Sieurcouff.
   He received us well, told us we had given him much trouble: but that he
did not blame us.
   His and his Surgeon’s behaviour to us was very brave and honourable,
as indeed was that of his officers, and people in general, whilst I remained
his prisoner.
   At four a.m. the two vessels tacked and we immediately discovered a sail
which they gave chase to.
   About seven o’clock the ship hoved too, and as she had a jack at the fore,
I concluded it was meant as a deception, and that they knew of the Pilot
Schooner’s being taken, particularly as we were at least forty miles to the
southward of pilot’s water. I, however, found, to my mortification, that
the Indiamen’s people were deceived by the appearance of the snow, and
being off their guard, were made an easy prize of.
   By what I learn of this extraordinary circumstance, the people were
so much terrified on board the Indiaman, under a supposition of their deck
being full of armed men, and that the other ship was also about to attack
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    them, that they could not be prevailed on by their officers to rally, and go
    on the upper deck. Captain Burnyeat and Lieutenant Pickett were entirely
    deserted and shot, and several of the people wounded. Two of the Frenchmen
    were wounded, one by a random shot from their own vessel, and the other
    by a cutlass.
                                                         n'th February, 1796.
       On Friday last accounts were received in town of the capture of the
    Hon’ble Company’s Ship Triton, Captain Burnyeat, off Juggernath Pagoda,
    on her passage from Madras to Bengal. The particulars of this unfortunate
    event we understood to be as follows:—
      Early on Friday morning, the 29th ultimo, a Pilot Schooner was seen
    from the Triton on her larboard bow, on which Captain Burnyeat ordered
    the ship to be hove too. The schooner approached till within fifteen or
    twenty fathoms, and Captain Burnyeat was in the act of hailing her, when
    she fired a volley of musquetry immediately on the people on the Triton s
    deck, on which Captain Burnyeat called his men to their quarters, but
    unfortunately all who were on deck, the Captain, Lieutenant Pickett, Mr.
    Agnew, Midshipman, the man at the helm, a quartermaster, Mr. Jackson,
    Purser and one of the Captain’s servants excepted, precipitately went below.
    The schooner had put her helm a-port, and fallen directly on the Triton s
    quarter, and boarded from the bowsprit.
       The Captain, and the few who with him remained on deck, were almost
    instantaneously either shot or cut down by the assailants. The men who had
    retreated to the gun deck being panic struck, made no attempt to resist, but
    soon calling out for quarter, delivered up the ship to the enemy.
       This unfortunate capture, which appears to have been the consequence
    of a sudden surprise, will be a warning to all commanding officers during
    war never on any occasion whatever to be off their guard.