

       ‘I do not conceive’ [he concluded] ‘that any danger is to be apprehended
    from the six French frigates which are said to be cruising in the China Seas.
    I conceive the frigates and armed Indiamen to be more than equal to them;
    and besides them, the three ships going as transports carry guns.
       Upon the whole then, seeing that the place is so weak and that it would
    fall so easily, and that a force sufficient to destroy it can be sent there without
    any inconvenience, danger, or much additional expense, I consider that it
    would be an expedition honourable to the Governor-General, and to those
    employed upon it, and useful to the country, as it would deprive the enemy
    of his only remaining port in the Eastern Seas, and of one of which he has
    lately made the greatest use; and as such I offer my plans.’
       (Supplementary Despatches and Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur
                           ,
       Duke of Wellington K.G., India, iypj-i8o5, Vol. I, 1858, p. 4 et seq.)

  The future Field-Marshal was still a young man and inclined to over¬
simplify—as he soon realized—the problems involved in destroying the
Dutch East Indies. He dabbled in the navigational problems affecting the
date of sailing but reflected (on May 20'th) that:

    ... as the decision upon that subject depends upon the Admiral, who is
    the only independent and uncontrolled man in these parts, it is impossible
    to say what he will do; and as an attempt of the Government to influence
    him, or convince him, might be attended with bad consequences: they
    don’t seem to me to have given sufficient attention to that part of the question.
    Ships cannot lie in Manilla Bay in safety during the south-west monsoon.
    They cannot get there after the north-east monsoon will have set in, and
    being in the China Seas at the time of the Change from the south-west to
    the north-east is attended with much danger, so that there is much difficulty
    in coming to a proper decision about the time of attack. This difficulty
    would be removed if they would determine to attack a fort (Cavite) which
    commands the entrance of a bay in Manilla Bay, which is sheltered from

                                          116
                  THE   END    OF   SERCEY’s    SQUADRON

     the south-west monsoon; but in that case they must be stronger both in
     men and stores, as they will have two sieges instead of one. . . .
        (Supplementary Despatches, ijc>j-i8o5, Vol. I, p. 6. Letter from Colonel
        Wesley to Lord Mornington.)
   With his brother hardly yet installed as Governor-General, the younger
Wellesley was not, at this period, as influential as he was soon to become.
The operational plans lay between General Harris, the Admiral, and Major-
General St. Leger; and the Colonel of the 33rd Regiment was not even
supposed to know whither the expedition was bound. He thought his
seniors ‘guilty of great neglect in suffering a ship under Danish colours
to go out of the Ganges . . . avowedly bound to Manilla,’ but further
consideration led him to write (July 12th), ‘The destruction of Batavia
would ruin the Dutch; but it may be a question whether it would be right
completely to annihilate them, and it is probably that consideration which
has prevented from attacking them. . . .’ It probably was. Colonel Wesley
was on firmer ground in drawing up his admirable regimental orders
governing the daily routine of his men while on board ship. Hammocks
must be numbered, properly rolled and regularly scrubbed. Men are to be
divided into watches, guards mounted and sentries posted, troops paraded
morning and evening, men exercised with dumb-bells, parade states ren¬
dered, kit inspected once a week, smoking prevented and cleanliness ensured.
Soldiers were to be exercised with great guns and small arms, sixty rounds
per man to be allowed for musketry practice during the voyage (Supplemen¬
tary Despatches, page 19). There can be no doubt that Indiamen with
additional cannon and carrying troops so disciplined and trained would
have been, as the colonel claimed, more than equal to the French" frigates.
   The Manila expedition met its first check in the late arrival of the second
division of transports supposed to sail from Madras. The first division had
sailed and so had the division from Bengal, but the transports from Calcutta,
due at Madras, had mostly failed to appear. On August 10th Rainier thought
that the expedition might proceed by the north of Borneo with a rendezvous
at Balambangan, or might alternatively wait until November and then make
the eastern passage through the Moluccas. Lord Hobart, at Madras, with
whom the final decision lay, objected that this latter plan would leave India
unprotected for a very long time. Rainier explained this to the Governor-
General in a letter of August 10th, concluding:
       I am therefore necessarily led to conclude that the Expedition will be
    laid aside, and all that remains will be the execution of the secondary plan
    of operation, my attempt to destroy the Ships of War at Manilla. . . .
                                                                  (Ad. 1/168.)
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS