

                                      ”3
                       WAR    IN    THE    EASTERN   SEAS

     the Commander-in-Chief of the British Forces by Land, and the several
     Presidencies in India, in an expedition against Manilla, the outlines whereof
     are sketched, but wait the concurrence of the above authorities from Bengal.
     If this expedition should be determined upon, shall endeavour to give you
     timely notice thereof, in the mean time you are to keep yourself in readiness
     to join me—have nothing further to say on this subject at present, only
     informing you that if it takes place, it ought to leave the Coast by the
     beginning of August at farthest.
        Capt. Hayward is to call at Macao to deliver dispatches to the Select
     Committee there and get information respecting the forces and designs of
     the Spaniards at Manilla. . . .
        Our overland dispatches are dated Nov. n, 1796—have not received
     positive orders for reprisals on the Spaniards, but think you will be fully
     justified in seizing all Ships and Property by land belonging to Spanish
     subjects—am in hourly expectations of receiving His Majesty’s Proclamation
     to that effect by a Frigate or Packet. . . .
                                                                    (Ad. 1/168.)

  As three months or more would pass before the expedition could sail,
Rainier busied himself with preparations. The Suffolk, Centurion and
Carysfort were under repair at Trincomalee while the Admiral went in
the Victorious to Madras. He sent the Fox to patrol the Straits of Malacca
and the Orpheus, which had been damaged, to dock at Calcutta. The Trident
came out of dock at Bombay, and the Sybille and Centurion sailed to join
the Fox. Expecting no reinforcement from England, Rainier persuaded the
Governor-General to equip for the purposes of the expedition a fireship
(the Goonong Assi) and a bomb vessel (the Vulcan). By August prepara¬
tions were so well advanced that the first eight transports were able to sail
with the Victorious and Trident for Penang. The Heroine was sent to convoy
other transports sailing directly from Calcutta, and the fleet organized as
follows:
                                   Order of Battle
Frigates etc.                                                   Guns     Men
                        First or       Victorious                74      59°
     Fox
                        Starboard    ■ Resistance                44      295
     Hobart
                        Division       Trident                   64      491
     Carysfort      to repeat
     Vulcan
                                          Suffolk                74      59°
     Goonong Assi
                        Second or  Centurion                     5°       343
     Heroine
                        Larboard ■ La Sybille                    44       300
     Swift
                        Division   Arrogant                      74       59°
                                          “4
                   THE END       OF SERCEY’s SQUADRON