

    (W. S. Seton-Karr. Selections from Calcutta Gazettes of the Years iy8g— iyc>y^
    Vol. II, Calcutta, 1865, p. 444.)

  Although the apprentices in an Indiaman were properly called midship¬
men, it was unusual to call the chief officer ‘Lieutenant.’ Apart from this,
it will be noted that the Cartier was described indifferently as brig, snow
and schooner. The difference between these rigs was not very fundamental
and it is probable that Surcouf was at pains to alter his vessel’s appearance
as her description became known. For the rest, these two captures present
a contrast between two ways in which a capture might be effected. The
country ship Diana had no real means of defence but her captain acted very
correctly. He recognized the enemy in time and successively tried to escape,
to run his vessel ashore and finally to ram his assailant. By compelling the
privateer to fire her guns and by disabling both ships he had done his best

                                        no
                    SERCEY    AT   THE   ILE   DE   FRANCE

to improve his chances of recapture. He could do no more. The Indiaman
was feebly handled and fell a prize in just such a way as a privateer would
prefer, quickly, cheaply and with little damage on either side. The Triton s
ports were closed and her arms in the gunroom. There were only six men
on deck when she was boarded and all the firing was with muskets: mostly
those fired down the hatchways until the crew surrendered. An Indiaman
was supposed to be fully equal to any privateer and this capture made a
deep impression, especially on Admiral Elphinstone, who wrote                 on
February 24th from Madras:
       The Hon’ble Company’s Ship Triton has been disgracefully captured
    by a small Pilot Vessel, manned only with twenty-five Frenchmen. The
    number on board the Triton was one hundred and forty, she was going
    from hence to Bengal. The circumstance is unparalleled in the history of
    surprizing events, and scarcely to be credited, but the fact is confirmed and
    the commander killed.
                                                                     (Ad. 1/55.)
  Lacking the men to navigate both the Triton and Diana, Surcouf sold
the latter to her commander, accepting ransom to the amount of Rs. 30,000,
and put all his prisoners on board her. He then sailed for home in the
Triton, reaching the He de France on March 10th. The Government
naturally confiscated his prizes, he having sailed without letters of marque.
Surcouf took passage for France in order to lodge his appeal, which partially
succeeded. The result was his absence from the Indian Ocean until 1798.
The Cartier never reached the French base, being retaken on the way.
  Surcouf was not the only privateer at sea off India in 1796. In June a
‘small crazy vessel,’ carrying twelve 9-pounders and manned by 150
men, took three     prizes   and put into      Coringa.   Her   first   prize had
been a pilot schooner and she had used Surcouf’s trick, employing the pilot
vessel to attract and capture the other two. One of these was, rather sur¬
prisingly, recaptured by her lascar crew under the leadership of the serang.
There were a number of privateer successes at this period, tending to show
that the opportunity offered by the British disposition of forces was put
to better use by the privateers than the men-of-war. It is known, for example,
that in September 1796 some thirteen American ships sailed from Mauritius,
laden with English prize goods shipped on French account—sugar, sugar-
candy, indigo and piece-goods (i.e. cotton cloth)—ostensibly bound for
America or Hamburg and actually destined for Bordeaux. But now the
situation changed again with the Spanish entry into the war. The British
interest in the Moluccas could now be transferred to the Philippines. Dreams
of Spanish treasure could now become a reality.
                                      in
                               CHAPTER V