

This secondary plan involved troops and Craig, on August 17th, was
wanting to know what he was to do if unable to reach the Philippines—
attack some other place, or what? Hobart was opposed to any change in
destination and thought the destruction of the Spanish ships a great object
in itself as safeguarding the China trade. He reminded himself of the Secret
Committee’s letter of 4th August, 1796, which ended with the words ‘even
conquests may be inconvenient if they tend too much to scatter our Troops
or to expose them to great mortality in unhealthy climate.’ It was accord¬
ingly decided by Lord Hobart, on August 25th that the expedition, if
unable to reach the Philippines by either the direct or the Mindoro route,
should return at once to India. On the 27th Rainier wrote to the Admiralty
‘expecting now to sail in a day or two’ despite the difficulty over the
transports. He added, however, that ‘in the prosecution of so distant a
military enterprize the way whereto lies thro’ so perilous and perhaps
intricate a navigation, and consequently exposed to a variety of casualties,
adverse and unforeseen circumstances may interfere and disappoint the
wisest measures. . . .’ They may indeed. On the 28th the whole expedition
was abandoned.
  The causes for this change of policy are best given in Rainier’s own
words, contained in his report to the Admiralty.

                                                   Suffolk, Madras Road,
                                                          September 3rd, 1797.
     Sir
             I beg leave to acquaint you for their Lordships information that on
     the 28th ultimo, almost on the instant of my' quitting this road with His
     Majesty’s Ships and the last Division of Transports, an express was received
     from His Majesty’s minister at Constantinople by this Government and
     immediately communicated to me, announcing the important intelligence
     of the Emperor of Germany having concluded a Peace with the French
     Nation, an event so extremely favourable to the interests of the latter as
     cannot, we think, fail to draw their attention to the execution of their long
     projected plan of attack on the British Possessions in this Country in concert
     with Tippoo Sultan with whom they have had much friendly intercourse
     of late. In order to guard against the consequences of so formidable an
     alliance it has been thought advisable by the Right Hon’ble the President
     in Council of this Government to relinquish in toto the Expedition to
     Manilla, in support of which determination such forcible arguments were
     adduced by his Lordship, as put it out of my power from a principle of zeal
     for His Majesty’s Service, to withhold my consent to it—The chief point
     of discussion turned on the great risque the Possessions and acquisitions
     y/e now hold would be exposed to, after so large a part of the troops and
                                        118
                  THE   END    OF   SERCEY’s    SQUADRON