

  1 A Selection from the Despatches, etc., of the Duke of Wellington. Ed. by S. J Owen,
Oxford, 1880, p, 487.
  % C. H. Philips. The East India Company, IJ84-1834, Manchester, 1940, p. 101.

                                        120
                  THE   END   OF   SERCEY’s   SQUADRON

India to gain information. The Seine and Vertu now proceeded to Batavia
with three hundred men sent to reinforce the Dutch, then indirectly
threatened by the British expedition concentrating at Penang. The Admiral
returned to Port Louis on 20th September, 1797, bringing with him the
     ,
Forte Preneuse and Brule-Gueule and finding there the Prudente and
Regeneree.
  Complaints now began afresh about the difficulty of supplying the
squadron. Opportunely, from the colonists’ point of view, came a request
from the Spanish Government at the Philippines for naval assistance. Two
ships were to proceed to Spain with treasure (presumably from Mexico)
and the Spanish offered 300,000 livres for an escort of two frigates. Since
the colony wanted the money, and did not want the frigates, Sercey agreed
to send the Vertu and Regeneree to France—both ships needing repair.
Later he was persuaded to send home the Seine with three hundred troops
on board. While the squadron was thus being destroyed piecemeal, its vital
task was performed for it by Ripaud de Montandevert. This person was
an officer in the privateer VApollon. Being given charge of a prize, he
arrived, probably by accident, on the Malabar coast. Seized at first and
imprisoned, he was presently taken from Mangalore to Tippoo’s camp.
There he improved his position by announcing himself as an envoy from
the French Republic. He gained still warmer hospitality by talking glibly
about the French aid which Tippoo might reasonably expect. The result
was that Tippoo decided to send two agents (secretly and incognito) to
discuss the possibilities with Malartic. These two embarked with Ripaud
and sailed with him to the He de France. Misled, no doubt, by Ripaud
(who was enjoying this, his first and almost his only appearance in history)
Malartic mistook the nature of this mission and greeted the secret agents,
when they landed on 19th January, 1798 (masked, doubtless, and furtive)
with a salute of a hundred and fifty guns. He simultaneously issued a
proclamation inviting brave Frenchmen to volunteer for Citizen Tippoo’s
army and join in destroying the British Empire. Some eighty-six men
volunteered for this congenial task, but the secrecy of the whole transaction
seemed somehow to have fallen short of the ideal. The need now arose
to send the two envoys, with their new French allies, back to Mangalore.
  Sercey appointed La Preneuse (36) for the service and the frigate,
commanded by L’Hermitte, sailed on 8th March, 1798. L’Hermitte caught
two East Indiamen, the Woodcot (802 tons) and Raymond (793 tons) at
Tellicherry, capturing both and drawing fresh attention to his mission
before landing the envoys and volunteers at Mangalore on April 24th. A
reinforcement of eighty-six was not of vital importance to Tippoo’s army,
                                     121
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS