

which numbered seventy thousand. The same number of men forming a
military mission—officers, instructors and technicians—would have mat¬
tered; but these were just volunteers. They were enough, nevertheless, to
cause alarm at Madras. Ripaud alone had caused a stir—it is presumably
to his visit that Rainier refers in his letter of 3rd September, 1797 (see
page 118)—and his escapade might be included in the reasons why the Manila
expedition was abandonedf But the stealthy arrival of Tippoo’s emissaries
at Port Louis—known at Madras in a flash—caused consternation. Colonel
Arthur Wellesley refers to it in a paper dated 28th June, 1798.

       The reasoning upon the proclamation of the Governor of Mauritius,
    and upon the evidence of the persons who were there at the time it was
    issued, is conclusive.
       There is not a doubt but that Tippoo offered to conclude, and that he,
    in fact, has concluded with that Government, an alliance offensive and
    defensive against the British nation, and that the immediate object of that
    alliance is to drive us out of India. . . . The consequence of that alliance
    has been an addition to the forces of Tippoo of 150 men at most, and a
    certainty that he can receive no more assistance from the island of
    Mauritius. . . .
                                       (Supplementary Despatches, etc., p. 52.)

   There was at that time no war between Tippoo and the Company and
the younger Wellesley was against provoking one. But this ineffective aid
from Mauritius brought such a war, in the circumstances of 1798, appre¬
ciably nearer. As a gesture, it was significant. There was a sequel when
Tippoo tried to send his envoys to France in 1799. These were ‘a Monsr.
De Buque self appointed General and Ambassador Extraordinary to the
French Directory, with two Mussalmen under the same character,’ two
secretaries, two lascars and fifteen servants. These embarked in a French
armed ship called La Surprise, which was caught at the Seychelles by
H.M.S. Braave. The ambassadors, retrieved from the shore, where they had
hidden, were told of Tippoo’s death.
   With the Preneuse on her way to Mangalore, Admiral Sercey’s force was
                      ,
reduced to the Forte Prudente and Brule Gueule. That he was weak in
yielding, as he had, to the local feeling in Mauritius is certain. But if was
the dawn of democracy and Sercey liked the colonists, being one of them
by birth. More than that, he had recently married in April 1797 Louise
Victorine Caillean, a wealthy creole and a relative of the former governor,
Rene Magon. This was no time for making himself unpopular ashore with
his wife’s friends and relations; among whom, incidentally, he was to live
after his retirement from the Navy. He was not blamed in France, the
                                       122
                 THE   END    OF   SERCEy’s      SQUADRON

Minister reporting favourably on him to the Directory (Archives Nat. BB4
IJ7j 21 Thermidor, An. 5). For a man, however, whose squadron had acquired
for the island 700,000 piastres and 4,000,000 pounds of rice, he was treated
locally with small consideration. Influenced by the weakness of his squadron,
by the possibility of being relieved (perhaps by Kerguelen), and maybe
by his recent marriage, Sercey now decided to remain ashore and send
the Forte and Prudente, under Ravenel as Commodore, to cruise on the
Malabar coast. The cruise was mainly remarkable for a mutiny—which
Ravenel suppressed—among the troops which the Forte carried as marines.
The frigates made, however, a number of captures off Ceylon, in the
Straits of Bali and then in the Bay of Bengal.
  Sercey had achieved little in 1797, partly because the preparations for
the Manila expedition had kept him away from the China Sea in which
Dutch and Spanish co-operation might have been expected. If he was to
achieve more in 1798, he would have to rely, with his weakened forces,
on these allies. He contemplated the idea of a joint Franco-Spanish inter¬
ception of the China Fleet. Having thought out the plan, Sercey sent the
corvette Brule-Gueule to convey orders for Ravenel to bring his two frigates
to Batavia. The Brule-Gueule reached Tranquebar on 13th September, 1797,
having taken the East India Company’s extra ship Thomas off Ceylon
on the 9th. The Brule-Gueule narrowly missed (without knowing it) an
encounter with Rainier in person and so went on to deliver Sercey’s orders.
These orders were evidently received but not acted upon, for the Forte
and Prudente returned instead to Port Louis. Knowing Ravenel’s intention,
perhaps from the corvette bringing his reply on about October 5th, Sercey
sailed in the Brule-Gueule for Batavia, leaving orders for the two frigates
to follow. They reached port four days after the Admiral had gone and
would have obeyed their instructions. Once more, however, the Colonial
Assembly intervened and compelled Malartic to disarm the Prudente and
sell her to a commercial firm. She was taken, cruising as a privateer, in
February   1799. When Sercey heard of this at Sourabaya he wrote
(19th November, 1797) that Malartic had exceeded his powers. He wrote
bitterly to the Minister on December 15th, complaining of how he was
opposed by the colonists and explaining the impossibility of basing his
squadron on a place where he was refused all supplies (Arch. Nat. BB4 117).
Nor was the Admiral wholly reconciled to this loss by the soothing letter
from Malartic (received December 26th) to say that the Forte should be
sent to him in due course. Sercey himself reached Batavia in June 1798,
and was joined there by the Preneuse, her crew having been so mutinous
that five of them were court martialled and shot. It was no moment for