

                                    *34
                        THE   THREAT     FROM     EGYPT

     to assure him of their readiness to do their duty, and that they would inform
     him of any of their Shipmates who should hereafter attempt to excite any
     disturbance amongst them. Previous to this they had requested the enlarge¬
     ment of the men confined, which Capt. Lambert informed them could not
     be complied with, but that they might depend upon it justice would be
     done them. ’Tis some satisfaction to me to acquaint you, that the main
     deck petty officers in general, and several of the best of the crew, appeared
     to have no hand in this business, and except one man who is secured, there
     was nobody offered to interrupt the Captain and his officers in apprehending
     the prisoners, tho’ ’tis imagined the principal ringleaders are not among
     the number. Capt. Osborn, who was on board the Suffolk when the cheering
     happened, went on board his proper ship, and inquired of the Ship’s company
     if they had any complaints to make, which they answered in the negative.
     He took occasion at the same time to observe to them how attentive the
     Admiral had always been to them, and instanced it in the goodness of their
     provisions, the procuring them the indulgence of the allowance of Tea
     from their Lordships which they had found so gratifying, and also the
     commodious provision I had made for the sick in the lately established
     Hospital at Madras: they all replied they were very sensible of it. The
     disturbance originated as far as I am able to judge with some men impressed
     from the Indiamen lately arrived, by his Majesty’s Ship Victorious, whom
     I had ordered to be discharged into the Suffolk, and who perhaps found some
     mutinous disposed persons on board ready enough to join them, of which
     I fear there are not wanting some in all ships. . . .

  The mutineers were tried by court martial and sentenced, but the Admiral
celebrated the news of the Battle of Camperdown by pardoning them. To
judge from his portrait, Peter Rainier was not an inspiring leader. He was
fat, spectacled and perhaps a little solemn; an excellent officer and one who
knew the Indian Ocean better than most, but not a vivid personality.
Granted that the germ of mutiny came out from England, the Suffolk’s
crew were probably predisposed to mutiny from boredom. Life in the
flagship must have been almost as tedious as in the Channel fleet. The
only time—three months before—when they had been even near any prize
money, the whole thing had been cancelled. If the Arrogant and Victorious
were free from mutiny, it was probably because they had been in action
in September 1796 and their seamen had had something to talk about ever
since.
   The mutiny in the ships of the line was short-lived, in the frigates
non-existent, and the Admiral could devote all his attention to the war.
Early in 1798 his thoughts were chiefly with Captains Pakenham and Cooke,
respectively in the Moluccas and the China Seas. When Rainier had