

                                     I23
                          WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

keeping her in port and the Admiral sent her for a month’s cruise off Borneo,
hoping at that time that the Forfe and Prudente would have appeared before
the month ended. Disappointed of this reinforcement but promised Spanish
help in a letter from the Governor of the Philippines, dated 21st January,
1798, Sercey remained ashore at Sourabaya and sent the Preneuse and
Brule-Gueule to Manila with orders to co-operate with the Spanish against
the China Fleet. This they did (arriving 18th October, 1798), sailing from
Manila with two Spanish ships of the line and two frigates. So bad was
the Spanish seamanship, according to the French, that nothing could be
done. Spanish inactivity in 1797 had been due, apparently, to all their
men-of-war being dismasted in a typhoon in April. Perhaps this made
them the more cautious in 1798. They returned, at any rate, to port and
L’Hermitte rightly refused to intercept the China Fleet single-handed. He
sailed instead for Batavia and arrived on 6th April, 1799, where he found
Sercey in a bad temper—furious with Ravenel for not obeying orders,
furious with Malartic and           the   Colonial Assembly,         furious with      the
commander of the Prudente for yielding up his frigate, and now (on
hearing L’Hermitte’s story) furious with the Spanish as well. He hoisted
his flag in the Preneuse and on 17th April, 1799, sailed, with the Brule-
Gueule, for the lie de France. Approaching the island on 9th May, 1799,
he was chased by a blockading squadron, but took refuge in the Riviere
Noire and landed guns to make a shore battery. He finally reached Port
Louis on May 22nd, probably hoping to find there his former flagship
La Forte. She was not there. She had been taken.1
   It was Malartic who sent the Forte on her last cruise and Sercey’s
annoyance at this encroachment was increased when he heard that Ravenel,
who was ill, had been relieved in the command by Beaulieu le Loup, who
was old and worn out. Ravenel had protested to the end, urging Malartic
to send the Forte to Batavia as Sercey had ordered and as Malartic himself
had promised. Instead, she had sailed from Mauritius towards the end
of 1798 with orders to raid the Bay of Bengal. The time of year was well
chosen, being later than the season during which French cruisers were
expected there. The year itself was well chosen because—as we shall see—
attention was fixed on the Red Sea and Malabar coast. But the Bay of
Bengal was not wholly without protection, for Rainier had told the Sybille,
Captain E. Cooke, to remain there. An order of 3rd January, 1799, had
approved Cooke’s proposal to give a passage, in fact, to Lord Mornington,

  1 For these operations, see Histoire des Marine Franfais sous la republique,   iy8g-i8oj.
Charles Rouvier, Paris, 1868, p. 435, and L’lle de France. Esquisses Historiques. iji5—i8to.
Albert Pitot, 1899, p. 212.

                                            124
                      THE   END    OF   SERCEY’S      SQUADRON