

small arms. And added to all was the terrible sense of uncertainty as to what
was happening, with whom we were contending, and whether the La Forte
was winning the day or losing it.
  After the tenth or twelfth shot had penetrated the berth-room, Captain
Cooke swore he could stand it no longer, and that it required more courage
than he possessed to sit still and be shot at, like a rat in a hole. He therefore
began groping about to find a means of exit, and came across an aperture
in the bulkhead, made by the starting of the timbers consequent on a shot
striking the place. Through this, being exceedingly spare in person, he
managed with great difficulty to squeeze his body, and so got further
below to a place of comparative safety, from whence he called to us to
join him.
   The advice was excellent enough in its way but the thing was to carry
it out. Mr. Mackerel attempted the task first, I, at his request, aiding his
exertions. But unfortunately he was a very fat man, and got fairly wedged
when half-way through, so that he called out violently to be hauled back.
This was no easy matter, and accomplished with such difficulty that the
ludicrous effect of the scene has never passed from my memory, and critical
as our situation was, I could not refrain from laughing aloud, when, in
my endeavours to pull him back by the legs, his pantaloons first began to
peel off, and when I transferred my grip to his feet, one of his boots gave
way in my hand, and sent me sprawling backwards.
   Mr. Mackerel was mightily indignant at my levity, and upbraided me
for it in solemn and measured language, after I had at last managed to
extricate him. He then very soberly laid himself down flat on the floor,
observing, with a groan, that it was safer than standing; and as this seemed
sensible, and I did not like to desert him, I followed his example, jestingly
thanking him for the extra protection his ample person afforded me—a joke
he was in far too much consternation to relish.
  There we lay for half an hour, Mr. Mackerel saying not a word, but
breathing very hard, and whenever a crash was heard, turning instantly on
his side, so as to present his back to the attack if it should come, and then
giving vent to a groan, by way of thanks-giving, when he found himself
unhurt.
  At last the action began to draw to a close. The discharges of cannon were
less frequent, and the La Forte's men being all engaged in trying to set sail,
the rattle of musketry on the quarter-deck above our heads almost ceased.
Very nearly the last shot fired was one which, in penetrating the berth-
place, was so checked, that it came rolling slowly towards us; upon which
Mr. Mackerel jumped up and made a clean bound over it with an agility
that would have done credit to a goat. As I scuttled out of its way, its size
showed me it came from a twenty-four pounder, and I knew it must have
been fired by a Man-of-war. . . .

                                    127
                       WAR    IN   THE       EASTERN    SEAS