

the Governor-General, who wanted to visit Madras. It was while there
that Captain Cooke heard of the havoc being wrought among the country
                                                                     ,
ships. La Forte captured, in rapid succession, the Recovery Yarmouth Earl         ,
Morning ton, Chance      , Endeavour and Surprise. The Endeavour was com¬
manded and largely owned by Robert William Eastwick, from whose
published memoirs1 may be gained a vivid picture of all that happened.
He had recently had as a passenger the future Duke of Wellington and it
was fortunate that Colonel Wellesley was no longer aboard. The Endeavour
was off Balasore Roads when intercepted and Eastwick did his best to
run into shallow water but was dissuaded by accurate fire from La Forte’s
bow-chasers, so that ‘at 9 p.m.,’ as he writes, ‘on the last day of February,
1799 ,1 was forced to haul down my colours and surrender my ship.’ It was
the flash of these guns (captured English 24-pounders) which was seen on
board the Sybille, arrived after a quick passage from Madras and soon
standing towards the scene of the capture. Eastwick and his two mates
were taken on board La Forte, which went on to capture the Mornington
(Captain Cooke) on board of which ship was a passenger called Mackerel.
Cooke and Mackerel now joined Eastwick in captivity.

         There were several other English prisoners on board the La Forte, from
       whom we learnt the treatment we might expect. Their food was salt beef,
       boiled in vinegar, to which was added boiled peas, as a substitute for bread.
       Only one quart of water was allowed per diem, and not a glass of wine or
       spirits.
          As for the discipline of the ship, it was very slack. It was not at all unusual
       to see one of the foremast men, with his beef in his hands, eating it while
       walking the quarter-deck, and claiming an equal right to do it with the
       commanding officer, thus, I suppose, demonstrating the claims of liberty,
       equality and brotherhood. Nor was any scruple made of playing cards on
       the quarter-deck. The lieutenants generally came on deck with only trousers
       and an open shirt, often a check one, so that it was almost impossible to
       distinguish them. The men, however, went through their duty with alacrity,
       and were obedient to orders.

   The succeeding part of Eastwick’s narrative is rather surprising because
he describes an interview with Admiral Sercey, ‘a fine old man and a very
distinguished officer.’ Sercey was not, of course, on board. La Forte had
for long been his flagship and that is presumably why Eastwick mistook
the elderly Beaulieu le Loup for the Admiral. The mistake originated, no
doubt, among the prisoners. It was repeated in the local press after the
  1 A Master Manner, being the life and adventures of Captain Robert William Eastwick.
Ed. by Herbert Compton, 1891, p. 130 et seq.

                                           125
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS