

  1 H. C. M. Austen. Sea Fights and Corsairs of the Indian Ocean, being the Naval History of
Mauritius from tyi5 to 1810, Port Louis, Mauritius, 1935.

                                           I29                                         E
                            WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN        SEAS

 to the mild objection that Pellew was not then on the East Indies station.
 Whether Garneray was there either remains to be proved. In the meanwhile,
 his works are most safely classed as fiction.
    L’Hermitte sailed from the He de France on 4th August, 1799, to cruise,
 by Sercey’s orders, on the African coast. Shortly afterwards, on Septem¬
 ber 26th, Sercey was persuaded to send the Brule-Gueuie to France. There
 had been a small rebellion at Mauritius in October-November 1798, and
 some of the ringleaders were sent home soon afterwards. Other arrests
 followed later and the suspects were sent to France for trial—a death
 sentence, as it turned out, for the Brule-Gueule was wrecked on the Point
 du Raz, most of those aboard being drowned. The Preneuse, meanwhile,
 reached the African coast and the Mozambique Channel and, on Septem¬
 ber 20th, entered Delagoa Bay towards nightfall. The vessels at anchor there
 included the Camel, storeship (24), the Rattlesnake (18), a schooner and
 possibly a brig. English and French versions of what happened are some¬
 what at variance, the French having invented two Indiamen and a shore
 battery to enliven their tale and the English practically calling L’Hermitte
 a coward, which he certainly was not. There was, at any rate, an indecisive
night action, which ended, by one French account,1 with the Preneuse
escaping from the brig, which was on fire and drifting towards her, and
being afterwards prevented by the wind from re-entering the bay. By
another account,3 L’Hermitte had suffered forty casualties and broke off
the action to avoid further damage. He put to sea, at any rate, and his
late opponents sent a message to the senior naval officer at Table Bay.
The result was that the Jupiter (50) went in pursuit of the Preneuse and
overtook her on 9th October, 1799. L’Hermitte, however, beat off his
pursuer during a high sea and was able to continue his cruise, although
without any particular success.
   During the absence of the Preneuse two of the King’s ships, the
Tremendous (74) and the Adamant (50) were sent to blockade the French
islands. They arrived off Port Louis on about December 7th, just in time
to intercept the Preneuse, which appeared on the nth. Trapped between
the Adamant and the coast, L’Hermitte ran his frigate ashore near some
batteries. When within range, the Adamant opened fire and L’Hermitte
lowered his ensign. When the boats from the English ships reached the
Preneuse they found Captain L’Hermitte, his officers and a handful of men,

  1 Albert Pitot. Lille de France Esquisses Historiques (1715-1810), Port Louis, Mauritius,
1899, P- 216, et seq.
   2 Charles Rouvier. Histoire des Marins Frangais sous la Republique, 1389-1803, Paris, 1868,
p. 442, et seq.