

                                             I30
                 THE   END   OF   SERCEY’S    SQUADRON

the rest having escaped ashore. Having removed these few prisoners, who
were later released on parole, Lieutenant Grey of the Adamant set fire to
the frigate, which was completely destroyed. This was the last of the French
squadron. Admiral Sercey was with the nearest shore battery and saw with
his own eyes the fate of this, his last frigate. Now, having no squadron
to command, he decided to return to France. On arrival there he was
given an administrative post ashore and later offered another command.
This he refused, asking leave instead to retire. This being granted, he
returned to the He de France, which he helped later to defend. One might
almost wonder why.
                             CHAPTER VI



           The Threat from Egypt
                                _



S   ercey’s operations in   1797-99 had not given Admiral Rainier much
    cause for anxiety. He received, it is true, inaccurate information about
    the French from time to time, mostly from Danish vessels. He thus
heard in the autumn of 1797 that a fleet was expected from France, but
commented °tis doubtful how far the Dane’s intelligence was to be relied
upon, as the account he gave of the French Frigates we know to be
erroneous.’ Writing to the Admiralty on 15th October, 1797, Rainier gave
the latest news about the Dutch East Indies and added ‘The French
Frigates, there is reason to suppose, are lurking somewhere in these seas.’
He was not unduly concerned about them. ‘We have also late information,’
he added, ‘of a Privateer or two being on the Malabar Coast . . . the only
mischief they have hitherto done has been the plundering of some Arabian
Dows, and as ’tis said to a considerable amount.’ Here again he was only
mildly interested. It was, in point of fact, a period during which the
French privateers were extremely active. Robert Surcouf appeared with the
Clarisse (14) in 1798. Houdoul with the Appollon (16) was the privateer
to whom Rainier refers as on the Malabar coast and Malroux with the
Iphigenie did some damage in 1798. Lememe was at sea with L’Uni in that
year, which also saw Vaillant’s career brought to its sudden close. LUni   ,
Lememe’s ship, was described as ‘from Europe, mounting 26 nine-pounders
on her gun-deck, besides her quarterdeck and forecastle guns, 220 men,
she is reckoned a very fast sailor, has much the appearance of a London-
built ship, painted with yellow sides and white mouldings.’ LUni was
at Mocha, disguised as a Dutch merchantman, in 1798, having left the
French islands on July 16th. She took a number of prizes off Socotra.
But the fact is that Surcouf was almost the only privateer who would
attack an East Indiaman. And the captures of his contemporaries (there
were perhaps eight of them, all told) were, many of them, not at the
English expense. Surcouf’s more notable prizes included the Portuguese
ship Nostra Signora de la Conception, with 116,000 piastres on board.
Houdoul’s best capture was the Bader-Bux bound from Mocha to Surat.
                                    132
                      THE   THREAT     FROM    EGYPT