

Of the country ships with English names many were owned by Bombay
Parsees. Rainier, incidentally, suspected many of them of trading with the
enemy, either by a collusive arrangement at Tranquebar or by a fictitious
sale which gave them Danish colours. Losses among these ships, causing
annoyance among the Calcutta underwriters, did not arouse speechless
indignation either at the Admiralty or at the India House. For the war
was at a critical stage and statesmen had other causes for anxiety. Chief
of these in 1797 was the Naval Mutiny at Spithead, which spread from
there to the Nore and so, after some delay, to the foreign stations.
  Had the mutinies been what some people said they were, the results
of a sinister plot between French Jacobins and United Irishmen, the French
would have been ready to take advantage of them. Instead, they scarcely
knew of the mutinies until after they were over, and they gained from
them little or nothing. That year saw, however, the military successes
which brought the French armies to Venice and Genoa and Corfu, thus
setting the stage for the great blow of 1798 at Malta and Egypt. A recurrence
of mutiny on the foreign stations in 1798 would therefore have been
peculiarly dangerous. It has sometimes been said that the East Indies
station, as contrasted with the Cape, was free from mutiny. This is not
quite true. There was the beginnings of a mutiny and it was owing to
Rainier that no more came of it. He had in some measure forestalled it
by care for his men’s welfare, and his firmness did the rest. He believed,
indeed, that he had averted trouble altogether by distributing copies of
the Act which provided for increases of pay and provisions, and reported
accordingly on 7th January, 1798:

      I have the satisfaction to acquaint you for their Lordships’ information
    that there has not appeared the least disposition to mutiny on board any
    of the Ships of the Squadron, though the circumstances of that at Spithead
    and the consequent measures adopted had been known from the Newspapers
    some time before.                                           (Ad. 1/169.)

  Rainier was then at Madras, having been on the Coromandel coast or
off Ceylon after the Manila expedition was cancelled, meaning then to
proceed to the Malabar coast. He had, however, changed his mind and
sailed instead for Penang, which he had reached on November 18th,
returning to Madras on 2nd January, 1798, with the Suffolk and Arrogant.
From there he sailed for Colombo, arriving on the 13th. On the 25th he
was rather sadly reporting to the Admiralty that his seamen had mutinied
at Colombo, the trouble beginning in the flagship while the Admiral was
on shore.
                                     133
                  WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

   . . . They [the seamen] came aft and demanded of Captain Lambert his
acquiescence in several extravagant propositions, nearly similar to those
made by Parker at Nore and presenting several trivial complaints of ill
usage from the officers, insisted on Lieuts. Batt. and Dobbie being put on
shore. Captain Lambert in vain reasoned with them on the irregularity of
their conduct, but judging my presence would have a better effect on them,
accordingly sent for me, having gone on shore but the evening before;
when I came on boafd it was near dark, observed everything to be quiet
in the ship, and in the morning the usual duty carried on without any inter¬
ruption, or disorder. After breakfast I ordered all hands to be turned up,
and harangued them on the unreasonableness and impropriety of their
demands, acquainting them that they had been misinformed as to any
further gratification made by Government to the seamen on board the fleet
at home, except such as had already been read to them, (the contrary whereto
forming one part of their complaints) and in confirmation shewed them the
impossibility of it from the dates of Mr. Nepean’s Letters than which nothing
later had arrived, that as to the Lieutenants, of whose ill usage of them
they had complained, they should be tried by a Court Martial if they could
produce a charge with sufficient evidence against them—I then recommended
to them the serious consideration of their conduct, how unlike anything
I had ever observed in them before, and that it was but the other day I had
wrote the Secretary of the Admiralty to express to their Lordships my sense
of their dutiful behaviour. Therefore I hoped they would return peaceably
to their duty and by their future good conduct, efface as far as it was in their
power their very reprehensible proceedings of the preceding day, but
assured them in the strongest terms that I was determined to regulate my
conduct towards them by the Terms of the Articles of War, their Lordships’
orders and those of the King in Council, and took my leave; on which they
 quitted the Quarter Deck in a sullen discontented manner, and not long
after as I was walking the Quarter Deck with Captain Osborn and Turner,
we heard a loud hooting below which was followed by 20 or 30 men running
up the Fore Rigging and giving 3 cheers towards the Arrogant. I imme¬
 diately ordered the officers to push forward and seize them, on which the
men ran down the shrouds precipitately, not being answered by the Arrogant's
 Ship’s Company, while Captain Lambert attended by his officers armed
 followed them to the lower Gun-deck, and secured the most culpable,
eleven in number, whom I ordered into a boat alongside to be carried on
shore and there secured till sent for, which was complied with, my Lord
 Hobart being then at Colombo and apprized of what had happened, giving
 orders for that purpose. There was a man on board the Carysfort who
endeavoured to excite a similar disturbance, and was afterwards sent on
shore likewise. Nothing material has happened since, save that the Ship’s
 Company of the Suffolk came aft the second day after to Capt. Lambert,