

action and led finally to an account of Sercey’s death in battle appearing
in The Times with a few words of obituary. Sercey actually lived to be
a Vice-Admiral, a Commander of St. Louis and a Peer of France in 1830;
honours which he continued to enjoy until about 1835.
   The Sybille first sighted La Forte at 9.30 p.m. (February 28th) and,
according to Eastwick, by moonlight. It may be doubted, however, whether
the Sybille was sighted by her opponent so soon. For she was able to
manoeuvre for position and still secure a certain measure of surprise. The
French officers mistook her for some merchantmen ‘with the watch
asleep.’

         Nearer and nearer came the strange sail, as calm and stately as if she had
     the entire Ocean to herself, and no other vessel in sight. Such confidence
     amounted to audacity, for the display of lights marked her as a man-of-war.
     As the approaching ship continued her cruise and came within range, the
     Captain of the La Forte began to exhibit some doubts about her, and ordered
     a few shots to be fired at her. But these eliciting no response, he commanded
     the firing to cease, observing in my hearing, ‘she will prove another Bon
     Prix!’ Still, as a matter of precaution, every man was kept at his quarters,
     though in a careless way, and the guns were all loaded and pointed at the
      stranger.
         We prisoners were now ordered to retire below, and were shown into
     the officers’ berth-place, the door of which was locked upon us. . . .

  It was presumably the first lieutenant whom Eastwick overheard, but
he afterwards saw no more of the battle than he could glimpse through
a port-hole. The affair began when the Sybille put her helm up at 12.45 a.m.
and fired her port broadside into the Forte's stern at very close range. She
then came close alongside to leeward and had fired a second broadside
before the Frenchmen were sufficiently organized to reply. Then an
engagement began which lasted for one hour and forty minutes. Eastwick’s
account deserves quotation as evidence from an unusual point of view:
                                                                             •


       I had rather be in a dozen actions face to face with belching cannon, and
    exposed to the full fury of the tops, than experience again such another
    hour as we passed through. The din and noise were awful; the great ship
    shook and quivered under every discharge of her guns; a suffocating smell
    of gunpowder smoke pervaded the whole vessel, we being to leeward;
    and every second or third minute there came a great crash, most startling
    in the dark, and we heard a shot go in, and did not know whether the next
    might not carry us all off. From overhead came the trampling of feet, the
    cries of the wounded, the crashing sounds of falling spars and top-hamper,
    heard between the thundering of the cannon and the lesser roar of the
                                       126
                THE   END    OF     SERCEY’s    SQUADRON