

  From a 24-pound shot Eastwick might properly have inferred that
La Forte was engaging a ship of the line—there were only three 24-pounder
frigates in the English service and none of these was in the Indian Ocean.
In fact, however, he was mistaken, the shot being more probably from
an 18-pounder. The Sybille, although a captured French 40-gun frigate,
was far from being a match for La Forte and had no 24-pounder guns on
board. The comparative broadsides were as follows:

                                                                       (Ad. 1/169.)
                                                                             Weight
               La Sybille                               La Forte            (English)

     24      18-pdrs.              Main Deck              30       24-pdrs.      27 lb.
      6      12-pdrs.              Quarter Deck            6         8-pdrs.      9 lb.
      8      32-pdrs. Cannonades   Quarter Deck            6        36-pdrs.1   40J lb.
      4      12-pdrs.              Forecastle              4         8-pdrs.
      2      32-pdr. Cannonades    Forecastle              2       36-pdrs.1
                                   Gangways                2         8-pdrs.
                                   Gangways                2       36-pdrs.1

    44                             Total                  52 and 8 swivels


  The two ships compared otherwise as follows:

                            Length of       Beam       Burthen       Guns       Men
                            Gun Deck
  La Sybille                 156             4°i        I,°5°        48         370
  La Forte                   169             44i        r,36o        52         403

  La Forte was an exceptionally large frigate and had sailed with about
510 men, of whom, however, 100 (including several officers) were absent
in her prizes. The crew of the Sybille had been reduced by sickness to 240,
but she carried a party of soldiers and some volunteers shipped at Madras,
which gave her a total of 130 supernumeraries.
  The result of the action was to leave La Forte a wreck, surrendered
by a junior officer after the rest, including the captain and first lieutenant,
had fallen. All three masts had been shot away (18, 3 and 10 feet above
the deck), the bowsprit taken off close by the figurehead, her bulwarks
and chains gone, her cables, booms and boats cut to pieces and 300 shots
in her hull. She had 93 killed and 80 wounded, of whom 20 afterwards
died. La Sybille, by contrast, had 5 killed and 17 wounded, two masts
damaged, all her rigging and sails shot away (which enabled the French
                                        1   Brass

                                            128
plate hi. Two-decked man-of-war shortening sail




The Honourable East India Company’s ship Pitt
                    THE    END    OF    SERCEY’S      SQUADRON

prizes to escape) and no more than six shots in her upper works and hull.
It was a curious result of a duel in which the French ship was so much
more heavily gunned. It is explained, in part, by the fact that La Sybille
was a crack ship, her crew trained by the best captain on the station and
her handling masterly up to the moment when Captain Cooke was badly
(it proved fatally) wounded. It is explained, on the other side, by Beaulieu
le Loup’s relative incompetence and his bad relationship with Yigoureux,
his first lieutenant. His unreadiness for action—some guns not mounted,
some masked by the cable, the powder damp and no drinking water for
the guns’ crews—was manifest. And apart from that, he had an obsession
about gunnery and had, a few days before the action, ordered his gun
layers to withdraw their quoins and so elevate to a commencing range
of 2,000 yards. They were mostly firing at that range during the action
and so clean over the hull of a smaller opponent. La Sybille s shooting was,
as Mr. Mackerel had occasion to notice, extremely accurate. And Captain
Cooke’s monument stands to-day in Westminster Abbey, in lieu perhaps of
that wider fame which, had he lived, would certainly have been his.
  With the capture of the Forte, Sercey had only the Preneuse and the
corvette    Brule-Gueule.      The     Preneuse    was      commanded      by    Captain
L’Hermitte, Sercey’s most distinguished officer. He shares the laurels with
Surcouf, Lememe and the other corsairs. But the normal difficulty about
ascertaining all that took place among these French heroes is greatly
                                                                ,
enhanced by the existence of a book called Voyages Aventures et Combat
by Louis Garneray. This work and Mes Pontons has been published and
republished in France, often with illustration but never (it would seem)
in a critical edition. It is a popular adventure story and no one has troubled
to test its truth. Thus Mr. H. C. M. Austen translates pages of it in his
otherwise valuable book on the naval history of Mauritius,1 and remarks
(p. 71) that ‘the testimony of an eye-witness is irresistible.’ This is not
strictly true. Eye-witnesses can be mistaken—as Eastwick, for example,
is mistaken about occasions on which he was unquestionably present. But
the value of an eye-witness depends, after all, on his having been there.
And no one, so far, has taken the trouble to discover who Louis Garneray
was—whether he was the painter or his brother or whom—and in what
ships he served and when. When his narrative has been checked by the
muster rolls of ships, we shall know better what to believe. For present
purposes it may suffice to point out that the highly-coloured and unlikely
story of L’Hermitte’s reception by Sir Edward Pellew in 1799 is open