

The European troops were of the 84th Regiment and numbered two hundred,
the native troops six hundred, In reporting (31st March, 1799) the early
departure of this convoy from Bombay, Rainier wrote complacently of the
preparations made:
       The cannon for the Batteries are twelve thirty-two pounders, besides
    lighter guns. Proper materials are embarked on board the transports both
    for erecting Batteries* and constructing Barracks and Storehouses. This
    convoy will sail in a day or two, and there is no doubt entertained of making
    the passage in good time ... it may be reasonably conjectured there is fresh
    water on the island. . . .

   As so often happens, however, the expedition made a smaller impression
when it reached its destination. Blankett reported from Mocha on June 6th,
to Rainier, that he had co-operated according to orders.

       In consequence of the orders you sent me, as soon as I could be supplied
    with Provisions from the Storeship, I proceeded to the Isle of Perim, in the
    Straits of Babelmandeb and in my passage met the Fox who had previously
    landed Lieut-Col. Murray and his suite on that island and was on his way
    to join me in Mocha Road; on my arrival at the Island on the 7th [May] I
    found the troops landed—soon after which I wrote a letter to Lieutn Col1
    Murray. ... I soon found that they were come on a great scale to build
    batteries in the Sea, that should command the Straits, but that they were
    unprovided with Water, without casks to procure it, without tools for their
    carpenters, caulkers or Coopers and even without shovels or spades and
    without money to purchase any of those wants—in short so helpless an
    expedition perhaps never left India before—Whenever they wished the
    assistance of the Navy it was given them, but they would neither consult or
    allow an opinion from the officers on the most practicable mode of pro¬
    ceeding. . . . From this persisting, their work has been ill done, their tanks
    are badly put together, and they have been doing and undoing ever since
    their arrival. . . .
       I cannot think after the unprecedented manner in which the Bombay
    Presidency have treated me, that it was my business to enter into speculative
    opinions, how the force at the island could be better applied. It is possible
    for folly to defeat a Plan wise in itself, by making its prosecution impracti¬
    cable.
       I shall always think that the possession of this island was highly eligible,
    practicable and even necessary at the present moment, but to set down a
    large body of men unprovided and helpless without a previous consideration,
    speaks too plainly for itself to need any illustration of mine.
      Whether the Island affords Water or not is still problematical. . . .
                                                                 (Ad. 1/169.)
                                        150
                        THE   THREAT      FROM    EGYPT