

   Without committing himself to belief or incredulity, Rainier felt justified
in planning to reinforce Blankett and patrol the Persian Gulf. A week later,
on the 9th, the Admiral had no further news, save that the Centurion had
sailed (without the Belvidere) and that

       I have ordered the Senior Captain of His Majesty’s Ships on the Malabar
     Coast cruizing off Mangalore, to treat Sultan Tippoo as His Majesty’s Enemy,
    whenever he shall be informed by proper authority, in my absence, that
    the Supreme Government of India have commenced Hostilities against
    that Prince.
                                                                   (Ad. 1/169.)

  The Supreme Government was taking no risks as far as Tippoo was
concerned. It might be satisfactory to know how difficult it would be for
Bonaparte to make contact with his potential ally in India. But it would
                                        148
                       THE   THREAT     FROM EGYPT

be far more satisfactory to be certain that he would find no ally there to
contact. The campaign against Tippoo began in February 1799 and ended
with the storming of Seringapatam in May. As Rainier had assured the
Admiralty in January, the East India Company was ‘ready to take the field
in such force as, from intelligence received, the Sultan is little able to cope
with, without the assistance of the French, whose junction it will be my
duty to prevent; and of which at present there is no great apprehension
entertained.’ It was General Baird—once Tippoo’s prisoner in that very
place—who commanded the army. But when they found Tippoo’s body
it was Colonel Arthur Wellesley who felt the heart and rose to tell the
General that their enemy was dead. Afterwards, had any more French
troops found their way, by any means, to Mysore, they would have found
Arthur Wellesley there to meet them. All chance of an Indian alliance was
a thing of the past.
   The measures taken to block Bonaparte’s route to India—measures
naval, military and diplomatic—were held to be incomplete unless some
bases were occupied at the mouth of the Red Sea. The orders from Dundas
provided for such a base being seized—the island of Perim being specified.
The Government of Bombay prepared to carry out instructions but without
excluding the island of Melun as an alternative. The idea was to secure, if
possible, a position from which the straits—or at least the navigable channel
—might be covered by shore batteries. Informed by Government of this
intention, Rainier sent orders to Commodore Blankett to co-operate. These
reached Blankett soon after his arrival at Mocha and were brought by a
much-needed storeship. This was followed by a number of transports and,
going over to the island in early May, Blankett found a Lieutenant-Colonel
Murray with ‘all the apparatus for a large settlement.’ The troops had been
landed, and fortifications were being put in hand. If that rocky and for¬
bidding island had a defect, however, it was in the total lack of any water
supply. The chief concern, therefore, of the garrison was in the digging
of reservoirs and the fetching of water-casks from the Arabian coast or
from Abyssinia. Blankett looked on the whole business with the strongest
disapproval. In the first place, he held that the straits could be blocked
perfectly well by men-of-war based on Mocha, near which port all shipping
had to pass. In the second place, he had not been consulted. And, in the
third, he did not want to see his ships tied to Perim by the necessity of
fetching water for the garrison.
   The expedition actually comprised the Fox (32), the H.C.S. Princess
Charlotte (armed—36), the H.C. bomb ketch Stromholo, two gun-boats
and several transports including the Baker, Jehangeer and Upton Castle.
                                      149
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN     SEAS