

                                        M3
WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS




             144
                             THE    THREAT       FROM EGYPT

devious ends. Blankett found that he could do little but wait. He found,
however, a certain grim satisfaction in realizing that Bonaparte had chosen
the worst sea in the world for the sort of operation he apparently intended,
bor three months no ship could enter the Red Sea and for the following
three months no ship could leave it! For a squadron to dash into Suez
and dash out again with troops on board would imply staff-work of a
superhuman order.

         ‘In a month from this’ [wrote Rainier on April 16th] ‘the Northern Mon¬
      soon will set in, during which time no ships can enter the Straits (as I am
      told) so that I shall have then no apprehension from without. In this
      Monsoon Buonaparte, if he move at all, must make his push, and I hope
      in that case to give a good account of him.’

   When the monsoon was over, Blankett intended to go to Bombay to
repair his ships. That they needed repair may well be believed.
    What had Bonaparte been doing all this time? It had taken him two
or three months to deal with local resistance in Egypt and it was not until
November 1798 that he ordered an advance on Suez. Even then, because
of the Turkish threat, the column sent was quite small and the orders only
for a reconnaissance in force. General Bon marched from Cairo on
December 3rd, with six hundred men and two guns. With him went a naval
man called Collot, with ten sailors. Bon’s task was to see all the cisterns
filled and arrange with the Arabs at Tor to keep up the supply of water.
He was to build a battery to face seawards and secure Suez from molestation.
He was to prepare one or two local craft to act as cruisers, assure the
merchants of Yambo and Jidda that their trade was safe, fortify Suez on
the landward side, and gain all possible information about Jidda and
Mecca.
   General Bon reached Suez on December 7th, occupied the town without
difficulty, and found in the harbour four unarmed merchantmen and five
or six small craft. He reported that the place was easy to defend against
naval attack, being protected by sandbanks stretching seawards for miles
and approachable only by a narrow channel having a depth of two and
a half fathoms at most. No man-of-war could get within range. On the nth,
hearing that all was well, Bonaparte sent off a supply column with fifty
more sailors, seven or eight shipwrights, thirty-five engineers, and another
gun.1    On December 24th, Bonaparte set off to visit Suez in person,
    1 On December 18th Bonaparte ordered General Bon to survey the anchorage and ascertain
‘si des fregates de l’ile de France, que j’attend, pourraient, etant arrivees a Suez, s’approcher
de la cote jusqu’a ioo toises de maniere a etre protegees par les batteries de cote.’ See
L'Expedition d’Egypte, Vol. Ill, p. 444 et seq.

                                              M5
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN' SEAS