

       There is no reason at present to apprehend any hostile equipment being
     in motion in Europe to attack the British settlements in this country; and
     the fears of any from the French Islands, which so lately existed and took
     their rise in the events that followed the appearance of La Preneuse, French
     frigate, on the Malabar Coast may from very recent intelligence received
     from the Mauritius be looked upon as entirely removed; and therefore am
     of opinion there will be no occasion for the services of His Majesty’s ships
     during the S.W. Monsoon on that coast . . . altho’ I shall ever regard it as
     an object to prevent as far as lies in my power, the Enemy’s cruisers from
     molesting the Trade of that Coast and affording a confidence to their friend
     Tippoo Sultan. . . .
                                                                   (Ad. 1/169.)

   Bonaparte had captured Alexandria a week before Rainier wrote the
above letter, news of which reached India rather slowly. But Lord Morning-
ton acted before the news came, warning Rainier on August 31st in a letter
to which the Admiral replied as follows:
                                                    Suffolk, Madras Road.
                                                         September 17th 1798.
     My Lord
            Influenced by the consideration of the several circumstances so
     ably detailed in your Lordship’s letter of the 31st ultimo respecting the
     apprehensions that may be reasonably entertained of the inimical designs
     of Tippoo Sultan, and the co-operation that may be afforded him on the
     part of the French, affecting the safety of British possessions in India, I
     purpose proceeding to the Malabar Coast with his Majesty’s Ships Suffolk
    and Trident, leaving the Victorious for the protection of this Coast ’till the
     Homeward bound Indiamen are loaded. . . .

  By September 27th, ten days later, in giving orders to the captain of the
Arrogant to proceed to China and then rejoin the flagship, Rainier was
able to include a warning:
       As ’tis apprehended part of the French armament said to be destined for
    Egypt may be coming this way, if they can escape Lord St. Vincent, it will
     behove you to approach the Malabar Coast with great caution. . . .

   It was November before Rainier seems to have had any precise informa¬
tion about Egypt, and even that was accompanied by many baseless
rumours. He knew enough, however, in September to begin re-deploying
his squadron to the westward, mainly in order to blockade Mysore. He
                                       147
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

was thus able to report (in cypher) on December 2nd that he had received
his orders from the Admiralty and, with them, information about
Commodore Blankett’s mission.
                                                 Centurion, Bombay 2nd Dec.
       ... The present disposition of His Majesty’s Squadron under my command,
    is as follows, Suffolk and Victorious on the Malabar Coast near Mangalore
    —the Trident preparihg to dock; Centurion has docked, and proceeds to
    Mocha with the Belvidere Indiaman in five days, to reinforce Commodore
    Blankett, a situation of the greatest alarm at present—The Sybille is or was
    at the mouth of the Ganges, but ordered to join me. The Arrogant and
    Virginie in the Streights of Malacca but may be gone to convoy the Trade
    from China—The Carysfort and Fox at China; daily expected to return to
    Prince of Wales Island. These last four ships are also ordered to join me,
    but uncertain when they may receive the order; the Resistance missing—
    The Orpheus, Hobart, Vulcan Bomb and Amboyna Brig stationed at the
    Spice Islands.
       Certain intelligence, VIZ. Buonaparte getting possession of Cairo—
    Admiral Nelson’s Victory—the French had not reached Suez the 25th of
    August last, nor was there the least apprehension of their penetrating through
    Persia in the middle of last month, on the contrary, the attempt is deemed
    utterly impracticable.
       Intelligence received from Bussora [Bushire]      but not authenticated;
    burning of the Ships at Alexandria by Captain Trowbridge; successive
    defeats and massacres of the French Army in Egypt by the Arabs—Buona¬
    parte determining to get to the East Indies, had reached Suez with 8000
    men. . . .
                                                                   (Ad. 1/169.)