

accompanied by a small escort, together with Rear-Admiral Ganteaume
and a motley following of antiquaries and Egyptologists, geologists and
surveyors. Arriving on December 27th, he questioned such Arab seamen
as could be found, inspected the town, and issued a number of characteristic
orders. The Admiral was told to equip three gunboats and use them to
reconnoitre Tor and other neighbouring ports. Leaving subordinates to
carry out these orders aSiWell as they might, Bonaparte hurried off again
on 3rd January, 1799, to explore the traces of the canal dug by the ancients.
He was back in Cairo on the evening of the 6th. At this period he was
evidently considering the construction of a Red Sea squadron, and had even
begun to draw up plans for naval operations in the near future. These
would have been more realistic if Admiral Sercey’s frigates had been at
hand. Instead, the Preneuse and Brule-Gueule were far to the eastward,
attempting to co-operate with the Spanish, and the Forte was on her way
towards the Bay of Bengal and capture. It does not appear that Sercey was
even ordered to co-operate with Bonaparte; if he was, the orders came
too late, after his squadron had virtually ceased to exist. As for the ship¬
wrights at Suez, they managed to build not only the three gunboats but
a brigantine constructed from the timber of two dhows. They were still
so busied when, on April 27th, two ships were seen approaching from the
south. They were not Sercey’s frigates. They were the Centurion and the
Albatross. To anything of a flotilla which anyone could conceivably build
at Suez, they were the answer; the finish; checkmate.
  In the crisis occasioned by the invasion of Egypt, Dundas, as we have
seen, acted with great vigour. But the Governor-General of India and
Admiral Rainier were fully as resolute, both before and after their instruc¬
tions arrived. On the 17th June, 1798, while Bonaparte was at Malta and
about to sail for Egypt, Rainier was assuring the Admiralty ‘that all His
Majesty’s extensive Dominions in this Country are in perfect safety and
tranquillity, which as far as lies with me no exertions shall be wanting to
preserve.’ He had been busy organizing the protection of trade and had
been, in person, on the Malabar coast from April until his arrival at
Trincomalee in June. While on the west side of India he had heard from
Calicut ‘of the warlike movements in the dominions of Sultan Tippoo,
indicating a sanguine expectation of being joined by a French force,’ but the
fact that the Suffolk and Arrogant were far more in evidence than the French
had a sobering effect. On July 9th, Rainier outlined his plans for the benefit
of the Governor-General. He proposed to send the Arrogant (74), Fox (32)
and Carysfort (28) to the Straits of Malacca, while retaining the Suffolk (74),
Victorious (74), Trident (64) and Virginie (38) on the Coromandel coast.
                                       146
                        THE   THREAT     FROM EGYPT

He explained that (with several under repair) he lacked the ships for offensive
action and added: