

                                      *35
                        WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

extricated himself from the complex problems inherent in ruling the
Moluccas, he had left Pakenham to take his place. Pakenham had with
him the Resistance (44), and the three sloops, Hobart, Vulcan and Amboyna.
For a time Pakenham was chiefly occupied with a rebellion in Amboyna
itself, but by July 1797 he was able to report the conquest of the Dutch
settlement at Copong on the island of Timor. This was followed, however,
by a Dutch plot to kill Pakenham by treachery. The town had surrendered
and been occupied by a small garrison, mainly sepoys, under Lieutenant
Frost. The fort was found difficult to defend, easily entered from the sea
side and overlooked by houses nearby. On the day of the rising the
lieutenant visited the Dutch governor at his office. The Dutch were
evidently disappointed and asked particularly whether the Commodore was
coming ashore. Leaving the governor’s the lieutenant heard a tumult and
saw one or two of his sentries being killed. Realizing that the Malays
(probably armed by the Dutch) had burst into the town, he ran for the
fort, with one or two survivors, and there found himself under heavy
musketry fire from the neighbouring buildings. The situation was momen¬
tarily saved by some marines, landed from boats, who climbed into the
weak embrasures on the sea side. It was clear, nevertheless, that the fort
was in no condition to stand a siege and that the marines were too few
to defend it even if it had been. It was decided, therefore, to burn the
whole town and blow up the fort, which was done after the marines had
been re-embarked. Some three hundred of the rebels were killed and sixteen
of the seamen and sepoys.
   The relatively easy occupation of Amboyna and Banda had encouraged
Rainier, it will be remembered, to order (before he left in 1796) the further
conquest of Ternate. But Ternate, northernmost island of the Moluccas,
had been well fortified and was held by the obstinate Governor Budach.
He did not surrender to Pakenham’s summons and held out, in fact, until
1801.1 In the meanwhile, certain ships, of Rainier’s squadron had to remain
in the Moluccas and more would have been needed had not the East India
Company’s cruisers been there to assist. It was an awkward commitment,
but it is fair to recall that Rainier regarded the Moluccas as a permanent
conquest and a part of the British Empire. In accounts of the expedition
to Java in 1811 it is too often forgotten that the way had been prepared by
a previous occupation of the Moluccas and by the naval operations which,
extending over years, had gradually familiarized the Navy with a region
from which the Dutch had for generations excluded all European rivals.
  1 See Commodore Sir John Hayes, his voyage and life, ij6y~i8yi. Ida Lee. London, 1912.
(Chapter XIV.)

                                           136
                        THE   THREAT     FROM EGYPT

  Farther to the eastward, the problem was to ensure the safety of the
China fleet at a period when the Spanish at Manila were actively at war,
with ships admirably placed to waylay the trade. Rainier’s first measure of
trade protection, taken while the Manila expedition was still in preparation,
had been to send the Sybille (38), Captain Cooke, and Centurion (50), to
escort the outward-bound China trade (i.e. from Bombay to Macao)
through the Straits of Malacca. This was on 12th July, 1797, and by
August 21 st he had sent the Victorious (74) and Trident (64) in the same
direction. The Sybille and Trident, with the Fox (32) were to go on to
Macao and escort the China ships homeward. The danger to the China
trade was increased by the cancellation of the Manila expedition, the threat
of which, while it lasted, was enough to keep the Spaniards in port.