

wanted to know. The Spanish had the San Pedro (74), Montanes (74)
and Europa (74), the Maria de la Cabeya (36) and Lucia (36), all in port,
and another 36-gun frigate expected back in two months. None of the
ships in port was fit to sail. They were all fairly harmless and ill-equipped,
and no real threat to anyone. It was just as well to let them alone. Rainier
evidently thought the same for he reported Captain Cooke’s adventure
to the Admiralty as follows:

        . . . Captain Cooke in La Sybille and Fox during the lading of the Indiamen
     at Canton made an alert into Manila Bay, January 13th' last and by hoisting
     French Colours completely deceived the Spaniards till he had obtained
     every useful information . . . and then dismissed the Spanish officers and
     crews with the boats that brought them off; a conduct much to my satis¬
     faction, as the Governor of Manila behaved so very honorably towards
     his Majesty’s subjects on the breaking out of the war. . . .

  Anglo-Spanish relations fell something short, it is evident, of total war.
A year later, as we have seen, Edward Cooke lay mortally wounded at
Calcutta while his prize the Forte was towed by the Sybille into port.
   During the latter half of 1798, Admiral Rainier had more important
things to worry about than the safety of the China fleet. On May 19th,
the expedition under General Bonaparte sailed from Toulon. On July 1st
his troops were landing in Egypt, and on the 2nd they captured Alexandria.
A month later his fleet was destroyed in Aboukir Bay. That Bonaparte
was bound for Egypt Rainier knew on September 17th, if not before. More
detailed information he lacked. He knew enough, however, to understand
the chief factors in the situation and he must have had, for the moment,
sufficient food for thought. As regards the invasion of Egypt, neither he
nor Dundas nor the authorities in India were taken wholly by surprise.
They had, as we have seen, expected something of the kind. On the other
hand, they were mostly (Dundas excepted)              sceptical of Bonaparte’s
chances of reaching India. Supposing him firmly settled in Egypt, with all
Turkish opposition neutralized, the choices open to him were, broadly,
two: to proceed by sea or by land. The march overland would imply, in
the first instance, an understanding with the rulers of Persia and Arabia,
and, in the second place, a solution to a supply problem which seemed
insoluble. The voyage from Suez would imply ships. These could be either
sent from France, sent from the Mauritius or acquired somehow (built,
for example) at Suez. With the French ports closely watched, there seemed
no likelihood of a squadron leaving France without being so closely pursued
as to be foredoomed to disaster. The squadron at Mauritius had ceased

                                       139
                         WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

to exist, or nearly so, and neither Dutch nor Spanish allies had so far proved
effective. The privateers, if requisitioned, were mostly quite small. As for
the Red Sea, the local craft to be found there were smaller still, and the
materials for building anything larger were conspicuously absent. This,
nevertheless, seemed the most hopeful line of approach, for Tippoo Sultan
was the obvious ally and the Red Sea led in his direction. Mangalore was
the obvious place of diserpbarkation and the Governor-General knew that,
say, three thousand French soldiers landed there could do enormous harm.
It is not clear that Bonaparte ever contemplated thus sacrificing a brigade,
but Wellesley had to bear the possibility in mind. And granted that the
tonnage to embark his whole army might seem unobtainable, the craft
needed to carry a brigade might just possibly exist. Tippoo himself might
strive to send some ships and, once given a few, these might scour the
Red Sea for more. Dundas seems to have expected Bonaparte to follow
Alexander’s route to India and took diplomatic means to impede him, while
not ignoring the Red Sea alternative. His more energetic measures included
 ordering the Bombay Government to occupy the island of Perim, at the
 southern entrance to the Red Sea. He also instructed Wellesley to deal
with Tippoo before French help could reach him. ‘If Tipu has made
preparations of a hostile nature ... do not wait for actual hostilities on his
part . . . attack him!’1 This was sound policy, whatever Bonaparte’s plan
might be.
   Apart from the wisdom he may or may not have shown, Dundas is
given much credit, and no doubt rightly, for the speed with which he
acted. His suspicion of Bonaparte’s destination had become conviction
by June 13th and his orders followed at once. One essential, he decided,
was to have a squadron in the Red Sea at the earliest possible moment.
One way to ensure this would have been to send orders to Rainier, possibly
followed by reinforcements. But it was a moment of crisis and to Dundas,
at his most Napoleonic, this procedure seemed too slow. He decided to
send a squadron directly there from England. It would come eventually
under Rainier’s command—that was inevitable—but with orders from the
Secretary of State it could go straight to Suez and cut out the delay which
might result from an attempt to give orders to Rainier. One project urged
by Dundas at this time was countered by Grenville with an unkind sugges¬
tion that he should consult a large-scale map of Asia: his Red Sea project
would have lost none of its effect had he also had time to consult a chart
and sailing directory. Be that as it may, he chose Captain J. Blankett for
this service and instructed the Admiralty to send him to Suez at the earliest
  1 See The East India Company, 1384—1834. C. H. Philips. Manchester, 1940, p. 101, et seq.
                                           I40
                        THE THREAT FROM EGYPT