

        The necessity I shall be under of sending a strong convoy to China
     every season whilst the Spaniards are in so much force there, will naturally
     occur to their Lordships’ observation, and as they may be expected to put
     to Sea again when they receive information of our Expedition being laid
     aside, which must have reached them by this time, I am apprehensive it
     will delay Capt. Cooke’s return with the ships under his command to a
     later period than I had calculated, as it may be conjectured the Supercargoes
     will apply to him to wait to take under his convoy the whole of the home¬
     ward bound ships then in port by the different routes they may be directed
     to take, as far as their courses lie together. . . .
                     (Rainier to Admiralty, 25th November, 1797. Ad. 1/168.)

   Captain   Edward     Cooke    duly brought     his   convoy    to   Macao    on
13th December, 1798, his crews much enfeebled by sickness, especially
that of the Trident. As Rainier had expected, Cooke was asked, and agreed,
to remain until all the Indiamen were loaded. To be more exact, he agreed
to escort one division of the fleet as far as the latitude of Manila and then
return for the rest, or for such as were ready by the end of March. The
supercargoes wanted to fix an even later date but the necessity for this
would be apparent only if the Spaniards were at sea. This Captain Cooke
decided to learn by personal reconnaissance as soon as he had parted with
the first group of Indiamen. The information received through Swedish
intermediaries seemed to him, no doubt, too vague and contradictory.
There can be no doubt that Cooke had an additional motive in hoping
to intercept two of the Spanish treasure ships, which he believed to be at
Manila and due to leave. Sailing with the Sybille and Fox (Captain Malcolm)
on 5th January, 1798, Cooke rid himself of his Indiamen and was off the
Philippines by the nth. He learnt from a coasting vessel that only two
                                       137                                     E*
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

of the Spanish men-of-war were ready for sea. Thus encouraged, Cooke
proceeded to disguise his two frigates, probably modelling the Sybille on
the Seine and the Fox on the Prudente. The transformation must have been
very complete, extending even to uniform—one imagines the sailors glee¬
fully learning to shout ‘Vive la Republique’ from time to time. Thus
disguised and rehearsed the two frigates entered Manila Bay after dark
on the 13th, passed Corregidor and anchored before midnight. At sunrise
they hoisted French colours and worked up the bay until within sight of
the Spanish squadron in Cavita road—three ships of the line and two
frigates. The Fox was leading and it was that frigate which the Spanish
guard-boat approached. Answering the inevitable question, a linguist on
board the Fox explained nonchalantly that the two frigates were part of
Sercey’s squadron and had put in, hoping for supplies and Spanish co¬
operation. A Spanish naval officer then promised them supplies, but
explained that none of the men-of-war could be prepared for sea in less
than two months; which was perhaps just as well. Captain Cooke now
came on board (to the tune, one hopes, of the Marseillaise) and was
introduced as Commodore Latour. The party then adjourned to Malcolm’s
cabin for a glass of wine, drunk to the downfall of England. There they
were presently joined by some more officers, rowed out in Rear-Admiral
Don Martin Alaba’s barge. A second boatload arrived with messages from
the Admiral, brought by his A.D.C. At that point the guests had to be
undeceived; if only perhaps to save the Fox's crew from hysteria. The
episode ended with the bloodless capture of three Spanish gunboats, the
prisoners taken, about two hundred, being all released.
  There can be no doubt that a slightly stronger squadron, given the same
measure of surprise, could have destroyed the Spanish squadron at its
moorings with probably the dockyard as well. As it happened, the squadron
might easily have been reinforced by the Resistance (44), which Rainier
had ordered to Macao from the Moluccas. She had been off Manila—by
mere accident, of course—a few days before. Instead, however, of capturing
the richly-laded Marquesetta., she had merely frightened the Spaniards into
unloading that ship. The Marquesetta was now lying, with the Rey-Carlos     ,
in Cavita, well out of reach, and the Resistance had put back to the Moluccas
after sustaining such damage in a gale that she very nearly foundered. Had
her visit coincided with that of the two frigates, Pakenham would have
been in command—a man without Cooke’s touch of genius—and the
Resistance did not, of course, resemble any of the French frigates. Apart,
however, from these material considerations, it is evident that Cooke did
not want to carry matters too far. He had learnt, in great detail, all he
                                    138
                        THE   THREAT      FROM EGYPT