

  On another occasion Bentham said:

       Blankett was a retainer of Lord Shelburne, one of the numerous hangers-on
    who were tale-bearers to my lord and was familiar with the Whigs. He
    was an ignorant, confident, amusing fellow, an object of great aversion
    to the Bowood ladies from his coarse manners. But he was employed by
    Lord Shelburne to repeat to him what passed among the Whigs, and especially
    to report the conversations at the Admiralty. . . . We had a dispute about
    the relative size of Sicily and Ireland. He would have it that Sicily was the
    biggest. But though ill-read and assuming, and addicted to falsehood, rather
    from temerity than mendacity, he was a necessary instrument to Lord
    Shelburne. . . .
                                                               {Ibid., p. 116.)

  Blankett had professional virtues which could hardly be appreciated by
one who had met him only at Bowood. He had been in the East Indies
but not in the Red Sea. Indeed, to have found an officer acquainted with
the Red Sea would have been extremely difficult; it was a region rarely
visited, almost unsurveyed, and generally but little known. Owing to bad
weather in the Atlantic, Blankett did not round the Cape until October 1st.
He was harassed by easterly gales, in which his two consorts parted
company, only rejoining him at the Comoro Islands. It was the wrong
time of year for the voyage he was attempting, and he spent all November
and December on the East African coast struggling against adverse winds
and currents. On December 10th he captured the French privateer Apollon
(12 guns, 125 men), the corsairs having every reason to be surprised and
hurt at finding British men-of-war where, in all conscience, they had no
business to be. Writing to the Admiralty on 16th January, 1799, Blankett
reported:

       I have now been eight weeks on this Coast, hitherto little known (if at
    all) to the English, in the course of which time, I have endeavoured by

                                      142
                         THE   THREAT      FROM EGYPT

     standing both to the Northward and Southward, to find the means of
     proceeding on my voyage, hitherto without success, and have crossed the
     Line fourteen times, but have found the Winds invariably to the Eastward
     and a strong current setting to the S.W. so as to have made it impossible
     to get off the Coast. I am now anchored in about 40 5' North, with an intent
     to send the Daedalus to the Cape for a supply of salt provisions and spirits....

  The Daedalus went off, with orders to rejoin him at Aden, and Blankett
pushed on doggedly, his men on reduced rations. He learnt from native
craft that ‘the French had landed at Alexandria and were got to Cairo’
which spurred him on afresh. Still delayed by gales in February, and running
short not only of food and water, but of fuel and candles and everything
else, he put into Zanzibar ‘altho’,’ he wrote, ‘I do not know that an
English ship has ever been there,’ and managed to obtain there rice, beef,
wood and water. So fortified, he was enabled to reach Mocha on April 13th.
There he found Captain Wilson of the Company’s Marine and learnt from
him that Admiral Rainier had sent two ships up the Red Sea already, the
Centurion (50) and Albatross (r8), and that these had sailed from Jidda for
Suez a fortnight before.
  It is sad to think that all this frantic hurry should have ended, after a
ten months’ voyage, in this horrible anti-climax. The idea of sending a
small squadron to watch Suez was not (when one pauses to consider it)
as brilliantly original as all that. Rainier had thought of it for himself—as
of course he would, and as he was paid to do—and had acted early in
December with calm efficiency. It would have been quicker, for that matter,
to have sent him an order direct. Blankett may have reflected on these
depressing facts. There, however, he was, as senior naval officer in the Red
Sea, and he had to decide what to do next. He turned to Captain Wilson
for information. The officers of the Company’s Marine were a rather
embittered set of men, without the prestige of the Navy or the profits of
the Indiamen. Apart from prize-money they had no legal means of making
a fortune and no very obvious prospects of advancement. One may picture
Wilson as probably a man who knew the Red Sea, the Arabs and the Royal
Navy and disliked them all. His replies would be laconic. Blankett wanted
to reach Suez? It was too late in the year. The northern monsoon would
set in before he could arrive there. What about the Daedalus? If she did
not appear within a month she would not be able to enter the straits. Would
the Centurion be likely to return? She couldn’t—not until the monsoon
changed. Were any supplies to be had locally? No. Any water? Oh, yes—
at three dollars a cask. Was there any news of Bonaparte? Nothing to be
relied upon—it was mostly invented by Arab chieftains to serve their own