

possible moment with the rank of Commodore. By June 30th Blankett was
at the Fountain Inn at Portsmouth and urging the Commissioner of the
Dockyard to hasten the victualling of the Leopard (50) in which he was
to hoist a broad pendant. A Captain Blair was to have gone with him, but
a change of plan sent this emissary off ‘to pursue his journey overland to
Jedda and other Ports in the Red Sea, as also to Aden for the purpose of
furnishing you with such Intelligence as he may be able to collect.’ This
representative of an M.I. Branch vanished (no doubt in Arab disguise)
while Blankett chafed at the maddening deliberation with which stores were
being supplied to the Orestes (13) and Daedalus (32). ‘I have now served
more than forty years,’ he confided to Nepean, ‘and find impatience still
prevails. . . .’ By July 5th he was at Spithead and wondering what the
Navy was coming to.

        It appears to me that the manners of our service is much changed, par¬
     ticularly the officers, who seem to have lost much of that vivacity we used
     to see formerly, and as for respect it seems almost lost. We sent away 200
     women yesterday and reserved none. The fashion of carrying women to
     sea answers no good purpose, but introduces many bad ones. . . .
                                                                   (Ad. 1/169.)

   On July 6th the Leopard was at St. Helen’s but the Daedalus was still
without captain, first lieutenant, master or surgeon. To make matters
worse, Captain Surridge and Captain Ball had been summoned to sit on
a court martial. ‘Could not they be excused?’ begged Blankett of Admiral
Waldegrave; but he begged in vain. The idea! What would he be asking
next? One may imagine Waldegrave expressing his surprise to a contem¬
porary ‘The manners of the service are sadly changed, Sir—as for respect,
it seems almost lost!’ Blankett was able to sail soon afterwards and was at
Torbay on the 12th, renewing his water supply, but ‘I shall put to sea again
without a moment’s loss of time.’ That interview with Dundas had had its
effect; Blankett had been breathless ever since.
   John Blankett had been made captain in 1780 and was now, in 1798,
very near his flag. He was known to Jeremy Bentham, who described him
(in 1781) as:

     . . . One of the most wrong-headed blockheads I think I ever met with;
     putting in his oar on every occasion, talking a tort and a travers, and spoiling
     every discussion that is started. Yet he is connected with many of the first
     people in opposition and, in particular, has the ear of the maitre de la maison
     (i.e. Lord Shelburne) to a degree I am sorry to observe. His great merit
     is the having been a lieutenant to Keppel, whose dme damnee he is, and has
                                        141
                       WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    written paragraphs and pamphlets on his side. Before he went, he took me
    into confidence, and consulted me about a nonsensical project of his for
    discovering polished and commercial nations where Cooke had been, and
    found none: the most absurd idea, supported by the most absurd arguments,
    in the most confused method, and in the most slovenly and awkward style.
    He it is who brought home the Rippon from the East Indies. He is personally
    acquainted with Rumbold and defends him without argument and without
     shame. Sed de hoc plus satis.
       (Works of Jeremy Bentham, ed. by John Bowring, Vol. X, Edinburgh,
       1843, P- 95-)