

                                      157
                         WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

Bay, which they reconnoitred when they knew that ‘there was no ship in
a state to oppose them.5
   It is perhaps fair to conclude that neither squadron was spoiling for a
fight. Captain Horsburgh of the Bombay Anna wrote, ‘The general opinion
was, that the surprize and disappointment of the Enemy must have been
great, on their finding three English ships of war at Macao’—Danish ships
having assured them there was only one. Captain Hargood had a convoy
to protect, and Admiral Alava’s men were showing an appalling lack of
seamanship. When they were parted by weather and darkness, each went
his own way. Hargood sailed with his convoy on February 7th and the
Spanish Admiral returned to Manila, where the two French frigates left
him in disgust. With Hargood gone, however, the Europa (74) and Fama (36)
reappeared off Macao and indeed anchored there on May 19th. The super¬
cargoes wrote anxiously to Rainier on the 26th, and the Admiral responded
by sending a strong detachment to cover the convoy of 1799-1800. This
was ensured by an order given to Captain Josias Rowley of E Imperieuse (38)
on August 21 st, directing him to proceed with convoy to China. The
Trident (64) and Providence schooner went on the same service and the
Arrogant (74) was ordered in September to strengthen still further the
homecoming China fleet. Captain Rowley’s convoy was delayed on the
way and then caught in a typhoon on October 22nd, L Imperieuse losing
her foremast, mizzen-mast, bowsprit, main-topmast and rudder. Once at
Macao with the badly-damaged Imperieuse, Captain Rowley had fresh
trouble in seeking to secure the use of a regular man-of-war anchorage
at Anson’s Bay. The Chinese would not admit men-of-war into the river
if they could help it and they threatened to stop the trade if the Imperieuse
did not leave. Although the Spaniards did nothing more, they had certainly,
at least indirectly, caused trouble enough.1
   For the above reasons among others, Rainier would probably have liked
to attack Manila. The defeat and death of Tippoo, however, had left the
Governor-General with troops to spare and his own ideas of how to
employ them. It had also left him with a fire-eating General in Baird and
an extremely able military adviser in his own younger brother, the Hon.
Colonel Arthur Wellesley. The Governor-General, left to himself or to
his brother’s advice, would probably have preferred to attack Mauritius.
Whereas the Admiral’s responsibility was maritime, the Marquess Wellesley’s
responsibility was for British India as a whole. If an invasion overland were
impracticable, as now seemed almost certain, the only possible threat to
  1 See The Chronicles of the East India Company trading to China, 1635—1834 H B Morse
Vol. II, p. 332.
                               JAVA   REPRIEVED

India must come by sea. But no one supposed that an army could sail from
France to India without calling anywhere for supplies and water. With the
Cape in English hands, the necessary halfway house must be Mauritius.
With that captured, a large-scale expedition to India would be almost
physically impossible, even without naval opposition. As Colonel Wellesley
had written in 1797, ‘Mauritius ought to be taken. As long as the French
have an establishment there, Great Britain cannot call herself safe in India.’
Apart from that, the French islands were a nest of privateers. Merchants
and shipowners in India were complaining of their losses and a Governor-
General at Calcutta could not help but hear them. He heard more about
their troubles than did the Admiral at Madras and far more than anyone
at India House or in Whitehall.
  The French privateer vessels in 1799-1801 may have numbered as many
as a dozen. Nine of them, at least, are known by name. These were: