

  Problematical it was to remain. Blankett, however, remained at Mocha
and tried to recall the Centurion (Captain J. S. Rainier) from Suez. This
order was based on a belief, fostered by Arab reports, that the French army
had been defeated and ‘completely surrounded.’ He cancelled it later and
promised to reinforce the Centurion instead. He considered, however, that
the straits were the point to defend in force and the place to which a
desperate   Bonaparte would eventually be driven. On May 19th, the
Daedalus at length arrived from the Cape, with stores no longer wanted
but having taken the Prudente off the Cape on February 9th. Also, on
June 6th, the Centurion arrived at Mocha, having left the Albatross to cruise
for six weeks off Tor. Captain Rainier’s report was reassuring—Bonaparte
had no flotilla at Suez. And now, with the setting in of the northern mon¬
soon, there was little chance of any vessels reaching Suez from the Indian
Ocean. Blankett remained at Mocha, however, and was presently joined
by the Albatross, with definite news that the French had occupied Kosseir
and a letter from Sir Sidney Smith giving news of the successful defence
of Acre. This information was quite correct. The French General Desaix
had been chasing the Mamelukes up the left bank of the Nile, and, towards
the end of May, he sent a small force to garrison Kosseir and its semi-ruined
fort. This port was thought useful as a means of intercepting any help
which the Mamelukes might otherwise draw from Arabia: while, at the
same time, facilitating negotiations with the Shereef of Mecca.
  Had the French been still intent on invading India (which they were not)
the attitude of the Shereef would have been an important factor in the
situation. Jidda was the nearest port at which the French could have found
any quantity of shipping and the Shereef, with a doubtful claim to his
office, was following a tortuous policy of his own, having probably been
bribed by Tippoo Sultan. As Blankett wrote in August:

       The Sheriffe is considered as extremely arbitrary and avaritious, practised
    in various deceits, seldom avowing any reason for his actions and jealous
    of the encreasing power of the Turks, from whose hands he has now almost
    wrested the whole authority they were used to exercise in his territories. . . .


  Blankett considered that the French capture of Kosseir was done ‘by
connivance from Mecca’ and that the time had come for resolute action.
By now Blankett was worried chiefly about the possibility of a permanent
French occupation of Egypt.

      From the judgment I have been able to form, I should conclude that
    Buonaparte meditates at present a firm establishment in Egypt, a system

                                       151
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

    far more formidable to our interests than the visionary atempt of passing
    to India, in which he must according to all probabilities, have failed.. ..
           (Blankett to Bombay Government, 17th August, 1799. Ad. 1/169.)
  Perhaps chiefly to impress the Shereef, Blankett ordered the Daedalus
and Fox to visit Jidda and then go on to Kosseir and—supposing it were
in enemy hands—destroy it. This feat would be doubly impressive as
performed against the iponsoon; which, for a frigate, was found to be
possible. The two frigates left Mocha on July 7th, left Jidda on August 2nd
and reached Kosseir on the 14th. Seeing the tricolour flying on the fort,
they anchored at a suitable distance and opened fire. They went on firing
‘day and night’ until the fort was in ruins and the colours shot away. The
bombardment lasted three days, with occasional and unsuccessful attempts
to land, and ended only from shortage of ammunition after the expenditure
of about three thousand rounds. Blankett’s motive in this was to impress
the Arabs (before the days of Mahan) with the possibilities of sea power.
As he wrote to Lord Spencer, ‘Your Lordship will naturally suppose it
was not an old Arab castle I considered of consequence,’ but rather the moral
effect in Arabia, and especially at Mecca.
  Following up his line of reasoning about the danger of a permanent
French hold on Egypt, Blankett was now intent on making Egypt less
valuable to France. Suffering badly from the heat, and by now a little shrill,
Blankett propounded a scheme for interrupting all trade connections of
Egypt and Arabia. Towards this the first step was to reduce the Shereef
to reason. Trusting that the bombardment of Kosseir had left the Shereef
in a receptive mood, Blankett determined to visit Jidda in person. For¬
tunately, on the very eve of his departure, Blankett (a Rear-Admiral now
by the promotion of February 15th which made Rainier a Vice-Admiral
of the Blue) received two important pieces of news. One was of the death
of Tippoo Sultan, the other of the departure of Bonaparte from Egypt
in August 1799. With these two events, the danger to India was virtually
at an end. The result was that when Blankett took his squadron to Jidda
he had no difficulty in persuading the Shereef to forbid all intercourse
between his ports and Suez. On his return to Mocha, he found that Colonel
Murray had in early September transferred the bulk of his force from Perim
to Aden. This move was the result of an invitation from the Sultan of Aden,
who was willing and indeed anxious to surrender the town as a dependency
with himself a pensioner. Taking this offer with him, Blankett went with
the Leopard, Centurion and Daedalus to winter and refit at Bombay. He
left the Fox and Albatross at Mocha, where they were joined for a time by
the Braave (38) and Amboyna (14).
                       THE   THREAT    FROM EGYPT