

     ... at day light on the 1st of January the Indiamen were 5 or 6 miles ahead,
     at the same time we saw a strange sail to the windward, standing to northward
     who on perceiving us bore down with great caution, because as Monsieur
     Surcouf afterward told me, he took one of the Ships to be either the Sybille
     or Nonesuch seeing the other two ships safe into the Sea. When I saw the
     strange sail altered her course, I took it for granted that she was the Privateer
     which the American had given intelligence of and immediately ordered a
     gun to be fired as a signal to the Indiamen. We continued the signal till
     about 8 o’clock when the Privateer saw that the Ships a-head paid no attention
     to our firing, she hoisted English Colours—up studding-sails and royals
     and came on with more confidence—at | past 8 she gave us a shot, hauled
                                          160
                                 JAVA     REPRIEVED

     down the English Colours and hoisted the French National Flag. We
     returned her fire from a six-pounder which we got off the deck into a stern
     port in the great cabin, at the same time carrying every sail after the India-
     men, anxiously hoping that the constant firing would bring them to our
     assistance, but we looked in vain, for they never made the smallest movement
     to assist us. At 9 the Privateer having got very near us, they began to fire
     grape shot from 2 brass 36-lb. cohorns which they had mounted forward.
     At this time it came on a light squall from the southward which brought the
     Indiamen directly to windward of us. During the squall we carried on press
     of sail and the firing ceased on both sides [but] the superior sailing of the
     Privateer soon brought her up again when she commenced a smart fire from
     musketry and grape shot from one of the 36-lb. cohorns—the other having
     been disabled early in the action; At 11 our powder was wholly expended,
     the last gun we fired being loaded with musket cartridges. The Frenchman
     then prepared to board us. They triced up graplins to their main and fore
     yardarms, and Surcouf gave orders to board, animating his men with a
     promise of liberty to plunder. Seeing that we were incapable of resisting the
     force that was ready to be thrown on board of us, I was under the necessity
     of ordering the Colours to be hauled down and we were taken possession
     of by an officer from the Clarissa French Privateer, Mons. Surcouf Com¬
     mander, formerly mounting 18 guns, but now mounts no more than nine
     4-pounders, one 9-pounder and two cohorns already mentioned, one of
     which is incapable of further service, one of the nulls being broke off close
      to the piece. She has likewise several bell-mouthed blunderbusses in each
      top which we saw them sending down after [we] were on board. Her reduced
      force is owing to her being chased by the Sybille frigate. At that time she
      threw overboard 4 12-pounders, three 9-pounders with their carriages, and
      all her spars, sawed thro’ a bulkhead which runs across abaft the mainmast
      and separates the officers from the crew, knocked down all the stantions
      and got the axes and saws up to cut off her poop, when unfortunately it fell
      little wind and they found they could save themselves without having
      recourse to the last resource. Her crew consists of M. Surcouf, his brother,
      four officers and a surgeon, sixty Europeans of several nations, ten caffries,
      eleven lascars who entered when he took the Albion1 and a few Malays.
      Surcouf sent on board the prize one officer (by trade a taylor), sixteen
      Frenchmen, and ten lascars. They were employed untill sunset shifting
      prisoners, and so refitting the rigging of the prize, which had been shot away
      during the action, and cutting out a double-headed shot which had entered
      near the stern post just above the waterline. All this time the Indiamen were