

  1 This was a common practice. But when the Prudente was taken by the Daedalus, and
an English deserter (Thomas Tring, alias Thomas Spinks) found among the Frenchmen, he
was condemned to death by a court martial and promptly executed. Maltese deserters from
the French army at Suez were enlisted in the King’s ships as marines.

                                             l6l                                   F
                       WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

     in sight to the S.W. At sunset when Surcouf was viewing them from the
     poop thro, a telescope he requested I would tell him upon my honor whether
     they were Indiamen or not.T repeated what I told him before that they were
     two Company’s ships with whom I had kept company ever since we left
     the pilot. He replied they were two Tritons, alluding to the easy capture
     which he made of that ship, and said the commanders deserved to be shot.
     This was the universal opinion of the French officers. I fear their conduct
     will be attended with* bad consequences to the Hon’ble Company’s ships
     as it has given the Frenchmen a very contemptible opinion of them and will
     subject them to many attacks which a spirited behaviour would have freed
     them from. . . . We landed at Bemblepatam yesterday . . . [having been
     released]. . . . Surcouf does not mean to come any more near the Sand Heads,
     being very much afraid of the Sybille and Nonesuch, but intends to cruize in
     the latitude of 19 and 20 degrees, and should he be joined by La Constance
     \Confiance ?] as he expects, the trade of Bengal will be entirely cut off until
     they have surfeited themselves with prizes and returned to the Mauritius to
     recruit their crews. I have written to Lord Mornington a similar letter to
     this. . . .
                                                                    (Ad. 1/170.)


  Lord Mornington received many such letters, not all written as philoso¬
phically. As for what Stewart says about the encouragement given to Surcouf
to attack Indiamen, he was perfectly right. This incident led directly to the
capture, on October 9th of this same year, of the H.C. Ship Kent, of 26
guns, off the Sandheads. The Kent, it is true, put up a fierce resistance
before being overpowered by boarding, her casualties including 14 killed
(her captain among them) and 44 wounded. Of a crew of about 90 to 100,
with 38 male passengers, this represents a high proportion. And the fact
that the action continued for one hour and forty-seven minutes proves that
the Kent was far from being ‘a Triton.’ On the other hand, had Surcouf
expected such a struggle—he had sixteen casualties of his own—he might
have hesitated to attack the Kent at all.
  The capture of the Kent made a sensation at Calcutta, but Bombay was
more shaken by the fate of H.M. Sloop Trincomalee (16). The privateer
Iphigenie (18), Captain Malroux, from the Isle of France, intercepted a
packet called the Pearl, on 7th October, 1799, at the entrance to the Persian
Gulf. Captain Fowler was killed and his chief mate could do no more than
sink the mails and surrender. The Pearl was carrying treasure, which was
transhipped, and Malroux meant to quit the gulf with his prize and make
for his base. The Iphigenie was chased, however, by the Trincomalee and
the Comet schooner. Overtaken on the 12th, the privateer engaged her
pursuer, which was in fact less heavily armed. A duel with cannon ended
                                       162
                            JAVA   REPRIEVED