

       We have held almost exclusive trade with India by the Cape of Good Hope,
    which appears to me to be more owing to the ignorance and weakness of
    the Turkish and Arab Governments than to any manifest superiority of
    our own. Surat or any of the other Northern Settlements are so well situated
    to carry on trade thro’ the Red Sea that it would be dangerous to make them
    sensible of all the advantages that would arise from it.
       From Surat to Suez at the proper season of the year is a voyage of six
    weeks and from Suez to Cairo that of three days, from thence down the
    river to the ports of France is too well known to mention, so that it is possible
    a Surat cargo to be landed at France in the course of eleven weeks. This
    always alarmed me, and I have constantly been of opinion that it is more
    our policy positively to check the present existing trade to the Red Sea
     than to encourage [it]. . . .

   Despite these memories of Albuquerque, this foreshadowing of De
Lesseps, the danger from Egypt was dwindling to nothing. The Indian
Governments were passing over to the offensive and the question was no
longer ‘Are the French coming?’ but ‘Where shall we attack them?’ To
this question, it will be seen, the answers were prompt and emphatic;
energetic but diverse.
                                        x55
                              CHAPTER VII


                      Java Reprieved
                          v          _ _


I   E ft   to his own devices, Rainier would have gone back to the point
    at which the offensive of 1797 had been broken off. The danger from
    .VEgypt having diminished, there was no longer any reason why
Manila should be spared. The Spanish, it is true, had now had ample time
in which to strengthen their defences. But secrecy had not been the chief
characteristic of the 1797 expedition, and there was now an additional reason
for the stroke then planned. For the Spanish squadron had of late shown
an enterprise of which their former inertia had given no warning. The
China fleet was, of course, a standing temptation—a convoy of the largest
merchantmen in the world, richly laden and adhering to a time-table (fixed
by the monsoons and the tea crop) which was known, in outline, to every¬
one. Had there been a more prolonged emergency in the Red Sea, the China
fleet might have been unescorted in 1799, which would have made the
temptation greater still. Actually, Rainier was able to spare the Intrepid (64),
the Fox (32) and Carysfort (28), the first of which arrived at Macao, or
rather Anson’s Bay, on or before 16th November, 1798. The Fox and
Carysfort sailed on December 10th with the country ships for India, and
the Indiamen for Bengal sailed without escort on 6th January, 1799. This
left only the Intrepid to protect the Indiamen sailing for England. But
Admiral Rainier had foreseen the difficulty. Hearing that the Spanish had
two sail of the line and two frigates ready for sea, with the French Preneuse
(36) and Brule-Gueule (32) eager to co-operate, he sent the Arrogant (74)
and La Virginie (38) to reinforce the escort. It was regarded as something
of a feat for these last two ships to reach China when they did by the
Eastern Passage, and Captain Oliver Osborn was commended afterwards
for his exertions.
  Subsequent events are represented rather differently in the English and
Spanish accounts. Rainier’s report, based on the report he received from
Hargood of the Intrepid, the senior captain, ran thus: