

with the privateer attempting to board the Trincomalee. That sloop lost
her lieutenant, master and boatswain during the first attempt, her captain
and carpenter during the second. The third attack found her with twelve
survivors resisting, headed by the purser. At that moment she blew up
and sank, destroying the Iphigenie in the process, which sank four minutes
later. The privateer lost about 115 men, some thirty to thirty-five survivors
being picked up by the Pearl prize (which had beaten off the Comet). The
Trincomalee went down with all hands but two. This, again, was the sort
of event which would lead some people to conclude that the capture of the
lie de France should not be long delayed. When an East Indiaman could
be taken by a privateer off the entrance to the Hooghly, and when a man-
of-war could be sunk while engaging another privateer in the Persian Gulf,
the time for stern measures might be thought to have come.
  While Admiral Rainier might dream of capturing Manila with the ‘galleon*
in port; while the Marquess Wellesley might plan to add Mauritius to the
Empire, the Cabinet in London had different ideas. The ‘Cabinet’ meant,
in practice, so far as India was concerned, Mr. Henry Dundas. And Dundas,
as bellicose as Wellesley could be, wanted to complete the overthrow of
the Dutch East Indies by the capture of Java and Surinam. The Admiralty
orders to that effect were dated 21st October, 1799, and were received by
Rainier on May 5th. Parallel orders had gone to Wellesley ‘from Mr.
Secretary Dundas, conveying His Majesty’s commands to the same effect.’
These commands were not so emphatic as to deprive the Governor-General
of the right to cancel the operation if need arose, and the likelihood of its
taking place was lessened at the start when Lord Clive at Madras protested
against having to provide the troops. On hearing, however, from Wellesley,
Rainier decided to blockade Batavia as a preliminary measure. Wellesley
approved this policy and decided to base the expedition on Calcutta, where
it could be assembled under his own eye. November 20th was the provisional
date by which the expedition should be ready to sail, and Rainier agreed
to lead it in person. On the military side the Governor-General had chosen
his brother to command, junior as he was, and now braced himself to
receive the protest of the Generals.
   Rainier was on the Malabar coast early in 1800 but at Madras on April 29th
when he assured the Admiralty that ‘affairs continue in a tranquil state on
this station.’ After May 5th he issued his orders for the blockade of Batavia
—the Daedalus (Captain Ball) to sail under sealed orders with the Centurion ,
Braave and Sybille. In the manner of more recent years their destination
would have been veiled under a code name (Operation Anti-Macassar,
perhaps), but in 1800 they were simply described as cruising off 25670.

                                     163
                        WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

The final orders were drawn up on June 28th—it was not until then that
the squadron could be assembled—and before that, on June 21st, Rainier
ordered Rear-Admiral Blankett to take command at Madras, ‘His Majesty’s
service requiring my absence from this coast on a particular service of
importance, not proper to be divulged.’ On July 2nd Rainier informed
Sir Roger Curtis at the Cape that he intended to keep L’Imperieuse and
Braave for the present, although not of the East Indies squadron. So the
preparation went on until, on July 5th, Rainier received a dispatch from
the Governor-General to say that the expedition was to be postponed. The
Marquess was considering the possibility of attacking Mauritius instead.
The Admiral reported this to the Admiralty on August 25th, remarking
that he personally had received no countermanding orders and would
continue to blockade Batavia until told to desist.