

  Blankett thus sailed rather reluctantly for the Red Sea, reaching the
straits on 30th March, 1800, and finding both Aden and Perim evacuated
and Colonel Murray gone northward. He also found dispatches from Sir
Sidney Smith reporting the convention of El Arisch (4th January, 1799)
by which the evacuation of Egypt had been agreed. He sailed at once for
Suez expecting to find Murray in possession and, arriving on May 1st,
was disappointed to find the French still there. The convention had been
annulled by Elphinstone—Lord Keith as he had become—and Colonel
Murray had withdrawn to Tor. The truce lasted long enough for Blankett
to invite several French officers to dine, and so gain information from
them about Suez. Then he retired to Jidda and sent a report to the Admiralty
in which he advised that Suez was hardly worth capturing or even bom¬
barding. He ended with a note on the climate:

       When we first arrived off Suez the weather was pleasant and to our
    feeling cold, the thermometer at Day and by Night being from 64° to 78°.
    But the latter part of the time when the Northern Monsoon set in about
    2 o’clock in the afternoon it began to blow strong, the wind bringing with
    it such quantities of Sand, Flies and Mosquitoes etc. as to darken the sky
    like a thick winter fog, altho’ we were three miles from the land. The air
    was hot and suffocating as if from the mouth of an oven, with a bad smell,
    and the thermometer rose to ioo° and continued so till at night. . . .

  On June 15th Blankett had a satisfactory conference with the Shereef

                                        154
                          THE   THREAT    FROM EGYPT

of Mecca, whom he urged to resist the French ‘as the Invaders of the rights
of Mankind and as destroyers of every principle of Morality and Virtue.’
All went well on this occasion, but two dhows from Suez presently arrived
with letters from General Kleber, telling of the retreat of the Turkish army.
This caused an abrupt change in the atmosphere and it became evident that
the Shereef’s main object was to gain complete independence of the Porte,
then a British ally. But Blankett blockaded Suez and kept the Shereef
outwardly friendly. ‘Jidda is so much exposed,’ he wrote wistfully, ‘that
I could easily fire the Town and the whole of the ships and vessels attached
to it.’ Of this the Shereef was made aware and the summer passed away
without the French gaining much advantage from his vacillation. Towards
the end of August Blankett saw that nothing more remained to do. He
sailed for Bombay, leaving La Forte with the Company’s cruiser Comet at
Mocha, and withdrawing the remainder of his squadron. As he did so the
French privateer Clarissa (16 guns, 148 men) sailed into his clutches, her
commander seeking a mild revenge by telling an unfounded story of French
frigates bound for the Red Sea. Blankett reached Bombay on August 31st
after a ten days’ passage from Mocha, destined to return, after refitting
his squadron, to his thankless task. Still viewing the French as the per¬
manent rulers of Egypt, he was becoming prophetically obsessed with the
possibilities of the Red Sea route.