

        Captain Osborn had arrived in Macao road but 3 or 4 days after a passage
     of some length wherein both ships had suffered considerable damage from

                                      I56
                             JAVA   REPRIEVED

    tempestuous weather and high seas in the Pacific Ocean, the Virginie having
    carried away her mizen mast and was laying without one when the combined
    force of the Enemy under Rear-Admiral Don Alaba appeared suddenly
    in that road, consisting of two seventy-four gun ships, two large frigates,
    Spanish, and two French Frigates, and approached His Majesty’s ships
    Intrepid, Arrogant and La Virginie in Line of Battle; Captain Hargood
    of the Intrepid, the senior officer, slipped his cables per signal and sail’d
    immediately in pursuit of them, being followed by the other two ships.
    Both squadrons were obliged to anchor among the Ladrones in the night,
    and in the morning to their surprise the Enemy were not seen.—The ships
    of the enemy appeared in very good order, and the Spanish Admiral’s ship
    sail’d remarkably fast—their running away from a force so much inferior
     to their own is no otherwise to be accounted for, but from their dread of a
     conflict that would in all probability have terminated in their disgrace
    and added another trophy to the Naval Atchievements of the War. It is
    proper to notice that none of the Convoy had then come down from the
     Tigris to alarm them by their doubtfull appearance.
  The Arrogant arrived at Macao on 21st January, 1799, and the Spanish
appeared on the 27th, probably without knowing of her arrival. Their
account of it appeared in the Manila Gazette of February nth. From this it
seems that the Europa (74) and Montanes (74), the Lucia and Fama frigates,
together with the Preneuse and Brule-Gueule, sailed from Manila on January
9th on a cruise ‘which from circumstances could not exceed 30 or 40 days.’
He heard that the English convoy would sail on about January 20th-30th
and tried to time his arrival to coincide. He knew about the Intrepid but
was rather vague about other escorting ships. He arrived among the Chinese
islands on the 26th, anchored overnight and sailed with the flood on the
morning of the 27th. The English, when sighted, ran away, although the
Europa, having outsailed her consorts, was alone. Don Ignacio de Alava
gave up the chase in order to rally his squadron. By the evening he had
his ships in line of battle, intending a night attack, but the captain of the
Montanes reported that his main-yard was sprung ‘which rendered it
impossible for him to make any effort whatever.’ It was getting dark but
Alava suspected that the enemy ‘were going on the opposite tack without
shewing any light.’ So he showed poop lanterns and mast-head lights to
let them know where to find him. He was prevented from further pursuit
by the accident to the Montanes and had to be content ‘with seeing two
English Ships of the Line and one Frigate run and abandon the Port before
two Spanish Ships of the Line and three Frigates with whom they do not
choose to measure their strength—which was less inferior to the Spanish
squadron than were the Spanish gunboats to the English frigates in Manila