

  At Bombay, from which Rainier had recently sailed, Blankett settled
down to discuss with the Bombay Government the merits of Aden which
Colonel Murray extolled. It had few, by his account. Perim was now ruled
out as impossible because the water found, by boring to 24 feet, had turned
out to be salt. Mocha was more useful but could not become a British
possession. The question was too important to decide at Bombay, and the
same could be said of Blankett’s proposals for discouraging trade with
Egypt. By careful inquiry, Blankett had established the fact that Arabia
depended partly on the export of coffee but more on the pilgrim traffic.
With the money derived from these services, the inhabitants bought corn
from Egypt and European goods from Cairo. It was, therefore, a simple
matter to cut off their food supply by naval blockade, as a means of political
pressure. But, apart from that, Blankett, turned economist, pointed out that
Aden, while useless to the Navy, might have commercial possibilities. Why
not, he asked, deflect to Aden all the trade now carried on between India
and Mocha and Jidda? The Bombay Government was sufficiently intrigued
with this idea to submit it to the Governor-General in Council. The decision
of 4th February, 1800, made by Lord Mornington and his advisers, was
eminently sound. They would do nothing to interrupt or deflect a pilgrim
traffic which was of interest to every Moslem in India, and the disturbance
of which would justify the belief that the Company was the enemy of
Islam. ‘On the whole,’ they concluded, ‘we are perfectly satisfied that the
proposed measure is in no respect eligible—We therefore direct that the
overture of the Sultann of Aden be declined in as conciliatory terms as
possible’ and Colonel Murray’s force withdrawn. They were opposed to
Blankett’s plan ‘for reducing the commerce and consequence of Jedda and
Mocha,’ and opposed equally ‘to the interruption of the corn trade between
Egypt and Arabia’ except in so far as India could offer an alternative source
of supply.
   Rainier returned to Bombay in January 1800, conferred there with
Blankett and on February 3rd gave him orders to return to the Red Sea
‘for the purpose of frustrating and defeating the hostile designs of the
French on this Country from Egypt.’ For this purpose Blankett was to
have the Leopard (50), Forte (38), Fox (32), Orestes (18), Albatross (18)
and Amboyna brig. The Orestes, however, foundered at sea and never
joined him. Rainier and Blankett were not on the best of terms, the latter
being ill, irritable and quick to resent any hint of criticism. He confided
his troubles to the First Lord of the Admiralty—as even more junior officers
were in those days encouraged to do—in a letter dated from Bombay on
January 17th:

                                     T53
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

    My Lord
            ... I have found Vice-Admiral Rainier here, who being of opinion
    that my presence was still necessary in the Red Sea, I have not declined
    to go, being willing as long as I am able to perform the duty entrusted to
    me to the best of my endeavours; but my health has suffered from the
    climate, and my situation is sometimes made very irksome. I cannot act
    from myself, and the distance and difficulty of intercourse with a commander-
    in-chief on the other side of India is attended with too many inconveniences
    to be proper for me to describe in a private letter. ... In dealing with the
    Arabs I have to do with the most artful and deceitful scoundrels in the
    world. . . .
    . . . should circumstances change, and that my presence in the Red Sea
    should be no longer requisite, I hope you will forgive me if I return home
    and leave Admiral Rainier in his sole command in these seas. A second
    flag officer in India can gain little profit or honour, and is amenable more
    than the chief and most exposed to censure of all sorts. . . .
                                                                    J. Blankett.
                             (Spencer Papers, Vol. IV, N.R.S., pp. 210, 217.)