

      that His Majesty’s Command officially signified to His Excellency and the
      officers commanding the land and sea forces were indispensably required
      to authorise an undertaking of that importance, quoting in justification
      thereof the three several instances of the kind that had occurred during my
      present command and of others within the compass of my experience: I have
      accordingly acquainted his Excellency with this determination. . . .
                                                                    (Ad. 1/171.)

   Wellesley’s dispatches in the Cornwallis had been entrusted to Mr. Stokes,
perhaps the person who had originated the plan and one certainly conversant
with Wellesley’s ideas about it.1 It is evident that Stokes made the worst
impression on Rainier, who discussed nothing with him and waited until
the 24th before handing him his sealed reply. Wellesley afterwards made
this delay a principal ground for complaints; of which again Rainier took
little notice. The Admiral privately thought Wellesley’s plan ‘utterly
impracticable . . . from the various glaring inconsistencies and inaccuracies
observable in it. . .
   Wellesley’s arguments for abandoning the expedition against Batavia
were convincing enough. Bonaparte’s successes in Italy would lead him
to attempt the relief of the French in Egypt and then perhaps renew his
threat to India. Lord Elgin’s correspondence suggested that the British
troops in Minorca might very probably be used to expel the French from
Egypt, with Turkish help, before such a threat could develop; in which
case a diversion from the Red Sea would be called for. Apart from that,
the French menace made it unwise to disperse the forces needed for the
defence of India, for ‘the pursuit of any foreign conquest, however easy,
must always yield to the necessity of self-defence.’ These arguments, as
Rainier pointed out, were equally valid as objections to the attack on
Mauritius. He refused, therefore, to co-operate.
   What motives underlay Wellesley’s vacillation at this time? He was
genuine, no doubt, in his concern for the safety of India, but he was also
swayed by concern for his brother and by the persuasive tongue of Mr.
Stokes.. Arthur Wellesley was in command of the troops at Trincomalee
and responsible for organizing the expedition, ‘deep,’ as Guedalla remarks,
‘in demands for vinegar, tea, sugar, beef, Staff officers and rum.’2 Still only
a colonel, Arthur (the best officer in India) was eligible to command the
    1 On December 1st Wellesley urged his brother to be attentive and kind to Stokes. ‘He is
a very honourable and honest man, of considerable knowledge in his own line, and of very
uncommon talents. His ardour will not displease you, but he is sometimes inclined to a
little too much magnificence. . . .’ Stokes was to be secretary and commissary to the
expedition and intendant of the island when it fell. Supplementary Despatches, p. 315.
    2 Philip Guedalla. The Duke, p. 97.