

  In short, Wellesley’s vacillation and Rainier’s own preference were alike
overruled by a direct order from England to send a force up the Red Sea.
In fact the transports collected at Trincomalee had already sailed for the
Malabar coast, having passed Colombo on February 20th under escort of
the Suffolk. The emphasis of the war was swinging back from the Dutch
islands to Suez, from Captain Ball to Admiral Blankett. Colonel Wellesley
would now be superseded by General Baird and the Mauritius left immune
for another year at least. Rainier naturally decided to sail for Bombay,
base for the operation now ordered, and there he arrived on the 15th April,
1801.
  Futile as the campaign of 1800 may seem, in retrospect, to have been,
it would be wrong to suppose that it was altogether without result. The
expedition never reached Batavia, it is true, and the troops went no nearer
the place than Trincomalee. But the naval part of the operation had made
some progress before the expedition was cancelled and the results cannot
be wholly ignored. Captain Ball of the Daedalus (32), with the Sybille (38),
Centurion (50) and Braave (38) under command, appeared off Batavia on
August 23 rd, detained two American ships which he found leaving the
port and approached the islands of Onrust and Kuyper which were practi¬
cally undefended. They were garrisoned by some forty native troops and
a German officer. ‘There was but three guns on Onrust, old, and carriages
                                          170
                             JAVA    REPRIEVED

out of repair. The storehouses had nothing in to speak of. . . .’ These
harbour defences having fallen, the Dutch vessels in the port mostly ran
themselves on shore. These numbered about forty ships, brigs and sloops.
Three others were towed into an inner harbour. Eight were taken and
destroyed, mostly laden with rice or in ballast. The neutral ships then or
subsequently detained comprised four American, four Danish and five
Moorish vessels. Native prows taken later, laden with rice, firewood and
coffee, numbered thirty. This effectively put an end to the trade of the port
and Ball now settled down to blockade it, ordering the Sybille off the River
Maroondah and the Centurion off Edam Island, which was occupied.
  Ball expected Admiral Rainier to appear in October at latest, but was
disappointed. Finding his supplies running short, he finally abandoned the
blockade on November 9th-i2th, his last acts being to release the neutral
vessels, destroy the buildings on Onrust, Kuyper and Edam Islands and
remove the Malay Chief (who was pro-British) from Maroondah. In his
report dated 16th December, 1800, Captain Ball expressed something of
the anxiety he felt during the period:

       As I am not versed in fortification and indeed know very little on the
    subject, I cant speak of the different works erected near the town of Batavia,
    and the lowness of the land prevents a good view of them. They were but
    badly prepared for the reception of an Army and Fleet on our first arrival
    there, but we could see them throwing up fresh works every day. To the
    eastward of the town there are six batteries flanking the sea and three to the
    westward, besides the one on the West side of the Pier and some heavy guns
    on the East side of the Pier Head.
       The little information obtained from such unintelligible people which
    made their escape from the town was not worth noticing. All which
    amounted to the great distress of the slaves, and that there was no Rice,
    that they were starving and that if we once made a landing, the whole of
    the Malays would join the British and would not leave a Dutchman alive,
    they could get at.
       From an anxiety of mind hardly to be expressed during the whole of
    our stay, I am not so well prepared to relate the various events in a letter
    as I otherwise should have done & the diabolical climate preventing all the
    mental faculties taking their due course. . . .