

invade Egypt. This altered the nature of Blankett’s task. His plan had been
to make a night attack on Suez with mortar and gun-boats, using that as
a feint to cover the destruction, by a landing party, of the town’s water
supply and the simultaneous blocking of the river by sinking vessels in it.
This had to be abandoned, as the port might be wanted. He was thwarted
as regards Kosseir by a different circumstance. ‘Had Cosire been in the
hands of the Enemy, I should certainly have again knocked it down,’ but
there was no longer a single Frenchman in the neighbourhood. So Blankett
began negotiating afresh with the Shereef of Mecca. These conferences
were at first vague and contradictory but Blankett, who needed Jidda as
his base, could not afford to quarrel, as he pointed out on 26th February,
1801.
       The necessity of having the use of this Port at present will be too obvious
    to you, for me to speak more on the subject. After leaving Jedda no refresh¬
    ment of any sort to be found, except water at Tor, which I doubt would fail
    in a dry season. From Tor to Suez, there is not a leaf to be seen, nor a blade
    of grass. All is a dreary, inhospitable, barren rock, sometimes varied with
    patches of sand, which serves to retain the heat reverberated from the
    surrounding mountains.
       The Sheriffe in one of his letters says justly: Christians can never make
    war in my country, it is full of mountains, has little water, and has too great
    heat for their complexions.

  Leaving Jidda on March 9th, Blankett struggled against northerly winds
and finally reached Tor. His object there was to present to various Arab
chiefs the letters he had extorted from the Shereef. This he accomplished
after holding a preliminary meeting of townsfolk. ‘I summoned the People
at Tor,’ Blankett reported proudly, ‘read the letters in Arabic to them,
gave them presents, promises and threats’ with the object of persuading
them to provide camels for the expected army. Blankett then entered Suez
on the 22nd, having lost one of the transports on a coral reef and saving
only her crew and soldiers. He found that the French had evacuated the
town, which he found ruinous and desolate. This was because the main
expedition had landed under Abercromby at Aboukir on March 8th,
compelling the French to concentrate in northern Egypt. Taking possession
of Suez and hoisting the flag, Blankett waited for the expedition to arrive.
In the meanwhile, realizing from letters which arrived from the Turks and
from Lord Keith that even a token movement from Suez would have a
moral effect, Blankett considered sending forward the three hundred and
twenty soldiers he had with him under Lieutenant-Colonel Lloyd. Lloyd was
eager to march but Blankett detained him until the necessary camels should

                                         175
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

arrive, as promised by the Turks. Blankett’s supplies were running short in
May and as the wind was north-westerly, he could see little likelihood of the
troops arriving in time. By the 17th he had decided to withdraw, even if it
should dispirit the Turks, but postponed doing so until June 6th. On that
day he received a letter from General Hutchinson (Abercromby had been
killed) asking that Lloyd’s detachment should join him. Lloyd marched
that evening into the desert and the Leopard fired an 11-gun salute as
he did so. Lloyd was destined to reach General Hutchinson’s camp but
only after twenty-three men, including three officers, had died of thirst,
and the remainder had suffered great, hardship. As the northern monsoon
had set in, there was no possibility of further troops reaching Suez. Blankett
accordingly sailed for Kosseir, supposing (rightly) that the expedition might
have arrived there.
  In point of fact, there were two separate forces concerned in the main
landing; the troops from Bombay and Captain Sir Home Popham, with the
Romney (50), Victor (18), and Sensible (36), from England. The Sensible
was acting as a troopship and two others were supposed to be in company
but may have separated on the way. For the Admiralty, with that same
sense of urgency which had originally brought Blankett on the scene, were
now repeating the procedure by sending Popham. He was sent to relieve
Blankett, at the latter’s request, but was also chosen as a navigational
expert and a man of known ingenuity. His was an independent command
and Rainier wrote rather stiffly in May that ‘Captain Sir Home Popham’s
appointment precludes the necessity of my interference in affairs in the
Red Sea, as he is not placed under my orders.’ It seems that Popham left
the Cape about February 21st, but Blankett had no news of him or of
any other part of the expedition until May 17th when he heard of the
arrival of five transports at Jidda together with the Company’s frigate
Marquis of Cornwallis. This division received Blankett’s orders, left at Jidda,
to follow him to Suez, but acted on other orders they had received at
Bombay. ‘There appears,’ wrote Blankett plaintively, ‘a manifest impropriety
in sending out a squadron of ships to an unknown sea where an Admiral
commands, without ordering them at least to follow his advice. . . .’ Had
they done so, those transports might have reached Suez. That was not,
however, what they had been told to do, and there can be little doubt
that the decision to land at Kosseir was wise. Lloyd’s march, with a larger
force, would have involved more than proportionate hardship, and the
remainder of the army would, in any case, have had to land elsewhere and
advance down the Nile.
  Admiral Rainier played little part in the Red Sea expedition. When he
                                       176
                        THE   RED    SEA     AND   PEACE