

                                            167
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

three thousand men thought sufficient for capturing Mauritius but too
junior to lead the probably larger force which might be needed in Egypt.
As for Mr. Stokes, ‘a seafaring gentleman,’ he had been prisoner in the
French islands and was prepared to swear that they were poorly garrisoned
and easy to capture by surprise. Of these influences Rainier was partly
aware. Writing personally to the First Ford, on the same date as his official
letter, he ended by assuring Ford Spencer that he was actuated only by his
sense of duty:

    . . . sensible of the delicacy of the situation I have placed myself in by
    opposing one of his Excellency’s exalted ranks and deservedly high estimation
    in the eyes of His Majesty’s Ministers, entirely confiding in your Lordship’s
    candour for giving full credit to the truth of my assertion.

  In thus refusing his co-operation, Admiral Rainier was taking, as he well
knew, a grave responsibility. He had, however—perhaps without being
aware of it—an ally in Admiral Sir Roger Curtis, the commander-in-chief
at the Cape. Mauritius had been blockaded intermittently by cruisers from
that station and it was on Curtis that Lord Spencer relied for his information
about the island. While agreeing that the inhabitants were ‘rather inclined
to Monarchy in France than the present order of things,’ Curtis did not
think that they would surrender tamely to England. Privateering suited
them too well. A force of 3,500 or 4,000 effectives, he thought, would be
needed to subdue the island and it would be folly to count on local
sympathy.

    ... a good deal of stress is laid on the temper and jarring interests of the
    inhabitants. I put no confidence in such ideas, and I think that in very many
    instances during the war we have seen the fallacy of such expectations.
    The indulging such hopes has often occasioned to us disappointment and
    distress in quarters nearer home than Isle France. . . .
       (Curtis to Lord Spencer, 28th November, 1800. Spencer Papers, Vol. IV,
       p. 238.)

  This was, of course, profoundly true and more recent experience has
illustrated the principle afresh. But Curtis was further worried about the
fate of the troops if the expedition should fail, with the men sickly, with
supplies short and with no neighbouring base to which the transports could
return. In the event, moreover, of success, the lie de France would itself
be difficult to supply, being normally dependent on the more fertile Bourbon
for corn and, in part, for cattle. Bourbon would also, therefore, have to
be captured, but Curtis believed it ‘next to being impregnable’ from having
no harbour. Curtis ended his letter rather acidly:
                                        168
                            JAVA   REPRIEVED

      ... I have not presumed to say a word as to the political expediency,
    or inexpediency of making an attempt upon it. I have confined myself to
    stating facts, perhaps not generally known, or if known, not sufficiently
    reasoned upon; it being the usage of projectors when enamoured of a
    scheme, not to touch upon, or to speak lightly of such things as may be
    deemed impediments. . . .
                                                                     {Ibid.')