

  Although he does not explain it, Ball was chiefly worried about disease.
Batavia lived up to its reputation at this time and the fever was taking its
toll. The casualties in action numbered only three killed and twelve
wounded, mostly in the Sybille, but the loss from disease was heavy,
amounting to 151 officers, seamen, marines and soldiers. No less than twelve
                                      171
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

naval officers and midshipmen died, and there were no less than fifty-seven
deaths in the Centurion alone^ all from what Rainier called ‘the direfull
epidemic of that unhealthy and fatal climate.’ How many were ill and
recovered is not stated, but it is evident that sickness was widespread and
that Ball himself was probably ill when he wrote his report. At the
period when he was raising the blockade for lack of supplies, the Victorious
was on the way to join him with transports carrying provisions for
four months.    Captain Clark’s orders      were countermanded, however,
on December 5th, and he did no more after meeting (and superseding)
Ball, who was junior to him, than to lead the sickly squadron back from
the Straits of Banca to Malacca on December 19th.
  Further to the eastward the Dutch governor Cranssen was still holding
out in Ternate and La Virginie (38), one of Rainier’s ships, with the Hobart
sloop, replaced by St.     Thome, was co-operating with the East India
Company’s ships and troops in a siege which did not end until the Dutch
finally surrendered on 20th June, 1801. Apart from that, operations among
the islands were over and Java left, for a time, to enjoy its reprieve.




                                     172
                                CHAPTER VIII



            The Red Sea and Peace


I  N   retrospect it is difficult to understand why the threat to India via
   Egypt was taken seriously after Tippoo’s defeat. It is equally difficult
    to acquit Dundas of indecision. For just as the troops collected at
Trincomalee were       destined now for Batavia, now for Mauritius and
now for the Red Sea, another and larger army concentrated at Gibraltar
was destined now for Portugal, now for Ferrol and now for Teneriffe.
It seemed, in fact, in the spring of 1800 that a concentration had
been made at Gibraltar without any definite object in view.1 As peace
negotiations were already, however, in prospect, Dundas gradually became
convinced of the need to expel the French from Egypt. To have the French
established there in time of peace was obviously undesirable, but their
removal by negotiation could only be gained by a sacrifice of territory
elsewhere. Egypt was not furthering French aims in the war, but it was
an undeniable asset in negotiating peace. Dundas pointed this out on
September 28th and suggested that the Turks might expel the French if
the latter were driven from their ports; Alexandria, Damietta and Rosetta
on the Mediterranean side, and from Suez and Kosseir on the Red Sea.
‘The first of these objects can only be attained by a force sent from the
Mediterranean, the second by a detachment from India.’ Although there
was opposition from the King and from several of his colleagues, Dundas
had his way and signed the necessary orders on October 6th. The military
command was given to his friend and relative by marriage, Sir Ralph
Abercromby, and orders for the Red Sea expedition were sent (as we have
seen) to India.
  As regards Rear-Admiral Blankett’s detachment, the Government’s
decision was anticipated, to some extent, by the Governor-General. Writing
directly to Blankett on October 16th, Wellesley said that news from Europe
suggested the need for ‘reducing the power and resources acquired by the
Enemy in Egypt and on the shores of the Red Sea.’ He recommended the
destruction, if practicable, of Suez, the seizure of vessels trading (under any
        1 Cyril Matheson. Life of Henry Dundas, London, 1937, p. 284, et seq.