

                                         I73
                         WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

flag) with ports in French possession, and the interruption of the corn
trade between Upper Egypt and Arabia. This last measure Wellesley had
previously opposed but the circumstances had altered.

        Recent events in Europe and in Egypt now impose on the British Govern¬
     ment in India, the duty of impairing by every possible means the resources
     of the French in Egypt as well as those of their adherents in Arabia.
        I shall direct the Governor and Council at Bombay to comply with every
     requisition for troops, vessels, gun boats, or any other supply you may
     require for the execution of the services suggested in this dispatch.
        My expectation is that the Government oj France will make an early effort
     to assist the French Army in Egypt thro the Red Sea, and under this impression
     I shall advise Vice Adi. Rainier to endeavour to reinforce your squadron.

  Lord Wellesley’s fears and Dundas’s strategy were not identical, but both
implied a naval force in the Red Sea. On 22nd December, 1800, Blankett
was on the point of sailing again with the Leopard and Fox to join the
Forte, which was still at Mocha. Urged by Wellesley, the Bombay Govern¬
ment had provided him with additional strength in the Bombay, frigate, the
Antelope and Fly (Company’s sloops), and the Strombolo and Drake (bomb
vessels). To his squadron were attached, furthermore, eight small vessels
to use as fireships or blockships, and three hundred soldiers, ‘besides
followers.’ ‘This has been a great effort,’ Blankett pointed out, ‘for Bombay
in its present state.’
  At the same time Blankett was not over-optimistic:

        I cannot profess myself very sanguine on the advantages that may arise
     from my little expedition. It may serve effectually to check those who wish
     to assist the Enemy and it is probable that a shew of force which the nature
     of the Arabs will undoubtedly lead them to magnify may be the means
     to draw off some part of the French force for the protection of Suez, and
     it is possible that the garrison of that place, finding themselves liable to be
     constantly annoy’d, may be tempted to desert.
                     (Blankett to Admiralty, 22nd December, 1800. Ad. 1/170.)

  Blankett was at Jidda on or before 26th February, 1801. Through sheer
carelessness (as Rainier thought) the frigate Forte (38) struck a rock in
entering the harbour and sank in six fathoms. Fler crew, guns and anchors
were saved, but the divers could not recover the ten months’ provisions
she carried, which proved a serious loss. Her hull was given by Blankett
to the Sheereef, who could salve the timbers and ironwork when she broke
up. At Jidda, Blankett received orders from the Secretary of State to occupy
Suez or Kosseir as a landing place for troops which were to be sent to

                                          174
                         THE      RED   SEA    AND   PEACE