

     Victorious      74 (Flag)   Clark
     Suffolk         74          Malcolm               With the commander-in¬
     Intrepid        64          Hargood                chief’s flag, or to pro¬
     Trident         64          Turner                 ceed to the Straits of
     Prudence     Armed                                 Malacca
     Mongoose     Vessels
     Arrogant        74          Osborn                To refit and join C.-in-C.

                                       ^5
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

   Of Rainier’s squadron, the Resistance (44) had been lost at sea and so
had the Orestes (18). La Forte was lost in the Red Sea, from ‘downright
neglect’ as Rainier suspected. The Hobart was condemned by survey, the
Carysfort (commanded by Lieutenant William Goate) sent back to England
and the Heroine (Captain Murray) had left Rainier almost speechless with
indignation by going home without orders to do so.
   Before sailing for Penang, Admiral Rainier reversed his earlier orders
to Admiral Blankett, telling him now to remain at Bombay, ready to return
to the Red Sea if the occasion should arise. He evidently sensed further
trouble in that direction, even to the point of leaving the Bay of Bengal
almost unprotected. Sailing from Madras on October 1st, with the nucleus
of his squadron, he reached Penang on the 19th. On the 30th he was joined
by the Trident from Madras, which had sailed ten days after he had, bringing
the unwelcome news (from Vienna, via Bushire)

    ... of the unfortunate reverse the affairs of the Austrians had experienced
    in Italy, in having been obliged in consequence to capitulate for an armistice
    with the French General Buonaparte in terms highly disadvantageous. . . .

   Rainier heard also that ‘the French General in Egypt had determined
to keep his ground,’ and concluded (a little wearily) that the Governor-
General would cancel the expedition again. No news came, however, to
that effect and the Admiral went in the Victorious as far as the Straits of
Dryon, sent her on with supply ships to join Captain Ball, and returned
in the Intrepid to Penang, expecting to find there the Suffolk with the
transports from Bengal. Instead, he encountered on December 2nd the
Cornwallis packet with a dispatch (dated October 22nd) from the Governor-
General to say that the expedition against Batavia must be postponed, if
not cancelled. Instead, the forces collected for that operation should now
concentrate at Trincomalee ‘to act on any emergent service of defensive
or offensive’ character, ‘but principally pointing to a co-operation with any
Armament that might be embarked in the Mediterranean for the purpose
of compelling the French to abandon Egypt.’ To this Rainier was more
or less resigned, aware though he was that he would have to redeploy his
entire squadron again. But an accompanying letter, of slightly later date,
delivered by the same means, left the Admiral more or less stunned.
       . . . His Excellency [he told the Admiralty on 27th December, 1800]
    roundly offers to my concurrence the Plan of an Expedition against the
    Isle of France, the particulars whereof I defer sending to another opportunity,
    contenting myself for the present in acquainting you, that I refused the
    co-operation of His Majesty’s Squadron, as being decidedly of the opinion
                                        166
                                  JAVA    REPRIEVED