

reached Bombay on April 15th in the Arrogant he found there the Suffolk
and Orpheus in dock, the Trident recently docked and getting ready for
sea. He was presently joined there by the Victorious, Sybille and Daedalus,
the last two from Madras. He learnt at Bombay that two divisions of
transports had sailed from thence on April 1st and a third with General
Baird had followed soon afterwards. Other transports had sailed from Goa,
and there was then no prospect of overtaking any of them. Captain
Malcolm of the Suffolk would have escorted the General’s division as far
as Mocha but dared not defer the docking of his ship. Indeed, when Rainier
arrived, the shipwrights were discussing whether she was worth repairing
at all. Rainier decided to remove some of her guns, reduce her spars and
alter her rating to that of a 64-gun ship. The Orpheus, Daedalus and Sybille
were all needing extensive repair, and the squadron had been further
weakened by the loss of the Forte. Rainier decided, accordingly, not to
send any ships to the Red Sea. He thought it unnecessary and doubted
whether the transports, sailing so late in the season, would not have to
return. Besides, it was now Home Popham’s responsibility—who was he,
the mere commander-in-chief, to interfere? He was more intent on with¬
drawing from the Red Sea such ships of his squadron as were already
there. He thus wrote to Blankett on May 16th:

        As their Lordships make no provision, for your Flag being flying in the
     Red Sea at the time when Captain Sir Home Popham would arrive, you
     are on receipt hereof to make the best of your way to join me with His
     Majesty’s ships Leppard and Fox unless Sir Home Popham should make
     application to you for the latter . . . and you are to bring with you all the
     crew of La Forte. . . .
                                                                   (Ad. 1/171.)

  He anticipated that Blankett would probably forestall this order by
withdrawing when Popham appeared. Blankett had no instructions to take
Popham under his command, and Popham was junior even to Captain
Surridge of the Leopard.
  Feeling that he could do no more, Rainier sailed for Madras with the
Arrogant, Victorious and Trident, leaving orders for his other ships to
follow when repaired. He could not resist the temptation to point out to
Lord Spencer (on May 10th) how fortunate it was that the expedition to
Mauritius had not taken place.

    . . . had the whole armament proceeded on the distant Service I have inti¬
    mated to your Lordship the consequences could but have been serious. . . .
    I feel no small degree of satisfaction in the reflection that my application
                                       177
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

    to Your Lordship to be superseded, preceded the period when this difference
    of opinion on Publick Service appeared.
  Lord Spencer did not accept Rainier’s resignation but did decide to
relieve Blankett, who was sick and obviously worn out. An order to Rainier
to allow Blankett to return to England in the Leopard was received in India
before ioth May, 1801, but came, as we shall see, too late.
  Rainier had been troubled at intervals during the year with reports of
a French squadron coming out to the Red Sea from France. Ganteaume’s
squadron which escaped from Brest in January 1801, might conceivably
have been bound for the Indian Ocean, and Rainier was sufficiently
impressed to keep a part of his squadron concentrated. He hardly supposed
that a large force could leave Europe for the East without being closely
pursued, but he thought it possible that isolated raiders might attempt
to interfere with Blankett’s or rather Popham’s line of communications.
The problem for any such raider would be one of supply and Rainier
concluded that the only possible base for French operations would be in
the Seychelles. He gave orders, therefore, on July 7th, for the Sybille to
proceed, after repairs, to the Seychelles, cruise in that vicinity, and return
to Madras by October 1st. This was, as it turned out, an astute move.
For the French did what Rainier had expected, sending to the Seychelles
from Nantes the brand-new frigate Chiffonne (36). Her initial errand was
to land there thirty-two persons suspected of plotting against the First
Consul, but she had taken two prizes on the way out and had, no doubt,
plans for further operations. The Chiffonne was at Mahe in the Seychelles
when the Sybille (38) found her. She was no match for her heavier opponent
and, being attacked (with some difficulty) while at anchor, surrendered
after a brief action and the loss of twenty-three killed and thirty wounded.
She was purchased into the Navy as a 12-pounder frigate, virtually replacing
the Forte.
  As for Admiral Blankett, his remaining career was brief. Arriving at
Kosseir on June 15th he found Sir Home Popham with the Romney (50)
and Victor sloop. The first division of troops under Colonel Murray had
landed a month before and gone inland to the Nile. General Baird was
still there, preparing to follow, but Blankett on the 20th announced his
departure for Mocha, mainly to procure supplies. He sailed on the 24th,
called at Jidda and sailed for Mocha, then intending to return to Kosseir.
But he died, worn out, on July 14th, as the Leopard entered Mocha, having
written his last report to the Admiralty on the 5th and having lent the
General sixty seamen to help in his voyage down the Nile. Baird reached
that river on May 30th, but did not join Hutchinson until after the fall
                                       178
                        THE   RED   SEA    AND   PEACE