

   His first meeting with Bonaparte took place early in 1801, just after the
Peace of Luneville. He was presented by Dessolles at Malmaison and very
graciously received. Succumbing readily to a little flattery, he became
from that hour an admirer of Bonaparte. Failing, subsequently, to bring
Moreau into a similar frame of mind, he decided that his safest course
would be to seek a command in the colonies. He foresaw what was going
to happen and, like other (ollowers of Moreau, had no desire to be involved.
   In thus deciding to go abroad, Decaen was only, in fact, anticipating
what would certainly be his fate. The First Consul naturally wished to
disperse Moreau’s friends before he dealt with the man himself. The boughs
were to be lopped off before the tree was felled. All this Decaen foresaw.
Chiefly in order to avoid being sent to the West Indies to serve under
Leclerc, he went boldly to Bonaparte and asked to be sent to India.
   ‘Have you been there before?’ asked Bonaparte. No, Decaen admitted,
he had not. But he was still young, and he had a particular hatred for the
English. He would not mind waiting ten years for the chance of a blow
at them. Bonaparte probably interpreted Decaen’s motives correctly
enough. Without making any direct reply to this, he ended by saying
something which led Decaen to hope for the best. He went away, or rather
was sent away, in the belief that his request would be granted. He was sent
to the Midi on a tour of inspection which kept him occupied, and also
perhaps kept him out of harm’s way, for the whole winter of 1801-2.
The preliminary treaty of 1st October, 1801, had already been signed, by
which French possessions in India were restored; but nothing could be done
towards taking possession of them until the final agreement.
   Meanwhile, Deeres was urging the First Consul to make his choice of
a Captain-General to command in the East. Like most subordinates asking
for a decision, he had a very definite idea of what decision he wanted. It
was his, Decres’s, choice that the First Consul was to make. Almost
certainly with a friend of his own in mind, he began to indicate what sort
of man should be sent. The Captain-General, he suggested, should be a
man of intelligence, a man of the most austere patriotism; but prudent also,
modest and even reserved. Bonaparte had other ideas.
   On his return from the Midi, Decaen went to report at Malmaison. He
was asked to lunch. He ate expectantly, waiting for the magic words to
be spoken. They were spoken. Presently Bonaparte inquired whether he
was still thinking about India. Decaen assured him quickly that he was.
‘Then,’ said the great man, ‘you shall go there.’ ‘In what capacity?’ ‘Captain-
General,’ came the reply. ‘Go to the Minister of Marine and ask to see the
papers relating to the expedition.’ A jubilant Decaen went off to seek
                                     190
                           DECAEN AND        LINOIS

Deeres. Moreau, arrests, trials, firing parties; all these already seemed a long,
a very long way away.
    The reasons underlying Bonaparte’s choice are fairly clear. Added to
 the need for getting rid of Decaen was the desire to annoy Deeres; and
overshadowing both was an Indian policy quite distinct from that which
Deeres was so persistently advocating. For the furtherance of this policy—
the trend of which will appear from the orders which Decaen subsequently
received—his choice was well advised. Decaen was a good intelligence
officer, as Bonaparte knew. The birds, in fact, which a single stone slew
were three in number. A man Bonaparte wished to exile was exiled. A
vacancy he wished to fill was filled. A minister he wished to snub was
snubbed.
    Even the snub was threefold. It marked, in the first place, a partial
rejection of a particular policy. It asserted, secondly, a determination to
keep all patronage in consular, in Napoleonic hands. And it had, lastly,
a personal aspect. Decaen had already quarrelled with the naval department.
His appointment was a missile, an elaborate retort, a thing certain to be
ill received.
    Decaen’s first interview with Deeres, following that luncheon with the
Consul, was somewhat painful. The Minister was aghast. Why had he not
been consulted? Why Decaen of all people? Such questions, if unspoken,
were evidently implied. Deeres finally refused to produce the relevant
documents. Decaen went. He came once more, armed with fresh and
positive orders. He bore away the papers in triumph.
    The danger in compelling a subordinate to carry out what he does not
approve lies in the possibility of his thwarting the general scheme by a
manipulation of the details. Deeres, before the expedition sailed, had
contrived to hamper its leader in more ways than one. And it may be
supposed that the making of the necessary arrangements was attended by
a good deal of friction.
    The Definitive Treaty was signed at Amiens on 27th March, 1802; and
it was thereby agreed that the restitutions to take place in the continent
and seas of Asia should be within six months as from that day. Decaen
was appointed to his command in June 1802. But he did not sail until
March 1803. The intervening period was spent partly in waiting for the
proper time of year for the voyage, partly in preparation and discussion.
The original proposal was for a force of some six hundred and fifty men.
Bonaparte increased this to rather over a thousand; and then added another
battalion, composed of creoles from Guadeloupe. This last addition
proceeded from an inability otherwise to dispose of them—an attempt to
                                      191
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS