

China and, on the 24th, by Sir Home Popham in the Romney. Popham
was escorting two transports with native troops which were landed to
relieve those stationed at Penang and Malacca. What purports to be the
inner story of what followed is given in the autobiography of Captain
D. Macdonald:
        There existed at this time a very serious misunderstanding between the
     commander-in-chief of H.M.’s naval forces in India and the Governor-
     General .. .(who had no control over H.M. Ships).... To show the impolicy
     of the system, and the dangerous lengths to which it might be carried, I
     will cite one instance. ... It happened that, late in the year 1801, after the
     final expulsion of the French from Egypt, H.M.S. Romney, bearing the
     broad pendant of Commodore Sir H. Popham, came from the Red Sea to
     Calcutta . . . and while the Romney was undergoing repairs, intelligence
     reached my Lord Wellesley of the projected invasion of Portugal by the
     French; and he came to the resolution of sending a force to take military
     occupation of their settlement at Macao, for the protection of the Chinese
     trade, and applied to Sir H. Popham to undertake its direction. As soon
     therefore as the equipment was complete he sailed; but, arriving off Prince
     of Wales’s Island, was met by the Admiral who, with a large portion of the
     squadron, had gone thither to intercept him: he was taken into port, made
     to deliver over charge of the armament, with all surplus stores and super¬
     numeraries, to Capt. Osborne of the Arrogant—and with seemingly undue
     severity, remanded back to the Red Sea for presuming (though at the
     request of the Governor-General in Council) to undertake any operation
     within the limits of his (the Admiral’s) station. All this, doubtless, the
     Admiral had power to enforce, but the consequences in this case might have
     been most disastrous. Sir Home Popham was alone in the confidence of Lord
     Wellesley and in possession of his views, as far as related to the ulterior
     objects of the expedition, all of which were to be jeopardized, if not sacrificed,
     to the caprice of one individual: as it happened, however, the peace of
     Amiens luckily intervened and rendered this precautionary measure of his
     Lordship’s government unnecessary.1

   This fairly represents the East India Company’s- point of view. But
Rainier had some excuse for being tired of Wellesley’s vacillation, and
more for being irritated by the presence of Popham. If, moreover, he was
opposed in principle to the occupation of Macao, events were ultimately
to prove him right.
   Fighting in Europe had stopped on 1st October, 1801, but Rainier had
no definite news of this until some months later, February 1st being the
   1 A Narrative of the Early Life and Services of Captn D. MacdonaldI.N. Weymouth,
n.d. Circa 1842.

                                          180
                        THE   RED   SEA    AND   PEACE