

 date by which the war was, for him, to end. But he had preliminary warning
 no doubt, that peace was likely and took no offensive action in the mean¬
 while. He did take proper steps to protect the China trade, but was partly
 relieved of that responsibility by the knowledge that the Belliqueux (64)
 had come out from England with the Indiamen and had remained with
 them at Canton. When details of the peace treaty were known, the
 provisions of most interest in India were those which restored all her
 Indian settlements to France. ‘His Britannick Majesty restores to the French
 Republick, and her Allies, namely, His Catholick Majesty and the Batavian
 Republick, all the possessions and colonies which belonged to them
 respectively, and which have been occupied or conquered by the British
 forces in the course of the war, with the exception of the island of Trinidad,
 and the Dutch possessions in the island of Ceylon. . . .’
   France thus regained Pondicherry, Chandernagore, Yanaon, Balasore,
 Foul Point and the other villages she had lost. Nothing was said of the
 trading rights conceded in 1783, which had not indeed proved very
 valuable. The Netherlands recovered Malacca, Amboyna, Banda and Ternate,
 as also the Cape. Ceylon was the sole eastern conquest to be retained: and
 this became a crown colony, being denied to the East India Company as
firmly as it was denied to the Dutch.
    It cannot be said that the naval war in the Indian Ocean from 1794 to
 1801 had been a brilliant success. There was little French opposition in
 the early stages when the French settlements in India were occupied; and
 the Dutch, becoming enemies in 1794, were relieved without much difficulty
 of Ceylon, Malacca and the Cape. Their attempt to retake the Cape having
 failed, Rainier went on to conquer the Moluccas in 1796. No naval effort
 was made by the French until 1796, when Admiral Sercey tried to raid
 Penang and then tried, with as little success, to intercept the China fleet.
 His squadron was so ill-supported by the colonists of Mauritius that it
had become ineffective by 1797 and was henceforward ignored. But Spain
too had become an enemy in 1796 and the expedition was now prepared
to capture Manila in 1797. With little naval opposition to be expected, the
success of this raid was fairly certain. It was abandoned, however, when
news came of the Treaty of Campo-Formio and of the relations established
between Tippoo and the French. With the landing in Egypt in 1797,
British attention was transferred to the Red Sea and remained fixed there
until 1799, leaving the Spaniards free to threaten the China fleet in two
successive years. As Tippoo was crushed and as the danger from Egypt
seemed to lessen, a new British expedition was prepared, primarily to
subdue Java but with Manila and the lie de France under discussion as
                                     181
                     WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

alternative or subsequent objectives. This was abandoned on the news of
a fresh Austrian defeat and orders came from England for an expedition
to expel the French from Egypt before peace should be made. The
expedition took place in 1800-1, as part of a larger operation in the
Mediterranean, and played some small part in ensuring that Egypt should
not become a French colony. And so the war came to an unsatisfactory,
and as it proved temporary, end.
  From the French side, two general conclusions suggest themselves.
First and foremost, French colonial methods had combined with the effects
of the Revolution to make the Mauritius almost useless as a naval base.
It was a poor source of supplies in any case but the colonists were, apart
from that, acting in their own interests and not in those of France. What
supplies they had went to their own privateers, not to Sercey’s squadron,
and French naval efforts died away for lack (after 1795) of a base any
nearer to India than Brest. British sea power was thus almost unchallenged
from 1794 to 1797, which circumstance led to the successive capture of
the Dutch colonies other than Java. In the ordinary course of events, Java,
Manila and the French islands would have fallen in turn. But British sea
power had been stretched to the uttermost in the effort to cope simul¬
taneously with the French, Spanish and Dutch fleets, and the result was
that withdrawal from the Mediterranean in 1796 which made Bonaparte’s
counter-stroke possible. What followed is a striking demonstration of what
can be done by an army against a fleet. For the remaining enemy settlements
were saved by Bonaparte and by his indirect threat to India. With Tippoo’s
help, he saved Manila by the military successes which led up to the Treaty
of Campo-Formio. He saved Mauritius by landing in Egypt. He saved
Java by threatening to retain Egypt. In assessing the relative failure of
his Egyptian campaign, these indirect results should be borne in mind.
To put British India on the defensive from 1797 to 1801 was, in itself,
no mean achievement.
  What is more doubtful is the question of whether the British reaction
to Bonaparte’s threat was not exaggerated. It is manifest that the British
operations in the Red Sea, naval and military, produced no great result.
As against this, it might be argued that the mere presence of these forces
had a deterrent effect, in itself decisive as apart from anything they did.
This is true enough but much still depends on whether Bonaparte’s
advance on India was in fact feasible. The Governor-General evidently
considered that it was; and was especially sensitive to the threat so long
as Tippoo was in the field. Grenville and Lord Spencer were less credulous,
but the final verdict lies with Bonaparte himself, whose actions may be
                                      182
                            THE    RED    SEA      AND   PEACE