

                                             188
                           DECAEN    AND   LINOIS

on which Napoleon felt very differently, but he too was influenced by the
fear that the English would declare war—as they actually did—before he
was ready. Deeres went further and urged a policy, in India, of self-efface¬
ment. Although not, in general, much given to self-effacement, Napoleon
was partly convinced by his Minister’s arguments. He agreed that the force
sent should be small, and that it should be led by someone unlikely to
alarm the British. But he did not fall in with Decres’s views to the extent of
sending nearly all the troops to the lie de France. And he differed again in
his choice of an officer to send. The man he chose was not at all the tactful,
obscure and diffident type of person the Minister had in mind. The man he
chose was Decaen.
   Decaen was a man of middle-class origin, born in 1769. As a youth he
served in the Marine Artillery for three years (1789-90). After quitting
that corps, he settled down to study law as the articled pupil of a provincial
lawyer in his native town of Caen. He was still a law-student when the wars
demanded his services—a student, but also a sergeant-major in the National
Guard. This served as a starting point; and, once on active service, he soon
displayed a gift for organization. He was, in consequence, promoted swiftly,
but without seeing much service as a regimental officer. From the beginning,
something in the quality of his mind, added to a literacy none too common
in the armies of the Revolution, marked him out as a specialist and staff-
officer. He reached the rank of captain while in Kleber’s battalion, but his
work seems mainly to have been the organization of the transport in La
Vendee. Transferred to the Army of the Rhine, he was employed in the
Intelligence Department. Rising quickly, he became Adjutant-General in
September 1795. With the rank of brigadier, he served under Moreau at
Ingolstadt. Then he commanded a detachment of the ‘Army of England’
at Cherbourg. Afterwards, he was sent to the army at Mayence, but, quar¬
relling violently with Jourdan, he was transferred to the Rhine. Under
Moreau once more, he commanded a division at Hohenlinden. This gained
him some distinction. He was thought of as a coming man.
   Although he had served under Hoche and Kleber, he was regarded in
the Army as a follower of Moreau. And so he regarded himself. It is essential
to grasp this, for it is the key to his subsequent career. Being in a position
to know something of Moreau’s dislike of Bonaparte, and being able to
guess at Bonaparte’s jealousy of Moreau, Decaen realized what the fate of
his chief was likely to be. He saw that his own position, as a follower of
Moreau, was not without its dangers. Noted as he was for sincerity and
bluntness, he had quite sufficient acumen to change sides before it was too
late.
                                     189
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS