

  sell them to the United States having failed. The coloured troops were
  to go in transports, the rest in ships of war. The expedition was to include
  civilian officials and the ships were to carry provisions for a year as well
 as large sums of money and valuable presents for the native princes of
  India. There was certainly much to arrange.
     Decaen received his orders from Deeres on 8th February, 1803—orders
 to proceed to Pondicherry and demand the cession of the place under the
 terms of the Treaty of Amiens. In these instructions the possibility of a
 speedy outbreak of war was not forgotten. The most important point,
 however, concerned Decaen’s relations with the naval commander-in-chief.
 As a revenge for the various occasions on which Decaen had seemed to
 score over him, Deeres made the naval command independent of the
 military, instead of being subordinate. The two commanders-in-chief were
 merely urged to co-operate. Decaen’s naval colleague was Rear-Admiral
 Durand Linois.
     Charles Alexandre Leon Durand de Linois—so ran his full title—was
 born in 1761, and was thus Decaen’s senior by eight years. He was of the
 smaller Breton nobility which often supplied the old regime with officers
 for the Navy. Entering in 1776, he saw his first service in the East Indies,
 under Suffren; a fact of significance, largely explaining his appointment.
 He was captain of the Formidable in 1795, when he was taken prisoner.
 Being soon exchanged, he commanded a ship in the Bantry Bay Expedition
 of 1796. Promoted Rear-Admiral in 1799, he served first as Captain of the
 Fleet to Bruix and afterwards as second-in-command to Ganteaume in
 1800. Then, in the following year, came the great moment of his life.
 This was the action at Aigeciras. On this occasion Linois, with three sail
 of the line, contrived to inflict a reverse on Sir James Saumarez, with six.
 One of the English ships surrendered to him. It was a defensive action,
and one in which Linois had the powerful aid of shoal water and shore
batteries. But such details are trivial compared with the central fact that
the English had, somehow, been beaten. The phenomenon was not altogether
unknown. Nevertheless, the French Navy at that time had no superfluity
of victorious Admirals, so that Linois came to be regarded as a hero and
a rising man. He was to go to the East Indies where, it was hoped, he
would prove another Suffren.
    In character, Linois is best understood as the opposite of Decaen.
Whereas Decaen was a man of the revolution, promoted from the ranks,
Linois was of the old regime and a man of birth. While Decaen retained
the ardour of youth, Linois had already, in middle life, the caution of age.
Where Decaen failed was in lack of patience. Where Linois failed was in
                                    192
plate iv. Action between H.M. frigate La Sybille and the French frigate La Forte (28th February, 1799)
plate v. The French 74-gun ship Marengo, refitting at Brest in 1803.
                            DECAEN      AND    LINOIS