

thought to represent his views. Of him it would be true to say that, although
planning an invasion of India in 1801, he was not concerned with Egypt
as a stepping-stone. His later plan depended on his alliance with Paul I
of Russia and involved a French army descending the Danube, crossing
the Black Sea in Russian ships to Taganrog, marching to the Volga and
so by that river to Astrakan, and thence with a Russian army into India.
Massena was admittedly to cross Persia and Afghanistan, but equally
without making use of Egypt. The assassination of the Tsar finished this
particular scheme but it went far enough to demonstrate Napoleon’s lack
of interest in the Red Sea route.1 On the British side it is proper to remember
that Dundas united in himself the offices of Secretary of State for War
and President of the Board of Control. From long association with Indian
affairs, he had acquired a proprietary interest in India which may have
influenced unduly his conduct of the war. Lord Wellesley’s anxiety is less
open to criticism—defending India was his main responsibility—but that
it was excessive in 1800 seems clear. Perhaps it would be fair to acquit
the Indian Government of any needless caution up to and including 1799.
Then again, in 1801, with negotiations for peace in contemplation, Dundas
can hardly be blamed for wanting to evict the French from Egypt. It was
perhaps in 1800 that the chance for offensive action was culpably let slip.
One cause of this misfortune was, no doubt, the appointment of Arthur
Wellesley to govern at Seringapatam which, by depriving the Marquess
of his brother’s advice, contributed perhaps to that vacillation of which
Admiral Rainier justly complained. This was at its worst in 1800 and was
perhaps attributable, in part, to the exhaustion of Dundas and the excitable
temperament of Lord Wellesley. The peace, in leaving France in possession
of Mauritius, left her with the means to renew the war in the Indian Ocean.
Towards this the first step, as Bonaparte realized, was to bring the colony
under effective French control. It remained only to find a man capable of
doing it.


    See La colonisation Frangaise pendant la periods Napoleonienne (1799-1815). J. Saintoyant,
Paris, 1931, p. 426.




                                             183
                                  i




'
                                      '


                     tv       -



                 '


                     ■




         ■




             .




    :'




                          ■
PART TWO
                                     CHAPTER IX



                      Decaen and Linois

     At the time of the Peace of Amiens, the French Minister of Marine
     /-\and Colonies was Forfait, but he was replaced in 1802 by Denis
AL JLDecres. The change involved no reversal, however, of policy.
Forfait had argued that the French factories in India were, since Tippoo’s
defeat and death, militarily valueless. He thought it useless to fortify Pondi¬
cherry afresh and his successor thought the same, urging that the town
would be captured in any case in the event of war and questioning whether
the English would even allow it to be fortified. But if agreed on that point,
Forfait and Deeres were different in outlook, and from this point Deeres
becomes important. Generally speaking, France had no coherent colonial
policy between 1793 and 1801. But France had latterly acquired a ruler and
one whose mouthpiece was to be Deeres. Born in 1761, a noble, Deeres
entered the Gardes-Marine in 1779 and saw service in the West Indies. In
1791 he was a lieutenant in the Cybele, St. Felix’s flagship in the Indian
Ocean. In the early days of the revolution Deeres was in some danger of
being hanged by the Cybele s crew. He avoided that fate but, sent by St.
Felix to France to ask for help, he was arrested and not reinstated until
1795. He served in the expedition to Ireland and was later promoted Rear-
Admiral. In the Guillaume-Tell he fought at the Battle of the Nile and
escaped; only to be taken later, off Malta, in 1800. The action between her
and the Penelope (36), Lion (64) and Fondroyant (80) became famous in
French naval annals, ending as it did with the Guillaume-Tell dismasted,
twenty guns silenced and two hundred casualties.1 Deeres, who had himself
been wounded, was given a sword of honour and made, successively,
Prefect-Maritime at L’Orient and Minister of Marine. He is said to have
done extremely good work in connection with the dockyards at Venice,
Antwerp, Flushing and Cherbourg.
     Whatever virtues Deeres may have had as an administrator—and they
were considerable—he was not the man to revive and inspire the French
Navy. Napoleon was unfortunate in his Admirals, as he himself recognized.
 1   See Rouvier, Histoire des Marins Frangais sous la Republique (1789-1805), Paris, 1868.