

of Cairo. It is not apparent that Baird’s march made any material difference
to the campaign. His force, comprising two divisions and over ten thousand
men, was strong enough to affect the result and appeared from a direction
which might be thought unexpected. Rainier considered the plan a good
one but left, as indeed it was, too late in the year. ‘According to my idea,
they will be very successful if half the troops from hence reached Cosire.’
Blankett was aggrieved at having been left to suppose that Suez, not
Kosseir, was to be the point of disembarkation. He pointed out in his last
dispatch that he could, if warned, have done something to prepare the way.
At the same time he admitted that ‘no other obstacle will be in the way
of General Baird’s progress except the difficulties of the march....’ Actually,
Baird’s march (largely waterborne) was remarkably swift, the delay being
rather over the departure from Bombay, and that possibly inevitable.
    Baird’s march was spectacular, if not brilliant in results, and attracted
much popular acclaim in England. In the services the operation was regarded
more critically. Baird’s appointment to command, itself a cause of delay,
had left Colonel Wellesley furious at being superseded and scarcely on
speaking terms with his brother. He was ill, in any case, with the ‘Malabar
itch’—an ailment which had again been a source of delay. Rainier was
irritated by the way in which Popham was placed beyond his control, and
Blankett hurt to think that his hard-won knowledge of the Red Sea
(purchased, as he must have begun to suspect, at the cost of his life) had
been put to so little use. Back in England, Blankett’s Whig friends (to whom
he was still Keppel’s lieutenant) were offended at the way he had been
treated while other officers were still shocked to think how Rainier’s
authority had now twice been set aside. To others who might be critical
of Dundas’s moments of strategic inspiration the appearance of Popham
would be the finishing touch—so junior a captain, with so little experience
of command and so much the pet of the politicians! Dying, Blankett might
reflect that it was only Lloyd’s detachment which could arrive in time to
be of service. Dying, Abercromby knew that any diversion from Suez
was bound to come too late. Most ironical of all must have been the
reflections of Sir Sidney Smith, who could recall that the Treaty of El-Arich
in 1800, if ratified, would have secured without bloodshed all the objects
for which this costly campaign had been fought.
    The war was nearly over and little else of moment occurred in 1801-2.
Rainier was at Madras in the autumn of 1801 but finding the weather
threatening, he put to sea on October 29th with the Victorious and Arrogant
and, after searching in vain for a rumoured privateer, dropped anchor at
Penang on December nth. There he was joined by the Centurion from

V                                    179
                        WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS