

   It is not apparent what Deeres replied or what flag was hoisted, but
Linois evidently considered himself in independent command.
   Before proceeding to Brest, where the troops and ships were being
collected, Decaen had two more interviews with the First Consul The
first was an official farewell, a luncheon party at Saint-Cloud. The rather
recently married Decaen had the honour of presenting his wife to Madame
Bonaparte. It was all very flattering and agreeable. Then, the next day,
came another interview; this time at the Tuilleries, Decaen and Bonaparte
alone. Decaen asked for further, and written, instructions from the First
Consul himself. Bonaparte was at first unwilling. He said he could see no
point in it. ‘What instructions can I give you that will be of any use at
such a distance?’ he demanded. ‘You must act for the best according to
circumstances.’ Decaen persisted, and with eventual success. He left the
palace bearing a document of which the following is a translation:

               INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE FIRST CONSUL
                         In the name of the French People

       The Captain-General has received from the Minister of Marine his
    instructions relative to the administration in India and the various rights
    and privileges to which the French settlements and commerce are entitled.
    But the First Consul thinks proper to add to these some additional instruc¬
    tions by which political and military affairs are to be guided.
       The Captain-General will find himself in a land in which our rivals hold
    sway, but with a rule which weighs equally heavily upon all. He must take
    care, then, to avoid giving them any cause for alarm or ground for complaint.
    He will disguise as far as possible the intentions of the Government. He is
    to uphold the diplomatic relations essential to the safety and maintenance
    of our settlements. He must study to maintain a cordial connection with
    the Peoples and Princes groaning under the yoke of the East India Company.
    The English are the tyrants of India; they are suspicious and jealous. It is
    necessary to treat them with smoothness and deceive them with apparent
    innocence. . . .

   Six months after his arrival at Pondicherry, Decaen is to send an officer
to France, entrusted with full knowledge of the situation, of the strength
of the English and of the possibilities of a campaign in India. Decaen is
subsequently instructed to report on these topics every six months, each
report correcting and amplifying those preceding it.

       In considering how to sustain a war in India over a period of years,
    it is necessary to work on the assumption that we shall not have command
                                       194
                           DECAEN      AND    LINOIS

    of the sea; and that considerable reinforcements are not, therefore, to be
    expected.
       It would be difficult for an army-corps to maintain itself in face of the
    strong English forces without allies and without a fortified base. Such a
    base would serve, in the last event, as a fortress in which to hold out for
    terms of capitulation; terms allowing of a return to France with arms and
    baggage. . . . The base should be a place of strength with a harbour or road¬
    stead capable of protecting frigates and merchantmen.
       After the question of alliances and of a base, the next things to be con¬
    sidered are supplies and munitions. The Captain-General will give both these
    subjects his most careful attention. He will report on each in the most detailed
    manner. . . .
        Should war break out between France and England before September
     1805; and should the Captain-General hear of it before any orders reach
    him from the Government, he is free to act as he thinks proper. He may fall
    back on the Isle of France and the Cape. On the other hand, he may remain
     on the mainland if the situation admits of it, provided that the troops are
    not thereby exposed to the risk of having to make an unconditional surrender.
    It is important that the army should not play a part calculated to lower our
     prestige in India, or, by its annihilation, weaken the potential resistance of
     the Isle of France.
        It is not to be supposed that Holland could remain neutral in the event of
    war with England. One of the first duties of the Captain-General will be to
     ascertain the state of the Dutch, Portuguese and Spanish settlements and
     discover what resources they can offer.
        The Captain-General’s mission is, first and foremost, one of reconnaissance.
     With a handful of troops, he will watch the political and military situation,
     while at the same time occupying our factories for the protection of trade.
     But the First Consul, aided by information received from him as well as
     by the exact observance of these instructions, will some day be able to place
     him on the road to a fame outlasting the memories of men and the passing
     of centuries.
                                            Given by the First Consul
                                                              {Signed) Bonaparte.