

According to Decaen, a somewhat biased critic, the Marengo nearly went
ashore at the Cape. By his version, Delarue blundered by moonlight into
the head of False Bay under the impression that it was Simon’s Bay,
and then woke up next morning with a start to find himself almost on the
beach. Decaen, in fact, thought very little of Delarue. Perhaps with some
reason, he ascribed the slowness of the Marengo to the incompetence
and timidity of her captain. In this view he was loudly supported by
the commander, Vrignaud, who was at daggers drawn with his superior
officer.
   Few of the passengers had taken much trouble to conceal their disgust
at the meals provided, but they took heart on sighting the Cape, confident
that there would be some improvement. Eggs and radishes graced the
festive board on the day of their arrival, and Linois announced that he
was laying in a plentiful stock of provisions at enormous expense. Nothing,
however, materialized beyond some fowls, some bushels of onions and
a few pumpkins hung up in the stern gallery. The Admiral’s unpopularity
intensified. He quarrelled again with Decaen about whether or not to call
at Bourbon, as previously on whether or not to reduce the water allowance.
All these matters of dispute were trivial enough in themselves, but they
were fatal hindrances to any effective co-operation between the naval and
military forces.
   The squadron sailed again on May 28th, passed within sight of Bourbon
and Galega, and made Ceylon on July 7th. Pondicherry was sighted orr
the 10th. Before, however, following the further proceedings of Admiral
Linois, it is necessary to see what had happened meanwhile in India.
   The Governor-General, Lord Wellesley, had received three successive
dispatches on the subject of Pondicherry. The first of these, dated 5th May,
1802, was simply an order to restore the French and Dutch settlements.
The second, dated October 17th, countermanded the first and ordered him
to delay restitution without in any way committing himself. The treaty
was not, of course, to be broken; but the expected outbreak of war was
to find Pondicherry still in English hands. These instructions arrived on
30th March, 1803. Finally, on May 8th, the Governor-General received
Lord Hobart’s third dispatch, the effect of which was to annul the second
and reiterate the injunctions of the first. Doubtless, these contradictory
orders were moves in some complex diplomatic game. Each dispatch may
well have been founded on some fresh piece of information. But Wellesley
thought otherwise. He regarded his orders as representing mere indecision.
Preferring his own judgment to that of a Cabinet which did not know
its own mind from one week to another, he decided to ignore the third
                                       200
                          DECAEN     AND   LINOIS

dispatch. The arrangements made in accordance with the second were
allowed to stand.
  These arrangements were as follows: The Governments of Madras and
Bombay had been instructed to send him all documents relative to the
execution of the Treaty of Amiens. If restitution was demanded of them,
they were to plead lack of instructions and refer the matter to Fort William.
While awaiting his reply, they were to treat the French with all possible
civility. What his reply was to be does not appear. Perhaps he hoped to
find a flaw in the wording of the treaty; or perhaps he had already found
one. Again, he may have intended to be elsewhere when the dispatch
should arrive. Delay is always easy. There were a dozen ways in which
he could postpone restitution, and he probably meant to resort to each
in turn.
  The Belle Poule parted company, as we have seen, on March 15th; the
intention being that this fast-sailing frigate should reach Pondicherry in
time to complete arrangements for the landing of the troops. Leger and
Binot, who sailed in her, were authorized to take over the settlement. They
had with them letters from Decaen to the Governor-General and the
Governor of Madras, demanding the surrender of the French settlements
under the terms of the Treaty of Amiens and naming Binot as the officer
empowered to receive them. The frigate also carried two companies of
infantry and the sum of 200,000 francs—or the equivalent in piastres—to
cover the initial expenses.
  The Belle Poule arrived at Pondicherry on June 15th, and Binot presented
his letters to the English Commandant—a certain Colonel Demeuron.
Demeuron sent them on to Madras, explaining that he himself had, of
course, no power to hand over the territory in question. But he was
naturally very anxious to help the French in any way he could. He would
take it upon himself, he said, to allow both civil and military officers to
land. He offered to help the surgeon of the Belle Poule to establish a tem¬
porary hospital on shore. He had already had a lodging prepared for Binot
himself.
  The reply from Madras came on June 19th. The Governor, Lord Clive,
was politeness itself. He promised to proceed without delay in the
restitution—as soon, that was to say, as he had received orders from
the Governor-General. Meanwhile, Colonel Cullen was the Commissioner
for the handing over of Pondicherry. He and Demeuron would do their
utmost to find accommodation for the French troops. Let them land, by
all means.
    On the day that Binot heard from Lord Clive, he saw some English
                                    201                                 G*
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS