

newspapers which were filled with rumours of war. Somewhat alarmed,
Binot consulted with Leger and the captain of the Belle Poule, Bruilhac.
Binot and Leger were in favour of landing the troops, Bruilhac strongly
against it. After some hesitation it was decided to land the greater part
of them. A hundred and eighty men were accordingly .landed on June 31st,
while eighty-two remained, for the time being, on board the frigate. Cullen
and Demeuron received them warmly and asked all the officers to dinner.
At the first toast, Cullen proposed the health of the First Consul. Binot
then proposed that of George III, afterwards presenting his host with a
medallion of Bonaparte. Cullen said that he would keep it and value it
as the portrait of one of the greatest men the world had seen. He was, in
short, enjoying his part.
    A week passed, ten days, a fortnight; and there was still no word from
Madras or Bengal. Then came the news that the English squadron had
sailed from Trincomalee and come to anchor on July 5th off Cuddalore
—some twenty miles down the coast from Pondicherry. Binot became still
more anxious. Bruilhac was definitely frightened. The English flag was
still flying at Pondicherry. There were rumours at Madras of an alliance
between France and Russia. The French commercial agent, Bruix, was
refused permission to go to Tranquebar. Leger noticed that no mention
was made in the Madras Gazette of the Belle Poule s arrival; an insignificant
fact which somehow added to his anxiety. In the light of other events,
even Cullen’s hospitality began to seem rather sinister. In retrospect, had
he not been a shade too polite? Not without some misgivings, Binot
allowed the rest of the troops to land. Meanwhile, the English men-of-war
 Trident (64) and Rattlesnake (18) sailed from Cuddalore and dropped
anchor close to the Belle Poule. Retreat now seemed impossible. Binot
could do nothing but wait; and he was still waiting when the French
squadron arrived.




                                       202
                               CHAPTER X


             New Outbreak of War

I   \eter Rainier had         now been on the East Indies station for over
     height years. Nothing had come of his previous resignation but he
     was now more definitely expecting to be relieved. He was more
elderly now and probably looked it, still spectacled and stouter than ever.
 His prize money, chiefly from the Moluccas, had made him a rich man
 and his property at his death was valued at nearly a quarter of a million—
a tenth of it rather oddly bequeathed towards the reduction of the national
 debt. He did not long enjoy his wealth for he died some three years after his
return to England. Gossip (of which India had plenty) said that he was
too much addicted to the pleasures of the table; which was very likely
true. His experience of the Indian Ocean was now unrivalled, and his sense
of his own importance by no means diminished. Nearly worn out as he
was, he was quite unfit to direct another naval war in the Indian Ocean.
On the other hand, his presence at the outbreak of war was an advantage
and he could do much to advise whoever came to succeed him.
   The custom had grown up for the bulk of the English squadron to
remain at Bombay, or anyway on the Malabar coast, during the north-east
monsoon; at Madras or anyway on the Coromandel coast during the south¬
west monsoon. The rumours of war, therefore, which preceded Decaen’s
arrival in India, found Rainier in the act of moving round from his winter
to his summer base. He accordingly stopped half-way, at Trincomalee.
It was a good place to await events, and his presence there would serve
to protect the port, which was valuable and ill-defended. The forces with
his flag consisted of the Centurion (50), Tremendous (74), Trident (64),
San Fiorenp (36), Terpsichore (32), Fox (32), the sloops Albatross and
Rattlesnake, and the troopships Sheerness and Wilhelmina. With these he
came to anchor at Trincomalee on about June 4th; and there he was joined
by the Concorde (36), Dedaigneuse (36), and the Lancaster (64)—all from
Madras; and ultimately by the sloop Victor, from Bombay. This comprised
the whole force then on the station.
   In April and May, Rainier, anticipating war, seemed chiefly anxious to
                                     203
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS