

 China ships; and, in the meanwhile, she served the useful purpose of
 drawing off the Centurion and -Fox in pursuit of her as soon as the news
 reached Bombay of her being seen near the Gulf of Persia.
    LAtalantes actual mission was to take a French envoy to the Court
 of Oman. The Imam Seid of Oman reigned at Muscat and owned twenty
 vessels in the Pilgrim trade. His state monopoly extended to the Red Sea
 and Zanzibar. On arrival1 at Muscat, Cavaignac could obtain no interview
with Seid Sultan, but the latter’s representative, Sheik Ali, explained that
a French envoy would be welcome in time of peace. News of the war
had reached Muscat (via Bushire) two days before L’Atalante arrived, and
Sheik Ali asked pointedly what forces Napoleon had in the neighbourhood
—whether he had a seaport nearby, and generally what protection he could
offer to the Sultan supposing an alliance were agreed? There was no
answer to this, and a fruitless voyage is now only remembered because
Cavaignac was the father of the General of that name, and because Pierre
Bouvet—a future sailor of note—made in L’Atalante one of his early
voyages.1
   Linois put to sea on October 8th with the Marengo, the two frigates
Belle Poule and Semillante, and the recently arrived corvette Berceau.
Calling at Bourbon in order to land General Magallon and his troops,
he sailed again from St. Denis on the 14th, steering roughly for the Straits
of Sunda. On November 21st he took the Countess of Sutherland, described
as an Indiaman, but evidently a country ship out of Calcutta and bound
for China with rice and cotton. She was sent with a prize crew to the
Isle of France. Linois probably owed this prize to the fact that she sailed
before the news of war reached Bengal. This would account for her being
on a course for the Straits of Sunda, perhaps with the object of calling
at Bencoolen—which settlement Linois himself intended to visit. Unpro¬
tected merchantmen seldom went near the Straits of Sunda in time of
war; it meant going too near the Dutch base.
   Linois made Sumatra on December 2nd, and sailed into Bencoolen
harbour the next day, under English colours. A French raid was apparently
the last thing the garrison expected. The gunners at Fort Marlborough
were entirely taken in by the false colours and a pilot was sent out to
bring the supposedly English ships into port. By the time the mistake
was discovered, it was too late to make any effective resistance. Two prizes
were taken and five English merchantmen were burnt by their crews.
Landing parties set fire to the warehouses on shore, which were filled with
   1 See Revue Maritime et Coloniale, Vols. 75 and 78, “La Guerre Maritime dans l’lnde,”
E. Fabre.

                                         210
                         NEW     OUTBREAK       OF   WAR

rice, opium, pepper, camphor and spices, and the squadron sailed again
on the 6th, well satisfied with the damage done.

     . . . d’apres les renseignmens que j’ai obtenus depuis, la perte que l’ennemi
     a eprouvee doit etre beaucoup au dela de dix millions que nous avions
     estimee d’abord. Les deux Bricks qui ont ete b rules etaint charges de munitions
     de guerre et quatre proas aussi incendies en outre des cinq Batimens etaint
     tres richement charges. . . A