

   Decaen showed a right instinct in demanding separate instructions from
Bonaparte. He had sensed the divergence in policy between the First
Consul and his Minister.
   Armed with his orders, and attended by relatives, Decaen made his
appearance at Brest on 22nd February, 1803. Caffarelli, the Prefet Maritime,
reported his arrival to the Minister (23 Frimaire, An. 11). His forces were
already there and he inspected them on board ship soon after his arrival.
His staff consisted of General Vandermaesen, Brigadier Sainte-Suzanne,
                                        x95
                         WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

 Brigadier Penmarch-Mainvielle and Brigadier Montigny; Engineer-Colonel
 Richemont, and two aides-de-eamp, Binot and D’Arsonval. Binot had
 instructions to go ahead in one of the frigates and make arrangements for
 the reception of the troops at Pondicherry. A number of civilians accom¬
 panied the expedition, headed by Decaen’s colleague, the Colonial Prefect
 Leger, and including several envoys bound for Persia or the Philippines.
 It was arranged that Leger should accompany Binot, bearing letters for
 Fort William and Fort St. George and empowered to take over the territory
 which England had agreed to restore. This, it was thought, would facilitate
 an immediate landing of the troops on arrival.
    In one respect, Decaen’s appointment had already proved a success. It
 had served to disarm English suspicion. He was so junior an officer that
 his appointment excited little attention. The English had never heard of
 him. Lord Whitworth, the ambassador, wrote vaguely that Decaen was
 a man of good character but without striking talents either as a soldier
 or a statesman. He concluded that so young a man—Decaen was not quite
 thirty-four—would be sent rather to maintain than increase the French
power in the East. Leger seemed to be an equally innocuous character,
chosen for having served at Pondicherry under the old regime. A nephew
 of Dupleix had been rejected for this post on the ground that his name
might create alarm.
    The one thing about the expedition likely to attract attention was the
number of general officers. It was excessive and unnatural. There were too
many of them for the number of troops carried. The obvious conclusion
was that it was intended to raise sepoy battalions in India. And this was
indeed the case. Lord Whitworth was not unduly alarmed. He might have
been more anxious had he known that some 80,000 francs had been spent
in gifts for the Indian princes. And he might have been still more anxious
had he known the gist of Decaen’s secret instructions.
    On February 24th, Decaen met his naval colleague. He and Linois then
went on board the Marengo, the ship that was destined to carry them both.
She lay in the outer harbour, all but ready for sea, a fine 74-gun ship. The
Marengo had been built at Toulon in 1794-95, doubled and coppered in
 1796 and extensively overhauled in 1800-1. She had originally been called
Jean Jacques Rousseau and was renamed, shortly before sailing, on
8th December, 1802.1 Her burthen (1,926 tons) exceeded that of many an
English second-rate; so that, according to English ideas, she mounted too
few guns for her size. Her weight of metal, however, was more than
respectable. She was pierced for 86 guns and mounted 84, including 28
      1 Arch. Nat. BB3 196. Caffarelli to Minister of Marine, 17 Frimaire, An 11.