

        Le Capitaine de Vau Delarue ayant bien voulu offrir a Madame Decaen
     sa chambre pour la traversee le Capn General paroit flatte et satisfait du
     logement qui lui est destine et de sa famille. Je la reunis aujourd’huy pour
     diner a Bord avec les autorites civiles et militaire de ce departement. . . .

The incident was closed. Or was it?
   The final arrangements were made. Binot and Leger embarked in the
Belle Poule frigate, the ship destined to go ahead of the squadron. General
Vandermaesen went in the Semillante frigate and Montigny in L’Atalante.
Colonel Sainte-Suzanne went in the despised Cote d’Or. The other transport,
Marie-Fran$aise, carried a few passengers but was laden chiefly with
provisions and stores. The creole troops were to follow later in trans¬
ports under convoy of the corvette Belter. One of these, the Malabar,
was loaded with biscuits, flour, oil, wine, vinegar and lard, mainly for
the hospital at Pondicherry. There was a great deal of overcrowding in
all the ships.
                                        198
                            DECAEN     AND   LINOIS

   The East Indies squadron consisted of the following ships:
          Ships              Guns         Captain               Crew      Troops
     Marengo                   74        Delarue                  593        418
     Belle Poule               44        Bruilhac                2 66        209
     L’Atalante                44        Beauchene               264         183
     Semillante                36        Mothare                  2I5        164
     Cote d’Or                  2        Dufresne                  87        361
     Marie-Francaise            2        Le-Bourg                  18         12

                              202                               i,443      i,347


    (Note: Accounts varyas to the numbers, both of seamen and soldiers.
 The crew of the Marengo was probably much larger. This Belle Poule,
 second of her name, had been launched at Nantes not long before, in 1802,
 being built in a private yard after a design by Sane. Her commander,
 Bruillac de Kerevel, was an old ‘officier bleu’ who had served in a French
 East Indiaman and was Sous-Lieutenant at the time of the Revolution.
 Moizeau was his First Lieutenant at the age of twenty-five, the other officers,
 except the purser, being younger still. The Semillante had been built at
 L’Orient in 1791.)
    The squadron put to sea on 6th March, 1803, and ran at once into bad
 weather, which lasted until Finisterre was passed. Nearly everyone was
 seasick, both Linois and Delarue being confined to their cabins for twenty-
 four hours. Decaen, by his own account, was immune. And he was certainly
 well enough to resume his feud with Linois at an early stage of the voyage.
 The chief source of dispute was the food. Although handsomely paid
 beforehand, Linois proved a very economical host. A solitary thin and
 diminutive Breton cow had perished in the gale; and a few fowls had
 shared the same fate. So the cabin fare was at once reduced to beef and
 haricots, salt bacon and beans. And even this unambitious scale was not
 maintained for long. The passengers shortly found themselves eating almost
exactly what was served out to the crew. The wine, too, was execrable,
undrinkable; but Decaen was enough of an old campaigner to have brought
his own. Linois assured his guests that fresh provisions would be obtained
at the Cape.
    The Belle Poule parted company on March 15 th and went straight on
to Pondicherry, calling only at Madagascar. The rest of the squadron put
into the Cape, arriving in False Bay on May 8th. L’Atalante, which had
parted company by accident early in the voyage, and had since been on
fire, arrived two days earlier. The Cote cl’Or arrived a few days later.
                                      199
                     WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS