

August 30th, to take command of a detachment, consisting of the
Concorde (36), and the sloops Victor and Rattlesnake, with which to patrol
the Sandheads, protect Madras and convoy the China trade back to India.
To this detachment the two troopships Sheerness and Wilhelmina were
annexed, chiefly at first for the purpose of rushing troops and guns to
reinforce Trincomalee, threatened at that time by the Kandians with whom
Governor North was in conflict. Both, however, were armed with heavy
carronades from the arsenal at Bombay, and were to be reckoned with
as ships of war. The China trade needing protection consisted of country
ships, twenty of them being bound for Bombay and expected to sail by
way of the Straits of Malacca between November and February. Bathurst
was to meet them, presumably, at Penang. Having made all these arrange¬
ments, Rainier sailed for Bombay in the Centurion, with three sail of the
line, two frigates and two sloops. He was there in November, with his
smaller ships watching Goa and the Malabar coast. Arriving on the 7th,
he had at once to put the Trident and Tremendous in dock, both being
much in need of repair.

                                                       Trident, Bombay Harbour.
                                                              10th December, 1803.
            Sir
                    Triplicate of my last of 14th ultimo (Original and Duplicate
            whereof were forwarded by Overland Dispatch on the 14th ultimo
            and 5th instant) accompanies this, since which have dispatched Ships
            to Cruize for the protection and defence of this Coast, and to scour
            the Gulf of Persia, for the security of the Trade, and particularly
            the conveyance of the Overland Dispatch between this Port and
            Bussorah [i.e. Bushire]. . . .
                The intelligence from the Mauritius of the arrival of the French
            Squadron there from Pondicherry, has been fully authenticated. . . .
            From the best information it has fell in my way to procure from
            Batavia, the strength of the Dutch Squadron in those Seas appear to
Bcuo        consist of three sail of the Line as pr. margin, five large Frigates, and
Kortenaar   three stout Corvettes, one of the large frigates, ’tis reported has been
            lost among the Moluccas.
               I have no account of the strength of the Spaniards at Manila but
            expect intelligence from thence soon. . . . The Governor-General of
            Goa has admitted a British Garrison into Alguada Port and I have
            directed Captain Bingham in His Majesty’s Ship St. Fiorenio, Senior
            Officer of the Cruisers employed as above-mentioned, to pay par¬
            ticular attention to the defence of Goa. . . .
                                      (Rainier to Admiralty. P.R.O. Ad. 1/173.)
                                         207
                         WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS