

   Decaen had come out to the East dreaming of a great campaign to
recover India for France. After his escape from Pondicherry he realized
that there was no chance of an immediate invasion of India. The task
devolved upon him of ruling the Isle of France instead. He found plenty
to do. The political sentiments of the colonists were of an obsolete kind,
and his first duty was to explain to them how unfashionable their views
had become. The previous Governor-General, Malartic, had died in July
1800 and the Colonial Assembly had invited the military commander,
General Magallon de la Morliere, to take his place; which he did.1 This
appointment, like the Colonial Assembly itself, was irregular, and the
removal of a Governor who had been there since 1796 was obviously
essential. Orthodox Bonapartism could hardly be expected of a man who
had left France as long ago as that. Another step was to rid the island
of its Assembly and other anachronisms. Decaen transferred Magallon to
Bourbon, with a suitable force, and himself took over the government
of the Isle of France.
   Military operations being out of the question, Decaen could make war
only by giving advice to Linois. He urged him to proceed with his squadron
to Java, and that for several reasons. To begin with, the Dutch at Batavia
had to be informed of the outbreak of war. It was advisable to reinforce
them at the same time, for which purpose Decaen planned to send them
the same battalion, by this time rather depleted, which had protected them
during the last war, and for which he had no particular use. Then, it was
well known that the English China fleet always sailed from Canton early
in the year. The French squadron could arrive in the China seas in time
to intercept it. There was a chance of there being no naval escort there
so early in the war. Finally, Decaen was anxious that Linois should go,
and as soon as possible. He disliked him personally, and the stay of his
squadron was a heavy burden on the colony, which was not too well
provisioned.
   The actual news of the outbreak of war was brought to the Isle of
France by the corvette Berceau, which came in on September 25th. By
that time, Linois had agreed to go to Batavia. He had wanted at first to
send the Marengo back to France, but it was pointed out that she would
probably fall in with the English on the French coast. His next proposal
had been to cruise on the Malabar coast, which was what the English
Admiral expected him to do. When he had at last been persuaded to sail
for Java, every effort was made to complete the refitting and recruiting
  1 J. Saintoyant. La colonisation Franpaise pendant la period Napoleonienne (1799—1815),
Paris, 1931. (Chapter VIII.)

                                          208
                       NEW   OUTBREAK     OF   WAR




of his squadron. His force had, however, to be weakened by the departure
of L'Atalante, which was dispatched on a mission to Muscat. She was
expected to rejoin him before the probable date of his encounter with the
                                   209
                         WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS