

                                           205
                       WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

after midnight, cables were cut and the whole squadron made sail to the
north-north-east—a direction no pursuer would be likely to take. The
anchors were buoyed and some boats were left behind at these buoys, with
lights burning in them. The ruse succeeded, and by dawn there was not
a sail in sight. So course was altered to south-east, as direct a course for the
Isle of France as the monsoon would allow the ships to steer. The squadron
made the island of Roderigue on August '14th, and reached the Isle of
France on the 16th.
   It is not clear whether the French squadron actually escaped unobserved.

       . . . About Midnight the French Admiral slipped and put to sea, with the
     two Frigates and corvette, and as we observed had left boats on their anchors
     with lights on them, obviously for the purpose of concealing their motions.
     At Daylight I sent ships out in different directions to observe what course
     he had steered, but none of them were able to get sight of him. . . .
                                  (P.R.O. Adm, 1 /173. To Admiralty, July 24th.)

   This is Rainier’s version of the affair, and it reads as if the departure
of the French was noticed. Had it not been reported, Rainier would have
been more doubtful, one would think, as to when it took place. Duclos,1
moreover, states that alarm rockets were fired on shore. In that case, it
seems odd that there was no immediate pursuit, if only to ascertain the
direction they took. But Rainier may have been rather afraid of overtaking
them. He was probably in some doubt as to what he should do if he did
come up with any of their ships. The departure of the French, however
secret and hurried, could hardly be construed as an act of war. Rainier was
evidently in something of a quandary. When the Belle Poule returned from
Madras, to find Linois gone, she seems to have been chased by English
ships, though without success. She reached the Isle of France before Linois
arrived there. The Cote d’Or transport appeared on the 16th. She was fired
on and detained, but eventually released. The Marie-Fran$aise, another
transport, came in on August 25th. She also was detained for a few days,
and actually taken to Negapatam. When released on the 31st, she did not
sail at once, and the result of this was that she did not sail at all. News of
the outbreak of war reached the coast on September 6th.
   Following the disappearance of the French squadron, Rainier remained
on the coast until the end of the month and then took his forces to await
developments at Trincomalee. At the end of August came the news of
war, which decided the Admiral to proceed with the strength of the
squadron to protect Bombay and Goa. Captain Bathurst was ordered, on
     1 MS. Memoir in the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich. See Appendix A.
                                         206
                          NEW     OUTBREAK       OF   WAR