

                                           196
                             DECAEN       AND    LINOIS

36-pounders on her lower deck. In English weights these would have
counted as 39-pounders, and were heavier than any English lower-deck
guns. Her broadside weighed 907 pounds. She measured 172 feet long in
the keel, with an extreme length of 198 feet n inches, and a beam of
44 feet 6 inches. There was rather more space between decks than English
ships had, her lower deck having a height of 6 feet 10 inches and her
main deck 4 inches less. She was a roomy ship, not unfitted to carry the
large numbers that were to sail in her. The crew alone numbered nearly
700, while the passengers and troops numbered little under 450. The official
report on her sailing qualities ran as follows:
      Gouveme superieurement, vire bien, ne cule presque pas, porte bien la
    voile. Excellentes qualites. Marche superieure.1

She was virtually an 80-gun ship, exceptionally well-armed and exceptionally
fast.
   The Marengo was at this time painted as follows: The sides of the ship
were painted black above the line of the copper. The tiers of ports were
painted yellow, the port-lids being of the same colour. The topsides were
black again, and she was painted internally the usual blood-red. All her
spars were yellow, or else perhaps left their natural colour and varnished.
Her figure-head is shown in the pictures of her as a winged figure of a
woman, wreathed and classically draped in white, bearing a wreath in her
hands; a figure, presumably, of Victory. Her stern was decorated with a
carved and gilded trophy of arms and standards, as well as with a normal
amount of scroll work. Her four boats were all smartly painted green
and white.
   The general colour scheme was somewhat altered during her refit at
the Isle of France following her grounding on the lie de Passe. Perhaps
with an idea of making her look more like an Indiaman, the yellow stripe
of her lower tier was painted out. From then until her capture she is shown
as black from her main-deck port-sills down to the copper.
   After duly admiring the ship, Decaen followed Linois below to inspect
the cabin accommodation. Leger was with him, and Vandermaesen; also
Caffarelli, the Prefect of the Marine at Brest. The Admiral showed them
the state-room; then his own cabin, to starboard; and then the captain’s
cabin to port. Decaen was wondering where he was to go when Linois
solved the problem by showing him the second cabin to starboard; this,
he gathered, was to be his own. Now, Decaen was sailing as Captain-
General of the French East Indies, and he quite properly regarded himself
          1 Archives Nat. BB5/6. Batiments de l’Etat. Matricide 1801 a 1807.

                                          197


                                                                               »
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

as the most important person in the ship. Yet he was apparently relegated
to the third place. This was bad in itself, but something in the way the
thing was done made it infinitely worse. He discovered, next, that
no furniture had been provided for him, although Deeres had told
him that he would find everything prepared. He would there and
then have to purchase his bedding, furniture, linen, plate, utensils and
crockery. The whole (situation was a deliberate insult. He announced
that he would not sail in the Marengo at all. He would rather go in
a transport.
    A hectic scene followed this outburst. The little group fluttered round
the fuming General, begging him to see reason. He could not go in the
 Cote d’Or, they told him. It was, they said, unprecedented. The Prefect
 said that he would not hear of it. He would be blamed if he allowed
 anything of the sort to happen. Linois said that he was only following
 custom in allotting the cabins as he had. He was only doing, he said, what
 was always done.
    Decaen quelled the tumult with a word. He would appeal to the First
 Consul. Needless to say, he had his own way in the end. Caffarelli did not
 want Bonaparte to hear of it, and so settled the question by making Linois
 give way. Decaen should have the first cabin to port, with half the state¬
 room if he preferred not to mess with Linois. The partition of the state-room,
 however, did not take place. Some sort of peace was made between them,
 and Linois gave a dinner party on the 26th to which Decaen and his staff
 were invited. Linois wrote to Deeres: