

prevent Goa from falling into French hands. This Portuguese port was
a weak place in the defences- of India, and it offered the easiest access to
the Mahratta country, where France would presumably look for allies. But
news came that there were no forces collected at the Isle of France in March,
and this, with the setting in of the bad weather season, convinced the Admiral
that his best plan would be to concentrate all his forces at Trincomalee.
   When the news came that the Belle Poule was at anchor off Pondicherry,
and that a squadron from France was due to arrive there shortly, Rainier
moved his squadron to Cuddalore roads. There was still no news from
England to justify apprehensions of an immediate outbreak of war. As late
as May 19th, Wellesley wrote that he thought an early renewal of hostilities
improbable. But, shortly after the arrival of the Belle Poule, some informa¬
tion arrived at Madras which strengthened the determination of the Indian
Governments not to surrender Pondicherry. This was the news of the
King’s speech of March 10th, or rather his message to Parliament, which
came by the overland mail. The news reached the Governor-General by
July 6th, in the form of a letter from Castlereagh stating that the fleet was
being equipped for sea, that press warrants had been issued, and that the
whole of the militia had been called out.
   While at Cuddalore, Rainier received an application from Cullen for
naval support to overawe the French troops already landed ‘who had
become rather disorderly and impatient at the delay in the restitution of
the place.’ And it was to comply with this request that the Trident and
Rattlesnake had been sent to anchor near the Belle Poule. When Linois
appeared, Rainier moved his whole squadron up to within four or five
miles of the French ships, and recalled the Trident and Rattlesnake. He was
now within striking distance and only waited for news of the outbreak
of war. Linois was trapped and the news might arrive at any moment.
   On first sighting Pondicherry, on July nth, Linois simultaneously made
out Rainier’s squadron, which was then making sail in order to prevent
his escape. He at once prepared for action, thinking that war had already
broken out—which indeed it had, but not in India. He was reassured by
a ship outward bound from Pondicherry for the Isle of France, and
accordingly came to anchor in the roads. The captain of the Belle Poule
came on board the Marengo to report.
  On learning the situation, Decaen’s first move was to write a letter of
protest to the Governor of Madras. He demanded that he should surrender
Pondicherry on his own responsibility. The letter was conveyed by the
Belle Poule. But before any answer could arrive, the whole situation was
changed. For, on the 18th, the brig Belier appeared. As soon as she was
                                       204
                            NEW    OUTBREAK         OF   WAR

 signalled it was obvious that she carried news of importance—she was
not expected to come out so soon; nor, as the escort for the transports
 to follow, was she expected to come alone. As soon as she dropped anchor,
her commander came on board the Marengo with dispatches for Decaen
 and Linois. She had sailed some ten days after the squadron and the
 dispatches were dated March 15th. The orders were made out in the
 expectation that the Belier would overtake Linois at the Cape. In view
 of the English preparations for war, the squadron was not to go to
Pondicherry but to the Isle of France, there to await further orders.
    Decaen was in a difficult position. With war clearly impending, he dared
not land at Pondicherry. Nor could he remain where he was. The English
were almost certain to hear the news of war, by overland mail, before he
 did. And their first move would be to annihilate Linois. It was essential
to go at once. But would Rainier allow him to go? There was always
the disquieting possibility that the English would treat his departure as
an act of war; as they might also treat the re-embarking of the troops landed
from the Belle Poule. They would suppose that the Belier brought news
of war, and act accordingly.
    Decaen asked Linois if it would be possible to avoid sacrificing the
troops on shore. The Admiral promptly refused to risk his ships in the
attempt. He suggested calling a council of war. Decaen derided this proposal
and ended the discussion by saying ‘Can you sail at midnight? If so, make
your arrangements for doing so.’ And so it was decided that the squadron
should slip away in the darkness, leaving Binot and his men to take over
the French settlements if there was peace, to capitulate in the event of war.
Binot had three months altogether at Pondicherry which he spent in making
contact with the Rajahs of Tanjore and Travancore and in establishing
an agent in Danish Tranquebar for intelligence purposes. He discovered
that French troops landed between Goa and Bombay would find Mahratta
allies. That possibility led to Decaen’s plan for invading India with four
thousand men in January 1805. It did not, however, settle the immediate
problem of escaping from Pondicherry.1
    Elaborate precautions were taken to ensure secrecy. Only three men
were present at the inception of the plan—Leger being the third—and no
fourth person was to be informed until the last moment. It was only after
sunset that Decaen and Linois rowed round the squadron and told the
chief officers of the change of plan. At 8.0 the order was given to hoist
in the boats quietly, clear for action, and heave the cables short. Soon
  1 J. Saintoyant. La colonisation Franpaise pendant la periode Napoleonienne (1799—1 ^1S);
p. 426, et seq.