

  Rainier was thoroughly annoyed. He did not like other people ordering
his ships about. He felt as if he was losing control of the situation. And it
would be months before he had the Albion and Sceptre under his orders.
The news of the raid on Bencoolen put him in no good mood for hearing
of such happenings. The disaster impending at the eastern end of the
Straits of Malacca was likely to be the ruin of his reputation. Nor did
there seem to him the slightest probability of the Albion and Sceptre doing
anything to avert the catastrophe. The news of the raid took two months
to reach Madras. It would probably take Ferrier five or six weeks to get
                                     219
                     WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

even as far as Penang. That left Linois with nearly four months at his
disposal in which to deal with the China fleet—which he knew now to
be unprotected and heading for the Straits of Malacca. He wrote that
‘before Captain Ferrier could reach the Streights of Singapore, the business
must have terminated one way or the other.’
  ‘They answered me with some chagrin’ was the Admiral’s comment on
the reply to his letter to Madras of March 14th. But before the reply came
he had somewhat changed his mind about the matter. He was joined by
the Concorde frigate, returned from the Straits of Malacca, on March 19th,
and Captain Wood was able to give him some information as to Ferrier’s
progress. On February 24th he had seen what he took to be two sail of
the line, to leeward of him, close together and standing to the eastward
under a press of sail. This was about fifty leagues north-west by west of
Penang. Rainier at first doubted whether these could have been the Albion
and Sceptre. For, to be as far east as that, they would have had to make
an impossibly quick passage, considering the time of year. But Wood,
however, reassured him on this point. The ^nds had been northerly for
the whole time of his voyage. Such a passage from Madras was, he thought,
quite practicable. This gave Rainier a ray of hope. If the China ships had
sailed very late, Ferrier might just be in time to be of some use. On
March 21 st he wrote to Lord William Bentinck that ‘This information has
almost induced me t<} retract the dissatisfaction I had expressed, in my
letter to your Lordship in Council of the 14th inst.’ And yet, in the end,
the Admiral’s first emotions were more or less justified. Despite an
exceptionally quick passage, the Albion and Sceptre did not arrive in time.




                                       220
                               CHAPTER XI


            The Battle of Pulo-Aur

T    "\he first information Admiral Linois obtained concerning the China
     fleet was from the officers of the Countess of Sutherland. They said
     that the country ships bound from Bengal to China had been
accompanied by two frigates. This was probably true. Bathurst’s two
frigates had certainly gone in that direction. The officers did not say—
indeed they may not have known—that this escort went no farther than
Penang. This intelligence left Linois free to suppose that these two frigates
might be returning with the convoy from China. He next heard, at Batavia,
that Rainier had been reinforced, his squadron now consisting of eight sail
of the line, besides frigates and armed Indiamen.