

Rainier wished to keep his squadron together. His attitude is apparent in
a letter he wrote to Lord Wellesley on nth January, 1804:
     . . . adverting to the strength of the combined Force of the Dutch and
     French Squadrons, I shall be extremely cautious of trusting single Frigates
     to Cruize at any distance from the Strength of the Squadron, on Stations
     where they may be liable to be attacked by a superior Force. . . .
                              (P.R.O. Ad. 1/175. Trident, Bombay Harbour.)

    This fear of allowing isolated frigates to run the risk of falling into
 Linois’s hands accounts for the fact that Bathurst was not ordered to go
 further south than Penang. It was also another factor in deciding Rainier
 not to send an escort for the China fleet. He would not send frigates while
 there was a possibility of their meeting the Marengo on the way. And he
 had only one ship of the line at his disposal; and that was the Lancaster (64).
 Now, apart from his other reasons for wishing to keep the Lancaster, it
 is obvious that the argument against exposing frigates to capture applied
 also, in a lesser degree, to a 64-gun ship. With every allowance for innate
 national superiority, the issue of a conflict between an English sixty-four
 and a French eighty-four would be, to say the least of it, doubtful. The
 risk was one which only certain conditions could justify.
    Lastly, it must be observed that Rainier had reason to hope that the
 China fleet could do without his help. It had sometimes been the practice,
 during the previous war, for a ship of the line to accompany one of the
 outward-bound convoys to China and then return with the whole fleet
to England. He had received no news from Canton for some time, and
he was not certain that this precaution had been neglected. It was at least
 possible that a ship or ships might have been sent to bring the China fleet
home, even without giving convoy to any portion of it on the outward
voyage. Some reinforcements were expected for the East Indies squadron.
It was quite possible that they would be sent out with orders to proceed
first to China and then see the tea ships past the Straits of Sunda. If, on
the other hand, no escort was sent, Rainier supposed that the Committee
of Supercargoes at Canton would have the intelligence to send the fleet back
by one of the eastward passages—Bali, say, or Lombok. There was little
risk in returning through these straits, for the enemy would not know
which to guard; and the route they were to take was always kept secret,
in any case, during a war—even the commanders being kept in ignorance
until after the homeward passage had commenced.
    Rainier’s opinion on these possibilities may be gathered from two of his
letters. The first, to Lord Wellesley, is dated nth January, 1804:
                                      216
                                NEW   OUTBREAK     OF   WAR

           . . . The protection of the Trade of the Company to, and from China, I
         apprehend will be provided for by the Admiralty, agreeable to the mode
         generally adopted during the late war; by sending a line of Battle Ship
         direct from England; and am disposed to think that one of the Ships of
         the Line seen off Madeira by the Tygress, was destined for that Service,
         if not two, and the other for St. Helena, or one for China and two for St.
         Helena. I did not conceive myself authorized to detail any part of the
         Squadron on that Service as things were circumstanced when the intelligence
         of the commencement of Hostilities was first received, or even on the first
         alarm of that event.
                                  (P.R.O. Adm. i/175. Trident, Bombay Harbour.)