

   The second, to Lord William Bentinck, is dated 21st March, 1804:
           . . . And with regard to the Company’s Homeward bound Ships, I never
         knew an instance during the last War, of their proceeding through the
         Streights of Sunda but with Convoy, even when the force of the enemy was
         so trifling in these Seas, and never through the Straits of Malacca but once,
         and then at my instance, having taken them under my Convoy at Macao.
         But when without Convoy they always had recourse to some one of the
         Eastern passages, as I trust they have now done, and the remaining Bombay
         Ships with them, part of the way. . . .
           ... No communication whatever has been made to me from England,
         or China, as to any expectation of Convoy from me, and for the last four
         years of the late War, a line of Battle ship had been constantly dispatched
         direct to China with the Convoy, to wait and conduct them Home again.. . .
                                         (P.R.O. Adm. 1/175. Trident, off Cochin.)

   The Admiral, it is evident, was worried about the China ships. He
confidently asserted they were safe, and hoped, while convincing Wellesley
and Bentinck, to convince himself. He failed. His arguments are sound
enough as far as they go. But he was crediting the supercargoes with an
intelligence of which they never seem to have shown any symptoms.
They were capable of assuming, as they apparently did assume, that the
Navy would ‘do something.’ To admit the entire validity of the Admiral’s
arguments would be to leave unexplained his own anxiety, which took
the form of querulous complaints that no one had told him any details
about the China fleet, and more especially its time of sailing—as if that
would have made any difference. The situation was that he was more or
less unable to do anything to protect the China ships, but would probably
be made the scapegoat if they came to grief. The calamity of their capture
would involve his ruin. His subsequent self-contradictions are the proof
of it.
                                           217
                       WAR      IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

  Curiously enough, Rainier was something of a hero at this time in the
eyes of the public in England. The rumour was that he had detained Linois’s
squadron at Pondicherry on his own responsibility; and no news had come,
in December 1803, of the French ships’ escape. On the 17th of that month
the following paragraph appeared in two newspapers, the True Briton
and Sun:
                           tv


       The detention of Linois’s Squadron becomes daily more credited . . .
    we think that little doubt ought to be entertained upon the fact. If such an
    event then has really taken place, how much is the country indebted to
    Admiral Rainier for the promptitude, spirit and energy of his conduct! for
    it is a fact, which, if it were not well known, would hardly be believed, that
    it was two months after the commencement of the War before any orders
    were dispatched from die Admiralty to the Naval Commandant in the
    Indian Seas . . . our Officers abroad have been left pretty much to their own
     discretion, from the criminal negligence in certain public departments. . . .