


  After the fall of the Addington administration, Lord St. Vincent
employed his leisure in prosecuting the proprietors of these newspapers
for libel. Their criticism was, as a fact, rather oddly misplaced. St. Vincent’s
crime was rather in the brutal haste with which he sent reinforcements
to sea. One at least of the two 74-gun ships dispatched to the East Indies
in June 1803 was ordered away in the midst of refitting, without enough
provisions, without money and without medical stores. Considering that
the war began only on May 16th, this reinforcement was fairly prompt.
The two ships were the Sceptre and Albion.
  The Sceptre was sent off at the end of June. The Albion, Captain Ferrier,
followed soon afterwards, with convoy; as did also the Grampus (50) and,
apparently, the Russel (74). They were all at Rio de Janeiro in the last week
of September 1803. There they found a Dutch squadron under Admiral
Hartsinck, consisting of the Terrible (60), Resistance (60), Pallas (36) and
Scipio (18). There was said to be another 68-gun ship belonging to the
squadron. These Dutch ships had slipped out of Ferrol on June 16th, just
as Sir Edward Pellew, captain of the Tonnant, came to blockade the port
in company with the Mars—a seventy-four like the Tonnant—and a sloop
called the Aigle. Finding the birds flown, he followed them for three weeks
without overtaking them; and at Rio de Janeiro, of course, they were
protected by the neutrality of the port.
  The English ships sailed from Rio de Janeiro on October 15th, but parted
company soon afterwards, the Russel and Grampus remaining to bring the
convoy along, the other two ships pushing on ahead. The Albion and
                                           218
                        NEW   OUTBREAK      OF   WAR

Sceptre came into Madras roads on 8th January, 1804, both their crews
being ‘extremely sickly and highly scorbutic.’ Rainier was then on the
other side of India, as we have seen, and he could not know for some
time of their arrival. They stayed off Madras for the next three weeks,
partly to await his orders. They were still there when the news came
of the raid on Bencoolen. Lord William Bentinck instantly sent for Captain
Ferrier and strongly urged him to take his two ships to the eastward.
They might yet arrive to save the China fleet. The chances were that they
would be too late, but there was a bare possibility of their being able to
effect a rescue. It seemed, at least, the only hope. Ferrier agreed to make
the attempt. He put to sea on February 8th and made sail for the Straits
of Malacca. He might have made a quicker passage to the Straits of Sunda,
but that would have put him hopelessly to leeward of where he wanted
to be. Bentinck saw him go and then sat down to make his apologies to
Admiral Rainier.
  An Indian Government could not, of course, give orders to a captain
in the Navy. But it could ‘requisition’; and an officer with no previous
orders to the contrary to plead, was taking a grave responsibility if he
neglected to comply with a requisition. Rainier’s wrath fell, therefore, on
Bentinck and his colleagues in the Madras Government. It was they who
were responsible rather than Ferrier.
                                                   Trident, Mangalore Road.
                                                          14th March, 1804.
     My Lord
             I must confess myself at a loss to express to your Lordship the
     deep and sensible regret impressed on my mind since I received the infor¬
    mation that His Majesty’s Ships Albion and Sceptre were detached to the
    Eastward, at the suggestion, and with the concurrence of your Lordships
     Government, without my Knowledge, on a distant Service so far from my
    reach. . . .
                           (To Lord William Bentinck. P.R.O. Adm. 1/175.)