

necessarily have been the Bombay ships, for there was a certain amount
 of refitting in Canton river. This much is clear, that three Indiamen were
rumoured to have been armed as 64-gun ships—a rumour which might
have had some slight basis of truth.
    It would be interesting, on this point, to know exactly what had been
done and discussed at Canton. It seems that, early in January 1804, the
commanders of the seventeen Indiamen met in council and resolved, by
a majority, to advise the supercargoes to dispatch the ships in a single
fleet via the Straits of Malacca. A minority advised sending the fleet home
in two divisions, one by the Straits of Allas or Lombok, the other (later)
by Dampier’s Straits. The supercargoes took the advice of the majority
but they were worried and produced at this time, oddly enough, a scheme
for arming Indiamen more heavily and increasing their crews by eighty or
a hundred men.1 It is an odd coincidence and just conceivable that a
rumour of a supposedly secret discussion might have represented as done
what was merely, in fact, proposed. It was, of course, quite impossible
to find any additional men at Canton (or, indeed, anywhere else). Guns
might have been procured there from any country ships which agreed to
spare them. Lacking, however, any specific evidence of this having been
arranged, and finding no mention of extra guns in any ship’s log, there
is a strong presumption against a laden Indiaman having any guns on her
lower deck.
    To set against this the French reported afterwards that several of the
English ships fired from two decks. Their reports varied, it is true, as to
the exact number of Indiamen with lower batteries; but that can hardly
serve to discredit the report altogether. It is admittedly absurd to state,
as does one French author, that the China ships, twenty-seven of them, each
mounted fifty guns with a crew of at least 150.2 3 The truth possibly is that
two or three of the 1,400-ton ships had cleared a little space on their lower
decks and mounted half a dozen real guns and perhaps as many dummies. A
precaution of this kind might easily have been taken at Canton as soon
as the danger was realized; so long, that is to say, as the guns were
procurable. If none came with the Bombay or country ships, on the other
hand, the whole story must probably be rejected. The commanders would
not have had much success looking for cannon in China.
   The China fleet sailed on 31st January, 1804, under the command of

  1 H. B. Morse. Chronicles of the East India Company trading to China, 1635-1834, Vol. II,
Oxford, 1926, pp. 408-9.
  3 C. F. Tombe. Voyages aux Indes Orientates, 1802-1806, Paris, 1810. Two vols. Vol. I,
p. 296.
                                           223
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

the senior captain, or Commodore, Nathaniel Dance. He was aged fifty-six
and chiefly noted for his persistent ill-luck in his private ventures. He was
a very resolute man in an unimaginative way. He had with him as a
passenger a naval lieutenant called Fowler, who was on his way home
after the wreck of the armed vessel he had been commanding, the Porpoise.
It was said afterwards that Dance received some instruction in tactics from
Fowler, which is likely enough, and that a plan of action was arranged
between them beforehand. It must be remembered that all commanders
of Indiamen were tolerably expert in performing ordinary fleet movements.
From constant sailing in convoy they knew how to obey the commoner
signals, even if they often did so in their own time. In making signals
and knowing what signals to make they were less proficient. They were
not much given to drilling when left to themselves.
  Commodore Dance had with him sixteen regular Indiamen of the
1,200-ton class, eleven country ships and the Ganges, a fast-sailing brig,
to be used for scouting and carrying orders. Two other vessels, a Portuguese
ship and the Rolla, Botany Bay ship, were to have been in company, but
failed to join the fleet when it sailed. There were, therefore, twenty-seven
ships and a brig. The fleet was off Macao on February 6th, and clear of
the land on the following day. Linois had sailed long before from Batavia,
on December 30th. With his squadron he had worked laboriously up the
Straits of Banca. It being the wrong time of year for that voyage, he had
a succession of calms and contrary winds, only arriving off Pulo-Auro
(Pulo-Aur was the French way of spelling it, Pulau Aur is what it is now
called) on January 28th. He was nevertheless well up to time. The Berceau
was sent to reconnoitre while the other ships watered. Then, on February 1st,
Linois sailed again and took up a position near the mouth of the Straits of
Malacca. Being astride the trade route, he had only to wait for his prey
to arrive.
  At this point it is interesting to observe that the north-east monsoon,
which had hindered the French Admiral’s progress up the Straits of Banca
(or Banka, as now spelt), was now serving his purpose very well. For all
the traffic was going one way, from east to west or from north to south;
that is, from Dance and towards Linois. Linois could therefore obtain plenty
of information about Dance, but Dance could obtain no news of Linois.
The French ships could straddle the path for weeks, secure in the know¬
ledge that there was no one to give their position away. Had Dance known
exactly where the French would be he could have gone another way. He
might, for instance, have made directly for the Straits of Sunda. But he
had no news and was well aware that he could expect none. Linois, on the
                                    224
                        THE   BATTLE    OF   PULO-AUR