

       Various have been the reports of a Force of the Enemy having been
    seen on the Coast of Guzerat, and near the Gulf of Kutch, a very late one
    (as pr. Copy of intelligence herewith enclosed) that was considerable enough
    to occasion an alarm in my own mind, that it might consist of the whole of
    Rear Admiral Linois’ Squadron. . . .

  Such a rumour as this originated, of course, in some ignorant native
                                     214
                         NEW    OUTBREAK       OF   WAR

mistaking L?Atalante for a ship of the line. The Admiral may not have
believed it for long, but he was careful to transmit the news to Bentinck.
Why? Simply because rumours of the same type were reaching him from
the other side of India. Here is an extract from his letter to Governor
North, of Ceylon, dated February 27th:
                                                        Trident, Cananore Road
    Honble Sir
            Your Excellency’s Secret Dispatch of the 18th Ultimo, reached
    me in Goa Road, via Bombay, the 18th instant.
       A report similar to that your Excellency mentions, of an expected attack by
    the combined Forces of France and Holland, was communicated to me by
    Lord. W. Bentinck, only differing in the object, as it was there given out
    to be the Coromandel Coast. I dont know a better situation the Squadron can
    occupy at present, than about this part of the Malabar Coast, to be as near
    at hand as possible, to afford your Excellency’s Government any assistance
    if needful, or eventually to oppose the effects of the intrigues of the Enemy
    with the Court of Portugal, with regard to Goa, and other settlements
    belonging to the Portuguese to the Northward as from intelligence suggested
    by the latest news papers to 21st October last, the crisis of that negociation,
    was daily expected to discover itself in terms inimical to the British interests,
    particularly in this Country. Your Excellency can forward a Dispatch to
    me in a few days by sending it to Anjango, whereas was the part of the
    Squadron now with me at Colombo, it would require a fortnight or three
    weeks to beat up to Goa. . . .

   Each Indian Government, it is clear, thought itself threatened.
   The next point to emphasize is that the Admiral’s ignorance extended
not only to the French whereabouts but to their strength. He had seen
Linois’s squadron, and he knew how formidable the Marengo was. What
he did not know was whether the French were to be reinforced, and
whether the Dutch intended to act with them. He had heard something
of a second and a third division due to arrive from Brest—with troops,
it was believed. These might have arrived for all he knew to the contrary.
He knew, again, something of the Dutch strength; but he did not know that
Dekker and Linois had failed to meet. Still less did he know that
it was the Dutch policy to avoid active co-operation with the French.
Failing such knowledge, he had to consider the possibility of being called
upon to face an allied squadron of a strength at least equal—and perhaps
superior—to his own.
   Knowing, then, that his strength was lessened through several ships
being in dock or in need of repair, and that an enemy of uncertain—but
possibly considerable—force was roaming at large in the Indian Ocean,
                                       215
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS