

       J’ai ete informe qu’il etait arrive d’Europe a L’Amiral Reinier deux
    vaisseaux de 74 et une fregate. Ainsi son escadre est composee de huit
    vaisseaux, un grand nombre de fregates, sans compter les vaisstaux de
    compagnie qu’ils peuvent avoir armes. Mais comme ils ont beaucoup de
    points a garder, leur forces doivent etre necessairment divisees. Cequi me
    laisse l’espoir de pouvoir leur faire beaucoup de mal en me portant suc-
    cessivement a de grandes distances dans les diverses parties des mers de
    l’Inde.1

  An American ship at Batavia, lately arrived from Canton, had brought
news that the Indiamen at Whampoa numbered seventeen, with six country
ships and a brig expected to sail in company, making twenty-four sail in all.
By this account, if it was true, there were no men-of-war in Canton river;
although the two frigates or some of the recently arrived ships of the line
might, of course, be on their way there. If no escort arrived, Linois knew
that he might expect to see twenty-four sail. If more appeared, he would
have to act with caution.
  Now, this question of numbers is the more important in view of the
difficulty of distinguishing between Indiamen and ships of war. Something
has already been said about this, but the point cannot be over-eipphasized.
It was not as if there was any line to be drawn between them. A 1,200-ton
                            1 Archives Nat. BB4 185.

                                       221
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

Indiaman could be turned into something like a frigate by leaving her hold
empty, adding a few guns and doubling her crew. An 8oo-ton Indiaman
could be made as formidable by the same process. A 1,400-ton Indiaman
could be turned into a 64-gun ship in the like manner, putting guns in her
lower-deck ports and trebling her crew. These were not mere technical
possibilities. Early in 1804 the Government of Bengal was actually equipping
two Indiamen for war, the Calcutta (40) and Lady Castlereagh (40). Linois
had heard something of this, but he could have no certainty that the
Indiamen so equipped would be stationed, as they were in fact stationed,
at the head of the Bay of Bengal. They might quite easily have been sent
eastwards. Then again, certain Indiamen had been bought into the Navy.
These only differed from armed Indiamen in being better manned. In
appearance, they can have differed very little from their former consorts.
Lastly, Linois had to remember that there were such things as men-of-war
disguised as Indiamen. The English frigates were disguised as often as not.
At least two of them were so disguised at that very time—the Sheerness
and the Caroline. A French privateer was actually taken by one of them
on February 4th. Another shared the same fate, through chasing what
appeared to be a merchant ship, on May 5th. The Concorde was playing
the same game in 1805. What is more, the mistake might be made even
where there was no effort at disguise. Even while Linois was at Batavia,
on December 21st, a French 12-gun privateer was crowding sail in reckless
pursuit of the two 74-gun ships Albion and Sceptre. She had even the
mortifying experience of catching them. The French Admiral, in short,
had a difficult problem. He had to do more than distinguish between
merchantmen and ships of war. There were merchantmen trying to look
like Indiamen. There were Indiamen trying to look like men-of-war. There
were Indiamen armed as men-of-war. There were men-of-war which had
once been Indiamen. There were men-of-war trying to look like Indiamen.
And, to complete the circle, there were men-of-war trying to look like
ordinary merchantmen.
   As it happened, there was, as we have seen, no escort with the China
fleet. Nor were any of the ships armed for war. They had sailed from
England before the war began. It seems, however, just possible that the
ships which had come out via Bombay had taken the opportunity to take
in some lower-deck guns from the arsenal, as ballast. There is no mention
of this, however, in the Earl Camden s log, and none but the Bombay
ships had the opportunity. China ships did not call at Calcutta, the only
other place where guns could be obtained. Perhaps as many as three ships
might have been able to muster a few lower-deck guns. They need not
                                   222
                            THE    BATTLE      OF   PULO-AUR