

contrary, had almost daily intelligence of Dance’s movements. He took
a Portuguese ship, a suspect, on February ist; an English brig from Macao
on the 2nd; another Portuguese, also with papers out of order, on the 3rd;
a Danish ship from Manila on the 6th; another Portuguese ship, which
was not detained, on the 7th; an English ship from Bombay on the nth.
Oddly enough, none of these gave him any better information as to the
numbers of the China fleet. He retained the impression that it numbered
about twenty-four sail, and from the Government of Batavia he received
a list of the sixteen Indiamen, correctly named. He learnt, of course, their
date of sailing. And he heard some tale, from a Portuguese ship, that three
of the Indiamen were fitted out as 64-gun ships—or so, at least, it was
afterwards said. It would be interesting to know whether these neutrals
had been primed with this story and indeed persuaded to reiterate the
number ‘twenty-four.’ Bribery was possible with vessels due to be at
Canton again in 1805.
   On the 14th, at daybreak, the French scouts, the Berceau and Aventurier     ,
made the signal for four, then for eight, and finally for twenty-eight sail.
There had been a gale during the night and dawn found the two French
frigates somewhat separated from the flagship. It took Linois some hours
to collect his forces. The convoy was sighted soon after 5.0 a.m., and he
had not formed his line of battle until 11.0. In the meanwhile, the sight
of five sail approaching to reconnoitre him was enough to make him come
into the wind. He was already a little anxious. He had expected to see
twenty-four ships, and here he was faced with twenty-seven and a brig.
He remembered what he had heard about there being two English frigates
somewhere to the eastward. He remembered the story of the three 64-gun
ships—the exact number in excess of what he expected. He decided to take
no risks. Sending the Berceau ahead, he approached the convoy cautiously.
Then he detached the Belle Poule to reconnoitre. She returned to report
at about 5.30, the Berceau coming in, presumably, at about the same time.
The captain of the Belle Poule reported that two of the enemy carried
lower-deck guns, and that fifteen or sixteen more were of the same size
but seemed to have no lower batteries. Four or five of the ships, he said,
appeared to be intended for the defence of the convoy; but he thought
that they could not be very strong. Halgan, of the Berceau, seems to have
reported in much the same strain. Neither he nor Bruilhac could perceive
any men-of-war among them. Linois was still doubtful. He decided to
delay his attack until the following morning, and signalled accordingly.
  The English were rather slow in sighting their opponents, possibly
because they were not expecting to see them. The Royal George made the
                                       225                                 H
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

signal for four strange sail at 8.0 a.m., and Dance thereupon signalled for
her and three other Indiamen—the Alfred, Bombay Castle and Hope—to
go ahead and reconnoitre. Lieutenant Fowler volunteered to go too, and
was sent after them in the Ganges brig. These vessels presently signalled
an enemy squadron consisting of one ship of the line, three frigates and
a brig. Dance then recalled them. This was at 1.0 p.m., and he was still
striving to put his forces, in order. He had not quite succeeded by 4.0 p.m.,
and indeed the country ships were not properly in position, covered by
the Indiamen, until after dark. Lieutenant Fowler, who stationed them,
returned with a few volunteers who did not wish to miss the battle.
  The China fleet lay to during the night, in line of battle, with the country
ships on the lee bow, that is, the side farthest from the enemy. Three ships,
detailed to play the part of the escort—probably the Earl Camden, Royal
George and Hope, the first being the Commodore’s ship—kept lights
burning all night. In the morning the same three ships hoisted blue ensigns,
as did also the Ganges brig. The rest apparently hoisted the red ensign.
And so the convoy offered battle.
  Linois spent the night in working to windward so as to have the weather
gage in the morning. One of his main objects in delaying the conflict was
to see what the convoy should try to do under cover of darkness. If the
ships tried to escape during the night, that would settle the question as
to whether there was an escort or not. It was with some disappointment
that he saw the convoy in line of battle next morning’. The determined
aspect of the enemy thoroughly disconcerted him. What he failed to realize
was that nobody but a fool, in Dance’s position, would have attempted
to run away—escort or no escort. Those heavily laden ‘tea wagons’ would
have been overtaken in a few hours. Incidentally, a less cautious tactician
might have drawn the opposite conclusion from Dance’s behaviour. Had
the apparent ships of the line been what their colours seemed to portend,
they would hardly have left Linois undisturbed during the night. They
would, in fact, have attacked him headlong the day before.