

    It may, however, be doubted whether the raid was altogether wise. It
advertised the presence of the raiders at a time when much depended upon
 secrecy. The results might have been—and nearly were—disastrous.
    Linois entered the Straits of Sunda on December ioth, and anchored
 in Batavia roads on the 12th. Mistaken at first for the enemy, his arrival
 spread consternation among the Dutch shipping. He reassured them by
firing a salute, and his men were soon busy watering and landing the
 troops. He told the Dutch authorities of the outbreak of war and asked
 for naval co-operation against the China fleet. But here he was disappointed,
 and that for several reasons To begin with, the Dutch squadron was not
 there. Rear-Admiral Dekker had on October 20th sailed for the Isle of
 France in order to discover whether war had begun; and, if so, to ask
 for reinforcements. He had in fact quitted Batavia a few days after Linois
 quitted Bourbon. Even more final, however, than the temporary absence
 of Dekker was the attitude of the Dutch officials. They greeted the French
without enthusiasm, were disposed to be critical of the troops Linois had
brought them, and seemed ill-disposed to co-operate in any way. Linois
managed to obtain some supplies from them, but the only vessel they would
allow to join in his enterprise was a small brig called L!Aventurier. They
evidently wished to keep out of the conflict as far as possible.
    Meanwhile, what was Admiral Rainier doing; and what, in particular,
had he done for the protection of the China ships? His first instinct, as
we have seen, was to protect what he considered to be the weak points
in the coastline of India—Goa, Bombay and Trincomalee. Being uncertain
as to whether Linois was likely to be joined by reinforcements from France,
he was anxious to keep his squadron together. Indeed, he half-apologized
to Wellesley for detaching Bathurst’s squadron, saying that the step was
justified by the Kandian war and the consequent necessity for having some
naval force on that side of India. As it was, however, he kept together his
three—or, counting the Centurion (50), his four—ships of the line. By
December he had been induced to allow the Centurion to go in chase of
                              1 Archives Nat. BB4 185.

                                        211
                     WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

L’Atalante, and had also been compelled to dock the Tremendous and
Trident. The Tremendous had -a weakened frame and decayed sternpost,
and ‘the most serious consequences would certainly have taken place had
she continued much longer afloat.’ The Trident was at first docked merely
to stop some leaks, but it was then found that, being iron-fastened, many
of her bolts were corroded. She appeared to be falling to pieces. After
pondering the problem 'for several seconds, Framjee Monakjee and
Jamsetjee Bomanjee recommended exactly what their remote predecessors
would have recommended to Marco Polo. They thought, on consideration,
that the best thing to do would be to give the ship an extra layer of wood
sheathing. Rainier agreed, and the Trident was thus put out of action for
some time to come. He was thus left with only one ship of the line at his
disposal, and that was the Lancaster (64).
   On 14th November, 1803, the exact disposition of the English squadron
was as follows: Trident and Tremendous in dock at Bombay; Lancaster,
Dedaigneuse, Albatross, San Fioren^o and Arrogant at Bombay, some in
need of refitting and docking, one or two available for watching Goa;
Dasher and Caroline on their way to Bombay; Centurion at Bombay, but
about to proceed to the westward; Wilhelmina on her way to Bombay
from Madras with provisions for the squadron and troops to land
at Point de Galle, Ceylon. Then there was the detachment under Bathurst;
the Terpsichore and Concorde on their way to Penang to meet the homeward-
bound country trade; the Sheerness and Rattlesnake to follow them; the
 Victor on convoy duty, gone to Bengal. The Caroline (36), was expected
from England, and had in fact arrived, but the Admiral did not know
where she was.
   The first mention of the China fleet was in a dispatch from Lord
Wellesley to Rainier, dated 17th September, 1803, immediately after the
news of the outbreak of war had reached Fort William. He states that the
renewal of hostilities does not, in his opinion, require any material change
in the distribution of the squadron, ‘excepting such arrangements as Your
Excellency may think fit to adopt for the protection of the Company’s
trade with China. . . .’ Rainier says nothing of any arrangement for this
purpose in his dispatch to the Admiralty of December 10th. After the
event, however, in his dispatch of 17th May, 1804, he claims that he had
provided for the protection of the China fleet by sending Bathurst to
Penang. He adds that Bathurst, with the Terpsichore and Concorde, would
have been there to protect the China ships had he not deviated from his
orders, which were ‘to wait till the whole Country Trade was arrived
from China.’ He had so deviated from his instructions in accordance with
                                       212
                       NEW    OUTBREAK     OF   WAR