

the wishes of the Governor-General, as expressed in a dispatch addressed
to Rainier at Madras, which Bathurst, as senior officer there, had opened.
    To grasp how lame these excuses are, it is only necessary to glance at
a chart. Penang is four hundred miles from the obvious place for inter¬
cepting the China fleet. What Bathurst had done, in fulfilment of the
Governor-General’s wishes, was to give escort to the first or earliest
division of the country ships, not waiting to collect the remainder. He
had not waited until the whole country trade was arrived. Had he done
so, he would have been there to protect the China fleet. But where would
he have been? At Penang. There was nothing in his orders to authorize
him to go any farther south than that. And what use would he have been
at Penang? True, he might have heard of the French squadron being at
Batavia and then gone to meet the China fleet as a stroke of initiative.
But it would have been a very bold stroke. For what if he met Linois
before he found the China fleet? Besides, an Admiral has no business to
 rely on strokes of initiative.
    The truth Rainier was trying to disguise was that he had done nothing
 for the protection of the China fleet. The object of Bathurst’s visit to
 Penang was simply to escort the country ships bound from China to India,
 in compliance with the petition of the Bombay shipowners of August 29th.
 This much is clear from the instructions given Bathurst on August 30th.
 He was not told to concern himself with the China fleet proper, the Indiamen
 carrying the tea from China to England. Therefore—apart from the chance
 of his acting on his own initiative—it made no difference to the China
 fleet whether he was at Penang or not; for it was highly improbable that
 the French would lie in wait anywhere near that settlement. And the
 question of his deviating from his orders—even if important in itself—
 had nothing whatever to do with the unprotected state of the company’s
 ships. To have been of the slightest use to them, Bathurst would have had
 to do more than deviate from his orders. He would have had to ignore
them.
   Rainier, then, did nothing to protect the China fleet, but was afterwards
ashamed of the fact; so ashamed that he pretended otherwise and put the
blame on a subordinate. Why did he do nothing? Wardroom gossip had
it that he was so addicted to eating mangoes that he refused to leave the
Malabar coast during the season for them, which begins in May; and that
he should have gone to meet the China fleet himself. Granting that his
taste for mangoes may have overridden every other consideration in his
mind, and that he might have lost his share of them by going eastwards
at that time of year (both of which suppositions seem a little improbable),
                                     213
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

it is still not quite clear why he could not send someone else. As a matter
of fact, his reputation as a mango-lover probably originated in his efforts
to make his seamen eat fruit as a preventive of scurvy.
    In finding a more tenable solution to the problem, one fact to bear in
mind is that he did not know that the China fleet was going to be attacked.
This may sound sufficiently obvious. Nevertheless, the knowledge of what
did happen is apt to blind us to the fact that other things might have
happened. Linois, we assume, was bound to make an attempt on the China
fleet. Because he did so, we think that it was the obvious thing to do. It
was not obvious to him, as we have seen. His first proposal was to send
the Marengo back to France; his second, to cruise on the Malabar coast.
It was only Decaen who induced him to go eastwards at all.
   In the nature of things, Rainier could have no information as to what
Linois was doing. On December ioth, it must be remembered, he was
writing to say that the intelligence of Linois’s arrival at the Mauritius had
been ‘fully authenticated.’ By that date, Linois was passing the Straits of
Sunda, leaving Bencoolen a smouldering ruin. That raid provided the
earliest news of his whereabouts. And when did Rainier hear of the raid ?
In February 1804. There was, in short, very little possibility of Rainier
receiving information in time for it to be of any use to him. His only hope
was to guess where the French were going and be there before them.
And yet the chances were heavily against his guessing aright. There were
plenty of rumours to misguide him. There was a report, which reached
England via Bordeaux in April, that ‘Admiral Linois had sailed for the
Cape of Good Hope, for the purpose of preventing its falling into the
hands of the English.’ This was only one, probably, of a dozen rumours
then being repeated. One of them—it reached England by way of
Philadelphia—happened to be correct. But how could Rainier know which
was correct?
   On 7th January, 1804, Rainier was writing to Lord William Bentinck,
the new governor at Fort St. George, to say that such ships as were
available were distributed between Dondra Head and the vicinity of Bombay.
The letter goes on—