

More by example than in obedience to signal the five leading Indiamen
tacked and, led by Timmins, went to succour the threatened rear. The
other ships cheered them as they passed. Seeing this movement, Linois
abandoned his original plan and steered to meet them. A brisk action
followed, lasting about forty minutes, in which the Marengo fired three
                   1 Log of the Earl Camden. India Office Library.
                                         227
                          WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN        SEAS

hundred and eighty rounds, receiving two shots through her foresail and
another through her fore-topsail, while two of her fore-topmast backstays
were shot away at the mast-head. The Royal George bore the brunt of the
fighting ‘and got as near the enemy as he would permit him,’1 but was well
supported by the Ganges and Earl Camden, the two ships astern of her.2 No
other ships were engaged. The first broadsides were not very effective on
either side, and Timmins was boldly trying to close the range when the
action ceased. It ceased becaused Linois at about i.o p.m. hauled his wind
and stood to the eastward under all sail. Faithful to the rules of war, Dance
signalled for a general chase, and the whole convoy made sail after the
retreating foe. After two hours of this ineffective pursuit, Dance made the
signal to tack. The Indiamen obeyed, some of them taking the opportunity
to fire their broadsides after the enemy; who was, of course, well out of
range. Dance then rallied his forces and shepherded them towards the
Straits of Malacca. ‘As long as we could distinguish the enemy, we perceived
him steering to the Eastward under a press of sail.’
   Dance was not without his vanity. As soon as he had recovered from
his astonishment, his swelling pride gave an unwarrantable colouring to
his version of the affair. He says nothing in his report about blue ensigns
and bluff. With an obvious and innocent motive, he rather preferred to
attribute his victory to hard fighting and esprit de corps. ‘We soon gave
them all they wanted,’ one can imagine the captains telling each other.
But this interpretation will not, of course, bear examination. As a battle
the affair was negligible. There was hardly any real fighting. None of the
ships engaged was appreciably damaged. There were no casualties on the
French side and but two on the English. Linois was not defeated. He was
deceived.
   Duclos, in his journal, makes out a case for the French Admiral by
adding up what he chooses to believe were the numbers of the English
guns and men, showing that the French were heavily outnumbered. Such
arithmetic is uncalled for. Of course they were outnumbered; much as
wolves might be outnumbered by sheep. The case would not be convincing
even if the statistics were correct, which, as a fact, they are not. Duclos
proves too much. Even granting his Indiamen their bristling artillery, no
one, not even Linois, thought them capable of withstanding the frigates,
let alone the Marengo. Linois was not unnerved by the contemplation of
some such list as Duclos presents. Had he been certain that the enemy was
no stronger than that, he would have continued the action for days. If he
    1 Dance’s report, quoted in Hardy's List of 1760-1812.
    1 The log of the Royal George states that ‘a hot action was kept up for half an hour.’
                                             228
                        THE   BATTLE     OF   PULO-AUR