

                                       232,
                        THE    BATTLE     OF   PULO-AUR

This ended the interview, but Decaen wrote to Linois that afternoon, again
expressing astonishment at his return. He pointed out that the squadron’s
stay was a burden on the colony, and ended by advising him to put to sea
within forty-eight hours. A cruise, he thought, in the vicinity of St. Helena
might lead to the capture of the convoy which had escaped at Pulo-Aur.
  In reply to Decaen’s letter, Linois refused to do anything of the kind.
His men, he said, wanted resting. Besides, as he explained in a second
interview, his station did not extend west of the Cape. And, for that matter,
his forces were insufficient. He proposed to send the Marengo to Europe,
for repairs. Decaen prevented this with some difficulty, and it was finally
agreed that the Berceau should return to France for fresh instructions. The
Captain-General and Admiral then began to compose their dispatches.
  Decaen wrote a fairly moderate dispatch to Deeres, asking only that the
naval forces should be subordinated to himself. He entrusted this to the
commander of the Berceau. Then he heard that Delarue, the captain of
the Marengo, was being sent home also—obviously carrying the Admiral’s
complaint against himself. So he wrote another letter, addressed to the
First Consul, containing an account of his quarrels with Linois; and to
this he added his own impression of what had happened at Pulo-Aur.
This he gave to his aide-de-camp, Lefebure, who also embarked in the
Berceau. Of the two messengers, Delarue carried the more violent missive.
Linois recommended that Decaen should be superseded by Magallan. In
defence of his own conduct, he estimated the strength of the enemy at
Pulo-Aur as eight 64-gun ships, twelve of twenty-six guns and one armed
brig. He could well, he said, distinguish the enemy ships but

         . . . Je ne pouvois connaitre sa force reele. Vingt de ces Batiments avaint
      l’apparence de vaisseau a deux Batteries; on crut avoir reconnu une fregate.
      Le Brick de Guerre avoit Pavilion Bleu ainsi que trois Vaisseaux; ceux ci
      faisoint partie de huit Vaux qui paroissoient plus partiedierement charges
      de la protection du Convoi. . . .
         Je pus remarquer pendant Taction que six a huit vaisseaux avoint fait
    v feux de leurs deux Batteries, il n’est pas douteux qu’ils n’objent en le desir
      d’etre attaque ce n’est qu’au moment de Tengagement qu’ils ont ouvert les
      sabords de cette Batterie.
          Cet engagement a dure 40 minutes. Les Boulets de Tennemi diriges
      generalement a degreer ne firent aux Batiments de la Division que de lege
     Dommage. Personne ne fut blesse.
        (Archives Nat. BB4 208. Linois to Deeres. Much of the rest of this dispatch
     is printed in James, Naval History, Vol. Ill, Appendices 20 and 21.)

   By landing at Pontavinda in Spain, Lefebure contrived to reach Paris
                                        233                                    H*
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS