

   The Dutch commander is definite here in his statement that his opponents
were out of range.1 He does not say that they were out of effective range
or just out of extreme range. He says that the only shot he fired failed to
carry half the distance. L’Aventurier mounted sixteen guns, possibly
8-pounders, but his carronades might have been larger and indeed pre¬
sumably were so as he used one to try the range. How far would his guns
carry? Fifteen hundred yards? Call it, however, a thousand yards. In that
case Linois engaged at upwards of two thousand yards. That would
  1 They were also out of range from the Berceau, according to Duclos; and Dance reported
that the enemy were ‘in a very close line.’

                                          230
                             THE    BATTLE       OF   PULO-AUR

sufficiently account for the little damage done. It would also explain why
he never made out whether Indiamen were firing from one deck or two.
   Dance entered the Straits of Malacca on the day after Linois’s retreat.
Thinking it not impossible that there might be ships of war at Penang,
he sent the Ganges brig on from Malacca to ask their protection. There
was none stationed there at this time, but on February 28th, in Lat. N. 4°3o',
the convoy fell in with the Albion and Sceptre, arriving about a fortnight
too late for the fray. Captain Ferrier was persuaded to escort the convoy
as far as St. Helena, where he arrived on June 9th. There were men-of-war
there to protect the China fleet on its voyage to England.1 It would be
interesting to speculate what might have been the result had the Albion
and Sceptre come via the Straits of Sunda.
    Having lost a prize worth eight millions sterling, Linois sailed for Batavia
by the Straits of Gaspar. On February 22nd he was joined by L’Atalante                     ,
just returned from her unsuccessful diplomatic visit to Muscat—where the
French agent was not allowed to land. Coming into Batavia harbour on
the 25th, Linois found a Dutch squadron composed of two 70-gun ships and
a frigate. This was part of the squadron Ferrier had seen at Rio de Janeiro,
and was under Vice-Admiral Hartsinck. At a more leisurely speed, Hartsinck
had passed the Straits of Malacca. Linois asked him to co-operate in a raid
on Balambangan, the English settlement in North Borneo, or else in a
second raid on Bencoolen. Hartsinck refused. He had been ordered to stay
near Java. Onrust had been raided during the last war and the Dutch
wanted their naval forces at hand to prevent future insult. Linois doubted
whether Hartsinck’s presence would be much protection. He argued that
Batavia was open to attack in any case, and that none of the other ports
was any safer, except Sourabaya, which could float nothing larger than
a frigate. These arguments had no effect. The Dutch Admiral had his orders.
   Meanwhile, all sorts of rumours were current in Batavia as to the cause
of Linois’s failing to take the China fleet. There had been an escort, it was
said, of two frigates; or, by another account, of six sail of the line. Each
Indiaman, the story went, had been armed with fifty guns and two hundred
men. The more sceptical, however, refused to believe this. Allowing the
fifty guns, they doubted whether the crews amounted to much more than
a hundred and fifty. Linois, it is clear, was not very communicative on the
subject. While at Batavia he took the opportunity to dispose of his two
recent prizes, the Henrietta and Admiral Rainier, the latter a brig, the former
an opium ship, with thirty-five chests of opium on board, worth 1.600