

was to be frightened by Indiamen, it might well be asked what he had
crossed the ocean for, if not expressly to look for them.
   What Linois actually feared was that some of the ships opposed to him
were men-of-war, or else Indiamen on the footing of 64-gun ships. At first
merely suspicious, he eventually became convinced that this was the case.
The first stage by which he reached this conclusion was attained on the 14th,
when twenty-eight sail were counted from the masthead. The second stage
was reached when Bruilhac reported that two of the English ships carried
guns on two decks. The third stage was gained as a result of the convoy’s
resolute aspect; and the fourth as a result of its confident behaviour in
the action. The final stage in the deception was reached when the English
actually pursued him for two hours. That tactical error was justified in its
psychological effect. Linois could not doubt the presence of an escort after
that. He broke off the action from fear of being surrounded. It may well
have been the pursuit which decided him not to renew it.
  Linois, in his report, did not commit himself to any particular view.
He merely insisted on the strength of the enemy.

        During the action the Admiral observed that seven or eight of the ships
     fired from both their decks. It was obvious that they wished to induce him
     to attack them, as they did not show their lower-deck guns until after the
     action began. . .

   ‘The superiority of his force was ascertained’—that is the burden of
Linois’s narrative. The lower-deck guns of at least four or five out of the
‘seven or eight’ ships credited with them were an illusion, due to the smoke
and to the excitement of battle; an illusion, moreover, which other French
officers did not share. Neither Bruilhac nor Halgan saw any such number
of two-deckers, and Van der Sande, commander of L’Aventurier, said
Linois and Delarue were alone in their belief. Motard afterwards declared
that he had seen men-of-war, but said nothing of it in the report he made
at the time. He, like the other officers, began to defend his chief only when
he was attacked. That his officers should later have tried to justify him
shows that Linois inspired a certain loyalty. Some attributed the fiasco
to Delarue’s cowardice and to his influence over the Admiral.
   The weakness of Linois’s case lies in his failure to ascertain his opponent’s
strength. The Belle Poule reported that two ships had lower-deck guns.
The Berceau reported that several were so armed, eventually making the
number eight. The Semillante reported that four Indiamen had two batteries
with an estimated number of sixty guns. Delarue of the Marengo said that
more than half of the Indiamen had two tiers and that each of the others
                                      229
                         WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

was at least equal to a frigate. Linois himself stated that six or eight of his
antagonists fired from their lower decks with guns which were not disclosed
until they opened fire. These estimates were made afterwards, but those
made at the time were conflicting enough. All depended on the question
of these lower-deck guns, for if there were none, the English were exactly
the opponents that Linois had been seeking and armed in exactly the way
he must have had reason to expect. Now, granted this measure of doubt,
the only remedy was to approach near enough to see. Linois tried to gain
the needed information by sending the Belle Poule to reconnoitre, but she
had evidently kept her distance and may have been partly foiled by the
ships which Dance had used for a similar reconnaissance. It remained,
therefore, to draw the enemy’s fire and see what it amounted to. The
disadvantage of this policy lay in the likelihood of being unable, through
damage, to break off an engagement with a force found to be superior.
Uneasily aware of this, Linois led his ships into battle. He fought, according
to Tombe ‘pendant plusiers heures a mi-portie de canon.’ But was that the
range? Was Linois really able to see his opponent?
   On this point the evidence of Captain Van der Sande of L' Aventurier is per¬
haps relevant. His brig was fourth in the line, just astern of the Belle Poule         :
        . . . L’ennemi arriva aussitot a 1’exception de 6 a 7 vaux dont 435 me
     parurent armee de deux Batteries, formant une Ligne les amures a tribord
     pour couvrir le reste de leur flotte. Je n’ai pas distingue parmi eux aucun
     vaisseau du Roi. . . .
                                      ,
        ... A midi f Le Marengo la Semillante et La Belle Poule s’engagaient
     avec deux Vaisseaux ennemis mais a une distance que les Corvettes ne
     furent pas prendre part au combat. Pour m’en convaincre je fis tire un coup
     de Carronade dont le Boulet n’atteint pas la moitie chemin de son but. . . .
     Le cannonade ayant duree a peu pres une demi heure, le Marengo, faisant
     force de voiles cessa son feu et diregea sa route a L’E.N.E. repetant de
     nouveaux le signal 133. . . .