

a jealousy of Hartsinck. That officer, under whose orders he was placed,
was junior to him, it seems, in years if not in service. Rather than serve
under him, Dekker returned home without orders. For this he was court-
martialled and condemned to death, though afterwards reprieved. His
departure weakened the Dutch squadron in numbers but hardly altered
its fighting potentialities. While the orders were that nothing should be
done, it scarcely mattered how many ships and men there were to do it.
Masterly inactivity was clearly the best policy and the promises to abandon
it made to Napoleon by the Grand Pensionary were never fulfilled. The
Dutch were unfortunate in being unable to maintain their virtual neutrality
in the East. Had they been able to do so, their colonies might have been
left undisturbed throughout the war.
   Admiral Rainier left the Malabar coast in the middle of May 1804,
accompanied by a part of his squadron. The remaining ships, including
those in dock or else about to enter dock, were directed to follow him
shortly. Some of them were appointed to convoy the country trade from
Bombay to Madras, where it was arranged that all the ships bound for
China should rendezvous. The flagship, Trident, was at Trincomalee on
May 30th and at Madras on June 7th.
   Meanwhile, information was being received which enabled the Admiral
to appreciate the situation more justly than had so far been possible. The
Dutch, it was becoming apparent, were playing a passive part in the war.
Some of their ships were evidently unfit for service, and the rest were
acting on the defensive. The French, too, had not been reinforced. This
intelligence convinced Rainier that Linois would confine himself to
commerce destruction. India, therefore, needed no particular defence
against invasion, and the squadron might presently assume an offensive
role. It was Wellesley, it seems, who now proposed that the Isle of France
should be blockaded, as during the last war. With the Cape in Dutch
hands, the blockade was difficult to organize, and Rainier was inclined at
first to object, but in the end he came round, with reservations, to the
Governor-General’s point of view. While the squadron was being collected,
however, and before any decision was reached on the policy of blockading
the French islands, the immediate problem was how to thwart the French
Admiral’s next move.
   In attempting to guess what the French plans were, Rainier was either
unimaginative or over-subtle. Or then, again, he may simply have been
misled by rumour. At any rate, he came to the conclusion that Linois was
likely to make a second attempt on the China fleet, with perhaps a second
visit to Bencoolen or else a raid on Padang. As far as one can judge, Linois
                                    238
                       CRUISE    OF   THE   ‘MARENGO*

seems to have been by no means incapable of repeating himself in this way.
And as he did once propose revisiting Bencoolen, Rainier’s supposition
was not as wild as might at first appear. He was mistaken, but it is easy
to understand why he should have been determined at all costs to avoid
any further anxiety on behalf of the China trade. He had come very near
 losing his reputation over the Pulo-Aur affair and was in no mood to
take any more risks such as he had then been forced to take.
    Having made his guess as to what Linois would do, Rainier made his
arrangements accordingly. While leaving ships to patrol various parts of
the coast of India, he sent, or planned to send, his strongest detachments
to the eastwards. Owing to the slowness of the Bombay ships, the country
vessels bound for China, over twenty in number, did not sail from Madras
until August 13 th. The escort consisted of the Caroline (36) and Grampus
(50), and Captain Page, who was in command of the convoy, was to take
the first sloop he came across and add her to the force. The Dasher was
thus picked up in the Straits of Malacca. At Penang the convoy was to be
joined by the three Indiamen from Bombay, escorted by the Dedaigneuse
(36). The four men-of-war were then to proceed to Macao with the
convoy and wait there until the China fleet should sail. Captain Page was
urged to look out for traces of the enemy ‘as ’tis suspected the French
Admiral may be gone that way.’ In case the Admiralty had sent no men-of-war
with the Indiamen sailing direct to China, a part of this escort was to convoy
the China fleet, if necessary, to England. As the Admiralty had sent a
64-gun ship, the total force at Macao was considerable.
    Captain Page was sent on a purely defensive errand. Other arrangements
were made for the pursuit of Linois should he appear in the China Seas.
First of all, Captain John Osborn was sent off with a strong detachment
to call at Bencoolen. He was given his orders on June 26th. They were to
the following effect: