

       If the bold front put on by the enemy in the daytime had been intended
    as a ruse to conceal his weakness, he would have profited by the darkness
    of the night to endeavour to conceal his escape; and in that case I should
    have taken advantage of his manoeuvres. But I soon became convinced that
    this security was not feigned; three of his ships constantly kept their lights
    up, and the fleet continued to lie-to, in order of battle, throughout the
    night....


  At 6.0 a.m. on the 16th, Linois was two or three miles to windward of
                                        226
                          THE    BATTLE      OF   PULO-AUR

the convoy. He hoisted French colours when the Indiamen hoisted English,
but did not at once accept the challenge. At 9.0 Commodore Dance tired
of waiting for him, and made sail, steering his course as if the French had
not been there. Linois then made sail and edged down towards him. His
delay in doing so was due to lack of wind in the early part of the day, and
he took the opportunity to call his captains together and explain to them
what he intended to do. His plan was to bear down on the enemy’s line,
threaten the centre and then cut off the rear. He was still in doubt as to
his opponent’s force, as the following extract from his report will show:

       At half-past seven, the enemy hoisted their colours; the squadron imme¬
    diately did the same. Though near enough to distinguish the vessels of
    the fleet, the Admiral could not ascertain their real force. Twenty of the
    vessels had the appearance of two-deckers. We thought we could dis¬
    tinguish a frigate. A brig of war and three ships had blue ensigns. The latter
    formed part of eight ships which seemed to be more particularly appointed
    for the protection of the convoy. . . .
       (Paraphrase of Linois’s report, as transmitted by Decaen to Bonaparte.)

  As Linois came down towards the English rear, meaning to cut off the
two sternmost ships, Commodore Dance was in some perplexity as to what
he should do. Fortunately, the Royal George and the Earl Camden were
close together, and the first-named ship was commanded by Captain John
Timmins.    Timmins, who had begun life in the Navy and was one of a
notable family in the Company’s service, was the genius on the English
side. It was he who first sighted Linois on the 14th. His ship was with the
detachment sent to reconnoitre. He afterwards did most of the fighting.
And it was he—and not Fowler, as it was rumoured in the Navy—who
now saved the situation. Dance stepped to the rail and shouted across to
him ‘What shall I do now?’ or words to that effect. Timmins shouted back
‘Tack in succession’; and suited the action to the words.

       At noon perceiving the enemy bear up to attack our rear, made the signal
    to the headmost ships and tacked towards them. At 12.10 the enemy opened
    their fire on the Royal George, Ganges and ourselves, which we all
    returned. . . .x