

before Delarue. But the English accounts of the action had reached Paris
even sooner; and these did more for Decaen than the superior speed of
his messenger. Bonaparte never saw Linois’s dispatches and he was furious
long before he read Decaen’s. He was particularly angry with the captain of
the Marengo for quitting his ship in the middle of a campaign, and with Linois
for sending him. He expressed his feelings in successive letters to Deeres.

       The conduct of Admiral Linois is miserable, and that of Captain Larue
    is worse. How can a captain lower himself to perform the duties of a mid¬
    shipman? How can a captain desert the ship he commands? Do not let
    Captain Larue remain longer than twenty-four hours in Paris. Tell him
    that I refuse to see him. Send him back to the Indies. Tell him to find some
    boat at Bayonne. I have entrusted a ship to him, for which he is responsible.
    Make it known at all the ports that I refuse to see him because he has quitted
    his ship.
       ... I have explained already what I think of Admiral Linois’s conduct.
    He has made the French flag the laughing-stock of the Universe. The very
    least one can say in criticism is that he has shown too much caution in handling
    his squadron. Fighting ships are not merchantmen. It is our honour I wish
    to guard—not just so many ships and so many men. . . . Rather than have
    had this happen, I would have preferred to lose three ships of the line.
       Write to Linois. Make him realise what he has done. Show him his
    mistake in thinking himself the only hope of the navy in the Indies. No man
    can call himself that while there is timber in our forests and men on our
    shores. With his rotten ship and five or six hundred men, it is absurd for
    him to reason as if he were Villars at Denain or the Archduke Charles on
    the Mur. ... You will tell him that he showed a lack of moral courage—
    the courage I value most in a leader—and so great a lack of it that I now think
    much less of his physical courage. Also tell him that I hope he will have
    done something for the honour of the flag before he returns to France.

   It was some time before the substance of these remarks reached the
Isle of France, in a form which Deeres had very greatly softened.

      Vous avez combattu pendant quarante minutes, selon votre rapport, et
    vous n’avez pas eu un homme blesse. D’un autre cote, celui de l’ennemi
    annonce qu’il n’a pas eu plus de trois hommes hors de combat. A cette
    maniere d’attaquer, la resistance ne pouvait qu’etre longue; en la faisant
    au contraire de tres pies, pas un de ces vaisseaux de la Compagnie (et il
    n’y en pas d’autres) n’eut soutenu votre feu pendant trente minutes.
      (Deeres to Linois, 7th October, 1804. Quoted in La Colonisation Franfaise
      pendant la periode Napoleonienne. J. Santoyant. Paris, 1931.)

But the effect was the reverse of what Bonaparte intended. The reproof
                                       234
                           THE BATTLE       OF PULO-AUR