

went a long way towards breaking Linois’s spirit. It entirely failed to spur
him to action.
   It is unlikely that Napoleon even saw the long report drawn up by
Delarue in defence of his chief—the Precis historique quoted above (see
page 232). It is a deplorable document. It described, however, a quarrel
between Decaen and Linois at the Cape, on the outward voyage, not
recorded elsewhere. In it Delarue praises Linois’s diplomacy at Batavia and
gives an account of the action at Pulo-Aur in which ‘nous avions a
combattre des forces au moins triples de notres,’ but in which Linois made
up in skill and sangfroid for his small strength and so cheated his opponents
of their expected triumph. He compares the strength of the two sides thus:1

            Division Franfaise                             Flotte Anglaise
     Le Marengo          74 canons                 Huit v’aux de 64             512
     La Belle Poule      42 canons [18 pdrs.]      Douze v’aux de 26            312
     La Semillante       36 canons [12 pdrs.]      Un Brick de Guerre            18
     Le Berceau          22 canons [8 pdrs.]
     L’ Aventurier        16 canons

     1 des Bouches a feu   190                                                  842


   He ends with a description, quoted earlier, of Decaen’s reception of
Linois, and of the ‘systeme de calomnie at de diffamation perfide organize
contre le Commandant des forces navales’ by Decaen’s toadying staff: a
collection of ignorant, self-seeking, malicious nonentities. Delarue could
show (if that were any use) that Linois was a gentleman and that Decaen
was not. But his report is chiefly valuable in revealing himself, and little,
as it happens, to his advantage.
   The rewards showered on the victors of Pulo-Aur are well known.
The Government, the Company and Lloyd’s were all in a generous mood.
The underwriters of Bombay were more especially munificent to Captain
Timmins. Silver vases and presentation swords were the order of the day.
And in the midst, as it were, of the buzz of congratulations, Admiral
Rainier’s voice was faintly to be heard making lame excuses for himself.
Fortunately for him, no one was disposed to be critical. His disingenuous ex¬
planations were allowed to pass. Excuses apart, Rainier seems to have heard
of the affair with mingled relief and astonishment. He referred to the ‘for¬
tunate escape made by the China fleet’ as a ‘most extraordinary circum¬
stance.’ An almost equally bewildered posterity can find no better word for it.
  1 Duclos, more moderate, allows Dance only 652 guns. He had, probably, between 500
and 550.
                                CHAPTER XII


               Cruise of the Marengo


    Admiral     Rainier    was still on the Malabar coast in April and
  ZA May 1804, and still impressed with the necessity for guarding India
1    j^_against a possible French invasion. He was at Goa on May 4th—
in the mango season, as his detractors doubtless remarked—when he wrote
to Governor Duncan at Bombay, doubting whether he could provide all
the convoys the merchants were petitioning for.