

                                                             (P.R.O. Adm. 1/175.)
         ... I conceive it will behove me to act with great caution in detaching
     Ships for Convoys, so as not to reduce the Squadron too much to allow it
     to face that of the Enemy, should they make a push this way, whose united
     force is from the best intelligence in my possession, superior to that of
     His Majesty’s under my Command, nor yet to appoint Convoys of too
     little strength to meet such Force as the Enemy may naturally be expected
     to have cruizing for them, and thereby expose the whole to capture; in which
     remark I have an eye particularly to the China Trade, who must necessarily
     navigate in a known direction, and unavoidably arrive at certain points.
     Other parts of the navigation of the Trade of His Majesty’s Subjects in
     these Seas nearer at hand will also require attention and protection from
     the Squadron, and particular inconvenience attending the Convoy to China
     is, that the Ships employed on that Service cannot be recalled, but must
     necessarily wait the return of the Season; from others they may be recalled
     in a certain time. . . .
         . . . Reflecting on the critical situation of Public affairs at Home, by the
     latest Accounts, in the threatened invasion daily expected to be attempted,
     there exists a strong probability the Company’s China Ships may not be
     able to get out of the Channel. . . .

   When he wrote the above, Rainier had not received sufficient information
to enable him to grasp the vital factor in the situation. He was still on the
defensive, as Decaen guessed he would be when he advised Linois to operate
to the eastwards. But a defensive strategy was no longer necessary. For the
whole situation was altered by the Dutch refusal to co-operate with the
                                        236
                     CRUISE    OF   THE    ‘MARENGO*

French. Rainier had before him a list of the allied ships opposed to him,
from which he could see that he was slightly outnumbered. There was the
Marengo. There was Vice-Admiral Dekker and his three sail of the line.
And there was Vice-Admiral Hartsinck, with two or perhaps three more.
Linois was presumably back at the Isle of France. But there was no news
of Dekker. And Hartsinck, last heard of at Rio de Janeiro, was also at
large. These facts were enough to suggest the need for caution. But if the
Dutch were committed to a policy of inaction, most of the forces opposed
to Rainier could be ruled out with a stroke of the pen. Dekker and Hartsinck
could be ignored and the English squadron could assume the offensive
against Linois. Rainier, however, knew nothing of this as yet. Nor did he
know of a curiously improbable event which was then taking place—an
event on a par with ‘the unaccountable timid retreat’ of Linois at Pulo-
Aur. This was the disappearance of Admiral Dekker.
  Dekker, it will be remembered, sailed from Batavia for the Isle of France
at about the same time as Linois sailed from the Isle of France for Batavia.
He had sailed, to be exact, on 25th October, 1803, arriving at Port Louis
on November 18th. His squadron consisted of the Pluto (74), Bato (74)
and Kortenaar (64). In a pleasantly seventeenth-century fashion, all three
ships had their lower-deck guns struck into the hold to make room for
cargo. It must, of course, be borne in mind that Dekker sailed before news
had come of the war. Indeed, it was chiefly in order to obtain news that
he went, as if the Batavian Government had a premonition that the brig
carrying the dispatches from Holland would be taken on the way, as in
fact she was. So that the cargoes of rice and sugar, to be disposed of at the
Isle of France, were not deliberately shipped in time of war; nor were they
the sole object of the voyage.
   Decaen was not very pleased to see the Dutch squadron. He thought
that Dekker might have been of some use to Linois, had he remained at
Batavia. Incidentally, it was not easy to find provisions for the Dutch
squadron so soon after refitting the French. Dekker thought himself fully
entitled to all that the island could supply, remembering that Admiral
Sercey had refitted at Batavia in 1798. To Decaen’s suggestion that he should
return to Java and join forces with Linois, Dekker replied that it was too
late, that he required stores which Port Louis was apparently unable to
furnish, and that he was going to the Cape: now once more, of course,
in Dutch hands. To the Cape he went, arriving fairly early in the year.
He was there in June. Then, sending his other two ships back to Batavia,
still miserably equipped and with crews reduced by sickness, he himself
returned to Holland in the Bato. His motive for quitting the station was
                                     237
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS