

  1 Ironically, the Earl Camden's lading included, 'it was said, some chests of tea intended
as a present for Napoleon. (Naval Chronicle, Vol. 12, p. 238.)

                                             23I
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

piastres each. The shabendar, or harbour-master, bought the cargoes of
both ships for 133,000 piastres; thus acquiring the opium which was probably
destined for him in any case. The Admiral had to be paid, of course, in specie.
  Linois sailed from Batavia on March 4th, three days after Hartsinck
sailed, apparently for Sourabaya. The French squadron then split up, the
Belle Poule and the Atalante being sent on a cruise, while the Marengo,
the Semillante and Berceau returned to the Isle of France. Here an important
decision was taken, for the separation of his force committed Linois to an
unambitious strategy for the immediate future.
  It was April 1st when Linois reached the Isle of France; Easter Day.
Decaen was at Mass when word came that the Rear-Admiral was in sight.
All impatience, he can hardly have stayed to the end. One of his staff came
on board as the flagship anchored. To this officer’s discreet inquiry as to
what had happened, Linois made no direct reply. He merely remarked that
the convoy had teeth. To this extent was Decaen prepared for the worst
when Linois presented himself on the following day.
  Decaen began the interview with some civility. In the presence of the
Admiral’s staff and his own, he made some attempt to hide his anger and
disappointment. But Linois’s story of failure and the calm assurance with
which he told it had the worst possible effect. When Decaen expressed
some surprise at the Admiral’s early return, he was told that the squadron
had done very well. A large sum had been made in prize-money and honour
had been done to the French flag. At this, Decaen’s annoyance fairly boiled
over. ‘Your profit is the last thing I take any interest in. As for the honour
of the flag, to that I attach rather more importance. But the Government
of the Republic will judge how far you have honoured its flag in the China
Seas.’ In his description of this interview Delarue describes Decaen’s
behaviour in terms which may be accurate:

    ... la contraction violente et les mouvemens decomposes de ce chef a son
    premier abord; son insultante reception, ses doutes et ses soupcons injurieux.
    . . . Je dois . . . attester a votre excellence que le Capn G1 de Caen a blesse,
    dans cette facheuse conjointure, la delicatesse des officiers present a cette
    conference, que sa conduite etrange a offert aux yeux de tous le spectacle
    vraiment scandaleux d’un homme qui foule aux pieds toute espece d’ordre
    et de convenance et qui sans egards, comme sans sujet et sans raison, se
    laisse entrainer a des mouvemens que font de phisionomie morale que la
    haine et l’envie et pour caractere que la fougue et la violence la plus bizarre
    et la plus extraordinaire.
       (Archives Nat. BB4 185. Precis historique de la Campagne de VInde.
    Capitaine de Vaisseau Delarue (Delarue de la Greardiere).)