

                                                   Trident, Madras Road
                                                     14th September, 1804
    My Lord
            In consequence of the Intelligence received yesterday from the
    Commander of the Portuguese Ship Gran Para, who was on board the
    French Admiral the 8th instant ... I purpose proceeding as expeditiously
    as possible to the Southward, as the Station he appeared to be cruizing in
                                    242
                       CRUISE     OF   THE   ‘MARENGO*

    borders nearly on the Track of the outward bound ships; whether I shall
    be able to beat round the Basses is extremely doubtful, as it is whether the
    French Admiral will be able to preserve his station to windward of them,
    the consequence of his getting to leeward from the effects of the Winds
    and Currents, or of chasing, will leave him no option but that of facing me,
    if I am fortunate enough to reach the Basses in time, or steer to the Eastward
    out of my way, probably, of returning to the Mauritius.
        I have no other Ship to take with me but the Albion, the lower yard of
    the Sceptre being found in a State not fit for Service, and the new one will
    not be ready in less than eight days. When it is finished that Ship will follow
    me, and I expect to fall in with the St. Forego.
       I am in hopes the Centurion will by the time the Sceptre leaves the Road
    be not far off (with Your Ship the Princess Charlotte from Vizagapatam)
    who will be ordered to remain for the protection of the Road, and eventually
    to proceed with the Homeward bound Convoy, and to see them well on their
    way, at least to the distance of the French Islands.
                                    I have the Honor to be
                                         My Lord
                                              Your Lordships
                                                   most obedient
    (To Lord W. Bentinck)                              Humble Servant,
    (P.R.O. Adm. 1/175.)                                     Peter Rainier.

   After thus informing the Governor of Madras of what he intended to
do, the Admiral put to sea. He fell in with the San Fioren^o, cruising on
the trade route eastward of Madras, and sent her to fetch the Sheerness
from Pondicherry. Both these were to rejoin him at Trincomalee. Orders
were sent to the Rattlesnake to do the same. Then, sailing on the 15th,
the Trident and Albion arrived in a day or two on the spot where Linois
had been seen. After cruising for a few days without seeing anything of
the enemy, Rainier gave it up. He sailed once more for Madras.
   Rainier’s failure to fall in with the French ships off Ceylon was not
unnatural. They were not there. On parting from the Portuguese ship,
Linois made straight for the coast, sighting the Madras mountains on the
14th. He missed Rainier by a hairbreadth, being off Madras on the very
day that the English ships put to sea. He seems to have crossed their wake,
just out of sight. An hour or two’s difference would have brought on a
collision between the two Admirals. Indeed, they would have met in any
case, had Rainier been bound to the southward. As it was, Rainier steered
eastwards in order to pick up the San Fioren^o, which greatly reduced the
chances of their meeting. And once they had missed each other, the chance
was gone; for they were bound in opposite directions.
                                       243
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS