

                                                   By Peter Rainier Esq.,
                                                   Vice-Admiral of the White,
    SECRET                                         and Commander in Chief of
                                                   His Majesty’s Ships and
                                                   Vessels in the East Indies
       Whereas information has been received that the French Admiral was
    ready for Sea with two Frigates on the 8th ultimo at the Mauritius; and
    tho’ industriously given out to be about to sail for Europe, was generally
    supposed to be going on a cruise against our Trade in these Seas, or probably
    to attack the Settlement of Bencoolon.
       You are hereby required and directed. . . .
                                      239
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

   The gist of the instructions were that Osborn was to go to Bencoolen
with his ship, Tremendous (74), Lancaster (64), Phaeton (38) and
Terpsichore (32). If he found no trace of the French squadron in that
direction, he was to proceed to the Isle of France and blockade it as long
as his victuals lasted. The orders included directions for retaking the
settlement at Bencoolen, should he find it in French hands. By a subsequent
order, dated July 3rd, Osborn was empowered to add the Albion and
Sceptre to his force, supposing he fell in with them and supposing they
were fit for service after their voyage to St. Helena.
   Osborn sailed from Trincomalee on July 8th. Rainier had heard that
Linois had sailed from the Isle of France on June 22nd, and he calculated
that it would take the French ships from four to six weeks to reach
Bencoolen or the Straits of Sunda. Osborn would be there in ten days
or a fortnight. Hunter and hunted would therefore arrive simultaneously.
It was excellently timed.
   No sooner had Captain Page departed than Rainier was wondering
whether he had been wise to detach him with so small a force. ‘I have
been somewhat uneasy almost ever since you sailed,’ he wrote, ‘from a
suggestion of my own fears, that Mons’r Linois may have stationed himself
& Squadron to Cruise for you. . . So, to be on the safe side, Rainier sent
the Russel (74) and the Victor sloop to Penang. The orders were that
these vessels should reinforce Page’s detachment in case of need. If, on
the other hand, the convoy had passed safely, and if there was no news
of the French, they were to cruise until further orders from Achin Road
to the Nicobars.
   To make assurances doubly sure, and to complete this concentration
to the eastwards, the Admiral resolved to proceed there himself in October.
He would take the Trident (64), the Centurion (50) and the San Fioren^o (36),
sail with them to the Straits of Malacca, collect the Russel (if she was
there), and appear in the vicinity of Pulo-Aur between December and
March.
   The plan was to treat the Malay Archipelago as a sort of trap. The bait
was the China fleet, due to arrive at the eastern end of the Straits of Malacca
at a certain time of year. Should Linois feel tempted, he would enter the
trap by the Straits of Sunda. Osborn, close at his heels, would close the
exit. Still followed by Osborn, the raider would gradually approach Pulo-
Aur. Then, as the bait came within reach, the trap would close with a
snap. Page would disclose himself to the eastward, Osborn to the southward,
and the Straits of Malacca would suddenly disgorge Admiral Rainier
himself. The unfortunate Linois would be overpowered by as many as
                                       240
                       CRUISE    OF   THE   ‘MARENGO*