

nephews with them on a foreign station, and it often happened that the son
or nephew returned home when the Admiral did. It was a type of coincidence
the Admiralty usually overlooked. In this case, however, the younger Rainier
returned again to India. He may too have had a taste for mangoes. He
certainly resembled his uncle in another respect—namely, that he made
a fortune there.
   Rainier’s successor in the command, as already noted, was Sir Edward
Pellew, Bart., Rear-Admiral of the White. He had been one of the most
noted frigate captains of his day. Then, latterly, he had been dragged
unwillingly into serving with the Channel fleet. His promotion to flag-rank
represented his escape from blockade duty. With promotion had come the
appointment to the East Indies station. This was given him, at his own
request, as a reward for political services to the Addington administration.
His title, however, had this flaw in it, that his claim to the gratitude of the
outgoing ministry was no merit in the eyes of the former opposition, now
in power. Scarcely had he been appointed than his friends went out of
office. It was in doubt for some time whether the appointment would not
be cancelled. As a result, apparently, of a bargain by which he surrendered
his seat in Parliament to one of Pitt’s followers, he was ultimately, though
grudgingly, confirmed in his command. He left England in the knowledge
that his tenure was insecure, and would have felt little surprise to hear
that his recall was decided upon on the eve of his sailing.
   Pellew’s flag was hoisted in the Culloden (74) on 4th July, 1804, at
Spithead. He sailed on the 10th, being joined off Culver Cliff by nine of
the ten East Indiamen he was to convoy. He reached Madeira on the 23rd,
leaving again three days later. In passing the Isle of Amsterdam on
October nth he learnt that a convoy of nine sail with a ship of the line
had passed the day before. These were the Indiamen bound for China
direct under the escort of the Athenienne (64). Pellew’s convoy consisted
of the last ships of the season, bound for Madras and Bengal and crowded
with the men of the 17th Regiment. To reach Bengal at that time of year,
during the north-east monsoon, it was necessary to keep well over on the
east side of the bay, passing probably through the Ten Degrees Passage
and then through the Passage of the Andamans. The ships for Madras
could not go there until the change of the monsoon and were to have
waited at Penang for that to happen—that being also the port for which
Pellew was bound—but Pellew heard some news which induced him to
alter his plans. Meeting a ship from Madras off the coast of Sumatra, he
learnt that the army had taken the field against Holkar, the Mahratta
chief. Thinking that the 17th Regiment might be needed, he sent
                                        252
                           PELLEW AND       LINOIS

the Madras ships along to Bengal with the rest of the convoy, parting
with the whole off Cape Negrais on November 20th. Then he turned
south and went down the Straits of Malacca in the hope of finding Rainier
at Penang.
   Pellew was not unreasonable in expecting to fall in with Rainier at
Penang at that time of year. Rainier had himself expected to be there.
But chasing after Linois had unduly delayed his departure from the coast,
delayed it indeed until a dangerous season, long after the proper time for
sailing. Rainier had long since put to sea, but he was escorting the homeward
bound convoy for the first part of its voyage, and was not, therefore,
going to Penang by the shortest route. Sir Edward arrived there before
him, was disappointed, and instantly set sail for Madras, which he reached
on December 10th. There he found a letter, left in the hand of the naval
officer, in which Admiral Rainier gave him a rendezvous at Penang, or
rather off Pulo-Aur. The two Admirals were off Achin Head at the same
time and had only failed to see each other owing to the thick and squally
weather usually met with at that season. Rather exasperated, Pellew sailed
once more for the Straits of Malacca. In a letter to a friend in England
Pellew wrote at the time:
       We have reached our destination without accident and have felt the
    glowing heat of a Thermometer at 88°, how I shall hold out against such
    melting I know not, hitherto my health continues and I think it will if I am
    prudent, and when I tell you that I still continue flannel next my skin and
    have not yet tasted Curry or any made dish you will give me credit for my
    intention of being so. I cannot say I am much struck with the Country,
    and am often very angry with myself for being instrumental to my leaving
    England and think I did not act wisely; however, here I am and will do the
    best I can until I am relieved and I hope that will be according to the usual
    rotation, for I dare say I shall have been fully gratified before that—dont
    however mistake me and think I mean money. I declare to you that is not
    my object. I long to deserve well of my country and I came in the hope of
    giving a blow to the inveterate and restless Enemies of Mankind... .x