

    On the evening of the 16th, the French squadron was off Masulipatam,
where a native coasting vessel was found. From this craft the information
was obtained that the Princess Charlotte Indiaman, referred to in Rainier’s
letter to Bentinck, had left that road a few days before for Vizagapatam,
under convoy of the troopship JVilhelmina.
   There were, as a matter of fact, three Indiamen then on the coast,
destined to proceed to England with piece goods and cinnamon. But two
of them, the Bengal and Asia, had first to ship saltpetre and sugar at
Calcutta, to serve as deadweight to the finer goods. There they accordingly
went. At the last moment, the Admiral ordered the JVilhelmina to escort
them, sending the Centurion to protect the Princess Charlotte. Thus it came
about that Linois found a 50-gun ship where his information led him to
expect a vessel ‘en flute,’ not much more formidable than a sloop.
   Linois passed Coringa during the night of the 16th, which was fortunate.
In daylight he would probably have made out the Albatross sloop, at that
time being docked there for repairs under the superintending care of
Mr. Roebuck. Then, on the 18th, he sighted the Centurion and other vessels
at anchor off Vizagapatam. In Rainier’s words, ‘Mons’r Linois dash’d into
that Road in the forenoon of the 18th, and commenced a furious attack
with the Marengo and Frigates on His Majesty’s Ship the Centurion.’ The
Princess Charlotte hauled down her colours without firing a shot. A country
ship, the Barnaby, ran herself on shore. The Centurion was thus left free
to protect herself as best she could. She was normally commanded by
John Sprat Rainier, but he, being dangerously ill, had been temporarily
replaced by Captain James Lind. He in turn was ashore and the Centurion
was at first commanded in this action by Lieutenant Phillips. After three
hours of confused fighting, in which the English ship took advantage of
the shoal water to keep the Marengo at a distance of about a mile, the
French ships retreated. Unaware of the extent to which the Bay of Bengal
was denuded of naval protection, Linois was afraid that an English squadron
might arrive at any minute. He launched his attack on the Centurion in the
belief that she would soon be overpowered. When he found that this was
not the least likely, and that his own sails and rigging were beginning to
suffer, he discontinued the action. The Marengo might have sunk the
Centurion outright had they been near each other, but the former ship could
not close the range to less than a mile. Fighting of that kind might continue
all day without decisive injury to either side. To have sunk or taken an
English man-of-war—‘a two-decker’ as Duclos described her with more
accuracy than candour—would have done something for Linois’s reputation.
But such a success could be bought too dearly. Dismasting on that hostile
                                    244
                           CRUISE    OF    THE   ‘MARENGO’

coast might have serious consequences. As it was, the Marengo came very
near to losing her fore topmast. Only the heel was struck, as it happened,
but two or three more such lucky hits would have crippled her. The French
Admiral decided to haul off before it was too late. Contenting himself with
the captured Indiaman, he left the Centurion in possession of the field.1
   After this skirmish, Linois stood away to the northward, his prize
disappearing, on the other hand, in a south-easterly direction. This was -
merely a ruse, for Linois altered his course immediately afterwards, rejoining
the prize and steering for the Isle of France. He thus avoided his last
pursuers. These were the men-of-war Sceptre and Sheerness. The Sceptre                 ,
it will be remembered, was left at Madras when Rainier sailed, with orders
to follow as soon as her new yard could be finished and sent off to her.
This would be in about eight days, it was expected. When she was almost
ready to sail, on the 23rd, news came of Linois having been seen off
Masulipatam a week before, heading northwards. The captain of the
Sceptre,    Sir   Archibald     Dickson,    then   very   properly    disobeyed     his
instructions. Putting to sea, and collecting the Sheerness—also somewhat
slow in joining in the wild-goose chase to the southward—he made straight
for the Sandheads. He knew, as Linois did not know, that there was not
a single man-of-war at the head of the Bay of Bengal, and that it was in
the power of the French squadron to play havoc among the shipping there.
He was, of course, too late to intercept Linois by steering that course. He
started five days after the Centurion s action. Hearing nothing of Linois
at the Sandheads, he returned despondently to Madras. It was not until
then that he heard of the affair at Vizagapatam. Rainier was already there.
He had heard the news off Negapatam on the 29th, when on his way to
Madras, where he arrived on October 2nd. ‘I learned to my great regret
that I had erred in my conjecture of the French Admiral’s designs,’ he
wrote to the Admiralty. ‘How unfortunate I was in my conjecture,’ he
wrote to Lord Wellesley, ‘your Excellency has been some time since fully
apprised of....’ Rainier was in a dejected mood. The war was not developing
as planned.
   Those with the longest experience in such matters tell us that a single
mosquito, once inside the net intended to exclude him, will effectually
prevent his victim from gaining any sleep for the remainder of the night.
When the would-be sleeper first hears that high-pitched buzzing close to
his ear, he will—so they say—make such violent gestures as may seem
most likely to dispose of his enemy. On composing himself, however, for
  1 Thomas Colby was serving in the Centurion and his journal describes this action. See
Mariner’s Mirror, Vol. 13, p. 259.