

           of Wales Island and Calcutta. On the 27th inst. I dispatched His
           Majesty’s Ship St. Fioren{o to cruise off Point Negrais and the Sand
           Heads.
              When I part with Convoy, [I] purpose making the best of my way
           to Achin and the entrance of the Streights of Malacca where I expect
           to be joined by the Russel, and if I find necessary, to proceed to the
           northward as far as Negrais, taking care to be between the Eastern
          entrance of the Streights of Malacca & Pulo Auro by the time the
           Trade from China may be expected thereabouts, as ’tis highly probable
           the combined force of the French and Dutch may be induced to make
          another effort to intercept them.
              For the protection of the Malabar Coast, I have appointed the
           Concorde and Fox, the latter but lately returned from the Red Sea,
          the former I conclude to have arrived there by this time, after having
          seen the Homeward bound Ships into the S.E. Trade from Bombay;
          the Captain of the Fox has my directions to defer docking till the
          Senior Officer thinks proper, as she will require a great repair, and
          her Services in the mean time may be wanted to protect the Trade
          till more of His Majesty’s Ships arrive on that Coast.
              Captain Osborn having the option to repair to either Coast
          according to the Season when he leaves his Station off the Mauritius,
          I conclude he will make choice of that of Malabar and I have sent
          orders to meet him on his arrival at Bombay to act for the good of
          His Majesty’s Service. . . . According to the letter I have received
          from him dated the 14th ultimo off Port Louis, he might be at Bombay
          in the Course of the first ten days in December at farthest. . . .
              Please to inform their Lordships that I have thought proper to
          order Captain Rainier to proceed all the way to Spithead with the
          Convoy, as the Centurion will soon require an expensive repair if
          detained any longer in this Country; in her present state she may be
          converted by the Navy Board to some usefull inferior establishment,
          and I know of no other means of effectively getting rid of the White
          Ants on board her, who have at times discovered themselves by serious
          depradations in her timbers aloft. And there is no reason to suppose
          they have been exterminated. . . .
                                 (Rainier to Admiralty. P.R.O. Adm. 1 /174.)

   This dispatch is quoted in full, or nearly so, because it gives, as well
as any paraphrase could do, the situation of the East Indies squadron at
the period when Rainier’s term of office was coming to an end. His
successor was already on the scene, although Rainier did not know of it.
One symptom of his approaching departure was the damage done by the
white ants on board the Centurion. Admirals liked to have their sons or
                                     251
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS