

                                           245
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

sleep, the same noise will again be heard, calling for renewed exertions.
And so, they say, the whole night will pass. In the morning, they conclude,
the insect will be found to have won. It is by means of some such simile
that a war of commerce destruction can be understood. Linois knew, as
he said, that the forces opposed to him would of necessity be scattered;
and that he could deceive them by appearing successively at widely
different points. This is, presumably, the mosquito’s idea of strategy. The
effect, at any rate, is the same. With the first news of the raider’s approach,
the naval defenders swung their forces hither and thither, making wild
grabs and wilder guesses at his supposed position. First there is a swift
clutching movement towards Pulo-Aur, then a snatch in the direction
of Ceylon, and lastly a feeble slap on the brow at Calcutta. In the meanwhile
the sprawling English possessions have been stung in quite a different
place. Dawn comes to find the damage done. An Indiaman has been taken
at Vizagapatam.
  It would be easy to censure Rainier for predicting so ill what his opponent
would do; and indeed he may at times have shown too little imagination.
At the same time, it is evident that he had to make some sort of guess.
And if his guesses were unfortunate, it does not appear that anyone else
had proved a better prophet. In one of his letters he begins a paragraph
with the words, ‘As I may without presumption pretend to as much
knowledge of the navigation in these Seas as most people. . . .’: and it is
quite possible that he knew the ground better than any other man alive.
He had served under Hughes just as Linois had served under Suffren. In
correspondence with the Admiralty he would casually refer their Lordships
to his memorandum submitted in 1783. There was no disputing with him
about the monsoons or the currents. And yet, despite his knowledge, the
enemy had made his escape. In a game of hide-and-seek it sometimes
happens that imagination is more needed than experience.
  Curiously enough, although they operated in the same waters, Linois
never fell in with the Belle Poule. He was aware of her presence through
falling in with one of her prizes on October 14th, a country ship she had
taken off Madras called the Pearl. But they did not meet until they regained
the Isle of France. His failing to come across the Psyche, privateer, was
more understandable. Her cruise ended early in the year, in April, when
she fought an indecisive action with the JVilhelmina and returned in a
damaged condition to the Isle of France.
   Before Linois himself had finally reached safety, he had to avoid a last
danger in the shape of Osborn’s small squadron off the Isle of France
itself. Osborn’s orders had been to proceed to that station if there was
                                        246
                      CRUISE    OF   THE   ‘MARENGO’