

sixteen men-of-war, and so his career would come to an abrupt conclusion.
Of course, things do not happen quite like that in real life. But it would
certainly be odd if the French Admiral could roam the China Seas for
long without encountering one of the squadrons sent in search of him.
Sooner or later, the end would come.
   Just as Rainier was putting the finishing touches to this admirable
scheme—oiling the mechanism, as it were, and pausing to admire the
effect—the news came that the Marengo had been seen, with two frigates,
about forty leagues due east from Dondra Head. The effect of this bomb¬
shell may be imagined. Instead of going to the China Seas, Linois had
placed himself in the track of the trade outbound from the Bay of Bengal.
Complete as Rainier’s arrangements were, they were based on a mere
guess. And it now proved that the guess was utterly and completely wrong.
   After more than two months of refitting and wrangling with Decaen,
Linois had sailed again on 20th June, 1804. He had with him the Marengo        ,
Semillante and Atalante. His plan was to cruise on the west side of India
and intercept the trade with the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. He expected
to be joined in the Gulf of Oman by the Belle Poule and by the Psyche          ,
a 32-gun privateer which Decaen later commissioned as a national frigate.
Both these ships were then at sea. Linois sailed, first of all, to St. Augustine
Bay, Madagascar, where he arrived on July 6th. Sailing again on the 18th,
he next called at the Comoro Islands. From there, he should, by the original
plan, have gone on to the Maldives. But some information he had received,
perhaps from Portuguese vessels out of Mozambique, and perhaps relative
to the disposition of the English squadron, caused him to change his mind.
Passing instead through the Eight Degrees Channel, without calling at
the Maldives, and then passing to the south of Ceylon, he made for the
Coromandel coast. On the way, on August 19th, he took two Bengal rice
ships, English vessels bound for Bombay, one having just called at Madras.
Then, having gone well to the eastward of Ceylon, he fell in with a couple
of Portuguese ships, the first on September 7th and the second on the
following day. This second ship was the Gran Para, of Lisbon, last from
Rio de Janeiro. After her captain had been called on board the Marengo, the
ship was released. She at once put into Madras, and it was from her that
Admiral Rainier heard of the Marengo’s whereabouts.
  Linois parted from the Gran Para on September 8th, in Lat. 8° 30' N.,
and Long. 82° E., and Rainier heard the news on the 13 th. He was
in an awkward position. Had Linois appeared in that latitude a year
before, he would have found six men-of-war posted to protect Trincomalee
and three more off Dondra Head. But now that the Kandian war had
                                      241
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

somewhat subsided, and fears abated of an attempt on Ceylon or on the
mainland, there was no force near at hand. All the strength of the squadron
had been dispatched to the eastward. Fortunately, however, not all the
ships destined for that service had actually sailed. The Albion and Sceptre  ,
returning from St. Helena, had not fallen in with Captain Osborn. They
were therefore at Madras, though hardly in a state for any immediate
service. The Admiral himself, though about to proceed to the eastward,
was still on the coast. With his flagship, or somewhere within reach, there
were two or three ships which he had intended to take with him, as well
as those to be left for the protection of trade. The San Fioren^o and
Rattlesnake were to hand, as also the troopships Sheerness and JVilhelmina   ,
which could be used as men-of-war though hardly as frigates. The
Centurion was farther up the coast on convoy duty. With these not very
promising materials Rainier had to devise some scheme for dealing with
the intruders.
  In making his plan of action, the Admiral had once more to guess at
the enemy’s intentions. And in making his guess, he took into account
a fact which he might have done better to forget. His period on the station
was nearly at an end, and his successor, he knew, was on the way out to
relieve him. Sir Edward Pellew was to be the new commander-in-chief—
a newly promoted Rear-Admiral and the same officer who had chased
Hartsinck across the Atlantic—and he would be coming out with a convoy.
Linois, when last seen, was not only in a position to intercept the country
trade but also in a position to waylay the expected convoy. Rainier
concluded that this was a deliberate move on the French Admiral’s part,
who could accordingly be relied upon to remain on his cruising ground.
The mistake here was in over-estimating Linois’s knowledge as well as in
imputing to him a love of glory of which that officer was innocent. To
encounter Sir Edward Pellew and a convoy of Indiamen more or less in
ballast was not one of Linois’s ambitions, even had he known where Pellew
was to be found. And indeed, as it happened, the new commander-in-chief
took a different route. However, Rainier had to make some decision, and
the decision he took was not unintelligent.