

                                                              (May 8th, 1805)
       I return you the letters from the Isle of France. I see nothing in them
    but disputes and vulgar squabbles between Linois, who is thoroughly
    second-rate, and fire-eating Decaen, who is utterly devoid of tact. The result
    of these disputes will be that Linois will stay at the Isle of France no longer
    than he can help. This will keep him at sea. And if he loses a frigate or two,
    it will be a loss I fully expect; and, anyway, the enemy will pay dearly for
    it. . . . Write and tell Linois to show a little more energy. Activity and
    boldness, that is what is wanted in the East.
/

   In noticing the absence of co-operation between Decaen and Linois,
Bonaparte made no attempt to make one of them the culprit. In a sense,
he blamed both; but then he had no very high opinion of either. He had
reasons, however, for wishing to encourage Linois, and the dispatches sent
out in 1805 tended rather to put the blame on Decaen.
   Napoleon’s motive for encouraging Linois sprang from two considera¬
tions. The first was a general change in policy. Decaen had been sent out
with orders to report on the possibilities of a campaign in India. Now,
in 1805, all plans for such a campaign were, for the time being, laid aside.
Indeed, Napoleon had virtually abandoned the project the year before.
Decaen’s reports had all been sanguine enough, of course. But Napoleon
did not believe them. The author had too obvious a motive. Lefebure,
who had been granted the interview denied to Delarue, duly urged Decaen’s
point of view. He spoke of native allies to be expected and of the scattered
nature of the English power. The proposal, as discussed, was for twenty-
three thousand men to land in India from a squadron of twenty-eight sail
of the line. Lefebure was closely questioned, and all the possibilities of
the scheme were carefully weighed. And the result was that the proposal
was rejected. Napoleon said that he could not spare twenty thousand men
and would not spare a lesser number. To send five or ten thousand would
be to run the risk of a serious reverse. It was in view of this decision that
                              1 Arch. Nat. BB4 239.

                                        248
                      CRUISE     OF   THE    ‘MARENGO’

interest shifted from Decaen to Linois. For a systematic campaign of
commerce destruction was now the most that could be attempted in the
East. More would have been possible had the Dutch co-operated. Deeres
and Napoleon’s foreign minister made strong representations at The Hague
and was assured by the Grand Pensionary of Holland that steps would
be taken.
       Personne n’est plus mecontent que moi, Monsieur, de l’inactivite absolue
    de l’escadre Batave dans l’lnde et personne n’est plus penetre de la necessite
    de faire cesse aussitot que possible cet etat de choses. . . .
       Le Gouverneur de Batavia devait etre change. Je viens de nommer a
    cette place importante Monsieur Grasveld. . . .
                                                        (13th September, 1805.)