

   At a moment when, as Deeres told Linois (13th October, 1805)
TEmpereur etait pret a passer en Angleterre a la tete de son armee, qui
deja etait embarquee sur la flotilla’ the Grand Pensionary was not inclined
to resist French pressure. But it does not appear that Hartsinck was in fact
spurred into activity.
   The second consideration in Napoleon’s mind was the want of a naval
officer more fitted for the task than Linois, the man already on the spot.
Linois was second-rate, but he could think of no one better. In criticizing
Linois, he could not help criticizing all the other admirals in the same
breath: ‘All the naval expeditions which have been undertaken since I came
to be Head of the Government have failed, partly because the admirals
see double, and partly because they have found (I don’t know where) that
you can make war without taking risks.’ Supposing that the other admirals
were no better, Linois had this in his favour, that he had once won a battle.
It was more than the rest could boast.


                             1 Archives Nat. BB4 239.
                                  CHAPTER XIII


                       Pellew and Linois

    Admiral          Rainier did not persevere for long in his fruitless
       search for the enemy. As we have seen, he soon returned to
 1 A^Madras. It was near the change of the monsoon and he had to
complete his provisions before quitting the coast. The convoy for England
was also due to sail, and he intended to escort it for a part of the voyage.
After that he intended to be off Pulo-Aur, as originally planned, in case
Linois or Hartsinck, or both, should have designs on the China fleet. He
was not yet convinced of the deliberate inactivity of the Dutch; and
Linois, of course, had still plenty of time in which to make some further
attempt in that direction. Rainier, it seems, had not received the information,
sent him by Osborn, that the French squadron had been provisioned only
for three months, and was therefore likely to return soon to the Isle of
France. Even had he done so, however, there remained the possibility of
Linois being in time, despite his necessary call at Port Louis. He might
even, for that matter, obtain provisions again at Batavia. It was essential,
at any rate, to be on one’s guard. The tea ships might not always be saved
by a fluke. Rainier sailed with the convoy on October 22nd, twenty days
after his return to Madras.
                                                      Trident at Sea
                                                              1 st November 1804.
               Sir
                       You will please acquaint their Lordships that pursuant to the
Trident        plan formed and communicated to His Excellency the Governor
Albion
               General for the Employment of His Majesty’s Ships for the approaching
Sceptre
Sheerness      N.E. Monsoon as hereafter detailed with His Majesty’s Ships as pr
St. Fioren^o
               margin, the Centurion having charge of 3 Homeward bound ships.
Victor
Rattlesnake    On the 23rd I ordered His Majesty’s Ship Sheerness to return to
Centurion &
               Madras Road for a particular purpose, and from thence the Captain is
Convoy
               to make the best of his way to Trincomalee, agreeable to an application
               I had lately received from His Excellency the Governor General, to
               be in readiness to take charge of a Convoy of transports His Excellency
               was on the point of sending there to embark native Troops for Prince
                                           250
                          PELLEW AND        LINOIS