

no news of Linois at Bencoolen. He had sailed from there accordingly on
August 12th, arriving at Rodriguez on the 24th, and being off Port Louis
on the 27th. Apart from merchantmen, the battered Psyche was the only
ship in port. During the first few days he caught two or three slavers
coming from Madagascar, and sent them to be disposed of at Penang.
Then he sent the Phaeton and Terpsichore to cruise off the south end of
the island, stationed the Lancaster off Port Louis, and went with the
Tremendous to his post off the Gunner’s Quoin. The blockade was not
very effective, but it was as efficient as the number of his ships allowed
of. Osborn had been employed on the same service during the last war
and knew all there was to be known about blockading. Unfortunately,
however, the inhabitants of the Isle of France knew all there was to be
known about being blockaded. Their experience was very wide indeed
and their arrangements correspondingly complete.
   Osborn was Admiral Rainier’s last card. If all his other plans failed—
as they did fail—there was still the chance that Linois would approach
his base a little too carelessly, and so perish on the threshold of safety.
It was a very slim chance. Linois had little opportunity, it was true, of
hearing of Osborn’s presence beforehand; but then he was not much given
to rashness of any kind. He arrived off the island on October 30th, hove-to
until it was dark, and then got in touch: with the shore by signals. In this
way he learnt that Osborn was off Port Louis. He accordingly steered for
Grand Port, which he entered the following day. In entering, the Marengo
grounded on the lie de Passe, carried away her rudder and scraped off
part of her false keel. However, damaged or not, she and her consorts were
safe in harbour. And Osborn at once raised the blockade, in which there
was no longer very much point. He sailed almost at once for Bombay,
where he took command in Rainier’s absence. As soon as he had gone,
Linois moved his ships round to Port Louis, which he entered on
November 13 th.
  While the Marengo was being careened and repaired, the feud broke out
afresh between Linois and Decaen. Prize-money was the chief source of
dispute. Linois and his officers were not content to have their money paid
them on their return to France. They took their share at once, as soon
as the prizes were sold, and invested the money at high interest with local
capitalists at Port Louis. Decaen objected to this practice, as the revenue
of the island was not improved by it. To such objections Linois replied
that he would send his prizes for sale elsewhere if the system was interfered
with. Linois would not remain at sea for more than five months. When
criticized by Decaen on this score, he claimed that the colony profited
                                     247
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

from his cruises. To this Decaen replied that the cost of refitting and
repairing the ships of the squadron exceeded the value of the prizes sent
in.1 Other disputes arose on more trifling points, and renewed appeals to
Deeres and Bonaparte were the result. Linois asked to be recalled, on
account of the ill-feeling between him and Decaen. Decaen asked that his
authority over the naval forces in the Indies might be defined.
   On reading the correspondence forwarded to him by Deeres, Bonaparte
replied to the Minister as follows: