

                                          257                                       I
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

safety and struck his flag on ioth September, 1805. His services were over,
and he retired to live ashore ..until his death in 1808. His will was peculiar.

      The late Admiral Rainier has left property to the amount of nearly
    250,0001 and after providing amply for his near relations, has made the
    following bequest:
       “I bequeath one-tenth part of my personal property to the Chancellor
    of the Exchequer for the time being, towards the reduction of the national
    debt, in acknowledgment of the generous bounty of the national establish¬
    ment of the Royal Navy, in which I have acquired the principal part of the
    fortune I now have, which has exceeded my merit and pretensions.”
                                              (Naval Chronicle, Vol. 10, p. 382.)


   Pellew, on his voyage out to India, had apparently had all the convoy
duty he wanted; for, on parting with the Indiamen, immediately after
quitting Penang, he left the Grampus and Victor to escort the country
ships while he himself went on alone. He reached Bombay on February 23rd,
finding Captain Osborn gone, he and the other captains being employed
in protecting trade farther up the coast. The only ships in port were the
Lancaster, Terpsichore and Fox, all three being in dock and the last-named
frigate being hardly worth repairing, according to Pellew. As he was to
add six ships to the squadron by purchase and had already heard of several
ships suitable for the service, Pellew planned to spare sufficient forces to
keep up a continuous blockade of the Isle of France by a system of
alternate reliefs. Osborn was to be sent back to blockade duty almost as
soon as he should appear.
   While the Marengo lay inactive during the winter, other French men-of-
war were afloat, and it is now necessary to follow their movements. The
Belle Poule and L Atalante went to cruise in the Bay of Bengal, but without
a great deal of success. They returned directly to the Isle of France in order
to join Linois in his next cruise. The Semillante was sent on a different
kind of service. In February 1805 news had reached the Isle of France
of the probability of war between Spain and England. The master of a
Danish vessel had seen some German newspapers in which there were
accounts of the taking of the four Spanish treasure ships on their way to
Spain. This was sure to mean war, and the Semillante was accordingly
sent to warn the Spanish Governor-General at Manila, Don Mariano
Fernandez de Fulgueras; and also perhaps to see in what way the Spaniards
might be willing to co-operate. Manila, like Batavia, was a place of great
strategic possibilities, supposing that an active naval force were based on it.
   The Semillante sailed on March 8th and, having gone three or four
                                        258
                           PELLEW AND      LINOIS