

   This matter being settled, another question arose. The senior commander
of the Indiamen wished to know what was being done to protect the convoy
                                     254
                           PELLEW AND        LINOIS

for the rest of the voyage to England. Now, ordinarily, with the whole
China fleet united, there would have been a man-of-war to escort them
all the way. But the Athenienne could not be with both divisions, so that
the first group was unprotected. Rainier replied that he would take the
Indiamen with him to Madras, and there they could join the convoy of
coast and bay ships destined to sail with his flag. The senior commander
agreed to this plan, but the other commanders strongly objected to it. Five
out of the seven ships, they said, were not in a condition to meet bad
weather off the Cape. Three of them were leaky—so much so that they
were floored with gruff goods to protect the cargo—and their crews were
composed of foreigners and Chinese, few of whom were to be relied upon
in rough weather.
   Rainier said that the best he could do for them was to dispatch them
with the Culloden, to remain in company as long as their courses lay
together. After that they would have to take their chance. He disclaimed
all responsibility for the consequences. Perhaps wisely, the commanders
of the Indiamen preferred risk of capture to risk of foundering; or perhaps
they were moved by personal considerations—fear, for example, of losing
a favourable voyage in the following season. This would account for the
senior commander’s attitude, as he was very likely on the eve of retiring.
At any rate, the Indiamen sailed with Pellew on January 27th, and boldly
parted company with him the same evening. This was just a week after
their arrival at Penang.
   Pellew having departed, with the Grampus and Victor and the country
trade bound for Bombay, Rainier detailed the DecLaigneuse, Albatross and
Seaflower to remain in the Straits of Malacca for the protection of trade
and to look out for the Athenienne and convoy. The Albatross came in just
as Pellew left, escorting two transports froni Ceylon and bringing the news
of the loss of the Sheerness, which had driven ashore in a gale. Rainier, it
may be remarked, had received information which led him to believe that
the Dutch contemplated some action in the immediate future.

       It is proper I should acquaint you for their Lordships’ information that
    when I arrived at Prince of Wales Island on the 9th of December as before
    related, I received Intelligence from an American Ship recently arrived there,
    who had left Batavia only six weeks before (26 October) that at that time
    Vice Admiral Heartsingh was lying there with a Squadron consisting of
    Four Ships of the Line, Two or three Frigates and Five or Six Armed Vessels.
    One of the Line of Battle Ships was refitting at Onrust, all the other Ships
    with the Armed Vessels were ready for Sea—it seems he had been lying some
    considerable time before at Sourabaya to recover their crews who had