

     presented the most grand coup d’oeil the imagination can conceive; the
     superb pillars by which the whole was supported, were alternately gold
     and blue and white, the whole evidently displaying the taste of the gentlemen
     who had the management of this part of the entertainment.
        The chandeliers and lamps which illuminated this spacious and grand
     building, were distributed with an equal degree of simplicity and elegance.
        The Dinner.—The Admiral was conducted to the centre of the table on
     the right hand of the Senior Civil Servant, the Governor and Sir Arthur to
     the left, and the Commander-in-Chief and Mr. Petrie to the opposite side.
     At regulated spaces, two Stewards were placed throughout the whole length,
     by which means the utmost regularity prevailed, and notwithstanding the
     number of visitors that were present, a private entertainment could not
     have been conducted with more order and regularity.
        The tables were covered with every luxury that munificence could produce;
     every thing was of its best kind, and what is scarcely to be paralleled, was
     quite hot. The wines were cool, excellent, and in great abundance, and the
     other wines were of the best importations. . . .
        (After the King, and the Navy and Army, Admiral Rainier’s health was
     drunk with three times three and the tune of Hearts of Oak. The Hon.
     Company was toasted to the tune of “Money in both pockets” and the
     Marquis Wellesley to the tune of “St. Patrick’s day in the morning.”)
        The company were obligingly entertained by several gentlemen of the
     Presidency with many select and choice songs, and the gallant Admiral sung
     three or four during the evening. . . .
        The Right Hon’ble the Governor did not rise from the table until past
     twelve, and it was nearly three o’clock before the Admiral departed from
     this well supplied and hospitable board. . . .
    Any faint suggestion here that the Admiral’s songs were neither select
nor choice must be, surely, inadvertent. And one would like to think that
someone had been able to procure some mangoes for the dessert.
    After collecting the homeward-bound trade at Madras, Rainier sailed for
England on March ioth, taking the Albion and Sceptre with him as far as
Lat. 40 io' S., Long. 84° 22' E. from whence he dismissed them on April 4th,
with orders to proceed to Trincomalee. He reached St. Helena on June 20th.1
There he found the China ships which had parted from him at Penang,
with the exception of one of the leaky ships, the Brunswick, which had
been sent to be docked at Bombay. Why they were still there is not clear, but
it is probable that they were detained by the governor until a naval escort
could be found for them. Rainier took them on to England, brought them in
  1 Sir Arthur Wellesley was with him. At St. Helena the Admiral ‘gave public breakfasts
every morning,’ and contributed £100 to a fund for consoling a whaler skipper whose ship
had been captured.