

 degrees southward, into the westerly winds, reached the Straits of Sunda
 by 18th April, 1805. Then, with difficulty, against contrary winds, she
 managed to arrive at Manila on May 30th. Her captain, Motard, had
 intended, after warning the Spaniards and landing there a French commercial
 agent, to cruise in the China Seas. But he found the Spanish in difficulties
 and was induced to alter his plans. The governor, Raphael Maria Deguilas,
 explained that the subsidies from Mexico were three years in arrears because
 of a royal order closing the ports. The colony was in need of specie and
 there was no ship of war to escort the galleon from Mexico. Motard agreed
 to cross the Pacific with the object of convoying this all-important vessel,
 and sailed accordingly on July 21st. With the aid of a Spanish pilot, the
 Semillante reached the entrance to the Straits of San Bernadino. There,
 while waiting for a favourable wind, she was attacked by the English
 men-of-war Phaeton (38) and Harrier (18). The first, it will be remembered,
 was one of the detachments left by Rainier at Penang. The second was a
 new arrival. Motard, with the aid of batteries on shore, succeeded in beating
 off his assailants. His ship, however, was damaged, and he abandoned all
 idea of going to Mexico, partly because he realized that the English would
 be lying in wait for him on his return. Entering the Pacific, he turned
 southward and avoided further molestation by a complicated passage south
 of the Celebes and out into the Indian Ocean near Timor. It was a feat
 of navigation even if it concluded a more or less futile voyage. The
 Semillante did not arrive at the Isle of France until November 5th.
    The Psyche is the fourth frigate to be dealt with. She has already been
 mentioned as a privateer. Decaen bought her into the Navy for 340,000
 francs at the conclusion of the voyage during which she fought an action
 with the Wilhelmina. A noted officer, her former owner, Captain Bergeret,
 was given the command of her on 18th June, 1804. He sailed for the Bay
 of Bengal, a favourite hunting ground, on November 9th and cruised there
with some success. There were hardly any ships of war in the bay at that
time, and the consternation at Calcutta was out of all proportion to the
damage done. As Rainier said, the merchants were ‘more apprehensive
of depredations on their Trade from Captain Bergeret’s abilities and
activity, than from the whole remaining Force of the French Navy at
present in these Seas united.’ The San Fiorenio (36), being sent to deal
with the intruder after the news had reached Calcutta of her being seen
off Vizagapatam, managed to come up with her on 13 th February, 1805.
There followed a long chase and a murderous conflict, which ended in
the surrender of the Psyche to her much heavier opponent. Bergeret would
not haul down his colours until fifty-seven officers and men were killed and
                                     259
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS