

      By authentic intelligence recently obtained from Batavia I learn that the
    Dutch Squadron were then lying at Samarang in a very inactive and sickly
    Condition, and it may not be expected that they will be induced to undertake
    any service of importance or act offensively at present. I am not so well
    apprized of the motions of the French at the Isle of France. . . .
                         (Pellew to Admiralty. 27th June, 1805. Adm. 1/176.)

   About three weeks later the situation was changed again by the news
that the squadron from Rochefort was not bound for India at all, and
had indeed been located in the West Indies. Then came the news of the
operations of Admiral Linois, a fresh complication which dwindled into
insignificance shortly afterwards in comparison with a final thunderbolt
which had the effect of turning a temporary muddle into a semi-permanent
state of chaos.
  To follow these developments it is necessary to return to the period at
which Pellew left England. He had been allowed to retain his appointment,
                                        264
                              PELLEW AND         LINOIS

it has been noted, although his friends went out of office immediately after
the appointment was made. But he had earned the enmity of the existing
Government, and was aware when he sailed that his recall might be decided
upon at any time. Instead, however, of recalling him, Lord Melville decided
to send a second flag officer out to India with orders to take over half the
squadron. The command was to be split in two, and the two commanders-
in-chief were to be almost entirely independent of each other. The dividing
line between the separated commands was to be a line due south from
Point de Galle. And Sir Thomas Troubridge, junior to Pellew and chosen
to supersede him in part of his command, was to have the eastern half.
   This arrangement is not wholly attributable to malice. The dispatch of
a second flag officer, indeed, had much to commend it. It was not even
an innovation. Rainier had Rear-Admiral Blankett serving with him in
1799-1800. This precedent was not encouraging, it is true, as the two did
not remain on good terms. Blankett ended, as we have seen, by asking
to be relieved, saying that ‘A second officer in India can gain little profit
or honour, and is amenable more than the chief and more exposed to
censure of all sorts.’ Nevertheless, the precedent existed and the possibility
was discussed before Melville’s time. Where personal rancour entered was
in making the junior flag officer independent of the senior—obviously a
fatal arrangement—and in giving the junior officer the more important
part of the command.
   Pellew had sailed in July 1804, and what was for all practical purposes
his ruin was under discussion within two or three months. Troubridge
was actually appointed in February 1805, and he was on board his flagship
by the end of that month.1 He sailed on April 24th, his flag in the
Blenheim (74) accompanied by a convoy of eighteen sail. With him was
the frigate Greyhound. Concerning his voyage out to India, and the trouble
he had with the ships he was convoying, something has already been said;
from which it may be gathered that he was distinctly difficult to deal with.
It is sufficient now to say of his voyage that he detached the Greyhound
with the Bombay ships at the southern entrance to the Mozambique Channel
in July, and continued his voyage with the remainder. Parting with the
Bombay ships reduced his convoy from eighteen to fourteen sail. Three
other Indiamen succeeded in being left behind by accident, and August
found the Blenheim with eleven Indiamen in company. Of these, six were
China ships. Troubridge was then in the middle of the Indian Ocean, in
the latitude of the French islands, and bound for Madras.
   1 There came out with him the officials appointed by Dundas to what was now the fourth
presidency. They came to be known collectively as the ‘Scotch invasion’ of Penang.
                                          265                                       I*
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS