

seventy wounded; until, that is to say, rather more than half his men were
casualties. On returning to the Hooghli, Lambert, the captain of the San
Fiorenio, received a present of 5,000 rupees from the merchants and under¬
writers, with which to purchase a piece of plate. Captain Bergeret was
an old friend of Admiral Pellew, having been his prisoner before in 1796.
Their meeting at Trincomalee was an affecting scene. They were close
enough friends to plan,* later, to live near each other in France. The plan
came to nothing, but the Admiral’s descendant in the present century went
to live in the part of France where these two ‘enemies’ talked of living
as neighbours.
   The unprotected state of the Bay of Bengal, to which was due the
impunity of the Belle Poule and L'Atalante, could only be attributed to
an error on Rainier’s part. Pellew was careful to point out that it was none
of his doing.

       Their Lordships will long since have heard of the departure of Vice-
    Admiral Rainier on the 10th Ultimo from Madras Road with eleven Sail
    of Indiamen. . . . The Admiral took widi him from Madras the only Ships
    there, namely the Albion and Sceptre. The Caroline was ordered to Colombo,
    so that the Bay was left without a Ship of War, nor did the Admiral communi¬
    cate to me what his intentions were respecting them.
       He had scarcely sailed before I received information of two small Captures
    made by the French Frigates La Belle Poule, and L’Atalante, near the head
    of the Bay of Bengal, in Lat. i9°2o' North, Long’de 85° East. The Admiral
    had information of the two frigates having been spoken a month before
    by a Dane in Latitude 30 North, Long 930 East. Their Lordships will perceive
    that I had no means from this side of India and at this Season to send after
    them for some time, and I trust any mischief they may do, will not therefore
    be charged to me. . . .
       Nothing more has been heard of the two Frigates since, and I conjecture,
    from learning the fate of the Psyche, that they proceeded down the East
    Coast, and if so, it is not improbable but they may fall in with the Russel
    and Dedaigneuse off that Coast. . . .
                        (Pellew to Admiralty. 23rd April, 1805. Adm. 1/176.)

   Pellew’s first concern while at Bombay was the purchase of ships for
the strengthening of the squadron. When he arrived he could find no vessel
suitable, but when all the China ships had come into port, his advertisements
in the Bombay Courier produced several tenders. The ships offered included
the Carron, of 1,072 tons, belonging to Messrs. Bruce, Fawcett & Co.,
and the Shah Kaikuseroo, of 1,048 tons, owned by a Parsee called Sorabjee
Muncherjee. Pellew bought these for £41,000 and £43,000 respectively,
                                        260
                          PELLEW AND       LINOIS

 in rough figures. The prices were exorbitant, but there was no choice.
 Each of these ships could mount fifty guns.
    Besides these two frigates, renamed by Pellew (to placate his enemies?)
 as the Duncan and Howe, and besides any further ships he was to purchase,
 there were several vessels handed over by the East India Company. There
 was the frigate Cornwallis of the Bombay Marine, ‘a prodigious fine ship’
 which Pellew altered to suit naval prejudices by opening her spar-deck
 amidships—the Navy was not yet converted to the flush deck. He also
 increased her spread of canvas, for her spars had been designed for a lascar
 crew. Then there was the Sir Edward Hughes, an Indiaman, already
 acquired, which Pellew loathed at sight. ‘She sails uncommonly bad in all
 points,’ he lamented, and went on to say that her decks were too weak
 for heavy guns and that she had only four feet between decks. Before long,
 Wellesley was offering him the other frigate of the Bombay Marine, a ship
 called the Bombay.; as also a smaller vessel, the Mornington. Finally, there
 was the recently taken Psyche, much in need of repair after her terrific
 battle with her captor. She was bought into the service on account of her
 good sailing qualities.
    The chief difficulty, of course, was to find men for these newly acquired
 ships. The Cornwallis and Hughes brought their crews with them from the
 Company’s service, but were much under strength. The two country ships,
 Howe and Duncan, heavily armed by Pellew, a gunnery specialist, with
 18-pounders and 32-pounder carronades, had to be manned with drafts
 from existing men-of-war, with soldiers borrowed from the Company as
 marines and with lascars to fill up the gaps. However, the squadron was
growing in numbers, and reinforcements were expected from England.
 Pellew could hope before long to undertake some decisive action against
the enemy.
    Behind this growth of the squadron were three active forces. The first
was the realization at the Admiralty that the East Indies station, since the
renewed outbreak of war, had many of the responsibilities which had been
borne in 1796—1801 by the squadron based on the Cape. There was a
case, therefore, for making it equal the two squadrons combined. The
second was the policy of Pitt’s last administration, which had begun just
before Pellew left England. When in opposition, Pitt had made vigorous
attacks on the Admiralty for not increasing sufficiently the strength of the
Navy. Lord St. Vincent was accused of exposing the country to invasion.
On coming, therefore, into office, Pitt and Dundas felt obliged to show
what a little energy could do. While ordering ships right and left, they
felt it especially desirable to be able to point to an immediate increase
                                    261
                         WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS