

   Rainier, meanwhile, had parted with the Centurion and convoy on
November 8th in Lat. 30 3' N., Long. 920 42' E., and arrived at Penang on
December 9th, some five days after Pellew’s departure. He had with him
the Trident, Albion, Sceptre and Seaflower, cutter. Sailing again almost
immediately, he fell in with four country ships from China under convoy
of the Dasher, sloop. By this early and imprudently small convoy he received
letters from Captain Page and from the Secret Committee of Supercargoes.
                    1 Edward Pellew, Viscount Exmouth, p. 327.
                                      253
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

 From these he gathered that the direct China ships had not yet arrived,
 but that the others, ‘with several Country Ships would positively be ready
 to leave Whampoa for the Streigh'ts of Singapore, sometime between
 Christmas day and the New Year.’ Undismayed by blowing weather,
 Rainier proceeded to Pulo-Aur, which he reached on 4th January, 1805.
 On the 14th the convoy appeared, Captain Page with the Caroline, Grampus
 and Dedaigneuse, eight Indiamen, one Botany Bay ship and seven country
 ships. The direct ships, with the Athenienne, had reached China on the very
 eve of the convoy’s sailing, it was reported, and they would not be ready
 to leave for another two months. There was no possibility of forming a
single convoy when ships were delayed to that extent.
    Returning to Penang with the convoy and the united escort which was
reinforced by the Rattlesnake off Malacca, but not by the Russel, which
should have been there, Rainier found Pellew waiting for him. The two
Admirals greeted each other with the thunder of cannon, and then settled
down to the long and complicated business of handing over the command.
Rainier did not relinquish his responsibility at once, for he had to return
to collect the homeward bound trade at Madras before he quitted the
station. He spent some time, however, in explaining the situation to his
successor. This was essential in that they would not meet again. Pellew
explained that he had orders to purchase ships into the Navy, and as this
transaction necessitated a visit to Bombay, he and Rainier would have to
part company. Pellew’s tenure of office would begin, then, at Bombay,
on the day that Rainier sailed from Madras.
        Taking into consideration their Lordships’ Order of 29th May and 7th
    June last for the purchase of six Ships for His Majesty’s Service . . . which
    I conceived would be best effected at Bombay, as supplying the best built
    Ships in India adapted to the King’s Service and as the principal part of
    them would be in Port on their return from China by the time the Rear
    Admiral would reach that Island and the present being a very favourable
    part of the Monsoon to make the quickest passage there, I therefore advised
    the Rear Admiral ... to proceed to Bombay to make the purchases required
    on his own Authority, disposing of such of His Majesty’s ships as he might
    fall in with as he thought most for the good of His Majesty’s Service, taking
    with him the valuable Trade from China bound for that Island together
    with His Majesty’s Ships Grampus and Victor, Sloop, which both required
    to be docked. . . .
                          (Rainier to Admiralty, 21st June, 1805. Adm. 1/176.)