

        To provide for the security of the Eastern Side of India, with a view to
     contribute every protection to the Ships of the Honourable Company
     and those of Individuals trading thither, has occupied my most serious
     attention. As a preliminary to the arrangement which it is my intention to
     make for this important purpose, I have directed Captain Wood in H.M.
     Ship Phaeton to sail in company with the Cornwallis and Harrier under his
     Orders for the immediate protection of the Trade on the Coast of China, to
    reconnoitre the Port of Manilla in their way to China, and to prevent the
    predatory views of the Enemy Cruizers in that quarter. H.M. Ships Dedaig-
    neuse and Albatross will be stationed in the Straits of Malacca and its vicinity,
                                                .
    and the Lancaster and Sir Edwd Hughes . . will convoy the Convoy from
    Bombay and from this Coast towards the close of the month of July &
    early in August.
        I shall in person move towards that side of India towards the fall of the
    year, and whatever purposes I shall hereafter have matured for the further
    effectual defence of the Company’s Trade and Settlements will be unfolded
    from time to time. . . .
                            (Pellew to Admiralty. 1st June, 1805. Adm. 1/176.)
                                        263
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

  Pellew tended to scatter his forces more than Rainier had done. In June
1805, when the above was written, he had eight ships on the coast, four at
Bombay, four with Osborn, six to the eastward, and two off Ceylon. The
sending of the Phaeton and her consorts to reconnoitre Manila—with
unfortunate results, as we have seen, for the Semillante—was a result of
the Admiralty’s orders to detain all Spanish vessels. These orders, dated
4th December, 1804, arrived at Madras about 30th May, 1805, soon after
Pellew himself arrived there, and he acted at once. There was nothing to
fear from the Spaniards at the moment, but there was some hope of
plundering them. All naval officers had heard of the Acapulco galleon, the
ship the Semillante was to have convoyed, and war with Spain was always
popular. One of the objects of Captain Wood’s mission was to make direct
inquiries as to the route taken by this desirable vessel, as to its time of
sailing and as to its exact value. It transpired, when his report was made,
that there were distinct possibilities. The reconnaissance was not fruitless.
   In warfare one is seldom given the chance to develop one’s plan of
operations. Events intervene and the scene changes faster than plans can
be made. In this instance, Pellew was not allowed to develop any strategic
ideas he may have formed. Hardly had he made his initial moves when
news came that a French squadron had escaped from Rochefort, possibly
bound for the East Indies. The Admiral had therefore to make distracted
efforts to recall and collect his line of battleships, as also to inform Osborn.
Conditions were changed again when information arrived enabling him
to appreciate better the intentions of the Dutch.