

following their accession to power. From that point of view, the purchase
of ships in India was an excellent move. By a mere order to Pellew, six
men-of-war came at once into theoretical existence. These could be added
to the paper strength of the Navy. Then the Ministers could turn to an
admiring House of Commons and say ‘When we came into office there
were so many ships. And now. . . .’ At a later period, the policy was
modified.
  The third motive underlying the growth of the East Indies squadron
was Lord Wellesley’s earnest wish to abolish the Bombay Marine. That
force was a source of continual trouble. It was amenable, certainly, to the
Indian Governments in a sense in which the Royal Navy was not. But
there was endless difficulty in manning it and preserving its personnel from
impressment. And at the end of it, the force was thoroughly despised.

       The merchant ships of the Company are men-of-war; the men-of-war
    of the Company are—what shall I call them? By their right names—they
    are all Bombay Marine ... the vessels and the crews are equally contemptible.

  This is the opinion of the Navy, as reflected in the pages of Captain
Marryat; and it was an opinion which Wellesley had come to share. In
time of war, at any rate, the larger cruisers were clearly better in the hands
of the naval commander-in-chief. More money would be spent on them,
better crews would be found for them, and their movements would be
co-ordinated with those of the other ships on the station.
  Leaving out of account these various additions to the squadron, the
force handed over to Pellew from Rainier consisted of the following vessels:

    Tremendous
    Albion
                  (74)          Phaeton         w            Rattlesnake    (18)
                  (74)          Terpsichore     (32)         Albatross      (18)
    Sceptre       (74)          Concorde        (36)         Victor         (18)
    Russel        (74)          Fox             (32)        Dasher          (18)
    Lancaster     (64)          Pitt            (36)        Seaflower (Cutter)
    Grampus       (5°)          Sheerness       (32)        Arrogant (Hulk)
                                San Fiorenpo    (36)
                                Dedaigneuse     (36)
                                Caroline        (36)
                                Wilhelmina      (32)
       To which must be added:—Culloden (74)
       And subtracted:—Sheerness (32)—wrecked.
       The Wilhemina had been re-armed as a frigate, and was no longer ‘en
    flute.’

  With a force of this size, including six sail of the line, it was obviously
                                       262
                            PELLEW AND         LINOIS

possible to deal with such ships as the French and Dutch—to whose
strength must now be added the Spanish—could muster to the eastward
of the Cape. With military co-operation, indeed, the bases of the allies could
be captured and annexed. And, even without military help, an effective
blockade could be instituted such as would restrain all enemy action.
Pellew’s first strategic move was to send a detachment to cruise off the
French islands. Osborn accordingly sailed on 25th March, 1805, with the
Tremendous  , Grampus and Terpsichore. His orders were to proceed from
Bombay and cruise in Lat. 2° N., Long. 8o° to 9o°E. —across the line of
approach to the Bay of Bengal—until joined by the Pitt. Then all four
ships were to take up their stations round the Isle of France. The Pitt,
a new frigate, was dispatched from Bombay on April 14th. Thus, Pellew
provided for the temporary protection of the Bay of Bengal until he should
be able to proceed to Madras in person and carry out the plans he had in
mind for a system of flying squadrons.
  Pellew quitted Bombay on April 30th, accompanied by the Concorde                  ,
Cornwallis and Howe. The last-named ship had been chosen by Wellesley
for his accommodation on his return to England. He called at Trincomalee
on May 21st, and arrived at Madras on the 24th, where he found the Albion           ,
Duncan , Rattlesnake, Harrier and Albatross. The Howe was at once sent
on to Bengal. Then Pellew began to make his arrangements for a scientific
disposal of his squadron.