

                                      255
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    suffered severely from the unhealthiness of Batavia Road . . . and had only
    returned to it the 6th of that Month.
       The American’s Intelligence confirmed me in my former conjecture of the
    enterprise the combined force of the Enemy would undertake early in the
    N.E. Monsoon, it being absolutely necessary the Dutch Squadron should from
    its Windward situation be in Batavia Road for their more convenient junction
    with the French Squadron of whose movements I had received no Information
    since the Attack on the Centurion in Vizagapatam Road on the 29th
    September. . . .
                         (Rainier to Admiralty, 21st June, 1805. Adm. 1/176.)

   It is not very easy to understand Rainier’s attitude towards the Dutch.
He knew what strategic use might be made of Batavia if the Dutch should
choose to turn their position to account. That was in itself a sufficiently
rational ground for anxiety. On the other hand, his own actions do not
imply any fear of what Hartsinck might do. For he sailed for Madras on
the 29th two days after the departure of Pellew, and took with him the
       ,       ,        ,
Trident Albion Sceptre Caroline and Dasher, leaving only a frigate and
two sloops to reinforce the Athenienne as her convoy came to the danger-
point. The Russel arrived later, it is true, crippled by a gale, but this was
not Rainier’s arrangement. And even if it had been, and the Russel was
repaired in time, the force was quite unequal to the Dutch squadron.
Rainier’s real opinion can probably be judged better from what he did
than from what he wrote.
   Before leaving India the Admiral was guest of honour at a farewell party
of which the details were recorded in the Madras Gaiette of March 2nd.

       On Tuesday evening, the Civil Servants of the Hon’ble Company gave
    an elegant entertainment at the Pantheon to His Excellency Vice Admiral
    Rainier, on occasion of his departure for Europe.
       The Admiral was received by the Stewards who were appointed for the
    occasion, in the front room of the Pantheon, and the Right Hon’ble the
    Governor, accompanied by His Excellency Sir John Cradock and the
    Hon’ble Sir Arthur Wellesley, arrived shortly after.
       A trumpet announced dinner being on the table, and was followed by
    the band striking up the popular tune of God Save the King; the company
    now passed through the theatre, and descended to a building which had
    been erected for the purpose.
       On entering the pavilion, the eye was immediately attracted by the
    elegance and splendour with which it was fitted up; the whole was covered
    with fine white linen, richly embossed with stars of gold and fringed with
    variegated colours, to which were attached small reflecting globes which
                                       256
plate vi. Captain Sir Home Riggs Popham (1762-1820)
                   by M. Brown
plate vii. Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Pellew (1757-1833), Commander-in-Chief
                on the East Indies Station, by James Northcote
                              PELLEW      AND    LINOIS