

Isle of France, and the Semillante was blockaded at Manila. The English
knew where Linois was, he asserted, and the ships at the Cape were lying
in wait for him. They had a squadron on the Agulhas bank and another in
Simon’s Bay. After dealing with him, they were to make a dash at the Isle
of France, he concluded—probably with some enjoyment of the consterna¬
tion he was causing.1
   Most American seamen disliked both sides in the war with fairly equal
intensity, but it is possible that this American hated the English less. There
seems to have been more than a touch of malice in his story. At any rate,
whatever his motive, whether it was love of mischief or casual impulse,
he evidently began by telling the literal truth and ended off with hearsay
or deliberate invention.
   Believing all this information, true and false, the French Admiral decided
that, as the Isle of France was immediately threatened, it would be unwise
for him to return there. He had at this time bread for fifty days at 12 ounces
per head per day, but he had little else, having obtained only water at
Port-au-Prince. Supposing, he argued, that the lie de France was blockaded
and itself short of food, his return there would weaken it. Then, his rigging
was worn out. Supposing it damaged, his voyage to Java, Manila or Rio
de Janeiro would be prolonged beyond fifty days. ‘Je n’ai vu,’ he wrote,
‘de parti plus convenable aux interets de l’etat, pour parvenir a sauver les
batimens qui m’etoient confies, que celui de me rendrer directement en
France.’ Even for that voyage he thought it necessary on meeting contrary
winds to put his crew on reduced rations of water and 10 ounces of bread
per day. In thus returning to France without orders, Linois was risking
disgrace, dismissal, imprisonment or even death. The desperate decision,
however, was taken, and the two ships steered northwards again. On
March 13th, in Lat. 26° 16' N., Long. 89° 26’ E., they fell in with a squadron
commanded by Sir John Borlase Warren, both being taken after making
a strenuous resistance. Engaged by a 98-gun ship, the Marengo was
reduced to a shattered hulk before Linois would surrender. The casualties
comprised sixty killed and eighty-two wounded, the latter number including
Linois himself (wounded in the right leg), Vrignaud (who lost an arm) and
Enseigne de Vaisseau Durand Linois. Duclos the diarist was wounded in
the left arm and legs by splinters of wood. The Marengo was brought into
Portsmouth as a prize on May 14th.2 So ended Rear-Admiral Linois’s

  1 Information given in letter from Linois to Deeres, 20th May, 1806. Arch. Nat. BB4 252.
  1 She was dismasted in a gale and nearly foundered on the way. The action and the voyage
to England are described in two letters written by a midshipman of the Ramillies who was
one of the prize crew. (Naval Chronicle, Vol. 15, p. 407.)

                                          274
                                PELLEW AND          LINOIS

campaign in the East Indies.1 His next letter to Deeres was dated from
Bath.
   Linois remained a prisoner of war until 1814. He was made Governor of
Guadeloupe under Louis XVIII, to whom he remained loyal during the
‘Hundred Days.’ He retired in 1816 and died at Versailles in 1848. His naval
career was not without distinction and its less creditable episodes were
redeemed, in part, by the obstinacy with which he fought his last battle
in 1806. Like Deeres he was never, probably, a believer in the Napoleonic
Empire. And he evidently derived from the old regime a tactical caution
which his own parsimonious nature tended, perhaps, to reinforce. His
anxiety, as shown in the words quoted above, to save the vessels committed
to his charge, extended to their rigging and sailcloth. He hated to see waste
and damage and tended to regard an action mainly in the light of expended
stores, the value of which had to be set against a possible gain in prize-
money. This is the privateer’s approach to war, with ledger to balance
the profit and loss, and it was too prevalent in the French Navy. But
Linois’s interest in prize-money sprang, at least in part, from a care for his
men, who were otherwise unpaid. His thought for their welfare is always
apparent and they repaid him with loyalty and something like affection.
More happily circumstanced, he might have had more success. It is difficult,
however, to imagine any circumstance which could have made him a useful
ally of Decaen.