

          On the 20th of May last the French Ships Marengo of 80 guns and Belle
       Poule of 44 sailed from the Isle of France in consequence of receiving Intelli¬
       gence by an American Ship which had passed through the Squadron of
       Commodore Osborn, of his situation to windward out of sight of the
       Island, & who by this means avoided him.
          By a dispatch received express from His Excellency the Honble Fred’k
       North, Governour of Ceylon under date of the 12th instant, I learn that
       these ships had appeared off Point de Galle, where they unfortunately
                                          267
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    intercepted and captured the Honourable Company’s Ship Brunswick             ,
    laden with Cotton from Bombay to China. She left that port on the ist Instant,
    in company with the Sarah and two other Country Ships. The Sarah was
    run on shore by her Commander a little to the North West of Point de Galle
    in order to prevent her falling into the hands of the Enemy. The Cargo will
    be saved, and there are hopes of getting the ship off. The two other Ships
    I have reason to believe have made their Escape.
       It should be observed that the Sailing of these Ships without protection
    was totally in contradiction of my purposes, and had their Commanders
    thought proper to avail themselves of the Convoy appointed to sail from
    Bombay early in the approaching Month with the regular Ships, this loss
    would have been effectually prevented, and it is still less excusable when it
    is known to result from considerations of Individual profit arising from an
    early market.
       The further operations of the Enemy’s Ships are at present altogether
    Conjectural, and I shall make such a Disposition of the Force, as I trust
    may succeed in intercepting them. His Majesty’s Ships Albion and Duncan
    were on the Coast of Ceylon at this time, but altho they subsequently
    received Intelligence of the Enemy’s appearance they were unable to gain
    a position sufficiently weatherly, owing to the Strong Gales which con¬
    stantly prevail at this Season.—His Majesty’s Ships Russel and Concorde
    were also dispatched from hence on the receipt of this information with a
    similar want of success. It is my intention to send H.M. Ship Albion to
    unite with the Dedaigneuse and Albatross in the Straits of Malacca without
    loss of time, under an expectation of Captain Ferrier’s falling in with them
    in that quarter should the Enemy have proceeded to the Eastward, and a
    Frigate will be dispatched tomorrow to apprize Commodore Osborn of
    their motions, who I trust may yet fall in with them should the disposition
    of the several ships fail in the accomplishment of this desirable object. His
    Majesty’s Ships Sceptre and St. Fiorenpo will be placed to receive them off
    Vizigapatam should they appear in that Quarter, while the Culloden and
    Caroline will be held in readiness to move on the first Intelligence from this
    Fort.
                (Pellew to Admiralty, 22nd July, 1805. P.R.O. Adm. 1/176.)