

off the island now consisted of two sail of the line and two frigates. This
may have confirmed Linois in his determination not to return there. His
decision, however, to go to the Cape—which was, strictly speaking, outside
his station—had been taken before the cruise began.
    The Cape was sighted on September ioth and the Marengo and Belle
Poule came to anchor in Simon’s Bay on the 13th. There they took in
provisions and water, expecting to be joined before long by L' Atalante
and by the Brunswick. Both of these ships arrived. The Brunswick came
in on the 18th, in the midst of a gale, and instantly went ashore, becoming
a total loss. The frigate appeared on the 22nd, and the whole squadron
moved round to Table Bay a month later. On November 3rd, during
another gale, L Atalante went ashore. She was floated again but, being
found in need of repairs which could not be carried out at the Cape, her
day of usefulness was judged to be over. Captain Beauchene tried to save
L' Atalante but was ordered by Linois (supposing L’ Atalante to be beyond
repair) to see whether the Dutch Bato (74) left there by Dekker two years
ago, could be taken to Europe. Finding that this could be done only at
a   colossal   expense,   Linois     distributed   seventy   of V Atalante* s   men
between the Marengo and Belle Poule. The remaining one hundred and sixty
took part in the defence of the Cape and afterwards became prisoners of
war. Some or all of these are said to have fought under their captain at
Blauenberg.
    With a squadron reduced once more to two ships, Linois sailed on
November 9th, in order to cruise on the west coast of Africa. It was a
futile proceeding, resulting in nothing but the capture of two or three
English slavers. Having gone as far north as the Gulf of Guinea and the
latitude of Fernando Po, Linois went as if to cruise in the region of
St. Helena, with the intention of returning ultimately to the Cape. Some
distance south-west of the island, he fell in with the American ship Ganges,
sixty-two days out of Canton and bound for Philadelphia. This chance
encounter was the first event of importance—apart, that is to say, from the
loss of LAtalante and of the Brunswick—that had taken place during the
cruise. For the master of the Ganges, a certain Mr. John Philipps, gave
Linois the news of the Cape having been taken by the English. The decisive
action was fought on January 8th, and Linois heard of it from Mr. Philipps
on the 27th.
    The taking of the Cape meant for Linois the loss of his base. He had
taken in but four months’ supplies before he sailed, and he had already
been at sea more than ten weeks. He would have to sail for the Isle of
France at once. But at this point destiny interfered in the person of Mr.
                                           272
                         PELLEW AND     LINOIS




Philipps. Having told the truth about the Cape, which he had heard from
one of the English men-of-war engaged in its reduction, he went on to
elaborate his story. There were, he said, three English men-of-war at
St. Helena, besides the squadron at the Cape. Admiral Pellew was off the
                                  273
                         WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN       SEAS