

   1 Much information concerning this last voyage is to be derived from the journals of
 Thomas Addison (The Naval Miscellany, Vol. I, Navy Records Society, Vol. XX, ed.
J. K. Laughton, 1902). Addison joined the Brunswick as midshipman in 1803 and was present
when Captain Grant surrendered to Linois, ‘not having twenty effective European seamen
on board.’ He describes his life as a prisoner of war in the Marengo. ‘They had 1,000 French
sailors on board, including, by the way, a good many Yankees among them, with about a
hundred Lascars. . . . We soon discovered the looseness of their discipline, officers and men
mingling, hail well met. Liberty and Equality was a motto indeed stamped on the guns. I
frequently saw the ship’s barber . . . walking arm in arm with the first captain, chatting
intimately together on the quarter-deck. . . . They have a poor idea of cleanliness; neatness
is out of the question. . . . Our living was wretched. Only two meals per diem; both put
together would hardly make a good English breakfast, with a purser’s pint of sour Bordeaux
claret, and half a pint of water. . . .’ Addison was present at the action with Troubridge and
he saw the Brunswick wrecked at the Cape. He was there released and so missed the action
in which the Marengo was taken.




                                            275
                            CHAPTER XIV


            The Command Divided

■'T'TT"Tith     the departure of the Marengo there was a profound
 \ Y /change in the character of the war as waged in the East. Linois,
   V Vin his three cruises, had not succeeded in any one major enter¬
prise, apart perhaps from the raid on Bencoolen. Nevertheless, the presence
of the Marengo had been a factor in the situation, and one which the
English could not ignore. By a series of accidents, the French flagship
never showed her formidable fighting qualities until the day she was
taken. The calibre of her guns, however, was known, and there was always
a risk of some isolated English man-of-war falling a prey to her. The
Centurion was very fortunate to escape capture, and would hardly have
so escaped but for shallow water, an improvised battery on shore, and
Linois’s anxiety to be gone. In the skirmish with the Blenheim, it happened
that lower-deck guns could not be used. And yet, although little used, the
Marengo's 36-pounders had always to be reckoned with. In her last action,
by an extraordinary accident, the Marengo was caught as we have seen
by a three-decker. Judging by the terrific conflict that ensued, and the
courage shown both by Linois and his crew, it may be doubted whether
any English 74-gun ship could have taken her. With so formidable an
enemy at large, the English had to be cautious.
   Once rid of the Marengo, the strategic problem resolved itself into mere
commerce protection. There was no longer much risk of the English
cruisers being taken. The difficulty was to ensure that they should be
everywhere at once. There remained, of course, the possibility of a fresh
squadron coming out from France. But of this Pellew was fairly certain
to receive warning beforehand. The blockade of the French naval bases
was never effective enough to prevent the enemy from sailing. What it
did do was to prevent them sailing unobserved. The ships blockading a
French harbour might not see the enemy go, but they could hardly fail
to notice the fact that he had gone. And the news would get to India by
overland mail long before the squadron itself was likely to arrive. False
alarms, however, were to be expected and we have already seen that they
were not unknown.
                                   27 6
                        THE   COMMAND           DIVIDED