

                                          Blenheim, Madras Roads
                                                     1 st September, 1805.
    Sir
           Be pleased to acquaint the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
                                    278
                         THE   COMMAND       DIVIDED

    that on my arrival at Madras I met Sir Edward Pellew. I communicated to
    him my orders, the tenor of their Lordships’ Commission and Instructions
    to me as Commander in Chief on the district of Coast which their Lordships
    had been pleased to assign me, requesting him to proceed to an arrangement
    of the several points therein contained, to establish under the existing cir¬
    cumstances, places of Rendezvous, and also others, under events which
    might possibly arise; begging him at the same time to place under me
    the ships and vessels pointed out in the margin of their Lordships’ Orders,
    or such part thereof as were then in the Roads, when to my astonishment,
    he gave me for answer, that he did not understand by their Lordships’
    Commission to me, or the instructions thereon, which I gave him to read,
    that I was authorised to take the Command on the Coast of Coromandel
    or the Bay of Bengal, and that what he conceived to be their Lordships’
    intention was, the Coast due East from the South Line (named in their
    orders and Commission) from Point De Galle, which will embrace Prince
    of Wales’s Island and the entrance to the straits of Malacca only, and con¬
    sequently I am not allowed to consider Madras or Bengal within the limits
    of my station: such a decision, and the Captain of the Blenheim as well as
    myself having previously received his orders to put ourselves under his
     Command, is, I conceive, -in direct opposition to their Lordships’
    directions. . . .
       ... I must request that you will be pleased to move the Lords Com¬
    missioners of the Admiralty speedily to afford such further explanation of
    their Lordships’ orders to Sir Edward Pellew as he seems to require. . . .
       I most cheerfully proceed under the command of Sir Edward Pellew,
    because it is my duty to yield obedience to a senior officer, and because I
    hope the result may prove beneficial to His Majesty’s Service; but I am
    persuaded that their Lordships will agree with me in opinion, that as effectual
     Co-operation might have been given by me as Commander in Chief agree¬
    ably to their Lordships’ appointment, as under the present circumstances,
    by which, in defiance of their Commission I am placed as second in
     Command of the Squadron only. . . .
                                                          (P.R.O. Ad. 1/176.)

  Pellew’s reading of the instructions was remarkably adroit. By confining
Troubridge to the south of a line due east from Point de Galle as well
as to the east of a line due south, he kept most of the station in his own
hands; and, more especially, he kept Madras and Trincomalee. On the
other hand, it was an obvious quibble. For one thing, it did not make
sense. What could be the point of making /Troubridge responsible for
defending the trade off Ceylon, if he had no base nearer than Penang?
And then again, if Pellew was to keep two-thirds of the station why was
he to be left with only half the ships? The excuse was ingenious, but it
                                       279
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS