




             270
                            PELLEW AND         LINOIS

when the encounter took place and the weather was too rough to allow
the two flagships to make much use of their lower-deck guns. The Blenheim
shipped so much water in trying to fire her 32-pounders that she had three
feet of water in her hold after a few minutes of it. Linois drew off for the
night, reconnoitred the convoy throughout the following day, and finally
‘took himself off’ as Troubridge expressed it. The Blenheim continued on
her way to Madras.
   At this period the Marengo had on board an unsympathetic witness in
the person of Captain Grant of the Brunswick. In his subsequent report
Grant describes the encounter with the Blenheim and convoy and continues
thus :

        . . . Thus did this valuable convoy bid defiance to the Marengo and her
     consort, and I take the liberty of remarking that while the Honorable
     Company’s ships are sufficiently manned, and have the support of one line
     of battle ship, there is little to be apprehended from the force that is at
     present under the command of Rear Admiral Linois, who has often confessed
     to me, that not having any port open for him to resort to in case of any
     accident happening to his ships, and no possible means of replacing a mast,
     should he unfortunately lose one, he is under the absolute necessity of acting
     as a privateer, and that it is therefore equally impolitic for him to risk the
     chance of an action with an equal force.
        As I have been two months at sea on board the Marengo, I have had full
     opportunity to confirm these ideas and to judge of the internal state and
     condition of the ship.... She sails uncommonly fast; but her ship’s company,
     though strong in number, there being 800 men now on board, does not
     possess 100 effective seamen, and is generally composed of a variety of charac¬
     ters of all nations, in which are included 200 Lascars and natives from the Isle
     of France. There does not appear to be the least order or discipline amongst
     their people; all are equal, and each man seems equally conscious of his
     own superiority; and such is the sad state and condition of the Marengo
     that I may with safety affirm, she floats upon the sea as a hulk of
     insubordination, filthiness and folly. . . .
                  (H.E.I.C. Proceedings Relative to Ships, Appendix No. 4229.)

  Although bound to the southward, Linois was not heading for the Isle
of France. As Napoleon had anticipated, that base had become intolerable
owing to his quarrels with Decaen. And he was now resolved to base his
further operations on the Cape of Good Hope. He arrived at Fort Dauphin,
Madagascar, on August 21st, hoping to find the Brunswick there. Hearing
nothing of her, he sailed again at once. On the 24th he fell in with a Danish
ship from the Isle of France and was informed that the English squadron
                                        271
                          WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN     SEAS