

   Pellew’s plans were made, of course, with a knowledge of the Rochefort
squadron’s destination. He would not otherwise have been able to disperse
his ships of the line in this fashion. And, without dispersing ships of the
line, there could be no pursuit. The arrangements made, it will be observed,
did not show the Admiral as committed to any one view of what the enemy
might do. He had provided for the obvious possibilities, and now waited
for further news. None came for the next five weeks. Instead of attempting
to do further damage, the French Admiral had fled southwards and was
                                      268
                          PELLEW AND       LINOIS

soon far beyond the reach of his opponent at Madras. It was well for him
that he did so, for Pellew had already shown himself a far more formidable
strategist than Rainier. Instead of rushing all his forces towards the scene
of the crime, he more or less took it for granted that whoever also might
be off Ceylon after the taking of the Brunswick, it would not be Linois.
His orders were designed to checkmate possible movements towards other
points of vantage. He thus showed a just appreciation of what Linois was
trying to do. ‘As they have many points to guard,’ Linois had written in
1803, ‘their force must necessarily be divided, and I hope to be able to
do them considerable mischief by directing my course successively to very
distant points in the different parts of the Indian Seas.’ Pellew had grasped
the essence of the mosquito’s strategy as well as if he had read this sentence
—which, by the way, he very probably had. Where his sagacity began to
fail was when the mosquitoes multiplied.
  In making off to the southward, Linois had thrown off any immediate
pursuit. But, although he did not know it, he was running into the arms
of yet another adversary; and that was Sir Thomas Troubridge. The
Blenheim and her convoy, bound for Madras, were on a course to the
northward in Long. 8i° E.; that is, on the meridian, roughly speaking, of
Point de Galle—from whence Linois was steering due south. It was not
altogether unnatural that they should meet, and so they eventually did,
in Lat. 190 09' S., Long. 8i° 17' E. on August 7th, nearly a month after the
taking of the Brunswick.
   In the action which followed it would probably be true to say that the
Belle Poule was the decisive factor, although neither side mentioned it.
Had the Marengo been alone, Troubridge would very likely have left his
Indiamen and hurled himself on the French Admiral. It would have been
a very even battle and might have ended in mutual destruction, which would
have been an ideal result from Pellew’s point of view. But Troubridge
could not leave the convoy while the Belle Poule was there, for the frigate
might easily snap up two or three Indiamen while the duel was in
progress.
  Troubridge’s first shots were fired at his own side in an effort to make
them form line of battle. They ultimately did so, and the Blenheim brought
up the rear. Linois, having sent the Brunswick away, made a half-hearted
attack on the convoy, keeping at long range. He discontinued the action
as soon as a few shots from the Blenheim had convinced him that he had
an escort to deal with. ‘I fancy he thought we were all Indiamen,’ wrote
Troubridge, ‘for the moment he made the Blenheim out through the Haze,
he bore away....’ Little damage was done on either side, for it was evening
                                     269
WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS