

  From the French point of view, the departure of Linois was no great
loss. He had not been a success. Had he waged war against English men-
of-war and settlements, he would have served a useful purpose. Insteacf,
he had chosen to play the part of a corsair. It was a part for which he was
unfitted. And, in any case, there was a disproportion between the means
and the end. To use the Marengo as a privateer, to chase merchantmen
in an 8o-gun ship, was like employing a steam-hammer to crack a nut.
Printed in Appendix C will be found a list of vessels taken or destroyed
by Linois’s squadron. It includes the ships taken by the frigates when
cruising   independently.   And   even    so,    it   is   not   impressive.   Three
Indiamen were taken altogether: the Princess Charlotte, the Brunswick
and the Althea, extra ship. Another extra ship was taken by the Psyche
—the Admiral Aplin—but that was in her privateering days. Five large
                                                            ,          ,
country ships were taken, the Countess of Sutherland Henrietta Elvgx Ann           ,
Pearl and Hope', the Upton Castle and the Charlotte should perhaps be
added to the number. These, then, with eight smaller vessels and the
damage done at Bencoolen, were all Linois could show as the results of
between two and three years’ cruising.
  Estimates as to the amount of the damage, as made by Duclos and
Flinders, are more or less valueless. There is an inevitable confusion
between the cost price and the sale price of both ships and cargoes, and
more confusion between the expected and the actual sale price of goods.
There was always, and of necessity, an enormous difference between the
amount lost by the English and the amount gained by the French. The
thing stolen is seldom worth to the thief what it was to the rightful owner.
The Brunswick, for example, was loaded with cotton, the value of which
depended on the fact that it was destined for China, where there were
Chinamen who wanted it. Taken by Linois off Ceylon, the Brunswick was
sent in the opposite direction. And the farther she went from China the
less valuable did the cotton become. Tea, again, was chiefly in demand in
England. Once taken from an English ship, its value sank at once, for it
was no longer on its way to the best market. Where there are so many
uncertainties, little reliance can be placed on French boasts or English
lamentations. Only the amounts paid by the underwriters would give any
certain clue to the damage inflicted.
  Duclos’s statement, on the other hand, of the amount of prize-money
recovered by the squadron is almost certainly accurate. It is a fact he may
be supposed to have known, if only from calculating beforehand what
his own share would amount to. His totals for the whole campaign add
up to 1,821,500 piastres. Allowing the piastre to have been worth five
                                        277
                      WAR    IN THE   EASTERN    SEAS

shillings, this comes to rather more than £455,000. As a quarter of the
proceeds went to the Government, the actual sale amount of vessels and
goods must have been in the region of £600,000. This may have been as
much as a third of the value of what the English lost.
   Now, £600,000 was quite a respectable sum. Yet the fact remains that
what Linois did was no more than any resolute privateer might have done;
and indeed it was no mo|,e than one privateer actually did. Linois had to
divide his profits between four ships. The resulting average of £150,000
per ship is exactly what was made by La Henrietta, privateer, during the
first sixteen months of the war. If Linois had been made to deduct his
expenses from his gross profits, he would presumably have found himself
confronted with a deficit.
  As Linois’s discomfiture left but one French man-of-war in the Indian
Ocean, it was now to be expected that some vigorous action would be
taken by the English against the French and Dutch headquarters. Plans
for such an offensive were, indeed, already under discussion. But all such
schemes were shattered by the division of the command, which fatal
arrangement left the English naval forces all but incapable of effective
action for twelve months to come.
  We left Troubridge pursuing his voyage to Madras after his encounter
with the Marengo. He arrived at his destination on 23rd August, 1805,
and hastened to show his orders to Pellew. The orders were to take over
the command of half the squadron—fourteen ships, to be exact, two being
of the line. His station was to be to the east of a line drawn due south
from Point de Galle. He was to be independent of the commander-in-chief
of the station to the west of the line; but in case a superior squadron of
the enemy should approach, a saving clause allowed the senior flag officer
to resume command of the whole or part of the ships of the line assigned
to serve on the eastern station.
  Pellew had heard something of the Admiralty’s plan of dividing the
command as early as July 22nd. Knowing that the proposal was insane
in itself, and intended chiefly to bring about his ruin, he had already
decided to evade his orders by every possible means. His first move was
to take Troubridge under his command. Troubridge, according to an
eye-witness, ‘protested strongly against it and was very violent.’ What
followed is best told in Troubridge’s words.