

  After his long period of refitting at the Isle of France, Linois sailed for
his third cruise on 22nd May, 1805. The Semillante having gone to the
Philippines, and L’Atalante having gone to cruise off the Cape of Good
Hope, the Marengo had the Belle Poule as her only consort. Captain Osborn
was attempting to blockade the Isle of France at that time, but Lirt'ois,
having ascertained his exact position from an American ship, had no difficulty
in avoiding him. The French ships then proceeded to the Seychelles, where
they watered, sailing again from Mahe on June nth. They were in sight
of the Laccadives on the 30th.
    When nearing Ceylon, Linois fell in with the ship Prime, a cartel out
of Bombay. Pellew had sought to arrange a general exchange of prisoners
almost as soon as he arrived on the station, and the Prime was bound for
the Isle of France with a shipload of Frenchmen. She was sailing, of course,
under a flag of truce. The French Admiral stopped her and compelled the
officer in charge to give up seventy-five of the prisoners. This was utterly
irregular in that an exchange needed to be arranged and ratified by accredited
agents, and could not take place like this in mid-ocean even if the English
officer had been ready to consent to it; which, in fact, he was not. Decaen
expressed his disapproval—he usually did where Linois was at all concerned
—and Pellew afterwards declared the whole proceeding void, whatever
that may have meant. In the meanwhile, however, the deed was done.
Forty-eight men went to the Marengo and twenty-seven to the Belle Poule,
and this very likely brought their complements up to strength. Another,
and unforeseen, result was the taking of the H.C.S. Brunswick.
    The Brunswick was a China ship and one of the fleet present when
Rainier met Pellew at Prince of Wales Island. She was then in a leaking
condition, having grounded on Second Bar while on her way up to
Whampoa. It was in the evening when the fleet had got under way, and
the Chinese had marked the channel with a hundred boats carrying lights.
At one point, one of the two Chinese pilots on board the Brunswick had
called out ‘port littee’ at the same moment as the other said ‘starboard,
littee.’ The disaster had not been caused by that, but by Captain Grant
kicking one of the pilots overboard, which led the Chinese to extinguish
their lights. Next morning had found three Indiamen aground. All three
were damaged, and it was this which caused the dispute at Penang. The
commanders of these three ships refused to accept convoy to Madras as
it would entail rounding the Cape at the worst time of year; or so, at least,
they said. The Brunswick was more seriously damaged than the other two,
and, not long after they sailed, her leaks increased so much that it was
thought necessary for her to go to Bombay. There she was docked and
                                     266
                              PELLEW AND        LINOIS

her cargo transhipped to homeward bound Indiamen. As it was then too
late for her to proceed to England, it was decided to send her back
to China.
  This decision of the Bombay Government was highly gratifying to
Captain Grant. He thus accidentally achieved what was for many the
ambition of a lifetime. He not only had the coveted privilege of a voyage
from Bombay to China, but his was also the first ship of the year. He
determined to sail as early as possible. He was unfortunate, however, in
being at Bombay during the period when Pellew was doing his utmost
to find crews for his newly acquired frigates. Practically the whole of the
Brunswick’s crew was impressed. Captain Grant was therefore ‘obliged to
hire French sailmakers out of the prison to repair our sails.’ The cartel
put to sea shortly afterwards with these same Frenchmen on board. It was
from them that Linois learnt all he could wish to know about the Brunswick.
They knew the date of her sailing, her destination, and the fact that she
would be without naval protection. They could also, of course, be relied
upon to recognize her at a glance.
  Captain Grant sailed on July ist, in company with three country ships,
and laboriously worked his way down the coast in the teeth of the monsoon.
Two of the country ships lost touch with him in the dark, so that only
the Sarah was present on the nth when the Marengo appeared. The
Brunswick was manned mainly by Chinese and lascars and could do nothing
but surrender. Linois reported afterwards (23 Messidor, An. 13) that the
Indiamen mounted 30 guns but with ports for 60 or even 64. Some of
her guns were struck down in the hold as ballast and there were only
twenty white seamen aboard. The Sarah ran herself on shore near Fort
de Galle, for it was off Ceylon that the incident took place. Grant would
have     done   the same with       the   Brunswick    but   was overhauled      too
quickly. Satisfied with his prize, and afraid to linger in search of the
other two country ships, Linois made sail to the southward so as to avoid
pursuit.
  News of this capture quickly reached Colombo and Madras.