

was too flimsy to uphold. Pellew changed his ground eventually. Indeed,
he had to. The argument was a sound opening, as it took the wind out
of Troubridge’s sails and shook his self-confidence generally. But it left
Pellew no pretext for retaining any of the ships assigned to Troubridge.
The instructions were explicit as regards the ships, having a list of names
in the margin. The only way of withholding compliance on this point was
to play for time.
   As soon as Troubridge had recovered from the astonishment he naturally
felt at his rival’s coolness, he asked Pellew to explain his point of view
in writing. In answer to his note—they were not on speaking terms by
that time—he received a carefully worded non-committal reply. There was
no hope of using it against Pellew later on, for there was no obvious method
of discovering what it meant. Pellew had not decided where he was to
make his stand, and so would not as yet commit himself in writing. The
same caution is apparent in his letter to the Admiralty of September 8th.
There he merely states his intention of escorting the whole China convoy
' to Prince of Wales Island, and of waiting there to protect the homeward
bound trade. He goes on to say that he will afterwards ‘proceed to the
completion of their Lordships’ arrangement agreeably to their Instructions
already noted, according to the existing circumstances, both in relation to
the Enemy’s force now to the Eastward as well as the general state of this
part of His Majesty’s Empire at large, always keeping in view the high
responsibility with which I am invested, and acting to the best of my
judgement and discretion. . . .’ The words underlined are not so emphasized
in the original, and they would not, in themselves, excite much comment
at the Admiralty. But, laid alongside Troubridge’s letter, they would be
enough to prepare their Lordships for what was to come.
   The movement to the eastward to protect the China fleet was a following
of precedent, and it was natural that Pellew should take Troubridge with
him. The convoy actually proceeded in two divisions, one on September 6th,
with Troubridge, and the other on the ioth, with Pellew. The escort
consisted of the two flagships, the Sceptre (74), Greyhound (32), Concorde (36),
Dedaigneuse (32), Rattlesnake (18) and Albatross (18); or, at any rate, it
did so by the time they reassembled at Penang on the 23rd. There,
while waiting for the division from Bombay, with the Sir Edward Hughes,
and for two other ships from Bengal, the two Admirals resumed their
discussions. Pellew proposed a compromise. He would allow Troubridge
to have the ships assigned him, but the dividing line between the two
commands should be 82!° E., which would have the effect of bringing
Madras and Trincomalee into the western station. He suggested that the
                                      280
                         THE   COMMAND       DIVIDED

commanders-in-chief should share patronage and emolument equally between
them. On Troubridge refusing to agree to this, Pellew informed him that
he intended, nevertheless, to divide the command on these lines. A final
interview on the 30th brought the two Admirals no nearer an amicable
agreement; and, on the same day, the rubicon crossed, Pellew wrote his
memorandum on the division of the command. It was sent to the Admiralty,
together with copies of his correspondence with Troubridge. The following
extracts contain the gist of his argument.