

    the cover of a defensive Squadron and should such a Force as that stated to
    be preparing for the East Indies at Brest be directed against it with an
    adequate body of Troops they might unless deterred by the presence of His
    Majesty’s Ships, rush into the Fort, and probably carry the Garrison by
    Coup de Main. At this momentous Crisis when it is known that one con¬
    siderable Expedition has been directed against our „Colonies in the East
    Indies and, from their Lordships Information another of greater magnitude
    is preparing at Brest as supposed for this Country, it behoves me to use
    every caution to take the best possible measures for the security of the
    British Possessions in India, more especially when I reflect upon the State
    of Politics in Europe, and the operation of the Intelligence which will have
    been received relative to the military Events which have taken place in the
    Interior of India, which though now wearing a more favourable aspect may
    have excited in the Enemy strong expectations of success in any attempt
    of this nature. The purpose of invasion may perhaps have been at present
    abandoned for the more feasible design of a General Attack upon our
    Colonial possessions, and occasioning a necessity for detaching largely
    from home defence.
                                                        (P.R.O. Adm. 1/176.)

   As soon as the state of the weather enabled Pellew to communicate with
the shore at Madras, which was by no means always possible at that time
of year, he received a further dispatch dated June 4th, confirming the
contents of the earlier one. He also heard of the peace made with the native
powers, news of the death of Lord Cornwallis coming simultaneously.
Then, as it was unwise to linger on the coast in November, he sailed on
the 3rd for Ceylon. Before he sailed, however, and perhaps as a result
of his consultation with the Government at Fort St. George, his views
seem to have changed on the subject of Trincomalee. He wrote, at any
rate, on the 2nd, saying ‘My attention will be carefully directed to the
safety of the Coasts of the Peninsula and Ceylon, viewing Bombay, Goa
and Trincomaley as the most important objects of Defence.’ And it was
in this order of importance that he seems to have viewed them henceforth,
to judge fom his movements. For, with but a short pause at Trincomalee,
he proceeded directly to Bombay.
  Arriving at Bombay, with a part of the squadron, on December 14th,
Pellew received the news of ‘the defeat of the combined fleet by Sir R.
Calder.’ He had still no assurance, however, as to the destination of the
expedition from Brest. He therefore thought it best to keep the line of
battleships on the Malabar coast, venturing to detach the Lancaster only,
which he sent to protect the homeward-bound China fleet off Pulo-Aur.
He felt more confident in detaching this ship because he was now reinforced
                                     286
                        THE COMMAND DIVIDED