

    Hickey cannot be relied upon for facts but he usually conveys a
sufficiently convincing idea of atmosphere. His account of British losses
may not be strictly accurate, but it is probably what the merchants
and underwriters were telling each other. There was no real naval
remedy, short of a strict convoy system or a strong expedition against
the Isle of France. And to a convoy system the Bengal merchants
—unlike those of Bombay—were opposed. As far back as 1799, Rainier
was writing that he had ‘frequently taken occasion to point out to the
merchants the security that would result to their trade from their ships
sailing with convoy. . . .’; but he had sagely added ‘I am, however, induced
to believe ’tis a plan not very compatible with the nature of the trade
they carry on. . . .’ Indeed, it was not. You cannot go on a smuggling
expedition with naval escort. And even the rice trade admitted of no
waiting for a convoy to collect. The habit of putting the blame on the
naval commander-in-chief was also of some antiquity. There was a com¬
plaint in the Bengal Gazette of 1781 of the bay being infested with French
privateers, reigning unmolested to the great impediment of trade; ‘But the
A-1 seems deaf to every complaint of this kind . . . however if he so
barefacedly neglects this part of his duty.. . .’ etc., etc. The problem was
no new one.
   Pellew was convinced that the oft-discussed expedition to the Isle of
France was the only means of putting an end to the French privateering
activities. On 4th January, 1806, he sent a proposal for such an expedition
to the Governor-General. Sir George Barlow, who had automatically
succeeded to the office on the death of Cornwallis, was not the man to
listen to such a project. According to Hickey, he was ‘a compound of
meanness and pride without a particle of genius’; and, whether this
description is accurate or not, he was certainly filled with a fanatical
parsimony where the Company was concerned. It was a rare quality, with
much to commend it in domestic affairs; but in war a rigid economy is
apt to defeat its own ends. When the Hon. Philip Dundas wrote from
Prince of Wales Island in 1805, asking for funds with which to improve
the defences of Fort Cornwallis, and especially for more troops and more
artillery, he received a reply which may be taken as typical of Barlow’s
mood. The Governor-General began by stating his fears that ‘the utmost
                                    288
                         THE   COMMAND       DIVIDED

exertion of public Credit, added to the whole of our Resources, will not
enable us to meet even these Demands which we know to be certain and
unavoidable’ and ended by refusing to send reinforcements until peace
was made. It is hardly to be wondered at that Pellew should receive a
similar reply a few months later. There was no money for such enterprises,
and there was an end of it.
    Barlow was exceptional in his anxiety for the Company’s finances. Most
 officials in India were quite content to let things slide; and most would
have agreed in the policy of attacking the French islands—if only through
being personally interested in the country trade. But Barlow had the
support, and indeed the positive orders, of the Court of Directors, with
which to repel all warlike proposals. And here it must be observed that
the Company, as such, suffered little at the hands of the privateers.
Indiamen could usually look after themselves where mere privateers were
concerned. On 28th November, 1805, for example, the Admiral Gardner
beat off the Jeune Adele, privateer of 32 guns, after nearly two hours’
fighting. It was among the country trade that the havoc was wrought.
The directors were not altogether deaf to complaints from Calcutta, but
they were sufficiently cool on the subject to delay action in the hope that
the expedition might be undertaken by the home Government. And what,
after all, was more likely, considering that the Cape of Good Hope was
sure to be attacked sooner or later ?
    On receiving from Barlow a reply in which financial difficulties and the
orders of the Court were pleaded, and the suggestion made that the islands
should rather be attacked by an expedition from England, Pellew did not
fail to pass on the idea to the Admiralty. He enclosed a copy of his own
original proposal with his dispatch of 12th February, 1806, and declared
himself well assured that,