

by the Tremendous. Osborn had quitted his station off the Isle of France
in the middle of August, leaving the frigates Pitt and Terpsichore to
continue the blockade. The Tremendous was worn out and due to return
to England, with convoy, in March 1806. On December 20th Pellew had
                                                                 ,
the following ships within call, ready for emergencies: Culloden Tremendous    ,
      ,         ,
Albion Sceptre Russel and Grampus. At this period the Squadron was
strengthened by the purchase of another country ship, the Asia, bought
at Bombay for £28,000 and renamed Sir Francis Drake. At this time
also, on December 27th, the news came of Linois being at the Cape and
expected to cruise between there and St. Helena. More news followed
which laid at rest all immediate fears of an expedition from Brest. Pellew
was thus left free to consider the problem of how to deal with the
privateers from the Isle of France.
   The French privateers at this time were thought to number about ten.
Four had from 30 to 36 guns, one had 24, three had 16 or 18, and there
          or two smaller ones. The best-known at this time were:

          Napoleon       Le Nouvel              8 guns          1805-6
          Amelie         Le Nouvel             14 guns
          Henriette      Henri                  8 guns          1803-6
          Deux Soeurs    Desjean Hilaire                        1806
          Fortune        Frangois Lememe       12-24 guns       1804

The Revenant, Robert Surcouf, of 18 guns and 192 men, was even better
known, but operated rather later, in 1807. This was the period of Surcouf’s
spectacular return to his old cruising ground, described in a later chapter.
Exact figures about these privateers are unobtainable, either of their
numbers or the numbers of their victims. Nor is it possible to follow their
movements. The Bay of Bengal, however, was their usual hunting ground,
and Pellew heard of five prizes falling to them while he was at Bombay.
The division of the command was entirely favourable to their activities,
for merchants did not know to whom to apply for convoy. A number
of the English cruisers, incidentally, were to the eastward with Troubridge
when they might perhaps have been employed more profitably in the bay.
The merchants began to complain, and the substance of their lament duly
found its way into the pages of William Hickey’s memoirs.
      . . . With such eminent nautical men as Pellew and Troubridge the mer¬
    chants flattered themselves that the Indian Seas would be kept quite free of
    French privateers or cruisers of any description, in which expectation,
    however, they were sadly disappointed. The two rival Admirals, jealous
    of each other’s line of command, soon began to dispute and actually to
                                     287
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

    quarrel, mutually upbraiding and taxing each other with neglect, during
    which dissensions the British trade, instead of being protected from the
    attacks of the enemy, suffered in a far greater degree than at any former
    period, more ships being captured in one twelvemonth than during the
    four preceding years. . . .