

                                            283
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

   The effect of Pellew’s memorandum was to postpone the complete
execution of the Admiralty’s orders until some further instructions should
arrive to enforce or modify those originally sent. On another station this
would have seemed a far less desperate proceeding. In the East Indies it
meant, in effect, disobeying orders for a year. If,. moreover, the new
instructions left any loophole, it was in Pellew’s power to apply respectfully
for further explanation, and so gain another year. To Troubridge, at least,
it seemed possible that Pellew would thus continue to raise objections
indefinitely, ‘go on quibbling for ever,’ and so remain in supreme command
until definitely recalled. As regards the personal conflict between Pellew
and Troubridge, it is perhaps fair to remember that Pellew’s personal
papers have survived while Troubridge’s were lost. We thus know exactly
what Pellew thought of his rival but rather less of what Troubridge thought
of Pellew. ‘Sir Thomas is more outrageous than ever,’ wrote Pellew to
Sir Evan Nepean, ‘and from a public correspondence full of invective and
low insinuation, has now commenced a private one of no less scurrility
and abuse. Language which degrades the Gentleman is ever flowing from
his lips. ... I wish to God I was out of it. I would rather command a
Frigate with her Bowsprit over the rocks of Ushant all my Life, than
command here on such terms: for Heaven’s sake call one of us home. . . .’
To a friend Pellew wrote, ‘Sir T. Troubridge ... is I fear a weak man—
entirely commanded by his passion; who is every week dishonouring
himself by striking some of his Midshipmen or anybody else who comes
in his way. . . .’ But writing to Admiral Markham, in a more reflective
mood, he wrote, ‘We are both warm enough, God knows; but brothers
could not agree as we are placed.’ And that is very near the truth of the
matter. Troubridge evidently intended to challenge Pellew at some future
date and only death prevented him.
  It will be observed that Pellew did not go so far as to suspend their
Lordships’ orders touching the division of the squadron. Troubridge was
to have the ships he had been assigned, although not immediately; for
it was Pellew’s intention first to reconnoitre, and probably attack, the
Dutch squadron at Batavia. Before anything could be done, however, the
situation was altered by the arrival of the Russel from Madras on October ist.
Pellew had been waiting for her, meaning to sail for Batavia as soon as
she should arrive. She brought a dispatch which had come by overland
mail, ‘their Lordships’ Secret letter in Cypher of the 7th May,’ which
conveyed the warning that a considerable French force might arrive very
shortly in the Indian Seas. The danger was real, for in January 1805
Napoleon had in fact ordered squadrons to be equipped at Brest, Rochefort
                                     284
                         THE    COMMAND       DIVIDED