

    effect me. I see nothing to hinder us from launching 74-gun ships, frigates
    and sloops. . . .
   There were in fact several hindrances he did not see; and the joke of
taking Philip Dundas in search of timber was rather spoilt by the latter’s
death in 1807. The plans for shipbuilding were shelved in 1809 and the
Government at Penang eventually placed on a less ambitious and more
economical establishment.
   While Troubridge explored Penang, the Blenheim meanwhile reached
Macao on 16th December, 1806, having gone with her convoy by the
                                      ,
Straits of Macassar. The Cornwallis Phaeton and Harrier operated in the
China Seas and the Lancaster arrived to act as escort for the China fleet
on its voyage to St. Helena. This convoy was very much delayed in 1806,
and it was not until April 2nd that Troubridge sailed to protect the last
division of Indiamen. By that time he had recovered the Blenheim, and
sent the Lancaster off with thirteen of the China ships. There were four
more to come, and Troubridge determined to meet them off Pulo-Aur
                  ,
with the Blenheim Sir Edward Hughes and Harrier. He intended to proceed
afterwards to the Coromandel coast, but all his plans were upset on April 6th.
For on that day the Blenheim grounded on a sandbank in the Straits of
Malacca. As luck would have it, this disaster took place at high water, on
a spring tide. Troubridge and his crew worked for days, trying to heave
her off at every flood, and in the end they succeeded. The ship’s water
was started soon after she went ashore and the heavy stores heaved over¬
board soon afterwards. A raft was made to take other stores to the Sir
Edward Hughes. Then the guns and shot were jettisoned. The ship still
lay inert, and, by the third day, the situation seemed hopeless, with the
ship heeling over in but seven feet of water at low tide with an equal depth
of water in her hold. Her masts were next cut away. This righted her,
and she was floated again on the 10th, to return, crippled, to Penang. The
indomitable Troubridge saved what he could of her stores and then set
to work to carry out repairs.
   There was a certain fatality attending Troubridge in his last years. It
so happened that the Blenheim had been built as a 90-gun ship in 1761,
and reduced to a third-rate only in 1801. She had still the under-water
dimensions of a three decker. She was consequently some few inches too
long to enter the old dock at Bombay—a fact which was known.1 The
new dock would have taken her, but was not yet completed. It was only
in a state of forwardness, as Pellew reported at about that time. The only
way to repair the Blenheims hull was to heave her down where she was,
                                  1 See p. 144.

                                      291
                       WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

at Penang. The difficulty had been foreseen to the extent of sending out
the necessary tackle for the purpose. But careening does a wooden ship
no good after she has been at sea for forty-five years; that is to say, it
may stop the leaks but will also weaken the frame. To Troubridge, a man
of St. Vincent’s school, the word ‘cannot’ was unknown. His motto was
not to make difficulties, and he duly set to work. But Pellew wrote to the
Admiralty ‘I much doubt whether the Blenheim can be considered fit for
any Active Service.’ It was a conclusion which events were to justify.
   Pellew quitted Bombay on February 23rd, and was off Point de Galle
on March 16th, supervising the departure of the convoy for England. He
was joined by the Pitt and Terpsichore, returning from the Isle of France,
the one with a hundred and twenty men on the sick list with scurvy, the
other damaged by going ashore and lacking most of her guns, which had
been jettisoned. Sending them to Bombay to refit, he came into Madras
roads on March 22nd. There, on April 17th, he received a reinforcement
in the shape of the Powerful (74). Sir John Duckworth, cruising with a
squadron off the C. de Verde Islands, had sighted, without being able to
overtake, a French squadron of six sail of the line. Judging that they were
bound for the East or West Indies, he had at once detached the Powerful
to warn and reinforce Pellew, while he himself intended to sail for
Barbados. On the 22nd a convoy arrived from England with the
Belliqueux, a 64-gun ship which came to take the place of the Tremendous.
She brought no news, but on the 30th a gun-brig appeared from the Cape
of Good Hope, bearing the tale of the capture of that settlement, together
with further but more doubtful intelligence of the French squadron from
Brest. Pellew made his arrangements for meeting the danger. The detach¬
ment off the Isle of France already had orders to fall back on Madras if
threatened by superior forces, and it was there that Pellew meant to
concentrate. Not having heard of the Blenheims misfortune, he hoped to
add her to his strength as soon as she should arrive.
   No further news arrived of the French danger, but on July 29th a
dispatch arrived which interested Pellew as much as could any intelligence
of the enemy. It was from the Admiralty, acknowledging his various
memoranda on the division of the command. It conveyed no decision,
but the mere fact that judgment was suspended was wholly in his favour.
If the Cabinet were considering the question, his arguments were fairly
certain to carry the day. The risk had been that the matter should be
treated, first and foremost, as a breach of discipline. St. Vincent, for example,
had he been in power, would have refused to discuss the points at issue.
He would have said that the question was, whether orders were to be
                                         292
                        THE   COMMAND      DIVIDED