

obeyed or not; and this was a question on which he had made up his mind
at an early stage in his career. Events, however, were shaping themselves
in Pellew’s favour. Melville was ruined and Pitt was dead, and from
impartial minds Pellew knew what kind of decision was to be expected.
    During the summer of 1806 an event occurred which might have
seemed to postpone indefinitely all chance of an expedition from India
against the French islands. This was the mutiny at Vellore. During its
crisis, the marines of the squadron were landed to occupy Fort St. George
while the regular garrison hastened to the scene of the massacre. The
 outbreak itself was soon suppressed, but the anxiety which resulted from
it, and the possibility of the French being encouraged thereby to attempt
an invasion, were enough to impose a policy of caution for years to come.
So Pellew had to maintain the blockade of Mauritius as well as he could.
 The Russel was relieved by the Albion and the Albion by the Sceptre.
Nevertheless, the news was not good. Two new French frigates had
arrived at the Isle of France, the Piemontaise (40) and Cannoniere. The
Piemontaise was a fine new frigate built in 1802-3. Epron, her commander,
 said of this ship, ‘il est impossible d’avoir de meilleur qualites que cette
fregate.’ The Cannoniere (48) had been the English Minerve captured after
grounding near Cherbourg in 1803—originally a French ship, however.
These, the Semillante (32), and the privateers continued to enter and leave
port, and there seemed no way of preventing them. An Indiaman, moreover,
the Warren Hastings, was taken by the first-named frigate and brought
into Port Louis with impunity.
    As for the privateers, four of the most formidable were taken during
the period 1805-6. But it was already clear that taking them did little
to reduce their numbers. The men who manned them had to be exchanged
in order to obtain the release of English prisoners, who were ill-treated
at the Isle of France and could not in humanity be left there. The ships
themselves, if sold, were bought by neutrals and resold to the French
‘amateurs.’ Discovering this, the Admiral bought into the service such
larger ships as the Bellone; while the smaller craft were sometimes sunk
or burnt. But this was no final solution to the problem. Captured English
merchantmen were turned into privateers and specially built vessels sent
out from France. There was no method of discouraging them. Indeed,
the men of Port Louis were, in a manner, forced to engage in this kind
of enterprise. There was nothing else for them to do. The English blockade
was at least effective enough to prevent much trading, except through the
neutrals. And it may be added that the neutrals, who were also the receivers
of stolen goods, were always ready to supply information as to where the
                                    293
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

richest prizes were to be found. Port Louis, again, was a slave-trading port,
and the history of Liverpool shows how readily the slaver turned into
a privateer. The two occupations were alike in demanding courage; and,
of the two, privateering was perhaps the less dangerous.
   October 1806 found Pellew still at Madras and still in ignorance as to
the Admiralty’s final decision, or at any rate without any official com¬
munication on the subject. But he was confident now that his action was
approved, and was making his plans accordingly. Rumour was still rife
of the approach of a French squadron from Europe.
       A report which was now prevalent throughout the British possessions
    in India occasioned considerable anxiety and alarm, especially amongst the
    mercantile people. This was that Jerome Bonaparte, brother to the tyrant
    of France, with a powerful squadron of ships of war, had escaped the vigilance
    of the British Fleet and had arrived in the Indian Seas, being at that time
    in the Dutch port of Batavia; it was further said that the fleet had brought
    out upwards of two thousand military men! The whole, however, turned
    out to be utterly without foundation, probably fabricated by some of the
    French emissaries resident in Calcutta, of which description of persons it
    was well known there was a great number. . . .
   The above is Hickey’s account, more valuable as gossip than history.
The ubiquity of enemy spies is presumably well known in every war. To
detect espionage is a sport beloved of the civilian mind. But, as far as is
known, Decaen relied for information on the French agent at the Danish
colony of Tranquebar. Hickey is again at fault in stating that the rumour
was utterly baseless. Two French squadrons had in fact escaped, and one
(under Willaumez, not Jerome) had gone as far as St. Helena. This was
not on the usual route to the West Indies, and it is not to be wondered at if
rumour would have it that the squadron was bound to the eastwards.
   These reports made a certain impression on Pellew, the more so because
the news he had received officially was, in the main, corroborative. It would
also be true to say that he was very willing to be impressed. Rumours
of a threatened French offensive were enough to constitute that state of
emergency which justified his retaining the ships of the line under his
command; a state which he had held to exist ever since Troubridge arrived.
He was eager, again, to find some excuse for an attack on Batavia. His
career demanded that his name should appear prominently in the Gaiette
from time to time, and Batavia offered the best opportunity for a certain
and easy success. It may be asked what Batavia had to do with the expected
French squadron; to which the answer must be that such a squadron might
seek the co-operation of Hartsinck. It is not a very convincing answer.
                                        294
                       THE   COMMAND      DIVIDED