

                                  282
                             THE    COMMAND          DIVIDED

      to the Commercial         and    Territorial    possessions   of the Honourable
      Company....
         Concurring fully in their Lordships’ Sentiments, I am well satisfied that
      more than one Flag Officer may be employed with very essential advantage
      on a Station so extended as that of the India Seas, and especially that a
      separate Command may be allotted to the Eastern side of India. The pro¬
      tection of the rising Colony of Prince of Wales Island, and the security of
      the important and rapidly increasing Trade carried on by the Country Ships
      between India and China, together with the observation of the Enemy’s
      possessions in that quarter, would engage all the attention of a distinct
      Command, while the charge of the Coasts of the Peninsula and Ceylon
      and the protection of the Convoys passing between the Ports of India and
      Europe, would furnish the more important Duty of the Senior Admiral.
         The Defence of the Honourable Company’s Principal Possessions when
      threatened by any hostile Attack from an Enemy’s Squadron would require
      that the Chief part of the Line of Battle Ships should be placed under his
      immediate Authority to enable him to arrange them at all times with a view
      to their ready co-operation, as otherwise, when employed in two far distant
      quarters of India, and acting under the Orders of different Commanders,
      as at present, many months would necessarily elapse before they could be
      assembled, and an Enemy’s Fleet arriving in these Seas, would have leisure
      to execute any views of hostility before the equivalent Force could possibly
      be collected to defeat their designs. . . .
      (P.R.O. Adm. 1/176.)                                                  Ed. Pellew.

   Instead of looking for flaws in Troubridge’s commission, Pellew had
wisely taken his stand on higher ground. In the above memorandum he
did not fail to point out the injury done to himself in confining him ‘to
the Presidency third in rank,’ but his main contention was impersonal and
sufficiently convincing. It is possible that he did rather less than justice
to Bombay as a place of shelter during the south-west monsoon. On the
other hand, he omitted an argument which was almost equally conclusive
against leaving a squadron there. For even if ships of the line ran no
appalling risk while at anchor in the harbour—and it is only fair to say
that such ships had survived the experience, even during the worst gales1
—their presence there could serve no useful purpose. For at that season
there was, speaking generally, no trade to protect and no enemy to fear.
It would be a pitiful economy of effort to leave half the squadron idle for
half the year.

  1 The example to the contrary was in the storm of 4th November, 1799, when over a
hundred vessels and five hundred lives were lost, H.M. Ship Resolution going to pieces under
the castle walls. See Glimpses of Old Bombay. James Douglas.