

        At this extreme distance from England, on a Station so far removed from
     their observation, I conceive their Lordships may not have been fully
     apprized of the various local considerations which will operate against the
     proposed Division of the Command, and that when these circumstances
     shall be laid before them, and reviewing the subject with additional Lights,
     their Lordships’ opinions may experience an essential change, and it will
     appear distinctly that should the proposed arrangement be carried fully
     into adoption, it cannot fail of being attended with prejudicial consequences
     and extreme inconveniences to those entrusted with its completion.
        Upon an Attentive examination of their Lordships’ Instructions for the
     separation of the Command, I observe that I am still vested with the weighty
     responsibility of providing for the general protection of our Possessions in
     this Country, by the authority given to me of resuming command of the
     whole number of line of Battle ships, so often as present impending danger
     shall render such a measure necessary, although I am restricted by those
     Instructions within a Line of Division which does not afford any eligible
     station where I could meet with effect the hostile operations of an Enemy’s
     Squadron.
        The danger of wintering at Bombay and the consequent practice of
    removing to the Coast of Coromandel during the South West Monsoon
    has uniformly prevailed. The Harbour of Bombay affords no adequate shelter
    during that Season for Ships of the Line—upon several occasions Merchant
     Ships which from their lesser draught of Water are able to take a station
    nearer to the Shore, have been driven from their anchors and wrecked during
    the prevalence of those tremendous Gales. Should the Squadron assigned
    to the Western Division remain at Sea during the continuance of that
    Monsoon, unless it proceeds across the Line it must be exposed to the
    severest weather with the probability of being crippled, without having a safe
    Port to resort to, and while thus disabled from active operations, no impedi¬
    ment to the hostile views of the Enemy could be afforded for the security
    of the Company’s Possessions.
        Madras has from a variety of considerations been hitherto established as
    the chief Station of the Commander in Chief in the East Indies. Its centrical
    situation for the purposes of ready communication with the several Presi-
                                      281
                  WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

dencies, and the receipt of intelligence from Europe, is obvious. It is the
point where the Fleet may be most readily assembled upon emergency, and
upon almost every occasion its vicinity has been the Theatre of those Actions
which have heretofore distinguished His Majesty’s Naval Service in these
Seas. From its great advantages of obtaining the several Articles of Supply
from other Ports of the Bay of Bengal, Madras has been long established as
the principal Depot of Naval Stores; The Victualling of the whole Squadron
and the only Naval' Hospital for the ships of His Majesty’s service
in the East Indies, have been fixed at this Presidency from considerations of
obvious Utility and convenience.
   Under their Fordships’ Instructions of the 24th September last, I had
given every consideration to the means of continuing the Blockade of Port
Louis in the most effectual manner. Many difficulties presented themselves
in carrying on that Service without interruption as well from its extreme
distance from our Settlements as from the inexpediency of keeping the Crews
during so protracted a period on Salt Provisions, who, from long
Service in this Country, are very generally affected with Scorbutic and
Ulcerous Complaints, which have increased to an alarming degree, as will
appear from the Hospital Reports. The limited number of ships now assigned
to my Command will not possibly permit of my relieving the Force which
may hereafter be employed off the Isle of France so frequently, as from these
considerations, I have previously proposed.
   The necessity of preserving a constant Force of Line of Battle Ships
concentrated for the Protection of the Company’s Possessions, is sufficiently
manifested by the Instructions of their Lordships of old date to my Pre¬
decessors, which have been reiterated on a late occasion to me, in the month
of June last when a French Naval Force was expected to proceed to India
from Rochefort and which established the principle as a Point of indispensable
Policy. . . .
   ... I have determined to adhere to the precise letter of their Lordships
Instructions in every point consistent with my sense of the public interests,
reserving only the Fort of Madras within my own direction, from a deliberate
Conviction of the necessity of making that coast the Principal defensive
Station in case of Emergency, until upon reference to their Lordships’
consideration of the Arguments I have done myself the Honour to submit
to them in the foregoing paragraphs, I shall receive their final judgement on
the Question.. . .
   I take the liberty of offering to their Lordships a deliberate opinion
that the Public Interests will be most effectually secured by placing under
the Charge of the Senior Admiral the protection of both the Coasts of the
Peninsula of India, and the island of Ceylon, who, thus vested with a com¬
prehensive charge, inseparably connected in all its bearings may be enabled
to reconcile the various contending Interests and provide an adequate Security