

    . . . altho the limitations under which the Governor General is placed, may
    not permit of his accepting of such an offer of co-operation, the dispos¬
    session of the French from the Isles of France and Bourbon, can alone secure
    the safety of the British Commerce in the Indian Seas from these depredations
    which it is otherwise so difficult to restrain, and to which, from Con¬
    siderations of Commercial Insurance, the Country Trade is voluntarily
    exposed, by the eagerness of the Owners to anticipate early Markets for their
    Cargoes, at the hazard of Capture.
                                                         (P.R.O. Adm. 1/177.)

  Thwarted in his desire for a combined expedition, and well aware that
no purely naval attack could make any impression on the French base,
                                      289                                    K
                          WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

Pellew did his best to maintain the blockade. To this end, he sent the
Russel, Duncan and Psyche to relieve the Pitt and Terpsichore. It was a
hopeless enterprise, for what Osborn failed to do with four ships was
hardly to be done by his successor with three. A squadron of six sail was
necessary, if, indeed, the islands could be blockaded at all. And, as such
a force would have to be relieved periodically by another squadron of
equal strength, Pellew cOuld have made the blockade effective by devoting
his entire squadron to the task but in no other way. It may be doubted
whether his reduced force would have been sufficient, even had there been
no other duties to perform. Taking into account the continual need for
refitting and docking, a squadron of fourteen or fifteen sail can seldom
have had an effective strength of twelve. As it was, there were other duties
to attend to, and it was as much as Pellew could do to keep three ships off
the Isle of France, with another three in readiness to relieve them.
   At Prince of Wales Island, meanwhile, Troubridge was striving to
collect his squadron. His minor grievances included, at first, an ignorance
of where Pellew had gone and why. He also complained that all his ships
had been dispatched elsewhere, and he himself left stranded without his
flagship and without his squadron. He occupied himself in studying
Penang’s resources as a naval base. This was the period when Penang,
or Prince of Wales Island, was being developed as the eastern base of the
divided East Indies command. The idea originated from Henry Dundas.
who in 1805 had influence over both Admiralty and India House. The
settlement was made a presidency and was also to be made a dockyard.1
Thus, in February 1806, Philip Dundas, the governor, informed the Court
of Directors of his intention ‘ ... of laying down the keel of a large Frigate,
without delay’ with expectation of a 74-gun ship to follow. On 29th March,
1806, Troubridge wrote to Lord Sidmouth:

        I am still shut up here by Sir E. Pellew . . . but I have not been idle. . . .
     I have just returned from a thirteen hours row and sail along the Coast and
     up the River looking at Timber; by way of treat, I took the Governor
     with me—the Thermometer 93. I am so well season’d that it does not
   1 Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. XXIII, Part 2, March
 1950. Early Penang and the Rise of Singapore, 1805-1832, C. D. Cowan, pp. 26, 29 et seq.
Although the whole episode savours of jobbery, the appointment of Mr. Philip Dundas
was not unreasonable. He had been a sailor and had commanded the H.C.S. Melville Castle
—a significantly named ship—for three voyages between 1787 and 1790. His uncle, Henry
Dundas, had then secured his appointment as Master Attendant at Bombay where (according
to Farington) ‘he had £10,000 a year and accumulated £70 or £80,000.’ After making a good
marriage in England he was sent out to the Penang governorship which was created for him.
But for the building up of a naval base he was not ill-qualified. See East Indiamen. Sir Evan
Cotton, pp.178-9.
                                            290
                        THE   COMMAND        DIVIDED