

and Ferrol to carry an army to India. Deeres talked him out of it, but the
threat meanwhile had its effect.
  Pellew at once decided to abandon the attack on Batavia and return
to India. He also concluded that the emergency was such as would justify
him in retaining command of all ships of the line, including those assigned
to Troubridge. Indeed, he was fairly obviously glad of the excuse. He had
also a certain satisfaction in keeping his rival in the dark as to what news
exactly the Russel had brought. It was, he hinted, a matter of weighty
importance; something, evidently, which a mere Rear-Admiral of the Blue
‘could not be expected to understand.
   After some hesitation, Pellew decided not to take the Blenheim with
him. Instead, he detached her to guard the convoy on its voyage to China.
Troubridge was left to hoist his flag in the sloop Rattlesnake (18), while
Pellew sailed for Madras with the Culloden, Albion, Russel and Sceptre,
leaving orders for the Lancaster to follow. During the voyage, on
October 22nd, Pellew wrote another disquisition on the subject of the
division of the command, without, however, improving very much on
the first. Arriving at Madras on November 1st, he sent a report of his
proceedings to the Admiralty. Parts of it seem worth quoting.

        ... I trust their Lordships will approve of my not having taken the
     Blenheim under my command upon this occasion, the presence of which
     Ship to the Eastward will now afford a sufficient protection to the China
     Fleet, as from authentick intelligence obtained whilst at Fort Cornwallis
     I learned that the Dutch Force is not in a capacity of active operation, and
     that the measures of that Government are solely directed to the protection
     of their own Coasts.—My former expectations of a combined operation of
     the French & Dutch have been in consequence entirely relieved for the
     present, and no intelligence of the Marengo being on this Coast having
     reached me, I am satisfied M. Linois must have returned to the Isle of France.
        It is my intention to establish Trincomaley at present as the most eligible
     Station to await the arrival of the Enemy’s Fleet, both as considering it the
     most Centrical point for affording protection to the different Coasts and for
     the receipt of Intelligence as well as from a persuasion that should the Enemy
     have matured any plan of hostility against our Eastern possessions that
     Port will become the first object of his attack from the peculiar advantages
     it would furnish to the hostile Squadron, its great and very improveable
     means of defence, its being calculated to afford the most effectual annoyance
     to our Commerce, and from whence hereafter he might most readily extend
     his views of Territorial requisitions on the Continent of India.
        The present state of the internal defence of Trincomaley is by no means
     calculated to resist the force of a premeditated and powerful attack, without
                                       285
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS