

Nevertheless, Pellew did not hesitate to use this argument when writing
 to the Admiralty. The Dutch, he held, should be dealt with to prevent
 them joining actively with the French. And the French, he thought,
if they came out to the East, would begin their campaign by attacking the
 China fleet. This would necessitate a call at Batavia. Hence it behoved
 him to be there before them.
    How far Pellew was serious in suspecting the Dutch must remain in
 doubt. In March of that year he had written that ‘unless effectual support
 shall be given to it from Europe, and the nature of that officer’s orders
be very essentially changed, a reasonable assurance may be entertained of
no Active Operations being undertaken by the Dutch Admiral from
 Batavia. . . .’ This conclusion was supported by local information and
 intercepted letters between Hartsinck and the Dutch Government, and
 there was no apparent reason why he should change his mind on the subject.
Moreover, his anxiety for his own fame was open and undisguised. When
 abandoning the idea of attacking Batavia in October 1805 he took credit
for his lofty motives: ‘. . . altho impressed with the most sanguine
expectation of success, I hesitated not a moment to surrender every
anticipated prospect of personal reputation. . . .’ On the other hand, a
phrase in one of his letters to Admiral Markham—‘I shall take the chance of
Batavia and act accordingly. If the French squadron should be there, don’t
be alarmed for us. . . .’—seems to indicate a real belief in the French
menace. It was a subject on which he was perhaps willing to be credulous.
    Pellew sailed from Madras on October 22nd, with the Culloden, Powerful,
Russel, Belliqueux, Terpsichore and Seaflower. At Trincomalee the home¬
ward bound convoy was collected, fifteen of the smaller Indiamen and
extra ships, which Pellew intended to protect on the first stage of the
voyage. He saw them across the line as if he had been intent on making
a southern passage to Bombay, and then, leaving them to the care of the
 Woolwich, a man-of-war sent out from England for the purpose, he turned
eastwards and made for the Straits of Sunda. He was, in a sense, invading
Troubridge’s province, even as defined by himself, but news had come
before he sailed which made it safe to do so. The news was that Troubridge
was to be transferred to the Cape, which was to be a separate station as
it had been under Curtis during the last war, and that he, Pellew, was
to be restored to his full command. This intelligence was authentic, though
not official, and it was very much what Pellew had been expecting for
some months. It was a sound solution of the problem, doing justice to the
one Admiral without disgracing the other. The establishment, moreover,
of a Cape squadron was clearly a step towards blockading the Mauritius
                                   295
                     WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN       SEAS

from the Cape and not from India; an admirable plan, according to Pellew’s
ideas. Troubridge showed somewhat less enthusiasm.
  The Dutch squadron Pellew was bent on destroying consisted of
the following ships, or had done       so   until   recently:   Revolutie   (70),
Schrikerrwekker (70), Pluto (70) and Kortenaar (70); Pallas (36), Maria
Riggersbergen (36) and Phoenix (36); Aventurier (18), William (14), Maria
Wilhelmina (14), Zee Ploeg (14) and a number of armed vessels belonging