




to the Dutch East India Company. On paper the squadron looked
formidable enough. But various circumstances had somewhat modified
Hartsinck’s real strength before Pellew arrived. Of the ships of the line,
the second had been wrecked and the fourth turned into a sheer-hulk.
The remaining two were not at Batavia but, like the Kortenaar, at Gressie.
They lay there undergoing repairs, partly because they needed repairs and
partly to be out of harm’s way in case the English should raid Batavia.
Of the frigates, the first and second had been taken by Troubridge’s
squadron, the one in July and the other in October, and the third was
                                      296
                          THE    COMMAND       DIVIDED

dismantled. The smaller craft, used for police work among the islands,
were tolerably effective but too small to be of much use in warfare.
Altogether, there were materials for a theoretical naval victory but not
for a genuine struggle.
   Being joined by the Sir Francis Drake, Pellew swept through the Straits
of Sunda, caught the Maria JVilhelmina off Bantam, and came into Batavia
roads on November 27th. Practically all the ships in harbour instantly ran
on shore. The boats of the squadron then went in and set fire to them.
The corvette William remained afloat and was taken, but she was afterwards
destroyed as valueless. The Phoenix, Aventurier, Zee Ploeg, five armed
vessels of the Company, and some twenty merchantmen were burnt, as
was also the dockyard and the establishment on the island of Onroost. The
attack was led by Pellew’s younger son, Fleetwood, made post-Captain
(aged seventeen) in the Terpsichore. A. proud father wrote afterwards to
a friend:

        He led the squadron thro’ Sunda and to Batavia with the greatest judgment,
     was never at fault. . . . He placed his ship ag’t the Dutch Frigate and Batteries
     with equal skill . . . upwards of 100 pieces of Cannon were opened at once
     on the boats—and in three minutes after they boarded the Phoenix of 36
     Guns, she was in full action ag’t her old friends and protecting his boats
    while firing at the ships. He fought her until the water overflowed her
    magazine, as they had scuttled her. I assure you, a prettier exploit I never
    saw. You will say, Aye, Aye, here is the Father. I have therefore done—
    but I assure you I say not half what others say of him. And so let it rest;
    it is great comfort to see that one has not reared a bevy of Pigeons. I assure
    you that my Eyes ran over and my heart swelled when I heard a general
    shout on board the Culloden from the lookers on when the Dutch frigate
    opened her fire under British Colours over Dutch—Well done, Fleetwood—
    well done, bravo—was the cry all around me. What Father could have kept
    his Eyes dry ? I was obliged to wipe them before I could look again thro’ the
    Glass. ... It was a pretty Command, 24 boats in three divisions towing each
    other until just within reach of Grapeshot, where they all rested to take
    breath and cast off, and with three cheers off they set thro’ shot and shells of
    all sorts, flank’d by two ships of 20 Guns on each side, the spare bowman
    standing erect waving his cutless over his head, all the officers standing with
    drawn swords—I never saw such a rush. . . . Now you will ask, what have
    you got by this. I answer little or nothing. I think if we had had 500 Troops
    we should have carried Batavia. We burnt about half a Million or more—
    bro’t off scarcely anything—£500 maY he my share, and that I shall present
    to my dear Fleetwood—he is a nice boy to do this at 17; but don’t mention
    his age for your life, he is full 30 in discretion, sense and manners. . . .
                                        297                                     K*
                       WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS