


                 Pellew and Decaen
                                      ~~




O       n being restored to the sole command, Pellew found himself with
         some twenty-eight men-of-war under his orders, apart from
         those he had to send to the Cape. In February 1807 they were
distributed as follows: The Powerful (74), with the frigates Drake and
Terpsichore, was near Batavia; the Belliqueux (64) was at Penang and the
Victor (18) on the coast of Sumatra; the frigates Caroline, Cornwallis, Hughes
and Phaeton were in the China Seas. There were thus nine ships to the
eastward. The Culloden, Psyche, Wilhelmina, Macassar, Dasher, Rattlesnake
and Seaflower—the flagship, three frigates, two sloops and a cutter—were
stationed at various points round the Bay of Bengal. The Bombay (32)
was off Point de Galle. The Albion, Russel, Grampus (50), the frigates
Pitt, Bellone, Concorde, Duncan, Dedaigneuse and San Fiorenqo, and the
sloop Albatross were all either at or near Bombay or else bound thither.
The frigate Fox was busy taking the Persian envoy back to Bussorah.
This was an even distribution of force—nine to the eastward, eight in the
Bay, eleven to the westward—and was intended for purposes of cruising
and trade protection. There was no longer any fear of invasion.
   Pellew returned from Batavia full of plans for the conquest of Java.
He had been impressed by the feeble resistance he had encountered and
was confident that, with a small military force, he could speedily add the
Dutch possessions to the British Empire. He accordingly sent a long
memorandum on the subject to Sir George Barlow. It was dated from
Madras, January 28th, and had probably been written on the voyage there
from Penang. The chief point he emphasized was the danger of Batavia
coming directly under French control.

       My attention has been more especially directed to this object from the
    recent establishment of a French Sovereignty in Holland and the expectation
    of a New Government being formed at Batavia under the principles of the
    present rulers of that unhappy Country, which may probably place the
    affairs of the Dutch in India upon a very different footing, and give a more
    active disposition to their measures than heretofore.
                                     300
                              PELLEW AND       DECAEN

       The system of Military inactivity so long persisted in by the Batavian
     Government, from political considerations of Commercial security, promise
     to be exchanged for those of Active hostility against our China Trade.
     The attention of the Government, henceforward directed by the authority
     of France, will be doubtless turned to that object, and the situation of Batavia
     will afford such opportunities of threatening the Commerce of the China
     Seas, as to endanger the safety of the Honble Company’s Ships employed
     in that Trade, and considerably embarrass the British interests in that quarter.
       A new Governor General was then daily expected at Batavia from Europe
     and much anxiety was entertained on that account by the old Inhabitants of
     the Settlement, who, I confidently learn, are extremely averse from the
     French Interest. . . .
       It appears to me worthy of our particular attention to consider the
     expediency of dispossessing the Dutch from Batavia before the measures
     of the New Government shall have given vigour and Activity to their
     authority there, and before any active operations against our Trade, probably
     even now in contemplation in Europe, shall have actually commenced.
                                                           (P.R.O. Adm. 1/178.)