

    The memorandum dwells on the Dutch jealousy of the French, on the
recent rebellions of the natives at Samarang and elsewhere, and on the
feebleness of the garrison of Batavia. The objections answered include that
of the unhealthiness of the place, which Pellew thought had been exaggerated,
and the cost of an expedition, which he thought would be inconsiderable.
The force to be sent need number no more than two thousand, half to be
Europeans; so that the objections to the expedition to the Mauritius did
not apply. Finally, if the scheme were rejected, it would surely be possible
to send troops sufficient for a landing to destroy the two ships up the
river at Griessie.
    Pellew was a very able officer; but he was not a born advocate. What
he failed to see was that the two parts of his argument tended to cancel
out. If the Dutch were so feeble, so distracted by native risings, and so
ill-affected towards the French that a handful of troops could subdue them,
there was surely nothing to be feared from their hostility. Where, on the
other hand, he was certainly in the right was in contending that Java should
be attacked at once if it was to be attacked at all. The impending French
Governor-General could not do much offensively unless he brought a
squadron with him; and that he could hardly do without Pellew receiving
warning in good time. But he could clearly improve the defences of the
island, so as to make its capture more difficult in the future.
    The reply from Fort William was dated February 14th, and was very
much what Sir George Barlow might have been expected to write. In
                                        301
                        WAR      IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

questioning the reality of the dangers Pellew described, he was probably
right; but it was the financial aspect which aroused his eloquence.

       Our perfect reliance on your Excellency’s distinguished judgement and
     discretion preclude any hesitation in confiding to your Excellency’s know¬
    ledge the actual condition of the Company’s finances in India, the burthen
    upon which still presses with such accumulated weight that no consideration
     inferior to the utmost supposable emergency could justify the adoption
     of any measure involving even a temporary augmentation of Expenditure
     to any considerable amount, or relieve us from the obligation to prosecute
    with unremitting solicitude the reduction of the public charges. . . .
       The rumour of a distant expedition might materially impair the public
     Credit and frustrate the Efforts now in progress for the relief of our financial
    difficulties. But any considerable Expenditure beyond the extent of the
    ordinary demands of the publick Service, would not only be inconsistent
    with the principles of Economy and reduction which we are indispensably
    required and pledge to pursue, but would in its immediate operation be
    highly embarrassing. . . .

   Another potent reason Barlow had to urge was the Vellore mutiny or
rather the possibility of a fresh outbreak if any considerable number of
white troops were withdrawn from India. And, last of all, there were the
orders of the Court of Directors prohibiting any such expedition, which
were still in force. The dispatch ends, however, with an offer to co-operate
in the destruction of the ships at Griessie.
   If the question had been merely whether the French menace was such
as to justify an expedition to Java, there can be no doubt that Barlow was
right. But there was also involved the more general problem as to whether
it would be worth while to turn the Dutch out of the Spice Islands. Nor
can much weight be given to Pellew’s opinion on the subject. His motives
were too obvious. He wanted fame and he wanted money. Rainier, when
only a Commodore, had made his fortune in dollars, cloves and nutmegs
when he took Amboyna and Banda in 1796. Pellew had so far made
practically nothing—some £4,000, to be exact, which barely covered his
outfit expenses. As for the widening of the bounds of Empire, he probably
cared not a farthing one way or the other. One of his first comments on
coming to India was that we seemed to be doing there exactly what we
hated Napoleon for doing in Europe. Barlow, on the other hand, cared
a great deal. With the mind of a merchant, he thought that the Company
had far too much territory as it was. There was something to be said for
his point of view. And there was also something to be said for the point
of view of his critics who repeated Clive’s maxim ‘To stop is dangerous,
                                        302
                          PELLEW AND        DECAEN