

   In June 1807, when Pellew returned to Madras, four ships were laid
up for repairs at Coringa or Bengal. The chief detachments were to the
eastward; one, consisting of the Russel, three frigates and a cutter, was
assembling by degrees at Macao; another, consisting of the Albion and
jBelliqueux, a frigate and two sloops, was based on Penang. The Psyche
and Caroline were reconnoitring Java. Eight ships were stationed round
the Bay of Bengal, four being at Madras. Three frigates were to the westward,
and two, sent to the Cape with convoy, found some excuse to return to
England. The Greyhound was still seeking traces of the Blenheim. It will
be noticed that there was now no squadron off the Isle of France. That
thankless task had been assigned to the senior officer at the Cape, pending
the arrival of an Admiral to take Troubridge’s place.
   Pellew had now to make preparations for his second visit to Java. Barlow,
superseded by Lord Minto in July, was no longer standing between India
and bankruptcy. It was probably too late, however, to alter any plans, even
had Minto felt so inclined. In discussions between the supreme Government
and the Government of Fort St. George, it was eventually decided that
five hundred troops of the 30th Regiment should be embarked at Madras,
together with some artillery, for the purpose of co-operating in the attack
on Griessil. During the summer of 1807, Pellew did what he could
to persuade Lord Minto to authorize a bolder plan, but without success.
Minto replied that the Government in England was against it, and that any
considerable scheme of operations would upset the conversion of Govern¬
ment loans in India. By October the expedition was ready to sail.

                                               His Majesty’s Ship Culloden
                                                    Madras Roads
                                                           18th October, 1807.

                   Their Lordships will have been already informed by my
           Communication under date of xst February, 1807 of my proposals
           to the Supreme Government of India, in relation to the Dutch Force
           in the Island of Java. . . .
             The troops have been embarked in good order yesterday and this
           morning, the Honble Company’s Ship Worcester having been taken
           up for the transport of the Chief part of the Troops, the remainder
           being put on board His Majesty’s Ships Culloden and Powerful.
Culloden
                It is my intention to get under weigh this Evening, or to-morrow
Powerful
Victor        morning with the ships named in the margin, augmenting my force
Samarang (18) by a junction at Prince of Wales Island with His Majesty’s Ship Russel

              and two frigates.

                                         3°4
                           PELLEW AND         DECAEN

              In conveying to their Lordships the proposed operation herein
           mentioned, I cannot forbear from expressing my sincere regret that
           the want of a sufficient authority from His Majesty’s Ministers at
           home prevents the undertaking of an Expedition of more importance,
           being entirely satisfied that had the supreme Government of India
           felt itself at liberty to enter into my original proposal of an attack
           upon Batavia, that that Capital and every subordinate Settlement of
           the Dutch on the Island of Java, would have fallen a very easy conquest
           to a force little superior in comparison to that which has been thus
           allotted for the execution of a more limited Service. My latest intelli¬
           gence from that quarter, brought by Captain Fleetwood Pellew,
           represented the situation of affairs at Batavia as extremely favourable
           to -such an undertaking, the disunion of the French and Dutch
           Interests being very greatly augmented by the late innovations in that
           Government, occasioned by the Elevation of Louis Bonaparte to the
           throne of Holland, as well as by the very sanguinary insurrections
           which have taken place among the Native Inhabitants, who are
           extremely averse to the domination of either the French or Dutch
           Nations.
              In making my original proposition to the Governor General I had
           in view the ultimate destruction of the works, and the abandonment
           of the City of Batavia, had it fallen into my possession, and the creation
           of a more healthy establishment at Grissey, or some point to the
           Eastward. . . .
              The Port of Grissey has been carefully reconnoitred by our Frigates,
           and trust such measures have been taken, as will provide for the
           assistance of Pilots and other persons of Experience to lead the force
           to the attack of the place and effectually secure us from disappoint¬
           ment. . . .
                                     (Pellew to Admiralty. P.R.O. Adm. 1/180.)