

         . . . You will naturally conclude I am in high spirits, and have nothing
     to do. That latter is true, for this day: When walking in the stern gallery
     and bringing to my mind all my dear friends at Home, I thought I would
     sit down, broiling as I am with heat, and write you a long letter, and here
     it is, puffing as I go, pens dried up, ink scarcely to be moved upon paper and
     a hand half shaking. . . A

   Pellew afterwards ascertained where the missing ships were, the Revolutie
and Pluto, collected what information he could concerning the state of the
Dutch possessions in general, and then sailed again on December ist. He
left the Powerful in the vicinity to make further inquiries, sent three ships
to Trincomalee and two to cruise to the eastward, and proceeded in person
to the Straits of Malacca.
  While off Malacca itself on ist January, 1807, he at last received the
order reappointing him to the sole command in the East Indies. He was
instructed to detach two ships of the line, one to be of 64 guns, for service
under Troubridge. He at once proceeded to Penang in the hope of finding
Troubridge there, with whom he could make the necessary arrangements
relative to his departure. He was disappointed. Arriving at Penang on
January nth, he found that Troubridge had gone. It was scarcely to be
wondered at. After their period of bitter rivalry the loser had no wish to
meet his successful enemy. Troubridge had not even written to Pellew.
He had no sooner received his orders to go to the Cape than he went off
in a fury, hoping never to see Pellew again. He never did see him again.
  Troubridge sailed from Penang on December 7th, and arrived at Madras
on the 19th. By his own account, he had expected to find Pellew there,
and only decided to proceed to the Cape on hearing that he was not
expected for two or three months. The need for haste which he put forward
was the absence of any naval protection at the Cape, most of the ships
from there having been taken to Buenos Ayres. That his real motive was
a fear of meeting Pellew seems more than probable, for the manner of his
departure verged on the insane. The Blenheim was utterly unfit for the
voyage and leaking so badly that the pumps were kept going even as she
lay at anchor. Her captain protested against going to the Cape at that time
of year, which would necessitate being off the French islands during the
hurricane months. The ship was almost falling to pieces. Troubridge had
his way, however, and sailed on January 12th. He took with him the
Harrier and Java, the latter ship in little better case than the Blenheim,
and left a letter for Pellew explaining that he did so in order to have the
means of communicating with India and Europe.
                    1 Edward Pellew, Viscount Exmouth, p. 374, et seq.
                                        298
                        THE   COMMAND      DIVIDED

   Pellew did not linger at Penang, but sailed at once for Madras in search
of Troubridge. Had he arrived in time, he would almost certainly have
prevented the Blenheim sailing. He would have compelled Troubridge to
delay his voyage or go in another ship. But Troubridge sailed on the
day after Pellew went in search of him and ten days before the Culloden
arrived. When he did arrive, Pellew presently wrote to Troubridge,
informing him that the Lancaster and Sceptre were under orders to join
him, but that the latter would need to refit at Bombay after returning
from her station off the Isle of France. He also promised to send the
Greyhound to the Cape—that being the frigate commanded by Troubridge’s
son—as soon as the Java should return to India. His intention was kindly,
but it was kindness thrown away. For Troubridge was caught in a heavy
gale off the south-east end of Madagascar on February ist, the Blenheim
and Java sinking with all hands and the Harrier having a narrow escape.
The last-named vessel was able to report having last seen the Blenheim
on the evening of the ist, when she was visibly settling in the water, with
a signal of distress flying.
   Considering this last circumstance, it is curious to note how persistent
were the rumours of the Blenheim having survived the gale. The state of
the Harrier, which had several ports stove in, her rigging blown to pieces
and gear washed overboard, and had been compelled to jettison four of
her guns, would hardly have seemed to encourage such a belief. Pellew
heard in June that the Blenheim and Java were still missing as late as May,
and he accordingly sent Troubridge’s son to make inquiries—under a flag
of truce—at the Isle of France and the settlements in Madagascar. Mean¬
while, it was confidently reported in England that the Blenheim was already
in port: ‘We are happy to state, that the safety of the Blenheim, Admiral
Troubridge’s flagship, has been ascertained’ {Naval Chronicle). And again,
in the Calcutta Monthly Journal for January 1808, it was very definitely
stated that the Blenheim and Java had survived the gale and afterwards
touched at the island of St. Mary’s, near Madagascar. Natives there were
said to have described them with some accuracy when questioned by the
officers of the Greyhound. This, in turn, gave rise to the legend that the
disappearance of the Blenheim was due to the subsequent mutiny of her
crew. It is this legend which is enshrined in the more or less libellous pages
of the novel called The Port-Admiral. However, whatever may have been
the fate of the unfortunate Troubridge, his removal had solved a difficulty.
The year 1807 saw the East Indies Command once more united under a
single Admiral, and the good effects were soon apparent.
                             CHAPTER XV