

         The Enemy’s Cruisers have of late been very successful in their depre¬
     dations on the Country Trade passing thro’ the Bay, tho’ they have for¬
     tunately not intercepted any of the Company’s Ships; their successes are
     to be attributed in a great measure to the Circumstance of the Masters of
     these Vessels being in the constant practice of running without Convoy, tho’
     it has been always afforded upon application, and which has hitherto secured
     the Company’s Ships from Capture. Although not less than six of my ships
     have been constantly cruizing in the Bay for the protection of the Trade,
     and intersecting it in every direction, none have had the good fortune to
     fall in with the Enemy’s Cruizers excepting the Russel, which captured the
     Adele privateer on the 5 December.
        The Isle of France being no longer within the limits of my Station, no
     information can reach me but by very uncertain Channels respecting the
     arrival and sailing of the Cruizers, and for the most part, the first Intelligence
     of their appearance in the Bay is announced by their successes. . . .
                      (Pellew to Admiralty, 22nd Febuary, 1808. Adm. 1/180.)

  With regard to the invasion scare, it is interesting to note that Napoleon
was actually considering something of the sort at that time. Seyd Sultan
of Oman had died in 1806 and Napoleon may have hoped for better things
from the new ruler, Seyd-Said.1 Apart from that, he was in close touch
  1 Dr. Rouire. ‘La question du Golfe Persique,’ Revue des Deux Mondes, Vol. 16, Paris,
1903, p. 889.

                                           308
                                 PELLEW AND          DECAEN

 with Persia, and this led to an alliance concluded on 4th May, 1807, following
 the Battle of Jena and also following Duckworth’s repulse in the Dardanelles.
 Russia and Persia were then at war in Georgia and General Gardanne’s
 mission was to arrange military co-operation between Persia and Turkey.
 This phase ended when Napoleon came to terms with the Tsar at Tilsit
 and new plans were made for sending help to Decaen, still with an eye on
 Persia. On 22nd June, 1807, Napoleon wrote to Deeres from Tilsit:

         Je recois votre memoire sur la Perse. J’attends, pour faire cette expedition
      dans le golfe Persique, que j’aie reponse de mon ambassadeur, le general
      Gardanne, qui est parti avec des officiers de l’artillerie et du genie, et qui
      doit etre rendu dans ce moment a Constantinople. Je desire que vous
      envoyiez un ingenieur de la marine qui soit un peu marin, pour lever les
      plans des cotes-Faites-le partir sans delai_Mon intention est d’envoyer,
      a le fin de septembre, 2 fregates neuves a File de France; elles auront des
      instructions pour se rendre dans la golfe Persique, ou elles prendront les
      depeches de mon ambassadeur. Ecrivez au general Decaen par toutes les
      voies possible, pour instruire de l’arrivee de mon ambassadeur en Perse, de
      de mon traite d’alliance avec cet empire, et de la necessite de se mettre en
      correspondance avec lui.1