

   The sloop Samarang mentioned in the above letter as destined to sail
with the expedition was a corvette taken from the Dutch by the Psyche
in the course of her reconnaissance of Java. She was called the Scipio when
taken, and Pellew bought her into the service for £4,725, paid to the
captors. The Jaseur, French brig, was bought for £1,794, at about the
same time. They were to replace the Harrier and Albatross.
   Sailing from Madras according to plan, Pellew arrived at Penang on
                                                ,
November 10th. There he found the Albion Russel and Belliqueux, with the
       ,
Caroline Fox, Seaflower and Jaseur. He had changed his mind, however,
about adding the Russel to his force. With some fear perhaps of what the
French cruisers might be doing in his absence, he sent her instead to the
Bay of Bengal. The Belliqueux was at the same time directed to cruise off
                                        3°5
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

 Point de Galle. The Albion was in need of docking, and had to go at once
to Bombay. Adding the other vessels to those he had brought with him,
 Pellew reached Malacca on the 19th, and sailed for Griessie on the following
 day. His squadron consisted now of the Culloden (74), Powerful (74),
 Caroline (36), Fox (32), Victor (18), Samarang (18), Seaflower (14),
Jaseur (12) and the Worcester, transport.
   The concealment of the Revolutie and Pluto up the River Sourabaya
might be compared to the concealment in our century of the Konigsberg;
with this difference, however, that the two Dutch ships had never done
any harm, even in their most active days. There seems, also, every reason
to suppose that they would have died a natural death if left alone. But the
practical problem was not dissimilar, for in either case the difficulty was
in reaching the enemy after he had been located. Pellew was at the eastern
end of Java by December 5th, and soon discovered that his two ships of
the line were prevented by shoal water from ascending the river as high
as Griessie. He hopefully summoned the Dutch to surrender. They correctly
interpreted this as a sign of weakness and refused. He then lightened the
Culloden and Powerful, heaved them through the shallows and managed
to reach Griessie with his whole force, silencing the batteries en route.
The Dutch promptly asked for terms, first taking the precaution of
scuttling the ships under dispute. Terms were thereupon agreed to, under
                   ,      ,
which the Revolutie Pluto Kortenaar and Rusthoff (Indiaman) were burnt,
the batteries destroyed, and water and provisions found for the squadron.
In returning to the mouth of the river, it was found that the difficulty
experienced in ascending it was due to ignorance more than to any defect
in the navigation. Pellew hastened to write his dispatches and ‘congratulate
their Lordships upon the entire destruction of the Naval Force of Holland
in the East Indies.’

                                            His Majesty’s Ship Culloden
                                                 off Grissee 15th Dec. 1807.
    Sir
             Their Lordships will be informed by my letter of yesterday of the
    circumstances under which the Dutch Ships of War lying at Grissee have
    been destroyed. The Government of Sourabaya having furnished me with
    pilots, the whole of our Squadron have returned in safety to the mouth of
    this Harbour from whence it is my intention to proceed immediately to
    Madras by the Straits of Malacca.
      The observations which I have had an opportunity of making during
    my continuance at this place lead me to a very favourable opinion of the
    value and importance of this Settlement should it hereafter be in the con-
                                     306
                              PELLEW AND        DECAEN