

     templation of His Majesty’s Ministers to obtain establishment on the Eastern
     extremity of Java. The Harbour is perfectly safe and Commodious; well
     protected from the violence of the periodical Winds, and has no dangers
     whatever within its limits, the bottom being throughout a soft mud.
         I have obtained possession of a very exact Chart of its whole Extent, and
     the adjacent Coast, the accuracy of which has been fully ascertained by our
     own experience. . . .
         Grissee is capable of being made an excellent Station for the refit of Men
     of War, where every accommodation might be formed with facility for
     heaving down. . . .
         The Climate of Sourabaya, Grissee, and the circumjacent Country is
     remarkably healthy, and as such is made the resort of persons sent from
     Batavia for recovery. The soil is very productive and excellent Teak timber
     grows in abundance throughout the whole district. Supplies of every kind
     of provisions are readily obtained from the neighbouring Country. . . .

                                      (Pellew to Admiralty. P.R.O. Adm. 1/180.)


   On the subject of Java, Pellew was a little apt to become lyrical; and
even his official dispatches read rather like the prospectus of some emigration
agent. He seems to have had a fellow enthusiast in Stamford Raffles, from
whom, indeed, the idea may have originated. The two men certainly knew
each other. But whether Grissie could ever have become of much importance
in a modern world which has lost most of its desire for cloves and nutmegs,
may well be doubted.
   The squadron reached Malacca on 25th January, 1808, to find there the
first division of the China fleet, eight Indiamen with the Cornwallis. The
second division, the direct ships and the Jupiter, was not expected to sail
from Macao until March. Pellew did not linger in the straits, but pushed
on for Madras. The expedition had been, in the main, a disappointment.
It was a tame affair. And, what was worse, the Dutch ships from Japan
had again somehow escaped him. These vessels shared the celebrity of the
Acapulco galleon, with an added touch of mystery in that no one seemed
to know exactly what they were laden with. Pellew had discovered when
they usually returned to Java and had timed his visits accordingly. Each
time, however, he missed them by two or three days. They would have
been caught on this occasion if Pellew had not allowed the Dutch to pilot
him so efficiently (and eagerly) out of Sourabaya River. To obtain more
exact information on the subject, Pellew hit on the expedient of sending
one of his sons to Japan. By this means, he at least discovered where
Nagasaki was. He incidentally founded the Japanese Navy, which had its
origin   in   a   fervent   desire   to   prevent   anything   of the   sort   ever

                                          3°7
                        WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN     SEAS

happening again. The young Pellew’s visit, if short, was eventful. (See
Appendix F.)
   The squadron arrived at Madras on February ioth, and Pellew was at
once greeted with two alarming items of news. The first was that a large
French army was about to march through Persia to co-operate with a
powerful squadron then on its way to the Persian Gulf. This had started,
it seems, as a popular rumour which the supreme Government began by
contradicting. Its persistence, however—which is not difficult to under¬
stand, since it had a substratum of truth—eventually won over the highest
officials. The result was that Captain Ferrier, senior officer at Bombay,
had been persuaded into sailing for the Persian Gulf on February 6th,
with the Albion, Phaeton and Dedaigneuse. And Pellew was met with an
urgent demand that he should proceed forthwith to the western side of
India, there to await the threatened invasion. Perhaps a little wearily, Pellew
agreed. He had been resisting French invasions ever since he arrived in
India, and must have been getting a trifle tired of them.
   The second item of news concerned the activities of the French cruisers
in the Bay of Bengal. It is best told in his own words.