

the eastward and four to the westward, with cruisers to patrol off Cheduba,
Negrais, the Andamans, the Nicobars and Achin Head; as also off Ceylon
and eastward of the Straits of Singapore. Wholly to comply with this
demand would have been impossible, but Pellew did his best for them.
He formed a detachment of one frigate and four sloops, destined for convoy
work in the bay and confined to that service. He appointed the dates of
sailing for the convoys, as desired, and he tried to provide other ships
for the defence of the head of the bay, and also for patrolling the various
points indicated, or at any rate some of them. The reply of the merchants
was to the effect that they had now changed their minds about the dates
of sailing, and that the sloops were not strong enough; they demanded
frigates instead. ... A system of some kind was in working order when
Pellew quitted the station, but it did not long survive his departure. In
 Rear-Admiral Drury the merchants met their match.




                                    3'9
                             CHAPTER XVI



                     Drury in China
                        \v    —




T    "\he    expedition destined for Macao assembled at Prince of Wales
     Island in August 1808. Drury himself arrived there about the 23rd,
     and was joined presently by the transports from Bengal. These were
now guarded by the Dedaigneuse, the Dover having been detached on
another service. The Phaeton also joined at some period, perhaps because
of the Greyhound being lost on the coast of Luconia on October nth.
The expedition proceeded to the eastwards and reached Macao early in
September.
  Before describing the events which took place, something should perhaps
be said about Rear-Admiral O’Brien Drury himself. The clue, possibly,
to his character lies in his claim, when commander-in-chief, to hold ‘the
highest official situation in India.’ The claim was characteristic both in
its accuracy and unreality. Strictly speaking, the Governor-General and
the governors of Madras and Bombay were the servants of the East India
Company and therefore bound to yield precedence to an Admiral, who
was the servant of the King. By the same wild logic they might be expected
to yield precedence to a midshipman. It was a trivial claim, and even Drury
failed to support it in practice. But there is a significance in the fact that
the claim was made, for it shows the extent to which Drury was out of
touch with life.
  Self-importance was a common failing among the senior officers of the
Navy. It was the natural product of the deference of subordinates, heightened
by an insufficient contact with men of equal eminence in other callings.
But Drury’s failing was not quite of this type. His pride was in his
profession and his office as such. He may not have thought meanly of
himself, but he reserved his real reverence for the thing that was to become
in time ‘The Service.’ Now, an officer can hardly think too highly of his
responsibility or the honour due his colours, but it is as well if he can
do so without disparaging the position of other people. The white ensign
gains little by any disrespect shown to the red. Drury was, in this respect,
a little before his time. The naval officer had quite recently become a
                                     320
■