

be unwelcome at the Imperial Court. If, finally, it came to blows, the China
fleet was, in relation to the Chinese, a formidable force in itself.
  For some reason, the supercargoes took the view that the trade was more
important to the Chinese than to the English. They knew what effect its
cessation would have on the Viceroy, and they reckoned on his being
amenable to pressure. They accordingly decided that the time to negotiate
was before the cotton had been landed and the duties paid. The prospect
of there being no cotton and no duties would, they thought, compel him
to see reason in the matter of Macao. In this belief they were partly justified.
That they should, for the moment, have quite forgotten the existence of
the Emperor was natural enough. He was a personage they never saw and
rarely heard of. He was a dim and distant figure of whom they were but
vaguely aware at any time. But they were unwise to ignore him, for two
reasons. First, he was bound to hear of a landing at Macao. Second, he
had very little interest in the trade at Canton. It is known that the Viceroy
retained most of the customs revenue for his own use. The extent to which
he did so made the trade more important to him; but it also made it
proportionately less important to the Emperor. The Imperial Court was
admittedly at a very great distance; but its mere remoteness made it matter
less to the Emperor whether Canton were ruined or not. In ignoring him
the supercargoes made a great mistake.
   When the Select Committee informed Drury of the change in their
views, strongly recommending him to occupy Macao without delay, that
officer began to show signs of impatience. ‘I endeavoured to show these
Gentlemen,’ he wrote, ‘that 24 Hours had scarcely elapsed since I had
agreed to delay the occupation of Macao until the orders daily expected
from Goa should arrive, and that it would be a breach of faith with the
Governor. . . .’ Drury tried to dissuade the supercargoes, but in vain.

        Requisitions were, however, so pressed by the Committee on me to
     occupy Macao, that I at length consented to take forcible possession of it
     and prepared to storm it; but having assured the Governor that I would not
     surprize him, and that I would give him notice before I landed, I accordingly
     sent him a Summons to allow the Troops to land—or I should do so at the
     point of the bayonet.
        After many hours consultation he gave a half assent, and I landed the
     Troops. The extraordinary convulsions this step occasioned, and the highly
     agitated and irritated state of both Chinese and Portuguese, with the
     reiterated entreaties of the Supra Cargoes, that I should go on shore, and
     by my presence restore tranquillity, I was induced to do so, and assumed
     an authority at Macao which gave me very great pain, being so insulting
                                         324
                             DRURY     IN   CHINA

    to the Governor, who readily acquiesced in every requisition I made, as
    did all the authorities, especially the Bishop, to whom I gave my most
    solemn assurance of Protection.