

the damage done was considerable. Pellew, of course, was held to blame
for every vessel captured. All the merchants agreed that their losses were
entirely due to his negligence. If, they said, he refrained from wasting his
time in futile expeditions to Java, he might have ships to spare for the
protection of trade. Surcouf had, as a matter of fact, been chased repeatedly
during the whole time he was in the bay. His impunity was not caused
by an absence of English cruisers, but by the fact of his sailing in one of
the fastest vessels afloat. Nevertheless, a scapegoat there had to be. If
Pellew could have added to his unpopularity at Calcutta, it was by saying,
as he did say, that the merchants were themselves to blame for not accepting
convoy.
   While Pellew was still at Madras digesting the highly unwelcome news
about Persia and about Surcouf, he was pleasantly surprised by the arrival
of Rear-Admiral Drury. This was on February 17th. Drury had received
orders to go to the East Indies as long ago as August 1807. With
instructions to seek Pellew and put himself under his orders, he had hoisted
his flag in the Monmouth (64) at Spithead on September 8th. With seven
Indiamen bound for the coast and two for Bombay, he had touched at
Madeira on the 27th, seen the Piemontaise in the distance on the 20th January,
1808, and now came to report at Madras, bringing his convoy with him.
   Drury’s arrival had two pleasing aspects from Pellew’s point of view.
In the first place, he had asked to be relieved, and was glad to have his
successor at hand. He had as yet received no orders to hand over the
command, however. The Admiralty’s intention was apparently that Drury
should learn his business under Pellew before being appointed to succeed
him. In the second place, Drury brought with him the news of the
impending war between England and Denmark. The dispatches he brought,
dated in August and September 1807, directed Pellew to detain and bring
into port all ships and vessels belonging to the Crown of Denmark,
treating their crews ‘with all possible civility and attention and not by
any means as Prisoners of War.’ The Governor-General had heard the
news a few days before, sending troops to occupy the Danish settlements
as early as the 12th. Tranquebar capitulated at once without any resistance.
It was not for the first time. News of the actual outbreak of war does not
seem to have come until about May 16th, but as the Danish shipping,
both in Bengal river and at Tranquebar, was detained in the meanwhile,
it was a simple matter to make the detention permanent. ‘That sturdy dog
of Denmark has given me by his obstinacy about fifty thousand pounds,’
wrote Pellew on June 1st. He began to feel that he had not come to India
in vain.
                                       312
                          PELLEW     AND    DECAEN

                                             His Majesty’s Ship Culloden
                                                  at Sea, 22 Feb. 1808
    Sir
           You will be pleased to state to the Board my arrival at Madras on
    the 10th instant and that the whole of the ships which accompanied me to
    the Coast of Java, have safely returned to that Anchorage.
       The arrival of Rear Admiral Drury in His Majesty’s Ship Monmouth to
    serve under my Flag has afforded me an advantageous opportunity of
    providing for the Services of this part of my Station during my absence on
    the Western side of the Peninsula.
       The Intelligence which has reached me from the Communications of
    the Governor General has rendered it advisable to move round without delay
    to Bombay in readiness to act upon any Emergency which may arise in that
    quarter.
        I have received no Instructions from their Lordships as to the views of
     the French in Persia by the latest opportunity nor of any projected Naval
    Expedition towards that Gulph. Accounts very variable and often Contra¬
     dictory have been circulated in this Country for some time past, and of late
    have gained considerable strength by the most recent information from
     Constantinople. The Eyes of the Supreme Government of India have been
    long directed with much solicitude to the situation of our Affairs in the
     Gulph, and to the Intrigues of the French Emissaries employed in the
    promotion of their views at that Court.
       A Communication lately received from Captain Hallowed of His Majesty’s
    Ship Tigre at Alexandria, announcing the arrival of General Menou with
     12000 Men at Constantinople in his way to Persia (whither an advanced
    number of French Officers had previously proceeded and are stated to have
    actually arrived at the Capital of Terehann) has greatly augmented the
    anxiety with which Lord Minto in Council had received the former accounts
    of their progress. . . .
       The Supreme Government having resolved to send Colonel Malcolm
    on a political mission upon this important juncture to the Gulf of Persia,
    I have, at the request of the Governor General, received him on board the
    Culloden for a passage to Bombay, from whence he will prosecute his voyage
    thither, and on my arrival at that Port I shall adopt such immediate measures
    as may be necessary to meet any future designs of the Enemy, or to co-operate
    with the wishes and measures of His Lordship in Council. Rear Admiral
    Drury will meanwile take charge of the Bay of Bengal and communicate
    with me overland to Bombay during my absence. . . .
                                  (Pellew to Admiralty. P.R.O. Adm. 1/180.)