

existing of occupying Macao by British Troops to prevent it falling into
the hands of the French, which would involve in it the destruction of our
Commerce with China.’ He also proposed that a similar message should
be sent to the Viceroy of Canton, and to the Emperor, asking permission




to occupy the town until peace should be restored. The Select Committee
agreed to the first proposal, recommending, however, that Drury should
go and see the governor in person. As to informing the Chinese, they
thought it would be ‘productive of much mischief.’ They preferred,
apparently, to confront the Viceroy with a fait accompli and leave him
to inform the Emperor if he saw fit.
                                  322
                            DRURY     IN   CHINA

  Drury went, as requested, to speak with the governor, Sr. Bernado
Alexe de Lemos e Faria. This gentleman seems to have been altogether
worthy of his office, dignified, courteous and intelligent. In a long
conversation, he consented to admit the troops, find accommodation for
them, and try to conciliate the Chinese; but only on condition that Drury
would wait for the orders to come from Goa—orders which he said were
daily expected. As the Select Committee said that such a delay would be
of no consequence, Drury agreed to wait. He added, however, a proviso
to the effect that he might have to occupy the town in the meanwhile if
it became necessary. He hoped that in that case there would be no
opposition from the Portuguese garrison. But the governor was firm on this
point. He would resist if anything -was done before the orders arrived.
  To Drury the governor’s attitude seemed perfectly reasonable, and he
thought that the consent of the Portuguese was worth some trouble to
obtain. Their resistance could only be trifling but their value in negotiating
with the Chinese would clearly be immense. Macao was not their absolute
possession. They held it by permission from the Emperor. It was one
thing for them to request leave to admit English auxiliaries, and quite
another for the English to force an entry and then ask the Emperor’s
approval. Nor would matters be improved by their omitting to ask the
Emperor’s approval.
  The Select Committee agreed at first to the principle of securing
Portuguese consent, if it were possible, but changed their minds on the
following day. The whole China fleet was at that time discharging, or
beginning to discharge cargo at Whampoa. Drury mentioned their number
as fifty-seven, but a printed list of the period contains only forty-two
names. According to the latter authority, there were fourteen Indiamen,
all but one of 1,200 tons nominal burthen; fifteen large country ships from
Bombay, one of 1,250 tons and the rest averaging about 700 tons; six
country ships from Bengal, mostly of 500 tons, more or less; five country
ships from Penang, one from Madras and one from Negapatam. Whatever
the exact number may have been, the property at stake was enormous.
Now, this fleet in the river complicated the negotiations. For one thing,
the Chinese could imprison it by blocking up Second Bar. For another,
they could more simply render it valueless by a mere refusal to trade. A
permanent stoppage of the tea supply would practically ruin the East India
Company at a blow. That was the one aspect of the situation. The other
aspect was that the stoppage of the cotton supply, and the trade generally,
would equally ruin Canton and its Viceroy, the officials and the Hong
merchants. The stoppage, moreover, of the customs duties would surely
                                     323
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS