

the smallest effect. . . .’l It is to the credit of the Admiralty that it
did not.
   Pellew sailed from Bombay early in June, captured a small French
privateer off Point de Galle on the ioth and reached Madras on the 12th.
His presence there was now highly necessary in that Lord Minto had finally
decided on the occupation of Macao. In his letter of May 9th, he proposed
to send the same type of force as contemplated in 1802; five or six hundred
sepoys, two companies of European infantry and a company of artillery.
He did not anticipate any resistance, and the supercargoes assured him
that there would be no trouble with the Chinese. He was in doubt as to
whether he should inform the Chinese before or after the deed was accom¬
plished. He wanted to obtain an order from the Viceroy of Goa for the
governor of Macao, directing him to admit the garrison on the same terms
as at Goa; but this he would have to leave to the last moment, to avoid
betraying his intention. Pellew agreed to co-operate, as a matter of course,
and proposed to put Rear-Admiral Drury in command of the expedition,
having under him a ship of the line, two frigates, and two small craft. At
first it was arranged that the expedition should assemble at Madras. On
Lord Minto’s desiring that Bengal should be the rendezvous instead, Penang
was decided upon as a compromise.
   As soon as Pellew arrived at Madras, events moved swiftly. He found
Drury already there, together with the ships he intended to send on the
expedition. By June 17th the Madras Government informed him that the
white troops were ready to embark. On the 18th, Pellew gave Drury his
orders, which were as follows: His Majesty’s Ministers having ordered the
occupation of Macao, in order to thwart French designs on it, and he
himself being ordered to co-operate, Drury was to take the Russel, Dover,
Greyhound, Diana and Jaseur under his command, and embark the troops
at Madras. He was then to proceed to Macao and assist in the occupation,
in close conjunction with the Select Committee of Supercargoes. If the Select
Committee wished it, and if it should appear advisable, he was to assist
in the suppression of piracy at the mouth of Canton river, where the
Ladrones were said to be increasing in numbers and activity. Should he
find that there was nothing to be done, he was to return to his station at
Prince of Wales Island. Pellew wrote on the same day to the Government
of Fort St. George, stating that Drury was to sail on the 23 rd and requesting
that the troops should be embarked at once.
   Drury actually sailed on the 24th, the Dover sailing two or three days
  1 See Memoirs of William Hickey, Vol. IV, p. 410 et seq. Also Adm. 1/180 Pellew to Lord
Minto, 21 st April, 1808, and underwriters to Lord Minto, 7th March, etc.

                                            3J7
                     WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

later and proceeding to Bengal to escort the two Indiamen, David Scott
and Alnwick Castle, in which the sepoys were to embark. These ships
rejoined or joined the expedition at Penang, the whole then proceeding
to the eastward.
   Pellew’s time in India was now nearly finished. He had not fared badly
in the end. ‘My objects here,’ he had written in 1806, ‘were my two sons.’
Both were now post-captains; the elder, Pownall, having made £3,000,
the younger, Fleetwood, £5,000, from prize-money. He had probably
made £100,000 himself and had the satisfaction of seeing Pownall Pellew
married to the eldest daughter of Sir George Barlow, a good match. He
was, lastly, promoted Vice-Admiral and could return to England as the
successful raider of Java—a coming man. Having thus made his fortune,
as his detractors remarked, he was eager to go home. On June 1st, he had
written to the Admiralty, stating his intention to proceed to England in
October. He was, as he said, beginning to wear. ‘My floor timbers are
very shaky.’ He was, as he complained, ‘Grey as a badger and fat as a pig,
running to belly.’ In more official language he told the Admiralty that
‘the state of my health renders it expedient for me to proceed to England
for the benefit of a Change of Climate.’ This dispatch crossed with one
from the Admiralty, dated April 26th, directing him to resign the command
to Drury. The Macao expedition, however, combined with the failure of
the mission to Persia, caused him to abandon his original intention. When
he received the Admiralty’s dispatch, towards the end of September, he
replied that he would retain the command until Drury should return. On
quitting Madras, he would proceed to Penang, hand over the command
as soon as Drury appeared, and then return with the China ships. The
October convoy from the coast and bay would have the protection of
the Albion, also due to return to England.
   Although no Persian crisis occurred during Drury’s absence to the
eastward, Pellew had quite enough to do in organizing a convoy system
for the country trade in the Bay of Bengal. To the merchants’ complaints
he had invariably replied by saying that they could have avoided their
losses by accepting convoy. He had repeatedly drawn their attention to
the fact that hardly any Bombay ships had been captured. This so
exasperated the merchants that they ultimately tried to silence him by
proposing a convoy system, very much as if they had been wanting it
all along, being thwarted only by naval slackness. Anxious to pacify these
potentates—Trail, Palmer & Co., Fairlie Gilmore & Co., Hogue
Davidson & Co., and the rest—Pellew rather weakly consented to their
scheme. Their proposal was that there should be four convoys a year to
                                      318
                         PELLEW AND       DECAEN