

                                             3I4
                          PELLEW AND      DECAEN

   Pellew was at Bombay in April, where he seems to have found the
threatened invasion through Persia already somewhat discredited. There
was, in fact, no further reference to the subject. Colonel Malcolm having
been sent to stem the onrush single-handed, the incident was regarded
as closed. Its place was at once taken by another matter of equal urgency.
This was the Portuguese question. So far, Portugal had been regarded
as a friendly neutral power. The occupation of Goa had been ordered
in an apologetic spirit. It had taken the outward form of military assistance
lent to the Viceroy in order that he might more effectually preserve his
neutrality. But now the news came of French designs on Portugal and of
the flight of the Portuguese royalty to South America. The English Cabinet
was already regarding Portugal as a potential ally of France, as just such
another vassal State as Holland. With the news, therefore, came the
order to occupy the      remaining Portuguese     settlements. Preparations
were also to be made for turning mere occupation into actual annexa¬
tion, should need arise. The orders were addressed, of course, to the
Supreme Government. The instructions sent to Pellew, which he received
on April 24th, were simply to the effect that he was to co-operate
with the Indian Governments in taking possession of the settlements in
question.
   The object of this apparently aggressive policy was mainly defensive.
In subordination to France, certain of the Portuguese colonies would be
highly dangerous. Those in East Africa, for example, if turned into bases
for the French cruisers—which the Portuguese alliance would multiply—
would close the Mozambique Channel to English trade. This is the more
easily understood when it is recalled how completely the Dutch alliance
with France had closed the Straits of Sunda. In the case of East Africa,
certain difficulties presented themselves and the matter was still under
discussion when the danger disappeared, Portugal becoming the ally of
England instead. East Africa, however, though important, was not nearly
so obvious a danger as Macao. The French could never seize Goa. They
could be ejected if they occupied Diu or Demaun. But Macao was a
different matter altogether. To have the French there would end the China
trade at a blow.
  All that Pellew did at first in response to his orders was to offer his
assistance to the Governor of Bombay and send the Albion and Dedaigneuse
to cruise off Goa in case they should be required to overawe the town.
On May 26th he was writing to say that he thought Macao could be left
alone for the present. He knew its importance, and he also knew that the
frigate Cannoniere was at that moment in the China Seas, operating from

                                    3r5
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

Manila. He knew, for that matter, that there was another French frigate,
the Caroline, which might easily be sent in the same direction. And other
ships might arrive, of course, from France. But, despite all this, he doubted
whether the French would ever get possession of Macao. The Chinese, he
thought, could be trusted to prevent this.
  It was while at Bombay that Pellew heard of the memorial from the
merchants of Calcutta. A copy had been sent there with a request that the
merchants of Bombay would add their signatures. The Bombay merchants,
so far from doing so, brought it to Pellew instead. Soon afterwards, another
copy arrived, sent by the Calcutta merchants to Pellew himself with the
somewhat unreasonable request that he would take it home with him and
deliver it to the Lords of the Admiralty. As he knew from his Bombay
friends that the original was already on its way to England, he refused
to do anything of the sort. He began to collect materials for his defence.
He wrote to the Admiralty, enclosing a resolution in his favour passed
by the Bombay merchants. Lord Minto wrote independently to bear witness
to his good character. His friends even managed to work up a slight reaction
in his favour at Calcutta.
     This memorial from the Bengal merchants produced a great deal of
controversy and a mass of correspondence. The statements and counter¬
statements are too bulky and far too complex to be dealt with here. They
sufficiently show that the willingness of the Bombay merchants to accept
convoy, and the extreme unwillingness of the Calcutta merchants to follow
suit, both arose from the character of their business, and not from the
character of the merchants. Another fact made apparent in the course of
the dispute is the influence wielded by the Calcutta business men in London.
Pellew was definitely anxious to justify himself. Although clearly innocent,
he began to draw up papers to show where all his ships were in the autumn
of 1807. He seems to have been quite worried about the possibility of
pressure being brought to bear on the Admiralty by Lloyd’s and the India
House. Both did, in fact, make some pronouncement against him, the Court
of Directors afterwards apologizing, however. It must be remembered in
this connection that Pellew was a self-made man. Lord Wellesley once
wrote that ‘No additional outrage which can issue from the most loathsome
den of the India House will accelerate my departure when the public safety
shall appear to require my aid.’ This is the language of an independent
nobleman. But a man like Pellew could not afford to ignore the India
House, or even Lloyd’s. Fortunately, his case was strong. Lord Minto,
moreover, was on his side. The result was that the memorial was ignored.
‘I   have never   heard,’ wrote    Hickey,    ‘that   this   Memorial   produced
                                        316
                               PELLEW       AND    DECAEN