




plate
    viii.  Rear-Admiral    Sir   Thomas Troubridge (i758?-i8o7),
Commander-in-Chief on the East Indies Station, by Sir William Beechey
plate ix. Captain Peter Rainier (</. 1836)
           by John Hoppner
                               DRURY     IN   CHINA

gentleman, and many of the officers of Drury’s generation hardly regarded
themselves as such. Ashore, they were liable to be treated as parvenus.
Pellew and Troubridge were both of this type, and so probably was Rainier.
But Drury had come to regard his profession as a superior caste, above the
criticism of ordinary mortals but infinitely responsible in the sight of
heaven; a chosen aristocracy with a special standard of honour, worthy
therefore, of a very special respect.
  There is much to admire in Drury’s attitude. But there is also much
to admire in the attitude of Don Quixote. A high notion of honour does
credit to any man. To be of use, however, it should have some relation
to the world about us. In Drury’s respect for his calling there was that
trace of insanity apparent in Lord St. Vincent’s respect for discipline. Like
Sir Sidney Smith he united much that was admirable with much that was
fantastic. A more prosaic person—Pellew himself, for example—might
have   quarrelled less violently with the       Company’s officials and the
commanders of Indiamen. A hearty and unconcealed contempt for all the
Company’s concerns was no very good qualification for an officer sent
to co-operate with the Indian Governments and the supercargoes at
Canton. That he was sent, however, can hardly be regretted; for the
expedition was futile in any case, and but for him it would not even have
been romantic. There is a poetry in his dispatches which must go far to
console one for the complete absence of times and dates.
  It must be remarked, first of all, that Lord Minto apparently failed to
persuade the governor, or rather the Viceroy, of Goa, to send suitable
orders to the governor of Macao. Neither, in the end, did he see fit to
inform the Chinese beforehand of what he intended to do. So that Drury’s
arrival at Macao was a surprise for all but the Select Committee, the
members of which had done nothing to warn or conciliate either the
Chinese or Portuguese. And here it must be remembered that the super¬
cargoes had no experience of government. They ruled no territory. They
controlled no troops. A situation in which they had to wield political power
was utterly novel to them. They had made their first mistakes before Drury
arrived, but these were very far from being their last and farther from
being their most disastrous.
  Drury had his first interview with Mr. Roberts, the President of the
Select Committee, on September 12th. He at once proposed to send a
message to the governor of Macao, stating his intention of occupying the
town with British troops, which were to be regarded as auxiliaries assisting
in its defence. He would make it clear that, unless they were admitted
as friends, the town would have to be taken by force; ‘the necessity then
                                        321                              L
                    WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS