

                                           310
                          PELLEW AND       DECAEN

 thousand five hundred men to the Isle of France. Fifteen thousand men
 were to follow later; and then the whole force was to land in India, perhaps
 to co-operate with another twenty thousand coming through Egypt.
 Napoleon begged Deeres not to raise objections and make difficulties.
 Would he, for once, try instead to suggest expedients? Deeres would not.
 But it did not matter, for news came almost at once of the risings in Spain.
 By July Napoleon had decided not to send any considerable force out of
 Europe. When a small reinforcement was eventually sent, it arrived too late.
    As regards the losses in the Bay of Bengal, many of them were due to
 the arrival in the Indian Seas of the famous privateer Surcouf. It has not
 been found possible to give here any distinct account of the activities of
 the French cruisers, whether private or national. The subject is one on
 which books have been written, but it is not one which lends itself for
 compression into pages, or even chapters. Some mention, however, must
 be made of Surcouf; for his successes had certain results which it will be
 necessary to deal with later.
    Surcouf sailed from Saint-Malo on 2nd March, 1807, in a specially
 designed 18-gun ship called the Revenant. He sighted Bourbon on May 31st,
 evaded the blockading squadron and entered Port Louis on June 10th.
 Few merchantmen had run the gauntlet for some time past, and the
 inhabitants were experiencing some mild degree of famine. Surcouf was
 enthusiastically welcomed, and Decaen suggested that he should try to
 intercept some of the Bengal rice ships. The corsair agreed and, sailing
 on September 3rd, arrived off Ceylon a fortnight later. He was soon on
 the trade route between Bengal and Madras, and successively took the
 Trafalgar, Mangles, Admiral Aplin, Susannah and Hunter. All these were
 rice ships. Having advertised his presence too much—there was by that
 time an embargo on the shipping in the Hooghli and a price on his head
 of a lac of rupees—he went to cruise on the Pegu coast for a fortnight.
 Then, when the scare had a little subsided, he suddenly came back to his
old station off the Sandheads. He now took the Success, Fortune, New
Endeavour, Colonel Macaulay, William Burroughs, Oriente and Jean Labdam.
This was a more mixed bag, the last two being neutrals detained for some
irregularity in their papers. Some of these craft he released or destroyed.
One, the Admiral Aplin, went ashore after her capture. The rest were sent
to the Isle of France where they all arrived safely, Surcouf himself coming
in afterwards on 31st January, 1808.
    The Revenant was not the only French cruiser operating in the bay
in 1807-8. There were others, and notably the frigate Pi&montaise, which
was still cruising successfully when Surcouf returned to his base. Altogether,
                                     311
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS