

   In some moods he wras more than inclined to treat Decaen and his
dispatches as something of a joke. One of the many emissaries sent to
him from the Isle of France was greeted cheerfully with the words, ‘Well,
how is Decaen? Bored down there, I suppose?’ When he treated the
proposals seriously, it was only to reject them. He came nearest, however,
to accepting such a scheme in the early months of 1808; that is, at the
very time that the Persian scare was at its height. This was partly due to
the personality of Rene Decaen, the General’s younger brother.
   Rene was sent off from the Isle of France in September 1807. His mission,
like that of previous messengers, was to convince Napoleon of the
possibilities of a campaign in India. But he brought knowledge, and
complete knowledge, of his brother’s plans; which was more, perhaps, than
other messengers had done. And, more important still, he carried the news
of the sepoy mutinies of 1805-6. Sailing towards the end of the month,
he reached Paris by 9th January, 1808. He had an interview with Napoleon
on the 27th.
   Rene had been transferred by his brother to the Navy, and had been
serving as an officer in the Piemontaise. He was probably, therefore, in
naval uniform. Napoleon, at any rate, laughed at his appearance and said,
  1 Correspondance de Napoleon avec le Ministre de la Marine 1804-1812. Extracte d’un
portefeuille de Sainte-Helene. Two vols. Paris, 1838. Vol. I, p. 204.

                                             3°9
                        WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

‘Hallo, I thought you were your brother’s aide-de-camp! And to what
regiment of cavalry do you belong?’ After Rene had given some explanation,
Napoleon asked where the vessel was in which he had come. ‘At St. Cyprien ?
Good. I’ll send you back at once.’ Then he asked for news of the frigates,
remarking that he had sent out two more last October. Satisfied on this
point, he suddenly asked, ‘Why haven’t the English taken the Isle of
France?’ ‘I think,’ said Rene, ‘that they have not attacked it so far because,
each time they have been about to do so, something has happened to distract
their attention in India or Europe.’ He added something about Napoleon
keeping them so busy elsewhere that they lacked the forces. He supposed
that they were waiting for an opportunity. They were not, he thought,
still in error as to the strength of the place. An attack would come if the
English in India were given time to breathe. ‘Oh, that’s it?’ said the
Emperor, ‘I have never been able to understand why they didn’t take it.
It’s sheer idiocy on their part. . . .’x
  In the course of the conversation, Napoleon returned to this point three
times, still wondering at the English stupidity. At last he said, ‘Come now,
tell me frankly, without boasting, how many men would be needed to
take the Isle of France? Exactly how many, I mean.’ Rene replied that
four or five thousand Europeans, with a few sepoys, could do it easily.
Decaen had only twelve or thirteen hundred men—for the militia and
black troops were almost worthless. Napoleon said that he really must
send Decaen five hundred more men. Two frigates, he thought, and, yes,
another five hundred men.
  Then it was that Rene broached the subject of India. Napoleon said
that he stood well with the Porte; that he was friendly, too, with the
Persians. He might send an army corps overland. . . . True to his new
uniform, Rene pointed out that an attack by sea would arrive sooner, and
the English would be unable to concentrate to meet it. ‘And where do you
think I am going to get the ships?’ demanded the Emperor. ‘You know
very well that I have none. . . .’ Many more questions followed. Supposing
he was able to find the ships, how could the troops be fed on the voyage,
now that the Cape had fallen? Rene answered all objections so well that
he went away thinking the matter settled and the expedition decided upon.
It is curious to remember how thoroughly Lord Minto shared this belief.
  Although not completely convinced, Napoleon was certainly thinking
seriously of a stroke at India. At length, on May 13th, he went so far as
to write to Deeres and ask him whether a squadron of three sail of the line
and six frigates could be fitted out by September; a squadron to carry four
              1 Henri Prentout. Ulsle de France sous Decaen, Paris, 1901.