

   Drury’s flag was transferred from the Monmouth to the Russel, the
former ship being directed to accompany the homeward-bound convoy
                                      313
                          WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

then about to sail. Drury then went over to Achin and so to Penang, the
arrangement being that he should return and meet Pellew at Madras in
May or June. The commander-in-chief evidently did not intend to be
kept for long by all this nonsense about Persia.
   Meanwhile, the homeward-bound convoy was collecting at Point de
Galle, detachments of Indiamen arriving there with naval escort from
Bengal, Madras and Bombay. Until the Madras contingent arrived, with
the Monmouth, the convoy was protected by the Belliqueux. But three of
the Indiamen, from Bombay, sailed for the rendezvous without escort—
apparently through being delayed. The Piemontaise, French frigate, then
cruising in the vicinity, learnt of their sailing from one of the half-dozen
prizes she had taken. She therefore lay in wait for them off Cape Comorin.
Unfortunately for the French ship, the English frigate San Fiorenqo arrived
from the opposite direction just as the Indiamen at last appeared, on
March 6th. A terrific conflict ensued between the two frigates, which lasted
for three days and ended with the surrender of the Piemontaise. The San
Fiorenqo and her prize, both in a shattered condition, came into Colombo
on the 12th.
   The Semillante was also cruising at this time, in the Bay of Bengal. She
fell in with the Terpsichore between Ceylon and Madras, but escaped after
an hour’s fighting. As such an encounter was bound to put an end to her
cruise, the English squadron had, altogether, done fairly well. Of the three
largest French cruisers haunting the coasts of India, one had been taken
and one so badly damaged that she had to return to France. Nevertheless,
one of the Indiamen waiting at Point de Galle carried a memorial to the
Admiralty from the merchants, agents, underwriters and shipowners of
Calcutta, complaining bitterly of the way in which commerce was left
exposed to the enemy.1 It was entrusted to Alexander Steward and Michael
Prendergast, passengers in the Castle Eden, who showed it to their fellow
passenger, William Hickey.
   Of this memorial there were other copies about besides the original
document which Hickey inevitably transcribed as material for his memoirs.
More will be said of these later. For the present, Pellew was unaware of
the insult intended. He reached Point de Galle on March 8th, together with
the Powerful and two other men-of-war, and went on at once towards
Bombay, leaving the convoy to sail as soon as the Belliqueux should be
relieved by the Monmouth.

   1 ‘The favourite expeditions against the Dutch ... a prostrate, a fallen and passive foe,
are attended . . . with no national or public advantage, while at the same time they leave the
whole Trade of India exposed to the depredations of an active and enterprizing Enemy.’