

    . . . fearful of the consequences of the immense mob at Canton provoking
    our men, and considering the too great responsibility I was putting on the
    Shoulders of so young a man as Capt’n Dawson, with express orders not
    to risque anything which could endanger an hostile act on our part, and
    fearing Seamen and Marines, if attacked, might not be withheld by his
    authority; and viewing the immense Stake we were playing for, suspended
    by a thread, a single musquet would have broken, and the greatest monopoly
    England and India has in the World would be lost for ever! I determined
    to accompany Capt’n Dawson in my Barge, as my controul would be more
    than his possibly could.

  It may be doubted whether Drury was quite honest in his report of
this boat expedition. He speaks as if the fetching of stores (liquor mostly
for the frigates) was the sole object in view; and yet he also says that he
                                       328
                                DRURY    IN   CHINA

 assented’ to it. Now, if the wants of his men were all he had in mind,
he would surely have initiated rather than approved the scheme. And,
again, if the China trade might have been brought to an end by the firing
of a musket, why did they take their muskets with them ? The most certain
method of preventing a shot being fired would have been to leave all
firearms behind. Granted that a Rear-Admiral might have more authority
than a junior captain, a physical impossibility might be supposed to have
more authority than either. It is fairly obvious, in fact, that this boat
expedition was not quite what Drury afterwards tried to make it appear.
It must have been suggested by the supercargoes as a final, though half¬
hearted attempt at intimidation. They probably had some vague hope that
the Chinese would collapse as soon as they heard of Drury’s approach.
And Drury himself must have shared in this expectation to some extent.
Otherwise, he would not have agreed to send the boats together and
armed. The fetching of stores was a mere pretext, to be used in explanation
if anything went wrong; a thin pretext, as the stores could have gone in
single unarmed boats, at night.

        On approaching Canton, their armed Junks were drawn across the River
     and myriads of People on board of them. Apprehending they might fire
     their little guns (which were pointed in the air) I ordered Capt’n Dawson
     to remain behind with all the Boats while I advanced in my Barge with a
     man in the Boat who spoke Chinese, in order to explain to their Admiral
     my peaceable intentions.
       When within about a hundred yards of them they fired a shot over the
     Boat. I still advanced, and one or two shots more passed over us, untill I
     got within about forty yards, all this time endeavouring to speak, but in vain.
     Now all the Junks opened their fire on my Barge, with stones and God knows
     what, untill one of the Marines in the Boat was struck, and the Seamen
     in all the other Boats, seeing me fired at so furiously, no longer were under
     control, but pulled close up, when I saw the necessity of ordering them all
     back, or the total annihilation of their poor Junks and Canton must have
     been the inevitable consequence, had I permitted a single Musquet to be
     fired, which was most impatiently looked for by every one. The Launches
     and boats anchoring out of reach of their little Junks, thousands of People
     came down in Boats shouting, and on the beach close to us, not in the least
     apprehensive of us or our guns; and when the tide turned I ordered all back.