


   It may seem strange that Drury should have given way in this manner,
but it must be remembered that the troops were not under his command.
He was the King’s officer. The troops were the Company’s. They were
under the orders of the President of the Select Committee, just as they
might be under the orders of the governor of Madras. If the Committee
wanted them to land, Drury could not refuse to land them. His landing
in person did not affect the issue. By that time the town was occupied.
He went on shore merely to restore order, which the military commanding
officer was apparently unable to do. Once there, he took command by
mere force of character.

      About 70 or 80 of the Mandarine Junks with about 5000 men having
    enter’d the Harbour, I saw the necessity of interfering and collecting the
    Handfull of men I had on shore to guard against surprize; By the most
    earnest solicitations of the Select Committee I almost forced the poor
    Governor to let the British Troops occupy La Monte Fort (the Governor’s
    only secure retreat). This point being gained the Committee appeared very
    much pleased and at their ease, but no sooner had the fermentation of loaded
    Stomachs begun to operate than their minds changed, and at 6 o’clock next
    morning Mr. Roberts and the Commanding Officer of the Troops came to
    request of me that the Troops should not occupy Monte.
      The Mandarine Vessels and Men having now withdrawn, and perceiving
    the most impotent indecision in the Committee, I told them it was so deroga¬
    tory to my situation that I should immediately embark, having been on
    shore 3 weeks or a month, tranquility being restored and provisions supplied
    the Town. I went on board my ship to proceed to Cheunpu to water, and in
    the idea of the Select Committee to intimidate the Chinese by moving
    upwards towards the Bocca Tigries.
      Eight hundred additional Troops now arrived under Colonel Wiguilem,
    from Bengal, when the President of the Select Committee sent off an express
    to me, to know if I had any objection to the Transports going into the Typa
    near Macao, and landing the Troops under Portuguese Colours, my reply
    was, the proposal was so contemptible, so unworthy of an Englishman, to
    land British Troops as a Portuguese Banditti, I would if it were done withdraw
    myself altogether from so scandalous a set.
      Mr. Pattle, the second of the Select Committee, now went to Canton,
    and opened what he called a negotiation with the Chinese, pressing each
    day my sending men of War into the Tigriss. Mr. Roberts, the president,
    proceeded also to Canton, and in the expectation that each day would

                                      325
                      WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    terminate the business, I was induced to send two Frigates up the Tigriss to
    Whampoa, in order to intimidate, as well as to receive specie, which was
    promised to a great amount, both public and private (a very small proportion
    of which was at last received).
       Perceiving we were infringing and trampling under foot every moral
    law of Man, and of Nations, and the poor defenceless Chinese infuriated
    to Phrenzy, calling forth their feeble means of defence and offence, and still
    trusting in the superior local knowledge of the Supra Cargoes, that all would
    be suddenly ended well if I appeared at Canton, I was at length induced to
    hoist my Flag in a Frigate, and, by reiterated entreaties, to go to Canton to
    demand an audience of the Viceroy, which I am now convinced the Supra
    Cargoes did every thing to prevent, and which I certainly could have had,
    from the dreadful alarm of the Chinese at my appearance at Canton with
    near a thousand armed men in my retinue, were it not prevented by the Supra
    Cargoes.
       A Chinese was now privately sent to me by the Hoppo, and I suppose
    the Viceroy, proffering me 400,000 Dollars to evacuate Macao, or as much
    more as I pleased, and that the Troops should be permitted to land again in
    small parties and remain there.