

   The incident shows that the supercargoes were right in believing that
the prospect of a cessation of trade—and of course no cargoes were being
discharged at this time—would frighten the Viceroy more than any one
else. He was ready to offer an enormous sum as a bribe to bring about
even a sham evacuation of Macao. Why ? Obviously, the affair had come
to the ears of the Emperor. There was no other person for whose benefit
the sham evacuation could be intended. To avert the abolition of the trade
by an Imperial decree, the best thing the Viceroy could do was to make
some show of compelling the English to depart. He probably knew, as
the Emperor did not, that there was no hope of ejecting them by force.
But his experience apparently led him to suppose that any Englishman
could be bribed.
      This old Chinese (who spoke English very well) was sent to me without
    the knowledge of the Supra Cargoes, whom I informed of the circumstances,
    and who I was well informed by Gentlemen present when the old Chinese
    delivered my note to Mr. Roberts, that he appeared exceedingly chagrined,
    Mr. Pattle petulantly declaring ‘By God, Roberts,_ this has marred all, and
    we will immediately embark the Troops.’ A letter was witten by Mr. Roberts
    immediately to me, declaring the old Chinese to be every thing that was
    bad, and that the Hong Merchants believing me the ostensible person would
    do great mischief, which I replied to by saying I would withdraw from the
    business altogether; and the honor and advantages .should be entirely the
    Select Committee’s.
                                      326
                             DRURY     IN   CHINA

       Reiterated entreaties (that all would be lost if I withdrew) induced me to
     remain, and still appear the ostensible person.
       Something so extraordinary and mysterious was now so evident to me,
    in the conduct of the Supra Cargoes, that I could not but suspect some secret
    transaction was going on, of which I was totally ignorant. My message to
    the Hoppo, and Viceroy, was ‘An English Officer is insulted by offering
    him a Bribe and Merchants would be punished for taking it, but as a proof
    of my sincerity that the protection of Macao and our Commerce was my
    only object I would withdraw one half of the Troops, but cannot receive
    any reward.’
       This plan was agreed to by the old Chinese, and I am persuaded, had it
    been followed up by the Supra Cargoes with common sense and justice,
    every matter would have been at that time settled and our Troops allowed
    to remain at Macao. . . .

  With a single inspired phrase, Drury tried to convey to the Chinese the
social gulf yawning between him and the East India Company’s servants. ‘An
English Officer is insulted by offering him a Bribe and Merchants would
be punished for taking it. . . .’ Perhaps the Chinese saw the point of this.
But they had sensed the cleavage between Drury and the supercargoes at
an earlier stage. That is why they tried to bribe him without telling them.
  The narrative from which the above quotations are taken is Drury’s
report to Pellew (P.R.O. Adm. 1/181). In the absence of dates, it must
be explained that the events described covered nearly three months. The
crisis came on November 27th-28th. On the first of these days, Drury
addressed a sort of ultimatum to the supercargoes.