


   Fortunately for the Chinese, and still more fortunately for the East India
Company, Drury was at once exceedingly brave and remarkably humane.
It was not every officer who could reason in that pitying way while
confronted by a howling mob of Chinese, and under a heavy fire of ‘stones
                                        329                                    L*
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

and God knows what.’ If it originated in folly, the incident at least closed
with a scene showing European forbearance, chivalry and discipline at its
best. It is, perhaps, worth mentioning that the Chinese claimed a naval
victory and erected a large war memorial to commemorate it. There is no
striving against ignorance.
   To continue the narrative:

       I thought this was a pretty strong proof that the Supra Cargoes could
    have no serious Idea that these People were to be intimidated into their
    measures, whatever they were; and as every step they had taken since I left
    them at Macao was in direct violation of their orders from the Supreme
    Government, I made Mr. Roberts read his instructions, and told him, if
    peace and Commerce can only be had by war, in two hours every Junk
    they have shall be destroyed, but if neither peace nor commerce is to be
    obtained by War, I never will sanction the slaughter of those defenceless
    multitudes, yet if my Seamen, or one of them, is killed, I will destroy Canton;
    therefore recollect what you will have to answer for. I gave you quiet
    possession of Macao with 300 men, you have there 1,100 with a regular
    staff at your Command. I never will give you an opinion in regard to what
    you are to do in Macao. I tell you no hostile act shall be committed against
    the Chinese, unless a man is killed, which nothing but the most singular
    accident has prevented. The Seamen under my controul have borne to be
    fired at, but if once let loose no power on Earth can stop them.

   After his encounter with the Chinese Navy, Drury wrote an account of
what had just happened for Pellew’s benefit. In describing the situation
he made it clear that, if the Select Committee should decide on war, he
would not lend his sanction to it. He refused to be the murderer of ‘this
strange and almost totally defenceless Rabble.’ He ends by saying ‘I hope
for the honor of the Service and the Welfare of our Country, that neither
you nor I may ever be again employed on a Jean bon St. Andre Expedition.
I never will.’ On the same day, either before or after his interview with
Mr. Roberts, he wrote officially to the Select Committee, which was
apparently assembled by that time on board the JValmer Castle, Indiaman,
at Whampoa. After a suitable amount of abuse and admonition, the letter
goes on ‘The Select Committee are directed to be the sole Arbiters in this
transaction; and I hope and expect that their next requisition to me may
be firm, wise, and final.’
   The supercargoes may have been the sole arbiters on the English side,
but this hardly gave them a complete control of the situation. There was
another arbiter to consider, and that was the Emperor of China. The now
distracted Viceroy had played his last card in sending word to the Emperor,
                                        330
                                DRURY     IN   CHINA