

                                      333
                     WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

China ships to England. He was now assured that they would certainly
not be sailing before March. As he did not intend to wait until then, he
at once handed over the command to Drury. The two Admirals sailed
on the same day, Drury bound for Madras and Pellew bound for Point
de Galle, where the Terpsichore was assembling the spring convoy of
Indiamen from the three Presidencies. The convoy sailed with the Culloden
and Terpsichore on 15th February, 1809. Off the Isle of France a very
heavy gale was encountered, the Culloden herself being considerably
damaged, and the convoy dispersed. The Admiral waited in Table Bay
for the ships to reassemble, sending some of them on to St. Helena as
soon as they arrived. Four of them did not arrive. After waiting for ten
days, Pellew proceeded to St. Helena, where he waited another ten days.
The missing Indiamen did not appear; and, in short, they were never
heard of again. The rest of the convoy sailed from St. Helena on May 9th,
and arrived in the Channel two months later. The Terpsichore escorted
the Indiaman into the Downs, while the Culloden put into Plymouth on
July 10th. Four days later, Pellew struck his flag and went ashore. He had
made his fortune at the price of a five years’ exile.




                                  334
PART THREE
                            CHAPTER XVII



                 The Navy in India

   At the period when Sir Edward Pellew left India, the East Indies
    \ station was organized on a pattern which survived for the rest of
JL JLthe war. With the limits of the station restored to what they had
been in Rainier’s time, but with the       Cape established as a separate
command; with the squadron in considerable strength, and with the last
French efforts impending, it may not be out of place to describe the
administrative problems which underlay the strategy of the Indian Ocean.
How did this station compare with others? What were its peculiarities?
Its first characteristic was its remoteness. The naval commander-in-chief
in India was too far away for effective control. Thus, the Admiralty was
perpetually trying to assert some kind of authority in India and as
perpetually finding itself thwarted; largely by mere distance. To official
orders to appoint an officer to a ship, to appoint a firm as agents, to
promote a midshipman, the Admiral was apt to reply that the ship was
wrecked, the firm bankrupt and the young gentleman dead.
  From the flag-officer’s point of view, this comparative freedom from
effective control was one of the principal attractions of the East Indies.
More especially was it valued as the means of promoting friends and
relations. Rainier’s nephew took less than a year to rise from the rank
of midshipman to that of post-captain. Sir Edward Pellew made one of
his sons a post-captain at the age of seventeen. Sir Thomas Troubridge
did much the same for his son. Officers were apt to die in the East Indies,
and the commander-in-chief could shuffle the vacancies round in such a
way as to leave the Admiralty eternally out of date in its information.
Prizes, too, were taken from the enemy, and it was for the commander-
in-chief to purchase them into the Navy if he thought fit. When he did
so, he named them, commissioned them, and appointed officers to them.
Again, when ships were worn out, it was he who had them sold out of the
service. In patronage and administration, he was very much a despot.
  The administration of the squadron’s finances, and the purchasing of
its non-edible stores, was entrusted to the naval officer at Madras and the
naval officer at Bombay. The former had a subordinate agent at Calcutta