

                                    337
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

and, after 1807, another subordinate agent at Penang. The first characteristic
of a naval officer was that he was never a naval officer; he was never,
that is to say, an officer in the Navy. He was a civilian and the representative
of the Navy Board. When there was a vacancy, the commander-in-chief
would sometimes appoint his secretary to the post. Otherwise, these officials
may have been promoted from the dockyards in England. At the beginning
of our period, the naval officers also acted as agents to the Sick and Hurt
Board, but this latter office was abolished in 1806.
  The duty of a naval officer was to take charge of the specie sent out
from England in dollars for the use of the squadron, to check all expen¬
diture and keep accounts of all supplies purchased. As storekeeper, it was
his duty to hire storehouses and, at Madras, an office as well. If, as was
often the case, there was no money to carry on the business, he had to
dispose of bills on the Navy Board, signed by the commander-in-chief.
When these could not be sold at any reasonable discount, he had to borrow
money from the Company’s treasury. One of his duties, in the absence
of the commander-in-chief or a senior officer appointed to command in
his absence, was to open dispatches from the Admiralty and decide whether
to forward them; and if so, how. It was a responsible post.
  The stores which a naval officer had to purchase and supply on
requisition to the ships of the squadron were chiefly items such as canvas,
cordage, ground-tackle, tar, paint and so forth. Sometimes the Navy Board
would send out quantities of canvas, cordage, and the like in the East
India Company’s ships—the Company took out stores freight free for the
squadron in India. But at other times it was necessary to make purchases
in India, often of country canvas and other local products in the absence
of European supplies. The greatest purchases were in connection with
ships bought into the Navy—country ships as well as prizes—which might
occasion the drawing of bills up to £90,000 at a time.
  Ordnance stores, strictly speaking cannon, shot and gunpowder, were
supplied by the East India Company through the arsenals at Bombay and
Madras. The Navy Board repaid the Company afterwards. This was a
transaction which did not affect the civil department of the Navy in India.
The victualling, again, was a separate affair. This was done by contract
for bills drawn on the Victualling Board in London. The building of
men-of-war in India, as apart from the carrying out of repairs, was arranged
in London between the Navy Board and the Company.
  As a result, apparently, of the activities of the Commission of Naval
Inquiry, the system under which the naval officers drew their emoluments
was entirely altered in 1806. Until then the officer at Madras, Mr, Hoseason,

                                      338
                          THE NAVY IN INDIA