

and it was at this juncture that the answer arrived. It was worded with
the firmness to be expected from the ruler of the world when addressing
the chiefs of some insignificant but occasionally troublesome frontier tribe.
The English had offered their assistance in excluding the French from
Macao, and also in suppressing the Ladrones. The Emperor, however, was
quite capable of guarding his own dominions against the French; and,
as for the pirates, there were none. He did not believe a word of what
the English said in excuse for seizing Macao. They had taken it because
they wanted it for themselves. Having thus summed up the situation, the
Emperor pronounced his judgment. The English were to leave Macao at
once. If they failed to do so, not only would they lose their trade, but
an infinite number of soldiers would be sent to seize them. This admirably
moderate decree was translated and sent on by the Viceroy, with a covering
letter of his own, urging the English to submit.
   The Imperial letter was apparently addressed to Drury, for he replied
to the Viceroy on December 5th, asking him to send some Mandarin of
rank to confer with him. At the same time he informed the Select Com¬
mittee that the Chinese ultimatum seemed to him to be ‘dictated by Wisdom,
Justice and dignified Manhood in support of those Moral Rights of Man,
of Nations, and of Nature, outraged and insulted.’ He ended by saying,
though not for the first time, ‘I shall therefore no longer degrade my
situation by the further continuance of a Negotiation which has long
appeared to me so mysterious and extraordinary.’ This message resulted
in a requisition from the Select Committee, dated December 8th, for Drury
to withdraw his ships from Whampoa and embark the troops at Macao.
This requisition being as ‘firm, wise, and final’ as he could have wished,
the Admiral gladly obeyed. He wrote again to Pellew from off Macao
on December 23rd.
     . . . And thus has finished the most mysterious, extraordinary and scandalous
     affair that ever disgraced such an Armament, seven Months employed on
     this Service, but which will be, I trust, a lasting memento and, for the Honor
     and welfare of the Country, prevent placing great National concerns in
     the hands of Merchants or Supra Cargoes, or any others whose individual
     views and Interests must be deeply involved in the Transaction . . . vesting
     such men with exalted authority, to be supported by British Ships and
     British Troops, was offering a mighty sphere to the small and feeble hand;
     which recoiling at every effort to grasp, it at length falls and crushes vain
     and impotent presumption.1
   1 The Select Committee of Roberts, Pattle, Bramston and Elphinstone was replaced on
6th December, 1810, Elphinstone alone being retained. On the Chinese side the Viceroy
and Governor were both cashiered and degraded two steps in rank.

                                         331
                       WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS