

                                         332
                             DRURY     IN   CHINA

    the immense debt due by the beggarly Hong Merchants to the Honourable
    Company—as I cannot attach to Gentlemen standing so high for liberality
    and honour, any thing so unworthy as selfish motives.
       I judge it proper to mention that my appearing as the Ostensible Person
    during this transaction was a matter of necessity in consequence of the
    entreaties of the Select Committee who assured me (which was true) the
    Chinese would neither correspond or communicate with them, and the
    Portuguese Governor at Macao could only communicate with me.
       When Mr. Elphinstone, one of the Select Committee, accompany’d by
    the Portuguese Judge of Macao came on board the Russel to inform me it
    was determined by the Committee to evacuate Macao immediately; with
    the declaration of the Commanding Officer of the Troops that Macao was
    not tenable with uoo men, and requesting my assistance to reimbark the
    Troops, I assured the Judge the Portuguese Trade should experience the
    same protection it had ever done, and that I had no reason to find fault with
    any part of the Governor’s conduct.
       I informed Mr. Elphinstone that when the Ships were laden and had
    sailed, as the same motives for the Select Committee wishing to occupy
    Macao might still exist, if they made the requisition, the same three hundred
    men that gave them before the possession should do so again, and maintain
    it, provided the Select Committee were not to interfere with the Officer left
    in the command of the Troops.

      (P.R.O. Adm. r/i 81. Report and correspondence sent by Drury to Pellew.)

  The same opinion regarding the impregnability of Macao is expressed
in Drury’s letter of the 23rd, in which he says that he could hold it with
a British regiment against all China ‘provided no Merchants or Supra
Cargoes, India Captains, Parsees, Portuguese Priests or Governors have
any thing to say to the execution of the plan.’ The truth of this contention,
however, was never ascertained. Macao was henceforth willingly left in
the possession of Portugal. It is curious to note that the Portuguese,
compelled to suffer such indignities at the hands of the English, were at
the same time suffering actual losses at the hands of the French. One of
their most valuable ships had long since been intercepted on the voyage
from Goa to Lisbon. In time of war it is dangerous to leave the combatants
in doubt as to which side one is on.
  Owing to the long delay in discharging cargo, there was no hope of
the China fleet sailing at the usual time of year. Drury accordingly left
the Dover and Dedaigneuse to assist the Lion in escorting it, and left Macao
on about December 24th. He was at Pulo-Aur by the 31st, and reached
Penang two or three days later. Two days after his arrival, Pellew appeared
in the Culloden. It will be recalled that Pellew had intended to escort the