

       In regard to the Ladrone Pirates which you ordered me to act against,
    as was advisable, according to suggestions of the Select Committee, I beg
    leave to observe all offers to assist the Chinese with British Seamen, in the
    total extirpation of 50,000 Ladrones have been treated by the Chinese Govern¬
    ment with the most dignified contempt, as I trust it will in future be
    by you, as a Tale told by the Supra Cargoes of Canton, full of sound
    signifying nothing. The Ladrones have ever existed, and I do firmly believe,
    are a most necessary Component part of this almost indefinite Empire. . . .

   As the Ladrones are still flourishing in some degree, the necessity for
their existence may perhaps be allowed. Drury’s attitude towards them
was explained by himself with more emphasis than lucidity. He apparently
thought that piracy was useful to the Chinese as an outlet for bad characters
and a natural defence of their coasts against strangers. He also said that
the idea of British seamen being used ‘to murder these defenceless myriads’
was ‘repugnant to common sense and decency.’ Without attempting to
follow this line of reasoning, it would be safe, probably, to admit that the
extermination of the pirates was impracticable. That they were as numerous
as Drury states them to have been was, at any rate, the common belief
of the time. Other accounts make the pirate vessels number between five
and six hundred. How the trade should have been of a volume to support
so many thieves is not apparent. However, whatever their exact number,
there was no obvious way of dealing with them, and Drury was clearly
wise in leaving the problem alone. The Admiral’s final report on the whole
affair ends as follows:

       They [the Supercargoes] still continued from indecision to something
    more absurd, till finding I was not to be driven from the Tigriss thro’ want
    and that I would not allow the Chinese to be slaughtered nor their little
     Forts to be destroyed, and the Gentlemen at Macao taking fright, a requisition
     was at length made that the Ships should quit the Tigriss and the Troops
     withdrawn.
       Viewing the whole transaction at the moment, since giving it my best
     consideration, and being convinced the Select Committee had no just ground
     to found their letter to the Supreme Government of the 9th of March, that
     if the Troops were landed at Macao, the Chinese would not make any serious
     objection to it (or words to that amount) and as their representation of the
     danger to be apprehended from the Ladrones is totally void of Common
     Sense, and without foundation, as also their representations of the hatred,
    and malignancy of the Portuguese Government towards them, is, I firmly
    believe, most groundless: I can only conclude from the immense sum offered
    me to withdraw the Troops from Macao, that the object of the Supra Cargoes
    was by intimidating the Chinese, to have forced them to a Liquidation of