

                                                  Whampoa, 27th Nov. 1808.
    Sir
             Having for nearly three months acceded to every admissible requisi¬
    tion of the Select Committee of Supra Cargoes, in the faint hope of con¬
    ciliating the Chinese Government to the aggression of occupying Macao
    by British Troops, and as I cannot but behold with regret and alarm, that
    the Great and Advantageous Commercial Monopoly which England has
    enjoyed, is in danger of being lost for ever to the Country.
       However Highly the superior local knowledge of the select Committee
    may be esteemed by the Honble Court of Directors, experience, the least
    fallible of human knowledge, evinces me it has failed in every instance
    throughout this arduous and most complex transaction, and as the crooked,
    left handed, winding mode of proceeding, is so opposite to the Summary
    straight line, prompt and vigorous common sense, prudence, justice, and
    Dignity marked for an Officer to pursue, I can no longer waste the Services
    of His Majesty’s Ships, so much required in India, in negotiating where

                                      327
                       WAR     IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    neither party gives the other Credit for a sentence of truth being uttered. . . .
    I feel myself called upon to fulfil my duty by warning you against the mischiefs
    likely to arise from a continuance of your proceedings, at the same time to
     offer my opinion how the great pending Evil may in some degree be remedied.
       You have scarcely left a mean between peace and War, the sword is
    nearly half out of the Scabbard. . . .

  However completely one’s sympathies may be with Drury, it must be
confessed that his solution of the problem, as propounded at this juncture,
was as wild a scheme as could be conceived. His lecture to the Select
Committee is admirable, but its effect must have been spoilt by its con¬
structive as opposed to its critical aspect. He wanted the supercargoes to
abandon the factory at Canton and turn Macao into the depot for the
Company’s trade. This, as he was careful to explain, would have the pleasing
effect of ruining ‘the Mandarin and infamous Hong Merchants.’ As the
Hong merchants were heavily in debt to the East India Company, their
ruin was not as desirable as Drury seemed to think. The Mandarins, also,
and the Viceroy, were standing alone at that tim’e between the English
and an Imperial decree abolishing the China trade. As for Macao, it would
obviously be given back to Portugal sooner or later, whereupon the
Company would find its depot under foreign jurisdiction, and far less
conveniently situated than at Canton.
  The crisis on the 28th had little to do with the above ultimatum. It was
simply caused by a number of armed ships’ boats being sent up to Canton
to fetch stores from the English factory there. Drury at first intended that
these launches should be under the command of Captain Dawson of the
Dedaigneuse. At the last moment, however, he decided to accompany the
boats himself.