

to shuffle them round in such a way as to make sure that the Navy had
only the worst of them. Parties of boys coming in ships of war were
therefore preferable, as not being adulterated in this way. As a final resort,
when all else failed, there were lascars and Malays. These were never
shipped when it was possible to avoid it; but it is probable that most ships
had four or five of them. Had the war continued much longer, all ships
would have had a considerable number. They were not so particular in
the French service; the Marengo had two hundred of them at one time.
There do not seem to have been many negroes in English men-of-war.
Many French slavers were caught in the early years of the war, but the
slaves seem to have been sold in the ordinary way for the benefit of the
captors. There is mention at the end of our period of officers buying negro
boys at io dollars apiece. But these were probably good for nothing except
as servants. Lascars, it may be added, were useless in action. The French
frigate Piemontaise carried nearly 200 lascars in a total crew of about
500, but they were merely in the way when it came to fighting. Finally,
even after Indiamen had been robbed of their last man, after foreigners
and natives had been enlisted, men-of-war were often undermanned. The
San Fiorenio, at the time of her famous action, had only 186 men on board,
 including the sick.
   A problem akin to that of the supply of men was that of the supply of
officers. The solution of this problem was found in the turning of boys
into men. There were always a fair number of midshipmen, and they were
promoted as fast as vacancies occurred. Lieutenants, therefore, might be
very young indeed—sometimes as young as fifteen. They might also be
fairly old, for the promotions from lieutenant to commander were very
capricious. Luck and interest were the keys to promotion from a lieutenancy.
It was a rank more easily gained than quitted. It sometimes happened that
a specially favoured officer was posted at the age of eighteen or twenty.
In such cases, the Admiral usually appointed a ‘dry nurse’—that is to say,
a capable and experienced first lieutenant, aged perhaps about forty. The
fate of such an officer was hard, for his chances of promotion were in
inverse proportion to his usefulness.
   To fill up the depleted ranks of the midshipmen there was but one
method, apart from receiving fresh supplies in the ships newly arrived on
the station; and that was to entice apprentices from the Indiamen. Some¬
times a few assistant surgeons could be obtained in the same way, and
there was often a greater shortage of these than of midshipmen.
   The payment of officers and men employed on a foreign station was
always a trifle erratic, but the East Indies had local peculiarities as well.
                                     343
                    WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

Officers were paid, as elsewhere, in quarterly bills drawn on the Navy
Board. To convert these into cash, they had to be negotiated at a
considerable discount—about 20 per cent. As, however, the East India