

  1 See Naval Chronicle, Vol. 26, p. 214, et seq, and p. 305. The case is cited of the Asia from
which Drury agreed to impress only thirteen men, but which yielded thirty-three men
altogether to the ships of his squadron.

                                              341
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

of an acting lieutenant—aged about fourteen—who began the interview
by ignoring the chief mate’s bow, and calling out rudely ‘Call your hands
out. I am come to press your men.’ As he held no commission and showed
no press warrant, some dispute then followed, in the course of which one
of the boat’s crew shouted, ‘You-of a Chief Mate, I know you well
and I only wait for orders to blow your brains out.’ The first lieutenant
of the sloop, on the same occasion, on being ‘touched gently on the
shoulder and desired to keep calm’—this was after the exchange of shots—
shouted ‘Don’t touch me. You’re poisonous. You are no gentleman. . .
until the chief mate threatened to kick him over the side. The details of
such an incident are childish enough, but the upshot is not. The Indiaman
had given up her proper quota of men and received a ‘protection’ for the
remainder from Admiral Drury. Despite this, she was boarded in an
irregular manner, and eventually forced to give up thirty-three more. On
her officers showing their resentment—more at the incivility than the
injustice—a scuffle ensued; and the result was that the first, second and
fourth mates of the Asia were suspended from office for armed resistance
to His Majesty’s flag.
    Leaving aside the rights and wrongs of that particular case, it is evident
that the Company’s officers had much to complain of in a state of affairs
which exposed them to such treatment. The comments of Captain
Tremenhere, the commander of the Asia, are worth quoting in this
connection. ‘The young men in the Navy are too often impressed with
such high notions of the honor and consequence which attach to them
from being in His Majesty’s Service that they are very apt to forget what
is due to the Officers in the Company’s Service, of equal respectability
with and possessing as nice a sense of honor as themselves, and imagine
they may just speak and act towards them as they think proper. . . .’ A
commander of an Indiaman was something of a personage in India, the
equal of a colonel when ashore. To lose all his best seamen was bad
enough without his being ordered about in the process by an offensive
little boy with a blue coat as his only warrant.
    Impressment from Indiamen was practically the only method of obtaining
recruits for the Navy in India. Occasionally a few foreign seamen, taken
in French and Dutch prizes, would volunteer for the service. Ships’
companies were always rather cosmopolitan in those days; in the Blenheim,
for instance, fifteen of the marines were Dutch and one of the lieutenants
Russian; so that foreign seamen did not come amiss. Then, the Marine
Society used to send out parties of boys from time to time, both in men-
of-war and Indiamen. If they came in Indiamen, the mates usually managed
                                       342
                           THE NAVY IN INDIA