

                                         349
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

 at Madras and Bombay. When the Hon. Basil Cochrane withdrew from the
 active duties of contractor, he appointed Messrs. Balfour, Baker and Hart
 to act as his attorneys. Whether his return to England was due, as Trou-
 bridge thought, to dread of investigation; or whether it was due to regret
 at losing his friend Admiral Rainier; or whether, again, it was due to his
 fortune having been made, Cochrane at least left a system in working
 order. In return for a specified sum, the contracting firm supplied the
 squadron with provisions of certain kinds. It did so through agents appointed
 at all the ports frequented by ships of the Navy, who would deliver the
 provisions only on receipt of a proper demand, signed by a captain. The
victualling of six thousand men for one year—this was the strength of the
naval personnel on the station in 1810—cost the Government £150,000.
 The chief items were beef and bread. Beef was usually to be obtained
without much difficulty; but bread, by which was meant biscuit, had a
tendency to give way to rice. It was never possible to keep rice out of the
menu for long at a time. For the seamen, rice was simply boiled dry and so
brought to table. For the officers, rice took the form of curry, in which
form it appeared even at breakfast. The ubiquity of rice is shown by Pellew’s
demand in 1805 for sets of copper boilers for all ships in the squadron, as
the iron ones did not answer. He explained that ‘the constant boiling of
Rice, which must be well dried to be eatable, wears the Cast Iron very
fast—The Frigates will want at least six sets, by the time they arrive. . .
    Just as wheat was apt to give way to rice, so was cocoa sure to give way
to tea and rum to arrack. Vinegar and pease seem to have been obtainable
in India, but there was never any beer except during the early part of the
voyage out from England. Some ships carried essence of malt, spruce and
yeast with which to brew a further supply, but this can never have lasted
for long. In 1808, Sir Edward Pellew issued orders that ‘vegetables of the
country’ were to be provided daily for a month after a ship came into port,
provided she had been at sea for twenty-eight days or more—for the first
fortnight, to the amount of a halfpenny a day per man, and afterwards to
half that amount. There were also certain rules about lemon-juice, but it
may be questioned whether lemons were often to be had. In this connection,
it may be noted that the victualling contractor supplied only the staple
articles of diet. Each ship was allowed a certain sum of money in dollars,
called ‘necessary money,’ with which the purser might buy fresh meat,
vegetables, etc., as the need arose. The cost of watering ships at Madras,
Bombay and Penang was borne by the Company.
   There seems to be no direct evidence as to what the normal diet was in
a man-of-war on the East Indies station, but the contract for the victualling
                                     350
                           THE NAVY IN INDIA