


                                To be sold
                           By Public Auction
                            on account of the
                                 Captors
                                  in the
                           MARINE YARD,
                        On Monday 4th March next
                          precisely at noon, the
                          Dutch East Indiaman
                              ELIZABETH
                                a prize to
                           His Majesty’s Ships
                       Tremendous         Lancaster
                          Phaeton and Terpsichore
                                with all the
                              ordnance stores
                              as she now lies
                      at her Moorings in this Harbour


                       The ship is between 3 and 4 years
                    old, of about 750 Tons burthen
                    Carpenter’s Measurement. Copper
                    fastened, built at Liverpool by one
                    of the first Mercantile Houses in
                    London, by which she was sold to
                    the Dutch during the late peace, is
                    in very high condition, and well
                    calculated from her construction for
                    the trade from this Port to Canton.


   From the gross selling price of ship, fittings and cargo, was deducted
the expenses of condemnation, the agents’ commission and the expenses of
the sale. The remainder was then divided into eight parts. One-eighth went
to the Admiral, a quarter to the captain or captains, an eighth to the
                                    348
                              THE    NAVY      IN   INDIA

lieutenants, an eighth to the warrant officers, an eighth to the petty officers,
and a quarter to be divided among the remainder.1 Captains very rightly
had the lion’s share, as it was they who were responsible if the vessel sent
in were not condemned. When not under a flag-officer’s orders, they had
the Admiral’s share as well. This was never the case in the East Indies,
however. Apart from the remote possibility of a prize being taken by the
escort of the direct China ships, the Admiral might claim a share in every
capture. It was he, on the whole, who benefited most under the system.
 His share might be small, but it was universal, and he had not to divide it
with anyone else. Thus, Rainier and Pellew were both supposed to have
made about £300,000 during their service afloat, the former entirely in the
East Indies. Pellew probably made about a third of his fortune there. He
would have made a great deal more if Troubridge had not taken £30,000
 out of his ‘Birds nest,’ as he expressed it. Admirals had, of course, to live
on a very expensive scale. What they gained was not all clear profit. Pellew
said that his outfit, on being promoted to his flag, cost £3,250—most of
this, perhaps, being spent on the silver plate which guests expected to see on
an Admiral’s table. Captains scarcely ever made fortunes, or met expenses,
 on quite this scale. In twenty years as a captain, Pellew did not make much
more than £50,000.
   In the East Indies, occasional windfalls in the form of prize-money
probably meant most to young commanders and ward-room officers. The
seamen, it is true, had no other pay; but neither had they many opportuni¬
ties of spending. Officers, on the other hand, had continual expenses. To
the newly promoted captain of a frigate, an unexpected £500 may have
made a great deal of difference. Prize-money was not the only profit made
by captains. There was also the freight charged on the specie or bullion
sometimes entrusted for greater safety to ships of war, both by the Com¬
pany and by private merchants. The former, after 1805, paid no more than
ij per cent. A clue to what had formerly been paid may lurk in Pellew’s
complaint that the new regulation reduced his income by £2,000 a year.
Although the Admiral shared in the profit, it may be doubted whether the
lower grades received anything. Merchants had presumably to drive their
own bargain with individual officers. There is evidence that the captain of
a frigate escorting the country ships to Canton might make as much as
£2,000 on the voyage.
   The victualling of the squadron was done, as we have seen, by contract.
This department never fell into the disorder which afflicted the naval offices
  1 The proportions are laid down in the proclamation of 7th July, 1803, quoted in Naval
Chronicle, Vol. io, p. 77.