

who had been secretary to Admiral Rainier, drew £600 a year as naval
officer, £300 a year as Agent to the Sick and Hurt Board, with an allowance
for house rent and a percentage on all disbursements. As purchases were
at that time extensive, the post was considered lucrative. Under the new
regulations, the total salary was reduced to £200 a year, and the purchases
on which ij per cent was allowed were to be cut down, stores being sent
out from England instead. Under this system the emoluments were reduced
to about £600 a year. As Sir Edward Pellew calculated that £3,000 a
year was the least on which a respectable man could live with credit at
Madras, it is not surprising that both naval officers instantly resigned.
The Hon. B. Cochrane, the victualling contractor, retired at the same
time. Sir Thomas Troubridge attributed this exodus to fear of investigation.
Had he ever assumed command at Madras, he would have sifted the whole
matter and exposed the culprits, if there were any. Pellew was more
lenient.
   Following the resignation of the naval officers, there was a period of
something like chaos. Pellew’s secretary, Mr. Hawke Locker, filled the post
at Madras for a time. He stated, however, that the salary was insufficient,
and was glad to be relieved by an Admiralty nominee. A Mr. Hall was
induced to act until the new official should arrive. At Bombay, Pellew
appointed Sir Miguel de Lima e Souza, a Portuguese resident who had
held the post under Sir Edward Hughes. The Admiralty sent out Mr.
T. J. Williamson to supersede him in 1807. On arriving, Mr. Williamson
found the emoluments insufficient, the stores in disorder and the staff
inadequate. A staff of four was allowed by the Navy Board—a native clerk,
two watchmen and a labourer. Sir Miguel was actually employing sixteen
people in all, a European clerk, nine native clerks and six watchmen and
labourers. Mr. Williamson said that the post was not what he had been
led to suppose. He declined to accept it and embarked for England three
weeks after his arrival. Hawke Locker had already refused it, so that Sir
Miguel was left to carry on. The Navy Board was still, however, intent
on introducing reforms and economies. The next move was to send out
two commissioners, one to each port. Commissioner Inman duly landed
at Madras in 1809. He had become a lunatic in the course of the voyage,
and died almost as soon as he came on shore. Commissioner Dundas
arrived at Bombay and instantly became involved in a feud with Admiral
Drury. Something was done, nevertheless, to reduce expenses; for, while
detesting each other, Drury and Dundas were both reformers, and the
former could do more than would have been possible had Inman been
alive.

                                    339
                          WAR     IN   THE     EASTERN       SEAS

  Drury’s ambition was to establish Negapatam as the chief refitting port,
with Trincomalee both for refitting and supplies. The chief advantage of
Negapatam was that it was not Madras. It was possible to establish there
a new civil department, untainted with the expensive ideas of the old.
Trincomalee had obvious advantages but was handicapped by the absence
of a town, and by the absence even of a sufficiently productive countryside.
Efforts to introduce settlers could not have instantaneous effect.
  Bombay was the only port capable of repairing ships of the line in dock.
For frigates, however, and smaller craft, there were two alternatives:
Calcutta and Coringa. Whereas Bombay dockyard was the Company’s
property, the docks at Calcutta and Coringa were in private hands. The
Navy had to pay, and heavily, for the use of any one of them. The
objection to the Calcutta dock was that it involved an appalling loss of
life from disease to enter the Hooghly at all. To keep ships constantly
in the neighbourhood—as Pellew had been frightened into doing—was
to decimate their crews. To dock a vessel there was worse, for it kept the
men idle as well. The objection to the Coringa dock was the muddy bar
which had to be crossed in reaching it. Bombay was not free from disease,
but it was, in the main, preferable to the other two. Nothing came of the
plans to make Penang a refitting port. One or two men-of-war were built
there at considerable expense, and after protracted delays.1 Finding the
master builder idle in 1807, Pellew appointed him to act as agent to the
naval officer at Madras. Fike the agent at Calcutta, he was given the care
of certain hired storehouses. There were no docks even in course of
construction, all the schemes for developing Penang having been shelved,
mainly owing to lack of funds at Fort William.
   Equal in importance to the building, repairing and refitting of ships was
the supply of men. Ships were not always fully manned when they came
out to India, more especially if they sailed in peace time and therefore on
a peace establishment. And, whether fully manned or not, they very soon
found themselves in want of men. The only way in which men could be
procured was by impressment from the Indiamen. The country ships had,
of course, no European seamen to impress, and their officers were all