

 of the hospital ship at Penang, in 1809, is at least suggestive. The full diet
 may be taken as being much the same as what a seaman would have in an
 ordinary ship when in harbour and commanded by a thoughtful captain,
 with the addition of certain luxuries usually confined to the officers. By the
 contract, then, every patient on full diet was to have a pint of tea for break¬
 fast, the tea to be ‘real good Souchong’ in a stated quantity, with a fixed
 proportion of brown sugar and milk. For dinner, each was to have a pint
 of stew composed of a pound of beef or mutton, with barley or rice, onions
 or pumpkin. With this the patient was entitled to a pound ‘of the best
 wheaten Bread’ and two-thirds of a pint of ‘good sound wine.’ For supper
 there was an allowance of rice, boiled as congee with some milk added.
 Patients on low diet were to be given sago, vegetables, milk, eggs and
 arrack in lieu of meat and wine. All patients, whether scorbutic or not,
 were generously dosed on arrival with lemons or limes so as to be on the
 safe side. The full diet, with salt beef usually substituted for fresh, and
 omitting the wine and milk, was probably not unlike the ordinary fare in
 a sea-going ship.
    As regards clothing in the East Indies squadron, the men seem usually
 to have worn some kind of tropical kit. The crew of the Blenheim, for
 instance, were supplied by contract with ‘coarse and inferior’ duck frocks
 and trousers; the frocks costing 4s. iod. and the trousers 4s. 3d. a pair.
 There is mention in other ships of straw hats and canvas caps. Strictly
 speaking, the officers were supposed to wear their proper uniforms when
 on duty; and they always did so at dinner. Even in the strictest ships, how¬
 ever, they changed into white jackets as soon as they came off duty. Mid¬
 shipmen were at such times content with nankeen trousers and an open
 shirt; they also very probably wore straw hats, even when on duty. With
 regard to dress, it is clear that things were tolerated in the East and West
Indies which would not have passed muster at Spithead. In his Naval
Adventures, Bowers describes joining a smart ship at Plymouth in 1807, as
midshipman. Having served only in the East Indies, he arrived on board in
a Flushing greatcoat and a ‘Leadenhall-street-cut’ jacket—amidst roars of
laughter from the young gentlemen on the quarter-deck, who were all
dressed in uniform coats, silk stockings or Hessian boots with tight panta¬
loons, and gold-laced cocked hats. In such matters the East Indies were
probably more careless than the West, as being farther away. And when
the attire of a frigate’s officers at Madras might be a little faded and frayed,
it may be supposed that midshipmen of a sloop at Malacca would scarcely
be distinguishable from the men. There was never quite the slovenliness in
the English squadron as was to be seen in the French frigates, where
                                      35i
                     WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS