

lieutenants appeared in check shirts without cravats. But smartness was
hardly even aimed at except under the eye of the commander-in-chief. The
acting lieutenant (aged fourteen) who came to impress men from the H.C.S.
Asia, as mentioned on an earlier page, was described as ‘dirty and ragged in
his dress’with a midshipman’s coat and ‘dirty trowsers.’ On a second visit, he
had rectified his appearance by donning a lieutenant’s' coat, the effect being
spoilt, however, by his having no stockings. That this was not exceptional
is shown by the fact that the observant Hickey once mistook the first
lieutenant of the Belliqueux for a midshipman.
   In general, the East Indies squadron must be thought of as eternally
struggling to keep up appearances. The main object of the struggle was to
remain European. That is why ‘Bombay Marine’ was the insult used in
place of the more usual ‘regular privateer’; the point of the sneer being to
insinuate that the ship referred to was ‘going native.’ This was a tendency
to which all ships were, in fact, exposed. Despite every effort, lascars and
country canvas, coir cordage and boiled rice, arrack and ghee would find
 their way on board. What was worse, many a frigate had to disfigure herself
at a blow by assuming the appearance of a country ship and the function of
a ‘plain clothes’ policeman. Altogether, we must picture the ships as totally
unlike the contemporary prints of them. We know what a frigate was sup¬
posed to look like. It was not thus that she was seen in India. The cloud of
snowy canvas gave place in the East to an odd collection of grey and yellow
sails, patched and worn and discoloured with age. The awnings were stained
and streaked with tar from the rigging. The paintwork was dingy and
blistered and the pitch had run from every seam. Half the crew looked like
 natives, some of them because they were natives; and the rest looked ill,
 chiefly because they were ill. The marines would be reduced to a handful,
 their tattered uniforms faded to a sort of pink. Officers and midshipmen
 had lost all resemblance to the fashion-plates, and there was a strong ten¬
 dency for everyone to hold acting rank. There might be two or three
 soured and elderly lieutenants, ruled with some difficulty by a very young
 and anxious commander, blessed with an acting commission and a load of
 debt. This is the kind of ship we must imagine; and at the end of it we
 must recall, with something of a start, that she was practically invincible.




                                       352
plate X. Captain Fleetwood Pellew (1789—1861) in the raid on Batavia
harbour in 1807, which he led at the age of seventeen, by George Chinnery
                             CHAPTER XVIII


                 Health and Sickness

I   nrom an administrative point of view, perhaps the greatest difficulty
    H encountered by the Navy in India was that of keeping seamen alive
    in sufficient numbers to carry on the duty. There were few means
of replacing them and the wastage was terrible. It was not unusual for a
frigate to have 50, 60 or even 80 men on the sick list at a time; and there
was at least one case of a frigate coming into port with only 30 men on
deck. Still more significant are the statistics of men invalided by survey. It
does not appear that men died on board ship in very alarming numbers,
except when ships were anchored off such pestilent marshes as those of
Bengal or Batavia. The steady and constant wastage was rather represented
by the long list of men discharged as either totally unfit for further service,
or else needing a change of climate. The following figures are not complete,
for a number of reasons; but they may serve to indicate the extent of the
evil.
                            Invalided                     Remarks
    September 1806           100 men       Including a captain, five lieutenants,
       (at Madras)                           a master and a captain of marines.
    January     1807          30           Including three captains, three lieute¬
    September 1807            27              nants, a surgeon, four midshipmen
      (at Madras)                            and two boatswains.
    April       1807          24           Including a lieutenant and a master.
       (at Bombay)
    June        1807         49            Including a captain and a lieutenant.
      (at Bombay)                            In 1807 four ships lost a hundred
                                             men between them—died of scurvy.
    February    1808         62            Including two officers.
       (at Madras)
    July        1808        100            Including   three   lieutenants,  two
      (at Madras)                            masters and a lieutenant of marines.
    August      1808          16           Including a lieutenant.
      (at Madras)
    December 1808            4i
      (at Bombay)