

   1 It appears that a frigate was laid down at Penang in 1805, called the Malacca, and completed
in 1809. Her copper fastenings, guns and other stores were sent out from England but no
orders that she was to be handed over to the Navy. She seems, therefore, to have gone to
England as a merchantman. Meanwhile timber was being collected towards building a ship of
the line. It took three years to assemble the timber for half the frame and Admiral Drury
then poured scorn on ‘the wasteful and ridiculous Idea of ever building Men of War at
this Island where neither timber or workmen can be procured without immence expense’ and
the timber was then sold again.

                                              340
                                 THE       NAVY     IN   INDIA

exempt. About the impressing of men from Indiamen there was endless
trouble. It was decided very early in the war that the crews of the Company’s
cruisers should be exempt; and thenceforward the ground of dispute was
as to whether men could be received from them as volunteers. Naval
officers claimed that they were bound to receive all seamen who should
offer themselves, the East India Company maintaining that the men were
under contract and were not free to volunteer. This problem never seems
to have been solved. Neither was any satisfactory solution arrived at on
the subject of impressment from Indiamen. Here, the law was entirely on
the side of the Navy. The Company’s ships were only merchantmen with
something of the status of privateers. They had no valid claim to any
degree of exemption. However, there were continual and bitter complaints
from the Company, culminating in the inquiries made into the foundering
of Indiamen in 1808 and 1809.1 Perhaps partly as a result of these disasters,
which were widely—though probably wrongly—attributed to under¬
manning, the admiralty eventually issued a code of regulations under
which most of the petty officers as well as the officers and apprentices of
Indiamen were protected. This was only the last of a number of attempts
to solve the problem. Most of the previous efforts had been made by the
commanders-in-chief in the East Indies. They had failed for various reasons,
one being the tendency of individual captains to disobey orders on this
topic, another being the tendency of admirals to issue orders which they
did not mean to enforce. It was always an easy matter to draw up one
set of instructions to show the Governor-General, and give out slightly
different instructions over the port. Whether the Admiralty’s regulations
would have been very effective at such a distance must remain doubtful.
After 1810 the question began to solve itself as the strength of the squadron
was reduced.
   In this question of impressment, one’s sympathies must usually be with
the Indiamen. Their officers had to put up with insult as well as injury.
The case mentioned by Hickey of the lieutenant who impressed twenty-two
men from the Castle Eden, replying to all remonstrances with the words
‘Orders, Captain, orders! I am bound to be obedient to my superiors!
Let them look out that’s got the watch!’ was not unusual except in the
civility shown. There was an affair on board H.C.S. Asia in 1809 which
nearly led to blows, which actually led to pistol shots, though none
happened to take effect. It was almost entirely due to the bad manners