




Company was beholden to the squadron for any safety its shipping enjoyed,
it expressed its gratitude by making certain allowances both to officers
and men. Commanders-in-chief were naturally considered first. In Admiral
Rainier’s day the commander-in-chief had, besides an allowance of £3,000
plus table expenses, a furnished country house provided for him, with
                                     344
                               THE NAVY IN INDIA

servants, at both Madras and Bombay.1 The Company was in a more
economical mood when Sir Edward Pellew arrived. Nevertheless, his
comfort was not overlooked. The allowance made to post-captains was
£500 a year, to commanders £250 and to ward-room officers £24. This
was called ‘batta’ or table money, and it was theoretically intended to make
the officers’ pay equal to that of the Company’s officers of equal rank.
The allowance made to the rest of the crew took the form of tea and sugar
—enough for breakfast every day. This was a peculiarity of the station;
elsewhere the men had cocoa for breakfast, tea being confined to the




                      ADMIRALS             HOUSE MADRAS

officers. Payment of ‘batta’ was not, it will be noted, on a reckless scale
where lieutenants were concerned. In fact, as their pay was only a trifle
over £100 a year, the ‘batta’ did little more than make up for what the
officers lost in discounting their bills. Lieutenants were thought to fare
badly in India, as clothing was expensive and palanquin hire a necessity
whenever they went on shore.
   As regards the payment of ‘other ranks’ the theory was that they could
only be paid at a ‘King’s Port’—which meant in practice Portsmouth or
Plymouth. Trincomalee was a ‘King’s Port,’ but it does not seem that

  1 The Madras ‘Admiralty House’—where Robert Clive had lived—still exists, or existed
at least in 1921. See The Story of Madras by Glyn Barlow, p. 85.

                                            345
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

ships were ever paid there. In fact, they do not appear to have been paid
at all until they returned to England. As both ships and men were liable
to remain in the East up to ten years, the hardship is apparent. It did not
attract much attention at the time. Dundonald once raised the point in
the Lower House, but the matter was not taken up—if only because it
was he who brought it to light. In this connection there was a problem
which remained unnoticed for an incredibly long time: the problem of
how native seamen were to be paid—men who could not return to England
(never having been there) and whom the voyage would probably kill if
they undertook it. The problem was first realized in 1809, when two
native seamen meekly petitioned for fourteen years’ pay. Only then did
it dawn on a British Admiral that the lascars in the squadron had never
been paid, and apparently never would be paid.
   Besides pay there was prize-money, which sometimes eased the situation
for needy officers and which was the only money the men ever saw while
on the station. From this point of view the squadron’s greatest blessing
was the Vice-Admiralty Court established at Colombo in 1804, under the
jurisdiction of the governor of Ceylon. So convenient a place made for
the speedy adjudication of prizes, and that in turn made for the early payment
of prize-money.
   Prizes were fairly numerous. On quitting the command, Sir Edward
Pellew thoughtfully provided the Admiralty with a list of his recent
achievements. He was able to boast of the capture or destruction, in about
four years, of 223 sail. The list includes 2 French frigates, 2 corvettes
and 13 privateers; 2 Spanish armed ships; 3 Dutch sail of the line, 2
frigates and 17 of the Company’s ships. The remaining 182 vessels were
merchantmen of various nationalities. Of course, many of the merchantmen
were worthless. The men-of-war which were destroyed would bring in
‘head-money’ only after a return to England. Still, there was a certain
profit to be made. And here it must be observed that the squadron enjoyed
an advantage in the complete absence of privateers on their own side.
When on other stations there were valuable prizes to be taken, and there
were privateers about, it was not to the Navy that the prizes fell. This
was what the French soon discovered. Naval officers made next to nothing
and a few—a very few—corsairs became millionaires. There could be no
English privateers in India simply because none but the Company’s ships
might round the Cape. To fit out a privateer in India was impossible for
lack of men. So the absence of English letters of marque does not prove
that there was no profitable cruising to be done. What it does show is
that the East Indies squadron had a clear field.
                                       346
                           THE NAVY IN INDIA