

   When a ship of war was taken, she was brought straight into harbour
and offered by the captor for purchase into the Navy, without reference
to a prize court. The official report sent to the commander-in-chief almost
invariably ended with the words ‘she is a fine vessel, nearly new, copper-
fastened, and admirably suited for the service’ or something to that effect.
It was always the captor’s object to persuade the Admiral to buy his prize,
for a ship of war was often of little value except for the purpose of war.
She was therefore unlikely to be bought except by a combatant; that is, by
the commander-in-chief, or else—through a few middlemen—by the other
side. And the commander-in-chief was likely to pay more in the
Government’s name, if only to prevent the other side getting the ship
back. Here are some instances of the prices paid. The Dutch corvette Scipio
was bought into the Navy for £4,725. La Jaseur, a smaller vessel, was
purchased for £1,794. The Dutch frigate Pallas was purchased for £15,000,
the Maria Riggersbergen for a little over £12,000. These prices were arrived
at as the result of a survey by impartial committees of builders and car¬
penters. The Navy Board accused Pellew of paying over £2,000 too much
for La Bellone privateer, and tried to charge him with the amount-—thus
ignoring the nature of the valuation by survey.
   When a merchantman was taken, she was sent with a prize crew fo
Ceylon, where her case came before the Vice-Admiralty Court. If released,
the cost of her detention might have to be met by the captain who sent
her in. If condemned as a lawful prize, which was more usual, she then
became the property of the captor or captors. More than one ship, it must
be observed, might be present at her taking; and all ships present shared
equally. It was usual for ships sailing together on a particular service, such
as the blockade of the Isle of France, to agree beforehand to share all prizes
taken, whether all the ships were present or not. A condemned prize was
next sent to one of the big ports. There she was put in charge of the
captor’s agents. One agent might be an attorney and the other the Admiral’s
secretary; or else the whole agency might be vested in a single firm. Agency,
however, was highly profitable—the San Raphael brought Pellew’s secretary
£10,000—and it was frequently given as a compliment to the secretary
of the commander-in-chief. The agents then immediately arranged for the
sale. On page 348 is a typical notice, from the Bombay Courier of
2nd March, 1805.
   In this instance, another auction was held for the disposal of the
ship’s stores ‘at Mr. Adamson’s Warehouses, on the 7th, in small lots to
suit purchasers.’ The stores thus sold were cables, canvas, tarred marline,
lead line, twine, paint-brushes, copper nails, sheet lead, futtock plates,
                                     347
                     WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

hammock stanchions, iron hoops, medicine chest, etc. The cargo, of course,
when there was any, would be sold at yet another sale. But there was some¬
times a difficulty about this if the goods fell within the Company’s mono¬
poly. Much depended on the business acumen of the agents. In this
case, for instance, care was doubtless taken to send the ship to Bombay. It
would have been hopeless to try to sell a 750-ton ship at Calcutta.