

                                     353                                     M
                       WAR    IN    THE   EASTERN     SEAS

                              Invalided                 Remarks
    December 1808             48 men
      (at Macao)               -
    January     1809          50
      (at Penang)
    February    1809           10
       (at Madras)
    February    1809     tv   27            Of seventy-four men invalided at
       (at Penang)                            Madras, Bombay and Penang, from
                                             February 28th to June 2nd, five
                                             were lieutenants.
    June        1809          29
      (at Bombay)
    July        1809           15
       (at Madras)
    September .1809           100           Including four lieutenants, a surgeon
       (at Madras)                            and two masters.
    October     1809           27           Including a lieutenant.
       (at Penang)
    October     1809            9
       (at Bombay)
    December 1809              63
       (at Penang)
    January     1810           5i
       (at Madras)
   The above lists are incomplete because they omit the numbers invalided
at Penang during the period of Sir T. Troubridge’s command there, that
officer having sent no communications on the subject to the Admiralty.
They are incomplete, again, as regards officers, and perhaps in other respects.
Even so, here we have little under nine hundred men invalided in something
over three years. Add to this the probable number invalided at Penang in
 1807 and 1808, another hundred at least. To the thousand so obtained, add
the hundreds who died of disease or were killed in action and the scores
drowned or killed in falling from aloft. Then add the further numbers who
died while prisoners at the Isle of France, or who died afterwards from
wounds received in action. Going merely on the probabilities, and leaving
out the eight or nine hundred men who went down in the Blenheim and
Java—as men who were quitting the station in any case—it would be safe
to say that the squadron lost between fifteen hundred and two thousand
men in three years, mostly died or invalided from disease.
   Now, what were the prevalent diseases? Scurvy was probably the
commonest, and the one causing most loss of life. It hardly appears,
                                          354
                          HEALTH    AND     SICKNESS

 however, in the invalid lists, except as a complication in some other
 disease. Men with scurvy either died or recovered. They were either buried
 at sea or sent back to their duty. And the same applies to the common
 fevers and fluxes. The diseases for which men were invalided were various.
  Officers, on the other hand, were nearly always invalided for the same
 complaint—‘Chronic Disease of the liver.’ Sometimes they combined this
 with dysentery, spasms or bowel complaints. The liver disease was very
 common on shore at Madras, and was often connected with various forms
 of excess. Seamen had hepatitis instead. Of the 92 men invalided at Madras
 in September 1806, 19 had ulcers, 13 suffered from hepatitis, 12 from
 debility and 6 from dysentery; 5 had lost a leg by amputation, 11 were
 lame, and others were epileptic, ruptured or insane. Of nearly 100 men
 invalided in July 1808, 19 had ulcers, 15 suffered from debility, 12 had
 dysentery—scorbutic or otherwise—and 7 had hepatitis. These are roughly
 the proportions found in most lists. Other diseases which were fairly
 common were consumption, phthisis, diseased viscera, gravel, asthma,
 rheumatism, vertigo, paralysis and venereal disease. The average age of
 the men invalided works out at about 33, and the average number of years
 in the service at 7 or 8. Very few of the men invalided were as old as fifty
 and many were under twenty-five. Admiral Drury was guilty of no exag¬
 geration when he referred to the ‘frightful Invalided Lists’ he had to submit.
     The principal naval hospital was at Madras. It was first established by
 Admiral Rainier on his own authority, to meet a growing need. The
 Admiralty approved, and the Commissioners of the Sick and Hurt Board
 sent out a surgeon and other officers. This first and temporary establishment
 consisted of three detached buildings, not designed for the purpose, but
 apparently built originally as private houses. As no instructions were sent
 out by the Board responsible, these buildings were used for some years,
being repaired and added to as appeared necessary. Pellew, soon after his
arrival, appointed a naval officer as governor, a fourth building being
added as an official residence. The post was, of course a sinecure; but the
Admiral found it a convenient method of securing the promotion of
favoured lieutenants. The appointment, as created by himself, carried with
 it the rank of commander, and lay in his own gift. The holder of the office
was automatically given the first sloop that fell vacant, his rank giving
him a superior claim. So matters continued until December 1807, when
a violent gale destroyed part of the hospital and rendered it necessary to
reconstruct the whole. Pellew accordingly asked the Government of Fort
St. George to allow their civil engineer to design and submit an estimate
for a new building. Hospitals, by this time, had been transferred from the
                                      355
                     WAR   IN   THE EASTERN     SEAS