

Sick and Hurt Board’s care to that of the Transport Board; but Pellew
received neither encouragement nor blame from either department. The
matter was too urgent to admit of any delay in waiting for orders. Left
to his own devices, Pellew accepted the estimate and told the builders to
proceed. The new hospital was finished by October 1808; an impressive
edifice with Ionic columns and a T-shaped ground plan. There was
accommodation for some three hundred patients, and various detached
buildings served to house the staff. The grounds were adorned by a large




tank, and a rope walk was constructed in one of the verandahs, providing
employment for convalescents. The old hospital buildings were demolished.
    At Bombay the naval hospital consisted of some buildings in the dock¬
yard, formerly used for stores. It was not a very satisfactory arrangement,
Bombay itself having no great reputation for healthiness. Admiral Drury
went so far as to write ‘the Grave of our Seamen is Bombay Hospital.’
The only alternative to it was a building on Butcher’s Island, which proved
little better. A solution, however, was found in 1810. In that year the
Arrogant (64), which had been used since 1804 in the triple capacity of
receiving ship, sheer hulk and floating battery, was condemned as unfit for
further service. The Ardaseer, country ship, was purchased at this time to
serve as a man-of-war. Admiral Drury, thinking little, apparently, of her
qualities, resolved to turn her into a floating hospital. For this purpose
she was renamed Arrogant. She presumably served as sheer hulk as well.
The duties of a receiving ship were transferred to some ranges of barracks
                                   356
                         HEALTH     AND    SICKNESS

on Butcher’s Island, and for a floating battery there was, it seems, no further
occasion.
   The idea of establishing a floating hospital at Bombay was suggested
by the success attending a similar experiment at Penang. Since 1804 the
practice had been to put all the sick and wounded which had to be landed
at Penang under the care of the Company’s chief surgeon, a certain Dr.
Hunter. Early in 1808, however, the JVilhelmina was reported as worn out,
and Pellew decided to send her to Fort Cornwallis to act as hospital ship.
 She was a 32-gun frigate, it will be remembered, and had formerly been
used as a troopship. She began her new duties in January 1809 when the
contract already mentioned—for victualling—was entered into with the
 surgeon in charge. For half a dollar a day per patient he undertook to
supply victuals, bedding, night gowns, night caps, lamps, bed pans, etc.;
which was thought a great reduction on what had formerly been paid for
the patients under the Company’s surgeon.
   As regards the skill of the medical men, little can be said. When a crew
 was infected with contagious ulcers, the surgeons offered no remedy except
amputations all round; and these did not necessarily save the life of the
patient. They were defeated, again, by malignant fevers. When some
seamen in the Tremendous were poisoned with fish caught off the Isle of
France—just as Boscawen’s men had been poisoned a half-century before—
the surgeon’s remedies seem to have been sufficiently drastic. Beginning
with ipecacuanha emetics, purgatives of Cl. Ricini, Natron Vitriolat, and
the common purging powder (Pulv. Jalapii and Cremor Tartari), he went
on to administer large doses of opium, Peruvian bark, warm fomentations,
more Cl. Ricini and an electuary of sulphur in particular cases. The men
recovered, whether because of or in spite of the treatment it is for the
learned to decide. It seems improbable that the surgeons had attained any
very great degree of skill in their art. On the other hand, when Pellew
wrote that ‘the Invalids and Sick from the several Ships in general, are
gradually diminishing in their number under the attention they receive
from medical treatment. . . .’ he probably intended his words to be inter¬
preted in the best possible sense.
   More important than the efforts made to cure disease were the efforts
made to prevent it. The art had been more or less founded by Captain
Cook, who, on his voyage of 1772, which lasted three years, lost but one
man out of a crew of a hundred and eighteen—the one man having had
his lungs affected before he embarked. His method involved the frequent
use of sweet wort (malt), sour-krout, and portable soup, but it is possible
that his success was more due to his force of character. It is not everyone
                                     357
                      WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS