

could also obtain by signal, when approaching from to windward, the
exact position of the blockading ships. Generally speaking, duty off the
Mauritius was an unpopular and unrewarding task. Early in 1809 it was
made slightly easier by the occupation of Rodriguez (or Roderigue) by
Lt.-Col. Keating and a small force from Bombay. Rodriguez provided wood
and water, with occasionally a few vegetables and poultry.
  One result of a closer blockade by a larger force was that British naval
officers became more familiar with the French islands. The idea that they
were impregnable began to be modified as a result of intensive recon¬
naissance. This may be said to have begun when the boats of the sloop
Otter (18) cut out a lugger from under the batteries of Riviere-Noire, lie
de France, on the night of the I4th-i5th August, 1809. Unimportant in
itself, this affair served to show what could be done. What was a mere raid
might have been a landing. Apart from that, it served to bring into local
prominence the name of Nesbit Willoughby, the Otter s commander. As a
quarrelsome lieutenant he had been dismissed his ship, and then dismissed
the Navy. He had thereafter regained his commission by service as a volun¬
teer, and then gained promotion on appointment to the Otter. He was to
be in the forefront of events which followed—a man of courage and resource,
able,   cruel   and—although repeatedly wounded—apparently immortal.
Contemporary with him on this station was Captain Robert Corbet,
another very active officer and even less popular among the men.
  Next stage in the reconnaissance of the French islands was heralded by
the arrival of the Caroline after her successful cruise in the Bay of Bengal.
Being warned of Rowley’s presence off Port Fouis, the Caroline put into
St. Paul’s, Bourbon, with her two prizes, the H.C. Ships Streatham and
Europe. Rowley pursued the Bellone, which escaped from Port Fouis on
17th August, 1809, failed to overtake her and returned to find the Caroline,
as reported, at St. Paul’s. Thoroughly exasperated, he now decided to
repeat, on a larger scale, Willoughby’s raid on Riviere-Noire. He sent
Corbet with the Nereide (36), Otter and Sapphire, sloops, to Rodriguez,
with a request for the loan of some troops. Keating decided to come in
person, embarking about 368 of his 600 men on board the frigate, sloops
and Wasp schooner. This was on September 16th, and Corbet’s ships
joined the Raisonahle (64) and Sirius (36) off Port Louis, where the final
arrangements were made. The team was an exceptionally strong one for the
purpose in view. With Rowley to direct, Corbet to carry out the disem¬
barkation, Keating to plan and command the attack on land, and Willoughby
to dash in with the seamen who would man the captured batteries, the
success of the operation seemed certain. The plan involved, first, a threat
                                        366
                   THE    FRENCH       ISLANDS      BLOCKADED

to the lie de France. Then the whole squadron sailed after dark on the 19th,
and so timed the voyage as to be off St. Paul’s, but unseen, by sunset on
the 20th. The squadron then hove to and the Nerelde went in alone, carrying
all the troops and equipped with barges and cutters from other vessels,
hoisted on temporary davits all round the ship.
  Lieutenant Samuel Walters in the Raisonable reported the landing, which
took place seven miles from St. Paul’s, as follows:1