

  James Prior, the surgeon of the Nisus, left no dissertation on the subject
of preserving health at sea, but the system observed in that frigate was
recorded by Captain Smyth. When at anchor, especially in any unhealthy
locality, no boats were allowed to leave the ship after sunset, and nobody
was allowed to sleep on shore. ‘During the hours of rest, the men were
kept strictly to their hammocks, from an impression that the night dews
of the tropics are frequently productive of disease; for seamen, sooner than
endure the heat below, will, if left to themselves, run any risk by sleeping
in the open air.’ Every morning the ’tween decks were washed, and then
kept clear for the rest of the day, so as to be cooled by ventilation and
ready for when the hammocks should be piped down in the evening.
   On this question of keeping the men to their proper berths at night,
Johnson was somewhat heretical. In his view, it was best to allow the
men to sleep on the forecastle, booms, hammock nettings or quarter-deck.
He maintains that, in harbour, this was their only chance of getting a
night’s rest. If kept below they merely sweated and fidgeted, making
excuses to come on deck as often as they could. He recommends that
the awnings should be left standing at night, and the men—despite the
regulations—allowed to sleep where they would; except, that is, when off
rivers or swamps or at seasons when a heavy dew falls.
  Considering how intelligently Johnson writes about the general domestic
economy of a ship, it is rather astonishing that he had so little to say about
diet. His assumption was that all that could be done was already being
done. As a matter of fact, the best remedy for scurvy and hepatitis was
available in his day and yet utterly neglected. It came into use only in
1808, as a result of the efforts of Dr. Anderson of Madras. This remedy
was the nopal.
  Dr. Anderson came out to India in 1758, as surgeon in an Indiaman
called the Drake. Scurvy broke out on the voyage, and Anderson found
that he could not check or cure it with any of the conventional remedies
—that is, by the unlimited use of portable soup, claret, port, madeira, beer,
porter and elder. On a return voyage in 1760 he made the still more
interesting discovery that lime juice was utterly useless. It is curious to
see how early its uselessness was proved, if only because of the nineteenth-
century legislation which compelled all British ships to carry it in quantities
which gave them the name of ‘limejuicers.’ It was only the experience of
arctic explorers which eventually shook the official doctrine on the subject.
Dr. Anderson, then, had his attention drawn to the subject of scurvy by
his own failure to cure the crew of the H.C.S. Drake. He discovered that
lemons could do what limes could not; but lemons were not obtainable
                                     361                                  M*
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

in the East Indies, and he set about looking for another remedy. In the
course of his experiments he tried, and apparently failed, to transplant the
cultivated cochineal from Mexico. Applying, however, to Sir Joseph Banks,
the President of the Royal Society, he was given a nopal plant from Kew
gardens. He was living, by that time, at Madras. The plant was sent out
to him and he started to cultivate it in his garden. This must have been
a great many years after his first voyages, for it was not until 1796 that
a trial was made of the nopal’s antiscorbutic properties. In that year, having
sailed in 1795, the supercargo of the ship Two Brothers wrote to Dr.
Anderson to say that the nopal was ‘equal to any vegetable I ever eat
in soup, famous in curries, and very good boiled,’ and that it was, moreover,
an excellent antiscorbutic. Dr. Anderson published this letter, but without
attracting the slightest attention. He continued, however, to cultivate the
plant, someone sending him a better specimen from China. Although he
offered to supply ships with it gratis, and frequently wrote and spoke in
its praise, nothing was done until 1808, which must have been near the
end of his life. In that year he was able to write to Sir Joseph Banks to
say that several men-of-war were now using the nopal with good effect,
so that there was ‘a fair prospect of abolishing scurvy from the marine
service.’
  The first ship to make use of Dr. Anderson’s discovery was the Russel,
Mr. Charles Edmund being the surgeon. He reported in March of the year
1808 that he had begun by giving it to his patients in its raw state; that
they liked it, comparing it with sorrel, but instantly had diarrhoea after¬
wards. Thenceforward he had only used it in soup, putting some in the
coppers every day so that the whole crew should have it. His letter to
Dr. Anderson ends with a request for a further supply. The next officer
to experiment with the plant was Captain Tucker, of the Dover. He and
his surgeon, Jeffreys, dosed forty selected men with a leaf a day, and noted
that not one of them had scurvy while all the rest of the crew was more
or lest tainted with it. After this, the plant came widely into use, Dr.
Anderson circulating a paper of directions for its preservation and offering
to supply the leaves to all who applied. The particular virtues claimed for
it were that it would keep indefinitely, that it was always procurable, and
that it was wholesome, nutritious and palatable whether raw or cooked.
  Although the nopal was a useful discovery, it was still possible to
combat scurvy without it, in the same way as Captain Cook had done.
This was demonstrated by Flinders, the explorer, who sailed in 1801 to
survey the shores of Australia, and who preserved his men merely by
cleanliness, ventilation, sour-krout, oatmeal, portable soup and plenty of
                                       362
                        HEALTH     AND     SICKNESS