

                                       359
                        WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

so liable to sickness as those who had been in the East for four or five years.
Johnson, the surgeon of the Caroline, wrote some remarks on this point
which he included in his Oriental Voyager and which are worth quoting.

         And here let me most sincerely bewail the cause, whatever it may be,
     that can induce government to keep ships such a length of time on the
     East India station before they are relieved!
         The prevailing ideq^ that men, by remaining a long time in India, become
     seasoned to the climate, and thereby better able to bear its effects, is, in my
     opinion, erroneous and uncharitable. It is true, that most Europeans on their
     first arrival here, as well as in other hot countries, experience a slight fit of
     illness, which probably renders them less obnoxious to disease for the next
     three or four years; but after this period we may, in general, expect that
     the constitution is imperceptibly giving way before the effects of the climate,
     which is rendered still more evident by the first serious illness that happens;
     when the debilitated state of the constitution gives them a much smaller
     chance of recovery, than if the disease took place within the above-mentioned
     period. It is well known, that the depressing passion of ‘Hope deferred’ is
     highly injurious to the constitution in any country; but in this one it is
     peculiarly so; many of the sailors looking entirely to the gloomy side of
     the picture, and considering themselves as sacrificed to the climate, when
     they see their messmates gradually drop off, with little other prospect before
     them than that of sharing the same fate! Men of this description are the very
     first to feel the baleful influence of the climate . . . men stand a much better
     chance of enjoying good health during the first three years in India, than
     they do afterwards. This was strongly instanced in the Caroline frigate;
     for though we were in the most sickly parts of-India, we lost fewer men,
     in the same space of time, than any of those frigates whose crews had been
     a long time in the country. . . .

  Johnson’s recommendations for preserving the health of seamen in India,
while including the above plea for a shorter period of service there, are
also interesting in other respects. He urges the frequent washing of lower
decks, the keeping of the crew under the awnings between n.o and
4.0, the substitution of wine for arrack whenever possible, and the
withholding of liberty to go ashore. On the subject of cold baths, he is
less drastic than the Duke of Wellington. The latter made his men have
a cold bath every morning while on board ship in the East, whether they
liked it or not. Johnson merely advises that the officers should encourage
the men to bathe by example and precept—a bath to consist of a few
buckets of water thrown over the head, in the chains. He is less keen on
allowing the men to swim about the ship, or in a sail over the side, owing
to the risk of sharks or excessive fatigue.
                                        360
                         HEALTH     AND    SICKNESS