

        Very light wind, all the first watch: by midnight the Nereide had not
     run above one third of her distance towards Galet point. But soon after
     daylight [when] we were about to telegraph to know if the troops were
     disembarked, that ship was laying within a quarter of a mile of the beach,
     sails all furl’d, and it is believed that she had never been discovered by the
     enemy from her anchoring to her making sail from it. Before we had time
     to hoist the second number, she made the whole at once, as follows ‘troops
     on shore and near the first battery.’ At that moment the frigate’s anchor
     trip’d, and she was in [under] a cloud of sail. [She] joined the squadron
     and took her station in succession in the line, and sent the boats to their
     respective ships, with a celerity peculiar to the gallant Captn. Corbet.
     Very soon after, the report of several guns were heard, and about 6 o’clock
     we had the pleasure of observing the Union Jack planted on the first or
     Eastmost battery—a great success in such a short time.. ..

  The anchorage at St. Paul’s was defended by a series of seven batteries
mounting over a hundred guns, and forming a wide crescent. The first
three were captured more or less by surprise but the centre battery had to
be stormed. The squadron meanwhile could not close on the anchorage,
partly because the western batteries were still firing, partly because their own
fire had to be withheld until the position of the troops ashore was more
exactly known. When the last battery ceased fire, the squadron stood in to
the bay and anchored near the Caroline and shipping, which quickly sur¬
rendered. By 8.30 a.m. the affair was over and the town captured.

      Thus was executed [writes Walters], in less than four hours by the
    superior skill and judgment of a few clever men, plans that treble the force
    would have failed in under inferior commanders. . . .’

  There was no question at that time of attempting the conquest of the
island, which had a considerable, although mainly militia, garrison, and
Rowley withdrew his forces on the 28th and took the troops back to
Rodriguez, thereafter resuming the blockade as before. The question was
now whether the squadron would succeed in intercepting the French
       1 Samuel Walters, Lieutenant R.N. Ed. by C. N. Parkinson, p. 78, et seq.

                                         367
                           WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN          SEAS

frigates when they returned from their cruise. It was a question soon settled,
for on 2nd January, 1810, Duperre appeared with the Bellone and Manche,
the captured men-of-war Minerva and Victor, and the prizes Charlton and
United Kingdom. Hamelin had previously, with the Venus, lured Rowley
away from Port Louis and now a freak of wind allowed the French frigates
to enter port while the British were becalmed. A month later Rowley
returned to the Cape, leaving Captain Lambert of the Iphigenia to continue
the blockade, with Captain Pym of the Sirius, the Magicienne and Sapphire,
and other vessels. The reputation of St. Paul’s as a haven of refuge had been
rudely shaken, but Port Louis remained as formidable as ever. The blockade,
moreover, had to be abandoned as the hurricane season approached, and
Decaen seized the opportunity, on March 14th, to send Duperre to sea
again with the Bellone, Minerva and Victor.
   One fact that emerges from accounts of the French operations at this
time is that the French Navy was recovering. A new generation of officers
was coming to command, many of them extremely capable. Napoleon had
never found his ideal sailor in the generation of Deeres and Linois. Officers
who remembered the Navy of the old regime mostly despised the Navy of
the Republic and Empire. The best of them, if alive, were in exile or ashore.
Of those who served, many were time-servers, glad to achieve swift pro¬
motion over mediocre competitors but without any belief in the France of
Napoleon. Eastwick describes seeing the sailors of the Forte eating their
beef or playing cards on the quarter-deck. What sort of discipline was that
in the eyes of le Marquis Pierre-Cesar-Charles Guillaume de Sercey? Or of
Charles-Alexandre Leon, Comte Durand de Linois? When the time came
they hailed Louis XVIII with relief. In the meanwhile, they went through
the motions of naval warfare without enthusiasm for the cause or belief in
the outcome. But the new generation of younger officers were of a different
kind, brought up in France of the Revolution and with few regrets for
what they had hardly known. They appeared in the Navy after 1800 and
now, by 1810, were coming to command corvettes and frigates with increas¬
ing efficiency. Such men were Pierre Bouvet of the Minerve, Duperre of
the Venus, Roussin and Baudin, the future Admirals. In the Marengo, even,
there had been some good junior officers, especially the navigators who
charted the coast from Cape Frio to Cape Lopez.1 The result was seen in
such an action as that of L’Arethuse and Amelia in 1813, as well as in the
actions now to be described.