

who can compel sailors to eat sour cabbage. In the same way, he insisted
on having a clean ship. The desirability of cleanliness, like the antiscorbutic
properties of sour-krout, was known before Cook’s time. His innovation
was in seeing that the ship was cleaned and the cabbage eaten. Although,
however, he had laid the foundations of a system of naval diet and hygiene,
its instant adoption throughout the service was hardly to be looked for.
In the first decade of the nineteenth century a great many officers were
still ignorant in regard to the preservation of health afloat. The days of
‘spit and polish’ were just beginning, and there was already a routine for
keeping the decks, the galley and the cooking utensils spotlessly clean.
This was very well so far as it went; but shining decks were perfectly
compatible with dirt below the waterline. Captain Cook’s care in ventilating,
scrubbing and drying the underwater parts of a ship was by no means
universally imitated. Captain Smyth, the biographer of Captain Beaver,
relates how, as an officer in a ship of the line in the East, he discovered
the cause of the disease which had decimated the crew. The ship referred
to must have been either the Powerful or Russel, in 1806. On clearing her
hold at Bombay, after the return from Batavia ‘the ground tier of casks
was found imbedded in a feculent mass of putrid mud! This palpable source
of remittent fever did not excite much remark at the time. . . .’ That it was
not thought in any way remarkable is significant, but what is especially
worth noticing is that the evil was wholly preventable by washing the
shingle ballast before stowing it and thenceforward flushing and pumping
out the bilgeways at regular intervals. If these precautions could be
neglected on board a ship of the line, it may be supposed that frigates
and sloops, often commanded by mere boys, were frequently in at least
as bad a case.
  It would not be too much to say that the vast majority of the seamen
who lost their lives in the East Indies were the victims, not of the climate,
but of the ignorance of their officers. The older captains, who had some¬
times learnt something from their own blunders, sighed over the inexperience
of youthful commanders. Their error was in believing that experience was
necessary. Actually, the methods of avoiding disease were all laid down in
print. Where officers failed was simply in neglecting to read it.
  Besides dirt and occasional errors in diet, a frequent source of debility
in a crew was that described by Captain Basil Ball in the following passage:
       It is a most painful thing . . . and exceedingly destructive to the health
    of a ship’s crew, who have been for some time in that country, when she
    falls under the command of an inexperienced officer, just arrived from
    Europe, and who, from being himself at first almost entirely insensible to

                                        358
                          HEALTH     AND     SICKNESS