

fresh water. More significant still was the voyage of the Belliqueux from
China to England in 1811. The ship had been in the East for five years,
and, of the 491 men on board, some 50 were exchanged from other ships
as invalids needing a change of climate. Most of these had been in the East
for ten years but had not actually been invalided. Thirty-two more of the
total complement were sent on board as unfit for duty. Despite all this,
Captain Byng contrived to land his seamen in England, alive and well.
Partly through the captain’s generosity, there was purchased in China
12 dozen capons, 2,000 pounds of potatoes, 200 pounds of carrots, 800
pounds of pumpkins, 500 pounds of dry onions and 2 catties of rusk.
The nopal was not forgotten, being introduced as an ingredient of a pickle
of which the basis was formed of onions and vinegar, nutmegs, mace,
cinnamon, ginger and pepper. It played, however, but a small part in the
triumph. Fresh supplies of livestock and vegetables, particularly watercress,
were obtained at St. Helena, and the voyage ended without the loss of
a man.




                                     363
                                 CHAPTER XIX



      The French Islands Blockaded

P   Hrom the time of the Marengo’s capture, Decaen was in effective
    H command of the naval forces based on Mauritius. From 1806 to
    1808, however,       these amounted         to very    little.   The   Piemontaise
cruised with some success until taken, as we have seen, in 1808. The Semil-
lante, after her action with the Phaeton in 1805, returned to refit at Port
Louis. She cruised the year following in company with the privateers
Bellone and Henriette, both of which were taken. Motard of the Semillante
was more fortunate, took numerous prizes and brought them safely to port.
Damaged in action, however, with the Dedaigneuse in 1808, the Semillante
returned that year to France. This left Decaen with only one frigate, the
Canonniere (40) which had come out in 1806, and one corvette, the Jena (18),
a purchased privateer. To this force was added the British sloop Laurel
(22), taken by the Canonniere in 1808, but this gain merely offset the loss
of the Jena, taken by the Modeste (36) off the Sandheads. Soon afterwards
the Canonniere, found to be worn out, was disarmed and sold as a merchant¬
man, only to be captured on her way back to France.1 The naval force at
Port Louis was reduced almost to nothing.
   As against this dwindling of resources, the lie de France was experiencing
an increasingly effective blockade. Pellew had been able to blockade the
French base only intermittently from India. But the recapture of the Cape
in 1806 and its re-establishment as a separate command altered the whole
situation. Troubridge was succeeded by Rear-Admiral Stirling and he in
turn by Rear-Admiral Bertie. Before the latter’s arrival in the Leopard (50)
in August 1808, the squadron was commanded by Captain Josias Rowley
and comprised the Raisonable (64), Grampus (50), Nereide (36), Laurel (22),
Otter (18), Harrier (18) and Cormorant (20). The duty of these vessels
resolved itself into a blockade of the French islands which Bertie directed
from the Cape and Rowley commanded off Port Louis. The capture of the
Laurel was an early incident of a blockade which became effective in the
autumn of 1808, and increasingly so as the squadron was reinforced.
   1 Worth about £150,000, she was chased fourteen times in ninety-three days and finally
taken off Belleisle by the Valiant (74), Captain John Bligh.