

                                          364
                  THE   FRENCH     ISLANDS    BLOCKADED

  The lie de France was now in real danger of famine and Decaen lacked
any naval means of breaking up the blockade. His appeals, however, to
Napoleon were not wholly ignored. In 1808-9 there reached Port Louis
successively the Manche (40) Captain Dornal de Guy, the Caroline (40)
Captain Billard, the Bellone (44) Captain Duperre, the Venus (44) Commo¬
dore Hamelin and the Mouche No. 6. These four frigates formed the ‘Divi¬
sion Hamelin’ but sailed from different ports—Cherbourg, Nantes and
Flushing—the Commodore on 12th November, 1808. All four reached
Port Louis in safety, despite the blockade, the Manche and Caroline being
fired on by the Raisonable but without effect. Putting to sea again in February
1809, the Caroline cruised off the Sandheads and captured two East India-
men, the Streatham and Europe. Commodore Hamelin himself with the
Venus and Manche and a corvette, the Creole, raided and destroyed the
East India Company’s small settlement at Tappanooly, off the west coast of
Sumatra, and then captured three East Indiamen, the Windham, United
Kingdom and Charlton. The Bellone also appeared in the Bay of Bengal and
there captured the sloop Victor (18), and later the Portuguese frigate
Minerva (52). The success of Hamelin’s squadron was due partly to sur¬
prise—there had been hardly any naval opposition in 1806-8 and Hamelin
appeared without warning—partly to Drury’s disdain for trade protection,
and partly to luck. At any rate, there was consternation in India, and even¬
tually in Leadenhall Street. There was also a growing realization that
nothing short of the capture of the French islands could make such a raid
impossible.
  Just as the arrival of Hamelin altered the whole situation for Admiral
Drury, so did it alter the whole position at the French islands. Whereas the
blockade could previously be maintained by a 50-gun ship or frigate with
two sloops, the autumn of 1809 found the French islands watched by the
Raisonable (64), Leopard (50), four frigates and two sloops. Even in this
strength the squadron had failed to prevent the Bellone (44) breaking out
on August 17th. The blockade had never, in fact, been very effective as
regards men-of-war, although a sufficient discouragement for the slower
kind of merchantman. Some of the British officers had great experience of
blockading but the French islands were not and had never been easy places
to blockade. The problem was to watch three widely separated ports—
Port Louis, Grand Port and St. Paul’s in the neighbouring island of Bourbon
—and guard each with a force equivalent to the force inside or likely to
arrive from elsewhere. In practice, the French men-of-war were normally
at Port Louis. It was open to them, nevertheless, to put in, on arrival, at
one of the other ports, both of which were adequately defended. They

                                     365
                       WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS