

    the disagreeable effect of the heat, considers the objections which other
    people make to exposure as mere fancies. Under this impression, he admits
    of no difference being made in the hours of work, but employs his people
    aloft, and in the boats, when sailing through the Straits of Sunda, or moored
    in Madras Roads, with as much unconcern as if he were navigating the
    British Channel, or lying snug at Spithead. The officers, and especially the
    surgeon, remonstrate in vain; poor Jack of course can say nothing; but
    in a few months, or it may be in a few weeks or days, half the ship’s company
    find themselves in the doctor’s list ... a judicious captain, under exactly
    similar circumatances, will not, perhaps, lose a man. . . .
        From half-past nine or ten, till two or three o’clock, an officer of experi¬
    ence and consideration, if he can help it, will never allow a seaman’s head
    to appear above the hammock-railing, but will discover some employment
    for the men on the main and lower decks. If the ship be at anchor, he will
    lay out a line, and warp the ship broadside to the sea breeze, that the cool
    air may sweep freely through all parts of the decks, and render everything
     fresh,' sweet, and wholesome. No boats will be sent away from the ship
     during that fiery interval; or if any duty absolutely requires exposure, it
    will be got over with the utmost expedition. In the event of the men getting
     wet by a shower of rain, it is always right to make them shift their clothes
     instantly, and to muster them afterwards, to see their things are dry and
     clean . . . the fatal effects of a hot climate on the European constitution,
     unless very carefully watched, are inevitable. When I have seen regiments
     reduced to mere skeletons, and ships so weakened in their crews that they
     could scarcely weigh the anchor, I have often thought of Dr. Johnson’s
    words . . . etc.


  The failure to guard against the effects of a tropical sun was not confined
to the young and inexperienced. In 1806 Sir Thomas Troubridge was
writing to Lord Sidmouth from Penang, T have just returned from a thirteen
hours row and sail along the Coast and up the Rivers looking at Timber;
by way of treat, I took the Governor with me—the Thermometer 93. I
am so well season’d that it does not effect me.’ The heat may or may not
have affected Troubridge; but what about his boat’s crew? And, as for
the governor, we know that he died shortly afterwards. It is quite possible
that this futile expedition cost half a dozen lives one way and another.
Troubridge was neither young nor inexperienced, and he should, in fact,
have known better.
  Another point to notice in Troubridge’s letter is that he shared the
common heresy about the possibility of becoming ‘seasoned’ to the climate.
This may have been possible ashore, but it was repeatedly shown that
the effect of the climate on seamen was cumulative; and that no men were