

                                              His Majesty’s Ship Cornelia
                                                   Madras Roads 29th July 1810
     Sir
          I am induced to lay before the Right Honorable the Lords Com¬
     missioners of the Admiralty the accompanying letter, as it relates to the
     attack of the Isle of France, that their Lordships may be satisfied the Squadron
     under my Command is always ready, in spite of the indecision of Indian
     Governments and the rejection last April of my entire Squadron for that
     Service, assembled in consequence of the most exigent Letters of the Governor
     General for me to meet him at Madras, which I did against the Monsoon
     and for nothing.
                                       I have the honour to be
                                          Sir
                                            Your most obedient
                                                humble Servant
     (P.R.O. Adm. 1/182)                        Wm O’B Drury

   The final decision of the Supreme Government did not reach Drury
until August 18th, soon after which date he reported to the Admiralty
that he was collecting all the ships he could to serve with the expedition.
He added that ‘In acting for the public good it behoves me to set aside
the Consideration of serving under a superior officer, and with that idea
I shall accompany my Squadron to the Mauritius.’ The ‘superior officer’
referred to was the commander-in-chief at the Cape, Admiral Bertie. It
was a detachment from his squadron, under Commodore Rowley, that
was blockading the island; and he was, of course, sure to be present when
it was attacked. The plan involved a converging of forces from India and
the Cape, and Bertie was naturally informed of Lord Minto’s plans. What
Drury had forgotten was that, in proceeding to the Mauritius, he was
quitting his station without orders; a serious offence in itself. Also, in
magnanimously offering to serve under a superior officer, he had lost sight
of the possibility of that officer not requiring his assistance.
  Lord Minto remained serenely determined that the expedition should
sail that year, and arrive before the hurricane season, that is, by mid-
November.

       I have been pretty nearly alone at times [he wrote on September 19th]

                                        379
                        WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN        SEAS

    in thinking it practicable to make the attempt before next April, a delay
    which might probably have been fatal to the ultimate success. . . . The
    French . . . employ the hurricane months, when the blockading squadron
    is obliged to quit the ground, to throw in supplies, and we are informed
    that, in consequence of the apprehensions excited by our late measures, the
    most positive assurances have been given to the Governor of the Isle of
    France that troops, military stores, and all other means of defence shall be
    dispatched from Europe this very season. It is of great consequence, therefore,
    that we should be at Port Louis to receive such supplies from France, rather
    than Monsieur De Caen. This is one of several reasons and certainly the
    strongest, which has made me damnatus obstinatus mulier (vide Cowslip’s
    translation) and determined me to push off the expedition now, whether it
    was possible or not. The weight of opinion was strong against me in all
    quarters, but when once the point was decided, all hands concurred lustily
    in the execution, and lo and behold! everything is actually afloat. Three
    divisions of troops from three Presidencies are now on their passage, with
    a very perfect equipment, having six weeks to perform a voyage which may
    be done in one month; five weeks is a fair allowance, so as to arrive at
    Rodriguez before November i. And this reminds me of a Piedmontese gentle¬
    man, who said that he had watched the quarrels of mules with men for several
    years, but had never in any instance found the mules in the wrong. . . d