

  1 In the Belle Poule was Bonnefoux, later to be the author of the Dictionnaire de marine a
voiles et a vapeur. The Belle Poule, which crossed the equator twenty-six times in three years,
certainly offered her officers some experience of navigation.

                                              368
                  THE   FRENCH     ISLANDS    BLOCKADED

   What was happening, meanwhile, on the East India Station proper? The
blockade of the French islands was not so stringent as to save India from
the French commerce raiders whose safe return we have noted. It is natural
to ask what the East Indies Squadron was doing about it. The station was,
from 13th February, 1809, under the command of Rear-Admiral Drury.
That was the date, at least, of his arrival at Madras following Pellew’s
departure for Europe. Drury found the squadron reduced in strength, three
sail of the line and two frigates having been sent home and a frigate and
two sloops lost or taken. French cruisers were at sea and Drury wrote to
Lord Minto on the 26th to explain that he would do what he could to check
their activities. His immediate grievance, however, concerned their present
deployment.
   The memorial signed by the Calcutta merchants had been ignored at
the Admiralty, but it had not failed to have its effect on Pellew. Although
one of the ablest men in the Navy, Pellew had his weaknesses. He had but
just become a Vice-Admiral, and he was not much over fifty. The best
part of his career was only beginning and, if all went well, the highest
honours might be his. Nor did he despise such things as rank and fame. He
looked forward to the peerage he was afterwards to obtain. On the other
hand, he was far from certain of it. He knew what had happened to Duck¬
worth and Strachan; and he was the last man to take any risk with his
reputation if he could avoid it. He was thus always sensitive to criticism,
always thin-skinned. Even in later days, when immortal fame as well as
peerage seemed almost within his grasp, he was often on the brink of
resigning because of some slight put upon him by the Admiralty. In sending
that memorial to England, the merchants had in fact found the joint in his
armour.
  It is not surprising that a man with Pellew’s special weaknesses should
have taken pains to ward off further criticism. Instead of pigeon-holing all
complaints with an Admiralty official’s nonchalance, he had tried in all
seriousness to remedy what the merchants found amiss. He may thereby
have earned their gratitude. He certainly did not receive it. As for his
unfortunate successor, it was left for him to undo the mischief and face the
abuse. Luckily, Drury was the reverse of Pellew. With his supreme con¬
tempt for all ‘Merchants or Supra Cargoes, India Captains, Parsees. . . .’
etc., he was quite impervious to any criticism in the Calcutta newspapers.
In fact, he probably enjoyed it. What he did object to was having to spend
months in making a better disposal of the force left to his care.