

remonstrance that propensity which is met throughout this Country to
direct the Navy as a machine, which never can be permitted, nor shall it
ever be left to the disposal of any one but the Commander in Chief so long
as I may have the honor to hold that situation.’ This was a sentiment
he often found occasion to express. Leaving his cruisers to blockade Java
and deal with the new fleet of corvettes which the Dutch had, from
necessity, brought into existence, Drury returned to Madras, arriving there
on September ioth.
  Before the Admiral left the coast, at the change of the monsoon, news
came of the taking of the Indiamen Europe and Streatham, the sloop Victor,
the Portuguese frigate Minerva and a number of country vessels in the Bay
of Bengal. Almost simultaneously came the news of the plundering of the
small settlement at Tapanooley, in Sumatra. The bay had not been left
defenceless—far from it—and yet, for the hundredth time, the raiders had
escaped. It was ‘singularly unfortunate,’ as Drury observed. While the
Bellone made her captures, many English cruisers were crossing the bay,
but none had fallen in with her. With the news of the French successes, or
hard upon it, came the complaints of the Calcutta merchants. As before,
they were sent to the Admiral with a request that he would forward them
to the Admiralty. Assuming that they were also communicating direct to
England, Drury took care to mention the matter in his next dispatch.

       ... I am naturally induced to apprize their Lordships of circumstances,
    as well as to guard them against the deceit practised on the face of the business,
    by a detail of imaginary distresses, made up, apparently supported by a very
    large body of Merchants and Agents for the Insurance Companys, which
    upon a close examination will be found to bear their signatures both
    collectively and individually. . . .
       ... To satisfy the Caprice of the Commercial part of Calcutta is utterly
    impossible: the multifarious interests and views of speculative men, whose
    minds are only directed to gain their own end, cannot altogether accord
    with the Commander in Chief, who must judge of the means as well as
    the result. . . . The Gentlemen of Calcutta must recollect that in regard
    to the Navy they are neither the Law nor the Gospel, and it will ever be
    found by them that the Squadron under my Command is steered by Compass
    alone.
       I lament exceedingly to hear of murmurings and Complaints against
    officers, particularly when upon investigating the statements, they are
    found void: and I cannot possibly meet requisitions coming through the
    Supreme Government without a dereliction of duty.
       It has been imagined that I could forego upon grounds which I knew
    to be trivial, the orders of His Majesty in Council, as well those from the
                                        371
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

    Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, tending to
    enforce the Blockade of Java and the Moluccas.
       In a second instance I aim solicited by the Merchants of Calcutta not to
    afford protection to Neutrals, particularly Americans, who ask for it, and
    to prohibit their sailing for fourteen days after the departure of our Fleets!
    to such entreaties I have been obliged to return a Negative. The Blockade
    I shall modify, but the Orders I receive must be obeyed. . . .