

  The first expedition duly sailed in April and arrived at Rodriguez in
June 18io. Meanwhile, Lord Minto was hard at work collecting the troops,
stores and ships needed for attacking the Mauritius itself. There were
difficulties, especially over doing the work in time, and the convoy actually
sailed not in August but September. It seemed to many experts that the
expedition would have to be postponed until April 1811. But Lord Minto
would not agree to that plan. He thought that Decaen might have been
reinforced by then. In this, his instinct was perfectly sound. Napoleon had
not forgotten the French islands and would soon, in any case, learn of
their predicament. On 17th April, 1809, he wrote to Deeres from the
Schonbriinn

     . . . il est egalement necessaire a penser a envoyer 3 fregates a Tile de France.
     Je n’ai plus dans cette colonie que 5 fregates, parmi lesquelles il y’en aura
     probablement 1 ou 2 qui seront prises. . . A

   This was after the ‘Division Hamelin’ had sailed and it does not appear
that any more frigates were sent until the Astree and Mouche sailed
early in 1810.2 Before then, on January 5th, Decaen made a last desperate
appeal for ships, men, money and supplies. Napoleon, on receiving this,
issued orders (as Minto thought he would) for immediate aid on a large
scale—five ships of the line, eight frigates, corvettes and transports with
1,200 or 1,500 men. These orders, perhaps slightly unrealistic, finally
produced three 40-gun frigates, each with 200 troops, which sailed for
Mauritius on 2nd February, 1811; two months after the island had fallen.
Minto foresaw Napoleon’s reaction and resolved to persevere with his
preparations for the second expedition. He did not at first find Drury very
co-operative. Following their disagreement in April the Admiral had
dismissed his squadron to different stations between Canton and the Persian
Gulf; one detachment, for example, being sent to occupy Amboyna and
Banda afresh and land there ‘part of the Madras European Regt. who
were three months ago in a state of outrageous Mutiny and Rebellion.’
Drury was therefore furious when told in July that the Mauritius was to
be attacked that autumn. This had been Minto’s intention all along, but
to Drury it seemed merely the result of vacillation. He replied rather sulkily
that he had collected his squadron for just such a purpose not three months
ago, and that now the ships were all dispersed. He might get some of
them together by September or October. But the Belliqueux had been sent
  1 Correspondance de Napoleon avec le Ministre de la Marine 1804-15. Two vols. Paris,
1838. Vol. II, p. 49.
  2 M. E. Fabre. La Guerre Maritime dans I’Inde sous le Consulat et VEmpire. Paris, 1883,
P- 65-
                                          378
                   LORD    MINTO     AND      ADMIRAL    DRURY

home, and the Russel was much in need of repair. Then there was the
China fleet and the country trade returning to India to be protected—and
the Indiamen to go through the Straits of Sunda, too. He consented,
however, to do what he could, sending the whole correspondence to the
Admiralty with a gesture of derision.