

  The division of transports from Madras sailed on September 22nd, with
the Cornwallis and Psyche. The ships from Bengal were left to the protection
of the Illustrious (74), those from Bombay to that of the Doris (36). Drury
sailed independently on the 23rd in the Russel (74), accompanied by the
Clorinde (38), Cornelia (32), Bucephalus (36), Phaeton (38) and Hesper.
The Diomede and Ceylon were already off the French islands, having gone
on ahead, the latter carrying Major-General Abercromby. The Hecate and
one or two other vessels were to follow. It was Drury’s purpose to arrive
before the slower-sailing transports so as to make all arrangements before
they arrived. Following this plan, he reached Rodriguez on October 21st,
and was on his way to the Mauritius when on October 24th he fell in with
Vice-Admiral Bertie in the Africaine, with whom, and under whose orders,
he returned to Rodriguez. What then occurred is best told in Drury’s
words.
                                                His Majesty’s Ship Russel
                                                     Mathurion Bay
                                                               Island of Rodriguez
                                                                     8th Nov. 1810.

                   My various Letters by this conveyance will inform their
    1 Lord Minto in India 1807-1814. Ed. by the Countess of Minto, 1880. Pp. 244-56.
                                          380
                     LORD     MINTO    AND     ADMIRAL    DRURY

Illustrious   Lordships of my arrival with a Squadron of fast sailing ships off the
Cornwallis
Clorinde
              Mauritius and of my meeting Vice Admiral Bertie, who at the moment
Cornelia      before an attack was made on the Isle of France, ordered me back to
Doris
Psyche
              India. Although I have now left ten Ships of my Squadron with Vice
Ceylon        Admiral Bertie, there can be no doubt but the assistance of the Russel,
Hesper
              Phaeton and Bucephalus, Vice Admiral Bertie is sending me back to
Hecate
Eclipse       India with, might be of the most essential service in the landing of
              the Troops.
                 I beg here to represent to their Lordships, I cannot but feel myself
              insulted and injured by Vice Admiral Bertie who has from his Seniority,
              wrested from me my legitimate right of acting with, and seeing
              concluded, the enterprise of an Expedition from India under my
              immediate auspices, supported by my utmost efforts of co-operation,
              at the requisition of the Government of India.
                 As Admiral Bertie told me he had their Lordships orders to take
              me and my Squadron under his Command; and that he would send
              me back to India before the attack on the Isle of France: I beg
              leave to enclose my correspondence with him, for their Lordships
              information and
                                      I have the honor to be
                                           Sir
                                              Your most obedient
                                                humble Servant
                                                Wm O’B. Drury.
              (Adm. 1/182.)