

  1 A Register of Ships. Revised by H. C. Hardy, 1813.
  1 Spencer Papers. N.R.S. Vol. LIX Curtis to Spencer, 28th November, 1800, p. 238.
  3 Ad. 1/63 Bertie to Admiralty 1st July, 1810.

 4 M.S. Proposal for the Total Expulsion of the French from Maritime India. Anon. 1809.

BM. MSS. Stowe 865.
                                          376
                     LORD     MINTO     AND      ADMIRAL      DRURY

   When, in March 1810, the Governor-General invited Admiral Drury
to confer with him on urgent business at Madras, he was still cautious
 enough to be thinking of Bourbon rather than of Mauritius. The news
 of Rowley’s raid had convinced him that the conquest of Bourbon would
be relatively easy, and he had accordingly decided to postpone an
 alternative scheme for attacking Java.1 Admiral Drury, with whom he had
 had some previous correspondence, maintained that a small addition to
 the proposed military force (six thousand men instead of four thousand)
 would justify an attack, not on Bourbon, but directly on Mauritius.
 Although Lord Minto had refused to take that risk without further informa¬
 tion, it would seem that Drury came to Madras in some expectation of
 the Governor-General changing his mind. Much to the Admiral’s annoyance,
 Lord Minto was immovable and refused, on March 12th, and subsequently,
 all naval co-operation save for an escort to go with the transports. He
 explained, however, that he was preparing a second expedition, to follow
 on the heels of the first, supposing it successful and supposing favourable
 conditions were reported for attacking Mauritius. Lord Minto’s strategy was
 apparently sound, for failure against Mauritius would be far less serious
 if there were a neighbouring base to which the defeated expedition could
 withdraw. But Drury no doubt argued that the attack on the one island
would reduce—would in fact eliminate—all chance of surprising the other.
    Drury evidently intended to lead the expedition in person and had
concentrated his squadron with that end in view, so that ‘in April, nearly
every ship was collected and ready to proceed.’ To have taken his squadron
outside his station, as Drury was apparently prepared to do, would have
been extremely irregular. But Minto discouraged this idea and preferred to
rely for his naval co-operation on Commodore Rowley and the ships
already there. His convoy comprised a 50-gun ship, two frigates and fourteen
transports, in which he embarked 3,650 troops. Minto wrote on this occasion
as follows:
                                                                      March 26, 1810.
        I am just sending an expedition to make the conquest of the Isle of Bourbon.
     There is the fairest prospect of success. I propose to follow up the blow by
     attacking the Mauritius, generally called the Isle of France. . . .
        A second expedition must be sent against the Isle of France, and a much
     larger force: including those going now about 10,000 men. The first will
     sail from Madras about May 1; the second will probably depart from India
     in August.2
  1 A. G. Field. The Expedition to Mauritius in 1810. Unpublished MS. thesis in the library
of the University of London.
  2 Lord Minto in India, 1807-1814. Ed. by the Countess of Minto, 1880, p. 243.
                                           377
                        WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS