

   It may be noted in this connection that the Calcutta merchants were
always willing to pillory the Admiral, not only because their trade was
always more exposed to losses than that of Bombay, but also because they
did not know their victim personally. The naval commander-in-chief
was hardly ever seen at Fort William. Sir Edward Pellew paid a hasty
visit to the fort just before he left India, and that was probably the only
time he visited it. Wellesley had urged him to come, shortly before he
himself left for England; but the meeting never took place. Drury had,
in all probability, never been there in his life. Madras was where Admirals
lived. It was there and at Bombay that an Admiral would live ashore and
meet all the shipowners at dinner. Pellew’s friendship was with Lord
William Bentinck, and it was Sir George Barlow’s daughter—when Barlow
was governor of Madras—that one of his sons married. He had friends,
again, at Bombay, notably the great shipowner, Mr. Forbes, who would
make caustic comments on the Calcutta merchants’ grievances, saying
that their opium did more harm than their rice did good. If Drury had
any friends, they would be at Madras or Penang. The merchants of Bengal
could tear his character to pieces in the certainty they would never meet
him at a dinner party. Those of Bombay did their grumbling in private
or in the newspapers. They did not compose offensive petitions and sign
their names at the foot. The Admiral, whoever he might be, was a man
they had to live with afterwards.
   Drury quitted Madras in October and proceeded straight to Bombay,
where he received reports of Captain Wainwright’s operations in the Persian
Gulf, where the frigates Chiffonne and Caroline were smoking out the pirate
stronghold of Rusal-Khyma with the assistance of seven of the Company’s

                                       373
                    WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS

cruisers. He did not remain there for long, coming south again to Colombo
in December, remaining there for part of January 1810, and so back to
Madras in February. This was an unusually early time of year for an
Admiral to appear on the coast. But the occasion, too, was unusual. A
scheme was afoot for ending these French depredations at a blow. The
French islands were, at last, to be attacked.




                                 374
                                      CHAPTER XX


     Lord Minto and Admiral Drury

T      ~|he    mystery which surrounds the capture of Mauritius is simply
       the mystery of why it was never attacked before. Napoleon, as we
       have seen, had been surprised to find it still in French hands in
 1808 and rightly incredulous of Rene Decaen’s courtly explanation.
Napoleon’s threat to India had certainly saved the French islands in
 1798-1801. Thereafter they were successively saved by the Company’s
orders—Wellesley was to defend India with the ‘smallest possible extension
of expenditure’1—and by the division of the East Indies station in 1805-7.
This was the period, incidentally, of Barlow’s rigid economy rule which
left Pellew little scope even in his raids on Java. In 1808-9 there was
the scare about Persia followed by the scare about the Portuguese colonies.
Thenceforward the remaining obstacle was ‘the determined spirit of penury’
prevalent in India. This spirit, inculcated by Lord Castlereagh, was the
ruling and sole principle of government                      under Sir George Barlow
‘displayed in every public advertisement and introduced into every secret
despatch.’2 Lord Minto only gradually freed himself from it, assisted a
little by the lamentation of the merchants at Calcutta.3
   But Minto’s dawning conviction that the capture of the French islands
would be, in fact, an economy, would have carried little weight at India
House • had Hamelin’s squadron been less successful. There were five
frigates based on Mauritius in               1809, with two corvettes and several
privateers, and they were doing considerable damage. More important still,
they were inflicting losses on the East India Company itself. Until this
time it had been a rare occurrence for an East Indiaman to be taken,
whatever the havoc wrought among privately owned shipping. Only seven
Indiamen had been captured during the years 1793-1801 and of these one
was retaken. Several of the smallest class were taken in the period 1803-5,