

   1 Despatches of Wellesley. Ed. S. J. Owen. P. 581.
   2 Despatches of the Marquess Wellesley. Ed. S. J. Owen. P. 804.
   3 In 1803 a London merchant could still write, in a letter to a friend in Calcutta ‘I hope
there will be no idea of an expedition . . . against Batavia and the isles Mauritius. But the rage
for extending our dominions is the proper character of Lord W-y’s government.' The
Intercepted Letters, 1804.

                                               375
                          WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN      SEAS

two more serious losses being the H.C.S. Brunswick (1,200 tons) in 1804,
and the H.C.S. Warren Hastings (1,200 tons) in 1805. The average was
little more, nevertheless, than one a year, and most of the victims were
of 500 to 600 tons.1 Now, in 1809, no less than five Indiamen were taken,
the Europe, Streatham, Windham, United Kingdom and Charlton', all of
them of the 8oo-ton class, and several very richly laden. This entirely
unprecedented loss, almost equal to the entire damage sustained during
the last war, fell in a year when, as it happened, five more Indiamen
foundered at sea. With three ships wrecked, there was a total loss that year
of thirteen sail. Although the French were responsible for less than half
of the damage, the general impression was alarming. The atmosphere in
Leadenhall Street, as well as in Fort William, was perceptibly more warlike.
   The Admiralty, advised by Sir Roger Curtis in 1800,2 3 4 had previously
suspected that Mauritius, if captured, would prove costly and useless.
From 1806, when the Cape was taken afresh, the Navy had used Capetown
and Simon’s Bay as bases for a blockading squadron. Towards the end of
1808 came orders from the Admiralty to tighten the blockade. Admiral
Bertie loyally did his best, wearing out his ships3 in an effort to cut off
the island’s food supply. The occupation of Rodriguez did not represent,
however, a change of policy but merely an attempt to make the blockade
more effective. The events, nevertheless, of 1809 proved the turning point
in naval policy. For while it was apparent, on the one hand, that the French
frigates could come and go despite the blockade, it was equally apparent
on the other hand, that St. Paul’s had offered only a feeble resistance to
the landing of September 21st. At the moment, in fact, when the French
squadron was proving most mischievous, the suspicion dawned that its
base was more vulnerable than had been supposed. If St. Paul’s could be
captured overnight, with the local militia too spiritless to retake it, might
not the lie de France prove as easy a conquest? Could it survive, in any
case,   if Bourbon were already           captured?      Naval   opinion    was       fairly
summarized, perhaps, by the author who pointed out that Mauritius would
always, in French hands, be a ‘focus of intrigue with the Native Powers’
and ‘Not the present, nor any future, nor any possible superiority of the
British Navy can wholly prevent a clandestine intercourse on the part of
the enemy with Asia, whilst he holds his footing on the Mauritius.^