

  Drury seems to have written to the Supreme Government in much the
same tone, adding, for the merchants’ benefit, an announcement of his
intention of cautioning his officers against going out of their way to
protect the Bengal trade. As he was simultaneously, and openly, planning
to transfer the whole naval establishment to Trincomalee, making Coringa
and Negapatam the refitting ports, the builders and contractors of Bombay
and Madras were making those settlements equally hostile to him. Fresh
complaints were made, in which connection the following dispatch may
be quoted, chronologically a little out of place.

                                        His Majesty’s Ship Russel
                                             Madras Roads: 15th February 1810.

            An extrordinary Letter from the Merchants of Calcutta to the Supreme
    Government of India, a copy of which has been transmitted to me by the
    Honble the Vice President in Council who declined forwarding it to the
    Honble the Court of Directors to lay before the Lords Commissioners of
    the Admiralty as a Complaint against me. My Letter which these Gentlemen
    make the motive for complaint, was one written to repel the unfounded
    complaint made by the same body against Captain Bremer of the Rattlesnake,
    which was also to have been laid before their Lordships.
       Having the honour of filling the highest official Situation in India, binds
    me to a rigid discharge of my duty, without looking to the right, or left,
    for either approbation or censure, and standing perfectly indifferent as to
    the opinion of Men collectively or individually, endeavouring at the same
    time to maintain the most unreserved and cordial intercourse with the
    Government of India, which never has been broken.
       Striking at peculation, and wasteful expense as well as various adoptions
    which certainly interfere both with Calcutta and Bombay, in placing the
    Squadron for certain refits more independent of both, has given more than
    offence to Speculation and Peculation, but my endeavours to settle the
    great Harbour of Trincomalee with Chinese Cultivators and Native Artificers
    (and which from the ready co-operation of General Maitland, who upon
    this, as other occasions where the Public Welfare is the object, exceeds
    expectation, but never falls short of it) has opened wide the mouths of India
    upon me, but whose unwholesome noise their Lordships will I am sure
                                      372
                   THE    FRENCH     ISLANDS      BLOCKADED

     treat as it merits. I have little doubt that in a very short time the foundation
     will be completely laid to render Trincomalee the finest Port in India,
     without any expence worthy of consideration, so little, that sooner than not
     give Trincomalee the trial, I would pay it.
        Their Lordships perspicuity needs no further comment from me on the
     supposed grievances of Merchants and complaints against the Commander
     in Chief, and their Lordships will approve the conduct of an Officer whose
     object is the Public Welfare, and whose measures are not to be given up to
     Cabal. . . .
                                             I have the honour to be
                                                  Sir,
                                                        Your most obedient
                                                        humble Servant
                                                        Wm O’B. Drury.