


    . . . my predecessor by his disposal of the squadron had compromised the
                                     369
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

    high and ostensible situation of a Commander in Chief by placing the whole
    effective force almost out of my reach. . . .
                                       (P.R.O. Adm. 1/181. 8th May, 1809.)


  When applied to for convoy by Lord Minto, he replied, on April 25th,
that he had not a single ship to spare. Pellew had allotted three-quarters of
the squadron to the Bay of Bengal—6 frigates and as many sloops. There
were 3 frigates and 5 sloops based on the Hooghli, a frigate between Cape
Negrais and Junkceylon, another between Achin and the Nicobars, and yet
another, with a sloop, on the west coast of Sumatra. As for the rest of the
ships, there was a ship of the line with the China fleet, and a frigate to
escort the Bombay country ships. There were three frigates lending dignity
to Brigadier-General Malcolm’s mission to Persia. Five other ships were in
dock. This left only the Russel and Modeste; and now the latter ship, a
frigate, had gone in chase of two of the enemy’s cruisers in the China
Seas. The situation was the worse because the ships in the Hooghli were
rendered almost inactive through loss of men by disease.
   Pellew’s system for the defence of the Bay of Bengal—in the establish¬
ment of which he made the same mistakes as Rainier had once made—would
not have survived for long in any case. But several events took place to
hasten its end. The capture of Rodriguez had been decided upon, as we
have seen, as a means of maintaining a closer blockade of the Isle of France.
The Belliqueux had therefore to be detached to escort the transports thither,
sailing from Bombay on June 28th. Earlier than this, before June 13th, the
orders came for Java to be put under a strict blockade. Finally, the Cornelia
frigate had been chased off Achin by a French squadron composed of two
frigates and a corvette. This had the immediate effect of sending Drury to
sea with the Phaeton and Cornelia to look for them—the Russel having
gone to fetch troops from Ceylon to suppress a fresh mutiny at Madras. It
had the ultimate effect of imposing a new strategy in which frigate squadrons
had to be allowed' for.
  The search for the three French ships, which was not successful, carried
Drury as far as Penang. He was there in August, making arrangements for
the blockade of Java. The Modeste, Barracouta and Procris were the first
vessels detailed for the service, others being later substituted. When first
informed of the orders Drury had received, to intercept Arab and Malay
trading vessels, Minto protested, as the merchants in the country trade
feared reprisals. Drury agreed to modify the blockade, though making it
clear that he resented the Supreme Government’s interference. ‘Their
Lordships will perceive,’ he wrote to the Admiralty, ‘from the tenor of the
                                    370
                  THE    FRENCH      ISLANDS      BLOCKADED