

  But it remained for Admiral Bertie to outline the services which gained
Rowley his baronetcy.

        A momentary superiority had been obtained by the enemy, but it was
     promptly and decisively crushed by the united zeal, judgment, perseverance,
     skill and intrepidity of Captain Josias Rowley, the value and importance
     of whose services, long, conspicuous, and distinguished as they have been,
     fully justified his being selected as the senior officer conducting the blockade
     of the Isle of France. In the present instance, Captain Rowley, almost alone
     and unsupported but by the never-failing energies and resources of his
     active and intelligent mind, under circumstances, as may easily be imagined,
     of extreme anxiety, mortification and disappointment, in a few hours not
     only retook two of His Majesty’s Ships, but captured, also, the largest
     frigate possessed by the enemy in those seas, and thus restored the British
     naval pre-eminence in that quarter, which his talents had so long successfully
     contributed to maintain.

   On this subject, Captain Hall points out that:

        ... if the incidents above related had not taken place at so great a distance
     from home, the renown of Sir Josias Rowley would assuredly have proved
     no less general in the country at large than it is, and ever must remain, in the
     Navy.

   The Battle of Grand Port cannot, however, be said to have had
momentous strategic consequences. The immediate danger was of units
attached to the combined expedition coming severally into an area believed
to be under British control. The Africaine was such a ship, although for¬
tunate in learning the position at Bourbon before she actually met the
enemy. The Ceylon’s capture was a more unfortunate example of the risks
being run and might easily have involved the permanent loss of the military
commander-in-chief. With the General and his staff captured, Willoughby
taken and Corbet dead, and a few more such specialists lost, the success of
the expedition would have been problematical. Especially serious would it
have been if the Boadicea had been taken and the Africaine left in French
hands. Without Rowley, without Lieutenant Street and the engineer,
Lieutenant Blakiston, without the masters of the Boadicea and Africaine,
Major-General Warde would have succeeded to a difficult, perhaps impos¬
sible, task. That the worst did not happen was due to the hard fighting
which preceded disaster, leaving temporarily crippled the frigates which
might have made French naval superiority complete. The Battle of Grand
                                        395
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS

Port left the Bellone, Minerve, and Nereide out of action for months to
come, and the recapture of the Africaine and Ceylon was made possible by
the damage each had suffered before surrender. French exploitation, more¬
over, of success, was hampered, no doubt, by the heavy casualties sustained
which must have made it difficult to man even the ships that were still fit
for sea. Due to these and other causes, the worst did not happen and Admiral
Bertie arrived to find Gaptain Rowley still at his post, the French ships
blockaded, the work of reconnaissance done and the experts (or some of
them) still available. As against this, the defeat at Grand Port and the capture
of the Africaine had revealed the weaknesses in the Navy which the Ameri¬
cans rediscovered in 1812; the neglect of gunnery and the over-confidence
in innate national superiority. Of these weaknesses a new generation of
French officers, Duperre, Bouvet and the rest, had taken advantage before
the Americans appeared on the scene. It is a fact which figures more promi¬
nently in French histories than in British. But the French success at Grand
Port did not, as it happened, even delay the fall of Mauritius. Overwhelming
forces were on their way, and when Duperre, on October 24th, sighted
seventeen sail off Port Louis, he knew that the war at sea was, as far as he
was concerned, finished. His frigates could do no more and he moored
them as floating batteries to protect Port Louis, sending many of their men
to man the shore batteries. He was no longer thinking of any offensive
operations. His problem was how to save his only naval base.