

 accurately representing a naval action by a diagram. He realizes that the
 diagram must be inexact and can, at best, show roughly the situation at a
 given time. Ships are less static than bodies of troops and, apart from that,
 theirs is a battlefield almost without features and one which it is rarely
 helpful to explore. One of the exceptions to the rule is the Battle of Grand
 Port, this British defeat of 1810. For the diagram made of this action by
 Mr. H. C. M. Austen has two fixed points of reference, to which the posi¬
 tions of the other ships can be related.1 Where much might be doubtful,
 the position in the action of two frigates is known; and known for the
 sufficient reason that they are still there. It was in 1933 that Mr. Austen,
 then Harbour Engineer, located the wrecks of the Sirius and Magicienne
 and recovered from the latter eight of her 12-pounder guns and five of her
 24-pounder carronades. So the diagram on page 391, based on that
 made by Mr. Austen, is less fanciful than some diagrams that are better
 known.
    The problem of what to do next now devolved on Commodore Rowley.
 From the Windham, on August 22nd, Rowley learnt of the impending
 attack on Grand Port and sailed that evening with the Boadicea (38) and
 the Bombay transport, both ships carrying troops. They were delayed by
 the same wind that delayed Hamelin and did not sight the lie de la Passe
 until the 29th, after all was over. He was chased off by the Venus and Manche
 and returned to St. Paul’s, quickly sending off the transport Emma to cruise
 off Rodriguez and warn all friendly shipping of what the position was.
 Besides the Boadicea his only force now comprised the sloops Otter and
 Staunch. The immediate question was whether Decaen would now try to
 recapture Bourbon. The naval force at his disposal, counting the Iphigenia,
 now included five frigates and two corvettes, which would be ample to
cover such an operation, had all been ready for sea. On the other hand,
Decaen knew of the coming British expedition and probably thought that
the defence of the one island was problem enough in itself. Be that as it
may, he exploited success only to the extent of ordering the Iphigenie (late
Iphigenia) and Astree, with the Entrepreneur corvette, to cruise off Bourbon.
They sailed for this purpose from Port Louis on September 9th and, on the
12th, saw what they took to be the Boadicea at St. Denis. The frigate they
there located was, in fact, a new arrival, the Africaine (38), commanded by
Robert Corbet, chosen for his experience on the station. The Boadicea,
with the Otter (16) and Staunch, was at St. Paul’s, where Rowley had
heard, by message overland, of Corbet’s arrival. All these English vessels
put to sea and Bouvet, finding himself outnumbered, withdrew towards
  1 See Sea Fights and Corsairs of the Indian Ocean. H. C. M. Austen, Mauritius, 1935? P- 148-
                                            393                                         n*
                           WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS