




               391
                     WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

Pym replied with an order for Willoughby to abandon ship and come
aboard the Sirius. Refusing to do this, Willoughby replied that he had
struck. It was now n.o p.m. and his attempts in the darkness to inform the
French of his surrender did not succeed. The Nereide remained, therefore,
under fire from the Bellone until 1.50 a.m. and could not make her surrender
effective until after daylight. She was under fire again even then because of
the Union Jack nailed fo her only surviving mast, which could only be
struck by cutting away the mast itself. Willoughby had gone into action
with colours on each mast. ‘I wish,’ wrote the unsympathetic Mrs. Welland,
‘this nonsense had saved his ship.’ Of the Nereide s 281 officers and men,
about 230 were casualties, of which number 92 were killed. Daybreak
revealed the smoke still hanging over the bay, with exhausted men on
bloodstained decks and bodies floating in the calm water of the battlefield.
The Nereide was a dismasted, floating shambles but it was not until nearly
3.0 p.m. on the afternoon of the 24th that Roussin went on board her. ‘II
le trouva,’ reported Duperre, ‘dans un etat impossible a decrire. . . .’
   Meanwhile, Pym had to decide what to do next. There were, broadly,
two alternatives. One was to order the Iphigenia to attack the grounded
French ships, perhaps by boarding. She had now little ammunition left, but
could have made a night attack with the boats of the squadron. This would
have been to lose, probably, the whole English squadron while ensuring
that the French loss should be at least comparable. The other alternative
was to save what could be saved. Wrongly, so far as one can judge, Captain
Pym chose the latter course and ordered the Iphigenia to withdraw by
warping and join the Sirius. This was done by 10.0 a.m., at which time it
was still hoped to refloat that ship. The Magicienne was, by contrast, a
hopeless case, and, her crew being removed to the Iphigenia, she was even¬
tually set on fire and destroyed. After further efforts, however, to refloat
the Sirius, she too had to be abandoned and burnt on the 25th. The Iphigenia
laboriously warped back towards the lie de la Passe, where many of the
men she carried were put ashore, and was near there on the 27th when
Commodore Hamelin’s squadron appeared outside the harbour. Lambert,
with insufficient water for his eight hundred officers and men, was glad to
capitulate on the 28th on terms which would give all of them a free passage
to the Cape or other British territory, on parole pending regular exchange.
Before this surrender, Lambert had, on the night of the 27th-28th, sent off
his launch with a report for Commodore Rowley. Another boat had been
sent on the same errand on the night before that. They carried very grave
news indeed.
  A difficulty which often presents itself to the naval historian is that of
                                       392
                           THE    BATTLE      OF    GRAND      PORT