

 was made by the boats of the Sirius and Iphigenia, the island being then
 garrisoned by fifty of the special troops. Captain Pym now sailed to join
 the Iphigenia off Port Louis, leaving Willoughby with the Nereide and
 Staunch to continue the propaganda war. Between Pym and Willoughby
 there was no love lost at this time, Willoughby being furious that Pym
 had captured the lie de la Passe before he (the real expert) had arrived.
    Willoughby was now, nevertheless, in his element and began an
 exhilarating series of operations in what we should call ‘commando’ style.
He began on the 17th by the capture—after a six-mile approach march—
 of the fort on Pointe du Diable. From there he marched along the coast,
 supported by the ship’s boats, to ‘Vieux Grand Port,’ the village which
Mahebourg had superseded. After distributing leaflets and after a skirmish
with a company of militia, Willoughby’s one hundred and seventy men were
all re-embarked. This was on August 17th, and Willoughby landed again on
the following day. Meeting now with no military opposition, he sent the
Staunch to join Captain Pym and landed afresh with his men on the 19th
and 20th. The inhabitants proved friendly and were further won over by
the model behaviour of the landing party. All, in fact, was going splendidly
until, on the 20th at 10.0 a.m., five ships were seen heading for the south
entrance. The Nereide was anchored just behind the He de la Passe and
Willoughby managed to reach her by midday, after a pull of nearly five
miles to windward in his gig. His other boats followed more slowly.
   There could be little doubt, of course, as to the strange ships’ identity.
It was Duperre’s squadron—two frigates and a corvette, with prizes.
Willoughby had now a difficult decision to make. The French had five
frigates to the British four, but three were still presumably in port. If
Duperre knew of the capture of the lie de la Passe, he would probably go
round to Port Louis, where he would encounter Pym’s three frigates, a
force barely equal to his own. But his appearance would presumably be
the signal for the other three frigates to come out of harbour, creating
impossible odds for Pym. Now, the trade wind blowing normally from
the south-east, Grand Port was easy to enter (with a pilot) but difficult
to leave; Port Louis easy to leave but difficult to approach. To prevent
the French squadron uniting, therefore—and to save Pym’s squadron
from annihilation—the best policy seemed to be to lure Duperre’s ships
into Grand Port, cripple them as they entered and trust to the trade wind,
the damage and the battery on the He de la Passe to keep them there.
Willoughby therefore hoisted French colours on the island and the Nereide
and made the signal to indicate that the British were off the Gunner’s
Quoin on the north side of the island. The French ships then made the
                                    386
                      THE   BATTLE     OF   GRAND    PORT

private signal and were answered, thereupon giving their numbers and so
revealing themselves (not very surprisingly) as the Bellone, Minerve, Victor
and two prizes; these last being, in fact, the Windham and Ceylon, Indiamen.
   In an extremely critical situation Willoughby chose the lesser of two
evils. But the weakness of his plan lay in the absence of about 160 of the
281 men by whom the Nereide should have been manned. The lie de la
Passe, furthermore, had nine guns, at most, facing seawards and these
without artillerymen. The need for gunners had not originally been
overlooked, for the troops employed included an officer (Lieutenant
Aldwinkle), a sergeant and a dozen gunners of the Madras artillery.
These had not, however, been included in the garrison of the lie de la
Passe. Willoughby had taken these with him to attack the fort or battery
at Pointe du Diable. They were still with him on the 18th, when the
sergeant deserted and one of the gunners was wounded. The remainder
were with him on the 20th, and now, as the French squadron approached,
they and their officer were in the heavier boats still laboriously rowing
off the from the shore. The modern reader is apt to assume that the loading
and firing of a muzzle-loading cannon was relatively simple; and so, in
a sense, it was. But the problem, as with the even simpler modern rifle,
is not merely how to fire but how to hit the target. And whereas the
essentially ‘commando’ type infantrymen on the He de la Passe could
undoubtedly fire the guns, provided they were loaded, it was a question
whether they would hit anything and more of a question whether they
could reload quickly and fire again with effect or indeed without hurting
themselves. The drill for fighting a battery was exact and complex and
implied months of hard training. All this occurred to Willoughby, no
doubt as the French ships entered the channel. Looking up the harbour
towards Vieux Grand Port, he could see, in the distance, the boats which
contained more than half his seamen, gunners and all his artillerymen. In
the Nereide he could fight one battery, no doubt, with the men on board—
who were probably, for the most part, sailmakers, cooks, carpenters,
caulkers, stewards and sick bay attendants. Had he remembered to see that
the ‘idlers’ had learnt their gun drill? If he had not, it was too late now
(the leading French vessel, a corvette, the Victor, was almost within
range. . . .)
   It is easier to criticize a battle than fight one. But critics who have studied
this action have been at a loss to reconcile Willoughby’s ability and courage
with his lack of success. There is, however, no great mystery about it.
He was, first and foremost, the expert in combined operations. He was
happiest in organizing an opposed landing on a moonless night, with boats
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS