

morning would have been preferable. At the same time, it is absurd to
represent this as an attack, through unknown navigational hazards. For
Willoughby, at any rate, had been all over the harbour from the 17th
onwards, and if no soundings were taken or rough chart made, the fault
was his. The French had taken up a position among the shoals between
Mahebourg and Vieux Grand Port, and all would depend on the English
ships’ ability to keep toff the coral reefs. The inexplicable feature of the
events which followed was Pym’s failure to keep in the track of the Nereide.
Willoughby had the only pilot (a negro) and had been over the ground in
his ship’s boats. His was the only ship that reached her allotted position.
But the Sirius, conned by Mr. Lesly, master of the Nereide, followed a
course of her own and came to grief over a quarter of a mile from the
French ships. The Magicienne and Iphigenia kept clear of the Sirius but
equally ignored the track of the Nereide. The Magicienne grounded accord¬
ingly on another shoal, whereupon the Iphigenia dropped anchor where she
was, in six fathoms. The result was that the Sirius and Magicienne were
 immobile, with few or no guns bearing on the enemy, while the Iphigenia
 engaged the Minerve at a range of about 450 yards. The Nereide was abreast
 of the Bellone and distant from her less than 200 yards.
    It thus came about that the action was initially between two English
 frigates and two French, the latter assisted by a corvette and an Indiaman
 and with occasional help from a few guns on shore; one of them directed
 by Decaen himself. The battle would have been more equal if the opposing
 frigates had been of something like the same size. But the Bellone (44) had
 18-pounders as against the 12-pounders of the Nereide, and the Iphigenia
 (an 18-pounder frigate) was only about equal to the Minerve. The vital
 phase of the action began at about 5.15 p.m. and ended at 8.30 p.m. when
 the Nereide ceased fire. The French had in that time reduced the Nereide to
 a mere wreck with Willoughby seriously wounded and most of his men
 casualties. The other English frigates had suffered little and one of them
 was still afloat. As against this, the Bellone, Minerve and Ceylon, their cables
 cut, had drifted aground ‘in a heap,’ with the smaller Victor beyond them
 and farther on the same shoal. Duperre himself was a casualty and Bouvet
 had taken command, shifting to the Bellone from the Minerve. Willoughby
 now sent a boat to the Sirius to report on the situation. The Nereide had
 drifted down towards her opponents, anchoring again near them, and still
 under fire from the Bellone. Willoughby could do nothing more and sug¬
  gested either an effort to tow the Nereide out by boats, or else the removal
  of her crew and setting her on fire in the hope of destroying the Bellone and
  her neighbours. Perhaps the boats were lacking for either plan for Captain
                                        39°
THE   BATTLE   OF    GRAND   PORT