

the blockade while he himself went to Rodriguez to meet the expected
transports from Madras. The Nereide went with him but Willoughby, the
expert in combined operations, had been nearly killed on June 15th by the
accidental bursting of a musket and recovered barely in time to be of use.
  During the attack on Bourbon, which began on July 7th, the blockade
of the neighbouring island was abandoned. All the men-of-war were
needed to cover the ( landing, which was successful and indeed but
ineffectively opposed. By the 9th Mr. Farquhar had landed and assumed
office as governor, and the Sirius, Iphigenia, Nereide and Staunch, gun-brig,
then returned hastily to resume the blockade. In the light of subsequent
events, it seems not improbable that the four thousand men who had
conquered Bourbon could have gone on to attack Mauritius without much
risk of losing the first island or of failing against the second. The information
that Decaen’s militia numbered over ten thousand had not, however, in
India, been qualified by Willoughby’s report that they would not fight.
The captors, therefore, of Bourbon had no orders to attack Mauritius, but
were rather to await the arrival of the second expedition towards the end
of the year. In the meanwhile, it was decided to undermine the opposition
by propaganda. Mr. Farquhar had printed for this purpose a proclamation
addressed to the inhabitants of Mauritius. It described their present state
in the gloomiest terms and contrasted it with the happiness which would
follow an (unresisted) British conquest. The only views of Britain, it
seemed, were ‘justice, commerce, and plenty.’ Then Farquhar added, more
recklessly, that ‘Our Government is generous . . . the French pay in paper
. . . and we pay in Spanish coin.’ The distribution of this literature was
entrusted to a squadron under the orders of Captain Pym of the Sirius,
the other ships being the Iphigenia, Nereide and Staunch. As an opening
move, the Nereide, Willoughby’s ship, carrying a special ‘commando’
unit of a hundred soldiers and three officers, was to capture the lie de la
Passe at the entrance to Grand Port, which town and neighbourhood
could then be inundated with propaganda. It was not, apparently, intended
to retain the island indefinitely (for which purpose the troops would hardly
suffice), but Grand Port was one place, clearly, at which the final landing
in force might be planned and this possibility was borne, no doubt, in mind.
  In comment on this plan of campaign, it is clear that the initial error
was that made by Lord Minto in April. It is probable that a slightly larger
force, as Drury urged, might have captured both islands in one operation.
But, apart from that, Minto had rejected the Admiral’s help and sent off
his first expedition without allowing Drury to strengthen the squadron
with which the troops were to act. This squadron had been weakened
                                      384
                        THE    BATTLE      OF    GRAND     PORT