

(unknown to Minto) in March, by the departure of the Raisonable (64)
and soon afterwards by the departure of the Leopard (50), both ordered
home by the Admiralty, probably for the docking they must have needed.
This meant that Rowley had with him some five frigates, opposed, in
theory, by four French frigates (either at Port Louis or likely to return
there), but actually, since the arrival of the Astree, by five. Minto was thus
relying, in his plans, on a naval superiority which did not exist. The next
error was in Rowley’s decision to remain with the Boadicea (38) at St. Paul’s,
and direct the blockade from there. He was capable and distinguished and
he had several reasons, no doubt, for doing what he did. Bourbon had
to be defended, French ships might call there, not knowing that it had
fallen, and the governor would be much happier with the Commodore
and his frigate at hand. The result was, however, to deprive the blockading
force of its most experienced senior officer and reduce it to an actual
inferiority as compared with the force it was to contain.
   To call this inferiority ‘actual’ is not quite accurate, for two of the
French frigates were on a cruise. But they had sailed on March 14th and
five months was quite a long time for a frigate to be at sea. On the other
hand, a blockade would imply a certain dispersion of the squadron, if only
to watch the two main ports. And, whereas the Venus and Manche were
40-gun ships, the Iphigenia, Magicienne, Sirius and Nereide were of 36
guns and with a far lighter broadside. These considerations were not,
presumably, forgotten, but recent events—the raid on Jacolet, the fall of
Bourbon—had given everyone unbounded confidence. Any English frigate
could capture any French frigate irrespective of size—in fact, could
probably capture two. Willoughby, the ablest of the captains, was a hothead
and possibly overshadowed Pym, his senior officer. At any rate, the
operations against the lie de France went gaily forward and were planned,
indeed, with great skill. Leaving the Iphigenia and Magicienne off Port
Louis, Captain Pym brought the Sirius, Nereide and Staunch, brig, to
Grand Port. A first attempt on the lie de la Passe failed on the night of
August 10th to nth because of adverse weather conditions. The second
attempt, on the 13th to 14th, succeeded so well that the officer defending
the fort surrendered without destroying his signal book. According to
James, the fort mounted four 24-pounders, nine 18-pounders, three 13-inch
mortars and two howitzers, and was held by two officers and eighty regular
soldiers. His expressed inability to describe the fortifications is no great
loss as they are still there; as are two of the 13-inch mortars.1 The capture
   1 H. C. M. Austen. Sea Fights and Corsairs of the Indian Ocean. Mauritius. See text and
illustration, p. 140.
                                                                                     N
                                           385
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS