

   The reason Bertie gave for sending Drury back to India was that he
could not sanction his continued absence from his station. That he was
technically in the right is beyond question. That he was generous may
be doubted. Drury returned rather sadly to Madras and died there on
6th March, 1811. Before that date he heard of the fall of Mauritius. His
consolation then was that he was on the point of sailing with another
expedition to Java.

       Obituary
         On the evening of March 6, Vice-Admiral William O’Bryen Drury,
      Commander-in-Chief in the East Indies.—He had not been in good health
      since he arrived in that country; but the severe illness immediately preceding
      his death was only of 24 hours duration. He was waiting the arrival of some
      ships from Bencoolen to proceed with the expedition against Java; and had,
      two days previously, fixed that the expedition should sail on the 13th;
      and it is a singular circumstance, that the Minden, 74, which had been fitted
      out, at Bombay, for his flag, and the arrival of which, at Madras, he had, for
                                         381
                     WAR IN THE EASTERN SEAS

    several days, been so anxiously expecting, appeared in the offing just as
    he expired. His remains were interred in St. Mary’s church, Madras, on the
    following evening. . . .

   On February 25th, before sailing from Calcutta to join Drury at Madras,
Lord Minto gave, among his reasons for accompanying the fleet in person,
the final one that ‘as Admiral Drury acts under a distinct authority and
is fond of acting for himself’ he, Minto, could not otherwise be certain
that his plan would be carried out. Before the Governor-General arrived,
Drury was acting under a still more distinct authority. And it was with
Commodore Broughton that Lord Minto sailed for Java.




                                   382
                             CHAPTER XXI


          The Battle of Grand Port

     After   the hurricane season in 1810, Captain Lambert resumed the
       blockade of Mauritius at the end of March. He had with him the
jL   \^Iphigenia (3 6), Leopard (50), Magicienne (36) and some smaller
vessels. In Port Louis were the Venus (40), Manche (40) and Entreprenant
corvette. The Bellone, Minerve and Victor were at sea but expected to
return. At Madras, Lord Minto was assembling his force for the capture
of Bourbon, and at the Cape Captain Josias Rowley, with the Boadicea (38)
and Sirius (38), was preparing to join Lambert and supersede him. The
latter’s squadron, too weak for its purpose, was reinforced in the meanwhile,
in April, by the Nereide (36) commanded by Nesbit Willoughby. It was
known that the attack on Bourbon was to be made and suspected that
one on Mauritius would follow. The immediate task was one of recon¬
naissance preliminary to the latter operation, and Willoughby began his
patrol to the south-east by revisiting the Riviere-Noire which he had raided
before. There he located the French frigate Astree, latest reinforcement
from Cherbourg, which had been unable to enter the blockaded Port Louis.
Then he went on (on April 30th) to reconnoitre the small harbour of
Jacolet, where he found a merchantman protected by two shore batteries
and decided to cut her out, together with a schooner, by a night attack.
As a first step it would be necessary to silence the batteries, which was
done by marines and sailors numbering a hundred. One battery was taken
that night and the other the following day. After some fighting on shore,
and after destroying the batteries, works, magazine, stores and signal house,
Willoughby re-embarked his force with little loss, bringing with him some
captured officers. The merchantman was found to be American and was
left, but the schooner was brought away. Jacolet was evidently judged
unsuitable for the landing of a larger force, but the raid served to show
that the local militia was unlikely to offer any serious resistance. It also
enabled Willoughby to demonstrate British respect for private property
and courtesy towards prisoners (who were exchanged soon afterwards).
Shortly afterwards, Commodore Rowley left Pym of the Sirius to continue
                                     383
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS