

  Mauritius, pursued by his opponents. The Africaine, much faster than her
  consorts, drew ahead of them during the night and overtook the French
  frigates when they were about two or three hours from Port Louis. Corbet
  engaged them both in a fierce night action, suffered 163 casualties out of a
  crew of 295, and struck his flag at 5.0 a.m. on the 13th, he himself being
  mortally wounded. The Boadicea was then four or five miles away and
  becalmed, the two sloops out of sight. Rowley retook the shattered and
  dismasted Africaine that evening.
     The time was now near for the coming of the expedition against Mauri¬
 tius, and a first symptom of its approach was the arrival of the frigate
  Ceylon (32), sent from Madras to inform Rowley of what was happening
 and when. She also carried Maior-General Abercromby and his staff sent to
 make a preliminary reconnaissance of the landing-places. Captain Gordon
 of the Ceylon expected to find Rowley’s squadron off Port Louis, which he
 sighted on September 17th. Commodore Hamelin promptly put to sea with
 the Venus, Manche and Victor and captured the Ceylon in a night action on
 the I7th-i8th. Commodore Rowley appeared in the morning with the
 Boadicea and his two sloops, recovered the Ceylon, captured the Venus
 (with Abercromby aboard) after ten minutes’ fighting1 and reached some¬
 thing like equality with Hamelin. For, of the five frigates in Port Louis,
 only two (Manche and Astree) were ready for sea. By October 19th, Rowley
 was off Port Louis with the Boadicea and Venus (renamed Nereide) and
 could fairly claim to have regained control of the situation even before
Admiral Bertie arrived in the Nisus. More than that, Rowley had sufficiently
reconnoitred the island to be able to point out a suitable landing-place for
troops. Much of the credit for the ultimate conquest is properly his. His
also, however, is part of the blame for the defeat which preceded it, which
his presence would almost certainly have prevented.
    While admitting that Rowley had initially made a tactical error, it is
only fair to point out now how magnificently he recovered the initiative.
The capture of the Venus (Hamelin’s flagship) was the turning-point but it
was followed by the astonishing achievement of refitting his own squadron
in a matter almost of days. The Venus, luckily, carried most of the stores
taken from a captured storeship. But to remove the Africaine’s lower masts
and replace them with those of the Windham was something of a feat and
performed at that very largely by soldiers.
        In the course of a few weeks [wrote Captain Basil Hall], as if by magic
     (and the influence of such a mind as Rowley’s falls little short of the magician’s
  1 In this action the Venus lost only nine killed and seventeen wounded. The Boadicea   had
only two wounded.

                                           394
                       THE   BATTLE     OF    GRAND     PORT

     touch), all four frigates were fitted for sea, and again ready for action,
     re-masted, re-equipped, and re-manned.. . .