

to touch down at 3.30 a.m. and the flotilla to be divided between beaches
A, B and C. He was an inspiring leader ashore in the Cochrane manner
and fancied himself as a tactician; not without reason. The result of his
semi-military bent was that his crew spent half their time on shore training
with small arms. When accidentally wounded in June, he had been
obviously instructing them himself in musketry. And in these operations
round Grand Port (as formerly at Jacolet) he not only had all his best
men on shore but was with them himself and always in the lead. Most
other captains would have put a lieutenant in command, not from lack
of enterprise but from a belief that their ship was their main responsibility.
Willoughby’s specialization would have mattered less had the Nereides
crew been trained in gunnery by someone else. But, as luck would have
it, Willoughby’s predecessor was Robert Corbet, whose cruelty had driven
the seamen to mutiny in 1809. Corbet was a specialist in seamanship (see
page 367) who nearly killed his men at sail drill but failed to train them
in target practice. Without disparagement of Willoughby, it would be fair
to say that he fell between two stools. Had he been more of a sailor, he
would not have been caught with so many of his best men on shore. Had
he been more of a soldier, he would have had his artillerymen on the lie
de la Passe, with seamen to help them rather than picked grenadiers.
    Some such thoughts as these may have passed through Willoughby’s
mind during the time between noon, when he came aboard, and 1.30,
when the Victor was approaching the Nereide. Astern of the corvette came
the Minerve and following her the Ceylon, prize. Willoughby, at 1.40,
struck his French ensign, hoisted British colours and opened fire. Had he
realized the ineffectiveness of his shore battery, he would probably have
allowed the Victor to pass. He preferred, however, to engage the Victor
and leave the Minerve to the guns on the lie de la Passe. The surprise
was complete, so much so that the Victor surrendered at once—escaping,
however, before she could be secured. For an instant, the Frenchmen felt
themselves in a trap, with perhaps the whole of the island in enemy hands.
But the Minerve's crew were reassured on finding themselves unharmed.
For the amateur gunners on the lie de la Passe had begun the battle by
accidentally exploding a hundred cartridges, killing three and injuring twelve
among themselves. Five of the guns facing seawards were dismounted and
the marksmanship of the remainder is probably fairly represented by the
shot fired at the Minerve which killed a man in the boat returning from
an attempt to secure the Victor. It does not seem that the Nereide fired
with much greater effect. Mrs. Welland, an English prisoner in the Ceylon,
saw the shot fall in the sea and pointed out to her husband that there must
                                     388
                     THE   BATTLE    OF    GRAND   PORT

be some mistake—shot should never be used in saluting a Commodore!
She was hustled below in haste but ran little risk where she was—only
one man on board was killed and none wounded. The Minerve, too, with
twenty casualties, suffered lightly for a ship that was too surprised to return
the fire. The Ceylon passed in turn, followed by the Bellone, the Windham
heading westwards and being ultimately (and rather oddly) recaptured by
two unarmed boats’ crews from the Sirius. By a miracle, the Nereides
boats were allowed to pass the Minerve, Ceylon and Victor and were
alongside, apparently, before the Bellone (Duperre’s flagship) arrived. The
French ships anchored well up the harbour, out of mortar range, removing
as they went the buoys which marked the channel. The position now was
that the French were in their harbour, almost unharmed, with Willoughby
still holding the entrance. He decided to stay where he was, sending a boat
to inform Pym of what had happened.
    Captain Pym learnt something of the position on August 21st from the
prisoners in the Windham, which ship he sent to warn Commodore Rowley.
Then he picked up Willoughby’s boat and knew the worst. He instantly
decided that his best chance was to collect his squadron and attack Duperre’s
ships in harbour. The French, although so greatly superior, were in two
fragments and his hope lay in destroying one, the only one he could reach,
before the other arrived. It was just possible if he acted swiftly and if
Hamelin acted slowly, and there was nothing else he could do. He arrived
with the Sirius off the lie de la Passe, late on the morning of the 22nd,
and saw the Nereide signal ‘Ready for action’ and ‘Enemy of inferior force.’
This latter signal (which a subsequent court martial properly called
‘injudicious’), nearly led to an immediate attack with the two frigates only,
an action only averted through the Sirius running aground and not being
refloated until the morning of the 23rd. By then the two frigates were
joined by the Iphigenia and Magicienne, and at 4.0 p.m., with the Nereide
leading, the whole squadron stood in to the attack. So far Pym’s plan had
worked well, and, in fact, the other three French frigates did not appear
until the 27th, leaving Pym with ample time to destroy Duperre’s squadron.
He had four frigates with which to attack two (heavier) frigates, a corvette
and a captured Indiaman. His superiority, however, was slight if account
be taken of the reinforcements which the French ships might (and did)
receive from the shore.
   Although the Venus, Astree and Manche did not arrive until after the
action, their presence imposed on Pym a haste which he would, no doubt,
in other circumstances, have avoided. A day spent in reconnaissance of the
channel would not have been wasted, and even an attack on the following
                                     389
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS