

Keating’s opinion was one which Decaen, with even better information,
probably shared. He had evidently planned, therefore, to defend Port
Louis against a frontal attack (which he could have done). Supposing there
were a landing elsewhere in considerable strength, he knew that a defence
of Port Louis would be impossible. For one thing, it was incompletely
fortified. For another there was no relieving force within thousands of
  1 The two battalions (107th and 108th) which Sercey had brought out were mutinous
and had been sent back to France in 1798. See, however, Appendix K.
  2 “Bengal Secret and Separate Consultations.” Quoted in The Expedition to Mauritius in
1810. A MS. thesis in the Library of the University of London. By A. G. Field.

                                           405
                           WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN        SEAS

miles. All he could do, in that event, would be to give battle outside the
town and attempt to gain reasonable terms of capitulation by a defensive
victory. And even this plan depended on the willingness of the militia to
stand their ground under fire. Beyond all this reasoning, Decaen had his
own motives for welcoming a chance to capitulate. He had been marooned
on the lie de France since 1803 and was heartily tired of the place. His
chances of making it the* base for an invasion of India had dwindled and
vanished and the governorship in itself, to an ambitious soldier, meant
nothing. While he had been doing garrison duty, his contemporaries were
being promoted. His rivals were Marshals of the Empire, Counts and Barons.
If he could gain terms which would leave him free to return to France, he
could even now gain rank and fame in Europe. He had only to ensure that
his capitulation should be honourable. He must return, but not in disgrace.1
   Thinking on these lines—and he would have been scarcely human to
have thought very differently—Decaen made a rather dashing recon¬
naissance at the head of his cavalry, withdrawing again with a slight wound
and some idea of his opponent’s strength. He decided to give battle on the
hill feature between the Tombeau River and Port Louis, and drew up his
troops astride the road which was the axis of the British advance. The
French numbered about three thousand five hundred men with four guns
and a howitzer, the force being commanded by Decaen’s second-in-com-
mand, General Yandermaesen. Decaen himself had returned to Port Louis,
presumably to ensure that it remained in his hands to bargain with. It might
possibly have been attacked from the sea while its defenders were deployed
elsewhere.
   From the foregoing account it will be seen that General Abercromby
did not push on with any reckless speed. His main difficulty was probably
one of supply. Early on the 30th he asked for naval co-operation and—the
Admiral being now off Port Louis—Captain Beaver sailed along the coast.
Seeing English colours flying over the battery at Cannoniere Point, he
stood on for Baie aux Tortues.