

   According to Captain Beaver and his biographer, the operation was not
as smoothly carried out as Prior, being an onlooker, supposed. To begin
                                      402
                       THE   CAPTURE     OF   MAURITIUS

with, Beaver’s own gig was swamped while towing behind the Nisus with
the loss of his copy of the signals. It was probably too late in the day to
make much difference, but worse was to follow, as Beaver explains:

        Having anchored (soon after ii.o a.m.) we hoisted out all the boats;
     but owing to some of the troops, who were to be on the right flank, having
     been put on board the Nereide, which was anchored the furthest to the left,
     it was near two o’clock before we pulled towards the shore. We then,
     however, gave way, and landed in a quarter of an hour without experiencing
     any obstacle, the enemy blowing up the magazine at Grand Bay, and re¬
     treating. It was well to be able to disembark and advance without a struggle,
     for circumstances did not combine as I could have wished. A strong tide
     was made to the westward, which prevented the flat and heavy boats from
     preserving the necessary order; but still better might have been obtained.
     ... It was on the whole, very short of what I intended. Our troops formed,
     and started off for the capital at about five o’clock, except one brigade;
     and by half-past eight, I had landed most of the troops, European and Native,
     and all the ammunition, food and spirits which the General had requested
     of me. . . .
        On the morning of the 30th considerable trouble and some confusion
     arose from disembarking sepoys, pioneers, and artillery at one spot, when
     I had expressly directed another. . . .


   It seems possible that Captain Beaver was a little too absorbed (as staff
officers incline to be) in the perfecting of organization as an end in itself
as apart from victory. However, he landed the army and it is proper now
to note the sequel.
   The first brigade landed, that of Lieutenant-Colonel Keating, was termed
the ‘Reserve.’ This meant that Keating’s was supposed to hold the bridge¬
head while the 1st Brigade passed through it. The landing, however, being
unopposed, Keating’s brigade was allowed to push on, its defensive role
being taken over by the 4th Brigade. Keating led his men along the beach
for about a mile and then turned inland through the woods. That night
there was a slight skirmish with the French troops which had withdrawn
from Fort Malartic. The advance was resumed at daybreak but the leading
formation halted in a position short of the Tombeau River while the other
troops, some only landed that morning, came up into line. They were still
forming at 2.0 p.m. on November 30th when General Decaen rode forward
to reconnoitre them.
   Decaen, it is clear, was in no mood to sell his life dearly at the head of
his army. For one thing, he had no army. He had originally brought out
                                       403
WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS