

                                                                  401
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

   Both Prior and Beaver himself wrote accounts of this landing and both
 deserve at least partial quotation.
       On the morning of the 29th . . . [Prior writes] . . . the breeze being par¬
    ticularly favourable, and the day one of the finest that could be chosen, the
    fleet stood toward the shore; in front appeared the rugged reef and sun-burnt
    hills and vallies of the prize for which we were to contend; behind followed
    more than sixty sail ’of large vessels, filled with armed men anticipating
    victory, and steering steadily and rapidly to the point of debarkation. This
    spot was Mapou Bay, formed by a small curve in the land, and discovered
    in the night excursions of our boats. It is situated in the straits dividing
    Mauritius from the islet called the Quoin, and which had been hitherto
    scarcely known to the English as a practicable channel for shipping. The
    bay was undefended, as far as could be ascertained, by works; and an opening
    in the reef promised to admit as many boats abreast as would suffice to land
    the first division of the army.
        In the mean time signals to ‘prepare for battle’—‘Have troops in readiness
     for landing’—‘Supply three days provisions,’ occupied the attention of
     those who had not more active duties to perform. We anchored a little after
     twelve o’clock, something less than a mile from the shore; on the beach all
    was quiet; not a gun or a soldier was to be seen. Two brigs-of-war took
     their stations close to the opening in the reef, to sweep the woods with
    grape, in case of opposition, while the flag ship (.Africaine) and Nisus,
    remaining a little without, covered them; several other frigates, with the
    Illustrious, seventy-four, and transports, kept still further out, but as near
    as the crowded state of the anchorage permitted. This, however, is very
    extensive, the water being likewise deep, and so clear that, though several
    fathoms below the surface, the beds of coral under the bottom of the ship
    were so distinct to the eye as the paper on which I write.
       I have already said, that Captain Beaver, who had again joined us, was
    charged with the very important duty of disembarking the army. The
    arrangements made by him were such, that in little more than an hour, two
    thousand men had been embarked, the boats placed in their proper stations,
    and preceded and flanked by gun-boats: the whole of the division now
    moved toward the shore, presenting a most magnificent and interesting
    spectacle. . . . While pulling to the beach, we on board could not but feel
    the most lively anxiety for the event, and continued gazing intently till we
    saw the troops land, form, and advance, without a musket being fired. The
    explosion of a magazine in Grand Bay, two or three miles to the westward,
    seemed as if the enemy intended to retreat and make a stand nearer to Port
    Louis. . . .