




                        PORT
                       LOUIS




                                       DOCKYARD

                           HOSPITAL'




                                         tower \C3 ys




                                                            BATTERY




                                                        BATTERY;:




                                          /PontQfi
                                             de
                                         ;Qrene/
                                                           Fort
                                                           Blanc




                        HARBOUR   ENTRANCE




                                                  I SEA MILE



                 404
                         THE    CAPTURE      OF   MAURITIUS

with him between 1,200 and 1,300 regular infantry. He had not been rein¬
forced and his regulars had dwindled to about 800. To these he could add
some 400 men from what had been the garrison of Bourbon, 50 artillerymen,
400 marines and 75 marine artillerymen. With his staff and 60-80 cavalry,
Decaen had perhaps 2,000 regular soldiers and marines.1 But of these a
fairly high proportion were needed for the seaward defences of Port Louis.
To counter-attack an enemy landing he would need to rely very largely
on the militia, which seems to have numbered about 3,000 men. As the
total European and Eurasian population numbered only 9,000 and free
coloured folk another 5,000, the militia can certainly never have mustered
10,000, a figure which has sometimes been given. There were, it is true,
some 80,000 slaves, of whom Decaen had once proposed to arm 4,000. But
this plan had been strongly opposed—with good reason—and nothing had
come of it. Much depended, therefore, on these 3,000 militia or those of
them within easy reach of where the landing took place. About this militia
force Keating had an opinion based partly on observation of the equivalent
body which had helped to defend Bourbon, partly on intelligence work
conducted from that island.
        The great mass of the inhabitants are Creoles, certainly allied to their
     mother country, but having existed so long without her protection under
     an intercourse carried on with great difficulty for many years, and now
     suffering from severe and cruel imposts, ruled with a military tyranny and
     their commerce annihilated, it cannot be expected they will be hearty in
     staking the remains of their property and their persons in the defence of a
     Government they are dissatisfied with, especially when by experience they
     know their persons and their property, their religion, and their customs will
     be respected, and protected by their enemy (as in Bourbon), with the
     additional and great inducements of a present market for their immense
     quantities of colonial products now lying in their warehouses. . . .2
                                                           (Keating to Castlereagh.)