

    It was as well that the Nisus did not arrive much sooner. As things
 were, Rowley’s squadron was feverishly re-equipping and the French
 frigates still mostly crippled. By October 15th Rowley’s frigates were ready
 for sea and Bertie shifted his flag to the Africaine and sailed with her, the
 Nisus, Boadicea (38), Nereide (late French Venus, 44), Ceylon (36) and
 Staunch, brig. The Otter, sloop, was sent back to England but the
 remaining ships appeared off Port Louis, somewhat to the French surprise.
 The squadron approached near enough to ascertain that six frigates and
 two sloops were in harbour—near enough, indeed, to draw the fire of
 the batteries and see the smoke ascending from the furnaces on Tonnelier
 Island where the French shot was being heated. The Admiral and General
 Abercromby then went on to Rodriguez in the Africaine, leaving Rowley
 to draw up plans for the landing, the actual conduct of which was to be
 entrusted to Beaver. With the Boadicea, Nisus and Nereide, Rowley went
 through the motions of blockading Port Louis by day, mainly as cover for
 an intensive reconnaissance at night. There can be no doubt that Rowley
 had long since chosen the area for the landing and now needed only to
 choose the actual beaches and anchorage. ‘The whole of the north coast,’
writes Mr. H. C. M. Austen,1 ‘had been carefully sounded by Commodore
 Rowley and Lieutenant Street (of the Staunch) with Lieutenant Blakiston
of the Madras Engineers and the masters of the Africaine and Boadicea.’
To this one might add that Captain Willoughby had also explored this
coastline, including Flat Island, and that credit must go to Willoughby and
others for eliminating other possibilities and so contributing to the final plan.
    The difficulty of landing on the Isle of France was due, primarily, to
the inhospitable rocks by which its coast is fringed. Careful survey had
revealed a breach in this natural defence at a point just opposite Coin de
Mire—the island which the English called the Gunner’s Quoin. Within
the passage was Mapou Bay, which had a good beach and which—unlike
the neighbouring Grand Bay—was undefended. This was carefully recon-
       1 H. C. M. Austen. Sea Fights and Corsairs of the Indian Ocean, Mauritius, 1935.
                                         398
                           THE    CAPTURE        OF   MAURITIUS

 noitred by parties of experts, the passage itself being buoyed on the eve
 of the landing. Soundings revealed a good anchorage within a mile of the
 shore and the anchorage off Flat Island was already known. Busy nights
 were spent with lead-line and compass, a cutter from the Nisus, with
 Lieutenant Bowler, being captured in the process. Those officers, mean¬
 while, who were less actively occupied, went in daylight to the islands
 and tried to shoot hares and curlews for the ward-room table. Days passed
 and patience dwindled, and it was not until November 24th that Rear-
 Admiral Bertie’s flag was seen.
    The delay was caused by the non-arrival of the Bengal and Cape
 divisions of transports. Rear-Admiral Drury had appeared with part of
 the East Indies squadron (see page 381) and had been sent away again,1
 but the Illustrious (74) was overdue and with her the troops from Bengal.
 Bertie waited at Rodriguez, hoping to concentrate his forces, but finally
 concluded that the season was too advanced to wait any longer. Abercromby
 agreed to make the attempt with the Madras and Bombay contingents alone
 and the fleet sailed from Roderiguez on November 22nd. The Bengal
 division came in sight at this juncture and brought the total number to
 sail to nearly seventy. The force now comprised the Illustrious (74),
 Cornwallis (44), Africaine (38), Boadicea (38), Nisus (38), Clorinde (38),
 Menelaus (38), Nereide (38), Phoebe (36), Doris (36), Cornelia (32), Psyche
 (32), Ceylon (32), and the sloops Hesper, Eclipse, Hecatey Actaeon and
 Staunch, together with numerous transports and auxiliaries. An Order of
 Battle in the Mauritius Archives gives the total number of troops, probably
 accurately, as 6,848, including marines serving ashore but excluding sailors.
The plan had been, no doubt, for a force of ten thousand men and this is the
strength which has sometimes been given. Bertie did not wait for his
slow-moving armada but went on ahead in the Africaine and, joining
Rowley, withdrew his squadron farther out to sea in order to lull the
enemy’s suspicions. That Decaen was deceived is more than doubtful.
What he really needed at this juncture was radar; and that, by some accounts,
was what, for all practical purposes, he had. For several inhabitants of
Mauritius claimed, at different times, the gift of second sight by which
they could detect ships at the distance of 90 or even 400 miles. Be that
as it may, the fleet kept away from the island for a few days, waiting for
the right weather conditions, and it was not until the 29th that it moved
in to the attack.