




                                     396
                                 CHAPTER XXII


           The Capture of Mauritius

T     ^he assembly of the forces from India and the Cape with the forces
      already in the vicinity of the French islands was no easy matter.
      And the time-table was further complicated by the fact that yet other
forces were coming from England; including, it would seem, the tonnage
in which some troops from the Cape were to embark. There also came
from England, and more rapidly, the frigate Nisus (38) commanded by
Captain Philip Beaver. This officer was another expert in combined
operations and especially chosen for this service. The Nisus, being newly-
built, made a fast passage out, leaving Plymouth on 22nd June, 1810,
reaching Madeira in eight days and sighting Table Bay on August 22nd.
At Capetown was Rear-Admiral Bertie, and what followed is best told
in Beaver’s own words:1
        I arrived at the Cape, on the 23rd of August, and the morning I went
     to pay my respects to Admiral Bertie, two officers came in with news of
     our having taken the Isle of Bourbon. This is good—and I have no doubt
     but its companion will quickly follow its fate. There is no man-of-war
     here besides ourselves and the Olympia cutter; so that I have hoisted
     the Admiral’s flag, and am to carry him to Mauritius, which is closely
     blockaded by his squadron. Troops will there meet us from India, and ere
     long another jewel will stud the crown of England. It is difficult to assign
     a reason why this measure has not been resorted to before, for the island has,
     for many years, nourished a vile nest of buccaneers against our Oriental
     commerce.

   Bertie was hoping for the ships to arrive in which the Cape contingent
could embark, but he lost patience, sent a hundred men of the 87th Regiment
on board the Nisus, and sailed in her on September 4th. His first desire
was to make contact with his blockading ships off Mauritius and he arrived
off that island, after meeting contrary winds, on October 2nd.
       We made the Isle of France on the 2nd instant, and hove to before the
     town, where our appearance seemed to produce considerable bustle along
  1 Capt. W. H. Smyth, R.N. The Life and Services of Captain Philip Beaver, London, 1829.

                                          397
                         WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

     the shores, and on board two frigates and a corvette in Port Louis. But to
     our utter astonishment, we saw nothing of our own vessels, though we
     continued cruizing off and on for a couple of days, without any attempt of
     the enemy to attack us. Lost in conjecture, we ran down to Bourbon to
     procure intelligence, and being baffled by light winds off St. Paul’s Bay,
     Commodore Rowley, with Colonel Keating, the governor of the island,
     came on board. Judge, if you can, what a damper we experienced, on hearing
     the bitter tidings of the loss of all our ships in an unsuccessful attack upon
     the anchorage of Port Sud Est. What a feather for France!