

        At half-past one [he wrote], I anchored to the eastward of bay Tortuse,
     and observing French colours flying, sent the first lieutenant, with a strong
     party, to take possession of the batteries; a service accomplished without
     any loss, as the enemy retreated with such precipitation, as to throw down
     the lighted matches without discharging the guns.

  1 See A Voyage to Terra Australis by Matthew Flinders, p. 490. In fact, Decaen was
acquitted by court martial and appointed commander-in-chief in Catalonia, with 30,000
troops. He had a success at Villafranca in 1813 and was appointed commander-in-chief in
Holland. He survived the restoration, rallied to Napoleon in 1815, and died of cholera in 1832.

                                             406
                      THE   CAPTURE       OF   MAURITIUS

   The Nisus was thus covering the army’s right flank on the eve of the
action which took place on December ist. The troops were still in position
short of the Tombeau River and did not advance until the following day¬
break. With a superiority, now obvious, in numbers, Abercromby out¬
flanked his opponent in orthodox fashion, sending a battalion of sepoys to
occupy Long Mountain and another column to seize the coastal batteries
covering Tombeau Bay and Baie aux Tortues. He then ordered a frontal
attack, before which the French militia broke and fled.

        December ist—At dawn of day [wrote Captain Beaver] I perceived a
     column of our troops near the works: they had been despatched to cover
     the right flank, by occupying them, but finding us already there, were
     enabled to rejoin the main body; and the communication being thus secured,
     I immediately sent a day’s provision for twelve thousand men. A cannonade
    soon after commenced from the enemy’s lines, on a hill a-breast the ship,
    as our soldiers advanced, which though pretty brisk for a time, totally
    ceased by half-past nine. I found that the advanced guard had had a sharp
    brush with the enemy, who were strongly posted, but were forced to retire,
    leaving two guns, some tumbrils, and a few wounded men behind them.
    The weather was uncommonly fine, but the troops complained of a grievous
    want of water.
        December 2nd—All our boats were employed in landing and transporting
    provisions for the army; and the seamen on shore were eminently useful
    in dragging the cannon over apparently unsurmountable obstacles [i.e. the
    Tombeau River, the bridge being demolished]. The General came on board
    and breakfasted with me, after having enjoyed a shave and a clean shirt:
   he was well satisfied with affairs on the whole, for the enemy had receded
   with each of our advances and the only stand they made scarcely merited
   the name of a skirmish. Between nine and ten o’clock, a flag of truce came
   out of Port Louis; and after much extravagant bravado and insolence on the
   part of Governor de Caen, the Isle of France was surrended by capitulation,
   on the 3rd. I wish I had been of greater consequence at this moment; the
   terms were rather demanded than supplicated, and are far too advantageous
   for such an undeserving and inferior garrison . . . they are actually allowed
   to march with their arms, their eagles, and fixed bayonets. Is not this too
   much? What can justify such concessions? ‘Oh’ cry out some people,
   ‘these honours are of no real importance; they are only trifles founded on
   opinion.’ But is it not to the influence of opinion that the French owe more
   of their conquests, than to physical strength? Will any one be found hardy
   enough to rise in the House of Commons, and move a vote of thanks on this
   occasion ?