

  As regards the date of sailing from Madras, it had nevertheless been left
to a dangerous period of the year. How narrowly the second convoy from
Madras was to escape disaster may be gathered from Beaver’s account of
his visit there shortly afterwards. He came to fetch specie for Mauritius (see
page 410) and arrived in a mood of self-congratulation at having taken the
degree-and-a-half channel (then little known) and so shortened his voyage
by nearly a thousand miles. In the event, however, he was glad not to have
made a still shorter passage.

       On the 14th of May the Nisus anchored in Madras roads, where the whole
    shore exhibited evidence of recent devastation, and the beach was literally
    strewed with the wrecks of every description of vessel ... it was stated
    that a storm of the severest description had commenced in the eastern quarter
    on the 2nd instant . . . angry blasts of wind, torrents of rain, and a peculiar
    rolling sea. . . . Large trees were torn up by the roots. . . . But in the road¬
    stead, the effect of this visitation exceeded all description: a hundred and
    twenty ships and vessels either bilged or foundered, and were all lost! It
    was providential that the expedition against Java had sailed two days before,
    or the whole armament, comprising the squadron of India, twelve Company’s
    cruisers and sixty transports with twelve thousand soldiers on board . . .
    [had been lost].

  Besides country craft, the vessels lost included the Dover, frigate, and
Chichester, store-ship. Prior, also there in the Nisus, writes:

        The horrors of the night are said to have been indescribable. Many of
     the native vessels . . . foundered at their anchors. . . . On shore, large trees
     were torn up by the roots, doors and window-shutters dashed with violence
     from their hinges, palings, sentry-boxes, every thing in short capable of being
     seized by the wind, overturned and carried away.1

  Regret, however, at the damage sustained was as nothing to the relief felt
that it was no worse. And the loss of life was less, it was found, than might
have been expected, considering that this was the worst storm experienced
at Madras since 1782.

  The fleet left Malacca in small, escorted divisions, round about June 17th.

     ... it was despatched [wrote Lord Minto] towards its destination in a number
     of small divisions, which sailed successively, each under charge of a frigate,
     and attended also by sloops of war or Company’s cruizers. The Modeste
     was not attached to any division, and, being sure of overtaking the earliest
     and swiftest, we remained at anchor till the whole had departed. The fleet
     consisted of 81 sail of all description. . . .
            1 J. Prior. A Visit to Madras . . . in the year 1811, London, 1821.
                                           414
                             THE    CONQUEST        OF   JAVA

         . . . The Modeste sailed from Malacca on June 18. We soon passed a great
      part of the fleet, and left them in the Straits of Singapore. . . . On the 29th
      anchored close to the island of Panambangan, which was the first rendezvous
      from Malacca. . . .