

       I am extremely happy to congratulate their Lordships upon the conquest
    of the valuable Island of Java and its Dependencies, wherein the evils
    adverted to are done away by the total fall of all the Enemy’s settlements in
    the East, and on taking possession of Macassar and Coupang on the Island
    of Timor the French Flag will no longer fly in the Eastern Seas.




                                       417                                      o
                            CHAPTER XXIV


               The End of the War

        '^'T'ith the capture of Java, the naval war in the East was at an
 \ V /end. Having no base anywhere near India, Napoleon gave up
   YVad idea of naval operations there.              From 1812, therefore, to
1815, the East Indies squadron, much reduced in strength, merely stood
guard against the French and the Americans, without actual conflict with
either. The first event was the arrival of the new commander-in-chief,
Vice-Admiral Sir Samuel Hood, K.B., who came within the limits of the
station in February and arrived at Madras on 5th April, 1812. Hood, the
younger brother of Viscount Hood and also of Lord Bridport, was an
extremely distinguished officer and far more senior than his predecessors
in this command had been on their arrival. Aged just fifty, he had been a
flag-officer since 1807 and a Vice-Admiral since 1811. His immediate
problem was what to do with Captain Broughton, whose broad pendant he
at first ordered to be struck. Later, Hood changed his mind and decided to
send Broughton to England, with pendant still flying:

    . . . under consideration of the very able services of Commodore Broughton,
    in the command of His Majesty’s Ships in India, since the death of the late
    Commander-in-Chief and judicious conduct therein.
                                                                 (Ad. 1/184.)

  But Hood then discovered that Broughton’s main object in going home
was to demand a court martial on Rear-Admiral Stopford for trespassing
on what was temporarily Broughton’s station. This made the Admiral alter
his plans afresh, thereby bringing upon himself the wrath of Broughton,
whose    ship, the Illustrious, he   took as   his    flagship. Hood   resented
Broughton’s ‘mode of application, dictating and even threatening’ and took
steps, after the commodore went, to guard himself against the expected
slander.

       I must entreat their Lordships’ support [he wrote on 1st July, 1812]
    at this distance when unable to reply to any representation he may chuse
    to make to their Lordships, and which from the tenor of his letters I have
    every reason to expect.
                                     418
                            THE   END     OF    THE   WAR

   It seems from other correspondence that Broughton was guilty of having41
 publickly made improper observation on my [i.e. Hood’s] conduct.’
Broughton, on the other hand, described himself as going home ‘a much
injured officer.’ His complaints did him no good, however, for he was
given no reward for his recent services and not employed again until 1815.
He never reached flag-rank and retired soon afterwards with a colonelcy of
marines by way of consolation.
   Once rid of Broughton, Hood reported to the Admiralty that much of
his squadron had still to be deployed off Java and that few ships were
available for service elsewhere.
                                            •