

   At Penang, Malacca1 and again at Panambangan the troops were landed in
the interests of health. From the latter place the Minto, schooner (Captain
Greig) was sent to reconnoitre uncharted seas towards the west coast of
Borneo and reported back to Panambangan before the bulk of the fleet
arrived there.

         Commodore Broughton [wrote Lord Minto] who is the most cautious
      navigator that ever wore a blue coat, was not satisfied to abide by Greig’s
      report, but ordered the Modeste to go ahead and reconnoitre the whole
      passage to the Rendezvous, thinking very properly that I had better be
      drowned than he. As I was entirely of the same opinion I accepted the service
      very thankfully. In reality I knew that George [i.e. Captain the Hon. G.
      Eliot] was much fitter to perform the duty than any other officer in the fleet
      and I thought it would be amusing to myself.

   The Modeste was in sight of Java on July 25th, the day on which news
came of Rear-Admiral Stopford’s approach. Stopford was commander-in¬
chief at the Cape in succession to Bertie. Hearing of Drury’s death and of
the Java expedition, he took the unusual step of quitting his station in
order to assume temporary command of another. Circumstances justified
him and Lord Minto wrote thankfully:

         The little Commodore’s brief hour of authority came to an end to the
      great relief of all in the fleet and army. There could not be a man less fit
      for the important situation into which chance had brought him. . . .

   In fact, however, it was under Broughton’s command that the landing
took place on August 4th. Chillingehing, the place chosen, is about twelve
miles east of Batavia, and was undefended. The credit for the swiftness of
the landing went to Captain Cole of the Caroline, who pushed the leading
troops on shore before the Dutch patrols could arrive on the scene. In
point of fact, the new Governor-General, Jansens, had collected his forces at
Meester-Cornelis, an inland camp, where they were in no position to
counter-attack the coast. The whole army was ashore by the evening of the
4th, and Batavia surrendered on the 8th. It was not until the following day
   1 Minto’s reception at Malacca was described by a Malay eye-witness, Abdullah, as follows:
‘And all the great men who were there to welcome him stood a long way off; and not one of
them dared to offer his hand, they only raised their hats and perspired. F. Swettenham.
British Malaya.

                                            415
                          WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN       SEAS

that Rear-Admiral Stopford arrived in the Scipion (74) and superseded
Broughton, to the latter’s speechless indignation. The fleet now comprised
4 ships of the line, 14 frigates and 7 slotfps, with 8 of the Company’s cruisers
under Commodore John Hayes. The only naval opposition might have
come from the 2 French frigates Nymphe (40) and Meduse (40), which
brought General Jansens to Java. These fled, however (not unreasonably)
from Sourabaya, and reached France safely. Jansens was defeated on August
25th but did not finally surrender until September 18th. Before then, on
the 15th, Stopford sailed for Sourabaya, leaving Broughton in the Illus¬
trious (74) off Samarang, to co-operate with the General, Sir Samuel Auch-
muty. Marines and seamen were serving ashore, some of the latter as
(of all things) horse artillery and known as the Marine Light Dragoons.1
   The surrender of Java was reported to the Admiralty by Commodore
Broughton on the 19th, in words which were probably very characteristic.
He enclosed a copy of the terms of capitulation, explaining that they had
been agreed