

       Had the Admiral fired one of the flagship’s thirty-two pounders, double
    shotted, down my throat, he could not have demolished more completely
    my bodily frame work than this fatal announcement shattered to pieces
    the gilded crockery-ware of my fondest hopes. ... As I recovered my
    scattered senses, however, I recollect gazing at the anchorage from the open
    window of the Admiralty House, near which we stood. The flag-ship then
    lay just off Osnaburg Point, with her ensign . . . dropped, in the calm, so
    perpendicularly from the gaff-end, that it looked like a rope more than a
    flag, while its reflection, as well as that of the ship herself, with every mast,
    yard, and line of the rigging, seemed, as it were, engraved on the surface
    of the tranquil pool, as distinctly as if another vessel had actually been
    inverted and placed beneath. I have seldom witnessed so complete a calm. The
                                       420
                               THE    END    OF     THE   WAR

        sea-breeze . . . had not as yet found its way into the recesses of the inner
        harbour, which, take it all in all, is one of the snuggest and most beautiful
        coves in the world. And such is the commodious nature of this admirable
        port, that even the Illustrious, though a large 74-gun ship, rode at anchor
        in perfect security, within a few yards of the beach, which ^t that spot is
        quite steep to, and is wooded down to the very edge of the water. . . .

   The pity is that Hall’s descriptive powers were not earlier applied to the
East Indies. For little was now happening there, and little likely to happen.
It is true that the news came on 4th January, 1813, of the war with the
United States—news which reached Muscat from Frankfort. It is true, also,
that     this war soon       led to the appearance of the Boston privateers
Hyder Ali (12) and Jacob Jones (20). The former was captured off the
Nicobars in May 1814. The Syren (18) never arrived, having been taken off
the Cape. But these were small fry and created less excitement than the
launch of the teak-built Cornwallis (74) at Bombay, first of a series to be
built of that excellent wood; the Cornwallis herself being rather delayed in
completion because of the capture of the Java in which her copper sheathing
was being brought from England.1 Sir Samuel Hood was at Bombay by the
end of 1813, and then spent the summer of 1814 in a cruise to the eastward.
With the Minden (74) he visited Acheen, Penang and Pontiana, and was back
at Madras that autumn. Unfortunately, Hood paid little attention to the
dangers of the climate and a visit he now paid to what had been Tippoo
Sultan’s palace at Seringapatam brought on an attack of malaria. He
returned to Madras and died there on 24th December, 1814. During that
last three days’ illness he sent for his flag-lieutenant and secretary, and
said:

          It will be too hard, Walcott, to die in this cursed place; but should I
        go off, let nothing deter you from going home and accounting to the
        Admiralty for my command of the East India Station.