

 Decaen might actually have haggled still more on December 2nd had
                                    407
                         WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

not the long-expected Cape Division arrived on that day with another two
thousand troops on board. These, with sailors ashore, would bring the
English total to nearly ten thousand, representing an overwhelming
superiority.   If Major-General Warde and         Commodore       Rowley were
insufficiently brutal in negotiation, as Beaver considered, it was not from,
lack of strength but lack of time. Granted that the hurricane season at
Mauritius is from January to March, it is also noteworthy that hurricanes
also happen there in December. This fact would not be overlooked in
1810, as a hurricane in 1808 had begun as early as November 21st, causing
the loss of three Indiamen off Rodriguez. Those to be stationed at Mauritius
for any length of time wanted to enter the harbour. Others were anxious to
leave the area before worse befell, or else were due back at Madras to take
part in the expedition to Java. The result was that, Bertie keeping no very
strict control, all the ships entered Port Louis. Beaver was contemptuous,
thinking that they would be safer at sea.

       Early on the 6th [he wrote], I ran down off the Port, where we anchored
     in eleven fathoms, and made the signal for a pilot to take us in. Every ship,
     whether man of war, or transport, without order or regularity, seems
     determined to force inside, and the mouth of the harbour is completely
     blocked up by shipping of all sorts and sizes; some of which, as might be
     expected, are on shore. Every kind of mooring is snapped up, whether
     good or bad, adequate or inadequate for the seizer. The four French frigates,
     which were moored for defence across the entrance, are still suffered to
     remain in the same station: such confusion, such gross neglect I never
     before witnessed.


  The Nisus was warped into harbour on the 7th and found herself moored
among 10 other men-of-war, 4 of the East India Company’s cruisers,
numerous transports, 6 captured frigates, 2 captured corvettes and 30
prizes. ‘If one ship should catch fire,’ Captain Beaver commented gloomily,
‘it is most probable that the whole fleet would be destroyed, and [he added
more cheerfully] the town also.’ He was left at Port Louis as Commodore
when Admiral Bertie sailed on the 8th.
   The first significant event of Beaver’s command at Mauritius was the
appearance on 5th January, 1811, of a strange sail. She was decoyed almost
into Port Louis by French colours and boarded smartly enough to secure
the dispatches she carried for Decaen. Besides signifying to Decaen his
recall, now unnecessary, these dispatches informed him that three French
frigates were following a fortnight later with troops and supplies. Beaver
accordingly sent to sea some of the ships that were with him—the Phoebe
                                          408
THE   CAPTURE   OF   MAURITIUS