

     without reference to me the Senior Naval Officer on the spot, or the Honble
     Rear-Admiral Stopford. ... In a great conjunct expedition of this nature
     I though it my duty to represent the same to Lieut. General Sir Samuel
     Auchmuty. . . .
                                                                         (Adm. 1/184.)

   Broughton was restored to his command by the departure of Stopford
and reported, on October 4th, on the state of the Dutch defences.

        In my visit to the Port of Gressie and Sourabaya I remarked that since
     the destruction of the Enemys Ships by Sir Edward Pellew, they had erected
     the strong fortress of Fort Louis to prevent ships entering the Port, and had
     sunk fourteen vessels to obstruct the passage, but they appear to have all
     drifted away, and except one large ship, do not impede the passage.
        The Entrance to the river of Sourabaya is strongly protected by two
     heavy Batteries of twenty-seven and seven guns. . . .
        The establishment of Grissie has no force, not even a battery, neither
     is there at Sourabaya except at the Pier Heads.
        As to Batavia there are no works of any kind for its protection or the
     canal, except an old ruinous fort without a gun, and the island of Onrust
     with the Arsenal etc. was destroyed by Captn. Tucker in the Dover near
     two years since, nor is there the remains of defence existing in any part of
     the Bay. . . .

  1 For a detailed account of this expedition see English Expeditions to the Dutch East Indies
during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. S. G. Rainbow. Unpublished thesis, University
of London, 1933.

                                            416
plate xi. Admiral Sir Nesbit Josiah Willoughby (1777-1849), called
‘The Immortal,’ from the oil painting by Thomas Barber at Birdsall
                          House, Malton
plate xii. Launch for landing troops, from a model in the Science Museum
                        THE    CONQUEST       OF   JAVA

  Batavia was indeed little fortified but one defence it still retained, as
Broughton ended by admitting.

      I am sorry to inform their Lordships that the Squadron is sickly, from
    the nature of the climate and its pernicious effects, which I always dreaded,
    has been severely felt by the seamen and marines that have landed, par¬
    ticularly the latter. We have in the Illustrious buried 31 men, and have now
    120 in the Sick Report. I hope a change of station will benefit her crew.

  In fact, the Illustrious lost 71 men before she left Java, and the squadron
as a whole lost 221, including 9 officers. Nor did these losses end when
Broughton was back at Madras, for he left 7 frigates and 2 sloops to guard
Java and the Straits of Sunda ‘to intercept any force the enemy may send
out from Europe,’ and these were still there in March 1812. By then the
squadron had dwindled to a total of 1 74-gun ship, 10 frigates, 5 sloops,
1 hospital ship at Penang and the sheer hulk at Bombay. Broughton was
not to remain commander-in-chief for long but the last word on the Java
campaign may properly be his, and extracted from his letter of 4th October,
1811. (Adm. 1/184.)