

        . . . But to keep up this force [off Java] with a distribution of the Ships
     to watch the extensive coast of this Country, I fear we shall not have a
     Squadron equal thereto, and it will be necessary always to keep a centrical
     Force prepared in case of an Enemy’s Squadron making its appearance in
     India, and thereby prevent that hazard to the Trade which might otherwise
     be occasioned.
                                                                        (Ad. 1/184.)
  The Admiralty were unimpressed, however, by this remote possibility
and wanted frigates and sloops to guard against American cruisers. They
presently ordered home the frigates Doris, Modeste, Bucephalus and Cor¬
nelia, the sloops Procris, Barracouta and Samarang. It was indeed high
time that some of these ships went home. They returned, many of them,
from Java in August 1812, with crews ‘much debilitated from the effects of
Java Fever and Dysentery.’ But, apart from that, the question had already
been raised as to whether ships should be allowed to remain indefinitely on
a foreign station. It was Lord Cochrane who, some years previously, pro¬
duced in Parliament a list of ships in the East Indies and pointed out that
       . . . The Centurion had been there eleven years, the Rattlesnake fourteen
    years, came home the other day, with only one man of the first crew—the
    Fox frigate, under the command of his brother, had been there fifteen years
    —the Sceptre eight years—the Albatross twelve, etc. Not one farthing of pay
    had been given all that period to all those men. He had made a calculation
    on the Fox frigate, and supposing only one hundred of the men returned,
    there would be due to the crew £25,000, not including the officers. What
    became of these sums all the while?1
  What, indeed? By 1812 most of these ships had returned home but
others, like the Sir Francis Drake (32), Piemontaise (38) and Phaeton (38)
had been there a considerable time. As for the seamen, who could be paid
only at a home port, their lot was admittedly hard.
   1 Thomas, Earl of Dundonald. The Autobiography of a Seaman, London, 1861, p. 384.

                                         419
                       WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN      SEAS

  Sir Samuel Hood’s immediate interest, however, was in the development
of the port of Trincomalee, which he (like Drury) wanted to make the
principal naval base and dockyard; one argument for which being that it
lay in a Crown Colony, not in the territory of the East India Company.
Hood went there in the autumn of 1812, ordered the harbour, the town,
Nicholson’s Cove and the surrounding country to be charted and mapped,
and began to make plans for the arsenal he hoped to establish. A principal
motive was economy, Hood having already, it is said, effected a 30 per cent
saving on victualling and other expenses. He hoped, no doubt, for still
greater efficiency in a naval establishment in Ceylon. Matters were, how¬
ever, to be held up in April 1813, by an epidemic which carried off a quarter
of the four thousand native inhabitants and nearly a hundred of the gar¬
rison. But his stay there is memorable also for the fact that the Illustrious
was there joined by Lieutenant Basil Hall. This event was not important in
itself, but Hall was afterwards to write those Fragments of Voyages and
Travels, from which we gain a good idea of life in the East Indies Squadron
in those last and uneventful years of the war. From them also we learn a
great deal about Hood, as also about Hall himself.
  Hall came out as a junior lieutenant in the Volage, which sailed from
Spithead on 25th March, 1812, and carried as passenger Sir Evan Nepean,
the former Secretary of the Admiralty, then recently appointed governor
of Bombay. With the Volage went the Princess Caroline (74), and the
Theban frigate, with six East Indiamen bound for China. Having parted
with the Indiamen, the Volage came into Bombay on August 12th, refitted
there and then sailed for Trincomalee. There Hall was transferred to the
flagship as fifth lieutenant, and in line, he hoped, for (eventual) promotion.
The Admiral himself was living ashore and there broke it to Hall that his
name was not on the Admiralty List for promotion.