

                                          412
                         THE   CONQUEST    OF   JAVA

he could not as easily prevent Lord Minto from guessing what his plans
were likely to be. And to see Java in French hands was to the Governor-
General of India an unpleasing spectacle, even with no French men-of-war
actually based there. Pellew’s raids had shown that Java was vulnerable and
Minto now intended nothing short of conquest. ‘I have still,’ he wrote,
‘one object more . . . which will fill up the whole scheme of my warlike
purposes, and which will purge the Eastern side of the globe of every
hostile or rival European establishment.’ To this purpose he had turned
even before the good news had come from the lie de France.
   As at Mauritius, however, the eventual conquest was preceded by opera¬
tions which began the year before. Amboyna, captured in the previous war
and afterwards restored, was taken again- in 1810 by Captain Edward
Tucker with the Dover (38), the Cornwallis (44) and Samarang (18), and
Banda fell to Captain Christopher Cole with the Caroline (36), Piemontaise
(38) and Barracouta (18). Cole’s exploit was the more remarkable of the
two and it was he, by Drury’s orders, who organized the leading division,
of the fleet destined to capture Java in 1811. That division was at Penang
on May 18th. A second division from Madras, sailing with the Phaeton
shortly after the first, foregathered with it at Penang and then went on in
company with Cole to Malacca, where another division appeared from
Bengal. As Drury had since died, the latter’s contingent was led by Com¬
modore W. R. Broughton of the Illustrious (74). The military commander-
in-chief was Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, and his force com¬
prised nearly twelve thousand men. Vessels of the East India Company’s
marine were present under Commodore John Hayes, and Captain Sayer,
with the Leda (36), Minden (74) and Procris (18), was already off Java,
making feint attacks and preventing any Dutch reconnaissance.
   About this expedition the most remarkable feature was the presence of
the Governor-General of India in the Modeste frigate, commanded by his
son. This cannot be deemed, unfortunately, an early example of a supreme
commander being placed over naval and military forces. He might, had he
chosen, have assumed command of the army, but actually did no more
than advise and finally arrange for the civil government of Java. He gave
various good reasons for going but admitted what was probably the real
one in a letter to his wife which reads ‘you will easily conceive what a
gratifying break this kind of adventure must make in the monotony of my
not less laborious life at Fort William.’ Apart from this, however, Minto
performed a great service by quietly insisting that the expedition should
proceed despite Drury’s dictum that a fleet which left Madras after March
1 st could never reach Java at all.
                                      4D
                        WAR     IN   THE    EASTERN        SEAS