




            409
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

(36), Galatea (36) and Racehorse (18)—hoping to lure the French frigates
into the harbour mouth and then have this detachment cut off their retreat.
The Nisus and Astrea (36) remained in port but ready to sail. Unfortu¬
nately, the three French frigates, Renommee (40), Clorinde (40) and Nereide
(40) were delayed in sailing and did not leave Brest until 2nd February nor
arrive off the Mauritius until May 6th. By then Beaver, after surviving a
hurricane on March 18th-19th—faithful to his principles he put to sea to
meet it, with the Astrea in company—had gone with the Nisus on April 4th,
first to the Seychelles Islands to occupy them and, second, to Madras, to
fetch specie for the bankrupt colony which England had now acquired.
Captain Schomberg of the Astrea took his place and was in Port Louis
when the French at last arrived. The trap did not work because the French
Commodore approached Grand Port, not Port Louis, and did that at night.
Nor could the two frigates do much against their heavier opponents until
the Astrea joined them.
   But the troop-laden French ships, if initially saved by their caution,
were in urgent need of water. They attempted to land for the purpose on
Bourbon but were foiled by the surf. When they sailed again from there,
Schomberg had no difficulty therefore in guessing their destination. The
nearest fresh water was in Madagascar and to Tamatave he accordingly
followed them, locating his quarry on May 20th. Despite an additional
vessel, as compared with the French, Schomberg’s squadron was much the
weaker. Nevertheless, in the extremely gallant action which followed,
Schomberg captured the Nereide and Renommee', a feat made possible by the
misconduct of the Clorinde, which gave little help in the action and even¬
tually fled, watering at the Seychelles and finally reaching Brest. Her com¬
mander, Captain St. Cricq, was court martialled, dismissed the service,
expelled from the Legion of Honour and sentenced to three years’ imprison¬
ment. On his passage to Elba in the Undaunted Napoleon confided to
 Captain Ussher that he had been dissatisfied with this sentence. ‘I did my
utmost,’ he explained, ‘to have St. Cricq shot, but he was tried by French
naval officers. . . .’ So well did Napoleon remember the affair that, finding
on his return to France that St. Cricq had been released and reinstated by
Louis XVIII, he sent him back to prison for the period of the hundred days.
    Captain Beaver returned to Port Louis, bringing three lacs of pagodas,
on June 27th, to find that this last belated French effort had been faithfully
dealt with in his absence. He refitted his battered squadron as well as he
could, being ‘without a stick or a fathom of rope . . . nor a morsel of junk’
and on July 2nd sailed with three of his ships, the Nisus, President and
Phoebe for Java. This was on orders from the Cape (where Bertie had been
                                       410
                     THE   CAPTURE    OF   MAURITIUS