

succeeded by Admiral Stopford). He sighted Australia on August 6th—
‘without a vestige of tree or shrub of any kind, being all of a quaker-like
drab colour, except when broken by dingy cliffs’—and noted that ‘a more
barren, uninviting land I never beheld.’ He ran on the 13th through the
Straits of Bali ‘all my charts of which resemble [it] just as much as they do
the Sea of Marmora, and no more,’ and reached Batavia on the 20th. The
city had fallen on the 9th but Admiral Stopford was able to make good use
of his services in attacking Cheribon and Samarang. His comments were
fairly acid to the end and he died at the Cape in 1812 of enteritis; in other
words, of inflammatory constipation.
                                  CHAPTER XXIII


                The Conquest of Java
                              *    -—■    -




'X'VW'T'hen Lord Minto heard of the fall of Mauritius at Madras on
  \ Y /25th January, 1811, he described it in a letter as a service ‘the
    VVmost important as it is universally considered here, and as in
truth I believe it to be, that could be rendered to the East India Company
and the nation in the East.’ This event should properly have deprived the
French of their only naval base east of the Cape. It did not do that, unfor¬
tunately, because it had been preceded by events in Europe which placed
the Netherlands and the Dutch overseas possessions in the power of France.
Under stricter French control, the colony of Java had been forced to accept
a French governor, who could make it a fresh naval base, even more
strategically placed than Port Louis had been and protected by diseases as
well as by navigational hazards. Whereas the lie de France surrendered on
3rd December, 1810, two French frigates sailed from Nantes on the 28th,
carrying General Jansen, destined to succeed Daendels as Governor-
General of Java. These were the Meduse and Nymphe, and the Sappho
corvette sailed from Bordeaux at much the same time with the object of
bringing Daendels back to France. These vessels were dispatched in ignor¬
ance of what had happened at Mauritius—and indeed three frigates were, as
we have seen, sent to carry aid there. They show, however, that Napoleon
was well aware of Batavia’s importance, whether as subsidiary or alternative
to Mauritius, and that use would soon be made of it. We know, moreover,
that Bouvet, after Decaen’s capitulation, and after returning to France,
petitioned Napoleon for leave to return to the Indian Ocean with an 80-gun
ship. This plan, reminiscent of Linois, was rejected. He was offered instead
two frigates and a corvette with which to operate from Batavia, and he
would undoubtedly have gone there had not news arrived of that city’s
                                                          ,
fall.1 We know, furthermore, that the Renommee Clorinde and Nereide (see
page 410) which sailed for Mauritius in February 1811 had Batavia as what
James calls their ‘succedaneous destination.’
   While Napoleon could thus make plans for an effective use of Batavia,
   1 M. E. Fabre. La Guerre Maritime dans I’Inde sous le Consulat et VEmpire, Paris, 1883,
p. 104.