

   These were almost his last words and in January 1815, Basil Hall was
writing his obituary for the Bombay Courier:

           Sir Samuel Hood possessed in a peculiar degree the qualifications which
        form a great commander: to the calmest and most accurate judgment, he
        added a presence of mind and rapidity of perception, under all changes of
        situation, that enabled him to turn every event, which arose even out of
        unforeseen difficulties and dangers, to the purpose he had in view. In common

  1 The Java also carried General Hislop, governor of Bombay, together with his staff and
some naval officers and men on their way to join the East Indies Squadron. (See Naval Chronicle,
Vol. 29, p. 242; Vol. 31, p. 59.)

                                              421
                           WAR    IN   THE     EASTERN    SEAS

     with Nelson he was anxious and impatient where there remained a doubt
     that the foe could be grappled with; butywhen the battle once began, his
     matchless intrepidity, his coolness, and the precision with which all his
     orders were given, diffused a confidence that was almost uniformly attended
     by victory.
        He was intimately versed in astronomy, as far, at least, as it is connected
     with navigation. In geography, ship-building, and fortification, and in many
     branches of mechanical philosophy, he was also well skilled. He studied,
     without exception, the languages, and, as far as possible, the laws and
     customs, of every country he visited. . . .

  Although Hood had opportunity for exploration and for learning Malay,
his last command gave little scope for his intrepidity and coolness in battle.
The appearance of these few American privateers, however, gave fresh
grounds for relief that Mauritius was now in British hands for there were
many American seamen familiar with the Eastern Seas who would gladly
have made it their base of operations. As things stood, the Indian Ocean,
tempting as it might be as a cruising ground, represented almost the
extreme limit of a privateer’s radius of action. The United States frigate
President was under orders to sail for the East Indies when she was captured
off Sandy Hook on 15th January, 1815. War came nearer, however, to India
when two American sloops, the Peacock and Hornet (20), sailed for the
East in January. They were chased off the Cape by the Cornwallis (74),
first ship of the line to be built in India, and the Hornet escaped only by
jettisoning her guns, and so could do no more than return home. The
Peacock sailed on alone and, on June 30th, in the Straits of Sunda,
encountered the East India Company’s sloop Nautilus (14). Peace had
already been made but the commander of the Peacock affected ignorance
and attacked the Nautilus, continuing to fire until she struck. It was a
singularly pointless aggression, the result perhaps of the cruise threatening
otherwise to end so tamely, and gained nothing but needless bloodshed.
With these last shots, fired actually in time of peace, the war in the Eastern
Seas can be said to have finished.1