

                                    434
                              APPENDICES

disadvantage, not fetch or carry tales, but always speak the truth without
the least prevarication, tho’ tis not necessary or prudent always to speak the
whole truth. Be as little absent from your Ship as possible and keep a very
economical table, giving your Officers good white wine, only having a little
choice Madeira or Claret for extraordinary visitants. Follow the example of
your most economical brother officers in these matters, without becoming
sordid, or niggardly.
     Exercise your Crew frequently, at great guns and small arms, reefing and
 furling sails, and (what is too much neglected) heaving up the anchor,
 catting, fishing them. The more actively they are employed the less time they
 have to employ on evil and undutiful and immoral subjects, but never do
 any work on Sundays, if it can be avoided.
    Avoid all profane cursing and swearing and all obscene expressions,
 particularly conversation at table, for a man is certainly the worse for having
 listened to or read any thing of that nature, and will one time or other have
 reason to repent for his indiscretion in that way. Alas: 'tis too much we are
 obliged to hear!—I leave it to Lady William Bentinck’s good counsel to
dissuade you from marrying too early—some deference is certainly due to
your good Father’s advice. As I am persuaded Her Ladyship has said every
 thing to you on the subject that good sense can suggest, I forbear saying any
thing more to you on the subject. But continue to be of the opinion that
marriage is a religious moral obligation, and ought to be entered into early
in life. The precise time must be left to every one’s discretion and the laws
and customs of his native country. With reference to the disposal of my
estate, I have already given you a hint of what I may do, but remember the
great uncertainty of all riches, and the weakness of the Human Mind.
    Few of our profession have passed through it under more unpleasant
circumstances that I have done, but the goodness of God here pre-eminently
distinguished me through life, and particularly during the last ten years of
it, which I have ever cheerfully acknowledged but have not made the
return I ought to have done. This I speak from melancholy conviction and
not from any affectation.

               When all thy Mercies, O my God
                 My rising soul surveys
               Transported with the view I am lost
                 In wonder, love and praise.

Yet how shall words, etc., etc., vide: Spectator, Volume VII.
  I hope Lady William was perfectly satisfied with your kind treatment on
board the Caroline. I thought you parted too soon and was concerned the
next day I had not stopped you. We passed Trincomaly 30 leagues to the
East of it withal making a single trip. If I don’t forget shall send you a few
books for your instruction in Religion and the knowledge of your pro-

                                   435
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS