

    fession. You should be very attentive in the improving yourself in the
    Arithmetical Knowledge of it, such as the Curves of Chase to come up with
    enemy with the least possible loss of time. And buy Clark on Naval Tactics.
    This being the 3rd April, our last ten days have not been very favourable to
    our progress.
       I pray God to bless you and make you a wise Captain and an able Com¬
    mander and give you good success. I rec’d your letter of the 10th ultimo—
    Hoseason will tell yoff my sentiments upon it.
                                I remain, my dear nephew,
                                      Your affectionate uncle and very humble
                                            servant,
                                               Peter Rainier.

   This letter of advice is typical of the period as well as typical of the
writer. In one respect at least the nephew was evidently to follow the
precept rather than the example of his uncle. For, despite his remarks on
early marriage, the Admiral was (and died) a bachelor.




                                     436
                                APPENDIX F

                    Sir Edward Pellew's General Orders
                            i




                                           His Majesty’s Ship Culloden,
                                                Bombay Harbour,
                                                             19th March, 1805.
Memo.

   The Ships Comprising the Squadron under Rear Admiral Sir Edward
Pellew are as far as circumstances will permit to be kept in a State of con¬
stant readiness for Sea and Action and every opportunity is to be embraced
by their Commanders for completing their Water, Provisions and neces¬
saries up to four months at least without waiting for any particular direc¬
tions on that Head, whenever they go into Port.
   The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having thought proper to
increase the allowance of Necessary Money to the Pursers of the Fleet, the
respective Captains are called upon to be particularly careful to keep their
Ships well supplied with Coals, Wood and Candles, at least equal to the
time for which their Bills are drawn and they are on no account to sign
Necessary Bills until it has been ascertained upon full enquiry that the
whole amount was actually laid out, and the articles absolutely received on
board. The Commander in Chief recommends particular attention to the
expenditure of necessaries and suggests the propriety of the respective
Captains establishing the daily expense of each article upon the most frugal
plan, a return always to be made on the back of the Weekly Accounts as
under:


                         Weekly expence of necessaries


   Coals in Bush.     Candles, Pounds       Oil in Gallons      Wood pr Cwt.



   The Commander in Chief is instructed by the Lords Commissioners of
the Admiralty to cause the strictest frugality to be observed in the Expendi¬
ture of the Public Stores, not only on account of the very high price Naval
Stores bear in this Country but also on account of the great difficulty of
procuring them in sufficient Quantity for the Fleet on home Service. Under
                                     437
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN    SEAS