

C. Rathbone Low, c. 1890, Vol. II, pp. 161-163. In a contribution to the
United Service Journal of 1839, entitled ‘Leaves from my Log Book (p. 5°7)
he is described as:

    ... an immense, corpulent man, seated in a commodious arm-chair that ran
    upon gun-trucks; it strongly reminded me of Neptune’s car, and certainly
    the old gentleman who sat in it was no bad personification of the sea god
    himself. . . .

  The oil painting by Devis, reproduced as frontispiece to this book, was
probably painted after his return from India in 1805. More revealing than
any painting, however, is the letter he wrote to his nephew, Peter Rainier,
on his promotion to command the Caroline in 1805. As one of the few of
his private letters known to exist, it is here reproduced in full. The reference
in the first sentence is to the wife of Lord William Bentinck and the reference
in the last sentence to Hoseason, the Admiral’s former secretary, later the
friend and adviser of Sir Edward Pellew.
                                               TRIDENT at Sea,
                                                        2nd April 1805.
     My dear Nephew,
        I hope you will have had the good sense to avail your self of every advan¬
     tage from Lady William’s kind partiality towards you, in the improvement
     of your manners and address, and in engaging and recommending your self
     to the notice and attention of the ladies as the only means of softening the
     austerity of a clownish awkwardness on first being introduced into their
     company, which Young Gentlemen of our profession are so particularly
     liable to than any others owing to their being so often and so long kept from
     their enlivening society. I don’t ever recollect having seen you dance, if
     you have not as yet learnt that necessary accomplishment, I would recom¬
     ment you to apply your leisure moments to acquire it and endeavour to
     excel in it, never mind from whom unless you have an option left you. You
      may both learn and improve in it by dancing with the young officers on the
      Quarterdeck. How many that have nevertheless been thought good dancers
      never had any other school!
         To your instructions from Lady William add the perusal of Chesterfield’s
      letters, the Spectator and other popular authors of good fame, for ’tis only
      by such kind of reading and keeping good company that you can acquire a
      competent knowledge of the English Language and a facility of expressing
      yourself with propriety in writing and in conversation. This is real education,
      which, like repentance, is the work of our life’s time. What we learn at
      Schools in our younger years hardly deserves the name. But above every
      other consideration, except what regards Religion and Virtue, let the attain¬
      ment of the knowledge of your duty in the distinguished situation you hold

                                         432
                                 APPENDICES