

most occupy your time and attention: a situation which, as I have often told
you, the First Nobleman in the land may envy for his son. Begin with the
one idea that your professional attainments have hitherto been very trifling
thro’ want of that experience which can only be acquired by length of servi¬
tude and opportunity and may even then be wanting. The proper preparation
of mind in the first stage of progress in any Art or Science consists in being
duly sensible of our ignorance in it, that we know nothing yet as we ought to
know. Presumption is the reverse of this in pretending to a knowledge we
have no claim to from experience, and it is therefore a certain barrier to
improvement. This remark is no more applicable to you than any other
young man in your situation but certainly is not less so, you may be assured.
    Eagerly embrace every opportunity of adding to your fund of knowledge
which, reduced to practice at every opportunity, becomes experience. A very
 prominent and important object of your station and dignity is the command
of men which affords a large scope for the display of your abilities of mind
as well as the duties of humanity and justice, and moreover opens to you a
great insight into human nature, tho’ but too often into its most debased
state. To speak practically, I advise you frequently to muster the crew in
order to become familiar to their tempers, their manners and dispositions
from your own knowledge and not the information of your Officers, many
of whom are not very liberal in their ideas, or are but too often influenced in
their description of them to you by prejudices and private animosities and
resentments. Consider your self at all times their advocate when any com¬
 plaint is brought against them, and never proceed to punishment but on the
fullest conviction by proper evidence and never by simple hearsay unless
on very extraordinary atrocities, and then the evidence should at least
amount to strong presumption of the crime being committed. A like conduct
should be your rule when a member of a Court-Martial, only, being then
under a most solemn oath, you should be proportionally more cautious in
forming your opinion for a sentence.
   Be attentive to all their complaints and relieve their little wants when it is
in your power. Few are their rights but never suffer them to be infringed by
yourself or those under you. Abstain most religiously from ever reviling
them with foul or abusive language, or suffer your officers to do so; ’tis
highly unbecoming to your character and theirs, as Officers, as Gentlemen,
and as Christians. Discourage by every means allowed you and by your own
virtuous example all those vices they are principally addicted to, and when
obliged to punish them let them see the object is the Vice and not the Man,
for the reformation of the whole, and to establish that state of discipline your
duty calls upon you for. Never punish with too much severity. When an
offender becomes incorrigible by the allowed measure of punishment, have
recourse to a Court-Martial were it even for drunkeness only. I believe an
example now and then of that kind would be found to be highly useful, and