




                                                                                                                    -S ^
                                                                                                          u          £« & H
                                                                                     p                    G         3 3 3
                                                                                      in                  o         O o O
                                                                                     u                Uh            ^ [J-, Uh


                                                                                                                                      428
                              APPENDIX D


                          Officers of the China Fleet


  It would seem that the China fleet of 1804 contained rather more
tactical skill and operational experience than might be expected. James
Farquharson, who commanded the Alfred, had been with the other China
ships which deceived Sercey in 1797. He would have thought of using
the blue ensign even if it had occurred to no one else. The idea originally
came, according to Biden, from Sir Richard Strachan. Dance himself had
had no more exhilarating experience than being captured in 1780 but
Timmins, his adviser at Pulo-Aur and his former third officer, had seen
service. To quote Biden:

       Captain Timins had served in the navy; he was a midshipman in the
    Experiment, Captain Sir James Wallace, when she captured the famed
    Belle Poule after a most desperate night action. . . . Mr. Timins was also
    present at the arduous and well contested battle of the Dogger Bank, in
    the Preston, of 50 guns; he served, during this severe engagement, as aide-
    de-camp to Captain Graeme. . . .

  Timmins had several brothers, his eldest being present as a marine officer
at Trafalgar and retiring as colonel. Two others were in the Navy, one
being a lieutenant at the Battle of Copenhagen. John Timmins himself
had been a lieutenant in the Indefatigable, and it was perhaps because of
this family background that the Royal George became so smart a ship.
Nisbet, the chief mate, had been acting-lieutenant in the Monarca (64),
serving under Hughes against Suffren. Hay, the second mate, had seen
active service in the H.C.S. Pigot in 1794. Biden himself, whom Timmins
had taken as an orphan from Greenwich Hospital School, had been acting-
midshipman under his patron in the Indefatigable. As for the Royal George
herself, if not equipped for war in 1804, she was certainly capable of being
so armed. She had carried a Letter of Marque in 1798 (when a mate who
assaulted the captain was sentenced by court martial to            two years’
imprisonment in the Marshalsea and was lucky to escape the death
penalty). She was actually armed with sixty-three guns in 1808 and manned
by 500 men. Biden is emphatic that Linois could not have been deceived—
‘Surely he could tell, at noon-day, whether the Indiamen fired from two
decks or one. . . ?’—but one of his own stories tells against him. He
narrates how Sir Edward Pellew once sent the Royal George the message
                                     429
                      WAR   IN   THE   EASTERN   SEAS