

                                    433
                  WAR    IN   THE    EASTERN    SEAS

tend to reform a whole Squadron. It is not legal to stop any man’s allowance
of Provisions, whole or in part by way of punishment, tho’ it is to put more
water to the allowance of Spirits of very drunken characters.
   One obvious means of gaining in your profession is by associating with
your brother Officers, particularly with those senior to you, to gain informa¬
tion not only on general points of service but also of the particular forms
generally used, as on all occasions so with respect to the method of keeping
the Ship’s Books, inspecting and auditing the Warrant Officer’s accounts,
weekly and monthly, the Purser’s at every time of re-victualling, and
examining strictly into the particulars stated in his Quarterly account with
the Victualling Office; informing yourself thoroughly of the tenour of the
several Acts of Parliament passed for the encouragement of Seamen with
regard to advances of every kind, nature of their discharges from the Ship’s
Books to Hospitals, or being invalided or turned over to other ships, as
omission of your duty in some instances is punished with pecuniary fines on
Yourself, and frequently attended with stoppages in the payment of your
wages which may expose you to various embarrassments. In short you
should understand thoroughly the business of a Captain’s Clerk for whose
conduct the Service holds you responsible, and it requires but a very small
portion of your leisure time to become perfect in it. If you have not got the
book of Printed Instructions you should endeavour to get one or buy
Riddel’s publications where they are all abstracted but this book is useful
also in many respects, particularly in understanding the above duty.
   You should not by any means neglect to comply with the Admiralty and
Naval Instructions of every kind, reading regularly to the Ship’s Company
as therein appointed the Articles of War, and Abstract the several Acts of
Parliament above mentioned, avoiding the error young men are apt to fall
into, often affectedly, of being above learning your duty in these points.
Whenever you receive orders from a Commanding Officer don’t be content
with a simple perusal of them, but look them over every now and then that
you may not mistake their meaning. In cases of doubt whether as to rules of
Service or professional practice always ask the opinion of your brother
officers who are most competent to give you information. I recommend
Captain M. Osborn, Captain Bingham and Captain Cockburn, but no matter
whom rather than expose yourself to a hazard of doing wrong. But follow
no one’s faults or absurdities, however praiseworthy their examples may be
in other respects!—so also with respect to myself, endeavour to imitate and
excel me in all commendable points; in those that are not so, do otherwise.
   Be sure to show every respectful attention to Sir Edward Pellew, address
him always by the title of His Excellency, I am persuaded you will meet
with a friend and counsellor in him if you conduct yourself toward him with
propriety. His character you know stands very high in the Service and that
deservedly. Never take any man’s character on hearsay particularly if to his