

       If ordered to cruize off the Mauritius during the existence of a French
    War, I conceive the thing of most consequence to be attended to is securing
    the weather approach to the Island, as owing to its situation in the South
    East Trade wind, almost all vessels bound to it get to the Eastward before
    they shape their course for it, more especially those belonging to France
    and her allies, who on drawing in with the Weather land, are immediately
    informed by Signals if any Enemy is off the Port, in which case they find
    shelter in Port Bourbon or at the anchorage in the mouth of the Grand
    Riviere, therefore to cut them off from this resource it is absolutely necessary
    for a ship to keep constantly to windward, which is neither so difficult or
    dangerous, or even unpleasant as is generally supposed. . . . [He goes on to
    recommend] a Cordon round it of six Ships stationed in the following
    manner:

                                       447
                      WAR    IN   THE   EASTERN     SEAS

       Between Gunner’s Quoin and Flat Island                            a frigate
       Ten miles north of Point Diable                            .          ditto
       Ten miles south of ,,      ,,                              .          ditto
       Between Port de Savenne & Point Brabant, a mile             Frig, or Sloop
       Off Black River                                            .          ditto
       Close in with Port Louis                                    .     a frigate
       But as long as the Enemy have a Line of Battle Ship in this Country
    there should of course be one in the Blockading Squadron whose station
    should depend on the French ship being in Port or at Sea; if the first, she
    should take the station of the Frigate north of Point Diable; a small Brig
    or Tender attached to the Senior Officer would prove serviceable in keeping
    up a communication between the whole and prevent the necessity of any
    ship quitting the station allotted her. . . .

  The third document, printed in the Naval Chronicle, Vol. 29 (1813),
p. 127, is signed I. S. S., but not dated:
       The best disposition for the annoyance of an enemy is to have tWo of
    the fastest sailing frigates to windward, as all French ships make that part
    of the island; one frigate between Port South-East (or Bourbon), and the
    Gunner’s-quoin (Coin de Mire); and another between Port Bourbon and
    Brabant; the former ship should always be sufficiently to windward to
    weather Diable, as otherwise a ship might enter the port, which was the case
    in our last cruise; when the Belle-poule got in unmolested, owing to the
    Phaeton not being able to weather that point. The two ships should, if
    possible, be always in sight from each other’s mast-heads; a sloop of war be
    off the Black river; with a frigate (or line-of-battle ship, according to the
    state of the port) off Port Louis; and another frigate close off Flat
    island and the Gunner’s quoin; which, I think, would be sufficient to block
    the whole island. But as the nights frequently are extremely dark, and the
    ships off Port Louis may not be quite close to the harbour, it is to be recom¬
    mended that boats armed, with rockets etc. to make signals, should be sent
    close in, with orders to return before daylight; which was practised in my
    first cruise. ... A frigate should always be stationed off St. Denys because,
    from the height of the hills at the Mauritius, and the signals established,
    French ships approaching that island frequently get away, and run down to
    Bourbon. ... It would be a good expedient to have a small schooner or
    lugger, as a tender, to communicate between the several ships and the
    commodore, to convey prisoners, necessaries etc. without being exposed
    to the chance of any thing slipping through the blockade; for frigates which
    have come down to leeward for the purpose of such communication, have
    been known to consume several days in regaining their respective stations....