

veyances of utility and pleasure are drawn by them. . . . the People much
resemble the natives of China in their appearance, dress, and manner of life,
nor do I perceive them to be at all more courageous or energetic . .. during
all the time they seemed to hold us in great dread—The night I went up in
the Boats, I landed at a Village opposite Nangasackie at a pretty good
substantial looking house, when the Inhabitants all fled in dismay. . . . The
Phaeton was in Nangasackie on the 5th and 6th of October 1808.
                                                          (Signed)
(from the Exmouth Papers)                                       Fleetwood Pellew


   The immediate result of this affair was the suicide by hari-kiri of the
governor of Nagasaki and the five principal military officers of the Pro¬
vince, the confinement under house-arrest of the Prince of Hizen for several
months ‘during which his fate was in suspense,’ the suicide by drowning of
three of the men who had acted as interpreters, and the orders by which the
inhabitants of the Prince’s district were forbidden for months to open the
front of their houses. A less immediate result was a Japanese ‘thirst for
vengeance’ which made Dr. Ainslie carry out his mission under Dutch
colours in 1813.1 The eventual result is said to have been the founding of
the Japanese Navy.

  1 Report on Japan to the Secret Committee of the English East India Company. By Sir Stamford
Raffles, 1812-16. Kobe, 1929. See Ainslie’s report, p. 153.




                                            446
                                APPENDIX K

                          The Blockade of Mauritius


  A book could be written on the problems of maintaining a blockade
with sailing ships, and a long chapter at least on the blockading of
Mauritius. From the following documents some idea may be gained of
what the problems were. The first is an extract of a dispatch from Pellew
to the Bengal Government dated 4th January, 1806:

       From an attentive examination of the subject, assisted by the opinion of
    Commodore Osborn and other officers whose experience confirms their
    judgment, it would be requisite to employ a force of not less than twelve
    Ships of War to attain the full advantage proposed to be derived from such
    a Blockade, namely two ships of the line, six Frigates and four Sloops, which
    (divided into two Squadrons) by an alternate relief, might preserve an
    invariable Blockade, and allow sufficient opportunity for their passage to
    and from India, to victual and refit.
       The longest period which the Ships employed on this Service have
    hitherto been able to maintain their station has been ten weeks for, altho
    always victualled for six months, the length of the passage occupies the whole
    of the remaining period, exclusive of the impracticability of preserving the
    Health of the Crews for a greater length of time.

  Osborn was undoubtedly the greatest living authority on blockading
the Isle of France and the following paper, dated 1804, taken from Sir
Edward Pellew’s manuscript book of ‘Nautical Remarks’ (Exmouth Papers,
N.M.M.), is most probably written by him: