

Remarks on Nangasakie Harbour, Japan, by Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds
        Pellew Esq., Captain of His Majesty s Ship “Phaeton


                                               Nangasakie, Oct. 6th 1808.
   Nangasackie Harbour ... is perhaps one of the finest and safest harbours
in the World considered in all points of view, and one which has been
probably the least described. This arises not only from the Policy of the
Japanese themselves which is constantly directed to the exclusion of strangers
and the prohibition of all kinds of Foreign Manufactures or innovations of
any kind, but also from the great silence always maintained by the Dutch,
who for nearly 150 years have been the only nation since the expulsion of
the Portuguese who have been permitted by the Japanese to trade in any
way with them. The Dutch who find this traffic a profitable one, are of
course interested not only to conceal its publicity but are anxious that the
idea of great danger should be annexed to the voyage to these parts, on
this account they have never published any Charts of their routes, or com¬
municated for the benefit of other Nations any of their discoveries, which
I believe however to be very limited, and it is certainly notorious to all
Navigators that the Dutch of all maritime Nations have least conduced to
the benefit of that Science, in general from a narrow and mean policy of
keeping to themselves what discoveries they may have made, their charts
are less to be depended on than any in the World, the Longitude being
invariably determined by the Dead Reckoning, and the modern and impor¬
tant improvements rendered to Navigation appear by them either to be
unknown or unregarded. Two Russian Ships on Discovery remained some
months at Nangasackie during the year 1804, I believe, and I understand
that from them a very good Account may be expected. I have reason to
believe the Phaeton the first English ship that ever entered the harbour,
and the account which I give may be depended on for its accuracy. . . .
[He remarks on the difficulty of finding the harbour, which is invisible
from the sea, hidden by an island which looks like a part of the coast. He
describes how he found the entrance and brought the Phaeton to anchor
off Papenburgh Island.]
  ... As it was dark I manned and armed three Boats and went up to the
town, where nothing was laying but three large Junks and innumerable
small craft of different sizes. Guard Boats of a large size and many small
                                    443
                      WAR   IN   THE    EASTERN   SEAS

ones continually watched us, but gave us no annoyance, the sound of
Gongs their signals of alarm were frequently heard. The harbour runs up
from the town a little way due north, but the water is there shallow and
forming nothing more than a River. The Island of Dezema on which all
the Houses of the Dutch Factors are situated, near the Southern extreme of
the town, is connected with it by a bridge of Stone, the Dutch colours were
flying on a staff there. We went with the Boats within Pistol shot, and had
it been an object would have landed; it is impossible to conceive a greater
state of misery than that which these unfortunate Dutch Factors are doomed
to live in, a strict Guard is kept on the Island from which they are never
suffered to depart, not a Book of any description is allowed them, and any
attempt to smuggle them or any other goods which are all prohibited would
certainly be attended with Death: on the appearance of a Ship, two of the
Eight of which the Establishment consists are permitted to go down to the
Ship with an Officer of the Japanese who has them in custody; two came
out to Papenburgh to meet the Phaeton, then under Dutch Colours, and
as they appeared not to suspect what we really were, I sent a Boat and took
possession of them. At first they shewed a reluctance to enter the Boat, but
the Crew drawing their Swords, the Japanese jumped overboard, and they
entered the Boat. On coming on board they faithfully assured us that no
Ships had been there for the present season, or since the Mount Vernon an
American Ship employed on this service has left it. Their appearance cor¬
roborated their statement of the extreme strictness of the Japanese in pre¬
venting the importation of any European Manufactured goods, hardly
allowing them common wearing apparel. These they obtain from the Ships
when they arrive, and more by connivance than consent, and by the absence
of the Ships of the present Season they appeared much in want of a supply
of this kind, as they were meanly dressed: such is the extreme caution of
the Japanese that on their leaving the Shore they are searched at three
different places on their way to the beach and an accurate inventory taken
of every article about their persons, even to their keys, pencil case etc etc
etc. and the whole of these they are obliged to account for at their landing
 or run the Peril of losing their lives. We prevailed on them to accept a Pair
of shoes and a Hat each, leaving their old ones on board as they supposed
the Japanese would not remark the difference between these articles and
the ones they brought on board, but; though we offered them wine and
every thing we supposed acceptable they constantly refused expressing the
greatest terror at the Idea. About io at night a Boat from the Governor
came to demand what we wanted and from whence we came but would not
come alongside, keeping off, we were obliged to send a Boat to take her
                                       444
                               APPENDICES