

these particulars it is that the Commander in Chief calls upon the respective
Commanders to second their Lordships’ views by paying the strictest
attention possible to the expenditure of Stores and the conduct of their
respective Warrant Officers, whose Monthly accounts are to be scrutinized
and will be frequently called for by the Admiral.
   The first Lieutenant and Master are called upon to attend the daily
expences as they arise, whereby they may greatly assist their Captains in
correcting an abuse which is become very alarming and of considerable
extent.
   No Ropes, Sails or Stores whatever are to be condemned without a
regular Survey nor are any Sails to be repaired, or any running Ropes
unrove or replaced without the necessity being scrutinized before the first
Lieutenant and Master, should the Captain not be in the way; and Stores
which may be hereafter condemned are not to be converted without Orders
from the Commander in Chief.
   The first Lieutenant and Master are also to attend the stowage of the
Warrant Officers’ Store Rooms to see that no injury may ensue from
carelessness or inattention on that Head.
   All demands for Stores are to be accompanied with the Books of the
remains on Charge, signed by the Captain, and a Copy of the last Supply
is to attend it, signed by the proper signing officers.
   No Iron bound Casks for Bread or any other article are to be Demanded
of the Contractor but under absolute necessity, which must be expressed in
the Body thereof; nor are any Water or other Iron bound Casks to be
shaken; but returned to the Contractor when necessary.
   No Buffalo Beef is to be received by any of the Squadron, the Contractor
having engaged to supply the Squadron with Ox Beef.
   No Stay sails are to be kept in the brails at Sea but always hauled down
when required for wearing, and Jibbs and stay sails, when down, to be
immediately stowed in a cloth. It is recommended whenever the Ships are
lying too with their Main Top sail aback, that all Stay Sails whatever should
be hauled down.
   No Sick are to be sent to the Hospital until examined by the Surgeon of
the Flag Ship.
   No Flags or Colours are to be made use of to cover Officers’ Cotts or
Hammocks, or for any other private purposes, and the respective Signal
Officers are charged with observance of this order, for a neglect of which
they will be made accountable.
   The Ships Company are to be put in three Watches; and when in Port
a division of the Watch always to be on Deck by night.
                                    438
                               APPENDICES

  Ship visiting among the People is absolutely forbid except by relations
of known good Character, and then but on particular occasions.
  Boats are never to be sent on Shore without a Petty Officer in them;
who is not to leave the Crew; but should the duty require a Petty Officer
to leave the Boat, a second one is always to be sent in her for the occasion.
  All Boats are to leave the Shore the moment the Evening Gun fires,
unless waiting for a Commissioned Officer who is expressly on duty.
  The Commander in Chief is extremely particular, that the Meal times of
the people are not broken in upon, and that Boats are not sent away at
such periods: He will hoist a red Pendant at the Main when he makes it
Noon, that all the Crews may dine at the same time, and one hour and a
half will be usually allowed; the Crews are to Breakfast at 8 Bells, and sup
at •£ past 5 p.m.
  If not compelled by urgent circumstances the Ships Company’s are not
to work between the hours of Eleven and Two.
  Loosing Sails etc. will be performed always at day break and whenever
it may be thought proper to wash the lower Deck they are to be finished
before breakfast.
   The Admiral directs that the Ships of the Squadron wash cloaths on the
same days of the Week, viz. Tuesdays and Fridays; should Rain prevent
their drying the following day must be adopted. Cloaths are to be hung
between the main and fore Masts only in Harbour.
   The Commander in Chief having considered the difficulty and expence
that young men labour under in this Country to furnish themselves with
European Cloathing as also the inconvenience of wearing them on Service
in this Climate, gives his permission to Commissioned Officers appearing
on Deck in round Hatts either Black or Coloured, with cockades and
Uniform half Coats with side arms. Petty Officers are permitted to wear
round Jackets made as Uniform with Pantaloons and waistcoats either
nankeen or White, with round Hatts as above, but on Public Parade days
officers of every description are expected to wear their proper Uniforms
and Cocked Hatts.
  Marine Officers are permitted the same indulgence on Duty and may
mount Guard without the Sash.
  The Commander in Chief most strictly forbids any officer whatever
from appearing in Coloured Cloaths, either on shore or on board, and takes
this opportunity to call to their remembrance the Orders of the Lords Com¬
missioners of the Admiralty on that Subject during the year 1796, which
Order will be most strictly enforced.
  Every Boat in the Fleet is to have the Signal Flags No. 226 painted on