

‘It is a symposium contributed by divers authors, all of them learned.
It is a serious essay in history based on detailed and in some cases
original research. Yet it is admirably written, admirably illustrated
and admirably produced . . . packed with useful, interesting and often
delightful information. . . . The book is an historian’s treasury; full
of interesting facts and of the germinating ideas that spring from
facts.’                                                  Sunday Times
‘A book which should be read not only by those who are concerned
in studying the strategic implications of the sea and ships, but by all
those who wish to acquire the broader view of Imperial Defence. If
the reader once picks it up, even if it be from a sense of duty, he will
continue to read it for his entertainment and enlightenment.’
                         Journal of the Royal United Service Institution
‘The story it tells, its excellent plates, diagrams, maps and statistical
schedules, make the volume a work of considerable significance for
 the historical records of this country.’
                                            Times Educational Supplement
                     by Michael Lewis
 THE NAVY OF BRITAIN
Second Impression              Illustrated        Demy 8vo       3os- net
This book is a history, not of Britain’s sea-power, but of that great
institution which has implemented it—the Navy of Britain. Again, it is
a history, not of thp Royal Navy alone, (though that holds an impor¬
tant place in it) but of something much wider and of even greater
national importance. It shows how dangerous it is—and, historically,
how wrong—to attempt to dissociate the Royal Navy from its ‘natural
reserves,’ since from the very earliest days of our history all have been
interwoven in one common pattern, all sprung from common parents,
all fostering common traditions, all seeking common ends. So this
book does not follow the plan that the thoughtless might expect, and
deal first with the R.N., then with the R.N.R., then with the R.N.V.R.,
and so on. Such vertical cuts are meaningless in the eye of History.
The divisions, rather, are horizontal. ‘Origins,’ ‘Ships,’ ‘Officers,’
‘Men,’ ‘Management,’ ‘In Action’—these are its big headings.

    It is written for those who might be expected from the nature of the
case to be interested—the officers and men of the Royal Navy, and the
officers and men of the Reserves who have known the sea life at first
hand. But it is also meant—perhaps most of all—for the ordinary
citizens who have not. These are the men and women who through
the centuries have benefited by the faithful services of their Navy—
that cross-section of themselves, the whole Navy of Britain. Here is set
out for them the story of this great national heritage which, more than
any one other, has changed their little island into a World Empire,
and saved it, without fail or fuss, from every tyrant who has threatened
it from the days of Philip of Spain to those of Hitler.