                              PREFACE
         The eagle of empire and the lamb of God




All our books are personal to us, or we could not live with them. This book
is no exception. I began thinking about it in 1983 and, whatever else I was
involved with, it always stayed very close to me. Along the way, there was
much encouragement and quite a lot of criticism, most of it constructive,
some of it shocking in its incoherent displeasure, all of it revealing. For
several very different reasons, I decided to stick to my guns and, for better
and for worse, this is the result.
   First, I felt that the simple idea behind the project was sound: The
Catholic religion is a – arguably the – central cultural and social element in
Italian life, and to tangle with it would be a considerable undertaking. The
French did so, under Napoleon, introducing the wholesale changes of the
Concordats. To my knowledge, there is no study of the period that examines
this on a wide canvas or at the grassroots, so I began. It was encouraging to
do so during a period when the issue of religion was at last finding its place
in the history of the revolutionary period. The series of lectures given by
Colin Lucas at Oxford in the early 1980s awakened me to much. The work
of Donald Sutherland, Timothy Tackett, in particular and of T.C.W.
Blanning beyond France, showed me what might be possible.1 In the course
of this research, there has been a flowering of fine literature, mainly by
Anglo-Saxon scholars, on the mid-century Catholic revival, and this gave me
an exciting historical context to which I could attempt to connect my own
work on the earlier period.2 This was also the moment when Edward Said’s
formulation of cultural imperialism started to make an impact, and I could
see much in common with my own work.3 There has been much hostility to
this proposition but it still seems valid, if fraught with complications. If
there could be cultural imperialism in one country, as foreshadowed in the
works of Linda Colley and much earlier – and prophetically – in those of
Eugene Weber,4 then there was a fighting chance that it was also there in the
largest, most heterogeneous empire the continent of Europe had known in
modern times. I believe it was there, and that the concept is present in the
archival sources avant la lettre. In the last stages of my work I was given timely
encouragement that the concept has a place in the specific historiography


                                        ix
