                AC K N OWL E D G E M EN TS




The author wishes to thank the British Academy for two Small Grants in
aid of research, which helped finance trips to Paris and Florence. Thanks
are also due to the editors of The Historian, for permission to reproduce
here, material previously published in ‘The War Against God: Napoleon,
Pope Pius VII and the People of Italy, 1800–1814,’ The Historian, Spring
2001, pp. 16–21; to the editors of War in History, for permission to repub-
lish material in Chapters 2 and 3, from ‘Noble Romans and Regenerated
Citizens: The Morality of Conscription in Napoleonic Italy, 1800–1814,’
War in History, 8 (2001) pp. 249–270. Chapters 2 and 3 also use material
from my article ‘Cultural Imperialism in a European Context? Political
Culture and Cultural Politics in Napoleonic Italy,’ Past & Present, 170 (2001)
pp. 152–180, and is reprinted with kind permission (World Copyright: The
Past and Present Society, 175 Banbury Road, Oxford, England.) Luciana
O’Flaherty first signed this book for UCL Press, thanks to the support of an
anonymous reader, and at Routledge Vicky Peters has been an excellent and
supportive editor throughout. Very special thanks are owed to the directors
of the Scotland–GLCA Programme, who granted me a six-week Fellowship,
free of all teaching obligations, in 2001. This enabled me to finish the book
and to revisit my old colleagues at that paradigm of all that is excellent in a
liberal arts college: Kalamazoo College. My former colleagues and many
new friends made me more than welcome. Warm thanks are owed to the
staffs of the Archivi di Stato of Turin, Cuneo, Genoa, Bologna, Parma and
especially Florence, where many vital sources were uncatalogued and located
thanks only to their expertise. The staff of the Archivio Comunale of Genoa
were outstanding. The Archives Nationales de Paris yielded their riches
thanks to my friends and colleagues Gérard Hérmisse, Philippe and Claire
Béchu, Pierre Portet, Jacky Plaut, Eric Dufour and many more now retired.
M. and Mme Charles Bonis lubricated the wheels of work in Paris for many
years, while M. Fleury and Mme Auffray of the Institut de la Francophonie
often provided soigné shelter. The research seminars of the Universities of
York, Strathclyde, Ann Arbor, Aberdeen, Reading and St Andrews all heard
earlier versions of this work, as did the Society for Eighteenth-Century


                                      xv
