                                  P R E FA C E


Italy as different from their own perceptions and experience. I find it diffi-
cult to hide behind the conceit that the Enlightenment according to Voltaire
was not the Enlightenment according to Napoleon; I find it impossible to
believe that the Napoleonic empire was not the Enlightenment ‘on horse-
back’. Above all – and this seems to be the most disconcerting point – the
Enlightenment had to be on horseback because it was embattled. Precious
few people wanted what it had to offer.
   There is more to this, I think. To admit a veritable Kulturkampf between
the Napoleonic regime and the Tridentine Church, and to link it to compa-
rable, if hardly identical, later struggles, casts the history of modern Europe
in a light most unflattering to liberal reformers of all stamps. These views
have been expressed in a German context and, much more guardedly, in that
of France. It is time to do so in the light of Italian evidence, too. Cultural
struggle – an internalized, inter-European model of cultural imperialism – is
a dark spectre, but it is real. I am struck by the thoughts of Allan Bloom in
that most controversial of books The Closing of the American Mind, when
he says, following Nietzsche,

    Cultures fight wars with one another. They must do so because
    values can only be asserted or posited by overcoming others, not by
    reasoning with them. Cultures have different perceptions, which
    determine what the world is. They cannot come to terms. There is
    no communication about the highest things.6

There is truth in this, and a great deal of truth in the context of modern
western Europe. To follow David Blackbourn, progress had to fight piety, at
least in Catholic Europe, not necessarily because piety opposed progress –
those who have studied the ramifications of Trent in subsequent centuries
have shown this is not inherently so – but because progress was so nakedly
aggressive and elitist. It had to fight all the harder because piety was the
stronger, more popular cause, not in terms of arms and tangible power, but
because it could draw on deep wells of belief and the loyalties that belief
created. Piety was part of the fabric of life, in ways progress could not hope
to be. Nietzsche, almost alone, saw this clearly, if from a loftier vantage
point than that of the archival historian, but he traced the limits of ratio-
nalism and above all admitted its battle with the soul in uncompromising
terms.
   This was an epic struggle. Those who insist on the assured, relentless
march of reason – Marxist or not – do not do justice to the nature of the
beast, and discount the greatest crisis of the West. This is not an obvious
assertion, in the context of an archival monograph, and caution should
dictate that it offers only ammunition to those with finer, more abstract
minds than my own. I wrote it with Nietzsche – or, more correctly, with my
thoughts drawn from Nietzsche – close to heart. Napoleon was, indeed, all


                                      xi
