                                  P R E FA C E


had to tell me about the tensions of summer processional seasons, or the
jangling nerves around a police barracks at Easter time. Throughout, I
found much to engage my own experience as I went along. My paternal
grandmother was a visceral républicaine et reformée who had no trouble
turning Unionist when transplanted to Ireland. She named her son and
grandson after her hero, Clemenceau, and told me, at the age of five, disaster
loomed if the Catholics were left in their ignorance. My maternal grand-
mother was a direct descendent of Richard Talbot. Setting my sights on
other cultures has not led me away from much that is ingrained in me.
   The interest in the power of Catholic faith – for that is the word – is not
detached. To fail to admit that, would be a lie. In the course of my adult life,
I have stood in deep respect of the example of a Catholic life, lived truly,
imbued as it is with an unsentimental compassion, just as I wondered in my
youth at the courage and dignity of my police family. Cora Flyn in my
student days; Jim McMillan, a friend and mentor, who might be surprised to
find himself acknowledged in this way, throughout my working life; Philippe
and Claire Béchu in the course of the research, especially; John and Elaine
Wickstrom in the final phases of the writing. They have all set living exam-
ples to one unschooled in such things. Theirs is a faith I cannot share. My
temperament – probably for worse than better – shall always be with the
eagle of empire and its restless, ruthless quest for Something Else, rather
than with the inner peace of the lamb of God. That does not preclude
respect and admiration.
   This work began with Liz, long ago and far away, but the circumstances
in which it was completed brought home that part of me will always belong
to her. It ended with Sue, my wife, without whom there would be nothing, so
much has she given me. With all its faults and failings – and amidst the clash
of cultures – this book is an offering of love to her.
                                                         St Patrick’s Day, 2001




                                      xiii
