                  T H E L A S T B A R B A R I A N I N VA S I O N ?


   When the French pushed over the Alps in the course of the revolutionary
wars, they found waiting for them in Italy a Church whose presence and
influence were more pervasive and significant in the lives of most of their
new administrés than the secular states of the ancien régime. The conflict
was between the greatest source of authority and influence in the old order –
and the only such institution common to all the states of Italy – and the
most powerful political entity the peninsula had known since the Roman
empire itself.


                    The motives of French rule in Italy
When Napoleon led his ragged troops over the Alps for the first time in
1796, he told the peoples of the lands he was entering that he had come to
liberate them from oppression, to bring liberty and the ideals of revolu-
tionary fraternity. He told his troops that they were entering the richest
plains in the world, that they would be well fed on their produce, that they
would all soon be rich with the pickings of the material civilization of the
great cities of northern Italy. From the very outset, the French occupation of
Italy had two faces. What drew the French? Was it the torch of civilization
and revolutionary fraternity, or the spoils of war? Did they wish to help or
exploit those they came to rule south of the Alps?
    In material terms, the French exploited their Italian territories from
beginning to end. Conscripts were wrung from the mountain valleys and the
cities and hamlets of the plains, to the point where regions such as Piedmont
and Lombardy became better sources of recruits – however unwillingly they
came forth – than many parts of France.4 When Italians rebelled against
this, the French replied with fire and sword, as in 1806 in the Piacentino –
the mountain region between Liguria and the Po valley – or in 1809 in
central and north-eastern Italy. ‘Burn a village’, was Napoleon’s own answer
to one of the earliest manifestations of this.5 The extension of the
Continental System to the Italian territories of the empire and the Kingdom
of Italy was an ill-concealed policy of economic imperialism that made of
Italy a mere supplier of raw materials to France.6 The disillusionment of the
Italian Jacobins with the authoritarian – as much as the exploitative – nature
of Napoleonic rule soured into a combination of sullen withdrawal, reluc-
tant collaboration from fear of popular reprisals and, finally, clandestine
anti-French conspiracy. In many cases, their most ideologically motivated
supporters at the outset of the occupation were among those most bitterly
disenchanted by the end. Carlo Botta, the disaffected Piedmontese revolu-
tionary, at several points in his Storia d’Italia and his longer history of the
Western world described Napoleon’s Italian campaigns as the last in a long
line of barbarian invasions.7
    Exploitation and political betrayal were the most obvious negative
aspects of Napoleonic rule in Italy, although it has been argued often and at


                                         2
