                                   P R E FA C E


that Goethe believed him to be, a breaker of worlds, but the gods he fought
were not quite dead yet, the natural bonds between men not quite dissolved.
Above all, for me the Christianity of the late ancien régime, with its admix-
ture of an atavistic popular culture which spanned the social spectrum and
the high culture of the Baroque, was the last manifestation of a genuinely
European ‘folk religion’; it was the spiritual manifestation of a society that
predated ‘the last man’. The struggle against Catholic culture – against
barbarism, ignorance and superstition in their discourse – became a battle
mythic for both sides which involved sacrifice and on which the fate of their
world hung. It did not admit relativism, at least not for long. Those on both
sides were aware of the hardening of the lines, at least in the early stage of
the conflict that took place in Napoleonic Italy. Europe in the wake of the
Enlightenment, in the face of the Enlightenment project, was no place for
relativism.
    More personally, it has been remarked with surprise at times along the
way, that an Ulster Protestant should acquire such an interest as this. When
the work, of its own accord, invoked Nietzsche, I found it hard to turn away.
It seemed to me something fundamental in a wider context, however limited
in its own parameters. I do not feel it odd, however. This was not an attempt
to expiate ‘post-colonial guilt’, to atone for the sins of the fathers. My poli-
tics are my own and are shaped by my community, if not uniformly of it.
There, really, is the deeper answer. Confessional allegiance aside, I was
instinctively drawn to a struggle between sides who abandoned relativism in
the face of deeper realities: that to defend cultural values, to preserve a
social cement, you had to be ‘fierce’, in local parlance. It is not attractive, it
is not to be admired, but it is real. It endures – and can imbue life with
meaning – when relativism fails the individual and impoverishes the soul.
The first, perhaps the only real point, is that nothing is easy, nor should it be
made to seem so. It is the duty of a scholar – of anyone who thinks – to
remember that. I did not need to have the bonds of lay confraternities or the
importance of communal, collective rites spelled out for me. In some ways, I
envy that closeness, those bonds and – if Nietzsche is right – the myths
which inspire and bind. Their consequences can be – usually are – diabolical,
to risk an all too apt reference. Yet they matter, especially in a society bereft
of them, through which one wanders rather than walks. Bonds shape even
the most recherché life. It was the lack of them in a previous post that drove
me back to the archives and the friendship of Paris and points Italian over
so many years. It was the comradeship and warmth of my new home, in
Aberdeen, which at last gave me the will to write.
    The scion of a police family – forbidden from following Rangers in the
name of la chose publique and the dignity of the dark green uniform – I can
also see the other side: Ignorance, bigotry, intolerance, plain hooliganism –
be it inspired by a local saint on top of an Apennine mountain or William
III in my own street – is part of this, and I brought it to the book. No one

                                       xii
