                                  P R E FA C E


of Italy by the appearance in 1998 of the volume of essays edited by Jane
Schneider, Italy’s ‘Southern Question’. Orientalism in One Country.5 It is
probably an intellectual failing – nay, one of sheer lack of intelligence – that
I am rooted in archival empiricism, but that approach does yield as much
objectivity as can be expected in a post-modern world. The evidence came
first, the interest in other frameworks came later.
    There is a very odd, nervous view of Napoleonic Europe that pervades its
study: Within France, it represents repression, the death of the dream; yet
beyond its borders, it is a beacon of Enlightened reform in a sea of reaction.
I do not dispute this, but I feel there are uncomfortable ramifications
involved that must be faced. They involve a serious questioning of the char-
acter – but not necessarily the intrinsic worth – of the ‘Enlightenment
project’. I start from the opinion, derived from the words and deeds of his
servants ‘on the ground’ – and from his own diktats – that Napoleon
deserves to be seen as the last of the Enlightened absolutists, at least in the
areas I have studied; this also admits a belief in the term ‘Enlightened abso-
lutist’. If no one else was an Enlightened absolutist – and I am not qualified
to say – Napoleon was, at least in his Italian possessions. The struggle for
reform here was marked and it meant confrontation with the culture
embodied by the Tridentine Church. It was fundamental to the history of
the Napoleonic period, and to the history of modern Italy, and it was a
struggle Napoleon lost. He was neither the first nor the last to do so, but
there is discomfort about bringing this to the centre of events. Should it be
accorded such importance? Was the struggle not self-evident and so hardly
worthy of detailed study? I do not think so and the stridency of those who
told me ‘We knew that anyway’ made me all the more distrustful. There was
a subject there if it made some people so upset. To delve into the war
between the Church and the Napoleonic regimes reveals a bourgeoisie – and
the term is valid, if broad – that was not entirely at ease with the new
regime; a peasantry perhaps more politicized than might be comfortable to
admit because it was not ‘progressive’ in character. To admit the power and
presence of the Church in Italian society is one thing; to examine the well-
springs of that power – to examine the proposition that it was all about
power and superstition and find that it was not quite so – is rather different.
It is important ground, however, and not to be ignored by the historian or
anyone else. Beside the Enlightened reforms effected by the French was a
trauma that went beyond the demands of conscription and bit deep into the
life of many communities and individuals. Above all, the Church and the
laity fought back, not once but many times and in many different ways. The
Napoleonic response was brutal, thus raising the uncomforting spectacle of
the harshness of the Enlightenment project. It was the work of a generation
of men – for men they were – fed on Voltaire and Diderot, who often
showed a surprising degree of ‘dechristianization’ for those so recently
escaped from the ancien régime. They certainly regarded what they found in

                                       x
