                  T H E L A S T B A R B A R I A N I N VA S I O N ?


support it, not least their seeming ignorance of many of the rites and prac-
tices of the Counter Reformation, such as the Forty Hours. Whether the
French masses were as estranged from the Church as Chartier and others
have suggested is not the central theme here. The Napoleonic occupation
fostered a meeting between members of the French elite and Italian society.
It would expose just how estranged that elite was from the Counter
Reformation as it had evolved in northern and central Italy. The encounter
also revealed how different had been the development of the Counter
Reformation in the French and the Italian Churches. By the time of the
Napoleonic conquest of Italy,

    the Revolution, through its declared hostility toward the old reli-
    gion, revealed to all eyes the reality of a transformation in belief
    that had already occurred.17

The application of the Concordat in Italy revealed it even more.
   The Italian Church had suffered none of the privations of its French
counterpart. Its monastic lands had been pillaged by the Army of Italy, but
not until the reconquest of 1800 was there any question of their wholesale
confiscation; the regular orders were still flourishing, if not quite on the
scale of the seventeenth century, in contrast to their steady decline in
France. However tenuous clerical control over the laity might be, nothing on
the scale of the dislocation of parish life that affected France in the 1790s
occurred south of the Alps. Perhaps more significantly, there was very little
trace in Italian society of the dechristianization some have seen as all perva-
sive among the French laity and all admit was a powerful presence, however
regionally qualified.18 The French were not the Godless horde of counter-
revolutionary propaganda – although they did, indeed, have a Godless
element among them – but they were an alien, heretical horde. Thus the
application of the Concordat would appear less the selective, largely appro-
priate restoration that it seemed to be in France, than an aggression. It
emerged for many Italians as, probably, the most barbaric aspect of the last
barbarian invasion.


                  The position of the Tridentine Church
If French intentions for their Italian administrés were Janus-like, the Italian
Church itself was hardly a monolith. In the context of the post-Napoleonic
Church in the Rhineland, Jonathan Sperber has outlined an institution ‘at
war on two fronts’, as it were, caught between the threats to its orthodoxy
posed by the ‘externally originated secularization’ of Enlightened offi-
cialdom – followed by the French – and the ‘inherent laicization’ embodied
in traditional popular piety.19 The Italian Church of the late ancien régime
faced a not dissimilar threat. If that of ‘externally originated secularization’


                                         5
