                   T H E L A S T B A R B A R I A N I N VA S I O N ?


absorb a great deal of Jansenism as it was practised in the parishes, while
divesting it of those politicized elements that led it into defiance of
authority. Whether or not Olwen Hufton’s definition of the emergent Tiers
Partie Catholique is correct in the context of the late ancien régime, it corre-
sponds well to the ethos of the Church of the Concordat at the level of the
episcopate and the Ministry of Religion. For Hufton, the Tiers Partie meant

    those who found a Jansenist approach to the conduct of life and
    worship totally desirable but who refused to embroil themselves in
    the theological pros and cons of Unigenitus and hence to erect the
    issue into a political conflict.12

This was perfect. The efforts of bishops, particularly in the Midi, to
‘strengthen and reform Catholic practice very much along the puritanical
lines of the Jansenists … to place Catholicism beyond reproach’13 were
reprised after the upheavals of the revolutionary decade, but loyalty to the
authority of the state was axiomatic. The style of official French
Catholicism was set, however: practising Jansenism under the secular eye of
Enlightened scepticism. Men of the Enlightenment were comfortable with
an established Church of this kind, even if they were hardly enamoured of
it. If religion there had to be, it should be an austere, rigorous, elitist reli-
gion, in keeping with the intellectual traditions of the French elite. The
Counter Reformation had arrived later than elsewhere, according to
Chartier, and became imbued with a severe native Augustinianism, even
beyond Jansenist circles.14 This was the kind of Church favoured and
fostered by the idéologues who were so influential in the first years of the
regime, typified by Antoine Roederer, a prominent Napoleonic imperial offi-
cial in Italy and Germany, whose son became a prefect of one of the
départements réunis. Privately a sceptic, he told his colleague Beugnot that
‘the people have no other need of religion, than as a source of morality’.
Roederer was one of many ‘peaceable anti-clericals’ in the regime, prepared
to work with the French episcopate to restore social stability, and to appease
them, better to gain their help for the secular authorities.15 The French saw
in this sort of Church an instrument of a very French form of civilization:
rational, moderate, well ordered, but still independent minded. It was an
extension of a cultural and political confidence that informed every aspect
of Napoleonic imperialism. The Gallican Church was subordinate to the
imperial cause and to the regime that guided it.
    This was what the French then sought to impose on Italy and, when they
did so, the Concordat found itself trying to take root in very different soil. It
is not possible here to explore how correct Chartier, following Tocqueville,
might be in his assertion that ‘eighteenth-century France underwent a
process of abandonment of Christian practices unequalled in Europe’.16
However, there is much in the reactions of French officials to Italian piety to


                                          4
