                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


ignorance, but also of general isolation, violence and social indiscipline, that
they instinctively turned to missionary activity. The missionaries did not
perceive a purely religious problem, in the strict sense; these regions were
usually too isolated to be threatened by the Reformation. If the Jesuits inter-
preted the roots and the likely cure for the vendetta culture of the periphery
to be spiritual in nature, they were also attempting to fill the void in social
control left by the political culture of the ancien régime. They found the best
way to tackle these regions, mainly in the islands and the Apennine valleys,
was to deploy the tactics they had developed for the populations of the New
World and the Far East. The Italian peripheries were soon dubbed ‘nuestras
Indías’ – ‘our Indies’ – and the missionaries themselves were schooled to
look at these regions ‘through foreign eyes’. It was not difficult.16 None
would have challenged Gramsci’s assertion that the Catholic faith was devel-
oped and systematized by an intellectual elite, and that it was meant to
acculturate and tame those forms of ‘popular religion’17 that were orthodox
in origin, but which the laity had adapted too readily to their secular culture.
They were still tolerated and even encouraged by the Church, for their
exuberance was to be curbed rather than extinguished. It was also meant to
stamp out what has been termed ‘natural religion’, something quite distinct
which embraced a matrix of non-Christian customs and practices ‘heavily
tinged with superstition and sometimes wholly foreign to religion’.18 It was a
distinction the Counter Reformation found easier to make than the French,
and this doctrinal clarity was the key to their adaptable, sophisticated
approach to the civilizing of the periphery. They knew where ‘magic’ ended
and ‘religion’ began, however overlaid by folkloric practice popular religion
might be. The Tridentine missionaries sought to redeem and purify existing
customs, if they were essentially orthodox, as well as to introduce new ones
of their own.19 Behind the external exaltations of the Baroque, there was a
subtlety utterly lacking in later, state-inspired projects to regenerate the
peripheries.
   Nevertheless, however ‘accommodating’ or ‘gradualist’ the tactics of the
missionaries or the urban Church hierarchies, those involved never doubted
that their mission went far beyond inculcating the doctrines of the faith in
these regions. The Catholic reformers, the Jesuits in particular, well under-
stood the difference between ‘popular’ as opposed to ‘popularized’ piety, as
well as the wider distinction between ‘popular’ and ‘natural’ religion.20 This
was a concerted drive by the missionary orders and by the secular hierarchy
through its seminary-trained parish clergy to change the culture and social
mores of the peripheries, in ways and through a level of social control
unthought of by the political authorities of the ancien régime states. It was a
question of public order based on disciplined personal morality, but it was
not imposed by the institutions of a secular state; it did not rest on force, at
least in the first instance. When this is remembered, the success of Trent,
however qualified over time, is remarkable. Much of that strength lay,


                                       12
