                                      2
         CE N TRE AND P ERIP H ERY
              The power and limits of a concept




The concept of states with clearly defined centres of political and economic
power and cultural pre-eminence has proved remarkably apt for the study of
the ancien régime in Italy.1 In the wider context of modern and early modern
Italian history, the acceptance of this concept by scholars has relocated the
historical geography of the peninsula away from a tendency to search for the
present north/south divide in earlier periods, and made central Assante’s
observation that ‘every province had its “South” ’.2 The distinctiveness
between the urban and lowland centres of every Italian region from the
Alpine and, even more, the Apennine uplands formed the fundamental
internal divisions of all the states of Hesperia in the north and centre, as
well as in the Kingdom of Naples. This represents the most useful frame-
work for Italian historical geography, at least before the mid-nineteenth
century.
   The topography of most of the states of the north and centre that
concern this study, fit this pattern securely. Turin, Genoa, Milan, Parma,
Modena and Florence – the capitals of the old states – together with their
subordinate regional centres like Piacenza, Siena or Brescia, were all
lowland or coastal cities, surrounded by mountain valleys which were clearly
their peripheries. Chris Wickham, writing of the early middle ages in
Tuscany and the Abruzzi, has concluded that ‘no “Apennine society” may
ever have existed … but a matrix of social tendencies characteristic of the
Apennines … can be delineated’.3 Although the detailed circumstances of
the Apennine spine and the states along it had obviously altered greatly over
the intervening millennium, the general point is still valid for eighteenth-
century Italy. Apennine valleys differed markedly from each other, but they
were all a clear periphery in relation to the urban centres. Topography corre-
sponded well to political geography under the old regime: each state had a
clear centre, an obvious capital, and none of them were located in the high-
lands of the Alpine or Apennine peripheries. By the eighteenth century,
political, social and cultural authority of all kinds – secular and sacred –
was based at the centre, and the centre was urban and lowland.
   Centre and periphery remained distinct entities in ancien régime Italy,


                                      7
