                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


however. Italian states were heterogeneous because, although the centre
possessed authority over the periphery, it could seldom translate it into terri-
torial power or control on any permanent basis. Nor, in some cases, did it
actually wish to do so. As Osvaldo Raggio has pointed out in a Ligurian
context, it is misleading to predicate early modern Italian history on the
study of the growth of the state and its organs, for not only did the state
often fail to subjugate the periphery, there were many cases – Genoa among
them – where it was not within the nature of the political culture of the
centre to try. To concentrate on the advance of the centre in these circum-
stances produces ‘only a partial and deformed image of the creation and
transmission of legitimate public authority’.4 Centre and periphery
remained distinct and separate in terms of formal authority; the links
between them were forged through economic interdependence, by ties of
patronage and clientage, rather than through formal administrative struc-
tures. Indeed, a millennium later there was still truth in Wickham’s
observation that:

    The self-identity of the mountains and the political, social,
    economic and cultural influence of the cities must be recognized as
    coexisting, at every stage in history … in opposition to each other
    … . Not only can one not understand the mountains without recog-
    nizing the influence of the city, but one cannot understand the
    history of any … city without seeing it against the background of
    the mountains.5

It is just that these influences did not work through channels that are
conventional in terms of the modern state. It is equally mistaken to regard
the periphery as static, devoid of political life, although that life took forms
that seldom corresponded to the institutionally based public life of the
centre. The periphery was far from an immobile world, its outward stability
the product of intense and incessant action among communities and clan
networks, as Giovanni Tocci rightly stresses.6 This internal dynamism was,
however, just that – internal – and did not affect the life of the centre any
more than the centre, by and large, sought to affect it.
   The picture emerging from most recent research reveals states which func-
tioned by arbitration coupled with occasional direct intervention on the
periphery, but also centres and peripheries in constant, complex contact
with each other. Put another way, the mountains were isolated only from the
constituted authorities of the centre; the periphery was, indeed, a physical,
topographical reality, but it was also a specifically political reality, and few
secular authorities challenged this for long. It was a question of de facto
independence, not isolation.
   Nevertheless, the centre was the centre when the life of the Italian states is
fixed in the currents of European history conventionally regarded as main-


                                        8
