                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


the Church was concerned. The wealth – or lack of it – as well as the
personnel and administration of the Italian Church were all fundamentally
conditioned by the importance of centre and periphery to Italian life.
   However, as will emerge, a singular – and significant – aspect of any
attempt to analyse the impact of Napoleonic rule on Italian piety is where it
breaks down. The pressures put upon Italian Catholicism by the Napoleonic
reforms reveal many continuities between the piety of the periphery and that
of the centre. Perhaps most significant of all, the experience of the epoca
francese provoked a coming together of the hierarchy and the urban masses
through the new found readiness of the former to adopt many aspects of
‘peripheral’ piety, and to promote them in an urban context in ways and to a
degree unlikely under the ancien régime. The impact of the French reforms
revealed Trent in a light very different from that of a rigid, centrally driven
attempt to standardize Italian religious life, although in earlier periods it
had certainly been that. Rather, when confronted by the enormity and
unpalatability of the Napoleonic reforms, the heirs of Trent proved them-
selves very malleable and able to compromise with other elements of the
complex, varied matrix of Italian Catholicism. Compared to the Gallican
Church imported over the Alps, the heirs of Trent emerged as ready to be
tamed by the laity as to try to tame it. This would emerge in the course of
the imposition of the Napoleonic reforms, however, not at the outset of
French rule.
   That Italy was divided into a centre and a periphery was received
wisdom: the French received it from the Church and found the experience of
Trent compatible with their own, in this respect, despite the very different
imperatives from which Trent and the French worked. It was where they
both started from. This is important in itself. The Tridentine Church and the
Napoleonic regimes did not conform in their aspirations or their methods
with those of the ancien régime. The insights of Tocci, Raggio and other
scholars of the secular old order cannot be applied to either of these
powerful presences in Italian history, for neither contented itself with a non-
institutional, indirect presence on the periphery, or with any form of oblique
arbitration at the centre. That is, neither were content with influence rather
than authority; neither accepted the desirability of a sporadic, as opposed to
permanent, presence on the periphery; neither would accept anything but a
monopoly of power in their respective spheres. This was how each, in turn,
approached its self-appointed task in Italy.

     The periphery: First impressions. From ‘nuestras Indías’ to ‘a
                           thousand Vendées’
The forces of the Catholic Reformation, and the Jesuits in particular,
‘discovered’ the lost Europe of the Italian periphery in the mid-sixteenth
century. So awestruck were they by the levels not only of basic doctrinal


                                      11
