                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


stream. Within their own confines, the centres of the Italian states subdi-
vided into the urban centres and the rural lowlands around them. There was
a marked town/country divide at the centre, but in the lowlands it was a case
of direct, effective control of the plains by the city. The lowlands shared
little in urban culture. Village life contrasted sharply with an urban populace
linked by guilds, wealthy confraternities and the long talons of official
patronage networks, but the plain had none of the political autonomy of the
true highland periphery.
    Political life at the centre revolved around the patronage of the courts, as
well as that of individuals or families, and was usually beyond the reach of
the micro-elites of the periphery. The centres of justice, ecclesiastical and
secular, lay here, as did the institutions of the state. Elite culture – high
culture – was essentially urban culture.7 Whereas the mountains were full of
small, poor bishoprics, in the states of the centre and the north the great sees
were, in the purest sense, metropolitan. In the Piacentino and Liguria, the
valleys were bereft of bishoprics altogether; their priests looked to Piacenza
or Parma, to the north and east of the Apennines, or to the coastal cities on
the southern and western side of the mountains. What forces of order the
states of the ancien régime possessed were overwhelmingly concentrated in
the cities. Corsican soldiers went out from Genoa to the valleys of the
Ligurian periphery, and then only, as a rule, when requested by local
factions or officials.8 The Republic of San Giorgio also concentrated its
sbirri in the capital, sprinkling only a handful of isolated individuals across
the valleys, which made of them more a spy network than a police force. In
the Duchies of Parma and Piacenza, and in Tuscany, a similar pattern
prevailed. Even in the territories of the House of Savoy policing rested only
with the army, based in the provincial capitals, from which it went out when
ordered. In contrast to this, the cities of northern and central Italy
abounded with urban police forces, official and semi-official. Above all, the
cities were the repositories of the greatest arm of social control available to
these weak states: the annone, the public grain stores provisioned by the
municipalities of the great cities and the state, itself, an exercise made
possible by the control exercised by the urban over the rural centre. The
cities, too, were the major centres of the wealth, and thus the charity, of the
Church. In times of crisis, the city was both a magnet that attracted the
desperate of the periphery and a bastion to be defended against this influx.
Whether through tight, effective controls on entry and residence,9 or by
stout resistance to siege, the centre – urban and rural – could still see the
periphery as a source of dark, barbarous violence, directed at its wealth and
prosperity. Alongside the very real ties of clientage and economic interest
were also atavistic suspicions and dread. The economic crisis triggered by
the first French invasion unleashed just such forces over much of northern
Italy between 1796 and 1799.10 A further reminder of the very real, potent
animosity between town and country came during the peasant revolts of


                                        9
