                  T H E L A S T B A R B A R I A N I N VA S I O N ?


length that they contained within them the germs of modernity. The French
brought an unprecedented degree of political unity to the peninsula; by 1809
it divided into the mainland Kingdom of Naples, the Kingdom of Italy in
the north-east and centre-east, and the imperial departments – the départe-
ments réunis – in the north-west and centre-west. In the two latter polities,
French institutions, French administrative practices and the introduction of
French property laws are widely credited with the general advancement of
the society and economy of the areas they penetrated most deeply.8 The
French certainly introduced higher standards of policing and law and order
than had existed anywhere in the peninsula hitherto, and they did this most
effectively in the Kingdom of Italy and the départements réunis.9 It is not the
intention of the present study to deny the positive and effective impact of
French rule on Italy, which I have written about myself. Rather the present
purpose is to go deeper than these essentially functional aspects of
Napoleonic rule.
   There was a highly subjective element to the imperial experience in Italy
for both the rulers and the ruled. Italian resentment was not confined to the
more explicit, material or strictly political forms of exploitation or repres-
sion. There is much in what follows to argue that these resentments actually
intensified in those cases where the French most wanted to avoid exploiting
their administrés and begin providing Italians with what they regarded as the
benefits of French civilization and culture. The politics of religion in
Napoleonic Italy turns, in essence, on the hostile reception Italians gave to
these initiatives; they proved among the most detested changes they endured
in the epoca francese. The intensity of the trauma endured, too, and the
determined opposition the religious reforms provoked, gives a clear indica-
tion as to how different were the cultures of rulers and ruled. They are a
reminder that concepts of ‘the other’ and of cultural imperialism, although
fraught with complexities, have a place in a purely European context and are
not the preserve of relations between Europe and the extra-European world.
   When the Napoleonic regime made its peace with the Catholic Church
with the French Concordat, it did so largely on its own terms and to suit the
needs of France itself. These needs have been aptly defined as:

    not primarily a return to Tridentine Catholicism with its hierarchy,
    doctrines, catechism and confessional, but a religion concerned with
    parish life, centred on church services and the familiar rituals of
    baptism, marriage and burial.10

This was not the case in Italy, but it was the core of a Concordat that co-
opted the Church into the Napoleonic state, rather than admitting it as a
real partner in social control. Jansenist and Richerist11 ideals had made a
real impact on those elements of the French Church that Napoleon came
most to trust. The real genius of the Napoleonic Church, however, was to


                                         3
