                  T H E L A S T B A R B A R I A N I N VA S I O N ?


was less sustained than in France or much of Germany, it was still a raw
wound after the traumatic confrontations between the Church and the
reformers of the Bourbon and Habsburg states in the 1760s.20 Yet, over the
course of the century, the Church may still have been moving closer to this
view of the need for reform, even if its position could hardly be described as
one of ‘liberal’ or even reforming Catholicism, as Owen Chadwick puts it.21
The struggle against popular religion was part of a truly longue durée and it
absorbed the lion’s share of ecclesiastical energies throughout the early
modern period. This challenge, more than any other, revealed the Church as
anything but uniform. How best to curb popular religion divided Jansenists
from Jesuits, the epsicopate from the itinerant orders, the priests from the
people, more clearly than most other issues. Attitudes to the style and tactics
of missionary activity, particularly, betokened wider, deeper religious divi-
sions among the clergy.22
    At the heart of the history of religion in the politics of Napoleonic Italy
lies the central sea-change in the attitude of the Church to its two major
adversaries. The result of the conflict with the Napoleonic regime reversed
the tentative, complex rapprochement between the Church and ‘externally
originated secularization’. Instead it made its peace with popular piety, to an
extent unthinkable in the previous century. Thus ‘inherent laicization’ not
only ceased to be perceived as a threat, but was no longer perceived as a
process of laicization. It was transformed into a source of strength that had
to be mobilized in crisis and deferred to, even imitated, in the darkest hours
of Napoleon’s persecution of the Curia. The Church emerged much changed
from the struggle, less complex, perhaps, but still a strong influence in
Italian society, battered but not dislodged by the Napoleonic onslaught.
This is the story of a Napoleonic defeat to rival that of 1812 in Russia, or
indeed Waterloo, of a magnitude only enhanced by its bloodless nature.




                                         6
