                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


college, but with a very different ethos and very clear goals. In the words of
its French director:

    I can gather together 150 young men of the leading noble families
    of Italy, and I have got these little counts, marquesses and princes
    to enact Le Dragon de Thionville and La Bataille d’Austerlitz … .
    You can grasp all the political and moral advantages. It is
    complained that I am giving too military an education to these chil-
    dren; that is to say, it is not exclusively monastical … I am breaking
    their ties to home a little, and their attachment to their families’
    values. It gives a small taste of the right subjects that carry abroad
    the love of the laws and practices of my country.45

Parents withdrew their children by the score and, by 1807, the college
collapsed.
   As a statement of intent, however, there can be few more emphatic
committed to paper. Here the army was to become l’école de la nation, just
as in France, but the French firmly believed that there was much more
schooling to be done, to the point where links with home and family had to
be ‘broken’ – nothing less – and a wholly new culture instilled in the youth
of the Italian nobility. That culture was entirely military in its ethos and
avowedly opposed to the values fostered by a Catholic education, in the eyes
of those who shaped imperial policy. The Administrative Prefect was very
clear as to who was behind the collapse of the lycée and his line of
reasoning sheds great light on the extent to which the French saw the pillars
of Italian culture as diametrically opposed to their own. He told his supe-
riors that:

    The superb institution that is the College of St Catherine is slipping
    from my control: the holidays, the ignorance, the intrigue, the local
    rivalries, all combine to oppose my project … . The ambassadors,
    the ministers, the references, the importuning of every conceivable
    type, the tears of some mothers, who have been misled – these are
    the tactics they use.46

A week, later he added an old enemy to this list:

    Provoked by Jesuit lies, and by those of the teachers who have
    remained, in the spirit of a discredited system, those who cannot
    tolerate a few salutary changes in the college cannot abide an
    educated, hard-working Frenchman among them: the result is that,
    daily, parents withdraw their children … . It seems impossible to
    struggle against the flood which is engulfing this fine
    establishment.47


                                      21
