                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


often laid the blame for the degeneration of the periphery at the feet of the
ancien régime states themselves. In imperial eyes the Church had failed to
play its part on the periphery, but that might have been no bad thing for the
prospects of the Napoleonic project. In this milieu, the Church was either
isolated and powerless in the face of a society so at odds with its mores, or
its lower clergy – regular and secular – were simply part of the culture of
vendetta and amorality the French felt still prevailed on the periphery. It was
the opinion of the French prefect of the department of the Apennines, east
of Genoa, that the Genoese government had deliberately weakened the
power of the bishops, for example, thus undermining their authority over
the lower clergy. As a result, indiscipline was rife; in this sphere, at least,
restoring and bolstering episcopal power was regarded as ‘a thing that is
quite necessary in this country’.33 The revolt of 1799 convinced the French
that this lack of discipline went far beyond lax personal conduct, however. It
produced a lower clergy all too much at one with the violence of the society
of which they had become too much a part. In the northern Tuscan town of
Pontremoli, according to the French police, an Augustinian friar Celestino
Ferrari led the revolt against them in 1799, ‘dressed as a cavalryman on
horseback, at the head of seven or eight armed peasants’. Ten years later,
during the Wagram campaign, he threatened the administrator of the prop-
erty seized from the monks under the Concordat that ‘he would carve him
into little pieces, should the government fall’.34 Cases like this underlined the
complicity of the lower clergy in the politics of counter-revolution. But, at a
deeper level, they also seemed to the French to reveal the failure of Trent in
these areas. After their own experiences in the Vendée and elsewhere, the
French had come to expect little else but counter-revolutionary sympathies
from the lower clergy. However, cases like Ferrari’s were just as significant
because they exposed how integrated were many clergy with the culture of
the laity. Many such cases convinced the French – and the Italian episcopate
– that the mountain clergy could be pre-Constance as much as pre-Trent. To
support ‘1799’ was one thing; to lead – literally – from the front was quite
another.
    Those who supported the counter-revolution, but held to a priestly
conduct, faced the different charge of using their intellectual superiority to
lead the ignorant and superstitious astray, of abusing their own gifts and
their position for secular – as much as seditious – ends. Typical in this
respect was the official view of the parocco of Castelnuovo, on the border
between Parma and Liguria. Taneridi was an ex-monk, a good preacher, a
serious man with considerable theological expertise which he used ‘to win
the support of the foolish and devout’. He came to the government’s atten-
tion in 1811 because he denounced the Concordat’s ruling that only parish
priests be allowed to predicate and used this as a platform to attack the
regime more widely.35 Taneridi conforms to the Tridentine model in many
ways: an intellectual placed in the midst of a savage people, capable of doing


                                       17
