                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


indeed, in that very capacity to let itself be qualified. The Church learnt to
discern carefully between what it itself defined as superstition and those
extraordinary aspects of devotion that fell outside the fixed patterns of the
liturgy and the festivals of the official calendar, such as pilgrimages and
personal enthusiasms for particular cults or miracles. It accepted that its
preferred Christocentric devotions were not as popular as those surrounding
the Virgin or local saints, and that many aspects of archaic piety were
expertly preserved and integrated into official celebrations. In return it saw
Easter confession and communion become virtually universal even in the
remotest parts of the periphery, while the Rosary, the Forty Hours and the
litanies that went with them became absorbed into popular practice. The
continued efforts of missionaries throughout the eighteenth century, as well
as the persistence of truly popular piety, are the clearest evidence that no
one believed the process was complete. Yet alongside the perseverance of the
post-Tridentine Church was its ability to accept that its own initiatives had
themselves been tamed by the communal structures of the periphery.
Experience had taught the clergy the complexities of mountain society. The
experience of the evangelical onslaught of Trent had revealed in those same
communities a capacity for cultural and religious adaptation under the
outward cloak of that ‘sense of immemoriality that one can persuade
oneself to feel when looking at a technologically “backward” society in the
Mediterranean’, as Chris Wickham has observed.21 It is as spurious in the
context of religiosity as it is in that of the rural economy.
    In terms of the permanent relevance of the periphery as a concept for
contemporaries, successive generations of clerics felt it was a problem that
did not go away. There was no permanent cure for the masses of the
periphery, only constant, increasingly regular and structured vigilance and
exhortation. Seen another way, the periphery – and also many parts of the
rural centre – also proved Gramsci right when he discerned in ‘popular reli-
gion’ not just conservative or reactionary ‘fossilized relics’ of traditional
custom, but also

    a series of often creative innovations, arising spontaneously from
    actual, changing conditions which were opposed to, or merely
    different from, the morality of the ruling classes.22

These differences became more obvious in the course of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries as the mores of Trent acquired a more pervasive grip on
the urban centre.
   Thus there was a great deal about the periphery that the French found
unchanged when they came to rule it as the Napoleonic empire expanded.
Equally there was a great deal in what had been changed by Trent that they
failed to understand or to accept as change for the better. In essence, the
French found societies they – and the Church, for that matter – considered


                                      13
