                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


These tirades provide a revealing list of those opposed to the French vision
for a regenerated Italian youth, all the direct enemies of militarism: the
strong tradition in weak ancien régime states of reliance on patronage –
itself a breeding ground for selfish corruption – which places private
concerns above public duties; the parochialism inherent in the life of weak
polities; and – perhaps the greatest evidence for French imperialists of inef-
fectual government – the undue, indeed overweening influence of the clergy
and of women on the destinies of their sons. In the last years of the
empire, the French sought to bring the sons of the leading families of the
Italian départements réunis and the Kingdom of Italy into the official fold
through their enlistment in the gardes d’honneur, a socially elite branch of
the National Guard. In an Italian context, the creation of the gardes
assumed the magnitude of a campaign of moral regeneration that was
itself the culmination of an arduous process of fostering a martial spirit in
the hearts and minds of Italian males. For the French officials who
imposed it, the creation of the gardes carried more than a hint of cultural
imperialism and, more specifically, of anti-clericalism. In April 1813,
Antoine Roederer, the French prefect of the department of Trasimeno,
singled out a particular youth for the gardes. He was worth more than
100,000 francs in rents and carried ‘le plus beau nom d’Italie’,
Connestabile Stoffa, but this was not Roederer’s reason for ‘targeting’ him
for active service:

    His father is dead and his mother treats him like a little girl. She is a
    respectable woman who imagines she could not do better than to
    have three priests bring up her boy. This young man is eighteen.
    Judge for yourself what a blow this will be for the poor mother! It
    creates a great good chance for this young man. There have been
    attempts to exempt him under thousands of pretexts.48

Roederer had a duty to regenerate Connestabile Stoffa, just as much as to
the imperial regime, to ensure that no young notable was exempted ‘when it
was a question of someone rich and important’.49 Roederer’s words are
replete with ethnic stereotypes, both in their direct intent towards the unfor-
tunate, inoffensive young Umbrian aristocrat and in what they reveal about
the ethos of imperial France and its fundamental incompatibility with
Tridentine Catholicism, as least as it had touched the Italian elites. The reac-
tion of Roman families such as the Patrizi was predictably hostile to this
thinly disguised policy of the conscription of barely pubescent Italian
nobles, giving rise to an upsurge of clericalism and overt piety.50 It had also
thrown several ancient Piedmontese families into the arms of the Jesuits by
the end of the period. In his memoirs, Massimo D’Azeglio recorded
movingly the impact of the forced departure of his older brothers to, respec-



                                       22
