                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


still to be violent, backward and superstitious. Like Trent, they saw spiritual
backwardness as part of the problem. However, they also came to regard
much of the work and the preferred methods of the Tridentine Church as
contributing factors to the problem of the periphery, rather than as pallia-
tives or progression. The Church could be blamed directly for many aspects
of the perceived savagery of the highlands, particularly for its complicity in
the great revolts of 1799. This formed, after all, the first and seminal experi-
ence of the periphery for the future imperial rulers of Italy, and it was not
something they could afford to put behind them. Whatever role the clergy
did or did not have in the ‘great Vendée’ of 1799, these revolts proved to the
French, beyond contradiction, that the Italian peripheries were dangerous.
Whether inspired or condemned by their clergy, the highland communities
had displayed a capacity for collective violence on a widespread if localized
scale.23 If Trent had sought to create a passive, non-violent society – and
what the French found at the centre predisposed them to think so – then it
had failed.
    During the longer period of occupation after 1800, French impressions
simply reflect a belief that, if its goal was to civilize the periphery, the work
of Trent had sunk without trace. The barbarism of rural life was driven
home to Paris again and again by those on the ground. They perceived a
society largely unchanged since the Middle Ages, pricked by the Renaissance
and the Counter Reformation only in a few urban centres like Siena. Beyond
that lay an inferno. The prefect of Ombronne, the Tuscan department that
was virtually synonymous with the old state of Siena, did not place the
blame for the general ‘current depraved state of morality’ on the clergy of
either the city or the countryside, nor did he believe that they were worse
now than in the past.24 The problem had much deeper roots:

    You would have to go back to the very distant past to find the cause
    of the depraved state of Tuscan morals, for Boccaccio in his tales,
    and the historians who have written after him, have given us most
    assuredly unflattering impressions.25

Other French officials were less discerning in their search for the source of
the illness, but they were just as disparaging. In the autumn of 1812, Norvins,
the Director-General of Police for the Roman departments undertook a tour
on horseback of both departments which lasted three months. His verdicts
were damning, not just of local politics but of the deeper cultural roots he
believed they stemmed from. On finding orphanages full of illegitimate chil-
dren in Civitavecchia, he exploded to his superiors in Paris:

    The corruption of morality is the same in all Italian towns, and
    especially in those of the ex-Roman states. Society is in a perpetual
    state of scandal, and only time can change that. It is easy enough to


                                       14
