                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


good but, in the political circumstances of the epoca francese, using his
talents in the immediate cause of disorder and in the wider purpose of
blocking the advance of Enlightenment through French rule in general and
the Concordat in particular. At least this was how it seemed from an official
point of view. Even in its ‘proper guise’, the Tridentine Church was not to be
wholly trusted. For the clergy, the superstition and volatility of the moun-
tain were there to be manipulated or joined; for the French, there did not
seem to be much of a choice. It was not a propitious point of departure for
the new regime.
   For all that, there was at least spirit in the communities of the periphery.
Violence betokened martial inclinations. Francesco Assereto and many like
him were regarded as good military material. There was a strong sense
among the French that, if Trent had failed to civilize these regions, at least it
had not emasculated them. The ephemeral presence of the Church had
saved the Umbrians from a worse state than isolation:

    being far from the centre, they were less under the yoke of the
    priests, and their industrious spirit found it easier to resist the influ-
    ence of a government bent on destroying all national spirit in its
    territories.36

Industry and enterprise in a society so imbued by Tridentine Catholicism
could assume singular forms, however. The French authorities took good
note of one such form in the Ligurian Apennines. However superstitious
and ignorant the people of the periphery might be, they were enterprising
and, essentially, amoral in the eyes of the imperial authorities. In a handful
of very poor mountain communes in Liguria, a particular practice emerges
from the French archives. Groups of men went out annually from
Boronasia, Mezzanego and Sopra la Croce, as far afield as France, Spain
and Portugal, as nothing short of ‘con artists’, to beg for money under a
traditional false pretext that their relatives had been captured by the Barbary
pirates and were being held hostage. They played on an old Christian duty
to help ransom such captives. They were known locally as the batti birbbi.
What most intrigued the French, however, was that this practice was not the
preserve of the very poor. The authorities believed that all the wealthiest
landowners in the area had been batti in their youth, the mayor included,
and that it had become something akin to a rite of passage in the area.37 For
the French, here was mountain ‘piety’ encapsulated. It had little to do with
real faith; it drew on communal solidarity; it preyed on a still more supersti-
tious centre. At least it possessed nerve and aggression, for where Trent
really did seem to have fulfilled its mission – in the lowlands and the cities –
the French found a more easily governable society but also a culture even
more repellent to them than that of their ‘thousand Vendées’, as General



                                       18
