                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


the emasculation of the Italian centre. There was too much enervating reli-
gion at the centre and they came to see it as the main cause of the malaise of
the Italian elites. Weak government and narrow political horizons had
created a vacuum into which the Tridentine Church had stolen, imparting
values to the elites that drained men of the martial spirit so essential to their
immediate war effort and that eroded morality and undermined the powers
of reason throughout society. Indeed the French throughout Italy reached
the startlingly uniform conclusion that they were faced with a corrupt,
effeminate and irrational – if cunning – elite. In these circumstances the
French were at a distinct disadvantage from Trent in their cultural assault on
the highlands. Trent had built a secure base for itself at the centre – the
French soon found out for themselves exactly how secure – whereas the new
imperial order felt it had none. Conversely, the French felt they had more
promising – if highly dangerous – material to hand on the periphery than
did Trent. It is here that the profundity of the gulf between the Borromean
and Bonapartist visions of the world emerges.
    The proof of how decadent and degraded the French felt the centre to be,
emerges starkly in the measures they took to try to regenerate its future
leaders and, indeed, in the fact that they concentrated on the younger gener-
ation having despaired of what they found. They also felt a compunction to
work fast, before the clergy – literally – corrupted the youth of the Italian
elite. In the city of Parma, the French official charged in 1806 with its
administration had very emphatic, precise views on the impact of clerical
influence on Parmense youth:

    a morality which is inseparable from a pure and firm piety is rare
    here, and vices exist because of the absence of any check to
    moderate them … . You would probably be surprised if I told you
    how familiar venomous, back-stabbing sarcasm is to the youth of
    all classes! You would probably be revolted to know that young
    creatures of eight or ten are sold into prostitution … the state must
    attack this propensity for licence at its source … . The number of
    priests must be reduced.44

Such judgements singled out the Church as a source of active harm in
Italy.
   There were plenty of aristocratic youths to go around the numerous
priests of Parma, thanks to the presence in the town of one of the greatest
and most exclusive boys’ boarding schools in Italy, the college of Santa
Caterina, which had attracted the sons of noble families from all over Italy
since the seventeenth century. A Jesuit foundation, the school had passed to
the Oratorians on their dissolution; the French inherited its boarders in 1805
when they annexed the Duchy. To reorient Parmese youth, in particular, and
the scions of the Italian nobility, in general, the French soon reopened the


                                       20
