                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


‘peace to the souls’ of the communities of the periphery. Neither confession
and communion at Easter, nor the ritual reconciliation of estranged neigh-
bours at the foot of the mission cross, were reflected in the dossiers of the
French police. What shocked them were their unsolicited origins. Lagarde,
the French Director-General of Police in Florence, told Paris clearly that:

    I have little liking for lightly taken measures and information
    coming from one sole source, for this channel is usually wrong,
    especially in Italy, which is a country of timorous, but also hateful
    passions. I never take severe measures without making enquiries on
    several different sides and … I regard the municipal authorities as
    essentially partial, especially in the smaller places.29

The violent society that emerges from the many local denunciations that
reached the French was even more shocking to the new regime than the
levels of duplicity and mutual animosity which inspired them. The same
apparent savagery that they had found directed against them in 1799 seemed
to be turned inwards, in ready fashion, on peripheral society itself.
   The legacy of a weak ancien régime was, at least to the Prefect of Genoa,
‘a country where spirits are naturally heady, where shots are never long
being fired’.30 What the French hated was the legacy of discord they
believed this weakness engendered. Left rudderless, a culture of vendetta
and feuding was only to be expected. This was certainly Nardon’s opinion of
what he found in the Piacentino, the hinterland of the duchies and the
theatre of the revolt of winter 1805–6. The experience of the revolt of the
Apennine valleys of the Piacentino was formative for French perceptions of
the region.31 Just as important as the occurrence of the revolt and its imme-
diate causes were the social climate and culture of anarchy that had given
birth to it:

    this country must be governed … there was a list of hideous crimes
    for every day during March which, although private in nature, pose
    no less a threat to the social order [than the recent revolt] … . These
    morals, customs, passions, are the tragic effects of a very old pattern
    of impunity.32

The Apennine spine of Italy was treacherous country for any kind of
authority; its populations were judged at best as laws unto themselves and at
worst as prone to slip into an atavistic barbarism if not ‘policed’.
   The Tridentine Church did not entirely disagree with such verdicts, but
the French did not see it as capable of playing anything but a subordinate
role, at best, in their project of taming the periphery. They felt their own
experience had generated enough evidence of the Church’s inadequacy as an
agent of social control, although it must be stressed that the French most


                                      16
