                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


    establish these moral excesses by [counting] the number of children
    left at the hospital.26

More detailed, personalized instances of this kind of behaviour reached the
French all the time from the periphery. Francesco Assereto, the son of a
notary and municipal secretary of the commune of Uscio in the Apennines
near Genoa, was obviously a man that Trent could not tame. Like his father,
Francesco was judged a violent character by the local authorities. A police
report described his conduct thus:

    he picks quarrels, he disturbs the peace of families by bringing
    dishonour and shame among them, by ruining young, inexperi-
    enced girls. This young man, devoid of morality, takes pleasure in
    insulting the mayor, the priest and the Gendarmerie, who all want
    him exiled.27

Although married, he had chased his wife from the house and installed two
young girls in her place. It is true that the parish priest was among the
loudest voices to demand his exile. The wider point was, however, that cases
of this kind convinced the French of the continued existence of ‘nuestras
Indías’ and that more was needed to civilize them than the Church had to
offer.
   If the towns provided the sex, the countryside offered the violence. In the
hill town of Frossione, Norvins seemed to have found his vision of hell:

    The inhabitants of the towns and the countryside look like savages
    … . There is no trace of civilization in these small towns perched on
    the slopes of the Apennines. The Popes called this district their
    Tartary … . This savage spirit prevails even in the wealthiest landed
    families … I intend to fight the brigandage of the mountains and
    the barbarity of the towns.28

If Trent had done no harm on the periphery – and given the prominent role
of the clergy in the revolts of 1799 this was not easy to assume – it had
certainly left no appreciable trace of what good it had sought to do.
Nevertheless, Norvins’ vow to regenerate and civilize the Roman periphery
resembles earlier Jesuit reactions enough to be remarked upon. Unlike the
political authorities of the ancien régime – and the Papal government
behaved no differently from lay states in this respect – neither the Tridentine
clergy nor the agents of French imperial rule were prepared to ignore the
‘civilizing mission’. Their targets were the same.
   The flood of denunciations and reports of violence on the periphery that
reached the new French rulers from every corner did little to convince them
that the work of the missionaries or the other efforts of Trent had brought


                                      15
