                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


Wirion – a veteran of the western departments – described Piedmont in
1801.38


          The centre: Saints or soldiers, Catholics or citizens?
The wild peripheries of the old states were a perennial presence – and
problem – for whoever ruled Italy. The process of taming them was part of a
long continuum. Under the old order, the urban centre had been regarded as
the counterpoint to the peripheries; it was the fount of civilizing influences.
The French turned this on its head, for the religious problem as it posed
itself at the centre was fundamentally different from its place on the
periphery. Whereas the mountains at least possessed the crude, untutored
elements of regeneration, the rot in Italian society started at the centre and
spread out from there. Italy was, in French eyes, rotten at the core. The
continued strength of the concept of ‘regeneration’ at the heart of the
French Revolution was nowhere more apparent than during the French rule
of the urban centres of Italy.39 Thanks, at least in part to the influence of
the post-Tridentine clergy, the French prefect admitted that ‘The city of
Siena probably sees fewer crimes committed than anywhere else’.40
Nevertheless, the price for this order was almost too high to pay. It warped
and twisted the natural intelligence the French readily accorded the Italian
elites. Roederer was far from seeing the Umbrian nobility as noble savages,
but rather as cunning, worldly and highly intelligent: ‘We find ourselves in a
country where the upper class is very clever. They take the slightest hint’.41
In similar vein, the prefect of the Apennines awarded grudging praise to the
local notables of the Ligurian periphery:

    We have to cope with the kind of men who are used to calculating
    the danger as much as the reward, and who act only in proportion
    to the interest or the risk that must be run.42

None of it translated into civic virtue, as derived from the Revolution,
however.
   French contempt for the elite culture they perceived at the centre makes
Napoleonic rule in Italy an almost unique period, although the first
Austrian officials to govern Tuscany under the House of Lorraine were also
shocked by the amorality they found among the Florentine elite.43 In the
context of its religious policies, the disdain the regime developed for that
culture stemmed from the dominant influence of Tridentine Catholicism on
the urban elites and masses. Here the French could watch and assess how
the Catholic Reformation could transform a society in which it took root,
and they did not like what they found. From this stemmed their determina-
tion to effect a cultural revolution in imperial Italy, which led to direct
conflict with the Church. Essentially this turned on what the French saw as


                                      19
