                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


hapless world of the ancien régime state. They came to see it not just as a
strictly political threat.
    Whereas the early modern concept of corruption and depravity saw them
as individual faults, however diffuse in human society, a view shared by the
first Austrians in Florence, the French believed they stemmed from political
and social circumstances. This is what made their relationship with the
Italian elites unique. The weak, clientistic nature of the secular governments
of the ancien régime were regarded as breeding grounds of decadence; the
fiat of imperial conquest had created a new set of circumstances from which
regeneration could begin. The Church, however, was seen as the breeder of
corruption on the ground the ancien régime state had vacated. As the old
states disappeared with the advance of the empire, the Church emerged ever
more clearly as the root of all evil. The ancien régime state was a real but
passive source of the problem; the Church was the active agent of the deca-
dence of the Italian elites. Ignorance and amorality might be predictable on
the periphery but the French saw at the centre, proof that the Church was
actually a force for ill. It had, at best, left the urban elites rudderless; at
worst, it had fostered their decadence and corruption. The empirical result
facing the new rulers seemed to be a society permeated by false values and
perverted moral codes. They found it everywhere, and they came to blame
the Church not the lay elite for this state of affairs.
    The most striking examples of the correlation the French made between
piety and moral corruption are probably not those drawn from public life, or
from the point where familial culture, public obligations and religion meet,
as in the case of the gardes d’honneur. Rather, the best indications of how far
‘the rot’ went within the Italian elites, and of how closely bound up it was
with religion, emerge in French attitudes to Italian upper-class women. The
incongruity of the piety and loose morals among Roman society women is
expressed in the official literature in the starkest terms. Degerando, a
member of the provisional administration charged with organizing the ex-
Papal states into French departments, told Paris in his ‘Statistical Report on
Rome and the Roman States’:

    High society women are very corrupt, but without the slightest hint
    of coquettishness about them. This corruption is a very deeply
    rooted thing, it is accepted, and does not stop them being devout.57

There is, of course a logic to this perceived incongruity. Women were the
most pious and ‘priest-ridden’ sector of Roman society, so it stands to
reason they would also be among the most morally corrupt. This was not at
all a disengaged, official reaction, dispassionately elucidated by one the
regime’s leading intellectuals. It was reflected in the personal correspondence
of the Comte de Tournon – a young nobleman, himself from a convention-
ally Catholic background – who was appointed the Prefect of the


                                      24
