                        C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


in the quest for regeneration was the Tridentine Church, because it held that
Church culpable for the moral decadence it saw all about it.
   It is already evident that the French decided to arrest this state of decline
with a very heterogeneous mixture of militarism, social and intellectual
refinement, and a return to the ‘primitive Church’. There is nothing in
contemporary discourse to suggest they sensed any irony or incongruity in
this. Jansenism had long ceased to be a source of subversion of constituted
authority, as had often been the case before 1789,62 and had evolved into a
pillar of the Gallican Church, as embodied in the Concordat. The Gallican
articles were included in the Concordat, despite the Vatican’s objections;
Portalis, Napoleon’s first Minister of Religion (Cultes), was an avowed
Gallican. Nor was the state alone in its Gallicanism; many French bishops
felt Napoleon had conceded too much to Rome. Although the Concordat
actually spelled the end of Gallican independence for the French episcopate,
this was not how it appeared to contemporaries, least of all Pius VII.63 The
Jansenist element of the Concordat would emerge less in the high politics
surrounding the Concordat than in its terms and the zeal with which they
were applied. The regular orders did not return under its terms, nor did the
abolished saints’ days or the right to process publicly on them. The ecclesias-
tical courts, the vast Church properties nationalized in 1790, all remained
unaltered. These were terms to be extended, along with the empire, not soft-
ened or adapted to local conditions.
   This was the spirit in which the Concordat came to Italy. The opposition
the French faced, and their implacable repression of that opposition,
destroyed one of the few constants Napoleon had hoped to pursue in Italy:
peaceful cooperation with the Church. In 1796 he exhorted the Army of
Italy – largely in vain – to remember they were in a Catholic country and to
respect the clergy.64 By the time he had finally torn up the Concordat and
imprisoned Pius VII and most of his cardinals, Napoleon had already
decided Italy was too priest-ridden for its own good.




                                       26
