                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


whole week, longer by several days than was usual. He did not remain
unsupported in his desire to curb the festa, for the Minister of Religion
replied that in future it would be confined to Sunday and the illuminations
restricted to the churches, in accordance with the terms of the Concordat.9
D’Auzers emerges as a Voltairian, shadowing the entry on ‘Superstition’ for
the Philosophical Dictionary:

    The superstitious man is to the rogue what the slave is to the tyrant.
    Further, the superstitious man is governed by the fanatic and
    becomes fanatic.10

His criticisms reveal more than the predictable exasperation of a Voltairian
of his generation, however. Here D’Auzers is not aghast at the barbarous-
ness of the ‘nuestras Indías’ of the periphery, at rude people untouched by
the currents of civilization. Rather he fears the power of a well-disciplined,
Tridentine clergy over an urban population, for it is just such a clergy – in
his eyes – that is turning the festa dei lumi into a disorderly event at its own
behest. What should have been a peaceful, relatively brief exercise in public
piety was corrupted by its very guardians and creators into something more
atavistic for short-term political goals. Turned on its head, this analysis
points not only to the power wielded by the secular clergy in this sizeable
Ligurian port – the type of place where Trent made itself felt – but also to a
tendency among the clergy to coalesce with more atavistic forces latent in
the laity, to project mass forms of passive – if often rowdy – resistance to
many aspects of French rule. D’Auzers, as a policeman, was quick to discern
this trend. In Genoa at the same time, after a ‘spate’ of miracles, the Prefect
there also lamented with undisguised contempt the uses to which priestly
power were put in the city:

    It is pathetic, in this century of Enlightenment, that of Napoleon
    the Great, [that] there are still those sordid enough, impudent
    enough, to agitate public credulity, as they dared to do here, last
    night.11

The fragile, if not quite artificial, nature of any ‘alliance’ between Trent and
the French is here exposed.
   Others found deeper, cultural reasons to disparage the religious culture
around them. In the same letter to his mother in which he foreshadowed the
‘arrival’ of the Concordat in the Papal states, Tournon contrasted the
robust, imperial past of his chef lieu with the servility of what he found:

    The temple of Jupiter that once dominated the eternal city is a far
    cry from the humble cells of the Passionists! The [Roman] triumphs
    brought exotic spoils of conquest to this place; the mendicant friars


                                       30
