                                       3
                     THE RELIGI ON
                     OF THE RULERS



In the autumn of 1810, after a walk in the hills, the new Prefect of Rome,
Tournon, wrote to his mother that ‘I sat on the ruins of the temple of
Jupiter Latinus, now a convent that will soon, itself, be a ruin’.1 This was no
flight of fancy, nor an idle threat, but a clear statement of policy, for the
Papal states, as the last territories to be annexed in the Italian peninsula,
would now feel the full force of the terms of the Concordat in a line that
stretched back to Piedmont in 1801. The French enforced its terms as rigor-
ously as they did those of the Civil Code or the laws on conscription, for it
was just as important to them. Turning convents into ruins was exactly what
Tournon had been sent to Rome to do, unless they were fit for offices,
barracks or schools, for this is what had happened everywhere else. It would
be no different now that the French had assumed responsibility for the very
heart of the Roman Catholic world.
    They did not have it all their own way, however. The imposition of the
Concordat on the peoples of Italy met with resistance everywhere, at every
level of society and on the periphery as much as at the centre, embracing the
clergy and laity alike. Yet the regime never wavered in its attempts to impose
its religious policies on Italy: to be an imperial subject was to be an adherent
of the Gallican Church, as defined by the Concordat. Indeed the empire’s
meridional possessions were singled out for particular attention in the
uncompromising words of a memorandum from the Ministry of Religion to
Napoleon in November 1809:

    The limits of our empire … embrace almost all of Christendom … .
    Now it is notorious … that the Alps and the Pyrenees have always
    been barriers that the purity of the principles of the Gallican
    Church have not been able to cross. This diversity no longer exists
    … [and] your Kingdom of Italy must now be taken as the model for
    uniformity of discipline in the Church [which] is the surest guar-
    antee of its perfection.2




                                      27
