                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


tively, the military academy of St Cyr and service in the Council of State, as
well as the fact that the former, on his return, became a Jesuit with his
father’s blessing. Indeed Massimo’s own education was entrusted to
members of the clandestine order. But the aggressive character of these
French policies not only shattered their own goal of ralliement among the
Italian nobility, it altered sensibly the cultural world of many members of
the only true ‘warrior aristocracy’ left in Italy, in Piedmont.51 Michael
Carroll has traced a psychological link from the ‘father-ineffective family’
through Marian devotion to the culture of machismo in southern Italy;52
whereas the French thought they detected many men too closely bound to
their mothers in northern and central Italy, they did not detect a great deal
of machismo among them. However, on the periphery Marian devotion did
seem to them to produce the aggression Carroll associates with the cult in
the Latin Mediterranean – if for different reasons.
   Although militarism was intrinsic to the culture of imperial France – and
the cultural ethos of the revolutionary and imperial regimes was very
masculine and warlike53 – the French contempt for the Italian elites and the
role the Tridentine Church played in their decadence went far beyond this
lack of martial virtue. The French remained imbued with the Enlightened
concept that the only true civilization was both polie et policée54 and, as the
Italians fell down on both these counts, they stood in need of the moral
regeneration propounded by the Revolution. However, many of their reac-
tions to the decadence they perceived in Italy also reveal the persistence of
an older, more widely defined concept of corruption, expressed by Jean-
Claude Waquet as

    the depravity of morals … governed by and closely related to sin …
    [C]orruption was the weakness of human nature, the depravity of
    mankind, the failure of virtue, the triumph of the passions, the
    outbreak of sin … . Its meaning was then extended to cover the
    wider notion of corruption having almost metaphysical qualities.55

The French beheld an Italy full – too full – of churches and clergy, and the
conclusion the new imperial rulers drew was not that Italians continued in
their corruption in the face of the admonitions of their priests, as Waquet
has posited for ancien régime Florence, but that the Tridentine Church itself
was part of the corruption, that it had left them rudderless. The French
distrusted the confessional not just as a ready weapon of the counter-revolu-
tion against the Revolution – although this was very strongly felt from the
top to the bottom of the regime – but as a morally corrupting influence in
itself. Thus the universality of Easter confession and communion, and the
power of conscience exerted by confessors,56 were not regarded by the French
as a miracle of administrative policing and social control in the otherwise



                                      23
