                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


    bring to it only the alms given them by wretches poorer than them-
    selves!12

As the scion of a royalist family who had fled the Jacobin sack of Lyon as a
child in 1794, Tournon’s contempt for Baroque charity is all the more
striking, with its clear resonance of Gibbon. Tournon’s conventionally pious
background make many of his disparaging remarks about Roman piety all
the more revealing. He was pious enough to pay for several masses to be said
for the soul of his father on his death in 1810, even if he had to rely on
juring priests to do so.13 Yet his loathing of indigenous religion is
omnipresent. Tournon thus embodies the extent to which the Catholic
Reformation had diverged in its French and Italian contexts. The gulf
between rulers and ruled was not all the fault of the Revolution.
   While Tournon, the aristocrat, despised the ignobility of Roman piety,
Degerando, the secular-minded, intellectual voice of the regime, turned his
scorn on the superficiality of religious culture among the Roman elite. Yet
whereas Tournon drew almost instinctively on his classical education and a
code of honour-through-glory, Degerando based his distaste on contempo-
rary French notions of a more cerebral approach to the sacred than he
found among the highest secular magistrates of the city:

    Religion, such as it is conceived of by Enlightened men, and felt by
    virtuous men – such as it exists generally in France – [is] the fruit of
    a reasoned and reasonable conviction, its principle is the improve-
    ment of morality. [This is] scarcely even perceived among the
    Romans … . Worship is only an expression. Relics, indulgences, the
    Forty Hours, the Rosary are what interest them; reading the
    Scriptures would appear profane, and a Roman would suspect
    heresy in these august, simple truths … the author of all things
    would pass only for an atheist. The Gospel exists no more in Rome,
    save in the paintings which decorate the basilicas … . How many
    thousands of men who come to kiss the feet of the statue of Jupiter
    – transformed into that of the prince of the Apostles – even suspect
    that a Gospel might exist!14

Degerando’s specific targets are as revealing as his more general observa-
tions. He derides the minutiae of Tridentine devotion, rather than a failure
by Trent to impose itself on the laity, for the Forty Hours and the Rosary
were the most renowned and readily accepted of Tridentine innovations. To
single them out as barriers to the attainment of piety struck at the heart of
orthodoxy, and Degerando knew it. Yet he could not see that such practices
were actually part of a concerted ‘anti-folklore strategy’ to create alterna-
tives to archaic popular traditions.15
   In Parma, Nardon, an ex-Terrorist, revealed – almost unwittingly – how


                                       31
