                   T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


gious festivals revealed what might best be described as ‘a-Tridentine’ prac-
tices to be widespread – and thoroughly denounced and opposed by the
local clergy – throughout the pianura padana, as well as the foothills of the
Dolomites. That is, the centre was far from free from archaism more readily
associated with the periphery, even in a region that might reasonably be
thought of as the ‘Borromean heartland’.7 The experience of Enlightened
reformers before them, and their own investigations, showed the French
that the imposition of the Concordat might not follow the pattern of
passive centre, recalcitrant periphery. It did, however, strengthen their
conviction of a common purpose with Trent that, in practice, singularly
failed to work.
   Their contempt for – and assault on – the religious culture of the hinter-
lands is wholly predictable. Perhaps less so was their withering contempt for
the spiritual decadence they perceived at the centre, among all classes of
lowland and urban society. It was the corollary of French disdain for the
perceived lack of Italian martial spirit. With the introduction of the
Concordat to the départements réunis and the Kingdom of Italy, that
contempt found its true institutional target: the Church itself.
   D’Auzers, as the Director of Police for the departments of Piedmont,
Liguria and the former Duchies of Parma and Piacenza, was the official
with the longest and widest perspective on Italian piety: his remit was wide,
as were the territories for which he was responsible, and his tenure was the
longest of all his colleagues. He could claim to know his administrés. In
1810, after almost seven years in Italy, his distaste for Tridentine piety is
manifest in his description of the great festa dei lumi held for the
Assumption at Chiavari on the Ligurian coast. The whole town was illumi-
nated for several days and nights, and this always included the houses of rich
and poor alike, as well as the churches and public buildings. This was a post-
Tridentine ritual par excellence, and D’Auzers pointed less to the archaic
disorder attendant on its celebration, than that Tridentine ideals had
triumphed too thoroughly among the urban people of the coast:

    What will become of the public servant? He can’t avoid being
    caught up in the crowd. If there is trouble, how can he control his
    administrés? The religious festivals are almost as important to the
    people as the law – and when the altar is not used to stir up
    fanaticism, they might guarantee him control, but not when the
    festivals are prolonged … when they lead to disorder. The people
    thus see only God and his ministers and, believing, obey them;
    they then become deaf to the public servant, who speaks for the
    law.8

D’Auzers also added that this particular year – the first of the Pope’s
captivity at Savona, just along the coast – the festa dei lumi had lasted a


                                      29
