                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


vast and unbridgeable was the gap between the French and Baroque piety in
an urban setting. In 1806, recently installed in the city, he remarked with
puzzlement on the very existence of the ceremony of the Forty Hours, when
‘day and night, processions of the confraternities and the [religious] corpo-
rations go about the churches’. More predictably he added ‘moreover, these
nocturnal ceremonies are often the occasion for scandal and trouble’.
Clearly some forms of fun were all right and others not, for ‘on the other
hand, all the theatres are closed’ for two days, something the two French
regiments stationed in the city found ‘very singular’. Nardon was particu-
larly proud that he found a compromise by which ‘each followed his own
tastes and principles’.16 This compromise foreshadowed the terms of the
Concordat regarding religious ceremonies, and pointed to his desire for a
virtual state of apartheid between the French and the locals in such matters.
This is the official decree issued by Nardon:

    We are French, we are led by French laws and customs:

    I will permit the religious ceremonies of the Forty Hours [to take
    place] because there is freedom of worship in France; I forbid and
    prohibit they be prolonged after eight in the evening, because to
    allow them to continue later would lead to scandal, for Religion
    itself, and for the public peace. I order the theatres be opened, as
    normal, as each will see fit; this is the essence of true civil and reli-
    gious liberty.17

Nardon’s decree is replete with significance at multiple levels. He simply
regarded the Forty Hours as an unknown, alien practice which, if disrep-
utable and exotic, should be tolerated in keeping with the principles of his
own political culture, but alien and exotic it certainly was. Nor was it to
impinge on what the French themselves regarded as normal. Predictable
condescension pervades his opinions. Yet – and this marks out the difference
with any previous experience of the French ‘interior’ – there is also a
complete sense of the Other. The Forty Hours was an explicitly Tridentine
form of ritual devotion developed first by the Capuchins in Borromean
Milan in the 1530s; it centred on the Eucharist, that most anti-populist of
objects of devotion, which the Capuchins made the core of their ‘Easter
strategy’ which tried to ensure that the public, collective Easter celebrations
had an orthodox ‘high point’. The Jesuits developed it further, making it
overlap with the last three days of Carnevale, which were usually the worst
for public order and sincere devotion, ‘[thus] establishing an alternative to
other forms of popular devotion, in strict accordance with their more
general anti-folklore strategy’.18 Perhaps the manner in which the Forty
Hours had come to be celebrated in Parma showed signs of that ‘loss of
effectiveness’ that allowed the masses to absorb Trent and evolve their own


                                       32
