                       C E N T R E A N D P E R I P H E RY


department of Rome in 1810, specifically because Paris hoped he would
prove acceptable to the Roman nobility. As it transpired, the female aristoc-
racy proved unacceptable to Tournon, whom they saw as a very eligible
bachelor indeed. He told his mother he would not bring a woman of less
than twenty to Rome as his wife because:

    she would be too prone to adopt the mores of this country which,
    in all Europe, are the most set against happiness. I swear that,
    although I am not jealous by nature, I would only marry in Rome
    with considerable distaste. ‘Putting it about’ – for that is the term
    for it – is so general, so open among the higher nobility, that I
    would almost never want my wife to live alone, among these society
    women.58

Tournon and Degerando were both struck not only by the cheek-by-jowl
existence of piety and promiscuity, but also by how joyless the whole busi-
ness was. This shocked Tournon at least as much as the immoral goings on.
This was all the more reason for breaking this culture down.
    The French had a diverse cultural arsenal they unleashed on the Italian
elites. The witty, polite conversation of the salon was to replace the
unseemly manoeuvrings of Italian society; the more cerebral tradition of
French theatre would oust the more vulgar enthusiasms of the opera. Saints
and sinners were to become soldiers and citizens.59 At the heart of the battle,
however, came the role of the Church.
    The French opinion of the Italian cities and lowlands came to resemble
Edward Said’s concept of ‘orientalism’ in so far as they regarded these parts
of Italy not as primitive in any way. Indeed, it is clear that they often felt
they were too sophisticated for their own good, although at a deeper level
held in a form of ignorant innocence by the Church. As with Western views
of the Ottoman Middle East in Said’s thesis, so the administrators of impe-
rial Italy viewed urban and elite culture as old centres of civilization in
decline. They were stagnant, atrophied cultures and, as a result, they had
become ‘trivialized’.60 Unlike Western views of the ‘East’, the French found
clear culprits for this process of trivialization and decline, the Tridentine
Church chief among them: as the cultural arbiter of ancien régime Italy, it
was obviously responsible for moral and cultural decadence.
    Tridentine Catholicsm, as it had evolved in French eyes by the time of
their rule, produced effeminate mothers’ boys and sluttish, coldly calculating
women, bereft of personal happiness. The impact of Baroque religiosity on
all spheres of Italian public life, as interpreted by the French, was as perni-
cious as it was pervasive.61 It soon became clear that this was also a regime
which was not prepared to leave such cultural mores alone. The Napoleonic
empire was the standard bearer of a new moral order and its obvious target



                                      25
