                   T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


but only under protest from Janet, the ex-republican head of the Domain,
who said it was giving in to ‘fanaticism’.29 For his part, Pius VII lambasted
Napoleon in his Instruction of 22 May 1808 for ‘his indifference to all reli-
gions, with the exception of Judaism, the implacable enemy of Jesus
Christ’.30
   The paradigm of cultural imperialism, as usually applied to extra-
European circumstances, has a clear relevance in the assessment offered to
Nardon on his arrival in Parma by a member of Moreau’s administration
about the ‘religion’ of the Piacentino:

    I think that we have made a huge mistake about religious attitudes
    in this area. I have looked at them closely, and I am convinced they
    do not stem from sincere piety, nor from superstitious fanaticism;
    only the habits acquired under the last Duke31 still retain the
    appearance of superstition, and mean nothing better than this, to
    those who seem more attached to religious practices [than others].
    In a word, the morality that is inseparable from a holy and firm
    piety is rather rare, and the vices [which exist here] are the direct
    result of this absence of a moderating check on them.32

The shift from patronizing tolerance to civilizing mission was now under
way. The same memorandum initiated the revival the College of Santa
Caterina. If anything, Nardon’s future experience of Parma hardened him
to such even-handed tolerance, but at this early juncture his attitude – and
that of his superiors – more resembles the bemused, innately superior toler-
ance detected by Said among a later generation of imperial administrators.33
It would not last. The system of cultural apartheid was not left to stand for
long.
   Like D’Auzers, Degerando and Tournon are revealed as Voltairians to the
core when their observations are set beside Voltaire’s entry ‘Bishop’ in the
Philosophical Dictionary, where he recounts an encounter between a young
Swiss Protestant and a wealthy prelate in the Papal states, who is, however,
walking on foot:

    ‘You are doubtless on your way to comfort a sick man,
    Monseigneur?’ ‘Sir, I am on my way to my master’s.’ ‘Your master?
    That is Jesus Christ, doubtless?’ ‘Sir, it is Cardinal Azolin; I am his
    almoner.’ ‘What! You are in the pay of a cardinal? But do you not
    know that there were no cardinals in the time of Jesus Christ and St
    John?’ ‘Is it possible?’ cried the Italian prelate. ‘Nothing is more
    true; you have read it in the Gospel.’ ‘I have never read it,’ answered
    the Bishop; ‘all I know is Our Lady’s office.’ ‘I tell you there were
    neither cardinals nor bishops, and when there were bishops, the
    priests were their equals almost, according to Jerome’s assertions in


                                      35
