                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


    and reasonable direction, to set religion in the place of the priests,
    morals in the place of devotions … . If carried out prudently, this
    Revolution might work without damaging Catholicism; the true
    tradition of the Church, directed by able men, would be enough to
    bring it about.37

Nor were these the visions of a powerless intellectual. The Minister of the 3e
arrondissement of Police saw the suppression of the monastic houses of
Tuscany as a vital step in just this direction:

    in the present circumstances, it is appropriate to prove [our inten-
    tions] to the peoples of Italy by carrying out great changes in this
    part of the Empire, through reforming the abuses that weak and
    vicious clerical government has allowed to be introduced; in the
    abolition of the religious orders, the government is seen to attach
    great importance to the eradication of libertinism, thus reimposing
    those severe morals which will benefit religion and return it to its
    ancient purity, replacing the degraded mores which emerge from
    such bad institutions [as the regular houses].38

Whereas Degerando’s views were formed by Enlightenment writings on the
nascent discipline of anthropology, those of le grand flic appear more rooted
in the subversive literature of the ‘forbidden books’39 and Diderot’s The
Nun. The words of both men, themselves so different, reveal a penchant for
confidence based on selectivity, authoritarian uniformity in the face of
complexity, and a mixture of zeal and self-assurance that equate with
cultural imperialism.
    Yet Degerando was all the more inaccurate in his vision of the future, in
believing that it also had native roots. His views represent less a real attempt
to bridge a cultural divide, than a projection of his hopes onto an unrecep-
tive past; his construct soon decomposed in the face of Italian realities. The
French missed three essential points about the post-Tridentine Church in
Italy that were exposed at every step of their own attempts at reform. The
first was how very pluralist Trent had been as regards the institutions of the
Church. Although there had been initial plans to amalgamate all the regu-
lars into a single order, and all the confraternities into a unique corps, that
of the Holy Sacrament40 – and the Concordat mirrored the former provision
exactly – their selective approach to history ignored the essential point, that
the Tridentine Church acknowledged, adapted to and then tapped the
impulses of revival and renewal within the regular orders; that it fostered
Jesuit missions and subsequently supported the emergent Redemptorists and
Passionists in the same work; that it made use of regulars as predicators to
bolster an under-staffed secular arm. Indeed, by the seventeenth century,
post-Tridentine bishops proved adept at using particular orders in special


                                       37
