                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


    several places.’ ‘Holy Virgin,’ said the Italian; ‘I knew nothing about
    it: and the popes?’ ‘There were not any popes any more than cardi-
    nals.’ The good bishop crossed himself, he thought he was with an
    evil spirit, and jumped out of the carriage.34

Lagarde, in Florence, concurred: ‘Tuscans are superstitious, rather than reli-
gious. The crime of the priests here, is to absolve anything, which makes for
“big” Fridays and Saturdays!’35 In Nardon, and even more so in his subordi-
nates, there is a sense of something more militant at work, however. Parma
brought out something of the ex-Terrorist in him; his uncompromising revo-
lutionary outlook saw him sent to Spain in 1812 to confront the demons
that he first met in Italy writ large. Moreover, French officials at the very
highest levels were implementing policy with cultural stereotypes firmly in
mind, and a blindness to the complexities and richness of indigenous Italian
religious life. Their strongly expressed personal prejudices, often predicated
on private tastes, are transformed into matters of historical consequence
because the terms of the Concordat – and the opposition and discontent
they provoked in Italy – gave these men the chance to act on their views.
Each of the opinions expressed above found its place in Napoleonic reli-
gious policy and spurred on its implementation, in a near perfect meeting of
private and public cultural dispositions. Put bluntly, contempt for Italian
religious life in all its myriad forms less dictated imperial policy, than
reflected it.
   Paradoxically, their highly selective approach to the Italian past also
allowed men of such opinions to see themselves as the heirs of the
Borromean paradigm. It was not entirely absurd. Degerando, as the official
intellectual of the regime, discerned the wider points of contact with Trent,
even while disparaging its details:

    The last and longest Council of Trent … renewed in part the old,
    severe rules of discipline, and intimidated even the morals of this
    same Court [of Rome], or, at the least, served warning on it of the
    need for a more austere morality in the face of the Protestant
    Reformation. In effect, from that time onwards, the throne of St
    Peter has seen more virtue and less scandal.36

Nevertheless, he believed that in the intervening centuries ‘[t]heology had
replaced Christianity’, that Roman theologians did not go back to the
sources and that ‘ecclesiastical history is on the Index’. In his reaction to
this, he assimilated to the original reforming zeal he saw in Trent:

    the moment has come to return religious ideas to their ancient and
    true spirit, to reveal Religion, itself, by stripping away the veils that
    have disfigured it, by giving a still uncertain century both a moral


                                       36
