                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


practice, showing contempt for the quasi-official, publicly sanctioned use of
denunciation which was made all the more distasteful by its introduction
into the sacred sphere. His sensibilities approximate in no small measure to
the revulsion felt by many French police officials at the readiness of their
Italian administrés to deploy denunciation against each other. It was another
aspect of the clash between the culture fostered by the Inquisition and that
of citoyennité under the Napoleonic police-state, for the biglietti had become
incongruous in any practical sense and reflect, rather, the lingering revolu-
tionary and liberal aspirations at the root of the regime.
    When the long history of hostility between the Revolution and the
confessional is recalled, the subjective objections to these practices emerge as
all the more central to the antagonism felt by the French towards this
Tridentine practice. It was his failure to reach a refractory confessor at the
Easter of 1791 that convinced Louis XVI to flee Paris, and the uneasy rela-
tionship developed from there. This baggage was carried over the Alps and
the French were always convinced that the dark, secretive space so meticu-
lously prescribed by Carlo Borromeo52 was now a powerful influence
against them. Yet, even surrounded by this sense of menace at what was
preached in the confessional, it was its wider context, as a form of social
coercion, and the methods used to ‘whip in’ the laity, that drew direct French
fire. It was not just their own position they felt to be threatened, but the
dignity of their administrés. Clearly the Napoleonic state and the Tridentine
Church had developed very different concepts of the line between the public
and the private sphere.
    The missions were the other major weapon of social control in the
Tridentine arsenal deliberately suppressed under the French, something not
originally stipulated by the Concordat. The decree abolishing all non-over-
seas missions in the empire and the Kingdoms of Naples and Italy was
issued on 26 September 1809,53 thereby enshrining in statute the hostility to
the missions felt among Italian reformers since the mid-eighteenth century:
Du Tillot issued a ‘blanket ban’ on them in Parma during his quarrel with
Rome in the 1760s,54 as did the Leopoldine legislation in Tuscany.55 Joseph
II banned Jesuit missions in the urban areas of Lombardy in 1767, although
he did not interfere with their work in rural areas,56 perhaps something of a
backhanded compliment to the importance of the missions as a source of
contact between the centre and the periphery. All this confirmed a growing
distaste for the demonstrative, traditional work of the missionaries among
reforming governments and sections of the urban educated classes, as well
as more longstanding Jansenist criticisms.57 However, the frequent assertion
that the missions were increasingly discredited in the late eighteenth century
ignores too many signs of their strength and popular appeal in Italy. This
does not equate to their decline in France after the 1770s, when the Superior
of the Mulotins – a new order founded in the late seventeenth century to
evangelize the remote west – declared that ‘a false delicacy prevailed so that


                                       40
