                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


form, and distributed it throughout Tuscany. Several copies were found in
Siena and the Prefect was very critical of Chigi-Zondadari and his Vicar-
General, who had ‘turned a blind eye’. Even if it was not a crime legally,
‘The evil is in the intention’ said the Prefect:

    Once upon a time, fanatics and the common people believed that on
    a given Sunday, heaven would take its vengeance on the enemies of
    the Catholic faith; the Jews were already considered ‘marked’
    victims of this vengeance. It is, then, for me to warn those who
    would use this as a pretext to attack the Jews … . But, on the one
    hand, the public can see that the supposed revenge of heaven has
    not happened, and that, on the other, the power of the state is ready
    to strike against anything opposed to it. Open your eyes to your
    own true interests every day, and remain under the law.26

Siena had seen a pogrom in 1799 and the Prefect well knew the force of
public opinion he faced. Only weeks before, he had uncovered a plot in
Siena to ‘raise the lower classes’ of the city against the Jews, ‘as in the year
seven’ (1799). The occasion had been the sale of properties from the closed
regular houses and the agitators played on the fact that Jews were prominent
purchasers, but also on the loss of alms and charity for the poor and the sick
as a result of the closures. He believed several nobles were agitating the
artisan families they patronized: Senese anti-Semitism could cross class
barriers. Troops were posted at the houses of Jewish families, and more were
asked for because the Prefect admitted that his 100 troops were not enough
to contain real trouble. The whole panoply of the counter-revolutionary
coalition seemed to be bearing down on the French, but the Prefect was
defiant:

    Your Excellency knows how the spirit of the lower classes can be
    influenced by some monkish malcontent or some indiscreet noble.
    If the strengthening of the visible physical force dissipates any idea
    of insubordination or riot, the moral force it supports gains a
    double strength, and emerges enhanced by going out to confront
    the opinions of the fanatics, and the agitated.27

The Gendarmerie arrived – this emergency providing the spur to its installa-
tion in Siena – along with more troops, and the Prefect was encouraged to
arrest ‘several leading people’ and send them to Florence for questioning.28
The same menace that was used to enforce conscription protected minorities
from the darker side of Baroque piety, but such incidents only hardened the
contempt felt by the French for Italian Catholicism. When similar sales in
Rome had by 1812 provoked a series of disorders and complaints, Tournon
– acting more in his originally conceived role of conciliator – halted them,


                                       34
