                   T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


devotional forms, blended partially with those of the Counter Reformation
and partially with ‘the remains of paganism, various superstitions and
numerous elements which were properly Christian’, as also characterized the
French masses in the late eighteenth century. 19 All this was lost on Nardon,
less because he sensed these cultural trends, than through total ignorance of
the origins and purpose of the Forty Hours. Whatever, he had his superiors
right behind him. The Minister of the Interior told him ‘You have done well
to forbid the prolongation of this ceremony beyond eight in the evening’ and
echoed Nardon’s views on public decency and order, adding:

    I also approve of the fact that you have forbidden the closure of the
    theatres … . The principles of religious toleration, which are the
    bases of the Concordat, do not intend to deprive citizens of amuse-
    ments which pose no threat to decency or public order, for religious
    motives.20

Tolerance had its limits, nonetheless. As at Chiavari under D’Auzers, the
festa was to be restricted in scope and time. Freedom of religion was
freedom as defined by the French Concordat, not by local practices.
   Nor were the French satisfied by the more sober expressions of Italian
piety cultivated by the Counter Reformation. This, too, was very different
from castigating the neo-paganism of the ‘nuestras Indías’ of the hinterlands,
or even the excesses of the urban masses. To lament the savage ignorance of
the mountain was one thing; to attack the urban elites who had thoroughly
absorbed the religious culture of Trent was quite another, revealing French
contempt for the decadence they perceived at the heart of elite Italian civi-
lization. Norvins, the secularized ex-noble, despised the Romans for their
attempts at gravitas, speaking of ‘this people, who prefer the procession to
the dance, and the sermon to the theatre’.21 Indeed, he condemned Tournon
and Miollis, the Governor of Rome, for suspending the theatre during Lent
and got his way.22 That is not to say that there were some elements of that
culture above Enlightened criticism or that deserved to survive.
   For better, as well as for worse, the French were determined to impose
religious toleration on the heartland of the Inquisition, and the heritage of
the Revolution could be rekindled by what they found in Italy. Napoleon’s
commitment to Jewish equality is well attested, as is the strength of Tuscan
anti-Semitism.23 The Concordat specifically banned the traditional passage
in the Easter sermon condemning the Jews for the death of Christ and,
during their first, tense Easter as the rulers of Tuscany, the French deployed
troops in all the churches of Pisa during Mass to enforce the ban.24 Only
two weeks earlier, the Archbishop of Pisa had tried to evade the change,
saying it was ‘too last minute’ and that the Pope would not allow it.25 Brute
force made him back down. The Pope’s response was to publish a small,
popular prayer book, emphasizing the Easter message in its traditional


                                      33
