                   T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


allowed traditional missions to continue, thus furnishing the French with
first-hand evidence of this aspect of ‘Baroque piety’ in action.
    The role of the missionaries, working with the Inquisition, was central to
all efforts by the centre to exert social control on the periphery. However,
perhaps the real loss to the Napoleonic regime came less in the realm of
policing, in the light of its own formidable ability to gather information,
than through the loss of the help of a potentially kindred spirit, even among
the ritually castigated Jesuits. From the outset of their work, the Jesuits in
particular were sensitive to cultural differences; they were as shocked by the
savagery and ignorance they felt existed on the periphery as any French offi-
cial, and even coined the phrase ‘nuestras Indías’ to draw the direct parallel
with the untamed New World; above all, they learned ‘to look at your own
country as if through foreign eyes’,67 thus initiating an anthropological
approach to social control on which the Enlightenment drew shamelessly.
That is, their cause was harmed less by the lack of the information gathered
by the missionaries, than by the skill and spirit with which such information
was gathered. Their sensibilities led the French into the same quagmire as
the mid-century reformers, Peter-Leopold and Du Tillot especially, but
which figures as diverse as the Ligurian giacobini, Turchi the post-Tillot
Bishop of Parma and Ferdinand III of Tuscany had all tried to reconstruct:
this work was now aborted. In their predisposition to recoil from these
methods of social control, the French inadvertently set themselves against
the tide of the ‘civilizing mission’ in its most successful manifestations in
Italy up to that time. Unlike their indigenous predecessors, the French
possessed real powers of coercion and so avoided paying a direct price for
their ignorance.
    As ever, it was a mixture of distaste at the external workings of the
missionaries they saw at first hand, their own traumatic experience of the
Vendée and an inability to distinguish among the many currents at work in
the late eighteenth-century Italian Church that led them to discard this most
powerful weapon in the struggle of the centre to control the periphery. There
was a difference of opinion about the nature of the missions at the apex of
the Napoleonic state that turned on conflicting interpretations of their role
in the Vendée, before and during the Revolution. Revolutionaries of all
shades felt the missions of Grignion de Montfort were the real origins of the
Vendean revolt, a fear made all the more intense because his missions were
thoroughly orthodox in character and so was Vendean piety. The Royal and
Catholic Army fought under the Christocentric Sacred Heart, rather than
the more atavistic Madonnas that rallied the Italian masses in 1799.
Although ‘more to do with Revolutionary phantasms … than factual
reality’68 this prejudice was alive and well within the Napoleonic police. Two
years after the abolition of special missions in 1809, Savary, Fouché’s
successor, lashed out against them as an active source of subversion in
France in a circular to ‘All Prefects and Police Commissioners’:


                                      42
