                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


interestingly, on a dislike for the explicit invasion of personal conscience and
privacy they effected. Their continued use came to light in the diocese of
Vercelli in 1809, when a rural canon denounced it to Paris.48 The Bishop
defended himself, arguing that he had revived it because people were ‘back-
sliding’, that it was still authorized by the Lateran Council. His main
argument, however, was that it was by demand of the heads of household –
les pères de familles – and so it was a matter of ‘domestic discipline’ more
than of ecclesiastical practice. The Bishop pointed to a change in religious
observance under way in this part of Italy, the longest under French rule:

    it is clear that the young will not communicate without a reason,
    and it is a fact, that where communion, at least at Easter, disap-
    pears, morality and the Faith disappear from view … . In fifty-six
    years, there was only one excommunication in Piedmont. Now, a
    good third of the faithful of our churches do not communicate,
    especially since the Revolution: One says nothing to them. One does
    not ask for their ticket … . It was only ever applied to the lower
    classes, to the country folk: Everyone would have said, had they not
    been issued, that the government had a secret policy to destroy
    Religion entirely, step by step. It was my hope … to make the
    government respected.49

The Bishop’s case is stunning, all the more so because he was very pro-
French. The vast implications for the secularization of this part of Italy are
striking in themselves, but equally striking is the fact that the regime was not
moved by it. It stuck to its original policy. Secularization was less of a threat
to it, in its own eyes, than the attack on the principles of freedom of reli-
gious conscience that was embodied by the use of the biglietti.50 When news
reached Paris that the practice still continued in Tuscany, three years after
the region’s annexation, the Minister of Religion ordered the Director-
General of Police in Florence to get the maires to intervene to prevent their
issue and ordered the Tuscan bishops to do the same, concluding to
Napoleon:

    there can be no more question of the tickets, which are counter to
    the spirit and the interest of religion. Counter to the spirit of reli-
    gion, which should not resort to coercion or still less this sort of
    public denunciation that facilitates great scandals. Counter to the
    interests of religion, since a great many of those who appear to
    fulfil their Easter duties, do so only to mislead their pastors.51

French officials at the highest level expressed their contempt for this practice
in the clearest possible terms. The Minister spoke of the empty spiritual
content of the exercise, echoing Degerando’s views on much Tridentine


                                       39
