                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


ways: the Jesuits and the new orders as missionaries to the periphery, the
Dominicans within the cities, and the Capuchins in the surrounding coun-
tryside, the ‘rural centre’.41 This flexible structure allowed them to adapt to
‘the social, political and economic contexts of individual states and specific
geographical areas within them’,42 something utterly at odds with the
Concordat and lost on the French. Just as the National Assembly chose to
ignore the findings of the Commission des Reguliers of the 1760s,43 so its
successor regime set aside the process of compromise, adaptation and evolu-
tion that was a defining element of the work of Trent. Borromeo and his
adherents certainly envisioned the partnership between the secular arm and
the other components of the Church as an unequal partnership, but they
hardly saw the future in terms of the annihilation of the regulars enacted
under Napoleon. The French neither saw – nor wished to see – that the
reforms set in motion by Trent were allowed to evolve: Degerando saw only
what Trent had been initially, not what it had become; he stressed only what
he saw as its degradation. In practical terms, this meant the French had no
grasp of the many ways in which the Church contributed to the process of
social control that was so essential to their own projects.
   Of course, the French did not outlaw confession, the Forty Hours or the
Rosary, but they did stamp out the ‘policing structures’ which had been
carefully put in place to enforce them since the sixteenth century, even when
not specifically banned by the Concordat. Most significantly, they outlawed
the effective method of parochial control of attendance at Easter confession,
the issue of biglietti – tickets – to parishioners in Holy Week, to be handed
in at confession which, in turn, admitted the holder to Easter communion.
In contrast to the ramshackle, ephemeral world of secular policing, this
system worked with ruthless efficiency and accuracy, even in remote areas.
The names of those who had neglected their duty were posted on church
doors, with some effect.44 Ironically, it rested on a vision of society shared
by the Napoleonic state and Trent, that of sedentary communities, for the
Italian episcopate shared the distrust of the Napoleonic police for the tran-
sient populations of the hinterlands. The biglietti were seen as one way to
exert at least a modicum of control over them.45 This appalled the French,
its distinct resemblance to the livret du travail and the internal passports
favoured by Police-Générale not withstanding. This was not a case of the
state trying to harness the power of the Church and failing. Rather it was
the triumph of cultural sensibility over utility. The French Bishop of Casale
in Piedmont believed this practice produced ‘truly deplorable consequences,
[stemming] from outdated, inquisitorial injunctions … . [It is] a dangerous
and useless practice’. He knew, however, that many of his curés were deeply
attached to it46 and his circular to them passed it off as an oversight on their
part, even referring to the use of biglietti as ‘a practice which had a good
effect, in a period when the piety of the faithful had been discernibly weak-
ened’.47 His private comments to the Minister reveal stronger feelings based,


                                       38
