                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


and away from the more ‘structural’ work they quickly assumed when it
became clear by the late sixteenth century that the Protestant threat would
not cross the Alps.80 Although the Commissioner noted – and was repelled
by – the ‘terrible discipline’ of the self-flagellation of one of the missionaries
at Rivarolo, he really feared that the missions were being put to political
ends. This was all the more pressing because of their popularity with all
classes: in the Val di Polcervera, ‘people of a certain standing went to the
mission, barefoot’ and handed out more alms than usual, the churches were
‘well attended’, the confessionals were never empty, there were more proces-
sions than ever – and they were big. At Sestri, they preached to a crowd of
over 4,000 in a wood outside the town and were followed by a rapturous
throng for nearly two miles, when they moved on after the usual five days’
work.81 It was the turning away from the work of ‘social control’ to counter-
revolutionary agitation that drove the Commissioner to demand ‘several
severe examples of punishment to arrest their progress’. He was very alert to
the ‘regression’ in the external presentation of the missions from the more
restrained models of the eighteenth century back to the ‘enthusiasm’ of the
Jesuits, but there was a deeper history behind what he interpreted as mere
‘playing politics’. The Church had a very long tradition of confronting
secular challenges it felt to be heretical or even diabolical. Also evident in
the missionary preaching in Liguria were elements of the earlier Franciscan
tradition of prophetic preaching, which stressed divine signs of change and
fate.82 This was more than a calculated political challenge to French rule; it
had echoes of a return to an orthodox atavism within the ranks of the cler-
ical intellectual elite. Ironically, a grudging respect for missions as they once
were is evident, if hardly dominant, in the thoughts of the Police
Commissioner.
   The Prefect was much less suspicious, but even more damning, in his
assessments. Rolland had been the Prefect of the Piedmontese department
of the Tanaro before crossing the Apennines – and noted that missions in
Piedmont were much less demonstrative than in Liguria. For all his experi-
ence, he was both a Protestant and a Frenchman, and his insistence on
banning the missions was cultural, not political. Rolland insisted they were
not politically dangerous; indeed, under the ancien régime, the government
used them to persuade people to hand over their arms. They were sickening,
for all that:

    These missions are exceedingly ludicrous things for Protestants,
    accustomed to the immobility and monotony of their preachers … .
    To the French, an Italian priest in the pulpit seems like a demon,
    and so a missionary who has to appear even more forceful than the
    regular preacher … has to reach his audience through actions that
    can only appear mad, extravagantly absurd … [self-]flagellation has
    always been a part of it, for without it, the oratory would have no


                                       45
