                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


nation for clergy opposed to the regime. There are many worrying aspects in
the behaviour of both Church and state in these incidents. French lack of
awareness of the different traditions of Italian missionary activity is already
clear, but parallel to it was the persistence of ‘archaic’ tendencies, chiefly
self-flagellation and ‘hell-fire’ preaching of the kind Liguori and his collabo-
rators had largely abandoned from the 1740s onwards. Even leaving any
potential for true counter-revolutionary agitation aside, this represented a
worrying trend within the Church: These missionaries were not Jesuits or
Capuchins, orders steeped in the tradition of this genre of proselytizing;
rather they were high-ranking secular clergy, handpicked by the Cardinal
Archbishop of Genoa for the task. This would seem to indicate a deliberate
shift away from the main currents of the eighteenth century towards a return
to more atavistic – populist, as well as popular – forms of devotion. This
trend is discernible in many other aspects of Spina’s actions and, arguably, it
is the clearest evidence of the Church’s efforts to reforge an alliance with the
masses in the face of the Revolutionary threat. Indeed, the other striking
feature of the missions of 1808, from the point of view of the Church espe-
cially, is how popular they were, both at the centre and on the periphery.
Large, fervent crowds supported the missions not only in the ‘Indies’ of the
Val di Polcervera but also in the maritime cities of Liguria. The populist
forms of devotion expressed in the missions spanned regional divisions; they
had roots everywhere and the Church was now playing to them rather than
trying to curb them, as had been done in the preceding decades. Even
according to the French, this was the case. Spina’s tactics were a far cry from
the insistent demands of the Bishop of Grossetto in 1776–7, when he
banned flagellation, that all missions be ‘wholly devoid of din’.87 French
prejudice was not wholly unfounded, it would seem, in matters of sensibility
and, even by the standards of his own Church, Spina was playing a
dangerous game. Liguori – to say nothing of Jansenist and reforming critics
– would have disapproved. These events depict the closing of a vicious circle:
in the face of a Church becoming defiant and difficult to work with, even
within its own rules, the regime resorted first to arbitrary arrest and then to
suppression, rather than trying to adapt the work of the missions to a
purpose avowed useful by all. For his part, Spina turned towards true
populism, setting the Church on a collision course with the French regime.
This was not a conflict about politics in the strictest sense – the missions
spoke about defending the Church, not reviving the Republic of St George –
it was, in truth, far worse than that. Church and state were pulling away
from the little common ground they possessed, willingly. Spina and French
officialdom together undermined what should have been their greatest
common cause: the struggle over a truly longue durée to achieve ‘the pacifi-
cation of souls’, a cause that should have been approximate to that of
creating a société polie et policée – and French officials of very anti-clerical
stamp were aware of this. The concrete, quasi-secular scope of the missions


                                       47
