                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


– ‘to facilitate reconciliation between enemies and restore peace in communi-
ties troubled in any way’, in the words of one historian88 – was rejected by
the French for reasons that were a mixture of politics and taste, being too
hedged in with cultural compromises to be adapted to the service of the new
regime.
    There is something of a ‘sliding scale’ that is often, and naturally, applied
by historians to the forms of resistance which were driven by religion,
whether wholly inspired by it or not: the violence of the Viva Maria risings
under the ancien régime, or the Santa Fede and the other revolts of 1799,
take precedence. These are followed by the peaceful but very public
confrontations between Church and state at High Days.89 Bringing up the
rear is a seldom manifested but more widespread sense of alienation from
the reforms of the Concordat, all the more important, perhaps, for being so.
Protest and resistance in religious matters were overwhelmingly peaceful in
character, but that should not detract from their intensity, particularly when
it is recalled how deeply some aspects of the Concordat struck into the
fabric of family life. The French ignored – as they had in France a decade
earlier – the fact that their reforms clashed with those of Trent exactly in
those aspects of the work of the Church dearest to the laity. Civil marriage
and divorce came as shocks to all classes all over the peninsula. They first
caused consternation in Turin, where the Piedmontese magistrates so lauded
by the Dal Pozzo and Degerando for their high degree of assimilation
admitted only eight divorce cases – and granted only three – between 1802
and 1814.90 In Naples the provisions for divorce were never actually
published, so great was Joseph’s fear of elite reaction to their very existence.
Indeed, under Napoleonic rule there were only nineteen divorces granted in
the two satellite kingdoms and the départements réunis combined.91 It
should be remembered, too, that divorce was an upper-class issue. There are
signs that civil marriage was intensely disliked among all classes. Only a
handful of civil marriages, without benefit of clergy, were ever contracted in
Piedmont during the triennio, for example.92 At one end of the social scale –
and of degrees of resentment – the respected Piedmontese jurisconsult J.B.
Ferrero, published a university textbook in 1808, Jurisprudence du mariage
sur le rapport moral: Traité tendant à concilier les lois du Code Napoléon, de
l’organisation des cultes et de l’enseignement public, the title of which is self-
explanatory; at the other, among the demands set out in the petitions of the
rebels of Val di Trebbia in the Piacentino in 1806, was that marriages take
place ‘only according to the rights of the Holy Church’. Indeed they also
demanded ‘the re-establishment of the monks, and the full restitution of
their properties’.93 There are even signs that by the late eighteenth century
the better organization of diocesan administration meant that canon law
made a significant impact on the laity, at least in urban centres, that




                                       48
