                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


   Nothing shocked or surprised the French in the barbarous, backward or
counter-revolutionary culture they found on the periphery. All this was well
known to them from their experience of their own periphery in the Vendée
and the Auvergne. Indeed, this experience was a constant point of reference,
in their religious as well as secular confrontations with the Italian hinter-
lands. Yet two things did shock them and convince them that they were
dealing with something markedly – if hardly entirely – different from the
problems of the ‘interior’. The first was how extensive the Italian periphery
was in comparison to that of France. Whereas it was felt in 1806 that only
the west and the Massif needed missionaries – and only a handful, at that106
– those French officials in Italy who did not oppose missions on principal
saw a huge need for them, in the right form. The French did not perceive a
large ‘block’ of Italy, comparable to that north and east of the future
‘Maggiolo Line’ that was already taking shape in the minds of Napoleonic
officialdom, a generation avant la lettre. Although Mirabeau père bemoaned
the failure of the French masses to attain ‘that softening of behaviour, that
urbanity, that civility … that is virtue’ in the 1750s,107 those of the next
generation felt that it had made far more progress than in Italy. Moreover,
there was a discernible ‘civilized core’ to both the country and the elite that
was lacking beyond the Alps. The second major difference with France was
that the culture of the French centre in no way equated with that of the
Italian centre. This has already been explored in a secular context, and the
French examination of Baroque piety in its urban, elite and lowland
contexts only confirmed their belief that these differences were rooted,
essentially, in religious differences. Degerando, Tournon, D’Auzers and
Nardon were criticizing the devotional culture of some of the largest cities
in Europe; D’Auzers and Rolland castigated not only the piety of the high-
land valleys in Liguria, but that of the substantial cities of the Riviera as
well. They were not blind to the nuances involved: the periphery was domi-
nated by archaism, neo-pagan devotional rituals, even a complete lack of
interest in the ‘true religion’ of the rational heart. Here, in ironic – if wholly
predictable – similitude to the early Jesuits, the French sometimes had hopes
of a return to ‘the primitive Church’, as they conceived it, much as they
hoped to harness highland ferocity to their military machine. In contrast,
they pointed to the enervating, degenerating consequences of the success of
the Tridentine Church. Thus they conceived a two-pronged assault on the
Italian Church, in every corner of their possessions, touching every arm of
the Church and every element of Italian society. The introduction of the
Concordat was meant to cut to the roots of a whole culture.




                                       51
