                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


    I have told His Majesty many times about the bad consequences of
    the missions … . These men, outsiders in the areas where they exer-
    cise the important ministry of preaching the word, are almost
    always distinguished by their fanatical, gross sermons … . I
    expressly advise you to see to it that all missions are banned in your
    jurisdictions, and to arrest any priest not in a parish who tries to
    preach.69

Earlier, in 1806, the Minister of Religion had stressed the importance of the
missions for reconciling parishioners to their own clergy; exactly because
they were outsiders: ‘The missionaries have re-established civil and religious
peace in many dioceses. They have done incalculable good.’ The report
asked for a minimum of 500 missionaries to serve the whole empire.70
Needless to say Napoleon trampled on the request, but in 1806 he did not
yet share all the prejudices of his police. In criticizing the proposals made by
the Ministry of Religion, he noted that the only part of the empire where
missions might be useful was, indeed, the Vendée, and that only twenty
priests, all trained in Paris, would be needed.71 By 1809 even this view had
changed, another instance of the regime moving not to the ‘right’ over time,
but back to its Revolutionary roots, as the views of Savary’s police prevailed
over those of even the most Gallican elements in the Church, even over the
protests of Fesch, who told his nephew directly that the news of their aboli-
tion had ‘terrified all the bishops and all French Catholics’.72 He got
nowhere, but his worries were supported even by the new French Bishop of
Piacenza, who informed Paris of ‘the very bad effect’ the decree had made at
the moment the missions traditionally began and which he thought a very
useful institution:

    Sunday morning begins with prayers and then Mass, catechism in
    the afternoon, vespers, a meeting, and then the benediction … .
    [T]he result is a useful education.

The Bishop hoped for their reinstatement, otherwise ‘we all run the risk of
provoking disquiet’.73 His colleague in Parma, Caselli, a Piedmontese ex-
regular noted for his loyalty to the regime,74 agreed: ‘these missions are
sometimes necessary to recall Christians from their errors’. Whereas his
French colleague painted a picture of missionary work for Paris, the native
prelate pointed to the practical disruption the ban would cause. The parish
clergy could not leave their posts during Advent and Lent, when their pres-
ence was most needed to ‘police the faithful’, but this was also when good,
constant preaching was most needed; the parishes were short-staffed as it
was. Nor were there enough truly good preachers to go around.75 The
different emphases stressed by the Frenchman and the Italian reveal the
shock felt by the former at the lack of religious education among his new


                                       43
