                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


contracted union. In practice, it did not work this way for the French: the
symbolic, binding significance of dowries and Church marriages as de facto
legal contracts certainly continued to outweigh the provisions of the Code.
Such attitudes become equally interesting when set beside the far clearer
materialistic opposition to the institution of divorce: simply that it could
ruin carefully constructed marriage strategies. The Code threatened nothing
of the kind; Trent might, yet Italians of all classes throughout the peninsula
stood by Trent in these matters. In the pressing concerns of family life, the
provisions of the Code left the new regime stranded between one of the few
Tridentine strictures viewed ambiguously by the laity and that same laity’s
distrust of the presence of the state in such matters. The French sensed this
and were extremely sensitive to any sign that civil marriage was being defied.
This was more than a matter of keeping the État Civil up to date, as shown
by the case of the Archpriest of Rapallo in 1810. He was denounced for
carrying out marriages before the civil ceremony had been performed. His
political views were not sound and one of the weddings in question was that
of a leading local civil servant.101 The reaction of the civil authorities was
revealing in its intemperance; both the Procureur of the Criminal Court and
the Prefect wanted him brought to trial. The former stressed the influence
wielded by the clergy in the coastal port and that this conduct proved ‘that
ignorance, fanaticism and prejudice are still set above the Price and the laws
of the Papacy’.102 The latter believed the public trial of a priest over such a
matter would have a good effect in the area, stressing the need for the
government to assert itself over the formalities of civil marriage once and
for all.103 On Sunday, 29 May 1808, shortly after the annexation of Tuscany
to the empire, the parish priest of Pitigliano near Arezzo preached against
civil marriage from the altar at the reading of the Gospel. He urged the
people to keep faith with the Church’s sacraments and that it was only the
sacrament that made marriage a contract. The police captain who heard the
sermon noted ‘there were some approving murmurs among the ignorant,
which could have dangerous consequences’.104 In contrast to its reception in
France, the Code satisfied no one here. These were the deeper currents of
dislocation and resentment which recalcitrant clergy would draw upon in
their more open, dramatic confrontations with the new regime. Perhaps the
depth of the chasm between rulers and ruled in the realm of marriage is
found in a report by Tournon in Rome in 1810. He ‘discovered’ the
Congregation of the Holy Annunciation, composed of 200 Roman laymen
and founded in 1460. It had no formal pious obligations, but existed either
to provide dowries for poor girls or to place them in convents. Tournon was
amazed at its success and its extensive resources, as they came wholly from
private donations. The Congregation was abolished by the patriots in 1798,
but revived thereafter, and in 1810 it was worth 30,000 francs.105 The Code
outlawed dowries, and the Concordat convents.



                                       50
