                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E R S


    effect. Gendarmes who speak the local dialect said there was
    nothing seditious preached during the mission at Sestri, as have
    other reliable sources.83

Yet he concluded that ‘For my part, I think the missions are very bad prac-
tices, just as the confraternities are very bad institutions’. His analysis took
no account, indeed showed no awareness of, the style of mission developed
by Liguori from the 1740s onwards.
   Fouché handed down a severe sentence, ordering that the Archpriest of
Comogli who had led the mission at Sestri be sent to Fenestrelles under
Haute Police. When D’Auzers passed on the order, the reason given was not
that of politicizing, counter-revolutionary agitation. Rather,

    This priest, amidst several scandalous scenes and challenges to the
    public peace, after having preached in a damaging way, allowed
    himself to be almost skinned [alive] in his pulpit, and to bleed like a
    flagellant. This excess of fanaticism took place before more than
    4,000 listeners.84

The first attempt to arrest the Archpriest failed, causing a minor riot in
Comogli. The gendarme charged with it said he would have preferred to
arrest his quarry on the road to Genoa, but felt time was short, as he had to
stop him taking part in another mission.85
   When Fouché then tackled the Ministry of Religion about this, he
blended the two strands of official disdain. The missionaries at Sestri
preached

    in a style that could only appear ridiculous to reasonable men, were
    it not also a dangerous influence on an ignorant and naturally
    superstitious fanatical people.

However, they had also been playing on ‘the events that have occurred at
Rome’, which was a loss because, parroting the words of his subordinate

    the preachers no longer stress morality. They take as their only stan-
    dard the dangers to religion, the need to defend it, and the absolute
    loyalty owed the Pope and the Church. The clear intention here,
    easily discerned, is to whip up their spirits, and drive them to
    excess.86

There was more than state security at stake in this incident; indeed, the
Prefect of the Apennines went so far as to say he did not see state security as
an issue: Fenestrelles was felt to be the best corrective to ‘old-time religion’,
regardless. In the years ahead, prison would increasingly become the desti-


                                       46
