                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


the regime sought to infiltrate the Mass itself with new prayers. These were
the most obvious ‘flashpoints’ between the state and its administrés, not just
in terms of religious practices but in the challenge of the conception of
political life embodied by the Napoleonic state and the more intricate, atom-
ized political culture – the campanilismo – of the Italian ancien régime.
Confraternities, local festivals and shrines, and even the Mass itself were all
central to this political world, and so at the forefront of a wider clash of
cultural values. There is a strong body of evidence to suggest that the newly
ruled knew what they were defending and that the experience of so doing
served to intensify those very bonds of corporatism the new regime had
determined to break. The defence of traditional, popular piety drew other-
wise divided communities together, as much in the larger provincial centres
as in the countryside and the highlands, thus having a similar effect to the
collective resistance to the imposition of conscription.7 Religious inspired
resistance proved all the more awkward to repress because it usually took
pacific forms. Nevertheless, the new rulers knew what they were set on
destroying and made the conscious choice to do so.
   The Napoleonic regime expressed its dislike for public forms of popular
devotion directly through legislation. Napoleon took up the cause of the
Habsburgs, through a policy ‘conscious of the need to consecrate the solemn
times, but also to reduce the number of holidays which distract people from
their work’.8 The Concordat reduced these High Days – drastically in the
case of most parts of Italy – and confined almost all of those that remained
to Sundays. In 1806, Menou and the Archbishop of Turin – both reliable,
loyal Bonapartists – were upbraided for allowing the Fête-Dieu to be held on
a Thursday: only Easter, Christmas, the Ascension, the Assumption, Corpus
Christi and All Saints days could be celebrated on a day other than Sunday.
The character of Sunday itself was also altered, however. While it was
considered too much for shops to open, a report by the Ministry of Religion
in 1807 stressed that

    a worker who thinks he needs [to do] a job, can work … . Religion
    must not contradict people’s views. In religious affairs, as in the
    natural and civic orders of things, necessity overrides all the rules,
    and suspends them.9

   The French in Italy pursued this enthusiastically. In 1812, the Sub-Prefect
of Novi fumed that

    It is impossible to stop people going to church on the days of festi-
    vals abolished by the Concordat, but it is easy enough for the police
    to prevent the preaching of useless sermons.10




                                      53
