                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Madonna della Guardia near Genoa; the Madonna della Misericordia at
Savona; and the Madonna di Montallegro at Rapallo.15 Smaller shrines were
also well supported. Cicagna, high in the Apennines, became a place of
pilgrimage in the 1530s when a neglected statue of the Virgin began granting
miraculous favours, following the introduction and widespread popularity of
the Rosary of the Madonna into these valleys by the Jesuits. Cicagna
presents an example of how deeply and swiftly the cult penetrated into this
part of ‘nuestras Indías’; the shrine still flourished in 1789, when a book was
published about the festa of 1786 when the Virgin was crowned, a rare
occurrence over most of northern Italy in this period.16 In 1807 and 1808
the Vicar-General of Genoa reported ever increasing amounts of alms and
other offerings – ‘the pious liberality of the faithful’ – at the small hill chapel
of Our Lady of Vittoria. All the funds went to the upkeep of the chapel;
none reached the parish. The Vicar-General complained that the local
authorities were so attached to ‘this fanatical devotion to the Virgin’ that
they did nothing to enforce the government’s ban on nocturnal processions,
which formed the devotions at the chapel.17 Thus, when the French annexed
Liguria, they entered one of the most intensely Marian parts of the Catholic
world. Vittoria and Cicagna, outposts of the Jesuit civilizing mission in the
1530s, remained defiant strongholds of atavism, in the eyes of many, by the
eighteenth century. The French occupation would bring the wheel full circle,
however. When the Vicar-General’s superior, Cardinal Spina, threw in his lot
with ‘this fanatical devotion’, it grew stronger still, as it was deliberately
rehabilitated – if hardly in need of actual revival – at the centre. The Vicar-
General’s identity of interest with the French over Marian devotion
belonged to a passing era.
   The omnipresence of the Madonna as a rallying cry during the traumatic
revolts of 1799 all over Italy conditioned all French relations with the
Virgin.18 The place of religious motives in these risings, and those of the late
eighteenth century against the Leopoldine reforms in Tuscany, is debatable
among historians,19 but clearer to contemporaries. Under the French, when
a Madonna cried, moved, fell over or worked a miracle, French officials and
the local giacobini reached for their guns. Over a six-month period in 1796,
no less than 114 incidents of madonnas moving their eyes were reported in
the Papal states, twenty-four of which were adjudged miraculous by the
authorities. A report of 1797 argued they were warnings from heaven against
earlier Jansenist outrages, rather than connected to the first French
invasion.20 The experience of the Concordat would prove there was little real
difference between Jansenism and French rule. When a woman regained her
sight in front of a statue of the Madonna in a church in Piacenza that was
due to be closed and turned into a stable, it attracted tremendous popular
interest, but the French were worried about more than a rowdy procession or
overwrought crowds. The church was closed, the image locked away before
the churchwarden removed it to safety. The whole thing risked ‘fomenting


                                        55
