                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


the Virgin if she were cured; when nothing happened, she took it back in a
huff. The whole panoply of popular Marian devotion was on display.
Norvins was no stranger to this culture, even if he despised it:

    It was a morning passed in the extravagance of the silliest supersti-
    tion … . It is all about bread and priestly conniving, and the
    customs dearest to this people.

He took pride in the fact that it was better policed than under the Popes.
French observers also noticed an older, indigenous struggle take place, at the
height of the devotions, although it was not noted as such. It was not really
the gendarmes who curbed the frenzy of the crowd, but the curé and the
local police commissioner who led them in litanies,

    and then this throng, avid for miracles and furious at its own power-
    lessness to obtain them, suddenly calmed itself, and went back to
    Rome, peaceably and piously, singing the litanies.56

What Norvins had, in fact, witnessed were good missionary tactics, as prac-
tised by Jesuits and Redemptorists. Norvins knew he had local knowledge to
be grateful for, but he did not know its history. He had witnessed a classic
case of a priest and a local official caught in the middle, less between
Church and state than between popular, pre-Tridentine devotion and more
orthodox practice. Most importantly, Trent had taught them how to cope.57
As Peter Burke pointed out in the context of the Masaniello revolt of 1647
in Naples, the most effective way to fight social drama was with social
drama: the Neapolitan clergy used Christocentric devotion to calm the
popular rage focused on the Virgin. ‘Order had to be restored in the super-
natural as well as the natural world’.58 This was beyond Norvins. Put
another way, left to its own devices French policy would have been unable to
curb ‘excessive’ Marian devotion, save by strong-arm tactics. Subtle strug-
gles, of an older kind, meant nothing to Norvins.
   Traditionally, the power of the Madonna manifested itself in several
ways. There was the power and veneration vested in the images, both statues
and paintings, and there were apparitions of Mary herself – or selves. The
differences between them are significant in themselves, in the wider context
of Italian piety.59 However, the way all these things were perceived by all
those involved was henceforth conditioned by the memory of 1799. It was
also different when it happened on the periphery, not near a large, control-
lable city. The Madonna appeared, perched in a tree, to a group of
countrywomen led by their priest, all shouting ‘Over here! Over here!’ Under
the ancien régime, it would have been a matter for the diocese to investigate
and, probably, to forget unless great interest continued to be shown in the
tree. But it took place in a village in the volatile Piacentino in 1810. The


                                      60
