                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


of the use of Papal indulgences connected with the Via Curcis in 1782 won
him elite support well beyond the circle of the political reformers.64 Now the
resurgence of upper-class Marian devotion indicated that the cultural
process of the previous century was in conscious reverse.
   A correlation has been discerned in Italian Marianism between a
neglected holy image and its sudden propensity to dispense miraculous
favours, even to the point that the former causes the latter.65 French policy
ensured the occurrence of many such instances. In the autumn of 1810 in
the small mountain commune of Compiano, where Tuscany, the Piacentino
and Liguria all meet, an isolated chapel was reopened, illegally as it tran-
spired. In the course of the restoration a painting on an outside wall was
uncovered from its layers of dust: the Madonna of Faggio. Then, D’Auzers
reported, ‘the rumours started’:

    It was said it had somehow detached itself from the wall. Soon,
    they were adding that the bells were ringing by themselves. Angels
    were seen flying high in the air, celebrating, their voices joining in
    with trumpets from on high. A woman dressed in heavenly blue was
    spotted walking majestically on the clouds at night, surrounded by
    burning candles, when the image of the Virgin was uncovered … .
    When a wall collapsed, trapping three stonemasons, no one was
    hurt, even though they had been trapped under three feet of earth.
    It was all due to the Virgin. These happenings – continually
    changed and added to – attracted much attention.66

The imagery invoked and the patterns of behaviour described certainly
reveal a very orthodox, almost standard vision of the Virgin and of Marian
behaviour, notable evidence of conformity with the imagery of the hierarchy
in the heart of the Apennines. More so, it might be added, than Bernadette’s
visions at Lourdes about which the Church remained uncomfortable – and
quickly sought to readjust.67 When the crowds came to admire the painting
from Pontremoli (in Tuscany) and Bardi and Borgo di Taro (in the
Piacentino), they expressed their devotion in the exaggerated manner the
French detested:

    The most credulous walked up the mountain barefoot, and
    approached the painting in this state, where they all believed their
    sins would be forgiven. There was a priest from Ozacca, at the head
    of ten or twelve women.68

D’Auzers’ contempt was palpable, but he attributed other motives to the
timing of this local cause célèbre. The first miracle took place on the same
day that twenty-seven Trappists from Cervara were being escorted to house
arrest in Compiano for refusal to take the oath and receive their pensions,


                                      62
