                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


periphery had to keep producing ‘evidence of divine intervention’ that was
clear and incontrovertible.35 Thus Marian devotion remained intense from
necessity, and came to symbolize the recalcitrance of the periphery.
   Atavism and recalcitrance were only to be expected on the periphery. But
the Virgin dominated the centre with similar intensity. Here the close links of
the Marian cult and older forms of popular piety should be recalled. The
earliest ‘reform movement’ in the Church, the Spiritual Franciscans, never
attacked the cult, while the Flagellants, spreading out from Perugia, actively
encouraged it and specifically argued that God was influenced by her inter-
cession.36 Although the lay brotherhoods were usually devoted to their own
patron saints, the bonds between them and Mary were real enough, forming
an informal coalition between those two aspects of popular piety that made
authority, clerical and secular alike, most uncomfortable. A petition from
the former members of the confraternity of the Sabbatini of Bologna in
1811 is a good example of the longevity and intensity of Marian devotion in
this prosperous urban centre:

    From time immemorial and without interruption, it has been the
    custom of the Sabbatini to go, one Saturday in the year, to visit the
    Sanctuary of the Blessed Virgin of San Lucca, leaving the city three
    hours before the Mass of St Peter [Matins]. In whatever circum-
    stances, and under whatever regime – and with its support – this
    religious duty has never been interrupted. Now, however, it has been
    suspended by order of the prefect.37

The regime had banned it because it was a nocturnal procession but, in
suppressing the confraternities as well, it destroyed those who sustained this
High Day. They did not give up, however. As for Marian devotion among
the Romans:

    Their great popular devotion was directed to Mary, the Mother of
    God, who was worshiped in a frenzy of tenderness. In the popular
    faith, she was the chief power in heaven; she had made the world.
    She replaced the God Hermes of ancient times. No work was done,
    no enterprise or business launched without sheltering under the
    image of Mary. She was the repository of the city’s collective
    memory and the rallying point of the Roman masses.38

In Piedmont, a very different society from that of Rome or Bologna, the
Madonna of Vico remained, under royal patronage, the greatest shrine in
the region. It was duly sacked by the Army of Italy in 1797 and its crown of
pearls – a present from the royal family – was carried off to Paris, along with
all the other treasures of the Grotto,39 a warning of what was to come.
    The revolts of 1799 are the most spectacular, politicized expressions of


                                      57
