                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


the importance of Mary in the hearts of the Italian masses. They bear
comparison with the almost contemporaneous revolts in Mexico. In 1769 a
localized, millenarian revolt fought in the name of Our Lady of Guadalupe;
it resembled the ‘Viva Maria’ risings in Tuscany.40 The next came in 1810
with the collapse of Spanish rule.41 The Virgin increasingly emerged as the
counterpoint to Enlightened reform and – more overtly – to Enlightened
absolutism, wherever her cult was strong. Mexico, like many parts of Italy in
the same period, felt the impact of the Bourbon reforms and reacted in
similar fashion. In Mexico, as in much of Italy, the 1760s saw religious poli-
cies attempted that one historian has termed the replacement of a Baroque
Church with a Church of the Enlightenment.42 The imperial dimension of
the Mexican and Italian experiences in 1810 is also worth considering. In
both cases, subject peoples turned to the Virgin as a focal point for resis-
tance. Late colonial Mexico may present more fruitful comparative ground
with the religious climate of the new imperial power in Italy than late ancien
régime France, where the Cult of the Virgin sustained far more direct and
consistent criticism, and seems to have been in comparative decline.43
Marxist claims for widespread dechristianization in France must be treated
with great circumspection, but the trend was far more apparent there than in
Italy.44 In France, although traditional devotion to Mary continued unal-
tered, it had become increasingly, if not quite exclusively, a phenomenon of
the periphery and of the lower classes. While in the Vendean bocage, a priest
of the Counter Reformation ‘[in order] to win over popular practices,
reach[ed] a compromise with his parish’, the five traditional Marian shrines
of the plain of the Sarthe – the bastion of republicanism in the west – had
disappeared by the eighteenth century.45 As J.-C. Martin has observed of the
Vendée, the difference between the bocage and the plain was not of belief as
such, but in ritual practices and, in the case of the plain, ‘in a greater
submission by the faithful to the clergy’.46 Although the Catholic revival of
the nineteenth century revealed the extent to which ‘genteel Catholics inhab-
ited the same miraculous world as the shepherdess’,47 there were still fewer
genteel Catholics by the 1790s than south of the Alps. Moreover, it was
often the product of a revival, not of a survival among them. France was
too fragmented, spiritually, to rise for the Virgin.48
    This was not so in Italy. The Italian masses, when thrown back on their
own devices, rose for the Madonna in 1799, as they had for the Virgin of the
Carmine in Naples in 1647 in the face of an earlier, Spanish imperialism.49
Cicagna became a redoubt of anti-French resistance in the Ligurian
Apennines under its priests, Pezzuolo and Connio, just as in the seventeenth
century the shrine of the Madonna had been a repair for smugglers and
other outlaws when Corsican soldiers were sent from Genoa to burn it
down. Lannes took similar actions in 1798 when the only part of the church
to survive his ravages was the chapel of the Virgin.50 Yet Mary represented a
particular form of revolt. There is no contradiction in the universality of


                                      58
