                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Marian revolts in 1799, which is not at all to assert any uniformity among
them. The French threatened every shrine and image and, therefore, every
shrine was to be defended. It is an irony coincidental on an objective level –
but not wholly by chance – that the Madonna was not taken as the symbol
of the largest, most coherent counter-revolutionary movements of the time:
Ruffo’s Santa Fede, the Royal and Catholic Army of the Vendée and Hofer’s
Tyroleans all fought under more orthodox, Christocentric banners.51 Mary’s
was the counter-revolution of the guerilla; the Sacred Heart, that of the
Crusade. The latter marched on Nantes and Naples, the former fought –
splintered, incoherent, but tenacious – only for hearth, home and harvest.
The Mexican experience juxtaposes Marian and Christocentric forms of
resistance most powerfully in the contrast between the atomized, Marian-
inspired Hildago revolt of the early nineteenth century and the highly
coordinated resistance of the Cristada a century later.52
    This iconography has a wider meaning than any politicized struggle,
however. In the age of Enlightenment and revolution, the Madonna – more
splintered than the Cross – remained close to the people. The judgement of
the leading historian of the place of religion in the Hidalgo revolt holds just
as good for Napoleonic Italy: ‘An ardent veneration of the Virgin Mary
served to justify both preserving the political and social status quo and
mounting pressures against it’.53 The imperial grip on Italy was far stronger
than that of any Mexican regime of the time, Spanish or indigenous, but,
when set in the wider context of ‘Enlightened imperialism’, the various
expressions of the Marian cult in Napoleonic Italy offer an intriguing
window on passive resistance and on the growing together of popular and
elite culture in the face of foreign occupation. The Madonna had led the
atomized counter-revolutions of the triennio, and she went on to assume a
special place in the history of the French occupation, thereafter. It has been
noted that ‘Mary’s decision to appear at particular places at particular times
is one of the things that most clearly establishes her as a distinct supernat-
ural personage’54 and that ‘the Virgin has favoured … rocky uplands – areas
of sheep and goats … not the fertile European plains’,55 behaviour that
makes her a fitting patron of guerrillas.
    Outwardly the forms of Marian devotion were little changed during the
epoca francese, because there was little the French could do to change them.
There were still apparitions, miracles, pilgrimages and the great festival of
the Assumption – just. The festival of the Madonna of Divine Love went on
as usual in May 1812, when over 2,000 Romans flocked to her small hill
chapel, nine miles from the town. The police said it would have been more,
but for troop movements blocking the roads. Crutches were cast on the altar;
an old woman – a domestic in a noble house – went into ‘the most horrible
convulsions’; no one was outraged when a distraught young woman soiled
the altar cloth in her ecstasy, indeed three hundred of them cried ‘Grace!’ for
her. Another woman placed a silver snuff box on the altar, promising it to


                                      59
