                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Prefect, Nardon, said it was all a priestly ruse to get money out of simple
peasants, but he told Paris he wanted those behind it punished. The maire
then ordered the gendarmes to cut down the tree:

    In this way, we have removed the means by which someone can
    abuse the credulity and faith of the highlanders. Since the oak no
    longer exists, the supposed miracles have gone away, and the
    fanatics and the superstitious keep their mouths shut.60

The point was that things were never going to be the same under the French,
and it was the state’s business to ensure as much.
   Even at the centre, the French were wary of Marian devotion. The police
commissioner of the Tuscan port of Livorno remarked in 1811 that the
arrest and exile of the Pope would probably cause little trouble in the city,

    but they would rise in revolt, if any one touched the Madonna di
    Montenero, in whom they have great confidence. She saved them
    during a terrible earthquake, sixty-seven years ago, and they have
    always been grateful.

It was all part of a superstitious ‘faith’, concerned only with external devo-
tion and devoid of dogma. However, this artificial approach to religion cut
across class lines, for ‘people of a certain rank only appear in church on
Sundays and High Days’.61
   This traditional mixture of intense devotion and lack of gravitas among
the urban elites was undergoing a subtle but profound change under the
impact of French rule. Old bastions of Enlightenment were crumbling.
Florence saw a spate of Marian miracles in 1811, ‘in this city of the supersti-
tious’ in the words of the Director-General of Police.62 Lilies burst into
flower before several of her statues on the street corners of the city, and
crowds gathered rather than getting on with their work. Ten months later
there were four more ‘flowerings’, and a Capuchin sister – whose house had
recently been suppressed under the Concordat – regained her sight at Mass
before a statue of the Virgin. The Director-General remarked, with routine
condescension, that interest in these things was not confined to the lower
classes, but that Florentines were not moved to raging fanaticism.63 But
there was nothing routine about this. It marked a very important cultural
change and, in the context of the French occupation, perhaps a political
point was made as well. The Madonna was finding upper-class support – if
not necessarily respectability – in the face of the Concordat. In this casual
remark, the whole trend of elite religiosity of the eighteenth century is seen
being reversed, as is the fact that the French missed its full significance. This
mattered in a Florentine context, because the city had been the cradle of the
Jansenist polemicist Giuseppe Pujati, whose attack on the fervour and laxity


                                       61
