                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Some did not see a problem with the former, however. This was the differ-
ence between the new regime and the old. The Gendarmerie could interpose
itself with particular brutality to enforce the law. In 1808, while looking for
refractory conscripts in a village near Piacenza, gendarmes found a banned
festa in progress. According to the – French – Bishop of Piacenza, ‘A
gendarme entered the church, sword in hand, hat on head, and insulted the
priest, using very obscene expressions’.11 Aggressive acts of this stamp
reveal the lasting heritage of the Jacobinism of the Army of Italy, but they
do not represent a phenomenon that waned with time.
   There was more to this than Josephine utilitarianism. The cheerful
brutality of the Gendarmerie on such occasions reveals how politicized
these confrontations were. This was a battle for public space, and for the
monopoly of civic ritual so important to both cultures. As the regime
attempted to impose the celebration of its own High Day, the feast of St
Napoleon, after 1806, and to enforce the new prayers for the Emperor in the
Liturgy, such scenes became more common. French hatred of popular reli-
gion had a future in Italy, as well as a recent history; it had ready ‘enforcers’
at local level to support the policy-makers on high. The people of Empoli in
Tuscany were wrong in the letter – but not necessarily in the spirit – of the
Concordat, in their fear that the French were about to abolish Christmas on
the eve of annexation in 1808.12


                           Madonnas and miracles
The new regime could not ban miracles, nor did it try to outlaw devotion to
the Virgin, in whom Italian popular piety soon found a familiar refuge and
focus of resistance. This, at least, was something the French were prepared
for. In both cultures, shrines and statues to the Virgin were widespread, espe-
cially in the countryside, and the French and Italian masses sought the same
help from their madonnas – often more profane in motive than sacred – in
the same ways. The use of the plural throughout is deliberate, for the
concept of separate, individual madonnas, almost as per statue or shrine,
was a widespread, common heresy in both France and Italy.13 Familiarity
bred contempt well before the annexation of large parts of Italy brought
official distaste of such things into contact with Italian culture.
   Nevertheless, there was a particular context to the relationship linking
rulers, ruled and the Virgin Mary in Napoleonic Italy. Although Marian
cults took almost identical forms in France and in northern and central
Italy, there was probably a difference in volume. A detailed study of the cult
in Italy reveals that, over the early modern period up to the late nineteenth
century, there were more miracles, shrines and appearances of the Madonna
in Italy than in other parts of the Catholic world. Within Italy, the highest
concentrations were in the north and the centre.14 The Ligurian Riviera was
a particularly strong centre of the cult, with three major shrines: the


                                       54
