                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


modern France. John Bossy, too, sees the success of Trent in this sphere as
sowing the seeds of long-term failure: ‘I should be inclined to blame the
sociological weaknesses of Tridentine Catholicism’.85 Chartier is even more
emphatic:

    The ecclesiastical venture that aimed at inducing all Christians to
    share the clerical definition of Christianity was freighted with
    unbearable tension. Between the faithful and their Counter
    Reformation priests … mutual incomprehension was unavoidable.86

The dilemma of this choice, made by the Gallican Church in the early
modern period, is still felt. The Dictionnaire de spiritualité ascétique et
mystique, a guardian of orthodoxy, admits that even though the confraterni-
ties had ‘degenerated’ into vehicles for petty, secular rivalries and ‘the
external expressions of piety had acquired too considerable a place’, it
cannot be doubted ‘that at this stage of human development, the confrater-
nity represented the solution most adapted to what we call today Action
Catholique’.87
   Nothing of the kind happened in eighteenth-century Italy, despite the
best efforts of Borromeo, Muratori, the togati and Peter-Leopold. If the
confraternities are, indeed, the key to transforming and taming popular reli-
giosity, then the fact that France and the Italian states took such different
paths is of major importance. Peter-Leopold found over 251 such bodies to
suppress in Florence alone in 1783; his investigations revealed their wealth
and popularity there, and his assault on them was soon undone in the face
of popular fury.88 The political battle was one thing for the regime – it had
been fought and won before, within France89 – the power of popular piety
itself was quite another, and the French were less prepared for it. The battle
was politicized – and it involved the defence of a political culture – but its
mainspring was piety. In this context, the Concordat put two alienated
cultures on a collision course.
   The Concordat permitted but one confraternity, that of the Holy
Sacrament, virtually synonymous with the parish committees, the fabriques,
which administered funds and cared for church property. They were allowed
their own chapels and banners but, as with all processions not connected
with the handful of ‘approved’ High Days, they could only hold them inside
the church. The hope was to give the curé complete control over all forms of
religious ritual in the parish, not just the administration of the sacraments.
This may not have mattered overly much in France, if even in Provence ‘the
festival – a heady time and a paroxysmic expression – was no longer the
same’.90 In Napoleonic Italy, it was like trying to put a tiger on a lead.
   Italian confraternities existed layer upon layer, their variety of form and
origins standing as a living testament to the inability of Trent or the secular
powers to reduce them to orthodox forms, even if they were, at times, able to


                                      68
