                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


    The Tuscan princes had learned from long experience how attached
    the people of Siena were to their contrade … [T]hey not only
    preserved it, but put it under their protection.98

If anything, the casacce of Genoa had an even greater standing than the
contrade in the eighteenth century. Unlike the great Palio, their glories have
not survived into living memory. The French took advice in Siena they
seldom heeded elsewhere and the restored regime in Tuscany proved more
accommodating than the Piedmontese, who were as alien in Genoa as the
French. In their own time, however, the casacce were as legendary as the
contrade and their Palio are today.
   The twenty-one casacce fraternities of Genoa99 had their origins in the
flagellant movements of the late Middle Ages, and by the seventeenth
century they were independent of the churches, with their own chaplains
and oratories. They continued to escape episcopal or state control, because
of powerful noble patronage and their mass memberships, and their proces-
sions dominated Holy Thursday. They represented cross-class solidarity
within their narrow neighbourhoods, their processions attracting the
wealthy, whose sons would pay large sums to carry crosses and floats.
Perhaps their real power is best seen by their survival of so many demands
to suppress them in the second half of the eighteenth century from within
the Enlightened elite of the Genoa. The secular powers were too timid to do
so, and in 1748 the Archbishop openly admitted they were beyond his
control. In short, as the century progressed, they became more like them-
selves – secular, sociable, rowdy, tightly knit – not less so. Popular devotion –
popular in its pristine sense, for all classes were involved – was still vibrant
here on the eve of the Revolution.100 In 1791 they attracted the disdain of a
Prussian traveller, von Archenholz:

    The Genoese have retained many devotional ceremonies … . There
    are more confraternities here, than in any other city in Italy … .
    Their costume is a long robe, and they are masked. Many of them
    hide weapons under these habits, hoping to strike an enemy, if he
    passes in the course of the procession. These foul deeds are not rare,
    and usually go unpunished: the brothers will protect the wrong
    doer, and refuse to name him. Most are working men; many devout
    merchants would not lower themselves to be involved in such things.
    But the nobles are proud to belong, and carry crosses in the proces-
    sion.101

The processions were interrupted during the fighting in 1797, but resumed in
1806 in their old pomp, attracting large crowds from far afield as was
normal.102 No more emphatic proof of their durability need be cited, than
the capacity of the casacce to survive the ravages of the Revolution and rise


                                       70
