                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


infiltrate them. The bastion of Tridentine orthodoxy was Easter observance,
and most of the festivities of Holy Week have their origins in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries.91 The remarkable feat of the confraternities
was to retain their stranglehold on the public festivities, even of Holy Week.
Borromeo foreshadowed Bonaparte, in his efforts to create new confraterni-
ties under tight episcopal control – ‘archconfraternities’ in his parlance –
meant to become the sole such bodies in every diocese and ‘fronted’ by the
lay elite. Obviously, they were dedicated to the Holy Sacrament, rather than
to the Virgin or local saints.92 Although these bodies proliferated, they
neither displaced nor overawed the older confraternities.93 In Civitavecchia,
in the Papal states, there were still three confraternities of practising flagel-
lants in the city on the eve of French rule. They had their chapels in the
Dominican house and dominated the Good Friday procession in the tradi-
tional style.94 In 1805, in the early stages of the application of the
Concordat, the police discovered a manual for flagellant ceremonies circu-
lating throughout the Kingdom of Italy, ‘which is producing some unrest,
and spreads their venom against the lawmakers’.95 An official enquiry of
1811 by the Minister of Public Instruction in Milan revealed the extent to
which the rural confraternities set up by Borromeo had evolved along more
traditional lines, dominating Easter Week with processions and rituals more
in keeping with pre-Tridentine, flagellant brotherhoods. The prefect of Lario
described the Good Friday procession in one village:

    telling the sad story of the Calvary, by getting a man to play the
    Nazarene, with gushing blood for his costume … . The little Virgins
    and the penitents followed him. None of the instruments of the
    Passion were missing, and there was a full contingent of barefoot
    Jews.

His colleague in the Adda said the brothers beat themselves ‘to extirpate the
excesses of carnevale and show their girlfriends how tough they were’.96 This
enquiry has already been cited as evidence of the weakness of the Tridentine
reforming process in its own heartland. It also reveals that, left to them-
selves, communities would subvert Tridentine institutions and devotions in
well-established, traditional ways: they had already formed their own
concept of the confraternity, and of Easter devotions, to the extent that
Trent was not just quickly subverted, but subverted in a specific way.
   Only in Tuscany was their power broken by the time of the Napoleonic
occupation. The ferocious resistance to the Leopoldine reforms had led to
their reinstatement as legitimate institutions, but the confraternities did not
get their properties back and so were reduced to almost nothing.97 However,
an exception had been made for the powerful contrade of Siena, whose high-
point was – and remains – the racing of the ‘sacred grey’ horses at Palio.



                                       69
