                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


    between the heads of these institutions and the curés. They organize
    clandestine meetings the police can watch only imperfectly, which
    serve other ends than the practice of pious virtues … . There is a
    prevailing spirit among their members, of independence from cler-
    ical authority.107

He noted, too, that the House of Savoy had long cherished the hope of
destroying the confraternities, and that the French stood in firmly in this
tradition.
    However, the most important clerical influence on the confraternities,
particularly on the periphery, was provided by the regular orders. They,
more than the parish clergy, guided the festivities and were often the chap-
lains of the oratories.108 Thus, when the Concordat abolished the regulars,
the slender grip held by the Church over the confraternities was weakened
still further. The eighteenth century had been a long, losing battle by the
Church to tame the confraternities. The parish clergy tried, in vain, to
enforce the bishops’ instructions to ban nocturnal processions, flagellants
and people in costumes, whether in the Borromean heartland of Novara or
in the true periphery of the Tuscan Maremma.109 As late as 1811, the mayor
of Budrio near Bologna in the Kingdom of Italy warned the prefect that the
brothers of the Holy Sacrament had long ago wrested the right to appoint
and sponsor the ‘extraordinary predication’ in the town from the parocco.
They even had moved it from Easter to May, which was more convenient for
the people of the surrounding countryside. It was, he added, best to let them
carry on, for ‘it is within the scope of the penitents’ influence to maintain
public order, quiet and peace’.110 This had survived almost ten years of the
Concordat. Even their own creation, the Confraternity of the Holy
Sacrament, had slipped from episcopal control in many places and, a gener-
ation before, the Jesuits had set themselves the daunting task of trying to
claw it back.111
    The Concordat was exactly in line with this tradition. This was not really
a question of fear of counter-revolution, at least to begin with. Judgements
such as those by the maire of the Piedmontese town of Cuneo in 1810 on the
three confraternities of the town were rare:

    These associations were a vehicle of the Sardinian government … .
    In the present circumstances, a public official cannot be blindly
    confident of them, since these gatherings take place under a kind of
    mystery which could degenerate in a moment of crisis, and serve as
    a rallying point for a fanatical faction.112

This was a question of an old struggle, not a new phase in counter-
revolutionary resistance, at least until the indigenous clergy began to change
sides themselves. Even the maire of Cuneo admitted, however, that the confra-


                                      72
