                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


the greatest enemy of religion’. His account to Napoleon shows the strength
of a different outlook:

    The whole population of the town and the neighbouring country-
    side moved itself to take part in these ceremonies. They lasted three
    days, and involved pilgrimages and offerings.78

Perhaps the greatest event of all took place at Savona on 8 September 1810,
however. Pius VII, incarcerated there, said a Mass in honour of the well-
loved Madonna of Savona on that, her feast day, which had been banned by
the French. A crowd of 400 found its way, unsolicited, to his window to hear
it. There was no trouble.79 The very apex of the hierarchy had now
embraced Marianism, in clear contrast to the reticence of the recent past. It
seemed that French domination now threatened every Madonna with
neglect, from those in the remote field chapels, closed by official order, to the
occupants of the greatest shrines. Her – or their – power now grew accord-
ingly, as Pius acknowledged.
    As the Marian tide rose against him, Napoleon made his own spiteful
riposte. In 1811 the government sold off the pearl crown of the Madonna of
Vico, looted in 1799, to the Mont de Piété of Paris, for the huge sum of over
37,000 francs, enough to pay the pensions of 1,000 ex-nuns. In 1816 the
restored government was still trying to recover it.80 This was only a skir-
mish.


                           The lay confraternities
The confraternities were the living embodiment of lay recalcitrance to Trent,
the great ‘irreducible’ element in popular devotion, detested by the Church
hierarchy, the secular authorities and reformers of all and every persuasion,
Tridentine, Jansenist or Enlightened. For Nicholas Terpstra,

    Brotherhoods were the most public face of the Church, yet were
    almost entirely lay … [I]t was their very ubiquity that made conflict
    and contradiction inevitable.81

The conflict between the empire of reason and the forces of ‘obscurantism’
was clearly drawn here, as was the more specifically political conflict
between corporatism and the ‘citizen state’ of the Revolution. The confrater-
nities were the driving force of carnevale, of public festivals that took over
whole cities when they did not revolve around isolated, suspect rural chapels,
dedicated to saints of dubious provenance, owned by the brotherhoods. To
Trent, this epitomized impiety and archaism; to the secular authorities,
simple disorder; to the Enlightenment, savagery and ignorance. Muratori
attacked them root and branch in his Antiquitates Italicae Medi Aevi, sive


                                       66
