                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Dissertationes de moribus, ritibus, religione regimine of 1742, devoting the
entire seventy-fifth dissertation to demolishing them. His disciple, Lorenzo
Mehus, a Florentine cleric, echoed this in his Of the Origins, Progress,
Abuses and Reform of the Lay Confraternities, written at the height of Peter-
Leopold’s wholesale abolition of the Tuscan brotherhoods in 1785. It sold
only 200 copies, but mirrored government policy, blaming their decadence
‘squarely on … the mendicant orders’. The government’s own report of 1783
concluded of the lay confraternities of Tuscany that ‘as far as piety and
devotion are concerned, there is not even a hint of them, but everything
revolves around mundane pomp and display’.82
   Predictably enough, the Napoleonic regime stood foresquare in this
continuum, to its own loathing of the brotherhoods adding the political
defiance of corporatism into the bargain. But it succeeded neither in
breaking this strong tradition, nor turning its assault on it into a source of
ralliement with those elements in the Italian elite normally hostile to the
effusive, often obstreperous character of public piety. Seldom did the
Napoleonic regime come so close to living up to its claim to be the heir of
Trent, but it was also in these reforms that Trent had most misjudged the
faithful. The judgement of Maurice Agulhon on the confraternities of
Provence on the eve of the Revolution is just as apposite south of the Alps:

    The phenomenae I have sought to isolate … are traditionally [seen]
    as those which defy rational, prosaic explanation. The irrational is
    the only opponent I have faced.83

   Yet Agulhon’s work also pointed to a decline in the religious element of
the confraternities, and the accelerating, if gradual, process of the transfer
of the meridional instincts of associative, public sociability from religious to
distinctly lay bodies. He also noted a growing distaste of ‘the France of
Paris, of the north’ for la sociabilité meridonale. John McManners concluded
that the relative success of orthodoxy in eighteenth-century France was most
felt when the hierarchy did finally harness and tame the confraternities. It
turned them into instruments of parish administration, imposing a more
serious intent on their devotions, a Pyrrhic victory:

    they had been attempting to turn the existing nominally religious
    clubs into devotional confraternities. Had they realized it, the
    choice before them was between the existing large membership with
    sociability or piety and few adherents. The period of the
    Enlightenment was the beginning of the process whereby the
    Church became a minority association.84

For McManners, the taming of the confraternities is a major turning point
in a seminal process in the social, cultural and even political history of


                                      67
