                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


again, not immediately, but after a long interval – just in time for the French
to ban them.
    The strength of confraternities was measured in less ostentatious forms of
devotion than those beloved of the casacce. Roman confraternities extended
their social influence ‘upwards’, attracting many nobles to their ranks, even
if their zeal for charity waned, thereby loosening their grip on the masses.
Yet even in ‘self-absorbed’ Rome, charity was not unknown.103 Elsewhere, as
the suppressions of the French period revealed, confraternities devoted to
burying the poor, caring for the sick and running the prisons were a useful
part of the Italian urban fabric. However ‘decadent’ they had become by
Tridentine standards, attempts to abolish them in the eighteenth century
should have warned the French what they were in for. The thirty confraterni-
ties of Prato in the 1780s were not wealthy enough to survive on their
patrimonies alone, and their magnificent oratories and processions were
supported by the continuous contributions of their members. Many of the
confraternities were avowedly popular as well, and over 50 per cent of the
population belonged to them – 3,865 people. This was hardly a phenomenon
in decline, although there was a marked trend towards secularization in that
regular devotions and administration became the preserve of the few. The
great festivals remained powerful expressions of confraternal solidarity,
however. Rather than despising their archaism the new, rising urban bour-
geoisie was determined to dominate the confraternities. When, in 1786, Ricci
proposed remodelling them on Borromean and Muratorian lines, he
attacked a live animal, not a corpse. Employed, respectable brothers were a
significant presence in the rioting of 1787, which reversed the reforms, and
calls for their restoration were among the rioters’ demands.104 The Senate of
Genoa was probably wise to leave the casacce alone. This kind of reform
had to await the arrival of the Gendarmerie.
    The disorder and divisions sown by the associative life of the confraterni-
ties reached far beyond the rowdiness of their processions. They divided
cities and the jealousies between brotherhoods were often almost rivalled by
the in-fighting for power and precedence within them.105 In the countryside,
they could easily become yet another vehicle for the feud. This was the case
just as much among the newer confraternities, founded in the wake of Trent,
as among those with medieval origins.106 Those directly concerned with
policing the periphery were, predictably, troubled by a lack of clerical
control over the religious life of a ‘degenerate’ laity. Loysel, the Prefect of
the Po – a man with a republican past, unlike D’Auzers, and not noted for
his religiosity – looked forward to the complete abolition of the lay confra-
ternities in the départements réunis, largely for reasons of public order, as
well as a sense of ingrained disgust at meridional piety:

    Their existence … apart from adding nothing to the standing of
    religion, is damaging to public order. There are always rows


                                      71
