                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


following the closure of their house: ‘Several superstitious – or ill-inten-
tioned – people asserted that the Virgin had shown herself to avenge the
oppressed innocents’. D’Auzers took no chances and demolished the chapel,

    which is far from any dwelling, deep in a wood and was often more
    a refuge of vagabonds and refractory conscripts than a temple of
    the faithful.

Of course, it would be to such men that Mary would come, as the icon of
the people. If D’Auzers was correct about the coupling of the apparitions
and miracles with the arrival of the refractory clergy, the events in
Compiano reveal profound levels of politicization in the heart of the
periphery, even if the issues involved were rooted in tradition and inter-
preted in purely religious forms. French policy struck deep into these
isolated communities as a result of the terms of the Concordat and the
harassment of refractory clergy. The result was first to relate atavistic piety
to contemporary politics, and then to leave a permanent reminder of French
‘Otherness’ and hostility in the area, not only through the arrival of the
Trappists but also in the physical ruins of the chapel. In this case D’Auzers
fought the whole panoply of Catholicism head on, leaving only ruins and –
it is safe to presume – deep resentment in his wake through his effort to
contain a set of events he assumed to be dangerous, revealed by his actions,
and culturally repugnant, by his words. This was the periphery, at least. It
was dangerous territory, but at least it was isolated. It would not remain
thus, however. Other events would soon bring home to the French that
Marianism, and the forces of resistance it represented, were finding other
homes beyond the periphery, and new adherents at the highest levels.
    Something happened in Genoa, under the occupation, that signalled a
major change in Italian piety, and much more. In the autumn of 1805,
before his departure from Liguria was postponed by the rising in the
Piacentino, Lebrun, the French commissioner for the annexation of the
region, made Cardinal Spina a parting gift of the statue of Our Lady of
Charity, which had been impounded after the suppression of the monastery
of Santo Spiritù. Spina thanked him warmly, and put it quietly away some-
where.69 It was a mistake by Lebrun. A ‘Virgin in reserve’ was a dangerous
cultural weapon in a country so devoted to Mary as Liguria, and even more
so in the adroit hands of Spina. When his old friend Pius VII was deposed,
arrested and gaoled in 1809, Spina did not try to raise Genoa in revolt.
Rather, that July, he fetched Our Lady of Charity out of the episcopal
cupboard, set her up in a new chapel in the Cathedral of San Lorenzo and
held a vast, unauthorized festival to celebrate her transfer from a quiet side
chapel to her new altar. It is tempting to equate this action to the tradition
of unveiling a Madonna, normally kept shrouded precisely to heighten
popular perceptions of her power, as happened in other parts of Italy and so


                                      63
