                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


hated by Jansenist reformers, although there are no references to such inten-
tions in Genoa.70 The episcopal celebrations lasted four days and embraced
the whole city, not just the parish of the San Lorenzo.71 When the proces-
sions, street banquets and open-air masses continued, unchecked and
unrebuked, into September, the Police Commissioner exploded:

    A week does not pass when similar ceremonies do not get repeated
    several times – first in one church, and then in another. More often,
    still, these general solemnities are celebrated not in one neighbour-
    hood, but over the length of the whole city … . This is how the
    whole point of the Concordat is dodged, completely. It is time these
    unofficial holidays were restricted to Sundays, they are making
    people lose time at work and adding to their misery.72

It was an old attack, an eighteenth-century response to something newer
than its expression might indicate. The French policeman missed the point,
and it was not really that Spina’s personal motive might have been to embar-
rass the regime over the arrest of the Pope. Whether this was his intention or
not – and, circumstantially, it is likely – the true significance of the new-
found passion for Our Lady of Charity is that Spina instigated and led it.
The devotion of the laity was assured, but that a Cardinal Archbishop
should play to it in so unrestrained a manner marks a fundamental change
in official attitudes to the Virgin and, above all, to the popular piety she
incarnated. The pressures of the Concordat, the traumas of the Revolution,
the arrest of the Pope and the misery of a port devastated by the blockade,
all came together in these festivities.
    It is impossible to say from the evidence whether Spina had undergone a
spiritual experience that led him back to popular piety, or if he was now
playing what Allan Bloom has called

    a cultural relativist [who] must care for culture more than truth, and
    fight for culture more than truth while knowing it is not the truth.73

The latter seems the more likely. Whatever, Spina had become a populist, at
least within the city. What had been thought necessary to hold in check a
generation before was now sponsored and blessed. This was not an old High
Day revived, but a new invention, built in defiance and fear of the
Concordat. Spina’s actions in Genoa represent a clear break with the recent
past, but they were not the dawn of a new religious culture. Spina was plan-
ning for the future, but he was not ahead of his time. The new festival was
not a forerunner of the tightly regulated, ‘tamed’ collective piety of the nine-
teenth-century revival. If the French police reports are to be believed, it
drew on the traditional unruliness of popular piety and based itself on its
traditional ritual space: the neighbourhoods of the city. Thus Spina was not


                                      64
