                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


a pioneer of the nineteenth-century revival in terms of social discipline. This
was an alliance between equals, not an assertion of a new, clerical-inspired
piety for the masses.
   Nevertheless, he pushed the Church’s relations with popular piety in a
new direction; that this was so, mattered enormously in the conditions
prevailing in Napoleonic Italy. His street parties were as great a volte-face as
was Napoleon’s coronation for Jacobins, probably more so. They were
joyous, rather than vicious; wine, not blood, ran in the narrow streets of the
old town; there was singing and laughter, not gunfire. Yet Spina produced a
spectacle of cultural resistance to the new order as profound as any guerilla
raid across the Balearic Sea. Above all, he had to change his own approach
to devotion to achieve it. The ceremonies were repeated on the anniversary
of the transfer of the statue in 1810.74 That year saw a series of ‘miracles’
before the Virgin. Spina did not go as far as supporting them, but he cyni-
cally played for time. However, several of his senior clergy did take it upon
themselves to promote the cult surrounding the image. One night in August,
an old woman came to offer a whole jug of oil for the lamps of her chapel,
in exchange for a few drops of the original oil. On the same night, a canon
of the cathedral gave the Madonna a gold ring set with a precious stone.
The police thought there were probably many more such gifts unknown to
them.75 The real point, lost on them, was the drawing together of popular
and ‘establishment’ piety. After disdaining her throughout the age of
Enlightenment, senior clerics in a major archdiocese were actively
promoting this most populist of cults. The Church was on a new path in
Liguria, even if it was not consonant with that taken by the later Catholic
revival. D’Auzers sensed it when he demanded of Savary in 1811 that as
many priests as possible be got out of Genoa and more reliable people
appointed. He went as far as insisting that a second Vicar-General be
appointed, and that the post went to a priest who was a police spy, to keep a
close eye on Spina.76
   Nor was Spina alone, even if, as the incumbent of a great see, he could
put on the best show. Under the nose of a French Metropolitan sent to
reform them, the Florentine clergy drew the wrath of the French police:

    There are festivities every day for the Madonna, there are octaves
    and the exposition of the Holy Sacrament in the Lady chapels until
    ten or eleven at night. In a word, the priests are inventing everything
    they can think of, to draw in the people, making them lose precious
    time off work.77

In Pisa, Spina’s tactics were replicated, although applied to the relics of the
patron saint of the city, transferred from one altar to another. The Minister
of Religion reprimanded the Archbishop, reminding him that ‘superstition is



                                      65
