                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


practice throughout the empire, and to precede them with Domine salvum
fac Imperatorem Nostrum Napoleonem, thus ensuring the object of the
prayers was known to the congregation. However, the Florentine clergy
omitted the name, leaving the impression that they might have been praying
for Francis I of Austria. Indeed, in a letter to the police, the Archpriest of
the Metropolitan of Florence admitted that ‘the usual practice’ was being
followed.144 Initially brought to heel, the Tuscan clergy did not conform for
long. Police-Générale raged to Religion, in July 1809, that the bishops had
told their curés they could dispense with chanting the Domine salvum fac
Imperatorem. Even when it was being sung, there had been adroit adjust-
ments to the liturgy by the clergy themselves:

    The chant was being said only after the farewell blessing, whereas
    from time immemorial [that is, before French rule] it was done at
    the same time as the Benediction. As a result of this change, this
    prayer ends the service, and it is said when the congregation is
    noisily leaving church, when the servers are snuffing out the candles.
    In a word, aversion to the government is to be seen everywhere, and
    recognized by these characteristic signs.145

It was believed this ‘adjustment’ had originated in Genoa and entered
Tuscany through Livorno, where it was common practice. Whether by coin-
cidence or imitation, this was also common in the Roman departments,
causing Norvins to say that the prayers were said only ‘in the shabbiest
fashion’.146
   In Pisa, on Holy Saturday 1808, a priest said the prayers in the name of
Emperor Francis, corrected himself audibly, and changed it to Napoleon.
When arrested for this, twenty-one wealthy petitioners came to his
support.147 On Good Friday 1808, a Florentine priest said the prayers, but
had the bells ringing and the organ playing as he did so. In the same service,
he also took a public stand against the omission of the anti-Semitic
prayers.148 In the summer of 1808, at the moment when fighting first broke
out in Spain, and at the start of the quarrel with Pius VII, the Bishop of
Sarazana in Liguria ordered a prayer to be said throughout the diocese
immediately before the Domine salvum fac Imperatorem: ‘an Oration for all
kinds of tribulation’. Traditionally it was said when war cut off sea commu-
nications with Genoa, and had last been said when the British were raiding
the coast. The Gendarmerie said it had stirred up the area.149
   In the Roman departments, things were often less subtle, but the timing
was in keeping with the power of the Mass as a public drama. In 1813 a
priest in Civitavecchia chose Good Friday as the first time he omitted the
Domine salvum fac Imperatorem. A year earlier, in a remote parish in
Umbria, a priest conducting the service left the altar at the point of the
Domine salvum fac Imperatorem, stood silently to one side for a moment,


                                      79
