                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


learned that the prudent way was simply not to mention the clergy in the
context of public ceremonies. The post-1860 festival of unification ‘offered
[its opponents] little room for provocation or confrontation’, remaining
secular and wholly official in form.163 Napoleon did not learn this lesson.
    The new festival of St Napoleon was an accident waiting to happen, at
least in an Italian context. It represents one of the worst in a whole series of
miscalculations made by the government in its quest for a legitimate place in
the Church calendar. Created in 1806, the debates surrounding the new
festival are very revealing of the preoccupations of the regime. From the
outset, the intention was to ‘pair’ it with one of the remaining great High
Days of the calendar, but not necessarily with Napoleon’s birthday on the
Assumption. Because outdoor festivities were regarded as essential, the
choice was restricted to Easter, Corpus Christi and the Assumption. Easter
was, indeed, toyed with by Portalis, on the grounds that it ‘was trouble’, but
even Napoleon – and even in 1806, at the height of his success – thought this
was taking too big a risk. Napoleon himself rejected Corpus Christi,
because it was too close to the old fête du Roi, promoted by Louis XIV, and
he did not want this festival to be associated with the old order, but rather to
mark a new beginning for the empire: marriages involving veterans and
serving soldiers would, it was hoped, come to be celebrated on this festival.
Portalis, the Minister of Religion, had originally wanted to link the new fête
with that of St Louis, but then convinced Napoleon that it could be easily
combined with the Assumption.164 The Piedmontese department of the
Sesia was one of the most secure, pro-French of the Italian departments,
and its Prefect reported that the new festival had been celebrated throughout
the department.165 Three years later, the Bishop said the same, but he hinted
strongly that this had only been done in the mountain parishes, because,
since 1806, he had made a point of touring them in August.166 In 1811
Spina spoke of the festival becoming almost the norm in Genoa, although,
as has been seen, he did his best to ‘overlay’ it with other events.
Nevertheless, he appeared almost terrified at the prospect of taking a step
too far in local eyes. When the government sought to underline the superi-
ority of the official saint over the Virgin, by rededicating the church of the
Annunciation to St Napoleon, Spina spoke out. He saw that local opinion
would regard this as a direct confrontation between the government and the
Madonna, and the power of the latter among his flock:

    However laudable this might be in the abstract, it seems to me there
    could be a flaw in the execution. This involves a church that has
    always, since it was built, been consecrated to the Virgin, and a
    church which – for exactly the fact of its dedication – has always
    been very dear to the people – as witnessed by the huge concourse
    that flocked to it, the day it was reopened.167



                                      82
