                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


and then returned to carry on the service. Roederer made no attempt to hide
the impact he made by this action: ‘Most of the congregation took it as the
sign to start leaving church at that moment’. He was put under police
watch.150 A canon of Velletri, also in the Roman departments, was particu-
larly clever when he answered a charge of not saying the Domine salvum fac
Imperatorem on the grounds that he did sing a Te Deum for the pregnancy of
the Empress and did not want to bore his congregation with needless repeti-
tion. It also transpired that all the churches of the town had omitted the
prayers for the Emperor on Holy Saturday.151 Anti-revolution was tipping
quite easily into counter-revolution.
    Te Deums were, perhaps, the most deeply embarrassing moments faced by
the regime. The most infamous was unquestionably the empty stalls in St
Peter’s and the other great basilicas of Rome, which greeted Tournon and
Norvins when they tried to celebrate the birth of the King of Rome ‘in his
own city’ in 1811.152 Tournon remarked in his memoirs that the clergy of
Rome saw quite clearly how important all this was to the government, and
let it play into their hands. This was a moment when a great deal was risked
on their adhesion to external ritual. Instead, Tournon recalled, the clergy
reminded the faithful that they did not recognize the divorce from Josephine,
and came very close to calling the King of Rome a bastard. Tournon also
felt, with hindsight, that things had not been helped because Miollis, from
an older, genuinely dechristianized generation of Bonapartists, had himself
failed to grasp the importance of clerical participation.153 The French reply
was swift and ruthless. Napoleon had already had those Cardinals who
refused to attend the wedding stripped of their standing and exiled to
various parts of France. The canons became among the first secular clergy
to be arrested and sent into exile, but even the musicians and the choir-
master of St Peter’s – all of whom had refused to participate – were first
sacked and then imprisoned. Miollis admitted that their ‘obstinacy’ had
created quite a stir in Rome.154 The French had had fair warning, however.
The first attempt to hold Te Deums in the Roman departments was in 1809,
for the anniversary of the imperial coronation. It was held in Civitavecchia,
but had to be sung by laymen as none of the clergy would do it. This was as
successful as it got, because the Vicar-General the diocese of Viterbo
ordered the clergy to boycott the ceremonies – and they obeyed. The Pro-
Vicar of Montefiascone told the French police that it was not a ceremony of
the Church in any case.155 In 1810 the great basilicas of Rome had ignored
requests to pray for the Empress when she was pregnant. This caused
Tournon to request the arrest of the ‘ringleaders’, a step he considered to
stop short of the violence he said he wished to avoid.156
    It was but the tip of an iceberg, however. Open defiance spread to the
provinces and was not confined to a few great occasions. Several clergy of
Frascati were exiled to Corsica in June 1811 for refusing to sing the Te Deum
for the birth of the King of Rome, but they were only scapegoats, for Miollis


                                      80
