                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


state-financed confines of the parish church. The Mass symbolized peace
and social unity in a divided society, whereas the oratories of noble families
and the lay confraternities, and the churches of the regular orders, repre-
sented the foe of corporatism and privilege, while the hill and field chapels
were the unpoliced havens of superstition and ignorance. When they tried to
insert the new, imperial state into the same parish Mass, the power of which
they so wanted to enhance, the French often united clergy and laity against
them, not the reverse. By attempting to infiltrate the Mass and the Church
calendar, the regime took a tremendous risk. It recognized the usefulness of
the Church as a tool of social control from the outset; this had been the
whole driving force behind the Concordat. However, what happened in
Napoleonic Italy shows that the regime did not have the faintest idea how to
harness it to these ends. It held too much devotional practice in too a great a
contempt to attempt to manipulate the clergy on its surest ground, or to
count on pressure from the laity to coerce their priests on its behalf.
   The regime attempted three innovations in the devotional life of the
Church, directly aimed at its own glorification: two were in the text of the
Mass itself, the other in the Church calendar. Prayers were to be said for the
Emperor at Sunday Mass, replacing those for the deposed ancien régime
rulers. The High Days and local saints’ days abolished by the Concordat
were to be replaced by the singing of Te Deum at Sunday Mass for military
victories and events in the life of the imperial family. Finally, the Imperial
Decree of 18 February 1806 created St Napoleon’s Day on the Emperor’s
birthday, 15 August, which fate had decreed was also the Feast of the
Assumption. All of these initiatives proved disastrous. Liturgical resistance,
when linked directly to the Sunday Mass, could insult the regime at the very
moment when social unity should have been closest to becoming a reality,
and it could be re-enacted regularly, almost routinely. The refusal to sing a
Te Deum offered the chance to belittle the regime at those very moments it
sought to make itself look glorious and – an important point, in the milita-
rized Europe of Napoleon – invincible. The whole concept of St Napoleon’s
Day brought the new, statist, militarized – as very distinct from militant –
Catholicism into direct conflict with its very antithesis – Marian devotion –
in the most poignant manner conceivable. It was all made even worse in the
practised hands of a post-Tridentine clergy, proficient in the well-defined
ritual of the Mass. Borromeo saw the secular Church as the officers of a
well-organized army – a diocese had its generals, colonels and captains143 –
a very ironic metaphor in the context of the confrontation of his successors
with Napoleon. French incursions into the liturgy of the Mass gave these
officers the opportunity to fight on their favourite ground, with the confi-
dence of their parishioners, ‘the ranks’. When the regime chose to fight on
the Assumption, it stumbled onto the favourite ground of those same ranks.
   In May 1808, following the annexation of Tuscany to the empire, the
Tuscan clergy were ordered to say public prayers for the Emperor, as was the


                                      78
