                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


ternities still had their role to play: ‘even now, their pious zeal for helping the
poor and the suffering is to be acknowledged’. However, socially exclusive
confraternities found it easier to evade the Concordat and did become
havens for counter-revolutionary sentiments, if not of revolt. The venerable
confraternity of La Toricella was the preserve of the noble families of
Piacenza. It refused to recognize the authority of the French bishop, and the
prefect suppressed it. This only resulted in a very insulting and well-publi-
cized sonnet about the bishop doing the rounds of the town.113
    The casacce continued to embody John Bossy’s vision of the confraterni-
ties as a ‘social miracle’, binding all classes together.114 Beside them, the
brotherhoods of Cuneo and Piacenza are examples of that ‘authoritarian
parenthood’ with which Borromeo and the ancien régime sought to infuse
them.115 The lay confraternities had survived into the nineteenth century in
all their guises, and all of them provided the French with ready vehicles for
that ‘entryism’ the Medici had practised so astutely in the construction of
the Tuscan state.116 The whole experience of the Italian ancien régime
demonstrated the readiness of the lay confraternities as instruments of
ralliement. Instead, the French chose to annihilate them.
    The confraternities had been anything but ‘corroded by the
Enlightenment’, nor had their traditional base among the bourgeoisie –
urban or rural – been weakened,117 save perhaps in Tuscany where Peter-
Leopold’s reforms dented their patrimonies. The archives of the Napoleonic
period reveal the continued wealth of the confraternities in urban centres, as
witnessed by the inventories of their suppressed oratories. In the country-
side, the abolished festivals of patron saints were often stopped only by the
Gendarmerie and the demolition of their field chapels. Powerful testimony to
the importance of the confraternities to their commuities on the periphery
can emerge less in their wealth, than their poverty. The oratories and masses
of confraternities of the Apennine valleys above Reggio-Emiliano absorbed
all their revenues, leading to the conclusion that they were supported not as
sources of privilege or prestige, but from devotion to particular chapels and
sites.118 Their vibrancy straddled centre and periphery, although it took
different forms. In urban centres they remained bastions of corporatism,
centred on trades or neighbourhoods, while in the countryside their key role
in public festivals made them the lynch-pins of communal solidarity. The
evidence amassed in the course of enforcing the Concordat sustains the view
that they were still strong and that, largely because of them, ‘the omnipres-
ence of religion in social life meant that no ceremony or public occasion
could be wholly profane’.119 This would cost the French dear, when they
tried to usurp their place. First, they simply had to stamp them out, and the
omens were not good. There were tiny rumblings in 1805 when the first steps
were taken to close the oratories in Genoa: keys were withheld from timid
local policemen,120 the first small shot in a long war. Genoa was the unoffi-
cial capital of associative lay devotion in Italy and, by 1809, it had a degree


                                        73
