                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Sub-Prefect thought this would be the end of it, for the Trinità and Sauli – a
wealthy merchant – were very influential.132 He was wrong. A year later, he
stood by helplessly as the populace celebrated the banned feast of their
patron saint for two days – working days – with full pomp, led by the confra-
ternities. Faced with such mass resistance, even the Gendarmerie – so
fearless in campaigns against the bandits of the region – was powerless. All
the Sub-Prefect could to was write an indignant letter to the Archpriest,
‘who answered me calmly’.133 In 1812, he reported that ‘[i]t is impossible to
stop people going to church, on the days of festivals abolished under the
Concordat’.134
   This is an indication not just of continued lay resistance to the
Concordat, but that, in the matter of the activities of the confraternities, the
local clergy – once their rivals – were effectively changing sides. This was the
provincial equivalent of Spina’s behaviour in Genoa. At the height of the
confrontations in Novi, the Prefect told Paris that he had asked the bishops
to support him in curbing these processions.135 It was a reasonable request
by eighteenth-century standards, but things were moving on. In 1812 the
Vicar-General of Casale – the immediate subordinate of a French prelate –
showed signs of supporting this sea-change in his parish clergy. He calmly
reported in 1812 that the parish of the hamlet of Castelnuovo Scivia allowed
the officially recognized confraternity of the Holy Sacrament to process the
streets in its traditional white robes on Corpus Christi. He added that the
official confraternities also do this in Alessandria, Turin and in the
Kingdom of Italy. Knowing it was virtually the norm, he did nothing, the
terms of the Concordat not withstanding. Finally, he observed to the Prefect
of Genoa of the Corpus Christi celebrations in Tortona, a sizeable town:

    following a very old practice, the Holy Sacrament was paraded
    through the streets, from one parish to the next, without this ever
    being regarded as a holiday. Only well-off people who do not have
    to do daily work take part.136

He would stop it next year, if the government wished. In 1813 the maire of
San Quirico, a village between Novi and Alessandria, reported that the curé
had allowed a robed, nocturnal procession in honour of Our Lady of the
Rosary to continue, because those who took part were not a confraternity.137
The recalcitrance of the Ligurian border-country is particularly poignant.
Its tradition of banditry had been thoroughly rooted out by the French; it
had been occupied longer than most other parts of the départements réunis,
but popular piety proved a more difficult enemy to defeat than the great
band of Mayno of the Spinetta.138
   Popular devotion in the Italian départements réunis had lost none of its
force, in either town or country. The vibrancy and outright rowdiness of the
confraternities did not preclude powerful backing from the lay elites, who at


                                      76
