                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


admitted that all the clergy of the city had stood together.157 It took place in
Montefiascone, but the President of the Civil Tribunal noted that only four
priests even came and,

    The Mass finished, the celebrant chanted the Te Deum, but scarcely
    had he started, when the small number of people attending
    suddenly all walked out … . A priest had been stationed on the
    door, to persuade people not to come.158

Nor did they desist. The police were still arresting clergy for this kind of
defiance throughout the Roman departments and Tuscany in 1813.159 Nor
was there only one way to defy government orders. In 1812 in Umbria
Roederer reported that although his clergy had sung Te Deums for the
birthday of the King of Rome, he found – after a thorough study of mass
missals – that they had actually said prayers irrelevant to the occasion.160
These were the greatest moments of defiance, but it was readily admitted
that, on the periphery, passive refusal to sing Te Deums or say prayers for the
Emperor was widespread. Nardon, in Parma, ominously reported that at the
height of the Wagram campaign in 1809 the Domine salvum fac Imperatorem
stopped being said throughout the Piacentino. The churches were full when
there was news of French victories, but no Te Deums were sung.161 There
seem to have been relatively few problems with getting the clergy to sing Te
Deums in most cathedrals and urban centres until the invasion of the Papal
states. The question was, how. Inevitably, no one proved better at subverting
it than Spina. When a Te Deum was called for in Liguria, for the first time
ever, to celebrate the victories of the Wagram campaign of 1809, Spina
decked out his cathedral and even the Domine salvum fac Imperatorem was
performed. However, Spina did all this according to the old pre-Concordat
calendar, which meant the official offices were performed on suppressed
High Days. Moreover, although his pastoral letter ordered the clergy to
follow suit throughout the Archdiocese, it did not indicate that the Domine
salvum fac Imperatorem was to be sung every Sunday and High Day. The
Police Commissioner concluded:

    I am not at all surprised that His Eminence should have concocted
    this little Jesuitical ruse to elude, as far as possible, the orders from
    Religion.162

Clearly, an artist was at work.
   This pattern repeated itself, exactly, in 1859–60, as did official responses
to this sort of clerical defiance. The Bishop of Pisa found himself ‘deported’
to Turin in 1860, and put under house arrest. It was a measure Cavour, the
godson of Pauline Bonaparte, described as ‘possibly not very legal, but
usefully compatible to political wisdom’. Nonetheless, the unitary state soon


                                       81
