                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


of clerical patronage unimaginable under the old order. In July 1809 –
following the passage of Pius VII into exile in Savona – the clergy made
clear, common cause with archaism. Four suppressed feasts of patron saints
were held in the town, with the assistance of the seculars – the regular clergy
who normally fulfilled these roles being themselves abolished.121 This simple
fact, in town and country, must always be remembered. No clerical presence
was possible in confraternal devotions, save that of a secular priest, after the
regular orders were dissolved. In an earlier era, this would have been hard to
imagine. No longer. In 1811, a curé in the city openly defied the police and
celebrated the banned feast of Nostra Signore della Carema with full pomp,
but he had refused to ring the bells for the victory of Wagram in 1809.122
The priest was obviously politically motivated in a true counter-revolu-
tionary sense. However, his way of building popular support was by
supporting the laity in what he knew they held dear. To sustain this kind of
feast day was to give pride of place to the confraternities. The other way to
protect the confraternities, especially the casacce, was first to stress the vital
public service they played in burying the dead, and then to elude the new
legislation of burial, which struck deeply at local tradition. By 1808 it was
clear to the French that when Lebrun ‘rallied’ the urban bourgeoisie and
handed them control of the municipality in 1806, he had made a crucial
error. The casacce were immediately revived and thus the new legislation on
burials, which prohibited inhumations in church or within urban areas, was
stalled repeatedly. It was ‘all of a piece’.123 Elite support for these forms of
popular devotion was still prevalent in the great port, and continued to be so
into the nineteenth century. The French finally banned the casacce in 1811,
but they re-emerged after 1814 and were just as unpopular with the House
of Savoy. Charles-Albert IV finally banned them, for good, in 1835.124 The
battle over burials continued under the restored monarchy as well.125
   In 1805 the Sub-Prefect of Novi, a moderately sized town on the border
between Piedmont and Liguria, warned his superiors that the local confra-
ternities were trying to elude the decree closing their oratories:

    The matter seems of little importance to me, but the locals are very
    passionate about their own oratories. They set great store about
    dressing in their red or white robes, so I dare do nothing, without
    your orders.126

It was another first shot in that same long war, and the fear of this exposed
local official is palpable. When the order came to abolish the confraternities
in 1809, the last hope of the brothers was that some might be saved, because
of the good works they undertook. It simply intensified the old rivalries and
the Sub-Prefect discerned a mixture of political lobbying and uncompre-
hending rebelliousness. First came the politics. The Sub-Prefect reported a
meeting with the heads of the confraternities on 9 December 1809:


                                       74
