                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


    The rivalry between the oratories of the penitents will work
    wonders for the public good of this commune. The fear engendered
    by their coming suppression has led them to come up with projects I
    will do all in my power to foster. They would never have proposed
    such things, in the days of their brilliant, assured existence.127

The brothers of the Trinità swore to bury all the dead in the public hospital;
their traditional rivals of the Misericordia promised to pay for a new public
fountain. It took the threat of destruction to shake them from the decadence
of the ‘para-religious’ state into which they had fallen, and to revive the
older tradition of a civic pride that was itself predominantly secular. Paris
was unmoved; the Concordat decreed their suppression. This was
predictable and, from the perspective of the regime, essential: even at their
most public-spirited, perhaps especially so, the confraternities incarnated a
spirit of corporatism and campanilismo far more dangerous to the new order
than meditated counter-revolution.
   In any case, when the Sub-Prefect gathered them together three weeks
later, their attitude had changed:

    I met with them three or four times, but it was useless … . You can
    see from their replies, what kind of attitude is driving all the orato-
    ries … . One of them had the temerity to say, to my face, that from
    that moment on, he was in protest against any further discussions. I
    told him that any such protest meant the death of his oratory.128

In his own anger, the Sub-Prefect told the brothers that theirs were worthless
institutions and that the oratories of Novi amounted to no more than
‘processions and the ringing of church bells – to which the Concordat has
put a welcome end’. This was a red flag to a bull. In the heat of the moment,
the Enlightenment had fired its usual salvo at communal corporatism and
popular devotion. The reply came in style, and force. Large processions and
much ringing of bells followed, not once but many times. In June 1810, the
maire of the hamlet of Pasturana reported that not only had the brothers of
his commune’s banned oratory assembled to process to their small hill
chapel for Corpus Christi, but that they had been joined by almost forty
members of the confraternity of the Trinità from Novi. Their leader, Sauli,
had with him their banner ‘which he had obviously pilfered’. The procession
took place ‘with full pomp and solemnity’129 and it was not clear whether
any clergy had even been involved,130 an interesting comment on how inde-
pendent, but also how determined to carry on, were the brothers of Novi.
The hill chapel was closed and the gendarmes impounded the keys;
D’Auzers called it ‘scandalous insubordination’ and wanted Sauli punished.
He was brought to Genoa, admonished by the Prefect and warned he could
be arrested under Haute Police, as this case had got as far as Paris.131 The


                                      75
