                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


least in some part must be counted as still sharing in popular culture. Now,
having survived clerical disdain for so long, they were receiving its support, a
pattern utterly different from the process at work in France itself.139 As
priests and people drew closer together, it was soon clear this support would
have to be mutual. The clergy had its own public battles to wage against the
Concordat and it found the laity on its side. In 1811, just months before
their final abolition, the Prefect of the Apennines called the confraternities
‘the last refuge of fanaticism, in opposition [to us] alongside the curés’.140
He knew not all of which he spoke. A clear sign of how far the clergy had
moved from its post-Tridentine position towards that of its flock came in
Umbria, the medieval cradle of the penitential confraternities. There, in
1811, the clergy of Terni linked the high drama of the liturgy with a direct
appeal to the most traditional piety beloved of the laity. After a very
‘fraught’ Holy Week, all the nobles, priests and ex-regulars turned out with a
large congregation for midnight Mass on the piazza on Good Friday. All the
laymen wore the black robes of the recently banned flagellant confraternity
of the town. When the cross was raised for the Benediction, the candles were
put out instead of saying the Domine salvum fac Imperatorem. Norvins
noted that no priests said the prayers during Holy Week. There were no
regulars or non-jurors involved in this.141


                            Liturgical resistance
The extent to which priests led their people or were led by them vexed the
whole Catholic world in the early modern period, and the confrontation
with the Revolution merely intensified it. In Napoleonic Italy at least this
much is clear: certain of the liturgical innovations introduced by the new
imperial regime gave the clergy a very public platform to attack or support
the regime, in so far as they wished or dared to do so. It was, above all, a
public platform, for the Mass was the most widespread public drama in
Europe. The public nature of the Mass meant that acts of liturgical resis-
tance – or collaboration – could not escape the attention of the laity, and
this is what it has in common with the lay-inspired piety of the devotions
attached to the confraternities. Whatever went on to do with the Mass was
the business of laity and clergy alike. It could divide or unite them, but few
clerics could have long sustained liturgical resistance, or liturgical reform,
without the support, tacit or active, of their congregations.
   If anything, the Concordat sought to intensify the omniscience of the
Mass in the devotional life of the laity. This insistence on the centrality of
the parish church, and thus the assembly of its entire population for Sunday
Mass, was the response of a post-Enlightenment, secular, bureaucratic state
to the same culture of vendetta that Charles V confronted when he sought
to revive the Pax in his own empire.142 The French tried to cut away all other
sacred spaces where the Mass was said, concentrating it in the very public,


                                      77
