                    T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Spina then proposed a compromise, that either a church converted to secular
use could be dedicated to St Napoleon or – and here he perhaps revealed
more than he meant – that an altar to St Napoleon be set up in the church
of the Annunciation, ‘where both the Holy Virgin and St Napoleon could be
invoked, together, as is already the practice’. In a rare slip of his pen, Spina
let the authorities know that he had effectively sidelined the new festival and
attached it quietly to the Assumption. Other clerics blended craft with defi-
ance. It came to light that the whole diocese of Orvieto managed to ignore
St Napoleon’s Day in 1811, and then the anniversary of the coronation in
December, because the acting Vicar-General, Lambruschini, wrote ‘printer’s
error’ beside the two dates in the margin of his pastoral letter. This gave his
priests the excuse they needed to ‘dispense with their celebrations’, and it
sent Lambruschini to exile in Corsica, where he joined his brother, the
bishop.168
    It was bad enough to be sidelined by the Virgin. In Cornetto, in the Papal
states, St Napoleon’s Day clashed not only with the feast of the
Assumption, but with that of the patron saint of the town, who had been
abolished under the Concordat. In 1811 the clergy, maire and municipal
council, supported by the laity, celebrated the double feast and simply
ignored the official saint. This was not the first time this had happened, but
it was the last. Alert to the proceedings after incidents in 1809 and 1810, the
Gendarmerie entered the churches during Mass, arrested the priests at the
altars and hauled them away before the eyes of packed congregations ‘who
had to be restrained’.169 Savary condemned the overzealous behaviour of
the police, but he did not release the clergy, exiling most of them to
Corsica.170 There were communities which were undeterred by such ruth-
lessness, just as – in these cases – the French remained unmoved by the
prospect of depriving them of normal religious services. In the Umbrian
town of Marino in 1812, the Assumption was celebrated with full pomp by
the municipal council and clergy with no reference to St Napoleon, an act
which got virtually all of them gaoled and saw the churches closed for
several weeks. Thirty regular troops were sent to carry out the arrests, at a
time when the security forces were fully stretched enforcing conscription and
containing banditry in the area.171 The priorities of both sides were very
clear; both took very high risks and paid a very high price for it. Neither
flinched from such public, audacious confrontation.
    There was a sure sign of having entered the canon of the catalogue of
‘most heinous crimes’ in Napoleonic Italy, and that was to be accused
routinely of something in local denunciations and counter-denunciations.
The subject-matter of denunciations is the clearest evidence of what political
issues communities and local elites believed the government cared about.
Refusal to sing Te Deums and celebrate the feast of St Napoleon ‘made it’,
alongside 1799 and opposition to conscription. In a small commune near



                                      83
