                  T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


he still spoke out against it to the leaders of that regime – a rare sign of
courage at the time – having seen the brusque rejection of a political culture
based on arbitration.
    The bishops showed themselves to be men of the ancien régime in their
deeply rooted fear of the moral barbarousness of the periphery, linked in
their minds as it was to a latent cauldron of civil disorder, unless checked by
the civilizing forces of Church and state. However, this also throws Spina’s
propensity to court these instincts – through a return to older methods of
preaching, encouraging mass devotion to the Virgin and support for the
casacce – into a startling perspective. It reveals him so driven by opposition
to the Concordat that he turned his back on the norms of the ancien régime
to do so. Nor did Spina make his journey away from the Enlightenment
alone. Gazzola, the Bishop of Montefiascone, began the period as a
moderate, an open-minded man of the Enlightenment, but became ‘a man
of the right, who saw masonic conspiracy everywhere’.24
    The Bishop of Piacenza, Cerati, was hardly a supporter of the French
reforms either, and was regarded even by the reactionary, post-Tillot regime
as too fond of the Jesuits.25 His fear of the moral degeneration of the
periphery led him, like Turchi in Parma, to throw the Jesuits at the hinter-
land in the mid-1790s, but in the same spirit he put his clergy to work in the
interests of civil peace in the wake of the 1806 revolt. Just before his death,
Cerati issued two pastoral letters calling on the rebels to lay down their arms
and go home, which the French admitted were highly influential, and he also
mobilized the missionary Lazzarite and Reformed Franciscan fathers, thus
overriding Moreau’s decrees, for what would be their last efforts under the
French. The parish clergy rallied: ‘The priests of various parishes have
concerted [their efforts] to disarm the misguided highlanders’. Several curés
were singled out for praise, and the overall judgement given to Paris was that
‘[g]enerally, the attitude of the clergy is not at all bad’.26 These efforts should
have revealed the utility of the Church to them, in this kind of crisis and in
the governance of the periphery in general. Yet they pressed forward with
the introduction of the Concordat regardless. The Lazzarites and the
Reformed Franciscans went the way of the regular houses, already
suppressed to great local opposition. There was a bitter irony about the case
of the Lazzarites in particular. They had been locked in a fierce rivalry with
the Jesuits in Piacenza during the eighteenth century, and had always been in
the vanguard of neo-Jansenist reform. Indeed, Jansenist sympathies were
widespread among all the clergy of the town.27 The French remained blind
to this potential. Cerati’s successor, Fallot de Beaumont, a Frenchman who
was formerly Bishop of Ghent, told the Minister of Religion on his arrival
in Piacenza:

    there is it all to do, and it will take a great deal of time and care to
    introduce the discipline of the French clergy here, I will meet much


                                        91
