                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


this was especially strong in the Duchies – something quite different was
called for. He also admitted that Spina – hardly a model of complaisance to
the French – did his duty, as did Turchi’s successor in Parma, Caselli, ‘for
their pastoral letters on conscription’.6 Damning judgements were rare, such
as those delivered by the Prefect of the Arno on Albergotti, the Bishop of
the rebellious diocese of Arezzo, in 1809: ‘He was led into the episcopate by
flattery and the most affected zeal for religion’, although the Prefect also
added – unwittingly, for it was meant as a slight – that he was one of the
founders of a new proselytizing sect in Rome, centred on the Lazzarite and
Passionist missionaries.7
   The Borromean ideal had left a mark on the Italian episcopate that
endured into the epoca francese. There was much for the French to respect in
the generation of Italian bishops they found in charge, despite their ‘Roman
loyalism’, which had been sharpened in the struggles of the 1780s.
Throughout the eighteenth century, the appointments made by Rome and
the governments of the individual states showed an awareness of the devo-
tion to pastoral duty needed in a time of rapid social change.8 They were
imbued with the model of the French episcopate, and were overwhelmingly
aristocratic in background, usually educated at one of the great Jesuit ‘Noble
Colleges’ at Parma, Siena or Bologna.9 In short, Italian bishops were the
sort of men the Napoleonic regime prided itself on being able to work with
and ‘rally’ to itself. They failed. In 1807 – well before the final break with
Rome – the Minister of Religion told Napoleon that ‘[i]n general, Italian
precedents do not fare well for long with our principles’.10 There were only a
handful of vacancies in the ranks of the Italian episcopate in the epoca
francese, but how the French chose to deal with them shows how their policy
towards the Church hardened over the years and reveals the extent of the
erosion of goodwill between Church and state even before the break with
Rome became irreparable.
   Nevertheless, there ought to have been some common ground between the
Church and the Napoleonic state, particularly in that long struggle for ‘the
pacification of souls’ in the hinterlands. The quest for social control on the
periphery and the desire to centre the work of the Church around the episco-
pate and the parish were the touchstones of the Concordat and the Borromean
reforms alike. Indeed, even when the props of Baroque devotion had been
battered, the confraternities and regular orders suppressed, and all auxiliary
chapels closed by order of the secular power, this shared bond could remain.
The Subdelegate for Parma, who acted as caretaker after the departure of
Moreau and the arrival of Junot and Nardon, in 1806 advised Nardon that:

    I have heard His Excellency the [late] Cardinal Bishop [Turchi]
    bewail many times, the lack of instruction of the clergy of his
    diocese, except for those of the city of Parma, to whom this
    reproach does not apply. It is absolutely essential to correct this in


                                     87
