                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    opposition … . Peace must be maintained, the Emperor and the
    government must be loved, yet all the present usages, however great
    their antiquity, must be changed.28

Collaboration had been there for the asking in 1806, despite the unpopu-
larity of what the French were about, but as early as 1808 it was reported
that ‘the priests in the mountain parishes of the Piacentino are far from
leading conscripts to obedience or fulfilling the intentions of the govern-
ment’.29 His experience in Piacenza made Fallot de Beaumont cynical about
the distinction between centre and periphery, as regards the attitude of his
clergy to conscription: ‘The attitude of the mountain clergy is the same as
that of the clergy of the plain, but their circumstances are utterly different’.
The mountain clergy did not have to worry what they said or did not say on
the subject, as their flocks simply avoided it whatever. The clergy of the
pianura had no choice but to preach the will of the government, which was
easily enforced. This led not only to their loss of standing among their
flocks ‘who say the curés ought not to involve themselves in such matters’,
but to the disruption of worship:

    the young men no longer show themselves in church, since they
    have started being watched by the gendarmes, and even the women
    are now afraid to be found in them.30

This is a rare, searingly honest glimpse of the disruption conscription could
bring to routine devotion in an area where it was strong. It is also a powerful
example of the deep-rooted difficulties of creating a partnership between
Church and state in the circumstances of Napoleonic Italy, made all the
more poignant by the fact that this took place at the centre, and as a direct
result of the state being able to impose itself, not the reverse.
   During the tense days of 1809, the French no longer felt able to trust the
clergy of the region. The talk now was of ‘turbulent priests’ who were being
watched closely,31 and the ex-Franciscans, still living illegally as a group,
were accused – falsely, as it turned out – of having a cache of arms hidden in
case of an Austrian advance. Nardon had defended them, but also noted
that they were still highly regarded by all classes of society and that their
attitude was wholly different from that displayed in 1806.32 Some priests
were actually arrested in 1809 for pro-Austrian opinions; one, Bruschi, spent
two years in Fenestrelles and, on his release, was not allowed back to
Piacenza, which was considered too dangerous to harbour him by 1811.33
No progress had been made in Piacenza; quite the reverse: a window had
been closed in a volatile area. The French had deliberately placed ‘one of
their own’ here exactly because of its history of rebellion and ‘the great
influence held by the clergy over public opinion in this region’, but they had
manifestly failed to ‘enlighten the mass of the faithful, and to attach them


                                      92
