                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    imposing fête to soften the spirits and the hearts of these fierce
    highlanders.15

All the outward signs of an alliance between Church and state are on
display here. The symbolism, the very occasion itself – the fête of St
Napoleon, more often a ‘flashpoint’ in Church–state relations than a source
of cooperation – and, above all, the cultural assumptions of the Bishop of
Vercelli about the people of the periphery, were all those of the French. Nor
is the example of a Piedmontese bishop chosen at random: Vercelli was in
the Borromean heartland; it possessed a seminary noted for its Jansenist
tendencies.16 Yet, amidst this apparently viable partnership, the Bishop of
Vercelli – probably unwittingly – retained a political outlook that had not
shaken off the arbitrational approach to governing the periphery character-
istic of the old order – that ‘government at one remove’ the French were
determined to break with. When dealing with the killers of the gendarmes,
the Bishop went on:

    I have met with the most important families; I have seen the families
    of those guilty who have been arrested; I have spoken to everyone;
    in the end, it seems to me that it is persuasion that wins over
    people’s attitudes, and that, in the long run, makes them follow the
    law and obey the government. In the meantime, the Criminal
    Tribunal has not tried to find many of the guilty. I think this
    prudent. Tomorrow, taking advantage of the moment, I shall
    harangue the people. It seems to me that we will leave so profound
    an impression on the hearts of these highlanders, as to last a very
    long time.17

The normal procedure in such cases was to label them ‘revolts’, to occupy
the commune with troops and dispatch those charged with such offences to
the Extraordinary Military Tribunals, to avoid exactly the kind of ‘indul-
gent’ conduct suggested by the Bishop, and this is exactly what happened
here.18 The example of this pastoral visit seems to encapsulate the real possi-
bilities and the drastic limitations of collaborative ‘policing’ between Church
and state under the Napoleonic regime. Despite their similar perceptions of
the masses on the periphery, the Church – even when working within a tradi-
tion of subservience to the state in such matters – could not assimilate itself
to Napoleonic levels of social control. Thus the gap in understanding
between French imperialists and the Italian ruled emerges at its most
poignant less in cases of direct conflict than in those muddled attempts at
collaboration.
   The Piedmontese bishops were, by and large, ‘a good lot’ to the French;
during the triennio they were models of consistency in supporting the repres-
sion of disorder under successive regimes, to the point that even a besieged


                                      89
