                     T H E R E L I G I O N O F T H E RU L E D


Bobbio, in the hills between Genoa and Turin, the maire in 1811 accused the
curé of just this.172 The feast of St Napoleon had duly entered Italian life, if
not in the way envisaged.
   Nothing could have been more public than the opposition to the feast of
St Napoleon. It was high drama, in a well-understood context, that none
could ignore. Although carried out by the clergy, it would have meant
nothing without the presence of the laity, or the sure knowledge that they
approved of this defiance, however passively. Confrontation of this kind was
a preparation for the nineteenth century; it was the beginning of a
phenomenon in modern Italian history, not a set of circumstances
connected only to the epoca francese. If the unitary state absorbed some of
the grosser lessons of all this, after 1860 Church and state alike saw that
public celebrations exposed the uneasy nature of their truce for all to see. In
1870 the journal Civiltà Cattolica mocked the lacklustre atmosphere of offi-
cial festivals. The Catholic press, in general, contrasted the power of
traditional religious celebrations with the hollowness of those of the state.
In 1880 the liberal politician Giorgio Curcio agreed:

    The government has taken a negative approach to amusements … .
    The Catholic Church … has come to the rescue of the vilest classes
    of the people, with festivals and religious processions.173

The French occupation was a dress rehearsal for the future as much as a
struggle between reaction and revolution.
   In the immediate context of Napoleonic repression, the Mass and the
Assumption above all became vital elements in strengthening the bonds of
community, and the ties between the parish clergy and their flocks, in the
most poignant manner imaginable short of martyrdom. The passive, thor-
oughly non-violent conduct of the clergy ensured the French did not get the
chance to grant them this. Thus the French helped to foster exactly that
which every revolutionary regime sought to break down: those ties of corpo-
rate and communitarian solidarity that stood between the state and the
individual citizen. The clergy risked arrest and exile, not for obscure reasons
of conscience alone, but to preserve the collective rituals dearest to the
people, and the feast of the Virgin was the dearest of all. When the regime
honoured the most Christocentric of the surviving High Days, Corpus
Christi, by placing a guard of honour on the processed Host, it made a
statement. It did so again, if perhaps less deliberately, when it tried to over-
shadow the Virgin with its own festival. When the clergy rose in defence of
the Assumption, it took the road back to populism. When the laity bridled
at assaults on the Virgin, but seemingly let the changes to Corpus Christi
pass, it confirmed its atavistic allegiances and its relative indifference to the
more orthodox aspects of public piety.174 The confrontation between St
Napoleon’s Day and the Assumption encapsulated the differences between


                                       84
