                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    the mountain areas, where the peasants are in the most profound
    ignorance, and where a trained pastor would be a great help, even
    for the civil administration.11

The Bishop of Modena in the Kingdom of Italy felt the same in 1810.12
Spina bewailed the wildness of the Ligurian valleys – even as he fomented
archaism in the cities of the littoral. Following his pastoral visit to the
valleys in 1812, Spina told the Minister of Religion:

    As for the inhabitants of the [valley of the] Fontanabuona, who are
    infamous enough, I have found them a little worse [than of late] … .
    There is, I believe, something to be desired as regards their private
    morality.13

The Bishop of Biella, in north-eastern Piedmont believed the laity of the
periphery was in constant need of episcopal supervision; the montagnardi
were always one step away from the moral abyss. He took this chance to
plead the case for a real alliance between Church and state in this struggle at
the inception of French rule in Piedmont:

    [The bishops] have to work in every corner of their dioceses to
    inspire, to regulate, to remind of, this morality without which
    peoples fall back into a state of barbarousness, and without which
    no society can survive for long, even if it be buttressed by good civil
    laws … . Men will always degrade themselves, and so either they
    must be recalled to their duty by love, or constrained to do it by
    authority.14

These hopes persisted, although the partnership, even where successful on
the surface, contained many nuances in practice, as the Bishop of Vercelli
found when he tried to support the state during a tour of the upland
parishes of his diocese during the ‘war scare’ of 1809. Following the murder
of two gendarmes in the area, he celebrated the new official fête of St
Napoleon with considerable ostentation:

    Deeds work better than words. Thus, I made of St Napoleon’s day,
    a fête such has never been seen in these mountains. It does well to
    unnerve these people, and to bind them to their duty, even if
    through the spectacle of a religious festival. I gathered together the
    clergy of the neighbouring communes: I led the procession myself: I
    selected the best preacher for the sermon: musicians were sent for: I
    ordered fireworks: one hundred National Guards presented arms,
    so imposing their presence on a crowd of almost 10,000 people who
    came to the fête. It seems the right thing, to me, to hold an


                                      88
