                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    They don’t bring themselves to recognize the curés named by the
    Archbishop, and desert their churches completely. The curés in
    charge already openly refuse to let them take possession [of their
    curés], that they cannot do so ‘in good conscience’ … . The number
    of curés appointed by the Archbishop grows daily, and misinforma-
    tion spreads through the countryside, because of their impunity, so
    the evil spreads. It seems to me that action is essential now, if more
    severe punishment is not to come later.83

Lay violence soon reared up. A curé appointed to the town of Vespasiano
by D’Osmond had his presbytery attacked by stone-throwing mobs and he
had to flee back to Florence. A year earlier, the police had spoken of ‘this
sort of catholic anarchy that is surely typified by the archbishopric of
Florence’.84 Events of the kind that followed the publication of the Civil
Constitution of the Clergy in France in 1790 were re-enacted in Tuscany, a
quarter of a century later. The main difference was probably that the
Napoleonic regime was readier to resort to brute force than the ‘atheistical’
revolutionaries.
   Much of the resistance to D’Osmond stemmed directly from the breach
with Rome, and the forms it took mirrored the behaviour of the Roman
clergy, but initially it was the work of the Tuscans themselves, and often pre-
dated resistance in the Papal states. Nevertheless, Tuscan resistance came to
be bolstered by events further south. Florence was a disaster, but it was only
a foretaste of what was to come. It was probably fortunate for the French
that no other sees became vacant in these years, for the experience of
D’Osmond was a lesson in how important the episcopate was to the new
regime. Desperation set in when resistance sprang up at parish level,
however. Political problems of this kind only compounded the other difficul-
ties of parish life the French inherited from the ancien régime.
   Of the French bishops in Italy, D’Osmond simply withdrew with the
troops in 1814, abandoning his see; Fallot was translated to a see in the inte-
rior in 1813. The former became Bishop of Nancy; the latter of Bourges in
1813. The bishops of Casale and Asti tried to stay on, but were pressured
into leaving by the combined efforts of the restored monarchy and the Holy
See.85


                             The parish clergy
In a report of 1806, the Ministry of Religion concluded that low numbers of
secular clergy were a problem throughout the empire. No state money had
been provided for the 1804 project to establish a seminary in each diocese,
and the number of livings had actually fallen below the 36,000 left intact in
1791 – to just over 33,000 – despite the massive annexations that had taken
place thereafter. The suppression of collegial and privately endowed


                                      99
