                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


rose to be first secretary of the Order in Rome and then held a high post
with the Inquisition. He impressed Pius VII in the negotiations for the
Concordat with his sharp eye for detail. Until the seizure of Rome, he
worked well with the regime, his appointment a product of the brief ‘honey-
moon period’ between the Papacy and Napoleon. However, he turned
against the regime at the Concile Nationale in 1811, putting himself at the
head of the Curial opposition.42
   The reasoning behind the appointment of a French prelate to Piacenza,
and some of its consequences, have already been discussed, but the arrival of
a Frenchman in that particular diocese reveals how traumatic the revolt of
1806 had been for the regime, however easily, in military terms, it had
crushed open rebellion. The Minister of Religion made Fallot’s role very
clear to him from the outset, and it was not that of a conventional ‘good
shepherd’ whose first duty was to his flock:

    You will speak to me, in general terms, of the differences that exist
    between your circumscription and those of the neighboring bishops.
    I hope you will send me confidential details of these … I must know
    all the nuances that go to constitute the whole. You are too good an
    administrator not to share my concerns here, or to leave me unin-
    formed of either public or confidential matters, as well as of your
    personal opinion, which carries great weight with me.43

It was hardly a role his predecessor would have tolerated, or of which his
own Vicar-General approved. Things had come a long way from the days of
Cerati, ‘the great almoner’.
    The French made two more appointments to Italian sees, the first in the
Piedmontese diocese of Asti in 1809 and the second – after the refusal of
Pius VII to sanction such appointments – to the great Archdiocese of
Florence. Both ended in tears. Asti had always been regarded as a problem;
its bishop, the Piedmontese aristocrat Gattinara, was deeply distrusted by
the French administrators and the local patriots, because of the leading role
he had taken in the royalist counter-revolution during the triennio and the
first years of French rule.44 In 1810 the sub-prefect warned that ‘the chapter
is infected by Ultramontane ideas’ under the leadership of Carlevaris, the
Vicar-General, over whom Gattinara had lost all control. Borghese, the
Governor-General of Turin, agreed, saying the new bishop ‘ought to be of
the right outlook, in order to control those priests’. Thus the Minister of
Religion requested that the new bishop be sent immediately, without waiting
for a Papal bull, and that Carlevaris be ‘removed’.45
    The choice fell on Dejean de St Saveur, the Vicar-General of Mende, then
over sixty and described by the Bishop of Casale as ‘having the great misfor-
tune, especially for a public man, of having a hideous face’ and of having
been ‘aged by the experience of the Revolution’.46 Dejean arrived in Asti


                                     94
