                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


imperceptibly to France’.34 Nevertheless, it was a policy they expanded
rather than abandoned.
   This policy began at the beginning, in the new Piedmontese departments,
with the dispatch of the Bishop of Amiens to organize their religious affairs.
He subsequently remained, as Bishop of Casale, after the see was translated
from Alessandria. His brief was to ‘Gallicanize’ Piedmont, and from the
outset he stressed the need to introduce the Concordat in full, and quickly,
in which task he was backed to the hilt by Menou.35 They did so ruthlessly.
While Pius VII stood aside, the regular houses were suppressed and the
Piedmontese dioceses were reduced from seventeen to eight; Napoleon had
originally wanted only six: one per department, on the French model.36 This
left the Archbishop of Turin, Burzone del Signore, hampered in his cautious
but clear attempts to rally his bishops around him to bridle the work of
Amiens. He fought back with one of the first clear examples of liturgical
resistance the French faced, when he concluded a pastoral letter to his arch-
diocese in June 1804 – most of which was a panegyric to Napoleon – with
the phrase ‘[i]ssued nevertheless under the orders of His Majesty the
Emperor Napoleon, as we are mandated by his sovereign letters, on which
we have modelled the tenor of our own’.37 Following his refusal to attend
the imperial coronation a few months later, Burzone had his resignation
forced from him. Thus the Concordat was in force and its chief critic ousted,
but there should have been warning signs for the French in this apparent
triumph. Burzone was not a traditionalist, in the Curial sense, indeed he had
a deeply Jansenist background, having been Bishop of Vercelli and a
product of its seminary; he was of a legal family, and hardly a fanatic.38 The
intransigent nature of the French reforms had been too much for him
nonetheless. His successor, Giacinto Della Torre, then Bishop of Acqui, was
shortlisted by the Minister of Religion to Napoleon thus:

    This is the candidate who is the least imposing as a prelate, but who
    conducted himself well for France during the times of trouble [the
    triennio], and who has even issued homilies and pastoral letters in
    favour of the French.39

Della Torre strove to protect those of his clergy considered ‘dangerous’ by
the government, and worked well with Prospero Balbo to enhance the
standing of the Church in the University of Turin.40 Nevertheless, the rela-
tive passivity of the Piedmontese dioceses under the French was due in great
part to his role as a Napoleonic ‘courtier’: his collaboration was probably
from conviction; he was pleased to be freed from Roman control.41 The
French were not so fortunate elsewhere.
   In 1804 the appointment of a reliable Italian prelate to the diocese of
Parma, to replace Turchi, also proved successful initially. Carlo Francesco
Caselli was Piedmontese by birth, and a regular of the Servi di Maria, who


                                     93
