                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


benefices – ‘in which the faithful found great support’ – had created a gap.
No less than 60,000 more priests were needed, while 8,000 more vicars were
required ‘in towns of a certain importance’.86 None of these proposals were
ever entertained by Paris for the urban areas of the Italian départements
réunis; only for the periphery did French officials speak in the same vein as
this challenging report.
   Everywhere they looked in Italy, the French thought they saw supersti-
tion and ignorance. They also encountered great complexity, nowhere more
so than in the parochial life of the Church. This complexity was shared by
the centre and the periphery in all the ex-states that formed the départements
réunis, for nowhere were the structures of religious life easily compatible
with the logical simplicity and uniformity prescribed by the Concordat. The
French policy of one diocese per department was seldom achieved, but to
Italians the results seemed ruthless enough. The example of the Piedmontese
dioceses was a message of intent. Reductions were sought later in the
Duchies of Parma and Piacenza – where the four dioceses were meant to be
reduced to two (still two per department in this case) – and later, with
considerable ruthlessness, in the Roman departments. The most common
argument put forward for the conservation of a see came from the periphery,
based on topography, but Paris had its unswerving answer to hand. It was
formulated best by the Ministry of Religion in 1806, drawing on its experi-
ence in Piedmont, Liguria and the Duchies. To the ‘topographical’
argument, Paris replied that the whole concept of a departmental chef lieu
was that it was easily accessible to all parts of its department, thus being the
place from which bishops could reach their curés most easily. For this same
reason, bishops should deal with only one prefect, and they should be as
close to each other as possible, because – in a frank admission – experience
taught that there were always many disputes to be resolved between them
should a prefect have to deal with several bishops, and vice versa. Thus a
bishop should be under the nose of one prefect, and not able to play one off
against another.87
   One diocese per department was awkward enough for the Italian Church,
but the mosaic of devotional worship below it belonged to another world for
a system which recognized only the curé and his subordinates as its
providers. Even they were not to be trusted, however. Curés were best kept
isolated in their own parishes, under their bishops, and the French disliked
even those aspects of reforming legislation they found, as in Tuscany where
the Synod of Pistoia had authorized regular meetings of parocci. Although
there was no attempt to ban them, the Ministry of Police warned that of
Religion that there was to be ‘nothing secret’ about them, adding that ‘this
kind of gathering raises doubts about the advantages to be gained [from its
existence] in the current situation’.88 The Concordat had no place for the
regular orders or the confraternities; it confined worship to Sundays and
brooked very little outside interference in the work of the parish. It abol-


                                      100
