                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


putting the curé and the parish at the centre of parish life. It was a battle
against pluralism, in town and country, mountain and plain, that others had
lost before them.


                                The periphery
Just as their relations with the episcopate reveal the limits and strains of
collaboration between willing partners, so their relationship with the parish
clergy was generally marked by tolerance stretched to its limits. However
much they distrusted, and even feared, the parocci, the French still preferred
them to the regulars or the members of the lay confraternities, and strove to
concentrate all forms of religious life around the parish. The terms of the
Concordat actually restrained the French, because it made them utterly
dependent on the parish priests, although it was also arguably that aspect of
the Concordat that brought the religious policies of the new regime closest
to those of Trent. On the periphery, the Napoleonic quest for tighter hierar-
chical control and a stronger external presence in these communities, often
revealed that Trent had only partially succeeded in replacing the earlier role
of the priest as part of his community, sharing its collective prejudices and
priorities, with a representative of the intellectual dictatorship of the Church
hierarchy.96
    The upheavals of the triennio often weakened episcopal control in the
hinterlands, the important place of religion in counter-revolution not with-
standing. The vastly different responses of the Piedmontese episcopate and
its subordinates, especially in the highland parishes, meant the French never
extended their confidence in the bishops to the parocci. In 1801 Jourdan was
chafing at the bit to get at them:

    in general, the clergy of Piedmont are pronounced enemies of the
    French government … . As long as [it] continues to close its eyes to
    the criminal conduct of the priests … public tranquillity will always
    be threatened, the people of the countryside … will always be
    disposed to take up arms against us … the bulk of the country’s
    people has a blind confidence in their priests and, thanks to their
    perfidious suggestions and outright lies, they … see in every
    Frenchman only an enemy.97

However, the French were constrained to endure them. The attitude – and
the discourse – initiated by Jourdan spread among his colleagues as the
empire expanded; the hatred of the French police for the Italian parocci is
almost a commonplace in their correspondence. Moreau de St-Méry lashed
out against the clergy almost instinctively at the first news of the revolt of
the Piacentino in December 1805: ‘It is known to me, personally, that the
men of the cloth have incited this disobedience’.98 At the height of the 1809


                                      102
