                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


worked hard to undo them ever since; that they did all they could to get the
Inquisition re-established before 1808; that ‘their pretext was to save the holy
faith and their secret goal was to make a sacrifice of the Jacobins and the
Jansenists’; and they had not changed. Their addresses of loyalty to the
Emperor were nothing but tactical ploys.63 A few weeks later, he was even
more scathing about the Florentines:

    But I will tell you confidentially, [that] in spite of his fine qualities,
    M. D’Osmond will never have great influence in Florence unless he
    has his bull: His lively, sharp and likeable character contrasts too
    much with the rigidity and false piety of his predecessors.64

In another example of cultural disparagement, the Director-General
asserted the incompatibility of the ‘Florentine character’ with the superior –
and emblematic – virtues of the French.
   Nonetheless, there was a great deal of hard experience to support his
more empirical assessments. Although the Bishop of Pisa was openly
opposed to D’Osmond from the outset, Grosiberti, in Grossetto and his
chapter, adhered quickly to the new Metropolitan.65 However, in November,
when D’Osmond invited Grosiberti to celebrate the anniversary of the impe-
rial coronation, he resigned rather than do so.66 D’Osmond and the secular
arm struck hard and fast: Grosiberti was sent to Fenestrelles, where he was
treated with exceptional harshness and kept in solitary confinement, which
even the Director-General thought excessive and ‘unfortunate’ for
D’Osmond’s public image. Nevertheless, the example made of him was
deemed necessary,

    and it has beaten all the ecclesiastical opposition here into silence.
    The malcontents may protest to their consciences, but they obey
    outwardly. Governments need nothing more. And I dare say that
    this change in the Florentine clergy is due, in part, to the firmness
    with which I met their first attempts at resistance.67

In the course of 1812 the Bishop of Fiesole followed Grosiberto into
custody, this time in Parma, and the French police boasted of the ‘timid
shadow’ to which they had reduced Chigi-Zondadari, the ‘fanatical but
silent’ Archbishop of Siena, among others. Corboli, too, ‘was going through
the motions demanded of him’.68 Even this proved wrong. Corboli had
emerged as a rallying point for the opposition in the chapter, drawing
strongly on the fact that Pius VII had renewed him as Vicar on the death of
D’Osmond’s predecessor and had told the chapter to turn to him, rather
than the Archbishop, as the official head of the diocese. Corboli also had a
‘good past’, being sacked under Peter-Leopold and brought back after
Peter-Leopold’s departure.69 Throughout his tenure, the members of the


                                       97
