                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


chapter simply boycotted and ignored D’Osmond; only more threats from
Elisa made Corboli lead them to him, for a very formal, stilted visit in April
1813.70 Corboli died of a fever in December 1813, but the damage was
already done.71
   From a very early stage, once the chapter was stifled, resistance to
D’Osmond shifted to the parishes. Many curés simply refused to receive visi-
tations from him, or made it clear they did not want to.72 As early as March
1811 D’Osmond complained that the clergy of Pievani refused to read his
Easter message ‘because they do not recognize my jurisdiction … they have
drawn together, in a little conventicle’.73 He wanted the firmest action
possible taken against them, and fully supported their deportation to
Corsica in May.74 That summer the curé of Londa, Nuzzi, preached openly
against D’Osmond and the whole Concordat, refused to say the prayers for
the Emperor and told his congregation the sad tale of a priest who had been
excommunicated for so doing; he too went to Corsica.75. The Prefect warned
Elisa that these were not isolated incidents76 and this pattern was, indeed,
repeated throughout the archdiocese until the end of French rule. In April
1812 eight priests in Empoli refused to make an unambiguous declaration of
loyalty to D’Osmond, and said they took their advice from Corboli. In they
end, they were forced to obey.77 A month earlier, Canon Baldi of Florence
went to Fenestrelles for refusing to recognize D’Osmond, even as the routine
administrative head of the archbishopric.78 That is, a year on and after
severe examples of French ruthlessness, the clergy at all levels, and outwith
Florence, remained defiant.
   Florentine society found other, subtler ways to ignore D’Osmond and the
Concordat. The secular clergy gravitated to the religious foundation of the
Vincenzoguerra of San Firenze, which was not banned under the
Concordat, where ‘fanaticism reigns’, according to D’Osmond, although he
seemed to fear them and did not want direct action taken against them,
which was not his usual reaction.79 Police-Générale disagreed, because these
priests were teaching the catechism to the children of the leading families of
Tuscany and acting as confessors to the elite.80 None of the twenty-nine
curés of the city visited D’Osmond, and the police admitted that it was the
former ‘House of San Firenze that set the tone’.81 Few of the great
Florentine families attended the cathedral, or brought their children to be
baptized or for their first communion. It reached embarrassing heights even
within the new, official social ‘pecking order’ of Elisa’s court. In 1812 her
new Chamberlain, Capponi, had his new daughter baptized with the usual
fanfare of a Florentine patrician in the Bapitistry of San Giovanni.
However, he did so by private arrangement with a priest known to be anti-
D’Osmond. ‘The Capponis are as anti-French as they are prominent’,
remarked the Director-General, ‘and it has had a very bad influence on the
town’.82 This was signalled as part of a general and growing resistance by
1813:


                                     98
