                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


without a bull and, following the rupture with Rome later that year, he never
received one. His new chapter simply refused to recognize him. Dejean was
hardly a ‘radical priest’, having served as Vicar-General of Narbonne under
that most worldly of ancien régime ‘politico’ prelates, Dillon, who lived most
of the year in Paris in a highly secular style, while Dejean ran the diocese.47
He had made his name helping Dillon to manage the Estates of Languedoc,
where they had worked to preserve clerical privileges as a condition for
support for other reforming initiatives.48 None of this served him well in
Asti, and he emerged from the experience a dedicated Bonapartist. The
Vicar-General was eventually sent to Fenestrelles, along with two other
canons who continued to refuse to acknowledge Dejean. It took the
personal intervention of the Archbishop of Turin to get the rest of the
chapter to submit formally to Dejean. This included even the new Vicar-
General he had himself appointed, Dani, who submitted only after
assurances were given that he would avoid arrest, something the Minister of
Religion had reservations about.49 Dejean paid dearly for this after 1814. He
felt the combined wrath of the restored Court and Pius VII, who agreed he
should be deported to France, which he was.50 Dani played a key role in this,
according to D’Azeglio, the Piedmontese ambassador in Rome:

    I have received from Dani himself an original paper by M. Dejean,
    which proves the violence used against the former and legiti-
    mate Vicar-General-Capitular, which is enough to demonstrate his
    guilt … 51

The whole incident was a failure. It was ‘resolved only by ruthless intimida-
tion’, and was not forgotten by those concerned, despite the defiant, militant
Gallican attitude taken in Paris:

    This example of making recourse to the Metropolitan will, in itself,
    serve very well as proof that where there are problems with a
    chapter over a vacant see, it is not to the Pope, but to the
    Metropolitan that the chapter must turn.52

Events in Florence were to prove this assessment to be, at the very least,
premature.
   For all the problems Dejean encountered, Asti was a small see under a
loyal Metropolitan, and the work of the diocese managed to continue. It was
different when the French imposed D’Osmond, the Bishop of Ghent, on the
Metropolitan See of Florence. On the death of the incumbent in 1810, the
feud with Pius VII was at its height. D’Osmond was a moderate man, who
had overcome initial resistance to his status as a French outsider in a large
Belgian diocese, and won many friends there, before his translation to
Florence.53 It was all damned from the start, however, as he not only arrived


                                      95
