                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   These concerns are reflected in two reports drawn up for the Prefect of
Genoa in 1810 and 1811, both of which reveal the poverty of the secular
arm of the Church in the north-western Apennines. The first was
Observations on the Planned Reorganization of the Parishes of the Diocese of
Casale and Its 444 Parishes.132 The Diocese of Casale spanned the
Apennines and the plain of the Po, but the report focused on the mountain
parishes, most of which were in the suppressed dioceses of Tortona and
Bobbio – over 200 – an area of difficult terrain and few means of communi-
cation, where

    the people of the hamlets and small settlements would be left
    without the spiritual support of religion, or of Christian moral
    teaching, should they have their curé or vicar removed.

The report pointed directly to the dilemma facing both Church and state in
such an area: the need to retain parishes in remote areas had to be weighed
against their poor livings, which ‘diminished the dignity of the curé’. The
report especially disliked the dependence of many curés on local charity or
on income derived from their parishioners, in keeping as much with the
preoccupations of Borromeo as with those of the National Assembly. To
this end, the government had already shifted some of the revenues from
‘over-endowed’ parishes to the poorer ones. It was not enough, however, and
the report concluded by proposing a ‘triple order’ of clergy, which would
‘convert’ many of the smaller curés into vicaries (for areas under 250 souls)
and dependent chapels (for those under 800), leaving true curés for centres
of over 800 souls. Even then, it warned, money would be tight. The findings
of this report were applicable elsewhere along the Apennine chain. To an
extent, its conclusions echo the pleas of the Bishop of Montalcino in
Tuscany, who sought more vicars for his mountainous, rugged diocese,
rather than more cures, for those already in existence were too poor to
support a single priest. He was concerned that the vicars were so poorly paid
that they had to earn their livings saying masses on High Days, leaving the
curés virtually unaided most of the time.133 The parish priest of Marradi in
Tuscany told Menou that he had a poor parish and many priests to pay who
had to support themselves by saying masses. He hoped the new government
would find other ways to pay them, presumably with the properties and
revenues of the suppressed monasteries.134 The ground for collaboration in
this field was workable, if not actually clear.
   The problem of poor pay and resultant clerical greed was one of the few
issues where the state could ally with the laity against their priests. In 1812
the sub-prefect of the mountain arrondissement of Novi informed his supe-
riors of complaints




                                     109
