                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   Beyond the habitual refrain of the police against ‘fanatical, superstitious
enemies of the government’ – of the threat of counter-revolution – were also
many more mundane cases revealing a highland clergy that had escaped
ecclesiastical discipline. The numbers are impossible to evaluate, nor is there
any evidence on a scale to suggest such things were common, but their pres-
ence shows a persistence of problems common under the ancien régime. In
1805 the new French Bishop of Casale noted the extremes he found in the
poor mountain parishes of his diocese, where the desservants in charge of
isolated hill chapels came to see themselves as independent of the curés to
whom they were subordinate, while in other parishes they did not have the
means or standing to do their jobs properly.113 The portrait of Salvi, the
curé of the Tuscan village of Sovicilla, reveals anything but a Tridentine
model. He came to the attention of the new regime in 1810, when he was
accused of attacking the greffier of the justice of the peace with a cutlass,
and had already been in trouble trying to get a friend exempted from
conscription and an abortion for a girl he may or may not have made preg-
nant.114 None of the charges were proved, but what emerges is more a local
notable than the Tridentine professional found at the regional centre,
Siena:115

    he has made himself the landlord of several farms around the
    commune, he has opened his own pharmacy, and also dabbles in
    surgery and medicine. In these ways, he has made himself influen-
    tial in the area, and has excercised his influence for many years; it
    extends to all sorts of things, even as far as contravening the
    authority of the maire, the justice of the peace and the other offi-
    cials in the commune … . His activities have always led him to be
    thought of as the protector of his parishioners, and during his
    clashes with the maire, he has been able to get many certificates out
    of the people of his parish, in which these imbeciles attest that the
    maire tried to assassinate Salvi.116

This kind of interest in modern science and medicine was hardly what the
Ministry of Religion had in mind in its calls for a better educated clergy.
There was no question in anyone’s mind that he was an awkward chef popu-
laire, even when the authorities agreed he was probably innocent. It was his
power in the commune that made both the Prefect and the Vicar-General of
Siena want him moved elsewhere.117 However, he was a known supporter of
the French, ‘who does not mix much with monks or priestly cliques’. Paris
ruled that he was to stay, for political reasons, and that his political loyalty
should be used to better effect by the local authorities.118
   Even where there was real consensus, it was often impossible to act upon.
Spina returned from his pastoral visitation to the hinterlands in 1812 more
satisfied than he had hoped with the level of education of his clergy, but as


                                      106
