                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   ‘Au début les montagnes’ was a curse on the Church, just as much as on
the state. Here should have been common, if inhospitable, ground between
the Borromean mission and that of the new regime. Indeed, some prelates
were glad to see the end of many ancien régime restrictions on their jurisdic-
tions. The Bishop of Vercelli lambasted the negligence and obstructive
behaviour of lay patrons of parishes in his former bishopric of Biella with
the same bile as any secular prince. His flock told him repeatedly that they
would have had the means to revive their parishes if the lay patrons either
did their duty or renounced their feudal prerogatives.142 This was one prayer
the French answered, at least. In the main, however, the French reforms were
compromised by natural obstacles and the resources it took to challenge
them. The mountain did not move for the last emperor of the west, any
more than for the great saint of Milan.
   However, the terms of the Concordat, and the rigid manner in which the
French stuck to them, made their task harder – and more resented by the
faithful of the hinterlands – than it need otherwise have been. The new
regime simply refused to recognize the complexity of the Church on the
periphery, or why it needed to be thus. This attitude is already evident in the
decision to suppress the missions, an ‘addition’ to the terms of the
Concordat the French need not have adopted. The real problem on the
periphery was its insistence on the parish as the sole, as opposed to the
dominant, force in religious life. Local observers resented this assault on
tradition, but they also believed it unworkable. It was an issue that roused
the periphery to petition the centre, and the profusion of evidence it gener-
ated meant the new rulers could not plead ignorance. The rebels of the
Piacentino included in their complaints the abolition of three regular houses
in the Val di Trebbia. Other protests came in more supplicant – but emphatic
– form. In 1808, and again in 1810, the people of Giara in the Alpine
foothills north of Biella petitioned for the restoration of their parish church;
they were now far from their parish church and too poor to support its
costs, compared to their old church, ‘being for the most part day labourers,
mezzadri and artisans’.143 This was not the voice of the urban, often well-
heeled confraternities, or of the regular orders, but the genuine cry of
popular piety. A flood of similar petitions came to the Prefect of Genoa in
1810, in the hope that the projected reorganization of the parishes would
mean expansion, not the contraction usually favoured by the regime. Most
resembled that of Giara. The people of Sturla-Marina in the hills outside
Genoa argued from poverty and topography, 144 as did those of the parish
of Santa Maria di Grenacolo in the hills on the other side of the city.145 The
former even offered to rent the Church from the authorities at their own
expense, if only the department would pay the priest a small sum to
augment their own alms, a request that showed both strong popular piety
and a complete misconception of French policy over clerical pay. Two years
later, the mountain parish of San Bartolemeo degli Armeni even won the


                                      111
