                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    against the curés [who] demand vast sums for the administration of
    the sacraments, and who propose to raise them, since the govern-
    ment has assigned them fixed salaries.135

If Biggio and his ilk were authority’s idea of the ‘nightmare curé’, a parish-
ioner’s model was Mosconi, from the remote parish of Sozzola in the
diocese of Pontremolì, which bordered Tuscany, Liguria and the Piacentino.
He encapsulated the problems foreseen in the official studies. Ignoring the
Edict of 8 June 1810, which abolished the tithe – and of which he later
pleaded ignorance136 – he declared at the altar that those who did not pay
the tithe were excommunicates, and used the confessional and the refusal of
absolution to make his point.137 It took two Directors-General of Police and
three bishops to bring him to heel.
   The second report, Repairs to Churches and Presbyteries from 1811, was
devoted to the diocese of Casale and showed the literal shambles much of
the rural Church was in. Eighty-five parishes either had no presbytery at all,
or ones that were in ruins. Many also had dilapidated churches.138 The hard
evidence of the poverty of the Church was all too obvious, as was the
inability of even so powerful a regime as the Napoleonic empire, to meet the
challenge.139 A similar report for the Tuscan dioceses by the Prefect of the
Arno in January 1811, drew careful distinctions between centre and
periphery, mountain and plain, as well as hinting at his growing hostility to
the bishops.140 The expansionist demands of the Bishop of Fiesole – shortly
to be imprisoned – were staunchly rebuffed by the Prefect. Fiesole had
twenty parishes for only 6,580 souls,

    which proves the uselessness of the proposed increase … . This
    observation can apply to almost all the communes of this depart-
    ment, from which Your Excellency can judge the need for a new
    parochial organization.

The exception that proves the rule was in the hill commune of Figlino, where
poor communications led the Prefect to support the Bishop’s hopes for
expansion, limited to more dependent chapels rather than full cures. He
took the same line with the Bishop of Arezzo – hardly a friend – in fighting
to conserve small parishes in the commune Bibbimma, ‘which is cut off from
Arezzo for many months of the year’, while stamping on his plans for
expansion in the larger towns. He recommended the closure of several
churches in Arezzo itself, where there was a parish church for every 720
souls, ‘which gives us the scandalous spectacle of deserted temples’. In the
Alpine bishopric of Ivrea, of the nine parishes abolished in 1810, three were
in the towns; the cures ‘created to meet the real needs of the people … in
mountains cut through with torrents’ were conserved.141 The state could and
did listen in these circumstances.


                                     110
