                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


revolt in the Veneto, Napoleon himself ordered Eugène to arrest the Bishop
of Udine for treason and to have him shot, orders which the Viceroy
managed to contain by a brief detention.99 Yet a sense of realism emerged in
quieter times. According to the Director-General of Police in Florence, in
1809:

    I do not doubt that various priests do not distinguish themselves by
    seditious conniving and through alarmist sermons. In these circum-
    stances, the police must act with a certain latitude. It is probably
    more important keep the government at a distance from any
    appearance of religious persecution, but it is also essential to
    repress the audacity of troublemakers and fanatics.100

The clergy of the periphery were feared as much as their flocks, even when
French rule had become secure. As with the parocci of the highland zones of
the Kingdom of Italy, however poor, they were invested with tremendous
influence in their communities and, during the triennio, they had used it to
drive the counter-revolution, usually escaping episcopal control.101 By the
time that control began to reassert itself, Church and state were at odds over
the captivity of Pius VII. D’Auzers saw the priests of the Ligurian valleys as
an integral part of their communities, made all the more dangerous by their
role as intermediaries with the centre:

    This ferocious mountain country, lacking main roads, is very back-
    ward in terms of its civilization. The priests do well from this
    ignorance in misleading the people. They use superstition and
    fanaticism to great effect … . It is certain they have had word about
    the Pope. They circulate … all the seditious writings from Rome,
    giving them a dangerous character.102

D’Auzers stressed how isolated and thinly spread were the forces of order in
these valleys, making a hostile clergy all the more dangerous. He wanted
examples made, even of the Bishop of Sarazzana, but another school of
thought believed the clergy of such areas could only push their flocks the
way they wanted to go. The incarnation of the government’s nightmare was
probably Biggio, the curé of Orrero in the notorious valley of the
Fontanabuona in Liguria. He was avowedly anti-French, lived openly with
the mother of his child and defied Spina’s reprimands. Biggio preached
openly against conscription. He was also rich and immensely influential:

    He spends his night in the cabarets, and goes about the valley
    armed with a musket and a knife. Through his wealth, his character
    and his alliances with the leading troublemakers of the
    Fontanabuona, his spiritual ministry from the pulpit and the


                                     103
