                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


unhappy as the French that ‘so many of them serve as secretaries to the
maires … which must distract them greatly from the duties of their voca-
tion’.119 Neither the secular nor the sacred arm could reverse this in the early
nineteenth century, but there was a shared preoccupation.
   There were serious criminal cases involving the parish clergy from time to
time, and the French did not often shirk their duty to protect the public.
Even in the vilest, however, there were significant problems. In 1812 the
authorities were all agreed that there was an indisputable case of serious
child abuse against a canon of Velletri in the ex-Papal states. However, the
canon, Giorgi, was also one of only a handful of local clergy to have taken
the Oath of Loyalty to the regime, leading the Procureur-Impériale to reflect
that ‘the publicity would be a triumph for the refractories, as well as a social
scandal’.120 Paris shied away from a public trial and ordered Giorgi dealt
with under Haute Police, which also coincided with the wishes of the
family.121 Another case from the Roman departments reveals much deeper
complications for the French, however. Ferdinando Cerelli, a priest from the
isolated village of Ceprano, was accused in 1812 of poisoning his nephew
with opium. The Procureur noted that ‘as it was a question involving a
priest, the hall was full of his supporters’, but the real problem went deeper:

    I am in a difficult position as to where to stand in this unfortunate
    business, which also, perhaps, has to do with the status of the
    accused, and with the old view that such a person cannot be judged
    by laymen … . It is one of those problems that one dares not admit,
    even when it is as obvious as it is probable.122

There were exceptions to this, however. In 1807 several parishes in the
Piacentino made use of the new French legislation to drag their curés before
the courts, not because they had done anything wrong, but to give evidence
in delicate family cases, one of which involved the reputation of a young
girl. The Bishop did not like their involvement in this sort of thing and,
worried that it would compromise their position of leadership in their
communities, asked Paris to keep them out of court.123 Nothing was simple
or easy, in the relations between Church and state.
   The French feared and often hated the parish clergy of the periphery, but
they also had a commitment to help them materially. Everywhere they
looked in Italy, they found a poor, over-extended clergy in the hinterlands,
quite different from the superfluity of priests in the lowlands and the urban
centres. It is a sign of the suspicion, frustration and open hatred of the
clergy by the police that they alone made no distinction between centre and
periphery in this matter. They called for a reduction in their numbers every-
where. Lagarde, the Director-General in Florence, demanded first a
reduction in the number of dioceses from twenty-two to three – one per
department, on the French model – and then of curés to one per justice of


                                      107
