                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    confessional, he has made himself influential and formidable, to the
    point where no one dares denounce him or confront him.103

Biggio was less pre-Trent, than pre-Constance. This was where the Counter
Reformation and the counter-revolution parted company, and the case of
Biggio brought D’Auzers and Spina into a relatively rare but powerful
alliance. It took D’Auzers almost two years to convince Paris to arrest him,
and gaol him in Parma, but Spina was able in the interim to confine him in a
retreat.104 Where it was a case of gross clerical indiscipline – and the
Apennine parishes seem to have had their fair share – Spina and D’Auzers
always worked together, along with the local authorities, as in the case of the
curé of Levaggi, who took up with the wife of a parishioner.105 When a
similar case arose in the Piacentino in 1813, they combined again to have the
priest Boselli of Montechiarugolo arrested. Boselli had links with a family
of known counter-revolutionaries, and was now known as a drunken,
violent womanizer, although he was released after an interview with the
Prefect.106 In such cases, the old problems of simply governing the periphery
bound all the authorities together. Whether Spina was a true counter-revolu-
tionary or not, the mores of Trent took precedence over politics, at least in
the hinterland. The cold comfort D’Auzers could draw from this was that at
least Spina did not manipulate such men, even if no one else did either.
    The kind of rigid internal discipline and powerful intellectual leadership
mustered by Corboli in the cities and plains of the archbishopric of
Florence, could not be replicated in the dioceses of the periphery, for better
or for worse. The one great constant was Easter, however. This was, perhaps,
the most lasting, pervasive victory Trent had won over the course of the
early modern period, and it haunted the French. It was a lesson they learnt
early. Jourdan told Fouché in 1802:

    the Easter season … is the time when priests exercise their greatest
    influence over the people through the confessional and, in general,
    [the priests] are loyal to the King of Sardinia. This is the second
    year I have noted that people are at their most volatile at this
    time.107

At the other end of the period, and of the départements réunis, Roederer in
Umbria told Paris to forget any immediate hopes for many laymen to serve
in local government, for:

    we are approaching that dread period for the full deployment of the
    power of the clergy, Easter … . We are in a country where no one,
    whatever his rank or wealth, neglects his devotional duties; there is




                                     104
