                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


began to be felt. In the hills outside Rome in 1811, a hermit reoccupied a
suppressed field chapel and set up on its altar – ‘with a kind of ceremony’ –
a wooden crucifix which had been torn down from the exterior of the chapel
and had only its arms left. Warned that ‘the common people, and the
women especially, came running in crowds to adore the arms of the crucifix’,
the police broke up the crowd, arrested the hermit, and deported him back
to Piedmont, his place of origin. When asked why he had set up the crucifix,
he replied that ‘he had been forced to cede to the will of the people’.156
   Taken together, the relationship between the Church hierarchy and the
Napoleonic state as it developed on the periphery was fraught with prob-
lems, but there were at least signs that the ‘civilizing mission’ discerned by
both might serve as the foundation of a working compromise. Both were
often prepared to risk the ire of the laity, the better to control them.
Incompatibility was never far from the surface, but in practice it could be
held in check. It was not the same at the centre, in the great cities and the
lowlands.


                                 The centre
On the periphery, the French faced a problem that was literally as old as the
hills, as well as problems thrown up by the political traumas of the triennio.
They faced a different set of obstacles in urban and lowland areas. In direct
contrast to the periphery, they believed there were too many clergy in the
great cities and lowland plains of Italy, an attitude which made its way into
the consciousness of the laity and the local authorities, if sometimes in exag-
gerated form. Just as the people of Emploi in Tuscany interpreted the
French penchant for abolishing High Days as a sure sign they would cancel
Christmas, so during the reorganization of the Church in 1810 the maire of
Voghera, on the border between Piedmont and Liguria, wrote with trem-
bling hand to Paris, expressing local fears that his sizeable town would be
reduced to only one parish and one church.157 The difference was that the
maire and his administrés had long experience of the French, and they were
absolutely right. There was only one proper parish church in this town of
8,000; all the rest were oratories of confraternities or held by the regular
orders. In 1812 Voghera still had but one church.158
   The Prefect of the Arno in 1811 was very clear that twenty-nine parishes
were enough for Florence, a town of over 72,000. Pisa also followed this
pattern. In 1784, when Ricci and Peter-Leopold tried and failed to change
this, there were eighty-two places of worship for a population of 7,468 souls,
a ratio of 1:91. All was not as it seemed, however, for only fourteen of them
were parish churches; the rest had belonged to the confraternities, the
regular orders or were private oratories.159 This is what the French believed
to be sufficient.160 Parma had thirty parishes for 34,000 people, eight of
which depended on the regular houses and were without support after their


                                     114
