                T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    the closure of several churches, which only mar the impact of reli-
    gion; it will produce great good in the small communes where these
    rivalries between annexes and chapels lead to discord and
    disorder.151

Loysel, a man of republican stamp, showed a canny grasp of the nature of
many local problems by pointing to this aspect of parish organization; he
saw the point of so many dependent chapels and so was able to reach
beyond the administrative reasons, based on topography, on which petitions
usually dwelt. Rival clans had, over the centuries, simply avoided each other
by persuading the ecclesiastical authorities to give them their own chapels
away from a parish church dominated by their rivals.152 Even so, Loysel
failed to grasp Borromeo’s insight that such peace could not be made from
within communities. That was what the missions were for, but the French
had abolished them; the only way to make the Mass central to the faithful
was to let them hold it where they wanted, as long as it was in a consecrated
space. To save the Mass, to enforce communion, rural parishes fragmented
in this way, just as those of the cities and towns were cut through with the
oratories of the confraternities. Even though he perceived the great problem
in this form, Loysel rejected a wealth of received experience about how to
cope with it. This kind of compromise was not in the nature of the regime.
   The use of such places to express the collective strength of communities
worried the new regime, a phobia carried over the Alps. Hill and field
chapels were a step away – often literally – from the dread grottoes of the
madonnas. They were the physical space where archaic piety met counter-
revolution, at least for the French police. In 1809 the Prefect of Genoa
lambasted the ‘innumerable’ unauthorized feste taking place in closed
chapels all over Liguria: ‘they lead only to unrest, and I don’t think they
should be tolerated’.153 D’Auzers had a more sinister view of them:

    the oratories and chapels spread over the countryside, or along the
    roads, which are useless for worship, are dilapidated and often serve
    as shelter for brigands … the first category that must be closed are
    all those more than a kilometre from rural communes, because they
    are too difficult to watch, even if they do have enough funds for
    their upkeep.154

In 1810 a priest in Arezzo used private connections to get permission from
the imprisoned Pope to open several domestic chapels. Although the govern-
ment took a dim view of this, it only demanded his arrest when it became
clear they were all in rural areas.155 Once closed, such chapels could turn
into focal points for even more archaic forms of devotion. The phenomenon
of ‘power through neglect’ so widespread in images of Marian devotion,
soon found parallels in other forms, as the consequences of French policy


                                    113
