                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


because they knew how to appeal to their clergy: They were obeyed because
they were believed. It could – and did – go the other way as the effects of the
Concordat began to be felt. There would be more to come in Rome. In his
memoirs, Tournon admitted a connection between Tridentine discipline and
the assertion of ‘conscience’, so despised by all revolutionary regimes, from
1790 onwards:

    This sacrifice was made to an abstraction; this abnegation of their
    own convictions (for they all admitted that there was nothing crim-
    inal in the oath itself) in the face of the orders left by the Pope, had
    something imposing about it that inspired respect.196

Tournon did not flinch from his duty either. At the time, rather than in the
memoirs written under the restoration, it was at best the respect of one
professional for another. It took discipline, as well as conscience, to with-
stand the blandishments of the French, as well as their threats: these priests
lost their livings immediately, unlike those previously arrested in Tuscany.
   When the French felt under pressure, they lashed out at the clergy if they
showed themselves disobedient. In the fraught days after the revolt of the
Piacentino, following the refusal of a priest to bury a French official, Junot
thundered at the Bishop of Borgo San Donnino to ‘police the conduct of
the clergy of your diocese’, but in a very different cause to that of
Borromeo:

    [Priests] can forgive or not forgive in the confessional, but they are
    not the judges of people’s consciences. God alone has that right,
    and it is right that you make them appreciate that they have no
    temporal power.197

In the heat of a crisis, this was the face of Bonapartist theology, and it had
nothing in common with Trent.
   The French disliked the very sight of a numerous clergy; it was a bad
sign, for there was far more to French attitudes than finances or the deploy-
ment of resources. In 1805 the Piedmontese bishops, including Amiens,
Paris’s own commissioner for Church affairs in the new departments, asked
that twenty-six of the fifty-four collegial and abbatial chapters of Piedmont
be retained. The Minister of Religion refused; all fifty-four were suppressed,
‘so that ecclesiastics will not be so numerous in the future’.198 Moreau de St-
Méry and Nardon had grave differences over the future of Parma, but they
had identical views on the clergy of the city: to begin with there were too
many, and they earned their living in useless ways, by saying masses, thus
encouraging the conservation of too many High Days. Above all, the pres-
ence of ‘numerous celibate men introduces the corruption of morals’, to the
extent that Moreau wanted the churches closed before dark ‘to stop them


                                      121
