                  T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    [a] great number of the inhabitants would not only lose frequent
    [access to] the Mass, they would also be deprived of spiritual
    support in case of sickness, without the facility of the said oratory.

He ended by emphasizing that all that was wanted was the reopening of the
building, not the refounding of its confraternity, and he got his way.178
   Maintaining the service of the parishes, urban or rural, was a maxim the
French held to, even in the darkest corners of resistance. At the height of the
crisis over the Oath, Tournon used this argument in vain to dissuade the
many non-juring clergy from abandoning their parishes.179 He had backing
in Paris, where the Minister of Religion told Miollis that the only spiritual
function non-juring priests could perform was saying Mass.180 Stripped of
their incomes, set for exile and even gaol, this exception to their lot was very
revealing of the dilemma in which the regime had placed itself. Even
Roederer in Umbria, probably the most ferocious of the prefects, drew back
from this prospect:

    [It is] infinitely preferable to have refractories at the head of the
    parishes, than to deprive the people of the Mass, given that the
    refractories would not give in anyway, and that the closure of the
    churches would create a dreadful way to raise the people in
    revolt.181

Yet no one came closer to destroying this maxim than the French them-
selves, through their own policies.
   The imposition of the Oath on the Roman and Tuscan clergy was the
single greatest example of this, but there were other trends at work within
the regime, which ran against the restructuring of the parish clergy. The
Sub-Prefect of Genoa responded thus to the request to take Holy Orders of
four well-qualified boys in 1805:

    I cannot keep silent about the large quantity of ministers of reli-
    gion; this arrondissement is full of them. Measures must be taken to
    ensure that a great many young men do not assume this condition
    … . [T]heir ministry is, effectively, useless, because of the multi-
    plicity of benefices, which forces them to find other ways to get the
    people to support them. They are a burden on the people, and
    superstition alone allows them to carry on.182

This is as revealing of official prejudices, as of indigenous ‘superstition’. It is
also something that is and is not true. The assumption that there were too
many vocations runs against the history of the Church in early modern
Italy.183 Yet it also touches on the problem Ricci tried to confront in Pisa a
quarter of a century earlier. Indeed, when asked to produce a report on who


                                       118
