                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


being the rendezvous of the debauched’.199 Nardon’s deputy lashed out in
1806 that

    You would probably be revolted to know that young creatures of
    eight or ten are sold into prostitution … the state must attack this
    propensity for licence at its source … . The number of priests must
    be reduced.200

These objections were not administrative in origin.
   The relationship between the French and the secular clergy was, unsur-
prisingly, very complex, but the French had the dubious talent of reducing it
to its stark essentials, a process fostered by the rigidity of the Concordat. In
most cases where compromise was both possible and sought, it came ‘from
the bottom up’ – from the Italian clergy, usually and significantly at local
level and on the periphery. A pattern emerges in these dealings and, while
not universal, it is dominant in the relationship between ruler and ruled:
Italian parocci, and occasionally their superiors, sought to draw from the
system imposed on them by the Concordat what help they could in the
struggle against poverty and the world of ‘nuestras Indías’ many still
perceived around them. There was seldom any question of the regime giving
in to them over local customs or traditions. It was seldom a ‘two-way street’,
for where the French might give way – usually over reopening an isolated
oratory – it was for the imperatives of their own policy, not out of deference
to local tradition, as shrewder petitioners soon learned. ‘Integration’, as
defined by Nathan Watchel – the voluntary incorporation of foreign
elements into the indigenous system – was not unknown in the relationship
between the French and the secular clergy, at least on the periphery, but it
occurred only at the behest of the conquerors. Moreover, it took place
within the framework of an official policy that corresponds deeply to
Watchel’s definition of ‘assimilation’ – the elimination of indigenous tradi-
tions when overwhelmed by foreign rule.201 This, almost without exception,
is what the French serving ‘on the ground’ in Italy wanted to see, and that is
how they usually interpreted the application of the Concordat, although it
usually emerges more starkly in an urban context than in the hinterlands.
   Those in the ‘front line’ of the empire often swept aside the differences
between the piety of the centre and that of the periphery, even if they
acknowledged their existence. For the Sub-Prefect of Pisa in 1813, it would
all be a cloak for revolt as it had been in 1799. Regional differences were
real, but that was not the point. Should the enemy arrive,

    nothing could contain the populace of the towns, to whom religion
    would serve as a pretext, [while among] the ignorant bands who
    inhabit the countryside, respect for this same religion tips into
    fanaticism.202


                                      122
