                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    Although numerous, [the churches] scarcely suffice for the religious
    services which the Romans are so used to. Each neighbourhood,
    each street, has one or several churches where the local is used to
    fulfilling his devotions. There is not a church without a miraculous
    image, a tomb, a tradition, that does not make it venerable in their
    eyes. The faithful would be hurt, public opinion would be shocked,
    if the number of these places of worship was to be limited.168

Nonetheless, Tournon saw a clear division between those churches of artistic
and historical interest, and those of interest to ‘purely local observance’.
Only the former merited reopening, and only then if others were closed in
recompense. Fortunately for the service of parishes, Tournon believed that
many parish churches were more artistically important than the oratories.
French aesthetic taste would dictate the fate of Rome, even when its Prefect
showed an awareness of local devotional culture rare among the occupiers.
His Emperor thought twenty parishes enough for the capital of
Christendom, out of the existing eighty.169 Yet even Napoleon did not
formulate policy with as much ruthless clarity – or ill-disguised sarcasm – as
the Director of the Domain of the department of the Reno in the Kingdom
of Italy. The requests of the Vicar-General to reopen ex-regular churches for
parish use met with this reply:

    The Vicar flatters himself in being able to conserve the churches
    already allocated to him without the obligation to renounce others,
    and he bases this presumptuousness on the need for them revealed
    by the throngs of people who attend the open churches. I would
    observe to him, that the existing churches already cost the govern-
    ment the allotted sums, and he would do well to indicate which
    churches he would close in recompense.170

   The French never developed a coherent strategy for the city of Genoa,
but the closure of all the churches and chapels of the regulars, and most of
the oratories, left huge gaps in parish administration. It also exposed the gap
in wealth and resources between the parishes and the ‘associative’ and
regular arms of devotion. The Prefect saw this as a means to further the
deeper policy at the heart of it all, by pilfering the wealth of the regular
houses, their churches and the private oratories, thus

    surrounding the curés – who are the only true ministers – with all
    the attention, all the pomp and all the magnificence that the cele-
    bration of the holy mysteries deserves.171

The curé and parish of San Vincenzo wanted to transfer the parish church
from their own church – ‘so small, so airless [and] very inconvenient for the


                                     116
