                  T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


inhabitants’ – to the church of the Consolation, formerly belonging to the
Dominicans and now vacant.172 The French encouraged this exchange, but
did not think in terms of expansion in Genoa any more than in Tuscany.
Although the Prefect was favourable to reopening the ex-Capuchin church
of the Annunciation as a parish church in 1811, it was on condition that the
existing parish church of San Carlo closed, and he demanded its amalgama-
tion with three other parishes. The Vicar-General objected, to no avail, that
were the parishes merged to include 4,000 souls, then both churches would
be needed.173 Rural topography made a readier impression on the regime
than did urban demography.
    ‘The parish as vulture’ was one of the few potent weapons the regime had
in winning acceptance for the many changes it tried to impose on religious
life. In 1808 the Tuscan bishops seem to have cooperated with the French to
prevent some priests speaking out against the sale of the property and the
harvests of the suppressed regular houses, partly by appealing to the benefits
that might accrue to the parishes as a result.174 Indeed, in 1811 D’Osmond
reported a flood of requests from parishes for church furnishings and holy
objects confiscated from the monasteries. Bells were particularly sought
after, and parishes were willing to pay the costs of their delivery. He advised
the government against selling off organs to private individuals or
destroying them; instead they should be reserved for parish use.175 Paris
agreed, but left it to the prefects to decide which churches would benefit.176
    ‘The parish as vulture’ could have an obvious, if confused, appeal in poor
rural parishes. Even in urban centres the line between government policy
and the sensibilities of its administrés could be thin, however. The opposi-
tion to the loss of the oratories of the confraternities has already been seen,
but even where such closures were finally accepted, other unacceptable faces
of popular devotion could emerge. Following the closure of all the oratories
and confraternities in Voghera by 1811, the maire told the sub-prefect that
‘the universal desire’ of the town was to have the church of San Giuseppe
reopened as the parish church. It stood in the main piazza, with a new
steeple built in 1806, with a clock in it, and a beautiful façade. This, in itself,
is striking evidence of the wealth and enthusiasm of the lay brothers who
had so recently paid for it. But there was more. The church lodged three
paintings of saints revered by the local people, together with an altar set up
in 1810 to the patron saint of the town, San Bovus, whose relics were
solemnly paraded through the town each year.177 The gap between rulers
and ruled becomes breathtaking in the face of such petitions, a sign that
devotional practices of this kind were not only popular, but still believed
acceptable, even in middle-sized towns. When the Vicar-General of Casale
petitioned for the reopening of an oratory in Brignano, an isolated moun-
tain parish with 600 scattered souls, he showed a far greater awareness of the
way to the regime’s heart. He played on topography alone, stressing that the
oratory had served as an auxiliary chapel in the past and that


                                       117
