                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


he considered best among the Tuscan clergy, Tardy, the Vice-President of the
Corps Législatif, said that not only were there more able men among the
regulars than the seculars, but that this was due to the massive number of
benefices in private, usually noble, hands. They were passed on to

    the sons of their servants, who, for the most part, have no learning,
    no aptitude nor any vocation for the clerical condition. They
    embrace it with the sole end of obtaining the revenues which serve,
    at once, as a pension for the services rendered by the father, and a
    clerical title for the son. This problem has filled the Tuscan clergy
    with rankly stupid priests – lazy, poorly trained and utterly unable
    to fulfil the work of the Holy Mystery.184

Comments of this kind are hard to quantify; they are impenetrably subjec-
tive. Nevertheless, the Leopoldine heritage did not indispose the French to
the Tuscan clergy. Tardy, like so many others, came away bitterly disap-
pointed by Tuscan realities, but he was not without local support. The
Bishop of Chiusi and Piena rejoiced that the Concordat had abolished
private benefices and given him the power himself to redistribute the
revenues of the eight canoneries of Pienza nominated by the descendants of
Pius II, who usually had no aptitude for them.185 Nevertheless, his plans to
fill the vacancies by a public examination were scotched by Paris, for the
intention was to abolish them completely.186
    Whatever evaluation is put on the problem of recruitment to the parish
clergy, the best solution would not appear to be turning away good candi-
dates, but something in the Sub-Prefect balked at the prospect of the ‘best
and the brightest’ entering the Church. The government was even equivocal
about the one remaining seminary in Rome itself. A report to the Consultà
in 1810 predicted that it would soon collapse without government help.
There were now only forty-seven students, most of whom were ‘aspirants to
the priesthood’, with only two in orders.187 Two years later, although the
Minister of Religion said that ‘the first see of Catholicism cannot be threat-
ened with the loss of its seminary’, he would only save what was left, not
expand it. Paris ordered part of the building turned into a lycée, with the
rump to continue as a seminary.188 Parma’s seminary had all but collapsed
by 1806. It had twenty-five students, but all the teaching was done by the
university, soon to be abolished; although recommendations were made for
it to be reformed and aided,189 it was closed with the university.190 Savary
was of the stated opinion that no more priests should be ordained in the
Italian departments until 1820; some of the present ‘surplus’ could be sent
to parishes in the interior.191
    The French idée fixe of an overstaffed urban Church was contested by
the Italian clergy everywhere from the outset of French rule. The impact of
the dissolution of the regular orders on parish life was made worse by the


                                     119
