                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


stipulations of the Concordat that ‘foreign clergy’ were not permitted to
work in the empire, nor were clergy from the imperial departments to do so
in the Kingdoms of Italy or Naples. Many prelates echoed the outspoken
Archbishop of Pisa, when in 1808 he protested about their imminent expul-
sion on the eve of the annexation of Tuscany:

    the foreign priests working in this diocese, all upstanding subjects
    and of exemplary conduct, must be allowed to continue in their
    work by the government, it being impossible to replace them, given
    the scant number of diocesan clergy.192

Cardinal Fesch himself intervened to no avail for the Dominican friars and
sisters in Parma and Piacenza, who had been deliberately encouraged to
come from elsewhere by the Duke, ‘people who have given their youth and
their labours to the service of the Sovereign’.193 Typically, Spina turned this
to the advantage of his diocese in an act more subversive, if less ostenta-
tious, than the defiance of his colleague in Pisa. The Edict of 1 September
1810 banned all clergy ‘sent home from abroad’ from serving anywhere in
the empire unless they took the Oath. Spina simply ignored it, assigning
them to parishes as auxiliaries where they were celebrating Mass, hearing
confessions and teaching the catechism. He simply used a ‘loophole’ that –
unlike in Tuscany and the Papal states – the Ligurian clergy had never been
asked to take the Oath. The Police Commissioner of Genoa hoped that a
reduction in the number of urban parishes would make it easier to recruit
only loyal, juring priests, without jeopardizing their pastoral work.194
   An even greater challenge faced the new regime, wherever Tridentine
discipline had become a reality. It was finally expressed in Article 49 of the
Vues sur l’organisation du Culte Catholique, drawn up by the Ministry of
Religion as a guide for the new Concordat of 1813, but embedded in
Gallican thinking since 1789. It declared that curés should be ‘worthy, by
their morals and intelligence, to be teachers of the people’ but in the same
breath declared that

    being salaried public officials … their interest will be intimately
    connected to that of the state. Their esprit du corps will disappear;
    priests will become valued members of society.195

The fundamental clash with the Borromean ideal was unavoidable, but the
French were right to wish to dismantle collective clerical discipline, for it
became a powerful weapon against them. Corboli had shown this in the
Metropolitan See of Florence, and many of his clergy, high and low, went to
prison as a result. As was evident in the support they gave the new regime
over the sale of the properties of the regulars, the Tuscan episcopate could
turn the tap of resistance on and off to a considerable degree, if only


                                     120
