                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


abolition, together with the Cathedral Chapter and four collegial churches.
Only one parish in the town was considered by the French to have a reason-
able revenue; most of the ninety-four clergy attached to them were in private
benefices, shortly to be abolished under the Concordat. It was further noted
that canons were paid almost twice as much as parish priests, and that one
third of revenue designated for their pay did not reach them, but went for
‘public service’, meaning charity.161 These were among the privileges and
practices, clawed back by Turchi after the fall of Du Tillot, that Moreau de
St-Méry said he most detested in his unpublished history of the Duchies.
They underpinned a venal, useless consistory and starved the parishes of
revenue in the interests of holding the idle poor in awe and superstition of
the Bishop.162
   The French perceived the persistence of ancien régime problems quickly
enough – ‘the fragmentation of “associative” religious life [the confraterni-
ties and oratories] to the detriment of the parish nucleus’, and the
subordination of the parish churches to the regulars163 – but they did not
think of expanding the parish network, only of cutting away ‘the competi-
tion’. They were not concerned with rectifying the problems of the
traditional parish structure to meet the demographic shifts of the late eigh-
teenth century. What drew their attention was the correlation of existing
resources to the numbers of clergy employed; there was never a question of
expanding numbers. The French were ruthless with the Roman dioceses,
twenty out of thirty-seven were abolished in the ‘first wave’, before yet more
of their incumbents refused to take the oath. The rationale was that they
were too small, some no bigger than a French parish.164 This accomplished,
even the loyal and the relatively exalted were not safe from this imperative. A
report to the Minister of Religion noted a few months later that ‘[t]he
number of canons who have taken the Oath in the suppressed chapters
greatly exceeds the number of prebends in those chapters still conserved’.165
Tournon noted the superfluity of clergy in Rome as compared to the rest of
the department: 407 secular clerics, compared to 582 curés and 1,474 vicars
for the rest of the Papal states. Rome had eighty-one parishes, only thirty-
three of which were ‘proper’ cures, but this figure was still capable of being
reduced.166
   When it came to dealing with Church property the French deemed redun-
dant, their ruthlessness could be breathtaking. They could get their
comeuppance, too, as in 1803 when they blew up the cathedral of
Alessandria, the second largest city in Piedmont, which was losing its see to
Casale and so did not need one anymore. When a prominent local Jacobin
was hit by a stone from the blast, and killed, the local clergy turned it into a
miracle, a sign of divine wrath, and refused to absolve him or bury him.167
Tournon was sensitive to the importance of actual buildings and their
contents to the Romans, although he still despised the devotional culture
behind them:


                                      115
