                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


regimes in the Papal states, Tuscany and Parma, republican governments
took a much more moderate stance after the trauma of Novanatanove than
they had before it. In Liguria there was no attempt to renew the radical
legislation of 1797, and the French found a very unreformed Church when
they annexed it in 1805, despite five years of nominally ‘patriot’ rule.221
There were few Piedmontese patriots intent on the destruction of the regu-
lars, as borne out by the proposals of the short-lived Ecclesiastical
Commission of the Provisional Government in 1800. Its Jansenist leanings
notwithstanding, the Commission made no attempt to abolish the regular
orders en masse, although it did close a significant number of individual
houses.222 The Italian patriots seemed to have learned something in the
course of the triennio. For all their ingrained fear and contempt for the
Church and its influence on the masses, the giacobini in office immediately
after Marengo showed many signs of moderating their stance, particularly
as regarded the regulars.
   In contrast, the Napoleonic regime, so often depicted as the conservative
saviour of the Church in these years, retained the much more militant stance
of the Revolution and never wavered from it. Even before formal, full
annexation to the empire, the French showed their hand. In Piedmont, as
early as 1802, Jourdan put a stop to any more novices being received into the
Piedmontese houses, and also forbade them receiving any regulars sent to
them from elsewhere by their Generals. He reserved a particular contempt
for the mendicant orders, in 1802 demanding they be stopped from begging
and suppressed as quickly as possible, given the poverty of the region just
after the war.223 Part of his reasoning was their growing poverty following
the failure of the government to provide pensions for them.224 At one point,
Jourdan begged the government either to let him send them home with
pensions – arguing that their families would not accept them otherwise – or
even to allow them to reassemble in communities. Jourdan was, to say the
least, anti-clerical, but he concluded that ‘Justice and political reality
demand some prompt, workable decision’.225 The incompetence of the
regime in paying ex-regulars the pensions they were promised continued
from beginning to end. Janet was so slow about it in Rome, Tournon
remarked in his memoirs, that had he done so the confiscations might have
cost the government more than it was worth.226 When the money did arrive,
it was often not enough. Even the Prefect of Genoa and Cardinal Spina
managed to agree on this in 1810. They remarked that as the numbers
increased with the advance of the empire, the level of the pension fell: while
the ex-regulars of Piedmont and the Duchies received, when their pension
was paid, 600 francs and 500 francs per month respectively for men and
women, those in Liguria received a maximum of 416 francs and 469 francs
respectively – often less if they were under fifty. The Ministry of Religion
never revised these levels; its policy was to choke off the numbers of regulars
before the suppressions took place.227


                                     126
