                  T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    These houses would soon become centres of intrigue, of seditious
    projects, havens for subversive writers and secret agents, who would
    torment [people’s] consciences, and sow discord and unrest.250

The regulars are depicted as intelligent and cunning; their ability to influ-
ence urban populations, as well as the isolated peasantry of the valleys, is
taken for granted. Above all, there is a clearly stated desire that those who
could not be secularized, simply be got out of sight. All this would come
back to haunt the French, and this policy would be undone by other aspects
of the dissolution of the regulars.
    Tournon pointed out that the Cordeliers house in the woods of Fonte
Colombo in the hills near Rieti would be a real loss to the hill communities, as it
served as a hospice, and the Minori Osservanti of that area had proved them-
selves useful in preaching peace and obedience to the government among the
peasantry. Nevertheless, he told Janet that it would be dangerous to make
exceptions. He ignored all petitions for exemption from the suppression.251
    Closed, isolated communities of regulars often seemed better aware of
the preoccupations of their new masters than the maires and notables of
many provincial centres. The Procuratore of the Tuscan Hermits is one such.
There were four hermitages, all in remote Apennine valleys, and in his peti-
tion to the Buon Governo in 1808 he stressed the economic importance of
their forestry industry for the people of the area and its technical sophistica-
tion, as well as the spiritual work they did among the indigent population of
the periphery. All this was normal enough. However, the Procuratore was
also at pains to stress their work as conservationists: while all the secular
landlords had destroyed their forests through ignorance and greed, the skills
of the Hermits had preserved the only sizeable forests in the region, the
conclusion being that they alone were to be trusted with this precious
resource.252 This revealed a remarkable grasp of the regime’s concern with
protecting forests, both in the public interest and as a military resource.253 It
still did them no good.
    Whereas the abbeys and monasteries of the periphery were detested for
their power and wealth, the mendicant orders in urban centres were loathed
for their own poverty – as Tournon revealed so clearly in his comments
about the Passionists of Rome – as well as for the alms they themselves
diverted from the poor. Some archaic customs made traditions of alms-
giving to the regulars. In Genoa in 1810 the maire informed the Prefect that
‘from time immemorial’ the mendicant orders in the city entered the timber
markets, by the docks, and ‘spontaneously received a piece of this
combustible wood, from buyers and sellers alike’.254 Moreau noted that the
ravages of the war increased the begging of the mendicant orders in Parma,
making of their poverty ‘something mystical’ in popular eyes.255
    When their refusal to take the Oath forced many into further poverty, as
their government pensions were withheld, the power of this mythic status


                                       131
