                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   In Parma, prior to the introduction of the Concordat in 1806, Moreau de
St-Méry had ‘frozen’ the regular houses. The ten male houses of the city
were no longer allowed to receive novices at all after 1805; the twenty-one
female houses could only take novices on appeal to Paris, nor could a novice
take vows without the approval of the Minister of Religion, which was never
accorded.228 Even when the French themselves demanded exceptions to this
rule, they did not treat those spared well. In 1805 Napoleon himself asked
the Sisters of Charity in Turin to reassemble in order to staff the hospices of
Turin, Asti and Alessandria. They replied that it was impossible, for ‘the
congregation is losing members daily, because the high demands of their
work are shortening their lives’.229 As the breach with Rome grew, even this
kind of concession disappeared from official policy. The Imperial Decree of
13 September 1810 spelled out starkly the end of all monastic life, male and
female, in the Ligurian and Piedmontese departments.230 It took the rarely
seen concerted efforts of Spina and the Prefect of Genoa to save the Sisters
of Refuge, the main source of charitable nursing in the whole of Liguria,
but the Daughters of the Visitation – whom they had saved in 1807 – did not
escape the ‘next round’ of 1810–11.231
   Even the assumptions of many patriots were in for a shock. In 1808 the
President of the Tuscan Buon Governo, who served the French well, believed
that they would go no further than forbidding future vocations, assuming ‘it
would not be inconvenient to allow those who have already taken orders to
continue to live outside secular society’.232 He obviously had no prior
knowledge of the stark statement that came from on high – ‘As for Liguria
and the states of Parma and Piacenza, there are still houses to be
suppressed’233 – at the definitive ‘reunion’ of the churches of Piedmont,
Liguria and the Duchies to the Gallican Church.
   The regime had no illusions about the popularity of the regulars when it
actually came to closing down their houses and churches, and – literally –
carting them away. The suppressions in Parma and Piacenza in 1805 were
carried out at four in the morning, without the knowledge of the bishops,
nor was any warning given to the regulars themselves.234 Nor could the local
authorities be depended upon, especially when the regulars simply ignored
prior orders. Most non-Tuscan regulars did not seem to respond to the first
orders, producing the emphatic response from the Buon Governo that ‘all
foreign clergy must leave’ early in 1808.235 The Tuscan regulars went quietly
– in the end. Nevertheless the police noted, in the same breath, signs of
profound passive protest among the laity, even as they mocked the culture
behind them:

    The people have been superstitious, but never disorderly. They show
    respect for the stupidest things. There is a well in the Carmelite
    church in Florence. When the monks left it, a crowd came with little



                                     127
