                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   On the periphery, the French often saw the monasteries as oppressive,
feudal landowners, channelling the wealth of the countryside into their own
coffers and generally holding back the progress of the areas they dominated.
Moreau de St-Méry dispatched a factfinding mission into the Apennine
valleys in 1805 – prior to the revolt – and its conclusions bolstered these
views. There was no denying the poverty of the area, which in turn made the
region so lawless. It was reported that a major cause of this in the Valdarda
were the heavy dues levied by the monastery there.248 The author of the
report was the notorious Captain Antonio Boccia, later discredited for his
brutal and incompetent handling of the suppression of the revolt.
Nevertheless, the French themselves collected evidence quite to the contrary
of Boccia’s report: among the demands of the rebels of 1806 in the
Piacentino were calls for the restoration of the regular houses in the Val di
Trebbia. In Tuscany, the Prefect of the Arno amassed evidence in 1810 that
gave him pause for thought. The difference between centre and periphery
was clear to him, and he took it as his starting point. Although he had no
mercy in store for the urban or lowland communities of regulars, in the
Apennine valleys he pointed directly to the pivotal role of the six monas-
teries found there, even if he did not hesitate to advise their closure:

    Their revenues are distributed in the area, thus spreading a kind of
    prosperity around these isolated places, and increasing production
    through favouring land clearance … . To close these religious
    houses, at present, [would mean that] the mountains would revert to
    wasteland, these disadvantaged places would become deserts.249

There was no question in his mind, even in the face of this evidence, that
they might be spared in their traditional form, for this would leave the
people of the valleys ‘as superstitious as they would be poor without them’.
It would be very dangerous to make any exceptions to the policy of aboli-
tion. The Prefect proposed to staff them with those regulars too old go out
into the world – those over seventy – and, after having nationalized the
property, to turn these ex-monasteries into hospices for travellers and the old
and infirm of the locality, ‘which would win the loyalty of these people for
the government’. This was an acknowledgement of the wider point that
regulars often served those areas the secular clergy could not reach, as well
as admitting the dangers involved in the assault on what both the National
Assembly and Joseph II before it had labelled ‘useless institutions’. The
Prefect added a comment very revealing of his own attitude to the different
role of the regulars on the periphery and at the centre. He felt it was far
better for the government to put all regulars over seventy in these isolated
houses, rather than let them live in urban centres where it would be easy for
them to regroup, unpoliced, in their old communities:



                                     130
