                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


Virgin of the Immaculate Conception [which] epitomized the alliance
between the Vatican and the faithful’ discerned by Ruth Harris at its high
point at Lourdes in the mid-nineteenth century.208
   Spina was, in a very real sense, ‘the morning star’ of the nineteenth-
century Catholic revival, and for this very reason he was on dangerous
ground, less in his subtle war with French secularism than in the old struggle
against religious archaism. When Spina invoked Marianism, the Vatican had
yet to formulate the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, its own sani-
tized response to the cult of the Virgin.209 Spina did not have this apparatus
behind – or indeed, above – him when he took the populist path during the
epoca francese. He could not impose the Immaculate Conception on archaic
Marianism, nor subsume it into a ‘safe’, Romantic sentimentalism that did
not yet exist. This made his course of action all the bolder and more
dangerous, for Spina, unlike his nineteenth-century successors, had to ride
the tiger of popular religiosity with only his own episcopal, essentially
Tridentine authority to hold it in check. This was probably why he chose to
confine this dangerous alliance with populism to ‘the centre’, to the cities
and the Riviera. The untamed archaism of the periphery was still too
potent, raw and, above all, independent to be treated with anything other
than Tridentine severity at this stage of the Catholic revival. Spina was too
close to the reality of ‘nuestras Indías’ to have truck with the later sentimen-
talism bestowed on such communities by Lasserre and the proponents of
Lourdes later in the century.210
   This was why, despite his other antics, Spina could still win praise from
the Minister of Religion, who bracketed him with Caselli in a report to
Napoleon in 1807 as having distinguished himself ‘in his pastoral instruc-
tions concerning conscription, and other various things that are of interest
to the government’. This was accurate: if the government’s concern was the
hinterland, where conscription was the main issue, then Spina ‘played the
game’. It was different elsewhere. The same report asserted that:

    Religion is monarchical. It is disposed to obey, it stifles the spirit of
    independence, it normalizes family feeling, together with all the
    peaceable, sociable virtues. Its good effects are recognizable in the
    countryside.211

It is the last sentence that matters. By following his own predispositions on
the periphery, Spina masked from Paris the real ‘counter-revolution’ he was
working in Genoa and the towns of the littoral. The stifled spirit of inde-
pendence and the ‘peaceable’ virtues were not evident to French eyes in the
streets of Genoa on High Days, even if the ‘sociable’ virtues were alive and
well for those carrying the casacce and the priests – often foreign or non-
juring – who blessed them. As the old ways persisted on the periphery, they
were being nursed back to life at the centre. If the official totem of the


                                      124
