                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


The only valid division for some imperial officials was between the vicious
cynicism of the centre and the barbarousness of the periphery. It applied to
religion, as to most other things.
    There is at least a grain of truth in some of the cynicism. The Italian
prelates especially led the French a merry dance. Although Giacinto in Turin
proved a loyal collaborator and Caselli ‘turned’ only at the end – though to
great effect, it is true – others played the sort of game that Paris often
missed, but that drove the French in Italy to distraction. The Roman
Cardinals and overtly defiant bishops like those of Pisa and Fiesole could
easily be packed off to prison. Spina in Genoa and – to a lesser degree –
Chigi-Zondadari in Siena were harder to pin down. Faced with ruthless
arrests and exiles, they played a game careful enough to dupe those outside
their areas, but defiant enough to draw the bile of the French with whom
they dealt. Chigi-Zondadari was the less overt of the two. He had, indeed,
been cowed by the French police early on, not least – as Lagarde proudly
admitted – because they played ruthlessly on his dire financial straits when
raising the spectre of exile.203 Despite this, the widespread use of biglietti
was not even uncovered in his diocese until 1812. If he helped smooth the
way over the closure of the regular houses, he did nothing to dampen the
fires of anti-Semitism in the residence of his see. He ‘blessed’ Tournon’s
marriage in Paris in 1810, but got out of actually performing the cere-
mony.204 Spina’s conduct was the more dramatic and enraging, but only to
those with local knowledge of what he was about. He had accepted the
Concordat in Liguria in 1806 without waiting for Papal approval.205 Nor did
Spina martyr himself at the Concile in 1811, and he advised caution and
conciliation throughout the years of the French occupation. He sided with
Maury and Fesch at the Concile and accompanied Caprara to Savona to try
to convince Pius to accept the extension of the Concordat to the Papal
states, and is said to have been received ‘without emotion’.206 One historian
sees him – reasonably from this perspective – as the ‘Emperor’s man’. 207
D’Auzers and his subordinates would have laughed at such an assessment.
Pacca – the ‘oracle’ of the Roman interpretation of the clash with Napoleon
– is utterly silent on Spina at this time. Arguably he did more than any other
single prelate not only to thwart the French in particular, but to set
Italian Catholicism on a new path. His many activities in this field may
rightly be called ‘subversive’, not only in that they undermined the integra-
tion of the Concordat in Liguria, but because they broke with the
eighteenth-century disdain for popular devotion. At the centre at least – in
an urban context, if hardly in the hinterlands of the Fontanabuona – Spina
was setting the Church on a new course under the well-informed and not
wholly uncomprehending Gallic noses around him. Spina stands at the
threshold of the Marian, populist revival that culminated in the promulga-
tion of the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception in 1854. His actions in
Genoa helped initiate that ‘linking of the Virgin of the Grotto and the


                                     123
