                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


parish Mass on Sunday were to survive – the new Pax for a new empire and
a new age – there was only so much the French could do against the secular
arm. It was different for the regulars.


                             The regular clergy
The Napoleonic regime did not like the regular clergy, male or female. It did
not see their worth, foresaw no useful place for them in society, and so swept
them away. They were perceived as dangerous, as well as useless; Napoleon
called the friars of Lombardy ‘the Papal police’.212 With rare exceptions –
for those involved in nursing, for example – the French had one solution: the
abolition of all regular communities and orders. Thus the new regime
treated this large sector of the Church as a monolith, in the direct tradition
of the framers of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy of 1790, nor would
this change from the annexation of Piedmont to the seizure of Rome.
Among the French, champions of the regulars are few and far between.
They were hated for many reasons, but hated they were. As in 1790, with the
findings of the Commission des Réguliers easily to hand,213 the imperial
regime had a wealth of information, culled by its own officials and unso-
licited in origin, about the many, complex and varied roles played by the
regular clergy in Italian society, at the centre and on the periphery. It swept
them all aside and remained firmly on the course laid down in 1790.
    There was very little, even in the tumultuous relationship between Church
and state in late eighteenth-century Italy, to prepare either the regular clergy
or the laity as a whole for French policy. None of the reforming initiatives of
the late eighteenth century had been as sweeping, or as ruthless, as the
Concordat. In Lombardy, Joseph did indeed abolish many regular houses,
but he did not ban entire orders or stamp out the regulars en masse.214 Nor
did Peter-Leopold in Tuscany, whose main concern was to detach the
regular orders from direct obedience to Rome.215 In Parma, Du Tillot closed
a number of houses and introduced new legislation on mainmorte to prevent
the extension of Church properties, largely aimed at the regulars.216 Only the
expulsion and dissolution of the Jesuits came close to matching the terms of
the Concordat in scope. There were examples of direct imitation of the
French among some of the patriot regimes of the triennio, but the pattern
was not universal: In Lombardy, where Joseph II’s reforms had left the
regular orders weakened, the Cispadane Republic set about confiscating
their remaining properties, supported by strong, if latent, currents of
Jansenism. However, by 1799 their work was far from complete.217 The
Ligurian patriots attempted to abolish the religious corporations in 1797,218
although by the following year they settled for closing only some houses and
expelling foreigners.219 However, in Puglia elements within the regular clergy
were active supporters of the Republic and as a result became targets of
counter-revolution in 1799.220 Quite apart from the avowedly reactionary


                                      125
