                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    vases to carry some away, as if it had miraculous qualities. The well
    was dry in two hours.236

The peaceful nature of such events should not detract from their intensity.
Italy may not have been Aragon; the Carmelites of Florence went their way
obediently, rather than fighting street-by-street as did their brothers in
Zaragossa that same year, but the love they inspired among the laity was no
less great for being gentle. These quiet scenes were not to be counted on,
however.
   Napoleon ordered 10,000 troops into the Roman departments expressly
to oversee the closure of the regular houses, and wanted it done in a fort-
night,237 orders which terrified the Consultà.238 His reasoning was clear,
ruthless and cynical. He knew the regulars would oppose this and proposed
to turn it to his advantage. It was a way to cow the secular arm:

    It highly probable that when the curés see that the rebellion of the
    senior branch of the Church [the regulars] has obliged [its members]
    to leave their country, and led to the confiscation and sale of their
    properties, they will not want to expose themselves or their
    communes to a similar fate.239

It was a huge task, as these comprised 519 communities containing 5,852
people.240 The Consultà tried to plan the suppression of the Roman regulars
with care, at least for their properties. Janet and Tournon drew up detailed
inventories, although Tournon had doubts about the honesty of some of
those employed.241
   Indeed, he drew Janet’s attention to the fact that some of the personnel
employed enjoyed their work rather too much. Narni and Donnat, Janet’s
assistants, broke into the convent of Santa Margarita with excessive force

    which could only trouble and frighten the sisters … . This conduct
    is as indecent as it is scandalous, and is far removed from the princi-
    ples of moderation and gentleness to be expected of employees
    charged with the abolition of the convents; it can only worsen
    public opinion.242

There were thefts and scandals throughout the operations, as the regulars
tried to conceal their art treasures and the French broke down doors to get
at them. It culminated in what were little more than raids on six convents, on
the night of 14–15 June 1810. The arrival of the commissioners caused
something like blind panic, although prior notice had been given. Dal Pozzo
remarked in his report:




                                     128
