                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


    A general alarm ensued, a terror among the nuns who did not know
    which way to turn; there was general confusion, looting took place,
    and many of the nuns took flight.

Tournon felt malicious rumours had been ‘fed’ to the nuns. Although the result
of the incident saw Janet stripped of his remit to carry out the closures, Dal
Pozzo and Tournon saw a well-organized plot in it all. The nuns wanted to be
forced out by troops – as they had to be – and made a point of wearing ‘ridicu-
lous clothes that brought undue attention to themselves’ as they left. For all
Tournon’s later attempts in his memoirs to portray himself as a friend of the
regulars,243 at the time he concurred with Dal Pozzo that the nuns were
‘quelques femmes bavardes’ in league with troublemakers.244
   There were certainly Mothers Superior who showed more defiance than
the male abbots and priors. The Mother Superior of a convent in Cento,
near Bologna, lambasted the Prefect of the Reno:

    What a fatal blow against Humanity, Signore Prefect! Closing the
    convent where we hoped to pass the rest of our days in peace! We
    are forever, nevertheless, the adored of God’s justice, and there is
    not with me one member of this community who will abandon
    Him, or fail to obey His superior orders, to keep the Rule and lead
    a retired life!245

Nuns did, indeed, fight back. Tournon had no doubt of this, telling Police-
Générale that, had the Oath been asked of them in his department, ‘we
would have met with even greater resistance than among the men’. Things
were bad enough, however, for they were falling ever deeper into poverty,
‘which makes an even worse impression because of the great interest their
sex inspires’.246 They could be tenacious. The convent of Monte Castrelli in
Umbria was suppressed in June 1811, but over two years later Roederer
found that fourteen of the nuns had reunited in the same building and under
the same Mother Superior, as if nothing had happened, except that they
were now politicized, ‘inculcating the youth of the area with anti-govern-
ment principles, and forming a very suspect group’.247 If the French feared
the reaction to the closure of the male houses, they were walking on eggs
when it came to the convents.
   There were two main prongs of the Concordat: the closure of all houses
and the deportation of all ‘foreign’ ex-regulars back to their places of origin.
The effects of the closures were felt in those communities where they took
place. The ramifications of the deportations affected the clergy directly, but
also diffused the impact of their plight across the length and breadth of the
départements réunis.




                                      129
