                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


that as late as 1811, in many parishes on High Days, ex-regulars now in
secular orders went about ‘with baskets and purses, collecting alms in the
name of the Holy Sacrament and the Madonna’.286
    The other path was into the lay world. There, too, trouble lurked, perhaps
less for the ex-regulars than for the authorities and the society which had to
come to terms with their new status. The French had a vision of liberating
many men and women from lives of denial forced upon them by a supersti-
tious, decadent culture, and there is some evidence to support this, but there
were others, such as one Martino of Montefiascone in Tuscany, who proved
real menaces. After the dissolution of his order, Martino went to live with
his brother, a peasant smallholder, where he raped his niece with consider-
able violence and then threatened the whole family. Here no one attempted a
cover up, and the authorities worked together to get him arrested under
Haute Police. The Vicar-General said he had always been violent and irreli-
gious, even as a monk.287 Such cases illustrate the irony pointed out by the
Bishop of Montefiascone that men in holy orders could always have been
detained indefinitely in safe retreats by the Ordinand. However, since the
regular houses no longer existed, he could no longer help the police in this
way; he had several disorderly clerics on his hands and could do little.288 His
remarks are a reminder of how central the Church had been to social
control, and even to practical policing, under the ancien régime. The
Concordat was part of a wider policy to increase the direct presence of the
secular state in society, and to tighten its grip, but remarks of this kind also
indicate the gap French policy could create before attempts were made to fill
it. With Martino, as in so many similar cases, Haute Police saved the situa-
tion.
    It did not take cases as dramatic as these to show the regime its dogmatic
views on the regular clergy had created a widespread, if deeply personal and
atomized, crisis in society. Tournon remarked, in a general but profound
tone, that ‘many families have had great problems with the return among
them of relatives with whom they have nothing in common’.289 Nevertheless,
the search for a new life, a complete break with the past, was frowned on by
the society around the ex-regulars. The case of Magdalina Brighenti, a
Florentine nun, illustrates the clash between French prejudices about the
coercive character of vocations and Tuscan mores. Although in orders since
1799, Brighenti had never adapted to convent life and eventually got Papal
permission to live at home, although her vows were not dissolved. She took
her chance, under the new regime, but the local authorities were frightened
by the prospects:

    She has been with a servant named Bianchi for some time. The news
    of this marriage caused a big storm in Florence, to the point that
    the Prefect asked both me and the maire not only to avoid the publi-
    cation of the marriage, but even the marriage itself.290


                                      137
