                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


   Their ex-confessors also stiffened female resistance to the Concordat. The
nuns of the suppressed convent of the Annunciation in Arezzo used their
confessor, Sansoni, as an envoy to the wealthy families of the town, thus
providing them with the patronage they needed to keep them together clan-
destinely. He also ‘exhorted them not to accept the state pensions they were
offered’.306 The authorities were determined to break up these gatherings.
No less an official than the Director-General of Police for the Kingdom of
Italy looked into a group of nuns in Bologna who were violating the
suppression, still wearing the habit in private and living a cloistered life.
They seem to have been supported by a wealthy merchant, Nusconi.307 Thus
support for ex-nuns was not confined to the nobility, the poor or other
clergy. The wealthy urban bourgeoisie – the ‘centre’ personified – was also
actively a part of this kind of passive resistance. In this case, Milan devel-
oped a skilful compromise of allowing communities of four or less nuns, if
without habits. The Prefect said they ‘stood up for themselves’ and asserted
that they had led blameless lives. They also made the thinly veiled threat of
the impact it all would have on public opinion:

    Deprived of support, they would find it wherever it was offered,
    and they would be welcomed elsewhere, because of their ancient,
    good name. Disorders might develop were they abandoned, in
    response to this bad behaviour.308

The cloistered sisters were no less politically astute than their harassers.
They stressed their ‘otherness’; there was no appeal to utility but rather the
assertion that their holiness, the uniqueness of their example was, of itself,
deeply valued by their culture and would be defended. But they went a step
further, and took on the regime on its own ground, for the sisters asserted
that their seclusion was wholly voluntary. They flung Diderot back in the
face of his public: this was a direct challenge to the commitment of the
Napoleonic state to freedom of conscience. Seen another way, there is a
trace of what Nathan Watchel calls ‘integration’ at work.309 In the shattered
peace of the cloister, these sisters were making the transition from defending
ancien régime privilege to insisting on a very post-revolutionary freedom of
association. It was not quite the path the new regime had hoped integration
would take, however.
   In the case of nuns, and of the habit, there was something deeper at work
in the official mind than purely political considerations. There seems to have
been an element in some French officials that enjoyed disrupting the life of
the female cloister. The scenes in Rome, which Dal Pozzo reported on with
less than a bleeding heart for the sisters, were not unique; they had prece-
dents. During the suppressions in Parma in 1805, the Benedictine house at
San Giovanni – the largest convent outside the city – was subjected to a
‘night raid’. The locks of the gate were shot open and the stores were


                                     141
