                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


classes, and of the regulars themselves, to refound communities in full defi-
ance of the law. There was no doubt what collective culture dictated over the
path the ex-regulars must take: there was nothing ‘ex-’ about them. French
policy allowed another act to be played out in a timeless struggle between
the unconventional individual and a society with a dominant cultural ethos.
The confrontation proved this ethos was not that of the intrusive, imperial
regime, which was always on the side of the marginal individual. Here, as in
so many other cases, the gap between rulers and ruled was yawning.
   In his memoirs Tournon blamed the policy behind the suppression of the
regular orders on pure official greed,297 but the sources – some under his
own signature – shout back something far deeper and more complex. The
French were not content to seize the properties of the regulars and deport
them ‘home’. They tracked their progress as carefully as they could to
thwart their attempts to enter the service of the elite as tutors or chaplains,
and to prevent them regrouping – technically now as private individuals – in
communities. This policy was aimed at every social class, high and low. The
politics of religious culture among the upper classes, rather than the culture
itself, was the dominant concern of the regime. Savary had a particular
suspicion of the household staffs of the great Italian families, a loosely
controlled section of the clergy that absorbed many ex-regulars during the
French occupation:

    Every household of any standing in the former states of Piedmont,
    Genoa and the Duchy of Parma had one or several clerics (abbés) in
    its pay, entitled ‘secretary’, ‘Intendant of monies’, ‘revenue
    collector’, ‘librarian’ etc. … . This class is, without doubt, the most
    dangerous, because it regards itself as independent of the govern-
    ment, from which it has nothing to hope, and from which it has
    nothing to fear, as it clings to the households of the rich and the big
    landowners. It passes on disruptive news that stirs up opposition
    and unrest among the highest echelons of society, and thus it seeps
    down to all social classes.298

There are many examples of exactly this. Private chapels abounded in
Umbria during the occupation, despite official distaste and suspicion. The
rich, influential Oddi family retained one such, and used it as a refuge for
non-jurors, regular and secular alike. The Sub-Prefect of Perugia had no
doubt about which feelings this sprang from, nor whence they led:

    The mistress of this house would rather give up something [namely
    her money] to hear Mass from a refractory cleric, who in her
    opinion ought to be considered like one of the saints of the primi-
    tive Church, who fled to the catacombs to avoid persecution.299



                                     139
