                T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


found begging on the streets, a fact Spina was quick to report to his new
masters.273 In 1810 the maire of Genoa received a desperate letter from his
counterpart in the Roman hill town of Todi, where several nuns of Genovese
origin were stranded without their pension following the suppression of the
Roman houses. The maire of Genoa reminded him, sadly, that they could
get their pensions only in Genoa; he could not send the money elsewhere.274
This was the least of French worries, once the likes of Frà Carme got home,
assuming, that is, that they still had homes to return to. By 1812 Miollis
lamented the whole policy, and held up the example of three ex-regulars,
sent home from Tuscany to Gradoli in the Papal states, where

    they abuse the simplicity of the local people and exercise a strong
    influence on the other clergy, turning them against taking the Oath,
    persuading them that it is impious to do so, and inspiring a hatred
    in everyone against those who do their duty.275

This was not an isolated case. No less than the Commandant of the Tuscan
Gendarmerie took it upon himself to report Torello Galestri, a former
Vicar-General of the Capuchins, newly deported home from Rome to
Montalcino. Galestri represents the two worst consequences of the French
policies of secularization and deportation. On the one hand:

    [H]e exercises a dangerous influence on consciences through the
    confessional [having become a secularized parish priest] announcing
    that he will not grant absolution to those who have bought goods
    belonging to the religious houses from the government.

This followed an attempt to re-enter secular society, as it were. While
working as a schoolmaster, he seduced two women and had to flee
Montalcino for a remote parish.276 A crumb of comfort offered by this case,
may have been the proof it offered that irreligion and Jacobinism did not
have a monopoly on immorality. Clerics like Galestri had their place in the
French eighteenth-century canon of anti-clerical stereotypes, as Thérèse
Philosophe reminded its wide readership. The regime might well have
pondered which was the worst option, in such cases, but it did not. The
regulars, unless literally unfit to walk, were released into society.
   The regime had two hopes for the ex-regulars. Many, especially within the
Church, hoped they could be absorbed into the secular arm to fill the huge
gaps in its ranks. There was some official encouragement for this, but with
conditions, as has been seen in the case of the ex-missionaries. They were
welcome as parish clergy, but not as predicators, where many bishops felt
their services were most needed. Spina’s views on this subject are already
known, but he was not alone. The suppression of the regulars destroyed a
long tradition of Easter devotion throughout Italy. In February 1808 the


                                    135
