                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


ransacked, leaving the nuns without provisions for a week and reliant on
charity.310 Such happenings may have been the residue of the Army of
Italy’s connection to the armées révolutionnaires, but it ran higher as well as
deeper. A real scandal connected to the convent of the Conservazione in
Chiavari in Liguria brought out these prejudices in D’Auzers. A prominent
family, the Rorgoli, placed one of their daughters, still a minor, in the
convent under the protection of her aunt, a nun. With the help of another
nun, the chaplain of the convent seduced the girl, who was then kidnapped
and taken to Pisa, where the authorities intervened. There followed a
conspiracy of silence between the family and the convent, which got the case
thrown out of court. It provoked this from D’Auzers:

    I have already had cause to assert that in this area, where supersti-
    tion and religious fanaticism are very strong, many people will try
    to hide this kind of horror if they can, in order to save a priest or,
    even more, a nun. It is impossible that those in the convent had no
    knowledge of this deed … I have reason to believe the same nun
    and priest attempted something similar with another girl, aged only
    fourteen … . This sort of thing is all too common.311

The genuinely sordid nature of this case brought out a prejudice in
D’Auzers, hardly a man with a ‘dechristianizing’ background. There are
echoes of Diderot, mixed into the justified rage of a decent man. As the last
female houses were, in 1810, facing another round of ‘reorganization’, they
could expect no support from the police. The Prefect of the Arno said
convents ‘were nothing other than perpetual prisons where the victims of
the cupidity or the fanaticism of their fathers were locked up’. If so, there
were a great many bad fathers about. The convents of Prato in the 1780s
may have had fewer vocations than in the seventeenth century, but they were
still overpopulated.312 Fauchet then asserted that, of the 3,600 remaining
nuns in Tuscany, only 155 ‘wanted to renounce the world’, a figure easily
disproved by the scale of subsequent passive resistance to the closure of
their houses.313
    Intriguingly, the French developed an almost pathological obsession with
the appearance of the habit. It took two forms. The first stemmed directly
from the overt defiance of the law involved, but there was something deeper
lurking behind it. The ‘Instructions for the Execution of the Royal Decree of
25 April 1810’ in the Kingdom of Italy were very precise about the timetable
for the disappearance of the regular habits: men had twenty days in which to
abandon theirs, women had two months, ‘and no more’; they were also to
cease to wear all other ‘distinctive ornaments’ of their orders. There were
payments towards new civilian clothes. Nuns were forbidden to go out in
their habits after these specified periods, even if they belonged to communi-
ties that were to be spared.314 Soon afterwards the podestà of a small


                                     142
