                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


Paris stood by Brighenti’s rights and its policy, but the response of the
Prefect – Fauchet, a republican ‘of the old school’ – shows how high feelings
could run over these things. When an ex-monk, Recco, wanted to marry in
Genoa in 1808, Spina told the maire that even a civil ceremony was out of
the question as ‘he is still bound by clerical ties’.291 The Prefect and Paris
made short work of Spina on this occasion,292 but that Spina ‘stuck out his
neck’ in so direct a manner – probably knowing he would lose – is a sign of
the depth of feeling surrounding the case. Miollis revealed an interesting set
of French attitudes to this sort of thing, and to religion in general, in his
reaction to the case of a an ex-regular in Viterbo. Pansieroni, now a priest,
was still saying Mass while living openly with a woman, despite an interdic-
tion from the Vicar-General. Miollis, an old soldier and something of a roué
himself, put it all down to jealousy and animosity on the part of the Vicar-
General and doubted the justice of the interdiction. There was no question
of Miollis intervening in his private life.293 Ominously, perhaps, Miollis
reported his joy that the Spanish Jesuits resident in Rome ‘have set a fine
example of cooperation with the government’, for all but the elderly had
married.294 The irony was lost on one so dechristianized.
   After 1814 several Piedmontese cases came to light that lend credence to
French claims that the regular orders had harboured unwilling inmates. By
1817 the ex-Dominican Nicola Tedeschi was a successful lawyer in Tortona,
conducting an affair with a married woman who had separated from her
husband. Under the restored monarchy, his father could at least cut him out
of his will.295 Miollis would have paid no attention. Seen another way, many
French prejudices were not always unfounded. Even the restored Savoyards
recognized this, post-1814. Their ambassador fought the Holy See hard to
‘calm the worries of the secularized regulars’ that they would be able to keep
their pensions and not be reintegrated to their old houses, a fear among
those who had become secular priests as well as those now laymen. Rome
gave the decisions to the bishops in 1818, and Turin feared this would
produce trouble.296 Yet, in the course of their protracted debates with the
Holy See, the Piedmontese also pressed the cases of many ex-regulars who
wanted to re-enter orders, if possible. The restored regime in Turin, for all its
avowed reactionary nature, was capable of trying to sift through the traumas
caused by what its ambassador, Barbaroux, termed ‘too general a seculariza-
tion’. This never dawned on successive revolutionary governments any more
than it did on the restored Papacy after 1814.
   When faced with supporting alien and often indigent relatives or seeing
them embrace the world in one way or another, there is no doubt what
Italian society preferred. The problems of reintegrating individual family
members at the fireside must be set in the wider context of the sacrifices, in
terms of alms given and respect paid, for the non-juring ex-regulars, who
had pensions waiting for them in the imperial coffers. Family disruption
must be weighed in the scales beside the efforts of laypeople of all social


                                      138
