                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


save the seven Augstinian sisters of the town, who were its sole source of
female education. The maire had a daughter with them, and he spoke from
both his heart and his wallet in telling his superiors that the girls of the town
would now either go without an education ‘or their fathers will be forced to
give them an education in other towns at very great cost’.266 However, Paris
was adamant that they could not do so as a community.267 At the other end
of the départements réunis, Tournon informed Paris that ‘[t]hey miss the
convents greatly, for in many areas most families saw them as useful for the
education of their daughters’.268 It was no different in the Kingdom of Italy.
The ‘Instructions for the Execution of the Royal Decree of 25 April 1810’
reminded prefects that those female houses spared in the first suppressions
of 1805 because their educational work were only having their fate ‘post-
poned’.269 The Director-General of Police in Florence warned Paris that the
Conservatori, the famed Tuscan girls’ schools so admired by Napoleon,
would have to close – which they did – before the government’s plans for
their expansion could go ahead, because they were staffed by nuns.270
   Regulars were not allowed to stay where they were unless they were
natives, not of the new imperial departments as a whole, but of the former
ancien régime state in question. It was a policy the regime pursued doggedly,
for there were periodic ‘mopping up operations’. The year 1810 saw not only
the order given in the new Roman departments for ‘all secular priests and all
regulars (of both sexes) in Rome to return to their native countries’, but also
the deportation of any regulars left in Piedmont either to their place of
origin or somewhere appropriate, as determined by the bishops and
prefects.271 The feelings of those about to be expelled can be glimpsed from
the petition of Francesco Antonio Carme, a Piedmontese-born friar, due to
be deported ‘home’ from Tuscany in 1808:

    I have been attacked, as so many others, by the government’s decree
    for all foreigners to leave Tuscany in a few days … . Forced to look
    elsewhere for an uncertain resting place … . I have a humble
    request: In Piedmont, I embraced a condition consecrated by the
    Faith that was once respected by the laws of that country. At the
    age of eighteen, the Revolution chased me out, without any provi-
    sion for my well-being. I found a refuge in Tuscany, where I could
    live according to my vocation … . Now, as I begin to recover my
    health, I am to be chased from here, in danger of a sudden death.272

For many regulars, male and female, the gradual process of annexation
meant that they were expelled more than once. Many Ligurian nuns in
Piedmontese convents were deported home in 1803, penniless, to families
that could not support them, and were taken into convents in Genoa. But,
like Frà Carme, the Revolution caught up with them when their houses were
abolished following the French annexation of Liguria in 1806. Many were


                                      134
