                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


This is, of course, a story as old as the Revolution. Nevertheless, in the light
of the regime’s own rhetoric on early Church history, the irony is stunning.
The French did not leave these nooks and crannies in the ecclesiastical fabric
alone for long. An Imperial Decree of 22 December 1812 ordered the
closure of all private and domestic oratories and chapels, prompting the
Prefect of Genoa to confess to the maire: ‘I can’t hide from myself that this
task will involve some difficulties’.300
   The example of the Piedmontese aristocracy in the assisting the exiled
Roman clergy was not unique. Police-Générale drew attention to an ex-
Passionist in Cornetto, who was acting discreetly as a confessor to the wives
of the local nobility, and was doing so in private houses in violation of the
law.301 Even at the height of French rule, some noble families went still
further, helping communities virtually to reform in only slightly altered
guise. The authorities usually dwelt on the overtly political aspects of such
cases. The priory of Teompone, near Vercelli in Piedmont, was under the
patronage of the Count Corte-Mozzè and, particularly, of his wife. They
founded it in 1805 as a refuge for ex-regulars, and it became almost a place
of local pilgrimage; their chief work was ministering to the local sick. The
case came to light through allegations – which the Bishop said were false –
that the priory had celebrated the Austrian declaration of war in 1809.
Nothing could be proved, but the police were more disposed to listen to the
ex-Jacobin maire and the curé, who wanted the benefice for his parish, than
to the Bishop.302 Even those in government pay could be behind these
communities. A group of ex-regulars in Spoleto, judged dangerous by the
authorities, had been supported after their initial suppression by an official
of the State Domain.303
   Nuns were popular recipients of aristocratic and bourgeois patronage
too, even in the teeth of the law. Norvins was almost colic at the thought of
the help given by leading Roman families to support clandestine convents
after the suppression:

    these gatherings take place every day … . It is in these dangerous
    reunions, conducted by fanatical priests, that the nobles and the
    leisured classes assemble, who are their protectors and providers; it
    all contributes to opposition to the government.304

Women supported other women against French policy, aristocrats champi-
oned the cause of poor and rich nuns alike. A dramatic – and temporarily
successful – example of this was when the former Princess of Parma,
daughter of the late Duke, took up residence with the threatened Ursulines
at their house in the city. Her actions saved them until 1810. Napoleon
allowed them to keep their properties and to wear their habits, but only
within the convent. Even this gallant Bourbon lady could not win them back
the right to receive new novices, however.305


                                      140
