                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


were found begging or without some visible means of support, they would
become the first inmates of the department’s new dépôt de mendicité and put
to work like other beggars.261 This surely represents the nadir of French
policy towards the regulars. Arguably, it is also one of the most emphatic
‘results’ won in European history for a campaign of passive resistance. None
of the mendicant friars in the Archdiocese of Bologna had accepted the
parish posts they were offered in 1810. The Vicar-General admitted that the
best among them were determined to defy the law and to continue preaching
wherever they were asked, moving from parish to parish as invited.262 They
defied not only the law, but the whole new order founded on the strangle-
hold of the parish, and it was the ‘best and the bravest’ who took this path.
Confrontation with the new regime threw these orders back on their austere
roots, and they were not found out of character. However, in the context of
the Concordat, there is another aspect to the resistance of the mendicants.
Just as the sisters of Bologna defied the regime for the freedom to be clois-
tered, so the mendicants held out for freedom of movement. This was a
struggle for personal liberty, as well as for tradition.
   The French came to fear the charity dispensed by the regulars, not just to
despise the alms they received. A study of poverty and public charity in
ancien régime Parma concludes that the Church

    had assumed the task of responding to the demands of the social
    services … . The will of the Church, of individual clerics or of
    private charity, was the origin of all forms of assistance in the
    city.263

This was soon revealed to the men most set on destroying this network and
the powerful social control they felt went with it. The successive administra-
tors of Parma – Moreau, Junot and Nardon – all reviled the regular clergy,
but the cold figures of Nardon’s report of 1806 show the varied and useful
roles they played in the life of the city. All the nuns taught young girls; the
Capuchins served the prisons and the hospital; the Benedictines gave boys
under eighteen a free education; the Raccolti worked, free of charge, in the
French military hospital.264 None were spared. Nor were the foreign regu-
lars allowed to stay to continue their parish work, despite the intervention of
Fesch. In Bologna in the Kingdom of Italy, the Vicar-General berated the
civil authorities about the disruption caused to parish work by the suppres-
sion of the regulars. The loss of so many of their churches was bad enough,
but he ‘played the big card’ when he said the administration of the sacra-
ments was now suffering.265
   The closure of the convents angered the laity for more than humanitarian
reasons. Petitions and protests from all over the départements réunis revealed
the central and often unique role played by the female orders in educating
girls. The maire and the Sub-Prefect of Voghera petitioned vigorously to


                                     133
