                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


    the Emperor on our territories are unjust and absurd, the result of
    overwhelming force, and they will be clearly recognized for what
    they may be by the temporal powers of Europe … [but] such enter-
    prises cannot be attributed solely to political or military reasons … .
    We have soon recognized that this business goes much farther than
    military or temporal forward planning … . [The French] would put
    in place of the Holy form of government left us by Christ … a new
    order of things … which are criminal sacrilege against the liberty
    and holy doctrines of the Church, which have been introduced now
    into our own provinces, as they have been in every other place under
    the power of this regime.8

Pius dwelt far more on the damage done to the Italian Church as a whole,
than on the seizure of his own domains. The Concordat had been intro-
duced into Italy ‘in a wholly arbitrary and perverse manner’; the ‘holiest
form of government, that left to us by Jesus Christ’ had been replaced by

    a Code which is not only opposed to the Holy canons, but to the
    very precepts of the Gospel; it has introduced a new order which
    tends to identify sects and superstition with the Catholic Church.

   That the confrontation took place in 1809 – after the invasion of Rome –
and not in 1806, can occlude its profound social and cultural nature, but the
signs were there. They are often buried by the empirical manner in which
Pius chose to argue against his powerful opponent between the creation of
the Concordat in 1802 and 1806. The Concordat itself had been a hard-
fought series of negotiations, and the simultaneous annexation of Piedmont
to France meant that Rome was not allowed time to settle. As early as 1803
the French and Rome were locked in dispute over the number of dioceses for
the new Piedmontese departments, in negotiations the French ambassador
to Rome described as bitter. Rome gave way only because the regime threat-
ened to confiscate Church property in Piedmont. Pius was deeply aware that
there was no theological justification for the unprecedented abolition of so
many dioceses at once. The ambassador made two prophetic observations at
this early date. The first was personal. Pius was ‘religious, heart and soul …
he is a holy man, of good character … a pure soul’. The second was that
Pius objected to far more than the loss of so many bishops: he also objected
to the loss of so many parish priests and the regulars, ‘workers in the vine-
yard of the Lord’.9 The following year, Pius raised doubts about the ability
of the Piedmontese bishops to receive the Légion d’honneur, a normal
award for bishops and prefects. He feared that this oath bound them to
support the divorce laws and the concepts of liberty and equality, which
were against Church doctrine. He also feared that ‘defending the laws of the
Republic’ might imply legitimizing the Terror. The matter was resolved in


                                     148
