                                      6
         T HE ROMAN C LERGY AN D
         THE CRISIS OF THE OATH



When Pius VII finally excommunicated Napoleon with the bull of June
1809, it was not as a shocked, spontaneous reaction to his arrest or the inva-
sion of his country. Tensions of a profoundly religious nature had been
building between the French and the Holy See since at least 1805. This was
the culmination of a process, not the beginning of a new quarrel. Nor was
its nature diplomatic or even narrowly ecclesiastical. It was not really about
forcing Rome into the blockade, the seizure of the Papal states, the Pope’s
arrest or even the installation of bishops, although this is how Napoleon
sought to disguise it, both before and after the arrest of Pius in 1809.1
    Rome had felt, with some justification, that it held a stronger hand in
negotiating the Concordat for the Italian Republic than in negotiating that
for France. Napoleon, too, knew he was dealing with a society where the
Church still held a pre-eminent position, the Josephine reforms not with-
standing. The Papacy engaged in protracted negotiations between 1802 and
1804, extracting several concessions it perceived as crucial at the time. With
considerable reluctance, Napoleon accorded the bishops more control over
the curriculum of their seminaries; the divorce laws were stricter than under
the French Concordat; although the Oath of loyalty was imposed, Rome
won in return the exemption of the clergy from military service. Above all,
Napoleon backed down over the proposed abolition of ten sees in
Lombardy, Modena and the Legations, and, paramount in the eyes of the
Curia at this point, Catholicism was declared the official state religion. The
Italian Republic, unlike the French empire, was not a secular state.
Napoleon swallowed hard. Melzi, his Vice-President, tried to fight back with
a decree issued just after the signature of the Concordat in January 1804,
which asserted the supremacy of the state over the Church, thus destroying
the notion of the Concordat as a compromise, because he demanded that
the state set the fundamental boundaries between the secular and spiritual
spheres. Melzi had been a close collaborator of Joseph II and saw the
French Concordat as closer to the Josephine model. When Napoleon forced
him to back down in June 1804, it almost led to Melzi’s resignation. Pius VII
now felt that the tide was turning in favour of the Church and assumed that,


                                     146
