                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


There were signs that this might be happening in Piedmont; there were even
more that this was what the new regime wanted. The question of habits, in
particular, and of the whole treatment of the regular orders throughout the
French occupation points in the direction Duffy has described. In 1810 the
Director-General of Police in Milan warned the Prefect of Bologna that the
regulars expelled from the Papal states would be crossing his department in
great numbers. Vigilance was needed, as they ‘attract too much popular
compassion’, and those still in their habits were to be kept moving by the
shortest route possible, preferably at night.321 After having sent them on
their way, Tournon wrote from Rome with relief and a premature sense of
triumph that ‘Not one person is left in the department dressed in a monastic
habit’.322 This was seen as a turning point.
   These hopes for a real transformation in Italian culture foundered on
more than military defeat, however. Well before war cut short Napoleonic
rule in Italy, the signs of opposition were already clear. It is impossible to
predict whether the signs of secularization present in Piedmontese society
would have spread with time, or whether Italy would have gone the way of
Tudor England. What can be said, through the case of the regulars, is that
opposition to the Concordat existed among all classes and in all places.
Above all, it centred on the will of the regular clergy themselves to resist the
French as best they could: passively, but as a body. The new order could not
shatter their collective discipline. Men and women were everywhere seen to
defy the government. This discipline could work for the regime. In Siena on
15 October 1810 the regular clergy of the diocese agreed en masse to take the
Oath. They did so, they declared, because Napoleon was one secular ruler,
replacing another, and the Church had a duty to obey; they also did so ‘to
preserve public peace’.323 It was a warning, more than a surrender. When the
breach with Rome reached its height with the occupation of the Papal states,
this discipline was turned against the French. The regulars had already set
the necessary example. Soon, it embraced a whole state in a massive
campaign of passive resistance to French rule.
   The laity appealed to tradition against the Concordat; the petitions of
maires, confraternities and communities stemmed from the disruption of
established practice and worked back from local needs to traditional
customs. In contrast, the regular clergy, significantly the more aware of the
prejudices of their new masters, appealed directly to utility, generally
eschewing tradition per se. There were also signs that the more vulnerable
sectors of the Church – the nuns and the mendicant orders – were turning
the discourse of the liberal state against itself, with couched appeals to
personal liberty. When it seized the Papal states, however, the imperial
regime faced a new form of opposition that enabled all the others to rally
around it: opposition to the Concordat here – and nowhere else – appealed
to legitimacy, political and spiritual. The arguments deployed by Chigi-
Zondadari to his regulars in Siena, only a few months before, became


                                      144
