                 T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


this was still the case in the parishes around the city, it was no longer so in
the hinterland where the clergy had, initially, taken the Oath.22 By December
1810, 225 cures were vacant in the department of Trasimène – over 30 per
cent – and it was impossible to find enough juring clergy to fill them.
Norvins was looking for signs of a regionalized pattern of support and
opposition, as had emerged in France, but the facts refused to correspond to
the known model. Very quickly it became clear that the French were faced
by something very generalized in character. When the Prefect tried to insist
that all new curés take the Oath, he was told by the Vicar-General of
Spoleto that they would be filled by supplicant priests, not curés, to avoid
confrontation. When the Prefect protested to Paris, Police-Générale decided
to accept the lesser of two evils. The response was telling:

    It is to be feared that worship will become clandestine, taking place
    in the catacombs, in country barns, and in the woods, with rocks for
    altars. That is where the hotheads can get to work, and political
    feelings can re-ignite and spread.23

The official vision of hell was the Church in the wilderness, and by 1810
there was no longer any doubt that it could do well in Italy. For all that,
imperial policy insisted on the Oath in these territories, from beginning to
end, thus playing directly into the hands of the Church. It was soon gener-
ally admitted that the periphery was impossible to control and that, as
opposition to the Oath grew, it could become the ‘danger zone’. Nor was it
long in coming.
   The ramifications of the Oath to the Civil Constitution of 1791 could
have alerted the French to the dangers of insisting on oaths of so public a
nature. Claude Langlois has argued convincingly that one of the most
dangerous aspects of the Oath was the way in which it nationalized the
conflict between Church and state, extending it both territorially to every
parish and beyond the arena of clergy and bureaucrats to involve ‘the
totality of the Nation’.24 The crisis over the Oath produced a rare example
of a ‘national crisis’ in pre-unification Italy, a formidable – if wholly ironic –
achievement by the regime so often lauded as the forebear of the Unitary
state.
   Even so, this must be weighed against the relative success the regime had
in persuading thousands of émigré priests to return to France, prior to the
ratification of the Concordat in 1801,25 and take a revised Oath pledging
obedience to the government, as opposed to loyalty to the Constitution as in
1791. The imposition of the oath in France had, at least, produced a
complex mosaic that was only intelligible in highly nuanced regional terms
and corresponded to no previous phenomenal patterns. There had been
significant pockets of success in the long term, when tested against the
forces of counter-revolution.26 The experience of the Cisalpine Republic


                                       151
