                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


this instance, but the signs of unease were clear.10 In 1805 Pius wrote directly
to Napoleon to protest about the abolition of the regular orders in Parma
and Piacenza.11 Each of these specific incidents outlines the issues around
which the ultimate clash took shape. The sweeping aggression of the
Concordat, in an Italian context, emerges in these early reactions to the
reduction of the secular arm and the suppression of the regulars.
Opposition to the extension of an essentially civil oath to Italian clergy was
a sign not just of dislike of oaths of this kind, but betrayed an increasingly
tangible dislike of the whole ethos of the secular French state. Napoleon’s
response was to hasten the implementation of the Concordat in all the new
territories.
   The annexation of Lucca to the empire in 1806 came close to lighting the
fuse of the conflict. The Archbishops of Genoa and Parma went their own
way in 1806, accepting the Concordat in return for avoiding the Oath. Their
colleague in Lucca turned to Rome for guidance, however. Here Napoleon
and Elisa sought to impose the Italian Concordat, with its insistence on the
Oath. Pius told the clergy of Lucca to refuse it and avoid association with
the new regime. Although Pius admitted they dare not oppose the suppres-
sion of the regulars, ‘submission by force of circumstance must not be seen
to equate with submission to injustice’. Therefore to take the Oath was
unthinkable, and Pius had not acquiesced to it in the départements réunis.
Elisa wanted to force the issue, but Napoleon drew away from direct
confrontation simply because of his military preoccupations. The most
immediately important result was that the clergy of Liguria, Parma and
Piacenza, and the ex-Venetian states, were not asked to take the Oath. The
clergy of Lucca were offered the French, as opposed to the Italian
Concordat, and so the issue of the Oath was avoided. In the words of one
historian, ‘hostilities were postponed’.12
   The uneasy truce soon fell apart over the nomination of bishops, but
there were some signs that the French could have mistaken – at least from
Paris – as sprigs of hope. Luigi Ruffo, the Archbishop of Naples, refused to
swear loyalty to Joseph and fled to Rome, but there was little widespread
imitation of this among the lower clergy. Nor did Rome’s refusal to recog-
nize Joseph unconditionally prevent the transfer of power.13 Maury was
persuaded at this time to leave the small Roman see of Montefiascone –
which he held as sinecure for his work in the Curia – for that of Paris. This
was taken as a sign by many of where real power lay, and of Napoleon’s
continuing ability to separate power politics from specifically religious ques-
tions.14 In 1806 overt acts of defiance by the upper clergy were the
exception, not the rule. Force had prevailed and, as soon as circumstances
allowed, there was good reason to feel it would do so again. In the wake of
the successful military campaigns stretching from Jena to Wagram, the
regime ignored the many undercurrents of unrest in Italy; when it was at last
ready to resume, the war began with the skirmish at Lucca three years


                                      149
