                 T H E C O N C O R DAT A N D T H E C L E RG Y


commune wrote to the prefect in Bologna, saying that the brothers of the
small Capuchin house in his commune simply could not comply within
twenty days. The reply was that, although the schoolmaster among them
would not be deported ‘home’, it was ‘vital to the good administration of
the parish’ that they abandon their habits.315 The defiance of the nuns at
Imola drove the authorities almost hysterical. They were first reported by
the Gendarmerie as still going about openly in their habits in October 1811,
‘an intolerable state of affairs’. However, on closer investigation, the Vicar-
General uncovered a far more subtle form of passive resistance: they were
all dressed the same, exactly, and in the same colour as their old habits, but
the clothes themselves were not their habits. The Prefect ordered the
Gendarmerie to stop them wearing these clothes, habits or not, on threat of
‘political and rigorous measures’.316 A year after the great revolt in this
region, these reactions appear, to say the least, exaggerated. It was yet
another example of a handful of women irking the new, powerful state –
and with considerable skill. The second reaction is, perhaps, the more
revealing of imperial intentions. There was a marked unease about the reap-
pearance of the habit where it was almost no more, as in Piedmont. Lameth,
the Prefect in Turin, complained in 1810 that the Piedmontese ex-mendi-
cants returning ‘home’ from Rome were still in their habits. Quite apart from
their begging and becoming a focus of public sympathy because of their
poverty, ‘[monastic] robes have not been seen up here for a long time’. Their
reappearance was not a good idea.317 Two years later, the Sub-Prefect of
Pinerolo made the same comment when non-jurors from Rome were exiled
to his chef lieu.318
    These reactions reveal something of the true revolutionary nature of
what the French were about in their quest to reform the Italian Church. A
Roman priest deported to Corsica spoke of it all as ‘a vast plan aimed at the
total control of the Church in its two components, the political and the spir-
itual’.319 Their obsession with the destruction of the outward signs of the
monastic, communal life – and, in the face of the evidence, the word is not
too strong – indicate just how vast this plan was. There was to be a complete
break with a very significant part of the past. People were meant to forget,
and the regime was going to make sure they did by removing the visible
proof. The imperial regimes in Milan and Paris hoped to oversee a process
akin to that of the first years of the reign of Elizabeth in England,
according to Eamon Duffy’s analysis, that even ‘where no … dramatic repu-
diation of popery occurred, time did what ideological confrontation could
not’. Duffy concludes his great study thus:

    By the end of the 1570s … a generation was growing up which
    knew nothing else … which did not look back to the Catholic past
    as their own, but another country, another world.320



                                     143
