                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


before. The victory of Lucca would prove, however, in the war against the
Church to be the equivalent of Baylen in Spain in 1808. A long, if non-
violent, guerrilla awaited the French. In 1806 in Lucca, Pius did not have to
test the loyalty of the faithful or his ‘troops’. By 1809, after his arrest and
deportation, he had to renew the call. Both the clergy and laity of his states
responded en masse.


               The Oath and the clergy of the Papal states
The French knew exactly the ultimate fate of the regular orders; whatever
the price of the confrontation, and whether they took the Oath or not, they
were to disappear. The fate of the secular clergy could never be so straight-
forward. The Roman bishops resisted the Oath staunchly and were
supported by their canons; Napoleon’s reply was to arrest and exile them to
France, and then sequester their properties. The Cathedral Chapter of
Spoleto was reduced to a single canon in 1810.15 This was more than an act
of spite, however. Their resistance was foreseen and the ruthless treatment
accorded the prelates was part of a well-planned policy to overawe the
parish clergy, whose cooperation with the regime was deemed essential by
Paris. In June 1810, Napoleon dictated a note in the Council of State,
ordering the Oath not be imposed on the parocci of the new Roman depart-
ments until more troops arrived and the regular orders had been abolished –
and until the properties of the non-juring bishops had been sequestered:

    It is highly probable that, when the curés see that the rebellion of
    their superiors has ended in their exile, and has entailed the confis-
    cation and sale of their properties, that they will not want to expose
    themselves or their communes to similar goings-on.16

It was manifestly clear from the start what refusal to comply would mean.
Arrest, exile and poverty befell the good and the great first, not last, in
Napoleonic strategy. The enemy was found, brought to battle and suffered
maximum damage. If the new regime did not hesitate to deport and
impoverish fourteen princes of the Church, the parocci had nothing to
expect but worse. All subsequent resistance to the Oath must be set in this
context.17
   Nevertheless, there were some initial signs that this might be working.
Norvins felt that resistance to the Oath diminished the further an area was
from Rome.18 The periphery – whether in Umbria or on the Neapolitan
border, as in Frosinone – was the best place to expect support.19 In July 1810
it was reported that most of the curés of the mountain communes in
Umbria had taken the Oath,20 whereas only six had done so in the city of
Rome; the rest were deported, leaving only their vicars and auxiliary clergy
to cope.21 However, a year later the Sub-Prefect of Perugia said that while


                                     150
