                 T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


in an Italian context, the terms of neither Concordat would be enforced to
the letter. These hopes were dashed by two decrees in 1805, which effectively
renewed the principles set out by Melzi. The Civil Code was extended to the
Italian Republic in full, thus negating the concessions won over divorce and
civil marriage, while the regular orders were suppressed entirely, so dashing
Pius’s assumption that the Concordat would not be enforced in full.
Church–state relations were thus permanently poisoned in the new
Kingdom of Italy, but in a wider context Rome now saw that its real enemy
was the Civil Code and the ruthless, incalculable introduction of legislation
outwith the terms of any Concordat Rome might negotiate with Napoleon.
In 1801 Napoleon had imposed the ‘Organic Articles’ unilaterally in the face
of Roman protests.2 Henceforth, it was clear he would behave no differently
outside ‘old France’. Concessions like the recognition of Catholicism as the
state religion, or even the conservation of threatened dioceses, were now
seen as the empty window-dressing they were.3 In 1806 Napoleon replied to
Pius’s protests against its extension beyond the limits agreed in 1802, that the
Concordat and the Code were the embodiment ‘of the political system
inspired by Providence itself.’4 Napoleon did not refer to ‘Divine
Providence’. The battle lines were starkly drawn.
   In August 1806, when Napoleon extended the Concordat and the Civil
Code to the newly conquered territories – Liguria, the Duchies of Parma
and Piacenza, Lucca, and also to most of the former Venetian Republic, the
bulk of whose territories had recently been ceded to the Kingdom of Italy
by Austria – the College of Cardinals warned:

    in each of His Majesty’s conquests is seen the ruin of many reli-
    gious institutions and the norms of the Church … . These are our
    feelings, which you can regard as our Testament, and we are ready,
    if we must, to sign it with our blood … . Happy are those who
    suffer persecution for justice.5

A month later, Pius created a special team of theologians to assemble a bull
to condemn ‘all the ills that prevail in France and Italy, contrary to Doctrine
and to good standards’.6 In May 1808 Pius denounced religious toleration,
as embodied in the Concordat, as ‘nothing but a pretext for the lay power to
insinuate itself into spiritual affairs’. Equality accorded to different religious
beliefs, he concluded, could only damage the Catholic faith.7
   In 1809 this belief that the quarrel was profoundly religious and touched
the heart of the faith was unambiguously expressed in Pius’s denunciation of
Napoleon:

    The true sin committed by the French government does not concern
    our temporal authority. Such aggressions and usurpations, however
    unjust, arise in the course of history. The illegality of the claims of


                                       147
