                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


during the triennio mirrored closely that of the 1790s in France, giving no
clear signal that the 1801 settlement would have a different impact when
applied to Italy. In both these instances, the Church proved very divided
over the Oath, with no clear focus for opposition. In France, by the time a
clear Papal line emerged, the die had been cast for many jurors; later, in the
Cisalpine Republic, no leadership emerged at all.27 In 1806, by not imposing
the revised Oath that was now incorporated into the Concordat as Article 6,
the regime at last seemed to have begun to withdraw from the revolutionary
policy of oath-taking, bound up with notions of transparency. The model
for ruthlessness was now the Kingdom of Italy, where the Oath was strictly
enforced, not France.28 Events in Lucca seemed to confirm this trend in
imperial policy, but it was a false dawn. The most telling lesson, with the
benefit of hindsight, was the hardening of the Papacy over the Oath.
Henceforth, there was no ambiguity in the clergy’s duty to refuse it, for
excommunication awaited those who did.
   There were two forms of resistance to the Oath: outright refusal or retrac-
tion at a later date. Both were usually dramatic and public, if in different
ways. The French soon faced widespread retractions, a phenomenon they
should have been alert to. As early as 1793 many Parisian regulars had
retracted the Oath to the Civil Constitution29 and, although the real impact
of retractions by secular priests in France was only about 6 per cent in
reality, contemporaries were struck by a wave of perceived retractions in
1791.30 As early as 1801 the regime forbade retractions by juring priests,
even before the Concordat was ratified.31 The Roman phase of opposition-
by-retraction began at the top with the Bishop of Tivoli, one of only six
original juring bishops. He retracted his Oath before a full congregation at
the high altar on St Peter’s Day – to reinforce the obligatory nature of the
act – after apologizing to his flock for the embarrassment he had caused
them by taking it.32 He ‘fell into the arms of the gendarmes’, as one histo-
rian has put it, before being carted off to Alessandria to join the original
non-jurors.33 He set a trend. The canons of the provincial towns of
Canepina, Cori and Subiaco followed the lead of Tivoli, saying from the
altar that they had been tricked into taking the Oath, ‘retracted it gloriously’
and posted a notice to that effect on the Church doors as they were marched
away to exile ‘surrounded by gendarmes’.34 In 1811 the canons of Velletri
retracted their oaths in time for Easter, and then offered to take them again
‘as a gesture of goodwill’, but did not hand in their official retractions. By
the end of the year, they and several more were finally gaoled for refusing to
celebrate the holiday for Austerlitz.35 The Mass, especially on a High Day,
became a moment of drama and tension in a very real sense, as many juring
clergy chose these circumstances in which to retract the Oath.
   Neither did it die out quickly. In Civitavecchia in 1813 the two most
prominent priests in the town retracted their oaths during Holy Week, and
so were able to say Mass before full congregations and hear numerous


                                      152
