                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


were other sources of support than hierarchy. When the leaders had gone,
there was still the laity. He concluded that they had to be cut off from the
people of the city as far as possible, and that they could work great mischief
if they were not.77 The upshot was that one hundred more of them were sent
to Corsica.78 The Prefect of Bologna also came to believe that only by virtu-
ally incarcerating the Roman priests could they be separated from the
considerable support they got in the city.79 In 1813, D’Auzers also thought
hierarchy a powerful source of their solidarity, creating a ‘systematic opposi-
tion’.80 By then whatever had held them together had been subjected to
considerable strain. Their own experience of the 1791 oath should have
alerted Paris to the folly of this policy. As Timothy Tackett has noted of the
pattern of resistance to the revolutionary oath:

    For the priests themselves, faced with the dilemma of the oath, the
    presence of other clerics in the community created a context of
    support and emulation, reinforcing their sense of hierarchy and
    strengthening their resolve to act in uniformity against the oath.81

Napoleonic policy actually created such communities where they had not
existed before. The failure to learn from experience, as well as from the
reports of its own officials, is staggering.
   Administrative bungling often left them deprived of their pensions and of
proper accommodation or provisions, which reinforced their esprit du corps
in the face of adversity. Their arrival in such numbers terrified the local
authorities, both in practical terms and for deeper reasons. The Sub-Prefect
of Piacenza wrote, alarmed, to Nardon in July 1810:

    The unforeseen arrival of so many of these clerics … demands my
    special attention, and it has driven me to ask for special instructions
    … . [I]t is urgent to give me orders about these priests. They say they
    have been given nothing for their journey; many of them have no
    means of support … . The clergy of this area is not generally well
    disposed to us, and it would be better not to let them get close these
    men; politics dictates that they ought to be sent elsewhere.82

At the outset Paris agreed in the case of Piacenza. The Minister of Public
Worship did not want them to stay in Piacenza,83 His colleague in Parma
did not want them to stay either; one hundred could be put up in the closed
college of Santa Caterina – a deep irony, to say the least – but this was all
the town could cope with.84 The bishop agreed, adding ominously that, it
being beyond him to cope with the predicted – and realized – number of
400, ‘I can think of nothing else to do, at the moment, than to hand them
over to the charity of the faithful’.85 Stay they did, however. The brief
attempt to lodge them with families was scotched by Paris in no uncertain


                                     162
