                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


    The fire of civil war is fanned in the confessionals; if the govern-
    ment is not allowed to supervise them, if confessors are not made
    accountable for their conduct, if the government has no powers
    over a whole group of citizens who are silently undermining its
    work, this country will be in flames at the first opportunity.57

However powerful the reach of the confession, Roederer was wrong about
the imminence of a holy war. Resistance remained non-violent from begin-
ning to end, which is probably even more remarkable in an area soaked in
banditry and collective resistance to conscription.
   Arrest and deportation were swift and inevitable, but Roederer was
careful not to give these bishops the platform for spectacular protest
afforded the rural canons. He waited until after Easter to avoid open revolt,
and arrested them on their return from their pastoral rounds on the first
Sunday of Trinity. Fifty troops were sent to Foligno to take the bishop and
his canons, but they were not needed. They were all seized in dead of night –
‘no one noticed’ – and taken to Rome. It was only the beginning of resis-
tance, however, not the end. Roederer assumed the preparations taken by the
bishop of Assisi meant the sale of his harvests to provide for himself in
exile. He was wrong. On the night he was taken, the bishop gathered
together his clergy before the high altar of the cathedral, where he made
them swear loyalty to himself and the Pope, and to promise never to take the
French Oath. He then laid down a chain of command, and concluded by
saying he would rather see a layman in his stead than a juring cleric.58 He
meant it, and so did his clergy. In the months and years ahead, the Vicar-
General and the archpriest followed him; by 1813 the diocese was in the
hands of a parish priest, Paolucci, who held confession in private houses
and whose claims to apostolic authority were widely believed.59 By the
Easter of 1811 it was clear a similar chain of command had been organized
in Norcea. By then the diocese was run by a parish priest in the Kingdom of
Italy, following the arrest of the Vicar-General, who had kept the bishop in
touch with the diocese while he was in Bourg. The bishop himself was
moved to Fenestrelles to halt this correspondence.60
   Resistance – and persistence – of this kind over so long a period was a
tribute to the Borromean ideal of clerical discipline and attention to
doctrinal purity, as well as to pastoral devotion. Norvins came as close to
admiration for this as was possible for him:

    This ability to transfer all these apostolic powers prolongs the
    internal crisis we face. It is very much to be hoped that political
    circumstances will eventually win over the spiritual leader of the
    Church to the best interests of the clergy, and help achieve the paci-
    fication of his former subjects, because his blind obstinacy has been
    the only source of the trouble.61


                                     158
