                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


confessions as non-jurors. The price was arrest at the altar by the
omnipresent Gendarmerie on Easter Sunday, followed by deportation to
Corsica.36 The tendency of recalcitrant clergy to court state violence at the
climax of the Mass was already apparent elsewhere over the singing of Te
Deums. Now, with the Pope and most of the Curia in captivity, it sometimes
reached new heights. Perhaps there was more even than martyrdom present
in these acts. They might mark something of a return to a pre-Tridentine
conception of the Mass as a public sacrifice, in which occult violence was
embedded. Following the thoughts of John Bossy, the late medieval Mass
was ‘a locus for the extrapolation of social violence’, be it from the laity’s
view of Christ as a sacrificial scapegoat or as expiatory victim. In Napoleonic
Italy, the priest first renounced the safety of the Oath, in full knowledge of
his fate, partly to atone for the sins of collaboration – individual and collec-
tive – but also to expose the latent violence of the new order. At a much
deeper level than the regime could ever have suspected, it is arguable that
these confrontations served to revivify those atavistic, sacrificial aspects of
the Mass that Trent sought to occlude. The direct confrontation between the
secular state and the Church, when constructed in this way by the clergy,
seems to have set in reverse the process by which ‘sacrificial rites may lose
their power to convince when systems of public justice supersede private
systems of conflict settlement’. 37 These matters had to be public and collec-
tive, and admitted no truck with judicial process, and the sacrificial aspect of
these acts of resistance seems to be heightened by the absence of violence,
coupled with mass support, that surrounded them. The comment of a histo-
rian of the Kulturkampf is equally applicable to Napoleonic Italy:

    The image of an embattled Church – wounded, bleeding – consti-
    tuted a powerful symbol, one that placed a claim on the devout,
    demanding sacrifice and self-abnegation.38

   There were many less spectacular but equally significant retractions of
the Oath. In 1810 Roederer reported that many who had taken the Oath in
Umbria would retract, if they had not already done so, because of the influ-
ence of non-jurors who had either avoided deportation through ill health or
had returned from exile for the same reason. Their consciences were ‘being
worked on’.39 More demoralizing still were the letters written home by exiled
priests, particularly because the pensions of those deported were claimed –
wrongly and deliberately by the exiled priests – to be higher than the salaries
paid by the government to the jurors.40 Norvins stressed the example of the
refusal of the ex-regulars to take it, and their resultant poverty, as a major
‘eroding factor’ in the resolve of the juring clergy, who saw their opponents
supported by alms alone.41
   The French were correct to see the trouble as starting in Rome, where the
clergy refused the Oath almost en bloc, but by 1811 Tournon came to feel


                                      153
