                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


curiali had been broken by the needs of their families, although several from
the small Umbrian towns held out longer than most, until April 1812. Two
of them were fathers of large families.73
   Even this stubborn resistance could not match that of the ‘Roman priests’
deported to Parma, Piacenza, Bologna, Piedmont and Corsica. This dias-
pora turned a case of limited – if widespread – resistance in two
departments into a much wider problem.


                            The Roman diaspora
The clergy exiled to Civitavecchia – the Roman Cardinals, bishops and
canons – were but the vanguard of the mass deportations that followed the
mass refusals of the Oath. Indeed, deportation soon came to embrace just
supporting the non-jurors. In a monumental administrative blunder, Vicars-
General were not required to take the Oath. As a result, many became
effective leaders of resistance in the dioceses, but this did not save them from
deportation. Corsica became the gaol of last resort for the most troublesome
among the clergy, of whom there were more and more, according to the
authorities, as the years went by. By 1811 200 had been sent there. Parma,
Piacenza, Bologna and Alessandria – in the diocese of Casale – were all
under reliable bishops; they are also notoriously the coldest cities in Italy in
winter. By 1811 there were over 700 priests in these centres, with a further
350 in Civitavecchia.74 This does not count the many priests who returned
home from exile, through old age and ill health, to stiffen local resistance to
the Oath.
   The gross miscalculation by the authorities of placing them in groups
only provided further proof of the strength of hierarchy and discipline
among the secular clergy, at least matching that of the regulars. The Police
Commissioner of Civitavecchia spotted the potential for this from the
outset. He believed the canons now to be deported to the north would miss
their families and incomes, but would hold fast if kept together. Only if
separated from each other, and got out of the large urban centres they were
now in, could they be pressured into taking the Oath.75 He spoke from expe-
rience, but was not heeded. The police noted this – and lamented it – when
they tried to break them down. Nardon was made aware of the power of
hierarchy in these makeshift communities. He noted in January 1811 that

    those invested with various ecclesiastical dignities and the canons of
    the cathedrals have the most power and influence among them; the
    others only follow their lead.

He felt the solution was to exile the ‘officer class’ to Corsica.76 It did not
work. After the first such deportation that month, he called the remaining
priests together – without success. This shook him, for it revealed that there


                                      161
