                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


ramshackle weakness of his state, Pius had a hold over his subjects
possessed by few other Italian rulers. When the French seized the temporal
states, Church and state could not coordinate their opposition to the new
order: princes were deposed and removed; bishops stayed on, rudderless. In
the Papal states, however, Pius was able to order civil, as well as clerical,
disobedience, and by the same methods: excommunication for those who
took the Oath; refusal of confession and communion to those who served
the French. His bishops were also his provincial governors, and could
enforce this. In Rome and its environs, they did not stay in place long
enough to do so, but it took that bit longer to deal with the periphery and,
when Roederer arrived in Umbria, the clergy were ready for him.
   Roederer was first struck – and his hand forced – by the ability of the
bishops to disrupt local administration, for they summoned a worrying level
of lay support. They made the Pope’s orders clear, to the point that most
municipal officials refused to serve the French or, if they did so, would not
take the Oath. All the employees of all the hospitals refused to serve, as they
were directly under the bishops and faced excommunication. Roederer was
only able to get the mayors to stay on – ‘oathless’ – by playing on their fears
that their places would be taken by ‘the worst sort’. Even so, resignations
soon followed as Easter approached. Municipal government virtually
collapsed over Lent. In April 1810, Roederer admitted:

    It has not been possible to have a meeting of a municipal council
    anywhere in many dioceses; work is suspended … the priests are
    pleased by the number of resignations they receive; in dioceses
    where the priests are more insistent, whole councils have resigned en
    masse. As the work for conscription approaches, there are many
    communes where I have no representative of the government.56

Talks with the bishops only revealed the depth of their will to resist, and the
wealth of means at their disposal. The Bishop of Assisi announced, ‘with
the greatest sang froid’, that after considering the matter his conscience did
not allow him to admit government employees to communion and absolu-
tion, that he had ordered confessors not to absolve them. Then – in an
admission of pure defiance – he said he had ordered his parocci to omit
them from the distribution of the Easter biglietti – now, of course, illegal in
themselves. He told Roederer that he had made thorough preparations for
his imminent deportation. He seems the most forthcoming. The bishop of
Foligno told Roederer that, as the civil authority, the communion was none
of his business; the bishops of Norcea and Amelia had territories across the
border in the Kingdom of Italy, where it was reported they were preaching
open revolt and threatening to excommunicate anyone who joined the
French against the bandits. This was as close to violence as it ever came and
the power of the confession was, of itself, enough to frighten Roederer:


                                     157
