                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


that hierarchy and clerical discipline, coupled with an acute awareness of
both French and Papal policy, was what was truly decisive, rather than the
relationship of centre to periphery, although he was aware that Rome gave a
clear lead to the surrounding dioceses. He pointed to the initial willingness
of ten of the twelve bishops in his own department to take the Oath when it
was generally thought to apply only to bishops. However, when it became
clear that all canons and curés would also be subject to it, ‘opinion began to
turn against the Oath’: the conduct of the juring bishops came under attack
and hence public confidence in the juring priests was undermined. It was
made all the worse because ‘public opinion made itself felt in such a way
that no one knew who was behind it. It never came into the open’. From that
moment on, Tournon discerned, the retractions began among the bishops.
Of the twelve juring bishops, only seven stayed loyal.42
    From this point, retraction was overtaken by open refusal to take the
Oath, and it stemmed from the line adopted by the bishops. Whether
Tournon was correct in thinking the bishops had been pressured into
changing their stand by lay public opinion is uncertain, for the majority in
the Papal states as a whole were non-jurors from the outset, but his esti-
mation of the power of hierarchy and Tridentine discipline was correct.
The capacity of the bishops to lead their parocci had at times stood the
French in good stead elsewhere in Italy. Now it was turned fully against
them. The incontrovertible authority of the bishops over their priests
shown here – and in Tuscany – was anything but as evident in France,
where cathedral towns and areas of ultramontane traditions were almost
the only places where the bishops could influence the lower clergy; in areas
penetrated by Jansenism, they were deliberately defied.43 The different
paths taken by the Catholic Reformation in France and Italy are very
evident in the Oath crisis. Of the 1,100 canons of the department of
Rome, only fourteen took the Oath; in the provinces, retractions followed
the opinion of the bishops.44 Norvins interpreted this in a disparaging
light, but he acknowledged the esprit du corps evident among the rural
canons of the smaller Roman dioceses who did not come from important
families and were quite poor. They risked losing their properties and
livings, just the same:

    Some have refused the oath in esprit du corps, others from igno-
    rance or because they were afraid to contradict the Pope’s orders; in
    the provinces, many have blindly followed the example of their
    bishops.45

Even the most cynical observers sensed that the clergy were far from leader-
less, and that they knew their duty.
   The first deportations from the rural areas often matched the drama of
the first retractions. If anything, they were even more archaic in character.


                                     154
