                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


All the more striking, this took place in the small, isolated dioceses of the
periphery.
   However, it would have counted for little without the mass support of the
laity of all classes. There were moments when the non-violent nature of
resistance appeared a façade in the hands of laymen. In April 1811,
Roederer persuaded two of the leading curés of Assisi to take the Oath from
him in private but, when the news got out, public opinion forced them to flee
the area.62 Norvins tacitly admitted in 1812 that non-jurors – secular and
regular – were still openly saying Mass in the churches of the diocese of
Assisi and that they were always better attended than those of the jurors.
His only answer to a phenomenon almost as old as the Revolution was to
arrest and deport the priest then acting as Vicar-General;63 the real point
was the impotence of the state.
   Nor could the presence of a loyal bishop turn the tide. The juring bishop
of Città di Castello, Filippo Bechetti, was a rare and prized bird to the
regime. Roederer believed him to be the only truly learned bishop in the
department; the scion of a noble family of Bologna, he was well read and a
noted historian, as well as a theologian.64 His sermon in favour of the Oath
in December 1809 had won over all but two curés of the town.65 It did not
extend to the laity of the rebel dioceses, however. One of the hidden prob-
lems of using auxiliary clergy to staff the many vacant cures of the Roman
departments was their refusal to do much more than say the Mass and
administer extreme unction; they would not usually marry couples or
baptize children.66 The low number of baptisms in Umbria worried
Roederer, and he persuaded Bechetti to tour the department and so fill the
gap. Over 600 children were baptized on his tour in the summer of 1811, but
all of them were from his own diocese; not one child from the four ‘rebel
dioceses’ was brought forward.67
   The French blamed many things for this kind of resistance, usually the
continued influence of the Pope, strengthened by the clandestine local corre-
spondence between him and the exiled bishops; they pointed to the presence
of the ex-regulars and non-juring seculars; to the ignorance and fanaticism
of the people. Almost never, however, did they believe that violent coercion
within these communities was behind this ‘deaf resistance’ that went to the
core of family life. The popular nature of this passive resistance was never
denied. Indeed, it was openly avowed. The impotent rage of Norvins is
manifest when he told Paris in 1813 of the non-juring clergy exiled to
Civitavecchia from Umbria:

    These priests confess, despite promising not to confess; they take
    charge of childrens’ education, on the plausible pretext of earning a
    living; they are always in close touch with the people … . All
    attempts at surveillance are futile against the effort of thirty priests
    who work in the shadows, and of whom half their number would


                                      159
