                 T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


    suffice to corrupt a much larger town than Civitavecchia … . Every
    family is with them; the parish churches are empty; the juring clergy
    have no one to confess.68

Three things are important in this outburst beyond the admission of the
impotence of the regime in the face of truly popular opposition. One is the
sustained nature of the resistance, which began in 1810 and was still
powerful in 1813; another is the way in which clerical discipline and determi-
nation in exile enabled resistance to spread from the periphery to the urban,
lowland centres like Civitavecchia; finally, the magnitude of lay support for
this handful of impoverished clerics is striking. All these factors transformed
the defiance of these small, mountain dioceses into a much wider problem
for the French.
   Lay opposition to the Oath transcended class, as well as the divide
between centre and periphery. Norvins was terrified by the indirect power
wielded over the administration by the non-juring clergy in Rome. Many
civil servants who had taken the Oath were protecting the non-jurors, he
argued. The civil servants, in their turn, misled Miollis, thus paralyzing
French policy. Norvins believed there was a well-coordinated plot centred on
one priest, Nicolai, a popular confessor whose influence extended from field
guards to the highest levels of the civil service.69 It is impossible to prove the
veracity of Norvins’ fears, but two clear points emerge. The French ‘on the
ground’ in Rome had no doubt that the non-jurors had to be deported. It
was also debatable which was worse to them: a civil servant who openly
defied them and refused to take the Oath, or those supposed ‘fifth colum-
nists’ who did. There were plenty of examples to choose from.
   The most prominent laymen confronted with the Oath were the high
magistracy of the Papal states: the 306 curiali. In July 1811, fifty of the
Roman curiali – ‘chosen from among the most eminent’ – were arrested at
night and their property sequestered. Unlike the prelates they served, all but
fourteen of them broke down for the sake of their families and took the
Oath. The fourteen who refused were exiled to Corsica.70 An amnesty was
granted to all who would take the Oath in November 1811, but the Ministers
of Justice and Police-Générale still felt the most recalcitrant should be dealt
with harshly. Although they now drew back from deportation and seques-
tration of property, this was only because these measures would have to go
through the courts, whereas internal exile could be done through Haute
Police. The Minister of Justice, especially, was incensed by ‘the collective
defiance of a whole corporation’.71 The Public Prosecutor of the Imperial
Court of Rome thought legislation should be introduced to abolish the legal
standing of the curiali, reducing them to private citizens. Those among them
who were prepared to serve in the new courts were not ‘the most esteemed
among them’ in any case. He also admitted that the most highly thought of
were those who held out longest.72 The French readily admitted that the


                                       160
