                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


serving them: ‘You have to close your eyes to this mess; to repress it would
only worsen things’. In Foligno, Roederer had 72 vacant cures out of 126
and was resigned to the fact that even juring clergy would refuse to serve
there if requested, ‘but the churches are always full of the refractories or the
auxiliary clergy’. Roederer almost inadvertently pointed out directly the
remarkable nature of this state of affairs. He had no doubt that this was not
spontaneous; the local communities were not getting along on their own,
independent of traditional ecclesiastical authority, as had often been the
case in France in the 1790s.51 Paggi, the Archpriest of Foligno in the absence
of the bishop, sent out ambulant priests, all non-jurors, to serve the parishes
each Sunday, and he kept them on the move. This was not confined to the
Umbrian dioceses. In Corneto, the diocese was in the hands of a priest,
Paolucci, said to have been invested verbally with apostolic authority. He
confessed in private houses and kept moving, holding services in closed hill
chapels to avoid the authorities.52
   They were doing this without formal pay, because they refused all contact
with the civil authorities. The clandestine Church was operating on its own
and surviving, ‘and I would ask Your Excellency [Police-Générale] to take
into consideration the position I find myself in’. Only in the three Umbrian
dioceses whose bishops had taken the Oath – Perugia, Città delle Pieve and
Città di Castello – had all the curés followed their example, and only there
were things normal.53 As will be seen, the authority of these bishops,
however effective in their own dioceses, could not be extended beyond them.
Nor could it always be sustained. A report of May 1812 revealed that many
rural areas of the diocese of Città di Castello were full of unreliable clergy,
whom Roederer wanted replaced.54
   The French were not above getting rough with the non-juring clergy of
the tightly knit communities of the periphery. In the summer of 1811 troops
were sent to arrest them in Tolfa, a town noted for its rebellion in 1799.
Norvins had no doubt they all deserved exile and set about hunting down
those who had escaped him.55 However, there was little they could do in the
face of the highly organized, widespread passive resistance they met in the
four Umbrian dioceses of Assisi, Foligno, Amelia and Norcea. The bishops
of these dioceses, all marked down for abolition by the French, mounted
their opposition to the new regime in a manner that drew together all the
strands of spiritual, passive resistance the French had encountered in Italy
to date.
   The forms and methods this resistance took form almost a microcosm of
all those aspects of the Catholic faith, short of violence, the Church could
turn against the state. However, they were also able to introduce an element
unique to the circumstances of the Papal states, the appeal to civil servants
and laymen in general of the question of sovereign legitimacy. Pius’s own
words leave little doubt that the motives for resisting the French were, essen-
tially, spiritual, and so were the tactics of his bishops. Yet for all the


                                      156
