                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


sions, than for an Italian Jansenist to oppose the abolition of missions, or
accept the mendicant orders as the witnesses of his own persecution, but this
was the case, even if it took the sustained shock of Napoleonic imperialism
to bring it about.
   The struggle within the Church was partially prefigured by the anti-
Jansenist, anti-revolutionary campaigns of 1785–98, but they turned
principally on inter-clerical politics; their goal was precise and immediate –
the buttressing of Curial authority – however imbued with the anti-Jansenist
animus.130 The Napoleonic Concordats forced the Italian Church to
confront older, more profound tensions between itself and the laity; it now
had to face the unfinished business of Trent. The post-Tridentine Church
was reasonably adept at living with paradox but, when combined with the
intellectual currents of the eighteenth century, the older aversion to missions
and miracles, and an increasing ambivalence to the Madonna, infused the
whole Church. Jansenism might be contained, but this of itself did not
prevent the drift towards those rocks best discerned by Gramsci as a split
between an ‘intellectual Catholicism’ and a Church ‘for simple souls’.
Gramsci points directly to the almost eternal struggle of the Catholic
Church to prevent this.131 At few points in its history, at least in Italy, had
the Church come closer to letting this occur than in the second half of the
eighteenth century. The threat of the Napoleonic Concordats forced the
Church to confront this problem with renewed intensity.
   Pius VII probably spoke more truth than he knew when he castigated the
French for confusing superstition with Catholicism. The Church had gradu-
ally recognized this distinction over time, whereas for the French legitimate
belief was almost – if not wholly – confined to the sphere of the fixed
patterns of the liturgy. The boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable
piety had agonized eighteenth-century Italian clerics but now, increasingly,
they dissolved. This did not take the shape of the great battles of the eigh-
teenth century about the relative importance of external devotion and
internalized faith, which pitted cleric against cleric, and so the French offi-
cials usually missed the point altogether. The change took place in their full
view – and they hastened to scotch it – but few among the new rulers seemed
to grasp its import.
   Although a willingness to embrace many aspects of the faith ‘of the
simple souls’ was common both to Pius VII in his exile and to the humblest
friar or parocco, this was not the result of a well-coordinated project, unlike
the Curialist movement of the 1790s. Rather it was atomized, finding expres-
sion in a myriad of minor local realignments that would have been unlikely –
if not always unthinkable – before the intrusion of the Concordats. This war
was won by a multitude of individual deeds rather than formal polemics.
Parish clergy supported, rather than curbed, the exuberant devotions of the
confraternities; bishops came to commend the extra-parochial devotions of
oratories and field chapels, where once they had disliked them. Everywhere


                                     169
