                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


1810 five priests from Rome reached Parma, having made the journey
without even their small travelling allowances. They had been robbed by
bandits outside Viterbo, not far from Rome: ‘They lost everything, and their
health has also suffered considerably’.102 Nor did they ever deviate from
strict personal discipline. The civil authorities were unanimous in agreement
that the personal conduct of all these priests – without exception – was
above reproach. Personal immorality was completely absent from their
ranks. People craved their spiritual services, as has been seen. These men
were invested by Pius with the powers of papal legates, able to set up an
altar and administer all the sacraments, wherever they found themselves and
without the permission of the resident bishop. They did so. In Piacenza they
spent the winter of 1810–11 in a gutted, windowless ex-convent, which was
filled to bursting on Christmas Eve, as the snow poured through the roof.
The major noble families attended and the laity were led there by their
curés.103 Fifty of them were soon exiled to Corsica, the first group reaching
La Spezia on the Ligurian coast on 20 February. The police sent them there
under a Gendarmerie escort, at night to avoid La Spezia, and then by sea to
the naval base at Varignano to avoid passing through several small villages
along the coast. This secrecy followed the warm welcome given them by the
mayor of Pontremolì earlier in their journey, which the French did not want
repeated.104 The French knew all too well what they were about.
Increasingly, the regime turned to coercion. Illness had always been regarded
as just reason to allow even the most ‘opinionated’ priests to go home, but in
June 1812 Nardon refused this to Mondacci, a curé of Foligno exiled to
Piacenza, unless he took the Oath first.105 This was only a minor case,
however, given what was to come.
    Finally, it was decided to treat the Roman clergy as common criminals.
The Imperial Decree of 4 May 1812 ordered all the deported clergy who
refused to take the Oath to be sent to prison and deprived of their
allowances.106 In February 1813 Paris told Milan that the French government
would no longer pay priests in Bologna their allowances.107 When Milan
protested that the Italian government would not do so in its stead, Napoleon
simply ordered them sent before a military commission to be tried as brig-
ands.108 By March they had all been sent either to Corsica, or to Alessandria
to go on to Fenestrelles.109 This was the nadir of French ecclesiastical policy
in Italy. It was also a great victory for the Roman clergy. In the face of all
this, only a handful ever took the Oath. Five did so in Piacenza, and were
driven to the brink of nervous collapse by the others by the time the French
finally let them go home.110 More did so in Parma and Bologna, although
no figures were kept, and there were reports of retractions when they got
home, such as canon Forcella who, on returning to Cornetto as a juror,
immediately retracted his oath before the Church of the Penitence.111 By
July 1812, after a conference with them that lasted three and a half hours,
the Prefect got twenty-nine to take the Oath; fifty-nine still refused, the


                                     165
