                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


    demolished. Then the nobility and the monks will no longer have
    their workshops of discontent, and would be forced to worship
    publicly, and be unable to profane religion with sedition and
    hatred.127

The local reactions to the high politics at Fontainebleau exposed the fissures
between the religion of the rulers and that of the ruled all the more starkly.
Norvins – once an emigré himself – emerged from the process something
close to an Hébertiste in his tirades about nobles and monks, after enter-
taining the fleeting hope that only the diplomatic technicality of a civic oath
stood between the Roman elite and collaboration. The Church was hated
and feared, and to be pruned to its bare bones under the new Concordat. If
Norvins had come to be wary of the forces ranged against him, Lagarde was
more disdainful:

    Italy regards the Pope and his court as its property, to be kept on its
    territory. To put him in Avignon is akin to looting relics. There is
    less the influence of religious feeling here, than of a national senti-
    ment which has shown itself in different parts of Italy for many
    years. It sees itself as a body stripped of its former grandeur, but
    destined to regain it at some time or other.128

Lagarde may have been a prescient prophet, but he persisted in the orig-
inal French failure to accept the power of religion in Italian life. Norvins,
by contrast, had learned to fear it. In 1813, at the end, French sensibility
ranged between contemptuous complacency and almost paranoid hatred.
When Napoleon and Pius finally tore up the Concordat they had forged
together, they both pleased hosts of enthusiastic lieutenants. It did not
speak well for the essence of the imperial relationship in Napoleonic
Italy.

                   The priests, the police and the people
The war waged against God in Napoleonic Italy encompassed more than the
increasingly blatant confrontation between the Church and the Napoleonic
regime. These years also witnessed another, equally vital struggle within the
Church, a battle with itself that it had to win before it could hope to
confront the power of the Napoleonic state. Pius VII – himself from a
neo-Jansenist background129 – and many of his clergy had to move further
from their roots than did Napoleon, from his original role as ‘the saviour
of the Church’ to the gaoler of the Pope. The ex-Jansenist theology
professor came to embrace Marian devotion at its most populist; Napoleon
was, after all, a protégé of Robespierre’s brother. It was less of a wrench for
one gaoled at Thermidor to send Catholic clergy before military commis-


                                     168
