                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


networks. In Napoleonic Italy this similarity of character and purpose from
one locality to another remained just that, similarity; there were as yet no
structures to transform localized opposition into anything more widespread.
   There is strong evidence that the experience of Napoleonic rule left
Italian popular religion badly bruised, certainly in terms of its material
resources in the case of the confraternities and as regards places and objects
of worship outwith parish structures. Nevertheless, the essence of popular
piety, the mentalities that drove it and the forms through which it found
expression, emerged enhanced from the years of repression and official
discouragement. Gramsci, writing as late as 1919, could rhapsodize about
the benefits the revolution would gain when ‘Catholicism … became the
crowd itself, emanated from the masses, embodied itself in a hierarchy that
asked the consent of the masses’, a telling tribute to the enduring power of
the Church.137 Many currents of change would erode popular piety in
settenorial Italy by the end of the nineteenth century, and the Church would
soon master and tame many of them, although it never again attempted to
turn away from popular religiosity to the extent it had in the eighteenth
century. Its retreat was not effected by the Napoleonic state, however.
   The regime harried and harassed Italian popular religion, but it never
caught it. A comparison with the military role of the partidas in Spain is not
inappropriate, all the more so because the Italian hierarchy, like the Cortez,
found it had to accommodate these disorderly elements at first, but then
came to praise them, and finally to imitate their defiance when the French,
at last, came for them, ostensibly over the Oath. For their part, the
Tridentine clergy showed a coolness under fire worthy of Wellington’s troops
at Torres Verdes; their response to French harassment was a vindication of
the Borromean ideal in times of crisis, however compromised it might be in
normal circumstances. This is not to argue that other, more structural
currents of modernity would not, sooner rather than later, bring an end to
the world of the casacce or the hill chapels, but it seems hard to count the
Napoleonic state among them in terms of effectiveness, however strong its
resolve to take a lead in their destruction. This world would succumb to
economic and social change, but only temporarily to French pressure.
Indeed, where communities remained vibrant, so did popular piety – which
the clergy attacked only in the last quarter of the century.138 Although reli-
gious observance declined at the centre in northern and central Italy, it
remained both strong and highly politicized on the peripheries at the end of
the nineteenth century, where, in the place of socialist, secular radicaliza-
tion, ‘a resentful “clerico-populism” settled over the static and traditional
countryside’.139
   The Church, for its part, learned anew to confront the secular state with
the traditional symbols and rituals most deeply rooted in the collective tradi-
tion common to all social strata. These were the ways in which the Church
rebuilt its authority with the laity, its mind concentrated less by the


                                     171
