                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


Paris, and noted that the Tuscans were especially pleased at the prospect of
the Pope’s return, a reform of the Gallican articles and a more traditional
reorganization of the Italian dioceses. For once, he said, the clergy sang a Te
Deum with genuine enthusiasm.119
    However, Norvins reported the stirrings of a ‘White Terror’ among the
lower classes, and a thirst for revenge against the collaborators.120 The juring
clergy feared the refractories would now feel able to take a new Oath, and
that they would be sacrificed to appease them, losing their cures to the
returning heroes.121 Within a week it was clear that the news from Paris had
stiffened opposition to the French, not lessened it. Conscription was
collapsing and local government paralyzed as the false rumours spread that
the new Concordat included a complete restoration of Papal authority.
From Civitavecchia came news that the imprisoned refractories were
‘triumphant’, that they felt they could not lose – either supporting the new
Concordat, if its terms suited them, or declaring it a forgery, if they did
not.122 The Tuscan clergy were now looking hard at the terms of the new
Concordat, realizing that the number of parishes would be greatly reduced;
‘the brilliant conjectures have been retracted’ – conjectures that hoped for a
wholesale restoration of the old order.123
    For a moment, however, Norvins believed that Pius had lost his standing
among his subjects, his seemingly impenetrable resistance at last broken, that
‘the old idol had been dethroned’.124 Lagarde agreed, thinking the Tuscan
clergy had lost faith in him for signing the new Concordat.125 By early
March it was clear that Rome would not be returned to Pius and that he had
refused the new Concordat. Meanwhile the fuss had only served to alienate
the most useful episcopal collaborator in the area, the Bishop of Anagni. He
had served as the French-appointed Vicar-General of Rome, but learned
that – when a solution looked possible – he would not continue under the
new Concordat. Thus, when the government pushed ahead with the new
Concordat regardless, he refused to attend the obligatory Te Deum.126 Every
hope had been raised and dashed in these few weeks; all that was left was
confrontation. Norvins now believed firmly in Roman counter-revolution,
the power of the refractory Church and the need to take institutional steps
to reduce its presence in society. The terms of the new Concordat would
achieve this: one parish per 5,000 souls, making a total of 204 parish clergy
for the two Roman departments ‘will reduce my police work by half, and
reduce the relationship between the clergy and the people’. Finally, he lashed
out even at Tournon’s tepid form of appeasement:

    The other churches [than the 204 parish churches] should be closed.
    They should be converted to administrative uses, or kept as historic
    monuments by custodians. The chapels and oratories, where the
    malcontents gather together under the pretext of piety – to pray to
    God to strike France and bad mouth the emperor – should be


                                      167
