                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


Decree of 4 May not withstanding.112 Of the 200 sent to Corsica, thirty-
three broke down and took the Oath. Seven were canons of Rome, who had
been there since 1810; they all did so only after having been sent before a
military commission.113 Twelve took it in Pinerolo by 1812, but it was
admitted that they did so only after their own funds had run out.114 An
Imperial Decree of 25 March 1813 offered ‘full grace and pardon’ to anyone
who took the Oath by 1 May 1813. No one did so, leading Public Worship
to propose that they all be treated as felons, that no special concessions be
made to anyone who now took the Oath and that, as the Oath was a polit-
ical not a spiritual act, they all be declared rebels.115 The regime had been
driven to distraction, changing its policy over and over again but to no avail.
The military commission of Turin, which had brought the first great bandit
chiefs to heel in Napoleonic Italy, did not have the same effect on the fifty
priests still held in Pinerolo, who all refused.116
   The policy of enforcing the Oath had failed, utterly. Yet it is indicative of
the regime that there were calls from within its ranks to extend the Oath still
further. D’Auzers declared, after several years of dealing with Spina, that
the Ligurian clergy ought to be subject to it:

    By forcing them to take it, all the troublemakers will be unmasked.
    Either way, they will be placed in an embarrassing position, either
    to lose their influence in their faction, or to come into the open.117

D’Auzers, it should be noted, was among the most moderate of the senior
French officials in Italy. There was even a ministerial project in 1812 to
extend a new Oath, based on the Concordat of Fontainebleau, to the auxil-
iary clergy and vicars-general of the Roman departments.118 Events
overtook it, however.

              The failure of the Concordat of Fontainebleau
The hopes that Pius VII would accept the new Concordat concocted by the
Concile Nationale, and their subsequent disappointment, offer a poignant
window on the relationship between the Napoleonic state and Italian spiri-
tuality. In its death throes, the regime lashed out at its chosen scapegoats –
the Roman clergy – but between February and March 1813 the French
administrators and their Italian charges ran the whole gamut of hopes and
fears when it appeared that Pius had accepted the Concordat of
Fontainebleau. At the false dawn on 2 February, Norvins declared the news
of the Papal surrender would even have a good influence on brigandage. He
thought the educated classes welcomed the news, as it would heal the rifts
driven between families by the issue of collaboration, a revealing insight into
his own belief that so much hinged on simple loyalty to the former
sovereign. Lagarde, in Florence, also reported the initial joy at the news from


                                      166
