                 T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


prolonged influence of the Enlightenment than by the short, sharp shock of
the Concordats. Turchi, the last pre-Napoleonic Bishop of Parma, was
regarded as among the greatest predicators of the eighteenth century, and he
used these gifts to castigate the Enlightenment and the works of the French
Revolution, the Jansenists included, from 1790 onwards.140 His skilful,
highly politicized predications, notably his oft reprinted ‘Important Advice
for the People’ of 1790, did much to undermine the new republican regime
in Milan during the triennio, even if it was less spectacular than the
sanfedismo of Ruffo in the south.141 This ‘hard-line’ stood in contrast to the
more restrained tone of the official Papal press before 1793, it should be
noted.142 The perceived need for resistance to the French reforms – and to
the Revolution itself – came from the dioceses and the parishes from the
outset, not from the top down.
   When Pius VII at last turned to face Napoleon and attack the Concordat
directly, he had this to draw on, as well as to foster. The Church came to
terms with itself and its faithful in these years, and so faced the secular chal-
lenge of the new regime with renewed confidence and widespread support.
The French failed to understand the ability of the Tridentine Church to
compromise with the archaism of the faithful and add old weapons to its
arsenal.
   It is all the more remarkable that this alliance with popular, often archaic,
religiosity was achieved without compromising the corporate discipline of
the Tridentine Church. The example of the Roman clergy is the most
striking evidence of this, but the capacity of the Church to sustain itself in
the Roman departments through ordained chains of command in the face of
continued mass arrests is, perhaps, an even greater tribute to the power of
hierarchy and corporate discipline in the face of an unprecedented crisis. It
was heralded by events in the Archdiocese of Florence, and engendered the
rallying of the local clergy to the Roman clergy, wherever they were sent.
These were the great causes célèbres nonetheless. The true test of clerical
solidarity came in the routine running of the dioceses and parishes in the
face of the reforms of the Concordat, and it was not found wanting.
Ultimately this exasperated and infuriated the French. It was an example of
self-discipline and resolve later imitated during the Kulturkampf.143
   With the exception of Lagarde in Florence – who confronted a Church
already battered by some aspects of the Leopoldine reforms – most French
officials learned to fear the Church to some degree, even if they felt a deep
cultural distaste for its values. Their appreciation – if that is the right term –
for its ability to exercise social control both at the centre and the periphery
stands in stark contrast to the contempt the French reserved for the weak-
ness of the secular states they succeeded. The new rulers soon learned that
the Church was the most potent indigenous influence they had to deal with
in Italy, even if they never discovered its secrets or appreciated its methods.
The recognition of this power – negligible in the face of military conquest


                                       172
