                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


    problems, added to the passing of time, have left almost nothing for
    his own support, which has left him in real poverty … . He had to
    neglect his affairs to see to the cure of souls, something he always
    did with distinction, never meddling in secular affairs.97

The mayor of Rieti asked for help for his curé, exiled first to Piacenza, then
to Bologna, who had only his benefice to support him. The mayor of Bastia,
near Assisi, pleaded for Don Antonio Ciar, also in Bologna, that he was of a
poor family himself and had had to support them from his benefice.98 The
mayor of Valentano, near Viterbo, stressed that Felice Damiani, a canon,
had several nephews who had been dependent on him, and he had had
nothing to support them with but his benefice. He had been given no
pension, because it was good benefice.99 This kind of support also shows the
esteem in which most of the exiled clergy were held in their communes.
   Nor did their plight leave the laity around them unmoved. Help came to
them in very practical ways, and they paid for it in traditional form, often by
saying masses for money, which was illegal on two counts: as an act in itself
and because non-juring clergy were not allowed to exercise their offices in
public. Bologna is the gastronomic capital of Italy, and its inhabitants
responded in kind for the masses they craved from the Roman clergy. Even
the Roman priests admitted, under police pressure, that they could not
afford the daily supplements of soup, wine, a piece of fruit and three pota-
toes from their own incomes. People crowded into their quarters to hear
them, even around the barred windows. Milan’s response was to withdraw
even the daily bread ration from all those who could not prove destitu-
tion.100 In Parma, formerly the seat of a great university and the Jesuit
college of Santa Caterina, several prominent local families sought to employ
Roman priests as tutors for their children – an example followed in
Piacenza, notably by the Scotti family, whose fiefs had stood at the heart of
the 1806 revolt in the Piacentino. Paris moved swiftly to stop this. Police-
Générale belatedly came to share the fears voiced by the Sub-Prefect of
Piacenza in 1810 that these priests had corrupted the whole town.101
   Finally, and most importantly, they became heroes and celebrities wher-
ever they went and among all classes of people. In this way, the example of
resistance forged in the Papal states, often in the smallest and most remote
dioceses, was carried to these large urban centres. Now ‘the desert’ was no
longer the preserve of the mendicant orders, its ‘normal’ inhabitants. Princes
of the Church and Roman canons with the fattest livings in Italy took their
place in their cramped quarters, alongside poor parocci from the Umbrian
hinterland, under the gaze of urban northerners who now had first-hand
knowledge of their resistance. Before their experience is analysed, it should
be stressed that all these men went quietly, as had the regulars before them;
no one attempted to avoid his fate. There were no ‘deserters’ among them,
whatever the hardships or dangers of their forced marches. In September


                                     164
