                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


terms,86 and they found themselves in those former priories and convents of
the two towns that were too dilapidated to be sold.87 The ‘overflow’ from
Parma and Piacenza was directed to Bologna.88 When they got there,
numbering 127, the mayor made it clear to the prefect that he could cope
with no more and hoped that the rumour of a total influx of 200 was
wrong.89 It was not.90 Most were housed in the derelict former convent of
the Annunciation and accorded meagre daily rations of bread.91 Those
exiled to Corsica – the most obdurate in saying Mass and hearing confes-
sions – were finally gaoled in the remote fortress of Sestri and put on bread
and water for their defiance.92 At times it is the casual remarks made in the
course of routine administration that are the most revealing. The first time
the clergy in Parma and Piacenza received their pensions on time was in
December 1810.93 These facts reveal that many of the letters written home
boasting of higher pensions and better treatment than the stipends accorded
the juring clergy were pure lies, if skilful propaganda.
   The Roman clergy certainly had high-ranking, wealthy men within it, but
the majority were of modest means. They needed their pensions, and lost a
great deal by their refusal to take the Oath. French policy took account of
differences in personal wealth, placing the Roman clergy into three cate-
gories: the poorest got 40 francs per month; the next, 20 francs per month;
the wealthiest, nothing. In January 1811 the Vicar-General of Parma
reported that only four of the 175 clergy still there after a big deportation to
Corsica got no pension, thirty-nine were in the middle category and fifty got
the full pension, as and when it came. The remaining eighty-two, the clear
majority, received only the standard minimum pension.94 Of the 200 in
Bologna, there was more private wealth, at least according to the French.
There, thirty-nine got no pension, sixty-six were in the middle category and
ninety-five received the full allowance. Many of those on pensions of 20
francs petitioned for full allowances, and the civil authorities – in their
places of exile and at home – almost invariably supported them. Their peti-
tions also reveal how straitened were their circumstances, how much their
extended families depended on them and, above all, how principled was the
stand they had taken. Even Roederer could be moved by such requests. In
1811 he supported a deported priest in Parma, who had been accorded
nothing, in his claims for a full pension; he had been obliged to sell his prop-
erties to pay his debts and for his journey.95 Nardon – the ‘host prefect’ of
Vicenzo Clarioni, a parish priest in Rome who was ill and had no support
other than his family – supported Clarioni’s claims to get a full (rather than
half) pension.96 ‘Back home’ the mayor of Poggio, in department Rome,
supported the petition of his deported curé, painting a picture of a modest
cleric:

    He has some land here, which forms his patrimony, from which he
    draws income in cash and kind from his coloni, but all the local


                                      163
