                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


the poverty of the Church won it support among all classes, as the tradi-
tional poverty of the friars blended with the new-found, ‘Oath-made’
hardships of the Roman clergy: in this way, many within the secular Church
found common cause with those elements of the regular orders, such as the
Capuchins, who had been regarded with some ambivalence by an earlier
generation. In these ways, the Church put itself in closer contact with the
laity, as the tensions implicit in Trent were set aside during the war against
the Concordats. The millenarian climate prevalent in the last decades of the
eighteenth century in Italy saw the flowering of miracles, of ‘an eschatolog-
ical tension’ created by the impact of traumatic events on collective
mentalities, beginning with the dissolution of the Jesuits and heightened by
the events of the triennio,132 fitting into a pattern common in the history of
modern Europe. ‘Modern European apparitions have occurred in clusters,
usually at periods of particular stress’, as David Blackbourn has accurately
observed.133 It did not end there, however; the nature of Napoleonic rule
meant the crisis was sustained. The Napoleonic reforms made the Church
enter into this crisis and master it. At the level of cultural experience, the
events of the epoca francese represent a powerful demonstration of the
dictum that popular religion was not the preserve of the lower classes.134
Nor was it confined to the most geographically isolated parts of the
periphery. Mario Rosa has pointed to ‘a clear distinction between the bour-
geois culture of the towns and the rural popular culture of the countryside’
that he feels had developed at the heart of Italian Catholicism in the course
of the eighteenth century.135 The events that took place under Napoleonic
rule examined here must, at the very least, heavily qualify this. Above all, the
conflict between the Napoleonic reforms and Italian Catholicism resulted in
the advance of popular piety, in stark contrast to the general trend perceived
by modernization theory.
   The confrontation between the Napoleonic regime and Italian popular
piety showed how vibrant and deep-rooted was the latter, and how deter-
mined it remained to resist the Concordat and its associated reforms. This
was as true at the centre as on the periphery, and it touched the elites as well
as the masses. The widespread, generally uniform character of this popular,
passive resistance by the laity bears both comparison and contrast with the
observation made of passive resistance during the Kulturkampf that ‘[h]erein
lay the power of popular Catholic culture: it patterned proximate events as
universal struggle’.136 The universality of Catholic imagery and belief were
the only real common factors in Italian life in the early nineteenth century,
and this made for the similarity of passive resistance everywhere. Beside this,
however, are the differences between the traditional popular religion of the
period and the later, more clerical-inspired popular piety of the Catholic
revival. In the very different environment of mid-century, passive resistance
became a national affair, as in Bismarckian Germany. The new popular
piety was now engendered and sustained by well-constructed support


                                      170
