                        T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


were. The Jesuits missed out half of the crucial Napoleonic equation, gai et
guerrier if, indeed, it was an equation at all.
   The secular hierarchy was not quite the same. Its leaders expected to serve
the state, with most – if not all – its faults. The Italian episcopate was
nothing if not realistic and for the French to fail to work effectively through
the bishops was truly picking a needless fight. It displays a gravely miscon-
ceived rigidity in their commitment to the terms of the Concordat, but given
the nature of the Italian episcopate – in contrast to the legacy of the Jesuits
among the lower clergy, the regular orders and, indeed, the laity – it need
not obscure completely the real identity of interest between the Napoleonic
state and this most orthodox sector of the Italian Church. Most bishops
preached obedience to conscription and sought to calm the unrest it
provoked, but even here the French were dissatisfied, as often as not,
because the episcopate worked through mediation not intimidation. Their
attitude to the ‘unpoliced’ periphery was not alien to that of the French, and
stretched beyond the policing of the laity to that of their own clergy as well.
It was less the day-to-day management of the dioceses that drove them
apart, than the realization when faced by local crises that the new secular
order was too significantly different from the old.
   The response of the episcopate and the parish clergy was to draw closer
to the laity, to meet it on its own ground and, finally, to stand up to the
French through passive opposition, like the regulars before them. It is,
perhaps, too readily assumed that the power of popular religion was waning
by the end of the eighteenth century simply because a growing section of
the clergy were combating it. That would be to confound activity with
achievement too readily. There is too much evidence to the contrary to
accept Owen Chadwick’s verdict that neo-Jansenist changes were making
steady, if slow progress among the laity by the end of the eighteenth
century, that ‘they made a turning point in the later history of the Church’.3
Indeed, even at the height of the Catholic revival, clerical control over
Marian apparitions and their links to local folk superstitions could be
tenuous, as David Blackbourn has shown in the case of Marpingen in the
Rhineland.4 In this period and place, there are strong grounds for describing
the conflict as between modernity, as embodied by aggressive reform, and
tradition. Faced with so stark a choice, the waverers in the Church finally
opted for tradition in the face of the Napoleonic onslaught, so placing
Church–state conflict in a very different context to that drawn by
Blackbourn for the Kulturkampf later in the century, when there were other
sources of modernity in society beyond those espoused by the state.5 A
useful comparison might be with Mexico during the Juarista reforms of the
1860s, during which the clergy sided with their communities against many
modernizing state reforms. This gave the Church lay support in its own
confrontation with the state over its anti-clerical reforms and also



                                     177
