                                       7
           THE WAR AGAINST GOD




It remains to place the conflict between the Napoleonic regime and the
Italian Church in the wider pattern of the history of Church and state both
before and after the epoca francese.
   The French reforms sat in a long line of attempts to ‘civilize’ the Italian
peripheries and to educate the urban masses. Almost all of these initiatives
were the work of the post-Tridentine Church, itself the object of French
persecution by the end of the occupation. Yet, at the end, that cannot allow
the significant – if highly paradoxical – identity of interest between that
Church and the Napoleonic state to go unremarked. Here it is essential to
make distinctions within the forces of the Catholic Reformation, the better
to evaluate the aspirations of the ‘Napoleonic project’ for the regeneration
of the Italian masses. There can be no other viable conclusion than that a
project for the moral regeneration of the Italians – coherent and sustained,
if ultimately futile – existed among the French. Beyond the conflict that
engulfed Church and state in the epoca francese was the longue durée of the
civilizing mission, in which the Napoleonic reforms have their place.
Looking forward, it must also be asked to what extent the conflict between
Church and state was a watershed for the future, in the formation of the
turbulent history of Church–state relations in the succeeding century.


                          Borromeo and Bonaparte
Although the Jesuits – and later the Capuchins – came to work closely with
the secular hierarchy in the course of the late sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries – the former priding themselves on their subordinate role to the
latter1 – the way of the Jesuits and their successor orders was not synony-
mous with that of the episcopal reformers, who are epitomized by Carlo
Borromeo. The French often failed to grasp these differences, and it was
their loss, in a very real sense. In a myriad of local elites, clientage networks
and alien political structures at the centre and on the periphery, the French
found Italian society difficult enough to penetrate without the loss of the
crucial sources of influence and information which only the episcopate, in


                                      175
