                T H E RO M A N C L E RG Y A N D T H E O AT H


but very influential in that of routine administration – is always present in
the intemperate outbursts of the French in Italy. It probably amounts to the
highest form of praise, in the circumstances. In his anger Norvins said of the
Roman clergy that

    The priests control everything, they dominate the great and the
    small, holding the former in childish ignorance, the latter in need ….
    They do the confessing, and so dispense all the hopes and fears of
    everyone.144

Roederer admitted to his superiors that

    When I first arrived, I soon discerned the bad will of the bishops [of
    Umbria] but that was nothing. The important thing was to under-
    stand their power, and to take in the consequences of their
    opposition.145

D’Auzers called the Ligurian clergy nothing less than ‘this powerful corps,
which from time immemorial has been able to rouse the people of town and
country at its will’. Deprived by the Concordat of its predicators, it now
turned to the ‘even more dangerous confessional, against which the police
are powerless’. They had a long experience of ‘using the conscience to
manipulate the human passions … of fostering an anathema for evidence, by
recourse to superstition’ and so were able to unsettle a government.146 This
is more than a recognition of influence, however; it is an admission of
defeat. The confessional was a weapon forged by Trent, and its effectiveness
was a tribute to its success among the laity.
   Finally, the pacific character of the Italian clergy stands out in an age of
brutal mass warfare, all the more striking because their passive resistance
came at the height of Napoleonic power. Pius and the Roman clergy – and
those of Florence before them – made their stands, and their way to prison,
not in the death throes of the empire, but when there was no continental
coalition in the field. They defied the regime in the aftermath of Wagram,
not in the flushes of optimism that marked the start of the new wars and
renewed coalitions. Until 1813 there was no realistic hope of liberation from
Napoleonic rule. In these circumstances the actions of the Roman clergy, of
Spina, of the humblest Capuchin or Franciscan who refused the Oath,
deserve to stand out as a beacon of opposition to Napoleon, alongside the
Spanish partidas. Violence attracts the gaze of history more readily than
dignified suffering, just as the martyrdom of Pius VII and the Roman clergy
attracted the compassion of contemporaries more than the subtlety of a
Spina. They all deserve a place in the clouds around the sun of Austerlitz,
however. Through their example, a different vision of the world survived a
time of rampant militarism and secularization. It found mass support. Pius


                                     173
