                        T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


more suspect to the regime, and probably more hostile to it, over the course
of Napoleonic rule. De facto, if never de jure, as had been the case in the
1790s, the Napoleonic regime was anti-clerical, at least in its Italian posses-
sions. Napoleon died an excommunicate, after having torn up the Concordat
he had staked so much on. This set of circumstances heralded many bitter
clashes between Church and state all over western Europe and in Latin
America in the century ahead.


                Church and state in the nineteenth century
The weight of evidence compiled by the French themselves reveals beyond
doubt the continued strength of popular piety in Italy. The emphatic judge-
ment must be that the Napoleonic reforms failed in their attempts to take up
the burden of Trent to ‘civilize’ and ‘enlighten’ the masses. As in Sperber’s
evaluation of the history of such reforms in the Rhineland, so in French
Italy the continuum of Enlightened, Revolutionary and Napoleonic reforms
had failed.11 The French battered the material resources of the regulars and
the confraternities, but the popular culture that sustained the latter and the
more orthodox reverence which upheld the former emerged, if anything,
strengthened by Napoleonic persecution. Chadwick’s judgements that, at the
turn of the century, ‘monks and nuns were too many to be respected because
they were monks or nuns’ and that ‘social ideas moved against the beggar
and the mendicant friars’ are utterly disproved by the Italian response to the
Napoleonic assault on the Church.12 The laity – rich and poor, urban and
rural – showed no signs of growing ‘more sensitive, or more austere, or more
bourgeois’, of moving ‘away from an older freedom of popular devotion’.13
Quite the reverse.
   Restored regimes in an older reforming tradition, such as the Prussians in
the Rhineland, saw efforts patterned on those of the French and earlier
enlightened regimes continue to fail into the mid-nineteenth century.14 The
House of Savoy too was still fighting ancien régime battles in Liguria into
the 1830s against the alliance that Spina had forged. The report of the new
Piedmontese police chief, made to his underling in Genoa in 1816, has a
familiar ring to it:

    the inhabitants of Piazza Santa Maria Angeloruno, of this city,
    celebrated the festival of the Holy Name of Mary with a zeal unbe-
    coming religion, by erecting an altar with a sacred image of the
    Virgin at night, after the festival had been held officially that day,
    which was expressly prohibited … . His Majesty [the King of
    Sardinia] is decided in his will to prevent any so-called solemnities
    that, under the cloak of Religion, are practised by the crowd, which
    are in the main motivated only by irreverence, scandal and civil
    disorder.15


                                     179
