                          T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


piety than at the turn of the century. The Catholic revival of the mid-nine-
teenth century was clerically inspired and controlled, at least in Germany
and France. When the French clergy began to welcome popular religion
back into the fold from about the 1830s, it was on their own terms and they
were quickly able to ‘sanitize’ it.28 It was, at least in part, this very ability to
control a large, disciplined faithful that made the new emergent states in
Germany, France and Italy so fearful of the Church. Perhaps the closest
parallel with the experience of Napoleonic Italy is Mexico in its late colonial
period. The Hildago revolt of 1810–15 drew only 9 per cent of parish clergy
to its ranks, but it was central to the rebels’ concept of the revolt. According
to its major historian,

    The church in its full sense of the body of communicants – priests
    and laity – remained an especially powerful set of relationships in
    the late colonial period.29

This was equally true in Napoleonic Italy, where violent resistance was rare
among the clergy, but, together with the laity, they proved a formidable pres-
ence in the face of French reform.
   When the history of clashes between Church and state in the nineteenth
century is traced, it emerges clearly that the Catholic Church was more
capable of reinventing itself than its liberal opponents. Just as Spina threw
in his lot with traditional popular piety and the Roman clergy rediscovered
‘the desert’ and the primitive Church, so the Church developed a whole new
range of devotional practices, organizational structures and proselytizing
techniques, all deployed in the mid-century revival. Liberalism – for all its
diversity in other ways – remained predictable and moribund in its response
to resurgences of clericalism. German liberals during the Kulturkampf saw
themselves as being in the vanguard of progress, a vanguard Catholics
seemed determined to halt through their perceived return to obscurantism.
As David Blackbourn has said,

    for liberals generally this ‘struggle of civilizations’ was concerned
    with far more than church–state relations in the narrow and formal
    sense: it was a clash between their own ‘modern’ outlook embodied
    in a liberal nationalism, and the backwardness and stubborn
    parochialism imputed to German Catholics.30

There is obviously no direct political line of descent from Napoleonic
authoritarianism to Protestant German liberalism, but their respective views
about popular Catholicism bear as close a resemblance as possible, over
historical time and space. The lineal connection between the 1902 Combes
government of the Third Republic and the First Empire is clearer, even if it
would have horrified the anti-Bonapartists in its ranks to admit as much. Its


                                        182
