                        T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


particular, could supply. They failed signally even to perceive that there were
real differences within the Catholic Reformation that might have made their
relationship with the episcopacy and sections of the secular clergy much
easier.
   Although the Napoleonic reformers shared many attitudes and concerns
even with the Jesuits, there was a fundamental rift between the ultimate
vision of the Gallican Church of the Concordat and the ideal of society held
by the most potent missionaries of Trent. Their shared contempt for what
they perceived as popular culture – for archaism – is a misleading point of
contact, as is their shared interest in the externals of public worship. Both
strove to conquer the public sphere of celebration and ritual from popular
piety by instituting demonstrative, but highly orchestrated, rituals of their
own. Jesuits fought to win back Easter from carnevale, as did the empire;
both sought to replace collective, traditional spontaneity with regimented,
prescribed acts of public allegiance. It is tempting to reduce the differences
between the Napoleonic quest for legitimacy in the public sphere and the
Jesuit missionaries’ drive to establish orthodoxy at the heart of the great
Church festivals to simply a matter of taste, of interpreting ‘Baroque enthu-
siasm’ and ‘Enlightened sensibilities’ as being only skin-deep, and to see the
revulsion of the French for Jesuit-inspired practices as those of aesthetic
predilection alone. This would be mistaken. There was an unbridgeable
difference between the passive, submissive and – above all – pacific society of
the Jesuit mission and the world of controlled, channelled individualism –
and aggression – desired by the French. The Napoleonic state did not wish
the Pax to be universal; it worked incessantly to bring peace to divided
communities by secular and – where it could – clerical means, but this was in
the interests of the narrowly defined national community. The Grande Nation –
however widely flung – was not the universal Church. Ferocity, initiative –
machismo – were still to be cultivated, if only for export. The civilized
Napoleonic polity was still a very masculine world. Its imperial officials
were right to sense the utter incompatibility of this version of the civilizing
mission with that of the Jesuits. If there was a Jesuit watchword, it was
patience. Gradual assimilation, achieved through acceptance, was their
preferred route to social control. Nothing could have been further from
Napoleonic dirigisme. It was indicative of the gentle – or, conversely, ‘sissi-
fied’ – nature of their vision that the Jesuits often targeted women and
children as their way into the rude, peripheral community or the rudderless
urban poor. In the education of the elites, their Noble Colleges held out
against teaching fencing and riding. The most damaging competitors to the
Noble Colleges by the eighteenth century were, significantly, the new mili-
tary academies.2 The Jesuit ideal of ‘perfecting the knight’ corresponded
with the premium the French put on clever conversation, worldly knowledge
and polished manners, but the French knight was also a working knight as it



                                     176
