                         T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


strengthened its bonds to those same communities, with which they had
been in conflict over the nature of popular religion.6
   The forces of tradition were still strong. In Napoleonic Italy, unlike in
much of later nineteenth-century Europe, the confraternities, Marian devo-
tion and the new-found influence of the mendicant orders were all too
powerful for the Church to ignore. However damaged they were by the
French reforms, it would be wrong to conclude they counted for nothing in
these years. They became foci of popular resistance, and the laity resisted
fiercely when rallied around these forces, so fiercely that many Italian clerics
saw sense in making common cause with them. That confraternities and
local feste were at the centre of passive resistance to Napoleonic rule gave it
shape and focus, if only at local level. It contradicts the picture painted for
France and the Rhineland of a declining popular religion, only unleashed
when the Revolution dismantled clerical control,7 or of a situation in flux,
‘as previously existing forms of clerical authority were dissolving without
anything definite emerging to take their place’.8 The French and Rhenish
clergy did not make common cause with popular religion as unreservedly as
their Italian counterparts, yet Spina and other Italian prelates ensured a
continuity in their hold over the laity, however compromised by the stan-
dards of eighteenth-century reformers. Whereas in other parts of western
Europe, historians detect a dangerous gap in relations between the Church
and the laity, in the decades between the Revolution and the ultramontane,
clerical-controlled revival of the mid-nineteenth century, this was not the
case in French Italy. In the Rhineland, popular religion was increasingly – if
not universally – regarded as a threat by the hierarchy in the changed
circumstances of 1790–1820;9 in France, the continuity between the attitudes
of the ancien régime clergy and those of the restoration period produced ‘the
inverse correlation … between formal religious practice and the practice of
popular religion’. The renewal of close ties between the French laity and its
clergy had to await the emergence of a new generation of priests, drawn
from the people, from mid-century onwards.10 Under the pressure of the
reforms of the Concordat, the Italian Church threw itself back on the
people and compromised with popular piety. In so disparate a country as
Italy, the Church responded to the Napoleonic challenge with considerable
uniformity and with startling difference from its counterparts elsewhere. In
the immediate context of Church–state relations in the epoca francese, this
willingness to turn its back on the eighteenth century and embrace popular
religion as a form of resistance spelt the complete collapse of any real
understanding between the secular church and the French.
   In the final analysis, the French were incapable of establishing good
working relations with any part of the Italian Church. The regulars were
simply swept away, more often than not with overt ruthlessness, while ulti-
mately it proved impossible to bind the episcopate to the regime on any but
the most utilitarian grounds. In general, the parish clergy certainly became


                                      178
