                        T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


Reich and the Third Republic, as in Napoleonic Italy, the Church turned to
passive resistance in the struggles of the late nineteenth century. The
changed circumstances of the period sharpened the edge through the new
phenomena of mass demonstrations and the emergence of Catholic political
parties – the Centre in Germany, Action Française in the Third Republic –
which were unthinkable in the first decade of the century. The tactics used
by the Mexican hierarchy during the Juarista persecutions of the 1860s bear
the closest comparison, in spirit and detail, with those first deployed in
Napoleonic Italy.38 The principles and the binding force of passive resis-
tance remained the same, however. Helmut Smith’s assessment of the
Catholic experience of the Kulturkampf can also serve as a universal model:

    The experience of persecution and resistance created the conditions
    for the formation of a Catholic community that transcended, at
    least in part, differences of class and status, a community that
    shared a common emotive rhetoric … . Herein lay the popular
    Catholic culture: it patterned proximate events as universal
    struggle.39

Neither the Napoleonic empire nor its successor liberal states could match
this. They had no comparable iconography and no deeply ingrained popular
traditions to sustain them. In Germany, ‘the reach of the Prussian state was
not always the same as its grasp’;40 in the Third Republic, ‘French society
and culture in general remained impregnated with religion. Neither Jules
Ferry nor even Émile Combes had changed anything in that respect’.41 In so
many countries the state – over the course of a century of unheralded
change – had achieved nothing in this regard, and learned less.

    The image of an embattled Church – wounded and bleeding –
    constituted a powerful symbol, one that placed a claim on the
    devout, demanding sacrifice and abnegation.42

This was the Church’s deepest, most powerful tradition. Governments
stirred it at their peril, but they went on doing so, partly because anti-
clericalism was a powerful unifying force within governments throughout
the nineteenth century. It defined the broad republican left for much of the
Third Republic, when it was otherwise riven by personal rivalries and the
deepening divisions between the socialist and non-socialist left. It provided a
unifying ‘republican spirituality’, expressing a philosophy of science and
progress against the clerical resurgence of the early years of the Republic,
even if challenged later by Guesde.43 Bismarck’s whole raison d’être in
provoking the Kulturkampf, in many interpretations, was to bind the liberals
to the government and, more profoundly, to shape a sense of national unity
and identity around the anti-Catholic struggle.44 It certainly bound the


                                     184
