                         T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


associative life, based on clientage, kinship, corporatism and shared ritual, to
the model of the secular, imperial state regarded by the French as the only
definition of political organization. As has been seen, the collective resis-
tance of the epoca francese took place in an atomized world that did not have
the wider organizational networks possessed by the mid-nineteenth century
revival, nor did it have any secular political framework above local level.
This did more than condition its character. In the context of politicization,
this atomized character was the essence of its political culture. The resis-
tance to French rule was meant to preserve exactly this and popular religion
– with its roots in local madonnas, local saints, confraternities and sacred
spaces – was the touchstone of that political culture, the conduit through
which it expressed itself and, in more practical ways, the means through
which it worked. Campinalismo, sacred and secular, was Italian political
culture. To refuse to recognize the politicized nature of religious resistance is
to miss the point in the same way as the French did.
   The exception to this was the Papal states. Here the nature of sovereign
power allowed an entire nation – one of the oldest states in Europe, what-
ever the French thought – to mobilize, peacefully, against the Napoleonic
reforms and foreign occupation. It produced something close to a national
campaign of disobedience, centred on the Oath and led by the clergy, but
that went far beyond these issues and came close to paralysing local govern-
ment and the administration of justice. The tactics developed by the Roman
episcopate to cope with the mass arrests and deportations were replicated in
Germany during the Kulturkampf and later in Mexico, when the whole
country was placed under a Papal interdict in the 1920s.55 The Church first
learnt how resist, tentatively, in the Archdiocese of Florence, and then in its
own heartland. It was a lesson it never forgot. The remarkable phenomenon
discerned by Helmut Smith during the Kulturkampf when ‘dutiful and law-
abiding Catholic men and women now held the authorities in contempt’56
appeared most emphatically in the Papal states between 1809 and 1814. The
response to the French occupation and the French reforms in the Papal
states set a pattern for the future on far more than a local scale, for in such
circumstances the Church proved it was truly a universal body, able to
oppose the universalist creed of liberalism wherever they clashed. It is more
than apt that, in its table of contents, a leading general study of modern
Italy groups the Church alongside the anarchists, socialists and the republi-
cans as ‘the subversives’.57
   The conflict described in this study was more than a clash between
Church and state. It was between the concept of society that emerged from
the French Revolution, as nurtured by the Napoleonic regime, and the
Catholic religion, as it was practised in northern and central Italy. Its
example stretched far beyond the Alps, if not by direct imitation in every
case, then whenever and wherever a set of historical circumstances presented
themselves. Its normative power is perhaps an even stronger indication of its


                                      188
