                         T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


aggressively anti-clerical policies culminated in a very Gallican dispute over
the appointment of bishops and ended in the destruction of Napoleon III’s
Concordat, the suspension of diplomatic relations between Paris and Rome,
and the separation of Church and state. In this sphere, at least, the Third
Republic might be said to be a truer heir of the First Empire than was the
Second Empire. Indeed, when Napoleonic policies in Italy are set beside
those of Combes, the latter emerge as the more moderate. Despite ‘a spec-
tacular exodus of monks’ when restrictions on clerical teaching were rigidly
enforced, even the arch-republican historian Maurice Agulhon concluded
that ‘many congregations submitted to the rules, and the network of private
schools was in the end little harmed’.31 The regular orders in Napoleonic
Italy were left no rules to hide behind.
   When the tensions at local level tipped over into confrontation, the
response of later liberal regimes differed not at all from that of the French in
Italy: Prussian troops swarmed into areas where Virgins appeared; seven
German bishops were gaoled and four were exiled during the Kulturkampf –
a smaller total than Napoleon managed in Italy – along with uncountable
numbers of priests who were briefly gaoled, harassed or forced to go ‘on the
run’ from pulpit to pulpit in order to avoid arrest for violation of the May
Laws.32 Again the only significant difference between these reactions and
those of the French in Italy is the relative leniency of the Prussians.
Napoleon ordered the Roman clergy – and others who supported them –
into far harsher exile than did Bismarck. Gendarmes made their appearance
when church buildings were barricaded against the anti-clerical laws in
1905–6 in France and ‘in rural territory … peasants armed with pitchforks
and cudgels rediscovered … the traditional weapons and actions of a resis-
tance uprising’.33 Nor had the attitude of the reformers changed. Combes’
ministers sought combat, ‘for they wanted to be a fighting government’.34
During the Kulturkampf there were German liberals ‘who viewed the state as
a social and cultural steamroller, and clearly enjoyed the vicarious experi-
ence of watching its power being applied’.35 Roederer had heirs, both lineal,
within the hexagon, and spiritual, beyond it. Confrontation with the Church
drew out the authoritarian, often brutal, element in liberalism throughout
the century. In this respect, the Napoleonic experience in Italy is a harbinger
of the future, and important in that it is the first incidence of how liberals
would react to Catholic resistance to reform when in control of a strong,
effective state, especially when that state proved less powerful than they had
assumed. They became bullies, but frustrated ones. David Blackbourn could
have been writing on Napoleonic Italy when he remarked of the
Kulturkampf ‘just as the actions of the Prussian state denoted weakness as
much as strength, so the violent bombast of liberal rhetoric denoted impo-
tence’.36
   The result for the state was ultimately the same too: failure. The ‘heavy-
handed response was not necessarily a sign of strength’.37 In the Second


                                      183
