                        T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


its religious policies to link the First Empire more to the Revolution than to
the old order.
    If Napoleon’s regime was indeed ‘the first modern dictatorship’, it was a
dictatorship of the modern left. As such, the religious resistance to it might,
almost perversely, be a forerunner – but not, it must be stressed, a direct
ancestor – of liberation theology, at least in the hands of the laity and at
grassroots level. The experience of Napoleonic Italy is, most certainly, an
important and early instance of how the Church and the faithful would
react and resist an authoritarian regime. For contemporaries – not least the
French themselves – the problems posed by the widespread passive resis-
tance provoked by their religious policies were far more pressing than the
conspiracies of the Carbonari and other conventionally ‘political’ sources of
opposition.52 The majority of examples of religious resistance in
Napoleonic Italy – lay as well as clerical, on the periphery as well as at the
centre – were not spontaneous or quietist, even if they were peaceful. Those
involved on both sides, at the grassroots, knew – and often said – that these
confrontations were about a way of life that the French were determined to
end and local communities were determined to preserve. The political aware-
ness of the regular clergy and the Roman priests was remarkably astute, nor
should this be wondered at. But it did not end there. Lay brothers, local
clergy and Marian visionaries were all combating French policies; they were
defying the new laws deliberately. Such defiance was one part of the asser-
tion of an indigenous political culture against the model of the state forcibly
imported by the French. The resistance was not, for the most part, spas-
modic or erratic. Even the apparitions and miracles continued beyond the
frequently quoted examples of the triennio. Fear of impending change and
upheaval are usually cited as the circumstances in which politics and appari-
tions and other forms of popular religiosity connect.53 In Napoleonic Italy
they persisted throughout the period of occupation which indicates not only
the enduring nature of the trauma, but also that these forms of disobedience
became embedded in local communities. Their longevity indicates not just
the tenacity of tradition, but the power of organization and the persistent
awareness of these communities in the face of Napoleonic rule. There was a
dynamic element in much of this resistance, notably in the ‘mobilization’ of
‘wronged madonnas’ in the defence of hill chapels and oratories. Nor, as has
been seen, were the authorities themselves unaware of this. If anything, the
French police may often have attributed too high a degree of politicization
to some of these events in linking them directly to Papal intrigue. That is,
they endowed them with the highly precise politics of counter-revolution,
rather than seeing in them the more diffuse, but still politicized, qualities
Colin Lucas and Roger Dupuy have called ‘anti-revolution’.54 Persistent
manifestations of collective anti-revolutionary protest – and those of the
confraternities are among the most tenacious – might reasonably be
described as politicized acts. They opposed one form of social and political


                                     187
