                         T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


their priests. The comparison with the German liberals’ view of the Church
during the Kulturkampf is too obvious to avoid. German liberals saw the
Church as a barrier to national unity, as well as to progress:

    From the liberals’ point of view, material and cultural ‘backward-
    ness’ went together: both were the product of a tightly disciplined,
    clerically controlled and ‘medieval’ Catholicism.47

Although within itself the Church was constantly evolving in the face of the
changes of the nineteenth century and responding to its challenges, liber-
alism – whether Napoleonic or German – saw it as an immovable foe.
   Taken together, this is damning proof of the narrowness of the liberal
vision of political culture and powerful evidence as to how much ‘liber-
alism’, so defined, was the ethos of the Napoleonic regime. The French
Revolution invented the framework of ‘conventional politics’ and, even if
the Napoleonic state neutered its representative aspects, its fundamental
preconceptions were based on that framework. If public life did not revolve
around public institutions at a national or imperial level, if it did not mean
service to the state, if it did not involve organized elections – even the rubber
stamping of electoral colleges or the sham of the plebiscites – then it was
not politics. The conventions of politics were set.
   It is the term ‘conventional’ that matters, however. There is a growing
sense among historians of the counter-revolution, perhaps more in a French
context than elsewhere, that an earlier literature has set the criteria for polit-
ical consciousness too high, certainly in terms of the early nineteenth
century, possibly even at a more general level. Historians of the French
Second Republic, if not without their critics, have opened a powerful debate
on popular, especially rural, radicalization.48 Donald Sutherland and Réné
Dupuy, working on Chouannerie, have done much to reposition the
‘threshold’ of politicization in the context of reaction. For Dupuy,
Chouannerie was the culmination of a political process begun in 1788, and
the point of the insurrection for the majority of peasants was to ‘recover
power that had been confiscated by fraud’.49 The clergy, and their own
opposition to the Oath which crystallised in the nocturnal processions of
1791, had been a part of that process. As Dupuy notes, the refractory clergy
were not wrong to say that the new regime sought to impose a new religion
on the people.50 This, too, was part of the process of the ‘confiscation of
power’. Sutherland, although less convinced of the sophistication of his
subjects, is still clear that ‘inarticulate and unconscious as it was, the coun-
trypeople’s notion of community was a critical factor in the ideological
make-up of Chouannerie’ and that Chouannerie was ‘one of the great moral
struggles of the revolutionary era’, in which the clergy and popular religion
had their parts to play.51 Politicization can come from the right as well as the
left, depending on the source of repression, and there is much in the ethos of


                                       186
