                         T H E WA R AG A I N S T G O D


German liberals together, however much it divided the German polity as a
whole or Protestants from Catholics.45 French republicans and German
liberals first buried other differences to fight the common foe in the nine-
teenth-century spirit of confidence in ‘progress’, and then drew together in
the face of their increasing vulnerability and isolation. This pattern was set
in Napoleonic Italy: Roederer and Tournon were juxtaposed to each other in
the new Roman departments precisely because of their diverse political and
cultural backgrounds, but the differences between them over religious resis-
tance were questions of nuance not substance. The ancien régime roué
Norvins and the ex-Terrorists Lagarde and Nardon had even less to separate
their views. D’Auzers, the moderate patrician, and Degerando, the repub-
lican intellectual, shared a common distaste for the Church, the faithful and
their ways. The powerful capacity of anti-clericalism to unite a very
consciously elitist elite, and then to cut it off from the society it was
supposed to guide, is already present here.


                  A theology for reaction and liberation?
The most important difference between the earlier experience of
Church–state conflict under the First Empire and the later confrontations is
obviously that of conventional political organization and consciousness.
Nevertheless the Napoleonic regime, like Bismarck and the German liberals
later in the century, conceived of political culture only in terms of the state,
extended from the national to the imperial but legitimized only by public
institutions and committed to ‘progress’. They saw the Church as an active
agent of opposition to this concept of public life, both in terms of the
universalist values it stood for and the cultural influence it exercised to the
detriment of public service. To Napoleonic imperialists, the Papal states
themselves were the antithesis of a polity. Norvins lashed out in 1813:

    Rome has never acted as a sovereign state in its dealings with
    Europe. Its government was neither commercial nor warlike in char-
    acter. It depended on the credulity of Catholics, on the spiritual
    influence of the great Saint, and so it could not make common
    cause with other governments, who all had age-old interests based
    on family ties, fleets, armies, and on tangible territorial power … .
    [T]here was nothing this singular people could have accepted, or
    understood [of such common interests], for it does not possess the
    most basic makings of a nation; it is under the yoke of its priests
    and its lawyers, who have replaced the victors of the Capitol as its
    rulers.46

Clericalism was the negation of civisme. The French believed Italians had
too narrow a vision of the world, rooted in a campanilismo encouraged by


                                      185
