

In  conclusion,  I  must  acknowledge  my  debt  of 
gratitude  to  the  following  institutions,  their  Ubrarians 
and  assistants  :  Archivio  di  Stato,  Napoli  ;  Biblioteca 
Nazionale,  Napoli  ;  Boston  Public  Library ;  British 
Museum  ;  British  Record  Office  ;  Cambridge  Univer- 
sity Library  ;  Harvard  College  Library  ;  San  Martino, 
Napoli ;  Societa  di  Storia  Patria,  Napoli ;  and  the 
Universita  di  Napoli.  I  am  also  indebted  to  the  Italian 
Government  and  to  the  American  Embassy  at  Rome 
for  assistance  in  obtaining  access  to  certain  MSS., 
to  Count  De  La  Ville-sur-Yllon  for  some  valuable 
suggestions,  and  to  Miss  S.  C.  Hart  for  reading  proof. 


PREFACE 


Postscript 


Xlll 


Since  the  above  was  written  more  than  four-fifths  of 
the  MS.  of  this  book  has  been  lost  while  out  of  my 
hands.  I  have,  therefore,  had  the  ungrateful  task  of 
rewriting  the  lost  portion,  and  not  being  in  a  position 
either  to  recall  the  words  of  the  missing  MS.  or  to 
undertake  a  journey  across  the  Atlantic,  my  work  has 
necessarily  suffered.  There  were  in  the  first  version 
passages,  extracts,  and  notes  that  were  taken  directly 
from  the  original  material,  and  that  in  this  second 
version  I  have  unfortunately  been  able  to  reproduce 
only  in  a  form  far  from  satisfactory  to  myself. 

Cambridge,  Mass.,  . 

February  1904. 


CONTENTS 


PART    I 


THE    NAPOLEONIC    EMPIRE    IN    SOUTHERN    ITALY 


CHAPTER   I 

State  of  Naples  in   1805 

Situation  of  kingdom  of  Naples — Geographical — Natural  resources — Origin  of 
people — Albanians — Mountaineers — Neapolitans — Continuity  of  customs 
— Oratory — Religion — Tlie  drama — Pulcinella — The  clergy — Education 
— S.  Gennaro — Italian  love  for  the  concrete — Rise  of  feudalism — Miser- 
able state  of  people — Low  morality — Feudal  law — Its  origins — Universita 
— Development  of  feudalism — Feudal  rights  and  abuses — Brigandage — 
Lazzaroni — Commerce — Agriculture — Finance — Public  debt — Fluctuation 
of  population — Bourbon  government — ^Justice — Foreign  policy 


PAGE 


CHAPTER   II 

Napoleon  and  Naples 

Ferdinand  I. — Mary  Caroline — Acton — World  politics — Taranto  and  the  East 
— Napplepn,  K-irig    of   Italy — Coerces    Naples — Elliot    and    Tatitcheff — 
Gallo's   warnings — Lacy   at  Naples — Treaty   of  neutrality — The   Anglo- 
Russians  at  Naples — Trafalgar  and  Austerlitz — PssihoXkSjX.Jtal^ — Retreat 
of   Anglo-Russians — Mary   Caroline's    negotiations — Craig    and    Sicily — 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation      .........     42 

XV 


xvi  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

CHAPTER   III 

Conquest  of  Naples 
(Feb.-June  1806) 

PAGE 

Policy  of  Napoleon — French  finance — Napoleon  and  Joseph — Is  offered  crown  ^ 
of  Naples — S.  Teodoro's  negotiations — Flight  of  the  Court — Collapse  of 
Neapolitan  resistance — Massena's  movements — Joseph's  entry  into  Naples 
— Task  before  the  invaders — The  Neapolitan  forces — Regnier  marches 
into  Calabria  —  Campotanese — French  at  Reggio — Neapolitan  flight — 
Corpi  'volanti — Character  and  causes  of  the  rising  in  Calabria — Military 
situation  end  of  March — Insurrection  of  Calabria — Rodio — Joseph  visits 
Calabria — His  portrait  and  line  of  internal  policy — Gaeta — Its  garrison  and 
commander — Commencement  of  siege — Unsuccessful  bombardments — 
Campredon  takes  charge — Hesse's  appeals  for  help — Smith  at  Palermo — 
Embarks  Fra  Diavolo — His  history — Smith  relieves  Gaeta — Captures 
Capri — Fra  Diavolo's  raid  and  treachery — Sent  to  Palermo — Sorties  from 
Gaeta — Smith's  proclamations — Progress  of  French  works — Massena 
takes  command      ...........     79 