


PREFACE  ix 

arrived  at  that  period  he  will  perhaps  agree  that  it 
would  be  more  justifiable  to  say  that  the  Risorgimento 
was  nearly  accomplished  in  1 8 1 3  than  that  it  only  began 
in  1 8 15. 

It  may  be  urged  that  the  scope  of  this  history  should 
have  been  extended  so  as  to  include  Sicily.  This  has 
not  been  done  for  various  reasons,  among  them  these  : 
that  it  would  have  been  destructive  to  the  unity  of  the 
book,  and  that  for  the  period  here  dealt  with  a  nearly 
indispensable  source  of  evidence  for  Sicilian  affairs 
remains  closed — the  dispatches  of  Lord  William  Ben- 
tinck.^  The  remarkable  conflict  between  Bentinck  and 
Queen  Mary  Caroline  is  the  key  to  the  central  period 
of  interest  in  Sicily,  and  when  entering  on  the  work  of 
collecting  material  for  this  history  I  could  not  foresee 
that  I  should  have  the  good  fortune  to  discover  a 
hitherto  unknown  manuscript  narrative  by  Queen  Mary 
Caroline,  in  which  one  side  of  this  political  drama  is 
circumstantially  stated.  As  to  this  MS.  the  reader 
must  be  referred  to  Appendix  D  ;  here  all  that  need 
be  added  on  the  subject  is  that  I  hope  to  be  able 
to  make  arrangements  for  editing  and  publishing  this 
valuable  document. 

In  the  course  of  this  book  more  than  one  new  reading 
of  history  will  be  met  with,  two  of  which  require  special 
mention  here.  The  portrait  of  Murat  is  so  far  removed 
from  that  generally  presented  that  it  may  be  thought 
the  work  of  an  apologist.  Nothing  could  be  further 
from  the  fact.     On  entering  into  the  preliminary  work 

^  Some  of  these  dispatches  are  accessible,  and  have  been  utilized  by  Mr.  Browning, 
Mons.  Weil,  and  others.  The  reference  is,  of  course,  to  those  that  have  been  specially 
held  back  by  the  British  Foreign  Office. 

VOL.  I  b 


/ 


X  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

for  this  book,  I  accepted,  with  at  most  a  vague  mis- 
trust, the   current  historical  estimate  of  Murat.     But 
as  evidence  accumulated,  my  views   became  modified, 
and  gradually  shaped  into  the  presentment  the  reader 
will  find.     The  facts,  the  evidence,  the  conclusions,  are 
put   forward    in   no  spirit    of  laudation.      It   may   be 
added  that  it  is  not  on  a  few  specific  items  of  important 
evidence  that  I  rely,  but  rather  on  an  accumulation  of 
minute  indications,  many  of  them  not  directly  traceable 
in  the  text.      Much  of  a  man's  character  may  insensibly 
filter  into  the  historian's  perception  by  the  handling  of 
dry  official  minutes  in  which  a  scrawled  decision  and 
signature  in  the  margin, — usually  nothing  more  than 
the  word   Tes   or    No, — afford    the    only    clue.     The 
examination  of  many  such  papers  may  not  result  in  the 
acquirement  of  a  single  definite  historical  fact,  yet  may 
go  far  in  shaping  an  opinion  of  character.     There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  both  in  the  days  of  the  Empire  and 
since  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  distort  the  propor- 
tion  of  the    personages.     Napoleon   was  undoubtedly 
great,  and  writers  promptly  combine  to  dwarf  the  men 
about  him  so  that  he  may  appear  gigantic.     But  his 
admirers    claim    for    him,   and    truly,   that   he   was    an 
admirable  judge  of  men  ;  if  so,  how  is  Murat's  extra- 
ordinary career  to  be  explained  ?    Is  not  the  presumption 
clear  that  he  was  one  of  the  six  most  serviceable  men  in 
France  ^     Except  Massena,  and  perhaps  Davoust,  he  was 
the  most  trusted  of  Napoleon's  lieutenants  ;  even  when 
the  end  was  drawing  near,  when  Napoleon  suspected  his 
brother-in-law  of  treason,  he  continued  to  treat  him  as 
the  second  man  in  his  army.     If  the  Emperor  did  this 