

The  kingdom  of  Naples,  the  continental  portion 
of  the  monarchy  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  comprised  about 
one  half  of  the  peninsular  part  of  Italy.  Its  northern 
boundary  ran  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Adriatic, 
from  a  point  about  midway  between  Rome  and  Naples 
to  one  not  far  south  of  Ancona.  Midway  between  the 
two  seas  rose  the  lofty  chain  of  the  Apennines,  at  many 
points  an  impassable  barrier  ;  it  stretched  the  whole 
length  of  Italy,  from  the  plains  of  Lombardy  through  the 
Papal  States  and  the  kingdom  of  Naples  to  the  extreme 
point  of  Calabria  where  the  rock  of  Scilla  marked  the 
abrupt  descent  of  the  mountains  into  the  waters  of  the 
Strait  of  Messina.  At  the  Gran  Sasso,  in  the  Abruzzi, 
the  extreme  elevation  of  nearly  10,000  feet  is  reached  ; 
and  at  all  points,  within  a  few  miles  of  Naples  and 
among  the  rugged  forest-clad  fastnesses  of  Calabria, 
the  lower  summits  are  frequently  clad  with  snow  late 
in  the  spring  and  early  in  the  autumn.  It  was  at  the 
extremities  of  the  kingdom  that  the  mountain  influence 
was  most  felt ;  towards  the  centre  two  considerable 
tracts  of  fertile  lowland  gave  it  a  different  character. 
The  smaller  of  these  lay  along  the  western  coast, 
stretching  northward  from  Nola  along  the  foot  of 
Vesuvius  to  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano  ;  the  greater 
extended  for  many  miles  along  the  Adriatic,  and  in- 
cluded the  rich  country  about  Foggia,  Bari,  and  Lecce. 
These  districts  and  many  of  the  mountain  valleys  were 
exceptionally    rich    in    soil  ;    the  whole    kingdom   was 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  3 

favoured  in  its  climate.  Everywhere  the  vine  and  the 
olive,  the  lemon  and  the  orange  grew  luxuriantly  ;  in 
the  volcanic  soil  about  the  city  of  Naples  two,  and  even 
three  crops  of  maize  and  garden  produce  might  be 
obtained  in  the  course  of  a  year.  The  neighbouring 
seas  were  as  rich  as  the  land,  and  rewarded  the  efforts 
of  many  fishermen,  harpooners,  and  divers.  Coral  and 
sponge  abounded,  and  fish  of  all  sorts — from  the  levia- 
than tunny  to  the  edible  sole.  Forests  of  oak  and  chest- 
nut clothed  the  mountains  of  Calabria,  and  might  have 
yielded  timber  of  the  finest  quality.  Mineral  resources 
were  fewer,  though  the  iron  deposits  of  the  Sila  might 
have  been  easily  converted  into  a  source  of  wealth. 
I  The  facilities  for  outlet  were  as  great  as  the  natural 
vresources  of  the  kingdom.  At  frequent  intervals  along 
the  rugged  coasts,  small  ports,  sufficient  to  accom- 
modate the  light  barks  of  the  Mediterranean,  might  be 
found,  while  larger  ones  were  not  few.  Nearly  with- 
out exception  the  important  centres  of  population  were 
within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast. 