

CHAPTER   VII 

Murat's  Reforms 

Military  preparations — Militia — War  with  Austria — Anglo-Sicilian  armaments 
— Eckmiihl  and  Essling — Stuart  sails — Takes  Ischia — Alarm  at  Naples 
— Naval  action — Preparations  for  retreat — Saliceti — Stuart's  position — 
Wagram — Brigandage — Ionian  Islands — Reforms — Finance — Continental 
blockade — Seizure  of  American  vessels — Educational  and  judicial  reform — 
Feudal  Commission  —  Zurlo — Police  department — Maghella — Saliceti — 
Annexation  of  Papal  States — Death  of  Saliceti — Court  parties — Neapolitan 
.Rationalist)  and  Joachim — Constitutionalism — Electoral  colleges — Public 
apathy ^^  Results  of  Wagram  —  Metternich  —  Napoleon's  marriage  — 
Napoleon  and  Murat      ..........  207 


xviii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

CHAPTER  VIII 

Sicilian  Intrigues  And  Demonstrations 

PAGE 

Invasion  of  Sicily — Mary  Caroline  and  the  British — Her  secret  communications — 
Castrone — D'  Amitia — Donop^rrMoli^^^^i^Jio's  expedition — Marriage  of  Maria 
Louisa — Fears  of  British— ^Napoleon's  intentiorxs>— Relief  of  Corfu — Affairs 
of  Spain — Cadiz  letter — BritisITTeeling — Mary  Caroline's  disclaimer — 
Joachim  arrives  at  Scilla — His  command  and  forces — Military  operations — 
Expedition  abandoned — Feelings  of  Joachim — Napoleon's  recriminations — 
King  of  Rome — Anti  -  French  decree — Quarrel  between  Joachim  and 
Napoleon — Caroline  proceeds  to  Paris — State  of  Calabria — Manhes — His 
system — The  brigands — Manhes  at  Serra — Capobianco  and  the  Carbonari 
— Manhes'  character      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .231 

CHAPTER   IX 

The  Defection  of  Murat 

Joachim  joins  Grande  Armee — Events  in  Russia — Commands  in  chief — Abandons 
army — Negotiations  between  Austria  and  Naples — Position  of  Metternich 
— Of  Joachim — Course  of  Sicilian  events  since  i8io — Bentinck — 
Negotiates  at  Ponza — ^Joachim  returns  to  army — Napoleon's  position — 
Joachim  and  Italy — Dresden  interview — Entreaties  of  Joachim — Negotia- 
tions of  Joachim  and  Metternich — Joachim  returns  to  Naples — Hesitating 

%.  policy — Italian  unity-^Fouche's  mission — Colletta  at  Bologna — Nugent 
at  Ravenna — Diplomatic  negotiations — Neipperg  at  Naples — His  letter  to 
Caroline — Austro- Neapolitan  alliance  —  Bentinck  at  Naples — Anglo- 
Neapolitan  armistice      .  .  .  .         .         .  .  .         .  -255 


CHAPTER   X 

Murat's  Incertitudes 

Armistice — British  attitude — French  at  Naples — Neapolitan  army — Generals — 
Rome  occupied — Advance  north — Joachim  at  Bologna — Tuscany  occupied 
— Eugene's  position — Correspondence — ^Decides  to  defend  Italy — Con- 
centrates on  Quadrilateral — St.  Dizier — Battle  of  Mincio- — Hesitation  of 
Joachim  —  British  policy — Bentinck's  instructions — Armistice  between 
Naples  and  Great  Britain — Nugent's  advance — Joachim  writes  to  Eugene 
and  Princess  Baciocchi — Champaubert — Napoleon  to  Caroline — Joachim 
to  Napoleon — Negotiations  with  Eugene — Joachim's  excuses  to  Bellegarde 