


CHAPTER   XIII 

The  Tragedy  of  Pizzo 

Murat  in  Provence — Waterloo — Royalist  reaction — Murat  pursued — Escapes  to 
Corsica — Franceschetti — State  of  Corsica — Gordon  visits  Murat — Decides 
on  expedition  to  Naples — Marches  toAjaccio — Carabelli's  mission — Arrest 
of  Otello — Correspondence  of  Murat  with  Naples — The  guetapens  theory — 
Macirone — Bastard  at  Bastia — Macirone  and  Carabelli  at  Ajaccio — Murat 
sails — His  plans — Lands  at  Pizzo — Situation  of  town — Coolness  of  in- 
habitants— Trentacapilli — Murat's  arrest — Nunziante  sends  troops — The 
news  at  Naples — Orders  sent  to  Nunziante — Court-martial — Execution 
of  Murat 386 


LIST    OF    MAPS 


Kingdom  of  Naples  in 

1806  . 

To  face  page       i 

Siege  of  Gaeta 

. 

„       „         105 

Maida      .          .          . 

. 

„       „         121 

Europe  after  Wagram 

. 

„       „        215 

Campaigns  of   1814,  18] 

5 

„       „        285 

Tolentino 

. 

„       „        369 

XXI 


PART    I 

THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE   IN 
SOUTHERN   ITALY 


ERRATUM 

Vol.  I.  page  7,  line  I'j^for  Constans  read  Constantius. 


CHAPTER   I 

STATE    OF    NAPLES    IN     1805 

Situation  of  kingdom  of  Naples — Geographical — Natural  resources 
— Origin  of  people — Albanians — Mountaineers — Neapolitans 
— Continuity  of  customs — Oratory — Religion — The  drama — 
Pulcinella — The  clergy — Education — S.  Gennaro — Italian  love 
for  the  concrete — Rise  of  feudalism — Miserable  state  of  people 
—  Low  morality  —  Feudal  law — Its  origins  —  Universita  — 
Development  of  feudalism — Feudal  rights  and  abuses — Brigand- 
age— Lazzaroni — Commerce — Agriculture — Finance — Public 
debt  —  Fluctuation  of  population  —  Bourbon  government — 
Justice — Foreign  policy. 

Towards  the  close  of  1805,  the  year  of  Trafalgar  and 
Austerlitz,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  had 
reached  a  crisis ;  a  remarkable  series  of  events  was 
soon  to  overtake  it.  The  people  of  the  southern  half 
of  the  Italian  peninsula  were  about  to  be  absorbed 
into  the  newly-formed  French  Empire  ;  they  were  to 
see  Napoleon's  kings  succeed  those  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon,  to  witness  and  suffer  merciless  wars  and 
dramatic  revolutions,  to  assist  at  the  overthrow  of 
feudalism,  to  participate  in  the  benefits  of  improved 
government,  to  feel  the  growth  of  a  new  spirit — that 
of  citizenship  and  nationality. 

To  understand  the  character  and   surroundings  of 
the    people    and    of    the    monarchy    with    which    this 

VOL.  I  B 


2  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

history  will  be  concerned,  something  of  their  past  and 
something  of  their  mutual  relations  must  first  be  made 
clear.  This  shall  be  the  subject  of  the  present  chapter  ; 
in  it  will  be  considered  the  social,  economic,  and 
political  conditions  of  the  people  of  Naples^at^  the 
period,  at  which  this  history  opens. 