THE    NAPOLEONIC    EMPIRE 


The 

Napoleonic  Empire 

In  Southern  Italy 

and  the 

Rise  of  the  Secret  Societies 


BY 

R.    M.  JOHNSTON 

AUTHOR    OF    'the    ROMAN    THEOCRACY    AND    THE    REPUBLIC,    1846-1I 
'  NAPOLEON  :    A    SHORT    BIOGRAPHY  ' 


VOLUME    I 


^'' 


MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,   Limited 

NEW    YORK  :    THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 
1904 

All  rights  reser-ued  \  ,.  ,-  X  O  \?  A.  '^  ^^^  * 


TO 
MRS.  W.   B.  WALKER 

A    KIND 
AND    VALUED    FRIEND 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/napoleonicempire01john 


PREFACE 

Naples  is  one  of  the  remote  corners  of  Europe,  but 
one  of  the  most  attractive,  for  Nature  and  History 
together  have  endov^ed  it  with  all  the  fascination  of 
the  grand,  extraordinary,  and  romantic.  As  one  gazes 
from  Posilipo  across  the  lovely  bay,  Capri,  the  haunt  of 
Tiberius,  arrests  the  eye  ;  to  the  left  Vesuvius  smokes 
watchfully  over  the  cities  it  has  swallowed,  while  in  the 
very  corner  of  the  gulf  nestles  Naples  ;  to  the  right 
are  Misenum,  Baias,  and  the  desolate  fields  where 
Virgil  meditated  the  JS.neid.  Every  promontory,  every 
island,  every  village,  every  stone  suggests  history ; 
and  wherever  the  eye  rests  the  azure  of  sea  and  sky 
frames  to  perfection  some  of  the  most  beautiful  scenes 
in  the  world.  Yet  it  is  not,  as  many  suppose,  from 
the  remote  past  alone  that  Naples  and  the  surrounding 
country  derive  their  mellowing  atmosphere  of  tradi- 
tion ;  the  moderns  have  some  claim  not  to  be  forgotten. 
For  the  history  of  ancient  Naples  can  show  no  more 
brilliant  or  romantic  figure  than  that  of  one  of  her 
modern  kings,  Joachim  Murat ;  no  more  momentous 
political  issues  ever  turned  on  her  possession  than 
those  evolved  by  the  gigantic  intellect  of  the  'Emperor 

Napoleon. 

vii 


viii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

It  is  to  trace  these  political  issues,  and  some  of  their 
more  immediate  consequences,  that  this  book  is  written. 
The  subject  has  been  much  neglected,  and  is  of  far 
more  importance  than  is  generally  assumed  in  histories 
of  wider  scope.  For  the  southern  end  of  the  Italian 
peninsula  was,  in  one  sense,  the  strategic  centre  or 
turning-point  of  the  great  war  between  France  and 
England.  From  1806  to  18 14  the  strength  of  the 
two  antagonists,  eagerly  watching  Egypt  and  the  route 
to  India,  balanced  at  the  Strait  of  Messina.  The 
British  occupation  of  Sicily,  the  events  associated  with 
the  names  of  Maida,  Ischia,  Capri,  Corfu,  and  Malta, 
have  been  undeservedly  lost  to  sight  behind  the  heavier 
cloud  of  war  that  rose  from  the  neighbouring  peninsula 
of  Spain. 

But  the  irruption  of  the  Napoleonic  influence  into 
southern  Italy  had  a  double  effect,  of  which  military 
affairs  present  only  one  aspect.  Not  only  will  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  struggle  for  the  Mediterranean 
between  France  and  England  and  the  tragic  fortunes 
of  King  Joachim  be  duly  chronicled,  but  also  the  fall 
of  feudalism,  the  creation  of  a  national  spirit  by  the 
French  conquest,  and  the  eventual  manifestation  of 
that  spirit  through  the  agency  of  the  secret  societies  in 
the  first  and  most  remarkable  of  the  Italian  national 
movements  of  the  Risorgimento.  It  may  further  be 
observed  that  the  date  always  assigned  for  the  begin- 
ning of  this  period,  18 15,  is  most  arbitrary  and  decep- 
tive. The  Risorgimento  was  essentially  Napoleonic  in 
its  origin,  and  its  history  is  meaningless  unless  drawn 
from  this  earliest  source  ;  indeed,  when  the  reader  has 