


PREFACE  xi 

during  the  last  critical  manoeuvres  of  the  campaign  of 
Saxony,  then  surely  either  Napoleon  was  a  bad  judge 
of  men,  or  Joachim  Murat  was  something  more  than 
the  empty-headed  beau  sahreur  of  the  legend.  The 
fact  isj  that  Murat's  figure  has  hitherto  been  reflected 
in  a  sort  of  historical  concave  glass  ;  all  the  features 
have  been  there,  and  in  their  due  place,  but  so  com- 
pletely distorted  as  to  make  the  likeness  undistinguish- 
able. 

The  other  matter  to  which  reference  must  be  made 
is  that  of  the  secret  societies.  The  point  of  view  I 
have  adopted  is  that  it  was  necessary,  however  deficient 
and  untrustworthy  the  material,  to  attempt  to  place 
this  essential  aspect  of  the  political  movements  of  the 
nineteenth  century  in  Italy  on  a  strict  historical  basis. 
The  evidence  is  of  the  most  distressingly  contradictory 
character.  There  is  little  that  is  really  authentic  for 
what  comes  before  1815  ;  after  that  date  the  ground 
is  slightly  firmer.  A  confidential  report  of  Sir  Richard 
Church,  of  which  the  MS.  is  at  the  Biblioteca  Nazionale 
at  Naples,  is  the  soundest  piece  ot  evidence  as  to  the 
secret  societies  with  which  I  am  acquainted  ;  it  affords 
a  good  starting-point  for  the  history  of  the  Carbonari, 
and  indirectly  shows  that  Bertholdi's  anonymous 
Memoirs  are  more  accurate  and  valuable  than  has  been 
generally  supposed.  Yet  whatever  care  and  judgment 
have  been  exercised  in  piecing  together  the  present  narra- 
tive, it  is  certain  that  here  and  there  inaccuracies  must 
have  crept  in.  I  have  thought  it  was  better  to  face  this 
risk,  believing  the  broad  outline  substantially  true,  than 
to  turn  away  from  an  important  aspect  of  the  history 


xii  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE 

of  this  period  which  serious  historians  have  hitherto 
refrained  from  touching  because  of  the  undoubtedly 
treacherous  character  of  the  evidence. 

It  is  not  only  in  the  matter  of  the  secret  societies 
that  the  material  for  this  history  v^as  of  an  unsatis- 
factory character,  but  generally.  Few,  if  any,  of  the 
contemporary  Italian  authorities  are  reliable  ;  the  two 
most  important,  Pepe  and  Colletta,  are  frequently 
unveracious  and  chronically  inaccurate.  The  docu- 
mentary material  for  the  period  before  1 8 1 5  is  slight, 
fragmentary,  and  difficult  to  find,  as  at  the  Bourbon 
restoration  nearly  every  trace  of  the  French  kings  was 
effaced.  Their  improved  system  of  administration  was 
retained,  but  their  records  were  destroyed  and  the  very 
mention  of  their  names  was  prohibited. 

As  to  the  manuscript  and  printed  authorities  I  have 
used,  the  student  must  be  referred  to  the  notes  at  the 
end  of  each  chapter  and  the  critical  bibliography. 
Appendix  K. 