

Nor  w^as  there  any  enlightenment  or  education 
to  check  the  gross  deceptions  of  the  priesthood,,__thie 
obscurantism  of  AutKonty.  The  Ignorantelli  and 
other  fraternities  made  some  show  of  pursuing  the 
vocation  of  teaching,  but  the  results  were  meagre. 
Even  in  the  highest  classes  knowledge  of  reading 
and  writing  was  far  from  universal.  De  Dedem 
speaks  of  a  daughter  of  the  Duchess  of  Cassano  who, 
on  leaving  the  convent  where  she  had  been  educated, 


14  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

could  neither  read  nor  write  ;  while  Roederer  goes 
further,  and  states  that  ladies  belonging  to  noble 
families  took  pains  not  to  learn  the  art  of  writing  lest 
they  might  be  mistaken  for  bourgeoises.  One  of  the 
greatest  noKIemen  of  the  kingdom,  the  Prince  of 
Paterno,  carried  ignorance  so  far  as  to  be  unable  to  say 
where  his  Sicilian  estates  were  situated.  If  such  was 
the  aristocracy,  the  brutish  condition  of  the  mass  of  the 
people  may  be  imagined.  Of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
capital  one-third  were  paupers;  they  mostly  slept  in 
the  open  under  conditions  little  removed  from  those  of 
animals.  Is  it  surprising  that  they  accepted  the  crudest 
impostures  of  the  priests  .^  Is  it  surprising  that  when 
stirred  to  civil  faction  they  should  have  displayed  brutal 
and  hideous  ferocity  .^^  And  yet  the  inmost  com- 
ponents of  their  nature  were  amiable,  social,  and  docile ! 
"  Of  Christianity  they  have  nothing  but  superstition 
and  fear,"  said  Taine  ;  and  it  is  only  too  true  that  not 
the  people  so  much  as  the  terrible  conditions  under 
which  they  had  suffered  for  many  centuries  were 
responsible  for  all  this  misery  and  degradation. 

The  ignorance  and  superstition  of  Naples  were  well 
illustrated  by  the  cult  of  its  patron  saint  or  city  god, 
Gennaro.  Januarius,  or  Gennaro,  a  Christian  martyr 
under  the  persecution  of  Diocletian,  was  worshipped  in 
the  fine  Gothic  cathedral  of  Naples,  displacing  Apollo, 
until  then  venerated  at  the  same  shrine.^  S.  Gennaro 
was  held  in  great  awe  and  reverence  by  the  Neapolitans  ; 
he  requited  their  affection,  and  demonstrated  his  con- 

^  The  conversion  of  Buddha  into  Saint  Josaphat,  as  traced  by  the  late  Professor 
Max  Miiller,  suggests  the  possibility  that  the  less  startling  transition  from  Apollo 
to  Gennaro  may  some  day  be  worked  out.  The  cathedral  is  merely  the  ancient 
temple  transformed,  and  it  may  be  that  the  miracle  is  merely  the  lineal  repre- 
sentative of  a  form  of  divination  similar  to  that  which  Horace  left  the  Jew  Apella 
to  make  the  most  of. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  15 

tinued  and  lively  interest  in  their  welfare  by  periodic 
miraculous  manifestations.  On  the  High  Altar,  near 
to  which  the  faithful  crowded,  the  solidified  blood  of 
the  decapitated  saint  was  exposed  in  a  phial.  In 
answer  to  the  shouts  of  encouragement,  or  abuse,  of 
his  devotees,  Gennaro  caused  its  contents  gradually  to 
liquefy  before  the  eyes  of  his  worshippers,  and,  by 
nicely  calculating  the  time  of  this  operation,  rendered 
more  or  less  favourable  auguries.  Thrice  in  every  year 
was  this  solemn  manifestation  repeated  ;  thrice  in  every 
year  a  devout  crowd  of  men  and  women  wailed  and 
supplicated  at  Gennaro's  altar-rail,  went  into  hysterical 
tears  and  raised  rapturous  shouts  at  the  saint's  response 
to  their  prayers,  deposited  their  alms  for  the  benefit  of 
those  whose  pious  ministrations  he  so  profitably  requited. 
Even  at  this  day  the  traveller  from  the  prosaic  West 
may  witness,  at  the  cost  of  a  modest  fee,  a  miracle 
performed  for  every  one  of  the  long  series  of  kings 
and  conquerors  recorded  in  the  annals  of  Naples. 
Gennaro's  blood  will  liquefy  with  as  ready  response  for 
him  as  it  did  for  Charles  VIII.  of  France,  for  Gonsalvo 
de  Cordova,  for  General  Championnet  and  his  atheistic 
grenadiers,  for  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon,  for  Joseph  Bona- 
parte, for  Victor  Emmanuel,  and  for  Garibaldi.^ 