

The  Neapolitan  was  as  deeply  attached  to  the  stage 
as  he  was  to  religion.  In  the  fourth  century  the  literary 
skill,  or  the  political  persuasion,  of  Gregory  Nazianzen 

1  Rolfe,  Naples  in  i88S,  I20,  12 1. 

2  For  the  practice  of  artificially  producing  these  voices  at  Naples,  see  Gorani, 
Mems.  i.  165.     It  was  made  illegal  in  i8o6  under  Joseph  Bonaparte, 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  11 

succeeded  in  supplanting  the  pagan  influence  of  the 
Greek  drama  ;  for  the  immortal  works  of  ^schylus, 
Sophocles,  Euripides,  and  Aristophanes  were  substituted 
the  devotional  compositions  of  Gregory  on  themes  such 
as  **  Moses  in  Egypt,''  the  "  Murder  of  the  Innocents," 
or  the  **  Sacrifice  of  Abraham/'  These  had,  after  an 
unvaried  course  of  representations  lasting  for  many 
centuries,  become  a  part  of  the  daily  hfe  of  the  people, 
and  perhaps  the  most  important  factor  in  the  formation 
of  their  theological  conceptions.  From  the  religious 
dramas  they  drew  the  symbolic  rites  of  their  societies,  and 
appropriate  images  to  express  their  joys  and  their  sorrows. 
But  if  the  Greek  drama  succumbed  to  the  irresistible 
efforts  of  Gregory  Nazianzen,  an  even  older  mani- 
festation of  man's  histrionic  propensity  managed  to 
survive — not  only  to  survive,  but  to  supply  Naples 
with  its  national  hero,  Pulcinella.  The  booths  in 
which  his  performances  took  place  were  generally 
crowded,  and  loud  laughter  greeted  his  buffooneries 
and  evanescent  witticisms.  This  character  and  his 
antics  had  come  down  from  the  ancient  Oscan  comedies, 
known  2isfabuU  Atellan^^  which  the  Greek  drama  and 
the  Aristophanic  comedies  never  succeeded  in  entirely 
supplanting.  When  Taine  thought  that  the  wildness  of 
imagination  shown  in  these  Pulcinella  farces  recalled 
the  buffooneries  of  Aristophanes,  he  was  perhaps  only 
noting  a  degeneration  suffered  by  the  ludi  Osci  from 
contact  with  the  decadent  Greek  spirit.  Since  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  comedian 
Fiorillo  elaborated  the  part  into  its  modern  aspect, 
Pulcinella  had  become  the  sole  important  personage  ot 
these  plays  and  the  comic  prototype  of  the  Neapolitan. 

^  Atella  was  a  small  town  on  the  site  of  the  modern  Aversa,  midway  between 
Naples  and  Caserta. 


12  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

He  was  a  long-nosed,  inane,  irresponsible  booby,  a 
pursuer  of  women,  a  sceptic,  easily  gulled,  never  open- 
ing his  mouth  but  to  utter  a  stupidity  or  worse.  He 
held  nothing  sacred — save  superstition  alone  ;  and  in- 
congruity never  disconcerted  him.  His  carved  figure 
might  be  seen  supporting  the  lamp  before  an  image 
of  the  Virgin,  and  his  theatre  might  be  found  estab- 
lished in  the  same  building  as  a  nunnery  ! 