

In  the  plains  of  Puglia  were  to  be  found  the  dullest 
and  most  debased  among  the  numerous  types  of  in- 
habitants ;  in  the  city  of  Naples,  the  most  vivacious 
and  interesting.  There,  and  there  alone  in  Italy,  some- 
thing of  the  Greek  spirit  had  survived  —  nothing  of 
the  Greek  virtues,  much  of  the  Greek  failings.  All 
the  cities  of  Magna  Grascia  had  disappeared  :  Kumas, 
Sybaris,  Croton,  Paestum  were  no  more.  Only  Neapolis 
of  the  colonies  of  the  Hellenes  had  survived,  and, 
under  Roman  rule,  had  retained  much  of  her  original 
character.  For  not  only  had  the  Greek  traditions  of 
philosophy  and  art  been  adopted  in  the  Roman  world, 
thus  aiding  the  preservation  of  this  element  where 
present,  but  the  flow  of  travel  from  Greece  to  Rome, 
passing  along  the  Appian  Way  from  Brindisi  to  the 
capital,  ran  within  a  few  miles  of  Naples,  which  thus 
became  a  natural  link  between  the  two  civilizations. 
In  later  days  the  Greek  Empire  of  the  East  rescued 
Naples  from  the  dominion  of  the  northern  invaders ; 
and  at  the  time  of  the  Norman  Conquest  in  the 
eleventh  century  it  had  been  for  three  hundred  years 
an  independent  State  maintaining  close  relations  with 
Constantinople  and  Greece. 


6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

In  considering  the  connection  between  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Southern  Italy  and  the  Ancients,  the  sequence 
of  historical  facts  does  not  present  the  only  clue.  The 
daily  customs  and  manner  of  thought  of  the  people  will 
afford  another,  equal  in  importance,  perhaps  greater 
in  interest. 

The  most  evident  trait  in  which  the  Neapolitans 
revealed  their  Greek  descent  was  in  their  mercurial, 
oratorical,  gesticulating  temperament — a  temperament 
so  completely  opposite  to  that  of  the  various  popula- 
tions about  them,  Sicilian,  Calabrian,  Abruzzian,  or 
Roman.  The  democratic  Greek  spirit  of  popular 
government  by  means  of  market  -  square  oratory, 
always  latent,  promptly  asserted  itself  whenever  the 
hand  of  despotism  relaxed.  Among  them  volubility 
was  spontaneous,  the  use  of  the  superlative  indispens- 
able, gesticulation  second  nature.  Is  it  not  thus  that 
we  picture  the  market-place  politicians  of  the  old  Greek 
states  ?  Perhaps  not  the  few  great  orators  whose 
studied  eloquence  was  to  become  the  model  for  future 
centuries,  but  the  great  mass  of  common  demagogues  ? 
Their  hold  on  the  fickle  crowd  of  citizens  was  won  in 
daily  open-air  contests,  in  which  only  a  pliable  face  and 
eloquent  fingers  could  carry  conviction  and  overcome 
the  manifold  difficulties  of  open-air  speaking.^  Did  not 
Demosthenes,  the  first  among  them,  say  that  in  action 
lay  the  greatest  virtue  of  the  orator  ?  No  man  is  more 
imitative  or  quicker  in  his  imitation  than  the  Nea- 
politan, and  it  may  be  advanced  that  in  his  peculiar 
trick  of  gesticulation  he  is  but  reproducing  that  which 
his  ancestors  first  caught  in  the  deliberative  assemblies 
in  which  oratory  directed  the  fortunes  of  the  Greek 