

^   In  the  Athenaeum  (1902,  305)  Signer  Lanciani  notes  an  interesting  link  between 
the  Vestal  Virgins  and  the  nuns  of  the  Catholic  Church. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  9 

as  the  mouth  and  chin  of  Hercules  at  Agrigentum  had 
succumbed  to  those  of  their  forefathers  ;  when  Raphael 
painted  Jonah  in  the  form  of  Antinous  he  conformed 
to  the  tradition  of  earlier  Christians  who,  while  adopt- 
ing the  official  Jonah,  had  carefully  retained  every 
appearance  of  their  earlier  divinity.  Illustrations  might 
be  repeated  indefinitely.  The  saints  of  the  Church 
were  merely  the  transfigured  gods  of  Olympus, 
subject  to  all  their  far  from  heavenly  passions.  An 
altar  at  Viterbo  dedicated  to  Santa  Rosa  was  inscribed 
with  the  following  verses  : — 

Quis  tamen  laudes  recolat,  quis  hujus 
Virginis  dotes,  sibi  quam  pudicis 
Nuptiis  junctam  voluit  superni 
Numen  Olympi  ?  ^ 

To  find  Santa  Rosa  compared  to  Diana  when  wooed 
by  Endymion  is  no  more  remarkable  than  to  find  Dante 
invoking  Apollo  and  his  most  sublime  vision  of 
Almighty  God  in  the  same  breath.  The  chief  cult  of 
the  Italians  at  the  time  of  the  transformation  had  been 
the  goddess  Cybele  ;  she  was  promptly  metamorphosed 
into  the  Virgin  Mary.  The  lares  viales  at  the  intersec- 
tion of  cross-roads  were  converted  into  her  shrines  ;  the 
ancient  ceremonies  were  uninterrupted  ;  garlands  and 
wreaths  were  still  suspended  ;  the  new  deity  was  invoked 
to  avert  mischance  and  bring  good  fortune,  and  to  this 
day  the  zampognari  of  the  Abruzzi  devotionally  tune 
their  rude  bagpipes  in  honour  of  Mary,  at  the  self-same 
spot,  at  the  self-same  shrine  where  their  forefathers 
sounded  the  tibia  in  honour  of  Cybele.  At  Naples 
itself  Diana  appears  to  have  been  the  goddess  most  in 
favour,  and  traces  of  her  worship  may  still  be  found  in 

^  Who  shall  tell  the  praise,  the  virtues  of  this  virgin,  whom  the  ruler  of  high 
Olympus  desired  in  chaste  espousal  ? 


10  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  cimaruta,  the  most  common  amulet  of  the  Nea- 
politans. An  acute  observer  has  even  traced  in  the 
sermon  of  a  Dominican  monk  of  the  present  day  some 
vestiges  of  the  formulas  used  in  the  worship  of  the 
Diana  Tifatina  of  Capua  fifteen  centuries  ago.^  At 
the  time  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  it  may  be 
much  later,  the  women  of  Naples  when  expecting 
childbirth  were  accustomed  to  hang  about  their  necks 
small  bags  containing  relics  of  St.  Come.  These  relics 
were  in  reality  small  Priapi,  and  recalled  one  of  the 
favourite  cults  of  pagan  days,  and  a  primitive  rite  of 
very  great  antiquity  that  still  survives  in  certain  parts 
of  India. 

If  Juvenal  was  justified  in  complaining  that  the 
gods  had  become  so  numerous  as  to  overburden  Atlas, 
Christianity  certainly  brought  no  relief.  The  extra- 
ordinary profusion  of  temples  and  ceremonies  of  the 
earlier  was  equalled,  if  not  surpassed,  by  that  of  the 
later  rite.  Begging,  once  restricted  to  the  priests  of 
Cybele,  extended  from  those  of  Mary  to  a  whole 
population,  and  became,  as  it  remains  to  this  day,  a 
national  misfortune.  The  emasculated  singers  who 
chanted  the  praises  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  were 
succeeded  by  equally  barbarously  used  choristers  whose 
dulcet  notes  proclaimed  the  glory  of  the  Mother  of 
Christ.^  The  festival  of  Hilaria,  dedicated  to  the 
older,  became  that  of  Lady  day,  sacred  to  the  younger 
deity. 