

The  miracle  of  S.  Gennaro  strikingly  illustrates  a 
marked  characteristic  of  the  Italian  people — the  con- 
stant desire  for  the  concrete  presentment  of  an  idea. 
If  the  worship  of  Peter  was  intended,  his  toe  must  be 
produced  ;  if  that  of  Januarius,  his  blood  ;  if  that  of 
Mary,  her  carved  image  festooned  with  ornaments;  if 
that  of  Christ,  the  sacred  heart  in  realistic  painting  ; 
if  that  of  the  Cross,  its  tangible  presentment  for  the 

^  A  description  of  the  miracle,  given  by  Count  Miot  de  Melito,  will  be  found  in 
Appendix  A,  vol.  ii. 


1 6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

worshipper  to  press  or  to  meet  with  moist  salutations. 
In  Italy  an  idea  must  be  embodied  or  symbolized  ;  hence 
it  may  be  just  to  pronounce  the  Neapolitan  Vico,  if  not 
the  greatest,  yet  the  most  typical  of  her  philosophers, 
for  the  whole  of  his  system  of  philosophy  turns  on  the 
interpretation  of  the  complicated  symbolic  device  that 
adorns  the  front  page  of  the  Scienza  Nuova,  The 
symbolism  that  had  centred  about  the  pagan  Pantheon 
had  been  largely  lost  in  the  Christian  metamorphosis, 
and  found  a  temporary  refuge  in  Neoplatonism.  The 
great  centuries  of  Italian  thought  and  art  resuscitated 
symbolism,  and  were  in  many  ways  a  reversion  to  the 
spirit  of  the  past.  When  the  love  of  the  concrete  and 
symbolic  animates  the  genius  of  a  people  dunng  an 
"age  that  produced  such  men  as  Dante,  Giotto,  Botticelli, 
Macchiavelli,  Michael  Angelo,  Palestrina,  or  Raphael, 
criticism  is  disarmed  by  admiration  and  wonder.  Of 
a  people,  of  a  spirit  that  could  produce  such  men 
what  shall  be  said  }  At  Naples  less  than  elsewhere  in 
Italy  did  genius  make  its  presence  felt ;  yet  the  quality 
of  mind  was  essentially  the  same,  and  in  the  varied 
gradations  of  intellect  that  may  be  traced  between  the 
philosophy  of  Vico  or  the  jurisprudential  work  of 
Delfico,  Filangieri,  Zurlo,  Briganti,  and  Giannone,  to 
the  burning  rhapsodies  of  the  improvisator e  Rossetti,  it 
is  impossible  not  to  recognise  a  breath  of  an  intellectual 
quality  second  to  that  of  no  other  people.  What,  then, 
is  wanting  ?  Why  does  such  a  fertile  field  remain  so 
long  fallow?  Perhaps  a  little  more  sincerity  is  the 
need,  a  little  more  precision  of  thought,  a  little  more 
freedom  from  the  distorting  inheritance  of  the  dark 
ages  ;  all  the  rest  is  there. 

Greatest  of  all    the  afflictions  suffered  by  Naples, 
inseparably  bound  up  with   all  others,   material,  ever- 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  17 

present,  immediate  and  brutalizing,  was  feudalism. 
Its  effects  were  to  be  traced  in  every  aspect  of  the 
social  system.  The  misery  to  which  it  had  reduced 
the  people  was  terrible,  and  in  a  northern  climate 
could  not  have  been  endured.  Even  in  the  city  of 
Naples,  one  of  the  largest  capitals  of  the  world, 
boasting  in  the  Toledo  a  street  unsurpassed  in 
Europe,  displaying  the  extremes  of  aristocratic  show 
and  magnificence,  beggars  walked  naked.  "  One  may  see 
quite  usually,"  wrote  King  Joseph,  "  men  lying  in  the 
streets,  naked  as  my  hand,  dying  of  hunger  ;  women 
and  children  also."  x\nother  writer  comments  on  the 
calmness  and  indifference  with  which  the  passers-by 
regarded  the  last  agony  of  a  woman  dying  in  the  road- 
way ;  the  sight  was  too  commonplace  to  arouse  the 
emotions.  Alongside  of  this  hideous  poverty  was 
invincible  indolence.  Roederer  in  his  correspondence 
reverts  again  and  again  to  this  apparently  incurable 
malady  of  the  Neapolitans  with  something  like  despair. 
Even  in  the  agricultural  districts  labour  aroused  little 
enthusiasm.  A  traveller  who  visited  Puglia  in  18 10 
described  the  state  of  the  peasantry  as  one  of  misery 
flanked  by  indolence.  If  anything  in  that  unhappy 
country  merited  the  name  of  national,  it  was  that  not 
infrequent  companion  of  indolence,  the  vice  of  gambling. 
In  the  streets  idle  men,  women,  children,  and  beggars 
played  with  the  hucklebones  dear  to  the  Romans,  or 
thrust  out  fingers  in  the  classic  game  of  mora.  Among 
the  aristocracy  more  advanced  methods  of  controlling 
the  exchange  of  coin  obtained.  The  publicist  Kotzebue 
states  that  the  principal  gambling-house  of  Naples  was 
kept  by  Prince  Rufando,  and  of  the  162  other  princes 
and  279  dukes  of  the  Neapolitan  aristocracy  more  were 
likely  to  envy  than  to  contemn  his  lucrative  eminence. 