

The  people  who  dwelt  in  the  land  Nature  had  thus 
favoured  were  of  ancient  descent  and  presented  some 
curious  characteristics.  But  that  descent  and  these 
characteristics  differed  widely  in  the  various  provinces 
of  the  kingdom.  There  was  nothing  resembling 
national  homogeneity  to  be  found  among  the  subjects 
of  the  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  save  the  compelling 
bond  resulting  from  the  exertion  of  personal  authority 
over  ignorance  and  poverty.  "  The  lively  Campanian, 
the  parsimonious  Abruzzese,  the  boorish  Pugliese,  the 
haughty  Calabrian  quarrelled  easily  and  showed  the 
heterogeneity  of  the  race,"  wrote  Cantu.  Not  only 
did  their  temperaments  differ,  but  also  th^^  j,ialects, 
to  the  point  of  mutual  unintelligibility.     Of  the  various 


4  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

elements  of  the  population,  none  showed  more  charac- 
teristic features  than  the  Albanians,  a  race  that  shows, 
according  to  Virchow,  the  greatest  cranial  capacity 
in  Europe.  Their  settlements  were  the  result  of  the 
immigration  that  had  taken  place  from  beyond  the 
Adriatic  between  the  sixteenth  and  eighteenth  centuries 
under  the  pressure  of  Turkish  conquest.  The  Albanians 
numbered  about  75,000  ;  they  retained  their  religion, 
dress,  and  customs,  and  spoke  an  Italianized  Greek 
dialect.^  Several  of  their  settlements  had  attained  con- 
siderable importance,  chief  among  them  the  large  town 
of  Catanzaro  in  Southern  Calabria.  Their  principal 
church,  situated  in  Naples,  had  been  founded  by 
Thomas  Palaeologus  in  15 18.  The  descendants  of 
their  famous  leader  Scanderbeg  were  large  landholders 
in  PugHa  down  to  the  nineteenth  century.  The 
Albanians  were  not  the  only  extraneous  elements. 
Passing  over  the  waves  of  northern  invasion  that 
marked  the  close  of  the  Roman  Empire,  from  that 
of  the  Goths  to  that  of  the  Lombards,  it  may  be 
remarked  that  the  wars  of  the  Middle  Ages,  especially 
those  between  the  Swabians  and  Angevins,  added  new 
elements  to  the  population.  Bands  of  mercenaries, 
mostly  Germans  and  Saracens,  were  brought  into  the 
kingdom  by  the  contending  princes,  and  seasons  of 
war  and  devastation  were  often  concluded  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  colony  of  foreign  auxiliaries  in  one  of 
the  abandoned  towns  they  had  lately  desolated.  Of 
these  the  best  example  was  that  of  Lucera,  for  many 
years  a  purely  Saracen  settlement. 

The  hardy  mountaineers  of  the  Abruzzi  and  Calabria, 
a  population  of  shepherds  and  farmers,  might  well  pass 
for  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Samnites,  Lucanians, 

1  See  a  paper  read  by  Prince  Lucien  Bonaparte  before  the  Philological  Society,  1890. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  5 

and  Brutii  whose  conquest  had  cost  Rome  so  many 
lives,  for  in  their  mountain  valleys  the  wars  and  in- 
vasions of  twenty-five  centuries  had  introduced  as  little 
fresh  blood  as  they  had  civilization.  With  them  the 
village  was  but  a  larger  family,  justice  the  sanction 
of  revenge,  the  vendetta  a  dearer  gratification  than 
living.  As  individual  or  clan  fighters  they  were  un- 
surpassed in  craft,  courage,  ferocity,  and  endurance. 
They  were  the  most  redoubtable  combatants  of  Europe 
as  guerillas,  the  most  easily  demoralized  as  regular 
troops. 