

The  people  of  Italy,  unlike  those  of  the  north,  had 
lost  all  nomadic  proclivity  long  before  the  Christian 
era.  Their  instinct  was  for  town  life.  In  Graeco-Roman 
days  this  tendency,  variously  strengthened  by  the  con- 
centration of  civilization  and  wealth  and  the  pressure  of 
warfare,  drew  the  population  into  towns  and  villages  of 
which  a  protective  wall  was  an  invariable  feature.  The 
peaceful  era  that  marked  the  early  days  of  the  Empire 
might,  if  continued,  have  resulted  in  a  more  even 
distribution  of  the  population  ;  but  the  fourth  century 
marked  the  beginning  of  a  period  of  disintegration, 
and  during  the  fourteen  hundred  years  that  followed, 
the  conditions  of  the  country  were  far  too  unsettled  to 
encourage  any  change  of  system.  During  the  whole 
of  this  period  the  people  of  southern  Italy  were 
misgoverned,  suffered  frequent  and  violent  changes 
of  rulers,  perpetually  endured  the  ravages  of  con- 
quest   from   without    and   of  spoliation    from    within. 


20  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Brigands  and  outlaws  were  the  only  part  of  the  com- 
munity that  did  not  seek  the  nightly  shelter  of  a 
fortified  wall.  As  timid  sheep  will  huddle  together  on 
the  approach  of  danger,  so  the  south  Italians  sought 
what  shelter  was  to  be  found  from  the  pirates  of  sea 
and  land  by  nestling  together  in  their  villages.  These 
were  sometimes  buried  in  the  recesses  of  some  forest- 
clad  valley,  or  more  generally  perched  on  a  lofty  hill  or 
cliff  that  added  the  defences  of  Nature  to  those  of  art. 
In  the  valleys  or  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  village 
stretched  the  land  that  produced  the  necessary  food. 
This  land  was  generally  uninclosed  and  used  in  com- 
mon ;  and  in  common  the  villagers  held  most  of  their 
property,  laboured,  fought,  lived,  and  suffered.  The 
affairs  of  the  village  or  town  were  regulated  by  an 
elected  body  of  what  might  be^  termed  eiders,  or,^ 
use  the  proper  terms,  by  a  syndic,  giurati  or  councillors, 
and  giudici  or  judges.  These  received  a  salary  of  a  few 
carlins  per  annum  from  the  common  funds.^ 

In  practice  it  was  generally  the  syndic  who  directed 
the  affairs  of  the  community,  and  that  in  a  manner 
profitable  to  himself.  The^governing  body,  together 
with  the  village  or  town  it  represented,  was  known  as 
the  Universita ;  despite  this  imposing  title  and  the 
ancient  tradition  it  represented,  these  communities  had 
little  real  power,  and  were  mostly  plunged  in  abject 
penury.  Their  lands  were  not  those  fertile  plains 
bordering  the  sea  where  the  inhabitants  of  Croton, 
Passtum,  or  Sybaris  planted  fruitful  farms  and  delight- 
ful gardens  ;  these  tracts  had  long  since  been  made 
uninhabitable  by  the  ravages  of  Saracen  pirates,  and  had 
become,  what  they  still  are,  useless  and  malaria-infected 
swamps.     It  was  among  the   hills  and  valleys  of  the 