

The  traditions  of  the  past  were  in  nothing  more 
faithfully  respected  than  in  the  immense  number  of  that 
class  of  the  population  that  lived  on  the  superstitions  of 
the  vulgar.  At  the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century 
about  100,000  priests,  monks,  and  nuns  ministered  to 
the  spiritual  needs  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples.^  Yet 
notwithstanding  the  cj^edulity^nd^jKility^ 
the  handsome  revenues  of  the  princes  of  the  Church, 
the  constant  benefactions  received,  the  enormous  estates 
held,  notwithstanding  an  annual  revenue  of  some 
9,000,000  ducats,  the  position  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  clergy  was  miserable.  Generally  coming  from  the 
lower  class,  poor,  ignorant,  and  vicious,  they  resorted 
to  a  variety  of  means  for  supporting  life,  of  which 
beggary  was  generally  the  most  dignified  and  honest. 
In  Calabria  small  villages  were  furnished  with  large 
churches,  and  correspondingly  large  chapters,  of  which 
the  canons,  dressed  in  rags  and  dirty  linen,  had  not 
one  hundred  francs  to  divide  among  themselves  in  the 
course  of  a  whole  year.  From  a  Cardinal- Archbishop 
of  Naples,  or  an  Abbot  of  Monte  Cassini,  feudal  lord 
of  twenty -two  villages,  to  a  barefooted,  unkempt 
mendicant  friar  the  distance  was  great.     Yet  that  dis- 

^  Serristori,  a  good  authority,  gives  47,000  priests,  25,000  monks,  and  26,000 
nuns  j  Roederer,  who  was  well  placed  for  knowing,  the  high  figure  of  64,000  for 
monks  and  nuns  alone,  (Ewvres,  iv.  62  ;  Gorani,  in  the  year  1 794,  gives  a  total  of 
87,000  J  Bianchini  says  100,000. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  13 

tance,  however  great,  was  not  an  impossible  one  to 
I  conquer,  and  the  man  of  low  birth  found  in  the  Church 
I  the  only  avenue  open  for  advancement.  To  this,  as 
well  as  to  their  superstition,  was  the  attachment  of  tl\e 
people  tor  the  Church  to  be  ascribed  ;  it  represented, 
m  a  curious  form,  the  embryo  of  democratic  institu- 
tions.Between  the  g^reat  mass  of  the  clergv  and  of 
the  people  there  was  a  perfect  similarity  of  views,  and 
I  it  the  people  were  generally  ignorant,  vicious,  and 
I  criminal,  so  were  their  spiritual  leaders.  In  the  pro- 
Vince  of  Puglia  in  the  year  18 17  one-fourth  of  the 
clergy  was  found  to  be  unutterably  bad,  and  mixed  up 
with  every  crime  and  outrage.  Priests  were  not  un- 
frequently  captains  of  bands  of  brigands.  In  the  city  of 
Naples  were  no  less  than  1 70  monasteries  and  convents ; 
the  churches,  as  the  official  almanac  for  1806  ingenu- 
ously states,  were  so  to  speak  **  innumerable."  Abject 
poverty  contentedly  feasted  its  eyes  on  the  gorgeous 
decorations  of  the  churches,  and  rubbed  shoulders  with 
sleek  ecclesiastical  dignitaries.  Free  distributions  of 
bread,  once  an  imperial  prerogative,  attached  to  each 
cleric  some  five  supporting  beggars  ;  and  thus  by  means 
of  this  most  ancient  and  honoured  of  political  methods 
a  strong  body  of  what  might  be  made  to  appear  public 
opinion  was  constantly  at  the  command  of  Religion. 