

VOL.  I  c 


i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Generally  speaking,  morality  was  at  the  lowest  possible, 
both  among  men  and  women,  and  the  character  of  the 
mhabitants  of  the  city  of  Naples  had  butTewl'edeeni- 
mg  traits.  The  expressions  of  a  contemporary  were 
perhaps  not  extravagant  when  he  said  :  "If  loyalty, 
honour,  firmness,  fidelity  to  institutions,  devotion  to 
country,  decency  and  morality,  social  virtues,  and  great 
traditions  are  the  real  constituents  of  a  national  char- 
acter, one  may  well  say  that  the  Neapolitans  have  no 
national  character."  ^  Neapolitans  agreed  with  foreigners 
as  to  their  own  unfitness.  Filangieri,  whose  personal 
bravery  was  exceptional  even  among  those  who  followed 
the  fortunes  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  wrote  to  his  son  : 
*'  Believe  me,  for  a  man  who  has  a  particle  of  honour 
and  of  blood  in  his  veins,  it  is  a  thousandfold  calamity  to 
be  born  a  Neapolitan." 

In  one  intellectual  distinction,  and  in  one  alone, 
Naples  was  pre-eminent  among  the  cities  of  Italy  ;  this 
was  in  the  unrivalled  doctrine  of  her  lawyers  in  matters 
feudal.  So  intricate  were  the  laws,  so  numerous  the 
tribunals,  so  litig^ious  the  contestants  and  so  learned 
Their  advocates,  that'  actions  frequently  exceeded  the 
ordinary  span  of  life,  and  occasionally  extended  over 
a  number  of  centuries.  For  the  possession  of  about 
half  a  square  mile  of  grazing  land  the  villages  of  Acerno 
and  Montecorvino  had  fattened  the  lawyers  for  over 
200  years.  Nearly  as  determined,  and  far  more  learned 
a  contest  was  waged  to  decide  the  tenure  of  a  plot  of 
land,  the  question  to  be  resolved  being  whether  Duke 
Ruggiero  the  Norman  had  intended  a  pious  gift  or 
a  grant  in  emphyteusis.  Similar  instances  could  be 
multiplied. 

To  realize  the  origin  of  the  afflictions  and  miseries 

^  Laurcnze,  Eaai  sur  Nap/es,  97. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  19 

caused  by  the  feudal  system  at  Naples  at  the  beginning 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  some  of  the  antecedents  of 
an  institution  so  terrible  in  its  later  effects  must  first 
be  traced.  For  the  present  purpose  the  view  will 
be  adopted  that  the  introduction  of  feudalism  into 
southern  Italy  was  not  the  work  of  the  Lombards, 
but  of  Robert  Guiscard  and  the  handful  of  Norman 
knights  who  conquered  the  country  in  the  eleventh 
century. 

To  understand  the  manner  in  which  the  Normans 
established  themselves  and  grafted  their  institutions  on 
those  they  found  in  existence,  to  appreciate  how  it  was 
that  the  system  they  founded  remained  in  vigour  for  so 
long  a  period,  it  is  first  necessary  to  consider  a  physical 
characteristic  of  the  country  together  with  the  mode  of 
settlement  of  its  inhabitants. 