

^   On  the  necessity  of  action  in  ancient  oratory  see  some  interesting  observations 
by  Boissier,  Prnmenades  arch.  Rome,  68. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  7 

cities.^  In  one  important  phase  of  this  history,  that 
which  deals  with  the  origin  and  methods  of  the  secret 
societies,  this  pecuhar  aptitude  of  the  Neapolitans  for 
expressing  with  a  barely  perceptible  muscular  contrac- 
tion of  eye,  of  face,  or  of  hand,  assent,  dissent,  and  a 
hundred  emotions,  will  be  seen  to  be  of  importance. 
The  dumb  language  of  Naples,  as  a  Swiss  observer 
called  it,  was  the  language  of  the  secret  societies. 

The  attribution  of  the  characteristic  just  noted  to 
such  a  remote  origin  need  cause  no  surprise,  for  it  will 
presently  be  shown  that  the  ancestry  of  the  principal 
legendary  hero  of  the  Neapolitans  may  be  traced  back  to 
a  civilization  anterior  even  to  that  of  the  Greeks.  In  the 
religion  and  superstition  of  the  people  there  had  indeed 
been  little  but  superficial  alteration  since  the  days  of 
the  prosperity  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Names  had  been 
changed,  but  not  ways  of  thought  and  belief.  Both  the 
inner  religious  sentiment  and  its  outward  ceremonial 
presentment  had  remained  very  nearly  what  they  were 
before  Jove  was  displaced  by  Jehovah.  The  religious 
revolution  of  the  fourth  century  was  more  significant 
in  its  political  than  in  its  theological  aspect,  nor  will 
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  southern  Italians  of 
the  present  day  believe  that  their  ancestors  were  capable 
of  a  sudden  transition  in  their  beliefs  as  the  effect  of  an 
imperial  decree.  Before  the  edicts  of  Constantine  and 
Constans  the  religion  of  the  Neapolitan  had  for  centuries 
centred  in  his  own  worldly  interests  ;  his  deities  won 
his  allegiance  so  far  as  they  affected  his  good  fortune  in 

^  It  would  be  out  of  place  to  elaborate  this  point.  It  may,  however,  be  pointed 
out,  firstly,  that  a  sharp  distinction  may  be  drawn  between  the  constant  and 
wonderfully  varied  gesticulation  of  the  Neapolitan  and  that  of  any  other  Italian  j 
secondly,  that  the  Marseillais,  who  also  represents  a  direct  and  continuous  Greek 
tradition,  may  be  distinguished  by  precisely  the  same  trait.  Gesticulation  is  not,  as 
generally  supposed,  a  southern  characteristic.  The  Spaniard,  the  Sicilian,  the  Arab 
will  gesticulate  little  more  than  the  most  impassive  Northerner. 


8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  affairs  of  life,  and  no  farther.  After  the  edicts  that 
imposed  Christianity  his  religion  took  a  new  name, 
incorporated  new  theories,  attempted  to  assimilate  a 
decentralizing  and  humanizing  political  movement ;  but 
as  for  his  inmost  belief  he  remained  inalterably  con- 
vinced that  the  new  Gods  could  and  did  affect  his 
daily  and  worldly  interests,  exactly  like  the  old  ones, 
and  they  secured  his  allegiance  to  the  extent  that 
he  imagined  they  would  continue  to  bring  him 
temporal,  but  not  spiritual,  good  fortune.  Even  in 
outward  aspects  the  change  was  of  the  most  super- 
ficial character,  and  the  masses  accepted  with  unanimous 
unconcern  the  substitution  of  the  Jah  of  the  Hebrews 
for  the  Jove  of  the  Cretans,  on  the  implied  condition 
that  their  ceremonies,  festivals,  and  manners  of  thought 
were  left  practically  untouched.  How  largely  this  was 
the  case  may  still,  at  a  distance  of  sixteen  centuries,  be 
traced.  The  intercessions  addressed  to  God  for  rain 
were  the  reproduction  of  those  that  had  been  addressed 
to  Jupiter.  In  the  numberless  priests  and  monks, 
ministers  of  ignorance,  fed  from  the  fruits  of  lucrative 
superstition,  might  be  seen  the  transformed  priests  of 
an  earlier  and  no  less  usefully  employed  religion.  In 
the  tonsure  of  the  Christian  monks  might  be  recognised 
the  distinctive  mark  of  the  priests  of  Isis  ;  in  the  dress 
of  the  nuns,  the  costume  of  the  Vestal  Virgins  ;  ^  in 
the  churches  might  be  viewed  the  columns  and  marbles, 
sometimes  even  the  complete  structure  of  the  temples 
devoted  to  the  earlier  rite.  The  statues  of  Christian 
saints  were  the  no  longer  popular  images  of  the  gods  of 
Olympus  ;  the  toe  of  Peter  in  the  Vatican  was  worn 
away  by  the  devout  salutations  of  later  generations,  just 