

It  was  from  the  necessaries  of  daily  existence  that 
baronial  extortion  derived  the  largest  revenue.  Mills 
and  baking  ovens  were  variously  taxed,  and  to  such  an 
extent  that,  bread  not  being  obtainable,  "  the  people 
were  compelled  to  cook  cakes  under  the  embers  and 
to  eat  them  for  bread.  And  it  happened  not  unfre- 
quently  that  the  Barons  instituted  proceedings  to  pre- 
vent the  exercise  of  this  miserable  privilege  which  even 
the  most  barbarous  people  enjoy.''  ^  Not  only  were 
mills  taxed,  but  the  exclusive  right  to  erect  them  was 
occasionally  claimed.  At  Cervinara  the  Universita  paid 
60  ducats  yearly  for  the  privilege  of  making  macaroni  ; 
and  in  1 809  no  less  than  forty-eight  villages  petitioned 
the  Feudal  Commission  for  freedom  to  collect  acorns. 
There  was  a  tithe  on  hens,  a  tax  for  keeping  them 
within  doors,  a  tax  for  selling  them,  for  killing  them,  on 

^  Bianchini,  296. 


28  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

their  eggs  ;  in  some  baronies  it  was  forbidden  to  dis- 
pose of  them  ;  in  another,  the  right  of  taking  as  many  of 
them  as  the  Baron  required  was  asserted.  On  fish  there 
were  some  thirty  different  taxes,  about  ten  more  than 
on  mills.  For  the  right  of  sending  out  fishing-vessels 
the  village  of  Scilla,  on  the  Strait  of  Messina,  paid 
250  ducats  annually  ;  while  such  ancient  taxes  as  the 
Sessanlino,  dating  back  to  the  Norman  period,  were 
still  in  force,  as  at  the  little  village  of  Castignano.  No 
article  of  food  escaped  seigneurial  rapacity.  Chestnuts 
were  taxed  ;  so  were  melons,  wine,  grapes,  figs,  honey, 
cheese,  nuts,  and  grass.  On  every  animal  alive,  on 
every  animal  sold,  on  every  animal  transported,  on 
every  animal  taken  to  water,  on  every  animal's  increase, 
on  every  carcase,  the  Baron  claimed  his  due.  At 
Caselnuovo  Monterotaro  the  Universita  built  a  cattle 
trough  to  avoid  that  of  the  Baron,  for  the  use  of  which 
a  heavy  toll  was  exacted  ;  no  sooner  was  the  trough  com- 
pleted than  the  Baron  forbad  its  use.  Fuel  was  taxed  as 
thoroughly  as  food  :  hearths  paid  toll,  while  even  pine 
cones  and  dead  leaves  did  not  escape  exaction.  Every 
impediment  that  ingenuity  could  devise  was  thrown 
in  the  way  of  husbandry  and  agriculture.  Rain  water, 
perhaps  owing  to  its  proceeding,  like  the  Baron's  right, 
from  heaven,  was  his  exclusive  property.  His  was  the 
sole  right  of  erecting  barns,  his  horses  alone  could  be 
employed  in  hauling  such  merchandise  as  was  adven- 
tured along  the  tracks  that  did  duty  for  roads.  In 
some  localities  the  taxes  on  occupied  buildings  were  so 
accumulated  as  to  make  them  uninhabitable.  Galanti 
states  that  at  S.  Germano  the  whole  population  of  some 
10,000  people  abandoned  their  houses  to  the  baronial 
agents,  and  sought  an  abode  with  their  cattle  in  the 
fields  under  rudely  constructed  shelters.     The  right  of 