

1  This  is  merely  a  rough  summary  of  the  matter  with  a  view  to  explain  what 
the  position  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  must  not  be  taken 
as  a  history  of  feudal  law. 


24  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

necessity,  on  every  right  of  proprietorship,  of  enjoy- 
ment, of  old-established  law  and  custom,  even  on  what 
they  made  but  a  burden,  on  existence  itself,  the  feudal 
proprietors  levied  their  tolls.  The  history  of  the 
accumulation  and  mutations  of  these  tolls  need  not  be 
entered  into  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  at  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century  more  than  1400  feudal  rights 
were  in  existence  and  exercise.  In  theory  the  feudal 
system  had  come  to  an  end  a  few  years  before  the 
period  at  which  this  history  opens  ;  in  reality  the 
burden  had  not  been  appreciably  lightened  by  Bourbon 
legislation. 

Feudal  oppression  probably  reached  its  height  under 
the  Angevin  kings.  In  the  fifteenth  century  the  evils 
of  the  system  were  so  crying  as  to  suggest  reform.  In 
1482  Ferdinand  I.  of  Arragon  decreed  that  his  subjects 
should  be  free  to  let  their  houses  or  lodgings,  to  carry 
on  any  honest  business,  to  keep  taverns,  to  use  wood 
and  water,  to  buy  and  sell  wine  and  oil.  This  decree 
proved  too  radical,  too  revolutionary.  The  good  in- 
tentions of  the  monarch  were  fruitless.  After  the  long 
period  of  wars  that  ushered  in  the  eighteenth  century, 
and  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the  younger  branch 
of  the  Spanish  Bourbons  on  the  throne  of  the  Two 
Sicilies,  it  appeared  for  a  short  time  as  though  better 
days  were  in  store.  Charles  III.,  a  successful  and  not 
unintelligent  ruler,  gave  promise  of  improvement. 
Bianchini  believes  that  a  great  change  was  eiFected 
during  his  reign.  The  change  in  reality  was  more 
of  detail,  more  administrative,  than  of  principle.  It 
might  in  a  distant  way  be  compared  to  that  effected 
in  France  half  a  century  earher  under  Louis  XIV. 
Charles  III.  issued  edicts  curtailing  several  baronial 
rights,  among  others  that  of  pardon,     tie  appears  to 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  25 

have  exercised  discrimination  in  appointments  to  judicial 
office  ;  he  compelled  the  Barons  to  reside  at  the  capital 
instead  of  on  their  estates,  and  generally  strengthened 
his  authority  at  their  expense.  Yet  the  oppression  of 
the  people  was  not  sensibly  lightened.  How  mediaeval 
the  spirit  of  the  age  remained  may  be  judged  when  its 
chief  philosopher,  the  admirable  Vico,  expressly  states 
that  on  questions  of  trespass  arising  between  two  Barons 
the  duel  was  the  proper  mode  of  trial. 

Under  Ferdinand,  the  successor  of  Charles,  whose 
long  reign  spanned  a  period  of  great  political  change 
(175 9- 1825),  the  prospect  of  reform  appeared  even 
better.  In  various  directions  improvements  were  in- 
troduced, though  they  largely  remained  a  dead  letter. 
But  the  direction  of  the  government  was  unintelligent^ 
and  had  there  been  a  real  desire  to  free  the  kingdom 
from  the  evils  of  feudalism  the  means  were  ready  to 
hand.  Itwas  evident  that,  as  a  feudal  possession  was 
not  alienable,  the  tenure  must  sooner  or  later  fail,  and 
the  property  eventually  revert  to  the  Crown.  These 
reversions  were  frequent ;  yet  as  they  did  not  form  a 
regular  part  of  the  income  of  the  Crown,  resales  might 
well  have  been  effected,  free  from  the  feudal  rights, 
and  with  some  consideration  for  the  advantage  of  the 
peasantry.  Such  a  system  pursued  for  a  century  would 
have  cost  the  Crown  nothing,  freed  a  part  of  the 
kingdom,  and  improved  its  conditions.  If  it  had  been 
supported  by  legislation  facilitating  redemption  from 
feudal  tenure,  and  if  the  Crown  had  shown  a  good 
example  with  respect  to  the  300  or  400  Universita 
of  which  the  King  was  the  direct  feudal  superior, 
Ferdinand  might  have  won  the  praise  of  posterity, 
increased  his  resources,  and  benefited  a  large  number 
of  his  subjects.     But  political  wisdom  was  a  difficult 