

Among  the  early  rulers  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples, 
or  of  Puglia,  as  it  was  at  first  called,  the  great  legislators 
were  Ruggiero  of  the  Norman  kings,  and  Frederick  II. 
of  the  Swabians.  By  them  it  was  established  that  the 
Baron's  fief  was  inalienable  ;  that  is,  that  the  Baron's 
land  could  not  pass  out  of  his  hands  in  any  other  way 
than  by  reversion  to  the  Crown.  So  rigorous  did  the 
construction  of  this  all -important  rule  become,  that 
Pecchia,  commenting  on  Frederick  the  Second's  con- 
st itutio  diva  memoria^  states  that  the  inability  to  alienate 
must  be  held  to  extend  to  every  contract  of  whatsoever 
kind  that  might  tend  to  lower  the  value  of  the  ^^i} 
Although  the  constitutio  diva  memorise  did  not  remain 
in  force  until  the  nineteenth  century,  an  outcome  of  it 
did,  of  which  the  effect  was  nearly  equal.  This  was 
the  system  of  fideicomessi^  or  trusts  on  property,  of 
endless  effect,  generally  intended  to  favour  the  rights  of 

^  Frederick's  better-known  constitution,  qua  sint  regalia,  need  not  be  noticed  in 
this  necessarily  limited  view  of  the  subject. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  23 

primogeniture.^  The  Courts,  imbued  with  the  tradi- 
tions of  feudalism  and  the  spirit  of  casuistry,  generally 
construed  these  trusts  in  the  spirit  in  which  they  were 
framed.  Thus  a  testamentary  disposition  would  be 
readily  enforced  that  directed  the  devolution  of  pro- 
perty for  certain  uses  for  the  duration  of  the  world,  or 
of  the  Holy  Sacrament,  or  of  bread  and  wine.  To 
such  a  point  had  the  system  been  carried,  so  inextricable 
was  the  maze  of  legal  complications  that  had  grown  up, 
that  money  was  unobtainable  for  any  transaction  involv- 
ing the  transfer  or  guarantee  of  immovables,  for  there 
was  no  certainty  that  a  binding  contract  could  be 
framed.  The  tendency  was  therefore  for  a  constant 
transference  of  land  from  the  weak  to  the  strong,  while 
the  law  stepped  in  to  prevent  the  breaking  up  of 
domains  once  acquired,  or  their  reversion  by  natural 
channels  into  the  hands  of  those  who  might  have  turned 
them  to  use. 

In  addition  to  their  tenure  of  the  land,  the  Barons 
had  acquired  vast  rights  from  the  kings.  Under 
Robert  the  Norman  they  had  extorted  the  so-called 
quattro  lettere  arhitrarie :  the  right  to  moderate  or  alter 
the  ordinary  law,  to  torture,  to  proceed  ex  officio  without 
previous  accusation,  and  to  increase  legal  penalties. 
While  such  extraordinary  privileges  were  wrung  from 
the  early  kings,  no  less  extraordinary  rights  were  forcibly 
acquired  over  the  people  and  their  property.  For 
every  reason  that  brutal  selfishness  and  ignorant  greed 
could  dictate,  spoliation  in  every  shape  was  wreaked  on 
the  towns  and  villages  of  Naples.  On  every  occupa- 
tion or  interest  of  life,  on  every  hour   and   on  every 