


26  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

end  for  a  Bourbon  to  achieve  ;  a  totally  opposite  policy 
to  that  indicated  by  reason,  by  interest,  and  by  humanity 
prevailed.  Even  in  cases  where  villages  belonged  to 
the  royal  domain,  with  the  privilege  of  never  being 
sold  out  of  it,  even  in  cases  where  the  Universita  had 
found  the  means  of  purchasing  itself  back  from  its 
Baron,  the  cash  offer  of  a  greedy  purchaser  would 
prove  too  much  for  the  cupidity  of  Monarch  or 
Ministers,  and  the  unfortunate  populations  would  be 
barbarously  resold  into  slavery.  In  the  early  days  of 
the  French  Revolution  a  Neapolitan  jurist  of  honoured 
memory,  Melchiorre  Delfico,  had  the  boldness  to  call 
public  attention  to  the  question  of  the  resale  of  feudal 
estates  by  the  Crown,  not  without  salutary  effect 
(^Rifflessioni  sulla  vendita  de  feudi  devoluti).  In  the 
course  of  the  next  few  years  several  estates  were  dis- 
posed of  under  an  allodial  or  freehold  tenure,  as  Delfico 
had  advocated,  instead  of  under  feudal  tenure.  But 
even  then  the  change  proved  more  nominal  than  real, 
for  though  the  feudal  designation  was  dropped,  the 
feudal  rights  were  enforced  in  their  entirety.^  The 
purchasers  of  land  no  longer  cared  for  the  empty 
forms  of  feudalism,  but  they  were  as  firmly  attached  to 
the  income  the  feudal  rights  represented  as  ever  their 
ancestors  had  been.  When  finally,  under  pressure  of 
the  great  popular  reaction  heralded  by  the  French 
Revolution,  the  abolition  of  feudalism  was  decreed, 
only  a  name  was  destroyed  ;  facts  were  left  practically 
untouched.  These  feudal  facts,  as  they  existed  at  the 
period  this  history  opens,  must  now  be  set  out. 

Feudal    tenures    of    some    fifty    different    varieties 
involved  services  in  person,  payments  in  kind  and  in 

^  A  few  Universita  were  successful  in  redeeming  themselves  at  this  period.     Thus 
Montesantangelo  freed  itself  from  feudalism  in  i8o2  at  a  cost  of  243,000  ducats. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  27 

money,  under  more  than  1400  specified  heads.  This 
does  not  signify  that  at  every  village  of  the  kingdom 
some  1400  taxes  were  exacted,  for  many  were  local  in 
their  application,  and  a  few  were  enforced  only  in 
solitary  or  very  rare  cases.  The  landowners  were  few, 
and  generally  non-resident ;  their  interests  were  con- 
fided to  rapacious  agents  and  lawyers.  Zurlo,  in  his 
masterly  report  on  the  condition  of  the  royal  domain 
of  the  forest  of  Sila  in  1791,  laid  stress  on  this  aspect 
of  the  question.  He  courageously  stated  his  opinion 
that  the  infinite  number  of  rights  claimed  against  the 
peasantry  was  of  no  use  to  any  one  save  the  infamous 
class  of  men  who  lived  on  this  state  of  things.  The 
conditions  of  life  of  the  peasantry  were  perhaps  at 
their  worst  in  this  district,  notwithstanding  its  iron 
mines  and  wealth  of  timber  ;  yet  it  was  bad  enough  at 
the  very  gates  and  in  the  streets  of  Naples. 