

The  lawlessness  and  brigandage  of  the  provinces 
was  representedjin  tTie  capital  by  the  turbulence  and 
crlminaiitv  of  the  lazzaroni.  They  were  the  fisher- 
men, street  hawkers,  beggars,  and  thieves  of  Naples, 
and  recalled  in  a  vague  way  the  Roman  plebs  and  the 
crowd    of  the   agora   whence    they   might    trace    their 

in  which  his  life  and  death,  adventures,  escapes,  deeds  of  daring  and  his  attempts  and 
skirmishes  with  the  Government  are  recounted  in  verse,  together  with  his  last  will 
and  testament." 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  33 

descent.  The  system  on  which  they  were  governed 
had  not  varied  much  since  the  days  of  the  Cassars.  As 
the  Roman  Emperors  humoured  them  by  the  judicious 
ministration  of  bread  and  the  games  of  the  circus,  so 
Ferdinand  of  Bourbon  declared  that  to  rule  them 
three  things  were  necessary  :  festa^  forca  e  farina — holi- 
days, scaffolds,  and  bread  ;  the  method  had  not  greatly 
changed  in  twenty  centuries.  The  lazzaroni  were  not 
an  organized  corps,  though  possessed  of  a  wonderful 
corporate  instinct  or  power  of  rapidly  actingjn  rnasses. 
Superstition,  laziness,  and  dirt  equally  commanded  their 
allegiance  ;  they  observed  no  law  save  under  compul- 
sion; they  lived  free  from  the  conventional  trammels 
of  society.  Many  of  them  had  neither  family  nor 
name  ;  one  out  of  three  answered  to  that  of  S pose  to. 
This  word  was  derived  from  the  esposti^  or  foundhngs, 
who  were  numerous,  and  were  cared  for  in  one  of  the 
largest  charitable  institutions  of  Naples..  The  food  of 
the  lazzaroni  was  chiefly  bread,  macaroni,  and  fish  ; 
their  usual  habitations  by  night  were  baskets  made  of 
osiers  ;  their  favourite  haunts  were  along  the  sea  front, 
between  the  port  and  the  Mercato,  or  at  the  foot  of 
the  Pizzofalcone  along  the  beach  of  Santa  Lucia.  As 
for  their  clothing  it  was  generally  of  the  poorest  and 
scantiest,  relieved  by  some  gaudy  scarf,  handkerchief, 
or  cap.  Travellers  from  the  north  remarked  on  the 
contrast  presented  by  the  fashionable  Toledo,  where, 
amidst  all  the  luxury  and  display  of  wealth,  lazzaroni 
might  be  seen  lying  devoid  of  clothing  by  the  entrances 
of  shops,  begging  for  bread. 

Despite  their  abject  condition  and  ignorance,  the 
lazzaroni  were  a  power  in  the  State.  Their  numbers 
were  formidable,  perhaps  150,000  before  1799.  On 
more  than   one   occasion   they   had   asserted    their   in- 

VOL.   I  D 


34  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fluence  in  no  uncertain  manner.  In  the  seventeenth 
century,  at  a  time  when  the  misery  and  terrible  con- 
ditions of  the  poor  were  even  more  grievous  than 
usual,  the  imposition  of  an  extra  tax  on  fruit  hawkers 
led  to  an  insurrection.  Under  the  famous  Masaniello 
they  obtained  control  of  the  city,  and  for  some  time 
carried  on  a  republican  form  of  government  with  the 
assistance  of  the  French  under  the  Due  de  Guise. 
Their  most  remarkable  exploits  were  performed  two 
centuries  later.  In  1799,  under  the  inspiration  of  the 
clergy,  they  rose  and  opposed  the  entrance  of  the  army 
of  the  French  Republic  into  the  city.  General  Cham- 
pionnet's  force  was  small  but  finely  led  and  composed 
of  veteran  battalions,  yet  the  lazzaroni  for  several  days 
made  victory  uncertain.  At  the  Porta  Capuana  they 
died  in  thousands,  and  thrice  drove  out  the  redoubtable 
grenadiers  of  the  Revolution ;  it  was  only  after  a 
slaughter  such  as  General  Thiebault  declared  he  never 
saw  equalled  in  all  the  Napoleonic  campaigns,  that  their 
desperate  resistance  was  overcome.  If  their  defence  of 
the  city  had  been  creditable,  the  horrors  they  per- 
petrated a  few  months  later,  on  the  retirement  of  the 
French  from  Naples  and  the  fall  of  the  democratic 
government  they  had  instituted,  have  perhaps  not  been 
surpassed  in  modern  European  history.  To  the  atro- 
cities of  the  Spaniards  in  the  Netherlands,  to  those  of 
the  Septembriseurs  and  Terrorists  in  France,  must  those 
of  the  lazzaroni  of  Naples  be  compared.  The  catalogue 
of  their  misdeeds  is  fortunately  not  entitled  to  find  a 
place  here. 