


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  29 

pasturing  on  the  common  land  was  taxed,  and  also  that 
of  using  a  spade  or  a  hoe  ;  while  every  harvester  paid  his 
due  to  the  Baron's  chest,  and  even  the  seed  reserved 
for  the  next  year's  crop  did  not  escape  imposition. 
Winspeare,  whose  authority  on  this  subject  is  in- 
disputable, furnishes  the  additional  detail  that  this 
abuse  was  worse  in  its  application,  and  that  in  the 
division  of  the  seed  the  Baron  and  his  agents  would 
make  no  allowance  for  a  bad  yield  or  damaged 
crops. 

The  tithes  could  be  so  called  only  by  euphemism, 
for  they  were  generally  extended  to  a  third,  a  fourth, 
or  even  a  half,  as  is  eloquently  testified  by  the  names 
of  such  taxes  as  the  mezzapietra^  mezzasemenza^  mezza- 
gallina^  and  others.  At  Christmastide  the  Baron, 
anxious  to  celebrate  this  festival  in  a  truly  religious 
spirit,  imposed  additional  taxation  ;  on  the  occasion  of 
his  marriage,  or  of  the  birth  of  an  heir,  for  the  main- 
tenance of  his  dogs,  or  for  that  of  his  agent,  again  the 
poor  man  had  to  pay.  The  Baron  had  an  exclusive 
right  to  snow,  to  the  dung  dropped  in  the  market- 
place ;  on  every  sale  at  a  fair  he  levied  a  percentage  ; 
every  ladder,  every  tree,  every  balcony,  every  wall, 
every  garden,  was  made  a  source  of  income.  At  Tufara 
the  peasant  was  made  to  pay  for  the  notable  privilege 
of  throwing  the  immondezze  of  the  household  out  of 
his  windows  into  the  street,  while  at  Conversano  the 
cause  of  sanitation  was  dissimilarly  advanced  by  the 
Baron,  who  exacted  payment  for  the  privilege  of  con- 
structing a  drain.  To__such_a_systemjhere^^ 
be  one  limit  worthy  of  serious  attention,  that  of  the^ 
resources  and  long-suffering  of  the  people^^TNo  con- 
lideration  oflaw,  of  justice,  of'oFTiumalTity^uld  be  said 
to  be  operative  when  a  Baron  imposed  a  fresh  tax  for 


30  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

what  he  chose  to  describe  as  family  reasons — ragione 
di  famiglia^  or  even,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Universita 
of  Poggiardo,  for  reasons  feelingly  described  as 
unknown. 

One  class  of  feudal  imposition  has  not  yet,  however, 
been  dealt  with,  that  relating  to  personal  services.  In 
this  respect  there  had  been  considerable  improvement 
since  the  days  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  since  the 
mediaeval  period  ;  yet  things  were  bad  enough.  In 
many  of  the  Universita  the  peasantry  were  still  in  a 
state  little  removed  from  serfage.  In  theory  the  nature 
of  their  services  to  the  Baron  might  vary  according  to 
their  standing  as  angarii  or  perangarii.  In  the  first 
case  the  services  were  rendered  at  the  expense  of  the 
Baron,  in  the  latter  at  the  expense  of  the  peasant. 
Ducange,  however,  convincingly  gives  the  following 
definition  :  "  Engaraire,  c'est  a  saver  qu'ils  laboreront 
continuellement.*'  Whether  angarii  or  perangarii y  few 
who  have  examined  the  records  of  King  Joachim's  Feudal 
Commission  will  doubt  that  the  unfortunate  bondsmen 
of  feudalism  laboured  continuously  and  profited  nothing. 
If  the  Baron  had  an  exclusive  right  to  snow,  he  also 
exercised  that  of  compelling  his  peasantry  to  convey  it 
to  his  cellars  ;  when  the  olive  or  the  grape  was  ripe, 
the  Baron's  crop  must  be  gratuitously  picked  while  the 
peasant's  waited  and  sometimes  spoiled.  A  pleasantly 
named  right  was  that  to  the  Giornata  d'amore^  but  when 
this  day's  free  labour  was  extended  to  four  days  out  of 
the  seven,  its  agreeable  description  hardly  sufficed  to 
conceal  the  appearance  of  actual  slavery.  In  one  case, 
of  which  the  record  still  exists,  four  men  had  been 
worked  continuously  for  twelve  months,  and  had  re- 
ceived nothing.  It  must,  however,  be  said  that  the 
most    odious   form  of  personal    service,   the    right    of 