


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  37 

small  proportion  towards  the  expenses  of  the  State,  the 
ancient  feudal  taxes  such  as  the  adoa^  rilevio^  cavallo 
?nontato^  and  others  producing  little.  The  incidence 
of  taxation  as  between  the  baronial  proprietor  and  the 
peasant  is  well  shown  in  the  estimate  of  revenue  for  the 
year  1790  given  by  Bianchini.  Out  of  a  total  of 
16,700,000  ducats  the  Universita  paid  in  direct  taxes 
2,100,000,  the  arrendamenti  yielded  3,000,000,  the 
gahella  2,900,000  ;  the  people  further  paid  in  various 
feudal  taxes  1,600,000,  and  in  support  of  the  church 
3,000,000.  The  Barons,  on  the  other  hand,  paid  as 
adoa  248,579  ducats,  and  under  less  important  heads 
an  insignificant  sum.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say, 
therefore,  that  the  poor  practically  supported  State. 
Crown^nd  aristocracy.  It  is  not  possible  to  advance 
what  the  public  debt  was,  for  no  one  appears  to  have  A  i 
known  ;  according  to  Bianchini,  whose  opinion  carries  (^  *  . 
weight,  it  probably  represented  in   1806  not  less  than  tv 

130,000,000  ducats. 

The  total  of  the  population  thus  burdened  had  risen 
from  about  one  and  a  half  millions  under  the  Angevin 
kings  to  five  millions  under  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon. 
But  it  was  subject  to  great  and  violent  fluctuations, 
owing  to  the  heavy  mortality  attending  the  political 
and  economic  accidents  of  the  period.  Thus  in  1 803 
and  1804  deaths  greatly  exceeded  births  in  the  city  of 
Naples,  and  in  the  year  i2^Q__the  lazzaroni  are  said 
to  have  J)een  diminished  by  no  less  than  100,000. 

Inseparably  bound  up  with  the  hideous  system  of 
feudalism  that  afilicted  this  unfortunate  kingdom  was 
the  ignorant,  brutish  selfishness  and  rapacity  of  those 
who  had  for  so  many  centuries  governed  it.  The 
Swabian  kings  may  have  been  better  than  the  Angevins, 
the    Bourbons    may  have    been    less   greedy    than    the 


38  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Spanish  viceroys,  yet  in  the  year  1805  it  might  well  be 
thought  that  this  cup  of  human  misery  was  full ;  that 
the  iniquities,  by  which  the  millions  of  Naples  were 
herded  together  without  education,  without  national  or 
civic  sentiments,  without  any  of  the  rights  that  breed 
self-respect,  honour,  courage,  and  virtue,  had  trans- 
gressed the  bounds  appointed  by  nature. 

But  relief  was  at  hand,  for  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon 
was  soon  to  be  driven  from  the  kingdom.  Something 
of  the  spirit  of  his  reign  has  already  been  seen  in  connec- 
tion with  the  feudal  question.  The  chief  reform  effected 
was  perhaps  that  in  judicial  procedure  whereby  judges 
were  required  to  state  the  reasons  for  their  decisions  in 
writing.  Its  effects  could  not  be  far-reaching  ;  judicial 
office  was  sold,  the  profit  being  a  royal  perquisite  ;  the 
law  was  chaotic  ;  the  decrees  of  twelve  conflicting  juris- 
dictions filled  a  hundred  volumes,  while  the  criminal  law 
was  buried  below  a  mass  of  precedents  and  customs.  The 
confusion  of  Roman,  canon,  and  feudal  law,  of  Norman 
and  Swabian  constitutions,  Spanish  pragmatic  decrees, 
private  statutes  of  the  city  of  Naples,  and  precedents 
of  the  Sommaria,  Vicaria,  and  other  tribunals,  would 
have  been  inextricable  had  not  the  sovereip^n's  preroga- 
tive made  his  decision  more  important  than  that  of  any 
or  all  of  his  judges.  Royal  interference  was  constant, 
exceptional  laws  and  speciallv  constituted  tribunals 
were  favourite  remedies,  while  before  the  opening  of 
any  trial  that  interested  the  King  or  his  Ministers  the 
sentence  was  dictated  to  those  whose  theoretical  duty  it 
was  to  expound  the  law  and  dispense  justice. 