

^  For  carlins,  and  all  Neapolitan  measures,  money,  etc.,  see  Appendix  B,  vol.  ii. 


CHAP.  I         STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  21 

Apennines  that  the   inhabitants    sought  refuge    and   a 
precarious  existence. 

This  peculiarity  in  the  conditions  of  life  of  the 
/  population  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  Normans  and 
to  the  development  of  the  feudal  system.  The  towns 
and  villages  were  singly  too  weak  to  resist  the  con- 
querors, and  quickly  passed  under  their  yoke.  When 
they  were  not  seized  by  force  they  were  occupied  at 
the  request  of  the  people,  who,  of  two  evils,  preferred  a 
protector  to  a  spoiler.  The  existing  fortification  was 
generally  strengthened  by  the  erection  of  a  baronial 
castle,  and  the  inhabitants,  whether  willingly  or  not,  and 
by  various  methods  of  absorption,  became  the  Baron^s 
feudal  dependents.  In  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
centuries  most  of  the  large  cities,  too  often  scourged, 
had  become  deserted ;  the  smaller  ones,  finding  no 
support  in  the  royal  government,  called  in  powerful 
Barons  as  their  only  possible  safeguard.  In  the 
fifteenth  century,  of  1500  Universita  in  the  kingdom, 
only  about  100  had  escaped  feudal  ownership.  A 
century  later  the  figures  were  little  changed  ;  but  in  the 
year  1786  very  few  of  the  free  Universita  survived, 
and  out  of  a  total  of  some  2000,  384  belonged  to  the 
Crown,  the  rest  to  the  Barons.-^ 

The  legal  and  constitutional  system  established  by 
the  Normans  in  southern  Italy  may  be  regarded  as  a 
fairly  uniform  superimposition  of  the  feudal  law  on  the 
great  variety  of  local  laws,  some  of  Roman,  some  of 
Greek,  some  of  Lombard,  some  of  Eastern,  some  of 
local  origin.  In  this  confusion  the  decrees  of  a  con- 
queror prevailed,  and  gave  some  sort  of  harmony  to 
the  whole.     From  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  when 

^  Moles,  quoted  by  Bianchini  ;  the  latter,  somewhat  contradictorily,  gives  a  total 
of  150  casali  or  hamlets  free  from  feudal  tenure  in  Puglia  alone  in  the  year  1586. 


22  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Ugolino  da  Porta  Ravignano  added  his  Decima  Col- 
lazione  to  the  Justinian  Code,  feudal  law  may  be  said 
to  have  prevailed  officially.  As  in  other  parts  of 
Europe  so  in  Naples,  it  rapidly  ran  through  its  period 
of  usefulness,  rapidly  developed  its  inherent  vices. 
The  property  of  the  Universita,  the  services  personal 
and  in  kind  of  the  people,  soon  depended  on  the 
Barons.  They  in  turn  yielded  service  and  paid  dues  to 
the  King  ;  but  their  greater  intelligence  and  strength, 
together  with  their  corporate  feeling,  made  them  equally 
able  to  resist  the  demands  of  the  Crown  and  to  impose 
their  commands  on  the  people.  The  helpless  inhabit- 
ants of  the  Universita  saw  their  every  property,  their 
every  right  disappear  into  the  bottomless  pit  of  feudal 
proprietorship. 