


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  31 

cunnatico  or  feminarum^  had  everywhere  fallen  into 
desuetude  or  been  compounded  for  money.^ 

With  the  feudal  burdens  such  as  they  have  just  been 
described,  it  was  not  remarkable  that  lawlessness  was 
universal.  For  centuries  brigandage  had  flourished. 
From  the  time  when  the  piratical  brigands  from  Nor- 
mandy had  assigned  to  themselves  the  Crown  and  the 
baronies  of  the  kingdom,  robbery  by  force  of  arms  had 
been  an  all-engrossing,  all  but  honoured  avocation.  It 
was  the  only  lucrative  one  open  to  the  man  of  enter- 
prise, save  only  the  law  and  the  church.  In  all  three 
an  equal  lack  of  conscience  was  essential  for  success, 
but  brigandage  called  for  one  manly  virtue,  courage  ; 
the  other  two  professions  did  not.  It  will,  therefore, 
hardly  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  engaged  the 
attention  of  the  best  element  in  the  population. 

In  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  so  formidable  and  so  well 
organized  had  the  brigands  become,  that  one  of  their 
leaders  was  known  as  King  Marcone  ;  at  Cotrone  he 
inflicted  a  signal  defeat  on  the  Spanish  infantry,  then 
the  first  in  Europe.  A  little  later  an  illustrious  and 
reverend  brigand,  the  Abate  Cesare  Riccardo,  attained 
a  wide  celebrity.  He  supplied  an  admiring  world  with 
his  autobiography  under  the  following  irresistible  title  : 
Nuova  istoria  del  famosissimo  e  forihondo  handito  Abate 
Cesare  Riccardo^  in  cut  si  racconta  in  ottava  rima  la  vita 
e  morte^  occasioni^  ricatti,  hravure  e  tutte  le  imprese  e 
scaramucce  fatte  con  la  Corte^  e  suo  testamento? 


1  Bianchini,  225;  Winspeare  is  less  decisive:  "  I  diritti  suUa  pudicizia  delle 
donne  erano,  per  lo  piu,  trasmutati  in  altrettante  capitazioni." — Abus'i  feudally  38. 
For  a  Sicilian  comparison  see  Leckie,  Historical  Swvey.  Yet  the  delicacy  of 
feudalism  did  not  go  far  when  money  advantages  might  be  secured,  and  in  the  six- 
teenth century  every  meretrke  of  Naples  paid  a  monthly  tax  of  two  carlins, — with  an 
additional  fifteen  grana  at  Christmas  and  Eastertide  ! 

2  "A  new  history  of  the  most  illustrious  and  furious  bandit  Abate  Cesare  Riccardo, 


32  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Under  the  Spanish  viceregal  government_^he  brig- 
ands,  or  malandrini^  were  at  their  worst.^  The  Govern- 
Inent  was  frequently  compelled  to  treat  with  them,  and 
the  Barons  constantly  employed  them  as  a  convenient 
militia.  Under  the  Bourbons  they  began  to  decline, 
although  more  than  one,  among  them  the  famous  Fra 
Diavolo  and  the  Reverend  Ciro  Annichiarico,  played 
a  conspicuous  part  in  the  events  that  will  later  be 
narrated.  Such  roads  as  existed  about  the  year  1800 
were  infested  with  footpads,  and  the  inevitable  pre- 
liminary of  a  journey  from  the  provinces  to  the  capital 
was  the  drawing  up  of  a  will.  Even  the  protection  of 
bodies  of  armed  retainers  was  insufficient  against  robbery, 
murder,  and  outrage.  Homicide  was  the  more  pre- 
valent owing  to  the  legal  subterfuges  and  judicial  cor- 
ruption that  rendered  escape  from  its  consequences 
easy.  Its  prevalence  and  influence  may  be  judged  from 
an  official  report  from  the  provincial  prison  of  Monte- 
fusco.  At  that  one  place  there  were,  in  May  1806, 
163  prisoners  charged  with  homicide  ;  some  of  them 
had  more  than  one  crime  to  account  for,  parricide  and 
other  atrocious  misdeeds  being  frequently  entered. 
The  whole  constitutes  a  frightful  catalogue  of  crime, 
and  sheds  a  most  instructive  light  on  the  social  con- 
ditions of  the  country. 