

Such  being  the  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  popula- 
tion of  town  and  country,  it  will  require  little  effort 
to  realize  that  the  state  of  commerce,  of  industry,  of 
agriculture,  and  of  the  general  finances  was  bad. 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  35 

The  only  road  in  the  kingdom  that  could  be 
accounted  better  than  a  mule  track  was  that  leading 
from  Naples  northwards  to  Rome.  Between  the  inland 
towns  and  villages  there  was  but  little  intercourse. 
Their  generally  inaccessible  situation,  the  absence  of 
trade,  the  violence  of  the  torrents  that  rush  down  from 
the  Apennines,  the  infrequency  of  bridges,  the  insecurity 
from  brigands,  the  innumerable  and  uncertain  obstacles 
presented  by  the  baronial  dues,  all  tended  to  keep 
the  villager  near  his  abode,  to  concentrate  his  attention 
on  his  patch  of  maize  or  herd  of  goats.  In  Calabria, 
wrote  King  Joseph  to  Napoleon,  there  were  neither 
roads  nor  justice.  Mountain  streams  converted  groves 
of  olive  and  orange  trees  into  swamps  ;  rich  forests 
had  disappeared,  destroyed  by  temporary  beneficiaries. 
Puglia,  once  famed  for  its  wealth  of  timber,  could  now 
afford  its  inhabitants  little  better  fuel  than  dung  ;  by 
its  application  to  this  use  the  land  correspondingly 
suffered.  The  spade,  hand  scythe,  and  wooden  plough 
were  the  only  implements  of  agriculture  employed  ; 
hoes  were  rare,  saws  and  scissors  unknown.  In  Puglia, 
the  most  important  of  the  agricultural  provinces,  there 
was  no  more  land  under  cultivation  in  the  year  1800 
than  there  had  been  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth 
century.  In  the  same  period  the  cattle  had  diminished 
from  about  three  million  head  to  less  than  one  and  a 
quarter.  Industry  was  all  but  non-existent,  the  expor- 
tation  of  wheat  prohibited,  public  works  were  neglected 
and  taxes  imposed  for  roads  that  were  never  begun. 
Commerce  was  restricted  by  import  and  export  duties  ; 
silk  spinning  had  once  been  a  profitable  occupation, 
but  declined  under  the  Bourbons.  At  Lauria  and  in 
several  other  places  it  was  prohibited  by  the  feudal 
lord  ;    at    Molano  the    Baron    exercised    the    right    of 


36  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

taking  over  the  whole  production  at  a  price  fixed  by 
himself.  Under  such  conditions  the  industry  not 
unnaturally  languished. 

The  revenue  of  the  State  was  not  flourishing,  nor 
did  the  multitude  of  taxes  result  in  a  correspondingly 
overflowing  treasury.  There  were  more  than  one 
hundred  direct  taxes,  and  a  large  number  of  indirect 
ones.  The  supreme  financial  authority  was  vested  in 
the  Regia  Camera,  a  body  of  auditors  who  exercised  no 
real  control.  The  municipalities  levied  the  taxes,  of 
which  they  paid  an  arbitrarily  fixed  proportion  to  the 
Government,  applying  the  surplus,  by  ancient  privilege, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  feudal  lord.  Of  the  total  revenue 
one  quarter  went  to  the  nobility  and  as  much  to  the 
clergy,  monastic  orders,  and  charitable  foundations. 
The  only  general  principle  that  guided  the  raising  of 
the  revenue  was  that  of  making  the  poorer  man  pay 
for  the  enjoyment  of  the  richer.  On  salt  the  tax  was 
3  ducats  and  3  grana  per  tomolo^  and  its  consumption 
was  compulsory.  The  Universita  was  obliged  to  take 
a  yearly  quantity  fixed  on  the  basis  of  population. 
Nearly  every  other  article  of  food  was  taxed,  the 
collection  being  contracted  out  to  a  farmer  of  the 
revenue  ;  imposts  thus  raised  were  known  as  the 
arrendamenti,  A  tax  of  one  once  on  each  hearth  may 
be  noticed,  and  also  a  curious  one  that  well  illustrates 
the  arbitrary  nature  of  the  system,  that  known  as  the 
nave  bruciata.  This  had  been  first  levied  many  years 
before  as  a  special  contribution  to  replace  a  royal  vessel 
that  had  been  burnt  ;  the  vessel  had  never  been  rebuilt, 
but  the  tax  continued  to  be  levied  annually.  Under 
this  inconsequent  and  crude  system  it  was  as  simple 
to  decree  a  new  tax  as  it  was  diflicult  to  discover  a 
profitable  source  of  revenue.     The  Barons  paid  but  a 