


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  51 

of  a  male  child  in  the  direct  line  of  succession,  could 
not  be  refused.  Ferdinand  did  refuse  it,  however,  and 
with  great  brutality  ;  he  also  issued  immediate  orders 
for  the  carrying  out  of  the  sentence.  The  unfortunate 
Duchess  was  placed  on  board  ship,  chains  at  her  wrists 
and  ankles,  and  thus  taken  back  to  Naples.  Nearly 
twelve  months  after  her  first  imprisonment  her  head  was 
struck  off  on  the  Piazza  del  Mercato. 

To  apportion  political  responsibility  and  blame  be- 
tween the  two  sovereigns  is  not  only  impossible  but 
unnecessary  ;  to  say  that  they  were  equally  censurable 
cannot  be  unjust  to  either.  Yet  from  the  time  of  the 
fall  of  the  Parthenopean  Republic  until  the  day  of  her 
death,  the  reputation  of  Mary  Caroline,  made  more 
terrible  by  the  magnifying  atmosphere  of  Naples,  hung 
like  a  cloud  of  gloom  over  the  city.  The  feariest  the 
insensate  Queen  should  return  once  more,  and  once  more 
let  loose  on  Naples  the  lazzaroni  and  the  free  companies 
of  Calabria  or  the  Abruzzi,  lest  once  more  their  property 
should  be  destroyed,  their  wives  and  children  plundered, 
tortured,  or  outraged,  became  the  political  nightmare 
of  the  citizens.^  Such  was  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  and 
such  her  reputation  with  the  best  class  of  her  subjects. 

Outside  of  her  dominions  the  Queen  was  viewed 
much  in  the  same  light,  accentuated  or  tempered  by 
political  considerations  :  in  England  as  a  woman  of 
excitable  and  ill -balanced  judgment,  but  a  necessary 
ally  ;  in  France  as  an  ogress  and  monster,  on  whom 
the  sword  of  Providence  must  sooner  or  later  descend. 
Mary  Caroline  was  to  suffer  equally  from  both  in  the 
great  struggle  between  these  two  Powers,  of  which  the 
control  of  the  Mediterranean  was  long  the  chief  object. 

^  See  especially  the  frequent  entries   in  Nicola's  Diario  ;  also  numerous  passages 
in  King  Joseph's  Correspondence,  and  the  contemporaries  generally. 


52  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

The  conflict  was  to  balance  evenly  where  the  two  great 
divisions^  of  that  kinp^dom  meet,  where  a  river -like 
stretch  of  sea  runs  between  the  famous  rocks  of  Scilla 
and  Charybdis  and  divides  Sicily  from  the  mainland. 
At  that  point  the  fortunes  of  the  two  great  empires 
were  long  to  fluctuate  uncertainly  ;  British  and  French 
sentries  were  to  observe  one  another  across  the  interven- 
ing waters.  No  nearer  Egypt  and  the  East  could  the  great 
land  empire  stretch  ;  no  farther  back  towards  the  Alps 
could  the  mighty  sea  empire  drive  back  her  formidable  foe. 

In  the  early  years  of  the  great  cycle  of  wars  between 
Great  Britain  and  France,  Mary  Caroline  had  been  firm 
in  her  friendship  and  alliance  with  the  former  Power, 
firm  in  her  hostility  to  the  latter.  These  sentiments 
reached  their  climax  in  the  last  years  of  the  eighteenth 
century  at  the  time  of  the  extravagant  demonstrations 
made  on  Nelson's  triumphant  return  from  his  victory  of 
the  Nile.  For  the  next  few  years  the  Queen's  English 
proclivities  continued  strong,  though  the  removal  of 
Nelson  and  the  Hamiltons  to  other  scenes  made  the 
hold  of  their  Government  on  the  Sicilian  alliance  far 
less  secure  ;  in  1805  British  influence  began  to  decline 
rapidly. 