


CHAPTER   II 

NAPOLEON    AND    NAPLES 

Ferdinand  I. — Mary  Caroline — Acton— World  politics — Taranto 
and  the  East — Napoleon,  King  of  Italy — Coerces  Naples — 
Elliot  and  Tatitcheff — Gallo's  warnings — Lacy  at  Naples — 
Treaty  of  neutrality  —  The  Anglo  -  Russians  at  Naples — 
Trafalgar  and  Austerlitz — Position  in  Italy — Retreat  of  Anglo- 
Russians — Mary  Caroline's  negotiations — Craig  and  Sicily — 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation. 

In  a  kingdom  ruled  as  was  that  of  Naples,  the 
character  and  prejudices  of  the  monarch  exercised  a 
disproportioned  influence.  The  relations  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  with  France  and  the  other  Powers  of  Europe 
were  more  largely  affected  by  the  temperaments  of 
Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline  than  by  the  crying 
necessities  of  their  subjects. 

Ferdinand  of  Bourbon  was  fourth  of  his  name 
among  the  kings  of  Naples,  third  among  those  of 
Sicily  ;  towards  the  close  of  his  reign  he  changed  his 
style  to  Ferdinand,  first  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  and  under 
that  designation  he  will  henceforth  appear  in  these 
pages.  Ferdinand  came  to  the  throne  at  the  early  age 
of  eight,  and  his  education  was  totally  neglected.  Prob- 
ably the  councillors  who  administered  the  kingdom 
during  his  minority  thought  it  to  their  interest  that 
the    young    King's     inclinations    and     abilities    should 

42 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  43 

develop  along  lines  that  rendered  unlikely  the  eventual 
curtailment  of  their  power.  The  boy  accordingly  grew 
up  in  ignorance.  He  read  with  difficulty,  and  could 
barely  write.  But  in  the  killing  of  all  sorts  of  game, 
in  riding  and  breaking  horses,  in  the  capture  of  fish, 
and  especially  in  harpooning  the  tunny,  he  acquired 
and  displayed  a  robust  body,  a  boorish  and  crafty 
intellect.^ 

He  found  the  associates  of  his  early  years  among 
grooms,  gamekeepers,  and  men  of  low  birth,  with 
whom  he  cultivated  and  acquired  a  truly  Neapolitan 
vulgarity  of  speech  and  manner.  During  his  whole 
life  Ferdinand  retained  the  use  of  the  dialect  and  tricksj 
early  caught,  and  few  of  his  habits  gave  more  delight 
to  his  faithful  subjects  than  that  of  having  macaroni!  v^^ 
served  in  his  box  at  the  opera  and  lapping  it  up  with 
all  the  grimaces  and  antics  of  a  lazzaro.  An  even 
more  popular  custom  of  the  King  took  him  several 
times  in  the  year  to  the  market-place,  the  famous 
Mercato,  the  scene  of  so  many  tragedies,  the  spot 
where  in  his  reign  so  many  died, — Manthone,  Eleonora 
Pimentel,  Marchese  Palmieri,  the  Duchess  of  Sanfelice, 
Fra  Diavolo,  and  so  many  others.  To  the  Mercato 
Ferdinand  would  proceed  when  laden  with  some 
particularly  good  haul  of  fish  from  his  lakes  at  Fusaro 
or  Patria.  Surrounded  by  a  shouting  mob  of  market 
men,  loafers  and  lazzaroni,  he  would  sell  his  catch  to 
the  highest  bidder,  meeting  the  coarse  jokes  of  the 
crowd  with  ready  and  vigorous  repartee.  Ferdinand's 
wit  and  manners  were  gross  ;  from  his  long  nose,  which 
with  his  lanky  figure  gave  him  a  striking  resemblance 