

^  The  King's  brother,  Charles  IV.  of  Spain,  had  similar  tastes,  of  which  an 
interesting  account  may  be  read  in  Beausset.  In  Goja's  fine  portrait  at  Capo  di 
Monte,  the  Spanish  king  is  shown  in  hunting  dress.  One  may  easily  imagine  that 
this  picture  was  a  favourite  one  with  Ferdinand, 


44  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

to  the  national  Pulcinella,  the  people  christened  him 
Nasone  ;  between  the  two  the  utmost  mutual  apprecia- 
tion and  good  humour  existed. 

That  the  small  section  of  the  community  engaged  in 
commerce  and  in  intellectual  pursuits  should  have 
viewed  Ferdinand  with  less  favour  is  perhaps  not  re- 
markable. Yet  even  among  the  thinking  classes  it  was 
generally  admitted  that  the  King  was  good-natured, 
and  that  below  his  ignorance  and  his  prejudices  he 
was  notabsolutel^^^deyoid  of  all  sense  of  justice  and 
luma^Tity^  Unfortunately  that  ignorance^aiTd'  those 
prejudices  were  so  great  that  it  was  at  times  difficult 
to  keep  sight  of  the  King's  good  side  through  the 
veil  of  crime  committed  under  his  authority.  Chief 
among  his  prejudices  was  that  covering  the  royal 
dignity,  such  as  it  was.  To  do  anything  which  the 
King  forbade,  or  to  leave  undone  anything  that  he  com- 
manded, constituted  an  offence  that  shook  Ferdinand's 
nature  to  its  utmost  depths.  Palmieri  relates  an 
anecdote  that  amusingly  illustrates  this  side  of  his 
character.  Before  1789  wigs  and  smooth  faces  had 
been  the  universal  mark  of  a  man  of  sufficient  rank  to 
be  admitted  to  Court.  But  the  French  Revolution 
was  nothing  if  not  thorough  ;  ardent  patriots  cut  their 
queues  and  wore  a  chevelure  a  la  Brutus ;  tonsorial 
fashions  became  political  badges,  portents  of  deep 
significance.  At  a  Court  ball  held  at  Palermo  a  young 
nobleman  named  RufFo,  a  staunch  royalist,  and  related 
to  the  famous  cardinal  of  the  same  name,  made  his 
appearance  duly  presentable  in  every  respect  save  for  a 
recently  fostered  growth  of  whiskers  that  adorned  his 
cheeks.  When  Ferdinand  caught  sight  of  him  he  was 
seized  with  violent  emotion  ;  he  rushed  up  to  the 
astonished  RufFo,  tightly  grasped  the  offending  whiskers 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  45 

in  his  hand  and  fiercely  shook  him,  crying  out  loudly 
the  while,  "  Porco!  hricconel  "  ^  It  was  only  with  great 
difficulty  that  RufFo  was  safely  extricated  from  the  hands 
of  the  infuriated  Ferdinand.  After  the  King's  return 
from  Palermo  to  Naples  in  18 15,  he  was  persuaded 
by  the  Duchess  of  Floridia  to  follow  the  then  prevalent 
fashion  and  to  cut  his  queue.  The  royal  example 
proved  irresistible,  and  was  immediately  followed  by 
the  Neapolitan  nobility.^ 

Although  he  married  young,  Ferdinand  maintained 
the  Bourbon  standard  of  immorality.  Fortunately  this 
side  of  his  character  had  no  influence  in  shaping 
political  events,  and  need  therefore  not  detain  us. 
For  matters  of  State  he  had  little  taste,  only  deep- 
rooted  prejudices  on  the  subject  of  the  royal  pre- 
rogative.  His  mind  was  engrossed  in  his  pastim.£a, 
and  he  sKowed  all  the  insouciance  proverbial  in  his 
family-  When  the  Court  fled  from  Naples  in  1798, 
one  of  the  royal  princes  died  on  the  British  flagship 
midway  to  Palermo  ;  yet  no  sooner  had  Ferdinand  set 
foot  on  land  than  he  set  about  organizing  a  hunting 
party.  Twenty  years  later,  when  his  brother,  Charles 
IV.  of  Spain,  died  at  Naples,  a  similar  incident  occurred. 