

But  the  country  was  not  ripe  for  such  a  form  of 
government ;  and  although  the  men  who  conducted  it 
showed  more  capacity,  moderation,  and  courage  than 
might  have  been  expected  under  such  remarkable  con- 
ditions, the  Republic  could  not  survive  the  withdrawal 
of  the  French  army  to  northern  Italy.  The  Partheno- 
pean  Republic  lived  but  a  few  months,  and  sank  in 
rivers  of  blood.  Defenceless  men,  women,  and  children 
were  butchered  in  hundreds  by  the  lazzaroni  and  by 
the  provincial  levies  of  Cardinal  Ruffo,  and  Ferdinand 
and  Mary  Caroline  were  re-established  on  their 
throne. 

The  horrors  of  the  royalist  reaction  were  soon  to 
be  atoned  for.  France  was  now  in  stronger  hands 
than  when  her  troops  had  been  forced  out  of  Italy  by 
Suvaroff.  Only  a  few  weeks  after  the  capture  of 
Naples  by  Ruffo  and  Nelson,  General  Bonaparte  returned 
from  his  expedition  to  Egypt,  turned  out  the  Directoire, 
and  established  the  Consular  Government.  As  First 
Consul  he  soon  returned  to  the  scene  of  his  great 
exploits,  and  having  won  the  victory  of  Marengo^  con- 
cluded a  peace  that  left  France  preponderant  once  more 
in  northern  Italy.  During  the  five  years  that  followed, 
he  remodelled  the  a'dmmistrative  system  and"tKe  army, 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  41 

forging^  a  weapon  fit  to  carve  out  his  fortune.  During 
this  period  the  government  of  Naples  was  constantly 
menaced  ;  the  sword  trembled  threateningly,  its  blow 
held  ever  suspended.     That  blow  was  at  last  to  descend 

j  as  a  consequence  of  the  first  campaign  of  the  Emperor 

^  Napoleon. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

BiBL.  Naz.  Napoli  ;  Church,  Secret  Report.  This  is  a  copy  of  an  original 
that  does  not  appear  to  be  at  the  Archivio  di  Stato  ;  perhaps  it  is  to  be  found 
among  the  papers  at  the  Royal  Palace,  to  which  access  has  so  far  been 
refused.  The  report  is  of  the  greatest  value  for  the  history  of  the  secret 
societies,  and  incidentally  for  social  and  economic  questions. 

Archivio  di  Stato,  Napoli  ;  Gmstizia,  1806:  several  interesting 
bundles  with  reference  to  feudal  legislation. 

Archivio  DI  Stato,  Napoli  5  Interna,  ^i,Commissione  feudale :  invalu- 
able collection  of  some  5000  bundles  of  MSS.  relating  to  the  abolition  of 
feudalism  together  with  the  Bolletino  Feudale,  Bolletino  delle  sentence,  and 
Supplimento  del  Bolletino,  for  which  see  Bibliography. 

Printed  Books 
(For  full  titles  and  critical  notes  see  Bibliography) 

Ammirati,  Gius  feodale  j  Barrio,  De  antiquitate  et  situ  Calabria } 
BiANCHiNi,  Finanze  di  Napoli;  Blunt,  Vestiges  of  Ancient  Manners; 
Bo  I  SSI  ER,  Promenades  Archeologiques ;  Bolletino  delle  sentenze ;  Bolletino 
Feudale ;  Calendario  della  Corte,  1806;  Cantu,  Cronistoria ,-  Cesare,  De, 
La  Fine  di  un  Regno  ;  Colletta,  Storia  di  Napoli ;  Dedem,  De,  Memoires  ; 
Delfico,  Riffiessioni  sulla  Vendita  de"  Feudi  De'voluti ;  Desvernois, 
Memoires;  Dumas,  Pre'cis  Militaire ;  Eustace,  Classical  Tour;  Fried- 
laender,  Toivn  Life  in  Ancient  Italy ;  Gorani,  Memoires  Secrets ;  Gian- 
none,  Storia  di  Napoli ;  Indice  de"  Diritti ;  Joseph,  Correspondance  du 
Roi ;  Kotzebue,  Travels ;  Laurenze,  Essai  sur  Naples;  Leckie,  Histor. 
Sur'vey  ;  M.  L.  R.,  Saggio  Politico  ;  Minasi,  Notizie  di  S cilia  ;  Miot  de 
Melito,  Memoires;  Nicola,  Diario ;  Novario,  De  Gra'vaminibus  Fassa- 
lorum ;  Orloff,  Memoires;  Palmieri,  Souvenirs  et  Pensees ;  Rehfues, 
Gemdlde  njon  Neapel;  Roederer,  CEu=vres;  Rolfe,  Naples  in  1888 ;  Savelli, 
Le'gion  Corse;  SEGVR,Hist.et  M/moires;  Serristori,  Statistica  delle  due  Sicilie; 
Supplimento  del  Bolletino  ;  Taine,  Foyage  en  Italie  ;  Thiebault,  Memoires; 
TuppuTi,  Reflexions  sur  F Agriculture  ;  Ungaro,  Prospetto  Economico  ;  Vico, 
Scienza  Nuo^a  ;  Winspeare,  Abusi  Feudali ;  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1809. 