

^  "  Pig,  rascal." 

2  In  1799  the  Neapolitan  republicans,  imitating  in  this  as  in  other  things  the 
example  of  their  French  supporters,  cut  their  queues  and  wore  their  hair  short  in 
the  latest  patriotic  fashion.  When  the  royalist  reaction  came,  many  paid  with  their 
head  for  its  tailless  condition.  Recourse  was  had  to  false  queues.  In  this  the 
populace  found  a  new  amusement,  and  for  several  weeks  no  one  could  walk  down 
the  Toledo  without  having  his  head  violently  jerked  more  than  once.  If  the  jerk 
had  no  result  he  was  safe.     The  following  amusing  quatrain  went  the  rounds  : — 

Vuoi  conoscere  il  Giacobino 
E  tu  tirali  il  codino, 
Se  la  coda  ti  viene  in  mano 
^uesto  e  vero  Republicano. 

If  you  ivant  to  knoiv  a  Jacobin — pull  at  his  tvig — if  the  queue  comes  aivay  in  your 
hand — he  is  a  real  Republican. 


46  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

When  in  1814  Queen  Mary  Caroline  died,  he  allowed 
but  a  scandalously  short  interval  to  elapse  before 
re-marrying  ;  his  second  wife  was  the  Princess  Partanna, 
better  known  as  the  Duchess  of  Floridia.  Such  was 
this  truly  Neapolitan  monarch !  So  slight  was  his 
sense  of  responsibility,  so  great  his  impatience  of 
business,  so  inapt  his  fingers  for  clerical  labour, 
that  he  appended  his  signature  to  papers  presented 
by  his  Ministers  by  means  of  an  engraved  stamp. 
This  stamp  Ferdinand  always  carried  with  him 
and  jealously  guarded  ;  he  viewed  it  with  religious 
respect,  as  the  priceless  concrete  manifestation  of 
all  those  solemn  and  mysterious  doctrines  that  made 
of  him  the  autocrat  and  possessor  of  five  millions 
of  men. 

The  King's  intense  dislike  for  affairs  of  State,  and 
his  incompetence  for  performing  the  merely  routine 
work  of  royalty,  made  Queen  Mary  Caroline's  op- 
portunity. From  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa,  her 
mother,  she  had  inherited  a  marked  though  ill-balanced 
talent  for  government.  The  age  was  one  in  which 
many  women  played  prominent  parts  in  the  affairs  of 
nations  :  Elizabeth  and  Catherine  in  Russia,  Maria 
Theresa  in  Austria,  the  beautiful  Louise  in  Prussia, 
Marie  Antoinette  and  even  plain  Madame  Roland  in 
France.  For  nearly  half  a  century  Mary  Caroline  was 
the  directing  political  force  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Two 
SiciHespand,lrrherTast  ye^s,  its  evil  genius.  After 
her  death  she  found  no  defenders,  not  among  her 
subjects,  not  among  her  English  friends,  not  among 
her  kindred  ;  and  when  she  died  at  Vienna  in  18 14 
her  nephew,  the  Emperor  Francis,  declined  to  order 
Court  mourning.  Of  recent  years  she  has  been  more 
fortunate  ;     and    one    of    her    apologists    has    brought 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  47 