

The  state  of  criminal  was  even  worse  than  that  of 
civil  law.  Trials  were  conducted  in  secret,  and  although 
torture  was  no  longer  employed,  chains,  semi-starva- 
tion, and  the  manifold  horrors  of  the  prisons  were  but 


CHAP.  I  STATE  OF  NAPLES  IN  1805  39 

one  degree  removed  from  it.  Proofs  of  guilt  were 
paid  for,  and  so  full  were  the  prisons,  so  rapidly  were 
the  galley  slaves  worked  to  death,  that  trial  by  truglio 
was  invented  to  empty  the  tenants  of  the  cells  on  to 
the  rowing  bench  with  convenient  expedition.  The 
truglio  disposed  of  batches  of  twenty  and  more  prisoners 
at  one  sentence  ;  this  was  settled  before  trial  between 
the  judge  and  the  advocate  who  was  officially  appointed 
to  conduct  the  defence.  Its  double  advantage  was  that 
it  economized  judicial  time  and  manned  the  royal 
galleys. 

The  early  part  of  Ferdinand's  reign  passed  quietly 
enough,  and  his  policy  developed  on  normal  Bourbon 
lines.-^  With  the  king  of  Spain,  his  brother  Charles  IV., 
he  maintained  intimate  relations.  To  Austria  he  bound 
himself  by  the  close  tie  of  marriage,  the  Archduchess 
Mary  Caroline,  most  energetic  and  domineering  of 
the  daughters  of  Maria  Theresa,  becoming  his  wife  in 
1768.^  With  France,  where  reigned  the  head  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon,  first  Louis  XV.  and  later  Louis 
XVI.,  his  relations  were  too  close  to  lead  to  serious 
difficulty.  So  everything  appeared  to  prosper.  A  few 
Neapolitan  lawyers  and  noblemen  were  carelessly  per- 
mitted to  talk  of  reform  and  to  discuss  Rousseau's 
Contrat  Social.  Mary  Caroline  herself,  following  the 
lead  of  her  brother  the  Emperor  Joseph,  turned  liberal, 
and  even  instituted  a  lodge  of  female  freemasons.  But 
the  time  for  the  Queen's  political  sentimentalism  was 
not  well  chosen  ;  the  day  of  popular  reaction  against 
the  iniquities  of  divine  right  had  come.     In  1789  began 

1  In  Appendix  C  will  be  found  a  table  giving  the  relations  of  the  French,  Spanish, 
and  Neapolitan  Bourbons. 

2  It  is  curious  that  English  usage  names  the  Empress  and  her  daughters  Maria, 
Mary,  and  Marie.  It  would  be  pedantic  to  speak  of  Marie  Caroline,  or  of  Maria 
Antoinette,  or  of  Mary'Thertsa  ! 


40  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  French  Revolution,  which  sounded  the  knell  of 
Bourbonism  and  sent  Mary  Caroline's  sister  and 
brother-in-law  to  the  scaffold.  The  detestation  of  the 
Sicilian  Court  for  the  new  government  of  France  was 
not  exceeded  in  vehemence  in  any  quarter  of  Europe. 
Finally,  in  1799,  the  army  of  Ferdinand  and  of  the 
First  Republic  met,  with  disastrous  results  for  the  King 
of  the  Two  Sicilies.  Champion  net  occupied  Naples, 
the  Court  sought  refuge  in  Sicily,  and  a  few  Neapolitan 
liberals  boldly  proclaimed  the  Parthenopean  Republic. 