

The  Mediterranean  is  about  2500  miles  in  length, 
which,  in  days  of  sailing  vessels,  represented  under 
adverse  circumstances  a  navigation  of  many  weeks,  and 
even  months.  At  about  midway  between  Gibraltar 
and  Egypt  a  geological  formation,  a  continuation  of 
the  Italian  Apennines,  narrows  the  distance  between 
Europe  and  Africa  to  a  narrow  strait ;  in  the  midst 
of  this  strait  lies  the  island  of  Malta.  From  Gibraltar, 
the  naval  base  of  Great  Britain,  from  Toulon,  the  naval 
base  of  France,  the  way  to  Egypt  lay  past  Malta,  and 
as  long  as  there  was  no  great  disproportion  in  the 
naval  strength  of  the  two  Powers,  the  possession  of 
this  naturally  strong  position  was^ertain  to  carix..Di:£- 


ponderance  with  it.     When   General  Bonaparte  sailed 


on  his   expedition  to  Egypt  in    1798,   he  turned   the 
Knights  of  Malta  out  of  possession  and  established  a 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  55 

garrison  in  their  stronghold,  thus  giving  France  a 
great  strategic  advantage  for  future  operations  in  the 
East!  That  advantage  was  temporarily  neutralized  by; 
the  destruction  of  the  French  fleet  off  the  Nile  by 
Lord  Nelson,  and  by  Great  Britain's  alliance  with  the 
Two  Sicilies,  whereby  slie  was  enabled  to  repair  her 
vessels  at  Naples  and  in  the  ports  of  Sicily.  So  great 
was  the  danger  of  the  French  occupation  of  Malta  felt 
to  be,  that  the  island  was  promptly  attacked  by  an 
Anglo-Sicilian  force  under  General  Pigot.  Two  years 
after  its  capture  by  France,  at  about  the  same  time 
as  the  battle  of  Marengo  was  fought,  Malta  passed  into 
the  possession  of  Great  Britain. 

The  sequel  of  Marengo  was  the  treaty  of  Luneville, 
pacifying  the  Continent,  and  the  sequel  of  the  treaty  of 
Luneville  was  the  treaty  of  Amiens  between  Great 
Britain  and  France.  The  British  Cabinet  and  people 
were  weary  of  war,  and  Bonaparte,  whose  aim  prob- 
ably went  no  further  than  obtaining  an  advantageous 
truce,  persuaded  the  new -formed  administration  of 
Lord  Addington  into  ceding  nearly  all  the  colonial 
possessions  lost  by  France,  and  into  agreeing  to 
evacuate  Malta  in  favour  of  a  neutral  holder.  The  treaty 
also  stipulated  that  the  French  troops  should  be  with- 
drawn from  the  occupied  Neapolitan  provinces.!  The 
question  of  Malta  and  Naples  was  the  all-important 
one,  and  in  a  few  months  it  appeared  that  the  treaty 
had  not  solved  it.  Great  Britain  would  not  withdraw 
her  garrison  from  Malta,  nor  France  hers  from  Puglia. 
Lord  Hawkesbury,  the  English  Foreign  Secretary,  and 
Lord  Whitworth,  his  special  envoy  to  Paris,  were  con- 
vinced that  Bonaparte's  chief  project  of  foreign  policy 
turned  on  the  occupation  of  Egypt.  Every  effort  of 
the  First  Consul  to  get  the  evacuation  of  Malta  carried 