

From  the  time  when  Bonaparte  seized  for  his  profit 
the  government  of  the  Republic,  France  had  been  the 
preponderating  power  in  Italy.  After  Marengo  her 
army  occupied  the  northern  portion  of  the  penin- 
sula undisturbed,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies 
was  in  imminent  danger  of  attack.  General  Murat, 
then  acting  Commander-in-chief,  dictated  the  terms  on 
which  invasion  and  the  occupation  of  Naples  might  be. 
avoided.  To  these  Ferdinand  and  the  temperate  Acton 
persuaded  Mary  Caroline  that  acquiescence  was  neces- 
sary ;   the    principal    clause    of  the    treaty  signed   was 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  53 

aimed  directly  at  Great  Britain,  and  provided  for  the 
temporary  military  occupation  of  the  Adriatic  provinces 
of  the  kingdom  by  French  troops!  To  understand  the 
significance  of  this  move  it  will  be  necessary  to  glance 
at  a  map  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  even  of  the  eastern 
hemisphere. 

The  last  wars  of  the  defunct  Bourbon  monarchy  of 
France  against  Great  Britain  had  seen  the  latter  Power 
acquire  two  great  colonial  empires  at  the  expense  of 
her  rival  :  Canada  and  India.  The  last  conflict  of  all, 
terminated  by  the  treaty  of  Paris  in  1783,  had  resulted 
in  the  humiliation  and  defeat  of  Great  Britain.  Yet 
she  retained  Canada  and  India,  and  while  France  sank 
rapidly  towards  bankruptcy,  the  finances  of  England 
showed  extraordinary  vitality,  her  prosperity  rising 
within  a  few  months  of  the  acknowledgment  of  her  de- 
feat to  a  point  never  before  reached.  The  impression 
widely  produced  on  the  Continent,  and  particularly  in 
France,  was  that  this  British  triumph  was  chiefly  due 
to  the  possession  of  India  and  other  colonies.  If 
Great  Britain  had  retained  her  prosperity  after  a  long 
war  that  had  seen  her  defeated  in  America  and  for 
several  weeks  defied  on  her  own  coasts  by  a  French 
and  Spanish  fleet,  it  appeared  to  many  that,  failing 
direct  invasion,  the  most  efl'ective  blow  that  could 
be  struck  at  her  was  through  her  commerce  and  her 
eastern  empire.  This  theory  was  eventually  adopted 
by  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

To  reach  India  there  were  three  routes.  One  was 
wholly  by  sea,  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  another 
wholly  by  land,  from  various  starting-points,  through 
Asiatic  Turkey  and  Persia  ;  a  third,  the  quickest,  partly 
by  sea,  partly  by  land,  through  the  Mediterranean  and 
Egypt.     The  first  of  these  routes  required  undisputed 


54  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

control  of  the  ocean  ;  the  second  necessitated  the  con- 
currence of  Russia  and  the  co-operation  or  conquest 
of  Turkey  ;  the  third  presented  a  somewhat  complex 
problem. 

For  Great  Britain  to  utilize  the  Mediterranean  it 
was  essential  that  she  should  be  able  to  maintain  a  fleet 
there,  or,  in  other  words,  that  she  should  possess  naval 
bases.  Without  fortified  harbours  of  refuge,  without 
depots  of  shot  and  gunpowder,  of  cordage,  yarn,  and 
sailcloth,  of  tar  and  timber  and  hundreds  of  naval 
necessaries,  her  fleets  in  the  Mediterranean  could  never 
have  been  kept  in  a  condition  ready  to  meet  those  of 
France  and  Spain  sailing  directly  from  their  arsenals. 
Her  first  and  unconscious  step  towards  acquiring  a  route 
to  India  through  the  Mediterranean  was  taken  in  1704, 
when  Gibraltar  was  captured.  It  was  the  second  step, 
taken  nearly  a  century  later,  that  occasioned  the  move- 
ment of  French  troops  into  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 