

forward  views  that  certainly  merit  attention.^  But 
admitting  that  Mary  Carohne's  pernicious  influence 
was  much  exaggerated  by  contemporary  report,  there 
yet  remains,  after  all  deductions  made,  enough  to 
warrant  her  condemnation.  It  was  true  in  her  case,  as 
may  be  observed  so  frequently  in  the  study  of  human 
nature,  that  the  good  and  the  bad  qualities  were  both 
well  marked  and  inextricably  confused.  Hence  the 
facility  with  which  detractors  or  apologists,  emphasiz- 
ing the  lights  on  one  side  of  the  picture  or  the  other, 
have  painted  her  a  crowned  monster  or  a  deeply 
wronged  woman.  The  truth  is  that  Mary  Caroline 
was  not  so  much  a  monster  as  a  woman  of  nervous 
temperament,  whose  activity  of  mind  bordered  on 
derangement.  She  possessed  some  good  traits,  but, 
politically  speaking,  the  judgment  of  posterity  cannot 
be  less  severe  than  that  of  those  who  suffered  at  her 
hands.  The  Queen  of  Naples,  following  the  fashion  of 
her  age,  was  much  addicted  to  sensibility  ;  her  private 
aifections,  for  so  long  as  they  lasted,  were  generally 
strong  and  attended  by  circumstances  of  generosity  and 
even  prodigality.  To  her  numerous  children  she  was 
passionately  devoted,  and  in  their  company  displayed 
the  most  pleasing  and  amiable  aspect  of  her  character.^ 

In  stronger  and  purely  intellectual  characteristics  there 
was  also  much  in  her  to  praise.  The  Prince  de  Ligne,  who 
knew  the  Austrian  Court  so  well,  declared  that  she  was 

1  Baron  Helfert  himself  describes  his  Maria  Karolhta  as  an  "  Ehrenrettung."  It 
js  unfortunately  too  much  of  a  set  defence  not  to  be  considerably  weakened  ;  yet  the 
character,  judgment,  and  learning  of  the  writer  place  it  on  a  totally  different  plane 
from  the  work  of  other  apologists. 

2  The  love  of  children  and  sensibility,  so  prominent  among  the  qualities  of  Mary 
Caroline,  have  been  put  forward  by  the  most  vehement  and  least  convincing  of 
her  apologists  as  an  argument  for  rebutting  every  unfavourable  allegation.  The 
argument  hardly  appears  to  require  serious  answer.  Did  not  Murat,  known  to  his 
soldiers  as  the  "butcher,"  boast  that  he  had  never  killed  a  man.?  Did  not 
Robespierre  declare  that  he  could  not  bear  the  sight  of  blood  ? 


48  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  only  one  of  Maria  Theresa's  children  who  resembled 
her  ;  a  British  minister  at  her  Court  said  that  she  was 
the  only  spirited  character  at  Naples.  She  could  take 
interest  in  the  minute  details  of  administration,  had 
**  nerves  stronger  than  her  principles,"  address,  and 
spirit.  But  what  intellectual  endowments  Mary 
Caroline  possessed  were  neutralized  by  her  complete 
lack  of  J  udgment.  Her  proud,  vindictive,  imperious, 
scheming  character  had  early  given  her  ascendancy  in 
the  councils  of  the  kingdom  ;  Ferdinand's  supineness 
soon  enabled  her  to  convert  this  into  all  but  absolute 
control.  The  Queen's  decisions  in  matters  of  State 
were  rarely  fortunate.  Energy  with  her  turned  to 
violence,  and  the  reasons  that  swayed  her  were  not 
based  on  the  considerations  that  appeal  to  a  statesman. 
What  influenced  her  were  those  petty  considerations  of 
vanity,  of  immediate  interest,  of  ambition,  of  pride,  of 
hatred,  of  friendship,  and  of  revenge  that  sacrifice  to  paltry 
and  individual  selfishness  the  interests  of  nations,  and 
make  the  happiness  and  the  lives  of  thousands  depend 
on  what  is  often  nothing  more  than  momentary  caprice.^ 
Yet,  however  pernicious  her  influence,  however 
great  her  responsibility,  it  would  be  unjust  to 
ascribe  the  calamities  of  Naples  to  the  Queen  alone  ; 
Ferdinand,  below  her  in  courage  and  talent,  was  her 
equal  in  falsehood  and  treachery.  That  he  some- 
times disapproved  of  the  Queen's  policy,  that  he  often 
acquiesced  in  it  from  ignorance  or  lassitude,  cannot  clear 
his  responsibility.     Lord  Collingwood,  a  man  of  cool 