

^  Since  the  above  was  set  up,  the  valuable  Diary  of  Sir  John  Moore  has  appeared, 
from  which  the  following  extract  concerning  Mary  Caroline  may  be  added  :  "  In 
private  life  she  would  have  been  a  clever,  entertaining  woman,  violent  in  her  passions, 
but,  upon  the  whole,  kind  and  good.  As  Queen,  directing  a  government,  her  weak- 
nesses, which  in  private  might  have  passed  unobserved,  resolve  themselves  into 
crimes,  and  she  becomes  violent,  absurd,  cruel,  unjust.  .  .  ." — ii.  192. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  49 

judgment,  wrote  of  them  as  follows  :  "  The  King  has 
much  the  appearance  and  manners  of  a  worthy,  honest 
country  gentleman.  .  .  .  The  Queen  .  .  .  would  be 
thought  a  deep  politician,  .  .  .  she  broods  over  what 
is  impracticable,  ...  and  frets  herself  continually 
that  others  are  not  as  dim-sighted  as  herself.  Her  lot 
.  .  .  has  been  cast  awry,  or  ...  so  loose  a  morality 
and  such  depravity  of  manners  would  never  have  been 
found  perched  upon  a  throne.''  ^  This  judgment  was 
severe,  but  not  unmerited.  The  Queen  was  as  un- 
dignified as  she  was  proud,  and  in  the  prolixity  of  her 
correspondence  and  memoirs  reveals  the  habitual  con- 
fusion and  vehemence  of  thought  that  inspired  her 
most  notable  acts.  Her  nature  was  passionate,  and  Jier 
personal  inclinations  played  _£ar_tQp  large  a  jpart  m  the 
political  arrangements  of  the  kingdom.  One  of  her 
favourites  and  ministers,  Acton,  extended  his  power  and 
fortune  to  the  point  of  concentrating  the  patronage  and 
emoluments  of  nearly  every  department  of  State  inlo 
His  hands.  Generally  inclined  to  temperate  and  com- 
mo3io us  courses,  it  may  be  said  of  him  that  the  direction 
he  gave  to  affairs  was  occasionally  beneficial ;  but  it 
cannot  be  said  that  he  was  either  a  virtuous  or  capable 
minister,  that  he  was  such  a  minister  as  the  needs  of 
Naples  cried  for,  or  that  any  other  influence  than  that 
of  the  Queen  could  possibly  have  kept  him  in  power. 

The  relations  between  Mary  Caroline  and  Ferdinand 
were  not  altogether  inharmonious  ;  on  one  ground  their 
views  completely  coincided,  that  was  on  the  assertion 
of  the  prerogatives  and  dignity  of  the  Crown.  Apart 
from  this,  the  King's  strongest  sentiment  with  regard  to 
the  Queen  appears  to  have  been  that  she  had  the  evil 
eye  or  jet tatur a ^  and  that  if  he  played  cards  her  presence 

^  Correspondence,  ii.  315. 
VOL.   I  E 


50  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

was  certain  to  be  fatal  to  his  success  !  But  the  senti- 
ments of  her  subjects  towards  her  were  very  different, 
,  and  far  stronger.  To  her  they  were  accustomed  to 
ascribe  the  whole  action  of  the  political  machine  ;  to 
her  they  charged  the  excesses  of  1799,  the  massacre  of 
the  upper  and  middle  classes  of  Naples  by  Cardinal 
Ruffo's  Sanfedisti  masse  and  the  lazzaroni,  their  deci- 
mation by  the  butcher  tribunal  of  Speziale.  This  may 
have  been  not  altogether  unjust  ;  the  fury  of  the 
Queen's  cry  for  revenge  had  wide  effects,  and  it  cannot 
be  doubted  that  the  extraordinary  passion  that  impelled 
Nelson  and  the  Hamiltons  was  even  stronger  in  their 
inspirer.  It  is  not  just,  however,  that  Ferdinand  should 
have  escaped  his  share  of  responsibility  for  the  events  of 
those  unhappy  days.  His  personal  popularity  with  many 
of  his  subjects  blinded  them  to  his  faults,  yet  one  of  the 
most  iniquitous  deeds  of  the  royalist  reaction,  the  execu- 
tion of  the  Duchess  of  Sanfelice,  was  one  for  which  the 
King  was  beyond  all  doubt  entirely  and  solely  responsible. 
The  Duchess  of  Sanfelice  was  young,  lovely,  newly 
married,  and  not  given  to  politics.  Her  husband  joined 
the  republican  movement,  and  she  unwillingly  became  the 
agent  through  whom  a  royalist  conspiracy  was  discovered. 
On  the  entry  of  the  royal  troops  she  succeeded  in 
escaping  the  massacres,  but  was  soon  discovered, 
arrested,  imprisoned,  tried,  and  condemned  to  death. 
Friends  at  Court  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  respite  on  the 
ground  that  she  was  expecting  childbirth.  To  sub- 
stantiate this  she  was  conveyed  to  Palermo,  where  she 
remained  in  prison  many  months,  her  case  being  nov/ 
apparently  forgotten.  But  on  the  Princess  Royal  giving 
birth  to  a  son,  she  was  persuaded  to  claim  from  the 
King  the  pardon  of  the  Duchess.  It  was  an  ancient 
privilege  and  custom  that  such  a  request,  on  the  birth 