

Mary  Caroline  had  been  content  to  rid  herself  of 

^  In  her  manuscript  memoirs  the  Q,ueen  makes  the  curious  assertion  that  Elliot 
counselled  compliance  with  the  French  demands.  A  dispatch  of  Kaunitz,  dated 
October  4,  may  throw  light  on  the  real  state  of  the  case  ;  in  this  he  writes  :  .  .  .  "  le 
ministre  d'Angleterre  parait  tres  pique." — Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  182. 


68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

St.  Cyr's  presence  at  the  cost  of  ratification  ;  she  was 
none  the  less  firmly  resolved  on  bringing  the  Anglo- 
Russians  to  Naples.  Even  had  she  wished  to,  she  had 
now  gone  too  far  to  recede.  For  a  month  already  mili- 
tary action  had  been  agreed  on  in  principle,  only  matters 
of  detail  remaining  over  for  diplomatic  adjustment. 

As  soon  as  St.  Cyr  was  informed  of  the  ratification 
of  the  treaty  of  neutrality  he  broke  up  his  cantonments. 
He  rapidly  marched  northwards  to  join  the  army  with 
which  Marshal  Massena  was  preparing  to  face  the  Arch- 
duke Charles  in  the  passes  of  the  Tyrol.  No  sooner 
were  the  French  columns  well  advanced  along  the 
Adriatic  coast  than  the  long -delayed  summons  was 
dispatcKed  calling  the  Russian  and  British  fleets  to  the 
Bay  of  Naples.^ 

Whatever  opinion  the  generals  and  diplomatists  of 
Russia  and  Great  Britain  might  privately  entertain  of 
the  political  conduct  of  the  Sicilian  Court,  their  instruc- 
tions, and  the  interests  of  their  countries,  could  leave 
them  no  ground  for  hesitation  in  seizing  the  oppor- 
tunity now  presented.  Sir  James  Craig,  the  very  able 
commander  of  the  British  force  assembled  at  Malta, 
described  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  neutrality  as 
an  "  act  of  perfidy,"  and  appears  to  have  felt  a  moment- 
ary embarrassment  in  taking  advantage  of  it.  Yet  on 
the  3rd  of  November  he  embarked  with  7500  good 
troops.  A  few  days  later,  off  the  coast  of  Sicily,  his 
fleet  met  that  conveying  some  14,500  Russians  from 
Corfu  ;  the  two,  proceeding  together,  reached  the  Bay 
of  Naples  on  the  19th  of  November.  On  the  same 
day  Alquier  hauled  down  the  French  flag  and  left  the 
capital. 

In   the  meanwhile   greater  events   than   these    were 

1  Apparently  on  the  i6th  of  October. — Bunbury,  201. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  69 

taking  place.  After  weeks  of  inaction  the  combined 
fleet  of  France  and  Spain  left  Cadiz,  and  on  the  21st  of 
October,  off  Cape  Trafalgar,  met  with  irretrievable 
disaster.  Britain's  greatest  victory  resulted  in  the 
assertion  of  her  superiority  over  the  combined  navies  of 
France  and  Spain  ;  it  also  ended  in  the  glorious  death 
of  an  inspired  naval  leader  whose  presence  appeared  to 
charm  victory,  of  a  personal  friend  and  beloved  hero 
of  the  Queen  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  whose  influence  for 
good  or  evil  was  never  more  to  be  felt  in  the  Medi- 
terranean. 