

This  menacing  attitude^ jja^oleonhad^en  caused 
by  tkejncrcasingly  hostiKxoursejjfjthe  Sidlian  Govern- 
men^.     Tatitchefl^  had  been  quickly  followed  by  Lacy, 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  65 

an  experienced  Russian  general,  who  was  in  command 
of  the  considerable  force  now  collected  at  Corfu. 
Mary  Caroline  was  aware  that  the  Austrian  and 
Russian  armies  would  soon  open  hostilities,  was  anxious 
to  concert  military  measures  to  protect  her  kingdom 
and  to  assist  the  Allies.  As  a  result  of  numerous  con- 
ferences, it  was  decided  to  form  an  army  on  the 
Neapolitan  frontier,  consisting  of  a  body  of  Russian 
troops  from  Corfu,  of  another  of  British  troops  from 
Malta,  together  with  the  forces  of  the  Sicilian  Crown. 
The  whole  was  to  be  under  the  supreme  command  of 
Lacy,  whom  his  English  descent,  experience,  and  tact 
well  qualified  for  the  task.-^ 

The  diplomats  of  Russia,  Great  Britain,  and  Austria 
had  many  difficulties  to  surmount  before  carrying 
through  the  arrangements  preliminary  to  placing  the 
projected  army  in  the  field.  The  Court  of  Naples 
appeared  unable  to  arrive  at  a  definite  decision  ;  two 
parties,  two  policies  struggled  for  supremacy.  Acton 
was  still  in  favour  of  a  prudent  course.  He  realized 
that  Naples  was  not  an  effective  factor  in  the  con- 
flict, and  that  the  events  of  Central  Europe  would 
decide  the  fate  of  the  monarchy.  He  was  for  assent- 
ing to  the  French  demands,  for  trusting  to  the 
military  success  of  the  Allies  for  relief,  but  not  for 
affording  the  Allies  assistance,  thereby  giving  France 
an  excuse  for  absorbing  the  kingdom.  Acton  was 
supported  by  Ferdinand,  who  in  this  crisis  showed 
more  interest  in  affairs  of  State  than  was  usual  with 
him.  On  the  other  hand,  Mary  Caroline  was  for  war, 
for  the  impetuous  course  that  would  relieve  her  over- 

^  The  British  officers  appear  to  have  been  fairly  satisfied  with  Lacy.  Bunbury's 
somewhat  adverse  opinion  seems  to  have  been  unduly  influenced  by  the  fact  that  the 
Russian  commander  brought  his  nightcap  to  councils  of  war. 

VOL.   I  F 


66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strung  nerves.  Acton  was  old,  she  had  tired  of  him, 
he  no  longer  possessed  his  former  influence  over  her. 
She  was  fully  informed  of  the  formidable  preparations 
of  Austria  and  Russia  ;  the  middle  of  August  had  been 
the  term  at  first  fixed  for  the  opening  of  hostilities  ; 
she  longed  for  revenge,  and  evoked  in  spirit  visions  of 
glorious  triumphs  over  her  detested  enemies.  The 
Queen  was  unable  to  resist  the  arguments  and  per- 
suasion of  TatitcheiF,  Lacy,  and  Elliot ;  she  overcame 
the  resistance  of  Ferdinand  and  Acton,  decided  to  face 
every  risk,  and  to  call  the  Russian  and  British  troops 
to  NaplesT^ 