


56  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

out  revealed  the  importance  he  attached  to  it  and  con- 
firmed their  suspicions. 

The  British  statesmen  were  now  fully  persuaded 
that  in  agreeing  to  abandon  Malta,  the  watch-tower 
of  Egypt,  as  Whitworth  called  it,  they  had  com- 
mitted a  grave  blunder  or  made  an  unwarranted  sacri- 
fice. There  appeared  no  other  way  of  repairing  this 
mistake  than  by  evading  the  engagement,  and  no 
diplomatic  skill  could  avert  war  as  the  consequence. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  British  statesmen  were 
correct  in  their  views  as  to  the  nature  of  the  First 
Consul's  political  projects ;  the  events  of  the  years 
that  followed  amply  proved  it.  Apart  from  General 
Sebastiani's  mission  in  the  East,  which  need  not  be 
discussed  here,  the  occupation  of  Puglia  by  French 
troops,  as  an  avowed  counterpoise  to  the  occupation 
of  Malta  by  those  of  Great  Britain,  could  have  but  one 
signification. 

The  province  of  Puglia  borders  the  Adriatic 
where  Italy  approaches  most  nearly  to  the  shores  of 
Turkey  ;  at  one  point  the  distance  is  but  fifty  miles. 
In  this  province  were  several  small  ports  facing  the 
Turkish  coast — Bari,  Barletta,  Brindisi,  Otranto  ;  and 
one  of  first-rate  importance,  Taranto.  There  the  erec- 
tion of  modern  fortifications  and  the  accumulation  of 
stores  would  form  an  excellent  naval  base,  and  one 
somewhat  nearer  Egypt  than  Malta.  On  the  other 
hand,  Taranto  lost  much  of  its  value  from  the  presence 
of  a  British  fortress  on  its  line  of  communications  by 
sea  with  France.  But  it  was  not  with  a  view  to  purely 
naval  operations  that  Taranto  was  an  important  posi- 
tion ;  for  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  Mediterranean 
rendered  possible  another  mode  of  approach  to  Egypt 
in  which  sea  operations  were  only  called   on  to  play 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  57 

a  subsidiary  part.  Li  the  days  when  vessels  were 
propelled  by  sails  only,  the  influence  of  sea-power  was 
greater  on  large  than  on  small  expanses  of  water. 
Between  two  far-distant  points  a  victorious  fleet  might 
check  all  hostile  movements  ;  between  two  points  close 
to  one  another  the  largest  fleet  might  be  neutralized 
during  a  few  hours  by  an  unfavourable  slant  of  wind, 
and  those  few  hours  might  suffice  to  carry  an  inferior 
fleet  from  the  one  point  to  the  other.  Precisely  this 
condition  existed  in  the  channel  of  Otranto  ;  British 
cruisers  might  patrol  it  for  days,  and  yet  a  strong 
north-westerly  wind  blowing  through  one  night  would 
suflice  to  carry  them  down  towards  the  Greek  coast 
and  to  carry  vessels  from  the  Italian  to  the  Turkish 
shore,  or  to  the  island  of  Corfu,  free  from  molestation. 
This  was  an  unsatisfactory  method  of  operating,  but  a 
perfectly  feasible  one,  as  was  shown  later.  The  con- 
ditions existing  at  Taranto  were  also  to  be  found 
further  east  ;  at  Constantinople,  at  the  Dardanelles, 
from  Greece  to  Crete,  from  the  Archipelago  to  Asia 
Minor. 