

military  engineers  were  rapidly  transforming^  Taranto 
mto  a  tirst-class  tortress. 

In  the  city  of  Naples  itself  circumstances  little 
likely  to  soothe  the  Queen's  susceptibilities  attended 
the  resumption  of  peaceful  relations  with  France.  The 
newly  appointed  Minister  of  the  Republic  was  Alquier, 
one  of  the  members  of  the  Convention  that  had  sent 
Louis  XVL  to  the  guillotine.  At  first  Mary  Caroline 
expressed  insurmountable  aversion  to  seeing  him  ;  later 
she  became  reconciled  to  his  presence,  and  finally 
exchanged  jokes  with  him.  Towards  Bonaparte  her 
dislike  was  tempered  by  extreme  curiosity  ;  and  in  the 
course  of  a  conversation  with  the  French  Minister 
in  the  year  1804  she  said  to  him,  laughingly  :  "You 
know  that  I  detest  your  country.  Yet  I  would  willingly 
travel  200  leagues  to  see  the  First  Consul.  He  loves 
glory  and  so  do  L  .   .  ."  ^ 

After  the  peace  of  Amiens  Ferdinand's  momentarily 
interrupted  diplomatic  relations  with  Great  Britain  were 
resumed,  Hugh  Elliot  being  sent  out  to  fill  the  arduous 
post  Sir  William  Hamilton  had  held  so  conspicuously. 
Elliot  proved  unfortunate  in  meeting  with  difficult 
circumstances  and  failed  to  earn  diplomatic  reputation. 
Through  the  new  British  Envoy  and  the  other  Ministers 
resident  at  Naples,  Mary  Caroline  was  kept  well  in- 
formed of  the  political  movement  of  Europe  against 
France  during  the  period  that  followed  the  treaties  of 
Luneville  and  Amiens.  Hostilities  between  Great 
Britain  and  France  broke  out  again  in  the  summer  of 
1803,  and  from  that  moment  the  former  Power  directed 
all  her  efforts  to  bring  Austria  and  Russia  to  her 
assistance.  Austria  was  not  reconciled  to  her  loss  of 
northern  Italy,  Russia  to  the  crushing  defeats  that  had 

1  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  ^elques  lettres  de  Marie  Caroline. 


6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

annihilated  the  long -triumphant  army  of  SuvaroiF. 
Both  of  these  two  great  empires,  jealous  of  Bonaparte's 
rapid  increase  of  strength,  of  his  stride  from  Consular 
to  Imperial  dignity,  were  mal?:ing  ready  to  challenge 
his  fortune.  To  their  help  Mary  Caroline  anxiously 
looked  for  relief  from  the  hated  incubus  of  French 
occupation  and  dictation.^ When  in  the  spring  of  1805 
f^apoleon,  following  up  his  proclamation  as  Emperor 
at  Paris,  proceeded  to  Milan  to  be  crowned  King  of 
Italy,  the  alarm  of  the  Sicihan  Court  rose  to  fever  heat. 
This  turned  into  panic  when  it  became  known  that  the 
Emperor  had  received  the  Neapolitan  Envoy,  Prince 
Cardito,  with  harsh  and  threatening  expressions. 

Napoleon's  gigantic  plans  against  Great  Britain  were 
now  rapidly  maturing,  and  it___was  essentjaL  that, 
whether  by  threats  or  persuasion ^  the  lower  end  .of 
tKe_Italian  peninsula  sho^d^ for  jhe  moment  be  kept 
at  rest.  The  maintenance  of  his  relations  with  the 
kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies  on  precisely  that  footing 
he  had  chosen,  meant  the  employment  of  the  least 
possible  number  of  his  troops  in  that  distant  quarter, 
made  safe  the  right  flank  of  the  army  that  would  soon 
have  to  face  Austria  in  northern  Italy,  and  retained 
for  future  eventualities  his  advanced  post  towards  the 
East.  With  the  plans  for  the  invasion  of  England  on 
the  point  of  execution,  with  the  inevitable  campaign 
against  the  north-eastern  Powers  already  shaping  in  his 
mind,  he  had  no  desire  to  trifle  in  war  with  Mary 
Carohne.  In  January  1805  he  tried  the  eflect  of  a 
direct  appeal  and  wrote  to  the  Queen  a  remarkable  and 
characteristic  letter.  He  told  her,  in  bald,  unambiguous 
phraseology,  precisely  what  course  it  would  be  to  her 
interest  to  take  :  let  her  dismiss  the  British  Minister, 
let  her  firmly  resolve  to  follow  the  lead  of  France,  and 