


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  63 

devourers  of  her  kingdom.  She  met  Elliot's  proposal 
with  much  coolness,  rejected  his  request,  and  from  that 
day  showed  him  far  less  favour  and  confidence.  The 
influence  of  the  British  Minister  received  another 
equally  severe  check  nearly  immediately  after  by  the 
arrival  of  the  newly  appointed  Russian  Minister 
Tatitcheff. 

The  Courts  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Naples  had  been 
on  cordial  terms  for  some  years.  In  1799  a  detach- 
ment of  Russian  troops  had  assisted  Cardinal  Ruffo 
in  his  capture  of  Naples,  and  since  that  time  the  Czar 
had  maintained  troops"  and  a  squadron  at  Corfu. 
There  was  nothing  in  Russian  policy  that  could  give 
umbrage  to  the  Court  of  Naples,  for  its  aspirations 
were  openly  fixed  on  the  Balkan  and  not  on  the  Italian 
peninsula.  There  was  therefore  nothing  to  tell  against 
Tatitcheff,  while  his  high  favour  with  the  Czar,  his 
personal  qualities,  his  loudly  proclaimed  Gallophobe 
sentiments  and  his  pushing  address  quickly  won  him 
Mary  Caroline's  ear.  There  was  no  political  reason 
why  Elhot  and  Tatitcheff  should  not  have  worked 
together,  but  personal  rivalry  asserted  itself,  and  the 
Russian  proved  successful  in  securing  the  royal  favour. 
The  British  Minister  had  attempted  to  drive  Naples 
into  war,  to  obtain  military  possession  of  the  most 
important  fortresses  of  Sicily  :  these  were  points  which 
the  Czar's  representative  did  not  fail  to  show  to  the 
Queen  under  the  most  unfavourable  light.  He  com- 
pared the  service  which  Russia  and  Great  Britain  might 
render,  the  one  disinterested,  the  other  not ;  he  pointed 
out  that  subjection  to  British  could  be  only  one  degree 
less  hateful  than  to  French  dictation. 

Not  long  after  Tatitcheff's  arrival  at  Naples,  in 
July,    the    European    situation    became    more    openly 


64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

threatening.  The  great  Powers  had  already  engaged 
in  those  preliminary  military  and  diplomatic  passes 
that  herald  an  approaching  conflict.  The  memorable 
cruise  of  Villeneuve  had  brought  the  French  fleet  near 
the  bare  headlands  of  Spain,  ofl^  which  the  greatest 
naval  battle  of  modern  times  was  soon  to  be  fought. 
Already  Napoleon*s  projected  invasion  of  England 
appeared  foiled  ;  in  his  mind  another  gigantic  and 
unexpected  stroke  was  fast  maturing.  From  Paris 
Ferdinand's  Minister,  the  astute  Di  Gallo,  sent  repeated 
warnings  of  danger.  The  storm  might  burst  at  any 
moment,  and  prudence  alone  could  save  Naples.  At 
Vienna  Paget,  and  at  St.  Petersburg  Leveson-Gower, 
urged  on  the  declaration  of  hostilities  under  threat 
of  suspending  the  payments  of  the  British  subsidies. 
Through  the  height  of  the  summer  that  was  to  have 
witnessed  the  invasion  of  England,  but  only  saw  Ville- 
neuve's  feeble  retreat  to  Cadiz,  the  strain  was  intense. 
War  was  evidently  coming,  but  how  and  when  none 
could  exactly  foresee.  On  the  4th  of  August  the 
Emperor  directed  Talleyrand  to  give  Alquier  a  free 
hand  to  break  ofl-'  relations  with  Naples  ;  this  discretion 
the  French  Minister,  however,  did  not  exercise.  At 
the  same  time  St.  Cyr  received  instructions  to  use  force, 
should  he  think  it  advisable^  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
pelling an Y_  muster  of  militia  made  in  the  provinces 
occupied  by  the  French  troops  ;  his  corps  was  quietly 
remforced,  bringing  his  total  up  to  about  17,000  men 
with  37  guns  ;  finally  he  was  warned  that  political 
complications  might  lead  to  his  beingjordered  to  occupy 
the  city  of  Naples  _by__the_ijtho7September. 