

Taranto,  though  an  outlying  and  in  many  ways 
disadvantageous  base,  was,  m  fact,  directly  connected 
with  the  territory  of  France.  An  accord  between 
France  and  the  Powers  of  north-eastern  Europe  was  all 
that  was  necessary  to  clear  the  way  for  the  concentration 
there  of  as  large  an  army  as  might  be  thought  necessary 
for  the  conquest  of  Salonika,  Constantinople,  or  Athens. 
However  wide  the  mark,  however  nebulous  or  romantic 
the  object  may  appear,  it  must  yet  be  said  that  the 
diplomatic  and  political  difficulties  were  greater  than 
the  military  in  this  first  great  step  toward  the  Orient 
that  so  fascinated  the  mind  of  Napoleon.  From  the 
earliest  days  of  his  greatness  his  dream   had   been  to 


58  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

effect  some  great  revolution  in  the  East,  nor  did  the 
failure  of  the  expedition  to  Egypt  shake  his  faith.  As 
will  be  seen  in  a  later  chapter,  when  he  reached  the 
height  of  his  glory  and  power  between  the  interviews 
of  Tilsit  and  Erfurt,  the  means  for  the  realization  of 
the  next  great  step  from  Taranto  eastward  took  a 
prominent  part  in  his  negotiations  and  measures. 

In  the  treaty  which  Murat  signed  with^the  Neapolitan 
Court^  the  one  point  of  Jiajiortance  therefore  was  to 
secure  Taranto,  the  counterpoise  of  Malta.  *'  That  is 
the  point  destined  to  play  the  biggest  part  one  day," 
wrote  Napoleon  to  his  brother  a  few  years  later  ;  and 
again,  ..."  You  will  be  of  the  greatest  assistance  in 
making  me  master  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  principal 
and  constant  object  of  my  policy." 

In  France  the  feeling  against  the  Neapolitan  Court 
was  strong,  especially  in  military  circles,  but  the  policy 
of  Bonaparte  was  influenced  less  by  motives  of  revenge 
than  of  expediency.  So  long  as  his  larger  naval  plans 
for  the  invasion  of  England  remained  operative,  so  long 
as  the  great  Powers  of  the  north-east  remained  in  a  state 
of  veiled  hostility,  he  thought  it  inexpedient  to  detach 
a  considerable  force  for  the  conquest  of  such  a  remote 

I  kingdom  as  that  of  Naples.  What  the  First  Consul 
wanted^  therefore,  was^  by  a  judicious  employment  of 
cajolery  and  threats,  to  maintain  the  existinp^  p;overnment 
of  the  Two  Sicilies  and  to  make  it  serve  his  present  pur- 

.  poses.  But  the  dictation  of  a  Napoleon  was  enough  to 
turn  an  even  less  proud  spirit  than  Mary  Caroline's. 
Hardly  were  the  French  troops  established  in  Puglia 
than  the  Sicilian  Government  was  ESicemptorily  called 
on  to  assume  an  attitude  of  hostile  neutralitvtowards 


GrHT^^BirSin^^^and^^t^^  heavy  guns^  munitions  of 

war,  and  artificers  for  the  works  with  w^^'^^  th^  pr^nrh 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  59 