

At  the  very  moment  when  Mary  Caroline's  policy 
triumphed  at  Naples  and  an  irrevocable  step  was 
being  taken,  that  of  Ferdinand  and  Acton  asserted 
itself  at  Paris.  Alarmed  at  the  intentions  of  France, 
supported  by  his  instructions  from  his  Government, 
anxious  to  meet  the  views  of  Talleyrand  and  Napoleon, 
Gallo  offered  to  enter  into  a  treaty  whereby  Naples 
would  undertake,  under  certain  conditions,  to  maintain 
neutrality.  This  Neapolitan  diplomat  had  come  within 
the  orbit  of  Napoleon  as  early  as  the  year  of  Campo 
Formio,  1797,  when  he  had  witnessed  the  famous 
meeting  between  the  commander  of  the  army  of  Italy 
and  Count  Cobenzl.  From  that  moment  he  became 
deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  power  of  the 
future  dominator  of  Europe,  whose  fortune  he  was  so 
long  to  follow.  Gallo  had  been  Ferdinand's  Minister 
at  Paris  during  the  Consulate,  and  had  witnessed  the 
proclamation  of  the  Empire.  His  early  admiration  for 
Napoleon  had  increased  with  years,  and  this,  together 
with  his  unconquerable  greed  for  pecuniary  benefits, 
makes  it  probable  that  at  the  period  now  in  question  he 
might  fairly  be  regarded  nearly  as  much  the  tool  of 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  67 

Napoleon  as  the  agent  of  Ferdinand.  He  at  all  events 
responded,  for  one  reason  or  another,  to  every  sugges- 
tion of  Talleyrand,  and  relying  on  the  necessities  of  the 
case  for  the  sanction  of  his  Government,  signed  the 
treaty  of  neutrality.  Its  terms  were  not  unfavourable  ; 
they  provided  that  the  Sicilian  Government  should 
maintain  neutrality  towards  FranceTthat  it  should~not 
permit  the  landing  of  foreign  troops  m  any  part  of  the 
two  kingdoms,  and  that  it  should  dismiss  from  its 
service  all  foreign  officers  ;  in  return  the  French  troops 
were  immediately  to  be  withdrawn  from^the  occupied 
provinces.  Talleyrand  and  Gallo  signed  this  treaty  on 
the  2 1  St  of  September  ;  the  Emperor  immediately  ratified 
it ;  on  the  23  rd  Marshal  Berthier  sent  orders  to  St. 
Cyr  in  which  he  notified  him  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty, 
and  gave  him  alternative  instructions  to  march  on 
Lombardy  or  on  Naples,  in  the  event  of  the  Sicilian 
Tjovernment  ratifying  or  refusing  to  ratify  the  treaty . 

On  the  3rd  of  October  the  treaty  of  neutrality 
arrived  at  Naples  ;  Alquier  gave  the  Government 
twenty-four  hours  in  which  to  decide  whether  it  would 
ratify  or  not,  and,  after  a  momentary  hesitation,  the 
necessary  signatures  were  given.-^  At  the  same  time 
a  protest  was  drawn  up  and  handed  to  Lacy,  in  which 
it  was  stated  that  the  treaty  of  neutrality  was  only 
signed  under  compulsion.  Thus  the  Sicilian  Court 
adopted  a  deliberately  deceptive  policy,  and  entered  on 
courses  which  Elliot,  the  Minister  of  one  of  its  allies, 
bluntly  declared  were  "  as  disgusting  as  they  were  dis- 
graceful." 