


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  71 

Archduke  Charles  should  be  supported  by  the  march 
northwards  of  Lacy's  army.  It  was  intended  that  the 
Austrians  and  the  Anglo-Russians  should  effect  their 
junction  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy.  But  these  diplo- 
matic arrangements  presupposed  success,  and  that  the 
generals  of  the  Allies  were  not  for  the  moment  in  a 
position  to  command. 

For  a  few  days  events  proceeded  smoothly  for  the 
Anglo-Russians.  The  first  dismay  caused  by  Mack's 
capitulation  was  over  ;  the  fortune  of  war  appeared 
once  more  to  balance  ;  the  intervention  of  Prussia,  the 
advent  of  the  Czar  were  eagerly  expected  ;  and  while 
the  allied  generals  prepared  their  transport  and  mounted 
their  cavalry,  they  were  cheered  with  the  news  of  the 
victory  of  Trafalgar.  It  had  never  entered  into  the 
calculations  of  Lacy  or  Craig  that  their  20,000  men 
should  advance  up  the  whole  length  of  the  Italian 
peninsula  unsupported.  They  anticipated  the  assistance 
of  a  large  body  of  Neapolitan  troops.  Much  to  the 
chagrin  of  Sir  James  Craig,  it  was  now  discovered  that 
material  assistance  could  not  be  expected.  The  royal 
army  was  too  small,  too  disorganized,  to  place  any 
considerable  corps  in  the  field  at  short  notice. 

Under  these  circumstances  Lacy  and  Craig  agreed 
that  the  best  course  was  to  begin  by  occupying  defensive 
positions  on  the  frontier,  leaving  farther  movements  to 
be  guided  by  events.  Accordingly  the  British  took  up 
a  line  extending  from  the  Mediterranean  along  the 
Garigliano  towards  the  mountains  of  the  Abruzzi. 
Their  left  was  in  touch  with  the  fortress  of  Gaeta, 
garrisoned  by  royal  troops  under  the  Prince  of  Hesse 
Philipstahl,  their  right  with  the  Russians,  who  from  San 
Germano  stretched  their  detachments  through  the  passes 
of  the  Apennines.     A  small  body  of  Neapolitan  troops 


72  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

under  Count  Roger  de  Damas  completed  the  line  on 
the  Adriatic  coast,  and  were  placed  under  the  direct 
orders  of  the  Russian  Commander-in-chief. 

On  the  4th  of  December  the  Government  issued  a 
decree  designed  to  remedy  the  weakness  of  the  army  by 
ordering  a  levy  en  masse  of  all  able-bodied  men  between 
the  ages  of  twenty  and  forty.  By  means  of  a  generous 
application  of  the  truglio  and  a  general  emptying  of  the 
prisons,  the  gaps  in  the  ranks  were  to  a  certain  extent 
reduced.  But  among  the  people  at  large  the  demands 
of  the  Government  met  with  far  from  ready  response. 
This  call  of  a  whole  population  to  arms  was,  most 
modestly,  expected  to  produce  30,000  soldiers  ;  in  fact 
it  produced  but  6000,  and  of  these  a  large  number  were 
bent,  on  desertion  at  the  first  opportunity.  So  great 
was  the  feeling  against  military  service  that  many 
preferred  self-mutilation. 