

One  day  before  Trafalgar  the  army  of  the  newly 
formed  French  Empire  brought  to  a  successful  close 
the  first  of  its  remarkable  operations.  As  a  result  of  one 
of  the  greatest  and  most  skilful  marches  recorded  in 
military  history,  the  French  army  had  been  moved  from 
its  positions  along  the  Channel  and  German  Ocean,  over 
the  Rhine,  through  the  heart  of  the  Black  Forest  and  the 
Swabian  Alps.  Unexpectedly  and  swiftly  it  emerged  on  the 
line  of  communications  of  the  Austrian  army,  destroyed 
its  isolated  divisions,  drove  Mack  into  Ulm,  and  on  the 
20th  of  October  received  his  surrender.  Wasting  not 
an  instant,  the  Emperor  continued  his  march  on  Vienna, 
but  without  receiving  peaceful  overtures.  The  Allies, 
though  momentarily  disheartened  by  the  destruction 
of  Mack,  determined  to  continue  the  struggle.  The 
Austrians  assembled  new  divisions  and  fell  back  on  the 
large  Russian  army  that  was  advancing  on  Vienna. 
While  the  military  struggle  still  promised  to  be  severe 
the  diplomatic  position  looked  menacing  for  Napoleon. 
Prussia's  hatred  of  the  new-born  military  power  of 
France  was  bringing  her  into  line  with  the  Allies,  and 
threatened  to  place  her  large  army  between  the  Emperor 
and  the  Rhine.     The  procrastination  of  Prussia  in  the 


70  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

field  of  diplomacy,  the  impetuosity  of  Alexander  in  the 
field  of  war,  relieved  Napoleon  from  a  position  of  the 
utmost  difficulty,  and  enabled  him  to  retain  supremacy 
by  winning  the  brilliant  victory  of  Austerlitz  on  the 
2nd  of  December. 

The  sudden  assault  of  the  hill  of  Pratzen  in  frozen 
Moravia  by  the  corps  of  Soult  and  Bernadotte  sealed 
the  fate  of  the  Anglo- Russian  army  at  the  southern 
end  of  the  Italian  peninsula,  700  miles  away.  Between 
the  disembarkation  of  Lacy's  and  Craig's  troops  and 
the  arrival  of  the  news  of  Austerlitz  only  a  month 
passed.  In  that  space  of  time  nothing  of  moment  took 
place  ;  yet  for  the  sake  of  an  idle  military  demonstra- 
tion Mary  Caroline  had  deliberately  violated  a  not 
unfavourable  treaty  and  had  jeopardized  her  throne. 
The  position  she  had  now  taken  up  was  past  all 
equivocation,  nor  could  the  Court  of  Naples  return  to 
the  sheath  the  cumbrous  sword  it  had  ventured  to 
brandish  at  the  dominator  of  Europe.  Even  had  the 
French  Minister  desired  to  avoid  a  breach  of  diplomatic 
relations,  the  flagrantly  hostile  nature  of  the  step  taken 
left  him  no  option.  But  his  intimate  knowledge  of  all 
that  passed  in  the  Court  circle  had  certainly  prepared 
him  for  an  aggressive  move.  Neither  Alquier,  nor  St. 
Cyr,  nor  yet  Napoleon  could  have  felt  much  doubt  as  to 
what  would  result  from  the  march  of  the  French  troops 
from  Puglia  to  the  Quadrilateral,  nor  can  it  reasonably 
be  supposed  that  the  Emperor  was  guided  by  any  but 
military  reasons  in  his  negotiations  with  Naples.  The 
presence  of  St.  Cyr  in  northern  Italy  was  an  imperative 
necessity,  for  Austria  had  mistakenly  concentrated  her 
strongest  army  under  her  best  general  in  the  Tyrol  and 
Massena  was  outnumbered.  The  Austrian  Government 
had  stipulated  with  its  allies  that  the  operations  of  the 