


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  6i 

all  would  be  well  with  her.  Why  should  she  not  cease 
from  her  intriguing  and  perceive  her  real  interests  ? 

But  the  Queen  was  too  proud,  too  hopeful  of  the 
fast-formTng  iiur^eancoalition,  to  followNapoieon's 
advice.  She  declined  to  order  Elliot  to  leave  her 
Court,  and  it  was  in  answer  to  this  that  the  Emperor 
had  uttered  his  threats  to  Prince  Cardito  at  Milan. 
The  Queen  of  Naples,  in  her  fear  and  distress,  took 
a  further  step  towards  open  hostility  by  repeatedly 
pressing  her  nephew,  the  Emperor  Francis,  for  positive 
assurances  of  his  armed  support  against  France. 

The  weight  of  the  French  occupation  of  Puglia  was 
becoming^  more  and  rnore  oppressive.  Early  itTme 
year  the  commanding  general,  St.  Cyr,  summoned  the 
Sicilian  Government  to  dismiss  from  its  service  Count 
Roger  de  Damas,  a  French  emigre  and  a  capable  officer. 
This  claim  was  evaded  by  transferring  the  Count  from 
Naples  to  Palermo.  The  even  more  embarrassing 
demand  of  the  French  Government  for  the  dismissal 
of  Elliot  caused  greater  difficulty  ;  eventually  the  inter- 
vention of  the  Austrian  Envoy,  Count  Kaunitz,  resulted 
in  the  British  Minister  remaining. 

By  the  end  of  February  1805,  if  not  earlier,  Mary 
Caroline  had  determined  to  brave  France  at  the  first 
j  favourable  opportunity.  The  Powers  received  assur- 
ances of  SiciUan  co-operation,  and  when,  on  the  nth 
of  April,  Great  Britain  and  Russia  signed  a  treaty  of 
offensive  and  defensive  alliance,  an  article  was  agreed 
to  providing  for  the  security  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Two  Sicilies.  By  this  treaty,  to  which  Austria  nearly 
immediately  acceded,  it  was  provided  that  the  alliance 
against  France  should  become  effective,  in  other  words 
that  hostilities  should  be  opened,  within  four  months. 
Great  Britain  was   thus    securing   her  great  object  of 


62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

effecting  a  military  diversion  that  would  draw  off  into 
the  heart  of  Europe  the  army  that  threatened  her  coasts. 
Her  diplomacy  at  Naples  strove  for  a  precisely 
similar  object  as  at  St.  Petersburg  and  Vienna.  To 
create  a  diversion  was  the  constant  effort  of  Elliot. 
He  diligently  played  on  the  Queen's  hatred  and  fear  of 
France,  he  insisted  on  the  advantage  that  would  accrue 
to  the  general  cause  were  Great  Britain  able  to  strike  a 
blow  at  her  enemy  in  the  Mediterranean  ;  finally  he 
presented  a  request  that  British  troops  should  be  per- 
mitted to  occupy  certain  points  in  Sicily  to  counter- 
balance the  French  occupation  of  Puglia.  From  this 
injudicious  diplomatic  step  may  be  traced  Mary 
Caroline's  suspicion  and  dislike  of  the  British  alliance, 
a  suspicion  that  was  to  develop  in  a  rapid  and  remark- 
able manner.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  ill 
judged  than  to  ask  a  Sovereign  whose  friendship  had 
been  constant  and  inspired  by  her  material  interests  to 
permit  a  military  occupation  entirely  to  the  profit  of 
her  ally  and  as  entirely  to  her  own  disadvantage.  For 
whatever  arguments  a  British  or  French  apologist  might 
put  forward  for  the  military  occupation  of  Brindisi  or 
Taranto,  of  Messina  or  Syracuse,  however  speciously 
the  one  might  argue  that  the  voluntary  surrender  of 
Puglia  was  compensated  by  the  retention  of  Naples,  or 
the  other  that  the  friendly  presence  of  British  troops 
was  more  a  protection  than  a  disadvantage,  the  fact 
remained  that  in  both  cases  the  real  power  of  the 
Sicilian  Crown  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  foreign 
government.  Mary  Caroline  did  not  nicely  balance 
whether  the  British  occupation  might  be  somewhat 
more  friendly  and  less  burdensome  than  that  of  the 
French  ;  she  merely  saw  in  it  a  further  abrogation  of 
her  sovereign  rights,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the 