

BiBL,  Naz.,  Memoirs  of  ^een  Mary  Caroline.  This  is  a  highly  im- 
portant source  of  information,  covering  the  period  1806-18 14,  very  copious 
in  personal  reminiscences  from  18 10.     See  Appendix  D. 

Printed  Books 
Abrantes,  d'  (Mme.  Junot),  Memoirs;  Browning,  England  and  Napoleon 
in  1803 i  Browning,  Hugh  Elliot;  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  S^uelques 
lettres  de  Marie  Caroline;  Bunbury,  Military  Transactions ;  Colletta, 
Storia ;  Collingwood,  Correspondence ;  Dumas,  Precis  militaire ;  Galt, 
Foyages;  Gorani,  Memoirs  ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina;  Helfert,  Maria 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Roi,  Correspondance ;  Las  Cases,  Memorial ;  Ligne, 
Memoirs;  MASsm  a.  Memoirs ;  Mavrice,  Diary  of  Sir  J.  Moore  ;  Metter- 
NiCH,  Memoirs ;  Minto,  Hugh  Elliot ;  Morgan,  Lady,  Italy ;  Napoleon, 
Correspondance  ;  Neumann,  Recueil  de  trait es ;  Nicola,  Diario  ;  Orloff, 
Memoirs;  F almieri^  Pens/es  et  sowvenirs ;  Roederer,  CEwvres ;  Schoell, 
Hist,  des  trait^s ;  Segur,  Hist,  et  Memoir es;  Treaties  and  Correspondence,  1806  ; 
Vandal,  Napoleon  et  Alexandre. 

^  The  generally  accepted  date  for  this  proclamation  is  that  given  in  the  text,  but 
it  did  not  make  its  appearance  in  the  Moniteur  till  the  ist  of  February.  Yet  its 
purport  was  known  at  Naples  on  the  25th  of  January,  so  that  whether  officially 
published  or  not  its  contents  must  have  been  revealed  not  much  later  than  its 
ostensible  date.  See  Napoleon,  Corr.  xi.  509  ;  Schoell,  Hht.  des  traites,  viii.  9  j 
Nicola,  ii.  188. 


CHAPTER   III 

CONQUEST    OF    NAPLES 

(Feb. -June  1806) 

Policy  of  Napoleon — French  finance — Napoleon  and  Joseph — Is 
oiFered  crown  of  Naples — S.  Teodoro's  negotiations — Flight 
of  the  Court — Collapse  of  Neapolitan  resistance — Massena's 
movements — Joseph's  entry  into  Naples  —  Task  before  the 
invaders  —  The  Neapolitan  forces  —  Regnier  marches  into 
Calabria  —  Campotanese  —  French  at  Reggio  —  Neapolitan 
flight — Corpi  volanti — Character  and  causes  of  the  rising  in 
Calabria — Military  situation  end  of  March — Insurrection  of 
Calabria — Rodio — Joseph  visits  Calabria — His  portrait  and  line 
of  internal  policy — Gaeta — Its  garrison  and  commander — 
Commencement  of  siege  —  Unsuccessful  bombardments  — 
Campredon  takes  charge — Hesse's  appeals  for  help — Smith 
at  Palermo  —  Embarks  Fra  Diavolo  —  His  history  —  Smith 
relieves  Gaeta  —  Captures  Capri  —  Fra  Diavolo's  raid  and 
treachery — Sent  to  Palermo — Sorties  from  Gaeta — Smith's 
proclamations — Progress  of  French  works  —  Massena  takes 
command. 

The  enmity  between  the  Bourbon  dynasty  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  and  the  people  of  France  had  been  transmitted 
from  the  events  of  the  great  Revolution  ;  the  military 
occupation  of  Puglia  by  the  Consular  Government  had 
been  intended  as  a  compensation  for  the  English  occupa- 
tion of  Malta  and  as  a  move  towards  future  operations 
in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  basin.     These  two  salient 