

While  the  Queen  called  out  the  masse  and  urged 
her  irresponsive  ministers  and  diplomats  to  futile 
efforts,  whiJe  the  King  with  great  good  humour  enjoyed 
the  pleasures  of  the  chase  at  Capo  di  Monte  and 
Fusaro,  Napoleon  resolved  the  fate  of  their  kingdom. 
Having  concluded  peace  with  Austria,  he  addressed  the 
following  proclamation  to  his  army  from  Schoenbrunn 
on  the  27  th  of  December  : — 

Soldiers,  for  ten  years  I  have  left  nothing  undone  to  save 
the  King  of  Naples  ;  he  has  left  nothing  undone  for  his  ruin. 
After  the  battles  of  Dego,  of  Mondovi,  of  Lodi  he  could  have 
offered  but  the  feeblest  resistance.  I  listened  to  the  promises 
of  this  Prince,  and  I  treated  him  with  generosity. 

When  the  second  coalition  was  destroyed  at  Marengo,  the 
King  of  Naples,  first  to  wage  an  unjust  war,  abandoned  by  his 
aUies  at  Luneville,  remained  isolated  and  defenceless  5  he  im- 
plored me,  and  for  a  second  time  I  pardoned  him. 

But  a  few  months  have  passed  since  you  were  at  the  gates 
of  Naples  ;  I  had  good  enough  grounds  both  to  suspect  the 
treason  there  hatching  and  to  avenge  the  insults  already  suffered. 
Again  I  was  generous.  I  recognised  the  neutrality  of  Naples  ; 
I  ordered  you  to  evacuate  that  kingdom,  and,  for  the  third 
time,  the  House  of  Naples  was  supported  and  saved. 

Shall  we  pardon  for  a  fourth  time  ?     Shall  we   trust  for  a 
fourth  time  a  Court  without  faith,  without  honour,  without  f 
judgment  ?     No  !    no  !    the  dynasty  of  Naples  has  ceased  to 
reign  ;  its  continued  existence  is  incompatible  with  the  repose 
of  Europe  and  the  honour  of  my  Crown. 

Soldiers,  forward  !     Hurl  into  the  waves,  if  they  should  await 


78  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

you,  the  feeble  battalions  of  the  tyrants  of  the  seas  ;  show 
the  world  how  we  chastise  perjury  ;  announce  without  delay 
that  all  Italy  is  subject  to  my  laws  or  to  those  of  my  allies, 
that  the  most  lovely  land  on  earth  is  free  from  the  yoke  of 
the  most  perfidious  of  people,  that  the  sanctity  of  treaties  is 
avenged,  and  that  the  souls  of  my  brave  soldiers  slaughtered 
in  the  ports  of  Sicily  on  their  return  from  Egypt  after  escaping 
the  dangers  of  shipwreck,  of  the  desert,  and  of  battle,  are  at 
last  appeased. 

Soldiers  !  my  brother  will  lead  you  ;  he  knows  my  plans  ;  he 
carries  my  authority  ;  he  has  my  complete  confidence  ;  encircle 
him  with  yours.^ 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Brit,  War  Off.,  Orig.  Corresp.  169  and  170,  containing  a  number  of 
dispatches  to  and  from  Elliot,  Craig,  Castlereagh,  Circello,  and  others 
concerning  the  British  force  under  Craig. 

Archivio  di  Stato,  Guerray  xxv.  2248,  contains  several  documents 
bearing  on  the  same  question. 