

There  was  thus  practically  nothing  to  oppose 
Massena's  advance  but  a  few  weak  battalions  of  the 
regular  army,  too  few  in  numbers  to  venture  into  the 
open  Campagna  through  which  lay  the  road  to  Naples. 
By  the  middle  of  January  Massena  had  35,000  men  in 
the  Roman  States,  of  which  about  25,000  were  in 
the  first  line.     Early  in  February  he  could  dispose  of 


86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

30,000  men  and  twenty-four  guns  for  actual  operations, 
with  nearly  10,000  more  advancing  to  his  support 
under  Duhesme,  and  on  the  8  th  he  crossed  the  Gari- 
gliano.  Joseph  Bonaparte  was  with  Massena,  and  as 
the  French  army  crossed  the  frontier  he  issued  a  pro- 
clamation to  the  people  of  Naples  assuring  them  that 
they  would  receive  friendly  treatment,  and  that  the  aim 
of  the  invaders  was  merely  to  chastise  the  breach  of 
faith  of  Ferdinand. 

Massena  pushed  directly  on  for  the  capital,  meeting 
with  no  opposition  save  from  the  fortresses  of  Gaeta 
and  Capua,  before  which  detachments  were  left  in 
observation.  At  Aversa  he  received  the  surrender  of 
Naples  from  the  regency,  and  on  the  14th,  six  days 
after  crossing  the  Garigliano,  a  French  detachment 
made  its  entry  into  the  city.  Before  their  arrival 
the  property -holders  had  formed  a  citizens'  guard 
for  protection  against  any  excesses  of  the  lazzaroni, 
and  the  rapidity  with  which  Massena  moved,  together 
with  the  promptitude  of  the  provisional  Giunta's 
surrender,  prevented  a  repetition  of  the  furious  defence 
and  terrible  slaughter  that  had  taken  place  when  Cham- 
pionnet  captured  Naples  for  the  Directoire  six  years 
before. 

On  the  15  th  of  February  Joseph  Bonaparte  made 
his  formal  entry  surrounded  by  a  brilliant  staff;  he 
took  up  his  abode  at  the  Royal  Palace,  styling  himself 
Prince  of  France,  Grand  Elector  of  the  Empire,  and 
Lieutenant  of  the  Emperor.  The  city  acquiesced 
,  passively  in  the  change  of  government,  and  the  French 
were  able  to  take  possession  of  no  less  than  200  pieces 
of  ordnance  and  large  stores  of  gunpowder  that  had 
neither  been  removed  nor  destroyed. 

Notwithstanding   the   facility   with  which  this   first 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  87 

conquest  had  been  accomplished,  the  French  army  was 
in  reahty  far  too  small  for  the  task  set  before  it.  Even 
had  Napoleon  transferred  another  50,000  men  from 
Germany  to  Massena's  command,  that  general  would 
have  disposed  of  insufficient  numbers.  The  80,000 
men  placed  under  his  orders  in  Lombardy-Venetia 
represented  but  40,000  in  the  Papal  States,  and  but 
25,000  in  the  city  of  Naples  ;  while  the  further 
stretch  from  that  point  to  the  extremity  of  Calabria 
would  mean  an  even  greater  proportionate  reduction. 
And  if  the  Strait  of  Messina  was  to  be  crossed, 
the  effective  force  left  available  for  the  conquest  of 
Sicily  would  be  quite  insignificant.  But  the  funda- 
mental political  consideration  on  which  the  strategy  of 
the  French  generals  should  have  been  based,  a  con- 
sideration that  was  indeed  in  Napoleon's  mind,  was 
that  no  conquest  of  Naples  could  be  complete  and  final 
unless  the  Bourbon  Court  was  driven  out  of  Sicily  as 
well.  From  this  was  deducible  the  further  consequence 
that  a  rapid  attack,  giving  no  time  for  the  elaboration 
of  a  system  of  defence,  offered  the  best  chance  of 
success.  As  it  was.  Napoleon  and  his  generals  com- 
pletely underestimated  the  total  of  troops  necessary  to 
enable  the  offensive  to  be  carried  beyond  the  Strait  of 
Messina,  and  no  provision  was  made  for  the  maritime 
transport  that  would  be  necessary  for  crossing  the  small 
branch  of  sea  that  separates  the  island  from  the  main- 
land. The  result  was  that  the  French  military  strength 
just  reached  the  strait,  but  there  fell  powerless,  and  that 
the  best  opportunity  that  was  ever  to  present  itself  of 
completing  the  conquest  of  the  whole  kingdom  passed 
away,  never  to  be  renewed. 