

The  Russian  immediately  informed  the  British 
Commander    of    the    instructions     he    had     received. 


74  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  Craig,  to  whose  judgment  his  Government  had 
wisely  given  great  latitude,  decided  that  he  could  not 
undertake  the  defence  of  Naples  unassisted,  and  must 
therefore  evacuate  simultaneously  with  the  Russians. 
Mary  Caroline  opposed  her  vehement  entreaties  to  the 
retirement  of  the  Anglo-Russians.  Convinced  now  of 
^her  political  errors,  prepared  for  the  most  bitter  sacrifices, 
she  sent  Cardinal  Fabrizio  Ruffo  to  Rome  on  the 
yth  of  January  with  instructions  to  attempt  negotia- 
tions through  the  intermediary  of  the  Pope  and  Cardinal 
Fesch.  He  was  given  powers  to  make  the  most  ample 
concessions.  To  give  this  negotiation  proper  support 
it  was  necessary,  the  Queen  argued,  to  keep  up  an 
appearance  of  material  strength  ;  it  was  necessary  that 
the  allied  army  should  retain  its  positions,  and  thereby 
induce  some  compromise  from  the  enemy.  TatitchefF 
strenuously  supported  this  not  unreasonable  contention. 
He  urged  Lacy  to  delay  his  movement  ;  Elliot,  gained 
to  the  same  viev/,  made  similar  representations  to  Craig. 
The  Russian  general,  although  he  had  received 
instructions  to  retire  to  Corfu,  at  first  showed  some 
inclination  to  interpret  his  orders  widely,  and  to 
afford  the  Queen's  negotiations  support  by  delaying 
his  departure.  After  some  discussion  with  Craig,  with 
whom  he  had  remained  on  good  terms  from  the 
beginning  of  their  co- operation,  he  proposed  to  the 
Court  that  the  allied  army  should  retreat  to  Calabria, 
and  there  take  up  a  strong  defensive  position.  This 
proposal  was  rejected,  and  in  terms  so  violent  and 
insulting,  that  Lacy  refused  to  accept  their  communica- 
tion.^ He  now  decided  that  further  discussion  would 
be    useless,  and    proceeded    to    carry  out    his    original 

1  Craig  to  Castlereagh,  Feb.   lo,   1806,  War  Off.  Or'ig.  Corr.  170,  "...  terms 
of  indiscreet  invective  ..."  is  Craig's  expression. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  75 

intention.  Craig's  conduct  conformed  to  that  of  his 
colleague.  The  Russian  and  British  Ministers  were 
greatly  angered  at  the  decision  of  the  generals ;  Mary 
Caroline  was  in  despair  at  a  departure  which  her  own 
violence  had  hastened.  To  Elliot  the  Queen  expressed 
herself  In  these  remarkable  terms  :  "  Degradation  and 
injury  will  be  the  price  we  shall  have  to  pay  for  the 
short  and  expensive  Anglo-Russian  visit.  We  are  sick 
at  heart  ;  nothing  could  have  surpassed  our  good  faith 
and  dignity.''  ^ 

But  Craig,  though  deaf  to  Elliot's  persuasion,  though 
determined  not  to  risk  his  small  corps  unsupported 
against  a  French  army  of  invasion,  was  at  the  same 
time  anxious  to  secure  for  his  Government  such  military 
positions  as  were  both  advantageous  and  defensible. 
Craig's  instructions  did  not  urge  him  to  secure  Sicilian 
but  British  interests  ;  a  possible  conflict  between  the 
two  was  even  anticipated,  and  his  orders  were  that,  in 
case  of  necessity,  he  was  to  occupy  Sicily,  and  even 
"  to  take  possession  of  it  without  the  concurrence  of 
His  Sicilian  Majesty."^  The  rights  of  Ferdinand  and 
Mary  ■  Caroline  were  no  more  sacred  to  the  British 
Government  and  its  commander  than  they  were  to 
Napoleon  and  St.  Cyr. 