

Craig's  first  idea  appears  to  have  been  to  occupy  and 
defend  Gaeta,  but  the  suggestion  that  British  troops 
should  enter  the  fortress  was  instantly  repelled  by  the 
Prince  of  Hesse.  Failing  this.  Sir  James  Craig  decided 
that  the  next  best  point  at  which  he  could  check  a 
French  invasion  was -on  the  Strait  of  Messina.  Pro- 
ceeding on  military  considerations  and  in  the  spirit  of 
his  instructions,  he  firmly  resolved  to  place  his  force  at 

^  Minto,  391. 
2  Craig  to  Elliot,  Jan.  27,  1806,  War  Off.  Orlg.  Corr.  170. 


76  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  point,  notwithstanding  the  strong  opposition  of 
Elliot.  No  sooner  was  the  Anglo-Russian  retirement 
decided  than  Craig  formally  applied  for  permission  to 
disembark  his  troops  at  Messina.  This  was  met  by  a 
curt  refusal.  So  far  did  the  resentment  of  the  Sicilian 
Government  go  that  orders  were  promptly  sent  that 
any  attempt  at  landing  on  the  part  of  the  British  was 
to  be  resisted,  and,  if  necessary,  by  force  of  arms.-^ 
Under  these  difficult  circumstances,  unsupported  by  his 
country's  diplomatic  representative,  Craig  showed  equal 
firmness,  coolness,  and  judgment.  Sailing  from  Castella- 
mare  on  the  19th  of  January,  he  carried  his  troops 
direct  to  Messina.  There  he  cast  anchor,  and,  without 
attempting  to  land  a  single  man,  awaited  circumstances 
that  would  compel  Ferdinand  to  call  for  the  aid  of  his 
unwelcome  defender.  His  judgment  was  soon  justified 
by  events,  and  on  the  13th  of  February  the  hostile 
orders  were  rescinded  and  the  British  troops  left  free 
to  disembark. 

The  departure  of  the  British  and  Russian  armies 
had  left  Mary  Caroline  well-nigh  defenceless.  In  her 
despair  the  Queen  issued  a  multitude  of  orders,  often 
contradictory,  generally  useless.  On  the  nth  of  January 
she  called  out  the  masse  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  ; 
they  were  those  same  free  companies,  midway  between 
the  comitiva  of  a  brigand  chief  and  the  slightly  less 
unruly  bodies  of  provincial  militia  that  had  followed 
Cardinal  Ruffo  to  the  assault  of  Naples  in  1799.  Often 
enough  they  were  but  bands  of  outlaws  attracted  to 
the  royal  service  by  a  free  pardon,  by  the  adornment 
of  their  chief  with  some  such;,  title  as  captain  or 
colonel,  and    by  the  hope  of  plunder.     Among    their 

1  Arch.  Nap.  "  Guerra,"  xxv.  2248,  Jan.  4  and  20,  1806  j  also  Circello  to  Elliot, 
Jan.  21,  1806,  War.  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170. 


CHAP.  11  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  77 

leaders  were  such  illustrious  freebooters  as  Sciarpa  and 
Michael  Pezza,  otherwise  known  as  Fra  Diavolo.  So 
detestable  did  this  measure  appear  that  Count  Roger 
de  Damas  refused  to  have  them  under  his  orders,  and 
that  Baron  Rodio,  who  had  been  among  the  most 
staunch  of  the  royalist  leaders  in  1799,  declined  to 
allow  his  name  to  be  connected  with  them  again. 