

Through  the  first  half  of  December  the  operations 
of  the  Allies  in  Naples,  though  purely  defensive,  pro- 
ceeded smoothly.  The  Neapolitan  battalions  gradually 
grew  larger,  and  a  Russian  reinforcement  of  some  6000 
men  was  landed  in  Puglia  and  helped  to  swell  Lacy's 
army  to  respectable  proportions.  But  any  hope  of  an 
eventual  advance  was  crushed  before  Christmas  by  the 
news  of  the  defeat  of  the  Austrian  and  Russian  Emperors 
at  Austerlitz.  So  profound  was  the  sensation  caused  by 
this  intelligence  that  on  the  very  day  of  its  circulation 
the  report  spread  through  Naples  that  the  Court  would 
take  refuge  at  Palermo.^ 

There  was  ample  reason  for  alarm.  The  Neapolitan 
Court  had  deliberately  challenged  Napoleon,  and  Jiow 
that  his  armies  were  triumphant,  but  Ojae-~i:£sult  could 

^  The   news   reached  Naples    on    the   22nd    of    December,    though    the   official 
dispatches  were  much  later. 


CHAP.  II  NAPOLEON  AND  NAPLES  73 

follow.  Neither  help  nor  sympathy  was  to  be  expected  ; 
'and  even  its  agents  could  find  nothing  to  say  in  paTITa- 
tion  of  such  political  blunders  and  duplicity.  At  first 
Gallo  attempted  to  keep  up  the  pretence  that  friendly 
relations  still  continued  between  the  two  Governments  ; 
he  protested  that  he  knew  of  no  infraction  of  the  treaty 
of  neutrality,  and  that  the  presence  of  the  Anglo- 
Russians  at  Naples  was  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  his 
Court.  This  position  was  not  long  tenable,  and  he 
finally,  and  far  more  intelligibly,  declared  that,  in  any 
event,  he  desired  not  to  leave  Paris,  where  he  would  be 
content  to  be  permitted  to  live  and  die.  In  a  private 
letter  to  Prince  Joseph  Bonaparte  he  expressed  in  un- 
measured terms  his  condemnation  of  the  Queen's  policy, 
and  earnestly  begged  for  the  personal  favour  of  the 
Emperor. 

In  her  own  resources  Mary  Caroline  could  not  con- 
fide. At  Paris  nothing  could  be  done.  At  Vienna  alone 
was  there  hope  of  succour.  To  the  Emperor  Francis, 
her  nephew  and  her  ally,  the  Queen  wrote  letters 
entreating  that  he  should  secure  the  inclusion  of  the 
Two  Sicilies  in  any  armistice  or  treaty  concluded  with 
France.  But  the  Austrian  Emperor  had  too  difficult 
a  situation  to  face  to  concern  himself  about  the  fate 
of  Naples,  nor  would  Napoleon  have  listened  to  pro- 
posals on  the  subject.  Russia  alone  remained  in  the 
field,  but  the  Czar  hesitated  whether  or  not  to  continue 
the  war.  His  army  was  shattered,  and  one  of  his  first 
steps  after  Austerlitz  was  to  provide  for  the  safe  with- 
drawal of  the  body  of  troops  he  had  ventured  in  far-away 
Naples.  Lacy  was  first  instructed  to  obtain  an  armistice, 
and  afterwards  to  transport  his  army  back  to  Corfu. 