

One  last   aspect   of  the   Neapolitan    question   as   it 
presented  itself  to  Napoleon  must  be  dwelt   on, — the 

VOL.  I  G 


Si  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

dynastic  one.  He  was  virtually  in  occupation  of  the 
throne  of  the  Bourbons.  He  felt  that  his  fall  would  be 
less  likely  to  lead  to  a  republican  reaction  than  to  a 
Bourbon  restoration.  For  that  House  he  had  much  of 
the  genuine  republican  detestation  of  a  true  child  of  the 
Revolution.  Every  blow  aimed  at  its  possessions  or 
repute  was  doubly  gratifying  to  him  ;  and  in  the 
impending  fall  of  the  Neapolitan  branch  of  that  House 
he  saw  the  opportunity  not  only  of  lowering  the  prestige 
of  a  possible  competitor,  but  of  increasing  his  own.  For 
his  secret  thought  had  long  been  to  come  to  no  terms 
with  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline  but  to  transfer 
their  dominions  and  their  crown  to  a  new  king  of  his 
owrPmaking.  That  king  could  be  none  other  than 
Napoleon's  eldest  brother  Joseph. 

In  the  summer  of  1805,  while  the  diplomatic 
manoeuvres  preceding  the  breaking  out  of  war  with 
Austria  and  Russia  were  taking  place,  Napoleon,  in  the 
hopes  of  securing  Austrian  neutrality,  had  offered  to 
separate  the  crowns  of  France  and  Italy.  Whether  he 
expected  anything  to  come  of  this  proposal  or  not 
there  was  certainly  a  report  current  that  the  Emperor 
would  resign  the  crown  of  Lombardy  in  favour  of 
Joseph  Bonaparte.-^  But  Austria's  non-acceptance  and 
the  event  of  the  war  were  to  effect  a  change  in  Joseph's 
destination.  Lombardy  was  to  remain  under  the  king- 
ship of  Napoleon,  while  his  brother  was  to  be  com- 
pensated with  the  throne  of  Naples. 

While  the  Emperor  led  his  army  into  Germany, 
Joseph  Bonaparte  had  remained  in  Paris  to  direct  affairs 
of  State.  The  correspondence  of  the  brothers  was 
constant  and  voluminous,  but  two  dates  will  sufficiently 

^  Roederer,  iii.  520.     Miot,  whose  authority  is  doubtful,  gives  quite  a  different 
version,  ii.  84,  107,  ill. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  83 

establish  the  development  of  Napoleon's  policy  as  it 
affected  the  question  of  Naples:  on  the  31st  of 
December,  having  then  left  Vienna  and  reached 
Munich,  he  wrote  appointing  Joseph  his  Lieutenant 
commanding  the  army  of  Naples,  with  authority  over  the 
Marshals  of  France.  Three  weeks  later,  from  Stuttgard, 
he  formally  offered  his  brother  the  crown  of  Naples. 

If  Count  Miot's  account  is  to  be  trusted,  Joseph 
Bonaparte  did  not  accept  this  regal  gift  without  reluct- 
ance. The  throne  of  Naples  was  in  theory  independent, 
and  its  occupant  could  not  at  the  same  time  hold  that 
of  France.  But  Napoleon  was  childless,  Joseph  was 
the  eldest  of  his  brothers,  and  the  throne  of  Naples 
appeared  a  poor  thing  when  compared  with  that  of 
France.  So  Joseph  hesitated,  until  Napoleon  intervened 
in  his  usual  authoritative  and  decisive  fashion.  At  the 
end  of  January,  Joseph,  who  was  now  on  his  way  to 
Italy,  had  not  yet  given  his  formal  acceptance  of  the 
offer.  The  Emperor  summoned  Miot,  his  brother's 
intimate  friend,  and  told  him  that  in  case  of  refusal  he 
would  make  another  appointment  to  the  crown  of 
Naples,  and  also  adopt  a  successor  to  his  own, — perhaps 
Eugene  Beauharnais.  This  proved  conclusive,  and 
Joseph,  fearing  worse  things,  agreed  to  accept  the 
crown  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline. 