

Before  Napoleon  even  knew  that  Massena's  columns 
were  in  position  to  cross  the  frontier,  he  urged  on  his 


88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

brother  that  he  must,  without  a  moment's  delay,  get 
22,000  men  to  Reggio,  whence  Sicily  could  easily  be 
taken  in  the  first  moment  of  panic.  Nothing  could 
be  sounder  than  the  considerations  on  which  this  order 
was  based,  but  the  means  for  its  execution  were  want- 
ing, nor  had  the  officers  to  whom  it  was  intrusted 
for  execution  that  unerring  discrimination  between  the 
vital  and  the  subsidiary  that  so  often  enabled  Napoleon 
to  concentrate  a  sufficient  amount  of  energy  on  the 
really  decisive  point. 

Immediately  after  the  occupation  of  the  city  of 
Naples,  Joseph  asserted  the  supreme  military  control 
given  him  by  his  brother;  Massena  was  placed  in 
charge  of  the  troops  concentrated  in  the  capital  and  its 
vicinity  ;  the  command  of  the  detached  force  operating 
on  the  Adriatic  side  towards  Puglia  was  given  to  St. 
Cyr,  while  all  the  troops  available  for  an  advance  into 
Calabria  were  placed  under  the  ablest  of  the  divisional 
generals  at  Naples,  Regnier.  He  was  instructed  to 
march  to  the  Strait  of  Messina  without  delay. 

When  Regnier,  at  the  end  of  February,  was  on  the 
point  of  marching  south,  the  forces  of  the  Sicilian 
Government  were  divided  into  two  bodies.  The 
one  under  Marshal  Rosenheim,  with  whom  was  the 
Hereditary  Prince,  was  retreating  before  Lecchi's 
advance  on  the  Adriatic  side  of  the  Apennines  ;  the 
other,  under  the  Comte  de  Damas,  maintained  a  corre- 
sponding position  on  the  western  slope,  observing  from  a 
distance  the  French  in  Naples.  Damas  had  some  6000 
or  7000  regulars  and  a  certain  number  of  Calabrese 
militia  ;  Rosenheim's  numbers  were  somewhat  less. 

Regnier,  at  the  head  of  about  10,000  men,  advanced 
from  Naples  with  exemplary  celerity  and  plunged  into 
the    mountains    of    Calabria,    and    into    winter.     His 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  89 

advance  lay  along  the  mule  track  that  did  duty  as  the 
principal  artery  of  communication  between  that  remote 
province  and  the  capital,  and  led  to  the  town  of 
Cassano.  Towards  Cassano,  which  lies  on  the  Adriatic 
slope,  lay  the  converging  lines  of  retreat  both  of  Rosen- 
heim and  of  Damas.  The  latter,  who  was  directly  on 
Regnier's  line  of  march,  determined  to  face  the  French 
in  the  high  mountain  passes  they  would  have  to  cross 
before  they  could  reach  that  town. 

On  the  6th  of  March,  at  Lagonegro,  the  armies  got 
into  touch,  and  a  heavy  skirmish  was  fought  between 
the  advanced  guard  of  the  French  and  the  rear-guard 
of  the  royal  forces.  This  rear-guard  was  made  up  of 
irregulars  and  militia  under  the  command  of  Sciarpa, 
one  of  the  best-known  of  the  leaders  of  the  Masse  in 
1799.  The  French  light  infantry,  manoeuvring  with 
rapidity  and  skill,  captured  four  guns  and  drove  the 
royalists  before  them  with  a  loss  of  300.  Three  days 
later  Regnier  came  up  with  Damas'  main  body  at  Cam- 
potanese  and  found  the  Sicilians  occupying  a  formidable 
position  in  a  small  plateau,  to  which  the  inlet  and  outlet 
were  narrow  defiles.  Damas  had  some  14,000  men, 
of  which  about  one  half  were  regulars,  drawn  up  across 
the  pass  ;  his  position  was  carefully  chosen  and  its 
front  was  completely  covered  with  breastworks  ;  his 
two  flanks  were  apparently  protected  by  the  mountain 
sides.  It  was  a  truly  admirable  position  for  defence, 
but  had  one  great  fault,  that  in  case  of  defeat  there  was 
but  a  narrow  outlet  for  retreat. 