

It  was  not  remarkable  that  with  the  Emperor  and 
his  brother  meditating  such  projects  the  negotiators  of 
the  Court  of  Naples  should  have  met  with  scant  success. 
Cardinal  Ruffo's  mission  having  resulted  in  nothing, 
the  Duke  of  S.  Teodoro  was  dispatched  to  Rome,  but 
accomplished  no  more.  On  the  28th  of  January  the  ^  (, 
Duke  was  admitted  to  an  interview  with  Joseph,  handed 
him  a  letter  from  the  Hereditary  Prince,  and  verbally 


84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

offered  the  abdication  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline 
in  favour  of  their  son,  if  peace  could  be  obtained  on 
such  terms.  The  French  Prince,  adhering  firmly  to 
Napoleon's  constantly  reiterated  instructions  that  he 
was  not  to  listen  to  terms  of  any  sort,  declined  to 
consider  the  Duke's  proposal.  S.  Teodoro,  a  slippery 
personage  whose  allegiance  was  already  wavering,  re- 
turned to  Naples,  but  apparently  did  not  report  the 
absolutely  barren  result  of  his  mission.  Following  his 
deceptive  assurances  as  to  the  success  of  his  negotia- 
tions the  order  for  the  levy  en  masse  was  rescinded. 
The  Queen  herself  gave  a  fanciful  account  of  these 
negotiations  to  Elliot,  while  in  her  Memoirs  she  makes 
the  curious  statement  that  the  Duke  reported  his 
negotiations  at  Rome  to  be  progressing  favourably, 
and  tried  to  persuade  her  to  journey  to  Terracina  with 
the  Hereditary  Prince,  there  to  have  an  interview  with 
Joseph.  Suspecting  some  treason  of  the  Duke,  she 
declined. 

The  complete  failure  of  the  peace  overtures  was, 
however,  soon  realized,  and  struck  alarm  in  the  hearts 
of  the  Court  of  Naples  ;  since  the  beginning  of  January 
valuables  from  the  royal  palaces  had  been  removed 
to  ships  ready  for  conveyance  to  Palermo  ;  on  the 
23rd  Ferdinand  decided  to  transfer  his  hunting  head- 
quarters to  Sicily,  leaving  the  government  to  the 
nominal  control  of  the  Hereditary  Prince,  and  of  a 
Giunta  composed  of  Naselli,  Canosa,  and  CianciuUi. 
On  the  nth  of  February  Mary  Caroline  followed  the 
King's  example,  taking  with  her  everything  of  value 
that  could  be  easily  conveyed.-^ 

1  This  appears  to  be  the  reasonable  view.  Extreme  statements  are,  however, 
easy  to  find,  and  in  opposite  directions  see  Joseph,  Corr.  ii.  14,  70  j  Helfert,  K'onigin 
Karolwa,  222  :  Segur,  ii.  502. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  85 

There  was  good  cause  for  the  Queen's  departure, 
for  the  French  columns  were  nearing  the  frontier,  and 
they  had  acquired  a  terrifying  reputation  for  celerity 
of  movement.  Under  Marshal  Massena,  perhaps 
the  most  able  and  vigorous  of  all  Napoleon's  generals, 
the  French  corps  of  invasion  were  rapidly  concentrat- 
ing. So  great  was  the  fear  they  inspired  that  even 
their  presence  appeared  scarcely  necessary  to  secure 
victory  ;  early  in  January,  when  they  were  as  yet  very 
far  distant,  the  Neapolitan  artillery  did  not  feel  secure 
in  convoying  guns  from  Naples  to  the  fortress  of 
Capua  save  with  lighted  matches !  Such  soldiers  as 
had  been  hastily  recruited  did  not  appear  likely  material 
to  face  the  enemy  ;  they  came  mostly  from  the  prisons, 
and  had  merely  changed  the  form  of  their  service  to 
the  State  by  means  of  a  sliding  scale  that  established 
an  equivalent  between  seven  years  at  the  galleys  and 
ten  years  of  military  service.  The  levy  of  soldiers 
from  the  unconvicted  section  of  the  population  was 
a  matter  of  greater  difficulty  ;  rioting,  disorder,  and 
seditious  placards  were  frequent,  especially  in  Puglia. 
The  withdrawal  of  the  Russian  and  British  troops  had 
completely  crushed  all  hope  of  successful  resistance,  and 
the  royal  cause,  which  had  found  so  many  zealous 
supporters  in  1799,  was  for  the  moment  without  a 
defender.  In  the  Campagna  there  were  no  enrolments, 
and  even  the  flying  corps  only  existed  on  paper. 