

79 


8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

facts,  and  the  events  attending  them,  had  been  among 
the  principal  causes  leading  to  the  Schoenbrunn  proclama- 
tion, but  there  had  been  others  also, — military,  financial, 
and  dynastic  considerations, — that  went  far  to  influence 
the  Emperor  Napoleon's  decision. 

He  had  just  delivered  a  crushing  blow  at  Austria, 
the  third  in  less  than  ten  years,  and  his  military  sup- 
remacy on  the  Continent  appeared  securely  established. 
He  found  himself,  for  the  moment,  with  but  one  enemy 
to  face,  that  powerful,  pertinacious  foe,  whose  wealth, 
maritime  genius,  and  dogged  hatred  were  at  the  end  to 
vanquish  him.  Already  Great  Britain  had  smirched  the 
magnificent  laurel  wreath  of  the  new-born  Empire  with 
the  indelible  trace  of  Trafalgar,  and  it  was  with  a  pang 
of  jealous  hatred  that  Napoleon  now  turned  to  strike  at 
her.  If  the  white  cliffs  ofjDover  were  beyond  his  reach, 
he  would  at  all  events  strike  wherever  he  could  find  a 
single  red-coated  soldier  ;  if  the  British  fleets  covered  the 
Channel  he  could  yet  move  foot  by  foot  nearer  that 
strategic  centre  of  the  world  where  three  continents 
meet,  and  where,  he  imagined,  lay  the  key  to  India. 
From  Naples,  from  Taranto,  from  Sicily,  whence  he 
would  drive  the  British,  he  would  stretch  across  the 
Adriatic,  and  his  still  considerable  fleets  would  furnish 
him  with  sufficient  sea  power  thence  eventually  to  aim 
a  deadly  thrust  at  Egypt  and  the  power  of  Britain. 

But  in  the  practical  mind  of  the  Emperor  these  plans, 
however  vast,  were  made  to  fit  in  with  a  carefully 
conceived  system  of  large  armaments  combined  with 
rigid  economy.  For  Napoleon  had  already  embarked 
on  his  ruthless  policy  of  making  war  self-supporting.^ 
At  a  time  when  he  was  struggling  to  restore  the  finances 
of  France  from  the  chaos  of  the  Revolution,  when  the 

^  This  policy  is  admirably  described  in  Fisher's  Napoleonic  Statesmanship,  Germany. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  8i 

market    quotation    of  French    5    per    cents    was    with 
difficulty  brought  up  to  50  (^6  in  March   1803),  he 
already  declared  that  the  day  France  went  to  war  he 
would    remit    twenty   millions   of  taxation.     In    1804 
and    1805   the  heavy  outlay   caused   by  the   war   with 
England  and  by  extraordinary  military  expenditure  had 
resulted   in   heavy  deficits  in  the   French  budget,  and 
the  campaign  of  1805  had  been  fought  on  a  financial 
basis  that  threatened   disaster.      Austerlitz   had   saved 
Napoleon   not   only   politically   but   financially.     As   a 
result  of  the   victory   and  of  the  heavy  contributions 
levied  from  Austria,  the  credit  of  the  French  treasury 
rapidly    improved.      Napoleon   now  began   to   put   in 
force  on  a  large  scale  the  system  that  eventually  con- 
tributed  so  largely  to  his   ruin.     Though  continental 
peace  was  secured,  he  proposed  maintaining  the  army 
on  a  war  footing  and  not  reducing  the  effective  strength 
of  his   battalions  by   one   man  ;    and   so   as   to   avoid 
irritating  French  public  opinion  by  calling  on  France 
to    meet    this    abnormal    expenditure,    he    so    shuffled 
the   political   cards   as   to   quarter   many   corps   of  his 
army    on    foreign    soil,    and    at    the    charge    of  those 
on   whom    they   were   quartered.      The   application   of 
this  system  in  Germany,  where  it  was  carried  out  on 
the  largest  scale,  will  not  concern  us,  but  it  is  necessary 
to  point  out  that  this  policy  was  one  of  the  factors  that 
dictated   the   conquest   of  Naples.     An  army  of  fifty 
thousand   men,   detached  to   southern   Italy   at  a  time 
when  its  presence  was  not  required  elsewhere,  would 
not  only  accomplish  certain  political  purposes,  but  would 
be  paid  for  by  the  conquered  people  and  relieve  the 
French  finances  to  a  corresponding  extent. 