

The  Calabrese  were  three  centuries  behind  their  time, 
and  might  well  be  called  the  "  savages  of  Europe."  ^ 
Yet   they  were    a    remarkable   and    individual    people. 

1  Rivarol,  i8. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  93 

They  were  generally  of  middle  stature,  muscular  and 
well-proportioned,  great  walkers  and  very  frugal.  One 
French  officer  thought  them  very  like  the  Spaniards, 
while  another,  of  Corsican  birth,  was  strongly  impressed 
with  their  resemblance  both  in  appearance  and  customs 
to  the  people  of  his  native  island.  They  certainly 
had  much  of  the  Corsican  spirit  of  vendetta  ;  in- 
dividuals, families,  and  even  villages  were  constantly 
at  open  warfare  with  one  another.  Beneath  the 
dark  cloak  with  which  they  draped  themselves  were 
concealed  the  daggers  and  other  arms  that  were  their 
constant  companions.  As  a  sign  of  approaching 
revenge  they  allowed  their  hair  and  beard  to  grow, 
and  when  thus  unkempt,  with  their  tall  conical  hats 
adorned  with  images  of  their  saints,  a  gun  on  their 
shoulder,  knives  stuck  in  their  belts,  the  appearance 
they  presented  was  equally  suggestive  of  romance  and 
of  homicide.  Internal  feud  was  the  normal  state  of 
Calabria. 

Apart  from  the  questions  of  daily  life,  disputes  of 
rivalry,  of  love,  of  money,  in  which  numerous  individuals 
were  engaged,  there  were  contentions  of  a  more 
political  character.  These  were  most  marked  where 
a  foreign  element  of  population  came  into  play.  The 
numerous  villages  whose  population  was  Albanian  were 
generally  more  prosperous  and  more  peacefully  inclined, 
and  had  occasionally  to  defend  themselves  in  arms 
against  lawless  neighbours.  More  progressive  yet  was 
a  small  but  important  section  of  the  community,  the 
trading  and  professional  circles  of  the  principal  towns, 
such  as  Monteleone,  Catanzaro,  and  Cosenza.  Here 
elements  of  education  and  of  political  thought  were  to 
be  found,  which  turned  to  hatred  of  Bourbon  rule.  In 
1799  this  became  republicanism,  in   1806  it  meant  a 


94  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strong  inclination   to   meet   the   French  conquest  half 

way.       (jKiabl*^* 

The  method  adopted  by  the  French  for  administering 
the  province  was  to  form  a  commission  of  government 
in  each  town  or  village,  on  which  the  responsibility  of  y 
maintaining  order  was  placed  ;  where  there  was  no 
liberal  or  French  party  the  village  priest  was  frequently 
chosen  to  preside  over  this  body.  In  many  cases  the 
new  organization  represented  nothing  more  definite  than 
the  personal  enemies  of  the  pre-existing  authorities, 
and  their  sole  bond  with  the  invader  was  that  inspired 
by  their  desire  of  satisfying  their  personal  vendettas. 