

Invasion  and  foreign  occupation  normally  excite 
restlessness  and  resentment ;  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  French  invasion  of  Calabria  there  was  much  to 
intensify  such  sentiments.  The  French  columns  had 
moved  free  from  the  shackle  of  waggon  transport,  and 
had  lived  on  the  country.  Although  the  army  was  in 
a  good  state  of  fighting  discipline,  it  was  otherwise 
demoralized  for  lack  of  administrative  care.  It  had 
entered  Naples  in  a  lamentable  condition,  "  with  less 
than  nothing,"  as  Segur  tersely  put  it.  It  had  no  pay, 
no  clothing,  and  no  boots.  Short  of  food,  short  of 
necessaries,  and  short  of  money,  the  troops  naturally 
provided  for  themselves  and  pillaged.  Joseph,  who 
may  be  suspected  of  attenuating  the  truth,  wrote  to 
Napoleon  that  the  disorder  of  a  few  soldiers,  especially 
of  the  Polish  legion,  had  filled  the  dearest  wish  of 
Queen  Mary  Caroline,  and  had  stirred  the  people  to 
revenge.  The  French  civil  officers,  who  quickly  followed 
the  military,  and  who  frequently  rivalled  the  former  in 
their  exactions,  rapacity,  and  contempt  for  the  feelings 
of  the  inhabitants,  added  to  the  hatred  with  which  a 
large  section  of  the  people  soon  regarded  the  invaders. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  95 

No  attempt  will  be  made  to  adopt  from  either 
French  or  Italian  writers  a  date  or  the  name  of  a 
locality  fixing  the  outbreak  of  the  rising  of  Calabria. 
There  was  a  gradual  though  rapid  transition  from  a 
state  of  criminal  lawlessness  before  the  French  invasion 
to  a  state  of  barbarous  warfare  after.  The  bands  of 
brigands  who  had  terrorized  the  country  before,  were 
transformed  into  patriotic  free  corps  loyally  fighting 
for  their  king  and  country,  while  the  royal  troops  that 
had  fled  before  the  French  were  now  transformed  into 
brigands  terrorizing  the  country.  On  the  other  hand 
the  peaceful  inhabitants  from  the  first  resented  the 
looting  propensities  of  the  French  troops  and  resorted 
to  armed  defence. 

From  a  strict  military  point  of  view,  however,  the 
situation  of  the  French  appeared  at  first  fairly  satis- 
factory. Duhesme,  with  a  supporting  column,  had 
followed  Regnier  south  from  Naples ;  the  large  garrison 
and  military  stores  of  Capua  had  been  surrendered. 
Gaeta  and  a  few  inconsiderable  forts  alone  remained 
unsubdued,  and  the  strength  of  the  army  of  occupation 
had  risen  to  over  40,000  men.  It  was  therefore  officially 
announced  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  capital  that  the 
*' comic"  defence  of  Calabria  was  at  an  end,  and  the 
new  proprietor  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  prepared  to 
pay  a  visit  to  the  outlying  parts  of  the  dominions  he 
prematurely  accounted  his  own.^ 