

On  the  13th  of  March  Regnier  reached  Cosenza, 
a  difficult  march  of  sixty  miles  from  Campotanese 
through  mountainous  country.  Only  one  week  later 
the  French  advanced  posts  were  at  Reggio,  on  the  Strait 
of  Messina.  Of  the  army  beaten  at  Campotanese  but 
few  reached  Sicily.  The  Hereditary  Prince  crossed  the 
strait  a  few  hours  in  advance  of  the  French,  and  the 
British  from  Messina,  where  they  were  now  installed, 
ferried  over  some  two  or  three  thousand  in  all  of  the 
troops  of  Rosenheim  and  Damas. 

Regnier's  extraordinary  march  had  been  if  anything 
too  rapid,  for  few  of  the  flying  Neapolitans  had  been 
able  to  keep  in  front  of  their  pursuers,  and  most  had 
merely  dispersed  on  either  side  of  the  French  line  of 
march.  Every  village  that  Regnier  left  in  his  rear 
was  soon  after  his  passage  alive  with  disorganized 
militiamen  and  a  medley  of  fugitives  and  deserters  from 
the  Sicilian  regulars.  In  the  course  of  his  hurried 
flight  the  Hereditary  Prince  had  issued  proclamations 
at  every  village  urging  the  formation  of  corpi  volanti^ 
or  flying  corps,  and  the  elements  for  forming  these  thus 
came  conveniently  to  hand.     The  preparations  for  the 

1  Courier,  i.  99,  160. 


92  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

levy  of  irregular  corps  had  long  been  made  ;  the 
circumstances  had  now  arisen  that  were  to  make  them 
eiFective  ;  and  no  sooner  had  the  French  column  passed 
by  than  its  line  of  communications  was  immediately  cut. 

The  rising  of  Calabria  against  the  French,  of  which 
these  events  were  the  immediate  origin,  lasted  more 
than  four  years,  and  in  the  acts  of  ferocity  that  charac- 
terized it,  can  only  be  compared  to  the  Spanish  rising 
that  occurred  a  few  years  later.  The  two  events  have 
often  been  likened,  but  in  one  most  important  aspect 
were  totally  dissimilar.  The  rising  of  Spain  against 
the  French  was  national  in  its  scope,  that  of  Calabria 
was  not.  The  Calabrese  had  not  reached  a  sufficiently 
advanced  stage  of  political  evolution  to  have  any  national 
conceptions  or  feelings.  Their  personal  relations  to  a 
feudal  lord,  or  the  common  prejudices  and  interests  of 
a  village  community  were  the  predominant  factors  that 
shaped  their  political  sentiments.  Their  province  was 
the  wildest  of  the  kingdom  ;  the  high  ranges  of  the  Silla 
in  its  centre  were  covered  with  dense  forests  of  beech, 
oak,  chestnut,  and  pine,  a  nearly  impenetrable  mass  of 
verdure  in  summer,  of  snow  and  mud  in  winter. 
Roads  were  non-existent.  The  barbarous  and  desolate 
condition  of  this  remote  province  was  enhanced  by 
the  indelible  traces  it  bore  of  a  terrible  earthquake 
that  had  visited  it  in  1783.  This  calamity  had  in- 
volved the  loss  of  100,000  lives.  Reggio,  one  of  the 
principal  towns,  was  described  as  still  in  ruins  in  the 
year  18 13.  At  the  time  of  the  French  invasion  hardly 
any  of  the  churches  had  been  rebuilt. 