

But  already  fighting  more  severe  than  any  the 
French  had  yet  met  with  at  the  hands  of  the  armies 
of  Damas  and  Rosenheim  had  taken  place.  At 
Soveria  a  peasant  named  Carmine  Caligiuri  headed  the 
villagers  in  an  attack  on  a  French  detachment  which 
lost   fourteen   men.      Four   days  later  he   ambuscaded 

^  Morjitore,  March  21,  1806. 


96  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  considerable  French  column,  defeated  it  with  the  loss 
of  a  colonel  and  forty  men  killed,  and  captured  a  rich 
booty.  His  success  and  example  inspired  the  neigh- 
bouring villages,  and  soon  all  that  part  of  the  country 
was  up.  Some  of  the  chiefs  were  peasants,  others 
noblemen  and  landowners.  Some  were  prompted  by 
greed,  some  by  loyalty  ;  all  were  equally  imbittered 
by  the  conduct  of  the  French  commanders  and  soldiers. 
That  conduct  was  certainly  not  free  from  reproach. 
One  of  their  own  officers  wrote,  with  equal  candour  and 
terseness,  that  of  the  generals  those  who  were  young 
pursued  women,  and  those  who  were  old  money.  The 
rationless  soldiers  looted,  the  Poles  especially  showing 
great  lack  of  discipline.  At  Scigliano,  on  the  march  to 
Reggio,  a  detachment  of  fifty  men  was  left  behind. 
Their  behaviour  was  disorderly,  a  woman  was  outraged, 
the  inhabitants  took  arms,  and  the  French  were  nearly 
all  massacred.  Such  events  as  those  at  Soveria  and 
Scigliano, — and  there  were  many  similar  outbreaks, — 
were  met  by  the  French  generals  by  one  uniform 
method  of  retaliation, — the  sacking  and  burning  of  the 
offending  village  ;  and  every  such  operation  naturally 
resulted  in  increasing  the  troops  of  brigands  or  free 
companies  whom  the  French  had  to  face. 

While  Calabria  thus  balanced  between  acquiescence 
in  French  rule  and  general  uprising,  the  other  provinces 
of  the  kingdom  had  been  overrun  with  little  difficulty 
— with  the  exception  of  the  blockade  of  Gaeta,  that 
became  eventually  a  memorable  siege  ;  but  one  incident 
of  the  military  operations  outside  Calabria  merits  atten- 
tion,— the  capture  and  death  of  Rodio.^  '' 

1  A  somewhat  different  character  of  Rodio  from  that  given  here  may  be  found 
in  Rodino's  narrative,  Arch.  Star.  Nap.  vi.  259.  This  account,  however,  is  so 
markedly  partisan  and  inaccurate  that  for  the  present  purpose  it  has  been  nearly 
entirely  rejected. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  97 

Among  the  leaders  of  the  royahst  reaction  of  1799, 
few  had  rendered  greater  service  to  the  Crown,  and 
none  had  shown  greater  humanity,  than  Don  Giovanni 
Batista,  Marchese  Rodio.  He  was  a  man  of  birth,  of 
education,  of  discretion,  of  honour,  and  withal  zealously 
attached  to  the  Crown.  After  the  capture  of  Naples 
he  was  given  an  important  command,  and  did  what  was 
possible  to  repress  the  irregularities  of  the  capimassi, 
such  as  Sciarpa  and  Fra  Diavolo,  who  were  placed  under 
his  orders.^  When  the  military  occupation  of  Puglia 
by  the  French  occurred,  Rodio  was  specially  detached 
from  his  post  as  Preside  or  Governor  of  Calabria  Citra, 
and  deputed  to  represent  the  Sicilian  Government  at 
St.  Cyr's  headquarters.  The  task  was  an  onerous  one, 
and  he  appears  to  have  discharged  it  faithfully  and 
well.  Yet  a  man  so  placed  could  not  fail  to  make 
many  enemies,  and  he  appears  to  have  had  bitter  ones 
both  among  the  French  and  the  Neapolitans. 