

Satisfied  that  the  security  of  Naples  was  assured  in 
the  keeping  of  such  men  as  Massena  and  Saliceti,  the 
French  Prince  determined  to  visit  the  province  of 
Calabria.  So  local  and  unimportant  did  the  disturb- 
ances in  that  province  as  yet  seem,  that  his  escort  con- 
sisted of  only  four  companies  of  light  infantry.  On 
the  3rd  of  April  Joseph  left  Naples,  accompanied  by 
Count  Miot,  acting  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  by 
General  Mathieu  Dumas,  acting  Minister  of  War. 
His  object  was  to  ascertain  for  himself  what  the  state 
of  the  country  was,  how  far  he  might  hope  to  win 
support,  in  what  directions  he  might  succeed  in  intro- 
ducing a  better  system  of  government. 

Joseph's  zeal  to  improve  the  conditions  of  the 
people  and  to  repress  injustice  and  exaction  among 
the  soldiers  and  functionaries  is  beyond  question,  and 
among  his  Ministers  were  men  well  able  to  second 
him,  men  whose  ability  was  equalled  by  their  integrity, 
such  as  Dumas  and  Roederer.  At  Naples  he  had 
insisted  on  the  shooting  of  French  soldiers  for  criminal 
disorder,  and  at   one  of  his  first  stops  in  Calabria,  at 

^   Dumas,  Precis  milh.  xv.  130. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  loi 

Lagonegro,  he  ordered  two  commissariat  officials  to 
be  handed  over  to  a  court-martial  for  robbing  the 
inhabitants.  Thus  heralded,  representing  power,  excit- 
ing curiosity,  Joseph  met  with  a  wonderfully  good 
reception  from  many  of  the  villages  on  his  route,  and 
at  one  or  two  of  the  large  towns  demonstrations  of 
welcome  were  organized  that  might  nearly  be  described 
as  enthusiastic.  At  Cosenza,  the  capital  of  Calabria, 
Napoleon's  brother  received  an  ovation.  Segur,  who 
was  one  of  his  staff",  has  left  a  lively  account  of  it.  The 
whole  population  of  the  town  and  neighbourhood  turned 
out  decked  in  their  gayest  attire.  They  appeared 
enraptured,  though  it  may  be  doubted  whether  this 
represented  much  more  than  their  love  for  a  festa 
and  their  racial  mobility  of  intellect.  Their  joy 
appeared  to  Segur  as  unfeigned  as  it  was  difficult  to 
credit. 

At  a  spot  just  beyond  Cosenza  an  impressive  and 
highly  characteristic  scene  awaited  the  French  Prince 
and  his  attendants.  A  mountain  village  had  sent  its 
men  to  greet  the  new  ruler.  The  track  led  through 
dense  forest,  and  there  unexpectedly  a  double  line  of 
dark,  swarthy,  athletic  figures  lined  the  pathway  on 
either  side.  Clad  in  their  draped  cloaks,  tall  ribboned 
hats,  and  thonged  buckskins  they  looked  picturesque, — 
and  formidable  from  the  pistols  and  daggers  in  their 
belts.  Any  apprehension  the  French  might  have  felt 
was  quickly  allayed,  for  they  explained  the  friendly 
nature  of  their  errand  by  pointing  to  their  guns  thrown 
on  the  sward  behind  them. 