

The  French,  with  forces  far  inferior  in  numbers,  far 
superior  in  quality,  advanced  to  attack  this  formidable 
position  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  March.  It  was 
cold,  and  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  driven  by  a  gusty  wind 
up  the  pass,  blew  directly  into  the  defenders'  eyes  and 


90  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

veiled  the  movements  of  the  French.  Regnier  sent 
his  light  infantry  up  the  mountain  flank  on  his  left, 
and  placed  his  most  dashing  brigadier,  General  Com- 
pere, in  charge  of  a  column  intended  to  advance  on  the 
Sicilian  centre  with  the  bayonet.  The  light  infantry, 
with  wonderful  agility,  wormed  their  way  along  the 
snow-beaten  cliiFs,  turned  a  difficult  passage  in  single 
file,  and  finally  came  out  on  Damas'  right  flank  and 
rear.  They  immediately  advanced  in  skirmishing 
order  and  opened  fire  ;  the  royal  troops  attempted  to 
manoeuvre  so  as  to  face  this  unexpected  attack,  and 
in  doing  so  fell  into  confusion.  At  this  moment 
Compere,  who  had  gradually  edged  up  nearer  and 
nearer,  rushed  his  column  forward  ;  one  or  two 
volleys  were  fired,  and  then  in  a  moment  the  Sicilian 
line  broke  and  Damas  was  defeated.  A  crowd  of 
fugitives  rushed  down  the  pass  only  to  find  the  narrow 
egress  blocked  by  the  first -comers,  and  the  active 
French  troops  were  able  to  capture  not  only  all  the 
artillery  of  the  defeated  army  but  2000  prisoners, 
including  two  generals  and  many  officers  of  rank. 

On  through  the  rain,  and  snow,  and  mud,  the  French 
kept  pushing  behind  the  melting  Sicilian  army,  and 
that  night  Regnier's  headquarters  were  carried  as  far  as 
the  village  of  Morano.  A  foretaste  of  the  horrors 
that  were  soon  to  fasten  on  Calabria  was  the  scene  in 
that  village  on  the  night  that  followed  the  French 
victory,  —  a  scene  vividly  depicted  by  an  officer  of 
Regnier's  stafl^  who  also  happened  to  be  a  master  of 
French  prose,  Paul  Louis  Courier.  Outside  the 
miserable  house  where  the  general  had  found  shelter 
were  rain,  mud,  and  darkness,  soldiers,  desperate  with 
fatigue  and  hunger,  searching  for  provisions,  some 
pillaging,  some  massacring.     At  the  door  of  the  house 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  91 

were  two  naked  corpses,  visible  by  the  fitful  blaze  of 
a  barn  set  on  fire  by  the  soldiers  ;  on  a  corner  of  the 
stairs  another  corpse  ;  in  the  bare  room  above,  the 
general  dictating  orders,  while  exhausted  staff-officers 
lay  on  the  floors  ;  the  whole  scene  punctuated  by  the 
piercing  and  continuous  shrieks  of  a  woman  complaining 
of  outrage.  No  fire,  no  bread,  no  furniture,  and  the 
next  house  ablaze.  Thus  were  the  horrors  of  war 
introduced  into  Calabria,  and  thus  began  a  campaign 
which  a  French  officer  described  as  "  one  of  the  most 
diabolical  waged  in  many  years."  ^ 