

His  wife  was  an  unpretentious  young  woman, 
Julie  Clary,  whose  more  attractive  sister  had  been 
an  early  flame  of  Napoleon,  later  marrying  Berna- 
dotte    and    becoming    Queen    of   Sweden.      To    Julie 


104  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Joseph  wrote,  shortly  after  his  elevation  to  the 
throne,  a  letter  that  shows  very  clearly  one  side  of 
his  character  : — 

.  .  .  Remind  mother  that  at  every  period  of  my  life,  as  an 
obscure  citizen,  as  a  farmer,  as  a  legislator,  I  have  always  cheer- 
//  fully  sacrificed  pleasure  to  duty.  I  am  not  one  to  underesti- 
mate an  elevated  station  or  to  slumber  in  it ;  for  me  it  means, 
it  shall  always  mean,  duties^  and  not  rights.  .  .  .  Justice  demands 
that  I  should  make  this  people  as  happy  as  the  scourge  of  war 
will  permit. 

The  new  King's  tour  through  Calabria  showed 
clearly  how  benevolent  were  his  sentiments  towards  the 
people  of  Naples,  and  how  distinctly  he  perceived  the 
abuses  of  French  rule.  Thus  he  wrote  to  Napoleon 
that  he  found  "  the  people  as  well  disposed  as  possible; 
wherever  honest  commandants  have  been  established 
some  time,  the  people  willingly  give  whatever  they  are 
asked  for."  But  three  days  later  he  found  at  Barletta 
a  precisely  opposite  state  of  affairs,  dishonesty  and 
official  rapine  prevalent.  The  civil  prefect,  the  sub- 
prefect,  and  the  general  in  command  were  all  rascals, 
and  were  all  dismissed  from  their  functions. 

Among  the  matters  in  which  the  opinions  of  the 
brothers  did  not  exactly  coincide  was  that  of  the  basis 
on  which  the  people  of  Naples  should  be  governed. 
Joseph,  his  ears  full  of  the  adulations  of  Court 
flatterers,  and  of  more  noisy  than  sincere  popular 
demonstrations,  gave  free  rein  to  his  instinctive  sense 
of  justice  and  benevolence.  But  to  Napoleon  such 
sentiments  as  these  were  mere  moonshine.  "You 
do  not  understand  the  people  generally,"  he  wrote, 
"  and  even  less  the  Italian  people.  You  attach  far 
too  much  importance  to  the  demonstrations  they  give 
you.    .    .    ."       And     on     another     occasion  :     "  The 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  105 

Neapolitans  are  behaving  well  ;  there  is  nothing  ex- 
traordinary in  that ;  you  have  spared  them,  and  they 
expected  worse  things  from  a  man  at  the  head  of 
50,000  troops.  You  are  mild,  moderate,  you  have  a 
kind  disposition,  and  are  appreciated  ;  but  from  that 
to  a  national  sentiment,  to  a  rational  and  interested 
submission,  is  a  far  cry." 

Two  of  the  new  King's  principal  advisers,  Massena 
and  Saliceti,  were  as  firm  believers  in  a  policy  of  vigour 
and  repression  as  was  the  Emperor,  and  their  stroke 
at  the  unfortunate  Rodio  was  probably  largely  founded 
on  terrorist  considerations.  In  the  first  days  of  the 
French  occupation  of  the  city,  when  soldiers  were 
nightly  assassinated  in  the  streets  by  the  lazzaroni,  the 
Marshal  had  been  anxious  to  strengthen  the  forts  of  St. 
Elmo  and  Castelnuovo,  and  from  them  to  dominate 
and  terrorize  the  capital ;  but  Joseph  declined  to  follow 
this  course.  He  was,  however,  quickly  disillusioned, 
for  the  first  few  prosperous  weeks  were  rapidly  coming 
to  a  close,  the  real  struggle  for  the  possession  of  Naples 
was  only  just  about  to  open. 