

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1806  Rodio  was  in  the 
Abruzzi,  which  the  French  had  evacuated  three  months 
before,  strenuously  maintaining  the  royal  authority 
under  difficult  conditions.  On  the  13th  of  January 
he  was  sent  to  Aquila  to  organize  flying  corps,  and  a  few 
weeks  later,  on  Massena's  advance,  was  sent  to  Matera 
as  Governor.^  Towards  the  end  of  February  the  French 
columns  were  approaching  Basilicata,  and  Rodio's  posi- 
tion had  become  insecure.  He  remained  faithful  ^to 
his  duty  to  the  end,  however,  doing  his  utmost  to 
organize  resistance,    and    staying    at    his  post   so  long 

•'•  Rodio  figures  as  a  colonel  in  the  official  calendar  for  1805.  Helfert  states  that 
he  was  promoted  to  general's  rank  in  1799, — on  what  authority  does  not  appear. 
There  is,  however,  a  document  in  the  Archives  at  Naples  by  which  it  would  seem 
that  he  was  promoted  brigadier  on  Jan.  lo,  1806  {Guerra,  xxv.  2136). 

2  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  2136,  Feb.  10,  1806.  This  date  weakens  UUoa's 
statement,  Intorno  alia  Storia^  192  j  at  page  201  this  author's  remarks  become  so 
obviously  extravagant  as  not  to  require  refutation. 

VOL.  I  H 


98  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

that  he  was  finally  threatened  by  French  columns  in 
various  directions.  He  retreated  into  the  valley  of 
the  Basento.  The  invading  troops  operating  from 
Gravina  and  Matera  drove  him  down  that  valley 
towards  the  sea,  but  when  he  reached  the  little  town 
of  Pisticci  he  found  another  French  force  under 
General  Ottavj  blocking  his  way  at  Bernalda.  Here, 
on  the  8th  of  March,  he  surrendered  himself  an 
unconditional  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  French.-^ 

From  Bernalda  Rodio  was  sent  to  Naples  under 
close  guard.  Two  men  were  at  that  moment  respons- 
ible for  the  action  of  the  government  under  Joseph 
Bonaparte,  Marshal  Massena  and  the  head  of  the 
police  department,  Saliceti.  They  decided  to  have 
Rodio  tried  by  a  military  commission  on  the  truly 
extraordinary  charges  of  rebellion  and  incitement  to 
insurrection.^  What  prompted  this  action  it  is  im- 
possible to  say  precisely,  and  surmise  must  be  offered 
as  a  substitute  for  verified  fact.  It  appears  certain 
that  Massena  convened  the  military  court  at  Saliceti's 
prompting,  and  that  the  Minister  of  Police  was 
influenced  partly  by  political,  partly  by  personal 
considerations.  Politically  he  may  have  felt  bound  to 
defer  to  the  constantly  renewed  injunctions  of  the 
Emperor  from  Paris  that  vigorous  methods  and  a 
little  terrorism  at  the  outset  would  eventually  make  for 
the  pacification  of  Naples  ;  personally  there  was  the 
constant  pressure  of  the  group  of  Neapolitan  liberals 
and  ex-republicans  who  swarmed  about  the  new  Govern- 