

^  Massena,  v.  177.  The  Monitor e  gives  Pomarico,  a  few  miles  north  of  Pisticci, 
as  the  scene  of  Rodio's  capture,  and  says  that  he  was  betrayed.  The  writer  of  the 
news,  presumably  a  Neapolitan  liberal,  displays  great  rancour  against  the  prisoner. 
Monitore,  March  21  and  25,  1806. 

2  This  was  not  the  first  military  commission  formed,  as  Greco  asserts ;  one  was 
assembled  a  week  earlier,  on  March  18. — Arch.  Nap.  Giustizia,  1806. 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  99 

ment,  and  especially  about  the  chief  of  the  police  depart- 
ment. These  men  saw  in  Rodio  a  leader  of  the  opposite 
camp  whom  they  might  now  safely  hound  to  death,  thus 
avenging  the  execution  and  murder  of  so  many  of  their 
friends  and  relations  when  Ferdinand  had  conquered 
the  Parthenopean  Republic  in  1799. 

These  considerations,  however,  do  not  appear  to 
have  weighed  with  the  military  commission.  It  did 
honour  to  the  unfortunate  royal  Governor,  and  to 
itself,  by  promptly  acquitting  him.  Infuriated  at  this 
result,  a  mob  of  Rodio's  enemies  proceeded  to  Saliceti's 
and  Massena's  offices  with  loud  outcries.  The  result 
was  deplorable.  The  Marshal  and  the  Minister  decided 
to  order  a  new  trial.  A  fresh  military  commission  was 
appointed.  It  met  at  the  Castel  del  Uovo,  and  during 
the  three  hours  it  required  to  work  itself  up  to  con- 
viction point,  Rodio  defended  himself  bravely,  claimed 
that  he  had  surrendered  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and 
demanded  the  treatment  of  a  soldier.  He  received 
it  only  in  the  form  of  his  sentence,  for  he  was  found 
guilty  and  condemned  to  be  shot  on  the  following  day, 
the  30th  of  March. 

Thus  was  judicially  murdered,  for  doing  his  duty, 
perhaps  the  most  worthy,  most  faithful,  most  honour- 
able, and  certainly  most  unfortunate  of  the  servants  of 
Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline.  What  some  of  the 
French  officers  serving  in  Naples  thought  on  the  subject 
may  be  recorded.  When  the  "  deplorable  news  "  was 
communicated  to  Segur  he  described  it  as  an  "  ugly 
stroke  attributed  to  Saliceti."  General  Dumas  wrote  : 
"  The  execution  of  the  Marchese  Rodio,  who  had 
surrendered  to  General  Duhesme's  forces,  caused  the 
indignation  of  all  honourable  men,  and  the  exasperation 
of  all   those   who   were   still    secretly   attached   to  the 


100  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

ancient  Court."  ^  Courier  was  even  less  reserved  in  his 
comments  ;  speaking  of  Rodio  he  wrote  :  ^'  His  death 
passes  here  as  a  murder.  .  .  .  Every  one  was  horror- 
struck,  perhaps  even  more  the  French  than  the 
NeapoHtans."  Joseph  is  said  to  have  been  ignorant 
of  his  Minister's  proceedings,  and,  after  the  event  ex- 
pressed regret  for  the  course  taken.  It  is  difficult, 
however,  after  reading  the  correspondence  between 
him  and  the  Emperor,  not  to  retain  some  little 
doubt  as  to  whether  the  French  Prince  did  not  in 
reality  merely  shut  his  eyes  to  the  proceedings  of  his 
Ministers. 