

One  more  scene  witnessed  by  Joseph  on  his  tour 
through  Calabria  must  detain  us, —  the  most  curious, 
perhaps  the  most  impressive  of  all.  The  way  led 
through  one  of  those  unfortunate  villages  on  which  the 


102  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

extreme  sentence  of  war  had  been  passed  and  executed 
by  the  French  commanders,  —  execute  militatrement 
was  the  semi-technical,  euphemistic  term.  Desola- 
tion reigned  where  the  village  street  had  once  been  ; 
the  church  alone  was  left  standing.  What  remained 
of  the  population,  men,  women,  and  children,  clad  in 
rags,  their  heads  encircled  with  crowns  of  twisted 
thorns,  knelt  in  the  ashes  of  their  homes,  covering 
their  heads  with  dust  as  the  conquerors  passed.  Their 
rude  and  pathetic  symbolism  was  more  eloquent  than 
the  redundant  platitudes  with  which  the  authorities  of 
Cosenza  had  greeted  Joseph,  and  the  Prince  and  his 
escort  were  profoundly  moved. 

It  was  while  on  this  journey  through  Calabria  that 
Joseph  received  his  brother's  instructions  to  assume 
the  royal  title.  Having  proceeded  as  far  as  Reggio, 
therefore,  he  thence  turned  back  towards  Naples  to 
make  a  solemn  entry  in  his  capacity  of  king. 

Having  thus  arrived  at  the  official  beginning  of 
Joseph's  reign,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  take  advantage 
of  such  a  notable  occasion  for  giving  a  portrait  of  the 
new-made  monarch  of  Naples,  or  of  the  Two  Sicilies, 
as  he  chose  to  style  himself.  King  Joseph  bore  no  very 
striking  resemblance  to  the  brother  who  had  crowned 
him.  In  face  and  feature  there  was  some  likeness  ; 
the  intelligent  forehead,  finely  cut  nose,  well-shaped 
eyes  and  mouth  were  there,  but  the  breadth  and 
strength  of  Napoleon  were  lacking  in  Joseph.  He 
was  a  man  of  considerable  intellectual  ability,  and 
showed  his  intelligence  in  nothing  more  than  in  his 
blind  devotion  and  unquestioning  obedience  to  his 
younger  brother.  In  his  correspondence  with  Napoleon 
Joseph's  tone  never  attains  regal  independence  and 
dignity,  but   remains  at  the  level  of  an  average   pro- 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  103 

vincial  governor.  Indeed  he  was  little  else.  His 
docility  and  subservience  were  as  noteworthy  as  the 
imperiousness  of  his  brother's  exhortations,  counsels, 
and  commands.  In  opinion  he  long  continued  a 
moderate  republican,  realizing  and  taking  pride  in 
the  immense  benefit  conferred  on  his  country  and 
Europe  by  the  great  Revolution,  applying  the  excel- 
lent qualities  of  his  heart  and  head  to  extending  the 
bounds  of  good  government  and  justice.  He  had 
many  of  the  attributes  of  a  good  and  a  wise  man,  but 
they  were  nearly  entirely  neutralized  by  a  weakness 
that  made  of  him  politically  little  more  than  the  docile 
tool  of  his  brother,  and  morally  little  more  than  a 
supine  sensualist.  His  convictions  remained  repub- 
lican when  his  brother  was  already  grasping  the  Im- 
perial diadem  ;  yet  they  failed  the  instant  a  crown 
was  pressed  on  his  acceptance.  His  conscience  re- 
volted from  the  exactions  and  robberies  that  disgraced 
so  many  of  the  French  generals,  yet  his  repubHcan 
sentiments  were  not  proof  against  the  regal  revenues 
that  afforded  him  the  means  of  gratifying  his  extremely 
regal  appetites.  He  was  just,  mild  almost  to  shyness, 
and  bore  his  royal  dignity  with  awkwardness.  He  was 
the  most  unwarlike  of  men,  although  he  had  in  the 
early  days  of  the  Empire  preferred  his  title  of  Colonel 
to  that  of  Prince.  In  the  cause  of  peace  he  came 
nearer  asserting  a  personal  influence  than  in  any  other, 
and  his  persistent  diplomacy  had  nearly  avoided  the 
rupture  between  France  and  England  in  the  year 
1803. 