

Smith,  not  attending  very  strictly  to  the  instructions 
under  which  Lord  Collingwood  had  dispatched  him 
to  Palermo,  had  fallen  in  with  the  projects  of  Mary 
Caroline.  He  had  taken  on  his  four  men-of-war 
the  guerilla  chiefs  or  capimassi  whom  she  wanted 
disembarked  at  various  favourable  points  along  the 
coast  of  Calabria  to  foster  the  insurrectionary  move- 
ment. It  was  unfortunate  that  Sidney  Smith  should 
have  fallen  in  with  this  scheme,  unfortunate  that  the 
blandishments  of  Mary  Caroline  and  the  grant  of  full 
powers  from  the  Sicilian   Court  should  have  led  him 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  iii 


•s^ 


to  act  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  his  instructions  and 
against  the  opinion  of  the  English  military  officers  at 
Messina,  for  he  thus  became  closely  connected  with 
perhaps  the  most  desperate  and  most  atrocious  of  all 
the  freebooters  for  which  the  kingdom  of  Naples  was 
for  so  many  centuries  renowned,  the  illustrious  Fra 
Diavolo. 

Colonel  Michele  Pezza,  as  he  was  officially,  and  only 
officially,  styled,  was  of  humble  origin  ;  he  was  born 
at  Itri,  a  few  miles  north  of  Gaeta,  about  the  year 
1770.  His  youth  was  criminal,  and  his  good  fortune 
such  that  however  outrageous  his  misdeeds,  however 
desperate  his  position,  he  always  escaped  capture  and 
prison.  In  the  popular  imagination  only  the  devil  or 
a  monk  could  be  thus  gifted,  and  therefore  Pezza  soon 
became  known  as  Fra  Diavolo.  Under  that  name  he 
rapidly  acquired  reputation,  influence,  and  a  large  circle 
of  followers.  In  1799,  under  a  promise  of  amnesty  from 
the  Government,  he  became  an  official  instead  of  a  private 
freebooter,  and  led  one  of  the  free  corps  that  followed 
the  flag  of  Cardinal  Ruffo.  Even  in  that  marvellous 
assemblage  of  ruffians  and  cut-throats  Fra  Diavolo's 
remarkable  qualities  made  themselves  felt,  and  his  band 
was  pronounced  by  General  Bourcard,  who  had  nominal 
control  of  all  the  masse,  as  the  most  undisciplined 
and  insubordinate,  "  committing  the  most  monstrous 
misdeeds."  -^ 

At  the  close  of  the  troubles  of  the  year  1799  the 
Government  managed  to  get  rid  of  the  services  of  this 
brigand  whom  it  had  decorated  with  the  title  of 
Colonel.  He  withdrew,  on  his  profits,  to  live  in 
dignified    retirement    at    his    birthplace,     and     thence 

1  "  .  .   .   Commettendo  i  piu  enormi  attentati." — Bourcard's  report,  ^rc^.  Nap. 
Guerra,  xxv.  6o2. 


112  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

importuned  the  Government  for  the  payment  of  large 
sums  which  he  claimed  were  due  to  him  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  his  men  in  the  course  of  the  campaign. 
In  this  he  was  unsuccessful,  but  during  the  next 
few  years  he  appears  to  have  been  the  terror  of 
the  country-side,  and  to  have  been  engaged  in  more 
than  one  homicidal  fray.  In  1806,  when  Mary  Caro- 
line was  looking  about  in  despair  for  some  means 
of  defending  the  kingdom,  this  ruffian  was  once 
more  called  to  the  assistance  of  the  throne,  and  he 
received  instructions  to  form  a  flying  corps.  He 
apparently  did  not  succeed  in  doing  this,  but  followed 
the  retreat  of  the  Court  to  Palermo.  The  arrival  of 
Sidney  Smith,  however,  together  with  the  necessity  of 
giving  Gaeta  some  assistance,  appeared  an  opportunity 
for  the  further  utilization  of  his  services. 