

Sidney  Smith  sailed  leisurely  along  the  coast  of 
Calabria  landing  capimassi^  issuing  proclamations,  and 
communicating  with  and  encouraging  the  insurgents. 
Fra  Diavolo,  his  three  brothers,  and  another  well- 
known  brigand,  by  name  Guariglia,  appear  to  have  been 
landed,  and  to  have  made  a  short  raid,  although  the 
Sicilians  they  commanded  were  very  short  of  arms. 
Eventually  the  English  squadron  reached  Gaeta,  into 
which  it  threw  provisions,  four  heavy  ship's  guns,  a 
few  English  gunners,  and  Fra  Diavolo.  The  British 
Admiral  further  organized  a  small  squadron  of  gun 
vessels  under  the  orders  of  Captain  Richardson  that 
contributed  greatly  to  the  defence  by  blockading  a 
similar  French  flotilla  in  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano. 
From  Gaeta  Sidney  Smith  sailed  -south  once  more, 
threatening  the  French  at  various  points.  At  Ischia 
and  Procida  he  was  beaten  off  by  the  shore  batteries, 
but  he  made  a  demonstration  in  the  Bay  of  Naples  with 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  113 

six  large  and  a  number  of  small  ships  on  the  very  day  on 
which  Joseph  made  his  solemn  entry  as  King  of  Naples. 
That  night,  as  the  city  illuminated  in  honour  of  its  new 
monarch,  the  British  surprised  the  small  garrison  of 
Capri  and  established  themselves  in  that  commanding 
and  threatening  position. 

Owing  to  Sidney  Smith's  intervention  the  Prince 
of  Hesse  was  now  prepared  to  meet  the  more  formid- 
able French  attack  with  renewed  vigour.  He  deter- 
mined to  make  what  use  he  could  of  the  irregular 
leaders  sent  to  him,  and  issued  a  proclamation  offering 
pay  at  the  rate  of  three  carlins  a  day  to  all  those 
enrolling  in  the  free  corps,  together  with  a  full  amnesty 
for  any  and  all  crimes  up  to  then  committed  by  these 
patriotic  volunteers.  Fra  Diavolo,  at  the  head  of  a 
considerable  body  of  these  irregulars,  was  dispatched 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Garigliano,  where  he  succeeded  in 
effecting  a  landing.  He  raided  the  country  on  the 
French  lines  of  communication.  For  a  few  days  he 
proceeded  without  interference,  but  later  was  driven 
back  into  the  fortress  again.  Debarred  from  pursuing 
his  lucrative  profession  outside  the  city,  he  turned  his 
attention  to  what  might  be  done  profitably  within  its 
walls,  and  early  in  May  proposed  to  the  French  com- 
manders that  he  should,  for  a  pecuniary  consideration, 
place  them  in  possession  of  one  of  the  gates  of  the 
fortress.  The  betrayer  was  betrayed  ;  the  Prince  of 
Hesse  had  him  arrested  and  shipped  to  Palermo,  where 
this  ruffian  was  received  with  becoming  sympathy, — at 
all  events  his  services  were  very  soon  again  requisitioned 
by  the  Sicilian  Government. 

Deprived  for  the  moment  of  the  co-operation  of 
Colonel  Pezza,  the  commandant  of  Gaeta  was  able  to 
devote  greater  attention  to  the  enemy  outside  the  walls. 