

Trafalgar  had  inspired  the  British  Cabinet  with  a 
false  sense  of  security  and  naval  supremacy,  and  the 
strength  of  the  Mediterranean  fleet  was  allowed  to  run 
down  to  a  perilously  low  point.  Early  in  1806, 
however.  Sir  Sidney  Smith  was  sent  out  from  England 
to  co-operate  with  the  British  land  force  under  Sir  James 
Craig.  The  chief  intent  of  the  British  Cabinet  in  dis- 
patching this  reinforcement  was  to  prosecute  operations 
against  the  French.  The  support  of  the  allied  Court  of 
Sicily  was  a  matter  of  subordinate,  if  of  any,  interest. 
Lord  Collingwood  gave  Sir  Sidney  Smith  the  following 

1  Collingwood  to  Marsden,  Feb.  22,  1806,  Adnt'ir.  Medk.  32  ;  cf.  also  Colling- 
wood, Corr.  A  few  months  later  the  French  had  12  sail  of  the  line  at  Cadiz,  6  at 
Cartagena,  4  at  Toulon,  and  6  at  sea  under  Willaumez.  Collingwood,  off  Cadiz, 
had  but  9. 


ii8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

instructions  :  that  the  chief  object  of  the  British  forces 
was  to  prevent  the  French  from  obtaining  possession 
of  Sicily,  and  that  his  ships  were  to  be  disposed 
accordingly  ;  should  the  Sicilian  Court  come  to  terms 
with  France,  his  instructions  were  still  to  hold  good, 
**  notwithstanding  any  remonstrance  which  the  King  of 
Naples  may  make  on  the  subject."  ^  To  Elliot  he 
confirmed  these  instructions  a  week  later,  stating  that 
"  it  is  the  intention  of  His  Majesty  that  the  French 
should  not  in  any  event  be  suffered  to  possess  them- 
selves of  Sicily." 

This  southernmost  point  of  Italy  was  now  indeed 
the  only  real  point  of  contact  between  the  two  great 
empires,  and  the  position  of  Sicily  as  a  stepping-stone 
towards  the  Orient  urged  both  Powers  to  wrestle  for 
the  possession  of  what  was  left  of  King  Ferdinand's 
dominions.  Napoleon  was  as  firm  on  this  point  as 
the  Ministers  of  George  III.  "I  would  rather  a  ten 
years'  war,"  he  wrote  to  Joseph,  *'than  leave  your 
kingdom  incomplete  and  Sicily  an  unsettled  question." 

From  the  moment  that  Regnier  had  reached  the 
Strait  of  Messina,  preparations  had  been  made  for  the 
crossing  ;  but  the  difiiculties  were  so  great  that  progress 
was  slow.  The  French  general's  force  was  far  too 
small  to  furnish  the  numerous  detachments  and  flying 
columns  necessary  to  keep  down  Calabria  and  at  the 
same  time  to  concentrate  in  any  strength  between 
Reggio  and  Scilla.  His  engineers  toiled  to  construct 
a  passable  road  that  should  connect  Naples  and  Reggio, 
while  his  gunners  attempted  with  varying  fortune  to 
navigate  barges  full  of  artillery  material  down  the  coast 
from  Taranto  and  other  points.     Yet,  however  slow, 

^  CoUingwood  to  S.   Smith,   March   2i,    1806,  Adm'ir.  Med'it.   32,     "King  of 
Naples,"  i.e.  Ferdinand. 