


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  109 

surrender,  and  once  more  the  besiegers'  fire  was 
promptly  and  completely  crushed  by  that  of  the 
defenders. 

So  far  the  French  siege  operations  had  not  been 
carried  out  on  anything  like  the  scale  necessary  for 
reducing  a  fortress  of  the  first  class.  Men,  guns,  and 
ammunition  were  scarce,  and  all  the  reserves  that  could 
be  disposed  of  were  being  drained  by  the  operations  in 
Calabria.  It  had  been  hoped,  from  the  early  experi- 
ences of  the  war,  that  a  demonstration,  accompanied  by 
a  warm  cannonade,  would  suffice  to  reduce  Gaeta. 
The  vigour  and  complete  success  with  which  the 
fortress  had  repelled  the  two  attacks  delivered,  immedi- 
ately changed  the  aspect  of  affairs,  and  made  it  a 
matter  of  first  necessity  to  proceed  to  its  reduction 
in  accordance  with  all  the  forms  of  the  military  art. 
General  Campredon,  one  of  the  best  engineers  in  the 
Imperial  service,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  siege 
works  ;  he  decided  to  push  trenches  and  batteries  down 
from  the  hills  right  on  to  the  neck  and  to  the  base  of 
the  bastions,  proceeding,  if  necessary,  to  the  conclusion 
of  battering  a  breach  and  pouring  in  a  storming  column. 
The  proposed  operations  were  difficult,  and  it  was 
realized  that  they  would  require  some  time.  The 
works  of  the  besiegers  had  so  far  been  carried  along 
the  lines  of  two  small  hills,  the  plateau  of  Atratina  and 
the  Monte  Secco,  the  latter  about  600  yards  distant 
from  the  fortress.  It  now  became  necessary  to  work 
down  from  the  Monte  Secco  on  to  the  neck,  where  not 
only  would  the  besiegers  be  exposed  to  the  plunging  fire 
of  the  Queen's  Battery,  but  where  the  ground  was  of 
such  a  rocky  nature  that  it  was  necessary  to  transport 
from  a  distance  all  the  material  for  the  heavy  revete- 
ments  of  the  trenches. 


no  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

While  the  French  toiled  at  their  works  and  kept  up 
a  constant  fire  on  the  port  from  their  coast  batteries, 
the  Prince  of  Hesse  for  a  while  suffered  more  appre- 
hension from  within  than  from  without.  His  troops 
were  so  bad  that  he  could  not  venture  on  sorties.  He 
was  more  concerned  to  retain  his  men  within  the  walls 
than  to  lead  them  without,  for  deserters  were  numerous. 
Of  those  who  thus  escaped  from  the  fortress,  a  con- 
siderable part  were  returned  by  the  French  commanders 
to  the  prisons  from  which  they  had  been  dragged  by 
Ferdinand  to  save  their  country. 

Although  communications  by  sea  were  open,  it  was 
long  before  the  garrison  of  Gaeta  received  the  supplies 
and  munitions  that  its  situation  called  for.  In  vain 
Hesse  appealed  to  the  Hereditary  Prince  for  the  means 
of  clothing  and  arming  his  soldiers.  Despairing  of 
obtaining  assistance  from  his  own  Government,  he 
turned  eagerly  to  the  commander  of  a  British  fleet  that 
had  now  arrived  in  Neapolitan  waters.  Sir  Sidney 
Smith.  Through  April  and  May  the  Governor  of 
Gaeta  addressed  numerous  demands  for  food  and  muni- 
tions to  the  British  Admiral,  and  eventually  received 
help. 