

Brit.  War  Off,,  Orig.  Corresp.  170:  a  few  dispatches  on  the  abandon- 
ment of  Naples  by  the  Bourbons. 

BiBL.  Naz.,  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  see  Appendix  D. 

Printed  Books 

Annual  Register,  1806;  Ayala,  Memorie  ,•  Bianchini,  Finanze  di 
Napoli ;  Browning,  England  and  Napoleon;  Bun  bury,  Mi/zV.  Transacs.  ; 
Cacciatore,  Esame  i  Colletta,  Storia ;  Courier,  Mems. ;  Crescieri, 
Memorie;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dumas,  Precis  mi  lit. ;  Dumas,  Souvenirs; 
DuRET  DE  Tavel,  Sejour  en  Calabre ;  Gaeta  Gazette;  Gorani,  Mems.; 
GouRBiLLON,  Voyage  a  I'Etna;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Corresp.;  Mass^na,  Mems.;  Metternich,  Mems.; 
MiOT,  Mems.;  Monitore  Napolitano ;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Rivarol,  Notice 
hist  or. ;  RoDiNO,  Narrazione,  Archivio  storico  Napolit.  vi.  ;  Roederer, 
(Ewvres ;  Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Segur,  Hist,  et  Mems.;  Treaties  and 
Corresp.  1806  ;  Ulloa,  Intorno  alia  Storia. 


CHAPTER  IV 

MAIDA    AND    THE    INSURRECTION    OF    CALABRIA 

Results  of  Trafalgar  —  British  Mediterranean  policy  —  France, 
England,  and  Sicily — Position  at  Messina — Stuart's  strategy — 
Leaves  Messina — Lands  in  Calabria — Regnier  concentrates — 
Battle  of  Maida  —  Regnier  retreats  —  Humanity  of  Stuart — 
Rising  of  Calabria — Stuart's  proclamation — Regnier  at  Catan- 
zaro — Stuart  motionless — De  Michele  assumes  government — 
Regnier  abandons  Catanzaro — Papasodero  and  Stuart — Pane  di 
Grano — Outrages  of  masse — Regnier  sacks  Strongoli — Retreats 
to  Cassano  —  Verdier  abandons  Cosenza — Storms  Cassano — 
Regnier's  position — Siege  of  Gaeta — Hesse  wounded — Fall  of 
Gaeta — Massena  marches  on  Calabria — Smith  and  the  capi- 
massi — Capri,  Ponza,  and  Canosa  —  Fra  Diavolo  at  Amantea 
— At  Fort  Licosa — At  Sperlonga — Calabria  proclaimed  in 
state  of  siege — Pane  di  Grano  defends  passes — Lauria  sacked 
— Regnier  relieved — Instances  of  ferocity — Dispersal  oi masse — 
Massena  at  Monteleone — Partisan  warfare — Courts-martial — 
Disease — De  Michele — Amantea  attacked  and  taken — Death 
of  De  Michele — Fra  Diavolo's  last  expedition — His  execution. 

The  defence  of  Gaeta  by  the  Prince  of  Hesse  had 
been  possible  only  because  England  controlled  the  sea, 
and  thus  kept  open  his  communications.  The  question 
of  naval  supremacy  in  the  Mediterranean  was  indeed 
the  all-important  one,  and  deserves  careful  examination. 
Trafalgar  had  had  great  results,  yet  perhaps  not  so  great 
as  was  generally  supposed.  The  invasion  of  England 
was  now  no    longer  threatened,   partly  owing   to  the 

ii6 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  117 

failure  of  Villeneuve's  campaign,  partly  owing  to  the 
enforced  displacement  of  the  French  army  from  the 
shores  of  the  Channel  to  the  forests  of  Germany.  So 
far,  then,  Trafalgar  had  been  decisive ;  it  had  also 
affirmed  the  prestige  and  superiority  of  the  British  navy, 
and  had  resulted  in  a  considerable  loss  in  ships  to  its 
opponents.  But  strategically  the  naval  position  was 
little  altered,  and  so  far  as  the  Mediterranean  was 
concerned  the  two  great  adversaries  remained  much  as 
they  were.  There  were  still  French  battleships  at  various 
ports  awaiting  the  opportunity  and  the  order  that  should 
concentrate  them  for  some  decisive  purpose.  Even  off 
Cadiz,  where  Trafalgar  had  left  the  British  nearly  as 
much  weakened  as  their  opponents,  Collingwood's  fleet 
had  but  little  margin  of  strength  for  the  duties  it  had 
to  fill.  Through  the  six  months  that  followed  Nelson's 
great  victory,  the  British  Commander-in-Chief  was  in 
constant  fear  lest  his  weak  squadron  might  be  unable 
to  prevent  the  French  Atlantic  fleets  from  passing  into 
the  Mediterranean.^ 