

VOL.  I  I 


114  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

On  the  13th  of  May,  and  again  two  days  later,  sorties 
were  made,  the  latter  commanded  by  Captain  Richard- 
son. The  French  were  surprised,  some  guns  were 
spiked,  and  a  few  prisoners  were  made.  But  towards 
the  end  of  May  the  French  troops,  that  had  up  till  then 
never  totalled  more  than  4000  men,  began  to  receive 
considerable  reinforcements,  and  the  works  progressed 
fast.  Sidney  Smith's  fleet  and  Richardson's  flotilla, 
however,  still  kept  Gaeta  free  by  sea,  and  the  sick  and 
wounded  were  now  regularly  removed  to  Sicily,  fresh 
men  being  introduced  to  replace  them. 

The  British  Admiral  did  not  confine  his  eflx>rts  to 
the  military  sphere,  but  tried  to  damage  his  enemy  by 
political  weapons  as  well.  Among  the  numerous  pro- 
clamations he  issued  was  one  in  which  freedom  to  trade 
with  all  ports  in  British  occupation  was  promised  to 
Neapolitan  vessels  flying  Ferdinand's  flag  ;  by  others  he 
incited  the  foreign  troops  in  the  French  service,  especi- 
ally a  battalion  of  blacks  from  San  Domingo,  to  desert 
the  Imperial  colours. 

In  the  early  part  of  June  the  French  trenches  had 
been  driven  half  across  the  neck,  up  to  about  200 
yards  of  the  glacis,  and  over  100  heavy  guns  were  in 
position  ready  to  open  fire.  But  though  the  besiegers' 
artillery  was  as  yet  silent,  awaiting  the  hour  for  the 
final  bombardment,  that  of  the  defenders  kept  up  a 
heavy  and  constant  fire  that  cost  the  French  many 
lives,  among  others  that  of  General  Vallongue,  killed 
while  directing  the  work  of  the  sappers  in  the  most 
advanced  parallel.  Reinforcements  were  constantly 
arriving,  and  on  the  28  th  of  June  the  French  force 
amounted  to  8000  men.  On  that  day  Marshal 
Massena,  impatient  of  the  delay  that  had  for  five 
months  neutralized  a  considerable  part  of  the  army  of 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  115 

occupation,  arrived  to  take  personal  charge  of  the 
operations.  It  was  indeed  time  that  Gaeta  fell,  for  at 
that  very  moment  a  new  and  unexpected  danger  was 
menacing  the  French  arms,  and  threatened  the  complete 
destruction  of  Regnier's  army  in  distant  Calabria. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  602,  2136  ;  the  same,  Corpi  Folanti,  145, 
224  :  miscellaneous  papers  on  Rodio  and  Fra  Dlavolo  ;  1071,  1974,  2132  : 
cruise  of  Sidney  Smith  and  siege  of  Gaeta. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustiziay  1806  :  miscellaneous  papers  on  disorders, 
recruiting,  courts-martial,  siege  of  Gaeta,  Rodio,  etc. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Medit.  32  :  reports  on  affairs  in  Calabria  from  British 
agents  at  Messina,  notably  by  Cancellier,  a  Calabrian  capomassi ;  also  on 
Sidney  Smith's  cruise.  In  this  file  are  several  copies  of  the  Gafita  Gazette^ 
published  during  the  siege. 