

The  defence  against  the  French  invaders  had  so  far 
done  little  to  enhance  the  prestige  of  the  dispossessed 
Government.  The  military  prowess  of  a  German 
soldier  of  fortune,  Lieutenant-General  the  Prince  of 
Hesse-Philipsthal,  was  partly  to  retrieve  the  honour 
of  the  Sicilian  arms.  To  this  officer  had  been  in- 
trusted the  defence  of  the  principal  fortress  of  the 
kingdom,  and  his  obstinate  and  nearly  successful 
resistance  to  the  French  for  a  time  threatened  disaster 
to  the  whole  enterprise  of  the  invaders. 

The  name  of  Gaeta  is  venerable ;  its  rocky  pro- 
montory has  been  honoured  in  the  two  great  epics  of 
the  Ancients.     The  town,  built  on  the  site  immortalized 


// 


io6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

by  Homer  and  Virgil,  contained  some  8000  people,  and 
was  situated  on  a  hilly  peninsula,  of  which  the  highest 
point  faced  the  mainland.  A  low  neck  of  sand  and 
rock,  rather  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide,  formed 
the  only  approach,  and  tier  after  tier  of  fortifications 
rose  from  it  towards  the  Tower  of  Orlando,  that  marked 
the  highest  point,  400  feet  above  sea -level.  The 
batteries  of  Gaeta  swept,  raked,  plunged,  and  converged 
on  to  this  approach  in  a  way  that  made  the  position 
very  formidable.  A  further  element  of  strength 
arose  from  the  fact  that  the  peninsula  broadened 
immediately  to  a  width  about  double  that  of  the 
neck,  so  that  half  of  the  batteries  that  faced  the 
mainland  were  protected  by  the  sea,  while  the  guns 
placed  in  them  could  be  trained  on  the  neck.  The 
total  development  of  the  fortifications  that  faced  the 
mainland  was  about  1300  yards,  and  most  of  this 
length  was  guarded  by  two,  and  in  places  three,  lines 
of  bastions,  with  numerous  outworks  and  covered  ways. 
Some  of  the  works  were  cut  out  of  the  granite  of  the 
hill,  and  some  were  placed  at  a  considerable  height,  the 
Breach  Battery  being  1 50  feet  above  sea-level,  while  the 
great  Queen's  Battery  was  even  higher,  and  commanded 
everything  within  range.  The  lofty  position  of  many 
of  these  works  was,  however,  in  one  way  a  source  of 
weakness,  for  it  exposed  the  base  of  the  bastions  to  the 
fire  of  a  besieger's  guns,  thus  rendering  breaching  more 
easy.  At  the  back  and  south  side  of  the  hill  on  which 
stood  the  Tower  of  Orlando  nestled  the  closely  packed 
houses  of  the  town,  many  of  which  were  thus  sheltered 
from  any  possible  bombardment.  The  small  port  ar 
the  further  extremity  of  the  town  could  be  just  reached 
by  batteries  along  the  coast,  but  as  a  set-off  the  bay 
afforded   excellent  anchorage,  and    communication    by 


CHAP.  Ill  CONQUEST  OF  NAPLES  107 

sea,  though  it  might  be  made  difficult,  could  hardly  be 
made  impossible. 