


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  119 

some  progress  was  made,  and  the  trunk  road  under 
construction  promised  the  early  transportation  of  the 
formidable  siege  train  assembled  before  Gaeta  as  soon 
as  that  fortress  should  fall. 

To  meet  the  threatened  invasion  of  Sicily,  the 
British  army,  now  no  longer  commanded  by  Sir  James 
Craig  but  by  Sir  John  Stuart,  still  retained  its  positions 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Messina.  Mary  Caroline's 
action  had  proved  so  disastrous  that  Ferdinand  had 
reinstated  Acton,  and  was  now  in  favour  of  a  policy 
based  on  British  friendship  and  support.  The  King 
and  his  Minister  visited  the  camp  at  Messina,  where  the 
splendid  discipline  of  the  British  troops,  and  the  ready 
money  they  carried  with  them,  had  placed  their  relations 
with  the  inhabitants  on  a  very  amicable  footing.  So 
pleased  was  Ferdinand  with  his  visit,  that  on  the  1 2th  of 
April  Acton  addressed  a  note  to  Elliot  whereby  Messina 
with  its  neighbourhood  was  formally  confided  to  British 
protection,  and  an  auxiliary  corps  of  6500  Sicilians  was 
placed  under  Stuart's  orders.  But,  as  was  so  often  the 
case  with  the  measures  of  the  Sicilian  Government,  this 
represented  more  on  paper  than  in  effect,  for  Messina 
was  now  nothing  more  than  a  British  garrison,  while 
the  6500  Sicilian  troops  were  not  to  be  found.  There 
were  officers  in  plenty,  but  recruits  were  for  the  most 
part  taken  from  the  prisons  and  galleys. 

The  British  commanders  attached  no  more  importance 
to  the  military  assistance  of  the  Sicilian  army  than  their 
Government  did  to  the  territorial  rights  of  the  Sicilian 
Court.  Sir  John  Stuart,  though  not  a  general  of  much 
ability  on  the  field  of  battle,  possessed  sufficient  strategic 
insight  to  grasp  the  broad  factors  of  the  military  situation.^ 

^  Bunbury's  judgment  of  Stuart  must  be  accepted  with  much  caution.     His  own 
opinions  as  to  the  conduct  of  affairs  are  very  far  from  sound. 


120  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

His  army  was  far  too  small  to  be  risked  in  offensive 
operations  in  Italy,  under  even  the  most  favourable 
conditions.  The  experience  of  several  centuries  of 
military  history,  and  particularly  of  the  last  few  years, 
had  shown  conclusively  that  the  mastery  of  Italy  was 
to  be  gained  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy,  and  that  what- 
ever Power  dominated  at  that  point  really  controlled  the 
Peninsula. 

It  never  entered  into  Sir  John  Stuart's  mind  that 
he  was  in  a  position  to  embark  on  offensive  operations, 
but  as  the  French  preparations  on  the  Strait  of  Messina 
became  more  and  more  threatening,  he  decided,  accord- 
ing to  the  soundest  principles  of  strategy,  that  he  could 
best  ward  off  the  attack  on  his  front  by  striking  a  blow 
himself  at  the  enemy's  line  of  communications.^  Every- 
thing appeared  to  favour  such  a  project.  The  French 
were  not  yet  strong  enough  to  attempt  any  serious 
movement  against  Messina ;  Calabria  was  wholly  in  a 
state  of  unrest,  partly  in  arms  ;  Gaeta  was  severely 
pressed,  and  needed  either  direct  help  or  a  strong 
diversion.  Under  these  circumstances  the  British 
general,  having  secured  the  co-operation  of  Sir  Sidney 
Smith  and  his  squadron,  decided  to  transport  his  little 
army  into  Calabria,  and  there  to  strike  a  blow  at  the 
French,  which,  if  successful,  would  raise  the  province 
and  drive  them  from  it. 