

Stuart  had  one  great  advantage  over  Regnier,  that 
his  troops,  once  embarked,  could  strike  the  French  line 
at  any,  and  perhaps  the  most  unprotected  point.^  The 
one  eventually  chosen  was  the  flattest  and  narrowest  of 
lower  Calabria,  where  the  Adriatic  and   Mediterranean 

1  Stuart  to  Windham,  July  2,  i8o6,  War  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170. 

2  "  Eight  thousand  men  on  the  English  vessels  are  worth  fifty  thousand  here,  for 
in  eight  days  they  may  appear  at  eight  different  points."  Joseph  to  Napoleon,  Joseph, 
Corr.  ii.  358. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  121 

approach  to  within  little  more  than  twenty  miles  of 
one  another.  It  was  the  very  spot  that  Crassus  had 
chosen  many  centuries  before  for  the  trench  and  wall 
with  which  he  had  attempted  to  coop  Spartacus  up 
within  the  peninsula  of  Reggio. 

Just  as  Massena  was  arriving  at  Gaeta  to  take 
charge  of  the  siege,  the  British  troops  were  leaving 
Messina.  On  the  ist  of  July  Sir  John  Stuart  disem- 
barked his  expedition,  consisting  of  4795  infantry  with 
sixteen  guns,  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  Gulf  of  S. 
Eufemia,  close  to  the  little  village  of  the  same  name.^ 
The  British  general  sent  out  detachments  as  far  as 
the  important  town  of  Nicastro,  and  at  the  same  time 
began  throwing  up  intrenchments  between  the  coast- 
line and  the  hill  on  which  the  village  of  S.  Eufemia 
was  situated.     His  lines  faced  a  little  east  of  south. 

It  was  from  the  south,  or  from  Reggio,  that  Sir 
John  Stuart  had  danger  to  fear.  To  the  north  of  him 
stretched  for  many  miles  the  most  dense,  mountainous, 
and  disaffected  part  of  Calabria,  where  the  small  French 
garrisons  and  flying  columns  had  as  much  as  they  could 
do  to  prevent  a  general  outburst  of  hostilities.  To 
the  south  was  a  considerable  depression  in  the  hills 
that  became  a  plain  of  some  extent  along  the  coast, 
traversed  by  the  little  river  Amato.  This  sluggish  and 
swampy  stream  ran  into  the  sea  about  ten  miles  to  the 
south  of  S.  Eufemia.  Beyond  the  Amato  the  hills,  on 
one  of  which  the  village  of  Maida  showed  conspicuous, 
regained  something  of  their  elevation,  and  were  lost  in  the 
horizon  of  lower  Calabria.  It  was  thence  that  Regnier 
might   be  looked   for.     The   French   general  had   for 

1  War  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  1 70  ;  Stuart's  report.  This  figure  includes  the  20th 
Regiment,  which  only  landed  the  day  of  the  battle.  Bunbury  (p,  237)  says  5200,  but 
probably  includes  some  Calabrese  under  Cancellier. 


122  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

some  days  been  keeping  an  anxious  watch  on  the  slow 
movements  of  the  British  transports,  and  as  soon  as  he 
learned  that  they  had  come  to  anchor  in  the  bay  of 
S.  Eufemia  he  immediately  sent  out  orders  for  collecting 
every  available  man. 