

Strategically  the  position  of  Gaeta  was  very  im- 
portant, for  it  lay  just  off  the  road  that  led  from 
Naples  to  northern  Italy  through  Rome,  and  was 
therefore  a  perpetual  menace  to  the  French  line  of 
communications.  From  the  former  city  it  was  forty- 
seven  miles  distant,  from  the  latter  ninety. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse  had  plenty  of  men  and  plenty 
of  guns  to  defend  Gaeta,  but  their  quality  was  rather 
doubtful.  Through  January  he  continuously  received 
batches  of  recruits  who  could  not  have  been  much  less 
dangerous  to  the  fortress  than  the  French  themselves. 
The  prison  dregs  sent  from  Naples  and  from  Sicily  to 
Gaeta  had  little  other  notion  of  military  service  than 
burning,  stealing,  and  rioting.  The  4000  men  that 
had  been  assembled  by  the  time  the  French  crossed 
the  frontier  would  have  probably  disbanded  or  become 
an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy  had  it  not  been  for  the 
magnetic  energy  and  courage  of  their  commander. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse  was  a  short  man,  with  a  red  face 
and  aquiline  nose  ;  he  was  an  eccentric,  hard-drinking, 
well-trained  soldier  of  fortune.  An  English  officer 
who  knew  him,  speaking  of  his  influence  over  his 
wretched  soldiers,  said,  "  his  familiar  buffoonery  and 
his  daring  example  mastered  their  fears,  their  affection, 
and  their  admiration."  ^  From  the  day  on  which  the 
French  first  made  their  appearance  in  front  of  the 
fortress,  the  Prince  of  Hesse  stationed  himself  at  the 
famous  Breach  Battery  with  the  determination  of  re- 
maining there  till  the  siege  ended.  He  is  then  said  to 
have  gravely  handed  the  key  of  a  convenient  cellar  to 
the  Bishop  of  Gaeta,  whom  he  solemnly  adjured  to  allow 

^  Bunbury,  234. 


io8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

him  but  one  bottle  a  day.  Whether  this  temperate 
resolve  was  closely  adhered  to  appears  doubtful, 
for  at  times  he  behaved  somewhat  extravagantly ; 
as  on  one  occasion  when  the  French  sappers  had 
pushed  close  under  the  walls  of  the  fortress  and 
the  Prince  ran  up  on  to  the  rampart  and,  through  a 
speaking-trumpet,  bawled  out  to  the  enemy,  "  Gaeta 
is  not  Ulm  !     Hesse  is  not  Mack  !  " 

About  the  time  that  the  French  entered  Naples, 
a  small  detachment  appeared  before  Gaeta  and  de- 
manded its  surrender  (February  13).  This  summons 
was  answered  by  a  cannon  shot,  and  the  invaders 
retired,  leaving  a  small  force  in  the  neighbouring 
hills  to  observe  the  fortress.  In  March  the  siege 
began  in  earnest  ;  Marshal  Massena  personally  made 
a  reconnaissance  and  placed  General  Lacour  in  com- 
mand of  the  attack.  The  French  took  possession 
of  the  little  fishing  village  of  Mola  di  Gaeta,  and 
established  themselves  on  the  rising  ground  to  the  east 
of  the  neck  leading  to  the  fortress.  The  field  artillery 
was  strengthened  by  heavier  pieces  from  Capua  and 
Naples,  batteries  were  hastily  thrown  up,  and  on  the 
21st  of  March  Gaeta  was  summoned  to  surrender  for 
the  second  time.  The  Prince  of  Hesse  replied  that 
his  answer  would  be  found  in  the  breach  ;  and  so  the 
besiegers'  guns  opened  fire.  They  were  nearly  im- 
mediately silenced  by  the  overpowering  weight  of 
metal  thrown  by  the  eighty  pieces  the  Prince  of  Hesse 
had  massed  on  the  fortress'  land  front.  Undaunted 
by  their  failure,  the  French  set  to  work  repairing  the 
damage  to  their  works,  dug  their  trenches  along  the 
hill  slopes  nearer  and  nearer  the  neck,  and  brought  up 
new  guns  to  strengthen  their  batteries.  On  the  5  th 
of  April  a  new  effort  was  made  to  persuade  Gaeta  into 