

The  two  generals  adopted  somewhat  similar  dis- 
positions ;  each  placed  his  infantry  in  a  line  of  echelons, 
but  whereas  Regnier  advanced  with  his  left  wing  leading, 
Stuart  adopted  the  opposite  mode.  The  French  left 
and  British  right  were  thus  bound  to  come  into  contact 
while  the  French  right  and  British  left  were  yet  far  apart. 


124  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

This  echelon  formation  of  the  two  armies  appeared 
very  favourable  for  the  French,  as  their  infantry  was 
seasoned,  well  led,  and  quick  in  manoeuvres.  Had  the 
leading  French  echelon  either  outflanked  or  broken 
through  the  leading  English  echelon  it  was  probable 
that  a  rapid  change  of  front  would  have  resulted 
in  the  rolling  up  of  the  British  line.  But  Stuart 
had  parried  against  being  outflanked  by  resting  his 
right  wing  on  the  Amato,  and  by  further  protecting 
it  with  a  detachment  of  riflemen  on  the  further  bank. 
Regnier's  chance  of  success  therefore  depended  on  his 
breaking  down  the  English  right  wing  at  the  first 
collision.  He  determined  to  do  this  by  a  rapid  advance 
in  solid  column,  ending  in  a  bayonet  charge,  which 
he  intended  should  decide  the  fate  of  the  day.  He 
selected  the  i^'  leger  for  this  duty,  as  fine  a  body  of 
light  infantry  as  was  to  be  found  in  the  French 
army.  General  Compere  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 
movement. 

The  British  had  halted  to  await  the  French  onset. 
The  ships  and  gunboats  stood  in  as  close  to  the  shore 
as  they  could,  though  too  far  out  to  take  any  active 
share  in  the  engagement. 

It  fell  to  Kempt' s  Light  Infantry  to  meet  the  first 
shock  of  the  battle.  To  the  massed  column  of  the 
French  tacticians  it  opposed  the  long-drawn-out  line 
retained  by  British  usage.  For  some  minutes  nothing 
could  be  seen  but  a  screen  of  cavalry  pickets  thrown 
out  by  Regnier  to  mask  his  movements.  Then  the 
horsemen  suddenly  wheeled  and  disappeared,  and  a 
great  cloud  of  dust  rolled  up.  Presently  the  glint  of 
bayonets  flashed  through  the  cloud,  the  rapid  tramp  of 
many  feet  beat  the  earth,  uniforms  and  men's  faces 
appeared.     A  general  oflicer  rode  in  front ;  flags  were 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  125 

waving  ;  drums  were  rolling.    The  i^'  leger  was  march- 
ing at  a  quick  step  straight  for  the  British  line. 

Kempt's  Light  Infantry  awaited  the  French  advance 
with  the  extraordinary  rigidity  of  discipline  that  then 
distinguished  the  British  army.  The  muskets  remained 
steadily  at  the  carry  until  the  coolly  and  unerringly 
judged  words  of  command  released  a  terrific  volley  into 
the  French  ranks.  Big  gaps  opened  in  the  files  of  the 
i^"^  leger  and  the  42nd  of  the  line  following  them  ; 
Compere  and  two  colonels  fell.  But  the  advance  was 
not  checked  ;  the  men  now  broke  into  a  charge  with 
bayonets  aligned.  On  they  came,  nearer  and  nearer, 
while  the  machine-like  British  line  went  through  the 
reloading  commands  with  the  relentless  precision  of  a 
machine.  The  French  had  rushed  up  to  not  much 
more  than  thirty  yards  when  for  the  second  time  that 
long  line  of  muskets  was  raised  and  discharged  ;  at  that 
point-blank  volley  the  whole  front  of  the  column 
melted.  The  ground  was  covered  with  dead  and  dying ; 
the  i^"^  leger  vf2i%  literally  annihilated.  A  few  brave  men 
struggled  on  and  were  shot  down  within  fifteen  yards  of 
the  British  line,  but  the  attack  had  hopelessly  failed  ; 
the  French  left  was  destroyed,  and  Regnier's  army  was 
practically  defeated  by  this  one  mortal  blow. 