

Regnier,  an  officer  of  great  ability  and  experience, 
could  have  come  to  no  other  decision  than  that  which 
he  adopted, — to  attack  the  English  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment.  For  they  were  directly  on  his  line 
of  communications,  and  the  slightest  British  success 
would  probably  raise  Calabria  against  him.  He  there- 
fore abandoned  all  but  two  or  three  indispensable  posts 
in  lower  Calabria,  drawing  in  every  available  man,  and 
on  the  evening  of  the  3rd  of  July  pitched  his  bivouac 
close  by  the  little  village  of  Maida.  There  on  the 
following  morning  he  mustered  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
the  British  commander  :  he  had  5150  men,  including  a 
regiment  of  chasseurs  a  cheval  and  a  battery  of  horse 
artillery.  He  was  thus  slightly  inferior  in  infantry 
and  artillery  to  Stuart,  but  superior  in  cavalry  ;  it  will 
be  no  Injustice  to  either  side  to  say  that  they  were 
evenly  matched. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  July,  therefore,  the 
two  armies  were  encamped  about  nine  miles  apart,  one 
to  the  north,  the  other  to  the  south  of  the  swampy 
lowland  through  which  ran  the  Amato.  Stuart's  position 
was  intrenched,  and  was  further  strengthened  by  the 
presence  of  Sidney  Smithes  ships  drawn  close  in  to 
shore  ;  but  it  was  unsuited  for  long  occupation,  as 
malaria  had  already  broken  out  among  the  men. 
Regnier  was  strongly  posted  on  the  hill  of  Maida  in  a 
position  which  Stuart  apparently  considered  could  not  be 
successfully  attacked,  but  the  French  commander  thought 
himself  insecure,  as  the  surrounding  woods  might  afford 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  123 

shelter  for  the  Calabrese  irregulars  and  brigands.  They 
were  closing  in  on  all  sides  to  witness  the  fray,  and 
already  a  body  of  200  under  Cancellier  had  marched 
into  Stuart's  camp.  Thus  neither  general  was  anxious 
to  remain  in  his  position. 

Stuart  was  first  to  move.  Having  reconnoitred  the 
French,  he  ordered  his  little  army  to  advance  in  one 
column  directly  along  the  beach  southwards.  If  his 
intention  was  to  tempt  the  French  commander  to  attack 
him  while  thus  dangerously  placed,  he  succeeded. 
Regnier,  seeing  the  British  leaving  their  intrenchments 
and  offering  him  a  chance  of  driving  them  into  the 
sea,  hastened  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity. 
His  troops  were  of  excellent  quality,  and  inspired  him 
with  every  hope  of  success  ;  he  doubted  not  but  that 
he  would  literally  fulfil  the  injunction  of  Napoleon's 
Schoenbrunn  proclamation  and  "  hurl  into  the  waves 
.  .   .  the  feeble  battalions  of  the  tyrants  of  the  seas." 

Regnier  directed  his  march  from  Maida  towards  the 
mouth  of  the  Amato,  at  which  point  he  expected  to 
strike  the  British  advance.  As  the  French  neared  the 
coast-line  they  were  observed  by  the  British,  and  Stuart 
came  to  a  halt.  The  English  general  now  faced  his 
battalions  inland  and  advanced  towards  the  French. 
The  ground  on  which  the  two  armies  met  was 
immediately  north  of  the  Amato  River,  on  a  scrub- 
covered  plain  turning  to  sand  near  the  sea  and  to 
swamp  near  the  river. 