

Had  Stuart  now  taken  advantage  of  the  gap  in 
the  French  left  and  advanced  rapidly,  he  might  have 
crushed  Regnier.  But  the  British  general  and  his 
troops  understood  defensive  better  than  offensive  tactics. 
As  it  was,  Kempt's  Light  Infantry  indulged  in  a 
disorderly  and  unprofitable  pursuit  of  the  column  they 
had  shattered,  while  the  other  British  echelons  remained 
in  position.  Thus  Regnier  was  given  time  to  reform 
his  line  ;  this  he  did  with  great  promptitude,  skill,  and 
determination.     His  centre  and  right  were  brought  up 


126  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

into  line,  and  not  yet  despairing  of  success,  he  attempted 
to  outflank  the  British  left.  But  Regnier  did  not 
venture  on  charging  tactics  again,  and  the  French  fire 
did  not  do  much  execution  ;  the  dust  and  smoke  was 
being  blown  straight  into  the  eyes  of  the  French  by  a 
westerly  wind,  and  their  few  field-pieces  were  not  well 
served.  Yet  they  were  making  some  progress  towards 
circling  around  the  British  left,  when  just  at  the  critical 
moment  the  20th  Regiment  came  up  from  the  beach, 
where  it  had  just  disembarked,  and  covered  Stuart's 
threatened  flank. 

Regnier  now  decided  on  retreat,  and  in  defeat  showed 
unimpaired  resource  and  resolution.  He  rapidly  drew 
off  his  infantry,  and  under  cover  of  his  cavalry  and 
horse  artillery  retired  in  the  direction  of  Catanzaro, 
carrying  with  him  about  300  wounded.  He  had 
left  between  1200  and  1500  dead  and  wounded  on 
the  battlefield.^  The  British  loss  was  only  45  killed 
and  282  wounded.  Thus  ended  a  battle  that  had  lasted 
barely  one  half-hour,  but  that  had  cost  the  defeated 
side  one-third  of  its  eff^ective  force  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  prisoners. 

There  was  no  pursuit  after  Maida.  The  English 
troops  were  exhausted  after  their  long  march  and 
strenuous  engagement  under  a  blazing  sun.  Nor  did 
their  lack  of  cavalry  and  the  caution  of  their  commander 
counsel  pursuit.  The  troops  therefore  went  into  camp, 
leaving  the  French  to  the  care  of  the  Sicilian  and 
Calabrese  irregulars.  The  numerous  French  wounded 
were  brought  in  and  cared  for.  General  Compere 
received  attentions  that  enabled  him  to  recover  from 

^  Stuart's  official  estimate  was  700  killed  and  1000  wounded.  Regnier  brought 
300  wounded  into  Catanzaro.  This  would  give  a  total  of  2000,  which  is  all  but 
incredible.  The  contemporaries  generally  placed  Regnier's  loss  at  from  1200  to 
1500. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA   127 

his  wounds;  he  was  afterwards  exchanged,  and  was 
eventually  killed  at  the  head  of  his  division  six  years 
later  at  Borodino. 

So  far  Sir  John  Stuart  had  met  with  complete 
success,  and  the  immediate  results  of  his  victory  were 
precisely  what  both  he  and  his  opponent  had  foreseen. 
Calabria  nearly  instantly  blazed  out  into  open  revolt. 
Every  church  bell  was  set  ringing,  and  the  villages 
about  Maida  that  contained  nothing  but  spectators  in 
the  early  afternoon  poured  bands  of  armed  loyalists 
into  the  British  camp  before  night.  A  cloud  of  guerillas 
hung  on  the  French  retreat,  and  the  British  general 
had  all  he  could  do  to  preserve  his  captured  and 
wounded  enemies  from  the  murderous  intents  of  his 
new-found  friends.  To  prevent  the  excesses  and 
atrocious  conduct  of  the  masse,  Sir  John  Stuart  offered 
by  proclamation  what  was  for  Calabria  the  very  large 
sum  often  ducats  in  gold  for  every  French  soldier,  and 
fifteen  ducats  for  every  French  officer  brought  in  to  his 
camp.  Even  this  proclamation  and  the  personal  exer- 
tions of  the  British  officers  were  not  in  every  case 
sufficient  to  preserve  from  death,  and  often  from  torture, 
more  than  one  unhappy  fugitive.^ 