


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  129 

most  monstrous  atrocities.  One  of  them,  Papasodero, 
had  a  price  placed  on  his  head  by  his  official  ally  Sir 
John  Stuart ;  the  ruffian,  nothing  daunted,  retorted  by 
placing  a  similar  price  on  that  of  the  British  general. 

Don  Nicola  Gualtieri,  more  generally  known  as  Pane 
di  Grano,  had  been  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  masse  in 
1799,  and  was  a  major  in  the  second  regiment  of  the 
Cosenza  militia  at  the  time  of  the  French  invasion. 
He  and  his  family  resided  at  Conflenti  ;  they  were 
ardent  royalists,  and  his  son  Fortunato  had  been  among 
those  executed  by  the  French  in  repression  of  the  out- 
breaks at  Soveria  and  Pedace.  His  hatred  of  the  in- 
vaders was  intense,  and  as  commander-in-chief  of  the 
masse  that  attacked  Regnier  on  his  retreat  he  gave  it 
full  vent.  He  proved  as  ferocious  a  leader  as  Fra 
Diavolo  himself.  The  masse  were  capable  of  all  the 
horrors  that  diabolical  ingenuity  could  devise.  At 
Nicastro  they  crucified  the  commandant  of  the  guard 
of  honour  that  had  greeted  Joseph  on  his  tour  through 
Calabria,  and  gouged  out  his  eyes.  At  Strongoli 
seventeen  French  soldiers  were  prisoners  ;  on  each  of 
seven  consecutive  days  one  of  these  unfortunate  men 
was  led  out,  placed  on  a  platform,  tortured  and  killed, 
to  the  great  delectation  of  the  inhabitants.  But 
these  savages  were  soon  deprived  of  their  amusement. 
Marching  northward  through  Cotrone,  where  he  had 
to  abandon  his  wounded,  Regnier  reached  Strongoli 
on  the  eighth  day,  the  29th  of  July,  and  rescued  the 
ten  survivors.  The  town  was  stormed,  sacked,  and 
burnt. 

The  fate  of  Strongoli  was  that  of  every  village 
passed  by  the  French  from  which  the  masse  had  received 
assistance.  At  Giro  the  population  was  in  arms,  but 
had  repressed  disorder  and  not  supported  the  insurgents ; 

VOL.  I  K 


130  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  French  troops  treated  it  as  friendly.  At  Corigliano 
conditions  were  different,  and  a  hard  fight,  in  which  the 
masse  suffered  heavy  losses,  ended  in  the  capture  and 
burning  of  the  town.  It  was  on  the  ist  of  August 
that  the  French  reached  Corigliano,  nearly  loo  miles 
from  Catanzaro,  which  testifies  to  the  fact  that  Regnier 
had  lost  none  of  his  vigour,  his  troops  none  of  their 
celerity. 

From  Corigliano  Regnier  marched  to  Cassano,  where 
he  effected  his  junction  with  a  small  force  under 
General  Verdier,  and  took  up  a  strong  defensive 
position.  The  latter  had  been  in  command  at  Cosenza. 
The  British  victory  and  the  subsequent  rising  had  com- 
pelled him  to  concentrate  all  his  detachments  on  the 
capital  of  the  province,  where  he  had  assembled  600 
men.  Threatened  by  a  large  force  under  Gernaliz  and 
being  short  of  ammunition,  he  had  decided  to  retreat. 
The  masse  at  once  occupied  the  town,  and  De  Michele 
was  installed  as  royal  governor.  Disorder  followed  ;  a 
number  of  houses  were  sacked  and  the  hospitals,  full 
of  French  sick  and  wounded,  were  nearly  burned.  In 
the  meanwhile  the  masse  had  already  cut  off  Verdier's 
retreat  by  occupying  Cassano,  and  the  French  general 
was  only  able  to  capture  this  position,  vital  to  him 
and  to  Regnier,  after  a  desperate  fight,  in  which  he 
expended  all  his  ammunition  and  only  succeeded  by  the 
last  desperate  expedient  of  using  the  bayonet. 