

In  the  meanwhile  Regnier,  finding  his  retreat  north- 
wards through  Cosenza  cut,  had  retired  over  the  hills  to 
the  Adriatic  side.  He  hoped  either  to  hold  his  ground  at 
Catanzaro  or,  at  the  worst,  to  make  his  way  to  Cassano 
by  following  the  Adriatic  coast.  He  was  only  able  to 
collect  some  4000  men  all  told,  and  his  troops  had 
been  seriously  demoralized  by  their  recent  defeat. 

For  three  weeks  Regnier  held  Catanzaro,  fifteen  miles 

1  It  is  interesting  to  recall  that  the  humanity  of  the  British  was  deeply  appreciated 
by  the  French.  An  acknowledgment  came  in  i8og  when  Soult  had  a  monument 
erected  at  Corunna  to  Sir  John  Moore,  who  had  been  prominent  in  the  operations 
in  Calabria. 


128  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

from  Maida,  harassed  by  the  masse  but  unmolested 
by  the  British.  But  the  Calabrese  were  now  sufficiently 
inspirited  and  sufficiently  numerous  to  contain  the 
French  force  unassisted,  nor  did  Stuart,  a  man  of 
honourable  and  generous  sentiments,  feel  any  inclina- 
tion to  associate  the  troops  under  his  command  with 
those  of  Ferdinand  and  Mary  Caroline's  capimassi. 
It  was  a  relief  to  the  French  that  Stuart  remained 
motionless  on  the  bay  of  S.  Eufemia,  and  the  opinion 
appears  to  have  been  generally  entertained  that  had  he 
at  once  marched  northwards  Regnier  must  have  capitu- 
lated and  nothing  could  have  stopped  the  British  short 
of  Naples.  Even  as  it  was,  Regnier  at  Catanzaro  was 
helpless  to  prevent  the  extension  of  the  Calabrese 
rising  north  and  south.  At  Cosenza  on  the  13th  of 
July,  one  week  after  the  battle,  a  royal  governor,  De 
Michele,  was  installed  and  a  decree  was  issued  appoint- 
ing Sir  John  Stuart  the  King's  Lieutenant  for  the 
Province.  To  the  south  the  British  commander  sent 
detachments  to  reduce  the  small  French  garrisons  left 
on  the  Strait  of  Messina  at  Reggio  and  Scilla. 

Finally  Regnier  decided  on  retreat,  and  on  the  26th 
of  July  started  on  his  march  north.  He  was  closely 
followed  by  some  8000  Calabrese  under  the  command 
of  Pane  di  Grano  and  Gernaliz,  whom  Ferdinand  had 
appointed  to  command  the  local  militia. 

These  Calabrese  leaders  merit  a  short  description, 
for  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  of  them  that  they  were 
little  better  than  savages  ;  ^   they  were  capable  of  the 

^  De  Blaquiere,  i.  519.  See  also  Fox  to  a  Court,  fVar  Off.  Orig.  Corr.  170  j 
Annual  Register,  1806,  146  j  Bunbury,  and  Moore's  Diary.  Exceptionally  a  few 
chiefs  of  the  masse  behaved  well,  as  Necco,  who  sent  the  French  he  captured  at 
Lagonegro  to  the  British  ships  (Greco,  Annali,  70).  Guariglia  and  Fra  Diavolo 
also  occasionally  preserved  their  prisoners'  lives,  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether 
humanity  so  much  as  commercialism  was  the  prompting  motive. 