

The  instant  Gaeta  surrendered  Massena  directed  his 
attention  to  the  critical  situation  of  Regnier.  On  the 
very  next  morning  after  he  obtained  possession  of  the 
fortress  some  of  the  troops  were  started  on  their  march 
towards  Naples  and  Calabria. 

It  was  well  indeed  for  King  Joseph  that  Gaeta  had 
fallen,  for  the  whole  kingdom  had  been  blazing  with 
insurrection  for  some  weeks  past  ;  only  a  few  towns 
were  under  effective  control,  and  for  some  days  the 
situation  had  appeared  so  desperate  that  the  complete 
withdrawal  of  the  Court  and  army  to  the  north  had 
been  seriously  contemplated.  The  coasts  were  patrolled 
by  British  and  Sicilian  ships,  from  which  bands  of 
irregulars  were  disembarked  without  difficulty.  This 
policy  was  actively  supported  by  Sidney  Smith,  but 
the  British  military  officers  opposed  it  strongly,  as  will 
appear  from  the  following  extract  from  a  dispatch 
written  by  Sir  John  Moore  to  General  Fox  : — 


136  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

His  [Sidney  Smith's]  interference  in  Calabria,  where  in 
his  imagination  he  is  directing  the  operations  of  armies,  but 
where  in  reahty  he  is  only  encouraging  murder  and  rapine,  and 
keeping  up  amongst  that  unhappy  people,  whom  we  have  no 
intention  to  support,  a  spirit  of  revolt  which  will  bring  upon 
them  the  more  severe  vengeance  of  the  French  Government. 
As  long  as  Sir  Sidney  had  money,  he  distributed  it  profusely  ; 
and  now,  with  as  little  judgment,  he  is  distributing  arms, 
ammunition,  and  provisions  .  .  .   (Aug.  24,  1806).^ 

So  great  was  the  activity  of  Sidney  Smith  and  his 
allies  that  Naples  itself  hardly  appeared  secure.  British 
ships  cruised  in  sight  of  the  city.  From  Capri  they 
controlled  the  waters  of  the  bay,  and  the  Governor, 
Hudson  Lowe,  maintained  close  communication  with 
the  small  chain  of  islands  that  stretched  away  to  the 
north-west  towards  Gaeta,  of  which  Ponza  and  Vento- 
tenne  were  the  most  important.  From  these  islands, 
and  from  Gaeta  before  its  fall,  a  constant  stream  of 
conspiracy  flowed  into  Naples.  They  also  served  as 
the  base  for  the  operations  of  Fra  Diavolo,  Guariglia, 
Ronca,  and  other  chiefs.  The  principal  agent  of  the 
Sicilian  Government,  or  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  at 
Ponza  was  the  young  Prince  of  Canosa,  an  unscrupulous 
intriguer  with  all  the  instincts  of  a  spy,  informer,  and 
gaoler,  who  was  to  earn  an  eminence,  unenviable  even 
in  those  unhappy  times  and  countries,  for  his  duplicity 
and  vices. 

In  the  first  week  of  July,  Sidney  Smith,  after  con- 
voying Stuart's  transports  to  the  Bay  of  S.  Eufemia, 
had  once  more  sailed  up  the  coast.  He  had  been  given 
large  powers  by  the  Sicilian  Government,  and  exercised 
the    right    of  appointing    capimassi   and   of  acting    as 