

On  the  3rd  of  July  the  besieged  received  a  reinforce- 
ment of  1 500  men  by  sea,  and  on  that  night  an  attack 
was  delivered  by  Captain  Richardson's  gunboats,  of 
which  the  result  was  indecisive.  For  three  days  more 
the  French  toiled  nearer  and  nearer  the  fortifications, 
and  at  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  they 
opened  fire  again  with  ninety  guns  and  at  shorter  range. 
Their  artillery  was  now  mostly  directed  against  the 
Queen's  Battery,  whose  fire  was  soon  reduced.  But 
Gaeta  refused  to  be  silenced  altogether,  and  through 
the  8  th  the  four  heavy  ship's  guns  landed  by  Sidney 
Smith  kept  up  a  heavy  and  damaging  fire,  while  the 
rapid  exhaustion  of  the  French  ammunition  caused  the 
greatest  anxiety  to  their  commanders.  On  the  loth 
furious  fighting  took  place  ;  the  French  sappers  were 
now  close  under  the  walls,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to 
establish  a  breaching  battery  quite  close  to  the  shore. 
The  defenders  rained  shot  and  shell  on  the  French 
works,  while  the  French  batteries  attempted  to  keep 
down  the  fire  of  the  fortress.  The  besiegers  were  finally 
repulsed,  but  not  before  one  of  their  shells,  bursting  in 
the  Breach  Battery,  struck  down  the  Prince  of  Hesse, 
and  inflicted  the  greatest  loss  on  the  garrison  it  could 
have  suffered.  No  sooner  was  the  event  known  in 
the  French  camp  than  Massena  ordered    his  batteries 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  133 

to  redouble  their  fire  and  threw  a  stream  of  shot  and 
shell  into  the  town. 

On  the  following  morning  General  Dedon,  in  com- 
mand of  the  artillery,  earnestly  represented  to  Marshal 
Massena  that  the  firing  must  be  slackened,  as  the 
ammunition  could  not  hold  out  ;  but  Massena,  aware 
of  the  perilous  position  of  affairs  in  Calabria,  and 
boldly  judging  the  situation,  declined  to  listen  to  this 
officer's  remonstrances.  He  was  right  in  thinking  that 
the  defence  of  Gaeta  would  collapse  with  the  loss  of  its 
brave  Governor. 

The  Prince  of  Hesse's  wound  was  thought  mortal, 
though  he  eventually  recovered.  He  was  taken  from 
the  post  he  had  so  splendidly  defended  for  five  months 
and  placed  on  board  an  English  vessel,  on  which 
he  was  transported  to  Palermo.  The  command  de- 
volved by  right  of  seniority  on  Colonel  Hotz,  an 
officer  of  moderate  ability,  but  lacking  prestige  and 
the  qualities  of  a  leader.  He  refused,  however,  to 
capitulate  when  summoned  to  do  so  by  Massena  on 
the  1 2th  of  July.  On  that  day  two  breaches  were 
just  beginning  to  show  in  the  fortress'  walls,  one  at 
the  Breach  Battery,  the  other  low  down  at  the  south- 
east angle  of  the  shore  defences. 

Four  days  later,  on  the  i6th  of  July,  the  crisis  was 
reached.  Massena  now  knew  that  Regnier  had  been 
defeated  in  Calabria  and  cut  off ;  he  feared  even  worse 
news  might  follow.  The  night  before  one  of  his 
engineer  officers  had  waded  through  two  feet  of  water 
from  the  end  of  the  most  advanced  French  sap  to  the 
lower  breach  at  the  corner  of  the  sea-front,  and  reported 
that  there  was  a  possible  passage  for  a  storming  party. 
He  had  now  only  1 84,000  pounds  of  powder  and  less 
than  5000  shot  and  shell  left, — a  supply  for  two  or 