


134  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

three  days.  No  reinforcement  was  to  be  looked  for  ; 
on  the  contrary,  Napoleon  was  drawing  troops  towards 
northern  Italy  and  strengthening  the  army  in  Germany 
for  the  war  with  Prussia  that  was  just  on  the  point  of 
breaking  out.  Reviewing  this  position,  Massena  deter- 
mined to  stake  all  on  the  throw,  to  fire  away  his  remain- 
ing ammunition,  and  then  if  possible  carry  Gaeta  with 
the  bayonet. 

All  through  the  17th  of  July  the  breaches  grev/ 
larger  and  larger  under  the  constant  pounding  of  the 
French  guns.  On  the  morning  of  the  i8th  it  was 
officially  given  out  in  the  camp  that  both  were  practic- 
able, and  preparations  were  made  for  storming. 

One  of  the  most  obvious  rules  that  guide  a  general 
when  about  to  attempt  the  capture  of  fortifications  is 
to  conceal  his  preparations  so  as  to  deliver  his  attack 
unexpectedly.  Had  the  Prince  of  Hesse  still  been  at 
his  post  on  the  Breach  Battery,  it  is  probable  that 
Massena  would  have  followed  this  rule  ;  with  Colonel 
Hotz  in  command  he  was  probably  wise  in  not  doing 
so.  In  the  course  of  the  morning  two  heavy  columns 
were  ostentatiously  assembled  in  the  trenches.  That 
on  the  left,  intended  to  move  against  the  lower  breach, 
was  made  up  of  chasseurs  and  grenadiers,  and  was 
placed  under  the  orders  of  a  brilliant  leader,  General 
Donzelot.  That  on  the  right,  intended  to  attack  the 
more  difficult  breach  under  the  Queen's  Battery,  was 
made  up  of  voltigeurs^  and  was  under  the  orders  of 
General  Valentin.  Supporting  columns  were  brought 
into  the  trenches  with  some  deliberation.  These  long- 
drawn-out  preparations  finally  produced  the  effect 
Massena  had  been  anxiously  hoping  for.  At  3  p.m. 
the  white  flag  rose  on  the  walls  of  Gaeta  ;  the  long 
siege  was  at  an  end.     Within  three  hours  of  the  raising 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  135 

of  the  white  flag  the  conditions  of  the  capitulation  were 
agreed. 

So  honourable  did  the  defence  of  Gaeta  appear 
to  Massena,  or  so  advantageous  its  capture,  that  he 
granted  very  lenient  terms.  The  fortress,  with  all  its 
guns  and  munitions  of  war,  was  to  be  surrendered,  but 
the  garrison  was  to  be  permitted  to  retire  to  Sicily  on 
condition  of  not  bearing  arms  against  the  French  during 
twelve  months.  No  sooner  had  hostilities  ceased,  how- 
ever, before  a  large  part  of  the  royal  troops  took 
the  opportunity  of  deserting  to  the  French  camp. 
The  spoils  of  Gaeta  included  about  170  cannon,  of 
which  one-third  were  damaged.  In  the  course  of  the 
siege  the  French  had  dug  9000  yards  of  trenches,  and 
they  acknowledged  the  loss  of  1000  killed  and  wounded, 
their  real  loss  being  probably  twice  as  great. 