

Although  Regnier  had  thus  succeeded  in  saving  some 
remnant  of  his  defeated  army,  he  had  lost  the  whole 
of  lower  Calabria  and  suffered  a  disastrous  retreat ; 
unless  reinforcements  and  supplies  v/ere  to  reach  him 
soon,  he  would  be  compelled  to  abandon  even  Cassano 
and  to  retreat  further  towards  Naples,  either  through 
the  defile  of  Campotanese  or,  if  that  should  be  held  in 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  131 

force,  excentrically  towards  Taranto.  But  the  obstacle 
that  had  long  prevented  the  Government  from  sending 
an  adequate  number  of  troops  to  Calabria  had  at  last 
been  removed,  and  Regnier  was  cheered  with  the  news 
that  he  might  now  expect  the  reinforcements  that  six 
weeks  earlier  could  not  be  spared.  For  the  siege  of 
Gaeta  was  at  last  at  an  end. 

When  Massena  arrived  at  the  camp  before  Gaeta 
on  the  28th  of  June,  the  Government  felt  how  urgent 
it  was  to  capture  the  fortress  immediately  and  thus 
release  the  large  body  of  troops  occupied  in,  the  siege. 
Massena  decided  to  make  one  more  attempt  to  frighten 
the  defenders  into  surrender  without  waiting  for  the 
completion  of  the  trenches.  To  lend  a  more  imposing 
and  decisive  appearance  to  this  demonstration.  King 
Joseph  proceeded  to  join  the  marshal  in  camp,  and 
was  present  when  fire  was  opened.  It  was  time  the 
besiegers'  artillery  spoke,  for  the  Sicilians  had  already 
fired  120,000  shot  and  22,000  shells. 

The  French  artillery  was  now  heavy  and  numerous 
enough  to  assert  superiority.  Fifty  large  guns  and 
twenty-three  mortars  rained  a  storm  of  iron  on  the 
fortifications  of  Gaeta ;  but  though  several  of  the 
defenders'  pieces  were  dismounted,  though  their 
defences  began  to  break  down  and  crumble,  though  a 
constant  stream  of  dead  and  dying  set  in  from  the 
ramparts  to  the  city,  the  Prince  of  Hesse  showed  no 
symptom  of  weakening.  By  the  ist  of  July  a  con- 
siderable impression  had  been  made  and  the  besieged 
had  suffered  the  loss  of  three  magazines  through  ex- 
plosion. The  French  fire  now  slackened,  however, 
while  the  trenches  and  batteries  were  pushed  nearer  to 
the  fortress.     It  had  become  a  question  of  fatal  moment 


132  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

with  Massena  whether  his  stock  of  ammunition  was 
sufficient  to  carry  a  bombardment  to  its  fit  conclusion. 
So  uncertain  did  this  appear  that  a  reward  of  fifty- 
centimes  was  offered  for  every  unexploded  shell  of  the 
enemy  brought  in,  and,  thus  stimulated,  the  men  of 
the  battalion  of  coloured  sappers  from  San  Domingo 
freely  lost  their  lives  or  enriched  themselves  by  the 
reckless  way  in  which  they  tore  the  burning  fuses  from 
the  enemy's  missiles. 