

^  Bunbury,  436  j  cf.  Moore's  Diary.  There  was  great  tension  between  Sidney 
Smith  and  the  generals  5  but  with  Collingwood,  Duckworth,  and  Martin  there  was 
always  harmonious  co-operation. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  137 

the  King's  direct  representative.  At  Amantea,  just 
north  of  Maida,  he  landed  Fra  Diavolo.  The  French 
garrison  retired  on  Cosenza,  from  which  place  Verdier 
retreated  soon  afterwards.  A  royalist  local  adminis- 
tration was  at  once  formed,  and  a  military  leader  of 
some  capacity  was  selected  in  the  person  of  Mirabelli. 
From  Cosenza,  under  the  general  leadership  of  Gernaliz, 
the  masse  had  moved  north  towards  Cassano,  where 
Regnier  and  Verdier  had  effected  their  junction  on 
the  3rd  of  August.  Not  daring  to  attack  the  French 
in  the  strong  defensive  position  they  occupied,  the  bulk 
of  the  insurgents  marched  to  the  mountain  pass  leading 
down  towards  Lagonegro,  where  Damas  had  been 
defeated  a  few  weeks  earlier.  There  they  hoped  to  be 
able  to  beat  back  any  reinforcements  that  might  be  sent 
from  Naples  to  Regnier. 

The  fall  of  Gaeta  made  the  advance  of  a  consider- 
able force  probable,  and  Sidney  Smith,  to  support  the 
flank  of  the  masse,  cruised  with  a  considerable  fleet  in 
the  Gulf  of  Policastro.  On  the  14th  of  August 
the  British  Admiral  and  Fra  Diavolo  captured  Fort 
Licosa,  garrisoned  by  a  small  detachment  of  the  Corsican 
Legion.  This  was  the  last  success  of  the  Anglo- 
Sicilians.  The  tide  of  war  was  fast  turning  against 
them. 

The  vigour  and  rapidity  with  which  Massena  relieved 
his  defeated  lieutenant  was  on  a  level  with  that  which 
had  distinguished  the  French  movements  since  the 
first  invasion  of  Naples ;  on  the  1 9th  of  July  he 
entered  Gaeta,  on  the  8  th  of  August  he  had  already 
struck  a  mortal  blow  at  the  masse,  160  miles  away. 
Rapidly  collecting  all  the  troops  that  could  be 
spared,  Massena  advanced  south  from  Naples.  He 
issued   a  proclamation  on  the    31st    of  July  declaring 


138  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Calabria  in  a  state  of  siege,  placing  the  French  troops 
at  the  charge  of  the  municipalities,  confiscating  for  the 
public  service  the  property  of  the  capimassi^  announcing 
the  closing  of  every  monastery  assisting  the  royal  forces, 
and  granting  pay  to  the  municipal  guards  faithful  to 
the  French  king.  To  oppose  the  French  marshal  Pane 
di  Grano,  Gernaliz,  Carbone,  and  Mandarini  had 
collected  some  8000  or  10,000  men,  a  mixture  of 
militia,  masse^  and  brigands,  which  included  many  newly 
landed  Sicilian  convicts.  With  these  they  prepared  to 
defend  the  passes. 

As  far  as  Lagonegro  Massena  met  with  little 
opposition.  On  leaving  that  town  the  French  column 
plunged  into  the  wildest  parts  of  Calabria,  and  followed 
the  defile  that  runs  under  the  Monte  del  Papa.  Through 
the  thick  glades  might  be  heard  clanging  the  church 
bells  of  the  little  village  of  Lauria  ringing  the  alarm, 
announcing  the  approaching  fight.  For  at  this  point 
the  masse  had  decided  to  make  their  stand.  When 
the  French  arrived  in  sight  of  the  village  they  found 
the  surrounding  heights  strongly  held  ;  but  Massena 
attacked  without  a  moment's  hesitation. 