

^  There  were  numerous  changes  in  the  first  few  months  not  of  sufficient 
importance  to  be  noted.  Other  Neapolitans  who  held  ministerial  office  were  the 
Prince  of  Bisignano,  Com.  Pignatelli,  Duke  of  Cassano,  Duke  of  Campochiaro,  and 
Duke  of  Laurenzano. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  153 

above  peculation,  but  during  the  term  of  his  ministry 
at  Naples  even  refused  the  increase  of  his  salary  that 
the  King  pressed  on  him,  and  that,  in  the  estimation 
of  all  but  himself,  his  services  merited. 

The  problem  that  faced  this  capable  administrator 
was  doubly  difficult,  because  the  French  conquest  had 
brought  with  it  a  state  of  maritime  war  and  a  con- 
sequent closing  up  of  normal  trade  channels.  Exporta- 
tion of  wine  and  oil  had  fallen  to  nothing,  and  to  make 
matters  worse,  the  first  harvest  reaped  under  the  new 
Government  fetched  only  one-third  of  the  price  obtained 
in  the  preceding  year,  and  in  March  1807  Puglia  was  so 
full  of  wheat  that  it  was  practically  unsaleable.  From 
1806  to  1808  olive  oil  accumulated  to  such  an  extent 
tnat  in  the  latter  year  some  80  or  100  million  francs' 
worth  was  waiting  for  a  purchaser  that  could  not  be 
found.  In  the  meanwhile  British  merchants  looked 
for  new  sources  of  supply,  and  Sicily  profited  to  the 
extent  that  Naples  lost. 

Yet  so  great  were  the  administrative  improvements 
introduced  that  they  probably  compensated  for  the  lost 
trade,  while  the  incidence  of  taxation  was  very  greatly 
altered  in  favour  of  the  poorer  class.  Instead  of  the 
numerous  taxes  on  agriculture  and  produce,  a  single 
new  tax  was  levied,  based  on  the  taxpayers'  estimated 
revenue  from  land  and  other  sources  ;  this  was  known 
as  the  fondiaria.  For  the  purposes  of  assessing  the 
fondiaria  a  cadastral  survey  of  the  kingdom  was  pro- 
jected, which  was  soon  afterwards  commenced,  and  was 
completed  after  the  Bourbon  restoration  in  18 18.  In 
addition  to  the  fondiaria  three  principal  sources  of 
revenue  were  established,  —  the  Customs,  the  royal 
domain,  and  the  consolidated  taxes,  among  which  the 
lottery,  tobacco,  and  stamps  were  the  principal.     The 


J54  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

farming  of  the  revenue  was  stopped,  and  some  of  the 
taxes  that  had  borne  most  heavily  on  the  poor  were 
lightened,  as  for  instance  that  on  salt,  which  was 
reduced  by  5  grana  per  rotolo. 

But  finance  on  these  lines,  even  if  an  improvement 
on  the  past  and  promising  for  the  future,  was  quite 
useless  to  meet  the  crying  necessities  of  the  immediate 
present.  Ready  money  was  urgently  needed.  The 
credit  of  the  new  Government  was  not  yet  equal  to 
raising  a  loan  from  bankers,  nor  would  Napoleon  help 
his  brother  even  to  the  extent  of  paying  the  French 
troops  employed  in  the  kingdom.  Joseph  would  not 
impose  the  contribution  of  war  of  thirty  millions  the 
Emperor  constantly  urged  ;  he  had  recourse  instead  to 
a  forced  loan  of  1,200,000  ducats  (July  1806).  The 
acknowledgment  given  to  the  unwilling  creditors  of  the 
State  was  in  the  form  of  a  4  per  cent  cedola,  or  bond, 
secured  on  freehold  land  belonging  to  the  Government. 
Property  of  this  description  was  about  the  only  asset 
with  which  the  Government  was  well  furnished.  This 
v/as  largely  owing  to  the  operation  of  the  decree  against 
absent  landlords  already  noticed.  It  was,  therefore, 
further  decided  to  offer  some  of  this  property  for  sale 
in  small  holdings,  the  price  being  payable  one  quarter 
in  cash  and  three  quarters  in  cedolas.  This  tended  to 
establish  a  real  open  market  value  for  the  new  bonds. 
Cedolas  were  also  issued  in  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of 
the  farmers  of  the  arrendamenti^  whose  contracts  were 
terminated  ;  amongst  these  ecclesiastical  corporations 
figured  largely.  The  holders  of  the  cedolas  were 
registered  on  a  "  Gran  libro  de'  Creditori  dello  Stato," 
instituted  by  Roederer,  in  which  was  also  specified  the 
State  property  on  which  each  cedola  was  secured.  The 
first  debit  entry  or  specification  of  State  property  set 