

If  he  could  not  obtain  sanction  of  religion,  and  thus 
gain  the  superstitious  reverence  of  his  subjects,  Joseph 
was  yet  very  firmly  resolved  to  win  their  personal 
affection  by  conferring  on  them  improved  and  decent 
methods  of  administration. 

The  task  of  introducing  reform  at  Naples  was  one 

1  How  deep-seated  that  fear  was  can  only  be  realized  by  a  perusal  of  the  con- 
temporaries. Nowhere  is  it  more  frequently  or  more  vividly  painted  than  in 
Nicola's  Diario. 


150  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  would  have  discouraged  any  but  the  men  who  had 
breathed  the  fortifying  atmosphere  of  the  great  Revolu- 
tion. It  was  fortunate  for  Joseph  that  he  had  several 
men  attached  to  his  service  who  had  learnt  their  state- 
craft at  that  wonderful  school.  For  Joseph  was  a 
king  more  by  his  weak  points  than  his  good.  As  a 
monarch  he  took  his  pleasures  royally,  and  was  apt  to 
forget  that  as  a  man  he  ardently  believed  in  the 
beneficent  duty  of  rulers,  in  education,  progress,  and 
civil  liberty.  The  work  of  reform  was  made  possible 
by  the  goodwill  of  the  King  and  by  the  fine  abilities, 
hard  work,  and  drastic  methods  of  such  men  as  Roederer, 
Dumas,  Miot,  and  Saliceti.  The  King  himself  took  no 
small  interest  and  part  in  their  labours,  and  if  we  could 
take  his  own  statements  literally,  laboured  scarcely 
less  than  the  great  Frederick  himself  at  affairs  of 
State. 

Unfortunately  there  came  into  Naples,  alongside  of 
the  men  of  real  ability  whose  talents  were  necessary  to 
the  country,  a  swarm  of  French  officials,  military  and 
civil,  distinguished  for  little  else  than  rapacity  and 
insolence.  To  them  Naples  was  a  conquered  country 
out  of  which  a  fortune  was  to  be  made  in  the  shortest 
possible  time.  Unfortunately  the  most  conspicuous  and 
most  unscrupulous  of  them  all  was  the  great  soldier 
who  commanded  the  French  army, — Marshal  Massena. 
Notwithstanding  the  eminence  and  fame  he  had 
attained,  he  could  not  discard  the  methods  of  his 
younger  days  when  his  occupations  had  been  those 
of  the  merchant  and  the  smuggler.  With  Massena 
victories  always  resolved  into  financial  profits,  and 
of  late  years  his  private  fortune  had  been  growing  by 
leaps  and  bounds.  One  of  his  chief  sources  of  revenue 
had    been   the    granting  of  so-called    licences  whereby 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  151 

cargoes  of  English  goods  were  surreptitiously  intro- 
duced and  sold  at  ports  occupied  by  the  French  forces. 
The  immense  sums  made  by  Massena  and  his  chief  of 
staff  in  northern  Italy  had  led  to  serious  difficulties 
between  him  and  the  Emperor.^  But  Napoleon  had 
not  felt  able  to  make  an  example  of  his  ablest  lieu- 
tenant, and  the  marshal  continued  in  command  of  the 
troops  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  continued  to 
set  the  most  evil  of  all  examples  to  his  subordinates. 
Fortunately  an  honest  man,  Mathieu  Dumas,  was 
appointed  Minister  of  War  ;  it  taxed  all  his  energies 
to  keep  under  some  sort  of  control  the  robberies  and 
exactions  of  his  military  commandants. 