

Such  a  blow  did  the  end  of  this  illustrious  free- 
booter appear  to  the  Bourbon  cause  that  solemn 
obsequies  in  his  honour  and  prayers  for  the  repose 
of  his  soul  were  ordered  by  the  Court  in  the  cathedral 
of  Palermo. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  eventful  year  1806  matters 

VOL.  I  L 


146  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  1 

were  getting  more  settled  in  the  much-harried  kingdom 
of  Naples,  and  Calabria  was  so  far  pacified  that  Massena 
left  Monteleone  to  return  to  the  capital  on  the  21st 
of  December. 

It  is  now  therefore  time  to  turn  from  the  field  of 
war  to  that  of  peace,  and  to  relate  what  the  French 
civil  administrators  had  found  to  do  and  had  accom- 
plished while  the  question  of  military  supremacy  was 
being  decided. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1071  :  papers  relating  to  the  siege  of 
Gaetaj  2248  :  papers  relating  to  the  British  at  Messina  j  xxx.  41  :  pro- 
clamations and  other  papers  relating  to  Massena's  advance  into  Calabria. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  reports  on  the  state  of  the  provinces. 

Brit.  War  Off.,  Orig.  Corresp.  170  :  Stuart's  dispatches  and  other 
papers  on  operations  in  Calabria. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Mediterranean,  32  :  dispatches  and  proclamations 
of  Collingwood,  Sidney  Smith,  and  others  covering  operations  from  Messina 
to  Gaeta,  with  numerous  references  to  Fra  Diavolo. 

Printed  Books 

Annual  Register,  1806  j  Blaquiere,  Letters  from  the  Mediterranean  ^ 
BuNBURY,  Milit.  Transacts.  ,•  Cacciatore,  Esame  ,•  Calendario  delta  Corte, 
1806;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Collingwood,  Corresp.;  Courier,  Mems. ; 
Davidson,  78M  Highlanders;  Desvernois,  Mems. ;  Dumas,  Fricis 
Milit  air  e ;  Dumas,  Souvenirs ;  Duret  de  Tavel,  S^jour  en  Calabre ; 
Greco,  Annali;  Greco,  Narrazione  ;  Helfert, Konigin  Karolina  ;  Joseph, 
Corresp. ;  Lamarque,  Mems. ;  Masse'na,  Mems. ;  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir 
John  Moore;  MiOT,  Mems.;  Monitore  Napolitano ;  Vepe,  Mems.;  Roederer, 
(Eunjres ;  Savelli,  Souvenirs ;  S^gur,  Hist,  et  Mems.  ;  Ulloa,  Sollevazione. 


CHAPTER  V 

Joseph's  internal   policy 

Sentiments  of  Naples  towards  new  Government — Changed  condi- 
tions— Papal  hostility — Reform  and  its  agents — Peculation — 
Massena  —  Return  of  nobility  —  First  Ministry  —  Finance  — 
Roederer  —  Commerce  —  The  fondiaria — Other  taxes  —  Land 
registry — Farming  of  revenue — Forced  loan — Cedolas — Gran 
libro — The  Hope  loan — Regal  expenses — Pompeii — Anti-feudal 
legislation — Judicial  commissions  —  Legal  reform — Adminis- 
trative— Council  of  State — Education — Military — Suppression 
of  monastic  orders  —  Ministry  of  police  —  Saliceti  —  Mary 
Caroline's  intrigues — Plots  at  Naples — Bruno's  correspondence 
intercepted — Civic  patrols — Projected  rising  of  June  1807 — 
Police  measures — Mosca's  attempt — Peace  of  Tilsit — Sicilian 
policy  —  Acton's  fall  —  St.  Clair — Sicilian  sentiments — Mary 
Caroline  and  the  British — Eastern  affairs — Fox  declines  to  act 
in  Calabria — Hesse's  expedition — Battle  of  Mileto — Calabrian 
brigandage  —  Regnier  on  the  Strait  of  Messina  —  Treaty  of 
Tilsit,  Ionian  Islands — Gantheaume's  expedition. 