

The  unopposed  entrance  of  Joseph  Bonaparte  into  Naples 
had  been  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  a  large  part 
of  the  citizens.  The  lazzaroni  had  been  given  no  time 
to  organize  disorder  ;  the  French  had  been  given  no 
provocation  for  attacking  the  city.  Thus  the  large 
class  whose  political  affections  are,  not  unreasonably, 
more  guided  by  considerations  of  material  interest  than 
by  sentiment,  were  in  a  sense  well  disposed  towards  the 
new  sovereign  ;  but  before  the  French  prince  had  been 

147 


148  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

in  possession  many  weeks,  this  feeling  began  to  pass, 
and  was  gradually  supplanted  by  the  apprehension  lest 
a  further  revolution  should  bring  back  the  old  Court, 
and  with  it  all  the  destruction  and  horrors  that  marked 
the  restoration  of  1799.  Yet  not  a  few,  some  in- 
spired with  confidence  and  a  zeal  for  reform,  others 
eager  to  obtain  official  station  at  any  risk,  made  show 
of  actively  supporting  the  new  Government.  Among 
these  were  many  of  the  amnestied  republicans  of 
1799,  and  not  a  few  prominent  men  who  had  hitherto 
proved  faithful  Bourbonists.  Cianciulli,  one  of  the 
regents  who  had  surrendered  the  city,  promptly  de- 
cided to  accept  office  ;  the  Duke  di  Gallo  threw  in 
his  lot  with  the  conquerors  before  even  the  frontier 
was  crossed  ;  many  other  prominent  men  followed  this 
example. 

There  were  many  reasons  why  the  French  conquest 
should  be  more  willingly  and  more  hopefully  accepted 
in  1806  than  it  had  been  in  1799.  The  mihtary 
i  prestige  of  the  young  Empire  was  even  greater  than 
^^  that  of  the  First  Republic  ;  its  ideals  of  civil  govern- 
ment appeared  to  avoid  the  extremes  both  of  democracy 
and  of  autocracy ;  last  and  perhaps  most  important  of  all 
to  the  inhabitants  of  a  country  so  firmly  attached  to 
Catholicism  as  Naples,  France  had  officially  been  con- 
verted back  from  atheism  to  her  ancient  faith,  so 
that  the  opposition  of  the  clerical  element  was  now  far 
less  unanimous,  far  less  envenomed  than  formerly. 
Since  1799  Bourbonism  had  displayed  its  most  revolting 
colours  ;  Bonapartism  had  shown  youthful  vigour  and 
healthy,  constructive  energy.  Can  it  be  wonderecTthat 
a  great  part  of  the  aristocracy  and  thinking  class  of 
Naples  showed  a  disposition  to  accept  the  new  order, — 
a '  disposition  tempered  only  by  a  fear  of  the  terrible 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  149 

consequences  that  might  attend  the  return  of  Ferdinand 
and  Mary  Caroline  ?  ^ 

Yet  even  under  these  circumstances  Joseph's  re- 
ception as  he  made  his  solemn  entry  into  the  city 
on  assuming  the  royal  dignity  astonished  his  friends. 
But  at  the  ceremonial  service  celebrated  at  the 
Church  of  the  Spirito  Santo,  the  clergy  showed  less 
enthusiasm  ;  Cardinal  Ruffo,  Archbishop  of  Naples, 
who  had  been  prevailed  on  to  officiate,  went  so  far 
indeed  as  to  omit  pointedly  all  mention  of  the  new 
king.  The  Cardinal's  omission  was  but  a  poor  re- 
compense for  the  magnificent  collar  of  diamonds  which 
Joseph  had  already  offered  at  the  shrine  of  S.  Gennaro, 
but  he  only  conformed  to  the  Pope's  opinion,  which 
was  that  the  new  King  of  Naples  was  no  king  at  all, 
but  merely  an  usurper.  This  attitude  of  the  higher 
clergy  and  of  Pius  VII.  towards  Joseph  was  one  of  the 
causes  that  led  to  the  quarrel  between  Napoleon  and 
the  Papacy,  a  quarrel  of  which  other  phases  will  be 
noticed  later  ;  suffice  it  to  say  for  the  present  that  the 
Emperor's  energetic  remonstrances  at  Rome  had  no 
effect  in  shaking  Pius,  who  clung  obstinately  to  his 
opinion,  and  therefore  Joseph  had  to  remain  an  un- 
consecrated  monarch, — a  very  serious  defect  in  his  title 
in  the  eyes  of  all  true  Neapolitans. 