

At  the  beginning  of  the  engagement  one  of  those 
incidents  that  so  often  occur  when  regular  and  irregular 
troops  are  opposed,  and  that  are  sometimes  properly 
described  as  treachery,  happened,  by  which  the  Corsican 
Legion  was  caught  in  a  trap  and  suffered  heavily.  The 
loss  was  avenged.  Massena  manoeuvred  skilfully,  and 
eventually  cut  off  a  large  number  of  the  enemy  in  the 
village  ;  Gardanne  stormed  Lauria  at  the  point  of  the 
bayonet  ;  the  desperate  defenders  kept  up  the  struggle 
street  by  street,  house  by  house  ;  no  quarter  was  given  ; 
fire  and  massacre  completed  the  work  of  destruction. 
Of  a  town  of  7000  people  nothing  but  ruins  remained  ; 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  139 

the  population,  men,  women,  and  children,  perished  in 
the  flames. 

Lauria  was  nearly  as  decisive  as  Campotanese. 
Massena  followed  up  his  advantage  swiftly,  shooting 
and  hanging  such  armed  men  as  fell  in  his  hands, — in 
one  week  no  less  than  600.  He  successfully  effected 
his  junction  with  Regnier  and  entered  Cosenza  with 
about  1 8,000  men  on  the  14th  of  August,  Pane  di  Grano 
abandoning  the  city  an  hour  previously.^  The  masse 
retreated  southwards,  Regnier  being  at  once  sent  on 
after  them,  but  a  stand  that  Gernaliz  attempted  to  make 
just  south  of  Cosenza  came  to  nothing,  and  he  lost  his 
life,  assassinated  by  one  of  his  own  men.  Massena, 
seeing  the  collapse  of  armed  resistance  and  judging  that 
his  ruthless  march  had  struck  terror  in  the  hearts  of 
the  Calabrese,  decided  to  adopt  milder  courses  and  to 
put  into  effect  instructions  he  had  received  from  the 
King.  On  the  17th  of  August  he  issued  orders  to  his 
generals  to  abstain  from  burning  villages. 

But  the  evil  was  too  deep-seated,  the  country  too 
harried,  the  people  too  imbittered,  feuds  had  been 
carried  too  far  ;  for  many  weeks  Calabria  remained 
unpacified  and  was  swept  by  a  wave  of  reckless  ferocity 
of  which  the  details  must  not  be  dwelt  on.  Yet  the 
duty  of  the  chronicler  cannot  be  altogether  evaded,  and 
one  of  many  similar  incidents  that  will  paint  the  miser- 
able state  of  the  country  must  be  selected  and  presented 
to  the  reader. 

At  the  little  village  of  Acri,  in  the  Sila,  the  retreat 
of  the  French  after  Maida  was  the  signal  for  a  royalist 
revolution.     A  small  number  of  the  inhabitants,  some 


1  Joseph,  Corr.  iii.  149;  Dumas,  Precis,  xv.  171;  Massena,  v.  262.  The  dis- 
crepancy in  the  totals  given  by  these  authorities  probably  arises  from  including  or 
excluding  Regnier's  force. 


140  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

twenty  in  all,  had  sided  with  the  French,  that  is  to  say, 
they  had  accepted  at  the  hand  of  the  conquerors 
various  village  functions  from  which  their  neighbours 
had  been  ousted.  On  the  15  th  of  August,  a  sacred 
and  auspicious  day,  the  mob,  headed  by  a  man  named 
Spaccapitta,  deposed  the  French  office-holders.  The 
people  naturally  attributed  their  success  not  so  much 
to  their  overwhelming  numbers  as  to  Mary  the  mother 
of  God,  and  fitly  to  celebrate  their  victory  and  her 
intercession  slowly  roasted  their  prisoners  alive  in  the 
public  square.  Spaccapitta  showed  himself  a  worthy 
leader  of  a  worthy  people  by  producing  a  piece  of  bread 
from  his  pocket  which  he  plastered  from  the  dissolving 
body  of  one  of  his  victims  and  ate.  Acri  suffered 
further  vicissitudes,  but  was  finally  reoccupied  either  by 
a  detachment  of  French  troops  or  of  national  guards 
from  Cosenza,  and  Spaccapitta,  with  two  other  ring- 
leaders, suffered  the  talion's  law  and  were,  according 
to  one  account,  burned,  to  another  impaled.^ 