

But  the  heart  sickens  at  such  details,  and  after 
repeating  that  the  incident  at  Acri  was  only  typical  of 
what  was  occurring  at  many  points  in  Calabria,  the 
operations  of  the  French  may  once  more  be  followed. 
They  were  now  to  meet  with  but  few  obstacles.  The 
masse  were  hopelessly  broken.  Sir  John  Stuart  had 
long  since  withdrawn  his  troops  to  Messina,  leaving 
behind  only  a  small  garrison  at  Scilla.  The  principal 
chiefs  of  the  masse,  with  the  exception  of  Pane  di 
Grano  and  Papasodero,  fled  to  Sicily.  On  the  ist  of 
September  Lamarque,  with   a  flying  column,   inflicted 

1  Greco,  Annali^  126,  129,  155.  Greco,  De  Angelis,  Courier,  and  other  authori- 
ties furnish  considerably  more  matter  of  the  same  sort.  The  impaling  incident  at 
Lagonegro,  which  Colletta  states  he  witnessed,  can  hardly  be  accepted  without 
corroboration.  A  particularly  dramatic  anecdote  is  that  recorded  by  Lamarque, 
ii.  142. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA   141 

severe  losses  on  the  masse  under  Guariglia  at  Camma- 
rata.  A  few  days  later  Massena,  who  had  declined 
overtures  made  by  the  Duke  of  Floridia,  now  in  com- 
mand for  King  Ferdinand,  entered  Monteleone.  In 
this  town,  the  capital  of  lower  Calabria,  the  French  were 
hailed  as  deliverers,  the  inhabitants  having  long  been 
noted  for  their  liberal  and  anti-Bourbon  sentiments. 

Here  the  campaign  may  be  said  to  have  ended. 
But  all  through  the  autumn  and  winter  a  fierce 
partisan  warfare  was  carried  on  in  Calabria ;  the 
small  bodies  of  masse  were  constantly  dispersed  and 
beaten,  and  were  as  constantly  renewed  by  fresh  drafts 
of  volunteers  and  of  enlisted  convicts  shipped  over 
from  Sicily.  Occasionally  considerable  bodies  of  the 
latter  would  surrender  at  the  first  summons,  and  the 
French  commanders  sent  large  batches  of  them  to 
Naples.  By  the  middle  of  September  no  less  than 
10,000  prisoners  of  this  description  were  in  the  capital. 
The  special  military  tribunals  or  courts-martial  estab- 
lished by  Massena  at  Cosenza  constantly  replenished 
their  numbers  and  assembled  many  firing  parties, 
exercising  a  terror  that  was  perhaps  salutary. 

This  narrative  of  the  conquest  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  by  the  French  cannot  be  completed  without 
giving  some  account  of  two  detached  incidents  of  minor 
importance  :  the  prolonged  defence  made  by  the  little 
town  of  Amantea  and  the  last  expedition  of  Fra 
Diavolo. 

On  the  approach  of  Massena,  De  Michele  abandoned 
Cosenza  and  retired  to  Fiumefreddo,  whence  he 
continued  to  issue  proclamations  and  carry  on  his 
duties  as  Preside.  He  was  now  at  the  central  spot  of 
the  remarkable  line  of  coast  that  stretches  for  some 
100  miles  from  the  Gulf  of  Policastro  to  the  Gulf  of 