


142  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

S.  Eufemia  in  one  nearly  unbroken  line  of  cliffs.  Here 
the  mountains  descend  sheer  into  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
broken  here  and  there  by  wild,  precipitous  ravines. 
Towns  and  villages  are  occasionally  concealed  in  the 
depths  of  the  mountains,  occasionally  perched  on  some 
commanding  and  inaccessible  rock.  Communication 
from  north  to  south  is  practically  impossible  save  by 
sea  ;  towards  the  west  a  few  difficult  mountain  tracks 
lead  to  Cosenza  and  the  valley  of  the  Crati. 

De  Michele  controlled  the  coast,  for  the  British  cruisers 
kept  the  sea  free.  He  promptly  inaugurated  a  royalist 
reign  of  terror  along  the  whole  coast-line  ;  Longobardi,^ 
suspected  of  French  sympathies,  was  sacked,  its  popula- 
tion was  destroyed,  and  many  other  scenes  of  horror 
and  outrage  followed. 

Of  the  numerous  villages  and  towns  dotted  along 
this  coast  the  two  most  important  were  Maratea,  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Gulf  of  Policastro,  and  Amantea,  just  to 
the  north  of  the  Gulf  of  S.  Eufemia ;  both  were  strongly 
placed  and  fairly  well  fortified,  and  the  French  detached 
strong  columns  to  reduce  them  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.  In  the  middle  of  September  Verdier  marched 
from  Cosenza  to  attack  Amantea  ;  his  force  was  small, 
his  supplies  scanty.  Mirabelli  showed  a  bold  front,  the 
French  assault  failed,  and  Verdier  retreated.  So  over- 
joyed were  the  Sicilian  troops  and  masse  at  their  victory 
that  they  immediately  started  shooting  the  inhabitants 
and  sacking  the  town  they  were  charged  to  protect. 
Verdier's  retreat  through  the  mountains  was  harassed 
by  the  ferocious  Parafante  at  the  head  of  3000  masse. 
For  nearly  three  months  more  it  was  thought  im- 
possible to  attempt  the  capture  of  Amantea  ;  finally,  on 

^  Immediately  south  of  Fiumefreddo,  not  the  village  of  the  same  name  between 
Monteleone  and  Pizzo. 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  143 

the  4th  of  December,  Verdier  started  from  Cosenza 
again,  this  time  with  four  battalions  and  four  guns. 
Once  more  Mirabelli  successfully  repelled  the  French 
attack  and  forced  Verdier  to  retreat.  He  was  pursued 
by  the  masse  to  the  very  gates  of  Cosenza. 

The  situation  was  becoming  humiliating  if  not 
dangerous  for  the  French.  The  fortifications  of 
Amantea  were  growing  formidable,  and  now  mounted 
ten  guns  ;  the  garrison  was  flushed  with  success  and 
replenished  from  Sicily  ;  stores  and  munitions  had  been 
thrown  in  by  sea.  It  was  decided  that  a  formal  siege 
must  be  undertaken,  and  reinforcements  were  hurried 
back  from  Monteleone. 

The  third  attack  on  Amantea  began  on  the  3rd  of 
January  1807.  Regnier  himself  reconnoitred  the  town, 
and  the  attacking  force  consisted  of  four  battalions  of 
French  troops,  2000  Calabrese  national  guards  newly 
recruited  at  Cosenza,  with  several  guns  and  howitzers. 
The  operations  took  the  form  of  a  regular  siege, 
by  trenches  and  breaching  batteries,  and  the  town 
was  cut  off  from  the  sea  by  a  few  v/ell-placed  guns. 
The  first  trench  was  quickly  opened  within  too 
yards  of  the  wall,  and  on  the  14th  of  January  a 
storming  column  was  sent  to  the  attack.  After 
furious  fighting  and  heavy  losses  it  was  driven  back. 
Nothing  daunted,  the  French  went  to  work  again  with 
pick  and  shovel,  dragged  their  guns  up  closer,  and  on 
the  30th  of  January  opened  fire  anew.  Six  days  of 
constant  pounding  opened  a  gaping  hole  in  the  walls 
of  Amantea,  and  after  exploding  a  heavy  mine,  once 
more  a  column  was  sent  to  the  assault  ;  this  time 
the  French  succeeded  in  effecting  a  lodgment.  But 
Mirabelli,  while  the  French  bombarded,  had  been 
building  up  a  second  line  of  defence  and  had  closed  up 