


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  155 

aside  for  the  creditors  in  the  year  1806  represented 
an  official  valuation  of  10,000,000  ducats. 

For  many  months  the  financial  struggle  was  severe, 
but  the  position  slowly  improved,  and  in  the  early 
part  of  1807  Napoleon  was  at  length  persuaded  to 
come  to  his  brother's  assistance,  in  the  first  instance  by 
granting  him  a  personal  allowance  of  half  a  million 
francs  a  month.  Towards  the  middle  of  1807  the 
finances  of  the  new  Government  were  beginning  to 
present  a  satisfactory  aspect,  and  as  at  this  precise 
moment  a  state  of  peace  had  been  re-established  on  the 
Continent  it  became  at  last  possible  to  negotiate  a  loan. 
This,  curiously  enough,  was  obtained,  after  roundabout 
negotiations  through  Lisbon  and  Amsterdam,  from 
the  well-known  Anglo-Dutch  house  of  Hope.  The 
nominal  amount  of  the  loan  was  3,000,000  florins.-^ 

Notwithstanding  Roederer's  efforts  Joseph  com- 
plained that  he  had  never  been  so  poor  ;  he  would  have 
been  more  correct  had  he  said  that  he  had  never  had 
so  much  to  spend.  His  regal  state  rivalled  and  even 
outshone  that  of  the  Bourbons.  At  the  palace  he 
employed  no  less  than  800  servants  at  salaries  of  twelve 
ducats  a  month  or  less,  and  his  Court  was  proportion- 
ately large  and  expensive.  Twenty-one  generals  and 
colonels  received  gifts  representing  annual  incomes  of 
from  2000  to  10,000  ducats,  while  the  ladies  of  his 
court,  both  married  and  unmarried,  had  no  ground  to 
complain  of  lack  of  attention  or  of  lack  of  generosity. 
Madame  de  Blaniac  and  Mile.  Miot  each  received 
dotations  of  nearly  6000  ducats  a  year,  and  the 
capitalized  value   of  such  gifts  rose  to  a   grand    total 

^  A  lengthy  file  of  documents,  covering  the  negotiations  with  the  inter- 
mediaries employed  by  the  Hopes,  may  be  consulted  in  the  Neapolitan  Archi'ves, 
XXX.  224. 


156  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  over  2,000,000  ducats.     It  was  not  remarkable  that 
recourse  to  the  Hopes  had  been  necessary. 

Joseph  rewarded  those  Neapolitan  noblemen  who 
paid  him  their  court  no  less  than  his  French  officers. 
He  instituted  an  order  of  knighthood,  of  the  Two 
Sicilies,  the  star  of  which  bore  the  legend  ''  Renovata 
patria."  He  coined  money  also  as  king  of  the  Two 
Sicilies  ;  Ferdinand  at  Palermo,  with  rather  more  justi- 
fication, doing  the  same.  In  general  he  displayed  a 
pomp  and  luxury  that  conciliated  some  men,  indisposed 
others,  but  did  not  succeed  in  making  his  awkward 
figure  and  affected  manner  kingly,  or  even  in  imposing 
on  the  keen  perceptions  of  the  populace.  Yet  the 
contrast  between  the  old  court  and  the  new  was  not 
altogether  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  latter.  Fashions 
had  changed  as  well  as  men  during  the  great  upheaval 
of  the  last  twenty  years.  Ruffles  and  lace,  flounces 
and  true  lovers'  knots,  hoops  and  rigid  corsets,  com- 
plicated head-dresses  and  delicate  Watteau  tints,  had 
disappeared  with  the  great  ladies  they  had  adorned. 
The  son  of  a  lawyer  and  the  daughter  of  a  merchant 
now  sat  on  the  throne  of  Naples, — and  how  changed 
was  the  scene  in  the  apartments  of  the  Royal  Palace  ! 
Women  dressed  in  too  low-cut  and  too  clinging  draperies 
of  classic  form  and  unrelieved  colour,  their  ornaments 
suggestive  of  the  buried  cities  of  the  Campagna  that 
so  dearly  interested  the  King,  their  looks  alternately 
bold  and  languishing,  and  as  a  background  the  straight 
lines  of  mural  decoration  and  rigid  furniture,  the 
brilliant  and  often  extravagant  uniforms  of  soldiers, 
bold  men  and  loud-voiced,  barrack -room  parvenus, 
but  brave  and  efficient  on  the  battlefield.  Perhaps  the 
atmosphere  suggested  vulgarity  and  pushful  struggle, 
yet  the  Court  centred  about  a  sovereign  whose  fore- 