


144  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  gorge  of  the  threatened  bastion.  No  sooner  had 
the  storming  party  gained  the  breach  than  he  poured 
down  a  heavy  fire  on  them  from  this  inner  wall,  and 
finally  drove  them  back  beaten. 

The  besiegers  had  now  lost  800  killed  and  wounded, 
and  it  proved  fortunate  for  them  that  Mirabelli  had 
exhausted  his  provisions.  He  offered  to  surrender,  and 
received  honourable  terms,  Verdier  occupying  the  town 
on  the  6  th  of  February. 

Since  the  end  of  November  the  other  districts  of 
Calabria  had  been  rapidly  pacified,  and  the  French 
were  now  able  to  concentrate  more  men  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Cosenza.  Several  attempts  were  made 
by  flying  columns  to  surprise  and  capture  De  Michele. 
Finally  he  was  taken  at  Fiumefreddo  on  the  21st  of 
January  ;  he  was  promptly  passed  before  a  drum-head 
court-martial  and  shot. 

While  these  events  proceeded  in  Calabria,  the  rest 
of  the  kingdom  had  been  suffering  nearly  as  severely 
from  rapine  and  disorder,  and  no  part  more  than  that 
stretching  from  Gaeta  through  the  mountains  of  the 
Abruzzi  to  the  Adriatic.  It  was  in  the  heart  of  this 
country,  the  scene  of  his  boyhood,  that  the  spell  was  at 
last  to  be  broken  that  had  earned  Fra  Diavolo  his  name. 

After  his  co-operation  with  Sidney  Smith  at  Point 
Licosa,  he  had  been  conveyed  to  Sperlunga,  near  Gaeta, 
where  his  band  was  disembarked.  From  that  point  he 
executed  several  successful  raids,  notably  at  Terracina, 
and  quickly  increased  his  following  and  resources.  At 
Itri  he  faced  a  French  flying  column  sent  to  put  an 
end  to  his  proceedings  ;  after  a  desperate  fight,  in 
which  he  lost  160  men,  he  was  defeated.  He  then 
pushed  further  towards  the  Abruzzi,  sacking,  burning, 
and    murdering.      The    whole    country  was   now  up  ; 


CHAP.  IV  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  CALABRIA  145 

brigandage  and  disorder  became  so  prevalent  that  a 
band  of  100  men  showed  themselves  as  near  Naples 
as  Caserta. 

By  the  middle  of  September  Fra  Diavolo  had  made 
his  way  to  the  little  town  of  Sora,  in  the  heart  of  the 
Abruzzi,  where  he  effected  his  junction  with  Sciablone, 
who  had  long  harried  those  parts,  and  mustered  an 
imposing  force  of  2000  men  with  five  guns.  But 
several  French  columns  under  General  Despagne  were 
now  converging  on  the  brigand  chief,  and  he  was 
compelled  to  make  a  stand.  The  French  took  Sora 
by  storm,  the  masse  were  routed,  Fra  Diavolo  himself 
was  severely  wounded.  He  managed,  however,  to 
escape  capture.  With  wonderful  endurance  and  re- 
source he  slipped  away  from  village  to  village,  and 
finally  reached  the  town  of  Avellino,  to  the  south  of 
Naples.  Near  this  place,  in  the  lofty  and  picturesque 
monastery  of  Monte  Vergine,  he  found  shelter.  But 
his  secret  was  soon  betrayed  ;  he  was  arrested  and 
taken  to  Naples.  A  cartel  was  sent  in  from  the  vessels 
cruising  about  the  bay  claiming  him  as  a  superior 
officer  of  the  Sicilian  army  and  proposing  his  exchange. 
But  where  no  mercy  had  been  shown  to  Rodio,  none 
could  be  expected  for  Fra  Diavolo.  He  was  brought 
before  a  court-martial,  and  on  the  9th  day  of 
November  was  shot  before  a  great  concourse  of  the 
lazzaroni  on  the  Piazza  del  Mercato. 