

One  of  the  first  objects  of  the  new  Government  was 
to  rally  to  its  support  the  nobility  of  the  kingdom, 
and  a  ready  means  of  securing  their  acquiescence,  if  not 
their  sympathy,  was  quickly  found.  Many  members 
of  the  aristocracy  had  followed  Ferdinand  in  his  flight 
to  Sicily,  but  a  decree  confiscating  the  landed  property 
of  all  absent  proprietors  soon  had  the  effect  of  bringing 
the  exiles  to  terms  and  of  thinning  the  ranks  of  the 
Court  circle  at  Palermo.  The  return  of  many  mem- 
bers of  the  aristocracy  to  Naples  helped  to  restore  its 
normal  appearance  to  the  capital.  There  had  in  fact 
been  little  break,  for  the  administrative  departments 
of  the  Government  had  continued  active,  and  it  was 
speedily  announced  that  although  reforms  were  to  be 
effected  no  sudden  change  would  be  introduced. 

The  names  of  the  King's  principal  French  advisers 
have  already  been  given,  and  will  soon  and  frequently 
recur  ;  they  were  helped  by  Neapolitans  from  the 
beginning,    and    Joseph's    first    ministry    included    the 

^  Amusing  accounts  of  how  Massena  was  made  to  disgorge  his  millions  may  be 
read  in  Lamarque  and  Marbot. 


152  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Duke  di  Gallo,  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the 
Marquis  Cianciulli,  and  afterwards  Count  Ricciardi, 
Ministers  of  Justice.^ 

The  first  and  most  pressing  question  that  King 
Joseph's  Ministers  were  called  on  to  solve  was  that  of 
finance.  Neapolitan  credit  was  bad  enough  before 
the  war  ;  it  had  now  fallen  to  vanishing  point.  Gold 
was  not  to  be  found.  The  invaders  were  penniless,  and 
Napoleon  expected  the  conquest  of  Naples  to  earn 
money.  All  available  gold  and  silver  had  been  removed 
when  Mary  Caroline  left  the  capital,  and  the  English 
merchandise,  which  the  French  hoped  to  seize,  had 
all  been  safely  disposed  of  before  their  arrival.  Yet 
it  was  imperative  to  find  immediately  3^  millions 
of  francs  monthly  for  military  expenditure  alone. 
Joseph  pleaded  hard  for  assistance  from  his  brother, 
but  met  with  an  unwavering  negative  for  more  than 
a  year.  There  was  only  one  thing  Napoleon  would 
give  him,  and  that  was  advice.  He  repeatedly  enjoined 
on  him  to  levy  a  war  contribution  of  30,000,000  francs 
on  Naples  ;  but  Joseph,  w^hose  disposition  was  all  for 
milder  and  more  popular  courses,  could  not  bring 
himself  to  such  heroic  remedies.  He  called  to  his  aid 
instead  his  intimate  friend  of  republican  days,  the 
publicist  Roederer,  who  became  Minister  of  Finance 
in  November  1806.  He  was  eminently  the  man  for 
the  task,  for  though  lacking  the  polish  of  manner 
necessary  for  the  pursuit  of  diplomacy,  he  had  the 
strong  intelligence,  inflexible  rectitude,  ability  in 
administrative  and  drafting  work  that  go  to  the 
making    of  a    practical    financier.     He  was    not  only 