

With  the  kingdom  in  such  a  state  of  criminal, 
pohjdcal,  and  military  disorder  as  it  was  during  the 
period  immediatdyToIIowing  the"  invasion,  it  was  found 
necessary  to  have  recourse  to  extraordinary  and  summary 
judicial  processes.  Alongside  of  the  courts -martial, 
four  exceptional  judicial  commissions  were  constituted. 
In  four  months  they  disposed  of  5000  prisoners.  In 
August  1806  these  commissions  were  converted  into 
regular    tribunals  dealing  with  matters  of  brigandage. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  159 

high  police,  and  treason.  In  the  meanwhile  prepara- 
tions were  being  made  for  codifying  Neapolitan  law 
on  the  model  of  the  Code  Napoleon.  The  Emperor 
repeatedly  urged  on  his  brother  the  introduction  of 
the  imperial  legislation,  and  the  chief  features  of  the 
French  system  were  gradually  brought  in.  Trial  by 
jury  was  not  established,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
it  would  have  been  politic  to  do  so.  A  great  step 
forward,  however,  was  marked  by  the  introduction  of 
publicity  of  debates,  and  the  people  of  Naples  quickly 
availed  themselves  of  this  beneficial  innovation  by 
thronging  the  courts  of  justice.  So  great  was  the 
popular  impression  made  by  this  reform  that  a 
contemporary  historian  of  Naples  remarked  of  it  : 
"  The  law  which  .  .  .  had  been  only  an  instrument 
to  preserve  tranquillity  .  .  .  became  for  the  future 
an  instrument  of  political  rights."  -^ 

Matters  of  administration  as  of  law  were  recast  on 
the  French  model.  The  ancient  territorial  divisions 
of  the  kingdom  were  reframed.  The  Universita  were 
given  a  local  government  body  of  ten  to  thirty  land- 
holders styled  decurionato^  who  elected  their  syndic  and 
sent  a  representative  to  a  provincial  council.  The 
syndic  was  checked  by  the  sotto  intendente  of  each 
district,  and  he  in  turn  by  the  intendente  of  the  province, 
who  depended  directly  on  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
and  whose  functions  might  be  described  as  including 
matters  of  administration,  of  taxation,  and  of  high 
police.  The  municipal  and  provincial  councils  of 
landowners  were  merely  consultative,  and  as  they  were 
for  the  most  part  made  up  of  men  who  were  partisans 
of  the  Government  and  unversed  in  matters  of  adminis- 
tration,   they    did    little    to    modify    the    rule    of    the 

■^  CoUetta,  Storia,  ii.  65, 


i6o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Minister  of  the  Interior  and  the  hierarchy  of  Govern- 
ment functionaries.  A  hasty  judgment  might  indeed 
lead  to  the  opinion  that  the  whole  system  was  little 
more  than  a  sham, — a  tax-collecting  and  administrative 
machine  ostentatiously  swathed  in  popular  and  repre- 
sentative forms.  Yet  this  judgment  would  be  more 
rightly  applied  to  the  system  as  exemplified  in  France 
under  the  Empire  than  in  Naples  under  the  French 
kings.  For  in  France  the  centralized  bureaucracy  of 
Napoleon  was  a  retrogression,  but  on  the  contrary  in 
Naples  the  system  introduced  by  Joseph  Bonaparte 
was  a  great  political  advance.  In  the  opinion  of  many 
educated  and  liberal  Neapolitans  it  was  quite  as  great 
an  advance  as  the  country  was  ready  for.  And  it 
might  further  be  pointed  out  that  these  reforms  were 
sincerely  intended  as  steps  towards  a  more  liberal 
and  better  system  of  government  by  Roederer,  by 
the  King,  and  especially  by  such  Neapolitan  adminis- 
trators as  Zurlo,  Ricciardi,  and  Winspeare.^  Another 
step  forward  was  marked  in  the  formation  of  a  Council 
of  State  of  thirty-six  members,  whose  functions  were 
to  debate  and  consult  on  every  measure. 