

^  Doubts  have  been  thrown  on  the  reality  of  Mosca's  attempt,  but  there  is 
nothing  in  the  evidence  given  at  the  trial  that  appears  at  all  improbable.  As 
nothing  definite  has  ever  been  put  forw^ard  to  rebut  that  evidence  one  must  accept  it, 
though  guardedly.  In  the  account  here  given,  the  official  report  has  been  generally 
followed.     See  Saliceti,  Rapporto  ,•  Nicola,  Diario  ,•  Joseph,  Corr. 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  169 

was  more  to  preserve  Sicily  than  to  reconquer  Naples, 
and  to  secure  that  end  he  was  prepared  to  place  his 
conduct  completely  under  British  guidance.  The  Queen, 
at  first  unduly  depressed,  soon  recovered  spirits  and 
influence  ;  she  turned  openly  against  her  old  friend 
Acton,  established  the  amiable  St.  Clair  as  her  declared 
favourite,  showed  her  dislike  to  the  British,  and  to 
Elliot  in  particular,  more  plainly  than  before,  and 
entered  on  a  course  of  which  some  of  the  results  in 
Calabria  have  already  been  noted.  Before  the  end  of 
1806  Ferdinand  had  virtually  resigned  the  direction  of 
affairs  once  more  to  his  wife,  and  Acton  was  honourably 
sent  into  retirement.  But  the  Queen's  policy  remained 
largely  a  personal  one  ;  St.  Clair,  who  was  no  politician, 
counted  for  nothing. 

Among  the  Sicilians  were  several  parties,  but  none 
favourable  to  the  Queen.  A  few  hoped  for  a  French 
invasion  ;  others  derived  British  sympathies  from  the 
increased  trade  and  prosperity  of  the  island  ;  others 
again  dreamed  of  Sicilian  progress  and  constitutional 
autonomy  ;  only  the  band  of  pensioned  Neapolitans 
and  of  salaried  spies  supported  the  policy  of  blind 
vindictiveness  pursued  by  the  Queen. 

The  British  generals  without  exception,  —  Craig, 
Stuart,  Fox,  and  Moore, — detested  the  Queen  and  her 
policy.  They  had  witnessed  the  horrors  committed  by 
the  masse  in  Calabria,  and  preferred  leaving  the  British 
arms  unstained  by  association  with  them  to  attempting 
military  operations  with  their  help.  After  Stuart's 
return  to  Messina  he  had  been  superseded  by  Fox,  and 
the  latter  was  soon  after  succeeded  by  his  second  in 
command,  Sir  John  Moore.  The  British  troops  were 
largely  reinforced,  and  for  a  time  it  looked  as  though 
the  British  Cabinet  meditated  a  strong  military  diversion 


170  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

against  Napoleon  in  Italy.  Russia  urged  this  course, 
and  the  failure  to  effect  this  diversion  was  eventually 
put  forward  by  Russia  as  an  excuse  for  the  signing  of 
a  separate  peace  with  France  at  Tilsit. 

But  the  thought  of  offensive  action  in  Italy,  for  a 
moment  flattered  by  the  brilliant  stroke  at  Maida,  soon 
gave  way  to  more  pressing  considerations.  Danger 
now  threatened  England  at  a  point  much  closer  to 
Egypt.  By  a  great  diplomatic  victory  Napoleon  had 
succeeded  in  detaching  Turkey  from  the  ranks  of  his 
enemies.  British  influence  no  longer  predominated  at 
Constantinople  ;  the  communications  of  Russia  with 
the  Mediterranean  were  cut  off,  and  England  viewed 
with  misgiving  a  change  in  the  political  arrangements  in 
the  East,  of  which  the  next  development  might  prove 
of  an  even  more  threatening  nature.  The  Cabinet 
resolved  to  attack  the  Turk  vigorously  by  sea  and  land, 
and  to  make  sure  of  the  possession  of  Egypt.  Admiral 
Duckworth  was  sent  to  bombard  Constantinople,  and 
Moore  received  orders  to  detach  5000  men  from 
Messina  for  the  capture  of  Alexandria  (November  1 806). 