

Regnier  followed  up  his  success  at  Mileto  by 
establishing  himself  firmly  on  the  Strait  of  Messina. 
In  January  1808  he  besieged  the  Sicilian  garrison  at 
Reggio  and  the  British  at  Scilla,  and  soon  captured 
these  posts.  By  the  middle  of  February  1808  every- 
thing was  at  last  ready  for  the  long-deferred  invasion 
of  Sicily  ;  the  French  general  could  dispose  of  9000  or 
10,000  men  on  the  strait,  and  as  many  more  could 
be  moved  up  from  Naples  on  short  notice.  At  this 
moment  a  difference  of  opinion  between  the  King  and 
Regnier  led  that  general  to  leave  his  command,  in  which 
he  was  replaced  by  General  Cavaignac. 

The  treaty  of  Tilsit  between  Russia  and  France, 
signed  on  the  7th  of  July  1807,  ^^^  profoundly 
modified  the  European  situation,  and  had  enabled 
Napoleon  to  turn  from  the  contests  of  the  North 
towards  his  cherished  schemes  for  securing  supremacy 
in  the  Mediterranean.  By  the  terms  of  that  treaty, 
terms  that  were  intended  to  be  kept  secret,  the  Ionian 
islands  were  abandoned  to  Napoleon  by  the  Czar  ;  the 
French  Emperor  lost  no  time  in  securing  this  new 
stepping-stone  towards  the  East.     Troops  were  at  once 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  173 

dispatched  from  Taranto  and  Brindisi  to  occupy  Corfu 
and  other  Islands.  Large  shipments  of  food-stuffs  were 
sent  over  as  the  wind  favoured  escape  from  the  British 
cruisers,  and  in  November  an  officer  in  whom  the 
Emperor  placed  great  reliance,  General  Donzelot,  took 
command  at  Corfu  after  narrowly  escaping  being  captured 
by  an  English  frigate. 

But  the  provisioning  and  supplying  of  Corfu  from 
the  ports  of  Puglia  was  a  slow  and  expensive  process, 
and  Napoleon  determined  to  mark  his  occupation  of 
this  new  possession  by  a  considerable  naval  operation. 
A  plan  that  Napoleon  had  prepared  a  year  before,  and 
that  CoUingwood  had  always  foreseen  and  feared,  was 
now  slightly  modified  and  put  into  execution. 

Early  in  January  1808  the  Emperor  decided  that 
the  Rochefort  fleet  should  sail  around  into  the  Medi- 
terranean, operate  its  junction  with  the  Toulon  fleet, 
and  proceed  to  Naples.  There  9000  men  were  to  be 
embarked  under  Marshal  Jourdan,  and  this  force  co- 
operating with  Regnier's  was  to  effect  the  crossing  of 
the  Strait  of  Messina.  The  naval  part  of  this  pro- 
gramme was  dangerous,  but  by  no  means  impossible, 
as  was  soon  proved.  From  a  military  point  of  view 
the  time  was  well  chosen,  as  a  large  reduction  in  the 
British  forces  at  Messina  had  just  been  made,  Sir 
John  Moore  having  been  ordered  to  Gibraltar  with 
some  8000  men.  But  the  Emperor  was  at  heart  more 
anxious  about  the  Ionian  islands  and  Turkey  than  he 
was  about  Sicily,  and  it  was  not  to  Naples  but  to  Corfu 
that  he  finally  ordered  his  fleet.^ 