

Just  at  the  time  when  the  British  army  in  Sicily  was 
thus  reduced  Mary  Caroline  began  meditating  the  plan 
for  the  recovery  of  the  kingdom,  of  which  the  projected 
insurrection  of  Naples  and  the  assassination  of  King 
Joseph  were  parts.  She  was  anxious  to  secure  the  co- 
operation of  the  British  forces  in  an  invasion  of  Calabria. 
Drummond,  who  had  succeeded  Fox  as  British  Minister, 
concurred  in  Mary  Caroline's  views,  and  attempted  to 
persuade  Moore  into  compliance,  but  in  vain.  The 
English  general  would  not  co-operate  with  the  Queen 
on  any  terms,  and  Sir  John  Moore  went  so  far  as 
openly  to  advocate  that  she  should  be  removed  from 
the  throne. 


CHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  171 

This  refusal  only  increased  Mary  Caroline's  jealousy 
and  hatred  of  the  British.  Her  determination  to 
strike  her  great  blow  was  not  shaken.  She  decided 
that  if  British  assistance  could  not  be  obtained  the 
Sicilian  army  alone  should  invade  Calabria,  and  she 
chose  the  Prince  of  Hesse  for  the  chief  command. 

The  Sicilian  general  selected  as  his  point  of  dis- 
embarkation the  extremity  of  the  peninsula.  The 
French  had  as  yet  but  small  detachments  south  of 
Monteleone,  and  had  not  even  attacked  the  British 
garrisons  left  behind  by  Sir  John  Stuart  after  Maida  at 
Reggio  and  Scilla.  He  had  with  him  some  5000 
Sicilian  troops,  and  advanced  directly  on  Monteleone. 
A  number  of  capimassi  accompanied  him,  including 
Pane  di  Grano,  Cancellier,  Neco,  and  Carbone.  On 
the  evening  of  the  27  th  of  May  he  reached  Mile  to, 
where  he  took  up  a  strong  position.  Regnier  had  col- 
lected a  small  force  at  Monteleone,  six  miles  away,  to 
repel  the  Sicilian  invasion.  On  the  night  that  the 
Prince  of  Hesse  arrived  at  Mileto  the  French  general 
left  Monteleone,  and  at  4.30  of  the  following  morning 
attacked  the  invaders'  positions  in  three  columns.  The 
action  was  short  and  decisive.  One  Sicilian  regiment 
under  a  capable  officer.  Colonel  Nunziante,  made  an 
honourable  defence,  the  rest  fled  at  the  sight  of  the 
French  bayonets.  The  masse  looked  on,  and  so  soon 
as  the  Sicilians  were  defeated  successfully  plundered 
their  baggage  train.  Hesse  lost  in  the  action  1633 
men  and  6  guns,  and  only  about  1000  of  his  army 
returned  to  Sicily. 

The  battle  of  Mileto  may  serve  to  mark  the  end  of 
regular  warfare  in  Calabria.  From  this  time  the  French 
generals  only  had  to  operate  against  brigands,  and  of 
their  doings  only  the  incident  connected  with  the  name 


172  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  Manhes  will  require  specific  mention.  It  will  suffice 
to  say  that  for  the  remainder  of  Joseph's  reign  brigand- 
age was  rife  in  Calabria,  but  gradually  decreased,  and 
became  more  and  more  clearly  criminal  and  non-political. 
Treachery,  barbarity,  the  burning  of  villages  did  not 
come  to  a  sudden  end,  nor  did  the  brigands  fail  on 
occasion  to  raise  the  cry  of  ''  Vivano  i  Borboni !  "  In 
February  1808  it  was  still  necessary  to  detail  a  whole 
battalion  to  escort  the  army  mail  in  the  passes  near 
Lagonegro,  but  in  the  spring  of  that  year  a  very  decided 
improvement  set  in. 