

In  matters  of  education  the  Government  took  even 
greater  steps  towards  progress  than  in  civil  administra- 
tion. It  was  decreed  that  every  Universita  should  be 
endowed  with  a  free  school  for  both  sexes,  and  every 
province  with  a  college.  A  Royal  Academy  was  also 
founded  devoted  to  the  encouragement  of  history, 
literature,  science,  and  art.  Schools  for  the  deaf -mute 
were  founded  and  the  prisons  were  reformed. 

The  militia  of  the  kingdom  was  maintained  under 

^  Roederer  in  an  official  report  to  Joseph  shows  clearly  the  line  of  future  progress 
aimed  at  when  he  says  :  "...  in  establishing  the  provincial  general  councils  your 
Majesty  has  laid  the  foundations  of  a  national  representation." — Rapporto,  1806,  15. 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  i6i 

a  slightly  modified  form,  and  steps  were  soon  taken 
to  reconstitute  a  native  army.  Brigands  and  Sicilian 
recruits  were  obtained  in  large  numbers,  and  from 
this  unpromising  material  four  regiments  were  formed 
under  French  discipline  and  supervision.  Neapolitan 
officers  were  attached  to  the  King's  staff,  among  others 
the  dashing  Filangieri  and  D'  Ambrosio,  who  both  rose 
to  high  rank  later.  A  regular  conscription  was  decreed, 
that  took  one  man  per  thousand  for  military  service  in 
1807,  ^^^  t^^t  afterwards  rose  to  three  per  thousand 
in  1808,  and  five  per  thousand  in  1809.  The  navy 
was  reorganized  on  similar  lines.  Many  gunboats  were 
built,  and  at  the  close  of  1807  there  were  eighty  ships 
ready  for  action. 

The  most  dangerous  of  all  the  reforming  measures 
of  the  new  Government  was  that  of  suppressing 
religious  corporations.  The  clergy,  and  especially  the 
monks,  were  hostile  to  the  French.  It  was  at  a 
monastery  that  Fra  Diavolo  had  obtained  shelter  at 
Avellino  ;  that  monastery  the  Government  suppressed 
as  a  punishment.  Its  large  estates  were  duly  confiscated, 
and  were  inscribed  in  the  Gran  Libro  as  a  security  for 
the  holders  of  cedolas. 

The  closing  of  this  monastery  proved  so  simple, 
so  satisfactory,  and  so  lucrative  an  operation  that  the 
Government's  appetite  was  whetted.  Precedents  were 
not  wanting ;  Joseph's  two  predecessors,  Charles  III. 
and  Ferdinand,  had  profited  not  a  little  from  the 
expulsion  of  the  Augustinian,  Jesuit,  and  other  Orders, 
and  where  they  had  led  the  way  the  French  Prince 
could  not  hesitate  to  follow.  The  suppression  of  the 
monasteries  was  purely  and  simply  a  measure  of 
spoliation  dictated  by  lack  of  money  ;  nothing  shows 
this  better  than  the  form  of  Joseph's  announcement  of 

VOL.  r  M 


1 62  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  fact  to  Napoleon  :  "I  have  just  suppressed  all 
the  rich  Orders."  The  monasteries  whose  property- 
was  thus  confiscated  numbered  213  ;  their  value  was 
estimated  at  about  150  millions  of  ducats;  they 
belonged  to  Orders  following  the  rule  of  S.  Bernard 
and  S.  Benedict,  which  included  the  Cassinesi,  Olivetani, 
Celestini,  Verginiani,  Certosini,  Camaldolesi,  Cisterciani, 
and  Bernardoni.  It  was  provided  that  their  property, 
now  devolving  on  the  Crown,  should  be  applied  to  the 
benefit  of  the  creditors  of  the  State.  Each  monk 
received  a  life  pension  of  from  60  to  120  ducats 
per  annum  ;  and  100  were  specially  excepted  for  the 
special  purpose  of  caring  for  the  valuable  libraries 
and  archives  of  Monte  Cassino,  La  Cava,  and  Monte 
Vergine.  The  preamble  of  the  decree  of  confiscation 
was  drawn  up  in  the  most  soothing  terms,  but  that 
could  not  alter  the  fact  that  every  one  of  the  dis- 
possessed monks  at  once  became  a  focus  of  dissatisfac- 
tion and  sedition  to  the  new  Government. 