

Sedition  was  in  truth  the  most  serious  of  all  the 
difficulties  the  Government  had  to  cope  with,  and  the 
duty  of  facing  it  was  especially  intrusted  to  the  most 
astute  and  capable  of  all  King  Joseph's  Ministers. 
On  the  7th  of  March  1806  the  Monitore  contained  a 
decree  instituting  a  Ministry  of  Police,  and  placing 
Cristoforo  Saliceti  at  its  head. 

Saliceti  was  a  remarkable  man.  Of  Genoese 
parentage,  though  a  French  citizen,  he  had  been  a 
member  of  the  Convention,  had  sat  with  the  Mountain, 
had  voted  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  had  himself 
narrowly  escaped  the  guillotine  a  little  later.  Yet 
Saliceti  was  one  of  the  most  capable  of  the  violent 
republicans.  He  had  great  administrative  and  executive 
talents,  was  indefatigable,   ardent,   and  courageous   to 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  163 

the  point  of  audacity.  Napoleon  had  known  him 
through  their  mutual  friend  Madame  Permon,  and 
had  formed  a  just  estimate  of  his  exceptional  ability. 
During  the  campaign  of  Italy,  in  1796,  Saliceti  had 
been  attached  to  the  young  general's  headquarters  as 
representant  du  peuple ;  in  this  capacity  he  obtained 
Murat's  promotion  to  the  rank  of  general,  and, 
early  recognising  the  extraordinary  genius  of  Napoleon, 
he  adopted  the  policy  of  following  his  fortune  and 
accepting  his  superiority.  Between  him  and  the  future 
Emperor  there  appears  to  have  been  neither  love  nor 
esteem,  only  that  mutual  respect  and  understanding 
that  one  high  intelligence  feels  for  another.  When 
Napoleon  attained  power  he  declined  to  employ 
Saliceti  in  France  ;  he  once  declared  to  Dumas  that 
the  Minister  of  Police  was  doing  fine  work  in  Naples, 
and  that  there  he  might  stop  ;  his  return  to  France 
could  not  be  permitted,  for  it  was  not  possible  for 
him  to  protect  "  les  miserables  qui  ont  vote  la  mort 
de  Louis  XVI."  Yet  he  did  not  scruple  to  employ 
Fouche ! 

Saliceti  had  followed  the  French  armies  at  a  time 
when  peculation  was  at  its  worst,  and  it  has  never 
been  suggested  that  he  set  his  face  against  it. 
Napoleon,  in  fact,  openly  accused  him  of  it  in  con- 
nection with  some  English  merchandise  confiscated  at 
Leghorn,  and  Miot,  who  shared  his  labours  at  Naples, 
recorded  the  following  dubious  opinion,  that,  "  without 
perhaps  seeking  to  increase  his  own  fortune,  he  allowed 
those  about  him  to  make  theirs."  ^ 

The  methods  of  the  Neapolitan  police  and  the  army 
of  spies  and  informers  with  which  its  head  was  soon 
surrounded,  created  an  atmosphere  where  honesty  and 

1  Miot,  ii.  181. 


i64  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

truth  stood  every  chance  of  being  stifled.  The  vendetta, 
interested  denunciations,  and  imaginary  plots  made  up 
a  large  part  of  the  work  of  this  department  of  State. 
But  alongside  of  much  that  was  personally  vindictive, 
much  that  was  purely  imaginative,  there  were  also 
grains  of  real  conspiracy  constantly  sown  by  the 
emissaries  of  the  Court  of  Palermo.  For  it  will 
hardly  be  too  much  to  say  that  Saliceti's  tenure  of 
office  was  one  long  secret  duel  with  Mary  Caroline. 