

In  the  spring  of  1 807  the  royalist  intrigues  culminated ; 
but  Saliceti  held  the  threads  in  his  hands.  In  December 
1 806  a  letter  had  come  into  the  possession  of  the  police 
addressed  by  Bruno,  who  commanded  the  Sicilian  flotilla 
at  Capri,  to  a  royalist  partisan  named  Agostino  Jiovine. 
The  letter  was  answered  by  the  police  in  the  name  of 
Jiovine,  and  a  regular  correspondence  was  carried  on 
for  several  months,  whereby   the  plans   of  the   Court 


1.66  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

became  completely  known  to  Saliceti.  Mary  Caroline's 
design  was  apparently  to  invade  Calabria  and,  on  the 
dispatch  of  French  reinforcements  from  Naples  to  the 
threatened  point,  to  raise  an  insurrection  in  the  city. 
The  military  part  of  this  plan  was  intrusted  to  the 
Prince  of  Hesse,  now  recovered  from  his  wounds,  and 
for  the  present  all  that  need  be  said  of  it  is  that  it 
proved  a  complete  failure.  At  Naples  the  danger  run 
by  the  Government  was  far  greater. 

The  public  mind  had  been  much  agitated  by  distorted 
rumours  on  the  subject  of  the  winter  campaign  fought 
between  the  French  and  Russians  in  eastern  Prussia, — so 
long  with  undecisive  results.^  The  lazzaroni  were  full 
of  the  idea  that  the  time  had  now  come  when  the 
French  would  have  to  retreat  to  the  north  and  Ferdinand 
might  reascend  the  throne  ;  the  fear  and  dismay  of  the 
middle  and  upper  class  was  scarcely  less  than  it  had  been 
in  1799.  The  civic  guard  anxiously  patrolled  the  city  at 
night.  The  excitement  and  rumours  increased  until  at 
last,  when  the  Government  knew  that  Hesse's  expedi- 
tion was  on  the  point  of  sailing  from  Sicily  for  Calabria, 
the  blow  fell.  The  first  week  in  June  had  been  fixed 
as  the  date  for  the  revolt,  and  it  was  reported  that  the 
burning  of  the  Palazzo  Satriano  was  to  be  the  signal  for 
the  approach  of  Bruno's  Sicilian  flotilla,  and  perhaps  also 
of  the  British  vessels  off  Capri.  All  this  was  well  known 
to  the  police.  On  the  22nd  of  May  a  great  number  of 
arrests  were  ordered,  and  a  perfect  reign  of  terror 
ensued.  A  number  of  the  principal  royalist  leaders 
were  immediately  tried,  and  numerous  executions 
followed,  notably  those  of  the  Duke  di  Filomarino  and 
the  Marquis  Palmieri.  On  the  Piazza  del  Castello,  at 
one  of  these  executions,  the  crowd  became   somewhat 

^   Pultusk,  Dec.  25,  1806  J  Eylau,  Feb.  8,  1807  ;  Friedland,  June  14,  1807. 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  167 

disorderly.  This  proved  a  sufficient  incentive  to  the 
civic  guards  to  charge  the  lazzaroni  and  to  clear  the 
square  and  adjoining  streets,  with  considerable  con- 
sequent mortality.  The  city  was  seething  with  excite- 
ment, but  the  resolute  bearing  of  the  Government 
carried  the  day.  For  six  weeks  Naples  lived  under 
Saliceti's  new  reign  of  terror,  of  which  the  culmination 
was  marked  by  Mosca's  attempt. 