


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  157 

head  and  whose  surroundings  proclaimed  intelligence  and 
power.     Could  as  much  be  said  of  Ferdinand  Nasone  ? 

Joseph  not  only  supported  the  classical  revival  as  a 
matter  of  fashion,  but,  being  a  good  latinist,  supported 
it  intelligently.  He  purchased  the  ground  covering 
the  lost  city  of  Pompeii,  and  took  an  active  and 
understanding  interest  in  the  work  of  excavating  its 
treasures.  He  liberally  encouraged  education,  art, 
and  music.  But  we  have  dwelt  long  enough  on  the 
financial  and  personal  aspects  of  the  assumption  of 
the  Neapolitan  crown  by  Joseph  Bonaparte  ;  matters 
of  administration  and  of  law  must  now  be  dealt  with, 
and  especially  those  relating  to  the  feudal  system. 

The  declared  policy  of  the  Government  and  the 
personal  inclination  of  the  King  were  to  sweep  away 
without  mercy  every  vestige  of  feudalism.  Feudal 
tenures  v/ere  immediately  abolished  on  the  private 
domains  of  the  Crown,  and  the  peasantry  was  relieved 
from  vexatious  restrictions  and  encouraged  in  agri- 
cultural pursuits.  So  firmly  were  the  old  feudal  ideas 
rooted,  however,  so  little  was  it  understood  what  the 
advent  of  a  Napoleonic  government  meant,  that  no 
sooner  had  Joseph  arrived  in  Naples  than  he  received 
various  petitions  from  barons  who  had  been  deprived 
of  some  of  their  privileges  after  the  troubles  of  1799, 
praying  for  the  restitution  of  their  feudal  rights  of 
jurisdiction.  Such  misconceptions  did  not  long  con- 
tinue. By  decree  of  the  2nd  of  August  1806  all 
baronial  jurisdiction,  all  rights  to  personal  services, 
and  all  water  rights  were  abolished.  A  month  later 
a  decree  was  issued  providing  for  the  division  of  feudal 
land  among  actual  occupiers.  Land  situated  near  a 
village,  not  actually  in  the  use  of  the  feudal  owner,  but 
occupied,  and  especially  if  improved  by  the  occupier, 


158  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

was  to  be  assigned  in  freehold  to  the  Universita  at  a 
compensation  to  be  fixed  by  the  council  of  the  chief 
civil  functionary  of  the  province.  Another  decree 
(September  1806),  following  the  precedent  set  by  the 
Neapolitan  Republic  in  1799,  declared  majorati  and 
fideicommessi  illegal ;  it  aimed,  in  other  words,  at  remov- 
ing the  fetters  of  inalienability  that  was  the  chief  cause 
of  the  stagnation  of  Neapolitan  property  and  capital. 

Much  of  this  legislation,  however,  remained  in- 
effective save  that  it  prepared  the  way  for  the  more 
drastic  measures  that  were  to  follow  and  finally  rid 
Naples  of  feudalism.  Yet  a  number  of  Universita 
endeavoured  to  obtain  what  advantage  they  could  from 
the  new  laws  and  from  the  favourable  spirit  of  the  new 
Government.  Hence  a  great  mass  of  litigation  was 
started  or  revived.  This  only  made  matters  worse, 
and  to  clear  the  legal  congestion  and  cut  through  to 
a  reasonable  working  basis  it  was  finally  decreed,  in 
November  1 807,  that  a  special  court  should  be  assembled 
in  the  course  of  the  year  1808  to  try  all  cases  turning 
on  contested  feudal  rights  between  the  Universita  and 
the  barons.  The  notable  proceedings  of  that  court 
shall  receive  notice  in  due  course  ;  here  they  can  find 
no  place,  as  they  belong  to  the  events  of  another  reign 
and  not  to  that  of  Joseph  Bonaparte. 