

Agostino  Mosca  was  a  leader  of  free  corps  of  much 
the  same  general  character  as  Fra  Diavolo  ;  Ferdinand 
had  granted  him  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  when  arrested 
in  the  woods  near  Castellamare,  just  south  of  Naples,  he 
was  attired  in  the  scarlet  uniform  of  the  Sicilian  army. 
The  part  he  was  intended  to  fill  in  the  conspiracy  was 
that  of  assassinating  King  Joseph,  and  to  attain  that 
object  he  was  heavily  armed,  though  it  does  not  appear 
precisely  in  what  manner  he  intended  to  carry  out  the 
deed. 
(  ,>fr  Mosca  had  been  landed  through  the  agency  of  the 
\  Prince  of  Canosa  ;  and  on  him  was  found,  among  other 
things,  a  bracelet  woven  from  a  woman's  hair,  which  he 
admitted  to  be  that  of  the  Queen's,  and  to  have  been 
given  to  him  by  Canosa.  Various  letters  were  also 
found  on  him  ;  several  from  Canosa  and  the  Marchesa 
di  Villa  Tranfo,  one  of  Mary  Caroline's  ladies,  inciting 
him  to  murder  Joseph.  One  letter  in  the  Queen's  own 
writing,  addressed  to  Mosca,  was  produced  at  the  trial, 
and  was  in  the  following  terms  : — 

Agostino  Mosca,  perform  zealously  and  energetically  that 
which  you  have  promised  to  do  for  the  good  service  of  the 
king  ;  if  successful,  you  may  rely  on  my  protection.  28th  of 
February  1807.     Carolina. 

The  evidence  was  damning  against  Mosca,  it  not  against 


i68  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Mary  Caroline.  He  was  tried,  found  guilty,  and  duly 
executed  in  the  Piazza  del  Mercato,  where  he  died 
somewhat  ungracefully,  clad  in  his  scarlet  uniform, 
reeling  from  too  copious  potations,  and  whiningly 
confessing  his  crime.^ 

For  several  weeks  the  police,  Saliceti,  and  terror  ruled 
Naples,  and  then,  in  the  middle  of  July,  came  the  news 
that  Napoleon's  great  victory  at  Friedland  had  been 
followed  by  a  peace  signed  at  Tilsit.  All  danger  of 
revolt  was  by  this  time  crushed  out,  all  fear  for  the 
stability  of  the  French  Empire  was  removed,  and  Joseph 
immediately  decreed  rejoicings  in  honour  of  peace,  and 
proclaimed  a  general  amnesty  for  political  offences 
(23rd  of  July  1807). 

Thus  was  foiled  the  last  serious  attempt  made  by 
the  Court  of  Palermo  to  unseat  King  Joseph,  and  that 
chiefly  owing  to  the  acuteness  and  remorseless  energy 
of  Saliceti.  One  episode  of  that  attempt  that  has  so  far 
only  been  briefly  alluded  to  must  now  be  dealt  with, — 
the  Prince  of  Hesse's  expedition  to  Calabria.  For  the 
better  understanding  of  events  it  will  now  be  necessary 
to  return  to  the  course  of  military  affairs  in  the  southern 
province,  and  to  trace  the  operations  of  the  French  and 
British  for  the  control  of  the  eastern  Mediterranean. 

The  struggle  between  the  two  parties  in  the  Sicilian 
Court  had  continued  after  its  arrival  at  Palermo.  Acton, 
strong  in  the  support  of  the  King  and  in  the  failure  that 
had  attended  Mary  Caroline's  policy,  promptly  recovered 
power.     His  object,  one  in  which  Ferdinand  concurred, 