

From  Palermo  the  defeated  Queen  urged  every  step 
that  might  restore  her  stolen  throne.  Among  the 
refugees  who  returned  to  Naples  at  the  threatened 
confiscation  of  their  estates  were  many  of  her  spies. 
Her  capimassi  and  agents  were  landed  at  every  point  of 
the  coast.  From  Ponza  Canosa  worked  a  vast  network 
of  secret  correspondence,  that  stretched  from  Naples 
all  over  the  kingdom.  At  Leghorn  and  Florence 
she  had  private  agents  who  received  instructions  and 
advice  from  her  own  hand,  often  in  writing  rendered 
invisible  by  the  use  of  lemon  juice.  From  Palermo 
to  Capri  and  from  Capri  to  Leghorn  cruised  small 
feluccas  conveying  her  emissaries  and  correspondence ; 
this  cost  her  large  sums,  and  was  eventually  of  far  more 
profit  to  her  chief  agent,  Castrone,  than  to  herself,  as 
she  afterwards  discovered.  For  several  years  the  Queen 
spent  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  million  ducats  a  year 
on  spies,  informers,  and  pensioned  Neapolitans. 

Mary  Caroline's  firm  belief  was  that  all  Naples  was 
for  the  Bourbons  except  the  lawyers  and  the  aristo- 
cracy, and,  making  allowance  for  the  large  neutral  mass 
that  had  little  prejudice  except  against  violent  change, 
the  Queen  was  perhaps  not  so  far  wrong.  Among  the 
lazzaroni  and  the  lower  classes  at  all  events  there  was 
much  unrest,  dissatisfaction,  and  hope  for  the  return  of 


CHAP.  V       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  165 

Ferdinand.  The  working  of  the  well-organised  police 
under  Saliceti's  energetic  superintendence  was  an  in- 
novation that  was  far  from  relished.  Crime  was  sternly- 
repressed  ;  the  streets  of  Naples  were  lighted  ;  large 
batches  of  convicts  were  shipped  to  Toulon  to  work  at 
the  new  docks  ;  military  commissions  ordered  numerous 
executions  for  treasonable  offences. 

For  the  executions  there  was  absolute  necessity  if 
the  French  dominion  was  to  be  maintained.  Already, 
in  June  1806,  while  the  tide  of  the  invaders'  first 
success  was  yet  flowing,  there  was  a  conspiracy  and 
attempted  rising  in  Naples.  The  Sicilian  red  cockade 
was  shown,  but  the  police  was  warned,  and  the  trouble 
was  not  allowed  to  come  to  a  head.  The  date  chosen 
for  the  outbreak  was  the  14th  of  June,  anniversary  of 
the  capture  of  Naples  by  the  royalists  seven  years  before, 
and  the  whole  current  of  public  sympathies,  opinions, 
hopes,  and  fears  recalled  the  period  of  the  fall  of  the 
Parthenopean  Republic.  But  for  a  time  the  energies 
of  Mary  Caroline  and  the  Sicilian  Court  were  diverted 
to  the  insurrection  of  Calabria,  which,  fanned  into  flame 
by  the  French  defeat  at  Maida,  offered  for  many  weeks 
some  hopes  of  success  for  the  royal  cause.  As  these 
hopes  declined,  conspiracy  and  agitation  were  renewed 
at  Naples,  und  through  the  winter  of  1806  the  police 
was  kept  vigorously  at  work. 