

Saliceti  inhabited  the  Palazzo  Maresca  on  the  Riviera 
di  Chiaja  with  his  daughter  and  her  husband,  the 
Neapolitan  Duke  di  Lavello.  The  building  was  of 
three  stories,  and  had  its  ground  floor  let  off  as  shops 
with    separate    entrances    on    the    street.      The    chief 

VOL.  I  177  N 


178  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

apartments  of  the  house  were  immediately  over  these 
shops.  At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  31st  of 
January  1808  Saliceti  was  driven  home.  He  was  just 
ascending  the  stairs  of  the  palace  when  a  terrific  explo- 
sion occurred  and  he  was  thrown  to  his  feet.  A  great 
hole  had  been  blown  through  more  than  twenty  rooms  of 
the  Palazzo  Maresca,  and  a  great  mass  of  debris  had 
crashed  down  into  the  courtyard.  Everything  was 
plunged  in  darkness  and  in  a  moment  the  whole  neigh- 
bourhood was  panic-stricken. 

Saliceti,  by  a  miraculous  chance,  escaped.  He  had 
been  thrown  down,  badly  bruised,  and  cut,  but  save 
for  an  ugly  gash  in  his  left  cheek,  he  was  not  seriously 
wounded.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Lavello  had 
been  hurled  from  the  room  where  they  were  sleeping 
into  a  mass  of  wreckage  that  filled  the  courtyard  of  the 
palace  ;  they  were  soon  extricated,  and  were  found  to 
have  suffered  nothing  more  serious  than  bruises  and 
lacerations.  One  servant  was  killed,  however,  and 
several  were  dangerously  wounded.  The  police  were 
soon  on  the  spot  and  busy.  In  the  course  of  the  morning 
numerous  arrests  were  made  ;  and  a  technical  inquiry 
conducted  by  Generals  Campredon  and  Dedon  showed 
conclusively  that  the  explosion  had  been  caused  by  an 
infernal  machine.  Before  many  hours  had  passed, 
several  of  the  assassins  were  in  the  hands  of  the  police. 

The  trial  revealed  the  following  facts.  One  of  the 
shops  under  the  Palazzo  Maresca  was  let  to  an  apothe- 
cary, Don  Onofrio  Viscardi,  who  was,  though  not  in 
any  very  zealous  or  prominent  way,  a  Bourbonist.  On 
the  night  of  the  28  th  of  January  his  two  sons,  Domenico 
and  Pasquale,  with  three  other  men,  entered  his  shop. 
They  had  just  arrived  in  Naples,  having  come  from 
Palermo   by  way  of  Ponza   in   a  small  sailing  vessel. 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  179 

They  told  the  apothecary  that  they  were  acting  under 
instructions  from  the  Prince  of  Canosa,  who  had  been 
appointed  Viceroy  of  Naples,  and  that  their  mission  was 
to  make  away  with  Saliceti.  The  old  apothecary  reluct- 
antly allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  to  give  up  the 
key  to  a  small  store-room  at  the  back  of  his  shop,  and 
here  the  conspirators  placed  a  shell  containing  about 
1 00  lbs.  of  gunpowder.  It  was  this  engine  that  wrought 
the  destruction. 