

Although  for  a  time  it  appeared  as  if  the  Emperor 
would  direct  that  succession  through  the  line  of  his 
brother  Louis,  whom  he  had  made  King  of  Holland, 
yet  it  was  clear  to  thinking  minds  that  if  Napoleon's 
life  was  cut  short, — and  it  was  menaced  from  many 
sides, — none  but  a  man  of  conspicuous  ability  and  char- 
acter could  possibly  hope  to  succeed  him.  One  of  the 
Emperor's  faults, — a  fault  without  which  he  would  not 
have  reached  the  eminence  he  did, — was  the  tenacity 
with  which  he  clung  to  power.  He  could  not  bear  to 
surrender  one  iota  of  his  authority,  and  in  that  respect 
had  well  chosen  his  two  Italian  subordinates  :  Eugene, 
who  always  obeyed  orders  with  military  punctiliousness  ; 
Joseph,  who,  playing  the  king  to  his  subjects,  played 

^   Schoell,  Recueily  i.  136. 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  183 

the  subject  to  Napoleon.  The  Emperor  was  well 
pleased  with  Joseph,  whose  subservience  contrasted 
favourably  with  the  independence  of  Louis  and  Lucien, 
and  in  the  first  week  of  December  1807  a  very  cordial 
interview  between  the  two  brothers  took  place  at  Venice. 
At  this  meeting  the  affairs  of  Naples,  of  Sicily,  and  of 
the  East  were  discussed,  and  it  appears  probable  that 
Napoleon  also  touched  on  the  probability  of  a  French 
intervention  in  Spain. 

During  the  early  weeks  of  1808  the  attention  of  the 
Emperor  appeared  centred  on  Turkey  and  the  East, 
and  he  supported  Gantheaume's  expedition  to  Corfu  by 
diplomatic  negotiations,  of  which  the  object  was  a  parti- 
tion of  Turkey  between  France,  Austria,  and  Russia.  But 
these  negotiations  were  not  easy  to  conduct,  and  by  the 
month  of  March  Napoleon  was  seriously  considering 
another  move  that  appeared  easier  of  accomplishment. 
Under  pretext  of  the  difficulties  between  France  and 
Portugal  a  number  of  French  corps  had  been  sent  south 
of  the  Pyrenees,  ostensibly  as  alHes  of  Spain.  Napoleon 
now  appointed  his  brother-in-law  Joachim  Murat,  Grand 
Duke  of  Berg,  commander-in-chief,  and  gave  him  in- 
structions to  occupy  Madrid.  The  events  that  followed 
belong  more  properly  to  the  history  of  Napoleon  than 
to  that  of  Naples.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  Emperor 
probably  anticipated  that  he  could  conquer  Spain  as 
easily  as  he  had  Portugal  a  few  months  before.  But 
before  going  further  the  development  of  Napoleonic 
aggression  in  the  direction  of  Spain  must  be  viewed 
more  closely  in  connection  with  the  relations  between 
France  and  Great  Britain. 

In  1806,  with  Fox  as  Prime  Minister,  peace  had 
been  for  a  moment  in  sight.  Fox  was  the  only  states- 
man whose  inclination  and  whose  influence  could  have 


i84  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 