

made  peace.  Napoleon  had  a  genuine  regard  for  the 
Whig  leader,  and  appears  for  a  time  to  have  nego- 
tiated in  expectation  of  a  settlement.  In  June  1806  he 
had  written  to  Joseph  that  only  the  question  of  Sicily 
still  divided  Talleyrand  and  Lord  Yarmouth.  An  in- 
demnity to  King  Ferdinand  for  the  abandonment  of 
Sicily  was  finally  discussed,  and  the  recognition  of 
Joseph  as  King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  was  virtually 
accepted  by  the  British  Cabinet.  The  compensation 
to  the  Bourbon  king  was  to  be  the  Balearic  Islands, 
together  with  some  American  possessions.^  The  death 
of  Fox  in  September  of  the  same  year  brought  these 
negotiations  to  nothing,  and  removed  the  last  chance  of 
an  understanding  between  the  two  great  rivals. 

The  Tory  Cabinet  that  succeeded  Fox  pursued  a 
less  conciliatory  policy  towards  France,  a  less  incon- 
siderate policy  towards  Sicily.  On  the  30th  of  March 
1807  Drummond,  the  British  Minister  at  Palermo, 
concluded  with  the  Marquis  of  Circello,  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  a  treaty  of  alliance,  offensive  and 
defensive.  It  was  provided  by  this  treaty  that  neither 
party  should  come  to  a  separate  peace,  that  an  annual 
subsidy  of  three  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling 
should  be  paid  by  England  to  Sicily  for  military  pur- 
poses, and  that  England  should  defend  Messina  and 
Augusta  with  10,000  men. 

England's  failure  in  her  double  attack  on  Turkey 
and  Egypt  shortly  before  this  treaty  was  signed  had 
resulted  in  the  return  of  her  troops  to  Sicily,  and  that 
island  had  now  come  to  be  jlooked  on  as  the  indispens- 
able basis  of  her  operations  in  the  Mediterranean. 
Had  not  Napoleon  at  this  period  attempted  the  con- 
quest of  the  Spanish  peninsula  it  appears  probable  that 

^  Undated  memorandum,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  30  j  cf.  Napoleon,  Corr.  xiii.  41. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  185 

England  would  soon  have  attempted  military  operations 
on  a  large  scale  against  Naples.  As  it  was,  Junot's 
march  on  Lisbon  was  promptly  answered  by  sending 
Sir  John  Moore,  with  8000  men,  from  Messina  to 
Portugal,  where  he  was,  a  few  months  later,  to  fight 
the  campaign  that  terminated  at  Corunna.  From  this 
beginning  arose  that  famous  and  obstinate  war  of  the 
Peninsula  that  raged  for  six  years,  and  the  fluctuations 
of  which  will  have  more  than  once  to  be  taken  into 
account  when  relating  the  history  of  southern  Italy 
for  the  same  period. 

At  the  end  of  March  1808  Murat  occupied  Madrid 
at  the  head  of  a  large  army.  A  few  weeks  later  Napo- 
leon proceeded  to  Bayonne.  There  he  saw  Charles  IV. 
of  Spain  and  his  son  Ferdinand.  On  the  5th  of  May 
the  Emperor  obtained  from  the  Spanish  sovereign  a 
renunciation  of  the  throne,  and  on  the  i  ith  he  dispatched 
what  was  practically  an  order  to  Joseph  to  assume  the 
Spanish  crown.  "You  will  receive  this  letter  on  the 
19th,"  he  wrote,  "you  will  leave  on  the  20th,  and  you 
will  arrive  here  on  the  ist  of  June."  Such  was  the 
military  precision  with  which  Napoleon  manoeuvred  his 
vassal  sovereigns. 