

On  the  loth  of  February  Gantheaume  sailed  from 
Toulon  with  two  three-deckers,  eight  80-  and  74-gun 

^  "  Corfu  is  of  so  much  importance  to  me  that  its  loss  would  deal  a  fatal  blow  to 
my  plans.  .  .  ." — Napoleon  to  Joseph,  Feb.  7,  1808,  Joseph,  Ccrr.  iv.  128. 


174  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

ships,  several  frigates,  four  transports,  and  some 
smaller  vessels,  and  shaped  a  course  due  south,  for  the 
Tunisian  coast.  A  storm  dispersed  the  fleet,  but  after 
a  rapid  passage  Gantheaume  and  his  subordinate 
Cosmao  anchored,  the  one  at  Corfu  on  the  23  rd  of 
February,  the  other  at  Taranto  two  days  later.  The 
French  admirals  soon  joined  forces,  poured  a  large 
supply  of  food  and  munitions  of  war  into  Corfu,  and 
set  sail  for  Toulon  again,  which  they  reached  unmolested. 
So  elated  was  Napoleon  at  the  complete  success  of  this 
naval  expedition  that  he  wrote  to  congratulate  Gan- 
theaume on  his  success  in  warm  terms,  and  announced 
the  increase  of  the  French  navy  and  preparations  for 
the  early  convoy  of  20,000  men  and  800  horses  to  an 
important  point. 

Just  as  when  Napoleon  had  sailed  the  length  of  the 
Mediterranean  to  Egypt  in  1798,  so  now  again  ten 
years  later  the  British  fleet  had  been  unable  to  find  the 
enemy  and  engage.  Collingwood  had  hurried  into  the 
Mediterranean  in  the  wake  of  the  Rochefort  fleet, 
anxious  to  protect  the  British  army  in  Sicily.  On  the 
6  th  of  December  the  British  admiral  was  cruising  off 
Syracuse  when  he  was  informed  that  the  Toulon  fleet 
was  at  sea.  The  news  was  premature,  but  Collingwood 
sailed  towards  Corfu,  where  he  awaited  the  French  till 
the  first  week  in  January.  Getting  no  further  informa- 
tion, however,  he  returned  to  Sicily.  He  then  slowly 
cruised  around  the  island,  reaching  its  north-western 
point  just  at  the  time  when  Gantheaume  was  leaving 
Toulon  and  running  down  the  Sardinian  coast  towards 
Africa.  But  Collingwood  could  get  no  tidings  of  the 
French,  and,  while  Gantheaume  was  circling  to  the 
south,  cruised  within  call  of  Messina  and  Palermo. 
Finally  he   made  his  way  slowly  northwards   up    the 


cHAP.v       JOSEPH'S  INTERNAL  POLICY  175 

Italian  coast,  but  not  until  Gantheaume  had  accom- 
plished his  mission  and  was  heading  for  Toulon  once 
more. 

CoUingwood's  mortification  at  having  failed  to  find 
the  French  fleet  was  extreme,  and  this  failure  served  to 
show  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  British  victories, 
there  was  yet  sufficient  strength  in  her  adversary  and  a 
sufficient  element  of  uncertainty  in  naval  warfare  to 
make  possible  a  vital  blow  at  Great  Britain's  maritime 
ascendancy.  If,  instead  of  sailing  to  Corfu  while  the 
British  were  at  Palermo,  Gantheaume  had  conveyed 
10,000  men  to  Palermo  while  the  British  were  at 
Corfu,  it  appears  far  from  improbable  that  Sicily  would 
have  changed  masters.  At  all  events,  though  little 
enough  was  ever  to  come  from  it.  Napoleon's  maritime 
blow  was  successfully  struck.  Corfu  was  victualled  and 
supplied  with  munitions  ;  and  another  effect  was  gained, 
for  Gantheaume's  success  produced  a  deeper  impression 
on  the  sea-depending  Neapolitans  than  any  four  such 
distant  Napoleonic  triumphs  as  Austerlitz  or  Friedland. 