

Joachim  Murat  had  not  risen  so  high  as  Napoleon, 
but  he  had  risen  nearly  as  much,  for  his  start  had  been 
humbler.  He  was  only  the  son  of  a  postmaster,  and 
was  born  at  La  Bastide  Fortuniere,  near  Cahors,  in 
Gascony,  on  the  25th  of  March  1771.  His  father's 
walk  of  life  determined  Murat's  great  love  and  under- 
standing of  horses  ;  and  although  his  earliest  education 
was  for  the  church,  a  youthful  escapade  very  naturally 
landed  him  in  the  ranks  of  a  cavalry  regiment.  He 
proved  as  fractious  to  military  as  to  theological  disci- 
pline, and  before  many  months  had  passed  was  dismissed 
from  the  army  for  insubordination.     But  on  the  break- 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES 


ing  out  of  the  Revolution  he  became  an  ardent  patriot, 
and  once  more  tried  the  trade  of  arms.  In  1791  he 
received  his  first  promotion,  the  first  of  many  that 
were  to  follow,  and  thus  naively  recorded  the  matter 
in  a  letter  to  his  brother  :  "I  am  working  hard  to  get 
promotion  and  shall  succeed.  I  shall  soon  be  made 
corporal/*^  A  year  later  he  wrote  again  :  "At  last  I 
am  a  sub-lieutenant,  from  which  my  family  will  gather 
that  I  have  not  had  to  show  too  much  patience."  ^  Four 
years  later  he  was  Colonel  of  the  21st  Dragoons,  and 
attached  to  the  first  army  that  Bonaparte  commanded. 
At  the  battle  of  Mondovi,  the  representant  du  peuple, 
Saliceti,  noticed  his  brilliant  conduct,  and  got  him  pro- 
moted to  the  rank  of  general. 

Had  Murat's  military  career  been  in  the  old  army 
and  under  Bourbon  auspices,  it  is  extremely  improbable 
that  his  name  would  ever  have  emerged  from  the 
obscurity  of  the  ranks  ;  his  low  birth  and  his  impetu- 
osity would  equally  have  told  against  him.  But  his 
remarkable  military  aptitude,  his  fiery,  undisciplined 
temperament  and  patriotic  fervour  brought  him  oppor- 
tunity, recognition,  and  rapid  promotion  in  the  loosely 
organized  and  democratic  armies  of  the  First  Republic. 
The  Revolution  had  transformed  the  art  of  war,  as  it 
had  transformed  so  many  institutions  and  habits.  The 
system  of  evolutions  founded  on  the  traditions  of 
Frederic,  but  no  longer  vivified  by  his  genius,  had 
degenerated  into  an  artificial  and  largely  unsound 
method  of  tactics,  alHed  with  a  vicious  theory  of  a  war 
of  positions.  To  keep  every  company  of  a  regiment 
in  solid  line  had  come  to  be  looked  on  as  of  greater 
importance  than  to  seize  house,  wood,  or  hill  by  means 
of  skirmishers  ;  to  capture  a  fortress  according  to  the 

1   Murat,  Corr.  i.  5.  2  /^/^^  i_  ^ 


190  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

rules  of  Vauban  of  more  importance  than  to  overrun 
a  fertile  but  unfortified  province  ;  to  maintain  winter 
quarters  for  a  regularly. established  number  of  months 
of  more  importance  than  to  strike  a  decisive,  but 
theoretically  irregular,  blow.  The  volunteers  of  the 
Revolution  and  their  improvised  generals  shattered 
these  military  ideals.  To  the  machine-like  manoeuvres 
of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick's  Prussians,  Dumouriez 
answered  triumphantly  with  his  ragged  and  half-armed 
lines  chanting  the  Marseillaise  in  world  -  resounding 
cadence  ;  at  Jemmappes  the  Austrian  commanders  were 
as  completely  shocked  as  they  were  defeated  by  Belliard 
galloping  over  their  intrenchments  at  the  head  of  a 
regiment  of  hussars.  Brune  captured  men-of-war  in 
the  frozen  Zuyder  Zee  with  cavalry.  The  brilliant 
young  generals  of  the  Revolution  soon  evolved  from 
their  apparent  deficiencies,  and  from  their  experience 
of  victory,  a  new  system  of  warfare.  Rapidity  of 
movement,  paid  for  at  nearly  any  price  ;  complete  dis- 
regard for  obstacles,  seasons,  and  the  accepted  maxims 
of  war  ;  irregular  tactics  in  which  the  soldiers'  intelli- 
gence and  initiative  were  employed  ;  a  large  use  of 
skirmishers ;  more  confused,  more  rapid,  and  more  head- 
long attack  ;  a  prosecution  of  victory  by  every  means 
possible  to  horsemen,  and  at  all  risks,  without  con- 
sideration for  the  formation  of  the  parade  ground  ; — 
these  became  the  fundamental  articles  of  the  creed  of 
the  great  school  of  soldiers  whose  most  skilful  and 
most  methodical  master  was  Napoleon. 