

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  miscellaneous  matters,  disorders, 
military  commissions,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  21,  194:  anti-feudal  measures,  etc.;  192  :  the 
same,  suppression  of  the  monastic  orders,  cedolas,  provincial  administration  ; 
193  :  miscellaneous  accounts  ;  244  :  Hope  loan,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  5  :  Corfu  operations  ;  1049  •  Calabria 
misc.  and  Mary  Caroline  ;   1974  :  Calabria  ;  2142  :  Mileto  operations. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  for  Sicilian  politics,  the  fall  of  Acton,  and 
the  Queen's  action  generally. 

Brit.  Admiralty,  Medit.  32  ;  and 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicil}>,  30,  a  few  dispatches  on  British  policy  in 
Sicily. 

Printed  Books 

Abrantes,    Mems. ;    Annual  Register,    1806;    Bianchini,   Finanze   di 


176  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

NapoH  s  Blaquiere,  Letters ;  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe,  S^uelques  lettres ; 
Bulletino  delle  Leggi, 1 808  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacts. ;  Cacciatore, Esame; 
CoLLETTA,Storia  ;  CoLhi^GWOOD,  Corresp.  ;  Desv ER^oiSy  Mems. ;  Dumas, 
Precis  militaire  ;  Dumas,  Sounjenirs  ,•  Duret  de  Tavel,  Sdjour  en  Calabre  ; 
Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina ;  Jeaffreson,  ^een  of 
Naples;  Joseph,  Corresp. ;  Lamarque,  Mems. ;  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir 
J.  Moore;  Minto,  Hugh  Elliot;  MiOT,  Mems. ;  Monitore  Napolitano ; 
Napoleon,  Corresp. ;  NicolX,  Diario  ;  Okloff,  Mems. ;  P ALMiERiy  Storia 
costituz. ;  Papers  respecting  Austria ;  Pepe,  Mems. ;  Rivarol,  S^jour  en 
Calabre ;  RiviELLO,  Cronaca  Potentina ;  Roederer,  (Ewvres ;  Roederer, 
Rapporto,  i8o6j  Saliceti,  Rapporto ;  Savelli,  L/gion  Corse;  Serristori, 
Statistica;  ZuRLO,  Rapporto,  1809. 


CHAPTER   VI 

BAYONNE MURAT,    KING    OF    NAPLES 

Attempt  on  Saliceti  —  Finance — Army — Legislation  —  Napoleon's 
policy — Imperial  succession — ^Joseph,  Eugene,  and  Italy — 
Venice  interview — Spanish  affairs  —  British  policy — Fox — 
Abdication  of  Charles  IV.  —  Constitutional  statute — Murat, 
King  of  Naples,  his  life,  marriage,  and  character — Style 
adopted  —  Entry  into  Naples  —  Impression  produced  —  Capri 
taken — Amnesty — Napoleon,  Joachim,  and  Caroline- — Fouche- 
Metternich  intrigue  —  Disgrace  of  Talleyrand  —  Coolness 
between  Joachim  and  Napoleon. 

The  last  few  months  of  Joseph  Bonaparte's  short  reign 
as  King  of  Naples  were  marked  by  only  one  striking 
incident,  an  after  effect  of  the  projected  revolt  crushed 
by  Saliceti  in  June  1 807.  The  lazzaroni,  though  cowed, 
were  still  firmly  convinced  that  Ferdinand's  return 
would  not  be  long  delayed.  Royalist  agents  still  found 
plenty  of  listeners  and  helpers.  If  a  revolution  appeared 
for  the  moment  out  of  the  question,  it  might  be  pos- 
sible to  be  at  least  revenged  against  the  Government's 
chief  agent  of  repression. 