

^  Bulletim  delle  Leggi,  1808,  209  (decree  on  judicial  organization)  j  230  (procedure 
before  justices  of  peace  and  tribunals)  j  299  (operative)  j  301  (criminal  law  and 
penalties)  ;  429  (operative). 


CHAP.  VI         MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  i8i 

of  brigandage  were  frequent,  in  one  case  1,000,000  ducats 
being  allocated  from  the  proceeds  of  sale  of  monastic 
lands  for  this  purpose. 

The  time  was  now  fast  approaching  when  might  be 
expected  the  cessation  of  the  evils  that  had  attended  the 
change  of  dynasty  at  Naples,  and  the  fruition  of  the 
great  reforms  introduced  ;  but  just  at  this  moment  it 
was  fated  that  Joseph  should  resign  his  Italian  throne. 
He  was  only  a  piece  in  the  world-wide  game  of  chess 
in  which  Napoleon  had  made  kings  his  pawns,  and  a 
new  phase  of  the  game  now  required  Joseph's  presence 
on  another  square. 

The  twelve  months  that  elapsed  between  Tilsit  and 
Bayonne  mark  the  central  point  of  the  history  of  the 
French  Empire.  Before  this  was  the  struggle  to  obtain 
mastery,  afterwards  the  struggle  to  retain  it.  All 
questions  of  external  policy  seem  to  go  up  to  or  come 
down  from  that  culminating  point,  and  it  is  time  to  see 
what  relation  the  affairs  of  Naples  bore  to  the  other 
great  questions  then  revolved  by  Napoleon.  After 
Austerlitz  his  fortune  had  appeared  firmly  established. 
The  Empire  was  crowned  by  victory  ;  public  confidence 
and  financial  stability  were  both  assured.  Napoleon 
returned  to  Paris  an  appreciably  changed  and  older  man 
physically,  and  no  less  so  politically.  The  eighth  day 
of  Nivose  of  the  year  XIV.  had  marked  the  end  of  a 
period,  the  ist  day  of  January  1806  ushered  in  a  new 
one.  From  this  date  the  Empire  might  be  viewed  as 
an  established  institution,  and  the  question  of  how  it 
was  to  be  carried  on  as  an  institution,  that  is,  apart 
from  the  life  of  one  man,  rapidly  made  headway  as 
one  of  vital  moment.  The  question  of  his  succession 
was  indirectly  involved  in  the  Italian  policy  of  the 
Emperor. 


i82  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Joseph  Bonaparte,  as  the  eldest  and  as  the  most 
docile  of  the  Emperor's  brothers,  had  some  preten- 
sions. The  decree  by  which  he  was  appointed  King  of 
Naples,  although  it  precluded  the  joining  of  the  French 
and  Neapolitan  crowns,  had  not  excluded  Joseph  from 
his  brother's  succession.  In  northern  Italy  a  similarly 
ambiguous  state  of  affairs  prevailed.  In  the  designa- 
tion of  what  had  formerly  been  the  Cisalpine  Republic, 
and  in  his  declarations  to  the  Lombard  representatives  at 
Lyons,  [Napoleon  had  indicated  the  possibility  of  Italian 
nationality.  In  a  note  of  Champagny  to  Cardinal 
Caprara  he  had  declared  that  "  all  Italy,  Rome,  Naples, 
and  Milan  form  an  offensive  and  defensive  league."  ^  In 
his  offers  of  renouncing  the  crown  of  Italy  in  1 805,  in 
his  acquiescence  in  the  generally  expressed  view  that  his 
stepson,  the  Viceroy  Eugene  Beauharnais,  might  soon 
wear  a  crown.  Napoleon  left  vague  and  dangerously 
unsettled  not  only  the  question  of  Italian  nationality 
but  that  of  the  succession  to  the  French  throne/} 