

The  manner  in  which  the  trial  was  conducted  and 
the  official  report  cannot  inspire  much  confidence. 
Onofrio  Viscardi  saved  his  life  by  giving  evidence,  and 
it  is  not  difficult  to  believe  that  he  stated  whatever  the 
police  suggested  to  him.  The  public  prosecutor  put 
his  case  forward  as  follows  :  "  The  ex-Queen,  Canosa, 
Pasquale  Viscardi  and  his  companions  are  the  authors 
and  the  executors  of  this  attempt."  A  correspondence 
carried  on  with  high-placed  personages  at  Palermo  was 
put  in  and  proved  by  Viscardi,  in  which  the  King  and 
Queen  were  constantly  referred  to,  though  not  in  a 
way  directly  implicating  them.  On  the  whole  it  can- 
not be  said  that  anything  very  material  was  proved 
beyond  the  facts  of  the  explosion  and  the  agency  of 
the  Viscardis.  The  Court,  however,  fully  accepted  the 
contentions  of  the  public  prosecutor,  and  condemned 
Domenico  Viscardi  and  one  of  his  accomplices  to 
death  ;  Pasquale  Viscardi  had  not  been  caught,  and  so 
escaped  the  death  penalty.  Several  other  accomplices 
received  lesser  sentences.^ 

Although  the  Sicilians  had  not  succeeded  in  killing 
Saliceti,  they  had  shaken  him  severely,  for  it  was  nearly 

1  Processo  per  /'  esplosioite,  passim  ;  the  evidence  of  Onofrio  Viscardi  is  of  such 
doubtful  value  that  in  this  particular  instance  it  would  appear  best  to  accept  Helfert'y 
vindication  of  Mary  Caroline.  But  one  may  adopt  the  Austrian  historian's  con- 
clusion w^ithout  entirely  sharing  his  confidence. 


i8o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

two  months  before  he  was  again  seen  in  public  ;  but, 
fortunately,  his  presence  was  not  now  so  essential  to  the 
conduct  of  affairs  as  it  had  been  a  few  months  earlier. 
How  far  matters  had  progressed  towards  a  normal 
course  can  be  judged  from  a  rapid  glance  at  the  affairs 
of  the  various  departments  of  State. 

The  treasury  receipts  that  amounted  to  900,000 
ducats  per  month  in  October  1807,  reached  1,000,000 
in  February  1808,  and  at  that  figure  balanced  expendi- 
ture. The  Neapolitan  army  had  rapidly  grown.  In 
the  summer  of  1807,  when  Napoleon  was  trying  to 
recover  from  the  heavy  losses  inflicted  on  him  by 
Bennigsen  in  Poland,  three  Neapolitan  regiments, 
some  4000  men,  had  been  sent  to  northern  Italy. 
In  March  1808  the  Neapolitan  native  army  mustered 
21,600  men.  In  the  field  of  legislation  various  decrees 
issued  in  the  early  months  of  1808,  bearing  chiefly  on 
criminal  law,  paved  the  way  for  the  introduction  of  a 
code.^  Martial  law  was  not  yet,  however,  entirely  dis- 
pensed with,  and  it  was  enacted  (May  12,  1808)  that 
all  enemies  landing,  not  forming  part  of  the  regular 
army  or  drawn  from  the  galleys,  should  be  court- 
martialled  and  shot.  Brigandage,  except  in  some  parts  of 
Calabria,  had  fallen  to  normal  proportions,  and  was  being 
actively  dealt  with  by  the  civil  and  military  authorities. 
As  a  general  rule  the  brigands  acted  in  small  bands 
and  for  the  purpose  of  robbery.  Murders  were  not  in- 
frequent, but  atrocities  quite  exceptional.  The  finances 
of  the  State  were  now  in  a  position  to  afford  some  relief 
to  the  sufferers  from  lawlessness,  and  in  the  last  few 
months  of  Joseph's  reign  the  grants  of  money  to  victims 