

1.  The  preservation  of  our  Sacred  Religion. 

2.  The  creation  of  a  pubHc  Treasury  distinct  from  the  Crown 

revenues. 

3.  The  creation  of  an  intermediate  body  and  of  a  national 

ParHament,  capable  of  enlightening  the  Sovereign,  and 
of  rendering  him  useful  services,  as  well  as  to  the 
Nation. 

4.  A  judicial  organization  that  shall  leave  the  judges  inde- 

pendent of  the  Sovereign,  and  that  shall  treat  all  citizens 
as  equals  before  the  law. 

5.  A  municipal  organization  that  shall  be  monopolized  by 

no  one,  but  aid  all. 

6.  The   protection    of  those    institutions    which    we    have 

founded,  by  means  of  which  the  creditors  of  the  State 
may  be  paid,  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  the  debts  which  we 
found  so  burdensome  on  our  assumption  of  the  Crown 
may  before  long  be  liquidated. 
As  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of  Italy,  our  august 
brother,    desires    to    interpose    his    authoritative    and    potent 
guarantee  in  this  act  which  lies  so  near  our  heart,  we  feel  con- 
fident that  our  hopes  for  the  welfare  of  our  deeply- beloved 
people  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  will  not  be  deluded,  reposing 
as  they  do  on  the  stainless  arch  of  his  immense  glory. 

Joseph. 

The  constitutional  statute  was  published  at  the  same 
date  as  Joseph's  farev^ell  proclamation  ;  it  was  constitu- 
tional more  in  name  than  in  fact.  The  only  serious  step 
it  contained  towards  popular  government  was  a  provision 
for  an  assembly  pompously  and  misleadingly  described 
as  a  Parlamento  nazionale  (Tit.  viii.).  This  assembly, 
which  was  never  convened,  was  to  be  made  up  of  ^n^ 
orders, — clergy,  nobility,  landowners,  men  of  learning, 
and  merchants, — each  sending  twenty  delegates.  All 
these  delegates  were  to  be  nominated  by  the  Crown 
with  the  sole  exception  of  the  twenty  landowners,  who 


i88  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

were  to  be  annually  chosen  by  selected  voters  named 
by  the  Crown.  From  the  tenor  of  this,  by  far  the  most 
important  concession  of  the  statute,  may  be  judged  the 
spirit  in  which  it  was  granted  by  Joseph,  or  rather  by 
Napoleon.  And  if  this  so  -  called  constitution  never 
came  into  effect  it  was  more  owing  to  its  uselessness 
than  to  its  liberality.  The  reality  was  that,  proceed- 
ing from  Joseph,  it  meant  nothing,  proceeding  from 
Napoleon  it  meant  only  this  :  that  he  wanted  to  reconcile 
the  people  of  Spain  to  his  usurpation  by  demonstrating 
that  his  rule  was  synonymous  with  benevolence  and 
liberalism. 

Having  now  for  the  second  time  removed  an  occu- 
pant of  the  throne  of  Naples,  it  became  necessary  for 
Napoleon  once  more  to  provide  a  King.  This  time 
his  choice  fell  on  a  soldier,  a  companion-in-arms,  the 
brilliancy  of  whose  military  career  and  the  closeness  of 
whose  connection  with  the  Emperor  made  it  impossible 
for  him  to  be  overlooked, — the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg, 
Great  Admiral  of  the  Empire,  and  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  French  armies  in  Spain. 