

Joseph  was  well  trained.  He  received  his  brother's 
orders  on  the  21st  of  May,  and  left  Naples  on  the  23rd, 
virtually  intrusting  the  government  to  Marshal  Jourdan 
and  Saliceti  ;  they  were  well  fitted  to  exercise  dictatorial 
power  during  an  interregnum.  The  object  of  the 
King's  sudden  journey  was  not  given  out  to  the  public. 
The  announcement  was  not,  however,  long  delayed. 
Within  a  few  days  of  his  arrival  at  Bayonne  Joseph 
wrote  a  letter  to  Roederer,  in  which  he  informed  him  of 
his  change  of  crowns,  and  expressed  regret  at  leaving 


i86  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Naples  just  when  the  results  of  their  labours  might  be 
looked  for.  He  added  that  it  was  his  intention,  with 
the  Emperor's  sanction,  to  issue  a  constitutional  decree 
as  his  parting  benefaction  to  his  subjects. 

A  few  days  later  Joseph's  accession  to  the  throne  of 
Spain  and  his  constitutional  concession  were  officially 
announced  in  the  following  extremely  characteristic  pro- 
clamation : — 

Bayonne,  June  23,  1808. 

Joseph  Napoleon,  King  of  Naples  and  Sicily 

People  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples — 

Providence,  whose  designs  are  inscrutable,  having  called  us 
to  the  throne  of  Spain  and  the  Indies,  we  have  been  placed 
under  the  cruel  necessity  of  leaving  a  people  we  have  had  such 
good  cause  to  love,  whose  happiness  was  the  dearest  care  of  our 
heart,  the  one  object  of  our  ambition.  He  alone  who  reads  in 
the  hearts  of  men  can  judge  of  the  sincerity  of  our  sentiments, 
notwithstanding  which  we  have  obeyed  another  call,  have 
accepted  another  burden,  imposed  on  us  by  the  concession  of 
rights  over  the  crown  of  Spain  acquired  by  our  august  brother 
H.M.  the  Emperor  of  the  French  and  King  of  Italy. 

In  these  solemn  circumstances,  convinced  that  institutions 
alone  are  permanent,  we  have  perceived  with  some  grief  that 
your  social  organization,  undertaken  by  us,  was  not  yet  com- 
plete, and  we  have  thought  that,  inasmuch  as  we  were  going 
far  from  you,  all  the  more  was  the  obligation  incumbent  on  us 
to  secure  in  every  way  possible  your  present  and  future  happi- 
ness. We  have  therefore  put  the  finishing  touch  to  our  work 
by  completing  the  Constitutional  Statute  of  the  Kingdom  on  the 
lines  already  partly  laid  down,  and  in  the  way  best  adapted  for 
the  necessities  of  our  times,  for  our  relations  with  neighbouring 
states,  for  the  national  character,  a  knowledge  of  which  we 
have  striven  to  acquire  from  the  moment  at  which  we  assumed 
the  responsibility  of  power,  to  the  best  advantage  possible  under 
the  circumstances  in  which  we  were  placed. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  187 

The  principal  objects  aimed  at  in  this  document  will  be  : — 