

The  situation  that  followed  was  curious.  Hudson 
Lowe  withdrew  his  forces  into  the  town  of  Capri  and 
the  French  overran  the  two  high  ends  of  the  island, 
got  a  foothold  at  the  northern  landing-place,  and  there 
managed  to  land  one  or  two  small  guns  to  attack  the 
garrison.  But  the  French  seemed  no  more  able  to 
carry  the  town  than  the  British  to  drive  them  from  the 
island.  A  deadlock  ensued  that  lasted  for  two  weeks, 
and  that  Murat  watched  with  the  utmost  impatience 
from  the  Punta  di  Campanella.  During  this  time  high 
winds  and  storms  cut  off  Lamarque  from  communica- 
tions, drove  some  British  cruisers  from  the  neighbour- 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  201 

hood  of  the  island,  and  compelled  General  Macfarlane, 
who  had  embarked  three  regiments  at  Messina  for 
Lowe's  relief,  to  return  to  port.  Finally,  on  the  i8th 
of  October,  having  reached  the  end  of  his  supplies  and 
munitions,  the  British  Governor  surrendered  with  780 
men.  The  terms  of  capitulation  provided  that  they 
should  be  prisoners  of  war  for  one  year  on  parole. 
Thus  King  Joachim,  within  six  weeks  of  ascending 
the  throne,  accomplished  the  brilliant  feat  of  removing 
the  British  colours  from  the  all  but  impregnable  rock 
whence  they  menaced  the  security  of  his  capital.  ^ 
So  delighted  was  the  King  at  this  auspicious  begin- 
ning of  his  reign,  or  so  beneficial  did  he  judge  the 
impression  produced  by  his  victory,  that  he  immediately 
proclaimed  an  amnesty  for  all  political  offences. 

With  Joseph  on  the  throne,  the  relations  of  Naples 
with  France  had  always  been  on  a  clear  and  well- 
defined  basis,  for  his  pliancy  and  subservience  to  his 
brother  were  beyond  all  possibility  of  question.  But 
with  the  new  king  a  totally  new  position  immediately 
arose. 

Joachim  Murat  was  too  much  a  man  of  action,  too 
successful,  too  self-reliant,  tamely  to  submit  to  any 
encroachment  on  what  he  considered  his  due.  At  the 
time  when  Napoleon  had  made  him  Grand  Duke  of 
Berg  he  had  already,  perhaps  rather  ridiculously,  asserted 
his  rights  as  against  the  Emperor.      Napoleon  asked 

^  A  few  well-known  incidents  of  the  capture  of  Capri  have  been  purposely 
omitted  as  being  of  slight  importance.  One  of  these  is  the  retreat  of  Church's 
company  from  Anacapri,  another  is  that  of  Colletta's  reconnaissance  of  the  island. 
The  Neapolitan  historian's  account  of  this  last  matter  is  clearly  apocryphal  in  part ; 
to  discuss  how  many  grains  of  truth  his  account  contains  appeared  unnecessary  and 
uninteresting.  As  to  Colletta's  credibility  see  Quintavalle,  Pignatelli-Strongoli, 
Discorsi ;  Borrelli,  Appendice.  On  Colletta's  own  showing,  d'Hautpoul  rejected 
his  proffered  advice. 