


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  197 

very  given  to  exhibitions  of  what  was  known  as 
sensibiHty,  a  fashionable  habit  of  emotional  exaggera- 
tion then  prevalent.  This  habit  frequently  threw  him 
into  paroxysms  of  tears,  and  together  with  a  hasty 
temper  led  to  many  scenes  in  which  Caroline  generally 
played  the  more  dignified  and  not  least  successful  part. 
It  will  be  seen  that  when  Murat  reached  the  great  crisis 
of  his  life,  his  hastiness  and  sensibility  became  matters 
of  considerable  political  importance. 

On  the  28  th  of  June  the  Monitor e  announced  the 
elevation  of  Joseph  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  on 
the  2nd  of  August  it  published  the  decrees  proclaiming 
the  accession  to  the  throne  of  Naples  of  Joachim  Murat 
and  his  guarantee  of  the  constitutional  statute.  The 
style  adopted  by  the  new  king  in  these  decrees  ran  as 
follows :  "  Gioacchino  Napoleone,  per  la  grazia  di  Dio 
e  per  la  costituzione  dello  Stato  Re  delle  Due  Sicilie." 

On  the  6th  of  September  King  Joachim  made  his 
formal  entry  into  his  capital.  He  rode  through  the 
streets  attired  in  one  of  his  most  briUiant  uniforms,  and 
followed  by  a  large  and  glittering  staff.  At  the 
Cathedral  of  San  Gennaro  a  solemn  service  was  held,  and 
illuminations  followed.  The  people  appeared  greatly 
pleased  with  their  new  monarch's  splendid  and  martial 
appearance,  with  his  radiant  and  smiling  face,  and  gave 
him  a  good  welcome.  The  general  satisfaction  was 
increased  by  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  widespread 
fear  lest  Joseph's  removal  might  result  in  the  incorpora- 
tion of  Naples  with  the  French  Empire.  Two  weeks 
later  Caroline  arrived  ;  her  handsome  presence  and 
bearing  producing  a  favourable  impression. 

Murat,  with  characteristic  impetuosity,  lost  not  a 
moment  in  giving  to  his  reign  the  military  impulse  it  could 


198  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

not  fail  to  have.  His  bearing  and  affability  made  an 
instantaneous  and  profound  impression  on  the  Neapolitan 
officers  who  were  received  by  him  ;  he  expressed  the 
utmost  confidence  in  them,  and  promised  them  victory, 
glory,  and  promotion.  They  were  completely  dazzled, 
and  saw  in  him  a  second  Charles  XII. 

From  the  windows  and  terrace  of  the  Palazzo  Reale, 
that  Joachim  Murat  now  occupied,  may  be  seen  one  of 
the  most  lovely  and  majestic  views  in  the  world.  The 
Bay  of  Naples  stretches  its  dancing  blue  waters  across 
from  the  busy  arsenal  towards  the  long,  curving 
sweep  of  coast  over  which  the  lofty  cone  of  Vesuvius 
rears  its  smoking  crest.  Along  the  distant  cliffs  of 
Sorrento,  whence  white  villas  flash  back  the  rays  of 
the  descending  sun,  the  coast  curves  further  and  further 
towards  the  open  mouth,  where  the  long  rocky  back  of 
Capri,  like  a  slumbering  dragon  of  the  waters,  guards 
the  entrance  to  the  bay.  This  is  the  culminating  point 
of  the  landscape  ;  it  was  the  point  that,  in  the  year  1808, 
drew  the  soldier's  and  the  sovereign's  eye.  Was  he 
the  master,  was  he  the  lord  of  that  wonderful  country, 
or  was  that  Power  whose  hostile  flag  waved  on  the 
topmost  summit  of  the  island  ^  For  several  days  after 
he  took  possession  of  the  palace,  Joachim  paced  the 
terrace,  often  stopping  and  gazing  at  Capri  through  a 
telescope,  and  finally  he  resolved  on  its  capture. 