

1  "  One  never  regrets  this  sort  of  local  knowledge." — Napoleon  to  Murat,  July 
27,  1801. 

VOL.  I  O 


194  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  his  choice  prudently  fell  on  the  crown  just  vacated 
by  Joseph  Bonaparte. 

An  important  factor  in  the  rise  of  Murat  had  been 
his  marriage.  Shortly  after  Brumaire  Maria  Annun- 
ziata,  afterwards  named  Caroline,  youngest  sister  of  the 
First  Consul,  became  his  wife.  Caroline  Bonaparte  had 
all  the  traits  of  beauty  usual  in  her  family  ;  good 
features,  fine  eyes,  a  perfect  skin,  delicately  modelled 
hands  and  feet.  She  resembled  Napoleon  in  character 
more  closely  perhaps  than  did  any  other  of  his  brothers 
or  sisters.  Napoleon  said  that  in  her  was  "  much 
stuff,  much  character,  and  unbounded  ambition  "  ;  he 
might  with  equal  justice  have  said  it  of  himself.  In 
Caroline  ambition  was,  in  truth,  the  master  passion,  and 
made  her  dominate  other  failings,  and  to  a  certain 
extent  preserve  appearances  which  her  sisters  were  far 
too  apt  to  neglect. 

The  marriage  of  Joachim  Murat  and  Caroline 
Bonaparte  was  a  love  match.  General  Thiebault  has 
left  in  his  Memoirs  a  delightful  glimpse  of  them  in  the 
early  days  : — 

I  had  breakfast  with  General  Murat.  ...  It  would  not  have 
been  easy  to  be  more  simple  than  was  Murat,  more  unaffected 
than  was  the  future  Queen  of  Naples  .  .  .  she  as  lovely  as 
an  angel,  he  superb  in  figure,  in  strength,  in  features  .  .  . 
covered  with  laurels  gathered  in  Italy,  in  Germany,  in  Egypt, — 
was  there  anything  lacking  to  complete  their  happiness  and  their 
hopes  ?  .  .  .  After  an  excellent  breakfast  served  on  handsome 
china,  a  coarse  earthenware  pot  was  brought  in  containing 
some  raisine  :  "  This  is  one  of  our  provincial  titbits,"  said 
Murat  J  "  my  mother  makes  it  and  sends  it  me."  ^ 

The    early    affection    of   the    Murats    unfortunately 

^  Thiebault,  Mems.  iii.  141  j  raisine  is  a  preserve  into  which  pears,  grapes,  and 
other  ingredients  enter. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  195 

dwindled,  though  some  show  of  fondness  and  an  official 
pretence  of  correct  conjugal  relations  was  maintained. 
Before  long  Caroline's  ambition  began  to  play  a  large 
part  in  the  life  of  husband  and  wife.  Murat  required 
little  enough  pushing  on  the  road  on  which  his  wife  was 
urging  him,  and  on  this  subject  complete  harmony  long 
subsisted  between  them.  However  far  the  unreasonable 
exigencies  of  Napoleonic  warfare  might  lead  him,  Murat 
always  had  at  Paris  a  scheming,  plotting,  bold  and 
unscrupulous  agent,  in  whose  hands  his  interests  were 
constantly  being  pushed.  Right  and  left  Caroline  made 
friends,  and  at  any  cost.  No  one  could  predict  the 
future — and  what  could  be  more  possible  than  that  the 
Emperor  might  be  killed  in  battle  ?  Foreseeing  that 
possibility  and  others,  Caroline  cultivated  with  success 
the  friendship  of  Junot,  military  Governor  of  Paris. 
She  also  made  a  friend,  who  later  stood  her  in  good 
stead,  in  the  person  of  the  Austrian  Ambassador,  Count 
Metternich. 