

From  the  opening  of  the  Italian  campaign  of  1796, 
Murat's  rise  was  rapid.  Notwithstanding  a  personal 
incident  in  which  both  he  and  Josephine  Bonaparte 
showed  some  little  indiscretion,  he  became  one  of  his 
commander's  most  trusted  subordinates.  He  followed 
him  to  Egypt,  and  there  proved  himself  a  horseman 
worthy  to  cross  sabres  with  the  Mameluk  cavalry. 
He  was  one  of  the  few  selected  to  return  to  France 
with  Bonaparte,  and  the  choice  turned  out  fortunate, 
for  on  the  1 8  th  of  Brumaire,  when  the  would-be  dictator 
faltered  before  the  storm  of  Republican  anger  that 
greeted  him  in  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  it  was 
Murat's  arm  that  supported  and  sheltered  him  from 
their  fury  ;  it  was  Murat  who  brought  his  grenadiers 
into  the  Hall ;  it  was  Murat  who  at  that  doubtful 
moment  rent  the  existing  Constitution  with  his  bayonets, 
saved  Napoleon  from  Caesar's  fate,  and  made  possible 
the  Consulate  and  the  Empire. 

His  services,  though  not  proclaimed  from  the  house- 
tops, were  fittingly  rewarded.  He  was  made  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  French  troops  in  Italy,  and 
there  began  to  show  that  his  mind  was  not  entirely 
given  up  to  military  matters.     He  successfully  cultivated 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  193 

the  good  graces  of  the  Pope,  who  showed  him  great 
marks  of  esteem.  He  also  made  a  flying  visit  to  Naples, 
acting  on  Napoleon's  prophetic  prompting,  "Ce  sont  des 
connaissances  locales  qu*on  ne  se  repent  jamais  d'avoir."  ^ 
At  Naples,  where  he  only  stayed  a  few  days,  his  striking 
presence,  affability,  and  open-handed  generosity  created 
a  favourable  impression.  King  Ferdinand,  more  from 
fear  than  any  other  sentiment,  offered  him  the  Orders 
of  the  Kingdom.  How  little  could  he  foresee  that  but 
seven  years  later  the  strange-looking,  low-born  repub- 
lican general  whom  he  secretly  viewed  with  contempt, 
would  be  sitting  with  greater  magnificence  and  greater 
prestige  than  his  own  on  the  throne  from  which  he  now 
condescended  to  honour  him  ! 

In  the  early  campaigns  of  the  Empire,  Murat  held 
supreme  command  of  the  cavalry,  and  took  a  brilliant 
part,  especially  in  the  destruction  of  the  Prussian  army 
after  Jena.  He  became  Grand  Duke  of  Berg,  a  con- 
siderable principality  on  the  borders  of  Holland,  and 
entered  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  In  1808, 
when  it  came  to  Spain's  turn  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of 
French  invasion,  it  was  to  the  Grand  Duke  that  was 
given  the  supreme  command  of  the  large  army  collected 
for  the  purpose.  It  was  in  the  early  part  of  May, 
while  his  headquarters  were  at  Madrid,  that  Murat 
received  his  greatest  and,  as  it  proved,  final  promotion. 
Napoleon  offered  him  his  choice  between  the  thrones 
of  Portugal  and  Naples.  There  may  have  been  a 
moment's  hesitation  ;  there  may  have  been  disappoint- 
ment that  the  apparently  richer  prize  of  Spain  was  not 
destined  for  him.  But  Murat's  mind  did  not  balance 
long  on  the  alternative  offered  for   his  consideration, 