

The  operation  on  which  the  King  now  directed  all 
his  energies  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty, — foolhardy, 
as  a  British  officer  described  it.  The  island  of  Capri 
is  about  three  miles  long  from  east  to  west  by  half  as 
wide.  It  is  entirely  mountainous,  and  presents  a  nearly 
unbroken  line  of  cliff.  The  landing-places  are  two 
small  open  roadsteads, — one  to  the  north,  the  other  to 
the   south  ;  between   them   the   island  is  narrower  and 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  199 

lower  than  at  its  eastern  and  western  points.  On  the 
crest  between  the  landing-places  was  perched  the  little 
town  of  Capri,  the  fortifications  of  which  and  of  the 
whole  island  had  been  much  strengthened  by  the 
Governor,  Major  Hudson  Lowe.  Five  forts  and 
numerous  breastworks  made  doubly  strong  this  natural 
fortress,  and  had  earned  for  it  the  name  of  the  "  little 
Gibraltar."  Sir  John  Stuart  had  recently  added  to 
Hudson  Lowe's  garrison,  which  consisted  of  an  ex- 
cellent battalion  of  Corsican  Rangers,  a  battalion  of 
recently  recruited  Maltese  riflemen,  of  rather  poor 
quality. 

The  Neapolitan  preparations  were  quickly  made  and 
with  great  secrecy.  A  considerable  number  of  small 
gun  vessels  were  got  ready,  including  twenty  -  five 
equipped  and  presented  to  the  King  on  his  accession 
by  the  merchants  of  Naples  ;  this  flotilla  was  placed 
under  the  command  of  the  brave  and  dashing  Captain 
Bausan,  a  Neapolitan  officer  trained  in  the  British  navy. 
Detachments  were  carefully  picked  from  the  regiments 
quartered  at  Naples,  and  early  in  the  morning  of  the 
4th  of  October  1 500  grenadiers  and  chasseurs  left  Naples 
for  Capri  in  sixty  boats.  A  similar  detachment  of  400 
men  started  from  Salerno  at  the  same  time.  Lamarque 
was  in  command  and  d'Hautpoul  was  in  charge  of  the 
engineers.  One  frigate,  one  corvette,  and  twenty-six 
gun  vessels  convoyed  the  troops. 

Joachim,  with  Regnier  and  Saliceti,  and  attended  by 
his  staff,  took  up  his  position  at  the  nearest  point  of  the 
mainland,  the  Punta  di  Campanella,  and  followed  the 
operations  through  a  telescope.  The  flotilla  divided 
into  three  sections,  and  at  about  3  p.m.  the  leading  one 
got  close  in  under  the  cliffs  at  the  south-eastern  corner 
of  the  island,  and  the  men  scrambled  from  the  boats 


200  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

on  to  the  rocks  and  began  to  work  their  way  up  the 
cliffs. 

At  Anacapri,  towards  the  south-west  of  the  island, 
the  French  equally  made  good  a  lodgment,  and  by 
means  of  ladders  and  ropes  began  clambering  up 
towards  the  plateau.  It  was  now  discovered  that  the 
precipitous  nature  of  the  ascent  was  more  of  an 
advantage  than  a  difficulty  to  the  assailants,  for  the 
Maltese  riflemen  posted  on  the  edge  of  the  plateau 
above  could  And  no  mark  they  could  hit  so  directly 
below  them.  The  fact  that  the  defenders  were  raw 
recruits,  the  attackers  picked  veterans,  decided  this 
curious  combat  in  favour  of  the  French.  Well  led  by 
Lamarque  and  a  number  of  experienced  officers,  the 
grenadiers  and  voltigeurs,  in  groups  and  singly,  worked 
their  way  up  the  cliffs,  took  shelter,  and  opened  fire  as 
opportunity  offered,  and  although  in  some  places  parties 
had  to  pass  the  whole  night  in  exposed  positions  midway 
up  the  cliffs,  yet  by  the  following  morning  the  plateau 
of  Anacapri  with  many  prisoners  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  French  ;  this  gave  them  complete  control 
of  the  western  half  of  the  island. 