

In  such  a  school  Murat  could  not  fail  to  reach  a  high 
rank.  His  exceptional  ability  as  a  leader  of  horse  was 
quickly  recognised  by  Napoleon.  For  he  had  an  unerring 
judgment  in  manoeuvring  any  number  of  horsemen,  a 
perfect  eye  for  country  and  for  pace,  to  which  he  added 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  191 

lightning-like  decision,  and  a  courage  with  just  the  pro- 
portion of  recklessness  that  makes  a  great  leader  of 
cavalry.  The  man  who  would  lead  horsemen  must 
take  risks,  must  ride  in  front,  in  plain  view  ;  Murat's 
striking  person  was  soon  familiar  to  every  trooper  of 
the  French  army.  With  only  a  switch  in  his  hand, 
gorgeously  attired,  his  hat  surmounted  with  tufts  of 
feathers  clasped  with  diamonds  and  rubies,  long  lines 
of  glittering  horsemen  galloping  behind  him,  the  ex- 
traordinary, flaming  figure  of  Joachim  Murat  soon  fed 
the  legends  of  every  camp  fire.  His  was  the  brillant 
apparition  that  the  Austrian,  Prussian,  or  Russian  most 
dreaded  to  see  bursting  from  the  whirling  dust-cloud 
that  swept  across  the  battle-field.  Ever  foremost  in 
battle,  and  riding  into  his  opponents'  ranks,  he  never 
made  use  of  sword  or  pistol,  and  prided  himself  on 
never  having  killed  a  man.  So  exceptional  was  his 
courage,  so  picturesque  his  personality,  that  the  Czar 
Alexander  is  reported  to  have  issued  orders  that  no 
Russian  soldier  was  to  fire  at  him ;  yet  so  irresistible 
was  his  instinct  for  charging  any  and  every  force  of  the 
enemy  he  might  meet,  that  the  French  troopers  had 
nicknamed  him  ''  le  boucher  de  I'armee,"  while  the 
Empress  Josephine  once  declared  that  he  positively 
reeked  of  gunpowder,  and  would  have  sabred  the  Eternal 
Father  himself.  The  Marechal  de  Castellane,  at  one 
time  attached  to  his  staff,  has  left  the  following  account 
of  Murat  and  of  one  of  the  extraordinary  costumes  he 
loved  to  appear  in  : — 

A  braver  man  than  the  King  of  Naples  is  not  to  be  found  ; 
he  faces  greater  dangers  than  his  troopers.  Wherever  a  shot  is 
fired,  there  he  will  certainly  be  found,  dressed  in  some  such  way 
as  this — a  wide  hat  trimmed  with  heavy  gold  braid,  over  that  a 
white  plume  surmounted  by  a  long  white  egrette  surrounded 


192  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

with  other  feathers  ;  his  hair  long  and  curled  ;  a  cloak  of 
green  velvet  trimmed  with  gold  braid,  under  that  a  sky-blue 
frogged  tunic,  also  braided  with  gold  .  .  .  ;  crimson  breeches 
of  Polish  fashion,  braided  with  gold  ;  and  yellow  boots. 

Murat's  personal  appearance  was  as  striking  as  his 
manner  of  attiring  himself.  His  heavy  lips  and  mouth, 
his  large  blue  eyes,  and  masses  of  curling  black  hair, 
gave  him  a  somewhat  coarse  and  sensual  appearance 
that  was  only  redeemed  by  the  strength  marked  by  the 
line  of  the  nose  and  brow,  and  by  the  affability  pro- 
claimed by  the  winning  smile  that  rarely  left  him. 