

Not  long  afterwards  occurre4  an  incident  that  very 
much  increased  the  latent  antagonism  between  the  two 
brothers-in-law.  The  treaty  of  Tilsit  had  closed  the 
first  cycle  of  the  wars  of  the  Empire,  and  had  left  it  at 
its  height  of  glory,  prestige,  and  power.  Yet  even  at 
that  moment  the  Austrian  Ambassador  at  Paris,  the 
shrewdest  of  European  diplomatists,  Count  Metternich, 
foresaw  nothing  but  anarchy  in  the  event  of  the 
Emperor's  death,  and  wrote:  '' It  is  in  truth  curious 
that  Napoleon  .  .   .  has  never  taken   one   single    step 

^  "It  pains  me  to  hear  you  have  played  monkey  tricks  in  honour  of  S,  Gennaro." 
Napoleon  to  Murat,  Nov.  14,  1808.     Napoleon,  Corr.  (Brotonne),  151. 


204  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

tending  to  ensure  the  existence  of  his  successors."^  The 
fact  probably  was  that  Napoleon  neither  knew  where, 
nor  cared,  to  look  for  a  successor.  His  brothers  and 
sisters,  with  the  possible  exception  of  Joseph,  had  proved 
more  troublesome  than  helpful,  and  among  them  not 
one  was  fit  to  hold  the  Empire  together.  The  once- 
contemplated  succession  of  the  eldest  son  of  his  brother 
Louis  and  of  Hortense  had  only  excited  the  ill-will  of 
the  other  members  of  his  family.  There  were  in  reality 
but  three  persons  to  be  found  among  the  members  of 
the  Imperial  family  who  could  reasonably  hope  to  hold 
the  throne  after  Napoleon  :  Joseph  Bonaparte,  Eugene 
Beauharnais,  and  Joachim  Murat.  The  first  had  the 
best  claim  as  head  of  the  Bonaparte  family,  as  already 
a  king,  as  the  staunch  and  unswerving  executor  of 
Napoleon*s  behests  ;  but  he  was  weak,  and  inspired  ftw 
men  either  with  attachment  or  respect.  The  Viceroy 
of  Italy  was  strong  in  the  Emperor*s  adoption,  in  his 
undoubted  political  and  military  ability,  in  his  mother's 
great  solicitude  and  constant  endeavour  to  further  his 
interests  ;  but  he  was  very  young,  and  had  not  proved 
his  mettle  as  he  did  later.  Murat  was  pre-eminent  in 
the  favour  of  a  great  part  of  the  army^  in  the  precedence 
he  had  long  held  over  other  marshals,  in  the  unscrupu- 
lous ambition  and  intriguing  power  of  his  wife. 

For  the  many  who  believed  that  a  change  of  govern- 
ment must  turn  on  the  opinion  of  the  army,  the  support 
of  the  most  conspicuous  and  not  least  popular  figure 
in  that  army,  the  support  of  a  brother-in-law  of  the 
Emperor,  appeared  desirable  if  not  indispensable.  How 
Caroline,  competing  with  the  Empress  Josephine,  had 
secured  the  benevolent  regard  of  Junot,  Governor  of 
Paris,  has  been  related.     Nothing  came  of  this  intrigue, 

^  Metternich  to  Stadion,  July  26,  1807,  Metternich,  Mems.  ii.  145. 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  205 