


202  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

him  to  give  up  the  fortress  of  Wesel  to  the  Empire, 
for  which  he  offered  in  exchange  the  duchy  of  Nassau, 
and  the  principality  of  Dissemburg  ;  the  Grand  Duke 
flatly  declined,  and  talked,  in  loud,  Gascon  fashion,  of 
shutting  himself  up  in  Wesel  and  defending  it  to  the 
last  cartridge.  Finally,  it  became  necessary  to  send  a 
detachment  of  French  troops  to  occupy  the  fortress 
without  the  Grand  Duke's  consent.  This  was  only  a 
foretaste  of  what  was  soon  to  come. 

From  the  moment  of  the  arrival  of  Caroline  at 
Naples  there  was  an  atmosphere  of  intrigue  about  the 
Court,  and  the  King  and  Queen  were  soon  at  the  head 
of  two  opposed  parties.  Caroline,  strong  in  her  abilities 
and  ambition,  in  her  relationship  and  influence  with  the 
great  dispenser  of  royal  dignities,  in  the  special  rever- 
sion created  for  her  to  the  crown  of  Naples  in  the  event 
of  Joachim's  predeceasing  her,  aspired  to  rule  in  the 
field  of  politics,  leaving  to  her  husband  the  more  con- 
genial pursuit  of  war.  She  began  by  reposing  her 
policy  on  her  brother's  support,  and  secured  an  im- 
portant ally  in  the  person  of  his  Minister  to  the 
Neapolitan  Court,  d'Aubusson  Lafeuillade.  Between 
Napoleon  and  Joachim  there  was  still  some  little  coolness 
subsisting  from  the  Wesel  incident  and  others,  so  that 
what  with  his  wife  and  his  Imperial  brother-in-law,  the 
new  king  found  the  throne  of  Naples  not  altogether  a 
comfortable  one  to  occupy. 

Napoleon,  though  making  a  great  pretence  of  dis- 
tributing thrones,  could  not  bear  to  surrender  one  iota 
of  authority,  nor  to  see  another  making  show  of  climb- 
ing the  same  ladder  of  which  he  had  himself  reached 
the  topmost  rung.  The  Emperor  evidently  anticipated 
from  the  first  that  Joachim  would  make  a  very  diff^erent 
sort  of  provincial  governor  from  Joseph,  and  he  appears 


CHAP.  VI        MURAT,  KING  OF  NAPLES  203 

to  have  decided  to  keep  him  under  strict  subordina- 
tion. Napoleon,  among  his  first  assertions  of  authority, 
issued  instructions  that,  in  his  capacity  of  commander 
of  the  French  troops  stationed  in  the  kingdom,  the 
King  of  Naples  should  draw  up  official  reports  in  due 
form  for  CJarke,  the  Minister  of  War.  The  Emperor's 
communications  to  the  King  were  pointedly  framed  in 
a  crisp,  commanding  style,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
express  trenchant  opinions  and  often  commands  on  the 
most  minute  details  of  the  affairs  of  Naples.  When 
Joachim,  conforming  to  the  custom  of  centuries,  a 
custom  still  officially  recognised  at  our  day,  paid  his 
devotion  to  the  miraculous  performance  of  S.  Gennaro, 
Napoleon,  more  tersely  than  politely,  wrote  :  "J'apprends 
avec  peine  que  vous  avez  fait  des  singeries  pour  St. 
Janvier."  ^  When  the  Emperor  was  informed  that  a 
change  was  contemplated  in  the  Neapolitan  Code,  with 
a  view  to  meeting  the  strong  religious  prejudices  of  the 
Neapolitans  on  the  question  of  divorce,  he  ordered  that 
the  change  should  not  be  made  in  the  same  imperative 
form  that  he  would  have  used  for  ordering  the  move- 
ment of  an  army  corps. 