

The  grant  of  the  crown  of  Naples  to  Joachim  and 
Caroline  satisfied  an  ambition  they  had  long  felt. 
Caroline  was  now  the  equal  in  rank  of  her  brothers 
Louis  and  Joseph,  and  Joachim  satisfied  a  desire  that 
had  arisen  as  early  as  1806,  when  he  already  aspired  to 
become  monarch  of  a  resuscitated  kingdom  of  Poland. 

With  Murat  now  a  king  the  question  must  be  asked  : 
what  were  his  qualifications  for  that  exalted  position  ? 
As  a  corporal  he  had  deserved  promotion  at  his 
colonel's  hands  ;  as  a  colonel,  the  representant  du  peuple 
Saliceti  had  commended  him  ;  as  a  general.  Napoleon 
had  made  him  his  Master  of  the  Horse  ;  was  he 
likely  to  win  equal  success  as  a  king  }  Without 
any  question  he  possessed  that  most  conspicuous  of 
all    kingly    qualities,    military    courage.      His    ability 


196  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

as  a  leader  of  cavalry  has  already  been  noticed,  but 
it  must  be  added  that  as  a  commander-in-chief  he 
could  not  be  placed  in  the  first  rank  of  the  generals  of 
his  day, — in  the  same  rank  as  Massena  or  Wellington. 
Murat  could  lead  troops,  but  he  was  often  far  too 
impetuous  ;  he  did  not  excel  in  organizing,  was  a  bad 
disciplinarian,  and  had  no  eye  for  the  selection  of  sub- 
ordinates. When  he  became  King  of  Naples,  men  of 
no  military  capacity  rose  from  captains  to  generals  in  a 
few  years,  while  in  France  officers  of  the  finest  abilities, 
Regnier,  Belliard,  St.  Cyr  and  so  many  others,  could 
barely  earn  a  step  by  long  and  extraordinary  services. 

Murat's  open-handed  bountifulness  perhaps  became 
a  kingly  part,  perhaps  helped  to  make  his  striking 
personality  popular,  but  it  demoralized  the  Neapolitan 
army.  His  bearing  was  dignified,  his  demeanour  affable, 
his  smile  engaging,  a  military  brusqueness  covered  with 
a  becoming  veil  lapses  into  the  language  or  behaviour  of 
the  camp.  He  was  by  no  means  deficient  in  ability  and 
political  instinct,  but  he  always  remained  thoroughly 
Gascon  in  his  suspiciousness  and  jealousy  of  control. 
Murat  spoke  Italian  well,  and  was  always  able  to  hold  his 
own  in  the  discussions  of  his  Ministers.  If  his  qualities 
proved  not  sufficient  to  retain  the  difficult  crown  he 
was  called  on  to  wear,  yet  it  might  fairly  be  said  of  him, 
as  an  old  German  diplomat  once  told  Cavaignac,  that 
there  was  no  other  king  in  Europe  better  fitted  for  the 
part  he  had  to  play.  In  political  ability  he  was  the 
equal  of  most  of  the  European  sovereigns,  in  goodness 
of  heart  he  excelled  most,  in  the  military  virtues  he  was 
the  superior  of  all. 

One  more  trait  must  be  added  to  complete  the 
portrait  of  the  new  King  of  Naples,  one  the  importance 
of  which   has   been  somewhat  exaggerated.      He  was 