

for  the  eventuality  on  which  it  hinged  did  not  arise. 
But  when,  in  1808,  the  Emperor,  after  barely  a  year's 
repose,  plunged  once  more  into  warfare,  shrewd  men 
began  to  view  with  misgiving  his  growing  abuse  of  mili- 
tary genius  and  power,  and  wondered  whether  a  Spanish 
bullet  or  knife  might  not  touch  the  charmed  life  that 
had  so  often  braved  unscathed  the  Austrians,  Prussians, 
and  Russians.  At  this  moment,  in  December  1808, 
while  Napoleon  was  toiling  through  the  snow- clad 
passes  of  revolted  Spain  after  Sir  John  Moore,  Talley- 
rand and  Fouche,  long  enemies,  became  reconciled. 
"  These  two  political  personages  made  their  entrance  at 
a  fashionable  reception  arm  in  arm,  and  ostentatiously 
promenaded  their  alliance  before  the  astonished  guests. 
It  was  a  little  thing  and  yet  it  was  a  great  one  ;  for 
Talleyrand  and  Fouche  were  the  two  most  delicate 
political  weathercocks  in  France,  and  if  they  both  veered 
together  it  was  safe  to  conclude  there  was  something  in  the 
wind."  ^  The  political  circles  of  Paris  were  astonished 
and  alarmed  at  this  move,  and  suddenly  realized  possi- 
bilities that  the  triumphs  of  Napoleon  had  momentarily 
obliterated. 

It  was  evident  that  at  any  moment  might  arise  a 
political  situation  in  which  Napoleon  would  not  be  a 
factor  ;  when  it  did  arise,  Talleyrand  and  Fouche  were 
prepared  to  solve  it.  The  contemporary  authorities, 
however,  are  pretty  well  agreed  that  this  intrigue  did 
not  go  very  far,  and  it  is  only  from  events  that  took 
place  a  year  later  that  it  might  be  inferred  that  Murat 
took  an  active  part  in  it.  Yet  it  seems  clear  that  it 
was  on  him  that  the  two  politicians  looked  as  the  future 
occupant  of  the  Imperial  throne,  and  that  it  was  in  this 
sense  that  the  Emperor  himself  understood  the  situation. 

1  Johnston,  Napoleon,  i6i. 


2o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

This  at  all  events  may  be  taken  as  the  starting-point  of 
an  antagonism  that  finally  became  an  open  breach. 

Napoleon  suddenly  left  his  army  in  Spain,  reached 
Paris  late  in  January  1809,  and  vindicated  his  authority 
by  disgracing  and  earning  the  undying  hatred  of  Talley- 
rand, the  astute  statesman  who  had  for  so  many  years 
and  with  so  much  dexterity  managed  the  foreign  relations 
of  France.  His  brother-in-law,  however,  the  Emperor 
could  not  touch ;  all  he  could  do  was  to  keep  him  at  a 
distance,  and  when,  a  few  weeks  later,  the  French  armies 
were  once  more  set  in  motion  towards  the  frontiers  of 
Austria,  they  lacked  the  inspiring  presence  of  their  great 
cavalry  leader,  whom  the  Emperor,  doubtless  to  the 
regret  of  Caroline,  informed  that  his  presence  would  be 
of  greater  value  at  Naples  than  with  the  army. 