


214  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

kingship,  and  not  in  the  military,  that  Joachim  Murat 
has  earned  the  larger  title  to  the  consideration  and 
esteem  of  posterity. 

It  may  be  said  fairly,  and  in  no  spirit  of  deprecia- 
tion, that  the  reforms  initiated  by  Joseph  had  remained 
largely  on  paper  and  of  no  effect.  The  administrative 
machine,  the  police,  and  to  a  certain  extent  the  work 
of  legislation,  had  been  established  ;  but  the  mass  of 
the  people  still  moved  according  to  their  ancient 
customs  and  viewed  with  indifference  or  with  contempt 
the  work  of  innovation.  But  if  the  two  years  of 
Joseph's  reign  showed  very  little  real  result,  the  first 
two  of  Joachim's  did  bring  some  very  real  changes 
into  the  existence  of  the  Neapolitans. 

When  Joseph  left  Naples,  Roederer  followed  him, 
and  it  had  not  proved  easy  to  fill  the  vacant  post  of 
Minister  of  Finance.  A  Neapolitan,  Pignatelli,  assumed 
the  charge,  but  with  little  success,  and  was  soon  relieved 
by  Agar  de  Mosbourg.  The  new  Minister  was  a  French 
administrator  of  some  ability  who  had  been  attached  to 
Murat  when  Grand  Duke  of  Berg,  very  much  in  the  same 
way  as  Roederer  had  been  to  Joseph.  Under  his  rule 
financial  matters  continued  to  mend,  though  very  slowly. 
The  credit  of  the  State  at  the  close  of  1 809  was  certainly 
better  than  it  had  been  three  years  before,  yet  it  was 
far  from  good.  Ce dolus  representing  100,000,000 
ducats  had  been  issued,  and  covered  the  whole  public 
debt ;  their  current  quotation  was  20,  that  is  a  deprecia- 
tion of  80  per  cent  from  the  face  value.  Making  allow- 
ance for  the  exceptional  events  of  1809,  the  revenue  con- 
tinued to  gain  steadily.  In  the  early  part  of  1808  it 
had  balanced  expenditure,  as  already  related.  In  18 10 
the  budget  showed  an  income  of  13,367,000  lire,  with 
a  surplus  of  1,353,000  lire,  and  in  181 1  it  had  further 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  215 

risen  to  15,687,000  lire,  with  a  surplus  of  2,147,000. 
This  expansion  of  the  revenue  was  largely  obtained  by 
a  gradual  increase  of  the  rendite  patrimonalii  bearing  on 
the  rich,  accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  the  dazii  di 
consumo  bearing  on  the  poor.  Thus  in  18 10  it  might 
be  said  that  the  Neapolitan  finances  were  progressing 
rapidly  in  the  direction  of  prosperity,  and  only  needed 
political  stability.  In  that  year  a  useful  financial  step 
was  taken  by  fixing  a  limit  of  2,000,000  ducats  for  the 
annual  increase  of  the  Gran  Libro  indebtedness  ;  cedolas 
quickly  rose  to  25. 

The  great  source  of  weakness  of  the  State  finances 
was  the  stoppage  of  commerce  that  arose  from  the 
hostilities  between  France  and  Great  Britain.  Some- 
thing of  the  evils  arising  from  this  cause  has  already 
been  noticed  ;  a  wider  view  of  the  subject  may  now 
with  advantage  be  taken. 