


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  217 

Rome  Carthage  ;  in  avowing  that  aim  he  proclaimed 
himself  not  a  child  of  the  Revolution,  not  a  man  vi^ith 
views  ahead  of  his  times,  but  an  enemy  of  progress  and 
civilization.  He  had  set  up  his  will  and  his  appetite 
to  override  the  consensus  of  informed  and  educated 
opinion  that,  in  the  mutual  intercourse  of  states  even 
when  that  intercourse  took  the  form  of  hostilities, 
certain  conventions  of  mutual  consideration,  of  inter- 
national obligation,  of  civilized  duty,  must  be  observed. 
He  failed  to  perceive  that  his  individual  will  and  power, 
however  much  it  might  surpass  that  of  other  individuals 
and  rulers,  could  not  surpass  that  of  a  century,  or,  at 
least,  could  only  do  so  on  the  one  condition  of  following 
the  same  current  and  outstripping  it.  In  the  political 
calculations  on  which  the  Emperor  based  his  policy  of 
the  Continental  blockade  he  ascribed  far  too  large  an 
effectiveness  to  his  decrees,  far  too  slight  an  effectiveness 
to  economic  conditions  and  public  opinion,  English 
ships  supplied  the  Continent  with  cotton  and  wool,  sugar 
and  coffee,  paper  and  cutlery,  every  necessary  and  every 
luxury  of  life.  Could  one  man  prevent  unanimous 
millions  from  purchasing  the  food  they  were  used  to, 
the  delicacies  they  relished,  the  clothes  in  which  wives 
and  daughters  looked  their  best  ?  Could  one  man 
compel  undying  hatred  to  the  enterprising  suppliers  of 
these  things  ?  Napoleon  would  ask  no  such  questions. 
He  struck  at  Great  Britain  with  all  his  strength  ;  he 
succeeded  in  dealing  a  damaging,  but  not  a  vital  blow 
to  her  commerce,  and  injured  himself  far  more  severely 
by  the  recoil. 

Every  one  conspired  to  defeat  the  Imperial  policy. 
Marshal  Massena  was  not  the  only  functionary  who 
made  a  fortune  out  of  the  licences  issued  for  the 
bringing    in    of    English    goods,    and    even    in    the 


2i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

immediate  circle  of  the  Emperor  the  lucrative  practice 
was  carried  on.  From  the  Baltic  to  the  Adriatic 
English  merchandise  filtered  in  through  every  port, 
though  with  difficulty,  and  King  Joachim  himself 
never  went  without  English  manufactured  goods. 
But  exportation  was  a  matter  of  far  greater  difficulty, 
and  the  valuable  produce  of  Naples  could  find  no 
outlet. 

Great  Britain  did  not  fail  to  return  blow  for  blow. 
The  retaliatory  measures  of  the  British  Cabinet  made 
matters  worse,  and  the  Orders  in  Council  of  January 
and  November  1807  declaring  neutral  ships  lawful 
prizes  unless  trading  through  a  British  port,  placed  such 
ships  in  an  impossible  dilemma.  In  the  Mediterranean 
the  neutral  vessels  carrying  foreign  trade  were  largely 
American,  and  President  Jeffisrson  declared  to  Congress 
in  October  1807  :  "Under  this  new  law  of  the  ocean 
our  trade  in  the  Mediterranean  has  been  swept  away  by 
seizures  and  condemnations,  and  that  in  other  seas  is 
threatened  by  the  same  fate."  ^  So  completely  was  trade 
for  a  while  annihilated  that  when  Collingwood  was 
cruising  in  search  of  Gantheaume  in  the  winter  of 
1 807-1 808,  he  found  the  utmost  difficulty  in  getting 
information,  for,  as  he  wrote  to  Castlereagh,  there 
was  not  "  a  ship  of  any  nation  to  be  met  with  on 
the  sea.'' 