

207 


2o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

strengthen  the  army.  A  premium  was  put  on  things 
military  at  Court,  and  the  provincial  militia  was 
organized  on  an  effective  basis.  The  militiamen  were 
drawn  from  the  middle  class,  citizens  paying  the 
fondiaria  to  the  extent  of  not  less  than  five  ducats 
annually ;  each  district  furnished  a  battalion,  each 
province  a  legion.  Home  service  was  unremunerated, 
save  for  one  picked  company  per  battalion  that  received 
the  same  pay  as  regulars. 

The  military  character  of  the  new  reign  received  its 
official  sanction  in  a  grand  national  festival  and  review 
held  on  the  26th  of  March  1809.  The  King  with 
much  martial  pomp  and  circumstance  watched  12,000 
Neapolitan  troops  march  past,  and  presented  flags, 
rewards,  and  decorations.  But  at  the  very  time  when 
the  new -formed  Neapolitan  troops  were  parading  on 
the  Chiaja,  events  were  shaping  that  were  to  put  their 
discipline  and  their  loyalty  to  King  Joachim  to  a  severe 
test. 

Napoleon's  hasty  journey  from  Galicia  to  Paris  in 
January  1809  had  been  partly  caused  by  the  political 
demonstration  of  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  partly  by 
impending  danger  of  a  new  conflict  with  Austria.-^  War 
appeared  to  be  on  the  point  of  breaking  out  in  Germany 
once  more,  and  the  Imperial  Guard  was  ordered  to 
follow  close  on  the  Emperor's  footsteps  and  march 
towards  the  Rhine  and  Bavaria.  In  the  early  weeks  of 
1809  military  preparations  became  even  more  marked. 
French  and  Neapolitan  troops  were  steadily  drained  from 
the  south,  and  sent  either  to  the  Austrian  frontier  or 

^  The  argument  of  General  Maurice  (Moore's  Diary)  that  his  return  was  caused 
by  Moore's  movement  and  the  consequent  disarrangement  of  his  plans  in  Spain  does 
not  appear  well  founded. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  209 

to  Spain  ;  and  as  Naples  became  weaker,  so  the  hope  of 
any  offensive  movement  against  Sicily  rapidly  dwindled. 
Soon  it  was  reported  that  Naples  itself  would  be 
attacked.  The  British  Government  was  anxious  to 
effect  a  diversion  to  assist  Austria  in  the  coming 
struggle,  and  it  was  known  that  a  large  Anglo-Sicilian 
expedition  was  being  fitted  out  at  Messina  and 
Palermo. 

Hostilities  between  the  French  and  Austrians  began 
in  the  middle  of  April,  and  events  followed  much  the 
same  course  as  they  had  in  1805.  On  the  22nd  of 
April  the  Archduke  Charles  was  defeated  at  Eckmiihl 
in  Bavaria  ;  on  the  12th  of  May  Napoleon  once  more 
occupied  Vienna.  Ten  days  later  the  Emperor 
attempted  to  cross  the  Danube  but  was  met  by  the 
Archduke  Charles,  who  drove  him  back  from  Aspern 
and  Essling  on  the  northern  bank  into  the  island  of 
Lobau,  where  the  French  army  found  a  precarious 
refuge  and  intrenched  itself. 