


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  211 

managed  to  draw  up  to  the  Neapolitan  flotilla.  After 
doubling  Cape  Miseno  most  of  the  gunboats  turned 
towards  Baia  and  Pozzuoli,  several  of  them  being 
destroyed  by  the  British  or  run  ashore.  Bausan, 
however,  fought  his  way  across  the  bay,  made  the 
point  of  Posilipo,  and  then  steered  for  the  Arsenal. 
The  Cyane  clung  closely  to  the  Neapolitan,  but  Bausan 
kept  up  a  running  fight  ;  when  at  last  he  reached  the 
mole  the  British  frigate  was  beaten  off  by  a  heavy  fire 
from  the  harbour  defences  that  turned  her  decks  into 
shambles.  Joachim  who,  with  all  Naples,  had  been  a 
spectator  of  this  naval  duel,  immediately  went  on  board 
Bausan's  vessel  and  congratulated  her  captain  and  crew 
on  their  notable  engagement. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  greatest  excitement  reigned  in 
the  capital,  and  many  a  Bourbon  supporter  thought  a 
restoration  was  imminent.  The  weakness  of  the  French 
was  known,  the  strength  of  the  Anglo  -  Sicilians  was 
exaggerated,  while  the  reports  from  Vienna  made  it 
appear  as  though  Napoleon's  career  of  victory  had 
closed.  Preparations  for  evacuating  Naples  were  made. 
Troops  were  echelonned  towards  the  frontier,  valuables 
from  the  Royal  Palace  were  packed  ready  for  trans- 
portation, and  Marshal  Perignon  openly  advocated  the 
abandonment  of  Naples.  At  this  critical  juncture 
Saliceti  arrived  from  Rome,  where  he  had  been  absent 
on  a  mission  that  will  presently  be  noticed.  His 
unfaltering  courage  and  statesmanlike  advice  restored 
confidence.  With  admirable  insight  he  accurately 
gauged  the  spirit  of  the  British  generals  and  declared  : 
"  They  are  even  more  undecided  than  we  are  ;  that  will 
save  us."  ^ 

Saliceti  was  right ;  Sir  John  Stuart  at  Ischia  appeared 

^  De  Dedem,  177  j  Savelli,  166, 


212  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

content  to  await  events,  just  as  after  Maida  he  made 
his  operations  turn  on  the  strategic  consideration 
that  the  control  of  Naples  really  depended  on  that  of 
northern  Italy.  He  apparently  determined  to  await 
the  result  of  the  operations  on  the  Danube  and  to  make 
the  further  prosecution  of  his  enterprise  turn  on  the 
success  or  non-success  of  the  Austrians.  He  was  far 
from  satisfied  with  his  position  at  Ischia.  Collingwood, 
who  was  blockading  Toulon,  was  not  reassuring.  He 
wrote  to  Stuart  that  his  move  was  good  only  as  a 
diversion,  that  Ischia  was  a  bad  position  to  remain  in, 
and  that  to  invade  Naples  was  useless  unless  there  was 
a  popular  movement.  There  was  the  further  danger 
that  should  a  strong  north-west  wind  arise,  the  British 
fleet  would  lose  touch  with  Toulon  and  the  French 
might  slip  out  and  sail  into  the  Bay  of  Naples  before  the 
British  admiral  could  know  that  they  had  left  their 
anchorage.  This  dispatch  of  Collingwood  reached 
Stuart  at  a  decisive  moment,  for  the  news  had  just 
become  known  at  Naples  that  on  the  6th  of  July 
Napoleon  had  extricated  himself  from  all  his  difficulties 
by  the  brilliant  victory  of  Wagram. 