

The  policy  of  Naples  followed  closely  that  of  France 
in  the  matter  of  the  Continental  blockade.  After  the 
interview  at  Venice  and  the  Milan  decrees  in  the  winter 
of  1 807-1 808,  it  was  enacted  that  no  cotton  goods  should 
be  introduced  into  Naples  except  on  the  production  of 
a  certificate  of  origin  giving  France  or  the  kingdom  of 
Italy  as  the  place  of  manufacture  ;    at  the  same  time 

^  Message  of  Oct.  27,  1807. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  219 

vessels  trading  with  England  were  declared  denational- 
ized. Early  in  1808  Napoleon  wrote  as  follows  to 
Joseph  :  "  Be  vigilant,  and  see  that  all  my  blockading 
measures  are  carried  out.  Every  American  ship  calling 
at  one  of  your  ports  comes  from  England  :  take  that 
as  your  guiding  principle.''  ^  Yet  American  traders, 
attracted  by  the  prospect  of  large  profits,  attempted 
to  carry  on  trade  with  Naples  in  spite  of  the  decrees. 
In  1809,  when  the  schooner  Rait  of  Baltimore  was 
seized,  the  remonstrance  of  the  Consular  agent  of  the 
United  States  resulted  in  the  Duke  di  Gallo's  consent 
to  her  release  as  she  had  sailed  direct  from  Baltimore 
without  touching  at  an  English  port.  The  success  of 
this  ship  encouraged  others,  but  with  less  good  fortune, 
for  towards  the  end  of  the  same  year  several  American 
vessels  were  seized.  The  cargoes  were  confiscated  and 
sold,  which  was  only  a  judicial  farce  for  putting  money 
into  the  pockets  of  the  various  officials  concerned ;  in 
one  instance  a  bankrupt  French  speculator  named 
Bastide  was  assigned  a  cargo  of  nankeen,  and  cleared 
100  per  cent  on  an  immediate  turnover.  The  American 
Consular  agent  made  strong  representations,  and  after 
some  months  elicited  the  worse  than  diplomatic  reply 
that  the  seizure  of  the  cargoes  was  founded  on  the 
Act  of  Congress  interdicting  commercial  intercourse 
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  and 
France  and  their  dependencies. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  dispose  of  this  question  of 
the  American  ships  finally  at  this  point.  Redress  for 
these  seizures  was  never  obtained  from  King  Joachim's 
Government.  Later,  in  1818,  Mr.  Pinckney  was  sent 
to  Naples  on  a  special  mission,  but  failed  ;  it  was 
not    till    1832    that    the    claim    was    recognised    and 

*  Joseph,  Corr.  iv.  2Z6. 


220  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

damages  to  the  extent  of  over  2,000,000  ducats  were 
paid.^ 

The  Continental  blockade  was  the  chief  cause  that 
prevented  Naples  from  entering  on  an  era  of  prosperity 
which  her  improved  political  system  would  otherwise 
undoubtedly  have  given  her.  Though  everything  was 
done  to  promote  a  coasting  trade  with  France,  though 
internal  commerce  was  encouraged  by  the  establishment 
of  fairs  and  markets,  by  the  building  of  roads,  by  the 
abolishment  of  feudal  taxes  and  impediments,  nothing 
could  serve  to  draw  out  of  the  kingdom  that  rich 
stream  of  natural  produce  that  should  have  sent  back 
in  its  stead  a  returning  flow  of  wealth  and  prosperity. 