

The  receipt  of  this  news  decided  the  result  of 
the  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition.  Ischia  was  abandoned. 
The  troops  were  re-embarked  and  ingloriously  returned 
whence  they  had  come,  while  Joachim  hastily  dispatched 
orders  to  Calabria  for  his  army  to  re-occupy  the  positions 
they  had  for  a  moment  abandoned. 

Unfortunately  even  the  short  space  of  time  during 
which  the  French  weakness  had  lasted  had  sufficed  to 
replunge  Calabria  into  a  state  of  anarchy.  From  the 
ships  of  the  fleet  or  from  small  vessels  sent  out  from 
Sicily  numerous  parties  of  freebooters  were  landed  at 
every  point  of  the  peninsula.     For  the  Adriatic  was  as 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  213 

much  under  British  control  as  was  the  Mediterranean, 
and  a  small  expedition  had  even  reduced  the  French 
islands  of  Zante,  Cephalonia,  Ithaca,  and  Cerigo,  while 
the  British  cruisers  and  Sicilian  corsairs  flying  the 
Union  Jack  cut  off  the  food  supplies  of  Corfu  and 
reduced  Donzelot  and  his  garrison  to  great  distress.^ 
Right  up  the  Adriatic  coast  capimassi  landed  and 
carried  their  devastations.  One  in  Puglia  gave  himself 
out  as  Prince  Francis  of  Bourbon,  and  levied  taxes  in  all 
due  form.  But  it  is  needless  to  catalogue  the  details  of 
a  state  of  brigandage  precisely  similar  to  those  already 
described.  It  will  be  enough  to  say  that  Calabria  and 
many  districts  of  other  provinces  were  soon  in  as  bad  a 
state  as  they  were  three  years  before,  suffered  the  same 
horrors,  the  same  devastation,  and  the  same  punish- 
ments. An  official  report  gave  the  number  of  criminal 
offences  classed  under  the  head  of  brigandage  for  the 
year  1809  as  33,000  ;  it  must  be  added  that  this  figure 
appears  almost  incredible  even  for  Naples. 

After  the  abandonment  of  Ischia  by  Sir  John  Stuart 
and  his  return  to  Sicily  the  situation  rapidly  improved. 
Reinforcements  of  French  troops  arrived  from  the 
north  ;  soon  the  Neapolitan  army  reached  a  total  of 
30,000  men.  Every  position  formerly  held  on  the 
Strait  of  Messina  was  re-occupied  ;  and,  greatest  relief 
of  all,  the  Prince  of  Canosa  left  Ponza.  It  only  now 
remained  to  allay  and  pacify  the  internal  inflammation 
of  the  kingdom,  to  carry  out,  extend,  and  make 
fruitful  the  reforms  begun  by  Joseph.  This  work  was 
at  once  taken  in  hand,  and  it  is  curious  to  reflect  in  this 
connection   that  it  was  in  the   lawgiving   attributes  of 

^  The  excesses  of  many  of  the  Sicilian  privateers  that  sheltered  under  the  Union 
Jack  was  a  source  of  great  distress  to  the  British  army  officers.  A  number  of 
interesting  papers  concerning  a  particularly  odious  case  of  this  sort  at  Cotrone,  in  the 
summer  of  1807,  are  preserved  in  the  Archives  at  Naples. 