

Already  before  the  period  of  the  French  Revolution 
the  extensive  maritime  trade  of  Great  Britain  and  her 
insular  invulnerability  had  given  a  gradually  more  and 
more  pronounced  commercial  character  to  wars  in  which 
she  had  been  engaged.  If  England  could  not  be  invaded, 
the  colonies  whence  she  obtained  her  food  and  her  wealth 
might  be  ;  the  vessels  that  conveyed  her  food  and  her 
wealth  could  be  seized.  She  could  be  despoiled  of  her 
possessions  and  of  her  ships,  ruined  and  starved.  Such 
was  the  theory  of  those  who  could  see  no  way  of 
invading  her.  The  French  Republic,  with  robust  faith 
but  far  from  adequate  resources,  attempted  to  reduce 
this  theory  of  warfare  to  practice,  and  not  content 
with  striking  at  British  merchandise  carried  under  the 
British  flag,  issued  decrees  whereby  a  neutral  flag  should 
not  avail  to  protect  British  goods  from  seizure. 

This    system    was    ended    when    Bonaparte    became 


2i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

First  Consul,  and  the  peace  signed  at  Amiens  gave  for 
a  time  promise  of  better  things.  The  two  countries 
were,  however,  soon  at  war  again,  and  Napoleon,  with 
the  splendid  army  he  had  built  up  out  of  the  soldiers 
and  the  spirit  of  the  Revolution,  determined  to  settle 
the  long-standing  quarrel  between  France  and  Great 
Britain  in  the  only  decisive  way,  by  marching  to  London 
at  the  head  of  his  troops.  But  the  Grande  Armee  was 
called  away  from  the  sands  of  Boulogne  to  face  the 
Powers  of  the  north-east  ;  Villeneuve's  fleet  fell  victim 
to  Nelson,  and  the  projected  invasion  of  England  was 
soon  relegated  to  a  very  uncertain  future.  Foiled  in 
his  attempt  to  deliver  his  great  blow  at  England's 
heart,  the  baffled  Emperor  fell  back  on  the  only  other 
policy  of  attack  he  was  in  a  position  to  use,  and  set  to 
work  to  follow  the  direction  and  to  extend  the  scope 
of  the  'Directoire  s  operations  against  British  commerce. 

The  first  of  the  decrees  marking  the  policy  of  the 
Continental  blockade  was  issued  at  Berlin  on  the  21st 
of  November  1806.  It  declared  the  British  Isles  in  a 
state  of  blockade  and  cut  oiF  from  all  intercourse  ;  it 
further  decreed  that  all  British  subjects  were  liable  to 
capture  as  prisoners  of  war  and  to  seizure  of  their 
property.  No  neutral  ship  having  touched  at  any 
point  in  England  was  to  be  admitted  to  port,  and  a 
false  declaration  as  to  this  was  to  entail  seizure. 

The  policy  thus  announced  must  here  be  viewed 
in  its  application  to  the  aifairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  ;  yet,  even  from  that  restricted  standpoint,  a 
few  observations  of  a  general  character  should  first  be 
made.  In  his  insatiable  thirst  for  domination  and  in  his 
blind  confidence  in  his  genius.  Napoleon  had  set  up  an 
absolutely  retrograde  ideal  of  warfare.  He  apparently 
aimed  at  destroying  Britain  as  Sparta  had  Athens,  or 