

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1049  :  miscellaneous  ;  1974  :  expedition 
to  Capri. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  193,  and  Interno^  z^  In'ventario,  5077,  5078,  5079  : 
Internal  disorders. 

San  Martino,  Balsamo  MS. :  expedition  to  Capri. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  30  :  peace  negotiations  of  1806. 

Printed  Books 

Abrant^s,  Mems.  ;  Borrelli,  Appendice  ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1 8 14-18 15  ; 
Bulletino  delle  Leggi,  1808  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacs.;  Cantu,  Cronistoria ; 
C  AV  AiGi<i  AC,  Mems.  ;  CuvRCH,  Mems.  ;  Collett  a,  S  tori  a  ;  Collingwood, 
Corresp. ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De  Dedem,  Mems.;  Duret  de  Tavel, 
S^'our  en  Calabre  ;  Fouch^,  Mems. ;  Gallois,  Hist,  de  Murat ;  Helfert, 
Maria  Karolina  ;  Joseph,  Corr.  ;  Maciro^e,  Interesting  Facts ;  Madelin, 
Fouch^i  Metternich,  Mems. ;  Miot,  Mems. ;  Monitore  Napolitano  y 
Napoleon,  Corr.,  and  Brotonne  ;  NicolX,  Diario  ;  Minernja  Napolitana  ; 
Murat,  Corr.;  Murat,  Murat  en  Espagne ;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Pepe, 
Mems. ;  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi ;  Potocka,  Mems. ;  Processo  per 
r  esplosione  ;  Qvit^tavalle,  Notizi a  S tor.  ;  RiuvsAT,  Mems.  ;  Roederer, 
(Lucres;  Roederer,  Rapporto ;  St.  Amand,  Marie  Amelie ;  Savelli, 
Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  Segur,  Mems.;  Talleyrand,  Corr. 
inidite ;  Thi^bault,  Mems.;  Vandal,  Napole6n  et Alexandre. 


CHAPTER   VII 

murat's  reforms 

Military  preparations — Militia — War  with  Austria — Anglo-Sicilian 
armaments — Eckmiihl  and  Essling — Stuart  sails — Takes  Ischia 
— Alarm  at  Naples — Naval  action — Preparations  for  retreat — 
Saliceti  —  Stuart's  position  —  Wagram  —  Brigandage  —  Ionian 
Islands — Reforms — Finance — Continental  blockade — Seizure 
of  American  vessels — Educational  and  judicial  reform — Feudal 
Commission — Zurlo — Police  department — Maghella — Saliceti 
— Annexation  of  Papal  States — Death  of  Saliceti — Court  parties 
—Neapolitan  nationalists  and  Joachim  —  Constitutionalism  — 
Electoral  colleges  —  Public  apathy  —  Results  of  Wagram  — 
Metternich — Napoleon's  marriage — Napoleon  and  Murat. 

The  capture  of  Capri  was  not  followed  by  any  further 
military  success.  Although  in  the  early  months  of  the 
new  reign  it  was  freely  rumoured  that  the  conquest  of 
Sicily  would  soon  be  undertaken,  although  new  regiments 
were  raised  and  the  army  total  increased  to  23,000 
French  and  27,000  Neapolitan  troops,  yet  events 
passing  on  a  larger  scene  than  that  of  Naples  proved  of 
preponderating  importance.  So  far  from  undertaking 
offensive  operations,  Joachim  for  several  months  of  the 
year  1809  had  as  severe  a  struggle  to  retain  his  crown 
as  his  predecessor  had  when  pressed  by  Sir  John  Stuart 
and  the  Prince  of  Hesse. 

Whether  the  conquest  of  Sicily  or  the  defence  of 
Naples    was    uppermost,    it    was    equally    necessary   to 