

A  few  days  after  the  news  ot  this  great  check  to  the 
French  arms  arrived  at  Naples,  other  news,  equally  or 
even  more  threatening,  came  from  the  opposite  direc- 
tion. On  the  nth  of  June  the  Anglo-Sicilian  fleet 
sailed  from  Messina  and  other  ports  ;  it  carried  14,000 
soldiers,  of  which  more  than  half  were  British,  the 
whole  being  under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Stuart. 
The  British  force  was  imposing.  The  hopes  of 
Mary  Caroline  had  once  more  risen  to  a  high  pitch. 
Her  second  son.  Prince  Leopold,  accompanied  the 
expedition  as  a  volunteer.  Sir  John  Stuart  having 
declined  his  assistance  in  any  other  capacity.  Yet  the 
expedition  was  weak  in  the  extreme  caution  of  its 
commander  -  in  -  chief,  in  his  strong  aversion  for  his 
Sicilian  allies  and  for  the  methods  of  revolution, 
VOL.  r  p 


210  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

proscription,  and  bloodshed,  which  he  and  his  officers 
believed  would  follow  a  Bourbon  restoration  at  Naples. 

Slowly  the  great  fleet,  250  British  and  Sicilian  ships, 
sailed  along  the  Calabrian  coast  northwards,  occasionally 
landing  small  parties.  The  end  of  June  had  come 
when  it  reached  the  Bay  of  Naples,  and  after  destroying 
a  number  of  Neapolitan  gunboats,  landed  troops  on 
the  island  of  Ischia,  of  which  the  principal  town  and 
fortress  were  besieged  and  reduced  on  the  last  day  of 
the  month. 

The  presence  of  so  large  an  hostile  army  within  a  few 
miles  of  the  capital  caused  alarm  and  almost  consterna- 
tion at  Naples.  The  available  military  force  had  just 
been  still  further  reduced  by  a  detachment  of  6000 
men  sent  to  Rome,  which  Napoleon  had  annexed  to  the 
Empire  by  a  decree  issued  on  his  reaching  Vienna.  All 
the  troops  that  Joachim  could  collect  amounted  to  no 
more  than  1 1 ,000  men  ;  he  therefore  decided  to  con- 
centrate and  to  bring  closer  to  the  capital  the  division  in 
Calabria.  Partouneaux,  who  had  succeeded  Cavaignac 
in  the  command  of  that  province,  was  accordingly 
ordered  to  get  his  troops  together  and  prepare  to  march 
towards  Naples.  Scilla  was  blown  up  ;  4000  men  were 
concentrated  at  Monteleone,  and  1600  at  Lagonegro. 

Not  only  did  Joachim  decide  to  hasten  to  the 
defence  of  his  threatened  capital  all  his  available 
military  strength,  but  also  such  ships  as  he  possessed. 
Orders  were  sent  to  Bausan  to  bring  from  Gaeta  a 
frigate,  a  corvette,  and  some  gunboats  stationed  there. 
He  started  at  night,  and  reached  the  channel  between 
Procida  and  the  mainland  in  the  early  morning.  The 
wind  was  light,  but  Bausan  was  already  well  to  wind- 
ward of  most  of  the  British  ships  in  the  waters  of 
Ischia.      The    frigate     Cyane    and    a    brig,    however, 