

Although  not  altogether  successful  in  promoting  trade, 
the  Government  of  Naples  accomplished  excellent  results 
in  the  field  of  education.  The  system  decreed  by  Joseph 
was  now  put  into  practice,  and  his  other  undertakings 
were  generally  pursued  and  placed  on  a  basis  of  practical 
utility.  The  reforms  that  evoked  most  opposition 
were  those  of  a  judicial  nature,  such  as  the  compulsory 
registration  of  mortgages.  Many  of  the  provisions  of 
the  Napoleonic  Code,  especially  that  by  which  a  civil 
ceremony  as  well  as  a  religious  was  necessary  to  validate 
a  marriage,  encountered  bitter  hostility.  One  legal 
measure  of  the  Government,  however,  met  with  warm 
approval  and  appreciation,  the  institution  of  the  Feudal 
Commission.  The  various  decrees  of  Joseph's  reign 
dealing  with  and  restricting  the  application  of  feudal 
rights  had  led  to  a  vast  amount  of  litigation  that  seemed 
to  make  matters  even  worse  and  more  complicated 
than  before.  It  was  decided  that  a  special  tribunal 
must  be  formed  to  determine  these  questions,  and  the 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Confische  dei  legni  Americani  ^   Martens,  Recueily  iv.  359  j  Papers  laid 
before  Congress^  Feb.  28,  18 18. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  221 

Feudal  Commission  came  into  existence  by  decree  of 
the  3rd  of  December  1808. 

The  statesman  to  whose  charge  it  fell  to  direct  the 
proceedings  of  the  Feudal  Commission  was  Giuseppe 
Zurlo,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  the  most  eminent 
administrator  that  Naples  produced  in  those  troublous 
times.  Intelligent,  active,  public -minded,  liberal  yet 
temperate,  and,  above  all,  honest,  Zurlo  might,  in 
better  days,  have  earned  the  reputation  of  a  great 
statesman.  He  had  already  risen  to  important  posi- 
tions under  the  Bourbons.  His  reports  on  the  royal 
domains  in  the  Sila  were  more  truthful  than  palat- 
able, yet  his  ability  and  utility  had  raised  him  from 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  public  servants.  In  1799, 
although  zealous  for  reform,  he  had  enough  fidelity 
to  Ferdinand,  or  distrust  of  the  Parthenopean  Republic, 
not  to  join  the  revolutionary  government.  He  held 
aloof,  and  soon  after  the  return  of  Ferdinand  was 
placed  by  Acton  in  the  difficult  position  of  director 
of  the  finances  of  the  kingdom.  In  1803  he  was 
disgraced,  more  from  the  fault  of  the  system  than 
his  own,  but  his  integrity  remained  above  suspicion. 
Unappreciated  by  a  government  the  depths  of  whose 
ineptitude  he  had  sounded  more  deeply  than  most  men, 
he  had  been  among  the  first  who  had  thrown  in  their 
lot  with  the  new  order.  Under  Joseph  and  Joachim 
he  had  been  intrusted  with  high  charges  ;  he  was  now 
to  superintend  a  work  which  his  special  knowledge, 
temperate  spirit,  and  honest  statesmanship  was  to  do 
much  to  bring  to  a  good  end,  a  work  that  deserves 
to  be  honourably  recorded  in  the  pages  of  history,  and 
with  which  his  name,  as  well  as  that  of  his  sovereign, 
must  be  for  ever  associated. 