

On  the  29th  of  May  the  Cadiz  Gazette  published 
two  French  intercepted  dispatches,  one  of  which  pur- 
ported to  be  written  by  Napoleon  to  Mary  Caroline. 
It  alluded  to  the  possibility  of  an  arrangement  based  on 
the  Queen's  driving  the   British   out   of  Sicily.     This 

;  1  It  may  be  recalled  that  in  the  summer  of  i8io  Wellington,  heavily  out- 
(numbered,  operated  a  long  retreat  before  Massena,  fought  a  defensive  action  at 
/Busaco,  and  finally  fell  back  on  the  lines  of  Torres  Vedras  in  front  of  Lisbon,  w^hich 
|he  held  j  only  his  fine  generalship  and  foresight  saved  the  British  army  and  com- 
)  pensated  for  the  reinforcements  that  he  needed,  but  did  not  receive. 


238  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

supposed  communication  between  the  Emperor  and  the 
Queen  may  now  be  easily  perceived  to  have  been  a 
clumsy  forgery,  very  probably  a  police  device,  intended 
to  make  its  way  into  British  hands,  or  perhaps  the 
lucubration  of  a  journalist  whose  methods  anticipated 
those  of  a  more  anxiously  competitive  age.  Yet  at  the 
first  moment  the  genuineness  of  this  communication 
was  largely  believed,  and,  curiously  enough,  by  Mary 
Caroline  herself.  In  Sicily,  at  the  time  when  this  sup- 
posed letter  from  the  Emperor  to  Mary  Caroline  was 
published  in  Spain,  the  feeling  of  hostility  between  the 
British  and  the  Queen  and  the  sense  of  insecurity  were 
hourly  increasing.  The  British  Minister's  dispatches 
are  full  of  the  "  strange  incredulity  "  of  the  Palermo 
Court  as  to  the  French  invasion.  The  inactivity  and 
jealousy  of  the  Sicilians  are  complained  of.  The  fear 
is  expressed  that  the  British  will  have  to  face  not  only 
a  French  attack,  but  a  defection  in  their  rear.  Finally, 
Amherst  recommended  the  course  advocated  by  Sir 
John  Moore  more  than  two  years  before,  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  Queen.  "  I  further  think  it  absolutely 
necessary,"  he  wrote  to  Wellesley,  "  that  the  Queen 
should  cease  to  take  the  lead  in  public  affairs."  ^ 

From  the  Neapolitan  side  these  fears  of  the  British 
were  assiduously  fostered,  and  just  as  the  news  of  the 
Cadiz  letter  arrived  in  Palermo  from  Spain,  a  proclama- 
tion reached  it  from  Naples  in  which  Joachim  announced 
to  his  troops  that  the  Sicilians  were  ready  to  co-operate 
with  them  and  to  rise  against  the  British.  On  the 
15th  of  July  Mary  Caroline  sent  for  Lord  Amherst. 
She  had  just  received  a  copy  of  the  Cadiz  Gazette^  and 
was  in  a  state  of  some  excitement.  She  read  to  the 
British  Minister  Napoleon's  supposed  letter,  and  then 

1  Amherst  to  Wellesley,  June  11  and  19,  18 10,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  39. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  239 