

1  ArcL  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.   2061.      Castelli's  MS.,  Cronaca  di  Sicilia,  quoted   by 
Bianco,  apparently  confirms  this  point. 


236  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

in  the  small  ports  close  to  the  Strait  of  Messina. 
On  the  I  oth  of  March  1 8 1  o  Mary  Caroline  wrote  to 
Vienna  :  "  I  hope  to  God  that  Murat's  enterprise  will 
not  prosper,  that  would  be  a  terrible  misfortune  ;  in 
that  event  I  am  resolved  not  to  go  to  England  to  beg 
the  bread  of  necessity,  but  to  await  here  the  fate  of  the 
Due  d'Enghien/'  ^ 

A  few  days  later  news  of  the  utmost  importance  was 
received ;  an  event  had  taken  place  that  appeared  to  have 
as  confusing  an  effect  on  the  policy  of  the  Court  of 
Palermo  as  on  that  of  Naples.  A  Neapolitan  gazette 
arrived  announcing  the  marriage  of  Napoleon  and 
Maria  Louisa.  Mary „  Caroline's  first  movement  was 
one  of  horror  and  indignation  at  the  thought  of  her 
progeny  being  allied  to  the  greatest  man  of  his  age  ; 
but  soon  other  thoughts  arose,  and  before  long  the 
Neapolitans  of  her  entourage  were  in  high  spirits, 
and  busy  building  hopes  that  this  event  portended 
peace  and  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  to  Naples. 
Soon  the  Queen,  on  slight  enough  grounds,  was  in  a 
triumphant  mood  ;  and  Amherst,  who  believed  her  to 
be  in  secret  communication  with  Vienna  on  the  subject, 
was  indignant  and  was  pacified  only  with  great  difficulty. 

The  avowed  hostility  of  the  Queen  to  the  British 
made  their  position  very  difficult,  if  not  dangerous. 
The  force  that  Murat  was  mustering  appeared  formid- 
able. So  critical  did  the  situation  appear  that  on  the 
I  oth  of  May  Lord  Amherst  recorded  his  opinion,  that 
"  in  the  present  insufficient  means  of  defence  of  this 
island,  the  landing  of  an  hostile  army,  even  of  no  very 
considerable  magnitude,  would  probably  be  followed 
by  the  subjugation    of  the   kingdom.''  ^      The   alarm 

^  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  396. 
*  Amherst  to  Wellesley,  May  10,  18 10,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily y  39. 


CH.viii  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  237 

reflected  in  this  dispatch  of  Lord  Amherst  was  in  all 
probability  precisely  the  result  aimed  at  by  Napoleon. 
Otherwise  the  slowness  with  which  his  army  concen- 
trated on  the  Strait  of  Messina  and  the  unguarded  way 
in  which  their  objective  was  publicly  advertised  must  be 
pronounced  contrary  to  his  usual  methods.  The  con- 
clusion appears  warranted,  when  viewing  the  events  of 
1 8 10  as  a  whole,  that  Napoleon  did  not  intend  to 
attack  Sicily,  and  it  is  possible  that  towards  the  middle 
of  the  year,  June  or  July,  Mary  Caroline  received  some 
secret  intelligence  or  authoritative  hint  that  she  had 
nothing  to  fear  from  the  French  army  gathered  in 
sight  of  Messina.  But  if  Napoleon  did  not  intend  to 
invade  Sicily,  he  certainly  intended  his  movements  on 
the  Strait  to  be  productive  of  results.  One  of  these 
was  duly  accomplished,  for  the  British  naval  strength 
being  drawn  to  Messina,  Corfu  was  relieved  from  the 
blockade  and  had  large  stores  of  supplies  thrown  into 
it  from  Brindisi  and  Taranto,  thus,  for  once,  affording 
to  the  farmers  of  Puglia  the  opportunity  of  selling  their 
grain.  Another  result  aimed  at  was  to  prevent  the 
British  Government  from  dispatching  reinforcements 
to  Spain,  where  the  Emperor  had  concentrated  a  large 
army  under  Massena  with  which  he  intended  to  crush 
Wellington  and  terminate  the  Peninsular  War.-^ 