

^  The  theory  that  Saliceti  was  poisoned,  whether  by  Maghella  or  not,  appears  to 
repose  on  nothing  solid  ;  Cavaignac,  260  ;  Radowsky,  120  j  Savelli,  176  j  but  cf. 
Romeo,  13  j  Ulloa,  Intorno  alia  Storia,  256  ;  CoIIetta,  Storia,  ii.  109  ;  De  Dedem, 
chap.  ii.  and  Nicola,  510. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS 


227 


French  entourage,  little  by  little,  might  be  alienated  ; 
Italian  functionaries  and  methods  might  in  time  entirely 
prevail.  A  few  ardent  spirits,  deluded  by  an  imaginative 
interpretation  of  the  scope  of  the  constitutional  statute 
of  Bayonne,  already  saw  a  constitutional  monarchy,  with 
a  representative  chamber,  as  the  form  of  government  of 
their  country. 

The  statute  of  Bayonne  never  came  into  effect,  yet 
it  is  not  true,  as  many  writers  have  asserted  on  an 
authority  that  is  often  deliberately  false,^  that  it  remained 
totally  unacted  on.  The  people  of  Naples  were  unfit 
for  and  undesirous  of  representative  institutions,  yet 
King  Joachim's  Ministers  attempted  by  gradual  steps 
to  bring  these  conditions  nearer.  The  year  1809  was 
too  unsettled  to  permit  of  the  introduction  of  such 
measures  as  might  be  thought  the  natural  outcome  of 
the  Bayonne  statute,  but  several  decrees,  preparing  the 
ground  for  the  future,  were  issued.  By  these  electoral  dis- 
tricts were  marked  out ;  arrangements  for  the  assembling 
of  conventions  of  merchants  and  landowners  in  various 
cities  were  made  ;  and  the  incompatibility  of  functions 
between  a  member  of  the  Parliament  and  a  Councillor  of 
State  was  laid  down.  In  all  these  decrees  the  King's 
title  was  referred  to  as  proceeding  from  the  grace  of 
God  and  the  Constitution.  In  18 10  a  further  step  in 
advance  was  made  by  ordering  the  convocation  of  the 
electoral  colleges  of  merchants  and  of  landed  proprietors. 
From  many  subordinate  officials  came  expressions  of 
gratitude  and  appreciation  for  these  measures  of  the 
Government.  The  Intendente  of  Basilicata  wrote  to 
Count  Zurlo,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  that  the  electoral 
college  of  landed  proprietors  viewed  their  convocation 
as  the  final  accomplishment  of  the  political  regeneration 

1  Colletta. 


228  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  their  country,  and  that  they  looked  forward  to  ap- 
pointing delegates  to  proceed  to  Naples  to  place  their 
desires  before  the  Government.  The  historian  Colletta, 
then  a  provincial  governor,  joined  the  chorus  of  approval, 
and  so  did  Giuseppe  Poerio,  another  Government  official. 
The  Intendente  of  Teramo  wrote  to  Zurlo  that  the 
articles  of  the  decree  would  be  executed,  "  bearing  in 
mind  the  provisions  of  the  constitutional  act  of  the 
kingdom."  Yet,  as  a  whole,  it  must  be  said  that  the  re- 
sponse to  this  measure  of  the  Government  was  extremely 
disappointing.  Sheaves  of  excuses  and  refusals  to  act 
on  the  electoral  colleges  were  received,  and  if  the  decrees 
proved  as  a  whole  non-effective,  it  must  be  pronounced 
to  have  been  the  fault  neither  of  the  Government  nor 
of  its  officials,  but  entirely  that  of  the  people.  Their 
supineness  or  fear  rendered  abortive  what  was  perhaps 
not  a  liberal  measure,  but  certainly  was,  and  was  intended 
as,  a  step  towards  representative  institutions. 