

The    Feudal    Commission    was    presided    over    by 


222  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Dragonetti,  and  among  its  subordinate  officials  were 
Pasquale  Borrelli  and  D.  Winspeare,  who  as  a  pro- 
vincial commissioner  and  the  intimate  and  confidant  of 
Zurlo  was  of  large  assistance.  In  a  little  more  than 
a  year  this  court  disposed  of  no  less  than  5000  cases. 
The  work  that  this  commission  undertook  has  been 
already  indicated  in  the  first  chapter,  and  details  there 
given  cannot  now  be  repeated.  The  principal  objects 
of  the  Feudal  Commission  were  to  pronounce  final 
sentence  in  all  litigation  pending  between  the  Univer- 
sita  and  the  Barons,  to  effect  the  distribution  of 
domanial  land  to  communities  and  individual  occupiers 
and  assess  the  cornpensation  to  be  paid,  to  enforce  the 
abolishment  of  such  personal  and  feudal  rights  as  had 
been  abrogated  by  the  decrees  of  Joseph.  The  dis- 
tribution of  the  domanial  land  was  to  be  concluded  by 
the  end  of  1809,  but  it  cannot  be  thought  inexpeditious 
that  it  was  two  years  later  before  this  great  labour  was 
completed. 

Among  the  feudal  rights  abolished  may  be  mentioned 
that  of  free  transport,  which  was  nearly  the  only  per- 
sonal service  that  had  not  been  transformed  into  a 
money  payment  ;  this  was  effected  by  a  decree  of  the 
9th  of  October  1806.  The  abolition  of  the  right  of 
free  pasture  by  Joachim  was  of  great  and  immediate 
benefit  to  agriculture,  especially  in  Calabria.  In  that 
province  the  Barons,  so  as  to  enjoy  their  privilege  of 
pasturage,  prevented  the  ploughing  and  sowing  of  land, 
and  turned  many  fertile  tracts  into  uncultivated  wilds.-^ 

But  it  is  impossible  to  carry  the  reader  through  the 
catalogue  of  1 400  feudal  rights  abolished  by  the  French 

^  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1808,  1809,  28.  The  Barons  appear  to  have  struggled  hard  to 
retain  this  privilege.  As  late  as  18 13  Zurlo  was  giving  directions  to  enforce  the  law 
against  them  5  Supplimento  del  Bolletino^  xxxii.  169. 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  223 

kings.  The  ground  those  rights  covered  has  already 
been  indicated.  The  records  of  the  Feudal  Com- 
mission are  voluminous  ;  they  are  to  be  found  in 
ninety-six  printed  volumes  and  about  5000  bundles  of 
documents  now  stored  at  the  Archivio  di  Stato  at 
Naples.  The  work  of  reducing  this  great  mass  of 
litigation  to  order,  of  giving  a  final  decision  in  every 
case,  of  compensating  proprietors,  of  distributing  land 
to  small  holders,  of  abolishing  unrighteous  privileges, 
of  maintaining  just  rights,  and,  most  arduous  of  all,  of 
cutting  through  legal  obstacles  to  a  quick  but  equitable 
judgment,  all  this  in  the  ultimate  resort  fell  on  Zurlo. 
And  what  was  perhaps  most  noteworthy  in  his  conduct 
of  this  essentially  revolutionary  work  was  that  he  never 
allowed  his  zeal  for  reform  and  for  improving  the  lot 
of  the  peasantry  to  outstrip  his  sense  of  justice  and 
equity.  He  knew  how  to  refuse  the  tenant  an  unjust 
release  as  well  as  how  to  compel  the  Baron  to  con- 
tribute his  due  to  the  prosperity  of  the  community. 
Thus  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  was  one  of  the 
busiest  and  most  beneficent  departments  of  State  during 
the  first  years  of  Joachim's  reign. 