

Wagram  and  the  peace  that  followed  had  great 
results.  The  shattered  fortunes  of  the  Austrian  Empire 
were  intrusted  to  a  great  statesman  who  was  destined 
to  retrieve  them.  Count  Metternich.  The  Emperor 
Napoleon,  his  mind  fixed  on  that  quarter  of  the  poli- 
tical horizon  to  which  Talleyrand  and  Fouche  had  so 
ominously  pointed  a  few  months  before,  decided  on 
a  stroke  that  was  to  set  at  rest  the  ambitions  of  those 
that  stood  nearest  his  throne.  Shortly  after  the 
Emperor's  return  from  Vienna  a  family  council  was 
called,  to  which  the  King  and  Queen  of  Naples  were 
summoned. 

Joachim  reached  Paris  about  the  end  of  November. 
He  passed  through  Rome  on  the  way,  where  he  reviewed 
the  French  and  Neapolitan  troops  of  the  garrison,  but 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  229 

was  received  with  scant  courtesy  by  such  of  the  cardinals 
as  had  remained  there  after  the  departure  of  Pius. 
When  the  family  council  met  it  was  found  that 
Napoleon  had  resolved  to  divorce  Josephine  and 
marry  again,  so  as  to  provide  an  heir  for  the  Empire. 
The  details  of  this  matter  do  not  concern  us  ;  it  will 
suffice  to  say  that  the  announcement  did  not  prove 
equally  agreeable  to  all  the  members  of  the  council. 
There  was  opposition.  But  the  Emperor  could  not  be 
shaken,  and  the  only  question  worth  discussing  was  as 
to  the  choice  of  the  new  Empress.  Joachim  upheld  the 
policy  of  the  Russian  alliance,  but  for  many  reasons  it 
was  the  Austrian  Archduchess  Maria  Louisa  who  was 
chosen.  It  was  a  great  diplomatic  victory  for  Metter- 
nich,  a  great  disillusion  for  the  ambitions  of  Joachim 
Murat. 

In  March  18 10,  one  month  before  the  marriage  of 
Napoleon,  the  King  of  Naples  was  once  more  in  dis- 
agreement with  his  imperial  brother-in-law,  this  time 
because  the  best  soldiers  of  the  French  regiments  at 
Naples  were  being  drafted  into  Joachim's  guard. 
Napoleon  threatened  to  send  a  French  general  to  take 
the  command  of  his  troops  at  Naples  unless  these  men 
were  at  once  sent  back  to  their  regiments,  and  the  King 
had,  as  usual,  to  comply.  A  month  later  Joachim 
assisted  at  the  great  function  at  Notre  Dame,  and  saw, 
with  mixed  feelings,  his  wife,  the  Queen  of  Naples, 
helping  to  carry  the  imperial  mantle  of  the  new 
Empress  of  the  French. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interna^  2°  Inventario,  5079  :  numerous  documents 
relating  to  the  measures  for  carrying  out  the  Bayonne  Constitution. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  xxx.  24,  197  :  same  subject,  and  legal  reforms. 


230  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interno,  41  ;  Commissione  Feudale,  and  Giustiziay  1808, 
Casalnuovo,  with  other  files,  for  the  Feudal  Commission. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Confisc/ie  dei  legnt  American'i. 
Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Guerra^  xxv.  1974  :  a  few  miscellaneous  matters. 