

Printed  Books 

Bertholdi,  Mems.  ;  Bianchini,  Finanze ;  Bolletino  delle  Sentenze ; 
Bolletino  Feudale  j  British  State  Papers^  1815-1816  ;  Bolletino  delle  Leggi, 
1808;  BuNBURY,  Milit.  Transacts. i  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Colletta, 
Storia ;  CoLLiNGWOOD,  Corr. ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De  Dedem,  Mems.; 
DuRET  DE  Tavel,  S^'our  en  Calabre  ;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Konigin 
Karolina ;  Joseph,  Corr. ;  Martens,  Recueil  de  Traites ;  Massarello, 
//  decennio ;  Napoleon,  Corr. ;  Nicola,  Diario ;  Orloff,  Mems. ; 
Palmieri,  Souvenirs;  Pepe,  Mems.;  Quintavalle,  Notizia  Storica ; 
Radowsky,  Cosi  memorahili ;  Roederer,  (Ewvres ;  Romeo,  Specchio  del 
disinganno ;  Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil;  Supplimento  del 
Bolletino;  Ulloa,  Interna  alia  Storia;  Vita  Politica  di  Medici;  ZuRLO, 
RapportOy  1808,  1809,  18 10,  181 1. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

SICILIAN    INTRIGUES    AND    DEMONSTRATIONS 

Invasion  of  Sicily — Mary  Caroline  and  the  British — Her  secret 
communications — Castrone— D'  Amitia — Donop — Moliterno's 
expedition  —  Marriage  of  Maria  Louisa  —  Fears  of  British — 
Napoleon's  intentions — Relief  of  Corfu — Affairs  of  Spain — 
Cadiz  letter — British  feeling — Mary  Caroline's  disclaimer — 
Joachim  arrives  at  Scilla — His  command  and  forces — Military 
operations  —  Expedition  abandoned  —  Feelings  of  Joachim — 
Napoleon's  recriminations  —  King  of  Rome — Anti- French 
decree  —  Quarrel  between  Joachim  and  Napoleon  —  Caroline 
proceeds  to  Paris — State  of  Calabria — Manhes — His  system — 
The  brigands  —  Manhes  at  Serra  —  Capobianco  and  the 
Carbonari — Manhes'  character. 

When  the  dynasty  of  Naples  had  ceased  to  reign ^ 
when  Joseph  Bonaparte,  Lieutenant  of  the  Emperor, 
and  Marshal  Massena  had  appropriated  to  the  uses  of 
Napoleon  the  continental  portion  of  the  kingdom  of 
the  Two  Sicilies,  it  had  been  intended  that  the  French 
army  should  not  pause  in  its  march  until  after  the 
Strait  of  Messina  had  been  crossed,  until  the  tricolour 
had  been  planted  on  the  ramparts  of  Palermo.  How 
that  design  failed  has  been  recorded.  But  through  all 
the  vicissitudes  that  attended  the  policy  of  France  and 
of  Naples  the  conquest  of  Sicily  had  always  taken  rank 
as  an  object  of  the  first  importance.  It  was  not,  how- 
ever, until  the  year   1810  that  circumstances  appeared 

231 


232  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

to  make  it  possible.  France  was  once  more  at  peace 
with  the  north-eastern  Powers,  only  England  and  Spain 
for  the  moment  engrossed  the  Emperor's  attention. 
However  great  the  force  required  to  maintain  the 
doubtful  hold  of  France  on  the  southern  peninsula,  it 
was  now  possible  to  move  considerable  detachments 
down  from  Lombardy  to  Naples. 

Accordingly,  numerous  bodies  of  French  troops, 
together  with  many  of  the  battalions  recruited  by 
Joachim,  were  slowly  moved  more  and  more  threaten- 
ingly near  the  Strait  of  Messina.  But  to  get  a  clearer 
view  of  the  curious  situation  that  shortly  arose  at  that 
point,  it  will  be  necessary  for  a  moment  to  consider 
the  position  on  the  further  side  of  the  Strait,  and  to  see 
what  were  the  relations  existing  between  Great  Britain, 
Sicily,  France,  and  Naples.  For  behind  all  the  hostile 
demonstrations  was  a  network  of  political  intrigue,  and 
it  is  by  no  means  certain  either  that  Napoleon  had  any 
design  whatever  on  Sicily,  or  that  if  the  French  troops 
had  effected  a  landing,  the  Court  of  Palermo  would  not 
have  received  them  with  open  arms. 