

The  police  department  also  continued  to  be  of  great 
importance.  Its  policy  was  founded  on  an  elaborate 
system  of  spying  and  delation,  a  close  inquisition  into 
the  acts  of  individuals,  a  constant  intercepting  and 
opening  of  letters  and  even  on  occasion  of  diplomatic 
dispatches.  Popular  demonstrations  were  led  and 
organized  by  paid  agents,  and  when  the  King  visited 
the  opera,  500  free  seats  were  distributed  to  selected 
persons,  resulting  in  gratifying  demonstrations  of  loyal 
enthusiasm.  Although  the  severity  of  the  police  had 
been  somewhat  relaxed  in  the  early  months  of  the 
reign,  it  had  been  reasserted  with  great  vigour  during 


224  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  troubles  of  1809,  and  not  a  little  of  the  efficacy  of 
its  measures  of  repression  had  been  due  to  Saliceti*s 
chief  subordinate,  the  Genoese  Maghella. 

Maghella  was  an  advanced  liberal,  a  subtle  and 
strong  politician,  a  compatriot  of  Saliceti  and,  in  a  way, 
of  Bonaparte.  He  was  given  to  secret  and  devious 
ways  that  were  perhaps  suitable  in  a  police  official,  but 
that  in  a  private  capacity  would  probably  have  led  him 
into  trouble.  He  was  one  of  a  small  but  important 
group  of  Italians  who  saw  in  the  existing  political  con- 
ditions of  Naples  a  transitional  stage  that  was  to  be 
turned  to  profit,  that  was  to  lead  to  more  liberal 
institutions,  that  was  to  result  perhaps  in  a  republic, 
perhaps  in  the  establishment  of  an  Italian  state,  at  all 
events,  of  one  in  which  Italians  should  have  the  decisive 
voice.  Such  sentiments  could  hardly  be  avowed  in 
public.  But  in  private,  under  the  strict  pledge  of 
secrecy,  under  the  veil  of  that  thin  allegory  and 
delicate  allusiveness  which  the  Italian  imagination  so 
rapidly  invents  and  pierces,  such  ideas  were  gradually 
permeating  the  minds  of  the  Italian  functionaries, 
civil  and  military,  that  stood  about  the  throne  of  their 
French  monarch. 

Saliceti  was  more  wary,  even  more  difficult  to  con- 
nect with  any  disloyal  intent,  than  Maghella.  To  his 
clear  eye  it  must  have  appeared  certain  that  the  time 
was  not  yet  ripe.  His  influence  among  liberal  Italians 
was  great ;  yet  he  was  very  guarded,  a  man  of  few 
words,  and  it  is  not  probable  that  he  went  far  in 
encouraging  the  rising  group  of  Italian  nationalists. 
One  of  his  contemporaries  at  Naples  said  of  Saliceti  : 
"  Although  he  had  accepted  the  i8th  of  Brumaire  and 
wore  the  colours  of  the  new  dynasty,  he  could  not  but 
think  his  surroundings  paltry  as  to  the  men,  debased  as 


CHAP.  VII  MURAT'S  REFORMS  225 

to  their  object.  I  do  not  say  he  was  still  a  republican  ; 
but  the  period  of  that  monumental  period,  of  the  titanic 
Comite  de  Salut  Public^  still  lived  in  him  and  lent  to  his 
attitude  in  his  new  functions  and  towards  his  new 
colleagues  a  shade  of  disdain  that  pierced  through  his 
usual  reserve."  ^  Yet  so  prudently  did  he  guard  his 
inmost  thoughts,  so  actively  and  well  did  he  perform 
the  functions  intrusted  to  him,  that  on  his  death  not 
only  did  the  citizens  of  Naples  regret  his  loss,  but 
Napoleon  declared  that  of  all  his  Ministers  he  had 
served  him  best. 