

There  was  a  not  altogether  unjustified  predisposition, 
arising  from  this  system  of  Mary  Caroline,  to  believe 
that  behind  it  were  intrigues  of  the  most  discreditable 
kind.  The  terror  her  name  inspired  at  Naples,  the 
affair  of  Mosca,  the  explosion  at  the  Palazzo  Maresca, 
the  doings  of  the  capimassi^  were  placed  to  her  discredit ; 
and  her  hatred  for  her  enforced  allies  at  Messina  was 
undisguised.  Just  at  the  moment  when  the  French  at 
last  really  threatened  the  invasion  of  Sicily,  the  coin- 
cidence of  two  or  three  curious  incidents  created  a 
belief,  not  yet  altogether  dispelled,  that  Mary  Caroline 
was  secretly  in  league  with  the  French,  that  she  had 
made  terms  with  Napoleon  through  the  good  offices  of 
her  grand-daughter  the  Empress  Maria  Louisa,  and  that 
she  had  agreed  to  raise  Sicily  against  the  British  and 
execute  a  second  Sicilian  Vespers. 

Undoubtedly  at  this  period  secret  communications 
did  pass  between  Mary  Caroline  and  France.  A  Sicilian 
officer  named  D'  Amitia  was  landed  in  Illyria  in  January 
1810  from  a  Sicilian  armed  brig;  he  saw  Marshal 
Marmont,  the  governor,  claimed  that  he  was  charged 
to  negotiate  a  rapprochement^  was  sent  to  Paris,  and  was 
there  imprisoned  by  order  of  the  Emperor.  Careful 
research  has  failed  to  throw  any  further  light  on  the 
incident,  or  to  trace  D'  Amitia  beyond  the  fortress  of 


CH.  VIII   INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  235 

Vincennes.  In  the  following  month  a  French  officer, 
F.  Donop  by  name,  who  was  then  a  prisoner  in  Sicilian 
hands,  was  released  and  dispatched  by  Castrone  to 
Trieste.  The  secrecy  in  which  his  departure  was 
shrouded,  his  destination,  and  the  fact  that  he  was 
supplied  with  money,  all  go  to  show  that  his  mission 
was  probably  of  the  same  general  nature  as  that  of 
D*  Amitia.i 

At  the  very  moment  when  the  Queen  was  sending 
these  emissaries  to  France,  the  Sicilian  Government  was 
making  great  show  of  preparations  for  an  expedition 
against  Naples.  Many  boats  were  collected,  together 
with  a  force  of  some  1200  or  1500  men  under  the 
Prince  of  Moliterno.  These  preparations  could  hardly 
be  taken  as  representing  a  serious  attempt  against  King 
Joachim.  They  were  viewed  with  great  suspicion  by 
Admiral  Martin,  who  had  succeeded  Collingwood. 
Moliterno  was  not  a  man  who  inspired  confidence. 
Although  a  republican  in  1799,  he  was  now  an  agent  of 
the  Queen,  in  receipt  of  secret  service  money,  and  had 
lately  passed  through  Paris  and  London. 

Martin  and  the  British  Minister  Amherst  paid  an 
official  visit  to  the  Queen  to  protest  against  Moliterno's 
expedition.  They  obtained  the  assurances  they  asked 
for,  but  Mary  Caroline,  though  prepared  to  make  every 
concession  necessary,  also  plainly  showed  that  in  her 
opinion  Great  Britain  had  no  intention  of  reconquer- 
ing Naples  or  even  of  restoring  Sicily  to  her  lawful 
sovereigns.  Not  only  was  Moliterno's  expedition 
abandoned,  but  the  hope  of  reconquering  Naples  was 
soon  changed  to  alarm  at  the  threatening  concentration 
of  troops  in  Calabria  and  at  the  preparations  going  on 