

The  rapid  development  of  Mary  Caroline's  hostility 
to  the  British  has  already  been  noted.  So  early  as 
May  1807  an  Englishman  residing  in  Sicily  wrote  of 
her  that  whenever  she  saw  one  of  his  compatriots  "  she 
feels  the  guillotine  on  her  neck.''  ^  The  Queen's  senti- 
ments were  repaid  in  kind  by  the  great  majority  of  the 
officials  sent  to  Sicily  by  the  British  Government,  and, 
to  counterbalance  the  Queen's  influence,  they  supported 
a  party  of  Sicilian  noblemen  led  by  the  Prince  of  Bel- 
monte  who  were  hostile  to  the  Queen  and  in  favour  of 
a  reforming  and  liberal  policy.     A  Sicilian  Parliament 

1  Leckie,  98. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  233 

assembled,  and  questions  of  supply  decided  against  the 
Queen's  wishes  accentuated  the  ill  feeling  between 
Belmonte's  party  and  Mary  Caroline. 

The  disputes  with  her  Sicilian  subjects,  her  helpless- 
ness against  the  British  generals  at  Messina,  constant 
ill  success,  and  the  disappointing  failure  of  the  Arch- 
duke Charles  and  of  Sir  John  Stuart  in  1809,  had 
further  impaired  the  Queen's  already  doubtful  health, 
bodily  and  mental.  Rage  and  dejection  alternately 
seized  her  on  the  return  of  the  Anglo-Sicilian  fleet  in  the 
autumn  of  1809.  She  reviled  her  son  Prince  Leopold 
for  his  inglorious  expedition,  and  in  a  letter  to  a  friend 
at  Vienna,  Canon  Boehme,  she  complained  that  affairs 
were  in  a  lamentable  position,  and  admitted  that  she 
constantly  took  opium  to  soothe  her  overstrung  nerves. 
Yet  she  continued  intriguing  with  all  the  restless 
folly  of  a  diseased  imagination.  She  had  no  right 
to  wield  regal  authority  in  a  direct  way,  and  all  her 
schemes  depended  on  the  exercise  of  personal  influence 
and  the  employment  of  secret  methods.  As  early  as 
1807  Lord  Collingwood  had  discovered  that  communi- 
cations were  passing  between  the  Queen  and  Marseilles, 
but  it  seems  probable  that  in  this  there  was  nothing  of 
more  importance  than  the  smuggling  of  the  latest  Paris 
fashions.^  Whether  the  Queen's  explanation  of  the  fact 
be  true  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  the  British  authorities 
viewed  her  with  such  dislike  and  suspicion  that  her 
every  step  was  construed  as  far  as  possible  to  her  dis- 
favour. Nothing  tended  to  increase  this  British  pre- 
judice more  than  the  network  of  spying  that  the  Queen 
had  thrown  from  Palermo  over  Naples  and  Messina 

^  Probably  through  Vacaro,  a  Palermitan  dealer  in  Parisian  fashions  patronized 
by  the  Queen. — Mary  Caroline  Memoirs.  Cf.  also  Sir  John  Moore's  Diary  for  similar 
reports,  possibly  with  the  same  origin. 


234  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

and  the  Tyrrhenian  Sea.  Doubtful  go-betweens  passed 
from  place  to  place,  as  often  as  not  paid  by  both  sides 
and  lying  to  both.  At  the  head  of  the  passport 
department  at  Palermo  was  a  low  poHce  agent,  Castrone 
by  name,  who  dispatched  all  the  Queen's  emissaries  and 
letters  and  chartered  her  vessels.  After  employing 
him  for  five  years  Mary  Caroline  finally  concluded 
that  he  cost  much  and  effected  little,  that  he  lived  in 
scandalous  luxury  and  was  an  endless  cause  of  vexation. 