

When,  just  before  his  check  at  Essling,  Napoleon 
determined  to  despoil  the  Pope  and  to  annex  the  Papal 
States  to  the  Empire,  he  specially  deputed  Saliceti  to 
perform  this  delicate  mission.  Six  thousand  Nea- 
politan troops  marched  to  Rome  to  carry  out  the 
Emperor's  measures. 

The  annexation  of  the  territory  proved  a  simple 
enough  matter,  but  when  the  news  of  Essling  reached 
Rome,  Pius,  doubtless  believing  that  God  had  inter- 
posed to  save  his  Vice -Regent,  attempted  to  second 
the  Austrian  arms  by  pronouncing  sentence  of  excom- 
munication against  the  great  spoiler.  With  the  Imperial 
army  hemmed  in  to  the  island  of  Lobau  by  the  Arch- 
duke Charles,  with  Sir  John  Stuart  at  the  gates  of 
Naples,  and  with  the  head  of  the  Catholic  Church 
rattling  his  pontifical  thunders,  the  situation  was  so 
alarming  that  many  men  even  of  tried  ability  would 
have  faltered.  But  Saliceti  had  studied  politics  at  a 
vigorous  school,  and  was  not  to  be  intimidated.  He 
promptly  arrested  Pius,  sent  him  under  guard  to 
France,  placed  Rome  under  martial  law,  and  then 
hurried  back  to  Naples,  where  he  arrived  in  time  to 

^  Cavaignac,  259. 
VOL.  I  Q 


226  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

give  fresh  heart  to  Joachim's  Ministers,  and  to  prevent 
the  abandonment  of  the  capital. 

Saliceti  was  not  long  to  survive  the  invaluable  services 
he  rendered  to  Napoleon  and  to  Joachim  in  the  summer 
of  1809.  He  had  been  in  failing  health  for  some  time 
and  liable  to  gastric  trouble.  In  December  of  the 
same  year  he  was  taken  suddenly  ill  at  the  theatre  one 
evening  after  dining  with  Maghella  ;  a  few  days  later 
he  died.^  He  was  succeeded  by  Maghella,  whose 
appointment  was  much  resented  by  the  Queen. 

It  has  already  been  related  that  from  the  first  advent 
of  the  new  King  and  Queen  to  Naples  the  Court  had 
divided  into  two  parties.  Saliceti  had  for  a  time  inclined 
to  side  with  Caroline,  knowing  her  qualities  and  her 
influence  with  the  Emperor.  But  the  Queen's  circle  was, 
unfortunately,  largely  composed  of  young  men,  pleasure- 
lovers,  dashing  officers  like  Lavauguyon,  Livron,  and 
Montrond.  To  participate  in  the  ambitions  and  counsels 
of  these  young  '' godelureaux,"  as  he  called  them,  was 
impossible  for  a  man  of  Saliceti's  calibre  and  character. 
He  appears  to  have  then  turned  towards  another  and 
important  party  that  soon  began  to  gain  influence  in 
the  entourage  of  the  King. 

Joachim's  character  invited  the  exercise  of  those  arts  of 
cajolery  and  flattery  in  which  the  Italians  are  adepts,  and 
that  constitute  their  favourite  means  of  attaining  their 
ends.  Among  the  Neapolitans  who  formed  a  part  of 
the  Court  circle,  those  whose  views  went  beyond  mere 
personal  advancement  saw  in  Joachim  a  vain,  good- 
hearted  soldier,  unfit  to  govern,  but  fit  to  be  led. 
Concessions  might  be  gradually  coaxed  from  him  ;  his 