

To  make  the  quarrel  between  the  brothers-in-law 
even  more  serious,  it  was  just  at  this  time  that  a  secret 
correspondence  of  Joachim  with  Paris  was  discovered 
by  the  police.  This  correspondence  revealed  that 
Joachim  kept  in  close  touch  with  Fouche  and  the 
small  party  of  intriguers  who  would  have  welcomed, 
in  certain  eventualities,  his  succession  to  the  Imperial 
throne.  General  Ayme,  of  the  Neapolitan  army,  was 
arrested  and  imprisoned  at  Vincennes,  while  Lavauguyon, 
one  of  Joachim's  equerries,  was  sent  out  of  Paris. 
Napoleon  further  ordered  instructions  to  be  forwarded  to 
the  Governor  of  Rome,  General  Miollis,  to  sequestrate 
the  famous  Farnese  Palace  and  collections  belonging  to 
the  Neapolitan  crown. 

Things  had  gone  far.  One  more  step  would  have 
marked  an  irreparable  breach.  At  this  crisis  of  their 
fortunes,  when  it  appeared  as  though  their  throne  might 
at  any  moment  be  taken  from  them,  Joachim  and 
Caroline  agreed  for  a  while  to  sink  their  differences. 
The   tension   between   Paris    and    Naples    immediately 


246  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

relaxed.  Marshal  Perignon,  Governor  of  Naples, 
officially  announced  to  the  King  that  he  had  instruc- 
tions to  declare  that  the  Emperor  had  no  intention  of 
annexing  Naples  to  the  Empire  ;  such  an  annexation 
was  unnecessary,  as  Naples  in  reality  was  but  a  portion 
of  the  Greater  Empire  ;  it  was  agreeable  to  the 
Emperor  that  Joachim  should  be  King  of  Naples, 
but  it  was  not  to  be  forgotten  that  Napoleon  was  none 
the  less  Emperor  there. 

In  Court  circles  at  Naples  and  among  the  diplomats 
an  open  breach  was  freely  talked  of.  Even  the  possi- 
bility of  an  armed  conflict  was  discussed,  and  in  one  of 
his  dispatches  the  Austrian  Minister,  Count  Mier, 
thought  it  worth  while  to  express  the  opinion  that 
Joachim,  in  such  an  eventuality,  could  not  rely  on  the 
French  and  foreign  officers  in  the  Neapolitan  army. 
Three  weeks  later  he  wrote  as  follows  : — 

This  incertitude  as  to  the  continued  existence  of  the  king- 
dom not  only  impedes  the  operations  of  government,  but 
greatly  affects  private  affairs  ;  no  one  dares  enter  into  con- 
tracts and  bargains  but  from  day  to  day  ;  and  the  government 
has  stopped  all  public  works  so  as  not  to  spend  what  money  is 
in  hand,  and  this  economy  is  specially  with  a  view  to  having 
specie  ready  in  case  of  trouble.^ 

Towards  the  end  of  October  it  was  thought  advis- 
able that  the  Queen  should  proceed  to  Paris  to  placate 
her  brother.  The  step  proved  in  a  measure  successful. 
Caroline's  influence  was  effective,  and  tangible  proofs 
of  Napoleon's  lessened  resentment  were  soon  aflx)rded 
by  the  restoration  of  the  Farnese  property  and  the 
release  of  Ayme. 