

declared  that  she  thoroughly  believed  in  its  genuine- 
ness, but  that  for  herself  she  was  unsv^^erving  in  her 
devotion  to  the  British  alliance.  Her  yiqw  that  the 
letter  was  genuine  was  soon  modified,  however,  for  a  few 
weeks  later,  at  the  request  of  the  Sicilian  charge  d'affaires 
at  Cadiz,  it  was  officially  announced  that  the  letter  was 
a  forgery  by  the  Spanish  Council  of  Regency. 

It  is  now  time  that  we  recrossed  the  Strait  to  follow 
the  operations  of  Napoleon  and  Joachim.  The  King 
of  Naples  arrived  at  Scilla  on  the  3rd  of  June,  saluted 
by  the  ringing  of  bells  and  by  salvos  of  artillery  that 
were  re-echoed,  but  with  solid  shot,  by  the  British 
batteries  on  the  further  side.  The  Strait  of  Messina 
at  this  point  appears  little  more  than  a  river  winding 
between  hilly  and  picturesque  banks.  It  gradually 
widens  from  about  two  miles  across  at  the  Faro  to 
eight  or  nine  miles  at  Messina.  The  troops  of  both 
armies  were  mostly  encamped  at  the  narrowest  point, 
and  so  slight  was  the  distance  between  them  that  from 
the  lofty  rock  of  Scilla,  550  feet  above  the  sea,  nearly 
all  the  British  camps  and  intrenchments  could  be  dis- 
covered. From  the  further  side  the  view  was  no  less 
remarkable  and  clear,  and  one  English  traveller  claimed 
to  have  distinguished  and  recognised  from  the  Faro 
through  a  telescope  the  person  of  the  King  of  Naples. 

The  command  of  the  French  and  Neapolitan  army 
was  nominally  in  the  hands  of  the  King,  with  General 
Grenier  as  his  chief  of  staff.  But  the  latter  was  in 
direct  communication  with  Paris,  and  was  responsible 
to  the  Minister  of  War  for  the  movements  of  the 
French  troops.  These  amounted  to  no  less  than 
18,000  men  on  the  i6th  of  July,  while  the  Neapolitans 
at  the  same  date  numbered  17,000.-^ 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1050  {e'tats  de  situation)  j  CoUetta  gives  the  total  as 


240  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Along  the  winding  shore  that  runs  from  Palmi 
southward  to  Reggio  hundreds  of  small  vessels,  includ- 
ing sixty  gunboats,  were  drawn  up  ready  to  embark 
the  expedition.  From  the  other  side  of  the  Strait  they 
appeared  like  a  "wood  of  masts." 

To  oppose  the  French  Sir  John  Stuart  mustered 
north  and  south  of  Messina  14,000  men  in  British  pay, 
of  which  about  one -half  were  Germans  and  other 
auxiliaries,  together  with  some  7000  or  8000  Sicilians 
of  very  doubtful  value.  In  one  respect  Stuart  was 
much  stronger  than  his  opponents,  for  a  large  British 
and  Sicilian  fleet  held  complete  command  of  the  Strait. 
A  number  of  English  cruisers  had  been  collected  from 
the  Mediterranean  and  Adriatic,  together  with  three 
battleships,  and  were  supported  by  about  100  gunboats 
each  mounting  one  18-  or  24-pounder. 