

Among  the  most  prominent  of  the  brigand  chiefs 
who  came  to  a  similar  end  only  Benincasa  and  Taccone 
need  be  mentioned.  The  former  was  one  of  the  capi- 
massi  who  followed  Cardinal  RufFo  in  '99.  Like 
Parafante  he  had  harried  the  country  since  1806,  and 
was  chiefly  known  for  the  hundreds  of  men  whose  noses 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  251 

had  been  slit  by  his  orders.     He  was  finally  killed  not 
far  from  Maida  in  March  1811.^ 

Taccone  had  a  period  of  success,  and,  posing  as  a 
political  personage,  characteristically  ordered  solemn 
processions  and  a  service  in  the  cathedral  at  Potenza, 
for  a  while  in  his  possession.  Equally  characteristically, 
with  the  same  unswerving  zeal  for  the  cause  he 
represented,  he  ordered  the  burning  of  women  whose 
views  did  not  happen  to  coincide  with  his.  The  civic 
guards  of  Potenza  finally  captured  this  atrocious  ruffian, 
and  he  was  happily  executed. 

But  a  more  pleasing  aspect  of  those  few  ferocious 
months  during  which  Manhes  reigned  over  Calabria 
must  also  be  noted.  At  the  little  village  of  Serra,  in 
the  wildest  part  of  the  Calabrian  mountains,  the  Syndic 
and  French  captain  in  command  were  enticed  into  a 
house,  treacherously  attacked,  and  murdered.  On  the 
news  reaching  Montelcone,  Manhes  instantly  started  in 
person  at  the  head  of  sixty  lancers.  He  arrived  at 
Serra  late  at  night,  and  on  the  following  morning 
ordered  the  people  to  be  collected  in  the  public  square 
As  soon  as  they  had  assembled,  he  addressed  them  in 
terms  that  may  be  shortly  rendered  thus  : — 

You  have  committed  a  brutal  outrage.  There  is  not  a  foot 
of  this  country  you  have  not  drenched  in  innocent  blood.  I 
declare  you  unworthy  of  making  part  of  a  civilized  community ; 
you  are  wild  beasts,  sanguinary,  ferocious,  respecters  neither  of 
divine  nor  of  human  law.  I  now  command  your  interdiction 
and  exclusion  from  all  authority,  spiritual  and  temporal ;  I 
command  that  the  doors  of  the  churches  of  Serra  be  nailed  up  ; 
and   I   enjoin   on   the   neighbouring  villages   that  every  path 

^  Copia  delle  lettere^  5  j  as  an  example  of  his  outrages  and  cruelties  the  following 
short  passage  may  be  quoted  :  "  Dodici  infelici  del  Reggimento  29  di  Hnea  Francese 
furono  da  lui  inchiodati  agli  alberi  del  Bosco  di  S.  Eufemia,  e  furono  trovati  .  .  . 
col  membre  virilo  reciso,  ed  indi  posto  nella  loro  bocca." — Noti%ia  sulle  Vite^  14. 


252  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

leading  to  Serra  be  watched,  preventing  all  communication, 
and  shooting  down  all  who  would  approach  as  wild  beasts 
suffering  from  hydrophobia. 

The  inhabitants  were  seized  with  consternation, 
which  increased  as  they  saw  the  threatened  measures 
being  carried  into  execution  and  their  priests  being 
removed  from  the  village.  Soon  they  agreed  to  hunt 
down  the  murderers,  and  before  long  satisfied  justice. 
A  month  later  Manhes  remitted  his  sentence  against 
the  village.  That  part  of  the  country  was  permanently 
pacified. 