

1  Bunbury,  224. 
VOL.  I  R 


242  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

account  to  cross  the  Strait.  Between  French  and 
Neapolitans  a  certain  amount  of  feeling  also  arose, 
especially  among  the  officers  of  the  two  nations  who 
served  on  Joachim's  staff.  Rumours  and  jealousies  of 
the  most  opposite  kinds  were  thus  current  in  the  two 
camps,  and  although  skirmishing  proceeded  daily, 
though  many  Neapolitan  boats  and  an  English  brig 
were  destroyed,  yet  matters  of  real  importance  seemed 
indefinitely  at  a  deadlock. 

Finally,  after  some  heavy  gunboat  engagements,  the 
King  gave  the  order  for  the  troops  to  be  embarked. 
It  was  the  night  of  the  i8th  of  September,  the  wind 
was  blowing  lightly  from  the  east,  and  Cavaignac's 
division  was  carried  across,  landing  near  Scaletta,  i8 
miles  south  of  Messina,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morn- 
ing. This  movement,  however,  remained  unsupported 
by  the  rest  of  the  army ;  it  may  be  that  Grenier  refused 
to  move,  either  in  execution  of  orders  from  Paris  or 
for  the  perfectly  comprehensible  military  reason  that 
the  movement  was  too  wide  to  be  safe.  At  all  events, 
Cavaignac's  division,  quickly  attacked  by  superior 
forces,  was  compelled  to  re-embark,  and  returned  to 
Reggio,  having  lost  a  battalion  of  Corsican  infantry 
of  looo  men  who  were  cut  off  and  taken  prisoners. 
The  Monitore  ascribed  the  failure  of  the  rest  of  the 
army  to  cross  to  the  lack  of  wind,  but  it  may  be 
remarked  that  it  was  to  the  lack  of  wind  alone  that 
Cavaignac  owed  the  return  of  his  boats  without  damage 
from  the  British  cruisers. 

This  proved  the  end  of  the  projected  invasion  of 
Sicily.  Eleven  days  later,  on  the  29th  of  September, 
the  royal  standard  was  hauled  down,  the  camps  were 
broken  up,  and  Joachim  returned  to  Naples.  The 
stormy    autumn   season  was    approaching,  yet  as  that 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  243 

had  not  deterred  Joachim  from  his  difficult  enterprise 
against  Capri,  it  does  not  appear  a  sufficient  reason  for 
the  abandonment  of  the  Sicilian  undertaking.  The 
real  reasons  were  written  large  on  the  face  of  events. 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  King  of  Naples'  precise 
policy  during  the  summer,  it  was  plain  that  neither  the 
British  nor  yet  the  Emperor  had  been  discomfited  ; 
but  he  certainly  had  been.  By  many  the  King's 
precipitate  abandonment  of  his  enterprise  was  ascribed 
to  his  firm  conviction  that  some  sort  of  understanding 
had  been  arrived  at  between  Napoleon  and  Mary 
Caroline. 

The  Emperor,  however,  whether  playing  a  part  or 
legitimately  displeased  at  his  lieutenant's  precipitate 
retreat,  complained  strongly  of  his  conduct.  Anxious 
at  the  approaching  crisis  at  Lisbon,  news  of  the  occupa- 
tion of  which  he  was  awaiting  from  Massena,  he  com- 
plained to  Joachim  that  his  retreat  from  the  Strait  of 
Messina  might  well  result  in  the  reinforcement  of  the 
British  in  Portugal  with  troops  that  would  otherwise 
have  been  dispatched  to  Sicily.  A  little  later  the 
Emperor,  still  far  from  sympathising  with  the  King's 
discomfiture,  reproached  him  for  the  bad  management 
that  had  failed  to  carry  the  whole  army  across  the  Strait 
and  had  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the  Corsican  battalion  ; 
not  content  with  this  he  blamed  Joachim  for  the  bad 
management  of  his  finances,  and  for  mustering  an  army 
of  40,000  Neapolitans,  when  20,000  would  be  just  as 
useful,  as  everything  in  reality  depended  on  the  French 
troops. 