

One  of  the  numerous  persons  executed  at  this  time 
was  Capobianco,  who  has  sometimes  been  called  the  first 
martyr  of  the  Carbonari.  The  rise  and  origin  of  this 
secret  society  will  engage  our  attention  a  little  later  ; 
all  that  need  be  said  for  the  present  is  that  in  1808, 
when  Calabria  was  fairly  peaceful,  and  a  great  muster- 
ing of  soldiers  and  militia  had  been  urged  by  Joachim, 
Briot,  intendente  of  the  province,  had  largely  made  use 
of  freemasonry  as  a  means  of  getting  together  local 
bodies.  Shortly  afterwards  Napoleon's  anti-papal 
policy  had  turned  the  Calabrian  clergy  more  strongly 
against  the  new  order,  and  secret  associations  on  more 
or  less  masonic  lines  were  employed  against  the  Govern- 
ment in  several  places,  a  certain  Canon  Le  Piane  being 
a  specially  active  agent.  Some  such  association,  with 
a  combination  of  other  exciting  causes,  led  a  farrier 
named  Capobianco,  Grand  Master  of  a  lodge,  and  who 
had  before  this  had  some  difficulties  with  the  Govern- 
ment, to  head  an  armed  movement  that  Manhes  very 
courageously  and  adroitly  mastered.  Capobianco  was 
arrested,  tried  by  court-martial,  and  hanged.^ 

1  Manhes'  letter  to  the  Paris  Moniteur  (Dec,  5,  1835)  makes  Colletta's  account 
valueless. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  253 

His  treatment  of  Serra  reveals  a  side  of  Manhes' 
character  that  shows  him  not  to  have  been  the  monster 
that  Calabrian  legend  has  made  him.  He  was  a 
haughty  man,  somewhat  spoiled  by  good  fortune  and 
the  King's  favour,  who  made  more  enemies  than 
friends,  yet  honest,  just  according  to  his  own  lights, 
indefatigable  and  tenacious.  With  the  English  governor 
of  Messina  he  maintained  courteous,  nearly  friendly, 
relations.  To  his  subordinates  he  nearly  as  frequently 
inculcated  strict  observance  of  legal  forms  as  the 
constant  pursuit  of  malefactors.  He  did  not  extirpate 
brigandage  from  Calabria,  because  even  if  swept  from 
the  mountain  sides  it  could  not  be  eradicated  from 
the  hearts  of  the  people,  yet  after  a  few  months  of 
his  rule  Calabria  ..."  assumed  the  appearance  of 
civilization  and  public  safety,''  and  this  was  undoubtedly 
a  great  step  forward.^  So  highly  were  his  services 
esteemed  that  the  King  created  him  a  count,  and 
promoted  him  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general,  while 
the  city  of  Castrovillari  presented  him  with  a  sword  of 
honour,  and  that  of  Cosenza  elected  him  a  free  burgess. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Interno,  2°  In^entario,  5079  :  measures  of  internal 
administration,  Calabria,  etc. 

Arch,  di  Stato  ;  Guerra,  xxv.  1050  :  official  returns,  troops,  etc.  j 
2061,  Donop. 

BiBL.  Naz.  :  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs :  events  in  Sicily. 