

In  view  of  the  preponderance  of  the  Anglo-Sicilians 
at  sea,  it  was  evident  that  the  crossing  could  only  be 
attempted  above  or  below  Messina,  at  some  time  when 
a  favourable  slant  of  wind  should  drive  the  opposing 
ships  out  of  reach  of  the  French  transports.  The 
town  itself,  well  fortified  and  protected  by  forts,  could 
not  be  attacked  from  seaward  with  the  slightest 
hope  of  success.  But  the  heavy  British  ships  were 
generally  kept  cruising  just  outside,  to  the  north  of 
the  Strait,  while  the  harbour  of  Messina  afforded  a 
convenient  shelter  for  several  frigates,  so  that,  however 
the  wind  blew,  there  was  always  a  British  naval  force 
ready  to  protect  the  coast-line  between  Messina  and 
the  Faro.  It  was  therefore  only  to  the  south  of 
Messina,  and  with  the  wind  blowing  about  south,  that 

16,000,  Pepe  as  22,000.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  official  estimate  was  inflated 
as  part  of  the  scheme  for  alarming  the  British,  yet  Colletta  and  Pepe  are  so  absolutely 
unreliable  that  on  the  whole  it  appears  better  to  reject  them  even  in  favour  of  official 
figures. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  241 

a  chance  of  a  successful  landing  existed.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  the  Neapolitan  vessels  and  transports 
were  gradually  concentrated  at  Reggio  and  Pentemele, 
while  only  small  detachments  of  them  were  left  about 
Scilla  and  Palmi. 

On  the  30th  of  June  a  grand  rehearsal  of  the  invasion 
of  Sicily  took  place.  The  whole  of  the  French  and 
Neapolitan  troops  were  embarked  at  11  p.m.,  remaining 
on  board  two  hours,  after  which  they  were  sent  back  to 
their  quarters.  This  embarkation  may  have  also  been 
intended  to  alarm  the  defenders  of  Messina,  for  it  took 
place  precisely  at  the  time  when  by  proclamations,  and 
devious  ways  untraceable  by  the  historian,  the  dangerous 
position  of  the  British  army  in  Sicily  had  been  tenfold 
magnified.  Day  and  night  skirmishes  occurred  along 
the  Strait.  One  of  these  affrays  was  graced  by  the 
presence  of  King  Ferdinand  himself,  who,  attended  by 
a  group  of  British  officers,  watched  a  naval  encounter 
from  one  of  their  batteries  "  with  childish  eagerness  ; 
at  every  shot  he  laughed  aloud,  threw  out  his  long 
bony  limbs  in  strange  gesticulations,  and  poured  volleys 
of  buffoonery  in  the  lazzaroni  dialect."  ^  Shots  from 
the  British  batteries  occasionally  carried  as  far  as  the 
magnificent  marquee  of  King  Joachim  that  stood  a 
conspicuous  mark  on  the  hill  of  Piale  ;  on  one  occasion 
three  fell  in  quick  succession  in  a  tent  occupied  by  some 
of  his  Neapolitan  staff  officers. 

As  the  summer  weeks  passed  and  no  decisive 
movement  took  place,  dissensions  arose  in  the  French 
camp  ;  before  long  it  was  rumoured  and  believed  that 
differences  had  arisen  between  the  King  and  Grenier. 
It  was  reported  that  the  French  general  held  orders 
direct    from    Paris   that    his  troops  were  not   on    any 