

Truly  Napoleon  was  a  hard  master  to  obey  and  to 
please  ;  in  these  letters  he  revealed  his  insincerity  so 
openly  that  the  King  of  Naples  was  exasperated  to  a 
dangerous  point.     The  fear  lest  the  kingdom  of  Naples 


244  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

should  suffer  the  same  fate  as  that  of  Holland/  the 
discovery  of  Napoleon's  deception  and  bad  faith, 
turned  his  thoughts  to  bitterness  and  resentment.  In 
the  opinion  of  an  officer  of  rank  it  '^  paved  the  way  for 
the  future  defection  of  a  prince  who  was  absolutely 
determined  to  be  an  independent  king."  ^  The  feeling 
of  hostility  between  Joachim  and  the  Emperor  was 
marked  through  the  winter  of  1810-1811  ;  it  increased 
perceptibly  in  the  early  spring. 

On  the  1 9th  of  March  1 8 1 1  occurred  an  event  on 
which  many  hopes  and  ambitions  depended.  The  new 
Empress  of  the  French  gave  birth  to  a  son,  and  he 
was  immediately  announced  to  the  world  as  the  King 
of  Rome.  The  title  was  a  suggestive  one,  and  might 
be  thought  to  raise  for  the  future  both  the  question  of 
Italian  nationality  and  that  of  the  possible  dispossession 
of  Joachim. 

The  King  of  Naples,  who  had  proceeded  to  Paris 
for  this  solemn  occasion,  suddenly  left  without  awaiting 
the  splendid  ceremonies  appointed  to  mark  the  birth  of 
the  heir  to  the  Empire.  Immediately  on  arriving  at 
his  capital  he  issued  a  decree  whereby  no  civil  or 
military  appointment  in  his  kingdom  could  be  held  by 
any  but  a  native-born  or  naturalized  Neapolitan.  The 
step  was  hasty,  premature,  and  ineffective  ;  even  among 
the  Neapolitans  men  of  sense,  like  Zurlo,  disapproved  of 
the  King's  rash  measure.  It  is  difficult  to  state  pre- 
cisely the  reasons  that  induced  Joachim  to  make  such 
a  move.  It  appears  equally  probable  that  irritation 
with  the  Emperor,  a  desire  to  assert  his  independence 
by  appealing  to  Neapolitan  nationalism,  and  jealousy  on 

}  1  Difficulties  between  the  Emperor  and  King  Louis  led  the  latter  to  abdicate  in 
(favour  of  his  son  in  the  summer  of  1810.  On  this  Napoleon,  by  decree,  annexed 
"the  kingdom  to  the  Empire.  ^  De  Dedem,  183. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  245 

account  of  an  intrigue  of  the  Queen  with  a  high-placed 
French  official,  denounced  by  Maghella,  entered  into 
them. 

Napoleon's  reply  to  the  decree  of  the  King  of 
Naples  was  instant  and  crushing.  The  Moniteur  an- 
nounced that  it  was  unnecessary  for  the  French  com- 
rades of  Joachim  Murat,  by  whose  aid  he  had  ascended 
the  throne,  to  become  naturalized  in  order  to  hold 
civil  and  military  offices  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 
Joachim's  rage  at  the  Emperor's  conclusive  retort 
was  unbounded.  He  tore  from  his  breast  the  Legion 
of  Honour,  and  vowed  he  would  wear  that  decoration 
no  longer  ;  so  violently  was  he  moved,  indeed,  that  he 
fell  ill. 