

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicifyy  30  :  dispatches  of  Drummond,  etc.  ;  39, 
dispatches  of  Amherst,  with  several  inclosures,  including  Cadiz  Gazette, 
Murat  proclamations,  etc. 

Brit.  Museum,  Egerton,  2401. 

Printed  Books 
Abrantes,    Mems. ;    Bianco,    Sicilia ;    Blaquiere,  Letters;    Botta, 
Storia ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacts.;  Cacciatore, Esame ;  Canosa,  Piffari 

^  Colletta,  Storia,  ii.  119. 


254  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

di  Montagna  ;  Castlekeagh,  Dispatc/ies  ,•  Cavaignac,  Mems.  ;  Cockburn, 
Foyage ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Collingwood,  Corr. ,-  Copia  delle  lettere  del 
Manhh  i  Crescieri,  Mems. ;  De  Dedem,  Mems. ;  Buret  de  Tavel, 
S(jour  en  Calabre  ;  G.,  M.  DE,  Notice  hhtorique  ;  Gallois,  Hut.  de  Murat ; 
Galt,  Voyages ;  Greco,  Annali ;  Helfert,  Kdnigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert, 
Maria  Karolina;  Helfert,  Murat;  Leckie,  Hist.  Sur'vey ;  Marmont, 
Mems.;  M^neval,  Mems.;  Monitor e Napolitano ;  Napoleon,  Corr.;  Nicola, 
Diario  ;  Notizia  sulle  Fite  ;  Orloff,  Mems.  ;  Pepe,  Mfwi. ,- Quintavalle, 
Notizia  Storica ;  Radowsky,  Cost  Memorabili ;  Riviello,  Cronaca  Potentina  ; 
Romeo,  Specchio  del  disinganno ;  St.  Amand,  Marie  Amdie ;  Savary, 
Mems.  ;  Savelli,  L/gion  Corse  ;  Turouan,  Saeurs  de  NapoUon. 


CHAPTER   IX 

THE    DEFECTION    OF    MURAT 

Joachim  joins  Grande  Armee — Events  in  Russia — Commands  in 
chief — Abandons  army — Negotiations  between  Austria  and 
Naples  —  Position  of  Metternich  —  Of  Joachim  —  Course  of 
Sicilian  events  since  1810 — Bentinck — Negotiates  at  Ponza — 
Joachim  returns  to  army — Napoleon's  position — Joachim  and 
Italy' — Dresden  interview  —  Entreaties  of  Joachim — Negotia- 
tions of  Joachim  and  Metternich — Joachim  returns  to  Naples 
—  Hesitating  policy  —  Italian  unity  —  Fouche's  mission  — 
Colletta  at  Bologna — Nugent  at  Ravenna — Diplomatic  negotia- 
tions— Neipperg  at  Naples — His  letter  to  Caroline — Austro- 
Neapolitan  alliance — Bentinck  at  Naples — Anglo-Neapolitan 
armistice. 

For  the  three  years  that  passed  between  18 12  and 
1 8 15  the  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  depended 
so  intimately  on  the  movements  and  decisions  of  one 
man,  that  the  centre  of  interest  of  its  history  must  be 
transferred  to  the  vast  scene  of  war  and  politics  that 
was  stretched  between  the  Kremlin  at  Moscow  and 
the  Palace  at  Fontainebleau.  During  that  period, 
while  the  great  events  that  marked  the  collapse  of 
the  Napoleonic  Empire  were  passing,  every  reasonable 
man  at  Naples  felt  that  the  future  of  the  kingdom 
would  be  decided  far  from  its  boundaries.  Yet  few 
foresaw  the  magnitude  of  the  revolution  that  was 
coming  about. 

255 


256  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

King  Joachim,  after  considerable  hesitation,  decided 
to  accept  the  command  of  the  cavalry  of  the  Grande 
y  Armee  which  Napoleon  had  offered  him.  One  of 
Caroline's  dearest  wishes  was  now  gratified,  for  when  in 
April  the  King  proceeded  to  Germany  she  was  installed 
as  Regent  of  the  kingdom. 