

Manhes  was  a  young,  dashing  cavalry  officer  of 
Joachim's  staff,  who  had  followed  him  to  Naples  with 
advantage  to  himself.  For,  only  a  lieutenant  at 
Austerlitz,  he  had  four  years  later  received  the  rank  of 
general  in  the  Neapolitan  service.  He  had  held  various 
commands  in  the  Abruzzi  and  Calabria,  and  had  shown 
energy  and  capacity.  Daure,  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
prepared  a  lengthy  report  recommending  a  series  of 
administrative  measures  to  pacify  the  province,  which 
the  King  at  first  was  inclined  to  adopt.  But  finally  he 
appears  to  have  concluded  that  only  military  rule  and 
vigorous  measures  could  effect  a  cure,  and  fixed  on 
Manhes  to  carry  them  out.     After    some    persuasion 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  249 

from  Zurlo,  Mosbourg,  and  Pignatelli,  he  accepted  the 
charge. 

Manhes  arrived  at  Monteleone  on  the  9th  of 
November  1 8 1  o.  He  had  already  issued  a  proclama- 
tion announcing  that  he  was  invested  with  full  powers 
for  pacifying  the  province,  that  former  measures  had 
been  unsuccessful,  and  that  in  the  future  no  more 
amnesties  would  be  granted.  For  a  few  weeks  the 
new  governor  did  nothing,  apparently  inactive  and 
powerless.  But  he  had  worked  out  a  plan  based  on  a 
principle  that  made  this  delay  necessary.  At  last,  when 
the  first  winter  snows  made  their  appearance  on  the 
mountain  tops,  he  issued  his  decrees.  The  plan  of 
Manhes  turned  on  two  fundamental  facts  :  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Calabria  were  nowhere  a  scattered  popu- 
lation, but  lived  entirely  in  village  communities,  and  that 
the  brigands  could  not  remain  in  the  mountain  fastnesses 
without  obtaining  food  from  the  villages.  He  there- 
fore decreed  that  every  one  of  the  rank  and  file  of 
the  brigands  who  surrendered  immediately  should  be 
pardoned,  and  receive  pay  at  the  rate  of  one  carlin 
per  day.  The  chiefs,  however,  were  not  included,  and 
had  a  price  put  on  their  heads.  Every  village  was  to 
live  under  military  guard,  the  cattle  were  to  be  kept 
under  watch  by  day,  within  the  walls  at  night.  No 
food  of  any  sort,  not  even  in  the  most  minute  quanti- 
ties, was  to  be  taken  beyond  the  walls  of  the  towns  or 
villages  under  penalty  of  death.  The  same  penalty 
was  to  be  awarded  to  any  one  holding  any  communi- 
cation with  the  brigands. 

These  drastic,  but  not  illogical,  measures  were  an- 
nounced by  every  parish  priest  of  Calabria  ;  they 
proved  largely  successful,  because  they  were  executed 
to  the  letter.     That  they  inflicted  hardship  is  true,  but 


250  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

that  milder  steps  would  have  succeeded  is  not  probable  ; 
and  it  cannot  be  thought  that  the  war  of  extermination 
against  the  brigands  was  unjustified.  A  staunch  Bour- 
bonist  described  their  excesses  as  more  worthy  of 
cannibals  than  men,  and  his  judgment  was  far  from 
an  exaggerated  one.  How  useless  was  the  civic  guard 
system  had  just  been  demonstrated  by  Parafante  who, 
near  Cosenza,  routed  a  whole  battalion  of  them  in 
pitched  battle.  For  four  years  he  had  harried  the 
country  between  Cosenza,  Amantea,  and  the  Sila,  but 
the  measures  of  Manhes  brought  him  to  bay  at  last. 
His  men  could  find  no  food  on  the  mountains.  The 
decrees  of  the  French  governor  were  followed  up 
with  cruel  vigour.  At  Stilo  some  women  and  boys  who 
took  bread  with  them  as  they  went  out  into  the  fields  to 
pick  olives,  were  shot.  At  Cosenza  a  father  was  shot  for 
supplying  food  to  his  son.  At  Nicastro  a  woman  who 
received  and  tended  a  new-born  babe  given  to  her  by 
a  girl  who  followed  the  brigands,  was  shot.  Millers 
who  had  sold  flour  to  the  outlaws  were  shot.  In  every 
village  lists  of  brigands  who  were  to  be  shot  at  sight 
were  posted,  and  all  the  while  every  particle  of  food  was 
kept  within  walls.  For  the  capture  or  head  of  Para- 
fante, Manhes  offered  everything  that  could  be  given, 
money,  honours,  promotion.  This  atrocious  murderer 
and  mutilator  was  finally  reduced  to  a  following  of  five 
men,  and  with  these  he  was  shot  down  in  the  forest  of 
Nicastro  in  the  month  of  February  1 8 1 1 . 