

Caroline  remained  in  Paris  through  the  winter  of 
i8i  1-1812,  while  Joachim  stayed  at  Naples  not  only 

1  Mier  to  Metternich,  Oct.  n,  i8ii,  Helfert,  Murat,  128. 


CH.  VIII  INTRIGUES  AND  DEMONSTRATIONS  247 

in  conjugal  but  in  political  isolation.  All  correspond- 
ence between  him  and  the  Emperor  ceased  ;  and  the 
separation  did  not  tend  to  improve  the  long -shaken 
relations  between  the  King  and  Queen.  The  prevailing 
impression  in  the  spring  of  1 8 1 2  was  still  that  any 
pretext  would  suffice  to  cause  the  annexation  of  Naples 
to  the  Empire,  when  the  threatened  outburst  of  the 
greatest  and  most  terrible  of  the  Napoleonic  wars 
served  to  divert  the  Emperor's  attention  to  other 
matters,  served  to  give  price  once  more  to  the  invalu- 
able services  of  the  great  cavalry  leader  of  the  Empire. 
His  presence  had  been  too  much  missed  in  1809  to 
make  him  less  than  indispensable  to  the  gigantic  army 
mustering  for  the  great  plunge  into  the  steppes  of 
Russia. 

While  Joachim's  relations  with  the  French  Empire 
thus  progressed,  there  had  been  plenty  to  engage  his 
attention  within  the  boundaries  of  the  kingdom.  The 
reforms,  finance,  and  legislation  of  this  period  have 
already  received  notice,  but  some  of  the  consequences 
of  the  expedition  to  the  Strait  of  Messina  have  not 
yet  been  related,  and  must  now  find  place.  So  often 
had  Calabria  been  officially  declared  pacified,  so  often 
had  regal  generosity  amnestied  the  province,  that  from 
these  two  facts  alone  it  might  fairly  be  concluded 
that  the  state  of  lawlessness  had  been  uninterrupted. 
Insurrection  turned  to  brigandage,  and  brigandage  to 
insurrection  with  the  same  rapidity  with  which  a 
peaceful,  slumbering  peasant  would  dart  up  and  un- 
sheathe his  knife  from  its  hidden  resting-place,  or  with 
which  a  red- coated  Sicilian  colonel  would  exchange 
his  regulation  sword  and  theoretical  civilization  for 
a   blunderbuss   and   the   military   ethics    of   a    North- 


248  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

American  Indian.  The  summer  of  1806  had  been 
very  bad,  that  of  1807  a  little,  and  of  1808  much 
better  ;  in  1 809  there  had  been  another  outbreak,  which 
even  the  presence  of  the  large  army  collected  in  the  pro- 
vince in  1 8 10  hardly  brought  within  bounds.  Convoys 
for  the  camps  along  the  Strait  of  Messina  were 
frequently  cut  off,  and  in  the  very  outskirts  of  the 
King's  headquarters  at  Piale  murders  by  brigands  were 
frequent. 

The  system  of  civic  guards  had  proved  so  far  of 
little  effect  in  restraining  and  punishing  excesses,  but  the 
chief  fault  had  undoubtedly  been  the  constant  variation 
of  policy.  Brigands  who  laughed  at  their  pursuers  were 
grandiloquently  amnestied  by  a  magnanimous  prince, 
but  were  promptly  hanged  in  spite  of  all  amnesties  if 
by  any  chance  taken  prisoner.  There  was  neither 
rigour,  nor  clemency,  nor  consistency  about  the  system 
pursued,  until,  after  the  break-up  of  the  camp  at 
Reggio,  General  Manhes  was  appointed  military 
governor  of  Calabria,  with  unlimited  powers  to  act  in 
the  King's  name. 