

The  persistent  circulation  of  the  reports  of  secret 
correspondence  between  Napoleon  and  Mary  Caroline 
had  the  double  effect  of  alienating  the  King  of  Naples 
from  the  Emperor  and  the  British  from  the  Queen  of 
Sicily.  The  British  generals  were  strong  in  their  denun- 
ciations of  the  Queen  ;  her  spies  were  caught  and  tried 
by  court-martial,  and,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  shot. 
An  exchange  of  letters  between  the  Queen  and  Lucien 
Bonaparte  was  jealously  watched.  A  trap  was  success- 
fully set  on  various  Sicilian  officers  who  declared  their 
readiness  to  fight  against  the  British.  It  had  now 
become  a  burning  question  whether  Mary  Caroline 
or  the  representative  of  Great  Britain  was  to  rule 
Sicily. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  the  British  Cabinet  decided 
to  send  to  Sicily  Lord  William  Bentinck,  who  in  the 
dual  capacity  of  diplomatic  representative  and  Com- 
mander-in-Chief was  virtually  intrusted  with  dictatorial 
power.  Bentinck  was  a  complex  personality,  of  which 
the  two  most  salient  features  were  inflexible  resolution 


262  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

and  bluntness  of  manner.  Mary  Caroline,  after  her 
first  interview  with  him,  described  him  to  the  Court 
circle  as  a  "  boorish  corporal,''  and  Bentinck  at  once 
demonstrated  his  lack  of  diplomatic  qualifications  by- 
manifesting  open  resentment.^  His  political  aims  were 
liberal,  inspired  by  a  genuine  aspiration  for  improve- 
ment, but  tinctured,  so  far  as  an  Italian  policy  was  con- 
cerned, by  a  violent  anti-French  sentiment  that  brought 
him  for  a  time  nearer  the  views  of  Castlereagh  than 
those  of  the  late  leader  of  his  own  party.  Fox.  By 
profession  he  was  a  soldier.  In  India  he  had  proved 
his  determination,  or  obstinacy,  to  the  point  of  arous- 
ing revolt  ;  at  Marengo,  with  Melas,  he  had  witnessed 
one  of  the  greatest  of  French  victories  ;  in  Germany, 
and  later  in  Spain,  he  had  been  in  the  field  against 
them,  though  with  but  ill  success.  As  director  of 
British  policy  in  the  Mediterranean  he  aimed  at  dealing 
a  blow  at  the  French  power  in  Italy.  From  the  first 
he  appears  to  have  thought  that  in  a  national  revolt  of 
the  Italian  people  lay  the  hope,  not  only  of  overturning 
the  throne  of  Naples,  but  of  effecting  some  radical 
improvement,  some  step  towards  the  nationalization 
and  liberalization  of  the  peninsula. 

For  some  months  after  Bentinck's  arrival  at  Palermo 
there  arose  no  opportunity  for  undertaking  any  of  the 
schemes  he  revolved.  Until  the  summer  of  1812  Spain 
remained  the  only  scene  of  active  operations,  and  the 
British  Government  was  more  disposed  to  utilize  what 
strength  it  could  dispose  of  in  the  Mediterranean  for 
assisting  Wellington  than  for  any  new  and  problematic 
movement  in  Italy.  But  even  had  Bentinck  disposed  of 
the  means,  he  would  have  lacked  the  leisure  to  invade 
Naples,   for  he   was  fully  occupied  during   two  years 