

The  march  of  Napoleon  into  Russia  was  so  obviously 
hazardous,  that  even  before  the  French  army  crossed 
the  frontier,  Paris  was  full  of  apprehension ;  long 
before  Moscow  was  reached  the  Grande  Armee  was 
seriously  disorganized,  demoralized,  and  reduced.  Even 
before  the  victorious  carnage  of  Borodino  (September 
7,  1 8 12),  Napoleon's  marshals  clearly  showed  that 
prosperity,  or  common  sense,  had  wearied  them  of 
war,  and  that  they  judged  the  enterprise  on  which 
their  master  had  embarked  foolhardy.  The  spirit  of 
criticism  that  had  been  checked  by  the  wave  of  success 
of  the  opening  years  of  the  Empire  was  now  alive 
once  more.  The  leader  who  had  formerly  been  their 
companion,  and  later  their  divinity,  had  appeared  to 
many  observers  weak  and  ineffective  at  the  battle  of 
Borodino,  where  Davout,  or  the  King  of  Naples,  if 
supported,  might  have  turned  the  Russian  defeat  into 
a  disaster. 

In  September  and  October  no  man  in  the  army  was 
more  profoundly  depressed  and  dissatisfied  than  the  King 
of  Naples.  In  command  of  a  detached  corps,  mostly 
made  up  of  cavalry,  he  was  hard  put  to  it  to  keep 
the  Cossacks  at  a  distance  from  Moscow.  He  was 
sick  of  his  work  and  of  semi -starvation,  and  fore- 
saw the  ensuing  disaster.  Together  with  his  disgust 
with  fruitless  skirmishing  in  a  half- desert  country, 
Joachim  was  irritated  by  constant  disagreement  with 
the  policy  of  Caroline  and  the  Neapolitan  Ministers, 


CHAP  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  257 

whose  action  he  vainly  attempted  to  direct  from  his 
headquarters. 

On  the  retreat  from  Moscow  the  King  of  Naples, 
leader  of  a  horseless  command,  did  nothing  of  note. 
He  was  not  one  of  the  few,  among  whom  Ney  and 
Prince  Eugene  were  most  conspicuous,  whose  fortitude 
shone  brightly  through  the  clouds  of  adversity.  He 
followed  the  footsteps  of  Napoleon  wearily  and  moodily 
through  burning  Smolensk  and  across  the  corpse-laden 
Berezina.  One  of  the  last  incidents  of  the  retreat  was 
of  special  importance  to  Joachim,  and  must  therefore 
be  mentioned.  Two  regiments  of  light  horse  of  the 
King*s  Guard  had  just  arrived  from  the  south.  They 
joined  the  army  at  Osmiana,  and  were  detailed  to 
escort  the  Emperor  to  Wilna,  two  days'  march  ;  so 
intense  was  the  cold  that  less  than  a  hundred  of  them 
arrived  at  the  journey's  end. 

On  the  5th  of  December  Napoleon  left  what 
remained  of  his  great  army.  Before  departing  he 
signed  a  decree  appointing  the  King  of  Naples  to  the 
command,  much  to  the  chagrin  of  Prince  Eugene. 
The  appointment  was  dictated  by  political  rather  than 
by  military  considerations,  for  at  this  crisis  in  the 
Emperor's  fortunes  he  considered  it  advisable  to  give 
himself  all  the  apparent  strength  he  could  by  present- 
ing the  King  as  his  chief  subordinate.  He  probably 
also  thought  that  his  interests  at  Naples  would  be  safer 
in  Caroline's  than  in  Joachim's  hands.  That  he  really 
trusted  the  King  is  not  possible,  for  there  had  been 
little  direct  intercourse  between  them  during  the 
campaign,  and  Napoleon  had  shown  an  extreme  and 
unreasonable  jealousy  at  the  frequent  and  not  un- 
friendly intercourse  that  Joachim  held  with  the 
Russians  when  in  command  of  the  outposts. 