

After  leaving  Erfurt,  where  he  saw  Napoleon  for  the 
last  time  of  his  life,  information  reached  Joachim  that 

1  From  the  letter  of  the  King  of  Bavaria  to  Prince  Eugene,  Oct.  8,  1813,  the 
inference  may  fairly  be  drawn  that  no  satisfactory  assurances  were  given  by  Joachim. 
— Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prkce  Eugene,  2. 


270  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

he  might  yet  count  on  the  goodwill  of  Metternich,  and 
negotiate  with  Austria  on  the  basis  of  his  retaining  the 
throne  of  Naples.  Possibly  a  communication  reached 
him  through  the  Austrian  lines  at  Ollendorf  on  the 
22nd  of  October.^  On  the  following  day  the  Duke  of 
Rocca  Romana  joined  him  at  Eisenach  with  dispatches 
from  Naples,  and  that  night  Murat  left  the  army  and 
started  as  fast  as  post-horses  could  gallop  for  Italy. 
On  learning  of  the  King's  abandonment  of  the  army 
Napoleon  was  greatly  enraged,  and  issued  orders  for  his 
arrest  if  he  should  pass  on  French  soil. 

The  arrival  of  Joachim  in  his  capital  was  immediately 
marked  by  a  step  that  unmistakably  proclaimed  a  com- 
plete reversal  of  policy.  The  King  arrived  on  the  4th 
of  November  ;  on  the  1 1  th  a  decree  was  issued  throw- 
ing the  trade  of  Naples  open  to  neutral  vessels.  Yet 
Joachim's  intentions  were  in  reality  far  from  fixed.  The 
very  next  day  after  the  issue  of  this  decree  he  wrote  to 
Napoleon  offering  to  march  into  Lombardy  at  the  head 
of  40,000  men,  but  asking  in  return  that  the  Emperor 
should  proclaim  the  independence  of  Italy.  He  was,  in 
fact,  open  to  the  first  good  offer,  and  was  faced  by  this 
difficulty  that  on  the  one  hand  Napoleon  was  not  accom- 
modating, and  that  on  the  other  he  had  to  deal  not  with 
one  but  with  several  parties,  one  of  which  alone,  so  far, 
had  shown  signs  of  meeting  him.  Metternich  was  ready 
to  enter  into  a  treaty,  but  was  that  of  real  value  if  Great 
Britain  was  not  prepared  to  concur  in  it  ?  Neither 
Castlereagh  at  the  Foreign  Office  nor  Bentinck  at 
Palermo  showed  signs  of  a  friendly  disposition,  though 

^  The  supposed  interview  between  Murat  and  Mier  has  been  conclusively  demon- 
strated to  be  apocryphal  by  M.  Weil  in  his  Prince  Eugene  et  Murat  ,•  yet  it  appears 
more  than  probable  that  some  communication  from  the  Austrian  lines  reached 
Murat  at  this  point,  perhaps  accompanied  by  a  passport  to  enable  him  to  pass 
through  southern  Germany. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MUR AT  271 

Lord  Aberdeen  appeared  disposed  to  concur  in  the 
Austrian  policy.  But  the  British  Ambassador  to  Vienna 
was  young  and  had  yet  much  to  learn  in  politics  and 
diplomacy.  His  uncertain  grasp  of  the  whole  question 
may  be  judged  from  the  following  extract  from  one  of 
his  dispatches  to  Castlereagh  :  "  The  grand  thing,  in 
the  first  instance,  is  to  precipitate  his  (Murat's)  acts  of 
hostility  against  Bonaparte  without  committing  our- 
selves by  any  engagement  or  precise  understanding."  -^ 