

A  few  days  before  offering  his  assistance,  for  a  price, 
to  Napoleon,  Joachim  had  made  a  similar  offer  to  Met- 
ternich.  Writing  in  cypher  to  Prince  Cariati  at  Vienna, 
he  expressed  himself  strongly  against  the  Emperor's 
folly,  stating  that  he  was  prepared  to  march  at  the  head 
of  80,000  men,  and  hoping  that  the  Allies  would  treat 
him  not  less  favourably  than  they  had  treated  Berna- 
dotte  and  Sweden.  This  dispatch  was  written  on  the 
journey  between  Eisenach  and  Naples.?-^ 

Since  his  return  from  Russia  in  the  early  weeks  of 
18 13  a  vast  political  scheme  had  been  growing  in 
Joachim's  mind,  until  it  had  now  become  the  central 
idea  about  which  all  his  plans  revolved.  If  the  French 
Empire  was  falling  to  pieces,  if  France  was  to  be  driven 
back  to  her  natural  frontiers  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Alps, 
why  should  not  an  Italian  State  be  constituted,  and  why 
should  not  he,  Joachim  Murat,  be  its  ruler  ?  The 
whole  peninsula,  though  nominally  under  three  govern- 
ments, was  under  similar  laws  and  administration. 
Whether  as  inhabitants  of  Naples,  of  the  French  depart- 
ments, or  of  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  Italians  had  fought 
side  by  side.  Did  the  break-up  of  the  Empire  portend 
the  break-up  of  this  outline  of  an  Italian  nationality  as 

1  Aberdeen  to  Castlereagh,  Nov.  lo,  1813,  Foreign  Off.  Austria^  102. 
2  Ibid. 


272  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

well  ?  The  constitution  of  Italy  as  a  national  unit  was 
no  new  conception ;  men  of  capacity  like  Saliceti, 
Maghella,  and  Bentinck  had  realized  its  possibility  ; 
Napoleon  had  announced  his  faith  in  it  by  creating 
Lombardy  the  kingdom  of  Italy  and  his  son  the  King  of 
Rome.  Many  believed  the  time  ripe  and  the  means 
found.  King  Joachim's  understanding  was  convinced, 
his  ambition  was  inflamed  ;  he  embarked  on  a  scheme 
full  of  dangers,  and  for  the  carrying  out  of  which  he 
had  few  qualifications  to  succeed. 

Yet  had  Napoleon  been  willing  to  benefit  Italy,  to 
sacrifice  his  personal  pride  to  the  interests  of  a  people, 
had  he  at  this  precise  moment  decreed  the  unification 
of  Lombardy,  the  French  departments  and  Naples 
under  Joachim,  he  would  have  covered  one  frontier  of 
France  and  might  have  concluded  an  honourable  peace. 
But  such  a  policy  could  not  commend  itself  to  the 
combative  and  selfish  genius  of  Napoleon.  His  anxiety 
at  the  position  of  affairs  south  of  the  Alps,  and  especially 
at  Joachim's  attitude,  was  great,  but  the  only  measure 
he  would  take  was  to  dispatch  Fouche  to  estimate  the 
possibilities  of  the  position  and  to  persuade  the  King  to 
return  to  his  military  obedience.  -^ — --^ — 

As  the  ex-Minister  of  Police  started  on  his  journey 
south  the  King  of  Naples  was  pressing  on  military  pre- 
parations and  his  troops  were  marching  northwards. 
Soon  Joachim  informed  Napoleon  that  his  army  was  in 
motion  for  northern  Italy.  An  engineer  officer.  General 
Colletta,  was  sent  to  Bologna  with  instructions  to 
reconnoitre  the  country  along  the  south  of  the  Po,  and 
to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  Fouche  and  with 
General  Pino  of  the  Italian  army,  commandant  of  the 
important  fortress  of  Ferrara.  At  Bologna  Colletta  met 
Pino,  Lavauguyon,  and  Fouche,  and  the  latter,  perhaps 