

^  Mary  Caroline  Memoirs. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  263 

settling  the  political  conditions  of  Sicily,  or,  in  other 
words,  depriving  Mary  Caroline  of  political  power. 

The  complicated  threads  of  the  political  intrigues 
of  those  two  years,  the  history  of  the  English  -  made 
constitution  presented  to  the  Sicilians  by  Bentinck, 
cannot  be  traced  here.  It  will  suffice  to  say  that  by 
the  beginning  of  1 8 1 3  the  affairs  of  Sicily  had  reached 
the  following  position.  The  Queen  was  virtually  a 
State  prisoner  in  British  custody,  and  under  engage- 
ment to  leave  the  island.  The  King  was  engaged  in 
his  favourite  occupation  of  hunting,  and  no  longer 
resided  at  Palermo.  The  Hereditary  Prince,  Francis, 
Duke  of  Calabria,  held  the  regency  confided  to  him  by 
his  father.  He  and  a  Sicilian  Parliament  ostensibly. 
Lord  William  Bentinck  in  reality,  ruled  Sicily.  The 
British  agent's  declared  policy  was  the  maintenance 
of  the  Bourbon  rights  as  stipulated  in  the  treaty  of 
aUiance,  and  the  freeing  of  Italy  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Italians  who  should  be  left  at  liberty  to  declare  for 
whatever  form  of  constitution  they  preferred.  In  the 
first  respect  his  views  accorded  with  those  of  the  British 
Cabinet ;  in  the  second  they  did  not. 

In  a  military  way  Bentinck  had  not  as  yet  effected 
much.  To  form  Sicilian  troops  was  a  difficult  task, 
for  such  recruits  as  could  be  obtained  deserted,  and  the 
officers  were  so  poor  that  they  were  not  above  begging 
for  charity  in  the  streets.  In  1 8 1 2  an  expedition  sent 
to  Catalonia  effected  little,  but  preparations  were  made 
for  another  and  larger  one  in  18 13. 

The  destruction  of  the  French  army  in  Russia,  and 
the  apparent  inclination  of  the  King  of  Naples  for 
peace,  gave  Bentinck  an  opportunity  for  detaching  him 
from  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon.  Having  in  the  early 
weeks  of  1 8 1 3  completed  all  preparations  for  his  pro- 


264  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

jected  expedition  to  Spain,  and  also  for  the  removal  of 
Mary  Caroline  from  Sicily,  he  sailed  for  the  small  island 
of  Ponza  late  in  May.  There  he  had  interviews  with 
some  secret  agents  of  Joachim,  the  English  merchant 
Jones,  and  a  subordinate  of  the  Neapolitan  Ministry 
for  Foreign  Affairs.  They  were  not  able  to  persuade 
him  into  offering  better  terms  than  these  :  that  the 
King  should  immediately  join  the  Alhes  with  all  his 
troops  ;  that  he  should  renounce  the  throne  of  Naples  ; 
in  return  Joachim  should  be  provided  with  an  equiva- 
lent compensation,  and,  until  such  compensation  was 
provided,  retain  Naples. 

These  proposals  of  Bentinck  were  not  accepted,  for 
the  whole  object  of  Joachim's  policy  was  the  retention 
of  Naples.  Yet  the  mere  fact  that  he  had  opened 
negotiations  with  Austria  and  Great  Britain,  in  which 
his  taking  sides  against  Napoleon  was  proposed,  marked 
a  big  step  forward.    As  Wellington  wrote  to  Bentinck  : — 