

VOL.  I  s 


258  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

At  a  council  of  war  which  Joachim  held  nearly 
immediately  after  assuming  command,  he  is  reported  to 
have  inveighed  bitterly  against  Napoleon's  insensate 
ambition,  to  which  he  ascribed  all  the  disasters  of  the 
army.  His  remarks  were  more  conformable  to  common 
sense  than  to  military  discipline,  and  several  of  the 
marshals  raised  their  voices  in  protest.  The  retreat  was 
continued  to  Konigsberg,  whence  Joachim,  writing  to 
his  wounded  chief  of  staff,  Belliard,  declared  :  "  Every- 
body wants  to  leave  the  army.  I  am  really  indignant 
at  the  general  demoralization.  If  this  state  of  affairs 
continues,  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  far  it  will  go."  ^ 
Only  a  few  days  later  he  himself  did  what  he  had  thus 
reprobated  in  others.  On  the  march  from  Mariens- 
werder  to  Posen  he  received  a  courier  from  Naples. 
The  news  contained  in  the  dispatches  handed  to  him 
appeared  to  agitate  him  greatly.  A  few  hours  later  he 
resigned  the  command  of  the  army  to  Prince  Eugene, 
and  took  the  road  for  Naples  with  the  same  precipitancy 
that  he  had  shown  in  the  year  1 8 1 1 .  The  return  of 
the  King  to  Naples  was  marked  by  a  coolness  between 
him  and  the  Queen  and  by  the  disgrace  of  a  prominent 
courtier,  in  which  facts,  rather  than  in  any  sudden 
political  calculation,  is  to  be  sought  the  explanation  of 
the  King's  abandonment  of  his  charge. 

Napoleon  was  indignant  when  he  heard  of  the  deser- 
tion of  his  command  by  the  King  of  Naples.  He 
immediately  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene  that  were  it  not 
for  the  critical  state  of  affairs  he  would  have  court- 
martialled  the  King.  When  he  met  the  Duke  of 
Carignano,  Neapolitan  Minister  at  Paris,  he  pointedly 
inquired  after  the  health  of  the  Queen ;  the  King  he 

1  Belliard,  i.  114. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  259 

passed  over  in  silence.  The  Moniteur  announced  to  the 
world  the  change  in  command  of  the  French  army  on 
the  Russian  frontier  with  the  insulting  comment  that 
Prince  Eugene's  talents  were  better  suited  for  the 
duties  which  the  absence  of  the  King  had  devolved  on 
him.  When  this  number  of  the  official  paper  reached 
Naples,  Joachim  was  wounded  to  the  quick.  He  wrote 
to  Belliard  strongly  complaining  of  the  treatment  he 
was  subjected  to,  vowing  unalterable  fidelity  to  the 
Emperor,  and  expressing  the  hope  that  he  would  soon 
meet  his  old  chief  of  staff  once  more  at  the  head  of 
his  troops. 

Nearly  immediately  after  this  an  exchange  of  views 
took  place  between  Prince  Cariati,  the  Neapolitan 
Minister  at  Vienna,  and  Count  Metternich,  and  between 
Count  Mier,  Austrian  Minister  at  Naples,  and  Joachim. 
Mier  was  a  trusted  diplomatist,  whose  part  at  Naples 
had  been  for  two  years  a  very  passive  one,  but  who 
was  now  to  use  to  some  purpose  the  personal  influence 
he  had  established  with  the  sovereigns  to  whom  he  was 
accredited.  The  precise  position  of  Austria  at  this 
moment  was  that  she  was  still  nominally  the  ally  of 
the  French  Empire.  Yet  every  one  knew  that  alliance 
to  be  one  of  necessity,  that  would  be  broken  at  the 
first  favourable  opportunity.  No  sooner  had  the 
first  intimations  of  the  catastrophe  of  Russia  reached 
Vienna  than  Austrian  diplomacy  began  to  stir.  If  the 
great  game  of  politics  was  to  turn  against  Napoleon, 
Metternich  was  anxious  to  obtain  his  share  in  the 
division,  of  the  spoils.  As  yet  few  men  realized  the 
extent  of  the  disaster  that  had  overtaken  the  French 
arms,  and  no  man  could  foresee  what  the  future 
would  bring.  Yet  every  day  that  passed  showed  the 
position  of  Napoleon  under  a  more  threatening  aspect. 