

influence,  mediate  a  peace  between  the  Emperor  and  the 
Allies.  But  Joachim,  however  independent  at  a  distance, 
was  in  the  presence  of  Napoleon  little  more  than  a 
"  poule  mouillee,"  as  Rapp  said.  Although  he  arrived 
at  headquarters  at  a  moment  when  negotiations  for  a 
settlement  were  proceeding  actively,  yet  once  face  to 
face  with  Napoleon,  he  was  able  to  play  no  part,  and 
sank  back  at  once  into  his  accustomed  role  of  a  mere 
mihtary  subordinate. 

The  position  of  Napoleon  at  this  moment  was  an 
extraordinary  one.  He  was  attempting  to  browbeat  a 
league  of  every  Power  of  Europe  with  an  army  but  half 
as  large  as  that  he  had  led  into  Russia,  of  which  but 
one-third  was  French,  and  in  which  conscripts  took 
the  place  of  veterans,  criticism  and  lassitude  the  place 
of  enthusiasm  and  confidence.  Every  sacrifice  had 
been  made  in  order  to  collect  troops  in  Germany. 
Grenier,  with  three  seasoned  divisions,  was  ordered 
north  from  Naples,  Italy  was  denuded  of  French  and 
German  troops,  and  between  February  and  November 
1,000,000  conscripts  were  taken  from  their  homes. 
After  Lutzen  Napoleon  intrusted  the  defence  of 
northern  Italy  to  Prince  Eugene,  and  ordered  the  King 
of  Naples  to  detach  20,000  men  to  serve  under  the 
Viceroy's  orders.  This  Joachim  declined  to  do,  though 
had  the  Emperor  promptly  and  ungrudgingly  given 
him  the  supreme  command  of  everything  south  of  the 
Alps,  it  appears  probable  that  a  great  part  of  the 
Neapolitan  army  would  have  marched  north,  and  that 
the  policy  of  Joachim  would  have  taken  a  different 
turn. 

Joachim  reached  headquarters  at  Dresden  just  as  the 
armistice  concluded  after  Bautzen  was  coming  to  a  close. 
That  armistice  had  been  marked  by  negotiations  during 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  267 

which  Austria  had  interposed  her  armed  mediation,  and 
Metternich  was  at  Dresden  submitting  to  the  Emperor 
the  terms  on  which  peace  might  yet  be  concluded.  For 
seven  hours  did  Metternich's  interview  with  Napoleon 
last,  for  seven  hours  did  the  King  of  Naples  and  several 
of  the  marshals  anxiously  await  the  result  in  an  ante- 
room. The  Austrian  negotiator  failed.  Napoleon 
could  not  bring  himself  to  sacrifice  what  was  required 
of  him.  "  Your  sovereigns  born  to  the  throne  may  be 
beaten  twenty  times,"  he  said  to  Metternich,  "  and  still 
go  back  to  their  palaces  ;  that  cannot  I,  the  child  of 
fortune.  .  .  ."  ^  Yet  the  French  army  was  crying  aloud 
for  peace.  To  the  expostulations  of  his  marshals  and  of 
his  most  trusty  advisers  the  Emperor  turned  a  deaf  ear. 
Caulaincourt,  Berthier,  Belliard  pleaded  with  him  in 
vain.  Duroc,  a  {qw  days  before  his  death,  declared 
that  things  had  gone  too  far.  Ney  and  the  King  of 
Naples  earnestly  remonstrated  against  eternal  warfare, 
and  on  Napoleon  calling  Joachim  a  traitor,  the  latter 
put  his  hand  on  his  sword.  At  Dresden  both  the  King 
and  Caulaincourt  actually  went  on  their  knees  begging 
the  Emperor  to  conclude  peace.  It  was  all  of  no  avail. 
The  strongest  declarations  could  not  move  him,  and 
when  Joachim  came  out  from  Napoleon's  study  he  said 
to  Belliard:  "Ah,  wretched  man!  he  will  sacrifice 
France  and  the  army,  and  kill  you  all.  .  .  .  Caulain- 
court told  him  some  very  strong,  even  harsh,  truths. 
He  listened  to  everything  with  perfect  composure."  ^ 