


26o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

As  the  hold  of  the  French  army  on  north-eastern 
Germany  gradually  relaxed,  the  sentiment  grew  in 
Vienna,  as  it  did  elsewhere,  that  the  time  had  now  come 
when  it  had  become  possible  to  check  the  extravagance 
of  Napoleon's  policy,  that  a  time  had  arrived  when  he 
might  be  persuaded  to  see  reason,  or  if  not  persuaded, 
then  compelled  to  see  it. 

The  views  held  in  Vienna  during  the  early  weeks  of 
1 8 1 3  were  in  reality  not  very  far  removed  from  those 
professed  quite  widely  in  Paris ;  they  were  even  closer 
to  those  of  the  King  of  Naples.  So  great  was 
Joachim's  anxiety  for  a  general  settlement  and  for 
peaceful  possession  of  his  throne,  that  a  whisper  of  the 
Emperor's  intention  of  uniting  Naples  to  the  Greater 
Empire,  once  more  circulated  in  the  spring  of  1813, 
sufficed  to  make  him  seek  in  Vienna  that  stable  support 
he  had  never  found  in  Paris.^  Knowing  as  he  did  how 
complete  had  been  the  destruction  of  the  Grande  Armee^ 
he  probably  based  his  whole  political  calculation  on  the 
supposition  that  the  Austrian  army  must  prove  a  factor 
of  such  weight  that  it  would  force  Napoleon  to  a 
settlement.  Joachim  had  not  yet  gauged  the  super- 
human resourcefulness  and  inflexibility  of  that  extra- 
ordinary man. 

In  April  the  first  diplomatic  pourparlers  took  place 
at  Naples.  They  were  carried  on  without  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Duke  di 
Gallo,  for  he  was  too  strong  a  supporter  of  Napoleon 
to  be  trusted.  The  overtures  came  from  the  Neapolitan 
side,  and  Mier  was  able  to  report  to  his  court  that 
Joachim's  mind  was  set  on  one  thing  only, — the  guar- 
antee of  his  actual  possessions  and  independence.     If  he 

1  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina^  514.     In  the  absence  of  any  other  authority  than 
Mier  one  may  venture  the  supposition  that  this  rumour  was  of  diplomatic  origin. 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  261 

could  only  obtain  this  he  was  prepared  to  follow  the 
Austrian  lead,  and  if  necessary  to  join  in  the  mediation 
which  Metternich  then  contemplated  as  a  means  of 
obtaining  a  settlement. 

Although  Austria  seemed  the  most  important  factor 
in  the  diplomatic  situation  for  Naples,  Great  Britain 
appeared  most  threatening  of  the  actual  belligerents. 
To  conciliate  her  was  at  least  as  necessary  as  to  con- 
ciliate Austria,  and  this  Joachim,  on  finding  Count 
Mier  in  a  friendly  disposition,  prepared  to  do.  The 
turn  that  Anglo-Neapolitan  relations  now  took  will  be 
more  clearly  understood  if  a  brief  retrospect  of  events 
that  had  taken  place  on  the  further  side  of  the  Strait 
of  Messina  since  18 10  be  first  attempted. 