

Your  late  discussions  with  Murat's  agents  have  entirely 
altered  the  appearance  of  affairs  in  Italy.  .  .  .  It  is  very  difficult 
to  form  an  opinion  of  Murat's  sincerity,  but  I  am  quite  certain 
he  will  do  nothing  unless  the  Emperor  of  Austria  should  take  a 
line  with  the  Allies.^ 

At  the  very  moment  that  Bentinck  was  at  Ponza 
the  aspect  of  affairs  in  France  and  in  northern  Europe 
was  rapidly  changing,  and  Joachim  was  once  more 
drawn  back  towards  Napoleon.  The  attitude  of  the 
King  had  caused  alarm  at  Paris.  On  the  3rd  of  June 
the  French  Minister  at  Naples,  Durand,  addressed  a 
note  to  Gallo  complaining  of  the  negotiations  proceed- 
ing between  Vienna  and  Naples.  At  the  same  time 
Joachim  received  from  Paris  private  letters  urging  him 

1   Wellington,  Disps.  x.  482. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  265 

to  join  the  army  in  Germany  and  not  to  leave  his  old 
comrades  to  fight  without  him.  For  some  weeks  he 
wavered,  though  had  Bentinck  agreed  to  guarantee  him 
Naples  he  would  doubtless  have  joined  the  Allies. 

These  entreaties,  the  unsatisfactory  proposals  of 
Bentinck,  and  the  rapid  advance  of  Napoleon's  new 
army  on  Berlin  all  served  to  check  the  King's  move- 
ment towards  the  Allies.  Yet  when  pressed  by  the 
Emperor  to  detach  troops  to  reinforce  Prince  Eugene 
in  northern  Italy  he  wrote  to  him  that,  although 
he  was  prepared  to  march  north  with  30,000  men,  it 
was  only  on  condition  that  he  should  hold  supreme 
command  south  of  the  Alps.  On  other  terms  he  would 
not  move  a  single  soldier. 

Metternich  had  now  advanced  so  far  towards  open 
hostilities  with  France  that  the  reserve  he  had  shown 
towards  the  Neapolitan  advances  in  April  had  become  im- 
patience in  July.  If  Austria  was  once  more  to  take  the 
field  against  Napoleon  it  was  of  desperate  importance 
that  every  possible  assistance  should  be  promptly  secured. 
He  urged  Mier  in  the  strongest  terms  to  obtain  the 
accession  of  the  King  to  the  Allies,  and  when  he  signed 
the  treaty  whereby  Austria  entered  the  coalition  he 
added  a  clause  providing  for  the  entry  and  indemnifica- 
tion of  the  King  of  Naples. 

On  the  2nd  of  May  Napoleon  won  the  battle  of 
Lutzen,  and  on  the  21st  the  battle  of  Bautzen.  For 
these  victories  Joachim  ordered  Te  Deums  to  be  sung, 
and  finally,  on  the  2nd  of  August,  on  receiving  a  letter 
from  Napoleon  inviting  him  to  Dresden,  he  suddenly 
decided  to  leave  Naples  and  join  the  French  army. 
He  appears  Jo  have  been  prompted  to  this  resolve 
by  various  motives  ;  among  them  was  the  belief  that 
he   could   successfully   interpose    and,   by  his  personal 


266  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 