

On  the  loth  of  August  the  armistice  came  to  an 
end.  Two  hundred  thousand  Austrians  now  joined  the 
Allies,  and  military  operations  were  resumed.  Joachim 
took  command  of  the  French  cavalry,  though  by  a 
strange  fiction  the  kingdom  of  Naples  continued  normal 

1  Metternich,  i.  i86.  2  Belliard,  i.  119,  124. 


268  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

diplomatic  relations  with  Austria,  and  the  King's  presence 
with  the  French  army  was  declared  to  be  merely  in  the 
capacity  of  a  volunteer.  That  one  volunteer  proved  a 
host  in  himself  so  long  as  fortune  remained  favourable. 
At  the  battle  of  Dresden  a  circling  movement  of  several 
divisions  of  cavalry  unerringly  led  by  Joachim  brought 
victory  once  more  to  the  Imperial  eagles. 

After  Dresden  came  much  marching  and  counter- 
marching. The  Emperor  divided  his  army  in  two, 
marched  in  person  towards  Berlin  against  Blucher,  and 
left  Joachim  to  hold  Schwarzenberg  in  check.  At  last 
the  French  and  allied  armies  gradually  closed  on  the 
town  of  Leipzig,  and  in  the  terrific  battle  that  was  there 
fought  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon  suffered  an  irretrievable 
blow.  The  French  army  began  its  retreat  from  Leipzig 
on  the  night  of  the  i8th  of  October,  but  already  a 
month  earlier  Metternich  had  resumed  his  efforts  to 
detach  Joachim  from  the  Emperor.  He  had  told  the 
King,  with  the  consent  of  Lord  Aberdeen,  British 
Ambassador  to  Vienila,  that  ''Austria  was  in  a  position 
to  make  communications  of  the  greatest  importance 
on  behalf  of  England  and  of  the  Prince  Regent  of 
Sicily.   .  .   ."^ 

The  fact  was  that  the  instructions  given  to  Lord 
Aberdeen,  on  his  leaving  London  for  Vienna  in  August, 
were  completely  in  accord  with  the  policy  adopted  by 
Bentinck  in  the  Ponza  negotiations,  and  directed  him 
that  the  British  Cabinet  was  not  prepared  to  sacrifice 
the  claim  of  King  Ferdinand  to  Naples,  but  was  pre- 
pared to  consider  the  compensation  of  Joachim  with  a 
"  liberal  establishment  "  in  central  Italy.^  Joachim  was 
not,  however,  acquainted  with  the  tenor  of  Lord  Aber- 

^  Foreign  Off.  Austria^  102,  undated,  but  presumably  not  later  than  Sept.  25. 
^  Rose,  ii.  301. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  269 

deen's  instructions,  and  it  is  indeed  doubtful  whether 
any  of  Metternich's  communications  actually  reached 
him  between  Dresden  and  Leipzig.^  But  after  that 
battle,  whether  any  communication  from  Metternich 
reached  him  or  not,  he  appears  to  have  decided  that  to 
go  on  longer  would  be  folly.  If  the  Emperor,  if  his 
old  companion-in-arms  was  determined  to  continue 
pouring  out  these  endless  libations  of  blood  against  the 
opinion  of  Europe,  of  France,  and  even  of  his  most 
trusted  lieutenants,  why  should  he  participate  longer 
in  such  folly  ?  Why  should  one  insane  will  prevail 
against  the  common -sense  of  mankind  ?  Was  he, 
Joachim  Murat,  to  be  drawn  against  his  wish  into  the 
vortex  of  destruction  into  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
was  straightway  plunging  ?  Was  it  wrong  to  compel  the 
war-mad  Emperor  to  desist,  and  that,  if  necessary,  by 
force  of  arms  ?  How  could  Napoleon  refuse  longer  to 
sign  that  peace  which  the  world  called  for  aloud  if  his 
old  friend,  his  brother-in-law,  the  Master  of  the  Imperial 
Horse,  the  possible  successor  to  the  French  throne,  the 
most  brilliant  soldier  of  his  army,  came  to  him  with  his 
sword  drawn  and  said  :  "  Sire,  what  you  seek  is  beyond 
nature  ;  it  has  turned  your  own  children  against  you  ; 
in  the  name  of  reason,  in  the  name  of  France,  you 
must  accept  peace."  Thus  probably  reasoned  the 
unhappy  Joachim  to  himself  on  that  mournful  march 
southwards  from  Leipzig  through  Weimar  and  Erfurt, 
through  the  scenes  of  the  brilliant  triumphs  of  former 
years. 