

Early  in  December  Metternich  decided  to  conclude 
a  treaty  with  Naples  on  the  terms  which  he  knew 
Joachim  considered  indispensable, — the  retention  of  his 
crown.  He  prepared  instructions  for  Count  Neipperg, 
whom  he  charged  with  the  negotiations,  and  submitted 
these  instructions  to  Lord  Aberdeen.  There  was 
unfortunately  a  fundamental  difference  between  the 
positions  of  Austria  and  Great  Britain  in  the  question 
of  Naples  which  the  British  Ambassador  failed  to  seize. 
Austria  had  recognised  and  maintained  diplomatic 
relations  with  Joachim  for  some  years,  and  she  had  no 
treaty  with  Ferdinand.  Great  Britain,  on  the  contrary, 
had  never  recognised  Joachim,  had  been  and  still  was  at 
war  with  him,  and  was  bound  by  a  treaty  of  alliance  to 
maintain'  Ferdinand*s  rights  to  Naples.  Oblivious  of 
these  facts,  falling  completely  under  the  influence  of 
Metternich,  Aberdeen,  on  the  12th  of  December, 
handed  him  a  note  in  which  he  stated  that  he  had  taken 

1  Johnston,  Lord  William  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Re'v.  xix. 


278  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

cognizance  of  the  instructions  given  by  Metternich  to 
Count  Neipperg  for  negotiating  an  alliance  with  the 
King  of  Naples  ;  that  he  saw  nothing  in  these  instruc- 
tions contrary  to  the  views  of  the  British  Government ; 
that  he  must,  however,  declare  formally  that  the 
British  Government  would  not  become  party  to  a 
treaty  guaranteeing  Naples  to  Murat  without  providing 
a  just  compensation  for  the  King  of  Sicily.  To  this 
Metternich  replied  that  the  indemnification  of  King 
Ferdinand,  in  case  he  should  renounce  his  rights  to 
Naples,  was  an  essential  part  of  the  views  of  the 
Austrian  Court,  and  would  be  provided  for  by  the 
treaty  it  was  proposed  to  conclude.^  In  this  exchange 
of  notes  it  is  clear  that  Aberdeen  completely  lost  sight 
of  the  essential  diiTperence  between  compensating  Ferdi- 
nand for  not  returning  to  Naples  and  compensating 
Joachim  for  giving  it  up. 

Neipperg  arrived  at  Naples  on  the  3 1  st  of  December 
18 13.  He  was  a  dashing  cavalry  officer,  and  intended 
to  negotiate  as  briskly  as  he  would  lead  a  charge. 
Metternich's  terms  were  to  be  taken  or  refused,  and  in 
no  event  was  Joachim  to  be  allowed  to  assume  a  neutral 
attitude.  Either  he  was  with  the  Allies  or  against  them. 
Neipperg  was  bearer  of  a  letter  from  Metternich  to 
the  Queen,  in  which  the  Austrian  Minister  stated  that 
Napoleon  was  on  the  point  of  coming  to  terms,  that  he 
was  prepared  to  let  the  Allies  dispose  of  Italy,  that 
through  the  influence  of  the  King  of  Bavaria  something 
might  be  done  in  favour  of  the  Viceroy,  and  that  it  was 
important,  therefore,  that  Naples  should  come  to  terms 
immediately. 