

Thus  pressed,  assured  by  Neipperg  that  Bentinck 
would  fall  into  line  with  Aberdeen,  and  further,  that 

1  Weil,  iii.  227,  228  j  Johnston,  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Rev.  xix. 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  279 

Austria  would  if  necessary  use  force  to  compel 
Ferdinand's  renunciation  of  Naples,  Joachim  signed 
the  treaty  that  turned  him  against  his  old  flag.  Yet 
one  fact  must  be  remembered,  that  at  this  moment 
neither  he  nor  Caroline  anticipated  that  their  action 
was  contributing  to  the  dethroning  of  Napoleon.  Few 
if  any  foresaw  such  an  event ;  to  compel  him  to  make 
peace  was  the  common  aim  ;  even  such  an  active 
Bourbon  agent  as  de  Vitrolles  admitted  that  no  one 
then  believed  in  a  royalist  restoration. 

The  treaty  between  Austria  and  Naples,  signed  on 
the  nth  of  January  18 14,  was  one  of  amity  and  of 
alliance  for  the  joint  prosecution  of  the  war.  Peace 
was  not  to  be  made  by  either  party  independently  of 
the  other.  Austria  guaranteed  the  actual  possessions  of 
the  King,  and  agreed  to  use  her  good  offices  to  procure 
the  accession  of  her  allies  to  this  guarantee.  On  his 
part  Joachim  renounced  all  pretensions  to  Sicily. 
Austria  undertook  to  place  60,000  men  and  Naples 
3O5OOO  in  the  field.  By  several  secret  clauses  it  was 
further  stipulated  that  Austria  would  use  her  good 
offices  to  procure  from  Ferdinand  a  renunciation  of  his 
claims  to  Naples  ;  that  Joachim  should  not  be  expected 
to  act  until  reassured  as  to  Great  Britain's  intentions  ; 
and  that,  at  a  general  peace,  Austria  would  support  the 
King's  claim  to  an  increase  of  territory  out  of  the  Papal 
States  with  a  population  of  400,000  souls. 

Neipperg  had  opened  communications  with  Bentinck 
immediately  on  arriving  at  Naples.  He  communicated 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  and  tried  to  persuade  the  British 
agent  into  concurrence.  Bentinck,  however,  was  with- 
out direct  instructions  from  Castlereagh  and  declined 
to  follow  Aberdeen's  lead.  In  that  he  proved  well 
advised,  for  when  he  heard  from  the  Foreign  Office  he 


28o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

was  instructed  that  the  policy  of  the  British  Cabinet 
was  not  correctly  represented  by  Lord  Aberdeen,  and 
was  unmodified  as  to  the  claims  of  Ferdinand  and 
Joachim.  Under  those  circumstances  he  acted  in  com- 
plete accordance  with  the  intentions  of  his  Government 
in  refusing  to  sign  anything  more  than  a  suspension 
of  hostilities.  This  he  negotiated  in  person  at  Naples 
and  signed  on  the  3rd  of  February  ;  it  merely  pro- 
vided that  hostilities  between  Great  Britain  and  Naples 
should  be  suspended  subject  to  resumption  at  three 
months'  notice,  and  that  commercial  relations  should 
be  resumed. 