

And  in  a  postscript  he  added : — 

Sire,  in  the  name  of  all  you  hold  most  dear  in  this  world,  in 
the  name  of  your  glory,  do  not  remain  obstinate  longer.  Make 
peace,  and  at  any  price  ;  gain  time  and  you  will  have  gained 
all ;  your  genius  and  time  will  do  the  rest.  If  you  refuse  to 
listen  to  the  entreaties  of  your  subjects,  of  your  friends,  you  are 
lost,  and  so  will  be  all  your  friends.  .  .  .  Believe  me  for  once. 
Put  to  one  side  your  pretensions,  your  passions ;  it  is  still  time 
to  save  Italy,  but  explain  yourself.^ 

This  letter  shows  very  clearly  the  double  current  of 
thought  coursing  through  Joachim's  mind, — on  the  one 
hand,  a  perception  far  more  clear  than  Napoleon's  of 
the  impending  ruin,  and  a  desire  for  peace  and  settle- 
ment at  any  cost ;  on  the  other,  the  ambitions  that  ob- 
scured such  plain  considerations  as  those  of  the  soldier's 
point  of  honour.  The  letter  remained  unanswered. 
At  the  same  time  as  Joachim  wrote  this  letter  to  the 

1  Murat  to  Pignatelli-StrongoH,  Dec.  19,  18 13,  San  Martino,  Murat  MS. 

2  Murat  to  Napoleon,  Dec.  25  (wrongly  given  28),  1813,  Weil,  iii.  291. 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  275 

Emperor,  Fouche  supported  it  with  another,  written 
two  days  later  from  Rome.  In  this  he  used  every 
argument  that  made  for  Napoleon's  proclaiming  the 
independence  of  Italy,  and  stated  clearly  that  the  King 
of  Naples  was  negotiating  with  the  Allies,  and  was  in 
hopes  of  getting  favourable  news  from  Vienna  very 
shortly. 

It  was  true  that  Joachim  was  negotiating,  and  not 
only  Fouche,  whose  motives  might  be  suspected,  but 
Caulaincourt,  Napoleon's  best  and  most  faithful  adviser, 
pressed  on  him  the  policy  of  liberating  Italy.  Caulain- 
court was  for  the  middle  course  of  giving  to  Joachim 
what  lay  south  and  to  Eugene  what  lay  north  of  the 
Po  ;  but  on  the  27th  of  December,  when  he  drew  up 
his  report  on  the  question  for  the  Emperor,  he  already 
thought  the  time  was  past  when  such  a  measure  could 
be  effective.  A  week  later  Napoleon  wrote  to  Caulain- 
court accepting  this  policy  ;  it  was  already  too  late.^ 

It  was  true,  as  Fouche  had  reported,  that  Joachim 
was  negotiating  ;  but  it  was  unfortunately  the  case  that 
the  reason  for  his  continued  offers  to  join  Napoleon,  on 
terms,  was  partly  because  no  information  was  reaching 
him  from  the  allied  headquarters,  while  from  Sicily 
and  Bentinck  his  reports  were  altogether  discouraging. 
In  the  course  of  the  first  week  of  January,  however,  the 
situation  v/as  largely  cleared. 

It  was  the  fatal  weakness  of  Joachim's  position  that 
his  negotiations  with  Austria  were  of  practically  no 
value  so  long  as  Great  Britain  did  not  concur  in  them. 
It  was  Great  Britain  and  '  not  Austria  whose  fleet 
patrolled  the  coast-line  of  Naples ;  it  was  Great  Britain 
and  not  Austria  whose  army  might  at  any  moment  and 
without    warning   appear  at   the   gates   of  his   capital. 