

Most  of  the  commanding  generals  had  ranked  as 
lieutenants  or  captains  when  Joachim  ascended  the 
throne,  and  few,  if  any,  had  military  talents.  Carascosa 
and  D'  Ambrosio  had  enough  tactics  to  manoeuvre  a 
brigade  ;  Lecchi  had  great  experience  but  was  past 
active  warfare  ;  Filangieri's  courage  and  dash  were 
unsurpassed  ;  Florestano  Pepe  was  the  only  general 
officer  of  real  ability  and  value,  and  he  was  with  Rapp 
besieged  in  Dantzig.  Of  the  other  generals  none  but 
Guglielmo  Pepe  and  Colletta  possessed  other  military 
virtues  save  courage,  and  one  or  two  no  better  recom- 
mendation than  Court  favour.  The  indiscipline  of  the 
generals  was  as  great  as  that  of  their  men ;  the 
Neapolitan  soldiers,  marauders,  deserters,  thieves,  had 
been  for  some  years  the  affliction  of  their  country  ; 
they  were  now  to  become  the  plague  of  northern 
Italy. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  285 

As  early  as  December  the  Neapolitans  had  entered 
Rome.  The  French  governor,  General  Miollis,  could 
only  dispose  of  a  few  hundred  men,  and  was  not  in  a 
position  to  defend  the  city.  He  affected  to  accept  the 
protestations  of  friendship  of  the  Neapolitans,  but  shut 
himself  up  in  the  castle  of  S.  Angelo,  where  he  awaited 
developments. 

So  exhausted  were  the  resources  of  the  Empire  by 
the  campaigns  of  Russia  and  Germany,  that  south  of 
the  Po  there  were  not  more  than  2000  French  troops 
in  all.  These  slowly  withdrew  as  the  Neapolitans 
advanced,  leaving  behind  them  small  garrisons  in 
Rome,  Civita  Vecchia,  and  Ancona.  Yet  the  move- 
ment of  the  Neapolitan  columns  northwards  during 
December  and  January  was  slow,  and  their  occupation 
of  the  French  departments  was  made  to  appear  by  the 
King's  functionaries  not  as  a  hostile  move,  but  as  a 
normal  and  friendly  transference  of  authority. 

On  the  23rd  of  January  Joachim  joined  the  head- 
quarters of  his  army  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ancona, 
and  thence  directed  his  columns  towards  the  Po.  As 
the  Neapolitan  generals  advanced  they  addressed  pro- 
clamations of  a  nationalist  character  to  the  inhabitants, 
calling  on  them  to  rise  for  the  independence  of  Italy. 

Marching  through  Cesena  and  Imola  on  Bologna, 
the  capital  city  of  Romagna,  the  King  came  into  con- 
tact on  his  right  with  Nugent  and  an  Austrian  column 
of  about  8000  men  advancing  in  the  same  direction 
through  Ravenna  and  Commachio.  In  the  evening 
of  the  31st  of  January,  preceded  by  a  detachment  of 
the  cavalry  of  the  Guard,  and  surrounded  by  his 
generals  and  a  large  staff,  Joachim  made  his  entry 
into  Bologna.  There  was  a  little  enthusiasm.  Many 
a  handkerchief  fluttered  as  the  brilliant  cavalcade  passed 