


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  273 

with  a  view  to  piercing  the  King's  intentions,  made 
the  conversation  turn  on  the  independence  of  Italy. 
This  was  indeed  the  one  subject  of  political  discussion 
in  the  peninsula,  especially  among  all  classes  of  military 
and  civil  officials. 

From  Bologna  Fouche  proceeded  to  Naples,  where 
he  had  several  interviews  with  the  King.  Joachim 
assured  him  that  he  was  faithful  to  the  Emperor  and 
intended  to  support  him,  but  that  the  danger  of  an 
attack  from  the  British  made  it  necessary  that  he 
should  dissemble  the  object  of  the  march  of  his  troops 
towards  the  north.  But  the  conferences  of  Fouche 
and  the  King  were  useless  and  could  lead  to  nothing. 
Behind  the  theatrical  magnificence  and  gallantry  of  the 
Court  of  Naples,  behind  the  specious  conversational 
parries  with  which  the  King  met  Fouche's  probably  not 
very  sincere  attacks,  Joachim  was  insensibly  slipping 
down  a  fatal  plane.  His  mind  was  dazzled  with  the 
idea  that  he  could  create  a  nation  and  seat  himself  on  a 
throne  greater  than  that  of  Naples. 

Facts  quickly  came  to  dispel  these  dreams.  Early  in 
December  a  small  Austrian  force  opened  operations  for 
the  Allies  close  to  the  mouth  of  the  Po.  From  Ravenna, 
on  the  I  oth  of  December,  the  commander  of  that  force, 
Count  Nugent,  addressed  a  proclamation  to  the  Italian 
people,  declaring  that  Austria  came  to  liberate  them  from 
the  yoke  of  France,  and  that  now  they  were  "  destined 
to  become  an  independent  nation.''  ^  This  proclamation 
aroused  Joachim  to  fury,  and  for  a  moment  he  appeared 
likely  to  turn  against  Austria.  He  wrote  to  the  com- 
mander of  his  most  advanced  corps.  General  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli,   to  tell   General   Pino,   in   command   of  the 

^  Chodzko,  Traites,  xiii.     In  1809  the  Archduke  John  had  issued  a  very  similar 
appeal  to  the  Italians. 

VOL.  I  T 


274  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

French  garrison  of  Ferrara,  that  he  must  hold  out 
against  the  Austrians  to  the  last  extremity,  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  would  promptly  relieve  him,  and  that 
the  King  would  start  for  the  front  in  person.^  To 
Napoleon  he  wrote  once  more  in  the  most  urgent  terms, 
stating  that  he  had  35,000  men  and  50  guns  within  a 
few  days'  march  of  Florence  and  Bologna,  and  pressing 
him  for  a  declaration  of  the  independence  of  Italy. 

Time  passes  (he  wrote),  the  enemy  gains  in  strength,  I  am 
reduced  to  silence,  and  the  moment  cannot  be  delayed  long 
when  I  shall  in  turn  be  compelled  to  explain  myself  to  my 
people  and  to  the  enemy.  A  longer  silence  on  my  part,  the 
consequence  of  yours,  would  lose  me  the  opinion  of  the  public, 
and  that  opinion  is  my  sole  strength  ;  once  that  is  lost  I 
can  do  nothing  either  for  you  or  for  myself.  Answer,  answer 
positively.  .  .  . 