

On  the  3rd  of  January,  when  on  the  point  of 
signing  the  treaty  with  Austria,  Joachim  wrote  as 
follows  to  Napoleon  : — 

Sire,  I  have  reached  the  most  unhappy  day  of  my  life,  I  am 
the  prey  of  the  most  painful  emotions  that  have  ever  stirred 
me.  I  must  choose.  And  I  see  on  one  side  the  inevitable 
loss  of  my  states,  of  my  family,  of  my  glory  even  ;  on  the 
other  an  engagement  contrary  to  my  eternal  attachment  for 
Your  Majesty,  to  my  unalterable  devotion  to  France.  Since 
four  days  an  Austrian  plenipotentiary  is  here.  .  .  . 

What  can  I  do,  menaced  on  all  sides,  and  with  no  help  to 
look  for  ?  If  I  commanded  a  French  army  I  would  risk  all.  .  .  . 
But,  Sire,  do  you  imagine  I  can  do  so  with  Neapolitan  troops  ? 
Do  you  imagine  that  I  could  lead  them  across  the  Alps  ?  Do 
you  imagine  that,  however  great  their  attachment  for  me,  they 
would  not  desert  a  sovereign  who  deserted  their  country  ? 

Such  circumstances  may  well  make  it  my  duty  to  take  sides 
against  my  most  constant  affections.  Should  this  happen,  may 
Your  Majesty  pity  me  !  I  shall  have  made  for  the  sake  of  my 
subjects,  my  children,  my  crown,  the  most  painful  sacrifice 
that  could  be  torn  from  me. 

But  perhaps  even  now  it  is  not  too  late  !  Ah,  if  it  be  so, 
prevent  the  effect  of  these  cruel  circumstances. 

I  implore  you  again,  for  the  sake  of  all  you  hold  dear,  for 


CHAP.  IX     THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  281 

the  sake  of  France,  for  the  sake  of  all  Europe,  and  by  all  the 
griefs  that  torment  me  at  this  terrible  moment,  I  implore  you 
make  peace  !  Deign  to  recall  that  this  was  what  I  intreated 
before  the  battle  of  Dresden,  after  that  battle,  before  leaving 
Your  Majesty  in  Germany,  that  this  I  have  never  ceased  to 
repeat  since  your  return  to  Paris.  I  repeat  it  to-day  with  all 
the  more  insistence  because  I  am  on  the  eve  of  being  cut  off 
from  communication  with  Your  Majesty.  .  .  . 

Sire,  if  a  harsh  necessity  compels  me,  as  I  fear,  into  relations 
apparently  hostile  to  your  interests,  but  that  may  perhaps  be 
useful  to  Your  Majesty  and  to  France  in  the  negotiations  for 
peace,  I  dare  hope  that  you  will  judge  me  with  calm,  with 
impartiality,  with  reasons  of  State,  and  with  the  feeling  that  I 
have  done  all  that  was  possible  to  prevent  such  a  misfortune.  .  .  .^ 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Austria,  102  :  Aberdeen's  dispatches  with  a  few 
useful  inclosures  and  copies. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  39  :  Amherst's  dispatches  ;  92  :  Bentinck's 
dispatches. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs,  for  the  struggle  between  the  Queen  and 
Bentinck. 

S.  Martino,  a  Murat  letter. 