

^  For  these  two  dispatches  see  Weil,  iii.  302,  345. 


276  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

When  Joachim  decided,  after  Leipzig,  to  trust  fortune 
in  basing  his  policy  on  Metternich's  overtures,  he  may 
have  taken  the  best  step  possible  under  the  circumstances, 
but  more  than  that  cannot  be  said.  It  was  now  imperative 
that  he  should  come  to  some  arrangement  with  Great 
Britain,  and  on  the  19th  of  November  he  sent  to  Sicily 
a  secret  agent,  Schinina  by  name,  to  sound  Lord 
William  Bentinck.  They  met  at  Syracuse  on  the  12th 
of  December. 

''  Schinina  asked  Bentinck  to  sign  an  armistice  on  the 
ground  that  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  about  to  be  con- 
cluded between  Austria  and  Naples,  and  that  Joachim 
could  not  move  his  troops  north  in  support  of  the 
Austrians  unless  assured  that  he  had  no  attack  to  fear 
from  the  Anglo-Sicilians.  As  evidence  of  the  Austrian 
attitude  he  produced  dispatches  showing  that  on  the  7th 
of  October  Metternich  had  offered  Murat  recognition 
at  the  price  of  an  alliance.  But  Bentinck  was  not 
satisfied  as  to  the  sincerity  of  these  overtures,  and 
pointed  to  the  fact  that  since  the  date  of  Metternich' s 
proposals  the  King  of  Naples  had  taken  part  in  the 
battle  of  Leipzig.  He  could  see  no  reason  to  assume 
that  Metternich  would  be  prepared  to  repeat  an  offer 
made  before  an  event  of  such  magnitude,  and  on  that 
ground  declined  to  negotiate.  This  was  a  pretext, 
though  not  a  bad  one  ;  Bentinck's  real  motives  for 
refusing  to  negotiate  were  probably  somewhat  mixed. 
He  appears  for  one  thing  to  have  been  jealous  of 
Austrian  influence.  He  wanted  Italy  to  become  free, 
and  England  to  help  her  on  the  way  to  freedom.  He 
thought  the  most  effective  military  weapon  against 
Napoleon  would  be  a  national  insurrection  similar  to 
that  which  had  enabled  the  British  arms  to  win  such 
signal    triumphs    in    Spain.      Perhaps    he    dreamed    of 


CHAP.  IX      THE  DEFECTION  OF  MURAT  277 

becoming  the  Wellington  of  Italy.  These  views  were 
somewhat  insecurely  founded,  but  Bentinck  made  no 
mistake  when  he  considered  Murat's  position  at  Naples 
very  precarious,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  he  com- 
mitted an  error  of  judgment  in  declining  to  enter  into 
negotiations  of  which  the  first  result  would  have  been 
to  enable  Murat  to  move  30,000  men  to  the  valley  of 
the  Po." ' 

His  mission  having  thus  failed,  Schinina  returned  to 
Naples,  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  establish  the  coincidence 
between  his  return  empty-handed  and  the  last  attempts 
of  Joachim  to  persuade  Napoleon  into  his  policy  of 
Italian  nationalization.  But  although  Bentinck  held 
out  no  hope  of  British  complaisance,  better  news  soon 
reached  the  King  from  another  quarter. 