


286  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

by  ;  and  in  the  piazza  a  crowd  assembled  that  greeted 
the  King  with  shouts  of  "  Viva  il  gran  Gioacchino  ! 
Viva  il  re  d'  Italia  ! "  These  acclamations  were  re- 
echoed by  the  soldiers,  but  probably  did  not  represent 
much  more  than  a  judicious  expenditure  on  the  part  of 
the  Neapolitan  secret  agents. 

On  the  day  following  his  arrival  the  King  visited 
the  city,  and  entered  among  other  places  the  Court  of 
Appeal.  There  he  made  a  speech  to  the  assembled 
judges,  in  which  he  declared  that  his  heart  and  aspira- 
tions were,  and  had  always  been,  for  the  Emperor  and 
for  France.  But  as  Napoleon  had  failed  to  support 
him,  he  had  been  compelled  against  his  wish  to  accede 
to  the  proposals  of  Austria,  and  to  become  the  ally  of 
the  Emperor  Francis. 

While  Joachim  with  the  main  body  thus  occupied 
Bologna,  detachments  of  his  army  marched  into  Tuscany, 
the  French  officials  and  such  small  bodies  of  troops  as 
were  with  them  everywhere  retiring.  Elise  Bonaparte 
and  her  husband.  Prince  and  Princess  Bacciocchi, 
abandoned  Florence,  and  soon  a  large  part,  nearly  one 
half,  of  the  Italian  peninsula  was  in  the  actual  occupation 
of  the  Neapolitan  troops.  The  remainder,  the  part 
that  lies  about  a  line  drawn  from  Genoa  through  Milan 
to  Venice,  was  now  to  be  contended  for  by  the 
Neapolitans,  by  the  Austrians,  by  the  British,  and  by 
the  French.  In  that  most  curious  and  complicated 
struggle  nearly  all  the  honours,  military,  diplomatic, 
and  of  personal  conduct,  were  to  remain  with  the 
Viceroy  of  Italy,  Prince  Eugene  Beauharnais. 

Notwithstanding  his  treaty  with  Austria,  notwith- 
standing his  military  occupation  of  so  many  cities  and 
departments  that  had  formed  part  of  the  French  Empire, 
there  had  been  so  far  no  open  hostility  between  Joachim 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  287 

and  the  French.  It  was  perfectly  conceivable  and 
widely  believed  that  the  King's  ambition  to  become 
head  of  a  great  Italian  state  might  in  some  way  be 
reconciled  with  a  support  of  the  French  arms  against 
the  Allies.  So  did  the  Viceroy  of  Italy  think  and  hope 
until  the  end  of  December.  On  the  14th  of  January, 
being  in  ignorance  of  the  treaty  signed  three  days 
earlier,  he  wrote  to  Joachim  urging  him  not  to  turn 
against  the  French  arms,  pointing  out  that  the  con- 
ferences in  progress  between  Napoleon  and  the  Allies 
would  probably  lead  to  peace,  and  that  the  King  would 
make  a  mistake  in  committing  himself  under  such 
circumstances.  He  closed  with  protestations  of  un- 
diminished personal  friendship,  and  by  asking  that, 
should  the  worst  happen,  he  might  at  all  events  receive 
full  warning  of  Joachim's  intentions.  A  few  days  later 
he  sent  to  Naples  one  of  his  most  trusted  staff  officers, 
General  Gifflenga,  whose  mission  was  to  discover  what 
course  Joachim  was  likely  to  adopt. 