

282 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  283 

The  treaty  was  not,  could  not  be,  a  satisfactory  arrange- 
ment. It  did  not  completely  safeguard  Joachim  against 
the  claim  of  Ferdinand,  which  the  British  would  not 
abandon  ;  it  did  not  gratify  the  ambition,  that  his 
Neapolitan  advisers  ardently  fostered,  to  make  of 
Naples  the  nucleus  of  Italian  independence  ;  it  plunged 
him  into  a  worse  than  equivocal  position  with  regard 
to  Napoleon  and  all  French  citizens.  The  French,  who 
made  up  a  large  part  of  the  Court  circle,  the  French 
military  officers  in  the  Neapolitan  service,  the  French 
civil  functionaries  and  soldiers,  soon  gave  Joachim  cause 
for  anxiety,  if  not  repentance. 

Perignon,  military  governor  of  Naples,  presented 
himself  at  the  Palace,  and  requested  a  formal  audience. 
The  King  received  him  in  presence  of  the  Queen, 
and  listened  to  his  remonstrances.  Failing  to  move 
Joachim,  the  old  Marshal  turned  to  Caroline  ;  but  she 
met  his  reproaches  unperturbed.  The  Queen  merely 
smiled  mockingly,  bowed  her  head  towards  her  husband, 
and  said  :  "  Monsieur  le  Marechal,  you  must  be  aware 
that  a  wife's  duty  is  obedience.''  ^ 

The  feeling  of  indignation  was  especially  strong 
among  the  French  officers,  and  nearly  all  of  them 
declined  to  serve  longer  under  Joachim.  At  Nola, 
where  the  Corsican  Legion  was  quartered,  a  remarkable 
scene  occurred.  At  the  cafe  where  the  officers  were 
accustomed  to  meet  in  the  evening,  they  protested 
against  the  King's  policy  by  raising  loud  and  continued 
shouts  of  "  Vive  I'Empereur  !  "  Joachim's  treason  was 
denounced,  and  from  the  colonel  to  the  youngest 
lieutenant  all  declared  they  would  never  bear  arms 
against  their  old  comrades.  They  eventually  had  to 
be  shipped  to  France. 

1  Cavaignac,  262. 


284  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

In  the  Corsicans  Joachim  lost  one  of  the  best 
regiments  in  his  service,  one  he  could  ill  afford  to 
spare,  for  the  army  he  was  placing  in  the  field  was  far 
less  well  composed  than  numerous.  From  29,000 
men,  exclusive  of  French  troops  in  the  kingdom,  which 
it  numbered  in  July  18 12,  it  had  risen  to  35,000  in 
October,  and  to  46,000  a  year  later.  Every  effort  was 
made  to  increase  it  further.  At  Court  a  premium  was 
set  on  all  things  military  ;  promotions  and  decorations 
were  lavished  ;  the  Neapolitan  officers  who  had  served 
in  Germany  or  Spain  had  rewards  showered  on  them. 
But  it  was  impossible. that  such  large  bodies  of  troops, 
raised  at  short  notice  from  a  population  that  had  no 
military  tradition,  and  was  wholly  impatient  of  dis- 
cipline, could  be  good.  The  rapid  promotion  of 
officers  by  Court  favour  and  the  injudicious  leniency  of 
the  King  did  not  tend  to  improve  them. 