

Printed  Books 

Bausset,  Mems. ;  Belliard,  Mems.  ,•  Bianchi,  Diplomazia  European 
Bianco,  Sicilia  durante  V  occupazione  ^  Bovlger,  Bentinck ;  British  State 
Papers,  1814-1815  ;  Browning,  ^een  Caroline ;  CantIj,  Cronistoria  ; 
Castlereagh,  Corr.;  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Chodzko,  Traites;  Cockburn, 
Voyage;  Colletta,  Opere ;  Colletta,  Storia ,•  De  Dedem,  Mems.; 
Desvernois,  Mems. ;  Fouch^,  Mems.  ;  G.,  M.  de,  Notice  histor.  ;  Gallois, 
Hist,  de  Murat ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert,  Murat;  Johnston, 
Lord  William  Bentinck  and  Murat;  Madelin,  Pouchy ;  Marbot,  Mems.; 
Memorie  sulla  Condotta ;  Metternich,  Mems.;  Morisani,  Ricordi ; 
Napoleon,  Corr.  and  Brotonne  ;  Palmieri,  Sounjenirs;  Palmieri,  Storia 
costitut.  ;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prince  Euglne ;  Romeo, 
Specchio  del  disinganno ;  Rose,  Napoleon;  St.  Am  and,  Marie  Amdie ; 
Savary,  Mems.;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  S^gur,  Mems.  ;  Vienna  Ga%ette,  1813  ; 
ViTROLLES,  Mems. ;  Weil,  Prince  Euglne  ;  Wellington,  Dispatches. 

1  Weil,  iii.  336. 


CHAPTER   X 

murat's  incertitudes 

Armistice — British  attitude — French  at  Naples — Neapolitan  army 
— Generals  —  Rome  occupied  —  Advance  north — Joachim  at 
Bologna — Tuscany  occupied — Eugene's  position — Correspond- 
ence— Decides  to  defend  Italy — Concentrates  on  Quadrilateral 
— St.  Dizier — Battle  of  Mincio  —  Hesitation  of  Joachim  — 
British  policy — Bentinck's  instructions  —  Armistice  between 
Naples  and  Great  Britain — Nugent's  advance — Joachim  writes 
to  Eugene  and  Princess  Bacciocchi — Champaubert — Napoleon 
to  Caroline — Joachim  to  Napoleon — Negotiations  with  Eugene 
— ^Joachim's  excuses  to  Bellegarde — Nugent  active- — Occupies 
Casalmaggiore — Grenier  at  Piacenza — Takes  Parma — Releases 
Neapolitan  prisoners — Effects  retreat  to  Borgoforte — Joachim 
decide  son  hostilities — Fight  at  Reggio — Neapolitan  generals  un- 
settled— Pepe  and  a  constitution — Petition  shelved — Bentinck 
at  Naples — Sicilian  proclamations — Bentinck's  to  the  people  of 
Italy — Joachim  attempts  to  propitiate  him — Bentinck's  harsh 
attitude  —  Intrigue  of  Neapolitan  generals — Joachim  thinks 
himself  sacrificed — His  letter  to  Fouche — Napoleon  negotiates 
with  Joachim — Conferences  at  S.  Giacomo — Alarm  of  Austrians 
— Bentinck's  note  to  Gallo — Allies  adhere  to  Austrian  policy — 
BalatschefF's  mission — Castlereagh  quiets  Bentinck — Conference 
at  Rovere — Release  of  Pope — Arrives  at  Neapolitan  outposts 
— Meets  Joachim — Nugent  crosses  Taro — Fighting  at  Piacenza 
— News  of  fall  of  Empire — Joachim's  position — Convention  of 
Schiarino  Rizzeno. 

The  treaty  of  alliance  between  Austria  and  Naples 
marked  a  period  in  the  history  of  Joachim,  but  it  did 
not  mark    the  end  of  his  incertitudes  or  hesitations. 