

^  For  the  date  and  authenticity  of  this  letter  see  Appendix  E,  vol.  ii. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  297 

These,  and  probably  other  similar  communications, 
reached  Joachim  towards  the  end  of  February  and 
beginning  of  March,  while  it  was  still  supposed  in  Italy 
that  Napoleon  was  pursuing  a  course  of  unchecked 
victories.  At  some  time  in  the  first  week  of  March 
Joachim  wrote  in  turn,  probably  in  direct  reply  to  the 
dispatch  just  quoted  : — 

Sire — Your  Majesty  is  in  danger,  the  capital  of  France  is 
menaced,  and  neither  can  I  defend  nor  can  I  die  for  you,  and 
your  Majesty's  most  loving  friend  appears  his  enemy  ! 

Sire,  pronounce  but  one  word,  and  I  will  sacrifice  my  family, 
my  subjects,  I  will  lose  all,  but  I  shall  have  served  you,  shall 
have  continued  to  prove  that  I  have  always  been  your  most 
devoted  friend.  That  is  all  I  ask.  ...  I  trust  the  Viceroy 
has  informed  you  of  all  I  have  done  —  tears  prevent  my 
continuing  my  letter.  I  am  here  alone  in  the  midst  of 
strangers.  I  have  to  conceal  all,  even  my  tears  !  This  letter. 
Sire,  makes  you  wholly  master  of  my  fate  ;  my  life  is  yours  -, 
my  honour  is  already  pledged  to  die  for  your  Majesty.  If  you 
could  see  me,  if  you  could  realize  what  I  have  suffered  these 
two  months,  you  would  pity  me.  Always  love  me  ;  I  was 
never  more  worthy  of  your  kindness.     Till  death  your  friend, 

Joachim  Napoleon.^ 

In  these  untutored  words  who  can  fail  to  recognise 
that  strong  blend  of  the  good  and  bad  side  of  human 
nature  that  was  so  conspicuous  in  Joachim  Murat  ? 
Moved  to  tears  by  generous  sentiments,  yet  acting 
the  ungenerous  part ;  crying  enough,  yet  hankering 
for  more  ;  confiding,  yet  dealing  doubly  ;  deceiving 
others,  and  himself  a  great  deal  more. 

But  while  Joachim  negotiated  and  remained  inactive, 

^  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Eugene,  79.  Mons.  Weil  fixes  the  4th  of  March  as  the 
date  of  this  letter,  but  it  would  appear  better  on  the  whole  to  place  it  just  before  the 
3rd,  at  which  date  Murat  received  the  letter  whereby  the  Emperor  Francis  ratified 
the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty  of  alliance.  Schoell,  whose  text  differs  in  several 
particulars,  places  the  date  one  day  later  than  Weil. 


298  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  Viceroy  pursued  an  opposite  course.  He  responded 
to  every  overture  that  came  from  the  Neapolitan  camp, 
but  without  any  faith  in  an  agreement  being  reached 
and  without  any  relaxation  of  his  utmost  military 
endeavour.  On  the  27  th  of  February  he  wrote  to  the 
Princess  Augusta  : — 

In  two  days  I  shall  finally  know  whether  the  King  of 
Naples  will  really  join  us. 

Two  days  later  : — 