


292  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

which  he  was  to  direct  against  northern  Italy,  thus 
co-operating  with  the  converging  movements  of  the 
Allies  on  France.  Lord  Bathurst's  dispatch  did  not 
contain  much  to  encourage  Bentinck  in  his  Hberalizing 
views.  His  principal  objective  was  to  be  Genoa,  and 
his  instructions  ran  :*'...  provided  it  be  clearly  with 
the  entire  concurrence  of  the  inhabitants,  you  may  take 
possession  of  Genoa  in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  his 
Sardinian  Majesty."  This  plainly  showed  the  trend 
of  British  policy,  how  far  it  was  from  supporting 
Bentinck's  views,  how  anxious  it  was  to  conform  with 
the  political  sentiments  that  permeated  the  views  of  the 
Continental  Powers  and  that  shortly  after  became 
embodied  in  the  decrees  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna. 
The  British  Cabinet  under  the  guidance  of  Liverpool 
and  Castlereagh  was  already  virtually  in  accord  with 
Austrian  policy. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  the  Foreign  Secretary,  had  pro- 
ceeded in  person  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Allies, 
where  British  interests  were  not  sufficiently  safe  in  the 
hands  of  Lord  Aberdeen.  One  of  his  first  acts  had 
been  to  protest  against  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  alliance 
between  Austria  and  Naples.  He  felt,  however,  that 
as  the  treaty  had  been  signed,  some  concession  must  be 
made.  He  saw  that  the  smaller  objects  must  be  made 
subservient  to  the  greater,  and  agreed  to  help  secure 
the  military  co-operation  of  King  Joachim  by  so  far 
departing  from  his  original  position  as  to  abandon  all 
idea  of  continuing  the  war  against  him,  provided  only 
Ferdinand  might  be  persuaded  to  accept  some  equivalent 
compensation  for  the  throne  of  Naples.  Bentinck  was 
therefore  instructed  by  Castlereagh  to  offer  explanations 
to  the  Court  of  Palermo,  and  to  make  clear  that  the 
interests  of  Sicily  must  be  subordinated  to  the  general 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  293 

cause.  A  little  later  he  received  a  dispatch,  an  extract 
from  which  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  position  of  Great 
Britain  more  clearly.  Speaking  of  the  treaty  between 
Austria  and  Naples,  Castlereagh  wrote  : — 

The  British  Government  never  liked  the  measure,  but 
being  taken  they  are  perfectly  ready  to  act  up  to  the  spirit  of 
the  Austrian  treaty,  and  to  acknowledge  Murat  upon  a  peace, 
on  two  conditions  :  i,  that  he  exerts  himself  honourably  in  the 
war  ;  and  2,  that  a  reasonable  indemnity  ...  be  found  for 
the  King  of  Sicily.^ 

The  propriety  and  soundness  of  the  position  taken 
up  by  Castlereagh  appear  unquestionable  ;  yet  however 
favourable  to  him  British  policy  might  be  in  reality, 
Joachim  had  no  certain  information  to  this  effect,  and 
justifiably  viewed  Bentinck  as  directly  hostile.  The 
position  he  was  now  in  at  Bologna  was  a  distressing 
one ; — not  knowing  whether  to  attack  his  old  comrades 
or  his  old  enemies ;  not  knowing  whether  to  keep 
faith  with  Napoleon  or  with  Metternich  ;  not  knowing 
whether  the  Viceroy  from  Borgoforte,  the  Sicilians  from 
Palermo,  the  British  from  the  sea,  or  the  Austrians  from 
Venetia  would  first  attack  him  ;  surrounded  by  incom- 
petent and  intriguing  officers  ;  aspiring  to  be  King  of 
Italy,  yet  fearing  he  should  not  long  be  King  of  Naples. 
He  made  his  position  even  worse  by  falling  into  an 
error  not  common  with  him,  but  not  extraordinary 
under  the  circumstances,  that  of  indecision.  He  accepted 
the  Viceroy's  far  from  disinterested  advice,  and  deter- 
mined that  his  best  course  would  be  not  to  commit 
himself  to  either  party  too  soon. 