


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  289 

the  east  and  a  smaller  Neapolitan  army  coming  from 
the  south.  Yet  he  resolved  to  attempt  the  defence  of 
the  line  of  the  Mincio,  making  Mantua  the  pivot  of  his 
operations. 

Under  these  circumstances  he  was  naturally  anxious 
to  profit  by  the  conduct  of  the  King  of  Naples,  however 
much  he  might  secretly  despise  it.  He  therefore  sent 
notice  to  the  Neapolitan  headquarters  that  the  crossing 
of  the  Taro,  a  small  affluent  of  the  Po  between  Parma 
and  Piacenza,  would  be  construed  an  act  of  hostility  ; 
he  then  withdrew  every  available  man  from  that  quarter, 
leaving  at  Piacenza  a  small  garrison  of  about  3000,  and, 
in  the  first  days  of  February,  concentrated  on  the 
Quadrilateral  nearly  the  whole  of  his  army,  in  all  40,000 
men,  of  whom  but  1200  were  French  by  birth.  So 
bad  did  he  judge  his  position  that  had  Murat  continued 
his  march  and  advanced  from  Bologna  to  Piacenza  the 
Viceroy  would  immediately  have  abandoned  Lombardy. 

In  reality  Prince  Eugene  had  little  cause  for  anxiety 
as  to  his  flank.  Just  at  the  moment  when  he  was 
concentrating  his  troops  on  the  Quadrilateral  to  face  the 
Austrians  under  Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  soldiers  were 
inspirited  with  the  news  of  Napoleon's  victory  over 
Bliicher  at  St.  Dizier,  the  first  battle  of  the  campaign 
of  France.  Coinciding  with  this  came  a  further  letter 
from  the  King  of  Naples  reiterating  his  assurances  that 
he  would  not  act  before  giving  the  Viceroy  warning. 
In  a  postscript  he  added  :  "Be  good  enough,  my  dear 
Eugene,  to  recall  my  name  to  the  Emperor,  and  to 
tell  him  of  my  sorrow  ;  I  weep  as  I  write  you  these 
few  words." 

On  the  3rd  and  4th  of  February  the  Viceroy 
abandoned  the  line  of  the  Adige  and  the  fortress  of 
Verona  ;  his  army  was  too  small  to  cover  so  extended 
VOL.  I  u 


290  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  line  and  so  large  a  fortress.  He  fell  back  to  a  new 
position  on  a  much  shorter  front  behind  the  Mincio, 
his  left  resting  on  Peschiera,  his  right  on  Mantua.  The 
latter  place  covered  the  passage  of  the  Po  at  Borgoforte, 
where  a  bridge  of  boats  had  been  established,  and 
formed  the  pivot  or  hinge  of  the  Viceroy's  position  ; 
it  was  intrusted  to  the  care  of  General  Zucchi. 

On  the  5  th  of  February,  Bellegarde  crossed  the 
Adige  and  advanced  on  the  line  of  the  Mincio.  He 
issued  at  the  same  time  a  proclamation  to  the  Italian 
people  announcing,  not,  as  was  usual,  that  the  era  of 
liberty  was  about  to  dawn,  but,  as  was  more  honest,  that 
the  ancient  governments  were  about  to  be  re-established. 
He  also  wrote  a  letter  to  Joachim  in  which  he  ascribed 
the  Viceroy's  abandonment  of  the  line  of  the  Adige 
to  the  arrival  of  the  Neapolitan  army  at  Bologna. 