

Count  Mier  and  Marshal  Bellegarde  acted  con- 
sistently as  though  there  were  no  question  as  to  the 

1  Castlereagh  to  Bentinck,  February  21st,  18 14,  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815, 
ii.  236. 


294  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

long-delayed  ratification  of  the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty 
of  alliance.  Nugent,  who  commanded  the  small  Austrian 
corps  south  of  the  Po,  was  placed  nominally  under  the 
orders  of  the  King.  But  this  general,  an  impetuous, 
resourceful,  and  indefatigable  officer,  viewed  the  King 
of  Naples  with  as  much  suspicion  and  dislike  as  did 
Bentinck.  It  was  not  long  before  difficulties  arose 
between  him  and  Joachim.  Nugent*s  military  sense 
made  him  perceive  plainly  what  the  Viceroy  well  knew 
was  his  weak  point.  He  determined,  however  small  in 
numbers,  to  push  up  the  south  bank  of  the  Po  and  to 
attack  Piacenza.  A  diversion  would  compel  Prince 
Eugene  to  weaken  the  line  of  the  Mincio  and  would 
give  Bellegarde  a  better  opportunity  for  crossing. 

On  the  8th  of  February,  the  day  on  which  the 
battle  of  the  Mincio  was  fought,  Nugent  reached  the 
Enza,  a  little  stream  midway  between  Reggio  and 
Parma,  along  which  Carascosa's  Neapolitan  division  had 
already  placed  a  line  of  outposts.  On  the  approach  of 
the  Austrians  the  Neapolitan  general  at  once  issued 
confidential  orders  that  they  were  not  to  be  allowed  to 
proceed  beyond  the  river.  He  also  wrote  to  the  chief 
of  the  general  staff,  General  Millet  de  Villeneuve,  stating 
that  Stahremberg  with  his  brigade  intended  marching 
on  Parma,  and  asking  whether  it  was  intended  that  he 
should  prevent  this  movement  by  force  of  arms.^ 
Nugent,  however,  did  not  heed  Carascosa's  opposition, 
and  did  not  await  the  arrival  of  instructions  from 
Joachim's  headquarters.  He  continued  his  march  and 
occupied  Modena  on  the  9  th,  where  he  proclaimed  a 
provisional  government  in  the  name  of  the  Grand  Duke 
Francis.  Thence  he  pushed  on  towards  Piacenza,  but 
after  some  inconclusive  skirmishing  was  compelled  to 

^  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1057. 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  295 

fall  back.  Nugent  now  took  up  an  attitude  of  observ- 
ation, reported  the  presence  of  a  large  body  of  troops 
in  the  fortress,  and  called  on  Carascosa  to  support  him, 
which  the  latter  showed  little  inclination  to  do. 

So  indisposed  was  Joachim  for  co-operating  with 
the  Austrians,  that  during  this  time  he  had  secretly 
continued  in  close  correspondence  with  the  Viceroy. 
Immediately  after  Bellegarde's  check  on  the  Mincio  he 
sent  an  officer  to  the  French  lines  with  overtures  for  an 
arrangement.  At  the  same  time  and  with  the  same 
object  he  wrote  to  Elise  Bonaparte,  Princess  Baciocchi  ; 
she  immediately  informed  the  Emperor  of  this  in  the 
following  terms  : — 