

I  have  received  several  letters  from  him  [Murat]  that  con- 
trast strangely  with  the  movements  of  his  troops.  The  King 
is  in  a  state  of  great  mental  excitement,  and  expresses  astonish- 
ment that  the  Viceroy  should  have  abandoned  the  line  of  the 
Adige,  and  that  I  should  have  withdrawn  from  Tuscany  with 
the  idea  that  he  could  be  the  enemy  of  your  Majesty  and 
France.  ...  I  am  told  that  in  his  communications  with  the 
Viceroy  the  King's  speeches  and  behaviour  are  the  same.  .  .  .^ 

To  the  few  French  officers  who  had  followed  his 
fortunes, — Millet  de  Villeneuve,  Livron,  and  others, — 
Joachim  repeatedly  declared  that  he  would  soon  turn 
and  side  once  more  with  his  former  brothers-in-arms. 

But  suddenly  the  scene  changed  again.  On  the 
14th  of  February  General  Pignatelli-Strongoli  arrived 
at  Joachim's  headquarters  from  France,  where  he  had 
been  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  allied  sovereigns.  He 
brought  with  him  dispatches  that  reassured  the  King 
as  to  the  attitude  of  the  Emperor  Francis,  and,  which 
was  probably  even  more  effective,  news  of  the  battle  of 
La  Rothiere,  fought  on  the  ist  of  February,  in  which, 

1  Elise  to  Napoleon,  Feb.  14,  1814,  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815,  ii.  300. 


296  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

as  it  appeared,  Schwarzenberg  had  defeated  Napoleon 
completely.  Joachim  then  immediately  resolved  to  take 
the  decisive  step,  and  formally  notified  the  Viceroy  that  he 
would  open  hostilities.  But,  by  another  sudden  change 
of  fortune,  forty-eight  hours  later  he  repented,  for  Prince 
Eugene  was  firing  triumphant  salvos  along  the  banks 
of  the  Mincio  to  celebrate  Napoleon's  brilliant  victories 
over  Bliicher  at  Champaubert  and  Montmirail. 

Joachim,  now  once  more  plunged  into  incertitude, 
could  see  no  other  solution  of  his  difficulties  than  that 
of  siding  with  whichever  party  remained  uppermost. 
Fortune  appeared  to  smile  on  Napoleon  again,  and 
again  the  Neapolitan  generals  were  instructed  to  hold 
their  troops  back. 

Towards  the  middle  of  February  it  appeared  as 
though  Napoleon's  gigantic  efforts  to  stem  the  tide  of 
invasion  might  be  rewarded.  The  Russians,  Prussians, 
and  Austrians  were  in  retreat,  and  success  might  even 
at  this  eleventh  hour  be  attained.  On  or  about  the 
27  th  of  that  month  he  at  last  decided  on  making  a 
direct  appeal  to  his  rebellious  lieutenant,  and  he  wrote 
to  Joachim  in  the  following  terms  : — 

I  shall  not  allude  to  my  displeasure  at  your  conduct,  which 
has  been  contrary  to  your  duty.  This  comes  from  your  weak- 
ness of  character.  You  are  a  good  soldier  on  the  battlefield, 
but  otherwise  have  no  decision,  no  character.  Turn  to  profit 
an  act  of  treason,  which  I  attribute  to  fear,  so  as  to  serve  me 
by  a  mutual  understanding.  I  rely  on  you,  on  your  contrition, 
on  your  promises.  I  imagine  you  are  not  one  of  those  who 
think  the  lion  is  dead.  If  that  is  your  idea,  it  is  mistaken. 
You  have  done  me  every  injury  possible  since  Wilna,  but  we 
will  not  speak  of  that.  The  title  of  King  has  turned  your 
head  ;  if  your  desire  is  to  retain  it,  act  well  and  keep  your 
word.  .  .  .^ 