

Nugent,  still  trying  to  drive  the  Neapolitans  into 
activity,  requested  Carascosa  to  support  his  demonstra- 
tion by  moving  his  division  towards  Borgoforte.  Had 
he  done  so  it  is  conceivable  that  the  Viceroy  might 
have  felt  compelled  to  weaken  his  hold  on  the  Mincio 
in  response  to  this  double  threat,  thus  affording  Belle- 
garde  an  opportunity  for  resuming  the  offensive  ;  but 


300  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Carascosa  merely  referred  the  matter  to  headquarters 
and  remained  passive.-^ 

Nugent's  restless  activity  determined  Prince  Eugene 
to  strike  a  blow  across  the  Po,  as  he  had  already  struck 
a  blow  across  the  Mincio.  The  Viceroy  was  inspired 
by  a  very  clear  understanding  of  that  first  principle  of 
the  military  art  that  makes  an  offensive  movement  the 
soundest  form  of  defence  ;  ^  he  showed  a  keen  intuition 
of  what  risks  his  position,  that  of  the  Empire,  and  his 
adversaries'  abilities,  called  on  him  to  take. 

Prince  Eugene  made  great  show  of  activity  along 
Bellegarde's  front,  at  Borgoforte  and  towards  Casal- 
maggiore,  but  he  directed  these  movements  in  such  a 
way  as  to  facilitate  the  rapid  concentration  of  some 
20,000  men  at  Piacenza  under  the  command  of  Grenier, 
one  of  the  most  capable  generals  in  the  Imperial 
service.^  Grenier's  orders  were  to  strike  quickly  and 
hard  at  the  Austrian  division  south  of  the  Po,  but, 
as  far  as  possible,  to  avoid  engaging  the  Neapolitans  ; 
these  orders  he  carried  out  vigorously  and  well.* 

On  the  2nd  of  March  Grenier,  driving  Nugent's 
detachments  before  him,  occupied  Parma,  where  he 
took  some  2000  prisoners.  Among  them  were  60 
Neapolitans,  and  these  the  French  commander  ordered 
to  be  released  and  sent  back  to  the  King.  On  the 
following  day  the  Viceroy  wrote  to  Joachim  informing 
him  that  any  of  his  troops  that  happened  to  be  taken 
would  be  released,  and  that  Grenier  had  orders  to 
march  to  Borgoforte,  to  which  movement  he  hoped  the 

^  Carascosa  to  Millet,  Feb.  23,  18 14,  Arch.  Nap.  Guerra,  xxv.  1057. 

^  Sir  John  Stuart's  MaiHa  expedition  is  another  excellent  illustration  of  precisely 
the  same  principle. 

2  Zucchi,  71  J  Brit.  State  Papers,  ii.  251-262;  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  197. 
Carascosa  estimated  Grenier's  force  at  not  more  than  12,000,  Arch.  Nap.  xxv. 
1057. 

*  Eugene  to  Joachim,  March  3,  18 14,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  200. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  301 

King  would  oifer  no  opposition.  It  is  difficult  to  say- 
precisely  what  this  extraordinary  communication  meant. 
It  was  in  one  sense  the  logical  outcome  of  the  negotia- 
tions that  had  been  proceeding  between  the  Viceroy 
and  Joachim,  yet  the  Prince's  move  and  intentions  were 
now  all  but  openly  hostile  ;  he  was  quite  ready  to  deal  the 
Neapolitans  a  decisive  blow  if  the  opportunity  should 
offer,  and  it  seems  probable  therefore  that  his  object 
was  that  this  dispatch  should  fall  into  Austrian  hands, 
or  at  all  events  that  the  current  of  events  should  sow 
irreparable  mistrust  between  his  two  opponents. 