

The  Viceroy  had  decided  to  take  advantage  of  the 
respite  given  him  by  the  King  of  Naples  to  deal  a  hard 
blow  at  the  Austrians,  and  thus  make  good  his  hold  on 
the  line  of  the  Mincio.  After  demonstrating  as  though 
he  intended  continuing  his  retreat  from  the  Mincio 
back  to  Piacenza,  he  rapidly  concentrated  the  bulk  of 
his  troops  on  Mantua,  and  issuing  from  that  fortress 
on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  fell  on  the  Austrian  flank 
near  Valeggio.  There  he  fought  a  long,  confused 
battle  with  Bellegarde,  of  which  the  result  was,  on  the 
whole,  more  favourable  to  the  French  than  to  the 
Austrian  arms.  The  Viceroy  was  entitled  to  claim  a 
success,  for  he  was  on  the  defensive  and  he  had  stopped 
the  Austrian  advance.  He  reported  to  the  Emperor  that 
had  he  completely  defeated  Bellegarde  he  would  im- 
mediately have  crossed  the  Po  at  Borgoforte  and  marched 
against  the  Neapolitans.  From  this  it  is  clear  that 
whatever  the  Viceroy  thought  it  advisable  to  write  to 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  291 

the  King,  he  would  have  had  no  hesitation  in  attacking 
him  had  he  been  strong  enough  to  do  so. 

In  the  meanwhile  what  was  King  Joachim's  position  ? 
He  was  still  at  Bologna  with  his  army,  profoundly- 
uncertain  what  to  do.  The  efforts  of  Napoleon  in 
France  and  of  Prince  Eugene  in  Italy  had  for  a 
moment  made  the  success  of  the  Allies  appear  doubtful. 
The  Austrian  guarantee  of  his  throne  appeared  well- 
nigh  useless  while  Great  Britain  continued  to  support 
King  Ferdinand.  The  treaty  of  alliance  called  for 
modification  in  some  of  its  details,  and  was  not  yet 
ratified  by  the  Emperor  Francis.  Bentinck,  though 
he  had  signed  the  armistice,  was  so  openly  unfriendly 
that  Joachim  viewed  the  British  agent  as  a  barely  dis- 
guised enemy  awaiting  the  first  favourable  opportunity 
of  attacking  him  from  behind. 

Bentinck's  dream  was  that  Italy  should  be  freed  from 
the  French,  not  for  the  benefit  of  Joachim,  nor  of 
Ferdinand,  nor  of  Austria,  nor  of  any  of  the  dis- 
possessed princes,  but  for  that  of  the  people,  under  a 
national  and  constitutional  form  of  government.  His 
views  were  plainly  expressed  ;  they  were  well  known  to 
the  liberal  circles  and  the  police  agents  of  Naples.  The 
British  Cabinet  had  had  too  much  cause  to  be  satisfied 
with  the  way  in  which  Bentinck  had  reduced  Sicily  to 
order  and  removed  Mary  Caroline  from  the  political 
scene  to  feel  any  disposition  to  recall  such  a  valuable 
servant ;  yet  no  Tory  Cabinet  could  possibly  sym- 
pathize with  his  views  as  to  Italian  emancipation.  It 
might  suit  them  as  a  matter  of  convenience  to  see  a 
popular  insurrection  drive  the  French  beyond  the  Alps, 
but  nothing  more.  Just  at  the  time  when  Bentinck 
was  negotiating  the  armistice  with  Naples  he  received  in- 
structions from  the  War  Office  to  prepare  an  expedition 