

Nugent  was  quite  unable  to  withstand  Grenier's 
advance,  for  the  Austrians  were  greatly  outnumbered 
and  Carascosa  would  not  help  them.  On  the  day  after 
capturing  Parma  the  French  general  pushed  one  of  his 
divisions,  under  Severoli,  to  Reggio,  Carascosa  and 
Nugent  falling  back  before  him.  With  his  two  re- 
maining divisions  he  turned  off  to  his  left  and  marched 
to  Guastalla.  There  he  effected  his  junction  with  the 
Viceroy,  who  had  assembled  a  considerable  force  at 
Borgoforte  to  protect  his  lieutenant's  march,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  threaten  Bellegarde  should  he  attempt 
a  forward  movement.  On  the  morning  of  the  4th  the 
success  of  Prince  Eugene's  operations  south  of  the  Po 
was  assured,  and  late  that  same  night  he  was  back  again 
at  Volta,  the  central  point  of  the  line  of  the  Mincio, 
prepared  to  face  Bellegarde  in  full  force. 

Grenier's  march  was  a  hazardous  but  brilliantly  con- 
ceived operation  ;  it  must  be  realized  that  its  success  de- 
pended on  Grenier's  retreat  being  not  back  to  Piacenza 
but  forward  to  Borgoforte.  Had  Grenier  been  met  on 
the  Enza  by  the  whole  Neapolitan  army  his  retreat 
must  have  been  by  Piacenza,  and  Bellegarde  would 
have  had  ample  warning  and  time  to  strike  at  the  line  of 


302  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  Mincio  before  the  Viceroy's  detached  three  divisions 
could  have  marched  back  again  by  Piacenza  and 
Cremona.  As  it  was,  Prince  Eugene's  movements  at 
Borgoforte  and  Guastalla  threatened  the  line  of  the 
Enza  and  at  the  same  time  opened  his  lieutenant's 
retreat  to  the  point  where  his  presence  was  immedi- 
ately required,  that  is  to  the  line  of  the  Mincio.  It 
was  a  very  bold  but  masterly  movement,  and  entirely 
successful. 

Grenier's  march  had  been  executed  only  just  in  time 
to  avoid  Neapolitan  resistance,  for  on  the  3rd  of 
March  an  incident  occurred  that  brought  Joachim  to  a 
strong  resolution.  On  that  day  he  received  an  auto- 
graph letter  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria  that  con- 
tained the  long-delayed,  long-hoped-for  ratification  of 
the  Austro-Neapolitan  treaty  of  alliance.  He  at  once 
decided,  for  the  second  time,  to  open  hostilities  in 
earnest,  and  on  the  5  th  of  March  he  wrote  to  the 
Viceroy  announcing  that  his  troops  would  enter  on 
active  operations. 

Grenier,  having  joined  Prince  Eugene  with  the  bulk 
of  his  troops,  had  left  Severoli  with  a  weak  division  at 
Reggio.  In  front  of  him  was  a  considerable  force, 
comprising  Nugent's,  Carascosa's,  and  D'  Ambrosio's 
divisions,  covering  Modena.  It  was  not  long  before 
Nugent  discovered  that  Grenier  with  the  main  body 
of  the  enemy  was  no  longer  in  front  of  him.  He 
promptly  decided  to  resume  the  offensive  and  attack 
Reggio. 