

I  send  you  herewith  a  short  statement  of  the  conditions  the 
King  of  Naples  has  had  the  impudence  to  put  forward,  pro- 
posing on  these  conditions  to  declare  against  the  Austrians. 
He  has,  however,  sent  me  a  verbal  promise  not  to  engage  his 
troops.  Of  this  I  am  taking  advantage,  though  not  altogether 
pinning  my  faith  to  it. 

The  Viceroy  had  already  gained  considerable  advan- 
tage from  his  negotiations  with  the  King,  for  Belle- 
garde  was  now^  in  a  state  of  complete  check  on  the 
Mincio.  On  the  loth  of  February  he  had  made  an 
attempt  to  cross  at  Valleggio,  but  had  been  vigorously 
repulsed  by  the  Viceroy.  The  Austrian  Field-Marshal 
had  since  been  content  to  maintain  an  expectant  attitude, 
for  not  only  had  he  no  certainty  of  defeating  the 
Viceroy,  but  he  could  not  tell  but  that  the  Neapolitan 
army  might  at  any  moment  appear  on  his  flank.  To 
Bellegarde's  and  Nugent's  reiterated  demands  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  should  advance  on  Piacenza,  the 
plausible  reply  was  reiterated  by  Joachim  that  an 
advance  on  Piacenza  would  leave  his  line  of  com- 
munications open  to  an  attack  from  the  Viceroy  de- 
bouching from  Borgoforte.  That  this  reason  was 
hardly  sound  in  view  of  the  great  numerical  inferiority 
of  the  Viceroy  was  amply  demonstrated  by  the  eventual 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  299 

course  of  operations,  and  by  the  bold  and  not  altogether 
fruitless  course  pursued  by  Nugent. 

This  commander  was  determined,  at  whatever  cost, 
whether  supported  by  the  Neapolitans  or  not,  to  effect 
a  diversion  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  Po  that  should 
in  some  way  facilitate  the  operations  of  Bellegarde  on 
the  northern  bank.  After  his  repulse  in  front  of 
Piacenza  early  in  the  month,  he  had  fallen  back  on  the 
line  occupied  by  the  Neapolitans  along  the  river  Enza. 
King  Joachim's  headquarters  were  at  Reggio,  midway 
between  the  Enza  and  Modena,  and  Nugent  established 
himself  on  the  right  of  Carascosa's  division  towards 
Guastalla.  On  the  21st  he  crossed  the  Enza,  marched 
through  Sacca,  and  after  throwing  a  bridge  of  boats 
across  the  Po,  occupied  Casalmaggiore  on  the  further 
bank. 

A  movement  of  this  sort,  carried  out  by  a  small 
corps,  was  more  alarming  than  dangerous  for  the 
Viceroy,  nor  could  Joachim  be  expected  to  take  such 
a  risk  as  to  follow  it  with  his  whole  army.  So  little 
importance  did  he  attach  to  the  movement  that  he 
placed  a  detachment  of  Neapolitans  under  Nugent*s 
orders,  and  these,  notably  the  sailors  of  the  Royal  Guard, 
were  commended  by  the  Austrian  general  for  their 
behaviour  in  the  skirmishing  that  took  place,  and  for 
the  skill  with  which  they  carried  out  the  necessary 
bridging  operations. 