

A  decision  of  vital  importance  depended  on  the 
result  of  these  inquiries  of  the  Viceroy  ;  for  he  had 
immediately  before  making  them  received  orders  from 
the  Emperor  that  he  was  to  abandon  Lombardy  and 
retreat  to  the  Alps  on  being  officially  informed  that 
Joachim  had  declared  in  favour  of  the  Allies.  But  it  so 
happened  that  the  King  was  not  prepared  to  make  such 
a  declaration  to  the  Viceroy,  notwithstanding  his  treaty 
of  alliance  with  Austria.  To  the  Viceroy's  communi- 
cation he  replied  that  he  could  not  move  his  troops  to 
assist  the  French  arms  north  of  the  Po,  for  not  only 
had  the  Emperor  made  no  request  that  they  should  be 
thus  employed,  but  he  had  also  left  the  question  of  their 
supreme  command  unsettled.  Yet  the  movement  of  his 
army,  he  claimed,  had  been  of  great  assistance  to  the 


288  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Emperor.  If  he  had  abstained  from  attacking  the 
Austrians,  it  was  owing  to  the  peace  conferences  in 
progress  and  to  the  presence  of  an  Austrian  negotiator 
at  Naples.  Should  he,  however,  to  his  deep  regret, 
eventually  be  compelled  to  separate  his  policy  from 
that  of  France,  he  undertook  to  give  the  Viceroy  the 
warning  he  asked  for  before  attacking  him.  For  the 
present  his  instructions  to  his  generals  were  not  to 
engage  in  hostilities  with  the  French  (Jan.  21,  18 14). 

On  receiving  this  dissembling  letter,  on  considering 
the  uncertainty  of  the  political  horizon,  and  the  in- 
evitable necessity,  as  it  seemed,  that  Napoleon  should 
soon  accept  the  terms  proposed  to  him  by  the  Allies, 
the  Viceroy  decided,  however  small  his  resources,  to 
maintain  his  position  in  Lombardy  for  the  present 
rather  than  retreat.  His  intention  was  to  prevent 
the  Neapolitans  from  crossing  the  Po  by  holding 
the  line  of  that  river  from  the  bridge  of  Borgoforte, 
just  south  of  Mantua,  to  Piacenza,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  prevent  the  Austrians'  advance  from  the 
north  and  east  by  contesting  with  them  the  lines  of 
the  Adige  and  Mincio  and  the  fortresses  of  the  Quad- 
rilateral,— Peschiera,  Verona,  Mantua,  and  Legnago. 
This  position,  one  of  the  most  famous  in  military 
history,  was  immensely  strong,  and  commanded  the 
northern  half  of  the  valley  of  the  Po,  blocking  the  two 
great  roads  that  come  down  into  Italy,  one  from  the 
Tyrol  along  the  Adige,  the  other  from  Austria  through 
Vicenza.  Yet  the  Quadrilateral  had  the  weakness  of  so 
many  elaborately  planned  military  positions :  it  required 
a  large  body  of  troops  to  occupy  all  its  fortifications 
and  to  cover  the  passages  of  the  rivers.  Prince  Eugene 
was  short  of  men,  and  he  would  have  with  inferior 
numbers  to   face  a  large  Austrian  army  coming  from 