

On  the  morning  of  the  7  th  of  March  Nugent  got  into 
action,  a  Neapolitan  brigade  under  G.  Pepe  supporting 
him.  From  the  headquarters  at  Modena,  fifteen  miles 
away,  Joachim  sent  orders  to  the  Austrian  general  not 
to  engage  ;  he  followed  in  person.     When  the   King 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  303 

arrived  in  front  of  Reggio,  he  found  not  only  that  his 
orders  had  been  disregarded,  but  that  his  generals  had 
been  gradually  drawn  into  supporting  Nugent's  move- 
ments. The  Franco -Italians,  heavily  outnumbered, 
had  been  forced  from  their  outlying  positions  and  were 
now  surrounded  and  at  a  great  disadvantage,  owing 
to  Severoli's  having  been  dangerously  wounded.  An 
hour's  truce  was  agreed  on,  and  the  King,  taking 
advantage  of  this,  arranged  that  the  Imperial  troops 
should  surrender  Reggio,  but  be  free  to  retreat  wher- 
ever they  liked.  It  was  the  universal  opinion  in  both 
armies  that  only  Joachim's  arrival  saved  the  French 
division  from  capture  or  destruction.  In  the  engage- 
ment the  Austrians  had  suffered  about  300  casualties, 
the  Neapolitans  had  36  killed  and  85  wounded. 

Joachim  now  established  his  headquarters  at  Reggio 
once  more,  and  the  Austro- Neapolitan  outposts  were 
pushed  out  towards  Piacenza,  gradually  reoccupying 
the  ground  from  which  Grenier  had  driven  them. 

The  extraordinary  fluctuations  and  uncertainty  of 
the  King's  policy,  the  anomaly  whereby  the  Italian 
generals  and  soldiers  alongside  of  whom  they  had  been 
used  to  fight  were  now  their  opponents  and  the 
detested  Austrians  their  friends,  the  contradictory 
orders  so  often  received,  the  indubitable  fact  that 
Joachim's  conduct  was  as  dangerous  as  it  was  deceitful, 
had  shaken  the  confidence  of  his  generals.  Their  long 
and  trying  inaction  in  front  of  the  enemy  had  given 
them  an  opportunity  for  indulging  in  the  most  irre- 
pressible of  the  sins  to  which  Neapolitan  flesh  is  heir 
to — that  of  intriguing.  Several  of  them,  chief  of  whom 
was  G.  Pepe,  were  ardent  nationalists ;  many  had 
vague  aspirations  for  a  united  Italy  ;  nearly  all  were 
animated  with  jealousy  towards  the  few  French  officers 


304  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

whom  the  King  had  retained  in  his  employment  ;  with 
scarcely  an  exception  they  were  ready  and  anxious  for 
any  change  that  might  result  in  personal  advantage. 
They  therefore  started  an  intrigue.  The  plot  had 
for  its  object  the  forcing  of  a  constitution  from  the 
King,  and  it  is  possible,  if  Pepe's  own  statements  on  the 
subject  are  accepted  at  face  value,  that  he  was  the  only  one 
of  the  generals  who  was  thoroughly  sincere  in  the  idea 
and  prepared  to  carry  it  out  at  all  costs.  From  early 
boyhood  he  had  been  an  ardent  republican.  With  his 
brother  Florestano  he  had  participated  in  the  revolution 
of  1799,  ^^^^  ^^^  later  been  engaged  in  intrigues  against 
the  Bourbons  and  suffered  imprisonment.  He  now 
became  particularly  active  in  promoting  an  address  to 
the  King  calling  on  him  to  grant  Naples  a  constitution. 