

These  negotiations  led  to  no  more  result  than  those 
of  a  month  earlier.  General  Zucchi,  Commandant  of 
Mantua,  made  the  necessary  arrangements,  and  an 
interview  between  him  and  General  Carascosa  took 
place.  This  was  followed  by  one  between  the  Viceroy, 
accompanied  by  Zucchi,  and  Livron,  representing 
Joachim.  This  last  interview  took  place  on  the  28th 
or  29  th  of  March,  when  Joachim's  relations  with  the 
Austrians  and  British  were  already  entering  a  new 
phase.  As  had  happened  before,  the  sincerity  of  the 
two  parties  was  so  slight,  their  views  and  ambitions  so 

1  Napoleon  to  Eugene,  March  12,  1814,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  215. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  311 

divergent,  that  nothing  came  of  the  interviews  save  a 
certain  amount  of  intriguing  among  the  Neapolitan  and 
Italian  generals. 

The  chief  effect  of  Joachim's  negotiations  with 
Prince  Eugene  during  the  last  ten  days  of  March  was 
unpremeditated  ;  they  greatly  alarmed  Bellegarde,  whose 
army  was  in  a  deplorable  condition  through  sickness, 
and  induced  him  to  make  a  strong  effort  to  maintain- 
amicable  relations.  Count  Mier  had  deeply  resented 
Bentinck's  gruff  intrusion  on  his  diplomatic  labours ; 
Bellegarde  was  aghast  at  the  prospect  of  having  to  face 
a  joint  attack  from  the  Viceroy  and  the  King.  Queen 
Caroline,  too,  feared  lest  at  the  last  minute,  just  when 
the  cause  of  the  Allies  appeared  more  certain  than  ever 
to  triumph,  Joachim  would  impetuously  plunge  into 
some  fatal  course  ;  she  sent  S.  Teodoro  and  Mosbourg 
from  Naples  to  press  her  advice  on  him. 

Mier's  efforts  at  Joachim's  headquarters  to  keep  the 
King  in  a  friendly  disposition  were  supported  from 
Verona,  where  Bentinck  had  joined  Bellegarde.  "  There 
he  discussed  matters  with  the  Austrian  commander  and 
the  British  officer  on  his  staff.  Sir  Robert  Wilson, 
who  was  as  distinguished  for  his  charm  of  manner  as 
Bentinck  was  for  his  bluntness.  In  every  quarter 
opinion  was  against  Bentinck.  It  was  not  very  material 
to  the  Austrians  whether  the  Neapolitans  or  the  British 
momentarily  controlled  Tuscany  ;  what  they  wanted  in 
the  first  place  was  that  Murat  should  be  persuaded  by 
some  means  or  other  to  march  his  army  on  Piacenza. 
That  done,  the  line  of  the  Mincio  must  fall,  and  Prince 
Eugene  must  retreat  to  the  Alps.  The  Austrian  view 
was  entirely  supported  by  Sir  Robert  Wilson  at  Verona, 
and  Castlereagh  was  writing  dispatches  from  France 
to  Bentinck  enjoining  on  him  a  conciliatory  attitude 


312  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

towards  Murat  and  the  subordination  of  his  operations 
to  Bellegarde's. 

"  Bentinck  was  profoundly  displeased  at  the  situa- 
tion ;  he  was  angered  at  finding  that  Prince  Eugene 
with  his  small  army  of  conscripts  was  successfully  hold- 
ing Lombardy  against  the  much  larger  forces  of  the 
Allies.  He  ascribed  the  failure  to  the  adoption  of  the 
Austrian  policy,  instead  of  that  on  which  he  had  set  his 
heart.  Yet  the  unanimity  of  opinion  against  him,  the 
representations  of  Bellegarde  and  Wilson,  the  tenor  of 
his  instructions,  all  warned  him  that  he  had  gone  very 
far.  He  appears  to  have  realized  that  he  was  no  longer 
acting  in  the  spirit  of  his  instructions,  and  on  returning 
to  the  Neapolitan  headquarters,  now  at  Bologna,  he 
took  Wilson  with  him. 