

"  All  felt  that  an  understanding  of  some  sort  must  be 
come  to.  Murat  now  put  forward  a  new  proposal  :  he 
offered  to  evacuate  Tuscany  if  Great  Britain  would 
sign  peace  ;  this  was  immediately  rejected  by  Wilson. 
On  the  2nd  of  April  a  note  was  drawn  up  by  Bentinck 
and  presented  to  Gallo.  In  this  document  are  clear 
indications  that  the  British  agent  felt  that  he  must 
abandon  the  position  he  had  taken  up  at  Reggio, 
though  it  can  hardly  be  described  as  conciliatory.  He 
formally  declared  that  Great  Britain  approved  the 
Austro-Neapolitan  treaty,  and  that  the  signature  of  a 
treaty  of  peace  was  declined  merely  out  of  consideration 
for  the  just  claims  of  the  allied  Sicilian  Government. 
He  invited  the  Neapolitan  Government  to  consider  the 
question  of  compensation  to  King  Ferdinand,  with  a 
view  to  arriving  at  a  settlement.  But  in  addition  to 
these  official  views,  Bentinck  stated  a  personal  opinion. 
He  complained  that  the  Neapolitan  Government  had 
not  participated    in    the  military  operations,  and    that 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  313 

suspicious  negotiations  had  taken  place  with  the  French 
camp  ;  he  also  protested  against  the  apparent  project  of 
permanent  occupation  of  the  territory  overrun  by  the 
Neapolitan  army.  He  concluded  by  recommending, 
not  demanding,  the  cession  of  part  of  Tuscany  to 
facilitate  the  British  operations,  a  prompt  co-operation 
with  the  Austrians,  and  the  renunciation  of  all  projects 
of  political  aggrandizement."  ^ 

This  note  represented  a  considerable  change  in 
Bentinck's  attitude,  yet  it  was  far  from  satisfactory  to 
Joachim.  The  Duke  di  Gallo  politely  parried  it  by 
referring  to  negotiations  that  had  taken  place  between 
Prince  Cariati  and  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Chalons.  On 
this  Bentinck  decided  to  rejoin  his  troops  and  operate 
in  the  direction  of  Genoa,  leaving  to  the  Austrians  and 
Sir  Robert  Wilson  the  charge  of  all  further  arrange- 
ments with  the  King  of  Naples. 

Every  courier  from  France  now  brought  news  that 
reassured  Joachim  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  Allies, 
that  strengthened  the  conviction  that  Napoleon^s  was  a 
lost  cause.  The  statesmen  of  the  Allies  assembled  at 
Chaumont  had  decided  that  in  view  of  existing  circum- 
stances it  was  better  that  the  Austrian  treaty  with 
Naples  should  be  indorsed  with  the  formal  adhesion 
of  the  Powers.  Metternich  was  prepared  to  admit 
that  the  long -delayed  ratification  of  the  treaty  by 
the  Emperor  Francis  constituted  a  partial  excuse  for 
the  non-activity  of  Joachim  ;  yet  now  that  every 
guarantee  was  offered  by  the  Powers,  the  time  had 
arrived  when  further  hesitation  would  not  be  tolerated. 
To  remove  some  of  the  King's  apprehensions,  the  Czar 
sent  General  Balatscheif  to  Joachim's  headquarters 
with  full   powers  to  concur  in  the  Austro-Neapolitan 