

Those  words,  the  train  of  thought  they  reveal,  the 
political  propaganda  that  had  been  pushed  among  certain 
masonic    and    other   circles  at   Naples,   all   these  were 

^  Castlereagh,  Corr.  ix.  239. 
VOL.  I  X 


3o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

influences  that  were  plain  to  Joachim,  as  they  were 
plain  to  all  who  knew  what  was  passing  behind  the 
scenes.  Bentinck*s  character  was  far  too  direct  to 
conceal  his  sympathies  and  sentiments,  and  it  is  small 
wonder  if  his  official  friendship  alarmed  the  King  of 
Naples  scarcely  less  than  his  old-time  hostility.  The 
Anglo  -  Sicilian  expedition  now  starting  for  northern 
Italy  to  assist  in  the  campaign  against  the  Viceroy 
proved  a  consistent  sequel  to  the  whole  of  Bentinck's 
policy. 

That  expedition,  comprising  some  14,000  Anglo- 
Sicilian  troops,  left  Palermo  for  Leghorn  at  the  end  of 
February  and  beginning  of  March.  Both  before  the 
departure  of  this  expedition  and  after  its  landing,  pro- 
clamations were  addressed  to  the  Sicilian  troops  by  the 
Hereditary  Prince  in  which  they  were  reminded  that  the 
Bourbon  claim  to  the  throne  of  Naples  was  not  aban- 
doned, and  that  the  Neapolitans  were  their  brethren. 
This  was  the  more  provocative  for  two  reasons,  one 
that  the  chief  command  was  being  directly  exercised 
by  Bentinck,  the  other  that  Leghorn,  where  the  Anglo- 
Sicilians  disembarked  on  the  13th  of  March,  was  no 
longer  under  the  French  flag,  but  in  peaceful  possession 
of  the  Neapolitans.  As  though  to  show  that  not  only 
Sicily  but  also  Great  Britain  was  hostile  to  the  avowed 
policy  of  Joachim,  Bentinck  himself  issued  a  proclama- 
tion at  Leghorn  in  the  following  terms  :• — 

Italians — Great  Britain  has  landed  her  troops  on  your 
coasts  ;  she  offers  you  her  assistance  in  order  to  rescue  you 
from  the  iron  yoke  of  Bonaparte.  .  .  . 

After  reviewing  the  national  uprisings  of  Europe  he 
continued  : — 

...  Is  then  Italy  alone  to  remain  under  the  yoke  ?     Shall 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  307 

Italians  alone  contend  against  Italians  in  favour  of  a  Tyrant,  and 
for  the  thraldom  of  their  country  ?  Italians,  hesitate  no  longer ; 
be  Italians  and  let  Italy  in  arms  be  convinced  that  the  great 
cause  of  the  country  is  in  her  hands. 

Warriors  of  Italy  !  you  are  not  invited  to  join  us  ;  but  you 
are  invited  to  vindicate  your  own  rights  and  to  be  free. 

Only  call  and  we  will  hasten  to  your  relief ;  and  then  Italy 
by  our  united  efforts  will  become  what  she  was  in  her  most 
prosperous  periods,  and  what  Spain  now  is.  Bentinck.^ 

Thus  the  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition,  which  was  in- 
tended to  co-operate  with  the  allied  Austrian  and 
Neapolitan  armies  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  with  the  one 
Power  and  an  armistice  with  the  other,  arrived  on  the 
scene  heralded  by  declarations  that  openly  avowed 
claims  hostile  to  those  of  the  King  of  Naples,  and  con- 
trary to  those  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  Nor  did 
Bentinck's  unconciliatory  attitude  contrast  favourably 
with  that  of  Joachim. 