

2  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815,  ii.  237. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  309 

of  Tuscany  and  that  of  the  King's  military  action. 
The  King  offered  to  evacuate  Tuscany  in  favour 
of  the  Anglo- Sicihans,  but  demanded  in  return  that 
Bentinck  should  sign  a  treaty  with  him  similar  to  the 
Austrian  treaty.  Bentinck  declined,  and  insisted  that 
the  Neapolitan  troops  must  be  immediately  withdrawn 
from  Tuscany,  threatening,  in  case  of  refusal,  to 
drive  them  out  and  to  invade  Naples  in  the  name  of 
King  Ferdinand.  Bentinck,  in  fact,  completely  lost 
sight  of  the  point  that  the  chief  object  of  his  negotiation 
should  have  been  to  secure  the  Neapolitan  co-operation 
against  the  Viceroy,  instead  of  which  he  was  assuming 
an  attitude  that  could  not  but  alarm  Joachim  and  make 
him  hang  back  even  more  than  he  had  hitherto.  So 
far  did  he  carry  his  disregard  for  Joachim's  susceptibilities 
that  he  avoided  addressing  him  in  the  forms  usual  with 
royalty  and  wore  the  Sicilian  red  cockade  in  his  hat. 

The  untactful  attitude  of  Bentinck  made  a  profound 
impression  on  the  King's  uneasy  conscience  and  suspicious 
temperament  ;  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was 
*'  already  sacrificed."  ^  In  despair,  and  notwithstanding 
the  news  of  the  reverses  that  were  now  overtaking  the 
Emperor  in  France,  he  turned  once  more  to  the  Viceroy 
for  help. 

On  the  20th  of  March  Bentinck  left  Reggio  for 
Verona,  where  he  intended  to  confer  with  Bellegarde; 
he  had  accomplished  less  than  nothing,  for  at  the  very 
time  he  was  leaving  the  Neapolitan  headquarters, 
clandestine  negotiations  with  the  French  camp  were 
resumed  by  Joachim.  It  so  happened  that  his  renewed 
desire  to  treat  coincided  with  the  arrival  of  a  dispatch 
from  Napoleon  to  the  Viceroy  in  which  the  Prince  was 
ordered    to    reopen    negotiations.     This    dispatch   had 

1  Mier  to  Metternich,  March  20,  18 14,  Helfert,  Murat,  151. 


310  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

been  written  by  Napoleon  three  days  after  his  defeat  at 
Laon,  and  shortly  after  receiving  Joachim's  letter  of 
the  I  St  or  2nd  of  March  already  given.  The  Emperor 
wrote  as  follows  : — 

My  Son — I  send  you  copy  of  a  most  extraordinary  letter  I 
have  received  from  the  King  of  Naples.  .  .  .  Send  an  agent 
to  this  extraordinary  traitor,  and  make  a  treaty  with  him  in  my 
name.  Don't  touch  either  Piedmont  or  Genoa.  .  .  .  Later 
we  shall  do  what  we  choose,  for,  in  the  face  of  such  ingratitude 
and  such  circumstances,  nothing  can  be  binding.^ 

The  Viceroy  received  this  letter  on  the  19th  of 
March,  and  at  the  very  same  time  one  from  Joachim 
dated  the  i8th, — that  is  two  days  before  Bentinck  left 
Reggio, — in  which  the  King  hinted  clearly  that  he  was 
open  to  negotiate.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
Viceroy  acted  at  once.  He  wrote  to  Joachim  that  he 
had  just  received  full  powers  from  the  Emperor  and 
was  prepared  to  conclude  a  treaty  ;  he  demanded  that 
in  the  meanwhile  hostilities  should  be  suspended.  He 
had  no  other  intention  than  to  amuse  Joachim  and  gain 
time. 