

This  interview  was  immediately  followed  by  the 
conference  at  Rovere,  already  related,  of  which  the 
result  was  the  adjustment  of  the  differences  between  Nea- 
politans, British,  and  Austrians,  and  the  arrangement 
that  the  King  of  Naples  should  march  on  Piacenza. 

That  advance  accordingly  took  place,  though  not 
without  some  further  slight  delay.  On  the  13  th  of 
April  Nugent  took  the  lead  and  crossed  the  Taro, 
supported  by  Pepe^s  brigade,  and  followed  by  the  whole 
army.  There  was  fighting  during  the  whole  day, 
especially  at  S.  Donino,  the  French  falling  back  steadily 
towards  Piacenza.  The  Austrians  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
fighting,  but  Pepe's  brigade  was  in  action,  and  its  com- 
mander earned  commendation.  Early  on  the  morning 
of  the  15th  the  advance  continued,  and  the  French  were 
driven  into  Piacenza,  Nugent  capturing  the  monastery 
of  San  Lazaro  after  some  heavy  fighting. 

Joachim,  though  present  with  the  army,  had  so  far 
not  taken  a  very  active  part  in  the  operations.  He  now 
ordered  headquarters  forward  to  a  small  house  close 
under  the  walls  of  the  city.  Piacenza  was  a  fortress  he 
had  attacked  once  before, — -in  the  year  1800,  when  the 
divisions  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  had  swept  down  into 
Italy  from  the  Great  St.  Bernard,  and  the  First  Consul 
had  marched  to  the  fields  of  Marengo.     He  had  found 


3i8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  task  easier  to  perform  then  with  French  cavalry 
than  it  now  appeared  to  be  with  Austrian  infantry. 

The  King's  advance  on  Piacenza  had  coincided  with 
news  of  defeat  and  disaster  to  the  Imperial  arms,  though 
for  the  last  few  days  information  from  France  had 
totally  failed.  Where  the  armies  of  the  Allies,  where 
that  of  the  Emperor  had  vanished,  was  wrapped  in 
mystery.^  As  Joachim  paced  the  garden  of  the  house 
where  he  had  taken  up  his  quarters,  conferring  with 
an  engineer  officer.  General  Colletta,  dispatches  were 
brought  to  him.  He  took  them  in  person  from  the 
staff  officer,  opened  and  read  them.  Those  present 
watched  him,  and  saw  him  grow  pale.  He  then  turned 
quickly  away,  walking  in  an  agitated  and  nervous 
manner.  At  last  he  called  up  his  staff,  and  in  a 
disheartened  way  told  them  what  had  happened — that 
Paris  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Allies,  and  that  Napoleon 
had  abdicated.  He  was  utterly  dejected,  and  remained 
in  that  state  for  several  days. 

As  so  often  happens  in  the  affairs  of  life,  Joachim, 
now  brought  face  to  face  with  the  termination  of  the 
struggle,  found  himself  quite  differently  placed  from  what 
he  had  anticipated.  *'  I  am  here  alone  in  the  midst  of 
strangers,  I  have  to  conceal  all,  even  my  tears  !  "  he 
had  written  to  the  Emperor  six  weeks  earlier  ;  but 
now,  how  much  greater  was  his  isolation !  What 
friendship,  what  sympathy  could  he  look  for  in  any 
direction  ?  What  had  been  his  political  conduct  to 
friends,  to  allies,  to  enemies  ?  What  had  been  the 
military  achievements  of  the  brilliant  Joachim  Murat  ? 
He   had  been  dragged  into  action  at  the  heels  of  an 