

On  the  unexpected  news  reaching  him  that  Pius  VII. 
had  set  out  from  Piacenza  for  the  Neapolitan  outposts 
Joachim  sent  orders  to  Nugent  to  detain  him  on  the 
further  side  of  the  Taro.  The  Austrian  general  did 
precisely  the  contrary  of  what  the  King  ordered  ;  he 
received  the  Pope  with  full  military  honours,  treated 
him  with  the  utmost  respect,  provided  him  with  a  suit- 
able escort,  and  promptly  sent  him  on  his  way  towards 
Parma.  Then  the  King  sent  Carascosa  from  Bologna, 
where  headquarters  then  were,  to  stop  the  Pope  from 

^  Napoleon  to  Eugene,  March  12,  18 14,  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  216. 


3i6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

proceeding  beyond  Reggio.  The  Neapolitan  general 
informed  Pius  that  he  must  break  his  journey  at  that 
city,  as  there  were  no  post-horses  obtainable ;  but 
strong  in  the  rectitude  of  his  cause,  strong  in  the 
attraction  of  Rome  that  called  him,  strong  in  the 
crowds  that  knelt  at  his  passage  and  invoked  his 
blessing,  the  Pope  replied  :  "  Then  I  will  pursue  my 
way  on  foot,  and  God  will  give  me  strength."  ^ 

There  was  no  stopping  so  resolute  a  traveller,  and 
if  Napoleon  had  ventured  to  arrest  Pius,  that  was  an 
enterprise  his  lieutenant  might  not  safely  contemplate. 
The  Pope  continued  his  journey  in  spite  of  Carascosa's 
efforts,  and  at  his  next  stopping- place,  Modena,  was 
met  by  another  emissary  of  the  King,  the  Duke  di 
Gallo.  The  King  of  Naples'  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs  had  mission  to  discuss  with  the  Pope  certain 
political  questions  that  his  return  involved  ;  he  met 
with  no  better  success  than  Carascosa,  however,  for 
Pius  firmly  declined  all  discussion  until  such  time  as  he 
should  be  restored  to  his  capital,  his  throne,  and  his 
government,  and  be  able  to  speak  and  act  as  became 
him. 

Failing  in  these  attempts  at  negotiation,  Joachim 
took  perhaps  the  best  middle  course  that  safety  and 
ambition  might  jointly  dictate,  and  addressed  a  letter 
to  Pius,  in  which,  after  assuring  him  of  his  personal 
devotion,  he  stated  that  he  would  immediately  take 
every  step  to  place  him  in  possession  of  the  dominions 
of  which  he  had  been  deprived  when  he  left  Rome. 
This  meant  the  capital  and  two  adjoining  departments  ; 
it  left  entirely  out  of  account  Romagna  and  the  Marches 
with  the  two  important  cities  of  Bologna  and  Ancona, 
actually  in  the  possession  of  the  NeapoHtans. 

1   Colletta,  Storia,  ii.  183  ;  Du  Casse,  Eugene,  x.  233. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  317 

At  Bologna  the  Pope  and  King  met.  Both  must 
have  recalled  their  earliest  relations  twelve  years  before, 
when  Joachim  was  General  Murat,  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  army  of  the  French  Republic.  Extraordinary 
events,  in  which  both  had  played  great  parts,  had  filled 
the  pages  of  history  since  then,  and  as  they  met,  cover- 
ing their  antagonism  with  a  formal  veil  of  courtesy, 
each  must  have  felt  that  the  end  of  that  extraordinary 
cycle  of  events  was  not  yet  reached. 