

But  Pepe  was  not  yet  sufficiently  influential  in  the 
army  to  carry  matters  his  own  way.  The  generals 
hung  back,  as  yet,  from  extreme  courses  ;  the  King 
received  their  petition  and  promised  to  consider  it. 
Instead  of  granting  a  constitution,  however,  he  won  over 
the  two  most  influential  of  the  intriguing  officers  by 
conferring  on  them  personal  favours.  They  probably 
appreciated  these  no  less  than  they  would  have  prized 
the  public  advantages  which  the  King  showed  no  inclina- 
tion for.  Carascosa  and  Pignatelli-Strongoli  received 
various  benefits  from  the  King,  grand  crosses  of  the 
Order  of  the  Two  Sicilies,  a  command  in  the  Royal 
Guards,  and  such-like  matters,  and  Pepe,  finding  sup- 
port weakening,  had,  for  a  while,  to  subside. 

But  if  Joachim's  hand  could  not  yet  be  forced  in 
the  matter  of  a  constitution,  there  was  another  matter 
that  equally,  and  with  perhaps  greater  propriety,  exercised 
his  generals,  and  to  which  they  now  turned  their  atten- 
tion,— that  of  the  conduct  of  the  campaign.     Foiled 


CHAP.  X  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  305 

in  their  constitutional  endeavours,  they  petitioned 
Joachim  to  call  a  council  of  war,  and  the  King,  either 
from  good -nature  or  from  necessity,  endured  this 
flagrant  breach  of  discipline,  though  he  did  not  accede 
to  their  wishes.  This  occurred,  in  all  probability, 
immediately  before  the  engagement  at  Reggio  ;  a  few 
days  later  a  new  turn  was  given  to  the  situation  by  the 
arrival  at  headquarters  of  Lord  William  Bentinck. 

The  representative  of  Great  Britain  in  the  Medi- 
terranean had  remained  in  Naples  for  several  days  at  the 
time  of  the  conclusion  of  the  armistice,  and  it  is  instructive 
to  note  what  his  impressions  then  were  ;  for  Bentinck, 
whatever  his  limitations  and  failings,  was  a  man  whose 
honesty  of  purpose  made  him  incapable  of  stating  that 
which  he  did  not  believe.  From  Joachim's  capital  he 
wrote  to  Castlereagh  on  the  6  th  of  February  setting 
forth  his  views  on  various  aspects  of  the  Italian  question. 
As  to  Sicily  he  was  under  no  illusion,  and  recognised 
that  the  constitution  of  the  island  would  not  last  longer 
than  the  British  protectorate.  However  hostile  to 
Joachim  Bentinck  might  be,  he  was  strongly  impressed 
with  the  universal  dismay  felt  at  Naples  at  the  thought 
of  a  return  of  the  Bourbons,  and  frankly  wrote  to 
Castlereagh  :  *'  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  the  terror 
universally  felt  at  the  unforgiving  temper  of  their 
Majesties."  His  hope  appears  to  have  been  that  the 
Bourbon  government  in  Sicily,  which,  under  British 
protection,  had  become  a  constitutional  state,  might  be 
"...  not  only  the  model  but  the  instrument  of 
Italian  independence."  ^ 