

The  King  of  Naples  was  anxious  to  propitiate  Great 
Britain,  and  however  much  it  cost  him  to  have  the 
Anglo  -  Sicilians  disembark  on  territory  his  troops 
already  occupied,  he  declared  to  Count  Mier  that  on 
Bentinck's  arrival  at  Leghorn  it  would  not  be  his  fault 
if  everything  in  dispute  between  them  was  not  settled 
amicably.  But  an  amicable  settlement  depends  on  a 
friendly  spirit  being  displayed  by  both  parties,  and 
Bentinck  was  far  from  showing  himself  ready  to  meet 
the  King  half-way.  He  was  irritated  at  finding  the 
Neapolitan  flag  flying  throughout  Tuscany,  and  at  the  idea 
that  perhaps  Joachim  would  succeed  in  his  ambition  of 
forming  an  Itahan  State.  At  all  events  he  left  Leghorn 
on  the  13th  of  March,  and  arrived  at  Reggio  two  days 
later,  and  by  the  course  he  adopted  there,  he  very  nearly 

1  Morning  Chronicle,  Feb.  12,  1815. 


3o8  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

succeeded  in  driving  Joachim  back  into  the  arms  of 
Napoleon. 

The  King  of  Naples  received  the  British  envoy  with 
every  outward  show  of  courtesy,  nay  more,  went  out  of 
his  way  to  please  him.^  Pepe's  brigade  was  passed  in 
review  in  his  honour,  and  every  compliment  and  attention 
shown  him.  But  Bentinck  now  knew  that  communica- 
tions had  passed  between  Joachim  and  the  Viceroy, 
while  Nugent  and  the  Austrian  officers  indignantly 
told  him  of  the  reiterated  refusals  of  the  Neapolitans 
to  march  against  the  French,  of  Grenier's  release  of  his 
Neapolitan  prisoners,  of  Severoli's  escape  from  Reggio. 
Although  the  nature  of  Joachim's  communications  with 
Prince  Eugene  was  unknown,  it  was  sufficiently  evident 
that  they  could  not  be  inspired  by  a  desire  to  promote 
the  interests  of  the  Allies. 

Unmoved  by  the  blandishments  of  the  King,  Bentinck 
took  up  an  attitude  blunt  in  his  presence,  all  but  openly 
hostile  out  of  it.  He  frankly  avowed  his  detestation  of 
Joachim  to  all  who  cared  to  listen,  and  openly  described 
him  as  a  counterpart  of  Bernadotte.  To  Bellegarde  he 
wrote  that  Joachim  was  not  fulfilling  his  obligations  : — 

...  Is  it  not  the  language  of  all  his  officers  and  of  himself 
that  all  Italy  should  be  united,  and  that  he  should  be  the  chief 
of  Italian  independence  ?  ...  Is  there  any  man  in  Italy,  is 
there  any  man  or  officer  in  the  Austrian  army  south  of  the  Po, 
has  your  Excellency,  or  have  I  myself,  any  confidence  whatever 
in  his  sincerity  ?  Do  not  all  believe  that  his  sole  object  is  to 
gain  time  ?  ^ 

Two  questions  were  the  chief  object  of  discussion 
between  Joachim  and  Bentinck :  that  of  the  occupation 

1  " .  .  .  se  mit  en  coquetterie  pour  lui  plaire."  Mier  to  Metternich,  Helfert, 
Konigin  Karolina,  574. 