

1  Johnston,  Bentinck  and  Murat,  Er.g.  Hist.  Rev.  xix.  277. 


314  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

treaty,  and  Castlereagh,  doubtless  in  accord  with 
Metternich,  wrote  to  Bentinck  in  somewhat  severe 
terms  instructing  him  to  subordinate  himself,  especially 
in  matters  concerning  relations  with  the  Allied  Powers, 
to  Field  -  Marshal  Bellegarde.  He  thought  that  it 
might  be  best  for  the  Anglo-Sicilian  force  to  be  incor- 
porated with  the  Neapolitans,  and  added,  "  It  is  in  vain 
to  hope  for  any  useful  concert  from  Murat  whilst  a 
system  of  menace  prevails  .  .  .  with  respect  to  his 
title  at  Naples.  .  .  ."  i 

As  a  result  of  the  clearly  expressed  intentions  of  the 
Allied  Powers  a  conference  was  held  on  the  yth  of 
April  at  Rovere  on  the  Po,  just  east  of  Mantua.  This 
was  attended  by  Field-Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  King  of 
Naples,  Count  Mier,  and  Sir  R.  Wilson.  Joachim  was 
now  reassured  as  to  the  intentions  of  Austria  and  Great 
Britain  ;  he  also  knew  that  Schwarzenberg  had  beaten 
Napoleon  at  Arcis-sur-Aube  and  was  marching  on  Paris. 
Under  these  circumstances  he  was  prepared  to  accede 
to  any  reasonable  proposal.  It  was  therefore  decided 
that  the  Anglo-Sicilians  should  evacuate  Tuscany  and 
confine  their  operations  to  the  Genoese  territory,  and 
that  the  Neapolitan  army  should  at  once  advance  on 
Piacenza.  These  decisions  were  put  into  immediate 
execution. 

After  the  engagement  at  Reggio  the  Austro-Neapolitan 
outposts  had  been  pushed  as  far  as  the  line  of  the  Taro, 
beyond  which  they  had  not  ventured.  Here  Nugent, 
always  as  near  to  the  enemy  as  he  could  get,  fixed  his 
quarters,  and  here,  towards  the  end  of  March,  a  curious 
incident  occurred  that  must  now  be  related. 

In  his  struggle  against  the  toils  that  the  Allies  were 
fasticlosing  about  him.  Napoleon,  though  never  abandon- 

1  Castlereagh  to  Bentinck,  April  3,  18 14,  Brit.  State  Papers^  1814-1815,  315. 


CHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  315 

ing  sufficient  to  obtain  peace,  had  yet,  one  by  one,  sur- 
rendered most  of  the  objects  of  his  ambitions.  Driven 
from  Spain,  he  had  released  Ferdinand  VII.,  nearly 
driven  from  Italy,  his  pretensions  as  the  successor  of 
Charlemagne  vanished,  and  he  released  the  Pope.  "  To 
embarrass  him  [the  King  of  Naples]  I  have  given 
orders  that  the  Pope  should  be  sent  to  the  outposts 
by  way  of  Piacenza  and  Parma,"  he  wrote  to  the 
Viceroy.^ 

This  sudden  appearance  of  a  new  factor  in  Italian 
politics  was  a  very  real  embarrassment  to  the  King.  The 
Pope  was,  within  certain  bounds,  the  greatest  power  in 
Italy  ;  Neapolitans  who  would  at  a  word  change  their 
allegiance  from  Ferdinand  to  Joachim  or  from  Joachim 
to  Ferdinand  were  unswerving  in  their  devotion  to  the 
Head  of  the  Church  ;  Pius  was  the  chief  priest  of  a 
religion  that  was  blindly  obeyed  by  Joachim's  subjects, 
and  that  had  never  consecrated  his  tenure  of  the 
throne  ;  he  claimed  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
dominion  over  a  great  part  of  the  territory  now  occu- 
pied by  the  Neapolitan  army, — territory  annexed  to 
the  French  Empire,  but  that  on  its  fall  was  claimed  in 
reversion  by  its  former  owner. 