


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  333 

fact  take  place,  but  it  is  certain  that  however  much 
Talleyrand  may  have  profited  by  it,  Joachim  did  not, 
for  the  representative  of  France  proved  his  most  bitter 
and  venomous  enemy  for  the  whole  duration  of  the 
Congress. 

Immediately  before  the  opening  of  the  conferences 
occurred  an  incident  not  unconnected  with  this  history, 
the  death  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline.  Expelled  from 
Sicily  by  Lord  William  Bentinck,  she  had  travelled  by 
way  of  the  Black  Sea  to  Austria.  Her  nephew,  the 
Emperor  Francis,  appointed  for  her  residence  the  small 
Castle  of  Hetzendorf,  immediately  adjoining  Schonbrunn. 
There  the  aged  Queen,  physically  spent,  intellectually 
weakening,  politically  dead,  found  enough  fire  in  her 
hatred  of  Bentinck  to  prepare  against  him  a  statement 
the  publication  of  which  was  to  expose  his  misdeeds  to 
the  statesmen  and  people  of  Europe.  She  completed 
her  work,  but  it  never  saw  the  light,  for  a  few  weeks 
later  the  Queen's  life  came  to  an  end.  She  died 
suddenly  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  September  18 14, 
apparently  from  apoplexy.  Thus  ended  a-  princess 
whose  misfortunes  and  misdeeds  were  equally  con- 
spicuous, whose  immorality  was  not  greater  than  that 
of  her  age  and  station,  whose  over-active  intelligence, 
guided  by  a  shallow  and  selfish  judgment,  produced 
great  calamities  at  a  time  of  trouble  and  revolution, 
whose  love  for  children  and  friends  was  balanced  by  a 
rancorous  hatred  of  those  she  chose  for  enemies  that 
made  her  name  a  threat  of  affliction  to  the  city  of 
Naples  for  many  years.  Her  death  was  not  mourned. 
Though  a  daughter  of  Maria  Theresa,  though  a  queen, 
though  in  misfortune,  the  Emperor  neither  attended 
her  obsequies  nor  assumed  mourning.  ''  The  Queen  of 
Naples  is  little  missed,''  wrote  Talleyrand  ;  "  her  death 


334  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

appears  to  have  relieved  Metternich."  ^  None  took 
notice  of  the  event,  and  a  few  weeks  after  her  death 
Ferdinand  married  anew.  But  when  the  news  reached 
the  Royal  Palace  of  Naples  in  the  midst  of  a  State 
ball,  Joachim  immediately  withdrew  and  ordered  the 
evening's  entertainment  to  be  concluded. 

Joachim  had  serious  cause  to  regret  the  death  of 
Mary  Caroline.  For  the  fact  that  to  dispossess  the 
French  occupant  of  the  throne  of  Naples  meant  the 
restoration  of  Ferdinand  and  his  queen  was  a  serious 
embarrassment  to  those  statesmen  who,  founding  their 
political  aims  on  the  plausible  basis  of  legidmity  and 
pre-established  rights,  derived  from  these  theories  the 
conclusion  that  Joachim  must  be  removed  from  the 
throne  of  Naples.  But  the  Bourbon  restoration  of 
1799  was  not  forgotten  ;  the  stains  of  blood  were  not 
yet  effaced.  The  Czar  Alexander  announced  in  un- 
equivocal terms  that  he  was  opposed  to  the  restoration 
of  the  "  butcher  king  "  to  the  throne  of  Naples  ;  and 
the  Emperor  Francis  and  Metternich,  though  strongly 
dissatisfied  with  Joachim's  conduct,  declared  that 
Austria  would  not  act  in  the  matter.  But  now  that 
Mary  Caroline  was  dead  a  great  obstacle  to  the 
Bourbon  restoration  was  removed. 