

1  A  dispatch  of  Castlereagh  was  written  from  Dijon  on  April  3rd  in  evidently 
complete  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  the  allied  armies  were  already  comfortably 
quartered  in  Paris. 


cHAP.x  MURAT'S  INCERTITUDES  319 

Austrian  brigadier  ;  he  had  incurred  the  well-founded 
distrust  of  Austria  and  Great  Britain  ;  he  had  earned 
the  hatred  and  contempt  of  France  and  of  Napoleon  ; 
he  had  forfeited  such  esteem  as  his  own  Neapolitans 
felt  for  him  ;  and  what  had  he  gained  ?  He  had  kept 
his  throne,  —  a  precarious  possession  compounded  of 
anxieties  and  remorse,  the  only  tottering  pinnacle  that 
remained  of  the  vast  edifice  of  Napoleon. 

The  Viceroy  and  Marshal  Bellegarde,  without  refer- 
ring to  the  King  of  Naples,  signed  a  military  convention 
at  Schiarino  Rizzeno  on  the  i6th  of  April  that  put  an 
end  to  military  operations  in  northern  Italy.  To  its 
terms  the  King  subsequently  acceded. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 
MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  105 1  :  army  returns;  1054,  Corsican 
legion  incident  ;  1057,  campaign  of  18 14. 

Printed  Books 

Bianco,  Ultimi  a^v^enimenti ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1 814-1 815;  Cantu, 
Cronistoria  ;  Carascosa,  Mems. ,-  Carrano,  Fita  di  G.  Pepe;  Castlereagh, 
Corr.  i  Cavaignac,  Mems.;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Consalvi,  Mems.;  De 
Dedem,  Mems.  ;  Desvernois,  Mems. ,-  Du  Casse,  Prince  Engine  ;  Fouche, 
Mems.  i  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina ;  Helfert,  Murat ;  Johnston, 
Bentinck  and  Murat,  Eng.  Hist.  Re'v.  xix. ;  Macirone,  Interesting  Facts; 
Memorie  sulla  Condotta  ;  MoRis ani,  Ricordi ;  Morning  Chronicle  ;  Miner'va 
Napolitana;  Napoleon,  Corr. ;  Orloff,  Mems.;  Pepe,  Mems.;  Pigna- 
telli-Strongoli,  Memorie;  Planat  de  la  Faye,  Prince  Eugene; 
Savelli,  Legion  Corse;  Schoell,  Recueil ;  Weil,  Prince  Eugene; 
Zucchi,  Memorie. 


CHAPTER   XI 

CONGRESS    OF    VIENNA 

Bourbon  restoration  —  Reaction  in  Italy — Neapolitans  evacuate — 
Their  misconduct  —  Clerical  agitation  —  Insubordination  of 
generals  —  Carbonaro  revolt — Joachim  returns  to  Naples — 
State  of  kingdom  —  Armaments  —  Generals'  intrigue  with 
Bentinck — Petition  Joachim — Pepe  arrested — Feeling  against 
Joachim  —  Bentinck  and  Castlereagh  —  Court  festivities  at 
Naples — Resettlement  of  Europe — Congress  decided — Austria 
and  Naples  —  Talleyrand  and  Joachim  —  Death  of  Mary 
Caroline — The  Czar  and  a  Bourbon  restoration  —  Talleyrand 
opposes  Naples  —  Neuville's  mission — Fagan  recalled  from 
Naples  —  Wellington's  attitude  —  Congress  opens  —  Naples 
excluded — Joachim's  excitement  —  Metternich  intervenes — 
Joachim  appeals  to  England — Saxon  question — The  Marches 
— Hostility  of  clerics — Joachim  offers  the  Marches  for  recog- 
nition— Talleyrand's  obstinacy — Polignac's  mission — Joachim 
challenges  France — Metternich's  note — Elba  —  Napoleon's 
position — Correspondence  with  Naples — Countess  Walewska 
— Madame  Mere  and  Joachim — British  at  Naples — Princess 
of  Wales — Oxford  arrested — Napoleon  leaves  Elba — News  at 
Naples — Joachim's  assurances — Change  of  attitude — Joachim 
joins  the  army. 