

Few  had  foreseen  that  Napoleon  would  prolong  his 
desperate  contest  with  combined  Europe  to  a  point  that 
would  involve  his  descent  from  the  throne.  His  fall 
meant  not  only  more  than  his  defeat,  but  something 
fundamentally  different.  Till  past  the  middle  of 
March,  Metternich,   whose   influence  in   such   a  crisis 

320 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  321 

would  have  been  decisive,  was  prepared  to  come  to 
terms  with  the  Emperor,  and  it  was  but  barely  two 
weeks  before  Napoleon's  abdication  that  a  Bourbon 
restoration  appeared  within  the  bounds  of  political 
probabilities.^  But  the  idea,  once  planted,  grew 
phenomenally  fast.  The  statesmen  of  the  Allied 
Powers  were  not  slow  to  realize  the  full  significance  of 
this  new  development,  and  perceived  that  they  had 
accomplished  more  than  the  defeat  of  Napoleon.  Not 
only  had  they  pulled  down  the  restless  conqueror  who 
had  carried  fire  and  sword  to  every  corner  of  Europe, 
but  also  such  of  the  principles  of  civil  equality  and  of 
political  freedom  that  had  survived  the  Republic  and 
been  carried  on  by  the  Empire.  It  was  immediately 
felt  that  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  meant  a  step 
back  towards  the  past. 

In  Italy  all  hopes  of  nationalization  vanished  with 
as  much  rapidity  as  might  have  the  smoke  from 
the  funeral  pyres  of  the  eloquent  proclamations, — 
Austrian,  British,  and  Neapolitan,  —  in  which  the 
Italians  were  called  on  to  rise  against  the  French 
tyranny  and  win  their  freedom.  Lombardy,  where 
more  than  once  an  independent  and  constitutional 
state  under  Eugene  Beauharnais  appeared  about  to 
come  into  existence,  was  occupied  by  Austria  ;  Pied- 
mont, with  the  addition  of  Genoa,  fell  to  the  King  of 
Sardinia ;  Tuscany  to  the  Grand  Duke.  Joachim 
unostentatiously  withdrew  his  troops  from  the  greater 
part  of  the  country  he  had  occupied.  On  the  28th  of 
April  he  concluded  a  military  convention  with  Belle- 
garde,  whereby  it  was  agreed  that  the  Austrians 
should  be  left  in  occupation  of  the  Duchies  and  lega- 
tions, while  the  Neapolitans  were  to  retain  possession 

1  De  VitroUes,  i.  128. 
VOL.  I  Y 


322  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  the  Marches,  including  Ancona,  Macerata,  and 
Fermo. 

Early  in  May  the  Neapolitan  evacuation  was  carried 
out,  much  to  the  relief  of  the  inhabitants.  The 
occupied  departments  had  been  denuded  of  money,  of 
provisions,  of  forage  by  the  successive  visitations  of 
French,  Austrians,  and  Neapolitans,  and  had  been 
thrown  into  a  state  of  great  ferment.  This  had  been 
especially  menacing  at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the 
Pope,  by  many,  if  not  by  most  of  the  inhabitants, 
considered  their  legitimate  sovereign,  temporal  and 
spiritual.  The  Neapolitans  in  particular  had  shown 
disgracefully  bad  discipline.  Deserters  were  numerous, 
at  one  time  several  hundreds  passing  one  point  in  a 
few  days.  Murder  and  pillage  were  frequent,  and 
some  regiments  were  indeed  little  better  than  criminal 
associations.  The  garrison  of  Rome  gave  their  general 
much  cause  for  anxiety.  Lavauguyon  reported  to  the 
King  that  the  behaviour  of  his  soldiers  was  ferocious, 
undisciplined,  and  frightful. 