

Of  all  the  provinces  he  had  overrun,  Joachim 
only  retained  possession  of  the  strip  of  Adriatic  coast- 
line that  ran  from  the  Neapolitan  border  to  the 
proximity  of  Bologna.  It  included  the  port  and 
fortress  of  Ancona,  and  it  gave  him  a  military  outlet 
into  the  valley  of  the  Po.  He  had  a  specious  claim  to 
it,  for  he  had  conquered  it  from  the  French  Empire  ; 
he  had  by  his  treaty  of  alliance  with  Austria  been 
assured  of  an  increase  of  territory,  and  his  military 
convention  with  Bellegarde  explicitly  assented  to  his 
present  occupation.  But  the  population  of  the  province 
was  not  content,  and  the  Papal  Government  claimed  a 
restoration  of  the  temporal  power  within  the  boundaries 
first  diminished  by  the  treaty  of  Tolentino  in  1797. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  323 

Clerical  influence  soon  began  to  assert  itself,  and 
was  at  no  pains  to  disguise  its  hostility  to  the  intruding 
government.  From  the  Marches  the  agitation  spread 
into  the  Abruzzi.  On  the  3rd  of  May,  at  Borrano,  a 
small  village  near  Civitella  del  Tronto,  a  hermit  named 
Fra  Agostino,  of  the  suppressed  order  of  the  Minori, 
attended  a  religious  solemnity  and  inflamed  the  people 
by  seditious  rumours,  making  them  shout  :  *'  Viva 
Ferdinando  !  Mora  Gioacchino  !  "  At  Compli  near  by, 
two  days  later,  the  parish  priest  gave  out  that  Napoleon 
was  dead  and  that  Joachim  soon  would  be,  to  the  great 
agitation  of  his  congregation.  These  disturbances  were 
promptly  allayed  by  the  arrest  of  their  authors,  but 
served  to  show  the  sensitive  state  of  public  opinion. 

That  there  was  no  reliance  to  be  placed  in  Nea- 
politan popular  support  had,  indeed,  been  amply 
demonstrated  in  the  course  of  the  war.  A  revolu- 
tion had  nearly  been  organized  among  the  secret 
societies  that  had  recently  become  so  popular.  The 
system  of  making  a  masonic  or  other  lodge  the 
cementing  bond  of  the  provincial  militia  had  extended 
widely  since  its  introduction  in  Calabria  during  the 
reign  of  King  Joseph ;  it  had  in  fact  infected  both  the 
army  and  militia.  Lodges  of  all  sorts  were  now 
numerous,  especially  those  of  the  Carbonari.  Their 
meetings  became  the  focus  of  political  discussion — it 
might  in  a  limited  sense  be  said  of  national  regeneration. 
In  1812-1813  a  considerable  immigration  had  set  in 
from  Sicily  to  Naples,  and  exaggerated  reports  of  the 
constitutional  system  introduced  into  that  island  by 
Bentinck  became  the  principal  subject  of  discussion 
of  the  lodges.  The  agitation  took  on  a  liberal  and 
nationalistic  aspect,  and  the  Sicilian  influence  was 
exerted  to  turn  it  as  far  as  possible  into  an  instrument 


324  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 