

for  the  overthrow  of  Joachim.     In  this  Bentinck  and 
the  SiciHans  were  not  altogether  successful. 

The  Carbonari  first  caused  anxiety  to  the  Govern- 
ment while  the  King  was  with  the  Grande  Armee  in 
Russia  ;  Caroline  supported  Maghella  in  an  attempt  to 
put  down  their  lodges,  but  could  not  altogether  sup- 
press them.  On  the  return  of  Joachim,  the  Minister 
of  Police,  who  was  himself  in  close  touch  with  Italian 
nationalism  and  masonic  circles,  appears  to  have  shifted 
his  position.  He  seems  to  have  judged  the  constitu- 
tional and  national  spirit  strong  enough  for  success,  and 
advised  the  King,  as  did  other  prominent  officials  and 
courtiers,  to  declare  frankly  for  Italian  independence. 
The  advice  was  bold,  yet  it  must  be  said  that  the  course 
Maghella  suggested  was  perhaps  not  less  promising  than 
that  actually  taken  by  the  King  in  1814  and  1815. 
The  result  of  this  advice  was  unfortunate  for  Maghella  ; 
the  Imperial  police  became  duly  informed  of  his  atti- 
tude ;  Napoleon  arranged  that  Maghella  should  be  sent 
to  Paris  on  an  ostensible  mission,  and  on  his  arrival 
promptly  had  him  arrested  and  placed  in  prison. 

Having  decided  not  to  make  use  of  this  secret 
agitation,  yet  unable  to  suppress  it,  the  Government 
tried  to  control  and  direct  it.  An  attempt  was  made, 
following  the  model  of  the  Napoleonic  policy,  to 
capture  the  Masonic  Grand  Lodges.  The  lodge  la 
Concorde  had  as  its  Grand  Master  Marshal  Jourdan 
(in  1 8 13),  while  its  members  comprised  many  civil 
functionaries.  Its  secretary  was  the  famous  impro- 
visatore  Gabriele  Rossetti,  later  to  become  perhaps 
the  most  ardent  of  all  Neapolitan  liberals.  But  now, 
in  1 8 13,  the  lodges,  although  filled  with  police  agents, 
began  to  show  symptoms  of  revolt,  that  of  Giuseppina 
taking  a  prominent  part.     Through  1 8 1 3  the  agitation 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  325 

increased,  and  spread  into  every  rank  of  the  army  ;  in 
the  early  part  of  18 14  it  had  become  dangerous.  At 
a  review  held  just  before  the  troops  marched  to  the 
north,  a  salute  with  blank  cartridges  was  ordered,  but 
a  bullet  was  fired  by  a  Carbonaro  that  nearly  hit  the 
King.  Joachim  at  once  rode  up  to  the  line,  com- 
manded the  reloading  of  the  muskets,  and,  facing  the 
men,  ordered  a  second  volley.  It  passed  harmlessly 
over  his  head. 

Coincident  with  the  King's  departure  for  the  army 
and  the  intriguing  of  his  generals  at  Reggio,  con- 
stitutional agitation  became  more  active  at  Naples,  and 
early  in  February  of  18 14  a  Grand  Lodge  according 
to  the  Scotch  Rite  was  formed  in  the  city  of  Naples 
that  attempted  to  assume  control  of  the  Carbonaro  and 
other  influences  at  work  against  the  Government.  But 
the  only  movement  that  took  place  was  in  the  provinces. 
In  the  last  week  of  March  an  armed  insurrection  broke 
out  in  the  Abruzzi  ;  in  the  space  of  a  few  hours  nearly 
the  whole  province  rose  in  arms.  The  suddenness  and 
unanimity  with  which  the  local  militia  organizations 
came  out  was  no  less  remarkable  than  the  extra- 
ordinarily divergent  aims  announced  by  the  suddenly 
revealed  leaders  of  the  insurrection.  They  represented 
no  less  than  four  distinct  political  ideals.  Some  leaders 
declared  for  Ferdinand,  others  for  a  Republic,  others  for 
a  constitutional  and  independent  government,  others  for 
the  Holy  Faith.  The  whole  province  of  Teramo  was 
controlled  by  the  insurgents  ;  and  it  looked  as  though 
the  Abruzzi  might  be  lost.  Manhes,  who  as  a  French 
officer  had  resigned  his  official  position  at  Naples, 
declined  the  mission  of  subduing  the  province,  but 
General  Montigny  restored  order  promptly,  though 
not  without  the  exercise  of  considerable  severity.     In 