


326  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Calabria,  where  the  Carbonari  had  been  in  close  relation 
with  Sicilian  emissaries  since  the  days  of  Capobianco,  an 
insurrection  occurred  at  Polistena,  south  of  Monteleone. 
There  in  a  few  days  several  thousand  armed  militia- 
men assembled,  their  banners  inscribed  Indipendenza 
d'  Italia ;  but  General  Desvernois,  in  command  of  the 
province,  speedily  dispersed  them  and  restored  order. 

On  his  return  from  the  army  to  his  capital,  there- 
fore, Joachim  found  matters  only  superficially  quiet. 
Yet  the  kingdom  was  undoubtedly  more  prosperous 
than  at  any  former  period  of  its  history,  showing,  after 
several  years  of  comparative  quiet,  the  effects  of  the  vast 
transformation  and  improved  administrative  methods 
introduced  by  the  French.  For  the  first  time  in  its 
history  the  kingdom  of  Naples  possessed  a  semblance 
of  national  institutions  :  an  army,  a  system  of  education, 
uniform  laws  and  administration.  For  three  years  a 
scheme  of  commercial  accounts  had  been  in  thorough 
working  order,  and  the  State  finances,  notwithstanding 
the  exceptional  military  expenditure,  were  steadily 
improving.  Cedolas  had  risen  to  '^^.  Industry  and 
agriculture  were  encouraged.  Cotton  -  growing  was 
showing  good  results  in  quantity  and  quality,  as  also 
the  beet-sugar  industry.  But  unfortunately  for  Naples, 
industry  and  commerce  had  to  be  subordinated  to 
political  and  military  considerations.  The  army  was 
still  being  rapidly  increased, — to  70,000  men  in  July, — 
and  the  money  expended  in  this  way  and  in  Court 
pageants  necessitated  larger  budgets.  The  tax-payer 
resented  this  the  more  owing  to  the  severity  meted 
out  to  him,  and  to  the  indulgence  shown  to  a  soldiery 
whose  thieving  and  pillaging  propensities  were  too 
often  unpleasantly  demonstrated  to  his  cost. 

The    bad    conduct    and     insubordination     of    the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  327 

Neapolitan  generals  was  no  less  than  that  of  the  men. 
After  the  close  of  the  campaign,  Carascosa  had  been 
left  in  command  by  the  King  ;  he  soon  called  a  meeting 
of  the  generals  at  his  headquarters  of  S.  Donino. 
Now  was  the  time,  they  thought,  for  securing  a  con- 
stitution for  Naples.  Carascosa  and  D'  Ambrosio  were 
for  obtaining  the  support  of  Bentinck,  and  Filangieri 
was  deputed  to  wait  on  him  with  the  proposal  that 
the  generals  should  be  furnished  with  fifty  thousand 
pounds  sterling,  the  pay  of  the  army  for  two  months, 
to  enable  them  to  march  on  Naples  and  proclaim  a 
constitution.     This  proposition  Bentinck  rejected.^ 

Feeling  unable  to  carry  the  army  without  money, 
the  generals  then  fell  back  on  a  less  drastic  policy  :  they 
drew  up  a  petition  for  the  grant  of  a  constitution  and 
the  dismissal  of  all  the  French  in  the  employ  of  the 
Government.  This  petition  was  signed  by  Carascosa, 
Filangieri,  D'  Ambrosio,  F.  Pepe,  G.  Pepe,  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli,  Pignatelli  -  Cerchiara,  Arcovito,  Medici, 
Petrinelli,  D'  Aquino,  and  Colletta.  This  comparatively 
mild  form  of  insubordination  did  not,  however,  satisfy 
the  more  ardent  spirits.  On  the  army's  taking  up 
quarters  in  the  Marches,  G.  Pepe  with  his  brigade  was 
stationed  at  Pesaro.  He  opened  communications  with 
his  Carbonaro  friends  in  the  Abruzzi  with  a  view  to 
a  new  rising,  and  tried  to  induce  the  other  generals 
stationed  about  Ancona  to  participate.  But  this  time 
the  plot  was  denounced  ;  Pepe  was  promptly  placed 
under  arrest  and  sent  to  Naples. 