

Castlereagh  and  the  British  Cabinet  were  convinced 
of  Joachim's  treachery,  and  could  see  no  reason  for  not 
putting  a  forcible  end  to  his  tenure  of  the  throne  of 
Naples.  Yet  the  attitude  of  the  Opposition,  the  wide- 
spread criticisms  of  Lord  William  Bentinck's  conduct, 
and  Metternich's  firmness  in  adhering  to  his  engage- 
ments, made  a  temporary  acquiescence  in  the  existing 
situation  the  most  convenient  course.  Bentinck  had 
clearly  gone  to  the  length  of  disobeying  positive  instruc- 
tions, as  in  certain  proceedings  of  his  at  Genoa,  and  in 
not  sending  one  of  his  officers  to  serve  on  Joachim's 
staff.  He  was  now  entirely  out  of  favour,  and  the 
attitude  of  the  Ministers  towards  him  will  appear  from 
an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Castlereagh  to  Liverpool  : — 

If  Bonaparte  had  been  enabled  to  maintain  himself  in  the 
field  in  France,  between  Murat's  rascality  and  Bellegarde's 
timidity,  and  Lord  William  Bentinck's  impracticability  and 
Whiggism,  which  seems  to  follow  him  everywhere,  we  should 
have  been  in  danger  of  a  serious  disappointment  in  that 
quarter.2 

^  Metternich  to  Castlereagh,  May  26,  1814;  Bianchi,  i.  333. 
2  Castlereagh,  Corr.  ix.  509. 


330  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

It  was  probably  with  a  sense  of  relief  that  Castlereagh 
received,  early  in  May,  an  application  for  leave  of 
absence  from  Bentinck.  The  request  was  immediately 
acceded  to. 

Yet  the  removal  of  Joachim's  greatest  enemy  from 
the  scene  hardly  served  to  make  Great  Britain  less 
hostile  than  before.  Her  diplomatic  representative  at 
Palermo,  a  Court,  consistently  referred  to  Joachim  as 
an  usurper  ;  the  Quarterly  Review  and  other  publica- 
tions demanded  the  King's  instant  removal  from  his 
throne  ;  Joachim's  agent  in  England,  Ancillotti,  could 
not  obtain  a  hearing  ;  and  no  other  representative  save 
a  consular  agent  named  Fagan  was  sent  to  represent 
Great  Britain  at  Naples.  It  will  soon  appear  that  his 
functions  were  not  intended  to  be  anything  more  than 
commercial. 

Joachim  and  Caroline  resolved  to  put  the  best  face 
on  this  threatening  position.  Never  had  Naples  seen  a 
more  festive  Court.  In  the  halls  and  along  the  terraces 
of  Capodimonte,  among  the  princely  villas  that  crown 
the  crest  from  the  Vomero  to  Posilipo,  dancing,  dining, 
singing,  and  merry-making  went  gaily  on, — brocades, 
cloth  of  gold,  embroideries,  rouge,  feathers,  and  jewels, 
deceived  the  eyes  of  those  who  could  not  perceive  that 
the  hearts  beneath  were  stricken  with  anguish  at  the 
thought  of  the  political  volcano  rumbling  below  their 
feet.  Light  feet  and  heavy  hearts,  sweet  smiles  and 
double  thoughts,  glittering  gems  and  ruin  stalking  near, 
— and  now  what  is  there  left  of  all  the  pageant }  under 
a  glass  case  at  the  Museum  of  San  Martino  a  few  worn 
tufts  of  light-blue  plumes,  a  velvet  cloak  embroidered 
with  golden  bees,  once  worn  by  Joachim  ;  and  on  the 
wall  facing  them  the  death-like  waxen  mask  of  Ferdinand 
vacantly  staring  at  the  few  surviving  relics  of  his  great 