


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  331 

competitor.  Pepe,  an  unwilling  participator  in  these 
revels,  has  left  some  record  of  them,  has  narrated  with 
mournful  indignation  how  at  the  villa  occupied  by 
Pauline  Bonaparte  on  the  Vomero,  his  talents,  panting 
for  nationalism,  constitutionalism,  and  such  matters, 
had  to  comply  with  the  Princess'  decrees  and  turn  to 
the  degrading  occupation  of  playing  pet  its  paquets  with 
the  ladies  of  her  suite. 

Besides  holding  court  pageants,  hunts,  balls,  and 
reviews,  Joachim  made  more  serious  bids  for  popu- 
larity. Trade  was  encouraged,  the  tax  on  cabotage 
was  removed,  and,  as  a  partial  concession  to  the 
nationalists,  it  was  decreed  that  to  hold  office  under 
the  Government,  Neapolitan  birth  or  naturalization  was 
essential. 

While  Joachim  thus  displayed  his  regal  splendour 
and  increased  his  military  strength,  the  statesmen  of 
the  four  great  Powers  that  had  conquered  France 
turned  their  attention  to  the  resettlement  of  the  affairs 
of  Europe.  Much  readjustment  had  taken  place  spon- 
taneously on  the  retreat  of  the  French  armies.  Thus 
in  Italy,  notwithstanding  the  proclamations  and  avowed 
policy  of  Bentinck  and  other  British  agents,  Lombardy 
reverted  to  Austria,  as  in  1796,  and  Piedmont  to  Sar- 
dinia. But  other  territorial  matters  remained  unsettled. 
Austria  and  Naples  were  both  in  actual  possession  of 
territory  once  the  Pope's ;  the  duchy  of  Parma,  assigned  to 
the  Empress  Maria  Louisa  by  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau, 
the  city  of  Genoa,  and  other  points,  gave  rise  to  con- 
flicting claims.  As  in  Italy,  so  in  other  parts  of  Europe, 
notably  in  Saxony  and  in  Poland,  difficult  questions  of 
possession  and  right  arose  that  could  not  be  settled 
without  prolonged  discussion.     The  Powers  therefore 


332  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

decided,  when  signing  peace  with  the  new  government 
of  France,  that  a  Congress  should  assemble  in  the 
autumn  at  Vienna  to  dispose  of  all  debated  territorial 
questions.  Now  it  was  evident  that  this  so-called 
European  Congress  was  something  different  from  what  it 
professed  to  be.  It  was  in  reality  a  conference  held  for 
the  purpose  of  parcelling  out  among  the  conquerors  of 
Napoleon  the  profits  of  their  victory,  and  it  appeared 
probable  that  the  Congress  would  do  little  else  than 
register  the  decrees  of  Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia, 
with  due  propitiation  of  Great  Britain  and  Bourbon 
France.  The  attention  of  every  monarch  and  people 
of  Europe  was  soon  concentrated  on  the  diplomatic 
proceedings  at  Vienna,  and  none  more  than  Joachim's 
and  his  subjects'. 

The  King  of  Naples'  best  guarantee  that  his  interests 
would  be  protected  at  the  Congress  was  the  goodwill 
of  Austria.  With  that  Power  he  had  a  treaty  of  amity 
and  alliance.  With  Prince  Metternich,  Queen  Caroline 
retained  some  relations  of  friendship  and  some  influence. 
To  strengthen  this  position  against  the  hostility  of 
Great  Britain  and  the  intrigues  of  the  Bourbon  Powers 
and  of  Queen  Mary  Caroline,  now  residing  at  the 
Castle  of  Hetzendorf  near  Vienna,  Joachim  sought  the 
support  of  one  who  had  formerly  been  his  friend, 
Talleyrand,  now  chief  director  of  the  foreign  policy 
of  his  most  Christian  Majesty  Louis  XVIII.  Secret 
agents  passed  between  the  two,  though  the  nature  of 
the  communications  is  unknown.  It  appears  probable, 
however,  that  financial  proposals  were  made  to  Talley- 
rand in  connection  with  his  Neapolitan  principality  of 
Benevento,  and  with  his  possible  services  at  the 
approaching  Congress  at  which  he  was  to  represent 
France.      Perhaps  some  pecuniary  transactions  did  in 