

Joachim  did  not  treat  his  refractory  general  with 
the  severity  that  might  have  proved  most  salutary. 
For    Pepe,    in    his    unmilitary,    insubordinate    fashion, 

1  a  Court  to  Castlereagh,  July  lo,  1820,  Foreign  Off.  Sicily,  90  j   Pepe,  Relation, 
Pamphleteer,  xxiii.  314  j  Pepe,  Memi.  ii.  2,  3. 


328  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

unfortunately  represented  that  embryo  of  public 
opinion  that  the  French  rule  had  created  in  Naples, 
and  without  the  support  of  which  Joachim  could  not 
hope  to  survive.  That  public  opinion,  even  though 
nationalist  and  constitutional  in  character,  was  all  that 
Joachim  had  to  lean  on.  He  thought,  and  doubtless 
correctly,  that  he  could  neither  afford  to  punish  Pepe 
nor  yet  to  trust  him  out  of  his  sight.  He  there- 
fore reproached  him  for  his  conduct,  explained  to 
him  that  it  was  quite  impossible,  in  view  of  the  reac- 
tionary course  on  which  the  Allies  were  embarking, 
that  he  should  openly  defy  them  by  proclaiming  a  con- 
stitution, and,  for  the  rest,  kept  the  general  dancing 
attendance  on  the  Court  and  safely  away  from  his 
troops. 

Joachim  had  certainly  good  reason  for  wishing  to 
secure  the  goodwill  of  his  army,  for  it  was  evident  that, 
should  the  full  details  of  his  intrigues  with  the  Viceroy 
and  Fouche  become  known  to  the  Allies,  he  might  well 
have  to  fight  for  his  throne.  Prince  Eugene,  Napoleon, 
Fouche,  Carascosa,  Zucchi,  numerous  staff  officers 
might  easily  reveal  a  part  or  the  whole  of  a  secret  that 
was  already  well-nigh  pierced.^ 

The  feeUng  against  him  was  so  bitter  that  at  the 
close  of  military  operations,  on  his  sending  the  Grand 
Cross  of  the  Order  of  the  Two  Sicilies  to  Field- 
Marshal  Bellegarde,  the  Austrian  general  returned  it. 
And  if  he  was  viewed  with  such  disfavour  by 
Austrians,  he  stood  even  worse  with  others.  It  was 
in  fact  only  Austrian  protection,  only  Metternich's 
determination  to  abide  by  his  treaty,  that  saved  Naples 


^  It  is  remarkable  that  so  little  of  the  proceedings  of  Joachim  became  known. 
It  was  not  till  many  years  later  that  the  publication  of  the  correspondence  of  Prince 
Eugene  by  Du  Casse  gave  the  first  substantial  historical  basis  of  these  events. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  329 

from  immediate  attack.  So  hostile  to  Joachim  was  the 
attitude  of  Great  Britain,  that  before  the  end  of  May 
Metternich  was  compelled  to  address  a  strongly  worded 
note  to  Castlereagh,  in  which  the  British  statesman  was 
reminded  that  Great  Britain  had  acceded  to  the  treaty 
of  Prague  (July  27,  18 13),  whereby  it  was  stipulated, 
among  other  things,  that  Austria  should  have  full  power 
to  conclude  a  treaty  guaranteeing  possession  of  the 
throne  of  Naples  to  Joachim  and  to  promise  him  an 
indemnity  in  return  for  his  assistance  ;  and,  further 
(Art.  30)5  that  Austria  should  have  a  free  hand  in  the 
resettlement  of  Italy .^ 