

On  the  30th  of  September  a  diplomatic  conference 
was  held,  preliminary  to  the  actual  meeting  of  the 
Congress.  At  this  conference  both  France  and  Spain 
were  represented,  as  well  as  the  four  great  Allies,  and  the 
question  of  Naples,  the  only  unrecovered  Bourbon 
possession,  was  immediately  raised  by  them.  Labrador, 
representing  Spain,  declared  himself  strongly  against 
the  retention  by  Joachim  of  the  throne  of  Naples,  and 
Talleyrand,  with  sublime  disregard  for  the  past,  stated 

^  Talleyrand,  Corr.  hied.  4. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  335 

his  opinion  that  no  guarantee  of  his  throne  should  ever 
have  been  given  to  Joachim,  and  that  in  no  event  could 
France  treat  such  a  guarantee  as  binding. 

This  pronouncement  of  the  restored  Bourbon 
monarchs  in  favour  of  the  youngest  branch  of  their 
House  was  the  more  threatening  because  closely  accom- 
panied by  steps  that  portended  military  action.  Colonel 
Hyde  de  Neuville,  a  staunch  Bourbonist  proscribed 
under  the  Empire,  was  sent  to  Turin  on  a  secret 
mission  by  the  French  Court.  He  arrived  there  early 
in  November  ;  his  object  was  to  secure  the  co-operation 
of  Sardinia  with  France,  Spain,  and  Sicily  in  an 
expedition  having  the  dethronement  of  Joachim  for  its 
object.  The  Sardinian  Government  appears  to  have 
referred  the  matter  for  the  advice  of  Metternich,  who 
declared  that  he  would  not  permit  French  troops  to 
operate  in  those  parts  of  central  Italy  occupied  by 
Austria.  Metternich  thereupon  formally  notified  the 
French  and  Neapolitan  Governments  that  no  military 
movements  on  either  part  would  be  permitted,  and 
with  this  Hyde  de  Neuville's  mission  came  to  an  end. 

The  hopes  of  the  Sicilian  Court,  foiled  in  this  first 
attempt,  now  turned  on  England,  whose  hostility  to 
Joachim  was  only  too  evident.  Fagan,  the  British 
Consul,  attempting  to  encroach  on  the  diplomatic 
field,  had  entered  into  a  correspondence  with  Gallo  in 
the  course  of  which  he  expressed  "  his  desire  to  con- 
solidate the  good  understanding  existing  between  the 
British  Government  and  that  of  his  Neapolitan 
Majesty  "  ;  whereupon  a  Court  at  once  recalled  him  to 
Palermo,  leaving  a  subordinate  official  in  charge  of  the 
consular  office  at  Naples.  Even  more  hostile  and 
far  more  influential  than  a  Court  was  Wellington. 
He  proposed  to  Castlereagh  in  September  that  Great 


336  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Britain  should  proceed  against  Joachim  by  force  of 
arms,  but  that  statesman,  in  view  of  the  relations  of 
Great  Britain  with  Austria,  was  hardly  prepared  to  go  to 
such  lengths.  His  position  was  fairly  stated  when 
he  declared  to  Campochiaro,  the  Neapolitan  envoy  at 
Vienna,  that  as  Joachim  had  not  fulfilled  his  obligations 
to  the  Allies  the  question  of  Naples  must  be  considered 
open  for  the  deliberation  of  the  Congress.  To  Talleyrand 
Castlereagh  promised  his  general  support,  though  not 
without  some  reservation  as  to  the  attitude  of  Parliament. 
He  probably  hoped,  as  did  Wellington,  that  with  such 
a  concentration  of  diplomatic  talent  as  there  was  in 
Vienna  some  method  of  separating  Joachim  from  the 
throne  of  Naples  would  be  discovered. 