

On  the  1st  of  November  the  Congress  formally 
opened,  one  of  its  earliest  decisions  being  that  the 
representatives  of  the  King  of  Naples  should  not  be 
admitted  to  the  deliberations.  Talleyrand  followed  this 
up  by  claiming  once  more  that  the  question  of  Naples 
should  be  discussed.  Metternich  wished  on  the  con- 
trary to  postpone  it,  and  was  in  a  measure  successful, 
for  the  Congress  decided  to  turn  its  attention  to  the 
territorial  readjustment  of  northern  Europe  before 
approaching  the  affairs  of  Italy. 

Joachim  was  represented  at  Vienna  by  Campochiaro 
and  Cariati,  together  with  certain  unofficial  personages, 
such  as  Roccaromana  and  Filangieri.  The  exclusion  of 
his  accredited  representatives  from  the  Congress,  and 
the  cool  and  even  hostile  reception  they  met  with  in 
every  quarter  greatly  alarmed  him.  The  King  became 
very  excited,  made  parade  to  the  Austrian  Minister  of 
his  large  military  resources,  and  threatened  to  invade 
the  Papal  States,  until  Mier  had  to  declare  that  any 
movement    of    the    Neapolitan    troops    towards    the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  337 

interior  of  Italy  would  be  viewed  by  Austria  as  a  casus 
belli.  To  moderate  the  irritation  of  the  King,  however, 
Metternich  instructed  Mier  to  explain  that  the  posi- 
tion of  Campochiaro  was  no  different  from  that  of  other 
delegates,  such  as  those  of  Sardinia  or  Bavaria,  while 
Filangieri  was  intrusted  with  an  autograph  letter  from 
the  Emperor  to  the  King.  On  receipt  of  this  letter 
Joachim  at  once  saw  Mier,  and  protested  to  him  his 
fidelity  to  the  Austrian  alliance.  At  the  same  time 
Metternich  insisted  on  the  self-evident  truth  that  on 
Austrian  support  alone  could  Joachim  rely,  that  all 
Europe  was  against  him,  and  that  the  slightest 
imprudence  on  his  part  might  be  fatal. 

"The  existence  of  the  King,"  wrote  Metternich  to  Mier, 
"  excites  opposition  in  all  Europe  ;  if  we  abandon  him,  he  will 
fall.  .  .  .  Any  efforts  we  might  make  to  persuade  the  Bourbon 
Courts  to  recognise  the  King  would  be  in  vain  ;  but  strong  in 
our  support,  in  direct  relations  with  our  other  allies,  the  King 
of  Naples  may  hope  for  the  best  if  he  is  wise  enough  to 
conduct  himself  calmly  and  prudently  ;  but  one  imprudent  act 
may  lose  all.  .  .  ."  ^ 

For  Joachim  to  gain  the  goodwill  of  Great  Britain 
and  the  Bourbon  Courts  appeared  impossible,  though 
even  that  was  not  left  unattempted.  A  secret  agent, 
Saint  Elie,  made  fruitless  overtures  in  Paris.  From 
Naples  Gallo  forwarded  to  Lord  Liverpool  an  autograph 
letter  from  Joachim  to  the  Prince  Regent,  making  an 
appeal  for  recognition,  while  at  Vienna  Campochiaro 
and  Cariati  presented  a  formal  note  to  Castlereagh. 
In  this,  after  referring  to  the  formal  concurrence 
of  Great  Britain  in  the  Austrian  policy,  and  to  the 
treaty  between  Austria  and  Naples,  the  British  Cabinet 
was    invited    to   enter   into    a    treaty    of  peace.     The 