

Although  Joachim  was  now  resolved  to  trust  his 
fortunes  to  the  ordeal  of  the  sword,  he  was  not  willing 
to  declare  himself  prematurely.  On  leaving  Naples  to 
join  his  army  he  sent  the  Count  de  Bauffremont  to 
Napoleon  to  inform  him  that  he  might  rely  on  his 
assistance,  but  it  was  not  till  the  end  of  March  that 

350 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  351 

he  heard  of  the  Emperor's  triumphant  entry  into  the 
capital  on  the  20th  and  that  Napoleon  wrote  to  the 
King  announcing  his  success  and  assuring  him  of  his 
support.  Yet  as  early  as  the  1 2th  of  March,  Maghella, 
who  had  returned  from  Paris  a  few  months  before,  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  poHce  department,  and  on  the 
17th  Manhes  was  appointed  military  governor  of  the 
city  of  Naples.  Both  these  appointments  suggested  that 
the  Government  had  serious  work  on  hand.  Mier's 
endeavours  to  maintain  the  alliance,  perhaps  supported 
by  the  influence  of  Caroline,  were  powerless  against  the 
influence  of  the  Bonaparte  party,  headed  by  the  Princess 
Borghese  and  the  ex-King  of  Westphalia. 

The  numbers  of  the  Neapolitan  army  had  risen  from 
70,000  in  July  1 8 14  to  85,000  at  the  end  of  that  year, 
and  at  that  figure  had  remained  about  stationary. 
Recruiting  had  been  especially  active  on  the  frontier, 
where  the  generals  received  orders  not  to  give  up 
Austrian  deserters  and  to  secure  as  many  soldiers  as 
possible  from  that  source  and  from  the  disbanded  army 
of  the  ex-kingdom  of  Italy.  In  the  Marches,  provincial 
legions  had  been  organized.  Maghella  was  sent  on  a 
secret  mission  to  stir  up  sentiments  favourable  to 
Joachim  at  Ancona,  and  favours,  titles,  and  decorations 
were  showered  on  all  whose  influence  could  be  secured 
for  the  Government. 

As  early  as  January  Neapolitan  troops  were  being 
concentrated  on  the  Roman  border,  and  when  in  March 
a  sudden  crisis  arose,  the  NeapoHtan  army  was  already 
in  position  and  as  fit  for  war  as  was  possible  under  the 
circumstances.  On  the  1 3th  of  March  Joachim  secretly 
issued  orders  for  mobilization  and  by  the  end  of  the 
month  he  knew  that  Napoleon  was  in  full  possession 
of  the  government  of  France.     Joachim  now  dropped 


352  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  mask,  and  without  waiting  to  hear  whether  the 
Emperor  intended  war  or  peace,  whether  his  co- 
operation would  be  more  useful  at  any  other  time  or  in 
any  other  manner,  he  straightway  ordered  his  columns 
across  the  frontier. 

The    warlike    steps    of   the    King    of  Naples  were 
explained   according   to  the  formulas  of  diplomacy  by 
Campochiaro  to  Metternich.     He  stated,  as  is  usual  in 
such  passes,  that  Naples  was  still  as  anxious  as  formerly 
to  maintain  peace  and  to  carry  out  all  her  engagements. 
But  the  Austrian  note  announcing  the  concentration  of 
150,000  men  on  the  Po  was  of  so  threatening  a  nature, 
and  so  contrary  to  Austria's  engagements,  that  the  King 
in  order  to  protect  his  interests  felt  bound  to  reoccupy 
those  positions  south  of  the  Po  which  he  had  held  the 
year  before.     The  answer  of  Metternich  to  this  barely 
veiled  declaration  of  war  was  immediate  and  categorical. 
He  addressed  a  note   to  the  Neapolitan  Minister,  in 
which  he  shortly  covered  the  diplomatic  ground  and 
finished  by  stating  that  the  crossing  of  the  frontier  by 
King  Joachim's  troops  was  an  act  of  hostility,  in  con- 
sequence  of  which   he   inclosed    the   passports  of  the 
Neapolitan  plenipotentiaries.     At  the  same  time  Count 
Mier  received  a  note  from  the  Queen  announcing  that 
hostilities  had  begun  and  that  his  passports  would  be 
sent.     This  was  on  the  3rd  of  April. 