


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  349 

tion  and  half  measures  which  he  had  been  drawn  into 
the  preceding  year.  Before  Napoleon  had  reached 
Paris,  Joachim  left  Naples  to  join  his  army.  The 
Monitore^  however,  merely  announced  that  the  King 
had  left  for  the  Abruzzi  on  a  tour  of  inspection,  and 
might  be  absent  several  weeks. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 

Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,  xxv.  1052  :  disturbances  in  Abruzzi,  returns, 
etc.  :  1054,  1057,  1058  :  campaign  of  1814  and  occupation  of  the 
Marches  ;  2082,  2083  :  immigration  from  Sicily  in  18 12-18 13. 

SociETA  Patria,  D'  Ambrosio  MS.  :  narrates  the  campaign  of  18 15,  and 
was  apparently  made  large  and  unacknowledged  use  of  by  Colletta  for  his 
narrative  of  the  same  event. 

Mary  Caroline  Memoirs  :  for  a  few  points  of  subsidiary  interest. 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  30  and  90  :  various. 

Printed  Books 

Beauchamp,  Hist,  des  c  amp  ague  s ;  Bertholdi,  Mems. ;  Bianchi, 
Diplomazia  Europj  Bianchini,  Finanze  di  Napoli ;  Bianco,  Ultimi 
a'wenimenti ;  Brit.  State  Papers,  1814-1815;  Cacciatore,  Esame ; 
Canosa,  Piffari  di  montagna ;  CANTtr,  Cronistoria ;  Carte  Segrete  della 
polizia  Austriaca ;  Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Consalvi, 
Corr.  i  Desvernois,  Mems. ,-  Fouche,  Mems. ;  Hansard,  Pari.  Debates, 
xxxi.  ;  Helfert,  Konigin  Karolina  ;  Helfert,  Murat ;  Inaugurazione  del 
G.\  O .-.  al  Rito  Scozz.-.;  Jeaffreson,  ^een  of  Naples ;  Las  Cases, 
Memorial;  Mac i rone,  Interesting  Facts ;  Melzi,  Memorie  ;  Memorie  sulla 
Condotta ;  Meneval,  Mems.;  Metternich,  Mems.;  Monitor e  Napolitano ; 
Orloff,  Mems.;  Pasquier,  Mems.;  Pelissier,  Registre  de  Vile  d'Elbe; 
Pepe,  Mems. ;  Pepe,  Relation,  Pamphleteer,  xxiii.  ;  Planat  de  la  Faye, 
Prince  Engine;  ^arterly  Renjie<vj,  xii.  ;  Quintavalle,  Notizia  storica ; 
Savary,  Mems. ;  S6gur,  Mems. ;  Tableau  des  Memhres  de  la  R  /,  L  .-. 
Joseph  la  Concorde;  Talleyrand,  Corr.  in^dite  {Pallain) ;  Tonelli, 
Bre-ue  idea ;  Vitrolles,  Mems.;  Wellington,  Suppl.  Dispatches;  Witt, 
Mem.  secrets ;  Zurlo,  Rapporto,  1 8 1 o-i  8 1 1 . 


CHAPTER    XII 

murat's  last  campaign 

Joachim  prepares  for  war  —  The  army  —  Hostilities  begin  — 
Diplomatic  relations  broken  —  Council  held  —  Joachim's 
plans — His  effective  strength — Movement  in  two  columns 
— Advance  from  Ancona — Bologna  occupied — Proclamation 
of  Rimini  —  Italian  national  convention  —  Public  apathy 
— Fight  on  the  Panaro — Attack  on  Occhiobello — March  of 
the  Guard — Austrian  movements — Carascosa  at  Modena — 
Carpi — Bianchi  at  Modena — Joachim  retreats — Council  of 
war — Guard  in  Tuscany — Retreat — Frimont  at  Bologna — 
Council  of  war — Bianchi  at  Florence — Joachim  on  the  Ronco 
— Demoralization  of  Neapolitans — Bianchi's  march — Caras- 
cosa faces  Neipperg — Fight  at  Monte  Milone — Battle  of 
Tolentino — Defeat  and  retreat — Belliard  joins  Joachim — 
Policy  of  Great  Britain — Bentinck  warns  Joachim — Castle- 
reagh's  letters  produced  to  Parliament — Dissatisfaction  at 
Naples — The  clergy — National  party — Constitution — Bour- 
bon restoration  decided  —  Caroline's  measures — Joachim 
arrives  at  Naples — Caroline  negotiates  with  Campbell — Her 
courage — Convention  of  Casa  Lanza — Scenes  of  last  days — 
Escape  of  Joachim — Caroline  goes  on  board  the  Tremendous — 
Prince  Leopold  enters  Naples. 