

^  victor  Emmanuel  to  St.  Marsan,  Nov.  2,  18 14  5  Bianchi,  i.  388, 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  343 

any  precise  idea  as  to  where  to   put  him,"  he  wrote. 
"  I  have  suggested  one  of  the  Azores."  ^ 

As  the  sittings  of  the  Congress  continued,  this  feeling 
became  more  marked ;  yet  it  cannot  be  said  that 
Napoleon's  conduct  excused  it,  for  he  gave  no  sign, 
merely  observing  with  keen  eye  that  political  horizon 
the  danger  signals  of  which  he  was  so  skilled  in  inter- 
preting. With  the  continent  of  Italy,  and  with  Naples 
in  particular,  he  entertained  but  little  correspondence. 
Pauline  Bonaparte  Princess  Borghese,  unswervingly 
staunch  to  her  brother  in  his  adversity,  had  visited  him 
at  Elba  and  thence  passed  to  Naples,  where  she  occupied 
a  villa  on  the  Vomero.  While  at  Elba  she  received 
communications  for  Napoleon  from  Joachim,  in  which 
the  King  professed  vague  sentiments  of  devotion  to  the 
Emperor.  She  doubtless  carried  with  her  to  Naples 
some  verbal  or  other  message  from  the  Emperor  to  his 
sister  Caroline,  and  perhaps  a  letter  of  some  sort  from 
Napoleon  to  Joachim.^  A  little  later  the  Countess 
Walewska,  a  great  favourite  of  Napoleon's,  with  her 
child,  afterwards  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  Napoleon 
III.,  visited  Elba  and  thence  proceeded  to  Naples,  this 
being  the  possible  and  sure  vehicle  of  any  message  that 
the  Emperor  might  have  wished  to  send.  Even  more 
direct  communications  between  Elba  and  Naples  passed. 
For  Elba  possessed  a  number  of  small  vessels  flying  the 
flag  of  its  sovereign/  and  these  were  not  infrequently 
seen  along  the  Neapolitan  coasts  ;  while  direct  evidence 
exists  that  dispatches  were  sent  from  Elba  to  Naples  on 
Neapolitan  vessels.  Yet  on  the  whole  it  does  not 
appear  probable  that  Napoleon  concerted  any  political 


^   Corr.  ined.  43. 

2  Pacca  to  Consalvi,  Dec.  3,  18145   Consalvi,  Corr.  175. 

2  White  and  red  stripe  with  three  golden  bees. 


344  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

scheme  with  Joachim  during  his  sojourn  at  Elba,  or 
entered  into  direct  communication  with  him  until  just 
as  he  was  making  ready  to  leave  the  island.-^ 

It  would  not  perhaps  be  unfair  to  see  Napoleon's 
feelings  towards  Joachim  reflected  in  the  conduct  of 
his  mother.  For  when  Madame  Mere  went  to  take  up 
her  abode  at  Rome,  Joachim  sent  her  a  present  of 
eight  carriage  horses,  which  Letizia  Bonaparte  at  once 
returned  to  the  donor.  Yet  Napoleon's  feelings  to- 
wards the  King  of  Naples  were  certainly  tempered 
by  political  considerations,  and  it  was  evident  to  most 
observers  that  the  attitude  adopted  by  the  Powers 
towards  Joachim  was  one  that  could  not  fail  to  make 
him  regret  the  past,  regret  the  fall  of  the  Empire, 
regret  that  he  had  no  longer  the  powerful  arm  of 
Napoleon  to  lean  upon. 