

1  Metternich  to  Mier,  Nov.  29,  1814  j  Helfert,  Murat,  167. 
VOL.  I  Z 


338  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

move  was  ineffective.  Joachim's  letter  remained  un- 
answered ;  yet  Castlereagh,  notwithstanding  Talley- 
rand's pressing  invitation  that  Great  Britain  should 
recognise  Ferdinand,  clung  fast  to  his  policy  of  not 
breaking  with  Austria  on  the  Neapolitan  question. 
This  was  now  the  more  essential  as  the  Congress  had 
revealed  wide  divergencies  of  views  between  the  Powers. 
The  partition  of  Saxony  and  Poland  and  other  minor 
points  had  led  to  estrangement,  and  Great  Britain, 
Austria,  and  France,  on  the  3rd  of  January  18 15, 
secretly  signed  a  treaty  of  alliance  covering  the  event- 
uality of  a  war  in  which  those  three  Powers  should  find 
themselves  face  to  face  with  Prussia  and  Russia. 

The  conflict  of  interest  between  the  Powers  became 
more  and  more  acute  and  appeared  to  give  Joachim 
some  chance  of  profit.  When  the  Congress  towards 
the  end  of  December  began  to  settle  north  Italian 
questions,  Gallo  protested  to  Mier  that,  according  to 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Prague,  Austria,  and  Austria 
alone,  was  entitled  to  interfere  in  Italian  affairs.  To 
have  Austria  alone  adjudicate  on  Italian  matters  would 
have  been  convenient  for  the  King  of  Naples,  as  the 
Congress  was  now  approaching  the  question  of  the 
Papal  territory. 

Rome  and  Naples  were  not  on  good  terms,  nor 
was  the  military  occupation  of  the  Marches  the  only 
grievance  of  the  Papal  Court.  The  Neapolitan  agent 
at  Rome,  Cavaliere  Zuccari,  was  a  Carbonaro  and 
in  close  touch  with  the  liberal  element  in  the  city. 
Between  him  and  the  Government  trouble  was  constantly 
arising.  While  Pius,  through  his  representative  at  Vienna, 
Cardinal  Consalvi,  exerted  his  influence  against  Joachim, 
the  clergy  of  the  Marches  circulated  petitions  against 
the  Neapolitan  Government  intended  to  strengthen  the 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  339 

Papal  case  at  the  Congress.  Metternich  was  disposed  to 
abandon  Bologna  and  the  Legations  to  the  Pope,  and 
he  thought  that  Joachim*s  best  policy  would  be  to 
admit  the  Papal  claim  to  the  Marches.  This  course 
was  suggested  to  the  King  by  Mier  and  by  Campochiaro, 
but  did  not  commend  itself.  There  was  indeed  an 
attempt  at  negotiating  with  Rome,  but  neither  party 
was  really  prepared  to  concede  what  the  other  required 
and  there  was  no  result.  Joachim  thought  he  could 
not  give  up  his  position  in  the  Marches  unless  in 
return  he  secured  complete  recognition  from  the  Pope. 
To  let  the  Papal  State  extend  to  the  Adriatic  was 
not  only  to  deprive  him  of  a  possession  he  thought 
himself  entitled  to  by  treaty,  it  was  also  to  consent 
to  being  shut  off  from  all  access  to  the  north,  to 
accept  being  hemmed  in  to  the  extremity  of  Italy, 
with  the  Papacy  to  the  north,  Bourbonism  to  the 
south,  and  the  fleets  of  Great  Britain  to  the  east  and 
west. 