


1  " .  .  .  Her  conduct  is  fidiculous,  extraordinary,  and  unbecoming.  .  .  .  She  has 
conceived  a  fine  passion  for  the  King,  and  makes  no  pretence  of  concealment." 
— Mier  to  Metternich,  March  5,  181 5  5  Helfert,  Murat,  30. 


346  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

would  have  eventually  meant  for  Joachim  ;  but  at 
the  very  moment  when  Campochiaro  was  delivering 
his  note  to  Metternich,  six  small  vessels  flying  the 
red  and  white  flag  with  the  golden  bees  were  speeding 
across  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Genoa  from  Elba  to 
France,  and  the  face  of  Europe  was  once  more  changed. 
When  the  news  reached  Vienna,  it  was  at  first  not 
realized  that  Napoleon  was  bound  for  France.  His 
men  and  Campbell,  the  British  Commissioner,  both 
thought  their  destination  was  southern  Italy  ;  but  the 
Emperor  had  no  such  intention  ;  he  was,  as  usual, 
aiming  his  blow  at  the  vital  point. 

Immediately  before  Napoleon's  departure  from  Elba 
some  communication  passed  between  him  and  Joachim, 
though  probably  it  did  not  enlighten  the  King  as  to  the 
Emperor's  exact  project.  It  was  on  the  4th  of  March 
that  Joachim  first  got  news  of  Napoleon's  departure 
from  Elba ;  it  produced  complete  confusion  in  the 
King's  councils.  It  was  not  clear  for  one  thing  how 
the  enterprise  embarked  on  by  Napoleon  would 
terminate.  Besides  this  the  dissension  between  the 
Allies,  together  with  the  King's  diplomatic  step  for 
obtaining  recognition  from  France,  held  out  hope  of 
good  news  arriving  from  Vienna.  Joachim  therefore 
kept  the  information  from  Elba  quiet  as  long  as 
possible,  and,  when  the  news  finally  transpired,  sent 
for  Mier.  Not  without  some  excitement,  the  King 
informed  him  that  he  held  firmly  by  his  engagements 
with  Austria  and  that  he  had  instructed  Campochiaro 
in  the  same  sense.  Towards  Great  Britain  the  same 
course  was  pursued.  After  a  Cabinet  meeting  held 
on  the  6th  of  March,  Gallo  sent  for  the  British 
consular  agent.  Walker,  and  declared  to  him  the 
King's  ^*  firm  and  most  decided  resolution  to  cultivate 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  347 

and  preserve  the  friendship  of  Great  Britain."  ^  At  the 
same  time  assurances  of  the  same  general  character 
were  transmitted  to  Prince  Castelciccala  to  give  to 
the  British  Cabinet. 

On  the  6th  of  March  the  official  Monitore  published 
an  article  commenting  on  a  recent  number  of  the 
London  Morning  Chronicle^  in  which  Joachim's  conduct 
during  the  campaign  of  18 14  was  severely  criticized. 
The  Neapolitan  journal  put  forward  the  following 
explanation  of  Joachim's  conduct.  Napoleon  had  been 
willing  to  give  Joachim  supreme  command  of  the  army 
in  Italy,  had,  in  fact,  drawn  up  the  necessary  decree  ; 
to  this  the  King  had  only  been  prepared  to  accede  as  a 
preliminary  to  a  general  pacification.  That  condition 
was  not  met  and  the  negotiations  came  to  nothing. 