

While  Napoleon  thus  sombrely  watched  from  Elba 
Europe  rapidly  drifting  towards  new  wars  and  France 
rapidly  drifting  to  an  anti- Bourbon  revolution,  at 
Naples  the  appearance  of  gaiety  and  festivity  was 
bravely  maintained.  Had  a  stranger  guiltless  of  poli- 
tical knowledge  harboured  in  the  city  he  would  have 
thought  that  a  Court  more  happy,  more  light-hearted, 
more  devoted  to  pleasure  and  to  festivity  had  never  been. 
Naples  was  full  of  visitors,  among  whom  the  English 
showed  conspicuously.  The  pacification  of  the  Con- 
tinent after  the  long  cycle  of  wars  had  resulted  in  a 
general  exodus  of  the  long-pent-up  British  aristocracy. 
Among  those  soon  conspicuous  at  Naples,  and  received 
with    evident    favour    at    Court,    were    the    Duke    of 

1  Napoleon's  own  statements  in  his  correspondence  and  the  Memorial  are  here 
preferred  to  Pepe's  vague  assertion  and  to  Meneval's  remarks,  which,  apparently, 
refer  to  Colonna's  mission.  In  any  case  Meneval  was  actually  at  Vienna,  and  his 
information  must  be  judged  by  the  light  of  that  fact. — Meneval,  iii.  409  5  Pepe, 
Mems.  ii.  passim  ;   Helfert,  Murai,  34. 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  345 

Bedford,  Lord  Holland,  Lord  Oxford,  Lord  Sligo,  Lord 
Llandaff,  and  General  Matthews,  all  members  of  the 
Whig  Opposition.  The  Englishmen  viewed  Joachim 
from  the  strict  standpoint  of  party  politics,  and  their 
admiration  of  him  grew  in  proportion  as  the  Tory 
Cabinet  discovered  its  hostility.  The  King,  on  his 
side,  unversed  in  the  nature  of  parliamentary  opinions, 
did  not  stop  to  consider  the  strength  of  Lord  Liver- 
pool's position,  nor  the  evil  that  might  result  from 
associating  with  an  impotent  Opposition,  and  showered 
favours  on  his  English  admirers.  Worst  of  all,  the 
Princess  of  Wales,  wife  of  the  Prince  Regent,  also 
arrived  at  Naples  during  the  winter  and  showed  an 
extreme  of  admiration  for  the  King  that  may  have 
been  perfectly  genuine,  but  was  certainly  neither 
decorous  nor  advantageous  to  either  party  .^ 

What  a  positive  disadvantage  his  friendship  with 
the  British  Opposition  was  to  Joachim  may  be  judged 
from  the  following  incident.  In  December  Lord 
Oxford  was  returning  to  England.  Joachim  in- 
trusted him  with  dispatches  for  his  secret  agent  at 
Paris,  St.  Elie.  By  some  means  or  other  the  French 
police  got  wind  of  this,  and  on  the  road  to  Paris, 
Oxford  was  arrested  and  all  his  papers  were  seized. 
Castlereagh,  so  far  from  showing  indignation  at  this 
violent  proceeding  against  an  English  traveller,  ex- 
pressed himself  to  Talleyrand  as  charmed  at  what  had 
happened. 

Had  there  been  no  Elba  and  no  Napoleon,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  forecast  what  the  result  of  all  the  diplomatic 
and  political  manoeuvring  of  the  winter  of  1814-1815 