

The  Pope,  though  at  heart  unfriendly,  was  prepared, 
on  terms,  to  adopt  a  neutral  attitude  towards  Naples  ; 
but  the  Bourbon  States  were  openly  and  uncompro- 
misingly hostile.  By  the  first  article  of  the  treaty  of 
the  30th  of  May  18 14,  the  new  French  Government 
had  entered  into  relations  of  peace  and  amity  with  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  "  and  his  allies."  Metternich, 
anxious  to  arrange  the  Italian  question  on  the  basis  of 
Joachim's  recognition,  and  so  to  strengthen  his  position 
against  an  attack  then  threatening  on  the  part  of 
Russia  and  Prussia,  now  urged  Talleyrand  to  agree  to 
the  due  execution  of  this  article  of  the  treaty.  But 
the  latter  evaded  all  engagements  and  took  refuge  in 
the  plea  that  at  the  time  of  the  signature  of  the  treaty 
the  French  Government  had  no  official  knowledge  of 


340  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

the  alliance  between  Austria  and  Naples.  Urged  by 
Campochiaro  and  Cariati,  Metternich  thereupon  officially 
brought  to  the  notice  of  the  French  plenipotentiary 
the  treaty  of  the  1 1  th  of  January  1 8 1 4,  but  failed  to 
get  anything  more  definite  from  him  than  that  he  was 
prepared  to  allow  the  state  of  peace  then  existing  to 
continue. 

Notwithstanding  the  continued  ill-success  of  his  dip- 
lomacy, Joachim,  following  Metternich's  advice,  had  well- 
nigh  resolved  to  withdraw  from  the  Marches,  with  the 
exception  of  the  fortress  of  Ancona  which  he  intended 
to  retain  until  the  close  of  the  Congress,  when  the 
French  Court  sent  Jules  de  Polignac  to  Rome  on  a 
mission  hostile  to  the  King.  This  move  showed  such 
an  unswerving  current  of  hostility,  the  tendency  of 
events  was  so  persistently  contrary  to  his  interests, 
that  finally  Joachim,  yielding  to  an  impulse  not 
unnatural  in  an  impetuous  soldier,  determined  to 
arrive  at  some  end  by  directly  challenging  the  French 
Government. 

The  moment  appeared  opportune,  for  the  tension 
between  the  two  northern  Powers  and  Austria  had 
reached  an  acute  stage.  In  a  great  European  war 
the  Neapolitan  army  might  be  accounted  a  useful 
factor,  and  already  Russia  gave  indications  of  con- 
templating overtures  to  Joachim,  while  the  Prussian 
Minister,  Hardenberg, -showed  signs  of  a  more  favour- 
able disposition  to  the  Neapolitan  envoys.  A  crisis 
appeared  to  be  rapidly  approa<:hing,  and  in  this  Joachim 
probably  hoped  to  find  the  circumstances  that  should 
force  his  recognition  from  the  Powers.  Of  the  three 
governments  arrayed  against  Prussia  and  Russia,  Austria 
was  friendly,  France  hostile,  and  Great  Britain  might 
reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the  lead  of  the  other 


CHAP.  XI  CONGRESS  OF  VIENNA  341 

two.  At  all  events,  neither  Lord  Castlereagh  nor 
Lord  Liverpool  had  committed  themselves  further  than 
by  declaring  that  the  question  of  Naples  was  one  for 
discussion.  Metternich  resolutely  maintained  his  posi- 
tion under  the  treaty  of  the  nth  of  January  18 14; 
"  Lord  Castlereagh  every  time  [the  question  of  Naples] 
was  presented  to  him  seemed  to  be  walking  on  hot 
coals  ;  he  would  not  declare  for  or  against.   .  .   ."  ^ 