

Under  these  circumstances  to  place  a  pistol  at  the 
head  of  France  appeared  to  Joachim  the  most  satisfactory 
course  to  pursue.  Campochiaro  received  instructions 
on  the  24th  of  February  to  deliver  a  note  to  Talleyrand 
categorically  asking  for  the  immediate  recognition  of 
Joachim  by  France.  Unfortunately  for  him  this  note 
reached  the  envoy  of  the  King  of  Naples  at  a  most 
inopportune  moment.  A  new  turn  in  the  wheel  of 
diplomacy  had  just  taken  place  and  the  Saxon  question, 
over  which  the  Powers  had  so  nearly  plunged  into  war, 
had  been  settled  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  country, 
save  Saxony.  Campochiaro  saw  the  danger,  but  could 
not  altogether  disregard  his  instructions.  He  decided, 
therefore,  to  address  his  note,  not  to  Talleyrand,  but  to 
Metternich.  This  course  appeared  milder  to  him,  but 
resulted  in  a  disastrous  check,  as  Metternich  answered 
it  immediately  by  a  note  in  which  he  declared  that 
Austria  would  tolerate  no  military  movements  in  Italy, 
and  this  he  backed  up  by  threatening  to  concentrate 
1 50,000  men  and  200  guns  on  the  Po.  The  Austrian 
Minister  addressed  a  similar  note,  though  not  worded 
in  the  same  menacing  form,  to  Talleyrand,  which  was  at 
once  accepted. 

The  news  of  this  diplomatic  defeat  was  at  once  dis- 
patched to  Naples  by  Campochiaro  ;  it  reached  Joachim 

^  Gentz,  Memorandum;   Metternich,  Mems.  ii.  583. 


342  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

on  the  yth  of  March.  But  at  that  date  a  new 
and  startling  political  development  had  revolutionized 
European  politics,  to  understand  which  it  will  be 
necessary  to  consider  the  position  occupied  in  relation 
to  these  events  by  the  disthroned  Emperor  of  the 
French. 

By  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau  Napoleon  had  secured 
for  himself  the  island  of  Elba  alone  out  of  all  his  vast 
dominions.  Of  this  little  island  off  the  coast  of  Tuscany 
the  Powers  agreed  to  recognise  him  as  the  independent 
sovereign.  There  he  retained  a  few  hundred  of  his 
old  soldiers  and  a  semblance  of  sovereignty.  But  no 
sooner  had  this  last  treaty  of  all  been  signed  with 
their  mighty  enemy  than  the  Powers  quickly  repented 
having  left  him  so  much  as  that  small  Mediterranean 
island.  The  frame  in  which  Napoleon  was  now 
placed  was  so  evidently  undersized  that  it  was  uni- 
versally feared  it  could  not  long  hold  him.  Nor  were 
the  perfectly  moderate,  reasonable,  and  not  onerous 
conditions  of  the  treaty  carried  out  in  their  fulness ; 
and  in  this  and  other  ways  the  Emperor  was  needlessly 
irritated.  By  the  time  the  sovereigns  and  diplomats  of 
Europe  had  assembled  at  Vienna  the  question  of  Elba 
had  become  nearly  as  burning  a  one  as  that  of  France 
had  been  before  the  fall  of  the  Empire.  On  the  2nd 
of  November  the  King  of  Sardinia  wrote  to  his 
Ambassador  at  Vienna  :  "  We  are  entirely  of  Prince 
Metternich's  opinion  on  the  necessity  of  getting  rid 
(eloigner)  of  Napoleon.  .  .  .  Italy  will  never  be  com- 
pletely at  rest  as  long  as  that  man  remains  so  near  it.'*  ^ 
Even  earlier  than  this  Talleyrand  had  been  able  to 
report  to  Louis  XVIII.  that  a  general  disposition  existed 
to  remove  Napoleon  from  Elba.      "  No  one  has  yet 