

On  the  following  day,  the  7th  of  March,  the 
attitude  of  the  King  of  Naples  completely  changed. 
On  that  day  he  received  from  Campochiaro  the  news 
of  the  ill-success  of  his  last  move  at  Vienna,  and  the 
ominous  information  that  Austria  was  preparing  to 
concentrate  150,000  men  and  200  guns  on  the  Po. 

From  this  moment  the  King's  protestations  of 
fidelity  to  the  Austrian  treaty  became  weaker.  About 
him  there  was  a  party,  in  which  the  Duke  di  Gallo 
was  perhaps  most  influential,  strong  in  its  support  of 
Napoleon.  That  party  now  rapidly  regained  its  ascend- 
ant. On  the  1 2th  of  March  Joachim  spoke  of  the 
Bourbons  publicly  before  the  Court  circle  and  declared  : 
"  I  am  their  enemy,  as  they  are  mine."  Considerable 
movements  of  troops  towards  the  frontier  were  taking 
place,  arising  doubtless  from  the  course  which  the 
Neapolitan  Government  had  decided  to  adopt  towards 
France  ;    Mier    asked    for    explanations    as    to    these 

1  Walker  to  Castlereagh,  March  7,  1815,  Brit.  State  Papers,  18 14-18 15,  ii.  281. 


348  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE         part  i 

movements.  The  King  assured  him  that  he  was 
faithful  to  the  Austrian  alliance,  but  showed  his 
sympathies  without  disguise  by  declaring  that  the 
news  from  Napoleon  was  good,  and  that  the  chances 
of  his  success  were  excellent.  To  Mier's  demands 
Gallo  formally  replied  on  the  14th,  but  in  purely 
evasive  terms.  On  the  following  day  information  of 
Napoleon's  triumphant  entry  into  Grenoble  reached 
Naples,  and  on  the  15  th  Gallo  had  an  inter- 
view with  Mier.  He  complained  of  the  coolness  of 
Austria  to  Naples,  declared  it  was  evident  that  it  was 
intended  to  sacrifice  the  King's  interests,  and  com- 
plained of  the  way  in  which  Campochiaro's  note  had 
been  received. 

No  diplomat  could  mistake  what  these  declarations 
portended.  Joachim  had  given  way  to  a  strong  re- 
action of  sentiment  and  had  now  practically  decided 
on  his  course.  The  events  of  the  spring  of  18 14, 
the  precarious  recompense,  the  bitter  sorrow  they 
had  brought  had  profoundly  affected  him.  Before 
the  Emperor  left  Elba  Joachim  was  preparing  to 
fight  for  his  throne  ;  now  that  the  tricolour  was  once 
more  the  national  flag  of  France,  he  believed  that 
his  opportunity  had  come  for  ridding  himself  of  the 
burden  of  shame  he  had  borne  for  twelve  long 
months,  and  for  striking  a  far  more  effective  blow 
for  his  own  interests  than  appeared  possible  but  a 
few  days  before.  Not  only  this,  but  the  vision  of 
Italian  independence  was  once  more  evoked,  and  the 
national  movement  of  France  against  the  Bourbons 
suggested  the  possibility  of  a  similar  Italian  movement 
against  the  Austrians  and  the  restored  governments. 
This  time  Joachim  was  not  in  a  hesitating  mood  ;  he 
was  determined  never  again  to  be  led  into  the  vacilla- 