


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  367 

merits  were  thrown  up,  and  the  army  was  extended 
in  position.  Joachim  was  now  as  anxious  to  waste 
time  as  three  weeks  before  he  had  been  anxious  to  gain 
it.  His  offensive  movement  having  failed,  and  Italy- 
having  received  his  political  overtures  with  unmistakable 
apathy,  it  was  plain  that  now  his  best  hope  lay  in  some 
general  scheme  of  pacification  that  might  possibly  be 
negotiated  between  Napoleon  and  the  Powers.  The 
hope  was  doubtless  a  slender  one,  yet  there  seemed 
to  be  no  better  course  than  to  defer  a  crisis  until 
Napoleon's  influence  could  make  itself  felt.  For  this 
or  similar  reasons,  Joachim  now  attempted  to  nego- 
tiate. He  sent  Colonel  Carafa  into  the  Austrian  lines, 
and  offered  to  conclude  an  armistice  with  a  view 
to  sending  plenipotentiaries  to  Vienna.  Neipperg  de- 
layed replying  for  two  days,  and  then  sent  an  evasive 
answer.  On  the  21st  and  22nd  there  were  demonstra- 
tions and  skirmishes  along  the  line  of  the  Ronco,  and 
in  the  evening  of  the  latter  day  Joachim  decided  to 
fall  back  to  some  position  nearer  to  Ancona.  Bianchi, 
although  the  King  was  unaware  of  the  fact,  was  already 
within  a  day's  march  of  Arezzo. 

From  the  day  on  which  the  line  of  the  Ronco  was 
abandoned,  the  Neapolitan  army  showed  greater  signs  ot 
demoralization  than  before.  Near  Cesena  an  officer 
of  the  rank  of  major  went  over  to  the  enemy  ;  deser- 
tion was  epidemic  in  the  rank  and  file ;  through  Cesena 
and  down  the  Emilian  road  Neipperg's  hussars  and 
Tyrolian  Jagers  hung  on  to  the  skirts  of  the  re- 
treating army  and  constantly  picked  up  prisoners  and 
demoralized  the  rear-guard.  Food  and  forage  were 
scarce  along  the  line  of  retreat,  for  even  before  the 
campaign  opened  Carascosa  had  warned  the  Govern- 
ment that  the  resources  of  the  country  were  exhausted. 


368  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

Now  the  distress  of  the  soldiers  was  terrible  ;  the  com- 
missariat broke  down  ;  hunger  led  to  pillage  ;  pillage 
to  excess.  General  Lecchi,  in  command  of  the  Third 
Division,  had  given  up  all  hope  of  success,  and  made 
no  scruples  of  telling  his  subordinates  so. 

Leaving  the  details  of  the  march  in  charge  of  the 
divisional  commanders,  Joachim  now  went  on  to 
Ancona,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  fortress  the 
Royal  Guard  effected  its  junction  with  the  army.  On 
the  30th  he  proceeded  to  Macerata,  where  he  met 
Pignatelli-Strongoli,  between  whom  and  the  King  a 
violent  scene  of  recrimination  took  place.  On  that 
day  news  came  from  the  outposts  that  the  Austrians 
were  showing  in  force  in  the  direction  of  Tolentino. 
Bianchi  was  already  descending  from  the  Apennines. 