

Joachim  still  hoped  that  Pignatelli-Strongoli  would 
effect  his  junction  with  the  main  army  somewhere  in 
Romagna.  Carascosa  had  received  orders  to  send  out 
reconnaissances  along  the  road  to  Pistoja,  where  Nugent 
with  a  small  Austrian  detachment  was  attempting  to 
arrest  the  passage  of  the  Neapolitan  Guard.  In  other 
directions,  too,  Carascosa  had  detachments,  and  at 
Carpi,  eight  miles  on  the  road  to  Borgoforte,  he  had 
stationed  Pepe's  brigade.  Further  than  this  the  Nea- 
politans had  not  ventured,  and  at  this  point  they  had 
been  in  close  touch  with  the  enemy  ever  since  the 
action  on  the  Panaro,  for  Bianchi  had  retired  no  further 
than  was  necessary. 

At  Carpi  the  Neapolitans  and  Austrians  remained 
in  touch  from  the  6th  to  the  loth  of  April.  Joachim 
hoped  that  Bianchi  would  be  able  to  attempt  nothing 
until  he  had  brought  the  operations  at  Ferrara 
to  a  successful  issue  and  joined  Carascosa  with 
D'  Ambrosio's  division,  which,  with  the  advent  of 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  the  Guards,  would  have  con- 
centrated a  considerable  army  and  enabled  the  Nea- 
politans to  resume  the  offensive.  These  hopes  were 
dispelled  by  Bianchi,  who  advanced  on  the  morning 
of  the  loth,  and  after  some  heavy  skirmishing  in  which 
the  Neapolitans  were  much  outnumbered,  drove  Pepe 
from  Carpi.  The  Neapolitan  general  retired  with  such 
promptitude  that  his  killed  and  wounded  were  few, 
though  in  prisoners  he  lost  several  hundreds. 

Bianchi's  attack  at  Carpi  had  only  been  intended 
as  a  demonstration  to  relieve  the  pressure  on  Occhio- 
bello,  but  so  feeble  was  the  Neapolitan  resistance,  so 
large  the  number  of  deserters,  so  patent  the  signs  of 


362  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

demoralization,  that  the  Austrian  general  decided  to 
continue  his  advance  and  pursued  Pepe  towards 
Modena.  On  the  following  day  Carascosa  retreated 
from  Modena  to  the  Panaro,  where  he  took  up  a 
defensive  position  and  was  joined  by  the  King.  On 
the  same  day  Mohr  made  a  sortie  from  the  bridge- 
head at  Occhiobello,  and  handled  D'  Ambrosio  so 
severely  that  he  ordered  his  division  to  fall  back  on 
Bologna.     Mohr  cautiously  followed  him. 

The  Austrians  now  had  several  divisions  in  motion 
south  of  the  Po,  under  such  competent  officers  as  Gober, 
Neipperg,  Merville,  and  Mohr  ;  Frimont  hoped  that 
with  these  he  would  be  able  to  defeat  Joachim  in  a 
battle  for  the  possession  of  Bologna.  But  the  position 
of  Joachim's  various  divisions  was  too  scattered  to 
afford  him  any  hope  of  success  before  concentrating 
his  army,  and  Bologna  was  the  only  point  at  which 
the  troops  from  Modena,  from  Cento,  and  from 
Ferrara  could  be  brought  together.  To  this  point 
accordingly  the  Neapolitan  retreat  was  continued, 
while  Carascosa's  division  screened  the  movement  by 
holding  the  banks  of  the  Panaro. 