

Viewed  narrowly  there  was  little  apparent  cause  for 
a  war  between  Naples  and  Austria.  To  many  it  came 
as  a  surprise,  and  it  did  not  respond  to  any  real  demand 
of  public  opinion.  Shortly  before  the  King  left  Naples 
for  the  army  he  held  a  council.  He  declared  to  his 
assembled  Neapolitan  and  French  councillors  that  he 
could  place  80,000  men  in  the  field  besides  twelve 
legions  of  provincial  militia,  and  that  Italy  both  north 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  353 

and  south  of  the  Po  was  ready  to  rise  for  independence. 
But  his  arguments  in  favour  of  war  met  with  little 
response.  His  French  advisers  urged  delay  so  as  not 
to  embarrass  the  policy  of  France,  the  Neapolitans  were 
anxious  not  to  put  their  fortunes  to  such  a  risk  as  that 
necessarily  entailed  by  a  war  with  Austria. 

On  leaving  the  council,  Joachim  met  General  Manhes, 
and  so  excited  was  he  that,  without  stopping  to  take  a  hat, 
he  took  the  general  with  him  and  drove  in  his  carriage 
along  the  sea  towards  Posilipo  in  heated  conversation. 
The  King's  chief  idea  in  hastening  on  hostilities  was 
not  altogether  unsound.  If  he  stood  any  chance  what- 
ever of  arousing  northern  Italy  and  defeating  Austria, 
it  was  only  by  some  such  means  as  he  appears  to  have 
contemplated.  A  sudden  irruption  into  Lombardy, 
attended  by  some  military  success  before  Austrian  re- 
inforcements could  appear,  might  lead  to  a  rising  in 
Milan  and  place  him  in  a  position  to  balance  between 
France  and  Austria  and  so  proceed  to  a  favourable 
settlement.  The  Austrians  had  enrolled  many  officers 
and  men  from  the  old  Italian  army,  and  these  elements 
might  prove  unreliable ;  besides  this,  Milan  had  been 
the  scene  of  much  active  intriguing  since  the  Austrian 
occupation,  notwithstanding  the  politic  and  tactful 
methods  of  the  military  governor,  General  Sommariva. 
Secret  societies  such  as  the  Carbonari  and  the  Spilla  Nera 
had  been  very  active  in  keeping  up  nationalistic  and 
anti-German  sentiment.  The  latter  society  was  largely 
made  up  of  old  Napoleonic  officers,  and  had  attempted 
to  open  communications  with  the  Emperor  while  at 
Elba.  Joachim's  political  plans  turned  on  these  and 
similar  considerations,  and  so  did  his  military  projects. 
Above  all  things,  he  was  firmly  resolved  that  hesitation 
should  not  mark  his  conduct  ;  he  was  determined  to 
VOL.  I  2  A 


354  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

show  as  much  celerity  of  movement  in  1 8 14  as  he  had 
dilatoriness  in  1815.  'Z^^^'^J 

The  Austrian  strength  in  Italy  was  about  60,000 
men  in  the  Quadrilateral  and  some  34,000  more  dis- 
tributed between  Lombardy,  Tuscany,  and  Romagna. 
Joachim  might  therefore  hope  by  prompt  action  to 
overpower  any  force  opposed  to  him  in  the  last-named 
province.  His  plan  was  to  effect  this  and  then  to 
possess  himself  of  the  passages  across  the  Po  at  Occhio- 
belloj  near  Ferrara,  and  at  Borgoforte.  His  flank  thus 
secured,  he  could  continue  his  march  on  Piacenza, 
straight  in  the  direction  of  Milan,  straight  in  the 
direction  of  France.  The  plan  was  intelligible,  but 
bold,  and  it  appears  probable  that  it  was  undertaken 
by  too  small  a  force  in  presence  of  too  large  a  one. 
For  notwithstanding  his  heavy  muster-rolls  and  im- 
posing statements,  it  was  not  a  very  large  army  that 
Joachim  was  able  to  place  actually  in  the  field  ;  its 
eff^ective  strength  was  about  35,000  men,  5000  horse, 
and  60  guns.  Of  these  the  guards  (some  4000  or 
5000  in  number)  were  picked  men,  largely  foreign, 
and  good  troops  ;  their  generals,  however,  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli  and  Livron,  were  incapable.  The  four 
divisions  of  the  line  were  under  Carascosa,  D*  Ambrosio, 
Lecchi,  and  Rossetti.  Millet  de  Villeneuve  was  chief 
of  staff;  Pedrinelli  commanded  the  artillery,  Colletta 
the  engineers.  The  army  was  short  of  light  infantry 
and  of  heavy  cavalry,  while  the  artillery  officers  were 
ill  trained. 