


364  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

the  fact  that  he  abandoned  Florence  and  for  once  felt 
himself  compelled  to  fall  back  without  firing  a  shot. 
As  usual  with  him,  however,  he  judged  clearly  of  the 
military  exigencies  of  the  situation  and  what  risks  they 
demanded  that  he  should  run.  He  therefore  took  up 
his  position  at  Pistoja,  a  few  miles  north-west  of 
Florence,  and  there  made  show  of  awaiting  the  Neapo- 
litan advance.  Nugent  was  well  placed  in  the  lower 
Apennines,  midway  between  Florence  and  Modena,  and 
fully  understood  how  important  it  was  that  Pignatelli- 
Strongoli  and  Carascosa  should  not  effect  their  junction. 
His  mere  presence  had  a  result  that  his  military  re- 
sources could  not  have  secured,  for  the  Neapolitan 
generals  were  so  terrified  of  their  Austrian  opponent 
that  with  vastly  superior  numbers  and  better  troops 
they  failed  ignominiously. 

On  the  1 1  th  of  April  the  Guard  marched  out  of 
Florence  towards  Pistoja  ;  the  movement  might  have 
had  considerable  results  five  days  earlier  ;  it  was  now 
quite  useless.  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  were 
both  afraid  of  Nugent ;  they  reconnoitred  but  could 
discern  no  Austrians ;  a  fog  came  on,  and  it  was 
reported  that  cavalry  was  in  movement  on  their 
flanks  ;  and  thereupon  they  resolved  to  retreat.  At 
the  same  time  orders  were  on  their  way  from  Joachim 
enjoining  caution,  directing  that  the  Royal  Guard  must 
be  kept  intact,  and  lastly,  as  already  noted,  commanding 
a  retreat  via  Arezzo  and  S.  Sepolcro.  No  order  could 
have  pleased  the  generals  more.  So  efficiently  did 
they  carry  it  out  that  on  the  i6th  Pignatelli-Strongoli 
and  Livron,  doubtless  to  the  amazement  of  Nugent, 
had  already  reached  Cortona,  more  than  fifty  miles 
south  of  Florence. 

While  Pignatelli-Strongoli  was  hurrying  to  Cortona, 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  365 

the  King's  positions  covering  Bologna  were  being  forced. 
On  the  15  th  Bianchi  surprised  a  Neapolitan  detachment 
at  Spilimberto  and  forced  the  passage  of  the  Panaro  at 
that  point.  Carascosa  retired.  A  skirmish  was  fought 
on  the  outskirts  of  Bologna,  but  on  the  night  of  the 
15  th  the  Neapolitans  abandoned  the  city,  and  on  the 
1 6th  fixed  their  headquarters  at  Imola. 

On  the  1 6th  the  Austrians  occupied  Bologna,  and  a 
council  of  war  was  held  to  determine  the  course  of 
future  operations.  Frimont  could  dispose  of  nearly 
45,000  men  to  carry  on  the  campaign  against  the  King 
of  Naples,  and  these  he  distributed  as  follows.  Neipperg, 
with  17,000  men,  was  ordered  to  follow  the  King's 
line  of  retreat.  Bianchi,  with  14,000,  was  ordered  to 
march  via  Florence,  Arezzo,  and  Perugia,  and  thence 
to  strike  across  at  the  Neapolitan  line  of  communica- 
tions in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ancona.  Nugent,  with 
some  5000,  was  ordered  to  push  on  towards  Rome  ; 
while  8000  more  were  to  act  as  a  reserve.  This  last 
body  did  not,  as  it  happened,  take  any  active  part  in 
the  campaign. 