

The  Neapolitan  army  had  been  preceded  by  a 
number  of  emissaries  whose  business  it  was  to  stir  up 
nationalist  movements.  At  Rimini,  on  the  30th  of 
March,  a  proclamation  was  issued  in  which  the  Italians 
were  informed,  with  all  due  emphasis  and  not  for  the 
first  time,  that  Providence  destined  them  for  in- 
dependence, that  the  hour  in  which  this  high  fortune 
was  to  be  accomplished  had  at  last  arrived,  and  that  the 
King  of  Naples  with  80,000  men  was  marching  for  the 
liberation  of  the  Peninsula.^  But  this  proclamation  pro- 
duced no  perceptible  effect ;  nor  did  another  issued  by 
Joachim  from  Bologna  a  little  later  convoking  an 
Italian  national  convention  to  assemble  at  Rome  on  the 
8  th  of  May.  Nowhere  was  there  any  semblance  of  a 
movement ;  the  energy  of  Italy  had  been  expended  in 

1  Pepe,  Mems.  H.  44. 

2  This  proclamation  is  attributed  to  Pellegrino  Rossi  (afterwards  the  ill-fated 
Prime  Minister  of  Pius  IX.)  by  Sig.  Lemmi,  though  on  somewhat  inconclusiv« 
grounds. — ^rch.  Star.  Napoli,  xxvi.  192. 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  357 

the  wars  of  Napoleon  ;  her  faith  had  been  shattered 
by  the  selfish  ambitions  of  the  princes  who  had  so 
frequently  invoked  the  vision  of  a  nationalism  that  was 
always  the  more  magniloquently  proclaimed  as  it  more 
nearly  coincided  with  their  own  immediate  interests. 
Joachim's  efforts  were  fruitless  ;  Italy  was  not  ripe  for 
revolution  but  yearning  for  repose,  and  even  from  among 
the  old  soldiers  of  Napoleon,  who  were  not  a  few  among 
the  population,  he  only  succeeded  in  raising  a  corps  of 
some  400  men  under  Colonel  Negri. 

At  Bologna  the  King  of  Naples  scarcely  paused  in 
his  headlong  march  ;  he  dispatched  thence  several 
columns  in  various  directions  to  carry  out  the  next 
part  of  his  plan  of  operations.  D'  Ambrosio  with 
his  division  was  detached  to  Ferrara.  He  was  to 
occupy  that  town,  capture  the  citadel,  and  secure  the 
passages  of  the  Po  just  beyond  at  Lagoscuro  and 
Occhiobello.  Joachim  himself  with  Carascosa's  division 
pushed  straight  along  the  great  Emilian  road  towards 
Modena. 

The  Austrian  commander  Bianchi,  who  had  so  far 
felt  obliged  to  retire  before  the  superior  forces  in  front 
of  him,  now  thought  himself  in  sufficient  strength  to 
make  a  stand.  To  protect  Modena  he  took  up  a 
position  where  the  Emilian  road  crosses  the  Panaro. 
He  appears  to  have  expected  to  defend  this  position 
successfully,  for  he  neglected  the  obvious  military  pre- 
caution of  destroying  the  long  bridge  of  Sant'  Ambrogio 
on  which  the  road  is  carried  across  the  river.  Bianchi 
had  some  5000  men  and  9  guns.  On  the  4th  of  April 
the  King  of  Naples  attacked  the  Austrians  ;  he  had 
with  him  Carascosa's  division,  one  regiment  of  cavalry, 
and  two  batteries,  in  all  more  than  7000  men.  The 
Neapolitans  deployed  along  the  river  banks,  above  and 