

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  plan  of  the  Austrian 
commander  with  the  accepted  principles  of  strategy. 
It  can  only  be  defended  on  the  grounds  that  the 
Neapolitan  army  was  considered  so  demoralized  as  not 
to  be  capable  of  effective  resistance,  and  that  the  urgent 
need  of  placing  troops  on  the  French  frontier  made  a 
risk  worth  running  that  gave  a  greater  probability  of  a 
decisive  engagement  being  fought  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.  Otherwise  the  splitting  up  of  the  Austrian 
army  into  two  nearly  equal  wings,  with  a  range  of 
mountains  between  them,  was  offering  the  Neapolitans 
the  best  possible  chance  of  concentrating  against  each 
wing  in  turn,  and  thus  gaining  an  immense  advantage 


366  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

of  numbers.  It  was  true  enough  that  the  Neapolitan 
rank  and  file  was  greatly  demoralized,  but,  as  was  sub- 
sequently proved,  Frimont  greatly  underrated  the  fight- 
ing quality  of  the  Royal  Guard  as  well  as  the  considerable 
personal  factor  represented  by  King  Joachim. 

The  part  that  Neipperg's  corps  was  intended  to  play 
was  not  to  engage  the  Neapolitans,  but  by  his  demon- 
strations to  delude  them  into  the  belief  that  the  whole 
Austrian  army  was  on  their  immediate  line  of  retreat. 
His  advance  was  to  be  slow  so  as  not  to  press  them, 
and  thus  to  gain  time  for  Bianchi  to  march  around  their 
flank  towards  Ancona.  This  plan  nearly  succeeded. 
Bianchi,  leaving  Bologna  on  the  17th,  got  to  Florence 
in  three  days,  and  in  three  more  to  Arezzo  ;  that  is  a 
march  of  115  miles  in  six  days, — a  wonderful  feat. 
At  the  same  time  Neipperg  was  advancing  in  far  more 
leisurely  fashion  along  the  Emilian  road.  Joachim's 
headquarters  had  remained  at  Imola  on  the  17th,  and 
on  the  three  following  days  had  been  in  turn  transferred 
to  Faenza,  Forli,  and  Cesena.  At  the  last-named  city 
Joachim  received  the  first  intimation  that  might  lead 
him  to  suspect  that  his  line  of  retreat  was  threatened. 
A  message  reached  him  from  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  which 
he  refused  to  believe,  that  an  Austrian  column  was 
operating  west  of  the  Apennines.^ 

So  far  Neipperg  had  made  no  show  of  energy  in 
following  up  the  retreating  army,  and  this  probably 
encouraged  the  King  to  reconnoitre  a  Hrq  defensive 
position  just  north  of  Cesena,  along  the  banks  of  the 
river  Ronco,  where  he  might  await  the  arrival  of  the 
Royal  Guard  and  the  attack  of  the  Austrians.     Intrench- 

1  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi,  i.  27  ;  ii.  32.  This  probably  did  not  refer  to 
Bianchi's  corps,  which  only  reached  Florence  on  the  day  Joachim  is  said  to  have 
received  this  dispatch.  Either  Pignatelli-Strongoli  has  got  his  date  wrong,  which  is 
not  in  the  least  unlikely,  or  his  dispatch  refers  not  to  Bianchi  but  to  Nugent. 