

It  was  perhaps  in  the  operations  at  Occhiobello  that 
the  absence  of  the  Royal  Guard  from  the  main  army 
was  most  felt,  for  had  the  heads  of  column  been  a 
little  more  resolute  the  positions  would  probably  have 
been  carried.  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  had  not 
equalled  the  King  in  the  celerity  of  their  march.  In- 
stead of  arriving  at  Florence  on  the  3rd  of  April,  which 
should  have  enabled  them  to  get  into  touch  with  Caras- 
cosa  at  Modena  on  the  6th,  they  did  not  reach  the 
capital  of  Tuscany  till  the  8th.  Although  now  ^yq 
days  late,  they  lost  even  more  time,  for  they  remained 
inactive  at  Florence  for  three  days  with  5400  infantry, 
1 900    cavalry,   and    16    guns,    a    force    more  valuable 


36o  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

than  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  Neapolitan  army. 
But  the  8th,  the  day  on  which  Pignatelli-Strongoli 
reached  Florence,  and  the  day  on  which  he  ought 
to  have  effected  his  junction  with  Carascosa  at  Modena, 
was  precisely  the  day  on  which  Joachim  failed  to  carry 
the  bridge-head  of  Occhiobello.  Had  his  Guard  been 
one  week  earlier  in  the  field  and  resolutely  led,  he 
might  still  have  retained  the  offensive  ;  as  it  was,  it 
passed  to  his  opponents. 

The  Austrians  had  been  completely  taken  by  surprise 
by  Joachim's  sudden  irruption  into  Romagna.  On 
the  25  th  of  March  Prince  Schwarzenberg,  who  had 
intrusted  the  command  in  Italy  to  Frimont,  was  com- 
pletely in  the  dark  as  to  the  King  of  Naples'  intentions. 
So  rapidly  did  Joachim  rush  his  army  forward  from 
Ancona,  that  the  action  on  the  Panaro  was  fought 
before  Metternich  had  handed  their  passports  to  Campo- 
chiaro  and  Cariati.  One  day  later,  at  the  same  time 
as  diplomatic  relations  were  broken  off,  Schwarzenberg 
wrote  to  Frimont  instructing  him  that  the  King  of 
Naples  was  marching  north  in  two  columns,  that  his 
plan  might  be  to  strike  into  Lombardy  between  Pia- 
cenza  and  Alessandria,  that  it  was  necessary  to  dispose 
of  the  Neapolitans  before  thinking  of  operations  against 
France,  and  that  he  should  therefore  assume  a  strong 
offensive  and  endeavour  to  bring  the  King  to  a  decisive 
engagement  as  near  to  the  Po  as  possible. 

These  instructions  the  Austrian  commander  rapidly 
carried  out.  Reinforcements  were  promptly  sent  from 
the  Quadrilateral  and  Lombardy  to  Borgoforte  and 
Occhiobello.  The  latter  position  was  saved  as  we 
have  seen.  At  the  same  time  Austrian  reinforcements 
were  steadily  crossing  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Borgo- 
forte, and  the  day  after  Joachim  failed  at  Occhiobello 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  361 

Bianchi  was  ready  to  assume  the  offensive  towards 
Modena. 