

The  King's  first  intention  had  been  to  concentrate 
the  whole  of  this  force  at  Ancona  and  thence  lead  it  in 
one  body  straight  into  Romagna,^  but  political  considera- 

1  Orders  were  issued  from  Solmona  on  the  1 8th  of  March  for  the  Royal  Guard 
to  march  on  Ancona. — Arch,  di  Stato^  Guerra^  xxv.  1059. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  355 

tions,  so  often  the  soldier's  bane,  dictated  a  change  at 
the  last  moment.  If  the  Neapolitan  army  was  concen- 
trated wholly  to  the  east  of  the  Apennines,  the  Austrians 
would  be  able  to  gather  force  on  the  west  coast  from 
the  Papal  and  Tuscan  governments  and  to  threaten  not 
only  the  King's  flank  but  perhaps  even  Naples  itself. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  a  portion  of  the  Neapolitan 
troops  marched  to  the  Po  through  the  Papal  States  and 
Tuscany,  a  certain  amount  of  strength  that  Austria 
might  gain  would  be  diverted  to  Naples  instead.  For 
this  reason  Joachim  decided  to  make  a  detached  com- 
mand of  the  Royal  Guard,  and  to  move  it  to  the  valley 
of  the  Po  through  Rome  and  Florence. 

Under  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron  this  column, 
about  7000  strong,  marched  into  Papal  territory  ;  the 
generals'  orders  were  to  observe  a  friendly  attitude 
to  the  inhabitants,  to  leave  Rome  at  their  left  hand, 
and,  marching  through  Foligno  and  Arezzo,  to  reach 
Florence  on  the  3rd  of  April.  Joachim  announced  the 
approach  of  his  troops  to  the  Grand  Duke  in  a  letter, 
assuring  him,  somewhat  paradoxically,  that  his  territory 
would  be  respected. 

While  Pignatelli-Strongoli  marched  through  Papal 
territory,  Joachim  with  the  rest  of  the  army  advanced 
from  Ancona  northwards.  On  the  28th  of  March  he 
published  a  decree  annexing  Urbino,  Pesaro,  and 
Gubbio.  On  the  29th  six  Neapolitan  gunboats  were 
ordered  to  sail  up  the  coast  from  Ancona  to  Rimini, 
a  frigate  following  them  ;  they  were  intended  to  operate 
in  conjunction  with  the  army  as  it  advanced  up  the 
coast. 

South  of  Bologna  the  Austrians  had  but  few  troops, 
merely  outposts  ;  they  withdrew  before  Joachim's  rapid 
advance,  and  the  only  shots  exchanged  were  in  a  slight 


356  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

skirmish  at  Cesena.  After  this  affair  Joachim  had  a 
number  of  his  officers  to  dine  with  him,  and,  probably  to 
animate  them  with  a  breath  of  his  own  ardent  spirit, 
talked,  much  to  the  surprise  of  his  hearers,  of  the  valour 
and  excellence  of  the  army  and  of  the  conquests  that 
lay  before  them.  On  the  2nd  of  April  Joachim  reached 
Bologna,  which  the  Austrians  abandoned  at  his  approach. 
So  rapidly  had  the  Neapolitan  columns  been  hurried 
along  the  Emilian  road  that  Lecchi's  division  alone  had 
600  laggards.  The  King's  reception  from  the  Bolognese 
was  not  so  warm  as  it  had  been  the  year  before,  yet  a 
number  of  women  could  not  resist  the  desire  of  waving 
a  handkerchief  at  the  striking  figure  of  the  first  horse- 
man of  Europe,  and  caused  him  to  turn  smilingly  back 
to  his  staff  with  the  remark  :  "  Well,  you  see,  the  ladies 
are  all  for  us  !  "  ^ 