

On  the  13th  the  King  called  a  council  of  war  at 
Bologna.  At  this  the  opinion  of  the  generals  coincided 
with  his  own,  that  the  only  hope  of  success  lay  in 
defeating  the  Austrians  in  battle.  To  effect  this  the 
first  object  was  to  meet  them  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances,  and  the  King  neither  liking  the  positions 
that  the  neighbourhood  of  Bologna  afforded,  nor  satis- 
fied to  fight  a  decisive  battle  without  the  Royal  Guard, 
decided  to  continue  his  retreat. 

Two  lines  were  open  for  retreating  from  Bologna  to 
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  the  one  by  Ancona,  the  other 
by  Florence,  the  one  east,  the  other  west  of  the  Apen- 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  363 

nines.  Their  length  was  approximately  equal.  The 
King  chose  the  former  because  it  offered  more  and 
better  defensive  positions,  because  his  magazines  were  at 
Ancona,  and  because  along  that  line  reinforcements  and 
supplies  were  being  continuously  pushed  up  from  Naples. 
A  retreat  by  way  of  Florence  only  offered  one  induce- 
ment, that  it  would  have  had  the  effect  of  uniting 
the  Royal  Guard  to  the  army  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.^  Joachim  accordingly  issued  orders  for  the 
baggage  train  of  the  army  to  be  moved  to  Ancona, 
took  what  measures  he  could  to  retard  the  Austrians  in 
their  advance  towards  Bologna,  and  sent  instructions  to 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  to  rejoin  the  main  army  in  the 
Marches,  moving  through  Arezzo  and  S.  Sepolcro. 
This  order  to  retreat  Pignatelli-Strongoli  and  Livron 
responded  to  with  a  promptitude  and  alacrity  they  had 
not  hitherto  shown. 

The  operations  of  the  Royal  Guard  in  Tuscany  had 
been  far  from  glorious.  Fair  discipline  was  observed  on 
the  march,  though  a  great  deal  of  desertion  took  place, 
and  that  mostly  among  the  men  of  northern  origin, 
veterans  of  the  Spanish  and  German  wars.  Rome  was 
not  entered,  though  as  a  measure  of  precaution  the  Pope 
saw  fit  to  abandon  his  capital.  On  the  8th  of  April, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  Pignatelli-Strongoli  occupied 
Florence.  The  only  force  in  Tuscany  was  a  small 
Austrian  detachment  with  some  Tuscan  levies  ;  but 
the  impetuous  Nugent  was  their  commander.  How 
weak  he  was  in  numbers  may  be  clearly  inferred  from 

^  CoUctta  in  his  Memoria  militare,  following  D'  Ambrosio,  whose  MS.  he  appears 
to  have  largely  copied,  gives  a  long  dissertation  on  what  he  terms  Joachim's  excentric 
retreat,  somewhat  superfluously  dragging  in  Bulow  and  Jomini.  The  whole  discus- 
sion, like  so  many  of  CoUetta's  disquisitions,  is  quite  pointless,  because  between  the 
route  via  Florence  and  that  'via  Ancona  there  is  practically  no  difference  in  mileage. 
The  line  of  retreat  chosen  was  obvious  and  necessary. 