


358  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

below  the  bridge.  In  several  places  they  managed  to 
wade  across  the  channels  and  wide  sandy  bed  of  the 
river  ;  at  one  spot  a  whole  battalion  reached  the  further 
side,  but,  unwilling  to  face  the  Austrian  fire,  took 
refuge  under  the  bank  and  eventually  surrendered. 
Close  to  the  bridge  no  progress  was  made,  the  Austrian 
field-pieces  sending  their  fire  straight  down  the  long 
causeway  to  where  Joachim  and  his  staff  watched  the 
undecisive  firing  proceeding.  Then  an  act  of  fine  mili- 
tary courage  turned  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  Joachim 
called  on  General  Filangieri  to  carry  the  bridge.  That 
brave  officer  immediately  placed  himself  at  the  head  of 
a  small  squadron  of  lancers,  and,  followed  by  twenty 
or  thirty  of  the  bravest  of  them,  galloped  the  whole 
length  of  the  bridge,  successfully  driving  the  Austrians 
from  their  position  at  the  further  end.  Filangieri  fell 
covered  with  wounds,  but  his  bold  dash  was  promptly 
supported  by  the  King,  the  Neapolitan  infantry  soon 
made  good  a  lodgment  on  the  further  bank  of  the 
Panaro,  and  Bianchi,  seeing  his  centre  thus  pierced, 
retreated  in  good  order  on  Modena.  The  Austrians 
had  lost  69  killed,  316  wounded,  and  66  missing  ;  the 
Neapolitans  26  killed,  95  wounded,  and  542  missing. 

Carascosa  pressed  on  after  the  retiring  Austrians 
and  occupied  Modena,  whence  he  threw  outposts  in 
the  direction  of  Reggio  and  of  Borgoforte.  Joachim 
did  not  continue  with  this  division,  however,  but  turned 
back,  for  he  was  not  in  sufficient  strength  to  push 
beyond  Modena  for  the  present.  Until  his  right  flank 
and  rear  had  been  secured  by  D'  Ambrosio's  operations 
near  Ferrara  he  could  not  safely  advance  further  towards 
Piacenza. 

D'  Ambrosio  had  marched  through  Ferrara,  where 
the  small  Austrian  garrison  took  refuge  in  the  citadel. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  359 

to  Occhiobello,  where  he  found  a  strongly  fortified 
bridge-head  sufficiently  garrisoned,  and  was  brought  to 
a  standstill.  Joachim  hurried  back  from  his  successful 
engagement  on  the  Panaro  to  the  help  of  D'  Ambrosio. 
The  King  arrived  at  Ferrara  on  the  6th,  but  found  the 
citadel  too  strong  for  a  coup-de-main.  The  next  day 
with  D'  Aquino's  brigade  he  captured  the  Austrian 
positions  at  the  bridge  of  Lagoscuro  and  marched 
thence  to  Occhiobello,  where  he  effected  his  junction 
with  D'  Ambrosio  on  the  night  of  the  7th.  On  the 
8  th  the  King  directed  a  strong  attack  on  the  Austrian 
fortifications,  now  defended  by  nearly  3000  men.  That 
attack,  like  all  those  previously  made  by  D'  Ambrosio, 
failed,  and  with  it  failed  the  whole  plan  of  campaign. 
Six  days  did  the  Neapolitans  remain  in  front  of 
the  bridge-head  at  Occhiobello  in  the  hope  of  driving 
out  the  Austrians,  but  the  attack  of  the  8  th  of  April 
when  Joachim  in  person  led  them  proved  to  be  the 
turning-point.  Each  day  after  that  the  Neapolitan 
attack  became  more  feeble  and  the  Austrian  defenders 
received  reinforcements  from  the  north. 