

The  position  was  a  distressing  one  for  Joachim,  yet 
it  might  have  been  remedied  in  the  course  of  a  few 
hours,  for  Bianchi  showed  no  sign  of  taking  the 
offensive  and  the  day  was  only  just  beginning  ;  but 
the  folly  and  indiscipline  of  Pignatelli-Strongoli  threw 
away  what  chance  of  success  yet  remained.  The 
commander  of  the  infantry  of  the  Guard  was  probably 
smarting  under  the  reproaches  addressed  to  him  by  the 
King  for  the  manner  in  which  he  had  acquitted  himself 
in  Tuscany.  Whether  for  this  reason,  or  from  mere 
wrongheadedness,  he  no  sooner  had  his  troops  de- 
ployed than  he  ordered  them  to  advance  and  attack  the 
Austrian  position  at  Cassone.  Joachim  galloped  up  as 
rapidly  as  he  could  to  the  point  where  firing  had  now 
broken  out.  He  arrived  too  late  to  disengage  the 
troops,  and  found  he  could  do  nothing  but  attempt  to 
direct  the  fighting  as  well  as  circumstances  would 
permit.  His  infantry  fought  well,  and  after  some 
heavy  firing  carried  Cassone  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet. 
But  Bianchi  had  some  artillery  well  placed  beyond  the 


372  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

village,  and  the  Guard  appeared  unable  to  make  further 
headway.  It  was  urgent  that  pressure  should  be 
applied  at  some  other  point  of  the  Austrian  line. 
D*  Aquino's  division  had  now  been  in  part  assembled 
and  formed  under  cover  of  the  woods  about  the  Monte 
Milone,  and  Joachim  ordered  it  to  advance  against  the 
Austrian  left.  D'  Aquino  disposed  his  troops  en  echelon^ 
right  flank  forward,  each  echelon  made  up  of  one 
battalion  formed  in  square.  This  formation  in  squares, 
an  ineffective  and  clumsy  one  for  attack,  was  judged 
necessary  by  D'  Aquino  as  his  right  flank  was  not 
covered,  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  Lecchi,  and  he 
feared  a  possible  charge  from  Bianchi's  dragoons. 

On  the  ridge  along  his  centre  Joachim  had  massed 
his  guns  and  was  directing  their  fire  across  a  hollow 
towards  the  Austrian  left.  Bianchi,  now  feeling  secure 
of  his  right  flank,  had  taken  up  his  position  at  the 
menaced  point,  and  transferred  a  couple  of  battalions 
of  Jagers  to  strengthen  his  line.  He  relied  greatly  on 
their  good  rifle  practice,  for  he  was  very  weak  in 
artillery.  D'  Aquino's  division  slowly  emerged  from 
the  woods,  moved  down  into  the  hollow,  and  marched 
towards  the  Austrian  position;  its  leading  echelon  was 
composed  of  the  3rd  Light  Infantry,  the  regiment  that 
had  behaved  so  badly  the  day  before  in  the  attack  on  the 
Monte  Milone.  When  within  firing  distance  the  Jagers 
and  Austrian  field-pieces  sent  a  plunging  fire  down  the 
hillside  into  the  Neapolitans,  and  nearly  immediately 
they  broke.  The  second  square,  seeing  the  first 
disbanding,  wavered.  At  this  moment  the  Tuscan 
dragoons  charged  on  the  Neapolitan  flank,  while  the 
Austrian  infantry  advanced,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
D'  Aquino's  division  was  routed. 