

The  Austrian  general  had  continued  his  march  with 
great  rapidity.  At  Florence  on  the  20th,  at  Arezzo  on 
the  23  rd,  he  had  reached  Camerino  on  the  29th.  Thence 
he  had  extended  to  his  left,  towards  Jesi,  at  which 
point  he  hoped  to  get  into  touch  with  Neipperg,  and 
slowly  advanced  towards  Tolentino  and  Macerata. 

As  soon  as  Joachim  realized  that  the  Austrian  army 
was  in  two  wings,  and  that  these  two  wings  were 
rapidly  drawing  together,  he  decided  to  attack  them  at 
once,  and,  if  possible,  beat  them  in  detail.  Bianchi's 
army  was  the  more  threatening  to  his  line  of  communi- 
cations, and  he  rightly  decided  to  direct  his  main  attack 
against  it.  Carascosa  was  left  in  front  of  Neipperg, 
with  orders  to  delay  the  Austrian  advance  and  to  fall 
back  as  slowly  as  possible  towards  Ancona.  On  the 
30th  he  took  up  a  good  position  at  Sinigaglia,  and, 
supported  by  the  gunboats  that  caused  the  Austrians 
much  annoyance,  fought  a  brief  engagement  that 
momentarily  delayed    Neipperg.     Meanwhile  Joachim 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  369 

was  concentrating  his  remaining  divisions  as  rapidly  as 
possible  on  Macerata.  On  the  ist  of  May  Bianchi 
occupied  Tolentino,  and  pushed  detachments  down  the 
valley  of  the  Chieti.  They  soon  got  into  contact  with 
the  Neapolitans.  Joachim,  who  now  had  a  consider- 
able part  of  his  army  in  Macerata  and  the  immediate 
neighbourhood,  decided  to  attempt  a  reconnaissance  in 
force  towards  Tolentino  on  the  following  day. 

On  the  2nd  of  May  Joachim  advanced  up  the  valley 
of  the  Chieti  and  along  the  range  of  hills  on  its  northern 
bank,  with  D'  Ambrosio's  division  and  the  cavalry  of 
the  Guard  under  Livron.  Bianchi  also  advanced  and 
sent  a  considerable  detachment  of  infantry  to  occupy 
one  of  the  highest  points  between  Macerata  and 
Tolentino,  the  Monte  Milone.  The  Neapolitan  lancers 
in  the  valley  of  the  Chieti  first  came  into  contact  with 
the  Austrian  patrols,  which  they  drove  before  them. 
The  King,  having  reconnoitred  the  Monte  Milone,  decided 
to  get  possession  of  it  if  possible,  and  ordered  D'  Ambrosio 
to  deploy  and  attack  the  position.  The  troops  went 
forward,  but  as  soon  as  the  leading  regiment,  the  3rd 
Light  Infantry,  got  under  fire,  it  broke  up  in  confusion. 
Joachim  galloped  up,  dismounted,  threw  himself  among 
the  men,  rallied  them,  and  led  them  forward  again  in 
person.  But  the  attack  was  unsuccessful ;  the  King 
was  repulsed  and  General  D'  Ambrosio  was  severely 
wounded.  Then  Joachim  attempted  a  flanking  move- 
ment, this  time  with  better  success,  and  finally  the 
Austrians  withdrew,  leaving  the  Monte  Milone  with  a 
number  of  prisoners  in  the  King's  hands.  That  night 
D'  Ambrosio's  division,  the  command  of  which  had  now 
devolved  on  D'  Aquino,  camped  on  the  Monte  Milone. 
Bianchi  had  fallen  back  to  a  position  just  in  front  of 
Tolentino,  where  he  was  able  that  night  to  concentrate 
VOL.  I  2  B 