

The  last  hours  of  King  Joachim's  reign  had  come. 
On  the  1 8  th  of  May  the  Monitor e  maintained  an 
ominous  reserve  on  the  political  situation  ;  it  diplo- 
matically devoted  the  greater  part  of  its  space  to  a  far 
from  burning  topic, — an  imaginary  conversation  between 
Pericles  and  Anaxagoras.  On  the  following  day  it 
appeared  for  the  last  time,  announcing  the  return  of 
Joachim  to  his  capital  and  the  warm  reception  he  had 
met  with.^  Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  of  May- 
King    Joachim    rode    out   from    his    palace   of  Naples 

^  Nearly  as  curious  as  the  dialogue  between  Pericles  and  Anaxagoras  in  the 
expiring  Monitore  is  the  playbill  of  the  theatres.  On  the  last  night  of  Joachim's 
reign  the  Fiorentini  gave  Gli  accidenti  delta  -vita ;  the  Fenice,  V  infermo  ad  arte  ; 
while  the  Teatro  della  Sorte  announced  Con  la  burla  i'  incommincia  ' 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  383 

accompanied  by  his  Master  of  the  Horse,  the  Duke  of 
Roccaromana,  and  by  a  few  officers  of  his  staff.  He  had 
discarded  uniform  and  wore  plain  clothes.  He  pushed 
rapidly  through  the  crowded  streets  that  lead  up  to  the 
Pizzofalcone,  along  the  Riviera  di  Chiaja,  and  to  the 
entrance  of  the  grotto  of  Posilipo,  whence  he  saw  for 
the  last  time  that  wonderful  city  that  had  during  seven 
eventful  years  been  his  capital.  On  through  the  long 
tunnel  of  the  Romans  he  rode,  out  into  the  wild  and 
romantic  region  beyond,  where  the  red  and  white  houses 
of  Pozzuoli  and  Baia  give  life  and  give  depth  to  a 
wonderful  scene,  where  the  mighty  relics  of  a  past 
civilization  and  the  mightier  remains  of  upheaved  nature 
might  well  arouse  chastening  reflections  in  the  mind  of 
the  dethroned  monarch.  At  the  loveliest  hour  of  the  day, 
when  the  sun  rushes  down  to  the  ocean,  the  fugitive 
king  urged  his  horse  up  the  slopes  that  lead  from  Lake 
Averno  to  the  Arco  Felice.  If  he  then  gazed  backwards 
he  might  have  seen  once  more  in  all  its  sunset  glory  that 
enchanted  region,  the  capes  and  islands,  the  hills,  the 
blue  bays,  and  the  purple  cone  of  Vesuvius  watchful 
over  all ;  all  his, — and  now  all  sinking  into  night.  And 
riding  but  a  few  paces  more  along  the  road  the  Ancients 
built,  through  the  arch  that  crowns  the  Monte  Grillo,  he 
could  watch  the  sun  descend  to  the  blue  Mediterranean 
that  had  so  often  threatened  him,  fall  beyond  the 
islands  whence  his  enemies  had  so  long  struggled  to 
overthrow  him,  disappear  towards  Corsica  whence  the 
maker  of  his  fortune  had  come.  As  he  urged  his  horse 
down  towards  the  coast-line  through  the  ruins  of  ancient 
Kumas,  the  sky  was  darkening  and  the  curving  white 
fringed  shore  that  fades  into  the  haze  of  the  horizon 
towards  Gaeta  gradually  became  dim.  In  the  dark- 
ness the  little  group  of  horsemen  finally  rode  up  to  a 