

But  the  Neapolitan  guns  from  the  ridge  redoubled 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  373 

their  fire,  and  the  Austrians  soon  stopped,  unwilling  as 
yet  to  risk  an  offensive  movement.  The  King,  followed 
by  his  staff,  did  his  utmost  to  re-form  the  troops.  He 
exposed  himself  to  the  hottest  fire.  Many  of  the 
officers  were  killed  and  wounded  by  his  side,  but  all  in 
vain,  for  the  Neapolitan  army  was  rapidly  nearing 
defeat.  As  Joachim  was  attempting  to  re-form  his 
broken  troops  under  cover  of  the  artillery,  a  staff  officer 
rode  up  with  a  dispatch  from  the  Abruzzi.  It  announced 
that  Nugent  with  a  small  force  had  just  reached  Aquila, 
within  the  frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  and  nearly  on  the 
King's  line  of  communications.  Joachim  had  now  no 
choice  but  to  retreat,  and  not  only  to  retreat  but  to  do 
so  rapidly  enough  to  reach  Naples  before  any  detached 
Austrian  corps  could  cut  him  off.  Orders  were  at 
once  issued  for  the  troops  to  fall  back  on  Macerata. 

To  point  the  moral  of  Joachim's  defeat  is  superfluous, 
and  no  deduction  can  be  drawn  here  that  the  intelligent 
reader  could  fail  to  drav/  for  himself.  It  may,  however, 
be  said  that  this  last  appearance  on  a  battlefield  of  one 
of  the  finest  soldiers  of  his  day  was  by  no  means 
entirely  discreditable.  His  courage  and  spirit  were 
never  more  conspicuous,  and  rarely  has  the  unaided 
example  of  one  man  done  more  to  inspire  a  bad  army 
to  effort.  Even  his  strategy  was  not  entirely  faulty, 
for  the  battle  was  not  fought  on  the  lines  that  he 
intended  ;  indeed  Joachim  might  have  said  with  some 
show  of  justification  that  Pignatelli-Strongoli's  dis- 
obedience and  bad  conduct  had  lost  him  the  battle. 
Yet  on  the  other  hand  the  King's  greatest  fault  as  a 
soldier  was  never  more  clearly  shown  than  when  he 
failed  to  relieve  that  general  of  his  command  and 
merely  reproached  him  with  his  ill-behaviour.  So  well 
had  the  Royal  Guard  and  many  of  Joachim's  officers 


374  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

fought  that  Blanchi  declared  that  the  Neapolitans  had 
shown  great  courage.  The  Austrian  loss  was  over  800 
in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  ;  the  Neapolitan  1720 
killed  and  wounded,  and  over  2000  prisoners. 

Pignatelli-Strongoli  had  continued  to  show  insub- 
ordination during  the  progress  of  the  battle,  and  an 
example  in  which  he  was  so  well  qualified  to  lead  the 
way  spread  rapidly  in  the  hour  of  misfortune.  No 
sooner  had  the  retreat  begun  than  the  Neapolitan 
generals,  nearly  without  exception,  abandoned  their 
commands  and  rode  into  Macerata.  There  an  informal 
consultation  at  the  King's  headquarters  degenerated 
into  a  scene  of  undignified  recrimination  and  reproach. 
D'  Aquino  had  the  hardihood  to  call  on  the  King  to 
abdicate,  and  was  immediately  relieved  of  his  command. 
Generals  and  men  were  starving  and  clamoured  for 
food.  In  the  course  of  the  ensuing  night  the  remnant 
of  D'  Aquino's  division  dispersed,  scouring  fields  and 
villages  for  the  means  of  preserving  life  ;  they  mostly 
fell  an  easy  prey  to  Bianchi's  cavalry  and  Jagers. 