


370  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

his  whole  force.  He  was  prepared  to  accept  battle  if 
necessary  on  the  following  day,  yet  he  was  by  no  means 
reassured  as  to  his  position,  for  he  had  not  yet  got 
into  touch  with  Neipperg,  and  he  realized  that  he  would 
probably  have  to  fight  unassisted  against  the  whole  of 
the  Neapolitan  army.  He  made  his  dispositions  for 
defence  in  the  following  manner.  A  detachment  was 
placed  to  the  south  of  the  Chieti.  The  main  Austrian 
line  was  drawn  up  to  the  north  of  and  at  right  angles 
to  that  stream  and  across  the  range  of  hills  that  runs 
parallel  to  it.  In  the  centre  an  advanced  position  was 
held  in  the  village  of  Cassone.  Further  to  the  left  the 
Austrians  faced  the  Monte  Milone,  and  on  the  extreme 
flank,  where  the  slopes  ran  down  into  flatter  country, 
Bianchi  placed  a  regiment  of  Tuscan  dragoons.  He 
had  about  1 1 ,000  men  in  line. 

Joachim  moved  the  Royal  Guard  up  the  valley  of 
the  Chieti  in  the  early  morning  of  the  3rd  of  May.  It 
was  intended  to  fill  the  space  between  the  river  and 
D'  Aquino's  division  on  the  Monte  Milone.  Lecchi 
had  orders  to  march  from  Macerata  and  take  up  his 
position  on  D'  Aquino's  right.  The  King's  intention 
was  to  attack  Cassone  with  the  Guard,  and  when  that 
had  sufficiently  drawn  the  Austrian  forces,  to  move 
forward  from  the  Monte  Milone  and  swing  Lecchi's 
division,  pivoting  on  D'  Aquino's,  right  around  Bianchi's 
left  flank.  Had  his  orders  been  carried  out  he  would 
have  had  some  15,000  men  in  the  field  ;  as  it  was  he 
had  not,  and  his  forces  actually  present  probably  did 
not  exceed  those  of  the  Austrians. 

The  chief  cause  of  the  failure  of  Joachim's  plans 
was  the  breakdown  of  the  commissariat  department. 
The  men  of  D'  Aquino's  division  had  scattered  from 
their  bivouac  on  the  Monte  Milone  in  search  of  food. 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  371 

The  Royal  Guard  had  only  obtained  the  scantiest  of 
rations  by  plundering  the  houses  of  Macerata.  Lecchi's 
division  had  fared  and  behaved  worst  of  all.  His  men 
had  arrived  near  Macerata  late  at  night  after  a  heavy 
march  and  had  not  been  able  to  find  any  food  whatever. 
They  dispersed  through  the  country  searching  for  sub- 
sistence, and  in  the  early  morning,  when  the  division 
should  have  marched  to  the  front,  it  was  impossible  to 
collect  a  single  battalion.  When  at  about  nine  o'clock 
Pignatelli-Strongoli  was  deploying  between  Monte 
Milone  and  the  Chieti,  D'  Aquino's  division  was  not  yet 
under  arms,  while  Lecchi  was  writing  to  the  chief  of 
staff  that  he  would  be  unable  to  march  from  Macerata 
until  his  men  had  obtained  food. 