

Naples  be  thought  to  have  borne  on  the  choice  between  the  Reno  and  the  Ronco 
as  a  position  for  offering  battle.  The  supposition  rests  on  nothing  but  vague  asser- 
tion, and  must  be  dismissed. 

^  Malet,  Voyage  en  Italie,  i66. 


378  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

English  cruisers  once  more  patrolled  the  coast  ;  gold 
was  becoming  scarce  ;  and  to  supply  his  wants  during 
the  campaign,  Joachim  had  raised  a  forced  loan  ot 
2,000,000  francs.  Strongest  of  all  the  influences  against 
the  King  was  that  of  the  Church.  He  had  never  been 
directly  recognised  by  the  Pope,  never  been  through 
the  rite  of  coronation,  a  ceremony  of  such  immense 
import  to  a  Catholic  people.  Between  the  uncrowned 
King  in  possession  and  the  duly  anointed  monarch 
not  far  away,  the  great  mass  of  the  people  made  a  choice 
that  was  kept  profoundly  secret.  The  antagonism  of 
the  Pope,  roused  by  the  occupation  of  part  of  his  terri- 
tory by  the  Neapolitan  troops,  and  carefully  fanned  by 
the  French  and  Spanish  Bourbons,  rendered  even  more 
hostile  the  attitude  of  the  Neapolitan  clergy  towards  the 
King.  Largely  as  a  consequence  of  that  attitude  the 
people  were  cold,  and  all  efforts  to  organize  a  general 
levy  were  fruitless. 

\^t  was  not  wrongly  that  Joachim  had  judged  that 
the  constitutional,  or  national,  or  Italian  party  was 
the  only  one  that  could  help  him.  And  it  is  not 
impossible  that  his  constant  reluctance  to  follow  them 
on  the  extreme  courses  they  were  constantly  advocat- 
ing stood  for  a  political  wisdom  that  discerned  fully 
how  weak  in  numbers  that  party  really  was.  How 
did  the  constitutional  question  stand  ?  In  a  cam- 
paign fought  with  the  clear  object  of  forming  a  large 
Italian  state  the  risk  taken  was  so  great,  his  crown  was 
so  clearly  staked,  that  it  appears  now  as  though  he 
should  not  have  hesitated  to  place  his  every  means  in 
the  scale,  as  though  he  should  have  clearly  announced 
that  the  war  was  more  than  one  of  ambition  and 
aggrandisement,  and  was  for  the  furtherance  of  the  civil 
liberties  of  the  Italian   people.  *    The   plausible  reason 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  379 

that  had  tied  his  hands  the  year  before  was  now  wanting. 
He  could  no  longer  say  that  his  alliance  with  Austria 
made  it  impolitic  for  him  to  give  his  subjects  a  consti- 
tution. Joachim  had  proved  less  bold,  and  even  less 
successful  in  a  political  than  in  a  military  sense.  On 
arriving  at  Ancona  to  take  command  of  the  army  he 
said  to  Pepe  :  .  .  .  "  We  will  talk  shortly  of  giving  a 
constitution  to  the  kingdom.  ..."  But  he  paltered 
with  a  question  that  ought  to  have  been  finally  settled, 
if  at  all,  before  he  left  Naples  for  the  front.  Only  when 
all  was  lost,  as  a  useless  and  ungracious  sop  to  exhausted 
fortune,  did  Joachim  proclaim  what  might,  two  years 
earlier,  have  crowned  the  great  political  work  of  the 
French  in  Italy.  On  the  12th  of  May,  when  the 
Neapolitan  army  had  fled  nearly  to  the  gates  of  the 
capital,  a  decree  was  issued  granting  Naples  a  constitu- 
tion ;  it  was  ante-dated  Rimini  the  30th  of  March. 