


376  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

to  review  other  events  lost  to  sight  during  the  relation 
of  the  campaign  of  Tolentino. 

One  of  the  chief  reasons  that  had  dictated  to  Joachim 
as  the  basis  of  his  policy  a  rapid  and  unexpected  stroke 
at  northern  Italy  was  the  danger  that  for  some  years 
had  constantly  menaced  Naples,  the  danger  from  sea, 
from  Great  Britain.  Although  he  had  not  succeeded 
in  obtaining  a  treaty  of  peace  from  that  Power,  yet  by 
the  terms  of  the  armistice  signed  by  Bentinck  a  year 
before,  it  was  necessary  that  each  government  should 
give  the  other  three  months'  notice  before  resuming 
hostilities.  The  King,  therefore,  chose  to  assume  that 
no  attack  need  be  feared  from  Great  Britain  so  long  as 
the  armistice  was  not  denounced. 

This  attitude  availed  nothing,  for  Bentinck,  now 
once  more  in  Genoa,  as  alert  and  prompt  as  usual, 
demanded  explanations  of  the  military  preparations  of 
the  Neapolitan  Government  as  early  as  the  22  nd  of 
March  ;  while  on  the  5  th  of  April  he  declared  in  a 
formal  note  that  the  alliance  of  Great  Britain  with 
Austria  made  every  act  of  hostility  against  the  latter 
Power  one  against  the  former  as  well,  and  that  the  in- 
stant he  was  notified  by  the  Austrian  Government  that 
hostilities  had  occurred,  he  should  consider  the  armistice 
between  Great  Britain  and  Naples  at  an  end.  Bentinck's 
position  was  supported  by  the  British  Cabinet,  and  it 
was  quickly  arranged  that  an  Anglo-Sicilian  expedition 
should  once  more  be  sent  against  Naples.^ 

1  Stewart  to  Wellington,  April  25,  181  5,  Wellington,  Sup.  Dhps.  x.  128,  That 
Bentinck's  action  affected  the  King  of  Naples'  military  operations  in  the  valley  of 
the  Po,  as  is  generally  related,  cannot  be  believed.  If  those  operations  are  closely 
dated  and  followed  they  will  all  appear  to  depend  on  purely  military  reasons  that 
left  no  sound  alternative  course  up  to  the  14th  of  April.  After  that  date  it  might 
possibly  be  said  that  Joachim  could  have  concentrated  on  the  Reno  covering  Bologna, 
and  there  accepted  battle.  But  there  were  plenty  of  reasons — military,  political, 
and   of  expediency — against  that  course,  nor  can  the  fear  of  a   British  attack  on 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  377 

The  population  of  Naples  had  quite  as  sensitive  a 
political  instinct  for  the  danger  that  menaced  them  from 
the  sea,  from  Great  Britain  and  Sicily,  as  their  King. 
Besides  this,  the  anti-Napoleonic  feeling  that  had  coursed 
through  the  Continent  from  Moscow  to  Madrid  had 
its  counterpart  at  Naples.  Unmilitary  in  their  in- 
stincts, the  Neapolitans  were  weary  of  the  conscription, 
of  being  marched  to  distant  lands  for  the  pleasure  of 
the  French  Emperor  ;  they  resented  the  weight  of  taxa- 
tion that  kept  up  an  army  they  detested  and  the  pomp 
of  a  court  that  did  not  represent  them.  As  is  usual 
in  matters  of  government,  no  balance  of  gain  was 
struck,  the  benefits  that  had  been  secured  were  for- 
gotten in  what  gave  opportunity  for  present  criticism. 
The  death  of  Mary  Caroline  had  removed  one  great 
cause  of  dislike  to  the  Bourbons,  and  in  the  general 
feeling  of  unrest  and  desire  for  settlement,  nothing  of 
Ferdinand  was  so  well  remembered  as  his  paternal 
methods,  his  truly  Neapolitan  manners,  his  easy-going 
simplicity.  The  pomp  of  Joachim's  Court  was  main- 
tained from  a  well-administered  revenue,  while  the  old- 
fashioned  ceremonial  of  Ferdinand  represented  unintelli- 
gent, wasteful,  and  burdensome  finance.  But  sentiment, 
not  reason,  guides  popular  criticism  ;  and  sentiment 
at  Naples  now  apprehended  more  change,  more  revolu- 
tion, and  pined  for  Bourbonism  as  the  only  possible 
permanent  settlement.^  The  merchants  of  Naples  were 
dissatisfied.  The  trade  of  the  port,  that  had  sprung  up 
once  more  under  the  armistice  after  an  interruption  of 
so  many  years,  had  been  cut  ofi^  again  by  the  events 
that   had   followed  Napoleon's    departure   from   Elba ; 