

Joachim's  retreat  from  Macerata  was  even  more 
disastrous  than  the  battle  of  Tolentino.  His  army 
literally  melted  away.  Heavy  rains  turned  the  Adriatic 
road  into  a  quagmire.  The  day  after  the  battle  it  was 
only  after  some  skirmishing  with  the  Austrians  and  the 
greatest  difiiculty  with  his  subordinates  that  the  King 
was  able  to  effect  a  junction  with  Carascosa  and  get 
the  army  started  on  the  road  to  Naples.  Bianchi  and 
Neipperg  together  could  now  dispose  of  22,000  men, 
and  they  hastened  on  in  pursuit  of  the  King.^  By  a 
rapid  advance  they  hoped  to  complete  the  demoraliza- 
tion of  the  Neapolitans  and  also  to  forestall  any  possible 

^  Neipperg  had  been  weakened  by  having  to  send  8000  men  under  Best  back 
from  Rimini  to  take  part  in  the  operations  against  France. 


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  375 

move  of  the  British  against  Naples  by  sea.  Between 
the  Chieti  and  the  Tronto  Joachim's  army  lost  three- 
quarters  of  its  numbers.  Many  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
Royal  Guard  deserted  ;  the  Neapolitans  mutinied  or 
went  home.  In  six  days  Joachim  arrived  at  Castel  di 
Sangro,  in  the  heart  of  the  Abruzzi,  and  there,  with 
what  feelings  it  is  difficult  to  realize,  he  found  a  traveller 
from  Naples  come  to  meet  him,  his  old  companion  in 
arms,  his  chief  of  staff  when  he  commanded  the  cavalry 
of  the  Grande  Armee^  Count  Belliard.  This  capable 
and  influential  officer  had  been  sent  on  a  special  mission 
to  the  •  King  by  Napoleon,  who,  not  at  fault,  viewed 
with  complete  mistrust  the  generals  and  staff  of  the 
Neapolitan  army.  Belliard  was  intended  to  advise  and 
guide  Joachim,  but  had  arrived  when  no  counsel  could 
avail. 

Belliard  reached  Naples  on  the  morning  of  the 
9th  of  May.  Before  proceeding  to  join  the  King  he 
was  received  by  the  Queen,  and  she  declared  to  him 
that  her  utmost  endeavour  had  been  used  to  dissuade 
Joachim  from  war,  and  that  neither  she,  nor  Mosbourg, 
nor  Gallo  had  succeeded  in  moving  him.  But  a  few 
days  later  Belliard  noted  that  the  King's  version  of 
matters  was  precisely  the  reverse,  and  that  he  ascribed 
the  war  entirely  to  the  urgent  solicitations  of  Caroline. 

On  the  same  day  that  Belliard  reached  Castel  di 
Sangro,  what  was  left  of  the  Neapolitan  army  passed 
through  it,  not  retreating,  but  ''  fleeing,"  as  the  French 
general  recorded.  There  was  a  short  skirmish  with  the 
Austrian  advanced  guard,  and  the  retreat  was  continued 
to  Venafro.  For  a  few  days  after  this  the  King  main- 
tained some  semblance  of  taking  military  measures  to 
reorganize  the  army  and  defend  the  kingdom,  but  before 
coming  to  his  final  retreat  to  Naples  it  will  be  necessary 