

It  was  far  too  late  now  for  Joachim  to  attempt  by 
any  means,  political  or  military,  to  retrieve  his  broken 
fortunes.  His  rupture  with  Austria  had  immediately 
crystallized  into  unanimity  the  hitherto  divided  opinions 
of  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  and  the  war  in  which  he  had 
engaged  was  immediately  accepted  as  one  of  which  the 
only  conclusion  could  be  a  Bourbon  restoration.  Before 
the  battle  of  Tolentino  was  fought  the  NeapoHtan  camps 
were  flooded  with  proclamations  announcing  the  return 
of  Ferdinand.  Metternich  was  not  prepared  to  com- 
promise, and  when  he  heard  from  Neipperg  that  Joachim 
was  willing  to  treat,  he  instructed  him  that  the  only 
terms  he  could  offer  to  the  King  were  an  annual  revenue 
of  1,000,000  florins  in  a  private  station  in  return  for 
his  resignation  of  the  throne.  On  receipt  of  these 
instructions,  a  week  after  Tolentino,  Neipperg  and 
Bianchi  conferred  and  agreed  not  to  act  on  them,  for 


380  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

they  considered  Joachim's  position  now  so  hopeless 
that  nothing  could  prevent  the  Austrian  troops  from 
marching  into  Naples.  Nor  were  the  Austrian  generals 
mistaken. 

On  receipt  of  the  news  of  the  disaster  at  Tolen- 
tino,  Queen  Caroline  called  a  council,  and  urged  the 
Ministers  to  devise  measures  that  might  yet  save  the 
kingdom.  Manhes  was  sent  to  take  command  of  a 
small  division  on  the  frontier  beyond  S.  Germano. 
He  was  soon  recalled,  however,  as  the  Government 
hardly  knew  whether  to  fear  the  Austrians  or  the  Nea- 
politans the  more,  and  Caroline  was  firmly  resolved  that 
if  unable  to  resist  the  former,  she  would  at  all  events 
maintain  her  own  subjects  in  order. 

For  a  few  days  more  Joachim  attempted  to  collect 
an  army  on  the  Liri,  and  assembled  at  Capua  some  5000 
men,  a  force  substantial  in  numbers  but  far  more  anxious 
to  surrender  than  to  fight.  On  the  night  of  the  i6th 
D'  Aspre  surprised  a  division  of  4000  Neapolitans  at 
Mignano,  totally  dispersing  them  ;  this  marked  the  end 
of  military  operations.  Two  days  later  Joachim,  accom- 
panied by  Belliard  and  a  few  staff  officers,  rode  into 
Naples  and  proceeded  to  the  Royal  Palace.  On  the 
walls  were  pasted  proclamations  that  he  heeded  little, 
announcing  to  all  who  cared  to  believe  that  the  kingdom 
of  Naples  had  now  become  a  constitutional  monarchy. 
Outside  the  gates  of  the  Palace  a  small  crowd,  groups  of 
liberal  enthusiasts,  had  collected,  and  perhaps  for  the  first 
time  since  he  had  worn  the  crown  Joachim  Murat,  the 
defeated  king,  met  with  a  really  warm  popular  reception. 

Within  doors  Joachim  and  Caroline  met,  not  without 
recrimination  and  tears.  Napoleon's  sister  had  foreseen 
the  completeness  of  the  disaster  from  the  day  when 
the  fatal  news  from  Tolentino  reached  her,   and  had 