


CHAP.  XII      MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  381 

straightway  prepared  for  the  worst.  She  had  immedi- 
ately sent  off  to  Paris  all  the  members  of  the  Bonaparte 
family  at  Naples,  Madame  Mere,  Princess  Borghese,  and 
Cardinal  Fesch.  On  the  loth  of  May  a  British  ship, 
probably  the  Tremendous,  that  had  been  hovering  off  the 
coast  for  some  days,  opened  communication,  and  in  the 
course  of  the  next  few  days  Caroline  agreed  terms  with 
Commodore  Campbell  for  her  personal  surrender. 

While  these  negotiations  were  proceeding  the  people 
of  Naples  were  kept  as  much  in  the  dark  as  possible. 
The  Monitore,  as  a  general  rule,  abstained  from  giving 
any  news  at  all,  and  what  information  it  did  contain  was 
totally  misleading.  The  engagement  at  Monte  Milone 
on  the  2nd  of  May  figured  as  a  great  Neapolitan  victory, 
the  complete  defeat  of  the  following  day  as  an  insignifi- 
cant skirmish.  Yet  the  people  of  Naples  felt  that  the 
end  was  approaching,  and  grew  correspondingly  restless. 

It  was  on  the  13th  of  May,  five  days  before  Joachim's 
return,  that  Caroline  concluded  her  arrangement  with 
Campbell  for  being  taken  on  board  the  Tremendous. 
But  the  British  commodore  could  not  dispose  of  a 
sufficient  force  to  occupy  Naples,  and  the  Queen  there- 
fore determined  to  remain  at  her  post  and  to  repress 
the  possible  disorder,  perhaps  even  insurrection,  that  the 
approaching  Bourbon  restoration  might  excite  among 
the  lazzaroni.  On  the  15  th  the  population  showed 
great  signs  of  restlessness,  and  threatening  groups  began 
to  form  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Palace.  Caroline 
ordered  out  her  state  carriage,  and,  drawn  by  six  horses, 
drove  slowly  and  with  a  serene  face  through  the 
crowded  streets  of  the  city.  Later  in  the  day  she 
attired  herself  in  a  military  coat  and  mounting  a  charger, 
passed  the  civic  guards  in  review.  This  show  of  deter- 
mination and  courage  well   became  a  Princess  of  the 


382  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

House  of  Bonaparte.  It  allayed  the  excitement  of  the 
impressionable  Neapolitans  and  perhaps  saved  Naples 
from  a  repetition  of  the  scenes  of  horror  that  had 
accompanied  the  last  Bourbon  restoration. 

Joachim  also  had  attempted  to  negotiate,  but  with 
less  good  fortune  than  Caroline.  He  sent  Gallo  to 
Bianchi's  headquarters,  only  to  discover  that  the 
Austrians  would  grant  him  no  terms  of  any  sort.  He 
then  appears  to  have  momentarily  thought  of  entering 
Gaeta  and  defending  that  fortress,  but  Austrian  cavalry- 
patrols  were  already  between  that  point  and  the  capital, 
so,  abandoning  this  idea,  he  instructed  Carascosa  and 
Colletta  to  enter  into  a  military  convention  on  behalf 
of  the  army  for  terminating  hostilities.  They  were 
instructed  to  make  the  best  conditions  they  could  for  the 
country  and  themselves,  and  to  leave  the  King  out  of 
consideration.  At  Casa  Lanza,  three  miles  from  Capua, 
on  the  20th  of  May,  the  Neapolitan  generals  met 
Bianchi,  Neipperg,  and  Lord  Burghersh,  and  signed  a 
convention  that  recognised  Ferdinand  as  King  and  put 
an  end  to  hostilities  ;  its  provisions  will  be  noticed  later. 