

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  28  th  of  September 
Carabelli  and  Macirone  arrived  together  at  Ajaccio. 
Murat  had  been  busy  for  some  days  fitting  out  some 
small  vessels  and  occupied  one  of  the  principal  houses 
of  the  town  on  which  his  standard  was  displayed  and  in 
front  of  which  sentries  paced.  Carabelli  was  the  first  to 
present  himself  for  an  audience.  Murat,  whose  prepara- 
tions were  complete  and  mind  apparently  made  up,  made 
no  attempt  to  disguise  his  project,  offered  Carabelli 
promotion  if  he  would  join  him,  which  the  Corsican 
prudently  declined.  He  then,  according  to  Carabelli's 
account  of  what  passed,  became  somewhat  excited  and, 
speaking  of  Naples,  declared  more  than  once  :  *'  I  will 
not  give  up  my  kingdom  I  "  "I  have  only  to  show 
myself  to  succeed  !  "  "At  the  worst  I  shall  die  as  a 
king  !  "  1 

His  interview  with  Murat  told  Carabelli  all  he 
wished  to  know,  and  he  employed  the  remainder  of 
the  day  in  persuading  his  compatriot  General  Ottavj 
to  give  up  the  enterprise,  and  in  this  succeeded. 

With  Macirone  Murat  spent  several  hours  in  long 
and  earnest  conference.  Macirone  first  handed  him 
a  letter  inclosing  an  offer  from  Metternich  to  provide 
him  with  a  passport  to  Trieste.  That  passport  was  in 
Macirone's  possession,  and  was  vised  by  Stewart,  the 
British  ambassador  at  Paris  ;  in  it  Joachim  was  referred 

1   Carabelli,  33  ;   Galvani,  74, 


396  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

to  by  the  title  of  Duke  of  Lipona.-^  Macirone  further- 
more declared  that  Captain  Bastard  held  his  ship,  the 
Meander^  at  his  disposal,  ready  to  convey  Murat  to 
Trieste  under  the  terms  of  this  arrangement,  and  added 
his  entreaties  to  the  documents  he  produced.  But  it  was 
now  too  late  to  turn  Murat  from  his  plan.  The  die 
was  cast,  he  said,  this  offer  of  security  came  too  late. 
For  three  months  he  had  awaited  the  decision  of  the 
Allies  in  vain,  and  now  he  was  determined  to  risk  all 
to  regain  his  kingdom.  At  the  worst  he  would  meet 
death,  and  that  had  no  fears  for  him.  Besides  that, 
three  hundred  brave  men  had  now  compromised  them- 
selves in  his  cause,  and  was  he  to  draw  back  at  the  last 
minute  and  abandon  them  } 

Yet  the  passport  was  too  precious  a  safeguard  to 
neglect.  Murat  without  much  difficulty  persuaded 
Macirone  to  hand  it  to  him,  and  in  return  gave  him  a 
letter  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  Mr.  Macirone,  Envoy  of  the  Allied  Powers  to 
King  Joachim,  I  have  made  myself  acquainted  with  the 
documents  in  your  charge.  I  accept  the  passport  in- 
trusted to  you  for  me,  and  intend  using  it  for  the  pur- 
pose of  reaching  the  destination  therein  specified.  .  .  ." 
The  letter  went  on  to  decline  a  British  ship  for  his 
conveyance,  and  concluded  by  stating  that  he  would  be 
prepared  to  discuss  matters  with  the  Allies  after  having 
joined  his  family. 