

His  interviews  with  the  emissaries  from  Paris  and 
Naples  not  having  disclosed  any  matter  affecting  the 
decision  he  had  already  taken,  Murat  prepared  im- 
mediately to  set  sail.  He  had  found  a  useful  officer 
for  the   naval   side  of  his  enterprise   in  Barbara,  who 

1  Lipona,   anagram   of   Napoli,   was   the   title   assumed    by  Caroline  on   leaving 

Naples. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  397 

had  ranked  as  a  captain  in  the  Neapolitan  navy,  and 
who  had  rendered  skilled  and  useful  service  at  the 
taking  of  Capri. ^  Under  the  supervision  of  Barbara, 
Murat  had  chartered  seven  feluccas  that  were  now 
lying  in  the  port.  They  were  small  vessels  of  from 
15  to  20  tons,  single  masted,  and  rigged  with  a  lateen 
sail.  On  this  little  flotilla  Murat  and  his  men  embarked 
late  on  the  night  of  the  28  th  of  September.  Before  going 
on  board  he  promoted  Natali  to  be  a  general,  and  gave 
similar  encouragement  and  promises  of  reward  to  his 
followers.  Then  with  some  250  or  300  men  all  told 
he  put  to  sea.  The  governor  of  the  citadel,  which 
overlooks  the  port,  ordered  his  soldiers  to  their  posts 
and  fired  several  rounds  at  the  expedition,  but  the 
gunners  appeared  unable  to  aim  straight  and  the  shots 
all  flew  harmlessly  very  wide  of  their  mark. 

What  Murat' s  plan  was  it  is  impossible  to  say. 
There  is  nothing  to  show,  nor  is  it  probable,  that  he 
had  concerted  measures  with  any  adherents  in  Naples. 
If  he  had  a  definite  plan  it  appears  clear  that  he  did 
precisely  what  his  circumstances  required  —  kept  it 
secret  from  every  one.  The  destination  of  the  ex- 
pedition was  perhaps  Salerno,  where  a  considerable 
number  of  soldiers  forming  part  of  the  old  army  had 
been  stationed.  Could  these  be  won  over  by  a  sudden 
appeal, — it  was  but  two  short  marches  to  Naples, — 
Murat  might  hope  by  rapidity  and  surprise  to  inspire 
panic  in  a  government  never  distinguished  for  resource 
or  courage,  and  thus  to  seize  the  capital. 

But  the  elements,  and  not  its  leader,  chose  the  land- 
fall of  the  expedition.  For  the  better  part  of  a  week 
light  head  winds  baffled  the  feluccas  ;   they  had  about 

^  Barbara  is  generally  described  as  somewhat  akin  to  a  pirate,  which  is  possible. 
CoUetta  states  that  Murat  created  him  a  baron  {Storia  di  Napoli,  ii.  268). 


398  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

reached  the  latitude  of  Naples  when  one  of  the  sudden 
and  violent  storms  usual  in  those  seas  at  that  period  of 
the  year  overtook  them.  Murat*s  frail  vessels  were 
instantly  dispersed.  The  one  on  which  he,  Frances- 
chetti,  Barbara,  and  some  thirty  followers  had  embarked 
was,  with  one  other,  blown  right  down  the  coast. 
On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  October,  the  weather  having 
now  moderated,  they  sighted  land  in  the  bay  of  S. 
Eufemia,  near  the  spot  whence  Sidney  Smith's  fleet 
had  watched  the  battle  of  Maida,  nine  years  before. 