

On  the  20th  of  September  Murat  and  Franceschetti 
with  their  followers  marched  out  of  Vescovado  on 
their  way  to  Ajaccio,  the  principal  port  of  Corsica,  the 
home  of  the  Bonapartes,  the  birthplace  of  Napoleon. 
At  nearly  all  the  villages  they  passed,  the  population 
turned  out  and  gave  them  an  enthusiastic  greeting  ; 
Murat  was  deeply  touched.  At  Ajaccio,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  23rd  of  September,  his  reception  was 
warmer  than  elsewhere,  and  appears  to  have  inspired 
Joachim,  and  to  have  persuaded  him  that  even  at  Naples 
his  chance  of  a  good  welcome  would  not  be  slight.^ 
The  civil  authorities  of  Ajaccio  abandoned  the  town 
on  Murat's  approach  ;  Colonel  Laforet,  the  military 
commandant,  whose  small  body  of  soldiers  was  far  more 
likely  to  fraternize  with  the  invaders  than  to  oppose 
them,  shut  himself  up  in  the  citadel. 

^  Franceschetti's  statement  that  this  welcome  persuaded  Murat  into  the  expedi- 
tion in  spite  of  his  advice  to  the  contrary  clearly  bears  the  stamp  of  bad  faith. 
Murat  in  a  communication  to  Governor  Verrieres  from  Vescovado  on  the  17th 
was  already  assuming  the  royal  title.  It  is  as  nearly  certain  as  possible  that  the 
practical  decision  was  taken  between  the  nth  and  the  17th,  between  the  dates  of 
Gordon's  visit  and  the  letter  to  Verrieres,  and  therefore  at  Franceschetti's  house. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  393 

The  Powers  and  the  new  Government  of  Naples 
were  now  beginning  to  get  anxious  at  Murat's  presence 
in  Corsica.  As  soon  as  King  Ferdinand's  Ministers 
learned  of  the  ex-King's  arrival  at  Bastia,  they  sent  a 
secret  agent,  Carabelli  by  name,  to  watch  Murat  and 
inform  the  Government  as  to  his  plans  ;  leaving  Naples 
on  the  I  ith  of  September,  he  reached  Bastia  on  the  24th. 
Carabelli  had  been  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Corsican 
legion  that  took  part  in  the  first  military  operations 
in  Calabria.  He  had  soon  taken  to  administrative 
duties  and  had  been  in  close  touch  with  Saliceti.  He 
had  given  up  military  for  civilian  employment,  being 
appointed  Secretary-general  of  Calabria,  and  later  In- 
tendente  of  Capitanata.  He  was  now  anxious  to  retain 
his  occupation  under  the  new  Government,  and  prepared 
to  ingratiate  himself  by  performing  any  task  required 
of  him.  His  acquaintance  with  the  Corsicans,  among 
whom  Murat  might  find  sympathizers,  probably  led 
to  his  selection  for  the  duty  he  was  now  called  on  to 
perform. 

Immediately  before  Carabelli's  departure  from 
Naples  the  Government  had  arrested  a  Moor  of  the 
classic  name  of  Otello,  who,  under  the  preceding  reign, 
had  been  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  characters  in 
Naples.  He  was  a  personal  servant  of  Murat,  and  had 
accompanied  him  in  his  flight  to  France.  Later,  on  his 
master's  second  flight,  he  made  his  way  back  to  Naples, 
where  his  presence  appears  to  have  been  prompted  by 
no  more  criminal  intent  than  one  of  conjugal  affection. 
Yet  the  pohce  chose  to  recognise  in  Otello  a  secret 
emissary  of  Murat  and  to  arrest  him.  At  about  the 
same  time,  whether  brought  in  by  Otello  or  otherwise, 
several  letters  written  by  Murat  to  a  few  of  his  past 
subjects,   among  which  was    possibly   one    to    General 