

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

MSS. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Guerra,xxv.  1052,  1053,  army  returns  5   1054,  move- 
ment of  troops,  etc.  ;  1055,  ^'^S^y  occupation  of  the  Marches  ;  1057,  1059, 
1060,  campaign  of  1815  ;  1061,  Caroline's  last  measures  at  Naples. 

SociETA  Patria,  D'  Ambrosto  MS.,  narrative  of  the  campaign  of  1815, 
see  p.  349. 

Printed  Books 

Beauchamp,  Catastrophe  de  Murat ,-  Belliard,  Mems. ;  Bertholdi, 
Mems.  ;  BiA^cui,  Diplomazia  Eur  op.  ;  Bianco,  Ultimi  a'v^enimenti ;  Brit. 
State  Papers,  1 8 14- 18 15  ;  Cacciatore,  Esame  ;  CANTt",  Cronistoria  ; 
Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Opere  inedite ;  Colletta,  Storia ; 
CoNSALVi,  Corr.;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dufourcq,  Murat;  Hansard, 
Pari.  Debs.  xxxi. ;  Helfert,  Murat;  Houssaye,  iSi^  ;  Lemmi,  Murat ; 
Macirone,  Interesting  Facts ;  Malet,  Voyage  en  Italie ;  Memorie  sulla 
Condotta ;  Monitore  Napolitano  ;  Napoleon,  Corr.;  P.  G.,  A'weninienti ; 
Vefe,  Mems.  ;  Pignatelli-Strongoli,  Discorsi ;  Quintavalle,  Notizia 
Storica  ;  Rav aschieri,  Filangieri  ;  Savary,  Mems.  ;  Schirmer,  Feldzug  ; 
Sf GUR,  Mems. ;  Star  (London)  ;  Wellington,  Supp.  Dispatches. 

VOL.  I  2  C 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE    TRAGEDY    OF    PIZZO 

Murat  in  Provence — Waterloo — Royalist  reaction — Murat  pursued 
— Escapes  to  Corsica — Franceschetti — State  of  Corsica — Gordon 
visits  Murat — Decides  on  expedition  to  Naples — Marches  to 
Ajaccio — Carabelli's  mission — Arrest  of  Otello — Correspond- 
ence of  Murat  with  Naples — The  guetapens  theory — Macirone 
—  Bastard  at  Bastia  —  Macirone  and  Carabelli  at  Ajaccio  — 
Murat  sails — His  plans — Lands  at  Pizzo — Situation  of  town — 
Coolness  of  inhabitants  —  Trentacapilli  —  Murat's  arrest  — 
Nunziante  sends  troops — The  news  at  Naples — Orders  sent  to 
Nunziante — Court-martial — Execution  of  Murat. 

Caroline  Bonaparte's  courageous  assertion  that  in 
four  months  her  brother  would  replace  her  on  the 
throne  was  not  destined  to  come  true.  When  but  little 
more  than  that  time  had  elapsed,  the  Emperor  of  the 
French  had  become  the  helpless  prisoner  of  St.  Helena, 
and  King  Joachim  had  come  to  an  even  more  merciful 
cessation  of  his  labours.^ 

Once  before  had  Joachim  Murat  landed  on  the 
southern  coast  of  France  after  successfully  escaping  the 
British  cruisers  patrolling  the  Mediterranean.  Then  the 
ill  success  of  Egypt  lay  behind :  now  that  of  Naples ;  then 
his  arm  was  ready  to  support  the  fortunes  of  Napoleon  : 

^  "  The  Calabrese  have  been  more  humane,  more  generous,  than  those  who  sent 
me  here,"  said  Napoleon  to  Las  Cases  when  informed  of  Murat's  end. 

386 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  387 

now  it  was  equally  ready,  equally  useful,  but  rejected 
and  powerless.  The  last  of  the  Imperial  armies  was 
rapidly  being  concentrated  on  the  Belgian  frontier  at 
the  very  moment  when  Murat  landed  on  French  soil, 
and  his  first  thought  was  to  fly  to  that  station  which 
strung  to  its  highest  tension  every  fibre  of  his  nature, 
the  front  of  the  Emperor's  cavalry.  But  the  feeling  of 
the  army  against  their  old  comrade  was  so  strong 
that  even  had  Napoleon  been  willing  he  could  hardly 
have  utilized  his  services.  To  his  demand  for  permis- 
sion to  return  to  Paris  he  received  a  curt  reply,  the 
Emperor  propounding  the  cutting  and  unanswerable 
question  :  '*  What  treaty  of  peace  has  been  concluded 
between  France  and  Naples  since  1814.^'*-^ 