

Murat  thus  unwillingly  found  himself  compelled  to 
settle  down  near  Toulon  and  await  events,  taking  up 
his  residence  at  a  villa  belonging  to  Admiral  Lallemand. 
There  he  lived  unostentatiously  with  a  small  suite, 
treated  respectfully  by  the  authorities  and  inhabitants. 
A  Mr.  de  Baudus  was  sent  to  reside  with  Murat  by  the 
Emperor  as  his  representative. 

On  this  footing  matters  remained  some  three  weeks, 
and  then  came  news  of  the  disaster  at  Waterloo,  followed 
by  the  second  abdication,  the  flight  of  Napoleon,  and 
the  second  restoration.  The  news  of  the  final  over- 
throw of  the  Empire  at  once  raised  a  royalist  agitation 
in  the  south,  and  Murat  was  immediately  placed  in  a 
position  of  great  anxiety.  The  royalist  mob  soon  broke 
out  into  excesses.  Marshal  Brune  was  barbarously 
murdered  at  Avignon.  A  few  days  later  a  reward  of 
8000  francs  was  offered  for  Murat's  capture.  He 
separated  from  his  followers  and  went  into  hiding.  He 
wandered  for  many  days  alone,  half  starved,  in  constant 

1  Macirone,  36. 


388  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fear  of  capture  and  assassination.  On  one  occasion, 
from  behind  some  shrubs  in  a  garden,  he  watched  a 
party  of  his  pursuers  search  the  house  where  but  a  few 
minutes  before  he  had  been  hospitably  received  and 
entertained.  Yet  through  all  his  wanderings  he  found  a 
few  faithful  friends,  and  sufficient  resources  in  his  own 
energy  and  abilities  to  escape  capture.  He  had  made 
an  offer  of  submission  to  Louis  XVIII.  and  implored 
his  magnanimity  immediately  after  the  downfall  of 
Napoleon  ;  he  had  also  applied  for  passports  and  per- 
mission to  take  refuge  in  England,  but  could  get  no 
tidings  from  his  agents. 

In  despair  at  not  hearing  from  Paris,  and  hopeless  of 
saving  his  life  from  the  numerous  bands  of  royalists 
searching  for  him,  Murat  decided  to  make  an  attempt 
to  escape  from  the  south  of  France  by  boat.  His  first 
intention  appears  to  have  been  to  sail  around  Spain  to 
Havre,  and  Roccaromana,  with  whom  he  remained  in 
communication,  succeeded  in  securing  a  small  vessel  for 
the  journey.  But  Joachim  was  so  closely  pursued  that 
he  was  only  able  to  reach  the  little  cove  where  he  was 
to  have  been  taken  off,  in  time  to  see  the  vesseFs  sails 
disappear  on  the  horizon.  Finally,  after  hiding  among 
vineyards  for  several  days,  he  succeeded  in  getting  out 
to  sea  in  a  small  rowing  boat  with  three  companions, 
— Langlade,  Blancard,  and  Donadieu,  ex-officers  in  the 
Imperial  navy. 

It  was  on  the  22  nd  of  August  that  Murat  and  his 
three  companions  embarked.  They  steered  for  Corsica. 
Thirty-six  hours  after  starting  they  were  overtaken  by  a 
gale  and  came  near  sinking.  Whether  they  would  ever 
have  reached  port  appears  doubtful  had  not  a  vessel 
then  crossed  their  course  and  rescued  them  ;  she  proved 
to  be  the  regular  packet  plying  from  Toulon  to  Bastia. 