


394  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Colletta,  were  handed  by  their  recipients  to  the 
Government,  and  caused  apprehension.^  Precautionary 
measures  were  at  once  taken.  A  patrol  of  gunboats 
was  established  along  the  Mediterranean  coast  of  the 
kingdom,  the  forts  of  Naples  were  provisioned,  the 
garrison  of  Gaeta  was  reinforced  with  Sicilian  troops, 
and  Carabelli  was  sent  on  his  secret  mission  to 
Corsica.^ 

Another  traveller  arrived  at  Bastia  within  a  few  hours 
of  Carabelli  ;  this  was  a  naturalised  British  subject, 
Neapolitan  by  birth,  named  Macirone.  He  had  been 
at  one  time  in  the  Neapolitan  military  service,  had  later 
become  connected  with  Fouche,  and  had  acted  as  a 
secret  intermediary  between  him  and  Wellington  after 
Waterloo.  He  had  also  remained  in  touch  with  Murat 
until  he  went  into  hiding.  Macirone  had  arrived  in 
Corsica  with  dispatches  for  Murat,  and  with  the  passport 
that  contained  the  guarantee  of  safety  the  ex-King  of 
Naples  had  so  long  been  kept  waiting  for.  At  Bastia 
was  the  British  frigate  Meander^  Captain  Bastard.     This 

^  Pignatelli-StrongoH,  Poche  osservazioniy  3  j  Radowsky,  123  ;  Medici's  report  in 
Helfert,  Murat,  211  ;  Carabelli,  21  ;  Colletta,  ii.  267. 

2  Medici's  report,  Helfert,  Murat,  211.  This  report  bears  every  mark  of  strongly 
exaggerating  what  little  the  police  knew  of  Murat's  movements.  The  controversy 
on  which  the  facts  just  narrated  bear  will  require  no  discussion  here,  as  Mons. 
Dufourcq's  and  Baron  Lumbroso's  criticisms  of  the  Marquis  de  Sassenay's  arguments 
are  conclusive.  These  criticisms  might  have  been  made  even  stronger  by  a  close 
comparison  of  dates.  Murat  reached  Vescovado  on  the  25th  of  August  ;  it  is 
probable  that  his  plan  for  returning  to  Naples  was  not  made  before  the  nth  of 
September.  Carabelli  left  Naples  on  the  14th  of  September,  reached  Bastia  on  the 
24th,  and  witnessed  Joachim's  departure  from  Ajaccio  on  the  28th.  How  could 
the  alleged  plot  of  the  Bourbon  Government  have  been  hatched  within  these  dates  ? 
A  recent  article  by  Signor  Lemmi  proves  nothing  more  than  that  a  rumour  was 
current  that  the  Neapolitan  police  had  laid  a  trap  for  Murat.  The  fact  that  such  a 
rumour  existed  is  past  question  j  and  this  second-  or  third-hand  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  the  rumour  adds  nothing  to  the  controversy.  As  to  Otello,  it  may 
further  be  pointed  out  that  as  he  did  not  follow  Murat  to  Corsica,  any  letters  he 
carried  must  have  come  from  France,  that  is,  before  Murat  had  formed  his 
plan. 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  395 

officer  had  in  vain  sent  messages  to  Vescovado  summon- 
ing Murat  to  surrender  to  him.  He  remained  helpless 
at  Bastia  awaiting  some  opportunity  that  should  favour 
the  accomplishment  of  his  hopes.  Macirone  saw  him, 
explained  the  object  of  his  mission,  and  asked  for  his 
assistance.  Bastard  promised  to  await  the  result  of 
Macirone's  efforts. 