


384  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

fisherman's  hut,  and  after  a  little  bargaining  hired  two 
small  vessels  that  lay  there  hauled  up  on  the  sand. 

Launched  on  the  vast  Mediterranean  in  a  small  boat 
there  was  but  little  Murat  could  attempt.  Once  more 
the  idea  appears  to  have  occurred  to  him  to  enter  Gaeta, 
where  the  commandant,  General  Begani,  could  be  relied 
on.  But  in  the  bay  of  Gaeta  British  cruisers  were  already 
hovering,  and  on  the  following  morning  the  fugitives 
found  their  way  barred,  and  had  to  turn  back  and 
seek  refuge  in  the  island  of  Ischia.  There,  close 
to  the  principal  town  of  the  island,  Joachim  remained 
in  extreme  peril  for  twenty -four  hours.  From  the 
cottage  where  he  and  his  party  had  taken  refuge  a 
small  xebec  was  perceived  on  the  morning  of  the  21st 
slowly  making  its  way  with  sweeps  along  the  channel 
that  divides  Ischia  from  Procida.  By  a  nearly  miracu- 
lous chance  the  xebec  turned  out  to  be  the  Santa 
Caterina^  chartered  by  and  conveying  General  Manhes 
and  his  party  to  France.  She  was  the  only  vessel  to 
which  Admiral  Lord  Exmouth,  who  had  arrived  in  the 
bay  on  the  20th,  had  given  a  permit  to  leave  Naples. 
Manhes  welcomed  Murat  and  his  followers  on  board, 
and  the  Santa  Caterina,  after  one  or  two  adventures 
with  British  cruisers,  brought  her  passengers  safely  to 
Cannes,  where  they  landed  on  the  30th  of  May. 

In  the  meanwhile  the  throne  of  Naples  had  been 
reoccupied  by  the  Bourbons.  On  the  21st  of  May 
Prince  Leopold,  the  King's  second  son  and  special 
representative,  joined  Bianchi's  headquarters  at  Teano. 
On  the  same  day  Caroline  Bonaparte  issued  her  last 
commands  as  Regent.  She  ordered  General  Florestano 
Pepe  and  the  commandants  of  the  forts  of  Naples  to 
facilitate  the  landing  of  British  sailors  that  would  take 
place  that  night.     Her  message  was  worded  with  the 


CHAP.  XII       MURAT'S  LAST  CAMPAIGN  385 

same  firmness  and  dignity  that  had  marked  her  whole 
conduct,  and  that  imparted  to  her  descent  from  the 
throne  a  quality  of  nobility  that  had  not  always  been 
present  during  her  tenure  of  it. 

Three  hundred  British  sailors  were  landed  that  night 
at  the  Arsenal,  immediately  at  the  back  of  the  Royal 
Palace,  and  Caroline  immediately  embarked  on  one  of 
their  boats  and  was  rowed  to  H.M.S.  Tremendous. 
At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  May, 
Count  Neipperg,  at  the  head  of  two  weary  regiments  of 
cavalry,  marched  into  the  city.  Late  on  the  23rd  Prince 
Leopold  and  Bianchi  rode  into  Naples,  and  were  received 
with  loud  acclamations  and  demonstrations  of  joy  ;  the 
Tremendous  and  the  other  British  ships  were  dressed  with 
bunting  and  fired  a  welcoming  salute.  But  Caroline's 
courage  did  not  desert  her.  She  witnessed  these  proceed- 
ings from  Campbell's  quarter-deck,  and  haughtily  declared 
to  those  who  stood  about  her  that  her  brother  would  re- 
place her  on  the  throne  of  Naples  within  four  months. 