

But  in  truth  Murat  was  now  weary  of  wandering, 
exasperated  with  the  new  part  Fortune  called  on  him 
to  play,  imbittered  with  the  humiliations  of  the  outlaw, 
desperate  at  the  silence  of  his  agents,  apprehensive  of 
the  worst  fate.  For  as  the  Powers  of  Europe  at  the 
Congress  of  Vienna  had  declared  Napoleon  a  public 
enemy  and  liable  to  public  vengeance,  might  not  Joachim 
have  to  fear  some  similar  decree  ?     He  could  get  no 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  391 

word  from  Paris,  and  probably  not  many  days  after 
reaching  Franceschetti's  house  he  began  meditating  a 
desperate  scheme  that  should  clear  a  way  through  all 
his  troubles. 

On  the  nth  of  September,  a  little  more  than  two 
weeks  after  Murat's  arrival  at  Vescovado,  a  Colonel 
Gordon  made  his  way  there  from  Bastia.  He  was  a 
British  political  agent,  and  had  been  landed  by  the 
British  frigate  Meander,  To  him  Murat  declared  that 
his  presence  in  Corsica  was  due  to  the  fear  lest  staying 
longer  in  the  south  of  France  he  should  have  been 
assassinated  ;  he  asserted,  and  doubtless  sincerely,  that 
he  had  no  intention  whatever  of  creating  any  disturb- 
ance in  Corsica  ;  one  thing  only  he  asked  for,  passports 
for  any  destination  the  Powers  approved  save  only  St. 
Helena. 

These  passports  neither  Colonel  Gordon  nor  any 
other  authority  appeared  prepared  to  produce,  and  so 
ominous  and  suggestive  did  this  appear  that  in  the 
course  of  the  next  few  days  Murat  suddenly  resolved 
on  a  new  line  of  action  and  came  to  a  fatal  determination.^ 
Franceschetti  was  a  man  of  the  adventurer  type,  and 
heavily  in  debt.  The  political  revolution  just  accom- 
plished had  apparently  closed  all  future  prospects  for 
him  ;  the  presence  and  circumstances  of  Joachim  sug- 
gested the  possibility  of  an  enterprise  in  which,  whether 
in  one  way  or  in  another,  profitable  opportunities  might 
arise.  Franceschetti  and  Murat  together  decided  to 
organize  an  armed  force  for  the  purpose  of  an  expedi- 
tion to  Naples  to  replace  Joachim  oni  the  throne.  The 
example  of  Napoleon's  successful  return  from  Elba  six 
months  before,  doubtless  helped  to  inspire  this  resolve. 

In  his  flight  Murat  had  succeeded  in  concealing  and 

*  But  cf.  the  doubtful  assertion  of  Galvani  (p.  i6). 


392  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

saving  a  sum  of  4000  napoleons  in  gold,  with  two 
epaulettes  and  a  hat  loop  of  diamonds  worth  about 
three  times  as  much  more.  In  addition  to  these  re- 
sources he  had  money  in  a  private  account  at  his  bankers 
in  Paris  on  which  he  could  draw.  He  was  therefore  in 
a  position  to  fit  out  an  expedition  and  recruit  adherents. 
No  sooner  was  it  known  that  volunteers  were  wanted 
than  many  old  soldiers  presented  themselves,  mostly 
men  who  had  fought  in  the  Corsican  legions  in  the 
French  and  Neapolitan  services.  Several  experienced 
officers  also  joined  Murat,  among  them  General  Ottavj 
and  Colonel  Natali.  In  a  very  few  days  a  force  of  two 
to  three  hundred  men  was  assembled. 