


cHAP.xiii      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  389 

Murat  was  recognised  on  board,  and  doubtless  found 
sympathisers  and  helpers,  for  although  unprovided  with 
a  passport  he  succeeded  in  passing  the  police  officers  on 
landing  in  Corsica ;  his  three  companions,  however, 
were  not  so  fortunate,  and  were  all  arrested.  Hearing 
that  Franceschetti,  a  general  whose  rank  he  had  himself 
conferred,  lived  near  Bastia,  at  the  little  village  of 
Vescovado,  Murat  at  once  set  out  for  his  house.  He 
arrived  there  alone  and  on  foot  on  the  25  th  of  August  ; 
but  would  Franceschetti  recognise  the  brilliant  King 
Joachim  in  the  ragged  wayfarer  who  stood  before  his 
door  .?  He  was  footsore  and  weary,  his  face  hidden  by 
a  thick  matted  beard,  his  head  covered  with  a  sailor's 
bonnet,  his  body  draped  in  a  long  black  cape.  For 
fiftcQn  days  he  had  not  slept  in  a  bed  and  had  lived  as 
a  hunted  outcast  and  vagrant. 

Franceschetti  had  made  good  his  escape  from 
Naples-^  at  the  time  of  the  entry  of  the  Austrians,  and, 
fortunately  for  Murat,  was  now  at  home  once  more  ; 
he  received  his  former  sovereign  with  every  sign  of 
affection  and  deference  and  the  warmest  Corsican 
hospitality.  The  principal  landowner  of  Vescovado 
was  the  mayor  Ceccaldi,  into  whose  family  Franceschetti 
had  married  ;  the  two  were  on  friendly  and  intimate 
terms. 

Ceccaldi,  with  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Vescovado, 
as  indeed  of  Corsica,  was  a  strong  Bonapartist,  yet  he 
felt  obliged,  in  view  of  his  official  position,  to  report 
Murat's  presence  to  the  authorities  at  Bastia.  A 
detachment  of  gendarmerie  was  at  once  dispatched  by 
the  Prefect  to  arrest  the  ex-King  of  Naples  ;  but  the 
relatives    and    friends    of    Ceccaldi    and    Franceschetti, 

^  It  will  be  seen  in  the  next  chapter  that  the  French  officers  were  not  included 
in  the  Convention  of  Casa  Lanza,  and  were  treated  as  prisoners  of  war. 


390  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

among  whom  were  more  than  one  old  soldier  of  the 
wars  of  the  Empire,  immediately  armed  and  declared 
that  Murat  was  under  the  protection  of  their  hospitality 
and  could  not  be  touched.  The  lieutenant  in  command, 
after  an  apparently  amicable  conversation  with  Murat, 
returned  to  Bastia  empty-handed. 

The  island  of  Corsica  was  at  this  time  in  a  curious 
state.  The  white  flag  of  the  Bourbons  was  everywhere 
flying  ;  but  as  it  represented  the  fifth  change  of  govern- 
ment that  the  islanders  had  sufl^ered  in  less  than  fifty 
years,  it  is  not  matter  for  surprise  that  it  aroused  no 
particular  sentiment  of  loyalty.  In  reality  there  were 
two  factions  in  the  island,  representing  the  wars  of  the 
second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  British  and 
French  ;  and  the  latter  faction  was  now  strongly  in  the 
ascendant  and  ardently  Bonapartist.  There  were  not 
1000  troops  in  the  island,  and  the  whole  population 
was  armed.  Under  these  circumstances  Murat  was  for 
the  moment  safe  ;  the  old  Napoleonic  and  Muratist 
soldiers  in  the  island  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  make 
any  attempt  at  arresting  him  futile  until  the  Govern- 
ment could  collect  a  considerable  body  of  troops. 
Even  then  the  island  was  so  vast  and  so  wild,  and  the 
hospitality  of  the  Corsicans  was  so  staunch,  that  he 
might  reasonably  hope  to  evade  capture  for  many 
months  to  come. 