

What  course  could  now  be  taken  ^  Franceschetti 
relates  that  he  urged  Murat  to  abandon  an  enterprise 
which,  with  the  handful  of  supporters  he  was  now 
reduced  to,  could  only  be  viewed  as  madness.  He 
held  a  passport  for  Trieste,  and  the  wisest  course  would 
be  to  give  up  all  idea  of  landing,  and  to  proceed  to  that 
port  directly.  But  a  cruise  of  nine  days  had  exhausted 
the  feluccas*  water  and  provisions  ;  Barbara  represented 
the  absolute  necessity  of  landing  for  this  reason,  and 
Murat,  if  he  had  hesitated  for  a  moment,  was  now 
persuaded  to  carry  out  his  original  purpose  at  all 
risks. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  8th  of  October,  the 
two  feluccas  drew  close  to  the  little  town  of  Pizzo. 
Joachim  attired  himself  in  full  uniform,  his  hat  crowned, 
as  was  his  custom,  with  feathers  and  a  diamond  clasp. 
At  eleven  o'clock  the  boats  were  manned  and  rowed  in 
from  the  feluccas  to  the  shore,  where  the  invaders, 
numbering  eighty  in  all,  landed. 

Pizzo  was  not  a  locality  where  Murat  could  hope 
for  a  good  reception.  It  had  in  former  years  been 
quite  a  thriving  little  port,  but  had  seen  its  trade 
ruined  under  the  French  kings  by  the  blockade  of  the 
coasts.     A  French  officer  who  knew  it,  recorded  that 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  399 

its  inhabitants  *'  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  great 
misery  .  .  .  and  were  ever  ready  to  manifest  their 
discontent."  ^  In  addition  to  this,  the  great  freeholder 
of  the  district  was  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  a  Spanish 
grandee,  whose  feelings  had  been  strongly  against 
Murat  ever  since  the  occupation  of  Madrid  in  1808. 
The  Duke's  steward,  Alcala  by  name,  possessed  great 
influence  among  the  people. 

Pizzo  was  largely  situated  on  a  hill,  or  clifF,  pro- 
jecting into  the  sea  ;  at  the  extremity  of  this  cliff  was 
a  small  mediaeval  castle,  used  as  a  coastguard  station. 
Back  of  the  castle  was  the  public  square  ;  at  the  foot 
of  the  hill  were  the  beach  and  landing-place.  Murat 
and  his  followers  marched  up  from  the  landing-place 
into  the  town  without  a  moment's  delay. 

Murat  was  leading.  It  was  a  Sunday  morning,  and 
in  the  market-place  a  large  number  of  people  were 
assembled  in  their  holiday  clothes.  As  he  passed  them 
he  began  calling  out :  "I  am  Joachim  ;  I  am  your 
King  ;  you  ought  to  recognise  me."  But  so  far  from 
this  producing  any  favourable  effect  it  immediately 
alarmed  the  hearers,  who  began  to  leave  the  market- 
place and  to  enter  their  houses. 

At  the  further  end  of  the  market-place,  in  front  of 
the  castle,  a  few  soldiers  of  the  coastguard  artillery 
there  stationed  were  parading  ;  their  uniform  was  as  yet 
unchanged.  Joachim  went  up  to  them,  and,  addressing 
the  sergeant  in  command,  said  :  "  Haven't  they  changed 
your  uniforms  yet.''  "  He  then  told  him  that  he  pro- 
moted him  captain,  and  ordered  him  to  have  the  drum 
beaten  and  to  follow  him.  But  the  drummer  would 
not  obey.  Murat  passed  behind  the  ranks  to  inspect 
the  men,   but  no  sooner  had   he   done    so   than   they 