


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  405 

dear  Stratti,  I  am  a  lost  man,  the  order  for  my  trial  is 
a  sentence  of  death  !  " 

The  court-martial  was  duly  assembled  ;  it  was  com- 
posed of  three  colonels  and  four  junior  officers,  every 
one  of  whom  had  served  in  Murat's  army  ;  yet  not 
one  of  those  selected  declined  the  task  set  before  him. 
They  proceeded  to  carry  out  certain  forms  of  judicial 
appearance  ;  listened  to  the  perfunctory  remarks  of  the 
officer  appointed  to  conduct  the  defence ;  found  il 
generate  francese,  as  they  described  their  late  King,  a 
public  enemy  ;  and  sentenced  him  to  be  shot  imme- 
diately in  the  courtyard  of  the  castle. 

Murat  played  his  appointed  part  in  these  necessary 
formalities  with  calm  and  dignity.  After  the  court  had 
pronounced  its  sentence  he  retired  to  the  small  room 
where  he  was  lodged,  and  there  received  the  visit  of  the 
Vicar  of  Pizzo,  Canon  Masdea.  Five  years  before,  at 
the  time  when  his  tent  had  been  pitched  in  the  midst  of 
a  formidable  army  on  the  hill  of  Piale,  whence  he  could 
watch  the  British  camps  he  longed  to  attack  in  Sicily, 
he  had  paid  a  visit  to  the  village  of  Pizzo,  and  Masdea 
had  then  received  from  the  King's  hands  a  large  sum 
from  his  private  purse  to  reconstruct  the  tower  of  his 
church  ;  it  was  now  Joachim's  turn  to  receive  from  the 
hands  of  the  humble  parish  priest  a  different  offering, 
that  of  the  last  ministrations  appointed  by  the  Catholic 
Church  for  those  about  to  die. 

It  was  now  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  A  part- 
ing letter  to  his  wife  and  children  written,  the  priest's 
absolution  received,  Murat  was  more  fully  prepared 
than  he  had  been  often  enough  in  his  life  to  meet 
death.  An  officer  stood  waiting  at  the  door,  and  as  he 
rose  from  his  knees  he  said  to  the  priest  :  "  Let  us  go 
and  accomplish  the  will  of  God." 


4o6  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

Outside  was  a  dark  passage,  and  nearly  immediately 
to  the  left,  three  steps  down.  At  the  foot  of  the  steps  a 
chair  was  placed,  and  in  a  narrow  little  area  in  front  of 
it  stood  the  firing  party.  So  cramped  was  the  space  that 
the  twelve  men  who  composed  it  had  to  be  placed  in 
three  ranks. 

Murat  came  down  and  faced  them.  The  chair  he 
refused.  The  front  rank  was  so  close  to  him  that  their 
muskets  nearly  touched  his  breast.  In  his  left  hand 
Joachim  held  a  miniature  of  his  wife  and  children  ;  of 
all  those  present  he  was  the  most  calm  and  self-controlled. 
Deliberately  and  clearly  he  ordered  the  soldiers  to  present 
arms  and  to  go  through  the  necessary  manoeuvres,  but 
the  men  were  so  moved  that  the  line  of  muskets  came 
up  very  unsteady  and  ill-directed.  He  then  said  : 
''  Spare  my  face  ;  aim  at  the  heart,"  and,  trying  with  his 
right  hand  to  draw  in  the  muskets  towards  his  breast, 
gave  the  word  to  fire. 