

The  triggers  were  pulled,  the  little  space  filled  with 
sound  and  smoke.  Murat's  body  remained  erect  for 
a  moment,  then  sank  down ;  his  forehead  as  it  fell 
struck  the  door  of  the  cell  where  his  comrades  were 
imprisoned.  Nunziante  was  outside  in  the  courtyard 
waiting,  holding  his  head  between  his  hands  and  leaning 
on  the  castle  walls,  and  when  the  dull  rumble  of  the 
volley  told  him  that  the  brave  soldier  within  had  ceased 
to  live,  he  burst  into  tears. 

Thus  came  to  an  inglorious  end  Joachim  Murat, 
for  whom,  whether  as  a  king,  as  a  general,  or  as  a  man, 
it  is  no  easy  matter  to  draw  up  a  just  epitaph.  For 
in  him  the  good  and  bad  qualities  were  equally 
conspicuous.  As  a  soldier  his  boldness  often  became 
rashness.  As  a  king  his  liberality  often  became  in- 
discriminate generosity.     As  a  man  his  keen  sense  for 


CHAP.  XIII       THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  407 

personal  advancement  often  became  craftiness  and 
deceit.  Yet  he  was  one  of  the  most  notable  soldiers  of 
an  age  great  in  military  achievement,  one  of  the  most 
notable  kings  in  an  age  of  political  transformation,  one 
of  the  most  human  characters  produced  by  the  Revolu- 
tion. He  was  a  man  of  the  people,  a  man  of  his  time, 
and  its  representative  in  some  of  its  most  hopeful 
aspects.  Unlike  that  great  intellectual  accident  of  the 
period,  Napoleon,  Murat  did  not  lose  on  the  throne 
all  his  democratic  affinities.  Unlike  his  master,  he 
retained  his  popular  sympathies,  and  yet  displayed 
qualities  of  mind,  of  heart,  and  of  courage  that  might 
serve  as  an  example  to  kings  born  of  an  older  race. 
His  evil  star  drew  him  from  obscurity,  gave  him 
Napoleon  for  a  leader,  and  from  the  day  when  he 
became  King  of  Naples  heaped  difficulties  on  him  that 
would  have  overburdened  most  men.  And  when  we 
remember  that  his  successor,,  on  the  throne  of  Naples 
was  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon,  we  cannot  refrain  from  a 
pang  of  regret  for  the  tragic  fate  of  that  misguided 
soldier,  Joachim  Murat. 

Principal  Authorities  consulted 

Brit.  Foreign  Off.,  Sicily,  70  :  dispatches  of  a  Court. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Giustizia,  1806  :  a  few  facts  as  to  Trentacapilli. 
Arch,  di  Stato,  Interna  z^  Inn^ent.  5077  :  a  few  facts  as  to  Carabelli. 
The  papers  as  to  Murat's  court-martial,  etc.,   once  at  the  Archives, 
appear  to  have  been  lost  or  misplaced.     • 

Printed  Books 

Belliard,  Mems.  ;  Bunbury,  Milit.  Transacs.  ;  Carabelli,  Calluniatori 
smascherati ;  Castlereagh,  Corr. ;  Colletta,  Storia ;  Craven,  Tour 
through  Naples;  Desvernois,  Mems.;  Dufourcq,  Murat;  Duret  de 
T AV EL,  Sejour  en  Calabre ;  Franceschetti,  Mems.;  Gallois,  Hist,  de 
Murat;  Galvani,  Mems.;  Gasparri,  Fine  di  un  regno  ;  Greco,  Annali ; 
Helfert,  Murat ;  Lemmi,  Fine  di  Murat ;  Macirone,  Interesting  Facts ; 