

At  this  moment,  when  all  seemed  lost,  the  fugitives 
espied  a  means  of  escape,  a  fisherman's  boat  hauled  high 
up  on  the  sand.  To  this  the  three  flew,  and  they 
struggled  desperately  to  drag  it  to  the  water.  As 
they  did  so  the  first  of  their  pursuers  were  appearing 

1  M.  Dufourcq  is  strongly  of  opinion  that  Barbara  did  not  betray  Murat,  and  as 
evidence  that  he  did  is  totally  wanting,  there  is  no  reason  for  not  agreeing  with 
him. 

VOL.  I  2   D 


402  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

at  the  edge  of  the  beach.  Their  efforts  became  more 
strenuous,  but  of  no  avail  ;  before  the  Hne  of  safety- 
could  be  reached,  the  crowd  was  on  them,  forming  a 
wide  half-circle.  Then  they  began  to  close  in.  Murat 
and  his  two  companions  now  drew  swords  and  pistols, 
and  as  the  crowd  edged  in  closer  and  closer,  Pernice 
fired.  His  shot  was  at  once  returned,  and  he  fell  dead. 
Then  ensued  a  scene  of  wild  confusion  ;  a  rush  was 
made  in  which  the  two  survivors  were  carried  off  their 
feet  and  rolled  on  to  the  sand.  For  a  whole  hour* they 
were  in  the  hands  of  the  mob,  many  of  them  women, 
and  it  was  miraculous  that  they  were  not  killed  or 
seriously  wounded.  The  pen  rebels  at  narrating  the 
indignities  that  Murat  then  suffered  :  he  was  pulled 
from  hand  to  hand  in  the  midst  of  the  howling  crowd, 
his  arms,  ornaments,  and  clothes  wrenched  from  him, 
his  face  and  body  begrimed  with  blood  and  sand, 
his  face  spat  upon,  his  hair  torn  from  his  head  in 
handfuls. 

This  miserable  scene  could  not  continue  long. 
Trentacapilli,  in  his  expert  way,  managed  to  secure 
Murat's  diamond  buckle  and  his  papers,  and  being  so 
far  satisfied,  he  succeeded  in  restoring  order,  marched 
the  prisoners  up  to  the  castle  and  sent  word  to  Monte- 
leone,  the  administrative  and  military  headquarters  of 
lower  Calabria,  of  what  had  happened.  The  general  in 
command  there  was  Don  Vito  Nunziante,  whom  we 
have  already  met  bravely  fighting  against  Regnier  at 
Mileto  some  eight  years  before  ;  he  was  a  good  officer 
and  an  honourable  and  humane  man.  Immediately 
on  hearing  of  Murat's  arrest  Nunziante  sent  the  news 
to  Naples  by  semaphore,  ordered  a  Te  Deum  to  be 
sung,  hurried  some  troops  off  to  Pizzo,  and  prepared 
to  follow  in  person. 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  403 

Captain  Stratti  with  a  detachment  of  forty  men 
arrived  at  Pizzo  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  immediately 
took  charge  of  the  castle  and  its  inmates.  All  of 
Joachim's  followers  had  been  arrested,  making  a  total 
of  seventy-nine  prisoners.  Some  of  them  were  wounded, 
all  were  hungry  and  exhausted,  and  they  were  penned 
together  in  a  small  room  barely  sufficient  to  hold  them. 
Captain  Stratti  at  once  separated  Murat, — for  whom 
he  showed  great  respect  and  humanity, — from  the  other 
prisoners,  and  did  what  he  could  to  alleviate  their 
distress.  The  steward  of  the  Duke  of  Infantado, 
Alcala  by  name,  brought  clothes  and  other  necessaries 
for  Murat,  and  sent  a  doctor  to  attend  him.  On 
the  following  day  Nunziante  arrived.  He  approved 
the  action  of  Stratti  and  Alcala,  visited  Murat  and 
treated  him  with  the  same  respect  and  consideration 
that  his  subordinate  had  shown. 