

In  the  meantime  the  line  of  semaphores  along  the 
coast  had  transmitted  the  news  to  Naples.  There  it 
was  already  known  on  the  6th,  through  Austrian 
channels,  that  Murat  had  sailed  with  an  expedition  from 
Ajaccio.  Anxiety  was  great  during  the  next  three 
days,  until  on  the  evening  of  the  9th,  while  Ferdinand 
was  at  the  San  Carlo  witnessing  the  opera,  he  heard, 
with  mixed  terror  and  delight,  as  Colletta  reports,  that 
Murat  was  a  prisoner.  Immediately  a  council  was 
called  to  determine  what  was  to  be  done,  and,  perhaps 
owing  to  the  fact  that  Murat  was  furnished  with  what 
amounted  to  a  joint  Austrian  and  British  safe-conduct, 
the  Ministers  of  those  two  Powers  were  sounded  as  to 
their  views. 

Prince  Jablonowsky,  the  Austrian  representative, 
was  too  profound  a  diplomat  to  deal  plainly  with  such 
a  painfully  direct  question  as  what  was  to  be  done  with 


404  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  parti 

a  Prince  with  whom  his  Court  had  entertained  such 
close  relations.  He  accordingly  found  a  diplomatic 
excuse  for  absenting  himself  from  Naples  for  a  few 
days.  What  a  Court  advised  the  Ministers  of  King 
Ferdinand  to  do  with  their  prisoner  cannot  be  said,  for 
apparently  no  record  has  survived  ;  but  it  will  not 
be  doing  him  an  injustice  to  infer  from  dispatches  of 
his  that  have  been  preserved,  from  his  well-known  feel- 
ing against  Murat,  and  from  the  reports  current  at  the 
time,  that,  knowing  the  incHnations  of  Ferdinand  and 
his  Ministers,  he  did  nothing  to  turn  them  towards  a 
more  merciful  course. 

As  a  result  of  deliberations  that  took  place  that 
night  orders  were  sent  to  Nunziante  early  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  loth.  He  was  instructed  to  assemble  a 
council  of  war,  to  try  Murat  as  a  public  enemy,  and  to 
proceed  to  the  execution  of  the  sentence  within  fifteen 
minutes  of  passing  judgment.  This  order  arrived  at 
Pizzo  late  on  the  night  of  the  1 2th. 

On  the  following  morning  Nunziante  in  person 
informed  Murat  that  he  was  immediately  to  be  tried  by 
court-martial.  Up  to  this  moment  he  had  kept  some 
hope.  He  had  attempted  to  maintain  the  fiction  that 
he  was  merely  travelling  to  Trieste,  and  that  stress  of 
weather  and  lack  of  provisions  had  been  the  sole  causes 
of  his  landing  at  Pizzo.  He  had  retained  a  cheerful 
demeanour,  and  on  dining  the  day  before  with 
Nunziante  and  Captain  Robinson,  commander  of  some 
Neapolitan  gunboats  that  had  been  sent  for,  he  appeared 
cheerful  and  not  as  a  man  in  peril  of  his  life.  With 
Stratti  he  had  discussed  on  the  I2th  the  probability  of 
his  being  sent  on  to  Trieste,  but  when  that  officer  saw 
him  on  the  next  day,  after  Nunziante's  announcement 
had  been  made,  Murat  at  once  said  to  him  :    "  Ah,  my 