

^  Duret  de  Tavel,  no. 


400  THE  NAPOLEONIC  EMPIRE  part  i 

quickly  broke  from  their  alignment  and  dispersed. 
The  market-place  was  now  nearly  empty.  It  was 
manifest  that  Pizzo  was  far  from  any  feeling  of 
enthusiasm  at  the  presence  of  its  late  king. 

A  hasty  consultation  was  now  held  between  Murat  and 
his  principal  followers,  and  it  was  decided  at  once  to 
take  the  road  that  led  from  Pizzo  to  Monteleone,  five 
miles  away.  The  latter  was  an  important  town,  and 
its  civic  guard  had  always  been  strong  in  its  anti- 
Bourbon  sentiments  and  its  support  of  the  French  rule. 
Here,  if  anywhere,  a  favourable  spirit  might  be  met 
with  ;  here,  if  anywhere,  the  proclamations  Joachim 
carried  announcing  the  coming  into  effect  of  his  con- 
stitution on  the  ensuing  ist  of  January  might  lead  to 
some  result. 

On  this  decision  being  come  to,  the  party  marched 
out  from  the  market-place  on  to  the  Monteleone  road. 
No  sooner  had  they  departed  than  windows  began  to 
open  and  balconies  to  fill  ;  in  a  few  moments  the  square 
was  once  more  animated.  Among  those  who  now  came 
out  of  the  houses  was  a  man  named  Gregorio  Trenta- 
capilli ;  he  was  a  zealous  Bourbonist,  a  lieutenant  of 
police  and  government  agent  before  the  French  con- 
quest, later  a  capomassi,  and  now  once  more  in  favour 
and  exercising  police  functions  in  the  district.  On 
coming  into  the  market-place,  finding  Murat  gone  and 
the  townspeople  excited  and  showing  decided  signs  of 
hostility  to  the  invaders,  he  promptly  took  command  of 
the  movement.  Followed  by  a  number  of  men  who 
had  armed  themselves  he  took  the  road  to  Monteleone, 
on  which  Murat  had  preceded  him  by  a  few  minutes. 

About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  along  that  road  Murat  had 
stopped  to  enable  one  of  his  followers  to  get  him  a  saddle 
horse,  and  there  Trentacapilli,  and  the  mob  following, 


CHAP.  XIII      THE  TRAGEDY  OF  PIZZO  401 

came  up  with  him.  A  confused  scene,  in  which  gesticu- 
lation and  shouting  played  the  chief  part,  then  took 
place.  Murat  turned  to  the  crowd  and  declared  that 
all  was  a  misunderstanding,  that  he  was  travelling  to 
Trieste  and  was  provided  with  a  passport  all  in  due 
order.  Trentacapilli, — every  brigand's  and  policeman's 
instinct  in  his  frame  vibrating  at  the  sight  of  the 
brilliantly  adorned  prize  only  just  out  of  reach  of  his 
fingers, — pushed  and  edged  gradually  closer  and  closer, 
calling  loudly  on  Murat  to  surrender  himself  a  prisoner. 
Franceschetti,  with  a  few  others,  attempted  to  screen 
their  leader,  and  at  last  in  the  scuffling  a  pistol  shot  was 
fired. 

This  pistol  shot,  harmless  enough  in  itself,  broke  up 
the  crowd.  The  Corsicans  took  to  their  heels  and 
scattered  right  and  left  through  the  fields.  Murat, 
Franceschetti,  and  one  follower.  Captain  Pernice,  fled 
along  the  road  to  Monteleone  for  a  short  distance  ; 
then,  at  a  place  where  the  road  crosses  a  stream,  they 
turned  down  towards  the  sea.  By  hard  running  they 
succeeded  in  putting  a  good  distance  between  their 
pursuers  and  themselves,  and  as  they  rushed  down 
towards  the  beach  they  were  not  without  good  hope 
of  escaping.  But  when  at  last  they  reached  the  sand 
they  found  their  boats  gone  and  Barbara's  two  feluccas 
a  mile  or  more  away.^ 