-   24   -




in France, in: MEW 7; The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte,      in:   MEW 8;   Civil War in France,      in:    MEW
173 .


         A   similarly    historically   sensitive   argument    is
called for to explain the structural variations of the
modern state. In his Critique of the Gotha Programme,
Marx asserts forcefully that "tt]he       'present-day
state' is ... a fiction"; it "changes with a country's
frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German Empire
from what it is in Switzerland, it is different in
England from what it is in the United States" [in:
Feuer   <ed. > 1978:   168] . The  reason   for  these
structural variations in political forms is to be
found in the variable relationship between wage labour
and capital:
         The specific economic form in which unpaid
         surplus labour is pumped out of the direct
         producers, determines the relation of domination
         and servitude, as it emerges directly out of
         production   itself    and   in   its turn  reacts
         determinant ly upon production. Upon this basis,
         however, is founded the entire structure of the
         economic community, which grows up out of the
         conditions of production itself, and consequently
         its specific political form. It is always the
         direct relation between the masters of the
         conditions of production and the direct producers
         ... which reveals the innermost secret,        the
         hidden foundation of the entire social edifice,
         and therefore also of the political form of the
         relation between sovereignty and dependence, in
         short, of the particular form of the State" CMew
         25/Das Kapital III: 799-800; cf. the English
         translation    in:   Bottomore/Rubel  <eds.> 1978:
         112; this translation has been slightly altered
         by adding     'determinantly'   in the emphasized
         sentence; emphasis added).


         To reiterate,     relations of domination react upon
production       in   a    determining   way   ("bestimmend     ...
zuriickwirkt"). Thus,        Marx draws our attention to the
interaction,      or rather reciprocity,       between economics
