                                                             -   21   -




relations.    It is with regard to this basic exchange
relationship that the 'doubling' of bourgeois society
in society and state must be explained.      For Marx,
this bifurcation is manifest in the distinction
between the spheres of private interests and general
interests,  between the    'private'  bourgeois,   the
selfish individual, and the 'public' citoyen, the
abstract citizen. Contrary to Hegel, Marx maintains
that   this   distinction   is  a   real,   essential
contradiction   which   cannot   be   reconciled   by
intermediary   institutional mechanisms such as the
'Stande' (estates). Marx asserts that it is false to
conceive of civil society as the difference between
state and family (as Hegel does in the 'Philosophy of
Right'). Rather civil society and family are to be
understood as the empirical preconditions of the
state; they turn themselves into the state, they are
the driving force behind the state [MEW 1; 2073. In
his preface to the Critique of Political Economy CMEW
13: 83 , Marx summarizes the result of his analysis of
Hegel's theory of the state:
     [T3 he conclusion Cwas3 that legal relations as
     well as forms of the state could be neither
     understood by themselves nor explained by the so-
     called general progress of the human mind,    but
     that they are rooted in the material conditions
     of life, which are summed up by Hegel ... under
     the name 'civil society'.


      In capitalism, the exchange between capital and
labour, as indeed the selling and buying of any other
commodity,    appears      as    if   it    were   an   exchange      of
equivalents CMEW 23:            189-90, 563; Grundrisse:  152
ff.3.  In exchanging            commodities (including labour
power), individuals enter into social relationships as
apparently formally free and equal owners of these
commodities. The very notion of ownership, however,
presupposes    a   legal    concept        of property, a legally
