-   26   -




     Pluralists  claim           to  explain    only  modern
democratic states.  But          many studies   on political
modernization and political development have been
undertaken from within a pluralist framework.        A
particularly fine example of this literature is Samuel
P. Huntington's book on 'Political Order in Changing
Societies'  [19683,  a classic pluralist study of
macropolitics,   i.e., political institution-building.
The fundamental issue conferring a thematic coherence
on his study is the question of how to avoid political
violence and instability in societies undergoing
economic,   social, and cultural   modernization.   He
contends      that   political    instability   and   disorder
result from high rates of social mobilization and the
expansion of political participation while rates of
political organization and institutionalization are
low [Huntington 1968: 53. For political order to exist
mobilized new social groups who demand political
participation   have to be accommodated by political
institutions.   It is to institution-building that
Huntington [1968: 85-63 gives primacy:

         The     effect   of the   expansion  of   political
         participation ... is usually to undermine the
         traditional    political    institutions   and    to
         obstruct   the development of modern political
         ones. Modernization and social mobilization, in
         particular, thus tend to produce political decay
         unless steps are taken to moderate or restrict
         its     impact   on political   consciousness   and
         political involvement.

         The importance of political institutions results
from their systemic performance they render for the
society as a whole: "maintaining order, resolving
disputes,     selecting authoritative leaders,  and
promoting community among two or more social forces"
[Huntington 1968: 8-93. This essentially functional
argument is extended in two directions. First, it is
argued that the dependence of society upon political
