-   36   -




capitalist  system.  To secure    its survival,                the
capitalist world-economy requires, of necessity,               the
unequal distribution of state-constituted political-
military institutions. Only this unequal structuration
of the international system            allows    for    capitalist
accumulation on a world scale:

         C I]f there is to be a multitude of political
         entities ... then it cannot be the case that all
         these entities be equally strong. For if they
         were, they would be in a position of blocking the
         effective operation of transnational economic
         entities whose locus were in another state. It
         would then follow that the world division of
         labor   would   be  impeded,  the   world-economy
         decline, and eventually the world-system fall
         apart. It also cannot be that no state machinery
         is strong. For in such a case, the capitalist
         strata would have no mechanisms to protect their
         interests, guaranteeing property rights, assuring
         various monopolies, spreading losses among larger
         population, etc. [Wallerstein 1974: 3543.

The conditio sine qua non of the existence of the
modern world-system is therefore the development of
relatively strong state apparatuses in the core of the
world-economy,   and relatively weak ones       in the
periphery.   According to Wallerstein [1980a: 2843, " a
state is strong to the extent that those who govern
can make their will prevail against the will of others
outside or inside the realm".

     Presenting a historical argument,  Wallerstein
shows that the attempts to  develop strong national
state apparatuses were intensified in Europe after
both Spain's and France's imperial policies had run
aground and resulted in their bankruptcy in 1557. In
the ensuing cyclical economic crisis the 'absolutist
monarchy' became the predominant form of a strong
state        [Wallerstein      1974:   265      ff.3.    Monarchs
strengthened   the          state   apparatuses   through      the
bureaucratization           of    the    administration,       the
