-   48   -




machinery. These political crises were transformed
into revolutionary crises through peasant revolts.


         In   her   analysis   of   the   outcomes   of   social
revolutions, Skocpol concentrates on the changes in
state structure. The rise and demise of political
leaderships, their power and their impotence hinges on
their ability to cope with the exigencies of waging
wars   and  coping  with  their   domestic   political
repercussions  [Skocpol  1979:  286].   According   to
Skocpol [1979: 1783, state building in France, for
example, was more powerfully shaped by these abilities
of the political      leadership than by the class
interests of conflicting social groups. The upshot of
this analytical approach is the argument that, in the
last instance, political contradictions and political
factional struggle within state organizations are more
important for social and political development than
class contradictions.

     This theoretical approach has been reinforced by
Skocpol ever since the publication of 'States and
Social Revolutions'. Skocpol [1980: 2003 very clearly
states the essence of her approach:

         Capitalism in general has no politics,       only
         (extremely flexible) outer limits for the kinds
         of supports for property ownership and controls
         of the labor force that it can tolerate. States
         and political parties within capitalism have
         cross-nationally    and   historically    varying
         structures. These structures powerfully shape and
         limit state interventions in the economy, and
         they determine the way in which class interests
         and conflicts get organized into (or out of)
         politics in a given time and place. More than
         this, state structures and party organizations
         have (to a very significant degree) independent
         histories.  They are shaped and reshaped not
         simply in response to socioeconomic changes or
         dominant-class interests, nor as a side-effect of
         class struggles.   Rather they are shaped and
         reshaped through the struggles of politicians
