-   42   -




The European state system, that had been developing
since the Italian Wars in 1494, was fundamentally
shaped by the strife for hegemony by some continental
powers and the balance-of-power politics set against
these claims to supremacy by other contending European
powers Ccf. also Dehio 1962 and Mattingly 19553. The
16th century was characterized by the power struggle
between Habsburg and France and the   denominational
antagonisms of the post-Reformation era. Either of
these conflicts increased the military requirements of
all continental states. The necessity of continuous
readiness for war made it paramount for the ruler to
push back the particularistic forces within the
countries in favour of the centralized monarchical
power:
         Absolutism can be considered as a concomitant
         phenomenon of that process of state formation by
         which an aggregation of territories is melted
         down to a unified polity ... But the historical
         necessity    of  such   larger state   formations
         resulted from the condition of the European state
         system ... The system of militarism with all its
         political   consequences has emerged from the
         power struggle and rivalry of the continental
         states since the end of the Middle Ages CHintze
         1970: 48-93.


         Hintze   analysed   the   interlocking   of   the
political-administrative system of domination,         the
military,  and the economy.   This interlocking        was
formative in so far as the development of the army and
its striking power depended on the efficiency of the
state institutions to mobilize the required resources.
Increased economic growth by means of economic and
commercial policies of the state and/or the excessive
exploitation of the population and the development of
military   and   administrative   institutions   were
complementary phenomena. Preparation for war was the
great activity of state formation in Western and
