-   68   -




to the employment of other ethically suspect devices
and people, and thereby oriented to the relativization
of all goals' [593]. A conflict between           non-ethical
mattei— of-fact considerations  in  the           sphere   of
politics and       the   personal   ethic   of   religion   is
inevitable:
         The use of force within the political community
         increasingly assumes the form of the Rechtsstaat.
         But from the point of view of religion, this is
         merely the most effective mimicry of brutality.
         All politics is oriented to raison d'dtat, to
         realism, and to the autonomous end of maintaining
         the external and internal distribution of power.
         These goals ,.. must necessarily seem senseless
         from the religious point of view [6003.


         The very existence of Protestantism shows that,
in the long term, the compromise between the political
power and the hierocratic power was detrimental to the
Catholic church. As Weber points out, the reform
movements within the church were provoked by 'the
unavoidable compromise of the hierocracy with the
secular powers and with sin' C1197]. For the reformers
the religious penetration of worldly life through the
hierocracy  had not    gone  far  enough.   This was
especially believed by bourgeois groups. The economic
rationalism of these bourgeois groups corresponded
with particular types of rigoristic ethical religion
[4803 which came into conflict with the politically
circumspect religiosity of the office charisma of the
Catholic church:

         It was the peculiar piety of the intensely
         religious bourgeois strata that made them side
         with   the   reformist    preachers   against   the
         traditional ecclesiastical apparatus, just       as
         they had sided earlier with the hierocracy
         against the Empire and with mendicant orders
         against the secular clergy;       their piety was
         characterized by a relatively rational ethics, by
         the nature of bourgeois occupations        andby a
         relatively   strong    preoccupation   with   self-
         justification before God ... [11973.
