                                                   -   67   -




a periodical discharge of the emotional sense of sin
[Weber 1967: 117-223:

     [Q3nly in the Protestant ethic of vocation does
     the    world,    despite     all     its   creaturely
     imperfections,    possess    unique    and  religious
     significance as the object through which one
     fulfills    his   duties    by    rational   behavior
     according    to   the    will    of    an  absolutely
     transcendental god. When success crowns rational,
     sober,   purposive    behavior    of the sort not
     oriented to worldly acquisition, such success is
     construed as a sign that god's blessing rests
     upon such behavior ... This religion demanded of
     the believer ... the avoidance of all surrender
     to the beauty of the world, to art, or to one's
     own moods and emotions. The clear and uniform
     goal of this asceticism was the disciplining and
     methodical organization of conduct. Its typical
     representative was the 'man of a vocation" or
     "professional"   (Berufsmensch) , and its unique
     result was the rational organization of social
     relationships [5563.

     This ethic was structurally adequate,      not only
for   modern   rational   capitalism   but   also   for
bureaucratic organizations as the materialization of
objectified power structures [601, 9753. The ethic of
ascetic Protestantism led to the      rejection of the
world as an incomplete and contingent place. The form
taken by the Puritans'    world-rejection was, however,
one of active rational world-domination since it was
within the world that the religious believers had to
prove their   worth. This notion promoted bureaucracy
as the tool of an      all-encompassing rationalism of
world-domination.

     But there is also a limit to the compatibility of
this religious ethic with objectified secular power
structures.  Weber maintains that public political
activity leads to the surrender of rigorous ethical
requirements 'since political activity is oriented to
average human qualities, to compromises, to craft, and
