                                                -   77   -




plurality of political communities competing with each
other   provided   capitalists   with   an   important
bargaining position vis-^-vis the state. They could
threaten to move their property to another country and
thus erode the tax base. In addition, they had    the
opportunity of denying to give loans to the state
unless they received preferential political treatment
C352] .


     But the capitalists could     not only demand
economic privileges but also demand a political
infrastructure compatible with the organization of
their economic activities.  In this respect, Weber
argues the case for the structural adequacy of
bureaucracy and capitalism. He maintains that the
technical and economic basis of 'modern culture'
'demands' [975] the calculability of results which
bureaucracy can provide. Furthermore,
     when fully developed, bureaucracy also stands, in
     a specific sense, under the principle of sine Ira
     ac   studio.    Bureaucracy  develops   the   more
     perfectly, the more it is "dehumanized", the more
     completely   it succeeds    in eliminating from
     official business love, hatred, and all personal,
     irrational, and emotional elements which escape
     calculation. This is appraised as its special
     virtue by capitalism. The more complicated and
     specialized modern culture becomes, the more its
     external    supporting   apparatus   demands   the
     personally detached and strictly objective expert
     ... Bureaucracy offers the attitudes demanded by
     the external apparatus of modern culture in the
     most favorable combination [975].


     Capitalism could not continue without 'stable,
strict,  intensive,  and calculable administration' .
Bureaucratic administration, on the other hand, could
only    develop in its most rational form because
capitalism,   as its most rational economic basis,
supplied    the necessary money resources [224]. Thus
bureaucratic organization of the political   structure
