-   70   -




believers,     not a ritual association of clans'   [1247,
1244]. Furthermore,

         Ct3he elimination of all ritual barriers of birth
         for the community of the eucharists, as realized
         in Antioch, was, in connection with the religious
         preconditions, the hour of conception for the
         Occidental 'citizenry'. This is the case even
         though its birth occurred more than a thousand
         years later in the revolutionary conjurationesof
         the medieval cities. For without commensalism -
         in Christian terms, without the Lord's Supper in
         common - no oath-bound fraternity and no medieval
         urban citizenry would have been possible C in:
         Gerth/Mills (eds.) 1967: 403-43.

In the medieval city, fraternization was not impeded
by any magical or religious barriers. But, on the
other hand, in so far as 'every foundation of the
Occidental city, during Antiquity and the Middle Ages,
went hand in hand with the establishment of a cultic
community   of   the  [productive]   citizens',   only
membership of the parish community bestowed the legal
status of citizen on the individual [in: Gerth/Mills
(eds.) 1967: 4023.

      Another   prerequisite  for this  revolutionary
innovation was the capability of the cities to put a
military check on the coercive power of the      city
lord:   All   coniuratlones and city unions in the
Occident were coalitions of the armed strata of the
cities [12623. The dispersion of military power that
was founded on the principle of self-equipment of the
armies had severe political consequences in so far as
it opened up room for manoeuvre for the bearers of
arms. This argument ties in with Weber's emphasis on
the beneficial effect which the competitive political
structure had on the development of the cities. The
less unitary the organization of the larger political
association, the more the political autonomy of the
urban   community could develop:   'The competition
