-   75   -




was in the interest of both economic and - given the
geopolitical power struggle - political actors. The
support   by  the   capitalists  for   the   political
communities was forthcoming because of the benefits
that accrued to them from doing so. This   'demand' of
the      capitalists   was,   in   turn,   met   by   the   state
because      of   its self-interest    in doing so.    The fact
that there was   within the state apparatus a group of
professional administrators,   the university-trained
experts in Roman law, with an interest of their own in
a qualitative and quantitative increase in public
bureaucracy    through    the     formalization    and
systematization of law in a logically impeccable way,
enhanced considerably this trend towards rationally
organized, bureaucratic administration C852 ff.] .

     According to Weber,    law and formal legality
became a political force via the Canon law of the
Catholic church and the reception of Roman law by the
medieval lawyers/administrators. The 'formal natural
law*   of  the   17th   and  18th   century, however,
articulated   the structural principle of the modern
state for the first time:

         All legitimate law rests upon enactment, and all
         enactment,    in   turn,    rests   upon   rational
         agreement. This agreement is either, first, real,
         i.e., derived from an actual original contract of
         free individuals, which also regulates the form
         in which new law is to be enacted in the future;
         or, second, ideal, in the sense that only that
         law   is   legitimate   whose   content  does   not
         contradict the conception of a reasonable order
         enacted by free agreement. The essential elements
         in such a natural law are the ''freedoms", and
         above all, "freedom of contract". The voluntary
         rational contract became one of the universal
         formal principles of natural law construction,
         either as the assumed real historical basis of
         all rational consociations Including the state,
         or, at least, as the regulative standard of
         evaluation C868-9; emphasis added].
