                                                  -   81   -




     monopolies and aid against violators of their own
     privileges. The crown, which was financially and
     administratively   utterly   dependent    upon   the
     privileged strata, feared these groups. But the
     political strategy of the English kings was
     essentially   one    of   rule    through    central
     parliament. In the main they tried to influence
     the urban constitutions and the composition of
     the city councils only in the interest of their
     parliamentary   election   politics;   hence    they
     supported the oligarchy of notables. The urban
     notables, for their part, could find a guarantee
     for their monopoly position vis-ci-vis the nor-
     privileged strata in the central administration,
     and only there. In the absence of a bureaucratic
     apparatus of their own, and in fact precisely
     because of the centralization of administration,
     the kings were dependent on the cooperation of
     the notables ... The financial power of the
     townsmen ... was considerable. But it was exerted
     collectively - within the status union of the
     commons represented in Parliament - as the power
     of an estate of privileged urban interests. It
     was around this grouping that all interests
     transcending the utilization of purely local
     monopolies revolved. Here we thus find for the
     first time an interlocal, national bourgeoisie
     [1279-80].

     This configuration was not so much a network of
voluntary alliances but a structured system of mutual
dependencies.   The   economic    interests   of   the
bourgeoisie were an integral part of national politics
which was not negotiable. The interests of the state
were the interests of the ‘political' nation and vice
versa. As England could dispense with a large standing
army because of her geographical location, she could
also resist the advance of the bureaucratic state
structure   which  characterized  the    political
development on the continent [970, 9873.


     The early national unification of England also
brought about 'a national body of law' whose bearers
were the English lawyers. They enjoyed a 'nation-wide
organization which was made possible ... by the
