-   210   -




          Agrarian reforms were not alone, however, in
          reducing the sales value of land; state lands in
          considerable quantity were thrown on the real
          estate market, depressing prices even more. At
          the same time the uncertain effects of the
          agrarian and tax reforms made lenders chary about
          extending credit to noble landowners ...       In
          addition,   the  losses of    robota forced the
          seigneurs to hire labor, and agricultural wages
          were increasing with the reduction of robota
          [Wright 1966: 162; Kerner 1932: 2113.


      But the peasants, too, were dissatisfied with the
refom. As we have seen above, not all peasants would
be covered by the new regulation. Those serfs whose
conditions were not regulated by the new law were
bound to resent being left out. Furthermore, as a
concession to the manorial lords, robot commutations
and abolitions which the peasants had anticipated, had
been suspended in those cases in which a petitioning
lord could show that the immediate application of the
law would work a hardship on him. Peasants feared that
this respite was the first move towards the ultimate
evasion of the law CWright 1966: 1473, But peasants
were also under the impression that the reform
constituted only a first step towards freeing them
from all obligations towards their lords. According to
the Bohemian tax commission this apprehension was the
reason why the peasants refused to sign a form
acknowledging their current urbarial obligations. Such
was the extent of this misapprehension, fuelled by the
events in France,   that an Imperial decree had to be
published in September 1789 in which it was made clear
that no further reforms could be expected. The peasant
opposition to the reform led to the outbreak of
peasant uprisings throughout the monarchy. Military
force had to be used to quell this unrest [Rozdolski
1961: 128-32; Griinberg II: 450-1; Wright 1966: 148;
Liebel-Weckowicz 1974: 80-13.
