                                               -   209   -




manorial woods and grassland. In 1789 they argued that
this step was justified because they alone were
obliged under the new law to pay the taxes which had
been imposed on these lands. Fully supporting the
claims of the manorial lords, both Court Chancellery
and provincial governments proposed that, instead of
having the right to use these lands free of charge,
the peasant subjects had either to pay part of the
taxes or to pay a fee to the lords    as compensation
[Rozdolski 1961: 145-63.


     There were two overriding financial reasons for
the aristocracy to oppose      the new law.     First,
landlords in Bohemia and Austria were used to
receiving on average between 20 to 30 per cent of the
peasant's gross income. The 17 per cent which the new
law set as the ceiling on payments to the lord was
thus evidently below the customary amount on which the
lords had based their economic calculations. Second,
the new tax collectors, which were responsible to
central government, posed a serious threat to the
Estates' administration of tax collection as they were
to collect the Estates' traditional taxes as well:

     The taxes owed the estates could not very well be
     added to Joseph's new land tax    ...Yet the old
     taxes had been set aside        to amortize the
     provincial debts and if they were to vanish, all
     payments on the principal and annual interest on
     these debts was threatened with default. It is
     because they were literally faced with bankruptcy
     that the provincial estates were on the point of
     revolt when Joseph died [sc. on February 20,
     17903 ... [Liebel-Weckowicz 1974: 803,


Discussing the seigneurial opposition to reform in
Bohemia, Wright points out that, as an effect of the
reform, seigneurial incomes were reduced:
     Land values declined sharply because of the 3oss
     of income and because of genera3 uncertainties
     occassioned by tax, land, and robota reforms ...
