     Agreeing that the provincial Estates should
     retain all of their traditional powers, the
     Estates [General] elected delegates from each of
     the provincial Estates to serve in a permanent
     national Congress. They limited the authority of
     the new executive body to issuing money and
     defending the country. The Congress could declare
     war and peace, establish a national army, and
     conclude foreign alliances. The Estates General
     would continue to exercise an even more limited
     legislative function [Polasky 1987: 135; Stradal
     1968: 1968: 303].


     These delegates to the Estates General and the
Congress, all of them members of the pre-revo]utionary
Estates, were agreed upon their joint responsibility
for   reestablishing traditional Belgian institutions
and   privileges.   The    ideological    and  political
differences among the forces which      had resisted the
Austrian rulers had now to be addressed. Faced with
the task of establishing a political order independent
of the Austrians, one central question required a
clear answer: where does sovereignty reside - in the
Estates, as the traditionalists argued, or in the
people,   as    the   democrats    maintained.   Popular
sovereignty for the traditionalists meant the indirect
representation of all the Belgian people by the
privileged orders - that is, the Estates. For the
democrats,   popular   sovereignty   meant     full   political
rights for all citizens under the rule of law. But for
them, *citizens' meant the members of the eductated
and propertied bourgeoisie; they had no intention to
grant political citizenship rights to the propertyless
[Polasky 1987: 150-2, 272; Stradal 1968: 300-1, 305],


     The political disintegration (along class-lines)
of the victorious anti-Austria coalition led to civil
war during the summer months of 1790. This fighting
between   the   Belgian   rebels     offered    the   Austrian
government   the chance    to reconquer Belgium [Stradal
