-   240   -




     Even if it had        been possible to mobilize the
hitherto unpolitical       urban bourgeoisie in greater
numbers,      they still   would not have posed a serious
challenge to the power of nobility. In terms of sheer
numbers, the urban bourgeoisie - merchants, craftsmen,
'professionals'  and 'intelligentsia'   - constituted
only about 2 per cent of the population in Hungary,
whereas the nobility formed about 4.4 per cent of the
population CBenda 1972: 483. Exploiting the conflicts
between serfs and manorial lords, however, would have
given the monarch much greater leverage. The history
of peasant unrest in Hungary made this consideration a
viable option.

     To put the peasant unrest of the 1780s and in
1790 in its social and economic context, we can, yet
again, draw on Kir&ly's seminal account of Hungarian
history in the 18th century:
          Already in the early 16th century Imperial forces
          penetrated Hungary every year because of the long
          Ottoman wars. The presence in Hungary of massive
          foreign forces meant the presence of many more
          persons to be fed, and this 'imported' consumer
          market created a great demand for food. The Peace
          Treaty of Karlovce in 1699 ... seemed to spell
          the end of this advantageous economic situation
          ... But the formation of the standing army only
          sixteen years later guaranteed that a large
          number   of   consumers  would   be   permanently
          stationed in Hungary. The War of the Austrian
          Succession <1740-48) and the Seven Years' War
          <1756-63) created new and even more profitable
          food markets for the landlords ... The landowners
          ... considered the profits from their lands not
          as reinvestable but as a means of augmenting
          their own luxury. This attitude prevented the
          occurrence of a broad agrarian revolution on the
          English pattern ... CB3y the middle of the
          agrarian boom in the 1760s the repopulation of
          Hungary was complete. The virgin lands that could
          be freely settled had disappeared, and this made
          the serfs ever mare dependent on the whims of the
          landowners ... C It3 led to an acceleration in
          their obligations to the lords and the gradual
