                                                 -   253   -




A large number of poor people, who had their meagre
savings invested in one of the 'brotherhoods', a sort
of mutual friendly society,    had already suffered
financial hardship when these saving banks were
dissolved by the government. Many of the petitions
which were lodged with the authorities in an attempt
to reclaim contributions were turned down.       The
economic depression, therefore, cut straight  across
all sections of society.


     During    the     French    wars   the   government
increasingly followed the course of emitting paper
money, the so-called Bancozettel, as a means of
financing   the    war    effort   [for   the  following
discussion: Klein 1974: 95-8; cf. also explanatory
notes to Table 1 in the appendix to this chapter] .
This course had already been pursued in the 1780s. In
1785 paper money amounted to 12,9 mio. fl. CM. and
totalled 28,1 mio. fl. CM, in 1790. In 1795 it was
almost three times higher than in 1785, amounting to
35,5 mio. fl. But it was only since August 1796 that
the limits imposed on theemission of the Bancozettel
were lifted to eleviate the financial crisis of the
state. The economic and financial effect of        this
policy, however, made itself not immediately manifest:

     Despite the issue of large amounts of paper
     currency and the mounting deficits during the
     1790s, the financial system of Austria - except
     for the run on the Viennese banks in 1797 - had
     remained quite stable. The quantity of paper
     money poured into the economy had not caused the
     serious inflation it should have, because during
     the war years merchants and vendors accepted the
     currency at face value. The confidence in the
     currency along with good harvests kept prices of
     food and other products fairly stable throughout
     the period,      which not    only maintained the
     monarchy's    financial   system   but  helped to
     preserve social and economic peace as well. By
     1801,   however,    confidence in the money was
     eroding, and inflation was becoming serious. By
     1803 prices in Vienna ranged from three to four
