-   252   -




     How   was    this military   effort  financed   ?
Wangermann [1959: 26-303 points out that the economic
policies of central government since the mid-1760s had
already negatively affected the commercial sections of
society even before    the Turkish War, The constant
demand of the state for privately borrowed money had
resulted in a chronic shortage of credit and inflation
of the interest-rate for private would-be borrowers as
financiers preferred the secure investment in          the
credit-hungry   state rather than in rickety           new
industrial orcommercial enterprises.      Until 1786,
money could be put into private foundations which then
advanced considerable sums from these private assets
to peasants and entrepreneurs as credit. But in 1786
it was decreed that all these capital assets in the
private foundations had to be transferred immediately
to state funds, with the result that a situation of
chronic credit shortage was transformed into one of
acute crisis. When in January 1787 the existing usury
laws were repealed, the lid was taken off the interest
rate altogether. As a result,   the economic situation
of this section of society further deteriorated.

     The imposition of a new war tax also contributed
to the economic crisis:

          The burghers (and the badly-paid officials) were
          subjected to the new war tax at the very time
          when rapidly rising prices had already forced
          them to tighten their belts a good deal. The
          rapid rise in prices had originally been caused
          by the diversion of supplies to the army. It was
          aggravated    by the   fact  that   the  Emperor,
          undeterred by the extraordinary situation created
          by the war, remained faithful to his policy of
          abolishing governmental regulation of internal
          trade, and simultaneously reducing imports. Thus
          the Viennese poor man's diet of imported fish
          disappeared from the market at the same time as
          bread and meat were rising in price [Wangermann
          1959: 29-303.
