                                                 -   281   -




provincial directorates opened up an opportunity for
either side to bypass, if thought advisable, the
president of the provincial government. In any case,
the    recurring   justification   for   the   different
treatment of the government of Lower Austria was the
importance which was attached by the minister of
police to an efficient policing of Vienna in the
interest of the security and survival of the state in
a time of internal and external threat COberhummer II:
96-7, 100-53 . It was only in March 1848 that all
matters concerning police were incorporated within the
ministry of the interior CBenna 1953: 2303.

     Since the summer of 1793 the police had been
aware of the identity and movements of some of the
'Jacobins' - as the members of these circles were now
called by the state authorities. When they attempted
to exploit the discontent amongst the population
during the crisis of the summer of 1794, the police
moved in and arrested the ringleaders. In his seminal
study on that period, Vangermann cogently describes
that critical situation:

      The failure of the [military! campaign of 1793 had
      shattered whatever hopes of a short war had
      survived earlier disasters. The preparation of the
      1794 campaign involved new financial burdens ...
      and a new drain of the badly needed manpower from
      the land to re-form depleted regiments.        The
      continued requirements of army provisions helped
      push up prices from the already high level
      prevailing since the Turkish War and jeopardized
      supplies for the capital. The attempts to suppress
      exports to Revolutionary France and, after April
      1794,   also to Revolutionary Poland inflicted
      considerable dislocation on Austrian commerce and
      industries. Everywhere an acute lack of money and
      men made itself felt. To crown all, the 1794
      harvest   in Hungary,   the monarchy's principal
      granary,   was threatened by a severe drought.
      Inevitably, the brunt of all the hardship was
      borne by the non-privileged,      who were still
      waiting for the concessions which had seemed at
      hand at the close of Leopold II's reign, but which
