                                                 -   295   -




members of the house of commons. One hundred and fifty-
constituencies each returned two members. Thirty-two
of these were county constituencies, based on a forty-
shilling freeholder franchise. In these constituencies
control over the election of candidates could be
exercised by creating fictitious freeholds and by
putting pressure on the freeholders, by using bribery
and patronage or by controlling the appointment of the
sheriffs who acted as returning officers. There were
also 117 boroughs (plus Trinity College, Dublin), and
membership for these was less prestigious than for the
county constituencies. Curtis C1937: 323-4] points out
that

       In the boroughs the votes varied from place to
       place; in some the corporation alone elected the
       member, in others the local magistrate, in others
       all    the   residents.   Most   of   them   were
       insignificant places, owned by the patron and
       called 'pocket boroughs', others, the 'decayed'
       or 'rotten' boroughs, had few or in several cases
       no inhabitants. The patrons had the nomination of
       176 members, and 86 sat for rotten boroughs.
       Above two-thirds of the seats in the House,
       [Henry] Grattan declared in 1790, were private
       property.

     Lecky C 11: 347] states that in 1783 it was
computed "that 124 members of the House of Commons
were absolutely nominated by fifty-three peers, while
ninety-one others were chosen by fifty-two commoners".
In those boroughs where only the members of the
corporation and the freemen had the right to vote, it
was imperative for the political magnate to ensure
that the thirteen or sometimes twelve members of the
corporation were his nominees and that only his
supporters were admitted as freemen [McCracken 1973a:
141].   In these constituencies control     was less
troublesome  than   in county   constituencies.  But,
whereas, in fact, few county elections were contested,
in those boroughs which were more open as regards
