                                                  -   259   -




going to Ireland. During the 18th century, however,
British trade with Ireland was greater than that with
any other European country [Cullen 1968: 46-7].


     Throughout the eighteenth century the export of
linen textiles far exceeded agricultural exports. So
predominant was the export of linen textiles that at
the end of the 1750s as much as 80 per cent of Irish
exports to Britain (by value) consisted of linen cloth
and yarn [Cullen 1968: 513. From 1710 onwards the
Anglo-Irish trade balance was in favour of Ireland
[James   1973:  198-200;  Clark/Donnelly 1983b:   293.
However, "Ireland's favorable balance was consumed in
large part by charges paid for shipping, by merchants'
commissions, by interest on loans, and especially by
rents    paid  to  absentee  landlords   [residing  in
England]'* [James 1973: 205]. Furthermore, the steady
growth of Britain's share in Irish trade does not only
reflect the strength of the British economy, but gives
also testimony to the advantages Britain gained from
the restrictions imposed on Irish colonial and foreign
trade.

     Summarizing his magisterial study on Anglo-Irish
trade in the 18th century, Cullen arrives at the
following conclusion:
     It   seems   clear   that    England's  industrial
     expansion and Ireland's economic development in
     the 18th century are associated. Alternative
     markets for Irish products were few, and the
     English market, from the start the motor of
     expansion in the linen industry, came in the
     second half of the 18th century to play the same
     role as far as Irish agricultural products were
     concerned.  At the time England's industrial
     expansion hardly appeared to threaten Ireland* s
     industrial  prospects.    Indeed the   growth   in
     effective demand in Ireland made possible by
     enlarged export outlets appeared to strengthen
     industry, and, as the second half of the 18th
     century progressed, larger units employing more
