-   304   -




     One attempt by the Protestant urban middle-class
to proscribe the economic activities of the Catholic
merchants   and traders   was the endeavour of the
Protestant   corporations  and  guilds   to  have   a
quarteragebill passed    by parliament. MacGeehin has
succinctly summarized the issue at stake:
          Catholics could not be permitted to become
          freemen of corporate towns as they would then
          share    in all the     privileges, exemptions and
          benefits of freemen, and moreover, they would
          have    the right    of   voting    for   members of
          parliament and municipal officers ,.. As non­
          freemen    were   non-eligible    to    become  "free
          brothers" in the guilds (i.e. they could not
          become full guild members), it was now decided to
          introduce to the guilds the new status of
          "quartei— brother" ... A non-freeman was admitted
          as a quarter-brother ... on payment of a fine
          called "intrusion money" and remained free of the
          guild so long as he paid his quarterage regularly
          every quarter day, and conformed to the guild
          regulations [MacGeehin 1952: 943.

     Catholics regarded quarterage as an unjust and
illegal levy and very often refused to pay it. The law
courts, however, denied the legal right of guilds and
corporations to enforce quarterage from non-freemen by
virtue of their charters. The guilds and corporations
attempted therefore to secure statutory sanction for
quarterage.        But although heads of quarterage      bills
were passed        in parliament in 1768, 1772, and       1778,
they did not get on the statute book because they were
cushioned in the privy council [MacGeehin 1952: 101
ff.3 . The case for the Catholic        interests was
effectively made by the Catholic Committee               which
organized and mobilized the Catholic middle              class
around this issue [cf., e.g., the committee's petition
against the 1772 Quarterage Bill in: Minute Book: 14-
153 . This Catholic Committee was to play an important
role in the struggle for Catholic emancipation in the
1790s.
