                                                  -   311   -




appropriate more speedily the economic profits which
the rise in farm income created. From mid-century,
therefore,    the   conventional  letting   policy   of
landowners changed radically [Dickson 1980b: 135-73.
As old leases fell in landlords increasingly rented
out land directly to undertenants. As a consequence of
the economic upswing many more small tenants than
before were now capable of stocking a farm and of
paying   rent.    Cullen   C1981: 1013   has   cogently
summarized the social and economic issues at stake:

     Thus, the Cmiddleman3 system was being challenged
     from above by the urge of landlords to eliminate
     middlemen and from below by the rise of the
     bettei— circumstanced tenantry ready to pay higher
     rents     and   no more likely    than   middlemen
     intermediaries to default on payment. Landlords
     were,     however, very ambivalent    towards    the
     replacement     of  middlemen:    they   frequently
     envisaged their replacement, but when leases came
     up for renewal they as frequently relet the land
     to them. This ambivalence can be accounted for
     very    simply by the fact that many of          the
     middlemen were related by blood or marriage to
     members of gentry families, or were Protestants
     whose replacement by     occupying farmers in the
     more backward regions necessitated a departure
     from long-established tradition of favouring the
     solvent Protestant tenant. But the break-up of
     the system was inevitable though it could be
     slowed down by the operation of family and social
     considerations.


     But there also developed an increasingly sharp
conflict between the prospering tenant farmer and the
cottier and labourer class. Rising prices benefited
the tenant farmer.    But the commercialization of
farming gave the tenant an economic incentive to
restrict access to land and to decline to grant plots
of land to the land-poor if his own labour needs had
been satisfied. In areas where commercial farming was
we 11-developed, the cottier or labourer found himself
in a situation in which he had to pay a competitive
rent for his plot without in many instances the
