-   326   -




Ireland          lifted.   The    Irish   were   allowed   to   become
members of the Turkey Company and to trade directly
with the Levant Sea.              The two restrictions which were
still kept in force excluded Irish trade from the area
covered by the monopoly of the East India Company and
forbade the re-export of colonial products to Great
Britain [McDowell 1979: 267-70; Lecky II:                       242-3;
Butterfield 1949: 175-7; Beckett 1981: 215-193.


     These trade concessions were a major victory for
the   Irish  Patriots.   But  there  was   still  the
legislative dependency of Ireland. After the economic
success the demand for constitutional reforms gained
force [O'Brien 1987: 28-62 gives a summary of the
political manoevres of both the Irish and British
administrations   and   the   Irish   opposition] . In
parliament on November 19, Grattan moved a resolution
"that the king's most excellent majesty, and the lords
and commons of Ireland, are the only power competent
to enact laws to bind Ireland" [quoted in: Beckett
1981: 2193. Although Grattan did not succeed with this
resolution in parliament, he expressed not only the
sentiments of the Irish Patriots but also the real
situation in Ireland: British acts were frequently
considered not to be binding.

          On the one hand, there was popular resistance to
the           implementation of     English law.   Lord    Lieutenant
Carlisle wrote to Lord Hillsborough in March 1782,

          Your lordship cannot be ignorant that the actual
          exercise of the British Parliament of Ireland
          [sic!3 was utterly and totally impracticable long
          before I arrived in this country. There was not a
          magistrate or revenue officer, however attached
          to or dependent on the British Government, who
          could venture to    enforce an English law. The
          attempt would have been madness,       as it was
          certain   to  receive   a   general  and  decided
          resistance, [quoted in: Lecky II: 2893
