-   336   -




patriotic party had availed themselves of their
support in their own fight for free trade and
political and Juridical independence. It       was the
changed social composition of this extra-parliamentary
body which caused widespread anxiety. In       the same
speech Grattan drew the attention of the House to

          the alarming measure of drilling the lowest
          classes of the populace, by which a stain had
          been put on the character of the Volunteers. The
          old,   the   original   Volunteers   had   become
          respectable,   because   they   represented   the
          property of the nation; but attempts had been
          made to arm the poverty of the kingdom CGrattan
          III: 2153.

     It was this fear that "the volunteers without
property", as Fox wrote, would soon be the only
government in Ireland, unless they were faced "in a
manful manner" [Fox on November 1, 1783    in: Grattan
III: 108;     Cannon 1969:   90-13 which informed the
patriots' response    to demands for political reform.
Charlemont, who was in principle in favour of some
sort   of parliamentary reform,       expressed these
considerations bluntly when he wrote that

          the true definition of a Just and beneficial
          reform in the representation of the people is
          simply this, that property should be equally and
          fully represented.   But change this into the
          allowance   of   suffrage   to   every  indigent
          individual ... and, instead of constitutional
          freedom, the alteration would be productive of
          anarchy ... [HMC Charlemont    I: 136; emphasis
          added3.

     Thus, the supporters of parliamentary reform
stood a bad chance of succeeding in their agitation.
Major representatives of the Patriots did not endorse
a reform which would have reduced their own power as
borough-owners or the power of the borough-owners who
were their sponsors "by extending boundaries and by
rendering void all bylaws designed to limit the number
