-   350   -




well as "the utter renouncing and abjuring" of the
Stuart Pretender. It also denied both the temporal and
deposing powers of the papacy "within this realm". In
urging all priests to take the oath, the Catholic
Church could not but alienate local parishes and
village communities [Brie 1987b: 172 ff.; Connolly
1982: chap. 63.

     The opinion of the Catholic hierarchy at large
can be found encapsulated in a circular letter which
the Catholic bishop of Ferns, Dr. Sweetman sent out
during the Vhiteboy disturbances in 1775. He told his
clergy that
          the    detestable,     lawless   and    unmeaning
          disturbances of the public, commonly called White
          Boys, are drawing on us, and our holy religion,
          the odium of our mild government,        and the
          gentlemen in power in our country. You are hereby
          ordered to denounce and declare the aforesaid
          banditti excommunicated, by God and the holy
          Catholic Church, from your altars; and all their
          setters-on, abettors, and advocates [quoted in:
          Brady Ced.> 1953: 1743.

Almost twenty years later, during the campaign for
Catholic relief in the 1790s, the Catholic archbishop
of Dublin,    John Thomas Troy,    could claim with
considerable justification that

          The same gospel spirit of subordination and
          respect towards God, and the ministers of his
          power on earth, constantly manifested itself in
          the zealous endeavours of the Catholic nobility,
          gentry, clergy, and informed individuals of every
          description in their communion,      to aid the
          government and magistrates in repelling a foreign
          enemy [i.e. France3 or preserving internal peace
          [i.e.   by "suppressing White-Boys,    Right-Boys,
          Defenders, and other rioters"3" [Troy 1793: 163.


As we shall see later, the archbishop's intervention
was not concerned so much with justifying the demands
of    the     Catholics   for   emancipation   but   rather   with
