-   352   -




peasant and farm labourer, the Catholic priest helped
to   sustain   the   stratified  structure   of   his
congregation.   Political   circumspection            was   thus
coupled with enforcing social inequality.

          During the previous quarter of a century agrarian
unrest had been directed much more clearly against
landlords and middlemen. In the 1760s the Whiteboys
protested against enclosures of commons and waste
lands and against the keeping of land from tillage
[Donnelly 1978: 343. This protest was a response to
the removal of restrictions on the import of Irish
cattle        into   England   in   1758/9   during   Britain's
engagement in the Seven Years War [Brie 1985: 151;
O'Donovan 1940: 109-103. Now that salted beef, pork
and butter could be exported the immediate effect was
an extension of land under pasture and a move towards
enclosures:   beef and dairy cattle encroached on
commonage and threatened thus the livelihood of
peasants. Furthermore, the Whiteboys also tried to
enforce    regulations  governing    land   occupancy,
landlord-tenant relations, wages, hearth-money, the
cost and disposal of provisions in time of scarcity,
roads, tolls, and the right to work [Wall 1973: 163.
Chari emont stated some of the reasons for the
Whiteboy activities in the late 1760s very succinctly:
          Exorbitant rents, low wages, want of employment
          in a country destitute of manufacture ... where
          oxen supplied the place of men, and, by leaving
          no room for cultivation ... starved the miserable
          remnant of thinly scattered inhabitants. Farms of
          enormous extent let by their rapacious and
          indolent   proprietors   to  monopolizing   land-
          jobbers, by whom small portions of them were
          again let and relet to intermediate oppressors,
          and by them sub-divided for five times their
          value among the wretched starvers upon potatoes
          and water. Taxes yearly increasing, and, still
          more, tithes, which the Catholic, without any
          possible benefit, unwillingly pays in addition to
          his priest's money, and by whose oppressive
