                                               -   371   -




JPs and a sufficient number of constables should
attend as the commissioners would direct [s.523. The
Whiteboy Act of 1776 was continued for seven years,
but the Dublin Police Act of 1777-78 was repealed
[ss.73 and 753.


     The radically new departure of the new Dublin
Police Act can be immediately grasped if it is
compared with the "Act for improving the police of the
city of Dublin" of 1777-78 C17&18 Geo III, c. 433.
This    act   had    reaffirmed    the   Corporation's
responsibility for policing. It constituted     a step
towards centralizing the watch system by grouping the
city's parishes into six wards. It stipulated that
     the lord mayor and board of aldermen ... shall
     from time to time nominate and appoint some of
     the aldermen ... to be aldermen of the said ward,
     and as such to have the special superintendance
     and care of and to be president or guardian of
     the police of each of the said respective wards
     .., and every such alderman,      president,   or
     guardian of the police in each respective ward
     shall have power and authority to nominate and
     appoint some person of the common council of the
     said city, and a resident in and inhabitant of
     the said ward, to be and act in the said ward as
     assistant to the said president ...Cs.13.


This deputy had to be approved by the lord mayor and
the board of aldermen   Cs.23. The wardmote Cmoot3court
was established as a kind of supervisory body.    This
wardmote court consisted of not less than six, and not
more than twelve inhabitants who had to be paying scot
and lot, i.e. sharing in the financial burdens of the
ward. This court was empowered to make or alter rules
as to the police and the preservation of the peace. It
had the power to appoint and remove constables!
watchmen, or patroles. This court was to be chaired by
the president or the deputy who had the casting vote
Cs.43. The number of police was not fixed but left to
