                                                -   367   -




Peace of Paris in 1763. In order to maintain effective
government in this region, the British government had
conceded that the province was to be ruled by French
civil law; that Catholics might hold office by taking
an oath    specially devised for them; and that the
Catholic   church could remain established by being
given the power to collect tithes CCorish 1985: 137-
83. Imperial concerns were clearly diminishing the
importance of religious considerations. Concern for
the stability of the Empire during the American War
also informed British politics towards Ireland. On the
one hand, it was expected that concessions to the
Irish Catholics would assuage their disaffection with
their marginalized position within society and help to
prevent them from giving support to an envisaged
attempt by the French navy to invade Ireland. But more
immediate military exigencies would appear to have
been even more important.

     Legal military service by Catholics of all three
kingdoms, England, Scotland and Ireland, had been
prohibited by an act of 1714 Cl Geo I, stat. 2, c.
473. Until the 1750s virtually no Catholics and few
Irish Protestants had been recruited into any British
regiment:

     But in the early stages of the Seven Years War,
     unauthorised recruiting by English regiments
     began   in the southern counties and        formal
     government   permission   was   given   for    the
     enlistment of catholics as marines ... C In 17713
     large-scale   recruitment  took   place   in   the
     provinces ... Irishmen of whatever religion had
     formed only about 6 per cent of all non­
     commissioned ranks of the British army in the
     mid-fifties, whereas on the eve of the American
     war the proportion was over 20 per cent. There
     were considerable recruiting problems in much of
     Britain by that stage and so it was to the
     periphery, to the Scottish Highlands and to parts
     of catholic Ireland, that the army was being
