                                               -   403   -




    best state of defence,     when the people are
    strong. The same force which was ready to defend
    the country against the attempts of foreign
    force, we hope, will be ever found equally ready
    to assert domestic quiet, and the common rights
    of all the people of Ireland ... it is the
    unalienable right of all the people of Ireland to
    carry arms ... an effectual and adequate reform
    in   the   representation   of   the  people   in
    parliament, is our only object, in the pursuit of
    which object we shall never slacken our efforts.
    If bad advisers, or weak and wicked men, shall
    force the people into extremity, on them let all
    the miseries fall of civil convulsion [Historical
    Collections (Belfast) 1817: 392].

     With its emphasis on the duty      of the armed
citizen,  this resolution defiantly     recalled the
position of the Volunteers during the American War of
Independence. Furthermore, it constituted a challenge
to government in that it was justifying, if ever so
subtly, "civil convulsion". And government was well
advised to take this challenge of the Volunteers
seriously as the Volunteers had been increasing in
numbers during the summer with many new corps
espousing liberal principles and winning over many
Volunteers in the older companies, which so far had
always inclined to conservative views and cautious
action [Rogers 1934: 2753.


     The radicalization of politics, in Belfast, at
any rate, could also be seen in the foundation of a
new club, the 'Irish Jacobins' in December 1792.
Whereas the Volunteers kept themselves guarded with
regard to a forthright endorsement of violent action
for bringing about change, the Jacobins declared much
more blatantly that in order to bring about reform "we
will individually and collectively exert every means
in our power" [Historical Collections (Belfast) 1817:
388-9; emphasis added; McSkimmin 1849: 22-33. Whereas
the Belfast United Irishmen were apparently dominated
