                                                        -   399   -




     After their unsuccessful attempt to gain the
parliamentary franchise in spring 1792, the Catholic
Committee,   including  the  secessionists  of  1791
[Plowden 1803/11, App. : 1823, engaged in an effort to
broaden its basis by mobilizing for a representative
Catholic congress to give concerted force to Catholic
demands. The county delegates to the congress were to
be chosen by "electors'', "respectable persons", who
had   to   be   selected, in     turn,   in each parish at        a
meeting "in a private house" . It was recommended that
the electors should elect also "associate delegates",
resident in Dublin, who could keep the county informed
about the congress's proceedings [Plowden 1803/11,
App.: 183-7: "On the manner of conducting the Election
of Delegates"].

     The Protestant power holders were perturbed at
the prospect of a representative Catholic congress.
The grand juries of at least twenty-eight counties
declared themselves against the proposed congress
[McDowell 1979:   407 n. 253 . The grand jury of the
county of Louth, with John Foster, the Speaker of the
House of Commons, as its foreman, resolved that
      the allowing to Roman Catholics the right of
      voting for members to serve in parliament, or
      admitting them to     any participation in the
      government of the kingdom, is incompatible with
      the safety of the Protestant establishment, the
      continuance of the succession to the crown in the
      illustrious House of Hanover, and must finally
      tend to shake, if not destroy our connexion with
      Great Britain [Plowden 1803/11, App.: 191; cf.
      protest resolutions ibid. : 187-993 .


     In its protest resolution the Corporation                    of
Dublin stated what it wished to see maintained:                   "A
protestant       ascendancy, which they defined as a
protestant      king of Ireland, a protestant hierarchy,
protestant      electors   and    government,   the   bench       of
