officers  possessing  landed property within this
kingdom" was established C33 Geo III, c. 22, s. 13.
But forming the militia had not been a policy
objective for which the government had been striving
out of its own volition. In May 1790, the       Lord
Lieutenant had expressed very eloquently the dilemma
which a militia force would pose for the government:
     The establishment of a militia in Ireland seems
     attended with unsurmountable difficulties; if it
     could be raised, would be burthensome CsicD and
     oppressive    to  a   great  degree,   especially
     considering the disproportion of Protestants and
     Catholics. Considering the militia with a view to
     the government of England, the militia would form
     a military body of the inhabitants of the
     country,   who,  upon any disagreement between
     England and Ireland, would certainly be actuated
     by the popular opinion. The strength of the
     militia would form an argument against the
     necessity of so large a military force, and would
     probably, in the end, cause a reduction of the
     military establishment. It would change the power
     of the sword, lex ultima regum, from the English
     army to the gentlemen of the country ... Upon one
     idea only I think the subject can be considered
     ... the danger that the volunteering spirit
     should be renewed, and whether that spirit might
     not be counteracted by this establishment Cin:
     HMC Fortescue I: 5833.

To form a militia would thus lead to yielding
considerable power over the means of coercion to the
local gentry which was rather undesirable from the
point of view of the Irish administration.         If,
however, armed citizens were roaming the country as
Volunteers, then yielding power and co-operating with
the local aristocracy and gentry would be the lesser
of two evils.


     Confronted    with   the   political   and   social
turbulence    in    Ireland,    Westmorland   and    the
administration gradually changed their opinion. In
November 1792 Westmorland maintained that it seemed
