-   422   -




structure more momentous, however, than in the linen
triangle between Belfast/Lisburn, Dungannon and Newry
[Crawford 1971: 117-443.


     As a result of the Cattle Acts of the 1660s and
the removal of duties on Irish linens in 1696, the
domestic linen industry was well established before
the turn of the century. In the 18th century the linen
industry was Ulster's main source of prosperity. In
the improving economic climate after 1740 many tenants
on long leases realized that there was more profit in
sub-letting land for small farms to weavers than in
farming.  So lucrative became the domestic linen
industry that Ulster experienced an overall decline in
agriculture in the second half of the 18th century.
One consequence of the dominance of the linen industry
was the evolution of a society of small tenant
farmers. The income available from yarn and cloth
production enabled families to maintain themselves on
smaller holdings. The opportunities which the linen
industry provided for young people to set up and
maintain homes of their own stimulated the subdivision
of holdings. And so did the expansion of the linen
industry which enabled many independent weavers to
take in cottiers in order to put out work to them
[Crawford 1979: 188; Kirkham 1988: 1003.

     Furthermore, the letting policy of the landlords
gradually destroyed the substantial farmer class:

          In the districts where the domestic industry of
          weaving fine linens was spreading through the
          countryside,  landlords  were  jealous  of  the
          profits made by many farmers in subletting
          holdings to weavers on short leases. Whenever
          these leases fell due for renewal, landlords
          insisted on renewing to the farmers only the
          holdings they actually occupied and on letting
          the properties that the farmers had sublet,
          directly to the weavers who lived on them. This
          measure destroyed the farming class in these
