                                                -   427   -




[Bartlett 1985a: 3753. In those counties where they
were already organized the Defenders took an active
role in the riots. By May 1793, their movement had
also spread into riot-torn areas like Sligo and
Leitrim [Elliott 1982: 453, But supporters and members
of the secret society of the Defenders became also
enrolled in the new militia corps:

     The militia was organised mostly on a county
     basis and its rank and file consisted largely of
     the catholic rural poor, precisely the sort of
     people who appear to have found Defenderism
     appealing.  There can be no doubt that many
     Defenders were ballotted into a number of militia
     regiments and, since regiments generally were not
     permitted to serve in the counties where they
     were raised, some regiments, as they travelled
     around the country,     became agents for the
     diffusion of Defenderism into new, 'uninfected'
     areas [Bartlett 1985a: 3753.

      The organization of the Irish militia, therefore,
was instrumental to spreading Defenderism [MacNeven
1807:   120-13.  Furthermore,   however, theDefenders
succeeded in attracting widespread rural support
outside of Ulster in consequence of the fact that they
did not limit their goals to narrowly sectarian
issues.  Their aims wereextremely diverse.    They
normally reflected the grievances of the different
localities into which the movement penetrated. Among
their general   aims, which   they pursued in every
district, were the regulation of tithes and the
opposition to tithe proctors or tithe farmers. They
sought the reduction of hearth-money and rents and
they agitated against the price of conacre land and
the level of labourers' wages. They also attacked the
high level of priests' fees. With regard to these
goals, the Defenders stood in the tradition of earlier
agrarian protest:   "But unlike the programmes of
previous agrarian societies, that of the Defenders
also included vague plans to assist a French invasion,
