-   434   -




and Tyrone, but disaffection, yet less violent,    had
also appeared in Sligo, Roscommon, Leitrim, Westmeath,
Meath, Kildare, Dublin, Longford, Fermanagh and Louth
CStoddart 1972: 613. Popular disaffection had also
experienced a boost by the attempt of a French
invasion fleet to land in Ireland in December 1796.
Though        a   most   bungled    exercise,   which     was    not   co­
ordinated with the United Irishmen and which, in the
end, came to nothing because of disagreement among the
French commanding officers and because of bad weather,
it boosted   the radicals' morale by convincing them
that France would support an Irish uprising [Elliott
1982: 109-233.

     Such was the unrest in the north in March 1797
that government instructed General Lake to disarm the
province. Pelham informed Lake that in pursuit of this
goal he was empowered to act, if need be, without
legal authorization by the local magistracy:
          His Excellency ... authorizes you to employ Force
          against   any Persons   assembled in Arms, not
          legallyauthorized    so to be, to dispense all
          tumultuous Assemblies of Persons though they may
          not be in Arms, without waiting for the Sanction
          and Assistance of the Civil Authority, if in your
          Opinion the Peace of the Realm or the Safety of
          His Majesty's faithful Subjects may be endangered
          by waiting for such Authority [JHC (Appendix
          1798), app. DCCCLVI3.

No        'rule of law', then,      for Ulster.    Worse,       the    army
considered    this order to    give the troops full
discretionary power to wage a 'total war* against the
Catholic population. The proclamation of martial law
on    17      May     1797   'legalized'    this    situation          [JHC
(Appendix           1798),   app*    DCCCLVII3.     One     commanding
officer informed Lake that
          I have arranged a plan to scour a district full
          of unregistered arms, and this I do, not so much
          with a hope to succeed to any extent, and to
