-   448   -




to the rebellion of     1798 [Dickson           1987:   189;    Hogan
1976: 96-7; Hayes-McCoy 1959: 203.


          From    the   start    the yeomanry   was     under     the
influence of the Orange Order. The United Irish
directed their efforts towards discouraging enlistment
into the new corps: "This not only left the field free
to Orangemen, but added to their prestige by seeming
to confirm their assertion that they had government
support" [Senior 1966: 573. In this way the formation
of the yeomanry exacerbated the socio-political and
sectarian conflict between the United Irish and the
Defenders on the one side and the Orangemen on the
other. The intensification of this conflict was rooted
in the very logic of this measure:
          By permitting the gentry to raise a force of
          part-time    soldiers    ...       the government
          unintentionally provided the means of creating a
          national Orange movement. The yeomanry could not
          be recruited without the cooperation of the lower
          class protestant, and the Orange lodges were to
          be both an agency for employing the energies of
          the protestant peasants and a means of keeping
          them under some degree of gentry control [Senior
          1966: 503 .


     The   government  was   much   pleased with   the
performance of the yeomanry corps during and after the
French invasion threat at Bantry Bay in County Cork in
December 1796: "From the armed Yeomanry, Government
derived the most honourable Assistance. Noblemen and
Gentlemen of the first Property vied in exerting
themselves at the Head of their Corps. Much of the
Express and Escort Duty was performed by them. In
Cork, Limerick and Galway, they took [on3 the Duty of
the Garrison", Camden reported to London    in January
1797.  Camden singled out the yeomanry corps in Dublin
for particular praise: They "have been formed of the
most          respectable   Barristers,   Attornies,     Merchants,
