- 456 -


     the numberless murders that are hourly committed
     by our people without any process or examination
     whatever. The yeomanry are in the style of the
     Loyalists in America, only much more numerous and
     powerful, and a thousand times more ferocious.
     These men have saved the country, but they now
     take the lead in rapine and murder.     The Irish
     militia, with few officers, and those chiefly of
     the worst kind, follow closely on the heels of
     the yeomanry in murder and every kind of
     atrocity,  and   the  Fencibles take a share,
     although much behind the others.      The feeble
     outrages, burnings, and murders which are still
     committed by the Rebels, serve to keep up the
     sanguinary   disposition   on    our  side    Cin:
     Cornwallis Correspondence II: 3693.


     The sectarian composition of the yeomanry may
explain why the Lord Lieutenant could consider them as
the most savage force in Ireland. As          an almost
exclusively Catholic force,    the militia,    however,
though being infiltrated by Orangemen, counted a
considerable number of United Irishmen and Defenders
among its ranks CSenior 1966: 54-73. Cornwallis, the
professional soldier, instead of accounting for the
militia behaviour by reference to either sectarian or
political motivations, emphasized the organizational
aspect. He maintained that '*their total want of all
idea of discipline and subordination" resulted "from
their being dispersed in small detachments over the
whole   face    of  the    country"   [in:  Cornwalis
Correspondence   III:   763.   Normal   discipline may have
been rather unstable in the first place because
Protestant officers who were drawn from      the gentry
commanded   Catholic   peasants.   The   breakdown   of
discipline      was further facilitated by "want of
preparation, guerilla nature of fighting, transport
difficulties,   march  fatigues,  absence   of supply
arrangements, Cand3 general improvisation of attack
and defence arrangements" CMacAnally 1949: 1273.
