                                                - 509 -


     Comparative    analysis   should    sharpen   our
     understanding of the contexts in which more
     detailed causal inferences can be drawn. Without
     a knowledge of contexts, causal inference may
     pretend to a level of generality to which it is
     not entitled. On the other hand, comparative
     studies should not attempt to replace causal
     analysis, because they can only deal with a few
     cases and cannot easily isolate the variables (as
     causal analysis must) CBendix 1978: 153.


It is important to be clear about what this position
entails. This argument does not deny that the logic of
causal analysis implies a counter-factual case or a
'control' case, and that, therefore, comparison is an
integral part of this logic. Rather, it is an argument
against the assumption that a comparative analysis,
for example by applying J.St.       Mill's method of
agreement   and/or   method   of   difference,   could
conclusively establish a list of causal factors which
could account for the occurrence or non-occurrence of
social phenomena.   Causal attribution is based on
(explicit or implicit) theorizing, not method. For
example, Barrington Moore's disinclination to consider
the position of the countries he analyses within the
international system as a possible causal factor for
the formation of democratic, fascist or communist
regimes has to be discussed, not on the basis of his
method,   but  on   the   basis  of   his   theoretical
orientation which is essentially 'society-centred'.
Again,  his neglect     of cultural   factors   is not
intrinsically methodologically founded, but is due to
his theory which has a clear 'materialist' bias.

     Furthermore, for a causal attribution on the
basis of comparative studies to be convincing the
social   scientist  has to   be able   to  isolate
'variables',    categorize them   as  'dependent' or
'independent'   and, above all,   keep them constant
