18 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

1. Clarit

Specify and circumscribe the independent and dependent variables

(the hypothesized antecedent and consequent);

2. Logical consistency or cotenability: Specify connecting principles that link
the antecedent with the consequent and that are cotenable with each other and with
the antecedent;

3. Historical consistency (minimal-rewrite rule): Specify antecedents that re-

quite altering as few “well-established” historical facts as possible;

4. Theoretical consistency: Articulate connecting principles that are consistent
with “well-established” theoretical generalizations relevant to the hypothesized an-
tecedent-consequent link;

5. Statistical consistency: Articulate connecting principles that are consistent
‘with “well-established” statistical generalizations relevant to the antecedent-conse-
«quent link;

6. Projectability: Tease out testable implications of the connecting principles
‘and determine whether those hypotheses are consistent with additional real-world
“observations.”

‘cross ideal types and are perhaps the best candidates for the status of universal minimum
standards

(Q) The third crterion—consistency with well-established historical fact (also known as the
‘minimal-rewrite rule) —is carefully observed by most idiographic researchers (ideal type 1) but
frequently ignored by many nomothetic researchers (ideal type 2);

(G) The fourth, fifth, and sixth crteria—consistency with well-established theoretical and
statistical generalizations and projectability—are more widely acknowledged among nomothetic
than among idiographic researchers (although a significant contingent of idiographic researchers
do apply these standards in their own work)

* Some logicians (Stalnaker 1984; Lewis 1973) have proposed a seventh test—the semantics
‘of possible worlds for judging the truth or falsehood of counterfactual claims. To testa propo-
sition ofthe form “if p, then q,” possible-worlds semantics directs us to do three things: (1)
identify the set of possible worlds {p} in which the counterfactual antecedent, p, is trie; (2)
identify that possible world {p'} that is “closest” to the actual worl; (3) determine whether that
possible word (p' falls in the intersection of the set of possible worlds in which p is tre, {p}.
‘and the set of possible worlds in with qis te, {q}. We should judge “if p, then q” to be true if
and only if the “closes” p falls in the intersection of (p} and {}. In other words, we should
judge “if p, then q” to be true if and only ifthe closest world in which p is true is also a world
in which ¢ is toe.

‘This logical calculus provides an elegant framework for evaluating counterfactual claims. It
assumes, however, a vastly more sophisticated knowledge of the causal workings ofthe world
than socal scientists currently possess (or are likely to possess anytime in the next century). We
‘need to partition the universe of possible works into overlapping sets, to locate the actual world
in the universe of possible worlds, and to quantify the “distance” between the actual workd and
each possible world. Not surprisingly, none of our contributors could implement this test. We
ifr from Lebow and Stein (Chapter 5) in that we distinguish the Lewis-Stalnaker approach
from the minimal-rewrite rule. Even if the antecedent p is an historically implausible miracle
cause (Chapter 2, Fearon, the closest word in which p is tru could still be a world in which q
is true, in which case the counterfactual violates the minimal-rewrite rule but passes the Lewis-
‘Stalnaker test.

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS. »
1, Well-Specified Antecedents and Consequents

ur first recommendation might strike readers as a tad obvious. Like actual
experiments, thought experiments should manipulate one cause at a time,
thereby isolating pathways of influence. Although excellent advice in princi
ple, implementing it is often deeply problematic. There is no way to hold
“all other things equal” when we perform thought experiments on social
systems that are densely interconnected (cf. Jervis 1993; Commentary 4,
Jervis). To invoke the terminology of experimental design, we cannot ma-
nipulate the “independent” variable in interconnected systems without creat-
ing ripple effects that alter the values taken on by other potential causes in
the historical matrix, thereby creating “confounding” variables that render
interpretation of the original thought experiment problematic.

At this juncture, radical wholists take the systems-theory argument even
further and insist that if we want to advance coherent and defensible coun-
terfactuals, we will have to reconstruct an entirely new hypothetical world
for each new counterfactual proposition—a new world that specifies all
other things that would also have to change in order to accommodate the
hypothesized antecedent (otherwise the counterfactual is underspecified)..
This position strikes us as too extreme. Causal interconnectedness is a mat-
ter of degree. In the words of one systems theorist: “Everything is connected
but some things are more connected than others. The world is a large matrix
of interactions in which most of the entries are very close to zero” (Pattee
1973, 23). The analytical challenge then becomes estimating interconnected-
ness and designing our counterfactual thought experiments with due consid-
eration for the complexities created by interconnectedness. Sometimes we
will discover that the wholists are right: the causal antecedent that we men-
tally manipulated is so deeply embedded in a recursive network of causation
that simply positing that “if cause x took on a different value, then y" is
deeply uninformative. Consider two examples:

(J) Cederman (Chapter 11) criticizes the structural-realist claim advanced
by Mearsheimer (1990, 14) that “ceteris paribus, war is more likely in a
multipolar system than a bipolar one.” In Cederman’s view, other things
probably cannot be held equal in the post-World War II case, and Mear-
sheimer glosses over the problem by failing to articulate what else would
hhave had to be different in counterfactual post-World War I systems in
which multipolarity prevailed. As soon as we try to specify the alternatives
to a bipolar world more precisely, we begin to appreciate the need for do-
mestic-political boundary conditions on the polarity counterfactual. For in-
stance, the identity of the third power—be it Great Britain, France, ot
China—might matter. Given the special historical relationship between Lon-

