                                                      Yellow fever in the 1790s
                       More difficult to explain is why the disease became less virulent. It may be that
                    decreased incidence of itself led to decreased virulence. As the virus cannot be trans-
                    mitted from mosquito to mosquito, fewer infected humans at any given moment
                    also meant fewer infected mosquitoes. The chances of infection resulting from the
                    bite of only one mosquito, rather than of many, were thus increased and, therefore,
                    it could be argued, the prospects of acquiring immunity via a mild or inappreciable
                    attack. This might seem a likely hypothesis, given that cases are usually more severe
                    in epidemic than endemic situations and yet vary considerably within those situa-
                    tions.28 However, experiments with monkeys have so far failed to reveal a marked
                    correlation between initial dosage of virus and the severity of an attack.29
                       Alternatively, it could be that different strains of the yellow fever virus, although
                    producing cross-immunity, vary greatly in virulence.Y0 In the decades before the
                    Revolution, the strain prevalent in the Caribbean could have been of a mild variety,
                    sometimes described as "yellow fever", sometimes as a type of "common remittent",
                    which nevertheless rendered its victims immune against other more fulminating
                    varieties known earlier in the century and which regained prevalence in the 1790s.
                    Interestingly, both Dr. Jackson and William Lempriere observed that the "common
                    remittent" of Jamaica tended to produce immunity against "yellow fever"..31 Thus,
                    it might not have been without reason that most doctors in Jamaica and those tending
                    the British troops in Saint Domingue considered "yellow fever" to be merely an
                    "aggravated" form of the "common remittent".32
                       It is not clear how far the epidemics of the 1790s were actually spread from island
                    to island and how far they resulted simply from an influx of non-immunes. In the
                    first case, the idea of a particularly deadly strain of virus is peculiarly apposite; in the
                    second, it is superfluous. Whether or not the virus was unusual, the pandemic was
                    doubtless intensified by the movements of refugees and soldiers from island to island
                    which increased the circulation of infected men and mosquitoes.
                       Greatest stress, however, should be laid on the wartime influxes of non-immunes
                    and their dense concentration. One cannot agree with Cantlie that "it was only a
                    tragic coincidence that the pestilence reappeared".83 What is more, the great inflow
                    of soldiers and seamen, their wives and children, prisoners of war, military con-
                    tractors and their clerks, doubled the white population of many West Indian towns.
                        28 George Augustin, History ofyellowfever, New Orleans, Searcy & Pfaff, pp. 1052-1054, concluded
                    that virulence was determined by the number of bites, after observing how the gradual eradication
                    of mosquitoes from New Orleans during the 1905 epidemic reduced both the incidence and virulence
                    of the disease.
                        2" Strode, op. cit., note 2 above, p. 448.
                       so See G. N. Hunter, J. C. Swartzwelder, and D. F. Clyde (editors), Tropical medicine, 5th ed.,
                    Philadelphia, London and Toronto, W. B. Saunders, 1976, p. 26.
                       I1 Jackson, op. cit., note 24 above, p. 250; Lempriere, op. cit., note 8 above, vol. 2, p. 29. Cf.
                    Jackson's descriptions of the "putrescent" type of "common remittent" (ibid., p. 140); also Lem-
                    priere's not very convincing attempts to distinguish the "common remittent" from the "continued
                    fever"", i.e. yellow fever (ibid., vol. 2, pp. 58-71). On the other hand, the "common remittent"was
                    said to recur.
                       "9 Jackson, op. cit., note 24 above, p. 247, and op. cit., note 4 above, introduction; McLean, op.
                    cit., note 4 above, passim. Dancer, op. cit., note 23 above, p. 53, observed that the "remittent"
                    sometimes "developed into" yellow fever.
                       " Cantlie, op. cit., note 1 above, vol. 1, p. 231.
                                                                                 43


Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
