                                                        David Geggus
                  au Prince generally suffered fewer sick and dead than did their comrades in the
                  other outposts. The explanation is probably twofold. As immunity to yellow fever is
                  acquired after only one attack, while immunity to malaria in the West Indies is a
                  product of several years' exposure to the disease, one might presume these troops
                  were more vulnerable to the latter than to yellow fever. In the summer, when yellow
                  fever raged at Port au Prince, malaria was probably not present there to the extent
                  it was in the more rural areas.
                     The capital, indeed, was only partly responsible for the hecatomb that engulfed
                  the British forces. Of the 2,000 soldiers who died between June and December, not
                  60 per cent were stationed in Port au Prince, where the death rate during the autumn
                  fell below that of the army as a whole. The mean monthly rate of loss for the period
                  31 August to 31 December was about 9.5 per cent. Possibly, this period saw yellow
                  fever transmitted from Port au Prince to the other outposts, particularly to Saint
                  Marc and the Mole Saint Nicholas, where the 22nd Foot was suddenly stricken and
                  where from August to October two-thirds of the garrison were sick. This hypothesis
                  receives some support from the registers of the Mole naval hospital, in which the
                  percentage of fatal cases caused by "fever" and the percentage of "fever" cases result-
                  ing in death rose to exceptional levels in the last quarter of the year (respectively
                  seventy-three per cent and fifty-six per cent, excluding "intermittent" fevers).42
                  Throughout the occupation, Port au Prince was to retain its reputation as a death-trap
                  but it came to be recognized that between August and October, and especially in
                  November, the Mole was equally or even more unhealthy.
                     Always split up into several detachments, the 49th Foot served at one time or
                  another in almost all the outposts of the occupied zone. Although it proved one of
                  the most durable of the British regiments, and was therefore exceptional, its ex-
                  perience of Saint Domingue was in a sense representative. It appears that from the
                  end of March until December, this "healthiest" of regiments always had between
                  a quarter and a half of its men sick. By August, in fact, it was the only regiment with
                  half its men fit for duty. However, in most corps morbidity levels began to drop in
                  October, and by December Port au Prince was the only centre where the sick still
                  outnumbered the healthy. In its second year in Saint Domingue, the 49th's mean
                  monthly rate of loss did not fall but rose, from 4.6 per cent to over five per cent,
                  and when the regiment was drafted at the end of August 1795, only 125 veterans
                  were still alive. The originally much larger 23rd and 41st regiments had shrunk to
                  almost the same size, burying in their first year in Saint Domingue over three-quarters
                  of their men.
                     Catastrophic though they were, the losses of 1794 were outmatched by those of the
                  following year. As always, in the early months of the year mortality was low. How-
                  ever, in May and June fever once more spread throughout the army. Chiefly affected
                  was the 96th regiment that had arrived from Ireland in April, along with the 81st.
                   Least affected were the original "Jamaican" regiments, while the 22nd, 23rd and
                  41st suffered to an intermediate extent. By 1 July, the 96th had lost since embarkation
                   forty-one per cent of its men. Yet, the worst was still to come. The desperately needed
                   reinforcements that appeared in August and October (including recruits for the
                      42 P.R.O., ADM 102/730, hospital register.

                                                                               46

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
