                                                      Yellow fever in the 1790s
                     compulsive vomiting sets in. Jaundice and delirium may appear, but its most charac-
                     teristic symptoms are a falling pulse accompanied by continued high temperature,
                     the vomiting of partly-digested blood and, in the later stages, generalized haemor-
                     rhage. It is not contagious, and survival of an attack gives immunity for life. Un-
                     fortunately, its clinical resemblances to pernicious tertian malaria, viral hepatitis,
                     and several other fevers, makes it difficult to diagnose even nowadays. Even so,
                     after considering all the clinical and epidemiological evidence, one may be fairly
                     certain that the grisly descriptions of the "St. Domingo Remittent" published during
                     and after the occupation generally refer to yellow fever.4
                        Robert Jackson and Hector McLean, who served as Assistant Inspectors of
                     Hospitals with the British forces in Saint Domingue, realized that jaundice was not
                     necessarily present in an attack and that it also occurred in other diseases, as did
                     occasionally the vomiting of altered blood. While stressing the appearance of haemor-
                     rhage and black vomit, they both noted the fall in the pulse, the reversion from
                     constipation to diarrhoea, the coated tongue with bright red edges, and other signifi-
                     cant symptoms. They also remarked how the symptoms changed on the third day.
                    The disease occurred all year round but principally from May to November. It was
                    largely confined to the ports. Typically affected were young men recently arrived
                    from northern climates. It was neither contagious, nor amenable to treatment with
                    cinchona bark, and rarely occurred twice, they thought, in the same person. Yellow
                    fever is the obvious diagnosis. It is true that McLean insisted that the disease was
                    different from the one that ravaged Philadelphia in 1793, now acknowledged to have
                    been yellow fever, but quite clearly he was misled by reports that it was contagious.5
                       The epidemics that spread through the Caribbean were similarly often thought to
                    be contagious.6 When death rates were high and the disease appeared to have been
                    imported, it was a logical deduction to make for men, dissatisfied with "climatic"
                    explanations of epidemic fevers and over-inclined to assimilate them to typhus.
                    Moreover, urban yellow fever tends to be localized; its vector, Aedes aegypti, rarely
                    travels over 100 metres. Hence, one can see how such a confusion might take place.
                    More surprising, the disease was often regarded as something horribly new. It was
                    claimed, in fact, that until the Port au Prince outbreak of June 1794, yellow fever
                    was known in Saint Domingue only by name.7 This might make one think that
                    either this disease or its antecedents were not actually yellow fever. Yet, it was every-
                    where observed that "Seamen and Strangers" proved far more vulnerable to it than
                    did colonists. West Indian-born whites and other long residents suffered little more
                    than the black and coloured population, which generally escaped infection.8 Curiously,
                      'Robert Jackson, Outline of the history and cure offever endemic and contagious, Edinburgh,
                    Mundell & Son, 1798; Hector McLean, Enquiry into the nature and causes of the great mortality of
                    the troops at St. Domingo, London, Cadell & Davies, 1797; William Fergusson, Notes and recollec-
                    tions ofa professional life, London, Longmans, 1846, pp. 142-161.
                       ' McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, preface, pp. 73 and 137.
                       ' William Wright, Memoir of the late William Wright M.D., Edinburgh and London, William
                    Blackwood, 1828, pp. 371-375; Colin Chisholm, Essay on the malignant pestilential fever, London,
                    C. Dilly, 1795, pp. 93-103; Alexandre Moreau de Jonn6s, Monographie historique et midicale de
                    la fivre jaune des Antilles, Paris, Migneret, 1820, pp. 83-85.
                       7 Pierre-Franiois Venault de Charmilly, Lettre a M. Bryan Edwards, London, 1797, p. 165.
                       ' Wright, op. cit., note 6 above, pp. 371-375; Chisholm, op. cit., note 6 above, pp. 93-102; William
                                                                                39

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
