                                                          David Geggus
                   Isles, it is important to note, more fever cases died in convalescence than during the
                   course of their illness, and doctors attributed this fact to the intemperance of their
                   patients and the hospitals' proximity to marshes.85 For several years, critics had con-
                   demned the unwieldy general hospitals.86 They bred disease, it was thought. The
                   smaller, regimental hospitals were more economical, provided more personal care,
                   and could treat soldiers with less delay. Yet, they were under-used. In Saint Domingue,
                   the main hospital buildings were generally large and well built, unlike in the British
                   islands, but in Port au Prince men were still cramped eighty to a ward with one doctor
                   between them. The government made considerable efforts to send out a sufficient
                   number of medical staff, and medical supplies were usually in abundance. Examina-
                   tions in surgery had become compulsory for regimental mates. Veteran practitioners,
                   however, like William Wright, complained that doctors and their assistants knew less
                   medicine than those of previous years, being less experienced.87 At any rate, metro-
                   politan qualifications, unlike tropical experience, could not prevent doctors and
                   orderlies dying as fast as their patients. Since thirty-three per cent of the European
                   troops and twelve per cent of the local corps were regularly on the sick list, the
                   hospitals were persistently overcrowded and undermanned. Nursing, therefore, was
                   entrusted to invalid soldiers and those considered "the scum of the regiments".
                   As the quality of nursing is vital in yellow fever-there is no other treatment as such-
                   the situation must be accounted extremely deleterious.
                      Since yellow fever has no specific remedy, it is ironic that the French and British
                   clashed so violently as to the appropriate method of treatment. The army was being
                   sacrificed, so the colonists claimed, to the ignorance of the British doctors. Some
                   French physicians denounced them in the English press and formally complained to
                   the Army Medical Board. Both sides claimed to have had more success than the
                   other, but it is significant that the troops themselves favoured French methods and
                   lost confidence in their own doctors.88 Indeed, Hector McLean had to agree that it
                   was absurd to send out to the West Indies doctors with no experience of tropical
                   medicine. Somewhat misguidedly, he attacked the "vanity" and "impudence" of his
                   French colleagues, who "equally oeconomic of medicines and the truth ... committed
                   their patients to a nurse and left the issue to nature", which was really the best course
                   of action. However, he came to recognize the importance of nursing and agreed
                   that patients needed a special diet in place of the salt meat they continued to receive
                   in hospital. He also adopted from the French their copious use of tisanes and
                   lemonade, important in combating dehydration caused by continual vomiting, and
                   their habit of warm baths, "to cleanse the skin of impurities".89
                      British methods were by contrast violent. In the language of the day, they were
                   "inflammatory", designed to excite the pulse and produce perspiration or salivation.
                      85 Letters by Nodes Dickinson, cited note 80 above, letter no. 1.
                      8" On the hospitals, see Hunter, op. cit., note 60 above, pp. 257-258; Lempriere, op. cit., note 8
                   above, vol. 2, p. 12; Jackson, op. cit., note4 above, p. 48; McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 227-235;
                   note 84 above.
                       7 Wright, op. cit., note 6 above, pp. 101-103.
                      "See note 84 above; McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 16-19, 111; Lieutenant Howard's
                   journal, cited note 45 above, vol. 1, p. 41.
                      89 McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 14-15, 146.
                                                                                54

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
