                                                        David Geggus
                   building up the strength of those who survived into convalescence. Blistering was
                   popular amongst British practitioners, although the French used it only in the last
                   resort. It was meant to stop vomiting. Burst blisters, however, attracted swarms of
                   ffies. They then became deep ulcers full of maggots that tortured the patient with
                   their burrowing. These could only be killed, McLean observed, with turpentine,
                   "which almost throws the patient into fits."95 Not surprisingly, neither doctor was
                   able to claim much success for his work. Lieutenant Howard of the York Hussars
                   ascribed his survival of an attack of fever to a concoction his black nurse gave him.96
                   Certainly, it is probable that the better results McLean achieved treating officers in
                   private houses owed much to the nursing of the local female population.
                   V. CONCLUSION
                      When the best medical minds of the day floundered in this fashion, it might seem
                   that the mortality in Saint Domingue was completely unavoidable. Yet some vital
                   facts were only too well known: that yellow fever only occurred in the towns; that
                   malaria was found near swamps; that in the hills troops only suffered from leg sores
                   and dysentery, and that on the high ridges of the interior they stayed as healthy as
                   in Europe. In Jamaica, the annual death rate in the mountain camps was around
                   two per cent; in the lowland camps it was 8.6 per cent.97 Commanders and engineers
                   repeatedly refused to heed medical advice about the siting of camps and outposts.
                   Jackson warned that, as long as new regiments were garrisoned in the ports, two-
                   thirds would die eacb year. He asked that the European garrison of Port au Prince
                   be camped in a crescent in the mountains around the town, but in vain.98 The govern-
                   ment, for its part, tried to send out new regiments before the start of the "sickly
                   season", so they had a chance to acclimatize, but in the event only four of the thirty
                   or so sent to Saint Domingue managed to disembark in the healthy period of Decem-
                   ber through March.
                      Nevertheless, advances were made. By 1797, more and more British troops were
                   moving into mountain outposts. Mortality was reduced at the Mole by building
                   new barracks in the hills above the port. The swamp at Les Irois was partly filled in.
                   Believing inactivity to be harmful, General Simcoe got troops out of their barracks
                    on exercises and in some posts he replaced British with colonials. When a new regi-
                   ment arrived, it was sent to salubrious Jfremie. Along with improvements in hospital
                    organization and restrictions on the drinking of rum, these changes clearly had, as
                    already seen, some impact.
                      By then, however, the government had abandoned its hopes of conquest and was
                    ready to pull out of Saint Domingue altogether, if necessary. Britain was threatened
                    with a French invasion, but men would not enlist for fear of being sent to the West
                    Indies. "The name of St. Domingo is execrated and dreaded by all descriptions,"

                    debate in Jamaica, see Royal Gazette, 1794, nos. 32-35.
                      9 McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, p. 171.
                      96 Lieutenant Howard's journal, cited note 45 above, vol. 3, p. 35.
                      97 See Lempriere, op. cit., note 8 above, vol. 1, pp. 220-223, 231; Jackson, op. cit., note 4 above,
                    pp. 88-98; McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 205, 217.
                      9* See Jackson, op. cit., note 4 above, p. 98; McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, p. 217.
                                                                                 56

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
