                                                         David Geggus
                   morbidity of the spring and summer of 1797 probably reflect a shift in the relative
                   incidence of malaria and yellow fever, as troops moved into the countryside on cam-
                   paign. However, the overall mortality of the British troops points to case-fatalities
                   much higher than those either disease exhibits nowadays, rarely being more than
                   ten per cent and often much less. It seems likely, however, that the high death rates
                   are at least partly explained by multiple infection. Some regiments, we know, arrived
                   suffering from typhus, and descriptions of yellow fever cases sometimes beginning
                   with fits of shivering perhaps suggest the simultaneous action ofboth diseases. Malaria,
                   though, was a much more probable alternative. "Remittent" fevers sometimes
                   were observed to develop into "intermittent" fevers and the persistent problems of
                   relapses among yellow fever convalescents suggests additional infection,74 as nor-
                   mally convalescence is rapid. When Saint Marc was surrounded by an open ditch
                   and Port au Prince general hospital was situated next to a marsh, simultaneous
                  infection was a real risk.
                     Contemporaries, however, tended to explain the British troops' vulnerability to
                  fever in terms of three factors. These were: a general level of debility, an excessive
                   consumption of alcohol, and inept medical treatment. They were wrong, of course,
                  to think such factors made the soldiers more susceptible to fever, but they un-
                  doubtedly affected a patient's chances of recovery or death. In the first place, these
                  were not men in the best of health. Often recruited in prisons and workhouses, only
                  the worst British regiments were sent to Saint Domingue. Pallid, thin men from the new
                  industrial towns, Dr. Jackson felt they radically lowered the standards of the British
                  Army, as regards both discipline and fitness.75 Before disembarking in Saint Domingue
                  some had spent from three to six months crowded on board troopships. Many had
                  passed mid-winter camped on the Irish coast, racked by dysentery and typhus. It is
                  worth reflecting that not a few of these troops must have contracted typhus, malaria,
                  and yellow fever all in the space of a year. On the other hand, these new regiments
                  often remained fit for months after their arrivaL while in the long run, the German
                  and French peasants in the "foreign corps" do not seem to have proven any more
                  hardy, though they arrived in much better shape. Furthermore, it was precisely the
                  healthiest, most impressive-looking regiments, such as the 82nd, which arrived after
                  a trouble-free voyage from Gibraltar, that suffered some of the worst losses in Saint
                  Domingue. The robust, hearty individual, in fact, was thought peculiarly prone to
                  yellow fever.76
                     Even so, as noted above, troops were progressively worn down by their life-style
                  and conditions in Saint Domingue. Coming from a Europe slightly cooler than it is
                  today, they had great difficulty in coping with temperatures considered high even
                  for the Caribbean. Unwashed, clad in flannel shirts and ill-fitting woollen uniforms
                  that were permanently caked with sweat and prevented proper thermo-regulation,
                  soldiers became easily exhausted and subject to "heat stress".77 Sleep was a luxury
                  in undermanned garrisons, and soldiers often went to bed in wet clothes. What little
                     "See McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, p. 123.
                     "Jackson, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 27-48.
                     76 See ibid., pp. 59, 63-67; McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 37-39, 213, 221.
                     77 McLean, op. cit., note 4 above, pp. 2, 210, 269.
                                                                              52

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
