                                                         David Geggus
                   effect on the soldier in the West Indies. The Jamaican garrison actually suffered more
                   during the first thirty years of the nineteenth century than it had in the preceding
                   three decades. Between 1803 and 1836, the mortality rate among white troops averaged
                   about thirteen per cent per annum and never fell in any year below six per cent.Y04
                   Yellow fever was still lumped together with other fevers (which recurred) under the
                   heading "remittent" but seems to have been responsible for the five epidemic years
                   of 1808, 1819, 1822, 1825, and 1827, when the death rate rose to between seventeen
                   and thirty per cent. Although the value of black troops had been well proven in
                   Saint Domingue, the Jamaican planters had insisted at the end ofthe war on increasing
                   the proportion of white troops in the island garrison-with predictable results.
                   However, but for the establishment of a number of barracks in the mountains (at
                   Stony Hill, Maroon Town, etc.) the death toll would assuredly have been higher.
                   SUMMARY
                      Although epidemics of yellow fever became suddenly rare in the Caribbean in the
                   1770s and 1780s, it did not disappear from the region, as some have supposed, but
                   assumed the less virulent guise usual in endemic situations, albeit for reasons that
                   remain debatable. The white population in that period undoubtedly contained a
                   greater proportion of locally-born or long-resident immunes than ever before-a
                   situation that was probably reversed in the nineteenth century, when the abolition
                   of the slave trade ended regular contact with West Africa. This explains both the
                   dramatic impact made by the pandemic of the 1790s and why it left the civilian
                   population largely untouched, though in the Greater Antilles climatic change may
                   also have been a significant influence. In West Indian garrisons, rates of death from
                   disease similarly varied dramatically, though not so much from one decade to another
                   as between times of war and peace. Wartime expeditions recreated the dense concentra-
                   tions of non-immunes known earlier in the colonial period, but were also attended
                   by other circumstances that combined to increase the soldier's exposure to infection
                   and greatly impair his chances of survival. These concerned the siting of camps, the
                   consumption of alcohol, standards of medical care and nutrition, and perhaps also
                   of hygiene. Multiple infection, sequential if not simultaneous, was an important
                   factor. Britain's military losses in the colony of Saint Domingue from 1793 to 1798
                   have been much exaggerated but, by any criterion, they remain among the worst
                   suffered in the Caribbean. As a result, the movement to reform the Army Medical
                   Department gained impetus but medical science, on balance, benefited little from
                   the catastrophe.
                     104 A. M. Tulloch and H. Marshall, Statistical report on the sickness, nwrtality and invaliding
                   among the troops in the West Indies, London, for H.M.S.O., 1838, pp. 44 47, and passim.




                                                                                58

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 114.19.87.63, on 23 Sep 2026 at 13:03:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025727300051012
