

allowed that on a question of supply every gentle-man had a right to introduce whatever topics he thought proper into the discussion. He trusted, however, that the House would excuse him from going at any length, into the details of the various subjects introduced by the hon. gentleman in the Speech he had just delivered, and be content with such observations as he thought it necessary to make upon the most prominent parts of it. When he submitted the Resolution he had just laid on the table to the consideration of the Committee, he had not entertained the slightest idea that the hon. gent. would go into so wide a field of argument on subjects, some of which, according to notice, he meant to bring forward for distinct and specific matter of debate. He could not, therefore, be supposed to come prepared to answer them fully when thus unexpectedly intoduced. With respect to the commercial question, he could only say, that there was no pretence for stating, in consequence of the petitions which had been alluded to, that the system had failed on our part, and that it had succeeded on the part of France. It was by no means fair to infer, that because certain extraordinary circumstances had happened in the course of the commerce of Europe, our trade and manufactures had alone been injured, and that France had not suffered in as great a proportion. This was a question on which many persons of great authority widely differed; and it was at present certainly undetermined. He for his 452 own part, verily believed, that had we never made our Orders in Council, not a single part of the trade of the continent would have been different from what it now was, but the situation of France would undoubtedly have been far more advantageous, and her commercial concerns more prosperous, had we, as the hon. gentleman seemed to desire and recommend, acquiesced tamely in those decrees, and thereby degraded and debased the country by a sacrifice of its best and dearest rights, the careful maintenance of which had brought us to our present state of glory and comparative prosperity. If we looked to the affairs which had been passing in the Peninsula, we should find, that France, during the last six months, had not been able to pay her armies: on the contrary, we had in all that time never failed to pay ours to the utmost farthing. This was one instance of our superiority and advantage over France, for our trade alone had enabled us to do it; but if we turned our eyes to the general state of distress which pervaded the whole continent of Europe we should find that our own difficulties, great as they unquestionably were, bore but a small proportion to what were experienced abroad. The effects of our Orders in Council were not, as the hon. gent. and others had said, to prevent commerce, but to encourage it and that they had done this one strong proof was, that in addition to his Milan and Berlin Decrees, the tyrant of Europe was obliged to resort to others which condemned our goods to be burnt, in order to get rid of them—those very goods which we had the means of getting into Europe in spite of all his tyranny and vigilance. He believed, indeed, there never was a proceeding which rendered more detestable the despotism of the ruler of France, than that of the above result, flowing altogether from our Orders in, Council. With regard to what had fallen from the hon. gent. as to our commerce with America, he believed that no man in this country ever seriously believed the Milan and Berlin decrees were absolutely repealed. It was true they had been repealed prospectively and conditionally; that was to say, either when Great Britain should give up her orders in council, and also her blockade, which was stated to be a novelty. If we should consent to give, up these, and all the maritime rights on which our present power was founded, then they were to be repealed; or, if we 453 refused to give up our maritime rights, and America should take up arms against us, then they were to stand repealed as to America, but not as to us. Could any man suppose that this country would bear such an idea, or that it would endure any set of ministers who could countenance such degrading proceeding upon such bare and doubtful evidence! The manner in which the intelligence had been brought to us was not to be depended on; it came in such a questionable shape, as would by no means warrant us in repealing our Orders in Council. He hoped the House would not think it necessary that he should answer as to the particular applications made to lord Bathurst or lord Wellesley, or the answers returned; but he knew very well that his Majesty's ministers had never any wish to delay rescinding the Orders in Council, whenever they could be fairly satisfied that the Milan and Berlin decrees had been actually repealed. The hon. gentleman had asked whether he would agree to lay before the House such papers relative to the dispute with America as had not been published by the American government. To this he would answer, that if the hon. gent. had not the whole of them in his possession, he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) would not consent to produce one, because, in the present state of the negotiation, nothing perhaps might turn out more injurious to the interests of both parties.—The hon. gent. had in the next place proceeded to the state of the Peninsula. On this head the Chancellor of the Exchequer said he gave him credit for a candid retraction of a former opinion; and the praises he bestowed on lord Wellington were highly honourable to his feelings. He could not, however, help thinking, that when the hon. gent. once took, up any gloomy view in the prospective, he was not able easily to get rid of it, or to suffer it to brighten on his vision. Last year the hon. gent. wished every man we had in the Peninsula were at home; and now, after all our late brilliant successes, the hon. gent. had again his doubts as to the final issue of our efforts there. For his own part, he certainly could not venture to predict what would be the ultimate fate of our army in the Peninsula; but our prospects were, in his mind, much better now than they were when the hon. gent last year looked on them with so desponding an eye. He might perhaps from the commencement of our inter- 454 ference have entertained more sanguine hopes of success than many other, but still he thought, as we were now joined by our allies with more spirit and enthusiasm than they at first evinced, and our generals having so repeatedly shewn that they could beat the most celebrated generals and the best disciplined troops of France; we might, without being accused of too much presumption, venture a hope, that our future efforts would not be in vain, and that we might still look forward without fear or dismay.—The hon. gent. had said, he thought we should still keep our eye fixed on peace, but feared the experiment had never been fairly tried. Whether that was the case or not, he would not pretend to decide. The last time it had been tried it was by those of whom the hon. gent. of course could not but think well, and they had tried it so long, that he believed the length to which the negociation was carried, had been universally allowed to have produced the most injurious consequences, not only to this country, but to all who were at that time in alliance with us.—As to the question of his having doubted the power of the House to grant money in the case of Mr. Palmer's claim, and then coming to it a few days afterwards for a vote of credit, he considered the cases to be very different, the one being the disposal of the supply, the other the supply itself.—With regard to the remaining argument respecting the King's health, it was time enough to speak of that when the hon. gentleman should bring forward the subject. All the argument urged for it was, that parliament, in case of the King's recovery, might be improperly prorogued; but there was no more reason to suppose that in this case, than in any other. He was then asked, whether he would have any objection to produce the examination of the physicians before the queen's council. He must confess he saw no reason for it at present, but it was time enough to debate that when the question was regularly brought before the House. Upon the whole, he was glad to find that the hon. gent. had no idea of refusing his assent to the motion, but had availed himself of the opportunity, rather for the purpose of delivering a speech than of obstructing the proceedings of government.