---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1811/jun/05/vote-of-credit"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1811/jun/05/vote-of-credit"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "62241ac7254af8e026695fbd01cd4d78fe16f176f841ba639970ed9d033a15db"
title: "VOTE OF CREDIT. (Hansard, 5 June 1811)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

VOTE OF CREDIT. (Hansard, 5 June 1811)

# VOTE OF CREDIT.

HC Deb 05 June 1811 vol 20 cc445-55 445

§ The House having resolved itself into a Committee of Supply,

rose to propose a Vote of Credit, to the extent of which, he believed, there would be no 446 objections, as it was the same that was granted last year. He should therefore move, That the sum of three millions be granted to his Majesty, as a Vote of Credit, to enable him to take such measures as may be necessary to defeat any enterprizes or designs of his enemies, and as the exigency of affairs may require.

said, that he should not have offered any observations on the present motion, if he had an expectation that other opportunities would occur before the prorogation, of stating to the House what appeared to him to be of great importance with respect to the interests of the country. It appeared to him that there could no longer be any doubt whether our commercial warfare with Europe and with America had or had not been successful. He was sure that this question was settled beyond all doubt in the minds of the suffering manufacturers, whose petitions had been that day before the House, and whose claims the Chancellor of the Exchequer had very reluctantly allowed to go a Committee. It had been already passed as a resolution by that House, "that since the year 1806, and particularly from the beginning of the year 1807, a system of proscription had been exercised by France which greatly diminished our exports to the continent." As far, then, as regarded the policy of this country with respect to Europe, it appeared, even from the resolution of that House, that the policy of this country had failed; and that the line of policy which France had adopted, as contrasted with our policy, and considered with respect to the objects which the enemy openly avowed, had been fully successful. With respect to America, also, the House had resolved, "that the intercourse with that country was uncertain and interrupted." It must be recollected, that a few years ago we had been told by the authors and advocates of the Orders in Council, that the trade with America would not be muck affected by them; that trade would force its own way; that America would soon see her true interests; and that our intercourse with that country would remain undiminished. America, at that time, told this country, that if she persisted in orders so contrary to the rights of independent nations, she would suspend the intercourse between the two countries. The authors of our Orders in Council anticipated no evils from this measure; but the distresses of our manufacturers now 447 clearly proved that great evils had resulted from it, and that the loss of the American market had been severely felt in this country. No man attempted to deny the sufferings of our manufacturers, or to say that they were overstated in their petitions. Their misery was sufficiently well known to the world, and the only reason alleged for not going into a Committee was the impossibility of giving them any substantial relief. If the enquiry should, however, now take place, he hoped that it might still be possible to prevail upon ministers to retrace their steps with respect to America, and to reopen that market to our exports. We had been often told, that it was impossible to repeal those Orders in Council, until the French decrees should have been repealed. If, however, the Berlin and Milan decrees were now actually repealed, why not repeal the Orders in Council? If there were doubts whether the French had really repealed those decrees or not, should not some experiment be made to learn whether they were sincere or not? When it had been in the power of ministers to put this matter to the test, it appeared to him, that a noble lord (the marquis Wellesley) had shewn a dilatoriness, and a negligence of conduct, which was quite astonishing. In his negociations with the American ambassador, he appeared to shew a considerable degree of inattention. The American minister had left the country; the negociations had completely broken off, and must recommence when Mr. Foster should arrive in America. The communications between the two governments had now been published by America, and he could conceive no other reason for having denied them to the House of Commons but merely to gain time. He could not avoid feeling very sincere regret, that a minister of such talents and such temper as Mr. Pinckney should have left the country. There never was a minister whose patience and forbearance had been more put to trial than Mr. Pinckney's, and he thought that it would be hardly possible to find a negociator equal to him, not only for supporting the interests of his own country, but for discussing with fairness the points which were disputed between the two countries. The course of the communications respecting the revocation of the French decrees was this: on the 25th of August, Mr. Pinckney communicated to the marquis Wellesley the revocation, expressing 448 an expectation that the Orders in Council would be revoked also. The receipt of this letter was not acknowledged until the 31st of August. On the 12th of October, the British merchants applied to the Board of Trade to know whether the Orders in Council would be revoked in consequence of the revocation of the French decrees. The vice president professed entire ignorance of the revocation on the part of France, and advised the merchants to call on the Chancellor of the Exchequer. That minister was then out of town; and no communication having been made to the merchants by the 9th of November, they, on that day, presented another memorial, and on the 12th of November, lord Bathurst saw the committee of merchants, and expressed a doubt of the decrees being really revoked by France, and a wish for some practical proof of it. The Committee immediately offered, as a way of obtaining this practical proof, to send off to France a rich American ship, which lay off Mother-bank, if she could obtain protection from the admiralty cruisers. This offer was refused. On the 19th the Committee saw lord Wellesley, who expressed himself to the same effect as lord Bathurst had done. They offered to him the same means of obtaining a practical proof, and were again refused. What could be more strange than that ministers, after having always professed that their Orders in Council should only subsist while the French decrees were in force, should yet neither take any measures themselves to ascertain whether the revocation was real or not, but should refuse the practical proof when offered by the merchants. It appeared as if ministers were afraid to give up their darling object. Lord Wellesley, however, said, that he would give an answer in a few days. No answer, however, did arrive, and on the 22d of December the merchants presented another memorial; and on the 29th they saw Mr. Hamilton, the Under-secretary, who told them that ministers had no satisfactory proofs of France having actually given up her decrees. They again presented a memorial, on the 12th of January, without any better success. It did appear to him that during all this time lord Bathurst and lord Wellesley had shown gross inattention to* those important interests which were involved in that question. On the 2d of November, the President of the United States published his proclamation, declare- 449 ing that the Berlin and Milan decrees had been revoked. In consequence of this proclamation many vessels cleared out for France from America. Some of those vessels were taken by our cruisers, and the first of them was the Fox, the case of which was highly important, as governing the fate of the other vessels taken under similar circumstances. This vessel, the Fox, was claimed by the American minister on the ground that the French decrees having been repealed, the British Orders in Council ceased of course. To this claim no answer was made; but the king's advocate received a letter to suspend the proceedings until after the departure of Mr. Pinckney and Mr. Foster from this country. Sir William Scott was, however, the other day proceeding to give judgment against the claimants, and only suspended the judgment on its being stated to him that new evidence could be produced of the revocation of the French decrees. This new evidence was the letter of the duke of Bassano to the American Consul, Mr. Russel. Those who first brought forward these Orders in Council did so from the supposition that they would operate in favour of this country; but when they had witnessed the in effects of them, he should have supposed that they would have been glad to escape from them, and would have taken the earliest opportunity of moving for rescinding them. By their licences they had been in the daily habit of violating their own system, and now they seemed to wish to preserve only that part which had been proved to be most prejudicial. All reciprocity of intercourse between this country and America was now at an end. America was ready to send her exports to this country, but not to receive ours in return. Such, too, was our intercourse with France. She allowed us, for her own interest, to purchase from her articles of the first necessity, but she would admit no exports from this country. Ministers had frequently been warned, that their system was attended with this great danger,—that America might be driven to manufacture for herself, and then even if the present misunderstanding should be settled, we should no longer find the market which it was in our power to have retained. Our exports might be encountered in America by domestic regulations made to protect their own manufactures. By a report of the progress of manufactures in America, it appeared that in the year 1810, there had been manufactured 450 in the State of New York alone, above 3 millions of yards of woollen cloth, 5,700,000 yards of linen, and 211,000 of cotton cloth. By this report it was certainly intended to shew America that she could do without England. Ministers appeared to him to have been grossly inattentive to a subject of the highest importance. Whether they expected war or peace, he could not say; but it appeared to him, that commercial war must end in actual war; and that if the Orders in Council were not rescinded, there must soon be conflicts between the vessels of the different countries.—He had already had an opportunity of delivering his opinion respecting the policy of this country towards the States of Europe. He should not hesitate still to say, that he wished the advantage might be taken of the present favourable posture of affairs to try whether peace were practicable or not. He knew that he was charged with being ready to accept any peace at any time: but he trusted that he would be as unwilling as any gentleman to accept of peace on terms that were not honourable for this country. He was ready to pay the warmest tribute of his admiration to the merit which had been displayed by lord Wellington. Nothing which could happen in future could make him retract from that praise which he had given to what lord Wellington had already done: but looking at the many glorious and sanguinary battles which had lately taken place, he saw no ground for confidently anticipating a favourable result to the war. He therefore thought that it was a time that it would be proper to try whether peace might not be obtained on honourable and reasonable terms.—The other points to which he wished to direct the attention of the House was of a nature purely domestic. He could not help thinking, that with respect to the sta