■•TT^rvr^y^y/ 


of 

pjwnrnaTOHs 


f?^ 


■^ 


l7  ^      ^ 


-o 


Robert  E.  Gross 
Collection 

A  Memorial  to  the  Founder 
of  the 


Business  Administration  Library 

flmi>«ri(/>/  ol    XjaMornta. 

Los  Angeles 


HISTORY 


OF 


PRICES, 

AND  OF 

THE  STATE   OF  THE  CIRCULATION, 
FROM  1793  TO  1837; 


PRECEDED    BY 


A  BRIEF  SKETCH  OF   THE  STATE  OF  THE  CORN  TRADE 
IN  THE  LAST  TWO   CENTURIES. 


BY 

THOMAS   TOOKE,  ESQ.  F.R.S. 

IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 

VOL.  L 
LONDON: 

PRINTED    FOR 

LONGMAN,   ORME,    BROWN,    GREEN,   AND   LONGMANS, 

PATERNOSTER-ROW. 
1838. 


London : 
Printed  by  A.  Spottiswoode, 
New-Street- Square. 


L.wss  Cclicciion 
Bus.  Adm.  Liba 


M5 


'  t 


m% 


PREFACE. 


The  present  Work  may,  in  some  points  of  view, 
be  considered  as  an  enlargement  and  continuation 
of  one  which  was  published  fifteen  years  ago  under 
the  title  of  "  Thoughts  and  Details  on  the  High 
and  Low  Prices  of  the  last  Thirty  Years,"  inasmuch 
as  it  embraces  the  same  line  of  argument,  and 
proposes  to  establish  the  same  conclusions  j  but  it 
is  essentially  different,  both  in  its  arrangement  and 
in  its  details.  The  view  now  presented  of  the 
operation  on  prices  of  the  more  general  causes, 
precedes  instead  of  following,  as  in  that  work  it 
did,  the  statements  bearing  upon  the  period  more 
immediately  under  consideration  :  while  the  details 
are  here  placed  in  chronological  order,  and  in 
historical  connection,  embracing  a  much  wider  col- 
lection of  illustrative  facts,  more  especially  of  those 
relating  to  the  state  of  the  circulation  j  with  a  con- 

A  2 

1  F;878.^4 


IV  PREFACE. 

tinuation  of  the  narrative  of  events  in  their  relation 
to  prices,  and  to  the  state  of  the  circulation,  in  the 
fifteen  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  publi- 
cation of  the  above-named  Work.  In  fact,  with 
the  exception  of  a  very  small  part,  the  whole  of 
that  which  is  now  submitted  to  the  public,  has 
been  written  afresh,  and  has  therefore  every  claim 
to  be  considered  as  a  new  Work. 

London,  April  28.  1838. 


CONTENTS 


THE    FIRST    VOLUME. 


Page 
Introduction       -  -  -  -  -  -     1 


PART  I. 

ON    THE    EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

General  view  of  the  subject     -  -  -  .         .     7 

CHAPTER  II. 

EfFcets  of  quantity  on  price  -  -  -  -  10 

CHAPTER  III. 

On  the  character  of  the  seasons  and  the  state  of  prices,  and 
the  condition  of  the  agricultural  interests  previous  to 
1793       -  -  -  .  -  .  -  21 

Sect.  1.    Period  ending  in  1692  -  -  -  -  -  21 

Sect.  2.    1693  to  1714  -  .  -  .  -  -  30 

Sect.  3.    1715  to  1765  -  .  -  -  -  -  38 

Sect.  4.    1765  to  1J75  .....  -  62 

Sect.  5.   1775  to  119^    -  -  -  -  -  .  .  75 


VI  CONTENTS. 

PART  II. 

ON    THE    EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Page 
General  view  of  the  subject  -  -  -  -  86 

CHAPTER  II. 

Effects  of  taxation  on  the  fluctuation  of  general  prices         -  87 

CHAPTER  III. 

Effect  of  the  extra  demand  or  consumption  supposed  to 
arise  out  of  a  state  of  war  in  general      -  -  -     90 

Sect.  1.    Extra  demand  or  consumption  arising  out  of  a  state  of  war  in 

general         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -90 

Sect.  2.    Effect  of  the  extra  demand  or  consumption  attributed  specially 

to  the  last  war  ..._.._   lOQ 

Sect.  3.    On  the  effects  of  the  monopoly  of  trade  enjoyed  by  this  country 

during  the  last  war  -  -  -  -  -  -   105 

Sect.  4.    Effects  of  the  stimulus  or  excitement  supposed  to  have  been 

occasioned  by  the  Government  expenditure  during  the  last  war  -   109 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Effect  of  war,  as  obstructing  supply,  and  increasing  the  cost 
of  production     -  -  -  -  -  -114 

PART  III. 

ON    THE    CURRENCY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

General  view  of  the  subject  -  -  -  -  118 

CHAPTER  II. 

Arguments  of  those  who  ascribe  a  greater  effect  to  the  bank 
restriction  than  that  indicated  by  the  difference  between 
the  market  price  and  the  mint  price  of  gold       -  -   128 

Sect.  1.  On  the  alleged  effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  in  depreciating  the 
value  of  the  precious  metals  •-  -  -  -  -130 

Sect.  2.  Effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  on  the  economised  use  of 
money  -  -  -  -  -  -  --144 

Sect.  3.  Effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  restriction  of  the  substitution  of 
credit  for  currency,  and  of  tlie  excessive  issues  of  country  paper        -   14G 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

I'ago 
Sect.  4.    On  the  alleged  constant  excess  of  issue  by  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, and  tlionce  of  the  whole  of  the  circulating  medium        -  -    153 
Sect.  5.    On  the  regulation  of  the   Bank  issues  during  the  restriction  -   163 
Sect.  C.    On  the  effect  of  the   Bank  restriction  in  raising  the  prices  of 
commodities              -              -             -              -              -              -  -168 

Sect.  7.  On  the  alleged  invariable  connection  of  increase  of  price  with 
the  Bank  restriction,  and  on  the  effect  of  the  near  approach  of  the  ter- 
mination of  the  restriction  producing  a  fall  of  prices  greatly  exceeding 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold  -  -  -  -   170 


PART  IV. 

HISTORICAL    SKETCH    OF    PRICES,    AND    OF    THE    STATE  OF  THE 
CIRCULATION,    FROM     1792    TO    1837. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Introduction  __---.  174 

CHAPTER  II. 

On  the  state  of  prices,  and  of  the  cix'culation,  from  the  com- 
mencement of  1793  to  the  close  of  1798  -  -  176 

Sect.  1.    On  the  seasons  in  connection  with  the  prices  of  provisions,  from 

1793  to  the  close  of  1798     -  -  -  -  -  -  179 

Sect.  2.    On  the  prices  of  commodities  from  1793  to  1798  -         _  188 

Sect.  3.    Bank  circulation,  1793  to  1798  -  -  -  -  192 

Sect,  4.    Summary  of  the  preceding  survey      -  -  .  _  210 

CHAPTER  III. 

On  the  state  of  prices,  and  of  the  circulation,  from  1799 
to  1803  -  -  -  -  -  -  212 

Sect.  1.    Rise  of  the  prices  of  provisions  and  other  articles  of  European 

produce  from  the  spring  of  1799  to  the  spring  of  1801  -  -  213 

Sect.  2.    Rise  of  wages  from  1799  to  1801  -  -  -         .  225 

Sect.  3.   Statement  of  the  general  causes   of  the  rise  of  the  prices  of 

commodities  and  labour  from  1799  to  1801  -  -  .  228 

Sect.  4.    Great  fall  of  the    prices  of  transatlantic    produce  from    the 

spring  of  1799  to  the  spring  of  1801     -  -  ...  233 

Sect.  5.    Fall  of  the  prices  of  provisions  from  the  spring  of  1801  to  the 

close  of  1 803  ...-.-.  236 

Sect.  6.    On  the  state  of  the  circulation  from  1799  to  1803  -         .  239 

Sect.  7.    Summary  of  the  preceding  survey       -  -  .  .  252 

CHAPTER  IV. 

State  of  prices  and  of  the  circulation  from  the  commence- 
ment of  ISO^  to  the  close  of  1808  -  -  -  255 

Sect.  1.    Deficiency  of  the  harvest  of  1 804       ....  258 
Sect.  2.    Seasons  of  1805  to  1808,  both  included  -  -         -  265 


Vlll  CONTENTS. 

Page 
Sect.  3.   Instances  of  some  of  the  most  prominent  of  the  variations  of 

the  prices  of  commodities  besides  those  of  corn  .  _  .  272 

Sect.  4.   New  fields  of  enterprise  opened  for  exports         -  -         -  276 

Sect.  5.    General  excitement  and   speculations  in   shares  in   1807  and 

1808  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  277 

Sect.  6.   On  the  state  of  the  circulation  from  1804  to  1808  -         -  280 

Sect.  7.    Advances  by  the  Bank  to  Government  .  _  .  286 

Sect.  8.    General  remarks  on  the  state  of  prices,  and  of  the  circulation, 

at  the  close  of  1808  .  -  -  -  .  -287 

Sect.  9.   Summary  of  the  preceding  survey  -  -  •         -  290 

CHAPTER  V. 

State  of  prices,  and  of  the  circulation,  from  1809  to  1813  -  292 

Sect.  1.    Prices  of  agricultural  produce,   from   the  commencement  of 

1809  to  the  summer  of  1811  .  .  _  _  .  293 
Sect.  2.   Fall  of  prices  of  commodities,  and  commercial  distress,  from 

1809  to  1811  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  300 

Sect.  3.  Revival  of  credit,  and  improved  prospects  of  trade,  in  the 
summer  of  1811       .--.-_.  316 

Sect.  4.  Rise  of  tlie  prices  of  agricultural  produce,  and  high  range  of 
them,  between  the  harvest  of  1811  and  the  harvest  of  1813    -  -  319 

f  e(;t.  5.  On  wages  and  salaries  as  connected  with  the  prices  of  neces- 
saries --__---_  328 

Sect.  6.  Advance  of  prices  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  in  1811  and 

1812  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  331 

Sect.  7.   Prices  of  commodities  from  the  summer  of  1 81 1  to  the  summer 

of  1813       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  339 

Sect.  8.   Fall  of  the  prices  of  corn,  and  other  European  produce,  in 

1813  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  341 

Sect.  9.    Rise  of  prices  of  exportable  commodities  in  1813  -         -  344 

Sect.  10.  State  of  the  circulation  from  1809  to  1813,  both  years  in- 
cluded        .....--.    348 

Sect.  11.   Summary  of  the  preceding  survey        -  -  -         -  373 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ihe  high  range  of  prices  which  prevailed  in  the 
closing  years  of  the  past,  and  in  the  earUer  part  of 
the  present  century,  contrasted  with  the  compara- 
tively low  range,  observable  in  the  period  which 
has  elapsed  from  1819  to  the  present  time,  forms  a 
very  striking  feature  in  the  history  of  the  agricul- 
ture and  commerce  of  this  country.  The  contrast 
thus  presented  involves  fluctuations  in  the  value 
of  property  so  great  as  naturally  to  have  excited, 
both  from  a  sense  of  interest  and  from  a  feeling  of 
rational  curiosity,  an  anxious  desire  to  obtain  a 
satisfactory  solution  of  phenomena  so  remarkable. 
Accordingly,  publications  without  number  or  end 
have  appeared,  professing  to  explain  the  extra- 
ordinary variations  of  prices  which  have  marked 
that  eventful  period.  The  explanations  hitherto 
offered,  whatever  may  have  been  the  nature  of  the 
proofs  and  illustrations  brought  forward  in  sup- 
port of  them,  resolve  themselves  mostly,  if  not 
wholly,  into  the  assignment  of  one  or  other  of  two 
general  causes;  namely,  the  war  and  the  currency. 
The  effect  of  war  in  raising  the  prices  of  ar- 
ticles directly  taxed,  has  been  generally  admitted. 
But  as  the  amount  of  taxes  levied  for  defraying 
the  expenses  of  the  war  continued  (with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  property  tax,  which  avowedly  did 
not  act  upon  prices)  undiminished  down  to  the 
summer  of  18^2  ;  and  as  the  fall  of  prices  of  ar^ 
tides  divested  of  duty,  that  of  provisions  especially, 

B 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

had  then  been  as  great,  and  to  as  low  a  point  of 
depression  as  has,  with  trifling  exceptions,  been 
since  witnessed  ;  and  moreover,  as  the  very  great 
reduction  of  duties  of  customs  and  excise,  v/hich 
has  taken  place  since  182^2,  has  not  been  attended 
with  any  corresponding  fall  of  the  prices  of  pro- 
visions, or  of  other  articles  divested  of  duty,  the 
previous  elevation  of  prices  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
the  war,  merely  on  tlie  ground  of  its  attendant 
taxation.*  It  is,  accordingly,  to  the  war,  not  as 
having  caused  the  taxes,  but  chiefly  as  having,  by 
the  enormous  amount  of  tlie  government  ex- 
penditiu'e  defrayed  by  loans,  caused  a  great  and 
increasing  demand  for  all  the  leading  articles  of 
consumption,  that  the  remarkable  elevation  of 
prices  has  been  ascribed  by  a  theory  which  num- 
bers among  its  supporters  no  mean  authorities. 

But  the  theory  of  war-demand,  as  having  raised 
prices,  and  of  the  peace  as  having,  by  the  con- 
sequent cessation  of  that  demand,  been  necessarily 
followed  by  a  fall  of  prices,  is  now  rarely  advanced. 
The  preponderant,  and  almost  exclusive  theory,  is 
that  which  refers  all  the  phenomena  of  high  prices 
from  1792  till  1819,  and  of  the  comparative  low 
prices  since  1819,  to  alterations  in  tlie  system  of 
our  currency,  holding  all  other  circumstances  that 
can  have  had  any  influence  to  be  so  subordinate  as 
not  to  be  worth  mentioning. 

These  opinions,  however  ingeniously  and  plau- 
sibly advanced  and  maintained,  admit,  as  I  conceive, 
of  being  shown,  by  a  careful  examination  of  facts, 
to  be  wholly  erroneous.  The  error,  indeed,  of 
the  theory  of  war- demand,  is  no  longer  one  which 

*  The  impediments  to  importation,  and  the  consequently 
increased  cost  of  foreign  supplies,  are  occasionally  referred  to 
as  accounting  for  some  increase  of  price.  But  this  effect  of  the 
war  is  but  slightly  noticed,  and  laid  little  stress  upon  by  any  of 
the  supporters  of  either  of  the  theories  of  war-demand  or  of  the 
currency. 


INTRODUCTION.  3  ' 

can  be  attended  with  any  practical  evil.  The 
association  of  war  with  high  jjrices,  and  supposed 
consequent  prosperity,  is  not  likely  to  exercise  any 
influence  on  the  foreign  policy  of  our  government. 
But  there  is  constant  danger  from  the  prevalent 
tlieory  of  the  currency. 

Repeated  attempts  have,  even  down  to  recent 
periods,  been  made  to  induce  thelegislature  to  revise, 
with  a  view  to  alter  and  debase,  the  present  standard 
of  value  ;  and  such  is  the  pertinacity  with  which  the 
opinions  infavour  of  debasement,  or  of  a  return  to 
inconvertible  paper  are  urged,  and  the  weight  of 
influence  by  which  they  are  supported,  th.at  there 
is  ground  for  apprehension  lest,  under  the  pressure 
of  any  temporary  inconvenience,  the  legislature 
might  be  led  to  listen  to  some  one  or  other  of  the 
multifarious  schemes  for  the  degradation  of  the 
currency  w^liich  are  always  afloat. 

The  claims  for  revision,  and  the  plans  for  alter- 
ation, all  proceed  on  tlie  assumption  that  the  greater 
part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  rise,  and  of  the  high 
range  of  prices  observable  during  the  interval  in 
which  cash  payments  were  suspended,  was  distinctly 
caused  by  the  restriction,  and  that  the  resumption 
of  cash  payments  has  been  the  main,  if  not  the  ex- 
clusive, cause  of  the  subsequent  fliU  of  prices. 

The  persons  maintaining  this  doctrine  hold, 
as  a  settled  article  of  their  creed,  that  Mr.  Ricardo, 
and  the  other  promoters  of  tlie  Act  of  1819  for  the 
resumption  of  cash  payments,  commonly  called 
Peel's  bill,  w^ere  manifestly  in  error  when  they 
contended  that  the  utmost  effect  of  that  measure 
upon  prices  would  not  exceed  4  or  5  per  cent., 
that  beinsT  the  difference  which  then  existed  be- 
tween  paper  and  gold  ;  for,  that  in  fact,  the  con- 
sequences of  the  passing  of  that  bill  have  been  felt 
in  a  general  fall  of  prices  to  the  extent  of  30  and 
40  per  cent.,  and,  according  to  some,  even  to  the 
extent  of  .50  per  cent. 

B  2 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

Granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  Mr. 
Kicardo  and  ihe  other  promoters  of  Peel's  bill 
were  wrong,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  fall  of 
the  prices  of  commodities  and  labour,  and  of 
property  generally,  had  been  clearly  the  conse- 
quence, and  not  merely  a  sequence  of  that  measure, 
it  would  not  follow  that  there  would  be  any  claim 
on  grounds  of  justice,  and  still  less  on  grounds  of 
policy,  to  unsettle  a  settlement  made  so  many  years 
ago.  But  if  it  should  be  made  to  appear  by  the 
most  extensive  induction  of  facts,  that  Peel's 
bill  did  not,  as  according  to  any  correct  mode  of 
reasoning  it  couM  not,  cause  the  fall  of  prices 
beyond  the  diiference  between  paper  and  gold, 
there  would  cease  to  be  even  the  shadow  of  a 
pretence  for  the  clamour  which  has  been  raised, 
and  so  pertinaciously  maintained,  against  that  just, 
wise,  and  salutary  measure. 

It  is  of  practical  importance  in  this  respect,  as 
also  with  the  object  of  forming  a  just  estimate  of 
many  things  otherwise  inexplicable  in  the  state  of 
agriculture  and  trade,  at  the  several  periods  of  the 
interval  under  consideration,  to  take  a  more  ex- 
tended survey  than  has  hitherto  been  attempted  of 
facts  bearing  upon  the  question.  To  institute 
such  a  survey,  and  to  endeavour  by  it  to  rescue  from 
misconception  and  misrepresentation  the  most 
eventful  and  interesting  periods  in  the  history  of 
the  agriculture  and  commerce  of  this  country,  is 
the  purpose  of  the  present  work. 

It  is  perfectly  possible,  that  a  knowledge  of  the 
facts  about  to  be  stated  may  lead  to  conclusions 
different  from  those  which  I  may  think  them 
calculated  to  establish.  But  it  is  quite  certain 
that  without  a  knowledge  of  those  facts,  not  only 
as  to  their  existence  but  as  to  the  order  of  time  in 
which  they  occurred,  no  correct  estimates  can  be 
formed,  no  just  conclusions  drawn  with  reference 
to  the  questions  under  discussion  ;  and  it  may  not 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

be  assuming  too  much  to  add,  that  without  a 
knowledge  of  the  circumstances,  which  will  be 
detailed  in  their  connection  with  prices,  no  just 
conception  can  be  formed  of  the  nature  and  causes 
of  the  great  vicissitudes  v/hich  have  marked  the 
state  of  agriculture,  of  manufactures,  and  com- 
merce in  the  long  interval  which  is  to  come  under 
examination. 

The  general  description  of  the  principal  causes  to 
which  the  phenomena  of  the  high  prices  observ- 
able between  1792  and  1819,  and  the  compara- 
tively low  prices  from  1819  to  the  present  time, 
will  be  found  referable,  according  to  my  view 
of  them,  may  be  classed  under  the  following 
heads : — 

1.  The  Variety  of  the  Seasons. 

2.  The  War. 

3.  The  Currency. 

There  are,  indeed,  two  other  circumstances  of 
a  general  character,  which  may  be  supposed  to 
have  influenced  prices,  viz.,  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation, and  the  improvements  in  agriculture  and  ma- 
nufactures. But  as  these  circumstances  have  been 
uniform  and  progressive  in  their  operation,  although 
in  opposite  directions,  they  do  not  form  any  promi- 
nent part  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  great 
Jluctuations  of  prices  can  be  accounted  for. 

In  as  far  as  the  mere  increase  of  population  might 
be  supposed  to  account  for  any  part  of  the  range  of 
high  prices  of  provisions,  by  the  necessity  of 
resorting  for  production  to  inferior  soils,  it  must 
be  admitted  (the  ratio  of  increase  of  population 
having  been  progressive)  as  a  counteraction  of  any 
tendency  to  fall.  And  as  the  improvements  in 
agriculture  and  manufactures,  all  tending  greatly 
to  reduce  the  cost  of  production,  were  in  progress 
during  the  whole  period,  although  not  so  rapidly 
in  the  earlier  part  of  it,  they  must  have  operated 
as  a  corrective  against  so  great  an  advance  in  price 

B    3 


0  INTRODUCTION. 

of  those  articles  to  which  they  applied,  as  might 
from  the  operation  of  other  causes  have  been  ex- 
pected. This  cause  need  therefore  only  be  inci- 
dentally referred  to,  as  accounting  for  the  further 
fall  of  the  particular  commodities  to  which  it  is 
applicable,  below  the  level  to  which  they  might 
otherwise  have  subsided. 

Tiie  historical  sketch  which  will  be  given  in  the 
course  of  this  work,  of  the  circumstances  which 
may  admit  of  being  connected  in  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect  with  prices,  will  afibrd  the  means 
of  judging  of  the  degree  in  which  each,  or  any  one 
or  more,  of  the  three  general  causes  above  stated 
may  be  supposed  to  have  operated.  But  the  con- 
clusions to  be  drawn  from  a  view  of  the  facts  as 
they  occurred  in  connection  v/ith  prices,  during 
the  period  immediately  under  consideration,  will 
derive  additional  force  in  as  far  as  they  may  be 
found  to  be  consistent  with  what  might  be  inferred 
d  prion  from  a  reference  to  the  mode  and  degree 
of  influence  of  those  general  causes,  and  from  ex- 
perience of  what  has  been  their  operation  durhig 
intervals  of  some  length  anterior  to  1793. 

The  course  which  it  seems  most  expedient  to 
adopt  with  this  view  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  con- 
sider the  mode  of  operation  of  each  of  these  causes, 
and  the  relative  degree  of  importance  to  be  at- 
tached to  it  on  general  grounds,  illustrated  by  a 
reference  to  any  observable  influence  exercised  by 
it  in  some  of  the  most  prominent  fluctuations  of 
prices,  antecedent  to  the  period  more  immediately 
under  examination,  and  then  to  jiroceed,  with  the 
inferences  thus  derived,  to  investigate  the  degree 
of  influence  that  may  be  legitimately  ascribed, 
separately  or  collectively,  to  these  causes  in  the 
great  variations  of  prices  that  have  occurred  since 
1792. 


PART  I. 

ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  THE  SEASONS, 


CHAPTER  I. 


GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT. 


A^OTHiNG  has  struck  me  as  being  more  strange  in 
all  the  discussions  and  reasonings  upon  the  subject 
of  the  high  and  low  prices  of  the  period  under 
consideration,  than  the  little  importance  which  lias 
been  attached  to  the  effects  which  a  difference  in 
the  character  of  the  seasons  is  calculated  to  occa- 
sion. 

Individuals  interested  in  the  markets  for  agri- 
cultural produce  are  habitually  alive  to  the  pro- 
digious influence  of  the  weather,  at  particular 
periods,  on  the  result  of  the  harvest  in  point  of 
quantity,  and  still  more  in  point  of  exchangeable 
value ;  and  yet  the  same  individuals,  when  called 
upon  to  account  for  a  range  of  high  or  low  prices 
at  an  antecedent  period,  perfectly  within  their  re- 
collection, seem  wholly  to  neglect  or  overlook  the 
consideration  of  the  possibility  of  any  influence  on 
an  extended  scale  of  that  cause,  to  which  in  detail, 
or  in  accounting  for  the  produce  of  any  particular 
year,  they  cannot  help  attaching  a  w^eight  prepon- 
derating over  every  other.  The  farmer  naturally, 
and  almost  instinctively,  watches,  with  painful 
anxiety,  the  several  critical  periods  in  the  growth 

B    t 


8  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  the  different  descriptions  of  produce,  and  infers, 
according  as  appearances  are  decidedly  unfavour- 
able or  propitious,  and  as  they  extend,  or  are  sup- 
posed to  extend,  generally  to  the  same  descriptions 
of  produce  in  other  districts,  the  probability  of  a 
great  alteration  in  the  price :  thus  severe  frost,  or 
heavy  rains  at  the  blooming  time,  or  unfavourable 
weather  at  harvest,  or  general  indications  of  blight  or 
mildew,  or  other  extensive  injury  from  some  pecu- 
liarity in  the  atmosphere,  lead  him  irresistibly  to 
the  conclusion  that,  supposing  the  same  cause  to 
apply  to  the  greater  part  of  the  country,  there  must 
be  a  great  rise  in  price,  whatever  may  be  the  state 
of  the  currency,  or  the  aspect  of  politics.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  after  a  year  of  bad  produce  and  high 
prices,  appearances  are  favourable  for  the  growing 
crops  ;  or  if,  after  threatening  indications  of  injury 
in  the  earlier  stages  of  vegetation,  the  weather  sud- 
denly becomes  propitious,  all  parties  interested  in 
the  price  immediately  anticipate  a  fall,  without  re- 
fining upon  the  suj^posed  agency  of  other  causes. 

Yet  such  being,  in  the  minds  of  farmers  and 
of  persons  interested  in  the  corn  trade,  the  para- 
mount importance  of  the  influence  of  particular  sea- 
sons on  the  production  of  corn,  it  is  not  a  little 
surprising,  that  among  the  numerous  witnesses 
examined  by  the  parliamentary  committees  on  agri- 
cultural distress,  there  appears  to  have  been,  with 
a  single  exception*,  none  who  included  in  their 
consideration  of  the  means  of  accounting  for  the 
prevalence  of  the  high  prices  from  1793  to  1815,  the 
possibility  of  a  more  than  usually  frequent  recur- 
rence of  unfavourable  seasons,  which,  combined  with 
the  impediments  from  the  war  to  a  foreign  supply, 
might  go  far  to  explain  the  phenomena.  The  gene- 
ral impression  has  been,  both  among  practical  men 

*  The  exception  here  alluded  to,  is,  that  of  my  evidence 
before  the  Agricultural  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons 
in  182L 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  9 

and  speculative  writers,  that  although  there  were 
two  instances  of  scarcities  during  the  war,  viz. 
1794,  1795,  and  1799,  1800,  and  one  subsequently 
in  I8I6,  there  was  nothing  otherwise  of  deficiency 
from  the  season  of  more  than  usual  occurrence,  or 
such  as  to  justify  a  higher  than  usual  range  of 
prices  between  1793  and  181 9-* 

Even  when  incidentally  admitting  the  effect  of 
the  more  prominent  scarcities,  little  if  any  notice 
is  taken  of  the  mode  and  degree  in  which  deficient 
crops  promoted,  during  their  prevalence,  the  pros- 
perity of  the  farmers  and  landlords,  or  of  the  in- 
evitable effect  of  the  transition  from  a  long  course 
of  comparative  dearth  to  abundance,  in  causing 
agricultural  distress. 

With  a  view  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  un- 
warranted by  experience,  in  the  supposition  of  the 
more  frequent  recurrence  of  unfavourable  seasons 
in  intervals  of  twenty  years  or  upwards,  than  in 
intervals  of  equal  length  immediately  preceding 
or  succeeding  ;  or  in  the  assignment  of  a  succes- 
sion of  years  of  plenty,  as  a  cause  of  suffering  to 
farmers  and  landlords  ;  I  propose  to  adduce  in- 
stances derived  from  antecedent  periods  in  the 
history  of  our  agriculture.  In  order,  however,  to 
judge  of  the  degree  in  which  the  variations  of  the 
seasons,  such  as  they  will  be  shown  to  have  been, 
are  calculated  to  affect  the  prices  of  produce  and 
the  condition  of  the  agricultural  interests,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  premise  some  general  observations  on 
the  effects  of  quantity  on  price. 

*  The  partizans  of  war-demand,  limit  their  expliination  of 
high  prices  to  1814,  while  those  of  the  currency  extend  theirs 
to  1819. 


10  EFFECT    OF    THK    SEASONS. 


CHAP.   II. 

EFFECTS    OF    QUANTITY    ON    PRICE. 

It  is  not  uncommon  to  meet  with  persons,  who, 
in  reasoning  upon  prices  of  corn  and  other  com- 
modities, take  for  granted  that  the  variations 
in  price  must  be  in  exact  or  near  proportion  to 
the  variations  in  the  quantity  which  may,  at  dif- 
ferent times,  be  actually  in  the  market  or  in  the 
country  for  sale ;  and  who,  if  the  variations  in 
price  do  not  correspond  with  the  variations  in 
quantity  in  a  near  proportion,  infer  that  there  must 
be  something  in  the  currency,  or  some  unusual 
cause  in  operation,  to  account  for  what  appears  to 
them  so  anomalous  an  effect.  Thus,  the  late  Mr. 
Mushet,  in  a  treatise  on  tlie  currency,  the  object 
of  which  is  to  account  for  all  tlie  phenoniena  of 
prices  by  the  state  of  the  circulation,  maintained, 
that  such  a  fall  of  price  as  was  in  question  could 
not  be  the  effect  of  abundance  if  the  currency 
remained  unaltered,  nor  be  productive  of  agricul- 
tural distress. 

"  Mr,  Tocke  has  (he  says  at  page  66.,  referring  to  a  former 
work  of  mine,)  laid  too  much  stress  upon  this  argument:  the 
cheapness  that  would  follow  from  increased  production  would 
come  gradually  upon  the  puhlic  ;  and,  if  the  amount  of  currency 
remained  the  same,  the  fall  in  prices  would  be  relative  to  their 
abundance.  But  that  one,  or  even  two,  good  harvests  should 
cause  a  fall  of  price  generally  from  30  to  45  per  cent.,  is  giving 
more  to  the  bounty  of  nature  than  I  think  will  be  found  consist- 
ent with  the  fact.  But  admitting  the  fact,  docs  it  follow  that 
this  abundance  should  cause  general  distress,  and  reduce  the 
agricultural  community  to  the  verge  of  ruin  ?  Admitting  the  ar- 
gument, that  a  productive  harvest  would  cause  a  fall  of  price 
beyond  the  actual  abundance,  would  the  farmer  have  no  recom- 
pence  whatever  from  such  abundance?  Would  such  abundance 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  11 

render  him  incapable  of  paying  for  two  or  three  years  in  succes- 
sion more  than  two  thirds  or  three  fourths  of  his  rent,  when 
landholders  were  obliged  to  meet  their  tenants  with  a  reduction  to 
that  extent,  or  have  their  farm  thrown  on  their  hands?  1  can- 
not contemplate  such  a  state  of  things  from  bountiful  harvests, 
even  under  the  operation  of  our  present  corn  laws.  Nor  am  I 
aware  that  any  evidence  of  such  being  the  case,  can  be  produced 
in  the  history  of  the  agriculture  of  this  country,  unaccompanied 
with  variations  in  the  amount  of  the  currency." 

I  liave  been  the  more  induced  to  insert  this 
quotation,  because  it  was  chiefly  on  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Mushet's  work  that  Mr.  J.  B.  Say,  the  most 
distinguislied  of  the  French  writers  on  Pohtical 
Economy,  expressed  a  most  exaggerated  opinion 
of  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  of  this  country  ; 
while,  cnriously  enongh,  Mr.  Say  had  occasion  at 
the  same  time  to  notice  variations  of  prices  as  great 
in  France,  which  he  accoimted  for  upon  very  ob- 
vious grounds,  without  inferring  any  alteration  of 
the  value  of  money. 

And  more  recently  an  opinion  to  the  same  effect 
has  been  stated  by  one  of  the  most  distinguished 
of  the  partisans  of  the  doctrine  of  the  paramount 
influence  of  the  currency.  Mr.  E.  S,  Cayley,  M.P., 
in  his  evidence  before  the  Lords'  Committee  on 
agriculture,  in  1836,  said  — 

"  It  is  one  of  the  false  notions  entertained  by  political  econo- 
mists, that  a  bad  harvest  is  an  advantage.  In  all  periods  of 
history  a  good  harvest  was  always  considered  a  blessing,  good 
both  for  man  and  beast,  for  then  there  is  plenty  in  the  land. 
When  there  is  a  deficient  crop,  that  increases  the  price^  but  not 
sufficiently  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of  produce;  but  the  in- 
crease of  produce  by  a  good  crop  in  a  proper  state  of  things, 
more  than  counterbalances  the  fall  of  price." — Report  of  Lords 
Committee  on  Agrieultaral  Distress,  1836.  p.  321. 

But  the  history  of  our  agriculture  tends  very 
clearly  to  prove  that  in  all  the  signal  instances  of 
scarcity  and  abundance  of  the  crops,  the  variations 
of  price  have  been  in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the 
utmost  computation  of  the  dift'erence  of  quan- 
tity, and  that  on  every  occasion  of  marked  tran- 


12  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

sition,  from  dearth  to  abundance  there  have  been 
complaints  of  agricultural  distress. 

The  fact  that  a  small  deficiency  in  the  produce 
of  corn,  compared  with  the  average  rate  of  con- 
sumption, occasionally  causes  a  rise  in  price  very 
much  beyond  the  ratio  of  the  defect,  is  obvious 
upon  the  slightest  reference  to  the  history  of  prices 
at  periods  when  nothing  in  the  state  of  politics  or 
of  the  currency  could  be  suspected  to  have  had 
any  influence. 

Some  writers  have  attempted  to  deduce  a  strict 
rule  of  proportion  between  a  given  defect  of  the 
harvest,  and  the  probable  rise  of  price. 

The  rule  of  this  kind  that  has  been  most  com- 
monly referred  to,  is  one  by  Gregory  King,  which 
is  introduced  in  the  following  passage  by  D'Ave- 
nant : — 

"  It  is  observed,  that  but  one  tenth  the  defect  in  the  harvest 
may  raise  the  price  three  tenths  ;  and  when  we  have  but  half  our 
crop  of  v.'heat,  which  now  and  then  happens,  the  remainder  is 
spun  out  by  thrift  and  good  management,  and  eked  out  by  the 
use  of  other  grain  :  but  this  will  not  do  for  above  one  year,  and 
would  be  a  small  help  in  the  succession  of  two  or  three  unseason- 
able harvests.  For  the  scarcity  even  of  one  year  is  very  de- 
structive, in  which  many  of  the  poorestsort  perish,  either  for  want 
of  sufficient  food,  or  by  unwholesome  diet. 

"  We  take  it,  that  a  defect  in  the  harvest  may  raise  the  price 
of  corn  in  the  following  proportions  :  — 

Defect.  Above  the  common  rate. 


1  tenth 

2  tenths 

3  tenths 

4  tenths 

5  tenths 


raises  the  price 


3  tenths 

8  tenths 

1-6  tenths 

2-8  tenths 

4!'5   tenths 


So  that  when  corn  rises  to  treble  the  common  rate,  it  may  be 
presumed  that  we  want  above  one  third  of  the  common  produce  ; 
and  if  we  should  want  five  tenths,  or  half  the  common  produce, 
the  price  would  rise  to  near  five  times  the  common  rate." — 
(D'Avcnant,  Vol.  II.  pages  224  and  225.) 

It  is  perhaps  superfluous  to  add,  that  no  such 
strict  rule    can   be    deduced ;    at   the   same  time, 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  13 

there  is  some  ground  for  supposing  that  the  esti- 
mate is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth,  from  observation 
of  the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  fact,  that  the 
price  of  corn  in  this  country  has  risen  from  100  to 
200  per  cent,  and  upwards,  when  the  utmost  com- 
puted deficiency  of  the  crops  has  not  been  more 
than  between  one  sixth  and  one  third  below  an 
average,  and  when  that  deficiency  has  been  relieved 
by  foreign  supplies. 

All  that  can  be  said,  therefore,  in  general  terms, 
is,  that  a  decided  deficiency  of  supply  is  commonly 
attended  in  the  case  of  corn,  more  than  in  that  of 
most  other  articles,  with  an  advance  in  price  very 
much  beyond  the  degree  of  the  deficiency.  And 
the  reason  of  the  fact  is  as  clear,  upon  a  little  re- 
flection, as  the  fact  itself  is  upon  the  slightest  ob- 
servation. 

The  process  by  which  the  rise  beyond  the 
proportion  of  defect  takes  place,  is  the  struggle  of 
every  one  to  get  his  accustomed  share  of  that 
which  is  necessary  for  his  subsistence,  and  of  which 
there  is  not  enough  or  so  much  as  usual  for  all. 
Supposing  a  given  deficiency,  the  degree  in  which 
the  money  price  may  rise,  will  depend  upon  the 
extent  of  the  pecuniary  means  of  the  lowest  classes 
of  the  community.  In  countries  where  the  pe- 
cuniary means  of  the  lowest  classes  are  limited  to 
the  power  of  obtaining  a  bare  subsistence  in  ordinary 
times,  as  in  Ireland,  and  on  many  parts  of  the  Con- 
tinent, and  where  neither  the  government,  as  in 
France,  nor  the  poor  laws  and  contributions  by 
wealthy  individuals,  as  in  England,  come  in  aid  of 
those  means,  a  proportion  of  the  population,  ac- 
cording to  the  degree  of  scarcity,  must  perish,  or 
suffer  diseases  incidental  to  an  insufficient  supply 
of  food,  or  to  a  substitution  of  inferior  and  un- 
wholesome diet.  And  the  increased  competition 
of  purchasers  being  thus  limited  to  the  classes 
above  the  lowest,  the  rise  in  price  may  not  be  very 


14  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

considerably  beyond  the  defect  of  quantity.  But 
in  France,  where  it  is  a  part  of  the  general  policy 
of  the  government  to  provide  by  the  purchase  of 
corn,  in  times  of  dearth,  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
lowest  classes,  and  particularly  for  that  of  the  in- 
habitants of  Paris  ;  and  in  this  country,  where  the 
poor  laws  create  a  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
lowest  classes,  at  the  expense  of  all  the  classes 
above  them  ;  where,  moreover,  the  voluntary  con- 
tributions of  richer  individuals  swell  that  fund  ;  it 
is  clear  that  the  competition  of  purchasers  would 
be  greatly  increased,  while  the  supply  being  li- 
mited, the  price  would  rise  very  considerably  beyond 
the  ratio  of  the  deficiency.  The  final  effect  of  a 
rise  in  })rice  so  much  beyond  the  defect  of  the 
crops,  when  that  increased  rise  is  produced  by  the 
causes  mentioned,  is  to  limit  the  consumption  and 
to  apportion  the  privations  resulting  from  scarcity 
over  a  larger  part  of  the  population  ;  thus  diminish- 
ing the  severity  of  pressure  upon  the  lowest  class, 
and  preventing  or  tending  to  prevent  any  part  of 
it  from  perishing,  as  it  might  otherwise  do,  from 
actual  want  of  food. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  bear  in  mind 
the  operation  of  the  principle  of  the  great  increase 
of  price  beyond  the  degree  of  deficiency,  with  a 
view  to  accounting  not  only  for  the  high  range  of 
prices,  but,  likewise,  for  the  extraordinary  pros- 
perity which  attended  the  agricultural  interest  * 
during  the  first  half  of  the  period  that  will  come 
under  consideration,  and  which  cannot,  in  my 
opinion,  be  accounted  for  in  any  other  way. 

*  By  agricultural  interest,  I  mean  exclusively  farmers  and 
landlords,  and  owners  of  tithes,  who  are  alone  benefited  by  an 
advance  of  price  resulting  from  scarcity.  The  condition  of  the 
labouring  classes,  even  of  those  employed  in  husbandry,  is  well 
known  to  be  deteriorated  in  periods  of  dearth,  as  the  wages  of 
labour  do  not  rise  in  full  proportion  to  the  advance  in  the  price 
of  provisions. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  15 

It  is  clearly  through  the  medium  of  prices  raised 
beyond  the  ratio  of  deficiency,  that  farmers  gained 
such  great  profits  pending  tlie  term  of  their  leases, 
and  that  landlords  obtained  such  greatly  advanced 
rents  at  the  granting  of  new  leases. 

If  prices  of  produce  had  risen  only  in  exact  pro- 
portion to  the  deficiency  of  growth  ;  thus,  if  in 
commonly  good  years,  an  acre  of  wheat  produced 
33  bushels,  which  sold  for  6s.  per  bushel,  or  9^  18.v., 
but,  in  a  bad  season,  produced  only  two  thirds  of  a 
crop,  or  22  bushels,  which  sold  for  9s.  the  bushel, 
or  9/.  18^.,  supposing  the  expenses  of  getting  in 
the  crops  to  be  the  same  in  both  cases,  the  farmer 
would  be  neither  gainer  nor  loser  by  the  deficiency 
of  his  crops,  that  deficiency  being  here  assumed  to 
be  general.  The  deficiency  would  be  a  general 
calamity,  and  farmers  and  landlords  would  bear 
their  shares  of  it  in  their  quality  of  consumers. 

But,  upon  the  principle  here  stated,  the  case 
would  be  widely  different.  In  the  event  of  a  defi- 
ciency of  one  third  of  an  average  crop,  a  bushel  of 
wheat  might  rise  to  I8s.  and  upwards.*  Now,  22 
bushels,  at  18.9.  per  bushel,  would  be  worth  19^.  l^s.^ 
whereas,  the  33  bushels  at  6s.,  were  worth  only 
9/.  18^.,  making  a  clear  profit  to  the  grower  of 
100  per  cent.  This,  of  course,  is  an  extreme  case, 
and  cannot,  in  general,  be  of  long  duration  ;  it 
supposes  no  great  surplus  from  former  years,  and 
no  immediate  prospect  of  adequate  relief  from  im- 
portation. While  the  deficiency  exists,  however, 
whether  in  reality  or  only  in  apprehension,  such, 
and  still  greater,  may  be  the  effect. 

For  the  sake  of  illustration  of  the  mode  and  de- 
gree in  which  a  deficiency  in  the  crops,  compared 

*  Considering  the  institutions  of  this  country  relative  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  poor,  if  there  should  be  a  deficiency  of  the 
crops  amounting  to  one-third,  without  amj  surplus  from  a  former 
year,  and  tcithout  any  chance  of  relief  by  importation,  the  price 
might  rise  five,  six,  or  even  tenfold. 


16  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

with  an  average  produce,  is  calculated  to  aifect  the 
condition  of  the  agricultural  interest,  let  us  suppose 
that  the  average  produce  of  corn  in  this  country 
were  32  millions  of  quarters  *  of  all  kinds,  which 
would  sell  at  40.9.  per  quarter  all  round  as  a  remu- 
nerative price,  making  an  amount  of  64,000,000/. 
to  be  distributed  as  wages,  profit,  and  rent,  includ- 
ing tithe  ;  but  by  the  occurrence  of  a  bad  crop,  de- 
ficient one  eighth,  uncompensated  by  a  surplus 
from  the  former  season,  the  price  advanced  to  60.9., 
there  would  then  be  28  millions  of  quarters  at  60*., 
making  84,000,000/,  being  a  clear  addition  of 
20,000,000/.,  to  be  distributed  among  the  farmers 
and  landlords,  and  receivers  of  tithe  in  kind,  in  the 
first  instance.  Eventually,  increased  wages  would 
form  some  deduction,  if  the  advance  in  price,  from 
the  continuance  of  deficiency,  lasted  for  more  than 
one  season,  or  if,  by  the  recurrence  of  deficiency 
at  short  intervals,  the  advance  were,  on  an  average, 
in  the  same  relative  proportion  If  the  deficiency 
were  one  quarter,  and  the  price  were  to  rise,  as  it 
infallibly  would,  to  at  least  double,  the  gain  among 
those  classes  would  be 

32,000,000  of  quarters  at  405.=:64-,000,000/. 
24,000,000  at  805.^:96,000,000/. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  tliat,  in  such  a  state  of 
things,  the  agricultural  interest  would  enjoy,  not 
only  the  appearance,  but  the  reality  of  prosperity. 
But  it  is  clear,  that  the  increased  income  distri- 
buted among  the  agricultural  interest  must,  with 
the  exception  of  the  increased  expenses  incurred  by 
the  landlords  and  farmers  in  their  quality  of  con- 

*  It  was  computed  by  Dr.  Colquhoun,  that  the  consumption 
of  all  kinds  of  grain  in  this  kingdom  amounted,  in  1812,  to  35 
millions  of  quarters,  exclusive  of  seed.  Mr.  M'Culloch  esti- 
mates that,  in  1834,  the  consumption  might  be  computed  at  44 
millions  exclusive  of  seed,  and  52  millions  including  seed. — See 
article,  Corn  Laws  and  Corn  Trade,  in  his  Commercial  Dictionary. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  IJ 

sumers,  be  at  the  expense  of  the  other  orders  of 
the  community.  The  advocates,  however,  for  the 
agricultural  claims,  which,  if  they  were  admitted 
and  could  be  made  operative  to  their  full  extent, 
would  artificially  perpetuate  the  effects  that  could 
otherwise  arise  only  from  the  sterility  of  the  soil  or 
the  unpropitiousness  of  the  seasons,  seem  to  confine 
their  observation  of  the  consequence  of  the  high 
price  of  provisions  to  the  direct  and  obvious  advan- 
tages resulting  from  the  increased  sum  to  be  distri- 
buted among  the  farmers  and  landlords ;  and  infer 
that  this  increased  sum  is  the  creation  of  so  much 
additional  wealth.  It  was  the  same  confinement  of 
view  to  the  increased  sum  which  an  advance  in  the 
price  of  corn  occasioned  to  be  distributed  in  the 
shape  of  profit  and  rent,  that  led  the  sect  of  econo- 
mists in  France,  who  considered  the  raw  produce 
of  the  earth  as  the  only  source  of  wealth,  to  look 
upon  every  advance  in  the  price  of  that  produce  as 
so  much  increase  of  national  wealth. 

While  the  fact,  indeed,  and  the  reason  of  the  fact 
that,  as  relates  to  commodities  generally,  and  to 
corn  more  especially,  a  deficiency  of  quantity  pro- 
duces a  great  relative  advance  in  price,  has  been 
repeatedly  noticed  and  variously  illustrated  by 
several  writers  ;  the  converse  of  the  proposition, 
viz.  that  an  excess  of  quantity  operates  in  depress- 
ing the  prices  of  commodities  generally,  but  of  corn 
more  especially,  in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the  degree 
of  that  excess,  was  little  noticed  until  the  publica- 
tion of  the  report  of  tlie  Agricultural  Committee 
in  1821,  or,  if  casually  noticed,  was  not  applied 
systematically  in  accounting  for  instances  of  great 
depression  of  prices,  and  of  consequent  distress 
among  those  who  felt  the  effects  of  that  depression. 
In  the  report  of  that  Committee,  the  principle 
which  is  here  alluded  to,  and  upon  which  I  was 
particularly  examined,  is  stated,  and  some  of  the 

c 


18  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

consequences   flowing  from  it  are  pointed  out  in 
the  following  passage  :  — 

''  Tlie  cause  which  produces  this  greater  susceptibihty  in  the 
corn  market,  cannot  be  better  explained  by  your  Committee, 
than  in  the  following  extract  from  the  answer  of  one  of  the  wit- 
nesses who  was  particularly  examined  to  this  point :  —  '  Why 
should  a  different  principle  apply  to  corn  than  to  any  other  ge- 
neral production  ?  Because  a  fall  in  the  price  of  any  other  com- 
modity, not  of  general  necessity,  brings  the  article  within  the 
reach  of  a  greater  number  of  individuals  :  whereas,  in  the  case 
of  corn,  the  average  quantity  is  sufficient  for  the  supply  of  every 
individual ;  all  beyond  that  causes  a  depression  of  the  market 
for  a  great  length  of  time,  and  a  succession  of  two  or  three 
abundant  seasons,  must  evidently  produce  an  enormously  in- 
convenient accumulation.' —  '  Is  there  not  a  greater  consump- 
tion of  corn  when  it  is  cheap  than  when  it  is  dear,  as  to  quantity  ? 
There  may,  and  doubtless  must  be,  a  greater  consumption  ;  but  it 
is  very  evident  that  if  the  population  was  before  adequately  fed, 
the  increased  consumption,  from  abundance,  can  amount  to  little 
more  than  waste ;  and  this  would  be  in  a  very  small  proportion 
to  the  whole  excess  of  a  good  harvest  or  two.' " 

The  report  then  proceeds  to  say  :  — 

"  In  the  substance  of  this  reasoning  your  Committee  entirely 
concur  ;  and  it  appears  to  them  that  it  cannot  be  called  in  ques- 
tion without  denying  either  that  corn  is  an  article  of  general 
necessity  and  universal  consumption  among  the  population  of 
this  country,  or  that  the  demand  is  materially  varied  by  the 
amount  of  the  supply.  This  latter  proposition,  except  within 
very  narrow  limits  altogether  disproportioned  to  fluctuation  in 
production,  is  not  warranted  by  experience.  The  general  truth, 
therefore,  of  the  observation  remains  unaltered  by  any  small 
degree  of  waste  on  the  one  side,  or  of  economy  on  the  other  ; 
neither  of  which  are  sufficient  to  counteract  the  effect  which 
opinion  and  speculation  must  have  upon  price,  when  it  is  felt 
how  little  demand  is  increased  by  redundancy,  or  checked  by 
scantiness  of  supply." 

It  has  been  chiefly  a  want  of  consideration  of 
the  magnitude  of  the  excess  or  defect  of  the  crops 
in  particular  seasons,  and  sometimes  in  a  succession 
of  seasons,  beyond  the  average  rate  of  consumption, 
that  has  led  a  large,  and,  probably  the  largest  class 
of  reasoners  on  the  prices  of  corn  to  suppose  that 
an  increase  of  consumption,  arising,  whether  from 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  19 

cheapness,  or  from  increased  employment  of  tlie 
working  classes,  in  consequence  of  a  flourishing  as 
contrasted  with  a  dull  state  of  trade  and  manufac- 
ture, could  form  any  considerable  proportion  to  the 
excess  of  a  superabundant  harvest.  *  If  it  is  con- 
sidered that  the  produce  of  an  ordinary  crop  of 
wheat  in  this  country,  at  the  commencement  of 
the  century,  was  estimated  at  nearly  9  millions  of 
quarters,  and  is  now  variously  computed  at  from 
12  to  14  millions,  and  that  the  variations  from 
season  have  been  to  the  extent  of  one  fourth,  or  up- 
wards, in  excess  or  defect,  making  in  the  earlier 
period  a  difference  of  upwards  of  2  millions  of 
quarters,  and  in  the  later  of  upwards  of  3  millions 
above  or  below  an  average,  and  a  difference  of  up- 
wards of  4  millions  in  the  one  case,  and  of  6  millions 
in  the  other  between  a  very  deficient  and  a  very 
abundant  crop,  —  it  may  easily  be  imagined,  that 
retrenchment  on  the  one  hand,  and  increased  con- 
sumption, however  wasteful,  on  the  other,  can  make 
comparatively  little  impression  on  such  enormous 
diiference  of  supply :  but  more  especially,  when 
such  difference  of  supply  is  extended  to  more  than 
a  single  season. 

It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered  at,  that  a 
succession  of  seasons,  of  somewhat  more  than  ordi- 
nary produce  relatively  to  the  usual  rate  of  con- 

*  Of  the  little  comparative  influence  of  retrenchment  on  the 
one  hand,  or  of  increased  consumption  on  the  other,  two  striking 
instances  may  be  adduced  :  — 

In  the  parliamentary  committee  on  the  scarcity  in  1800, 
the  deficiency  of  the  crop  of  wheat  was  estimated  at  about 
2,000,000  quarters  ;  and  in  the  examination  into  the  resources 
for  meeting  that  deficiency,  after  allowing  for  importation,  the 
use  of  substitutes  for  wheat,  and  the  stoppage  of  the  distilleries, 
the  whole  amount  of  retrenchment,  reckoned  upon  as  the  conse- 
quence of  the  very  high  price,  was  taken  at  300,000  quarters. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  more  recent  instance  of  the  crop  of 
ISS'l'  proves,  in  a  striking  manner,  the  insignificant  effect  of 
extra  consumption  upon  a  productive  harvest. 

c   2 


20  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

sumption,  should  be  attended  with  an  extreme 
depression  of  price ;  and  that  the  fall  of  prices, 
consequent  upon  such  a  succession  of  seasons  of 
more  than  ordinary  produce,  must  be  very  ruinous 
to  farmers,  who  were  under  agreement  to  pay  rents 
which  had  been  calculated  on  a  higher  range  of 
prices.* 

It  will  accordingly  be  seen,  on  reference  to 
former  periods  of  our  history,  that  there  were  very 
different  proportions  of  favourable  or  unfavourable 
seasons,  in  periods  of  considerable  length  ;  and  that 
on  the  transition  from  dearths  of  some  continuance 
to  abundance,  there  have  been  complaints,  as  in 
more  modern  times,  of  farmers  ruined,  and  of  rents 
unpaid. 

*  The  effect  of  abundance  in  depressing  the  price  of  corn, 
although  it  must  be  much  beyond  the  ratio  of  the  excess,  is  not 
calculated  to  be  in  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  deficiency  in  raising 
the  price.  In  the  event  of  a  superabundant  harvest,  a  part 
more  or  less  of  the  excess  may,  according  to  the  opinion  and 
the  capital,  or  credit  of  the  farmer,  be  held  over.  If,  however, 
the  recurrence  of  propitious  seasons  should  be  such  as  to  render 
the  accumulation  manifestly  and  inconveniently  large,  the  sub- 
sequent depression  would  be  the  greater,  in  proportion  to  the 
previous  resistance  to  a  fall,  and  the  only  remedy  would  be  an 
exportation  at  ruinously  low  rates,  and  eventually  a  diminished 
cultivation.  As  a  general  position,  tlierefore,  it  may  safely  be 
laid  down  that  an  excess  of  the  supply  of  corn  is  attended  with 
a  fall  of  price  much  beyond  the  ratio  of  excess ;  and  that  the 
larger  quantity  consequently  M'ill  yield  a  less  sum  of  money 
than  the  smaller  quantity. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  21 


CHAP.  III. 

ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  SEASONS  AND  THE 
STATE  OF  PRICES,  AND  THE  CONDITION  OF  THE 
AGRICULTURAL    INTERESTS    PREVIOUS    TO    1793. 

Section  1.  — Period  ending  in  1692. 

Of  the  character  of  the  seasons,  such  as  it  is  to  be 
inferred  from  the  state  of  prices  down  to  the  latter 
part  of  the  lyth  century,  a  concise,  and,  as  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  a  correct  view,  is  taken  in  the  follow- 
ing extract  from  an  article  in  the  Quarterly  Review, 
No.  57.,  which  contains  a  critique  on  a  former  work 
of  mine,  from  the  pen,  I  have  reason  to  believe,  of 
the  late  Mr.  Malthus  :  — 

"  In  that  very  valuable  table  of  prices  collected  by  Sir  Fre- 
derick Morton  Eden,  in  his  work  on  the  Poor,  periods  of  high 
and  low  prices  are  to  be  found,  of  considerable  duration,  for 
which  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  give  any  other  adequate  solu- 
tion, than  the  comparative  abundance  or  scantiness  of  the  supplies 
of  corn,  arising  from  the  number  of  favourable  or  unfavourable 
seasons  included  in  such  periods. 

"  After  the  great  plague,  which  occurred  about  the  middle  of 
the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  and  gave  occasion  to  the  first  attempt  to 
regulate  wages  by  law,  one  should  naturally  have  expected  that, 
owing  to  the  great  loss  of  people  then  sustained,  corn  would  be- 
come cheaper  rather  than  dearer  ;  instead  of  which  it  appears  to 
have  risen  from  about  5s.  4c?.,  the  average  of  the  first  twenty- 
five  years  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  to  lis.  9c?.,  the  average  of 
the  last  twenty-six  years  ;  with  very  little  difference  in  the  quan- 
tity of  silver  contained  in  the  same  nominal  sum.  For  this  great 
rise  of  bullion  prices,  spreading  itself  over  a  period  of  twenty- 
six  years,  it  would  be  scarcely  possible  to  assign  an  adequate 
cause  without  resorting  to  a  succession  of  unfavourable  seasons. 
During  the  reigns  of  Richard  II.  and  Henry  IV.,  a  period  of  thirty- 
four  years,  the  bullion  price  of  corn  seems  to  have  fallen  rather 

c  3 


22  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

lower  than  it  was  in  the  first  half  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III. 
In  the  first  twenty-three  years  it  was  5s.  7d.,  and  in  the  last 
eleven  years  6s.  Id. ;  and  as  in  the  latter  half  of  the  reign  of  Ed- 
ward III.  the  pound  of  silver  was  coined  into  255.,  and  at  the 
end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  IV.  into  30*.,  the  bullion  price  of  this 
period  was  rather  below  what  it  was  in  the  first  half  of  the  reign 
of  Edward  III. ;  and  it  certainly  would  be  very  difficult  to  explain 
the  low  prices  of  these  thirty-four  years,  and  the  high  prices  of 
the  preceding  twenty-six,  without  the  powei'ful  operation  of 
seasons. 

"  In  l^^i,  other  statutes  regulating  the  price  of  labour  were 
passed,  probably  owing  to  the  high  price  of  corn,  which  had  risen 
on  an  average  of  the  ten  preceding  years  to  10s.  8d.,  without  any 
further  alterations  in  the  coin ;  and  for  this  rise  there  seems  to 
be  no  adequate  cause,  but  a  succession  of  comparatively  scanty 
crops,  particularly  as  after  this  period  there  was  a  continuance  of 
low  prices  for  above  sixty  years.  The  average  price  of  wheat 
from  ]44'4  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  in  1509,  re- 
turned to  about  6s.,  while  the  pound  of  silver  being  coined  into 
I/.  175.  6d.  instead  of  1/.  2s.  6d.,  as  at  the  time  of  passing  the 
first  statute  of  labourers  in  1350,  showed  a  very  decided  fall  in 
the  bullion  price  of  wheat.  This  fall,  however,  was  so  consi- 
derable, and  lasted  for  so  very  long  a  period,  that  we  cannot  at- 
tribute it  wholly  to  the  seasons.  Still  less  are  we  disposed  to 
attribute  it  to  the  cause  assigned  by  Adam  Smith — a  gradual  rise 
in  the  value  of  silver,  because,  if  we  refer  to  his  own  criterion  of 
value,  labour,  we  shall  find  that  while  the  bullion  price  of  corn 
had  been  falling,  the  bullion  price  of  labour  had  been  rising,  and 
consequently,  silver  had  been  diminishing,  instead  of  increasing 
in  value.  These  prices  of  corn  and  labour  could  only  have  arisen 
from  a  great  and  continued  abundance  of  corn,  which  was  evinced 
by  the  very  large  quantity  of  it  awarded  to  the  labourer ;  and 
this  abundance  was  occasioned  probably  by  the  combined  ope- 
rations of  favourable  seasons  with  the  introduction  of  a  better 
system  of  agriculture,  before  the  distribution  of  property  and  the 
habits  of  the  labouring  classes  had  been  so  far  improved  as  to 
encourage  a  proportionate  increase  of  their  number. 

"  The  rise  in  the  price  of  corn  during  the  course  of  the  next 
century  may,  no  doubt,  be  easily  accounted  for  by  the  progress  of 
population  and  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines,  without  any 
aid  from  unfavourable  seasons,  although  in  fact  such  seasons 
did  combine  with  the  other  causes  just  mentioned,  in  raising  the 
price  of  wheat  towards  the  end  of  the  century  from  1594  to  1598. 
The  same  cause  unquestionably  operated  for  twenty  years  about 
the  middle  of  the  subsequent  century,  from  1646  to  1665  in- 
clusive, when  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat  was  2/.  IO5. — con- 
siderably higher  than  it  was  either  in  the  earlier  or  later  part  of 
the  century  ;  and  it  is  somewhat  singular,  that  while  during  a 
considerable  part  of  the  civil  wars  between  the  houses  of  York 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS,  ^3 

and  Lancaster,  and  subsequently,  corn  was  remarkably  cheap  ; 
during  the  civil  wars  under  Charles  I.,  and  sometime  subsequently, 
it  was  as  remarkably  dear —  a  pretty  strong  presumptive  proof 
that  the  seasons  had  more  to  do  with  the  prices  in  both  cases  than 
the  civil  wars." 

The  following  extracts,  from  the  Sloane  MSS. 
in  the  British  Museum,  No.  4174,  give  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  effect,  on  the  payment  of  rents,  of  a  fall 
of  prices,  which  occurred  between  I6I7  and  1621, 
namely,  from  4f3s,  3d.  the  quarter,  of  8  bushels, 
to  27*.*:  — 

"  Mr.  John  Chamberlain  to  Sir  Dudley  Carleton. 

"12  February,  1620. 
"  We  are  here  in  a  strange  state  to  complain  of  plenty  ;  but 
so  it  is,  that  corn  beareth  so  low  a  price  that  tenants  and  farmers 
are  very  backward  to  pay  their  rents,  and  in  many  places  plead 
disability ;  for  remedy  whereof  the  council  have  written  letters 
into  every  shire,  and  some  say  to  every  market-town,  to  provide 
a  granary  or  storehouse,  with  a  stock  to  buy  corn,  and  keep  it  for 
a  dear  year.  But  though  this  be  well  advised,  and  make  a  fair 
show  in  speculation,  yet  the  difficulties  be  so  many,  that  it  will 
not  be  so  easy  to  put  it  into  practice." 

The  following  was  written  at  the  same  period : 

"  England  was  never  generally  so  poor  since  I  was  born  as  it 
is  at  this  present ;  inasmuch  that  all  complain  they  cannot  re- 
ceive their  rents.  Yet  is  there  plenty  of  all  things  but  money, 
which  is  so  scant,  that  country  people  offer  corn  and  cattle,  or 
whatsoever  they  have  else,  in  lieu  of  rent  —  but  bring  no  money  ; 
and  corn  is  at  so  easy  rates  as  I  never  knew  it  to  be  at,  twenty 
or  twenty-two  pence  a  bushel,  barley  at  nine  pence,  and  yet  no 
quantity  will  be  taken  at  that  price  ;  so  that  for  all  the  common 
opinion  of  the  wealth  of  England,  I  fear,  when  it  comes  to  the 
trial,  it  will  prove  as  some  merchants,  who,  having  carried  on  a 


*  The  quotations  of  prices  of  wheat,  until  after  1792,  will  be 
confined  to  those  of  the  Windsor  market,  as  contained  in  the 
Eton  tables  for  the  Winchester  quarter  of  8  bushels.  As  the 
quality  is  supposed  to  be  superior  to  middling  wheat,  it  has  been 
usual  among  writers  on  corn  to  deduct  one  ninth  for  the  differ- 
ence ;  but  this  I  conceive  is  more  than  is  warranted ;  and  the 
quotations,  therefore,  stand  as  they  are  given  in  the  Parliamentary 
Papers. 

c  4 


24  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

great  show  a  long  time,  when  they  are  called  upon  too  fast  by 
their  creditors,  be  fain  to  play  bankrupt." 

And  further :  — 

"  Sir  Symonds  d'Ewes,  in  his  unpublished  diary,  notices,  in 
1621,  the  excessive  cheapness  and  plenty  of  wheat,  the  conse- 
quence of  which  was  to  reduce  the  price  of  lands  from  twenty 
years'  purchase  to  sixteen  or  seventeen.*  The  best  wheat  was 
then  2s.  Sd.  and  25.  6d.  the  bushel,  ordinary  2s. ;  barley  and  rye, 
Is.  3d. 

"  The  farmers  murmured  ;  the  poorer  sort  traversed  the  mar- 
kets to  find  out  the  finest  wheats,  for  none  else  w^ould  now  serve 
their  use,  though  before  they  were  glad  of  the  coarser  rye-bread. 
This  daintiness  was  soon  after  punished  by  the  high  prices  of  all 
sorts  of  grain  every  where,  which  never  since  abated." 

Again,  in  I67O,  prices  having  fallen  on  a  com- 
parison with  those  which  had  prevailed  during 
about  20  years,  namely,  from  1646  to  1665,  gave 
occasion  to  considerable  suffering. 

The  distress  complained  of  by  the  agricultural 
interest  was  the  reason  of  a  new  corn  bill,  imposing 
duties  on  the  importation  amounting  to  a  prohibi- 
tion. The  state  of  things  after  that  act  is  thus 
described  by  Roger  Coke  in  his  treatise,  entitled 
"  The  Church  and  State  are  in  equal  Danger  with 
Trade,"  published  in  I67I. 

"  The  ends  designed  by  the  acts  against  the  importation  of 
Irish  cattle,  of  raising  the  rents  of  the  lands  of  England,  are  so 
far  from  being  attained,  that  the  contrary  hath  ensued.  And  here 
I  wish  a  survey  were  taken  how  many  thousand  farms  are  thrown 
up  since  this  act ;  how  many  thousand  farms  are  abated,  some 
above  one  sixth,  others  above  one  fourth,  others  above  one  third ; 
some,  I  know,  which  after  two  years'  lying  waste,  are  abated  one 
half. 

In  1674  there  was  a  considerable  dearth.  The 
price  by  the  Eton  Tables  for  Lady-day  I673,  had 


*  The  fall  in  the  price  of  land,  as  indicated  by  the  reduced 
number  of  years'  purchase,  has  evidently,  in  this  case,  been  com- 
puted upon  the  rents  which  were  payable,  but  7iot paid  ;  and  the 
uncertainty  whether  the  low  price  of  produce  might  not  entail  a 
fall  of  rent  would  naturally  deter  purchasers  from  giving  so  much 
for  land  as  they  would  have  done  before  the  great  reduction  in 
the  value  of  the  produce. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  25 

been  35s.  6d.,  but  the  harvest  of  1673  having  proved 
defective,  the  price  on  the  Lady-day  1674  had  risen 
to  64.9.  And  the  two  years  1674  and  1675  are  re- 
ferred to  as  a  period  of  great  dearth.*  The  harvests 
of  1677  and  1678  appear,  by  inference  from  the 
prices,  likewise  to  have  been  defective,  t  At  Lady- 
day  1677,  the  price  had  been  30*.  3d.:  and  at 
Michaehnas,  I678,  56s.  lid.  On  the  average  of 
seven  years  the  price  was  from  I666  to  I672,  both 
years  included,  36s.;  and  from  I673  to  1679,  46*. 
being  a  rise  of  nearly  30  per  cent. 

This  comparative  high  range  of  prices  had 
probably,  the  tendency  to  encourage  and  extend 
tillage,  the  effects  of  which  seem  to  have  been 
developed  by  a  succession,  in  the  following  twelve 

*  Comber,  on  National  Subsistence,  p.  133. 

f  It  may  be  a  question  how  far  quotations  of  price  are  admis- 
sible as  evidence  of  the  state  of  the  seasons,  when  the  degree  in 
which  price  may  be  affected  by  the  seasons  is  the  very  object  of 
investigation.  The  answer  is,  that  doubtless  direct  historical 
testimony  would  be  better  authority  ;  but  that,  in  the  present 
case,  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  any  great  difference  of 
price  within  short  periods  may  be  quite  sufficient  for  practical 
purposes,  when  there  is  no  direct  description. 

From  an  account  in  the  Appendix  of  the  prices  of  the  Windsor 
market,  from  the  Eton  Tables,  any  very  marked  variation  in  the 
produce  or  promise  of  the  season  may  be  clearly  inferred  by  a 
reference  to  the  difference  between  the  quotations  of  the  spring 
and  autumn,  when  nothing  in  the  state  of  the  currency,  or  any 
other  important  circumstance  calculated  to  affect  prices,  is  re- 
corded to  have  occurred.  The  inference  to  this  effect  is 
strengthened  by  the  accordance  of  direct  notices  of  the  state 
of  the  seasons,  whenever  they  are  given,  with  the  indication 
conveyed  by  the  variation  between  the  Lady  day  and  Michael- 
mas prices.  Hence,  in  the  absence  of  any  historical  notice,  it 
may  be  safely  concluded,  when  no  considerable  difference  is  ob- 
servable in  the  quotations  from  six  months  to  six  months  and 
from  year  to  year,  that  the  seasons  have  preserved  a  general 
uniformity  of  character  as  to  productiveness. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  when  referring  to  considerable  variations  of 
price,  and  considering  them,  even  for  a  period  often  years,  to  be 
too  sudden  to  be  ascribed  to  any  change  in  the  value  of  silver, 
which  is  always  slow  and  gradual,  adds^  "  The  suddenness  of  the 
effect  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  a  cause  which  can  operate 
suddenly,  —  the  accidental  variation  of  the  seasons." 


26  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

yearsy  of  favourable  seasons  and  very  low  prices, 
with  the  exception  only  of  one  year,  viz.  1684,  in 
which,  judging  by  a  reference  to  the  price,  there 
seems  to  have  been  a  somewhat  deficient  crop. 

The  low  range  of  prices  in  the  six  years  ending 
in  1691,  is  more  especially  remarkable,  the  average 
for  those  years  being  only  29^.  5d. ;  but  if  we  take 
only  the  four  years  ending  in  I69I,  the  average 
price  will  be  found  to  be  still  lower,  viz.  9!Js.  'Jd., 
or  a  fall  of  upwards  of  40  per  cent.,  compared  with 
the  average  of  the  seven  years  ending  in  1679  ; 
this  price  too  being  for  a  quality  better  than 
middling. 

The  state  of  the  currency,  instead  of  account- 
ing for  this  low  price,  adds  to  the  grounds  for 
wonder  at  its  being  so  low.  The  silver,  which 
was  then  the  only  current  coin,  had,  during  some 
years  before  this  time,  been  undergoing  a  progres- 
sive deterioration,  and  had  probably,  at  the  revolu- 
tion in  1688,  reached  nearly  to  its  most  degraded 
state,  inasmuch  as  it  was,  very  soon  after  that  event, 
that  the  attention  of  Government  was  drawn  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  evil,  and  the  necessity  of  a  re- 
medy by  recoinage.  The  deterioration  of  the  coin, 
previous  to  the  re-coinage,  was  estimated,  by  Mr. 
Lownds,  at  25  per  cent.  * ;  but  supposing  the  de- 
gradation, in  1688,  to  have  been  only  to  the  extent 
of  20  per  cent.,  it  would  bring  the  price  in  money 
of  full  weight,  on  the  average  of  the  four  years 
ending  in  1 691,  to  22.9. :  and,  applying  the  same  de- 
duction to  the  lowest  quotation  by  the  Eton  Tables 
of  that  period,  viz.  at  Michaelmas  I688,  21^.  4^., 
the  price  in  silver  coin  of  standard  weight  would 
be  reduced  to  17*^  1^-  for  the  Winchester  quarter 


*  Silver  was  then  the  only  current  coin  by  which  prices  were 
determined.  The  guinea  commonly  exchanging  at  that  time 
for  305.  of  the  worn  and  dipt  silver.  In  1695  the  common  price 
of  silver  bullion  was  6s.  5d.  an  ounce,  being  Is.  5d.  or  nearly 
25  per  cent,  above  the  Mint  price. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  ^7 

of  wheat,  of  better  than  the  average  quality.  That 
there  is  no  material  error  in  this  very  low  quota- 
tion of  the  Windsor  market  is  proved  by  a  similar 
low  quotation  of  the  Oxford  market  in  Mr.  Lloyd's 
tables,  viz.  21*.  lid.,  at  Michaelmas  1688.  It  is 
impossible  to  assign  these  extremely  low  rates  to  any 
other  cause  than  that  of  an  inconvenient  accumu- 
lation arising  from  a  succession  of  favourable  seasons, 
operating  upon  a  state  of  tillage,  extended,  doubtless, 
by  the  comparatively  high  prices  which  liad  pre- 
vailed some  time  before. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  who  notices  the  very  low 
price  of  this  period,  seems  inclined  to  consider  it 
as  an  indication  of,  and  resulting  from,  an  increase 
in  the  value  of  silver.  For,  according  to  his  view, 
the  utmost  effect  of  the  discovery  and  working  of 
the  American  mines,  in  reducing  the  value  of  silver, 
had  been  completed  between  1630  and  1640,  or 
about  1636.  But  supposing  that  there  had  been 
better  grounds  than  there  now  appear  to  have  been 
for  the  opinion  entertained  by  Dr.  Smith,  of  a 
tendency  to  a  rise  in  the  value  of  silver,  this  cause 
must  necessarily  have  been  extremely  slow  in  its 
operation,  and  could  most  assuredly  not  account 
for  so  low  a  price  as  that  of  the  four  years  ending 
in  1691,  viz.  QJs.  Jd- ;  or,  allowing  for  the  deterior- 
ation of  the  coin,  22.9.  1^.,  being  the  lowest  at 
which  it  had  ever  been  since  1595;  long  before 
the  American  mines  could  possibly  have  produced 
their  full  effect. 

The  bounty  system*  to  which,  by  its  advocates, 

*  By  1  William  and  Mary,  a  bounty  was  granted,  of  5s.  per 
quarter,  on  the  exportation  of  wheat,  when  the  price  did  not  ex- 
ceed 4:8s.  2s.  6d.  per  quarter  on  barley  and  malt,  when  not  ex- 
ceeding 24*. ;  and  3*.  6^.  per  quarter  on  rye,  when  not  exceeding 
S2s.  A  bounty  of  2s.  6d.  per  quarter  was  subsequently  given 
upon  the  exportation  of  oats  and  oatmeal,  when  the  price  of  the 
former  did  not  exceed  1 5s.  per  quarter.  Importation  continued 
to  be  regulated  by  the  act  of  1670. 


28  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

the  low  prices  of  corn  in  the  first  sixty-five  years 
of  the  last  century  were  ascribed,  cannot  in  any 
way  be  brought  to  explain  the  low  rate  now  under 
consideration.  The  measure  was  not  adopted  till 
1688  ;  and  whatever  might  be  its  ultimate  effect  in 
encouraging  an  extended  tillage,  and  thus  even- 
tually reducing  the  price,  the  first  operation  of  it 
would  be,  as  it  was  intended  that  it  should  be, 
a  forced  exportation,  and  a  consequent  imme- 
diate relief  to  the  growers  and  dealers  from  the 
weight  of  accumulated  stock  with  which  they 
were  oppressed.  Accordingly,  the  markets  did 
recover  in  a  slight  degree,  after  the  passing  of  that 
measure,  although  they  continued  at  a  low  range 
till  1692.*  But  if  neither  the  supposed  increase 
of  the  value  of  silver,  nor  the  operation  of  the 
bounty  can  by  possibility  be  assigned  as  the  causes 
of  that  low  range  of  prices,  as  little  can  any  thing 
be  found  in  the  state  of  politics  or  trade  to  account 
for  it. 

A  fall  of  the  price  of  wheat  to  29*.  had  taken 
place  after  the  harvest  of  I687,  when  the  coun- 
try was  in  a  state  of  perfect  political  tranquillity: 
and  it  does  not  appear  that  the  revolution  in 
1688  had  any  effect  in  deranging  the  markets  for 
provisions.  If,  from  such  a  cause,  they  had  been 
particularly  depressed,  the  rebound,  when  the  ex- 
traordinary cause  of  depression  was  removed,  would 
have  been  proportionally  great ;  whereas  the  quo- 
tation at  Lady-day  1689,  of  the  Windsor  market,  was 
23s.  Id.,  and  of  the  Oxford  market  Q,5s.  6d.  And 
at  the  end  of  two  years  after  the  revolution,  viz. 
at  Lady- day  I69I,  wheat  in  the  Windsor  market 
was  only  Q9s. — the  silver  coin  being  then  at  nearly 
its  lowest  point  of  degradation.  There  appears, 
therefore,  no  ground  of  inference  that  any  part  of 

*  Indeed  it  must  be  perfectly  clear,  that  the  prices  in  the 
three  years  following  1688,  low  as  they  were,  would  have  been 
still  lower  but  for  the  bounty  on  exportation. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  29 

the  depression  of  prices  so  remarkable  between 
1685  and  1692,  can  be  refeiTed  to  the  state  of 
poHtics  in  that  interval  :  and  as  to  any  influence 
from  the  state  of  trade,  there  is  no  reason  whatever 
for  ascribing  to  it  a  depressing  effect  on  the  price 
of  provisions,  unless  an  impro^dng  and  flourish- 
ing state  of  it  is  calculated  to  have  that  effect. 
The  Board  of  Trade  represented  in  1697:  "We 
have  made  inquiry  into  the  state  of  trade  in  gene- 
ral, from  the  year  I67O  to  the  present  time  j  and 
from  the  best  calculations  we  can  make,  by  the 
duties  paid  at  the  Custom  House,  we  are  of 
opinion,  that  trade  in  general  did  considerably 
increase  from  the  end  of  the  Dutch  war  in  1673 
to  1689,  when  the  late  war  began." — Chalmers's 
Estimate^  p.  47. 

It  is  indeed  manifestly  impossible  to  discover 
any  cause  for  the  remarkably  low  prices  from  1685 
to  1692  *,  but  that  of  a  succession  of  favourable  sea- 
sons, acting  upon  a  probably  extended  cultivation. 
Ofthe  agricultural  distress,  resulting  from  such  sea- 
sons, a  sufficient  proof  is  furnished  by  the  enact- 
ment of  the  celebrated  measure  of  the  bounty ; 
the  real  object  of  which  was,  although  professing 
to  have  in  view  the  encouragement  of  tillage,  to 
relieve  the  landed  interest  from  the  pressure  of 
distress  arising  from  low  prices. 


*  In  a  publication,  entitled  a  General  Chronological  History 
of  the  Air,  Weather,  &c.,  by  Dr.  Short,  1749,  is  the  following 
quotation  from  a  diary  of  the  Rev.  S.  Say,  of  St.  James's, 
Westminster  :  —  "  In  the  latter  end  of  the  reign  of  King  James, 
and  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  King  William,  the  seasons 
were  kindly  to  the  fruits  ofthe  earth  ;  in  1688,  wheat  was  sold 
in  Norwich  at  2s.  per  bushel,  and  in  1691  for  about  2s,  6d." 


30  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


Section  2.  —  1693  to  1714. 

But  if  the  low  prices  immediately  antecedent  to 
1693  are,  chiefly  by  inference  (irresistible  as  the 
grounds  for  such  inference  are)  referable  to  the 
state  of  the  seasons,  there  is  direct  evidence  of  the 
influence  of  that  cause  in  the  remarkably  elevated 
range  of  prices  in  the  following  seven  years,  which 
are  traditionally  known  as  the  barren  years  at  the 
close  of  the  seventeenth  century.* 

Of  these  seasons  there  are  various  notices  to  be 
collected  from  publications  relating  to  that  period. 
Among  them  are  the  following :  — 

"  1692.  Great  rains  in  autumn  ;  an  earthquake  was  felt  in 
England,  and  in  most  parts  of  Europe. 

"  1693.  A  very  wet  summer  ;  this  unseasonable  weather  ex- 
tended to  France,  where  numbers  perished  for  want,  notwith- 
standing they  imported  much  corn  from  Sweden  and  Denmark. 
In  Kent,  turnips  made  a  considerable  share  of  bread  for  the 
people. 

"  1694.     A  very  wet  summer. 

"  1695.  Many  of  the  Scotch  are  driven  into  Ireland  by  the 
excessive  price  of  corn. 

"  1696.     A  very  wet  summer.     A  great  want  of  money  in 


*  In  The  Farmers  Magazine  for  January  1800,  is  a  passage 
in  which  the  editors,  after  noticing  the  importance  of  a  register 
of  the  seasons,  add,  "  Such  a  register  will  not  only  inform  the 
present  generation,  but  must  also  prove  very  interesting  to  pos- 
terity. We  need  hardly  say,  that  if  similar  information  could 
be  procured  concerning  the  causes  which  occasioned  the  scanty 
crops  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  traditionally  called 
the  barren  years,  it  would  be  considered  as  a  particular  obli- 
gation." And  Mr.  M'Culloch,  in  his  very  elaborate  work,  "  A 
Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Empire,"  adverting  to  the 
scarcities  with  which  Scotland  has  occasionally  been  visited, 
observes,  that,  "  Those  from  1693  to  1700,  emphatically  termed 
the  '  seven  ill  years,'  were  particularly  severe.  During  the 
*  seven  ill  years,'  the  distress  was  so  great  that  several  extensive 
parishes  in  Aberdeenshire,  and  other  parts  of  the  country,  were 
nearly  depopulated ;  and  some  farms  remained  unoccupied  for 
several  years  afterwards." — Vol.  i.  p.  424. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  31 

specie ;  but  this  was  soon  remedied  by  the  new  coin  coming 
out.* 

"  1698.  A  veiy  wet  summer.  Great  complaints  are  made 
of  the  dearness  of  provisions  and  decay  of  trade. 

"  These  cold  and  wet  seasons  lasted  more  than  seven  years ; 
the  dismal  effects  of  famine  were  felt  in  most  parts  of  Europe." 
An  Inquiry  into  the  Prices  of  Wheat,  Malt,  and  occasionally  of 
other  Provisio7is,  as  Sold  in  England  from  the  Year  1000  to  the 
Year  1765.  (Folio,  published  for  T.  Longman,  1768.) 

The  scarcity  resulting  from  such  seasons  is  no- 
ticed by  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  following  terms  : 
"  The  scarcity  which  prevailed  in  England  from 

*  The  state  of  the  weather  in  1697  is  not  noticed  in  this 
publication  ;  but  it  is  noticed  in  the  following  description,  ex- 
tracted from  a  "  Syllabus  of  the  general  State  of  Air,  Health, 
and  Seasons,''  by  Thomas  Short,  M.D. 

"  1697.  From  January  17.  to  February  11.,  a  hard  frost.  A 
cold  north  wind  all  March,  and  to  April  11.  July  16.  and  17., 
frost  and  mildew :  calm  to  August  10.  By  constant  daily 
rains  growing  corn  sprouted  in  the  ear  ;  then  came  good  harvest 
weather. 

"  1698.  January  had  much  snow,  and  deep  drifts.  February 
a  cold  cloudy  month;  14  inches  deep  snow  on  the  26th,  ice 
4  inches  thick.  April  22.,  a  deep  snow.  May  3.,  a  general  deep 
snow ;  and  to  June  18.,  very  rainy.  The  16th  of  June,  in  a  warm 
rich  soil,  was  the  first  wheat-ear  seen  near  London.  The  back- 
wardest  spring  in  forty -seven  years.  The  four  months,  to  the  end 
of  August,  had  scarce  two  days  together  without  rain  (except 
from  July  18th  to  the  26th).  The  wettest  season  known. 
Whole  fields  of  corn  spoilt,  even  in  Kent;  much  more  in  the 
north.  Horses  were  turned  into  the  pease  and  barley.  The 
earliest  wheat  not  cut  till  the  middle  of  September.  In  Kent, 
September  the  29th,  barley  standing  uncut  there ;  much  lay  in 
the  swaith  till  December ;  that  which  was  brought  in  was 
soaked  with  wet,  and  almost  useless.  Much  corn  in  the  north 
ungot  at  Christmas  ;  and,  in  Scotland,  they  were  throng-reaping 
in  January,  and  beating  the  deep  snow  off  it  as  they  reaped  the 
poor  green  empty  crop.  Bread,  made  of  wheat,  was  got ;  would 
not  stick  together,  but  fell  in  pieces,  and  tasted  as  sweet  as  if 
made  of  malt.  The  seed-time  was  so  wet,  that  there  was  hardly 
above  half  a  crop  sown  this  year. 

"  1699.  Now  begins  the  first  of  several  hot  summers.  June 
and  July  were  so  hot,  that  wheat  began  to  be  cut  the  1st  of 
August ;  and  though  there  was  but  half  a  crop  sown,  yet  it  fell 
from  9*.  and  105.  a  bushel  to  a  reasonable  price  ;  and  continued 
so  for  several  years." 


32  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

1693  to  1699,  both  inclusive,  though  no  doubt 
principally  owing  to  the  badness  of  the  seasons, 
and  therefore  extending  through  a  considerable 
part  of  Europe,  must  have  been  somewhat  en- 
hanced by  the  bounty.  In  1699,  accordingly,  the 
further  exportation  of  corn  was  prohibited  for  nine 
months."  As  the  price,  on  the  average,  was  above 
that  up  to  which  the  bounty  was  payable,  it  does 
not  appear  how  that  measure  could  have  enhanced 
the  price,  and  I  quote  the  passage  merely  as  evi- 
dence of  the  notoriety  of  the  fact  of  the  prevalence 
of  scarcity  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe 
during  an  interval  of  about  seven  years. 

The  relatively  high  prices  of  that  period  cannot, 
indeed,  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  in  any  other 
way.  The  bounty  must,  on  the  grounds  which  I 
have  stated,  have  been  wholly  inoperative  to  that 
effect ;  or,  rather,  in  as  far  as  it  was  calculated  to 
have  the  effect  ascribed  to  it  of  forcing  a  surplus 
produce,  it  might,  when  the  exportation  was  pro- 
hibited, have  had  a  temporary  effect  in  a  contrary 
direction,  viz.  of  preventing  the  rise  to  so  great  an 
extent  as  might  otherwise  have  taken  place. 

Of  the  inveterate  tendency  which  exists  to  refer 
every  instance  of  relatively  high  prices  of  corn  to 
the  currency,  however  palpably  attributable  to  other 
causes,  there  cannot  be  a  stronger  instance  than 
that  among  speakers  in  parliament,  and  among 
writers  out  of  it,  whenever  reference  has  been  made 
to  the  prices  of  corn  in  the  closing  years  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  it  seems  to  have  been  taken 
for  granted  that  they  were  exclusively  the  result  of 
the  deteriorated  state  of  the  coin. 

The  assignment  of  this  cause  for  the  great  rise 
of  prices  in  the  closing  years  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  is  at  the  outset  negatived  by  a  very  ob- 
vious and  simple  consideration.  The  silver  coins 
were,  in  I69I,  at,  as  nearly  as  might  be,  their 
greatest  debasement  j  and  it  is  the  rise  from  that 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  33 

period  of  nearly  100  per  cent,  which  is  to  be  ac- 
counted for.  It  would  be  extravagant  to  suppose 
that  the  further  deterioration,  till  the  calling  in  of 
the  bad  coin  in  1695,  could  have  been  such  as  to 
produce  any  sensible  effect  on  prices. 

In  tlie  course  of  the  years  l(i94  and  1695,  mea- 
sures had  been  taken  for  a  new  coinage ;  and  the 
effect  of  these  measures,  while  they  were  in  progress, 
was  to  occasion  great  scarcity  of  circulating  medium, 
by  the  inducement  to  hoard  or  to  export  the  more 
perfect  pieces,  and  to  reject  the  imperfect.  In  1695 
a  proclamation  was  issued,  prohibiting  the  currency 
of  the  clipped  money.  In  the  early  part  of  I696, 
being  the  interval  between  the  crying  down  of  the 
old,  and  the  issuing  of  the  new  coin,  the  scarcity 
of  money  seems  to  have  been  severely  felt,  as 
appears  by  the  following  extracts  from  Evelyn's 
Memoirs. 

'•June  11.  1696.  Want  of  current  money  to  carry  on 
the  smallest  concerns,  even  for  daily  provisions  in  the  markets. 
Guineas  lowered  to  22*.,  and  great  sums  daily  transported  to 
Holland,  where  it  yields  more,  with  other  treasure  sent  to  pay 
the  armies,  and  nothing  considerable  coined  of  the  new,  and 
now  only  current  stamp,  cause  such  a  scarcity,  that  tumults  are 
every  day  feared,  nobody  paying  or  receiving  :  so  imprudent 
was  the  late  parliament  to  condemn  the  old,  though  clipped  and 
corrupted,  till  they  had  provided  supplies.  To  this,  add  the 
fraud  of  the  bankers  and  goldsmiths,  who,  having  gotten  immense 
riches  by  extortion,  keep  up  their  treasure  in  expectation  of  en- 
hancing its  value." 

Nothing  can  indicate  more  strongly  than  this 
description  the  great  stagnation  of  the  circulation, 
and  the  consequent  enhancement  of  the  value  of  the 
circulating  medium  *  ;  and  it  is  probable,  therefore, 
that  prices,  high  as  they  were  from  deficiency  of 
supply  arising  out  of  the  seasons,  would  have  been 

*  Mr.  Huskisson,  in  his  speech  in  June,  1 822,  on  Mr.  Western's 
motion,  quoted  from  Archdeacon  Coxe's  publication  of  the  cor- 
respondence between  king  William  and  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury 
several  particulars  which  fully  confirm  this  statement  of  the 
scarcity  of  money  and  general  stagnation  which  prevailed  in 
1696. 

D 


34f  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

still  higher  in  the  interval  immediately  preceding 
1696,  if  the  contraction  of  the  circulation  had  not 
been  greater  *  with  a  debased,  than  it  subsequently 
was  with  a  more  perfect  coin.  In  I696  the  new 
coin  began  to  appear,  .and,  in  the  course  of  the 
two  following  years,  the  reformation  of  the  cur- 
rency was  completed ;  but  it  was  precisely  in  this 
interval,  viz.  from  I696  to  1699,  both  years  in- 
cluded (the  two  last  being  years  of  peace),  that 
prices  reached  their  greatest  height.  The  com- 
parison of  the  prices  of  wheat  in  the  four  years 
ending  in  l691j  when  the  coin  was  deteriorated  by 
at  least  20  per  cent.,  with  the  price  in  the  four  years 
ending  in  1699,  when  the  coin  was  restored  to  its 
full  standard  value,  will  stand  thus  : 

s.    d. 

4  years  ending  1691        -         -  -  27     7 

4  years  ending  1699    -  -  -  5Q     Q> 

A  further  presumption,  if  any  were  wanting, 
against  the  supposition  of  the  currency  having  had 
any  influence  in  this  high  range  of  prices,  is  derived 
from  the  circumstance  that  a  still  greater  pro- 
portionate rise,  in  the  same  period,  occurred  in 
France. 

With  regard  to  the  hypothesis  of  war  having 
occasioned  these  high  prices,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  prices  continued  low  during  the  first  two 
years  of  the  war,  viz.  from  1689  to  I692,  and  that 
nearly  the  highest  prices,  viz,  in  1698  and  1699, 
were  after  the  conclusion  of  peace. 

Upon  the  cessation  of  the  long  period  of  dearth, 
in  the  closing  years  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the 
fall  of  prices  was  rapid. 

The  price,  after  harvest,  at  Michaelmas  1700, 
had  fallen  to  336^.  9^.,  and,  after  the  harvest  of  I702, 

*  The  depression  of  the  exchange  immediately  previous  to 
1696,  to  the  extent  of  nearly  25  per  cent.,  was  the  effect  of  the 
large  foreign  expenditure.  But  that  depression  could,  of  course, 
not  have  taken  place  if  the  coin  had  been  perfect. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  35 

to  Q5s.  6d.  This  fall  of  upwards  of  50  per  cent, 
took  place,  notwithstanding  a  renewal  of  the  war 
with  France  in  the  year  before,  and  notwithstand- 
ing tlie  full  operation  of  the  bounty  on  exportation. 
The  fall  being  so  great,  it  might  naturally  be  sup- 
posed that  rents  which  had  probably  been  regulated 
with  some  reference  to  the  previous  long  range  of 
high  prices,  could  not  easily  be  paid,  and  there 
happens  to  be  testimony  that  rents  were  not  paid. 
Evelyn,  in  his  Diary,  January,  1703,  writes  :  "  Corn 
and  provisions  so  cheap,  that  the  farmers  are  unable 
to  pay  their  rents.'* 

The  harvest  of  1703  seems  to  have  been  unfa- 
vourable, as  the  price  of  wheat  rose  by  Lady- day 
following  to  nearly  double  of  what  it  had  been  in 
the  preceding  sprmg,  viz. 

Per  Winchester  Quarter. 
S.      d. 

1703.  Lady-day  -         -         -  26     8 
Michaelmas         -         -      -  37     4 

1704.  Lady-day       -         -  -  51     7 

At  Michaelmas,  1704,  it  fell  to  30^.  10^.,  indi- 
cating that  the  crops  of  that  year  had  proved 
abundant ;  and,  from  that  time  (the  government 
expenditure,  be  it  remarked,  arising  from  the  war 
being  then  on  a  very  large  scale)  till  I7O8,  it  con- 
tinued at  a  low  range,  viz.  from  23s.  Id.  to  27s.  3d. 
The  following  is  a  notice  of  this  period,  extracted 
from  the  work  which  I  have  already  quoted  :  — 

"  1706. —  Historians  take  notice  that  about  this  time  the 
kingdom  was  blessed  with  plenty  ;  that  the  people  cheerfully 
contributed  to  the  expense  of  the  war." 

The  same  author  proceeds  to  say : 

"  1708.* — A  hard   frost,  which   brought  on   a  prodigious 


*  The  winter  of  1708-9  is  one  of  the  most  memorable  of 
any  in  the  last  century  for  severity  and  duration.   The  instances 

D    2 


3d  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

scarcity  of  provisions,  more  in  France  than  in  England.  In 
general  the  summer  was  cold  and  wet. 

"  1709.  —  The  queen,  in  her  speech  to  parliament,  complains 
of  corn  being  exported  at  such  high  prices  as  distressed  the  poor. 
Exportation  prohibited  for  one  year.  There  fell  this  year  rain  to 
the  depth  of  26^  inches.  I  think  the  mean  depth  of  rain  falling 
in  England  is  19|  inches. 

"  1710. —  Exportation  prohibited  for  one  year." 

The  eftect  of  this  variation  of  the  seasons  on 
prices  is  strikingly  exemplified  in  the  following 
quotations  :  — 


s. 

d. 

1708.  Lady-day 

-  27 

3 

Michaelmas 

-      -  46 

3 

1709.  Lady-day 

-  57 

6 

Michaelmas 

-      -  81 

9 

1710.  Lady-day      - 

-  81 

9 

Being  a  rise  of  200  per  cent,  in  two  years.  We 
were  then  indeed  at  war,  as  we  had,  however, 
been  during  the  previous  low  prices  ;  but  as  if  to 
negative  the  possibility  of  ascribing  the  rise  in  this 
instance  to  extra  demand  or  consumption  arising 
from  the  war,  it  so  happens  that  the  price  fell  again, 


of  extreme  and  prolonged  frost  were  the  subject  of  observations 
interchanged  among  all  the  scientific  societies  of  Europe.  In 
this  country,  and  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the  Continent, 
the  frost  began  in  October,  and  continued  with  few  intermis- 
sions into  a  very  advanced  period  of  the  spring.  The  summer 
following  was  cold  and  wet.  And  the  dearth  with  which  Europe 
was  visited  in  1709,  as  the  consequence  of  the  severe  winter, 
and  the  cold  and  wet  summer,  appears  to  have  been  very  severe 
and  very  general.  Dr.  Short  gives  a  detailed  account,  too  long 
for  extract,  of  this  season  ;  but  he  notices  one  circumstance, 
which  is  worth  recording,  of  the  effects  of  the  cold  backward 
spring,  following  so  severe  a  winter,  on  the  wheat  crop  :  "  Wheat 
over  the  kingdom,"  he  says,  "  was  generally  destroyed  on  the 
north-east  side  of  the  furrows."  This  is  precisely  sim.ilar  to  the 
effects  ascribed  by  Mr.  Burke,  in  his  publication  entitled 
"  Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity,"  to  the  cold  east  winds  in 
June,  1795. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  37 

in  1713,  to  33s.  9d.  Nay,  even  farther  to  prove 
how  independent  of  the  war  the  fluctuation  was, 
the  price  having  continued  at  about  30s.  the  quarter 
till  the  peace  of  Utrecht,  in  I7IS,  immediately 
after  that  event,  rose  (at  Michaelmas,  1713,)  to 
56s.  lid.  or  70  pel'  cent.  During  all  these 
fluctuations,  the  silver  coins  were  in  an  undete- 
riorated  state.  There  had  been  some  variations 
in  the  value  at  which  the  gold  passed,  but  these 
did  not  affect  prices  which  were  estimated  in 
silver. 

A  comparison  with  the  prices  in  France  may 
again  be  resorted  to,  as  showing,  by  a  coinci- 
dence of  the  fluctuations,  that  they  were  produced 
by  causes  common  to  both  countries,  and  not  by 
any  peculiarity  in  the  currency  of  this  country. 
Indeed,  whether  by  reference  to  that  comparison, 
or  by  an  inspection  of  the  difference  between  the 
Lady-day  and  Michaelmas  quotation  of  either  the 
Eton  or  the  Oxford  tables,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  but  that  there  was,  on  the  continent  of 
Europe  as  well  as  in  this  country,  a  considerable 
proportion  of  deflcient  harvests  in  the  seven  years 
ending  in  1715,  as  compared  with  the  preceding 
seven  years. 

And  taking  the  whole  period  from  1692  to 
1715,  embracing  an  interval  of  twenty-three  years, 
it  will  be  seen  that  by  direct  evidence  for  the 
greater  part,  and  by  irresistible  inference  for  the 
rest,  there  are  not  fewer  than  eleven  of  these 
twenty-three  seasons  of  more  or  less  deficient  pro- 
duce. 

It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in  the  period 
here  referred  to,  the  bounty  on  exportation  had 
been  in  full  operation,  and  that  previously  to  the 
institution  of  it,  the  growth  of  corn  had,  in  ordi- 
nary seasons,  been  such  as  afforded  some  surplus 
for  exportation.     Upon  the  occurrence,  therefore, 

D  3 


38  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  years  of  scarcity,  the  portion  of  land  cultivated 
beyond  that  which  in  ordinary  years  was  sufficient 
to  supply  our  own  ordinary  consumption,  would 
be  available  (especially  when  enforced  by  a  pro- 
hibition of  export)  in  lieu  of  what,  under  opposite 
circumstances,  would  be  the  necessity  for  an  in- 
creased importation.  So  that,  if  from  1693  to 
1715  we  had  been  in  the  habit  of  requiring  an 
annual  foreign  supply  of  corn,  the  prices  would 
have  been  higher  by  at  least  tlie  ordinary  charges 
of  importation,  and  during  the  time  of  war  by  the 
extra  charges  incidental  to  the  difference  in  ordi- 
nary wars.  But  as  it  was,  the  average  prices  of 
seven  consecutive  years  of  that  period  were  up- 
wards of  80  per  cent,  higher  than  those  of  the 
seven  years  immediately  preceding,  and  this  ob- 
viously by  the  mere  effect  of  the  seasons.  If,  then, 
to  the  prices  of  the  seven  years  ending  in  1699, 
were  added  such  extraordinary  charges  as  formed 
the  condition  of  a  foreign  sujDply  during  the  latter 
period  of  last  war,  the  average  of  those  seven  years 
would  be  much  higher  relatively  to  the  interval 
of  seven  years  ending  in  1692,  than  the  average 
from  I8O7  to  181 1,  relatively  to  the  seven  years 
ending  in  1792. 


Section  3.  —  1 715  to  I765. 

But  if  the  period  of  twenty-three  years,  ending 
m  1715,  be  remarkable  for  a  high  range  of  prices 
of  corn,  compared  with  the  period  immediately 
preceding,  there  is  still  more  ground  for  remark 
in  the  very  low  comparative  range  of  prices  observ- 
able in  the  50  years  following  1715. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  39 

The  average  of  23  years,  ending  in  1715,  is, 
by  the  Eton  tables,  45s.  8d.  ;  while  of  the  50  years 
following  1715,  it  is  34.9.  lid.  In  order  to  obviate 
any  question  as  to  the  accuracy  of  these  quotations, 
they  may  be  compared  with  those  of  the  Oxford 
tables,  which  have  been  collected  with  great  care  by 
Mr.  Lloyd  ;  and  allowing  for  the  usual  difference  of 
markets,  it  will  be  found  that  they  lead  to  the  same 
comparative  results.* 

In  this  long  interval  of  50  years,  there  appear 
to  have  been  only  five  seasons  which,  whether 
by  inference  from   prices,  or  by  historical  notice. 


*  C.  Smith,  the  author  of  the  tracts  on  the  Corn  Trade,  pub- 
lished in  1765,  bears  the  following  testimon}^  to  the  accuracy  of 
the  Windsor  prices.  Referring  to  a  speech  addressed  by  the 
Procureur-general  to  the  parliament  of  Britany  in  France,  on  the 
20th  August,  1764',  wherein  he  has  occasion  to  state  that  the 
usual  price  of  wheat  throughout  Europe  was  reckoned  to  be 
twenty  livres  the  septier,  Mr.  Smith  adds  the  following  re- 
marks :  — 

"  Equal  to  33s.  6^d.  the  London  quarter.  Now,  it  appears 
that  the  average  price  for  the  last  79  years,  viz.  1686  to  1765, 
hath  been  33^.  2-^d.  at  Windsor ;  that  is,  id.  below  the  general 
market  of  Europe :  whereas  before  for  91  years  it  was  38*.  ^d. 
that  is,  45.  6d.  above  the  said  general  price.  And  that  these 
Windsor  prices  are  more  to  be  depended  on  than  could  at  first 
be  known,  is  proved,  not  only  by  the  said  average  price  of  Eu- 
rope, but  also  by  the  average  price  at  London  from  1740  to  1764, 
being  found,  on  inquiry,  to  have  been  only  6d.  per  quarter  less  ; 
and  by  the  average  of  all  the  wheat  bought  at  the  victualling 
offices  at  London,  Dover,  Portsmouth,  and  Plymouth,  for  the  last 
20  years,  ending  February  18.  1765,  as  appears  by  an  account 
laid  before  parliament,  being  only  32^.  6ld.,  that  is,  \Qd.  above 
the  Windsor  price  for  the  same  time;  and  this  last  sum  will 
amount  to  about  2  per  cent,  discount  on  the  bills,  but  we  cannot 
well  call  it  less  than  5  per  cent.,  and  then  it  will  be  found  to 
have  been  6d.  below  the  Windsor,  and  to  agree  with  the  London 
price." 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  C.  Smith,  in  his  quotation  of  the 
W^indsor  prices  of  wheat,  from  the  Eton  tables,  makes  a  deduc- 
tion, not  only  of  one  ninth  for  the  reduction  from  the  9  gallon 
measure  to  the  Winchester  measure  of  8  gallons,  but  of  one 
ninth  more  for  the  difference  of  quality  above  middling  wlieat, 

D    4 


40  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

could  be  considered  as  of  a  marked  deficiency  of 
produce,  or  in  any  way  approaching  to  what  could 
be  designated  as  seasons  of  scarcity.  These  were 
1727  and  1728  ;    1740  ;   1756  and"' 1 757. 

It  may  be  a  question  whether  the  year  1725 
should  not  be  included  among  the  seasons  of  marked 
deficiency  inasmuch  as  the  Michaelmas  price  rose 
nearly  V2s.,  namely,  from  37 s.  to  -l-O.s.,  above  that 
of  Lady-day.  But  the  price  gave  way  in  the  spring 
following  ;  and  as  the  quantity  of  wheat  exported 
was  about  200,000  quarters,  that  of  the  preceding 
year  having  been  still  greater,  besides  about  300,000 
quarters  of  malt,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  the  advance  of  price  which  was  of  very  short 
duration,  must  have  arisen  mainly,  if  not  exclu- 
sively, from  the  demand  for  exportation. 

If  the  harvest  of  1725  is  not  to  be  considered  by 
inference  from  the  price  to  have  been  deficient, 
there  being  no  historical  notice  to  that  effect,  it 
would  appear  that  there  was  not  a  single  season  of 
marked  deficiency  of  produce  from  1715  to  I727. 

From  1727  to  1729,  was  a  period  of  some,  though 
not  of  a  severe,  degree  of  dearth.  It  is  noticed 
historically,  and  is  further  proved  by  the  circum- 
stance, that  whereas  for  thirty  years  before  1727> 
and  for  thirty  years  after  1729,  there  had  been  a 
balance  of  export  of  wheat,  there  was  in  1728  a 
balance  of  import  of  70,757  quarters,  and  in  I729 
of  21,322  quarters. 

The  price  of  wheat  which  had  been  at  Lady-day, 
1727,  32.9.  lid.  rose  at  Michaelmas  to  4fls.  9d.,  and 
at  Lady-day,  1728,  to  49^.  2rf.  Referring  to  this 
period  is  the  following  passage,  in  "An  Inquiry  on 
National  Subsistence,"  by  W.  T.  Comber  :  — 

"  We  learn  from  contemporary  authority  that  the  scarcity  was 
owing  to  much  rain  which  had  fliUen  that  year,  and  that  the 
months  of  March,  April,  May,  June,  and  part  of  August  of  the 
following  year,  were  also  rainy.     This  occasioned  wlieat  to  rise 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  41 

from  4*.  per  bushel  to  8*.  But  the  sprhig  and  summer  of  1729 
being  remarkably  dry,  the  harvest  was  abundant,  and  the  prices 
of  next  year  were  only  28*.  4c?." 

Low  as  the  prices  had  been  in  the  absence  of 
seasons  of  scarcity  from  1715  to  1727j  they  were 
still  lower  in  the  twelve  following  years,  from  17^9 
to  1740.  There  does  not  indeed  appear  to  have 
been  in  that  interval  a  single  season  in  which  either 
from  prices  or  from  historical  reference,  any  de- 
ficiency of  produce  can  be  inferred.  The  writer 
last  quoted,  observes — 

''  The  average  of  1731,  1732,  and  1733,  was  only  22s.,  in 
the  latter  of  which  years  the  amount  of  all  grain  exported  ex- 
ceeded 697,000  quarters,  of  which  427,000  were  wheat :  498,000 
quarters  of  wheat  were  exported  the  next  year,  the  price  being 
30*.  The  average  annual  exportation  of  all  grain  for  the  ten 
years  from  1731  to  1740,  inclusive,  was  527,000  quarters,  and 
of  wheat  290,000  ;  and  the  average  bounty  103,000/.  per  annum. 
The  average  price  of  this  period  was  29.?.,  but  in  the  concluding 
year  it  was  39*." 

The  great  fall  of  prices  in  1731,  1732,  and  1733, 
following  the  slight  dearth  of  I727  and  1728,  was, 
as  might  be  expected,  productive  of  great  agricul- 
tural distress.  The  following  extract  describes  it  in 
terms  which  might  be  supposed  to  have  emanated 
from  the  late  Mr.  Webb  Hall's  Committee,  or  from 
the  Agricultural  Associations  of  a  more  recent 
period  :  — 

"  The  interest  of  our  British  landholders  has  been  declinins: 
several  years  last  past ;  it  has  been  a  general  observation,  that 
rents  have  been  sinking,  and  tenants  unable  to  make  as  good 
payments  as  formerly,  even  in  counties  where  there  is  the 
greatest  circulation  of  money,  the  maritime  ones,  and  those  near 
the  capital  cities  of  the  kingdom.  As  this  is  too  well  known  to 
be  their  case,  they  deserve  the  attention  and  favour  of  our  legis- 
lature :  it  is  proper  they  should  make  a  tolerable  interest  of  their 
money,  as  well  as  adventurers  in  other  businesses,  which  few  of 
them  do,  who  have  not  enjoyed  their  bargains  twenty  years,  or 
a  longer  time,  for  lands  are  much  dearer  now.  Wheat  this  year 
and  last  never  mounted  in  some  of  the  extreme  parts  of  the  king- 
dom, to  above  three  shillings  and  eight-pence  per  Winchester  ; 
barley  is  now  sold  in  the  West  of  England  for  two  shillings  per 


42  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

Winchester  bushel.  Prices  are  often  higher  fifty  miles  round 
London  than  elsewhere,  which  induces  several  great  men  to 
think  that  countrymen  live  better  than  they  really  do.  Country 
measures  (which  are  frequently  larger  than  the  Winchester  or 
legal  bushels)  contribute  farther  to  such  mistakes.  Before  they 
can  pay  their  rents,  wheat  of  middling  goodness  ought,  I  think, 
to  sell  for  about  four  shillings  and  three-pence  per  Winchester, 
not  in  a  few  places,  but  throughout  the  kingdom  ;  barley  for 
2s.  6d.,  peas,  2s.  3d.,  and  oats  1^.  6d.  per  Winchester.  I  know 
in  former  times  less  prices  were  sufficient ;  but  as  circumstances 
alter,  the  same  thing  is  altered^:  corn  farms  (iron,  timber,  har- 
vest people,  and  servants,  being  much  dearer  than  heretofore) 
will  not  yield  sufficient  profit  to  the  occupiers  of  them,  unless 
they  can  have  such  prices,  particularly  as  cattle,  pigs,  sheep,  but- 
ter, and  cheese,  are  now  one  third  part  cheaper  than  formerly, 
and  what  is  called  a  living  price. 

"  The  flourishing  condition  of  the  landed  interest  supports 
all  trade ;  most  trades  now  (except  those  which  supply  luxury, 
those  of  gold  and  silversmiths,  lacemen,  vintners,  painters, 
dealers  in  silks,  velvets,  and  high  priced  cloths,)  are  in  apparent 
decay ;  which  is  not  only  proved  by  the  general  declarations  of 
tradesmen,  but  by  too  many  instances  of  bankruptcy  amongst 
them.  I  wish  I  could  say  the  present  times  are  not  the  worst. 
Our  exports  are,  perhaps,  as  great  as  formerly ;  whence,  then, 
all  this  complaint  ?  Our  farmers  are  worse  customers  than  for- 
merly ;  necessity  has  compelled  them  to  more  carefulness  and 
frugality  in  laying  out  their  money,  than  they  were  accustomed 
to  do  in  better  times."  (The  Landholder's  Companion,  or 
Ways  and  Means  to  raise  the  Value  of  Land,  by  William  Allen, 
Esq.  of  Fobstone,  in  Pembrokeshire,  1734-.) 

As  further  proofs  of  the  complaints  of  distress, 
and  of  rents  ill  paid,  as  attending  the  low  prices  of 
corn,  are  the  following  extracts.  In  a  publication 
by  the  elder  Lord  Lyttleton,  "  Considerations  on 
the  Present  State  of  Affairs"  (1738),  he  says,  "  In 
most  parts  of  England,  gentlemen's  rents  are  so 
ill  paid,  and  the  weight  of  taxes  lies  so  heavy  on 
them,  that  those  who  have  nothing  from  the  court 
can  scarce  support  tlieir  famihes."  And  Arthur 
Young  quotes  a  writer  who,  in  1739,  speaks  of 
the  landholder  as  being  in  so  bad  a  state,  that  he 
asks,  "  What  must  have  become  of  them  if  it  had 
not  been  for  a  demand  from  abroad  ? "  (Farmer 
Restored,  p.  14.) 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  43 

The  winter  of  1739-40  was  one  of  extraordinary 
severity  and  duration.  It  forms  one  of  the  three 
most  memorable  winters  of  last  century,  the  other 
two  being  those  of  I7O8-9,  and  1794-5.  A  great 
number  of  interesting  details  of  the  phenomena 
attending  it  are  recorded  in  contemporary  publi- 
cations. As  in  tlie  case  of  the  other  two  remark- 
ably severe  and  long  winters,  it  was  followed  by 
a  very  deficient  harvest.  The  price  consequently, 
which  had  been  in  the  Windsor  market  at  Lady- 
day,  1739,  Sis.  5d.,  rose  at  Lady-day  following, 
1740,  to  41^.  9d.,  and  at  Michaelmas  to  56s.* 
This,  and  a  corresponding  high  price  of  other 
provisions,  was  felt  after  so  long  a  period  of  cheap- 
ness as  one  of  great  dearth.  The  exportation  was 
prohibited  for  one  year.  This  prohibition  of  export, 
combined  with  a  favourable  harvest  in  the  following 
year,  had  the  effect  of  reducing  the  price  at  Michael- 
mas, 1741,  to  32s.  The  dearth  in  this  instance,  ac- 
cordingly, was  confined  to  a  single  year  ;  and  it 
was  followed  by  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  ten 
good  and  abundant  seasons  ;  namely,  from  I7II  to 
1751. 

The  testimony  to  this  effect  rests  on  unexcep- 
tionable authority.  The  author  of  the  celebrated 
Corn  Tracts  t,  who  is  often  quoted  by  Dr.  Adam 
Smith,  and  who  has  furnished  materials  and  ficts 
for  the  great  bulk  of  succeeding  writers  on  the 
subject  of  corn,  expressly  says  (page  20.  2d  ed.), 
"  We  had  ten  as  good  years  as  ever  were  known  in 
succession,  from  1741  to  1751."  t 

*  The  price  in  the  Oxford  market,  at  Michaehiias,  1710,  was 
595. ;  at  Michaehnas,  1738,  it  had  been  20^.  2c?. ;  the  rise,  there- 
fore, upon  the  latter  price  was  nearly  200  per  cent. 

t  These  (of  which  the  first  edition  appeared  in  175S)  were 
published  anonymously,  but  have  been  generally  ascribed  to  Mr. 
Charles  Smith. 

X  In  a  paper  presented  to  the  Royal  Society  in  1786,  on  the 
variations  of  the  seasons,  by  Mr.  Barker  of  Lyndon,  referring  to 


44j  effect  of  the  seasons. 

In  addition  to  this  testimony  as  to  the  general 
character  attaching  to  the  term  from  1741  to  1751, 
I  have  met  with  casual  descriptions  of  particular 
years  ;  and  the  following  extracts  from  the  letters 
of  Mr.  Peter  Colhnson*,  a  celebrated  botanist,  to 
Linnaeus,  containing  those  descriptions,  may  not 
be  uninteresting,  at  the  same  time  that  they  will 
tend  to  form  something  like  a  standard  of  what 
may  be  considered  as  a  fine  season,  to  which  to 
refer  a  comparison  of  the  seasons  of  more  recent 
occurrence,  as  well  as  of  those  from  1793  to 
1813. 

"  London,  Jan.  18.  1743.  O.  S. 

"  We  have  now  a  wonderful  fine  season,  that  makes  our  spring 
flowers  come  forth.  I  am  sure  you  would  be  deHghted  to  see 
my  windows  filled  with  six  pots  of  flowers,  which  the  gardener 
has  sent  me  to  town  t,  viz.  great  plenty  of  aconites,  white  and 
green  hellebore,  double  hepatica,  crocus,  polyanthus,  periwinkle, 
laui'istinus,  vernal  red  cyclamen,  single  anemonies,  and  snow- 
drops. None  of  these  were  brought  forward  by  any  art,  but 
entirely  owing  to  the  temperature  of  the  season,  though  some 
seasons  I  have  known  things  forwai'der  than  now." 

"  London,  Oct.  26.  174.?,  O.  S. 

"  My  garden  is  in  great  beauty,  for  we  have  had  no  frost ; 
a  long,  dry,  warm  summer,  and  autumn  grapes  very  ripe. 

"  The  vineyards  turn  to  good  profit,  much  wine  being  made 
this  year  in  England." 

"  London,  Oct.  3.  1748,  O.  S. 

"  We  have  had  a  fine  summer.  Great  plenty  of  all  sorts  of 
fruits  and  grain,  and  a  very  delightful  autumn.  It  is  now  as  warm 
as  summer  ;  no  bearing  of  fires.  My  orange  trees  are  yet  abroad. 
My  vineyard  grapes  are  very  ripe  ;  a  considerable  quantity  of 
wine  will  this  year  be  made  in  England.  We  have  not  had  one 
frosty  morning  this  autumn.     Marvel  of  Peru,  double-flowered 


these  ten  years,  the  writer  says  of  them,  that  they  were  neither 
very  wet  nor  very  dry  ;  and  adds,  "  This  was  the  most  plentiful 
and  cheapest  time  for  corn  I  ever  remember." 

*  A  selection  of  the  correspondence  of  Linnaeus  and  other 
Naturalists,  by  Sir  Jas.  Edw.  Smith,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  &c.   1821. 

t  Mr.  Collinson's  country  house  was  at  Mill  Hill,  in  Middle- 
sex. ■* 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  45 

nasturtium,  and  all  other  annuals  are  not  touched.     My  garden 
makes  a  fine  show." 

"  May  8.  174-9. 

"  How  the  wmter  has  been  in  Sweden  I  do  not  know,  but  at 
London  the  like  warmth  and  mildness  were  never  remembered. 
Our  autumn  was  long,  warm,  and  dry,  with  a  few  slight  frosts 
before  Christmas  ;  but  we  have  had  since  fine,  warm,  dry  wea- 
ther, and  no  frosts  or  snow.  Our  gardens  were  in  great  beauty 
in  January  and  February  :  almonds,  apricots,  and  peaches  in 
blossom.  Feb.  23.  I  went  into  the  country.  The  elm  hedges  had 
small  leaves  ;  standard  plums,  almonds,  and  crocuses  in  full  blos- 
som ;  gooseberries  showing  their  fruit.  In  short,  it  would  be 
endless  to  talk  to  you  of  the  wonders  of  this  season.  March  5. 
The  fig  in  my  London  garden  had  small  leaves  when  peas  and 
beans  under  south  walls  were  in  blossom." 

The  exuberant  abundance,  resulting  from  sea- 
sons of  which  these  letters  afford  a  few  specimens, 
is  moreover  referred  to  in  several  pamphlets,  to 
which  the  dearths  of  1756  and  1757*  and  of  some 
subsequent  periods  gave  rise.  But  the  most  un- 
equivocal proof  of  the  exuberance  of  the  produce 
of  such  a  succession  of  plentiful  seasons,  is  afforded 
by  a  reference  to  the  exportations  of  grain  in  the 
concluding  years  of  that  series.* 

Years.                  Wheat.  Barley,  Malt,  and  Rye.  Total. 

174<8  54<3,387             530,830  1,074,267 

1749  629,049             515,684  1,144,733 

1750  947,602             658,588  1,606,190 


*  With  reference  to  the  ten  years  from  1741  to  1750,  Dr.  Adam 
Smith,  after  describing  them  as  years  of  extraordinary  plenty, 
and  as  attended  with  a  remarkably  low  price,  proceeds  to  ob- 
serve, "  Between  1741  and  1750,  however,  tlie  bounty  must  have 
hindered  the  price  of  corn  from  falling  so  low  in  the  home  market 
as  it  naturally  would  have  done.  During  these  ten  years  the  quan- 
tity of  grain  of  all  sorts  exported,  it  appears  from  the  Custom 
House  books,  amounted  to  no  less  than  8,029,156  quarters.  The 
bounty  paid  for  this  amounted  to  1,514,962^.  17^.  4^(^.  In  1749, 
Mr.  Pelham,  at  that  time  prime  minister,  observed  to  the  House 
of  Commons,  that  for  the  three  years  preceding,  a  very  extraordi- 
nai'y  sum  had  been  paid  as  bounty  for  the  exportation  of  corn.  He 
had  good  reason  to  make  this  observation ;  and  in  the  following 
year  he  might  have  had  still  better.  In  that  single  year  the 
bounty  paid  amounted  to  no  less  than  324,176^.  10*.  6d.  It  is 
unnecessary  to  observe  how  much  this  forced  exportation  must 


46  EFFECT    OF    T^E    SEASONS. 

From  what  the  author  of  the  Corn  Tracts  states, 
the  seasons  from  1752  to  1755  seem  to  liave  been 
of  doubtful  produce  ;  for  his  words  are,  after  men- 
tioning the  ten  good  years  in  succession,  "  Nay,  if 
tlie  common  opinion  is  right,  we  have  had  six- 
teen." But  we  may  conchide,  that  if  not  de- 
cidedly abundant,  they  were  not  deficient  in  any 
considerable  degree ;  for  there  was  a  large  export 
in  some  of  those  years,  a  great  want  of  corn  being 
experienced  in  the  south  of  Europe  in  that  interval, 
and  the  prices  at  home  were  not  raised  very  mate- 
rially by  that  export. 

I  have  been  induced  to  trespass  on  the  patience 
of  my  readers  with  so  long  a  detail  of  the  seasons 
in  the  interval  from  1730  to  1755,  because  they 
present  a  series  of  twenty-six  years,  with  the  inter- 
have  raised  the  price  of  corn  above  what  it  otherwise  would 
have  been  in  the  home  market."T—  Wealth  of  Nations,  vol.i.  ch.  11. 
Agreeing  as  I  do  with  Dr.  Smith  in  his  objection  to  the  bounty 
as  a  measure  of  legislation,  I  must  be  allowed  to  differ  from  him 
in  the  opinion  which  he  expresses  of  its  operation  in  the  present 
instance.  As  the  price  of  wheat  was  falling  coincidently  with 
the  enormous  exportation  of  the  three  concluding  years  of  the 
series,  viz. 

In  174-8         -     32s. 

1749  -     325. 

1750  -  28*. 
And  as  the  very  low  price  of  this  last  year  (being,  moreover,' 
low  as  it  was,  for  a  quality  better  than  middling,)  coincided  with 
the  largest  exportation  of  the  whole  period,  it  is  difficult  to  con- 
ceive how  it  could  be  said  to  havt  raised  the  price.  The  utmost 
that  can  be  said  by  the  objectors  to  the  bounty,  of  its  operation 
in  this  instance  is,  that  it  may  have  prevented  the  price  from 
falling  so  much  as  it  might  otherwise  have  done.  But  the  ad- 
vocates for  that  measure  might  contend,  and  with  apparent 
reason,  that  but  for  the  relief  afforded  by  the  bounty  to  the 
growers  they  must  have  reduced  the  cultivation,  and  thus  have 
raised  the  price.  In  truth,  the  operation  of  the  bounty  appears 
to  have  been  during  this  intei'val  rather  that  of  counteracting 
the  discouragement  to  cultivation  from  prices  so  very  low  as 
those  which  were  the  effect  of  a  series  of  plentiful  years  than  of 
raising  the  price,  and  of  thus,  according  to  the  received  notion, 
inducing  a  resort  to  fresh  land  at  an  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction. 


lOlrf. 

per 

■  quarter. 

lO^d. 

do. 

10|rf. 

do. 

EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


47 


vention  of  only  one  of  a  decidedly  unfavourable 
character,  viz.  the  winter  of  1739  and  17^0,  followed 
by  a  bad  harvest ;  and  because  the  inferences  from 
the  fact  are  of  importance  as  to  the  probable  or 
possible  eifect  of  such  a  succession  of  favourable 
seasons  on  prices,  independent  of  any  alteration  in 
the  currency  or  in  the  financial  measures  of  the 
government,  and  independent  likewise  of  transi- 
tions from  war  to  peace. 

The  degree  of  cheapness  resulting  from  a  suc- 
cession of  good  seasons,  or  of  seasons  unmarked 
by  the  intervention  of  any  one  of  great  deficiency, 
is  so  curious  as  to  be  worth  exhibiting  more  in 
detail  than  is  usually  done,  as  the  tables  containing 
average  prices  are  generally  confined  to  the  quo- 
tations of  wheat,  and  do  not  give  the  whole  range 
of  variations  even  of  that  single  article.  The  fol- 
lowing are  the  quotations  of  prices  at  Mark-lane  and 
Bear-quay,  for  fifteen  years,  and  they  afford  a  con- 
firmation in  detail  of  the  greatest  depression  having 
occurred  during  a  period  of  war  attended  by  a  very 
large  government  expenditure  defrayed  by  loans  :  — 

January  Prices  of  grain  at  Mark-lane  and  Bear-quay,  extracted 
from  the  Appendix  to  Sir  Frederick  Morton  Eden's  work 
(page  80.). 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley. 

Oats. 

S. 

s. 

S.            S. 

.$.      S. 

fl742 

26 

to  29 

15  to  20 

12  to  15 

1743 

20 

23 

15    20 

13    16 

1744 

19 

21 

11    13 

9    12 

War.  <(  1745 

18 

20 

12    15 

12    16 

1746 

16 

24 

10    12 

12    14 

1747 

27 

30 

8    12 

6  9^/. 

1748 

26 

28 

13    14 

9    12 

'  1749 

27 

32 

17    18 

14    16 

1750 

24 

29 

14    17 

12    14 

1751 

24 

27 

14    17 

13    14 

1752 

33 

34 

17    19 

12  6d.   16 

1753 

29 

33 

17    18 

10  6d.  12 

1754 

27 

33 

17    19 

12  6d.  13 

.y        ri755 

24 

26 

12    14 

10    13 

war.  < 

1756 

22 

26 

14    15 

12    13 

48  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

And  the  average  price  by  the  Eton  tables  for 
wheat  of  better  than  average  quahty,  for  the  ten 
years  from  1742  to  1751,  was  29.s'.  S^^. 

The  harvest  of  1756  proved  greatly  deficient, 
as  well  in  this  country,  as  through  the  greater  part 
of  Europe.  In  Smith's  Corn  Tracts  is  the  follow- 
ing description  of  it :  — 

"  The  last  season  of  1756  from  its  beginning  was  extremely 
unfavourable;  thousands  of  acres  remained  unsown,  and  the  bad 
condition  in  which  many  more  were  sown  rendered  them  incapable 
of  producing  a  good  crop,  although  favourable  weather  had  fol- 
lowed. It  is  certain  that  the  weather,  during  the  spring,  sum- 
mer, and  harvest,  was  generally  unfavourable  ;  great  quantities 
of  grain  perished  by  the  rains  and  winds,  and  most  of  what 
remained  proved  defective,  both  in  quantity  and  substance,  by 
its  not  duly  ripening. 

The  scarcity  thence  arising  was  attended  with 
a  very  considerable  advance  of  price,  and  with 
severe  suffering  among  the  lower  classes,  which  is 
thus  noticed  in  the  work  before  quoted :  — - 

"  1756.  Many  insurrections  in  England,  on  account  of  the 
scarcity  of  corn,  and  the  high  prices  of  provisions.  The  king 
expresses  to  the  parliament  his  concern  for  the  sufferings  of  the 
poor,  and  the  disturbances  to  which  they  have  given  rise  ;  and 
exhorts  them  to  consider  of  proper  measures  to  prevent  the  like 
mischiefs  hereafter.  The  exportation  of  corn  prohibited  from 
Christmas." 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  break  the  course  of 
this  description  of  the  seasons,  in  order  to  show 
the  prodigious  eflfect  on  price  of  one  season  of  de- 
cided scarcity,  when,  from  previous  exportation  or 
scanty  crops,  there  was  no  considerable  old  stock. 
The  quotations  of  wheat  in  Mark-lane,  in  1756, 
before  the  deficiency  of  the  harvest  of  that  year  had 
been  ascertained,  were  Q2s.  to  26.9. 

In  January,  1757,  the  price  rose  to    -  ^Q.?.  to  50s. 

February       -             -             -         -  47*.       51*. 

March         .             -            -             .  46*.       54s. 

April      -             -             -                  - .  64*. 

May         -             ....  64*. 

June              -                -                  -  67*.      72*. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  49 

The  harvest  of  1757  appears  to  have  been  de- 
ficient, although  not  in  the  same  degree.  It  is 
probable,  from  the  subjoined  extract  of  Colhnson's 
letters,  that  the  extreme  heat  of  the  summer  of 
1757  may  have  rendered  the  crops  hght. 

"  December  25  and  27.  1757. 

*'  The  extraordinary  heat  of  our  summer  has  ripened  all  sorts 
of  fruit  to  perfection.  In  two  gardens  I  saw  this  year  pomegra- 
nates against  south  walls,  without  any  art,  ripened  beyond  what 
can  be  imagined  in  so  northern  a  climate  ;  they  look  extremely 
beautiful,  and  are  of  the  size  of  some  brought  from  abroad.  Our 
autumn  has  been  long,  dry,  and  warm,  and  so  continues  ;  for  a 
few  slight  frosts  have  not  stripped  the  garden  of  flowers  at  Christ- 
mas-day. The  winter  season  has  not  closed  before  the  spring 
flowers  begin  ;  for  there  are  plenty  of  polyanthus,  narcissus, 
pansies,  and  sweet  violets,"  &c. 

The  six  succeeding  seasons,  viz.  from  1758  to 

1763,  both  years  inchided,  seem  to  have  been 
favourable :  the  particular  character  of  some  of 
them  is  noticed  in  CoUinson's  letters. 

'<  July  25.  1759. 

"  We  had  the  mildest  winter  ever  known.     Our  spring  was 

early  and  very  agreeable,  and  our  summer  the  finest  and  warmest 

since  1750.     Great  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  grain  and  fruits.     New 

wheat,  of  this  year's  produce,  has  been  the  21st  inst.  at  market." 

"  London,  Sept.  2.  1762. 

"  We  have  had  a  delightful  warm  summer ;  all  the  fruits  of 
the  earth  very  good  and  in  great  plenty." 

The  season  of  1763  is  thus  noticed  by  Collin- 
son  :  — 

"  London,  Sept.  15.  1763. 
"  Almost  every  day  rain  since  the  middle  of  July  ;  the  spring 
and  summer  very  dry  to  that  time.     Very  great  plenty  of  grass, 
and  all  sorts  of  corn,  but  the  weather  unkindly  for  the  harvest." 

Of  the  succeeding  season  I  find  no  direct  notice 
by  Collinson.     As   the  price  rose  at  Michaelmas, 

1764,  to  44.9.  5f/.,  a  high  price  at  that  time,  the 
harvest  of  that  year  may  be  suspected  to  have  been 
unfavourable ;  at  the   same  time,   as  there  was  a 


50  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

large  export,  it  is  possible  that  the  advanced  price 
may  in  some  measure  have  been  occasioned  by  an 
unusual  demand  for  corn  abroad.* 

Mr.  Collinson  gives  the  following  description  of 
the  season  of  I765  :  — 

"  London,  September  17.  1765. 

"  You,  my  dear  friend,  surprise  me  with  telling  me  of  your 
cold  and  wet  summer ;  whereas  our  summer  has  been  as  much 
in  the  extreme  the  other  way.  For  all  May,  June,  and  July  were 
excessively  hot  and  dry  ;  but  six  or  seven  rainy  days  in  three 
months,  so  that  all  our  grass  fields  look  like  the  sun-burnt  coun- 
tries of  Spain  and  Africa.  The  beginning  of  August  we  had  some 
fine  rains,  but  they  did  not  recover  our  usual  verdure ;  since  to 
the  present  writing,  hot  and  dry  weather,  not  a  drop  of  rain  for 
fourteen  days.  Our  hay  is  very  short,  and  oats  and  barley  a  mid- 
dling crop ;  but  of  wheat,  which  we  most  wanted,  good  Provi- 
dence has  favoured  us  with  a  plentiful  crop  and  a  good  harvest, 
which  began  two  weeks  sooner  than  in  common  years," 

After  this  fine,  though  not  very  productive  season, 
there  was  a  series  of  nearly  ten  years,  marked  by  a 
very  frequent  recurrence  of  unpropitious  seasons  : 
and  as  henceforward  a  new  epoch  commenced  in 
the  corn  trade  of  this  country,  characterised  by  a 
range  of  relatively  high  prices,  and  accompanied  by 

*  In  the  chronological  table  of  prices,  and  of  the  events  con- 
nected with  them,  in  the  work  before  referred  to,  is  the  following 
passage :  —  "  1764'.  The  king  reminds  his  parliament  of  the  high 
prices  of  corn,  occasioned  by  the  exportation  of  it.  The  parlia- 
ment finds  the  price  of  beef  to  be  3d.  per  lb.  to  the  vendor.  Beef, 
mutton,  and  veal,  at  Exeter,  4f/.  to  'l^d.'' 

N.  B.  In  the  same  work,  under  the  date  1724,  beef,  mutton, 
veal,  and  pork,  are  stated  to  have  been  at  Ifd.  per  lb.  at  Exeter. 

The  exportations  in  the  six  years  following  1758,  were  con- 
siderable, although  they  exhibit  a  decided  falling  off,  as  com- 
pared with  the  ten  years  ending  in  1750. 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Other  Grain. 

1759 

226,426  qrs. 

233,556  qrs. 

1760 

390,710 

313,903 

1761 

440,746 

437,359 

1762 

294,500 

415,081 

1763 

427,074 

218,482 

1764 

396,537 

261,231 

EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  51 

a  change  from  a  balance  of  export  to  a  balance  of 
import  of  grain,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  pause 
here  for  the  purpose  of  considering  some  of  the 
phenomena  presented  by  the  period  ending  in 
1765. 

All  the  writers  who  have  turned  their  attention 
to  the  subject  of  the  prices  of  corn,  have  been 
struck  with  the  circumstance  of  the  cheapness  of 
the  period  from  I7OO  to  1760*,  but  more  espe- 
cially in  the  interval  between  I715  and  17(J5, 
compared  with  the  average  price  of  the  preceding 
century,  and  have  endeavoured  variously  to  account 
for  that  circumstance.  The  pamphlets  with  which 
the  press  teemed,  upon  the  change  from  low  to 
high  prices,  referred  all  the  phenomena  of  the 
fluctuation,  according  as  it  suited  the  views  of  the 
writers,  to  the  operation  of  the  bounty  on  export- 
ation. The  question  respecting  the  effects  of  the 
bounty  seems,  indeed,  to  have  given  rise  to  almost 
as  much  controversy  at  that  time  as  the  question 
of  the  effects  of  the  bank  restriction  has  since 
done. 

The  advocates  for  the  boimty  contended,  that 
the  cheapness  of  corn  was  wholly  attributable  to 
that  measure,  while,  upon  every  occurrence  of  a 
season  of  dearth,  the  scarcity  and  consequent  high 
price  was  by  the    adversaries  of  the  bounty  re- 

*  "  In  the  sixty-four  first  years  of  the  present  century,  the 
avei'age  price  of  the  quarter  of  nine  bushels  of  the  best  wheat, 
at  Windsor  market,  appear  by  the  accounts  of  Eton  College  to 
have  been  21.  Os.  QYld,,  which  is  about  ten  shillings  and  sixpence, 
or  more  than  five  and  twenty  per  cent,  cheaper  than  it  had  been 
during  the  sixteen  years  preceding  1636  ;  when  the  discovery  of 
the  abundant  mines  of  America  may  be  supposed  to  have  pro- 
duced its  full  effect,  and  about  one  shilling  cheaper  than  it  had 
been  in  the  twenty-six  years  preceding  1620,  before  that  dis- 
covery can  be  supposed  to  have  produced  its  full  effect.  Accord- 
ing to  this  account,  the  average  price  of  middle  wheat  comes 
out  to  have  been  about  thirty-two  shillings  the  quarter  of  eight 
bushels." —  Wealth  of  Nations,  vol.  i.  chap.  xi. 

E   2 


52  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

ferred  to  the  excess  of  exportation  which  had  been 
thus  artificially  encouraged. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  upon  a  discussion 
of  the  principle  and  policy  of  the  bounty  on  the 
exportation  of  corn  ;  I  have  only  the  following 
short  remarks  to  make  upon  it,  as  connected  with 
its  effects  on  prices  between  1715  and  IjGS. 

For  the  reasons  already  given  a  few  pages  back, 
while  there  appear  to  be  no  sufficient  grounds  for 
the  opinion  of  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  that  the  bounty 
had  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  in  that  interval 
there  seems  to  be  as  little  ground  for  ascribing  to 
that  measure  such  encouragement  to  an  extension 
of  cultivation,  as  to  have  had  the  effect  of  sensibly 
reducing  the  price.  But  there  is  a  further  diffi- 
culty in  ascribing  to  the  bounty  the  remarkable 
cheapness  of  that  period,  compared  with  the  period 
immediately  preceding,  or  succeeding,  and  that  is, 
that  a  similar  degree  of  relative  cheapness  prevailed 
in  France,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  state- 
ment, extracted  from  the  Marquis  Garnier's  trans- 
lation of  Smith's  "  Wealth  of  Nations.'* 

Prices  of  the  Septier  of  Wheat  in  France,  Paris  Measure  :  — 


Years. 

Francs. 

Cents. 

1706  to 

1715 

29 

5 

1716 

1725 

17 

1 

1726 

1735 

15 

46 

1736 

1745 

18 

80 

1756 

1765 

17 

64 

1766 

1775 

28 

5 

This  degree  of  cheapness,  be  it  observed,  took 
place  under  a  system  of  corn  laws,  the  very  reverse 
of  that  which  prevailed  in  this  country,  the  export- 
ation thence  being  absolutely  prohibited.  Accord- 
ingly, while  the  low  prices  in  this  country  were, 
by  the  advocates  for  the  bounty,  ascribed  to  our 
encouragement  of  exportation,  a  similar  depression 
of  prices  in  France  was,  by  most  French  writers. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  53 

attributed  to  the  discouragement  of  exportation, 
and  to  the  occasional  encouragement  of  import- 
ation. So  stroHg  was  the  impression  there  that 
the  low  prices  were  occasioned  by  the  restrictive 
regulations  which  prohibited,  not  only  the  export- 
ation to  foreign  countries,  but  the  free  circulation 
from  province  to  province,  that  in  1763  the  go- 
vernment of  France  was  induced  to  issue  a  de- 
claration, allowing  the  free  circulation  of  grain  in 
the  interior,  and  an  edict  in  the  following  year 
granting  a  general  liberty  of  export  as  well  as  of 
import,  subject  only  to  modification  as  to  the  price 
at  which  the  export  was  to  cease,  viz.  12  livres 
10  sous  the, quintal,  equal  to  about  485.  the  Win- 
chester quarter.  It  might  fairly  then  be  asked, 
wdiether  effects  so  exactly  similar  in  the  two  coun- 
tries can  with  any  appearance  of  truth  be  ascribed 
to  systems  so  exactly  opposite. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith  has  a  remark  to  the  same  effect 
in  the  following  passage  :  — 

"  In  France,  till  1764-,  the  exportation  of  grain  was  by  law  pro- 
hibited; and  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  suppose,  that  nearly  the 
same  diminution  of  price  which  took  place  in  one  country,  not- 
withstanding this  prohibition,  should  in  another  be  owing  to  the 
extraordinary  encouragement  given  to  exportation."  —  Vol.  i. 
chap.  xi. 

There  is  reason  to  believe,  that  in  France  the 
same  prevalence  of  favourable  seasons,  or  rather, 
the  comparative  exemption  from  years  of  dearth, 
was  experienced,  although  with  some  considerable 
exceptions,  during  the  fifty  years  which  are  marked 
by  such  relative  cheapness. 

On  the  prevalence  of  a  general  similarity  of  sea- 
sons, allowing  for  differences  of  climate  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe  within  a  certain  latitude,  are 
the  following  remarks,  in  the  justness  of  which  I 
concur,  in  a  work  entitled,  "  On  the  Present  State 
of  England,"  by  J.  Lowe.    1823. 

"  The  public,  particularly  the  untravelled  part  of  the  public,  are 

E   3 


54  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

hardly  aware  of  the  similarity  of  temperature  prevailing  through- 
out what  may  be  called  the  corn  country  of  Europe,  we  mean 
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  the  north  of  France,  the  Netherlands, 
Denmark,  the  north-west  of  Germany,  and,  in  some  measure, 
Poland,  and  the  north-east  of  Germany.  All  this  tract  is  situated 
between  the  45th  and  55th  degrees  of  latitude,  and  subject,  in 
a  considerable  degree,  to  the  prevalence  of  similar  winds.  Nei- 
ther the  superabundance  of  rain  which  we  experience  in  one 
summer,  or  its  deficiency  in  another,  are  by  any  means  confined 
to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland;  while  in  winter  both  the  intensity 
and  duration  of  frost  are  always  greater  on  the  continent.  Ex- 
ceptions certainly  exist  in  particular  tracts  ;  but  in  support  of 
our  general  argument,  we  have  merely  to  recall  to  those  of  our 
readers  who  are  of  an  age  to  recollect  the  early  part  of  the  war, 
or  who  have  attended  to  registers  of  temperature,  the  more 
remarkable  seasons  of  the  present  age:  thus,  in  ITOl-,  the  spring 
was  prematurely  warm  on  the  continent,  as  in  England :  there, 
as  with  us,  the  summer  of  1798  was  dry,  and  that  of  1799  wet : 
again,  in  1811  the  harvest  was  deficient  throughout  the  north- 
west of  Europe  generally,  from  one  and  the  same  cause,  blight ; 
while  that  of  1816  was  still  more  generally  deficient,  from  rain 
and  want  of  warmth.  In  regard  to  a  more  remote  period,  we 
mean  the  17th  and  18th  centuries  generally,  if  the  temperature 
has  not  been  so  accurately  noted,  we  find,  from  the  coincidence 
in  prices,  that  it  is  highly  probable  that  there  prevailed  a  great 
similarity  in  the  weather  of  the  continent;  thus,  in  France,  the 
latter  years  of  the  17th  century,  the  seasons  of  1708  and  1709, 
as  well  as  several  of  the  seasons  between  1764'  and  1773,  were 
as  unpropitious,  and  attended  with  as  great  an  advance  of 
price,  as  in  England."     (Page  149) 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  at- 
tending the  state  of  things  here  described  is,  that 
while  the  price  of  corn  had  fallen  so  considerably, 
as  we  have  seen,  on  a  comparison  with  the  preced- 
ing century,  the  price  of  labour  in  this  country  had 
risen. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  referring  to  this  period,  ob- 
serves :  — 

"  The  money  price  of  labour  in  Great  Britain  has  risen 
during  the  present  century.  This,  however,  seems  to  be  the 
effect,  not  so  much  of  any  diminution  in  the  value  of  silver 
in  the  European  market,  as  of  an  increase  in  the  demand  for 
labour  in  Great  Britain,  arising  from  the  great,  and  almost  uni- 
versal, prosperity  of  the  country.  In  France,  a  country  not 
altogether  so  prosperous,  the  money  price  of  labour  has,  since 
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  been  observed  to  sink  gradually 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  55 

with  the  average  money  price  of  corn.  Botli  in  the  last  century 
and  the  present,  the  day  wages  of  common  labour  are  said  to 
have  been  pretty  uniformly  about  the  twentieth  part  of  the  aver- 
age price  of  the  septier  of  wheat,  a  measure  which  contains  a 
little  more  than  four  Winchester  bushels.  In  Great  Britain, 
the  real  recompense  of  labour,  it  has  already  been  shown 
the  real  quantities  of  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life 
which  are  given  to  the  labourer,  has  increased  considerably  dur- 
ing the  course  of  the  present  century.  The  rise  in  its  money 
price  seems  to  have  been  the  effect,  not  of  any  diminution  of  the 
value  of  silver  in  the  general  market  of  Europe,  but  of  a  rise  in 
the  real  price  of  labour  in  the  particular  market  of  Great  Britain, 
owing  to  the  peculiarly  happy  circumstances  of  the  country."  — 
Wealth  of  Nations,  vol.  i.  chap.  xi. 

According  to  Arthur  Young,  the  average  price 
of  wheat  was,  for  the  Avhole  of  the  17th  century, 
SSs.  '■2d.  per  Winchester  quarter ;  and  for  the  QQ 
years  from  I7OI  to  17 66,  326'.  1^/.,  being  a  fill  of 
16  per  cent ;  w^hile  the  price  of  agricultural  labour, 
which,  on  the  average  of  the  17th  century  had 
been  10\d.  per  day,  was,  for  66  years  ending  in 
1766,  12c?.,  or  a  rise  of  16  per  cent. 

The  fact,  indeed,  of  a  rise  of  money  wages  in 
this  country,  coincidently  with  a  fall  in  the  price 
of  corn  during  the  long  interval  in  question,  rests 
on  unquestionable  authorities. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  passage  quoted,  con- 
siders the  advance  in  the  rate  of  wages  as  the  con- 
sequence of  an  increased  demand  for  labour,  and  the 
decline  in  the  price  of  corn  as  a  consequence  of 
an  increased  value  of  silver.  The  utmost  effect  of 
the  supplies  of  gold  and  silver  since  the  discovery 
of  the  American  mines  had,  in  his  opinion,  (found- 
ed, as  it  should  seem,  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  on 
the  price  of  corn,)  been  felt  somewhat  before  the 
middle  of  the  17th  century.  The  Marquis  Garnier, 
likewise,  taking  wheat  for  long  periods  as  the 
measure  for  estimating  the  value  of  silver,  came 
to  the  conclusion,  that  the  utmost  depreciation 
of  it  by  the  American  mines  had  been  produced 
about  1689  ;  and   he  and   other   French  writers, 

E    i 


56  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

who  had  made  great  researches  on  the  subject, 
seem  disposed  to  concur  in  the  opinion  enter- 
tained by  Adam  Smith,  that,  considering  the  price 
of  wheat  for  a  series  of  years  of  some  length  as  the 
best  measure  of  value,  a  rise  in  the  value  of  silver 
was  to  be  inferred  by  the  fall  in  the  price  of  wheat 
during  the  first  65  years  of  the  last  century.  But 
without  going  into  the  general  question  of  a  mea- 
sure of  value,  or  of  the  connection  between  the 
price  of  corn  and  the  price  of  labour,  it  may  now 
be,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  considered  as  a  conceded 
point,  although  still  not  without  difficulty,  that  the 
money  price  of  common  day  labour  is  a  better  cri- 
terion than  corn,  of  the  value  of  the  precious  metals. 

According  to  this  criterion,  combined  with  the 
circumstance  that  many  other  important  articles  of 
consumption  besides  corn  had  risen,  tliere  can  be 
little  hesitation  in  coming  to  the  conclusion,  that 
the  value  of  the  precious  metals  was  undergoing 
some  depreciation  through  the  whole  of  the  65 
years  of  last  century,  during  which  there  had  been 
so  marked  a  fall  in  the  price  of  provisions.  And 
the  fall  and  the  low  range  of  the  price  of  corn,  wiiile 
money  was  undergoing,  however  slowly,  a  depreci- 
ation, prove  how  powerful  must  have  been  the 
depressing  circumstances  operating  upon  the  price 
of  corn,  to  be  sufficient,  not  only  to  prevent  a  rise 
corresponding  with  the  diminished  value  of  silver, 
but  to  cause  a  tendency  in  an  opposite  direction. 
The  tendency  to  a  decline  of  prices  through  so 
large  a  portion  of  last  century  occurred  too,  not- 
withstanding an  increase,  although  slow,  of  the 
population,  and  a  change  which  was  in  progress  to 
the  use  of  a  higher  diet. 

That  this  cheapness  of  corn  was  not  owing  to  any 
decline  or  decay  of  trade,  as  might  be  inferred 
according  to  the  doctrine  which  ascribes  the  varia- 
tions of  price  to  demand,  might  easily  be  shown  by 
reference  to  the  fact  that,  with  the  exception  of  the 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  57 

short  interval  from  1739  to  1744  *,  the  commerce 
of  the  comitry  throughout  the  reign  of  George  II., 
was  according  to  the  usual  tests  of  tonnage,  and 
exports  and  imports  progressively  increasing,  al- 
though not  so  rapidly  as  in  the  subsequent  reign. 

It  will  appear  by  a  reference  to  the  following 
division  of  this  work,  "  On  the  Effect  of  War  on 
Prices,"  that  whatever  may  have  been  the  influ- 
ence of  war  in  other  periods  of  our  history,  it  had 
not  the  effect  of  raising  prices  during  the  intervals 
in  whicli  it  prevailed  in  the  period  under  consider- 
ation :  and  that  the  longer  intervals  of  peace,  during 
which  the  prices  were  higher  than  during  the  wars, 
cannot  therefore  be  adduced  as  among  the  means 
of  accounting  for  the  low  prices  from  I7OO  to  1760. 

The  profound  internal  tranquillity  which  this 
country  enjoyed  during  that  interval  (for  the  at- 
tempts in  1715  and  1745  in  favour  of  the  Stuart 
family  were  too  feeble  and  too  short-lived  to  be 
worth  mentioning,  as  affecting  the  general  state  of 
internal  peace  and  security,)  may  be  considered  as 
having  had  some  influence  when  compared  with  the 
17th  century. 

The  civil  wars  which  prevailed  near  the  middle 
of  the  17tli  century  might,  doubtless,  be  supposed 
to  have  interfered  in  some  degree  with  tillage, 
although,  for  the  reasons  already  stated,  it  should 
seem  that  the  high  prices  of  that  interval  were 
more  owing  to  the  seasons  than  to  the  civil  war ; 
and  this  is  the  more  probable,    because  the  same 

*  This  exception  is  readily  accounted  for,  partly  by  the  ef- 
fects of  the  war  in  which  we  were  then  engaged  with  France, 
and  partly,  as  far,  at  least,  as  regards  the  amount  of  tonnage, 
by  the  prohibition  against  the  export  of  corn ;  a  prohibition 
which  was  in  force  during  a  part  of  that  period,  and  which,  of 
course,  while  it  lasted,  would  cause  a  diminution  of  the  tonnage 
usually  employed  in  the  transport  of  grain.  The  shipping  re- 
quired for  the  export  of  corn  in  the  middle  of  last  century  must 
have  formed  no  inconsiderable  proportion  of  the  whole  of  the 
tonnage  employed  in  the  trade  of  the  kingdom. 


58  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

relatively  high  prices  prevailed  in  France  during 
the  middle  of  the  17th  century  as  in  this  country. 
But  admitting  the  disturbed  state  of  the  country  to 
have  contributed  to  the  high  range  of  prices  which 
prevailed  during  the  civil  wars,  these  were  at  an 
end  before  1650.  And  during  the  concluding  50 
years  of  the  17th  century,  there  was  no  such  inter- 
ruption of  internal  peace  as  could  be  supposed  to 
interfere  with  the  operations  of  husbandry,  or  the 
general  inducements  to  cultivation. 

If,  then,  the  fall  of  prices  in  question  cannot  be 
accounted  for  by  our  corn  laws,  nor  by  the  price  of 
labour,  nor  by  the  state  of  the  country  in  respect 
of  population,  of  trade,  of  war  or  peace,  or  internal 
tranquillity,  nor  by  any  supposed  increase^,  of  the 
value  of  silver,  we  have  to  seek  for  some  cause  more 
distinctly  affecting  the  production  of  corn. 

It  is  universally  admitted,  however,  that  no  single 
cause  affects  the  production  of  corn  in  respect  of 
quantity  from  year  to  year,  so  much  as  the  differ- 
ence of  the  seasons  ;  and  the  variation  of  price  from 
this  cause,  is,  as  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe, 
in  a  ratio  much  beyond  the  difference  of  quantity. 
The  only  difficulty  therefore  which  attends  the  sup- 
position of  the  seasons  having  had  the  principal  in- 
fluence in  producing  the  cheapness  of  provisions 
in  the  period  alluded  to  of  last  century,  is  in  the 
length  of  time  to  which  the  operation  of  that  cause 
is  assigned.  It  has  been  assumed,  most  arbitrarily, 
that  the  differences  of  seasons,  in  their  influence 
on  the  production  of  corn,  must  be  equalised  within 
certain  periods,  limited  to  suit  some  particular  con- 
clusion. And  by  such  reasoners,  the  idea  of  any 
important  difference  in  the  produce,  and  the  still 
greater  difference  in  the  price,  in  a  period  of  20, 
or  even  of  10  years,  as  compared  with  an  equal 
period  immediately  preceding  or  following,  is 
treated  superciliously  as  a  perfectly  gratuitous  hy- 
pothesis.    Now,  it  will  be  for  the  reader  to  judge. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  59 

whether  there  is  not,  from  such  historical  evidence 
as  the  nature  of  the  subject  admits  of,  combined 
with  inferences  from  variations  of  price  from  year 
to  year,  the  strongest  possible  ground  of  presump- 
tion, that  the  period  of  50  years  from  1715  to 
1765,  was  characterised  by  a  marked  exemption 
from  seasons  of  scarcity,  compared  with  the  50 
years  preceding.* 

If  the  fact  of  such  comparative  exemption 
be  allowed,  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  con- 
sidering it  as  sufficient  to  account  for  the  greatest 
part,  if  not  for  the  whole,  of  the  relative  cheap- 
ness of  that  period.  If  in  the  50  years,  instead 
of  only  5  years  of  recorded  scarcity,  there 
had  been  upwards  of  20  years,  it  is  perfectly 
clear  that  the  produce  must  have  been  much  less, 
and  the  price  much  higher.  The  difference  in 
respect  of  the  quantity  of  produce,  is  equivalent 
to  a  difference  in  the  average  fertihty  of  the  soil 
during  the  period.  A  comparative  frequent  recur- 
rence of  bad  seasons  affords  a  less  produce  for  the 
same  labour  and  capital,  and  therefore  resolves 
itself,  during  the  preponderance  of  that  description 
of  seasons,  into  an  increased  cost  of  production. 

*  In  this  view  of  the  effect  of  the  seasons,  more  stress  has  been 
laid  on  the  exemption  from  those  of  marked  scarcity  than  on 
the  prevalence  of  those  of  more  than  ordinary  produce.  Not  but 
that  there  appear  to  be  strong  grounds  for  inferring  the  greater 
than  usual  prevalence  of  plentiful  seasons  in  the  period  here 
referred  to  ;  but^  because  the  grounds  for  such  inference  do  not 
admit  of  being  so  well  made  out.  A  very  deficient  harvest,  by 
the  privations  which  it  entails  on  the  bulk  of  the  community,  in- 
evitably attracts  general  notice,  and  is  in  many,  if  not  in  most, 
instances  the  subject  of  historical  notice  ;  besides  that,  in  in- 
stances of  deficiency  short  of  dearth,  the  suddenness  of  the 
rise  of  price  may  afford  strong  grounds  of  inference  as  to  the 
cause.  Whereas  the  indications  of  a  superabundant  harvest 
are  not  always  immediately  manifest.  The  fact  of  excess  of 
produce  may,  and  commonly  does,  escape  immediate  notice,  and 
is  known  only  in  its  ultimate  effects  upon  price,  which  are  com- 
paratively slow,  however  sure  to  follow. 


60  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

The  comparative  exemption  from  adverse  seasons 
would  consequently  be  equivalent,  during  the  period 
to  which  it  applied,  to  a  diminished  cost  of  pro- 
duction ;  and  would  thus,  with  the  aid  of  the 
bounty,  prevent  the  throwing  of  land  out  of  cul- 
tivation, or  even  might  admit  ofan  extended  tillage, 
notwithstanding  the  fall  and  low  range  of  prices 
observable  in  this  period.* 

This  long  period  of  great  abundance,  and  con- 
sequent cheapness  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  was 
one  which  appears  to  have  been  attended  with  a 
great  improvement  in  the  condition  and  habits  of 
the  great  bulk  of  the  population.  In  the  passage 
already  quoted  from  Adam  Smith,  he  refers  to  '•  the 
peculiarly  happy  circumstances  of  the  country  " 
during  that  period,  and  Mr.  Hallam,  in  his  *'  Consti- 
tutional History,"  describes  the  reign  of  George  II. 
as  "  the  most  prosperous  period  that  England  had 
ever  experienced.'*  The  author  of  the  Corn  Tracts, 
writing  in  1765,  observes,  that  "  bread  made  of 
wheat  is  become  more  generally  the  food  of  the 
labouring  people."  This  resort  to  a  higher  diet  is 
a  most  indisputable  sign  of  the  improvement  of 
their  condition.  The  great  command  which  the 
labouring  classes  possessed  over  the  necessaries  of 
life  during  that  interval,  might,  according  to  the 
received  theory  of  population,  be  expected  to  have 
been  attended  with  an  accelerated  ratio  of  increase 
of  numbers.  But,  according  to  the  best  evidence 
of  the  progress  of  population  in  this  country,  the 
ratio  of  increase  during  the  long  interval   under 

*  There  is  at  the  same  time  a  consideration  which  may  have 
some  weight  in  aid  of  the  influence  of  a  series  of  plentiful  years 
in  reducing  the  cost  of  production,  and  thus  admitting  of  keep- 
ing up  or  extending  the  cultivation  —  I  mean  the  very  low  rate 
of  interest  which  prevailed  through  the  reigns  of  George  I. 
and  II.,  and  which  would  render  the  outlay  of  capital  on 
land  remunerative  with  smaller  returns,  than  when  the  rate  of 
interest  was,  as  it  had  previously  and  has  since  been,  so  much 
higher. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  Gl 

consideration,  was  much  slower  than  it  has  been 
since,  under  circumstances  of  diminished  command 
of  necessaries  by  the  labouring  classes.  Mr.  Mal- 
thus  seems  to  have  been  struck  by  the  apparent 
anomaly,  and  gives  the  following  explanation  of  it 
in  his  work  entitled,  "  Principles  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy, considered  with  a  View  to  their  practical 
Application,"  p.  255. : — 

"  It  is  well  known  that  during  this  period  the  price  of  corn 
fell  considerably,  while  the  wages  of  labour  are  stated  to  have 
risen.  During  the  last  forty  years  of  the  17th  century,  and  the 
first  twenty  of  the  1 8th,  the  average  price  of  corn  was  such,  as, 
compared  with  the  wages  of  labour,  would  enable  the  labourer 
to  purchase  with  a  day's  earnings  two  thirds  of  a  peck  of  wheat. 
From  1720  to  1750  the  price  of  wheat  had  so  fallen,  while  wages 
had  risen,  that  instead  of  two  thirds,  the  labourer  could  purchase 
the  whole  of  a  peck  of  wheat  with  a  day's  labour. 

This  great  increase  of  command  over  the  necessaries  of  life 
did  not,  however,  produce  a  proportionate  increase  of  population. 
It  found  the  people  of  this  country  living  under  an  excellent  go- 
vernment, and  enjoying  all  the  advantages  of  civil  and  political 
liberty  in  an  unusual  degree.  The  lower  classes  of  people  had 
been  in  the  habit  of  being  respected,  both  by  the  laws  and 
the  higher  orders  of  their  fellow-citizens,  and  had  learned,  in 
consequence,  to  respect  themselves  :  and  the  result  was,  that, 
instead  of  an  increase  of  population  exclusively,  a  considerable 
portion  of  their  increased  real  wages  was  expended  in  a  marked 
improvement  of  the  quality  of  the  food  consumed,  and  a  decided 
elevation  in  the  standard  of  their  comforts  and  conveniences." 

The  solution  here  given  is  apparently  just.  But 
the  fact  itself  speaks  volumes  against  the  theory 
by  which  the  partisans,  whether  of  depreciation  or 
of  corn  monopoly,  seek  to  connect  a  high  price  of 
provisions  with  a  state  of  public  prosperity ;  and 
it  equally  militates  against  the  theory  of  demand, 
which,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  section,  attempts 
to  explain  the  sudden  rise  of  prices  following  this 
long  interval  of  cheapness,  by  the  hypothesis  of  a 
sudden  increase  of  consumption. 


6^  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


Section  4.—  I765  to  1775. 

The  change  which  dates  from  1765  in  the  prices 
of  provisions  from  cheapness  to  dearth,  and  in  the 
corn  trade  from  a  regular  exportation  to  a  prepon- 
derance of  importation,  has  been  the  subject  of 
general  remark,  and  has  given  rise,  as  usual,  on  oc- 
casions of  great  change,  to  controversy  as  to  the 
causes  of  it.  The  same  change  from  cheapness  to 
dearth  occurred  coincidently  through  the  rest  of 
Europe ;  and  this  dearness,  like  the  preceding  cheap- 
ness, was  referred  to  the  most  contradictory  causes. 
In  France  it  was  ascribed  to  the  recent  permission 
of  export,  at  the  same  time  that,  in  this  country,  it 
was  attributed  to  the  occasional  prohibitions  of  ex- 
port and  suspensions  of  the  restrictions  of  import, 
such  prohibitions  and  suspensions  being  argued  to 
operate  as  a  discouragement  of  tillage  ;  not  to 
mention  the  clamours  which  were  then  universally 
prevalent  against  the  supposed  improper  practices 
of  farmers,  millers,  and  bakers,  in  raising  and  keep- 
ing up  prices. 

The  most  plausible  of  the  reasons  among  the 
numerous  ones  which  have  been  advanced  for  the 
great  rise  was  the  supposition  of  a  fall  in  the  value 
of  silver.  A  considerable  increase  in  the  produce 
of  the  American  mines  is  noticed  by  Humboldt 
and  other  writers,  to  have  taken  place  in  the 
middle  of  last  century,  and  more  especially  about 
the  year  1770**  But  the  influence  of  this  cause, 
if  to  be  traced  at  all,  which  appears  to  be  doubtful, 
must  have  been  very  gradual,  and  scarcely  per- 
ceptible ;  and  it  could  not  come  into  operation  at 
all  so  as  to  affect  prices  in  Europe,  till  after  all  the 
phenomena  of  the  high  prices  now  under  consider- 
ation had  occurred  ;    at  any  rate,   it  would   not 

*  See  Mr.  Jacob's  valuable  Treatise,  entitled  "  Inquiry  into 
the  Precious  Metals/'  vol.  ii.  p.  l.^^. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  6S 

account  for  so  sudden  a  rise  as  took  place  in  I766, 
and  still  less  would  it  account  for  so  great  and 
sudden  a  transition  from  a  large  export  to  a  large 
import  of  grain,  as  took  place  between  I7 65  and 
1775. 

But  another  mode  of  accounting  for  the  phe- 
nomena in  question  has  of  late  years  become  more 
general.  The  very  able  and  well-informed  writer 
of  an  article  in  the  supplement  to  the  "  Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica"  on  the  Corn  Laws  and  the  Corn 
Trade,  gives  the  following  explanation  of  the 
change : — 

"  After  the  peace  of  Paris  in  1763,  the  national  improvement 
was  prodigiously  accelerated.  The  extension  of  industry  caused 
by  the  acquisition  of  new  branches  of  commerce,  by  the  increase 
of  our  colonial  possessions,  and,  perhaps,  more  than  all  the  rest, 
by  the  introduction  of  improved  machinery  into  the  cotton  ma- 
nufactories, was  followed  by  a  sudden  increase  of  the  population, 
and,  as  importation  was  prohibited,  by  a  corresponding  rise  of 
prices." 

And  the  late  Sir  Edward  West,  the  distinguished 
author  of  an  "Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capital 
to  Land,"  in  a  subsequent  "  Essay  on  the  Price  of 
Corn,"  referring  to  the  rise  of  price  between  I765 
and  1 775,  says  :  — 

"  The  true  cause  of  this  rise  of  price,  in  all  probability,  was 
the  increasing  population,  and  the  increased  cost  of  providing 
the  additional  produce  for  that  increasing  population,  according 
to  the  principle  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  in  my 
former  publication.  This  opinion  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of  the 
very  great  increase  of  the  population  between  the  years  1760 
and  1780.  On  reference  to  Mr.  Rickman's  Preliminary  Observ- 
ations to  the  Population  Abstract,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
population  increased  at  a  rate  far  more  rapid  during  this  in- 
terval than  at  any  former  period.  At  about  the  same  period, 
too — namely,  between  1766  and  1773,  our  imports  of  corn  began 
to  exceed  our  exports,  and  we  have  since  been  a  regularly  import- 
ing instead  of  an  exporting  country." 

The  opinion  to  this  effect  has  become  very  ge- 
neral, constituting  a  theory  which  refers  the  prin- 
cipal phenomena  of  the  prices  of  corn  to  difference 


64  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEA.^ONS. 

of  demand  or  consumption,  neglecting  or  treating  as 
subordinate  any  variations  of  supply  ;  but  it  is  a 
theory  which  will  be  found  to  be  constructed  on  a 
supposition  of  facts  which  did  not  exist,  and  to  be 
irreconcileable  with  those  which  will  be  shown  to 
have  existed  in  the  clear  relation  of  cause  and 
effect. 

That  a  prosperous  state  of  manufactures  and 
trade,  and  a  generally  flourishing  condition  of  the 
country,  accompanied  by  an  increasing  population 
employed  at  full  and  increasing  wages,  would  have 
a  tendency  to  increase  the  consumption,  and  that 
the  effect  of  a  continued  increase  of  consumption, 
under  a  given  state  of  supply,  would  be  to  raise 
prices,  diminishing  the  exportable  surplus  in  the 
first  instance,  and  forcing  eventually  a  resort  to 
fresh  soils  at  an  increased  cost,  or  to  an  impoi'tation 
in  as  far  as  permitted,  may  readily  be  allowed. 

But  an  increase  of  population,  even  in  its  most 
accelerated  progress,  and  allowing  for  the  utmost 
possible  difference  between  a  full  and  restricted  con- 
sumption, cannot  o\:^erate  j^ersaltum.  And  supposing 
even  that  the  assumed  increase  of  consumption  had 
not  been  accompanied  and  in  a  great  degree  compen- 
sated by  a  coincident  improvement  and  extension 
of  cultivation,  it  would  not  account  for  the  enor- 
mous difference  between  an  export  in  I763  and 
1764  of  820,000  quarters  of  wheat,  and  an  import 
in  1767  and  I768  of  830,000  quarters  ;  the  whole 
annual  consumption  of  wheat  at  that  period  not 
being  estimated  at  more  than  about  4,000,000  of 
quarters.  Still  less  would  it  account  for  so  great  and 
sudden  an  increase  of  price,  as  from  33^.  2^d.  at 
Ladyday,  1763,  to  58*.  8d.  at  Michaelmas,  I767. 

There  is,  however,  reason  to  believe  that 
there  was  not  only  no  increase  of  consumption  to 
account  for  that  rise  of  price  and  transition  from 
export  to  import,  but  that  the  rise  of  price  was 
required  to  limit,  and  did  limit,  the  consumption 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  65 

below  its  former  rate,  and  was  further  required  to 
induce  a  foreign  supply  to  make  good  the  de- 
ficiencies of  our  own  growth. 

The  reason  for  supposing  that  the  consumption 
was  diminished  instead  of  having  been  increased, 
compared  with  what  it  had  been  in  tiie  period  im- 
mediately preceding,  is,  that  the  rise  of  wages  did 
not  precede,  but  follow,  very  inadequately,  the  rise 
in  the  price  of  provisions. 

Arthur  Young*  states,  as  the  general  result  of  the 
information  obtained  by  him  in  his  extensive  agricul- 
tural tour  inl  767,  I768,  and  I77O,  that  the  mean  rate 
of  wages  for  the  whole  year  was  Js.  4.^kd.  per  week. 
Taking  an  average  of  the  five  years,  from  I766  to 
1770  inclusive,  the  price  of  the  quarter  of  wheat 
WTis  47s.  8f/.,  or  nearly  48^.,  whicli  would  be  6s. 
the  bushel,  and  Is.  6d.  the  peck.  At  these  prices 
of  labour  and  wheat,  the  earnings  of  the  labourer 
would  be  somewhat  under  five  sixths  of  a  peck. 
Now,  in  I7G3,  and  for  SO  years  before,  his  wages 
had  been  7'^'t  a  week,  and  the  average  price  of 
wheat  in  the  5  years  ending  in  1763  being  33.s\  1^//., 
his  daily  earnings  would  be  equal  to  very  nearly  a 
peck  of  wheat.  And  if  the  price  of  wheat  be  taken 
at  the  average  of  20  years  preceding  1755,  it  would 
appear  that  he  then  earned  somewhat  upwards  of 
a  peck.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  conceive  that 
earning  so  much  less  wheat  in  1767*  he  should  have 
consumed  more  than  in  17^3.  But  if,  from  diminished 
command  of  necessaries,  the  inference  were  not  clear 
against  the  supposition  of  an  increased  consump- 
tion, there  is  sufficient  presumption,  from  the  con- 
trast between  the  contented  state  of  the  population 
in  the  interval  from  I72O  to  1755,  and  the  dis- 
turbed and  insurrectionary  state  of  it  between  I765 


*  Annals  of  Agriculture,  No.  271.  p.  215. 
t  Malthus,  Political  Economy,  p.  279.     Arthur  Young,  Pro- 
gressive Value  of  Money,  p.  90. 

F 


60  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

and  1775,  of  their  being  fully  fed  in  the  former 
interval,  and  under-fed  in  the  latter. 

There  is,  moreover,  a  further  objection  to  the 
theory  which  supposes  a  direct  and  observable  in- 
fluence of  the  alternations  of  prosperous  or  de- 
clining trade,  on  the  prices  of  provisions,  that  the 
supposed  coincidence  is,  as  will  be  seen,  not  borne 
out  by  facts. 

Dr.  Adam  Smith,  in  the  following  passage,  refers, 
in  my  opinion,  to  the  right  cause.  At  the  same 
time  I  would  observe  upon  this  passage,  that  inas- 
much as  the  ten  or  twelve  bad  seasons  account, 
in  his  opinion,  for  the  range  of  high  prices  without 
inferring  a  diminished  value  of  silv^er,  the  ten  years 
of  extraordinary  plenty,  to  which  he  refers,  might 
be  considered  as  accounting  for  the  low  prices 
without  inferring  as  he  has  done  an  increased  value 
of  silver. 

"  The  high  price  of  corn  during  these  ten  or  twelve  years  past, 
indeed,  has  occasioned  a  suspicion  that  the  real  value  of  silver 
still  continues  to  fall  in  the  European  market.  This  high  price 
of  corn,  however,  seems  evidently  to  have  been  the  effect  of  the 
extraordinary  unfavourableness  of  the  seasons,  and  ought  there- 
fore to  be  regarded  not  as  a  permanent,  but  as  a  transitory  and 
occasional  event.  The  seasons  for  these  ten  or  twelve  years 
past  have  been  unfavourable  through  the  greater  part  of  Europe  ; 
and  the  disorders  of  Poland  have  very  much  increased  the  scarcity 
in  all  those  countries,  which  in  dear  years  used  to  be  supplied 
from  that  market.  So  long  a  course  of  bad  seasons,  though  not 
a  very  common  event,  is  by  no  means  a  singular  one ;  and  who- 
ever has  inquired  much  into  the  history  of  the  prices  of  corn  in 
former  times  will  be  at  no  loss  to  recollect  several  other  exam- 
ples of  the  same  kind.  Ten  years  of  extraordinary  scarcity, 
besides,  are  not  more  wonderful  than  ten  years  of  extraordinary 
plenty.  The  low  price  of  corn  from  IT-il  to  1750,  both  inclu- 
sivej  may  very  well  be  set  in  opposition  to  its  high  price  during 
the  last  eight  or  ten  years."     (Vol.  i.  p.  310.   3d  ed.) 

Of  the  prevalence  of  a  series  of  bad  seasons,  or, 
at  least,  of  the  very  frequent  recurrence  of  them  in 
this  country,  and  in  a  still  greater  degree,  perhaps, 
in  the  rest  of  Europe,  in  the  interval  between 
17^4^  and  177«5,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  Gj 

The  price  rose  considerably  after  the  harvest  of 
I7G4,  viz.  to  44,9.  5d.  at  Michaehnas,  and  49^.  9^. 
at  Lady-day  following.  This  rise  might  be  occa- 
sioned by  a  moderate  degree  of  deficiency,  there 
being,  probably,  little  or  no  surplus  in  consequence 
of  tlie  very  large  exportation,  which,  in  17^4, 
amounted  to  no  less  than  396,857  quarters  of  wheat. 
The  season  of  I766,  and  some  of  the  effects  of  the 
deficient  crops  of  the  harvest  of  that  year,  are  thus 
described  by  Collinson  :  — 

"  London,  Septenaber  25.  1166. 
"  We  have  had  a  most  uncommon  rainy  summer,  which  was 
no  way  propitious  to  the  growth  of  wheat ;  but  it  pleased  Provi- 
dence to  send  us  the  finest  hot  and  dry  harvest  ever  known,  yet 
the  warm  constant  rains  drew  up  the  wheat  so  much  to  stalk, 
that  the  ears  are  very  light.  I  hope  there  will  be  sufficient  to 
support  the  nation,  now  we  have  prudently  stopped  the  export- 
ation ;  for  so  great  are  the  wants,  and  the  demand  for  foreign 
markets  was  so  great  and  so  pressing,  that  it  advanced  the  price 
so  considerably  as  to  occasion  insurrections  in  many  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  to  stop  by  force  the  corn  from  being  exported;  but 
now  a  proclamation  is  come  out  to  prevent  it,  I  hope  all  will  be 
quiet  again." 

The  letters  of  Collinson  are  discontinued  after 
the  winter  of  that  year  ;  but  the  following  details, 
extracted  from  the  Annual  Register,  will,  it  is 
presumed,  afford  sufficient  evidence  of  severe  and 
long-continued  dearths  :  — 

In  1766,  the  quartern  loaf  in  London  was,  at 
one  time,  as  high  as  l.v.  (id.  Addresses  were  sent 
from  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  stating  the 
general  distress  of  the  people.  A  proclamation 
was  issued  in  September  to  suspend  the  exportation, 
and  enforce  the  laws  against  forestallers  and  re- 
graters  ;  and  the  speech  from  the  throne  on  the 
meeting  of  parliament  in  November  of  that  year 
began  in  the  following  terms  :  — 

"  The  high  price  of  wheat,  and  the  defective  produce  of  that 
grain  last  harvest,  together  with  the  extraordinary  demands  for 
the  same  fi-om  foreign  parts,  have  principally  determined  me  to 

F   2 


68 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 


call  you  thus  early  together,  that  I  might  have  the  sense  of  par- 
liament as  soon  as  convenientlj^  might  be,  on  a  matter  so  import- 
ant, and  particularly  affecting  the  poorer  sort  of  my  subjects." 

The  harvest  of  I767  appears  to  have  been  defi- 
cient in  a  still  greater  degree.*  The  price  at 
Michaelmas,  I7G7,  rose  to  58^.  8d. ;  and  although 
the  exportation  was  prohibited  for  another  year,  it 
continued  high  till  the  following  harvest,  which, 
with  that  of  I769,  may  be  inferred  to  have  been  of 
ordinary  produce,  inasmuch  as  the  prices  gradually 
gave  way,  and  in  the  latter  year  got  down  to  4<0s. 
But  although  the  privilege  of  export  under  a 
bounty  was  restored,  the  exportation  was  trifling. 

The  five  years  from  1770  to  1774,  both  years  in- 
cluded, were  attended  with  unproductive  harvests. 
The  dearth  arising  from  them  caused  considerable 
distress,  and  consequent  commotions  among  the 
people,  and  uneasiness  on  the  part  of  government. 
In  the  year  1770,  an  act  passed,  empowering  jus- 
tices, at  the  quarter  sessions,  to  order  returns  of  the 
prices  of  grain  ;  and  the  returns  thus  obtained 
formed  the  materials  for  the  average  prices,  thence- 
forward periodically  published.  The  exportation 
was  again  prohibited  in  that  and  the  following  year.t 

*  Such  was  the  severity  of  the  sufferings  of  the  people  from 
the  dearth  of  provisions,  that  serious  disturbances  broke  out,  and 
prevailed  with  greater  or  less  violence  over  the  greater  part  of  the 
kingdom.  Much  mischief  was  done  ;  and  many  lives  were  lost  in 
different  places.  The  military  were  called  out,  and  the  gaols 
filled  with  prisoners,  for  the  trial  of  whom  a  special  commission 
was  issued. 

The  king  in  his  speech  on  the  meeting  of  parliament  in  No- 
vember, ITSTj  referred  to  the  continued  scarcity  in  the  follow- 
ing terms  :  — 

"  Among  the  objects  of  a  domestic  nature,  none  can  demand 
more  speedy,  or  serious  attention,  than  what  regards  the  high 
price  of  corn,  which  neither  the  salutary  laws  passed  in  the 
last  session  of  parliament,  nor  the  produce  of  the  late  harvest, 
have  been  able  so  far  to  reduce  as  to  give  sufficient  relief  to 
the  distresses  of  the  poorer  sort  of  my  people." 

-}•  "  The  lord  mayor  ordered  the  meal-weighers  to  stick  up  in  a 
conspicuous  place,  in  the  corn-market,  in  Mark  Lane,  the  quan- 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  69 

In  1772,  importation  was  allowed  dnty  free,  to 
the  1st  May,  1773.  In  1773,  the  city  of  London 
offered  a  bounty  of  4.s'.  for  20,000  quarters  of 
wheat,  to  be  imported  between  March  and  June. 

These  were  all  indications  of  scarcity,  and  of 
alarm  arising  from  it,  not  to  be  mistaken. 

Mr.  Arbuthnot,  a  contemporary  writer,  remarked, 
in  1773j  "  that  we  had  had  five  successive  bad  crops, 
and  this  last  more  generally  so  than  any  of  the 
former  ;  that  it  had  been  nearly  the  same  all  over 
Europe ;  and,  therefore,  till  there  was  a  plentiful 
year,  corn  could  not  be  cheap."  He  conceived 
that  no  effectual  measure  could  be  taken  to  prevent 
the  recurrence  of  scarcity  till  this  event  happened, 
and  till  wheat  was  nearly  the  same  price  all  over 
Europe. 

It  is  said  by  this  author,  that  by  accounts  laid 
before  parliament  at  this  time,  the  yearly  produce 
of  wheat  alone  was  calculated  to  be  four  millions 
of  quarters,  which  he  believed  to  be  short  of  the 
reality.  * 

It  was  in  consequence  of  this  state  of  things  that 
the  opponents  of  the  corn  law,  as  it  then  existed, 
succeeded  in  carrying  a  fresh  act  in  1773,  by 
which  importation  was  allowed  at  a  duty  of  6^?.  per 
quarter,  when  the  price  of  wheat  was  at,  or  above, 
48.S'.  per  quarter,  and  the  bounty  and  exportation 
together  were  to  cease  when  the  price  was  at,  or 
above,  44*.  The  importation  and  exportation,  and 
bounty  for  other  grain,  in  their  relative  proportions 
to  wheat. 


titles  and  prices  of  wheat  sold,  and  the  names  of  the  buyers." — 
Comber  on  National  Subsistence,  p.  167. 

The  following  extract  from  the    Annual  Register  will   shew 
that  the  scarcity  extended  to  Ireland :  — 

"Dublin,  May  4.  1771. 
"  We  have  cause  of  complaint  of  the  dearness  of  provisions  as 
well  as  the  English ;  prime  pieces  of  beef  and  mutton  are  here 
6d.  per  pound,  lamb  8d.,  veal  7d.,  and  butter  lOd." 
*  Comber,  p.  168. 

F    3 


70  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

The  year  1774*  was  equally  adverse  with  the 
preceding  "season.     And  indisputable  proofs  exist 

*  In  the  Tiansactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  Ixxvi.  p.  24-0.^ 
is  a  paper  entitled  "  Qn  the  Variations  of  the  Seasons,  from  Ob- 
servations at  London  by  Mr.  Barker."  And  as  it  refers  to  the 
period  now  under  consideration,  a  copy  of  it  is  here  in- 
serted. 

"  On  the  Variations  of  the  Seasons. 

"  Measuring  the  rain  for  a  few  years  will  not  show  com- 
pletely the  general  quantity  of  rain  which  falls  in  anyplace  ;  for 
there  is  a  very  great  difference  at  different  periods  of  time.  If 
I  had  measured  the  rain  at  Lyndon  only  in  the  four  years,  174-0, 
1741,  174'2,  174-3,  the  mean  would  have  been  found  to  be  only 
16^  inches  in  the  year,  yet  they  were  not  at  all  complained  of 
as  dry  summers.  1740  was  cold  and  dry  till  July  30.;  1741 
was  cold  and  dry  ;  the  summer  hot,  dry,  and  burning,  till  the 
beginning  of  September ;  then  ten  days  wet,  and  very  warm 
again,  being  the  finest  autumn  for  grass  ever  known.  1742  was 
a  showery  summer,  and  1743  wet  in  the  middle;  but  then 
the  winters  were  dry  ;  so  that  the  quantity  of  rain  on  the 
whole  was  small.  1741  to  1750,  the  mean  was  18^  inches. 
1741  and  1750  were  hot,  dry  and  burning,  1750  being  the 
hottest  year  I  have  known.  The  intermediate  years  were  neither 
very  wet  nor  very  dry  ;  and  this  was  the  most  plentiful  and 
cheapest  time  for  corn  of  any  ten  years  I  remember;  for  grain 
oftener  fails  in  England  from  too  much  wet  than  from  too  little. 
1751  to  1760,  the  mean  year  was  22tV.  1760  was  hot,  dry,  and 
burning  ;  but  several  of  the  summers  were  wet,  and  not  so  plen- 
tiful. Three  wet  summers  together,  —  1754,  1755,  and  1756,  — 
were  a  time  of  scarcity,  and  we  have  had  more  failing  crops 
since  that  time  than  before  it.  From  1761  to  1770  there  was 
23:}  in  a  year.  1762  was  hot,  dry,  and  burning,  and  1765  cold 
and  dry ;  but  several  years  were  wet — 1763  and  1768  remarkably 
so  ;  and  of  those  ten  several  had  failing  crops,  and  some  had 
great  snows.  There  was  a  great  change  of  the  seasons  at  1763  ; 
for  I  have  had  more  rain  since  that  time  than  I  had  before  it, 
in  the  proportion  of  five  to  four.  From  1770  to  1780  there  was 
at  a  mean  26  inches.  1771  was  dry,  and  1778  and  1779  were 
hot,  yet  not  without  fits  of  rain  ;  and  most  of  the  other  years 
were  wet,  and  some  great  snows.  1773,  1774,  and  1775  were 
so  wet  that  there  came  32  inches  in  a  year,  which  is  nearly 
double  what  there  was  from  1740  to  1743.  In  twelve  months 
from  October,  1773,  to  September,  1774,  there  came  39-390 
inches  of  rain,  which  is  a  Lancashire  year.  And  in  one  month, 
September,  1774,  there  was  8  inches  ;  this  was  in  barley  and 
pease  harvest,  and  for  three  weeks  together  not  a  load  could  be 
carried.     By  the  above  state  of  the  case  it  appears  that  for  four 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  7 1 

of  the  scarcity  arising  from  that  and  the  preceding 
season,  inasmuch  as  the  importations  were,  in 


Years. 

Qrs.  of  Wheat. 

Including  all  other  Grain. 

1774 

- 

269,235 

803,844 

1775 

- 

544,641 

1,039,122 

When  these  quantities,  and  the  equally  large 
importations  of  IjGj  and  1708,  are  considered  with 
reference  to  the  total  estimated  produce  at  tliat 
period,  and  with  reference  also  to  the  very  large 
surplus  which  the  seasons  immediately  preceding 
had  yielded  for  exportation  at  low  prices,  some 
conception  may  be  formed  of  the  enormous  dif- 
ference of  the  productiveness  of  the  crops ;  but 
the  conception  would  be  inadequate,  unless  al- 
low^ance  were  made  for  an  excess  above  an  average 
in  the  one  case  much  beyond  the  mere  quantity 
exported,  and  in  the  other  for  a  deficiency  greater 
than  the  quantity  imported. 

The  average  price  from  the  Eton  tables  of  ten 
years,  from  1755  to  1764,  was  37 -sf.  Gd.  ;  and  of 
ten  years,  from  I765  to  1774-,  was  51.s.  ;  being 
a  rise  of  upwards  of  33  per  cent.  ;  but  the  ten 
years  ending  in  I764  comprise  two  seasons,  viz., 
1756  and  1757j  of  bad,  and  one,  viz.,  1664,  of  in- 
different produce.  If  w^e  compare  the  ten  years 
ending  in  1774  with  a  series  of  ten  good  seasons, 
such  as  from  1742  to  1751,  the  difference  will  be 
more  striking :  — 

s.  d. 
10  years,  ending  1751,  average  29  2 
10  years,  ending  1774  51     0 


successive  periods  of  ten  years,  the  quantity  of  rain  has  been 
increasing  each  time."  (Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  Ixxv. 
p.  240.) 

And  in  another  paper  Mr.  Barker  writes :  — 

"  In  four  years,  1740,  1741,  1742,  1743,  there  came  but 
66-361  of  rain.  In  the  four  years,  1772,  1773,  1774,  1775, 
there  was  r24--957,  which  is  nearly  twice  as  much." 

F    4 


72  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

The  advance  therefore  in  the  ten  years  ending 
1774  was  75  per  cent,  upon  the  price  for  the  ten 
years  ending  in  1751^  ;  the  clieap  period,  be  it 
observed,  embracing  five  years  of  war,  accom- 
panied by  large  loans,  while  the  dear  period  w^as  one 
of  universal  peace.  It  may  be  worth  while  too, 
with  a  view  of  having  some  notion,  however  im- 
perfect, of  the  difference  of  produce  in  these  two 
periods,  to  contrast  the  aggregate  quantity  ex- 
ported in  the  one  with  the  balance  of  importation 
in  the  other. 

Balance  of  Exjiorts. 
Years.  Wheat.  Grain  of  all  Kinds. 

174-2  10  1751      -      -      4,700,-509  qrs.  8,869,190  qrs. 

Balance  o^  Imports. 
1766  to  1775    -         -      1,363,149  qrs.  3,782,734  qrs. 

It  is  true  that  the  population  had  increased 
greatly  during  the  interval ;  but  so  likewise  had 
the  extent  of  cultivation.  The  numbers  of  acts  of 
inclosure  had  been, 

In  the  reign  of  George  I.  -  -  -  -     16 

George  II.  -         -  -  -  226 

And  in  the  first  fifteen  years  of  George  III.,  viz.  from 
1760  to  1775  -  -  -  -  -  734 

The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  the  increased 
extent  of  cultivation  had  nearly,  if  not  quite,  kept 
pace  with  the  increase  of  the  population:  besides 
that  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  improve- 
ments in  the  mode  of  cultivation,  although  not  so 
great  as  those  which  have  been  strikingly  observ- 
able of  late  years,  must  have  been  more  or  less  in 
progress  during  the  above-mentioned  period. 

l^he  whole  interval  from  1765  to  1775,  in  which 
there  was  so  frequent  a  recurrence  of  seasons  of 

*  It  is  probable  that  if  in  the  period  of  dearth  from  1765  to 
1775,  the  practice  had  prevailed  M'hich  was  introduced  twenty 
years  later,  of  making  up  for  deficiency  of  wages  by  parish  al* 
lowance,  the  prices  would  have  been  still  higher. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  73 

scarcity  in  this  country,  was  marked  by  dearths  of 
equal,  if  not  greater  severity,  on  tlie  continent  of 
Europe.  Reference  to  the  inclemency  of  some  of 
the  winters,  and  to  the  cold,  wet,  and  stormy  cha- 
racter of  the  summers,  are  to  be  met  with  in  the 
published  correspondence  of  several  French  writers 
of  that  period.  But  it  will  be  sufficient  for  the 
present  purpose  to  refer  to  the  following  passages 
from  the  "  Annual  Register  :  " — 

"  1767.  The  irregularity  and  inclemency  of  the  seasons  for 
some  years  past  in  different  parts  of  Europe  has  occasioned  an 
uncertainty  and  great  deficiency  in  the  crops  of  several  countries, 
by  which  the  poor  have  suffered  great  distresses.  The  Eccle- 
siastical State,  and  some  other  parts  of  Italy,  have  been  severely 
affected  by  this  calamity.  England,  which  usually  supplied  its 
neighbours  with  such  immense  quantities  of  grain,  and  allowed 
a  considerable  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  it,  has  been  a  suf- 
ferer from  the  same  cause,  and  it  has  required  the  utmost  atten- 
tion of  the  legislature  to  guard  against  and  prevent  the  dreadful 
consequences  attending  it. 

"  1768.  The  badness  of  the  late  harvest  in  France  had  oc- 
casioned provisions  of  all  sorts  to  bear  an  immoderate  price  ; 
and  corn,  in  particular,  was  not  only  very  dear,  but,  in  general, 
very  bad,  and  the  bread,  consequently,  disagreeable  and  un- 
wholesome. The  distresses  of  the  people  were  excessive,  and 
their  complaints  and  murmurings  became  universal.  In  such 
situations,  all  the  world  fancy  themselves  ingenious  in  finding 
out  the  causes  of  public  calamities  ;  and  if  any  novelties  have 
been  introduced,  they  always  come  in  for  a  great  share  of  popu- 
lar odium.  It  was  so  upon  this  occasion ;  and,  without  any  re- 
gard to  the  influence  of  seasons,  or  to  the  will  of  Heaven,  the 
miseries  of  the  people  were  attributed  to  the  edicts  which  the 
king  had  passed  some  time  ago,  for  the  free  importation  and 
exportation  of  corn  in  all  the  ports,  and  an  unlimited  circulation 
of  it  through  all  the  interior  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

"  1770.  A  scarcity  of  provisions  prevailed  in  France.  The 
distresses  of  the  people  were  this  year  so  excessive,  that  it  is 
said  4000  persons  perished  by  famine  in  Limousin  and  the 
Marche  onl}'  ;  and  in  Normandy,  the  most  fruitful  province  of 
France,  barley  bread  sold  at  above  2f/.  a  pound.  This  misery 
produced  numberless  riots  and  insurrections  in  different  parts, 
in  which  much  mischief  was  done,  and  many  lives  lost. 

"  Berlin,  April  13.  1771.  The  present  severity  and  extreme 
rigour  of  the  weather  is  so  very  remarkable,  that  the  oldest 
people  here  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  or  heard  the  like ; 
for  it  still  continues  to  freeze  every  night  as  in  the  middle  of 


74"  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

'winter,  and  a  great  quantity  of  snow  lies  on  the  ground,  which 
so  distresses  the  poor  inhabitants  of  the  country,  that  the  most 
melancholy  accounts  are  daily  received  of  the  misery  and 
wretchedness  occasioned  by  this  dreadful  calamity. 

'^  Frankfort,  April  7.  1771.  The  want  of  provisions  is  very 
great,  both  here  and  in  the  circle  of  Swabia.  Our  magistrates 
distribute  bread  to  the  poor  gratis,  and  those  of  Nuremberg  do 
the  same.     In  Bavaria,  bread  is  at  an  excessive  high  price. 

"  1773.  The  dearth  which  has  so  long  afflicted  different  parts 
of  Europe  has  this  year  been  grievously  felt  in  several  coun- 
tries. Germany,  Bohemia,  and  Sweden  have  presented  scenes 
of  the  greatest  calamity,  and  multitudes  have  perished  in  that 
miserable  extremity  of  wanting  the  plainest  and  most  common 
necessaries  of  life.  France,  though  in  a  lesser  degree,  has  been 
a  considerable  sharer  in  this  misfortune  ;  and  the  distresses  of 
the  people  have  occasioned  riots  and  disturbances  in  several  of 
the  provinces.  Nor  has  the  taking  off  of  the  bounty  on  export- 
ation in  England,  with  all  the  other  measures  that  have  been 
adopted  to  answer  the  same  purpose,  been  sufficient  to  remedy 
the  evils  proceeding  from  inclement  skies,  and  unusual  seasons. 

"  1775.  The  distresses  of  the  people,  owing  to  the  scarcity 
and  dearness  of  corn  in  France,  threw  that  kingdom  into  an  un- 
common state  of  disturbance  and  commotion  during  a  great  part 
of  the  spring  and  summer.  Bread  in  several  places  could  not 
be  procured  for  money  ;  and  the  beggars  are  said  to  have  refused 
the  latter,  whilst  they  rent  the  air  with  cries  for  the  former ;  so 
that  gold  was  no  longer  a  security  against  want.  This  distress 
was  the  more  irremediable,  as  other  nations  were  not  abun- 
dantly supplied.  The  scarcity  of  corn  in  England  not  only  cut 
off  that  resource,  but  diverted  a  still  greater  by  the  immense 
quantities  which  it  drew  from  the  American  colonies."  (After 
enumerating  instances  of  violence,  the  account  proceeds.)  "In 
the  mean  time  no  means  were  left  untried  by  the  government, 
either  to  quell  these  disturbances,  or  to  alleviate  their  cause. 
Troops  were  stationed  to  protect  the  markets,  and  the  roads 
and  rivers  by  which  they  were  supplied ;  great  companies  of  the 
burghers  were  armed  for  the  same  purpose.  The  king  granted 
a  considerable  bounty  on  the  importation  of  corn.  The  public 
disorders,  notwithstanding  all  these  measures,  increased  to  so 
alarming  a  degree,  as  at  length  to  excite  apprehensions  of  a  ge- 
neral insurrection,  and  to  make  it  appear  necessary  to  call  in  the 
troops  from  the  frontiers  to  the  centre  of  the  kingdom  ;  so  that 
the  Isle  of  France,  with  some  other  of  the  interior  provinces, 
were,  in  a  manner,  surrounded  and  intersected  with  lines  of 
armed  men.  It  at  length  pleased  Providence  that  a  most  plen- 
tiful liarvest  removed  the  distresses  of  the  people,  both  in  France 
and  most  other  parts  of  Europe." 


efi'ect  of  the  seasons.  75 


Section  5.  —  1775  to  1793. 

The  seasons  immediately  following  that  of  1774'> 
and  comprised  within  the  interval  terminating  in 
1792,  appear  to  have  been  irregular,  but  not  cha- 
racterised by  such  a  preponderance  of  the  pro- 
portion of  inclement  and  unproductive  seasons  as 
occurred  between  1760  and  177^* 

The  harvest  of  1775  is  described  at  the  close  of 
the  extracts  from  the  "  Annual  Register"  which 
have  been  referred  to,  as  having  been  plentiful  in 
France  and  most  other  parts  of  Europe.  And  ac- 
cordingly, immediately  after  the  harvest,  the  price 
which  at  Lady-day,  1775,  had  been  59*.  lid,,  fell 
to  435.  7d'  at  Michaelmas,  and  continued  at  about 
that  rate  till  the  harvest  of  1777>  when  the  price 
rose  to  51s.  7d.  In  the  mean  time  there  had  been 
a  balance  of  export  in  1776  of  about  200,000 
quarters  of  wheat;  while  in  1777  there  was  an  im- 
portation of  a  like  quantity. 

The  seasons  of  I778  and  1779  were  favourable, 
and  were  followed  by  a  considerable  fall  of  prices, 
the  decline  having  been  from  .51.v.  7d-,  the  quo- 
tation of  the  Windsor  market  at  Michaehnas  1777, 
to  S5s.  7d.  at  Michaehnas  1779-. 

In  the  "  Farmer's  Magazine,"  vol.  ii.  p.  139.,  is 
the  following  reference  to  the  season  of  1779  :  — 

"  Suppose  a  season  of  great  fertility,  such  as  the  ever  me- 
morable year  1779,  when  the  crop  was  one  fourth  above  a 
medium  crop." 

This  transition  to  abundance,  after  a  long  period  of 
dearth,  was  attended,  as  is  usual  on  such  occasions, 
with  stagnation  and  declining  prices,  and  a  general 
depression  of  the  landed  interest,  or  what  is  more 
familiarly  known  under  the  designation  of  "  agri- 
cultural distress." 

In  the  "  Annals  of  Agriculture,"  vol.  xxv. 
p.  460.,  is  the  following  description  in  the  extract 


76  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  a  letter  written  by  Arthur  Young,  in  1780,  of 

the  fall  of  prices  and  consequent  distress  at  the 

period  referred  to  :  — 

"  In  the  years  1776;,  1777,  prices  fell  considerably;  and,  in 
1779,  so  low,  that  very  general  complaints  have  been  heard  of 
ruined  farmers,  and  distressed  landlords;  and  at  the  time  I 
am  now  writing,  the  fact  holds  that  there  is  a  considerable  fall  in 
all  products,  and  great  numbers  of  farmers  ruined.  I  have  the 
prices  of  wool  for  forty  years  now  before  me,  and  that  which 
from  1758  to  1767  was  from  18*.  to  21 5.  a  tod,  is  for  1779  only 
125.,  and  was  in  1778  but  145.  We  must  go  back  to  1754  to 
find  a  year  so  low  as  the  last.  Wheat  and  all  sorts  of  grain  are 
greatly  fallen." 

The  decline  of  prices  here  noticed  has,  by  the 
theory  which  accounted  for  the  previous  rise  as 
the  effect  of  an  increased  consumption  arising  from 
a  prosperous  state  of  trade,  been  ascribed  to  a  di- 
minished consumption  occasioned  by  a  dull  and  de- 
clining trade.  But  as  the  state  of  trade,  judging 
not  only  from  exports  and  imports,  but  from  the 
best  authenticated  contemporary  accounts,  was 
still  declining  in  the  three  following  years,  being 
the  concluding  ones  of  the  American  war,  viz. 
from  1780  to  1784,  the  supposed  diminished  con. 
sumption  ought  to  have  had  the  effect  of  further 
depressing,  or,  at  all  events,  of  keeping  down  the 
price,  instead  of  which  there  was  a  considerable 
rise.     For  instance — ■ 


s.      a. 

1779 

-  m   3 

1780 

-  43     l\ 

1781 

-  52     5 

Of  the  seasons  of  1780  and  1781,  I  have  not 
met  with  any  particular  notice*  ;  but  that  of  1782 
is  recorded  as  having  been  very  unfavourable. 

*  As  far  as  can  be  inferred  from  a  reference  to  the  Lady-day 
and  Michaelmas  prices,  it  should  seem  that  the  produce  of  1780 
must  have  been  considered  to  be  deficient,  inasmuch  as  the  price 
of  wheat,  which,  at  Lady-day  1780,  had  been  385.  3d.,  rose,  at 
Michaelmas,  to  48^.,  and  at  Lady-day,  1781,  to  565.  lie?.  The 
price  declined  near  IO5.  the  quarter  after  the  harvest  of  1781, 
which  may  therefore  be  presumed  to  have  been  considered  as 
moderately  good. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  77 

In  Scotland  the  weather  during  the  whole  of 
that  year  was  as  inclement  as  the  season  of  1799 
afterwards  proved  to  be  ;  and  in  the  "  Farmers' 
Magazine"  for  1800,  there  is  a  minute  description 
of  the  similarity  in  point  of  weather  of  those  two 
years.  In  tlie  rest  of  the  island  there  was  a  de- 
ficiency of  produce,  although  not  to  so  great  a 
degree  as  in  Scotland.  A  winter  of  great  severity 
followed,  prices  rose  considerably,  and  a  large  im- 
portation of  corn  took  place  in  1783. 

As  an  example  of  the  great  and  sudden  alter- 
ation of  prices  occasionally  arising  from  the  occur- 
rence of  even  a  single  bad  season,  when  there  is 
not,  as  there  appears  not  to  have  been  in  this 
instance,  a  large  stock  on  hand,  I  subjoin  an 
extract  from  the  "  Annals  of  Agriculture,"  vol.  iii. 
p.  366.,  of  a  communication  from  Mr.  William 
Pitt,  dated  Pendeford,  April  4.  1785,  entitled 

"  CONTRASTS." 

The  following  contrast  of  effects  arising  from  dissimilar  seasons, 
now  so  recent,  may  perhaps  appear  striking  in  some  future  suc- 
cession of  regular  seasons  ;  and,  as  it  will  not  take  up  much 
room,  may  be  worth  preserving  from  oblivion,  by  registering  it  in 
the  Annals  of  Agriculture.  I  doubt  not  but  yourself  and  many 
others  can  recollect  circumstances  more  remarkable:  the  following 
have  come  under  my  own  immediate  observation  :  — 

Winter  succeeding  the  Harvest  of        Winter  succeeding  the  Harvest  of 
1781.  1782. 

£  s.  d.                                       £  s.  d. 

Barley  of  the  best  qua-  Barley  of  the  same  qua- 
lity sold  in  the  mar-  lity  sold  in  the  same 
kets  of  Staffordshire,  markets,  same  mea- 
our  customary  bushel  sure,  common  price, 
of  9^  gallons,  down  to  0  2    9        per  bushel,  7s.  to     -0     7    2 

Wheat,  immediately  af-  Wlieat  of  the  best  qua- 

ter  the  harvest,  clean  lity,   same  measure, 

for  seed,  the    above  per  bushel,  10s.  to      0  10    6 

measure  per  bushel  -  0  5    0 

Spring  Season,  1782.  Spring,  1783. 

Bought  sixty  bushels  of  Sold  out  of  the  product 

Dutch  oats  for  seed,  oats  that  had  lain  a 


78  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

£    s.  d.  £    s.  d. 

delivered  at  home,  per  month  in  the  wet,  and 

bushel     -         -  -  0     1     8        so   damaged    in    the 

stack  by  rain  during 
making  and  carrying 
in  bad  order,  that  they 
moulded  and  grew  to- 
gether, per  bushel  0  3  6 
A  friend  of  mine  sold  Bought   again     clover- 

clover  seed  of  a  good  seed  of  the  same  qua- 

quality  at  the   com-  lity  for  his  own  sow- 

mon     market   price,  ing,  at  per  cwt.         -  5   10    0 

which  was  per  cwt.     1    11     6 
1782.    Bought  Worces-  1784.    Hops  inferior  in 

tershire  hops,  of  ex-  quality  to  the  oppo- 

cellent  quality,  at  per  site,  bought   at  per 

cwt.        -         -         -  2     2    0       cwt.        -         -         -  5  12    0 

The  season  of  1783,  although  not  so  unfavour- 
able as  the  preceding,  seems  not  to  have  been  a 
productive  one.  It  was  followed  by  two  severe 
wmters  ;  and  the  spring  and  ;  ^mmer  of  1784  were 
cold  and  ungenial. 

The  effect  of  so  frequent  a  recurrence  of  winters 
of  great  severity  was  felt  in  a  comparative  scarcity 
and  high  price  of  animal  food  ;  and  this  description 
of  dearth  induced  the  Corporation  of  London,  in 
1786,  to  appoint  a  committee  for  the  purpose  of  in- 
quiring into  the  causes  of  the  high  price  of  pro- 
visions. The  first  resolution  of  the  committee  in  their 
report  is  sagely  couched  in  the  following  terms :  — 

"  Resolved,  That  it  appears  to  your  committee,  from  the  three 
different  papers  mentioned  in  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Montague, 
principal  clerk  in  the  Chamberlain's  office,  and  Mr.  Tomlinson, 
receiver  of  the  tolls  in  Smithfield  market,  containing  an  account 
of  the  number  of  cattle  and  sheep  brought  into  the  said  market 
during  the  last  thirty-six  years,  that  from  the  year  1732  to  1778, 
the  same  had  annually  increased  in  a  very  considerable  degree ; 
and  that  there  has  been  a  greater  increase  from  1V78  to  1783  ; 
but  the  decrease  that  has  happened  during  the  years  1784  and 
1785,  we  are  of  opinion,  from  the  evidence  that  has  been  laid 
before  us,  arises  from  the  pernicious  system  of  forestalling  in  the 
vicinity  of  this  metropolis." 

The  committee  likewise  attacked  the  prevailing 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  79 

tendency  to  new  enclosures,  as  one  of  the  con- 
current causes.  I  should  not  have  noticed  tliis 
strange  document,  but  for  the  following  information 
wliich  the  inquiry  brought  forth.  The  magistrates 
of  Sunderland,  in  answer  to  the  inquiries,  write  — 

"  For  the  last  three  years  we  have  had  two  very  dry  summers, 
and  three  very  severe  winters,  wliich  caused  much  destruction 
among  sheep  and  lambs  in  the  spring,  and  occasioned  a  great 
consumption  of  all  kinds  of  fodder  ;  and  even  great  quantities  of 
oats  were  used  after  hay,  straw,  and  turnips  were  eaten  up." 

There  are  other  answers  to  a  similar  purport :  I 
shall  only  further  extract  the  concluding  part  of 
one  from  Arthur  Young,  dated  August,  I786  :  — 

"  Last  winter  hay,  straw,  and  fodder  of  all  kinds  were  scarcer 
and  dearer  than  ever  known  in  this  kingdom.  Severe  frosts  de- 
stroyed the  turnips  and  cattle  of  all  kinds,  and  sheep  suffered 
dreadfully  ;  many  died,  and  the  rest  were  in  ill  plight  to  fatten 
early  in  this  summer." 

The  seasons  of  1780  and  I786  seem  to  have 
been  attended  with  an  ordinary  produce  of  the 
wheat  crops,  and  prices  fell  within  the  rate  at 
which  the  bounty  on  exportation  attached.  There 
was  accordingly  a  balance  of  export  of  wheat. 

The  average  price  of  the  Years  s, 

1782,  1783,  1784  -         -         was  54 

1785,  1786,  1787  -         -  -     44 

Now  it  is  very  well  known  that  there  was  an 
amazing  burst  of  prosperity  in  the  three  latter,  as 
compared  with  tlie  three  former  years,  which  had 
been  marked  by  great  commercial  and  financial  dif- 
ficulties, and  by  a  great  contraction  of  the  circu- 
lation, and  yet  we  see  a  fall  in  the  price  of  10s.  per 
quarter  in  the  latter  period.  This  fall  is  readily 
ascribed  to  the  difference  of  seasons ;  but  had  the 
effect  of  the  seasons  been  reversed,  the  low  prices 
of  1782,  1783,  and  1784,  would,  according  to  the 
theory  of  demand,  have  been  ascribed  to  the  de- 
clining, and  the  high  prices  of  1785,  I786,  and 
1787,  to  the  prosperous,  state  of  trade,  with  just  as 
much  reason  as  there  is  for  the  supposition  that  the 


80  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

low  prices  of  1777,  1778,  and  I779  were  caused 
by  the  dull  state  of  trade,  as  compared  with  the 
preceding  period  of  high  prices. 

The  winter  of  1788-9  was  again  a  very  severe 
one,  and  followed  by  a  backward  spring.  The 
crops  of  1789  were  considered  to  be  deficient  in  this 
country  ;  and  as  they  had  failed  in  a  still  greater 
degree  abroad,  it  was  apprehended  that  an  ex- 
portation, if  allowed,  might  entail  a  dearth.  There 
was  consequently,  after  an  inquiry  by  the  Board  of 
Trade,  as  to  the  result  of  the  harvest  of  1789,  and 
upon  information  received  of  scarcity  and  very  high 
prices  abroad,  as  well  as  of  a  deficiency  of  our  own 
crop  of  wheat,  an  order  in  council  issued  in  Decem- 
ber, 1789,  prohibiting  the  export,  and  allowing  im- 
portation duty  free  for  a  time  limited.  This  order  was 
confirmed  by  an  act  passed  in  the  session  of  1790. 

As   a  consequence   of  the  deficient  harvest  of 
1789,  the  price  which  at  Michaelmas,  I788,  had 
been   48«.,    rose    at    Michaelmas,   1789,   to  57*. ; 
and  had  it  not  been  for  the  prohibition  of  export- 
ation, it  would  have  risen  much  more,  because  in 
France  the  scarcity  was  such  as  to  amount  almost 
to  a  famine,  and  the  government  of  that  country, 
then  under  the  administration  of  M.  Necker,  ex- 
pended very  large  sums  in  procuring  corn  from 
abroad.     In  proof  of  the  effect  produced  by  those 
purchases    on   the   general   prices   of  Europe,   of 
which  those  of  Holland  may  be  considered  to  have 
been  at  that  time  the  best  criterion,  it  may  beob- 
served,  that  the  price  of  wheat  at  Amsterdam  rose 
in  1789  to  between  60.v.  and  7O.9.  the  quarter.    Our 
bullion   price  accordingly  was  below   the   bullion 
prices  of  Europe  in  that  year. 

The  summer  of  1790  was  wet,  and  the  prices 
ranged  high,  so  as  to  induce  a  large  importation, 
the  ports  being  open  at  the  low  duty  of  6d.  per 
quarter.  At  the  close  of  the  year  the  ports  were 
shut  to  importation,  but  opened  again  in  the  spring 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  81 

following,  thus  affording  a  presumption  that  even 
with  the  aid  of  a  considerable  foreign  supply,  the 
produce  of  the  preceding  harvest  had  been  below 
the  consumption. 

The  season  of  1791  is  described  in  the  *'  Annals 
of  Agriculture,"  vol.  xxiv.  p.  321.  as  one  of 
great  abundance.  And  the  produce  of  that  harvest, 
following  a  large  foreign  supply,  had  the  effect  of 
reducing  the  price  to  40.s'.  11^.,  and  thus  of  closing 
the  ports,  which  remained  shut  through  the  fol- 
lowing year.  But  the  low  price  was  productive,  as 
usual,  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  landed  in- 
terest, and  was  the  occasion  of  a  fresh  corn  bill.  * 

The  year  1792  is  stated  in  the  "  Annals  of  Agri- 
culture" to  have  been  "  remarkable  for  an  ex- 
tremely wet  summer,  by  which  the  crop  of  wheat 
was  much  injured  every  w'here."  This  inferiority 
of  the  harvest,  which  raised  the  price  at  Mi- 
chaelmas to  53s.  id.,  combined  perhaps  w^ith  ap- 
prehensions on  political  grounds,  induced  the 
government  on  the  9th  of  November,  1792,  to 
issue  an  order  in  council,  prohibiting  exportation 
until  the  following  spring ;  and  subsequently  par- 
liament passed  an  act,  33  Geo.  3.  c.  3.,  authorising 
the  king  in  council  to  prohibit  at  any  time  during 
the  session  the  exportation  of  all  kinds  of  grain, 
and  to  permit  the  importation  at  the  low  duty. 

On  a  review  of  the  eighteen  years  from  177<5  to 
1793,  it  appears  that,  although  not  marked  by  any 
extraordinary  inclemency  of  weather,  or  by  a  con- 
siderable degree  of  scarcity,  as  far  at  least  as 
regards  wheat,  excepting  from  1782  to  I78I',  the 
seasons  were  irregular,  and  that  a  large  proportion 

*  By  31  G.S.  c.  30.  from  15.  November,  the  former  laws  were 
repealed,  and  a  new  one  enacted,  by  which  wheat  was  subject  to 
a  duty  of  245.  Sd.  if  the  price  was  under  50s. ;  "2$.  6d.  at  or 
above  50*.  and  under  54^. ;  6d.  at  or  above  54*. ;  and  a  bount}^  of 
5s.  on  exportation  at  a  price  under  44*.  The  duty  and  bounty 
on  other  grain,  in  the  usual  proportion. 

G 


82  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

of  them  were  attended  with  harvests  of  scanty  pro- 
duce ;  not  scanty  merely  with  reference  to  an  in- 
creasing rate  of  consumption,  but  scanty  relatively 
to  the  average  produce  of  a  given  extent  of  cul- 
tivation. 

If  compared  with  an  equal  number  of  years  in  the 
middle  of  the  century,  for  instance,  from  1730  to 
1748,  the  preponderance  of  unfivourable  seasons 
here  described,  between  1775  and  1793,  is  very 
great ;  there  having  been  in  the  former  series  of 
eighteen  years  only  one  year  of  scarcity,  or  even 
of  any  thing  like  deficient  produce,  while  in  the 
latter  series  there  were  several  of  acknowledged 
deficiency,  namely,  1782,  1783,  and  1784^  1789, 
1790,  and  1792,  besides  others,  which,  by  inference 
from  prices,  and  from  the  sudden  transition  from 
export  to  import,  may  be  considered  to  have  been 
defective.  And  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclu- 
sion, that  if  there  had  been  an  equal  exemption,  not 
only  in  this  country  but  throughout  Europe,  from 
adverse  seasons  in  the  latter,  as  in  the  former 
period,  we  shonld  have  witnessed,  notwithstanding 
the  increase  of  population,  a  much  lower  range  of 
prices,  and  have  continued,  under  the  operation  of 
the  bounty,  to  have  been  an  exporting  country. 
The  contrast  in  that  case  would  have  been  still 
greater  than  it  is  between  the  prices  of  corn  im- 
mediately before,  and  those  subsequent  to  1793. 
As  it  was,  the  irregularity  of  the  seasons,  and  the 
more  frequent  recurrence  of  comparatively  deficient 
crops  in  the  last  35  years  of  the  18th  century,  ap- 
pear to  have  compensated  for  the  lower  range  of  the 
first  65  years,  and  to  have  had  the  effect  of  raising 
the  average  price  of  the  entire  century  to  a  level 
with  the  average  price  of  the  whole  of  the  17th 
century.  The  comparison  of  the  average  prices 
of  wheat  in  the  two  centuries  is  thus  given  by  Ar- 
thur Young  :  — 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  83 

/.    s.     d. 

17th  century        -         -     118  2  1  the  Winchester 
18th  century        -         -     1   18  7  J        quarter.* 

It  would  lead  into  too  wide  a  field  of  discussion 
to  enter  upon  the  various  questions  which  are  sug- 
gested by  this  very  remarkable  coincidence  of  the 

*  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  passage  in  which  the 
above  statement  of  the  averages  is  given :  — 

"  By  collecting  the  average  prices  of  wheat  for  various  periods, 
with  all  the  attention  in  my  power,  I  find  the  progress  through 
four  centuries  has  been  the  following  :  — 

I.    s.    d. 

Average  of  the  13th  century  -  12  9  per  quarter. 

14th  century  -  16  0 

15th  century  -  0  12  0 

16th  century  -  13  8 

"  This  result  does  not  correspond  with  any  general  authority  I 
have  met  with,  which  should  not  cause  surprise,  because  the  docu- 
ments were  equally  unknown  to  Dr.  Adam  Smith,  Sir  George 
Shuckburgh,  and  probably  to  some  other  writers  who  have 
treated  generally  on  the  subject. 

"  From  1595  we  have  fortunately  a  regular  register  of  wheat  at 
Windsor  ;  but  as  the  measure  there  is  nine  gallons,  and  the  price 
minuted  that  of  the  best  wheat  in  the  market,  the  sums  are  re- 
duced two  ninths  to  bring  them  to  the  Winchester  measure  and 
average  quality,  until  the  year  1771,  when  Catherwood's  tables 
for  the  average  of  the  whole  kingdom,  by  the  authority  of  the 
Register  Act,  commenced  ;  the  price  of  this  long  period  I  have 
reduced  to  the  following  average  :  — 

That  of  the  17th  century  was 
18th  century 

Being  a  rise  of  only  ^d.  per  bushel. 

"  The  equality  between  these  two  centuries  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  circumstances  to  be  met  with  in  the  economical  his- 
tory of  this  country.  The  average  from  1701  to  1766,  was 
\l.  12^.  W.,  which  is  a  fall  of  sixteen  per  cent,  below  the  price 
of  the  whole  preceding  century.  The  average  of  the  23  years 
from  1767  to  1789,  both  inclusive,  was  21.  5s.  3d.  ;  from  1767 
to  1800,  being  34  years,  the  price  was  21.  10s.  6d.  —  Progressive 
Value  of  Money,  p.  75. 

G    2 


/.     s. 

d. 

1    18 

2 

1   18 

7 

84  EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS. 

price  on  a  comparison  of  the  two  centuries.*  It  is 
sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  the  present  inquiry, 
tliat  in  the  surveys  which  have  been  taken  of  series 
extending  as  far  as  50  and  60t  years  each,  compared 
with  a  series  of  an  equal  number  of  years  imme- 
diately preceding  or  succeeding,  during  those  two 
centuries,  it  has  appeared  that  seasons  of  a  favour- 
able or  unfavourable  cliaracter  have  prevailed  in  a 
very  different  degree  or  frequency  of  occurrence  in 
the  respective  series ;  and  that  there  is  nothing 
therefore  at  variance  with  experience  derived  from 
former  periods  of  our  history,  in  the  assignment  of 

*  Any  attempt  to  explain  that  extraordinary  fact  would  involve 
the  necessity  of  a  consideration  of  many  points,  upon  which  the 
means  of  information  are  wanting  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  to  how 
far  the  cost  of  production  might  not  be  in  the  course  of  progres- 
sive reduction,  so  as,  with  the  aid  of  a  more  than  ordinary  exemp- 
tion from  seasons  of  scarcity,  to  countervail  the  continued  depre- 
ciation w^hich  gold  and  silver  appear  to  have  been,  however 
slowly,  undergoing  in  the  ISth  century.  The  corn  laws  must 
be  supposed  to  have  had  some  operation,  the  precise  nature 
of  which  it  would  be  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  trace. 
At  the  same  time,  as  the  price  in  this  country  did  not,  during 
those  two  centuries,  differ  materially  from  the  general  prices  of 
Europe,  the  presumption  is,  that  the  corn  laws,  although  they 
might,  and  doubtless  did,  occasionally  operate  in  aggravation  of 
other  causes  of  variation,  must,  in  some  instances,  have  operated 
in  compensation  ;  so  that,  however  unjust  and  impolitic,  however 
complex  and  absurd  the  system,  its  influence  on  prices  is  not 
very  discernible  down  to  the  conclusion  of  the  last  century. 

f  It  Is  not  essential  to  the  purposes  of  the  argument  on  the 
effect  to  be  ascribed  to  a  frequent  recurrence  of  bad  seasons  in 
the  interval  between  1793  and  1818,  to  seek  to  establish  the 
difference  of  frequency  of  recurrence  of  seasons  of  scarcity  or 
abundance  in  series  of  more  than  twenty-four  or  twenty -five 
years.  And  to  this  extent,  at  least,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the 
evidence  adduced  will  have  left  little  room  for  doubt.  But  the 
great  difference  which  has  been  pointed  out  in  the  comparative 
productiveness  arising  apparently  in  a  great  measure  from  the 
exemption  from  bad  seasons  during  an  interval  of  fifty  years, 
combined  with  the  near  approximation  of  the  average  prices  of 
each  of  the  tvvo  last  centuries,  may  fairly  justify  a  suspicion,  if  it 
does  not  go  the  length  of  authorising  the  conclusion,  that  a  series 
of  100  years  at  least  is  requisite  to  reduce  to  a  fair  average  the 
inequalities  of  the  seasons. 


EFFECT    OF    THE    SEASONS.  85 

a  greater  proportion  of  unfavourable  seasons  in  the 
interval  between  1792  and  1819,  than  in  an  equal 
interval  anterior  or  subsequent  to  that  period. 

It  is  moreover  to  be  borne  in  mind,  in  estimating 
the  effects  of  a  more  than  usually  frequent  recur- 
rence of  seasons  of  scarcity  or  plenty,  that  an  enor- 
mous difference  must  be  the  result  on  prices, 
according  as  there  may  be  more  or  less  of  impedi- 
ments, wliether  from  the  corn  laws,  or  from  a  state 
of  war,  to  importation  under  deficiency,  or  to  ex- 
portation of  a  surplus,  of  the  home  growth. 

The  corn  laws  were  inoperative,  or  nearly  so, 
between  1792  and  1815  :  but  the  war  which  pre- 
vailed during  that  interval  operated  most  powerfully 
in  aggravation  of  the  influence  of  the  seasons.  The 
very  great  difference  arising  from  the  effects  of  the 
last  war  on  the  prices  of  corn  will  be  exemplified 
in  the  period  of  high  prices,  which  is  about  to  come 
under  examination.  But  before  proceeding  to  the 
consideration  of  that  period,  it  is  desirable  to  obtain 
a  clear  view  of  the  o-eneral  effects  of  war  on  prices, 
and  of  the  specific  effects  which  may  be  ascribed 
to  the  last  war. 


G  3 


86 


PART  II. 

ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  WAR. 


CHAP.  I. 

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT. 

In  estimating  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  war 
and  transition  from  war  to  peace  may  affect  general 
prices,  two  distinct  questions  arise  :  the  one  is,  how 
far  the  taxes  requisite  to  defray  the  extraordinary 
expenses  attending  a  state  of  war  are  calculated  to 
raise  prices ;  and  the  other  is,  whether  the  prices 
of  commodities  in  general  (including  food  and  ne- 
cessaries), independent  of  the  degree  in  which  they 
may  be  affected  directly  or  indirectly  by  taxation, 
are  liable  to  be  influenced  by  war,  and  in  what 
degree,  through  the  medium  of  supply  and  de- 
mand. 


EFFECT    OF   WAR.  87 


CHAP.  II. 


EFFECTS    OF    TAXATION    ON     THE     FLUCTJJATION     OF 
GENERAL    PRICES. 

The  effects  of  taxation  on  prices  are  liable  to  vary 
according  to  the  mode  in  which  the  taxes  are 
imposed. 

An  income  or  property  tax,  equally  levied  upon 
all  classes,  would  not,  in  any  way  that  I  can  con- 
ceive, tend  to  raise  general  prices. 

Taxes  levied  upon  particular  commodities  have, 
in  general,  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  those 
commodities  ;  and  manufactured  articles  must  be 
raised  in  price  in  some  proportion  to  whatever  tax 
may  be  imposed  on  the  raw  materials.  But  it 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of 
taxes  upon  one  set  of  commodities,  that  all  other 
commodities,  although  untaxed,  should  be  raised 
in  price,  while  there  are  strong  grounds  of  pre- 
sumption that,  under  some  circumstances,  there 
might  be  an  opposite  tendency. 

The  conditions  through  which  taxes  upon  one 
set  of  commodities  are  calculated  to  have  an  in- 
direct or  circuitous  effect  in  raising  the  price  of 
untaxed  commodities,  are,  that  the  objects  taxed 
should  be  the  ingredients  or  the  instruments  of 
production  ;  and  that  such  taxes  should  not  apply  • 
generally,  and  nearly  equally,  to  all  productions. 

If  the  taxes  be  laid  on  the  ingredients  or  instru- 
ments of  production  of  some  particular  article  and 
not  of  others,  it  is   clear  that  such   article  must 

G  4- 


88  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

advance  in  price  as  the  condition  of  continued 
supply ;  without  such  advance  tlie  article  would 
not  yield  a  profit  equal  to  that  derived  from  other 
productions,  and  it  would,  after  some  interval,  cease 
to  be  produced  in  equal  quantity,  till  the  diminished 
supply  should  raise  the  price  in  some  proportion 
to  the  tax. 

But  if  taxes  on  the  instruments  of  production, 
as  on  corn,  or  other  necessaries  of  the  labourer,  or 
on  tlie  materials  composing  machinery  and  the 
implements  of  husbandry,  apply  equally,  or  nearly 
equally,  to  all  branches  of  industry,  they  cannot 
have  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  the  produce 
to  which  they  are  applied  ;  for,  provided  the  power 
of  reproducing  in  general  be  not  impaired,  there 
will  be  no  inducement  to  withdraw  capital  from  one 
occupation  and  to  transfer  it  to  another.  An  ad- 
vance of  price  is  not,  under  such  circumstances, 
a  condition  of  continued  supply. 

In  this  country  the  taxes  on  the  necessaries  of 
the  labourer,  and  on  the  instruments  of  production, 
do  not  apply^exclusively  to  agriculture  ;  they  apply, 
at  least  in  an  equal,  and  probably  in  more  than  an 
equal,  degree,  to  other  branches  of  industry  ;  and 
therefore,  according  to  the  principles  here  stated, 
they  are  not  calculated  to  have  the  effect  of  raising 
the  prices  of  agricultural  produce,  nor,  in  general, 
of  raising  the  prices  of  other  articles  that  are  not 
the  immediate  objects  of  taxation. 

It  is  not  my  intention,  at  present,  to  enter  into 
a  detailed  statement  of  the  grounds  for  this  opinion, 
which  would  involve  a  discussion  of  the  principles 
of  taxation ;  a  subject  foreign  to  the  purpose  of 
this  inquiry.  It  is  sufficient  to  remark,  in  general 
terms,  that  if  the  level  of  the  prices  of  articles  not 
taxed,  agircultural  produce,  for  instance,  were 
raised  by  the  taxes  laid  on  other  articles,  it  would 
follow,  that  if  the  whole  amount  of  taxation  levied 
during  a  war  were  continued  in  peace,  there  would. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  89 

as  far  as  taxation  is  concerned,  be  no  fall  of  prices 
in  the  transition  from  war  to  peace. 

As,  therefore,  the  whole  amount  of  taxation 
(including  land-tax,  tithe,  and  poor-rate)  down  to 
the  summer  of  1822,  was  as  great  as  during  the 
war,  with  the  exception  of  the  income  tax,  the  in- 
ference is,  tliatin  as  far  as  untaxed  commodities  and 
labour  were  raised  in  price  by  that  cause,  the  same 
cause,  subsisting  down  to  the  summer  of  1822, 
should  have  prevented  prices  from  falling  to  the 
level  to  which  they  would  otherwise  have  declined. 
And  as  the  controversy  has  mainly  turned  upon  the 
contrast  between  prices  during  the  war  and  since 
the  peace,  till  the  close  of  1822,  the  lowest  point 
having  been  reached  before  any  remission  of  tax- 
ation, the  income  tax  excepted,  we  may  fairly 
exclude  the  operation  of  taxes  from  among  the 
causes  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  untaxed 
commodities,  such  as  agricultural  produce,  or  of 
commodities  divested  of  the  taxes  to  which  they 
may  be  liable  on  importation  or  consumption. 

I  shall  therefore  proceed  to  examine  how  far 
war,  independent  of  taxation,  may  have  contri- 
buted to  the  fluctuation  of  prices. 


90  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 


CHAP.  III. 

EFFECT  OF  THE  EXTRA  DEMAND  OR  CONSUMPTION 
SUPPOSED  TO  ARISE  OUT  OF  A  STATE  OF  WAR  IN 
GENERAL. 

Those  persons  who  consider  the  range  of  high 
prices  which  prevailed  from  1793  to  1814,  as  being 
fully  accounted  for  by  the  war,  independently  of 
its  attendant  taxation,  proceed  on  the  assumed 
operation  of  the  following  causes  :  — 

1.  An  extra  demand  or  consumption  arising  out 
of  a  state  of  war  in  general. 

2.  The  extra  demand  or  consumption  peculiarly 
characterising  the  last  war. 

3.  The  monopoly  of  trade  enjoyed  b}'^  this  coun- 
try.    And, 

4.  The  stimulus  or  excitement  to  increased  po- 
pulation, production,  and  consumption,  occasioned 
by  the  profuse  government  expenditure  during  the 
above  period. 


Section   1. — Extra   Demand   or    Conswmption 
arising  out  of  a  state  of  War  in  general. 

The  reasoning  in  support  of  the  opinion,  that 
the  principal  phenomena  of  high  prices  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  effects  of  war  in  general,  through  the 
medium  of  extra  demand,  independently  of  any 
reference  to  circumstances  affecting  the  supply, 
may  be  stated  in  substance  as  follows  :  — 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  91 

That  the  whole  of  the  government  expenditure 
for  naval  and  military  purposes  may  be  regarded  as 
creating  a  new  source  of  demand  for  the  articles 
constituting  that  expenditure,  and  consequently  as 
tending  to  raise  the  price  of  such  articles. 

That  not  only  the  price  of  those  commodities, 
which  come  directly  under  the  description  of  naval 
and  military  stores,  must  experience  an  advance  in 
consequence  of  the  increased  demand,  but  that 
the  price  of  corn  and  other  necessaries  must  like- 
wise be  affected  in  a  considerable  degree  by  the 
additional  consumption  occasioned  by  the  main- 
tenance of  the  men  composing  the  fleets  and 
armies. 

That  not  only  the  demand  for  seamen  and 
soldiers  must  tend  directly  to  raise  the  rate  of 
wages  of  that  description  of  labourers  from  among 
whom  these  men  are  taken,  and  indirectly  the 
rate  of  wages  generally ;  but  that  the  increased 
demand  for  various  kinds  of  manufactured  articles 
requisite  for  the  equipment  of  fleets  and  armies,  is 
calculated  further  to  raise  the  rate  of  wages ;  and 
that  this  increased  demand  for  labour,  and  the 
consequent  advance  of  wages  in  general,  naturally 
occasion  increased  population  and  increased  con- 
sumption by  the  labouring  classes. 

Thus  the  government  expenditure  in  all  its 
ramifications  is  thought  to  extend  the  sphere  and 
increase  the  activity  of  demand  for  necessaries, 
to  operate  directly  or  indirectly  in  promoting 
briskness  of  circulation,  to  vivify  every  branch  of 
industry,  and  consequently  to  stimulate  exertion  to 
an  increase  of  every  kind  of  production. 

The  cessation,  by  the  peace,  of  all  such  extra 
demand,  the  great  customer  war  being  withdrawn, 
(when  by  the  stimulus  of  previous  high  prices 
there  was  a  general  increase  of  production,)  v/ould 
naturally,  it  is  supposed,  account  for  falling  markets 
and   consequent    distress   among    the    producing 


92  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

classes,  and  for  reduced  wages  and  diminished 
consumption  ;  these  leading,  through  a  long  course 
of  suffering,  to  the  only  remedy,  viz.  a  diminished 
production. 

The  fallacy  of  this  doctrine,  which  represents  a 
general  elevation  of  prices,  both  of  commodities 
and  labour,  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of  a 
state  of  war,  proceeds  (and  cannot  otherwise  than 
so  proceed)  on  the  supposition  that  the  money 
expended  by  the  government  consists  of  funds 
distinct  from  and  over  and  above  any  that  before 
existed  ;  whereas,  it  is  perfectly  demonstrable,  that 
an  expenditure  by  government,  whether  defrayed 
by  immediate  taxes  to  the  whole  amount,  or  by 
loan  on  the  anticipation  of  taxes  to  be  levied,  is 
nothing  but  a  change  in  the  mode  of  laying  out 
the  same  sum  of  money ;  and  that  what  is  ex- 
pended by  government  would  and  must  have  been 
laid  out  by  individuals  upon  objects  of  consump- 
tion, productive  or  unproductive. 

I  am  here  supposing  that,  both  on  the  part  of 
government  and  on  that  of  individuals,  the  habit  of 
hoarding  to  any  extent  is  out  of  the  question.  If 
government  were  in  the  practice  of  collecting  a 
surplus  *revenue  in  coin  in  time  of  peace,  and  of 
accumulating  it  as  treasure  to  be  expended  on  the 
occurrence  of  a  war,  then  indeed  there  would  be  a 
marked  difference  in  general  prices  on  the  tran- 
sition from  peace  to  war ;  but  even  this  addition  to 
the  circulating  medium  would  be  limited  in  its 
effect  on  prices  to  the  time  within  which  the  trea- 
sure was  in  a  course  of  progressive  outlay,  until  its 
natural  distribution  into  other  countries  was  ef- 
fected. A  similar  effect  would  follow,  if  indi- 
viduals were  in  the  habit  of  hoarding,  and  if,  for 
the  purposes  of  war,  they  were  obliged  to  give  up 
their  hoards  to  the  use  of  government.  These  sup- 
positions, however,  are  quite  foreign  to  the  practice 
of  the  times  which  are  under  consideration. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  93 

But  although,  upon  the  breaking  out  of  a  war, 
there  would  not  and  could  not  be  any  increase  in 
the  sum  total  of  demand  (the  quantum  of  the  cir- 
culating medium  remaining  unaltered),  there  would 
be  a  disturbance  of  the  proportion  of  the  prices  of 
commodities,  relativ^ely  to  each  other,  and  relatively 
also  to  the  price  of  labour.  The  articles  which 
might  suddenly  be  the  objects  of  government  de- 
mand would  rise ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those 
articles  which  would,  but  for  the  war,  have  been 
purchased  by  individuals,  from  the  fund  which  is 
withdrawn  from  them,  would  experience  an  equi- 
valent fldl  ;  in  general,  on  such  occasions,  the  de- 
mand by  government,  being  sudden  and  on  a  large 
scale,  for  commodities  of  which  the  supply  has  not 
had  time  to  accommodate  itself  to  such  extra  de- 
mand, may  produce  a  considerable  rise  in  the  price 
of  such  commodities  ;  while  the  corresponding  ab- 
straction of  demand  being  spread  over  an  infinitely 
greater  surflice,  would  operate  in  a  manner  that 
might  be  hardly  perceptible,  but  would  not  be  the 
less  real  on  the  sum  of  general  prices. 

I  have  assumed  that  the  quantity  of  money  in 
circulation  remains  the  same.  If  a  state  of  war 
includes  the  supposition  of  an  increase  in  the  quan- 
tity of  money,  then  indeed  the  case  would  be  al- 
tered. But  an  increase  of  currency  for  government 
purposes  must  be  either  in  coin,  which  can  only  be 
obtained  by  cheapness  relatively  to  other  countries, 
and  consequently  supposes  the  reverse  of  dearness, 
which  is  ascribed  to  war ;  or  in  paper,  which  in- 
volves the  question  of  depreciation,  and  this  will 
be  separately  considered.* 

*  It  may  be  supposed  that  government  might  and  did  avail 
itself  of  its  credit,  in  order  to  carry  on  its  expenditure  through 
that  medium  without  requiring  advances  from  capitalists,  who 
would  thus  have  their  funds  at  liberty  for  their  ordinary  pur- 
poses ;  and  thus  the  government  expenditure  might  constitute 
an  additional  demand.  But  a  slight  consideration  will  show  that 
such  use  of  its  credit  by  government  cannot  furnish  any  per- 


94  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

If  the  war  supplies  are  raised  within  the  year  by 
direct  taxation,  that  is,  by  an  income  or  property 
tax,  it  is  so  perfectly  clear,  that  whatever  is  ex- 
pended by  government  must  be  exactly  so  much 
abstracted  from  what  would  otherwise  have  been 
the  expenditure  by  individuals,  and  that  there  can 
consequently  be  no  elevation  of  the  aggregate  of 
prices,  whatever  may  be  the  disturbance  of  the 
relative  value  of  commodities  and  labour  among 
each  other  (the  aggregate  supply  of  these  remain- 
ing the  same),  as  to  appear  like  a  truism. 

But  it  may  be  a  question  whether  the  raising  of 
money  by  loan* ,  the  interest  of  which  only  is  to  be 
defrayed  by  direct  taxation,  might  not  enable  go- 
vernment to  buy  to  a  greater  amount  than  would  be 

manent  addition  to  the  means  of  purchase.  If  Exchequer,  or 
Navy,  or  Victualling  bills  are  issued  in  payment,  these  bills  will 
occupy  the  money  of  the  capitalists  who  buy  them,  as  much  as 
if  the  latter  lent  the  same  sum  to  government.  Or  if  mere 
book  credit  were  taken  by  government,  the  parties  selling  on 
such  credit  will  have  so  much  less  money  to  go  to  market  with. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  a  use  of  credit,  whether  by  government 
or  by  individuals,  is  virtually,  while  in  operation,  equivalent,  in 
its  effect  on  prices,  to  money ;  but  if  its  effect  be  to  raise  prices 
beyond  the  level  which  they  could  otherwise  maintain,  such 
effect  would  be  felt  in  a  depression  of  the  exchange,  and  (if  the 
paper  were  inconvertible)  in  a  rise  of  the  Mint  price  of  gold 
above  the  market  price,  thus  constituting  that  excess  and  conse- 
quent depreciation  of  the  currency,  which,  as  connected  with 
general  prices,  forms  a  distinct  branch  of  this  inquiry. 

*  Dr.  Chalmers,  in  his  very  elaborate  work  •'  On  Political  Eco- 
nomy, in  connection  with  the  Morals,  State,  and  Prospects  of 
Society,"  1832,  has  done  me  the  honour  of  making  some  remarks 
on  this  part  of  my  argument  contained  in  a  former  work  of  mine. 
After  having  given  it  as  his  opinion  that  a  government  expendi- 
ture defrayed  wholly  by  taxes  would  not  have  the  effect  of  raising 
prices,  except  of  the  articles  taxed,  he  proceeds  to  say,  that  "  Mr. 
Tooke  has  not  fully  adverted  to  the  distinction,  in  point  of  effect, 
between  a  war  expenditure,  that  is  defrayed  wholly  by  taxes,  and 
a  war  expenditure  that  is  defrayed  partly  by  loans."  Dr.  Chal- 
mers agrees  with  me  in  considering  that  "  the  money  which  is  in 
the  hands  of  capitalists  is  as  much  spent  as  would  be  the  same 
money  in  the  hands  of  government ;  and  that,  therefore,  when 
transferred  from  the  one  to  the  other,  there  is  no  greater  demand 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  95 

counterbalanced  by  the  diminished  power  of  indi- 
viduals to  purchase.  A  moment's  consideration, 
however,  will  be  sufficient  to  convince  any  one  that 
there  can  be  no  rise  of  general  prices  in  tliis  case  any 
more  than  in  the  former :  the  money  advanced  to 
government  would,  but  for  such  loan,  have  been  laid 
out  equally  in  purchases,  though  probably  not  of  the 
same  commodities,  or  would  have  been  lent  on  pri- 
vate securities  to  such  persons  as  would  have  laid  it 
out  in  purchases.  It  is  precisely  of  the  nature  of 
money  advanced  by  way  of  mortgage  to  individuals; 
the  lender  would  have,  when  he  had  advanced  the 
money,  just  so  much  less  to  lay  out  as  the  borrower 
had  more.  It  may  be  said  that  the  borrower  might 
spend  it  in  the  maintenance  of  unproductive  labour, 
whereas  the  lender  might  otherwise  have  laid  it  out 
reproductively  :  this  might  or  might  not  be  the  case, 
and  the  difference  might  eventually  aifect  the  quan- 
tum of  production  ;  but  we  have  supposed  the 
aggregate  supply  to  be  undiminished  by  war ;  for 
how  far  it  may  be  calculated  to  diminish  supply  is 
a  separate  question.  All  that  is  now  contended 
for  is,  that  there  cannot,  by  the  mere  loan  to  go- 
vernment, be  any  addition  to  the  total  of  demand  for 
commodities,  whatever  might  be  the  difference  in 
the  relative  proportions  of  them.* 

thereby  created  to  bear  on  the  general  market,  and  so  to  raise 
prices.  But,"  he  adds,  "  it  should  be  considered  that  though 
such  a  transference  gives  rise  to  no  greater  demand,  it  gives  rise 
to  a  less  supply;  and  that  this  will  raise  prices  just  as  effectu- 
ally." It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  I  have  not  neglected  this 
consideration,  but  have  referred  to  it  as  a  distinct  branch  of  the 
argument,  viz.  the  effect  of  war  in  diminishing  or  obstructing 
supply. 

*  The  raising  of  the  funds  requisite  for  the  purposes  of  the  war, 
by  loan,  might  be  supposed  to  have  the  effect  of  temporarily 
affecting  the  channels  of  circulation.  The  amount  advanced  to 
government  would  be,  it  may  be  thought,  collected  from  among 
large  sums  of  monied  capital,  seeking  investment,  some  of 
which  might  have  lain  dormant,  w^aiting  to  be  so  called  forth. 
And  if,  w  hen  paid  into  the  Exchequer,  or  into  the  Bank,  it  were 


96  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

In  the  case  of  indirect  taxation,  that  is,  of  taxes 
on  commodities,  whether  for  defraying  the  whole 
expenditure  or  the  mere  interest  of  loans,  the  ar- 
ticles immediately  taxed  must,  as  I  have  already 
admitted,  rise  in  price  in  some  proportion  to  the 
tax :  but  a  rise  in  price  from  this  cause  would  be 
unconnected  with  any  such  increased  demand  af- 
fecting commodities  generally,  as  is  assumed  by 
those  who  consider  that  the  expenditure  of  govern, 
ment  forms  a  fresh  fund,  whether  arising  from 
taxes  or  loans. 

Viewed  therefore  upon  general  grounds,  the 
conclusion  appears  to  be  irresistible,  that  the  extra 
demand  or  consumption  arising  from  government 
expenditure  cannot  have  the  effect  of  raising  the 
aggregate  of  prices  ;  and  this  conclusion  from  ge- 
neral reasoning  is  fully  borne  out  by  a  reference  to 
experience  of  the  effect  of  former  wars  upon 
prices. 

It  is  of  course  to  be  understood  that  articles 
which  are  subject  to  a  tax,  such  as  malt,  or  to  in- 
creased charges  of  importation,  such  as  colonial 
and  foreign  produce,  or  to  extra  demand  for  naval 
and  military  stores,  such  as  saltpetre  and  cordage, 
do  not  come  into  the  comparison  of  general  prices. 


immediately  distributed  in  payments  by  government,  there  might 
be  a  temporary  briskness  of  demand  upon  the  distribution  through 
the  minuter  channels  of  the  circulation  of  sums  which  were  pre- 
viously collected  in  masses.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  much 
ground  for  the  supposition,  that  any  marked  effect  would  be  pro- 
duced in  this  way,  even  admitting  that  it  were  consonant  to  the 
practice,  which  it  is  not.  For,  in  point  of  fact,  the  payments  by 
government  were  made,  not  suddenly,  but  distributed  over  inter- 
vals of  some  length.  And  so  far  from  the  distribution  of  the  sums 
paid  into  the  Bank  by  the  subscribers  to  the  loans  being  imme- 
diate, they  would,  in  some  instances,  have  been  inconveniently 
withheld  from  circulation,  had  it  not  been  that  the  Bank,  with 
a  view  to  avoid  such  inconvenient  contraction,  used  to  make  ad- 
vances to  the  subscribers  for  a  limited  time  for  the  amount  of 
their  subscriptions  after  the  first  payment. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  97 

With  these  exceptions  it  will  appear,  on  reference  to 
former  periods  of  our  history,  that  there  is  no  observ- 
able coincidence  of  a  rise  of  price  during  war,  and  a 
fall  during  peace.  On  the  contrary,  it  so  happens 
that,  in  the  case  of  the  agricultural  produce  of  this 
country,  there  was  for  upwards  of  a  hundred  years 
previous  to  1793  as  low  a  range  of  prices  during 
periods  of  war  as  during  the  intervals  of  peace. 
This  has  been  eminently  the  case  with  respect  to 
wheat,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  statement 
of  the  Windsor  prices  from  the  Eton  Tables  :  — 


£   s.     d. 

1688  to  1697 

10  years 

5  War 

-  2  2  6| 

1698 

1701 

4. 

Peace  ■ 

■  2  G  0 

1702 

1712 

11 

War   • 

"220 

1713 

1739 

27 

Peace  ■ 

•  1  15  lOf 

1740 

1748 

9 

War   . 

.  1  11  6i 

1749 

1754 

6 

Peace  ■ 

-  1  13  Hi 

1755 

1762 

8 

War   ■ 

•  1  17  It 

1763 

1774 

12 

Peace  ■ 

■  2  8  11^ 

1775 

1782 

8 

War 

-266^ 

1783 

1792 

10 

Peace  • 

■  2  10  2^ 

A  result  nearly  similar  is  observable  in  the  price 
of  meat,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to  Sir  F. 
Morton  Eden's  work,  entitled  "  State  of  the  Poor," 
containing  extracts  from  the  Victualling  Office 
prices.  See  also  the  prices  of  the  Greenwich  and 
Bethlem  Hospital  contracts,  in  the  Appendix  to 
the  several  Bullion  and  Agricultural  Reports  of 
the  Lords  and  Commons,  by  all  of  whiqh  it  will 
appear  that  the  prices  of  meat  and  other  provisions 
were  as  low  in  the  periods  of  war  as  in  those  of 
peace,  and  in  some  instances  lower.  The  Victual- 
ling Office  returns  are  the  more  striking,  because 
the  demands  for  the  navy  must  be  supposed  to  be 
calculated  to  operate  in  a  greater  degree  on  this 
description  of  food  than  on  corn. 

The  prices  of  wool  would  offier  nearly  the  same 
result. 

Other  articles  might  be  enumerated,  as  affiarding 
a  similar  conclusion. 

H 


98 


EFFECT    OF    WAR. 


Nor  do  the  wages  of  labour  appear  to  have  been, 
in  general,  higlier  during  war  than  in  the  intervals 
of  peace :  this  will  appear  from  the  following  ex- 
tract from  the  Greenwich  Hospital  prices  in  the 
Appendix  to  the  Commons'  Report  on  the  Re- 
sumption of  Cash  Payments  (page  338.). 


Carpenters 

Bricklayers 

Masons 

Plumbers 

per 

Day. 

per 

Day. 

per  Day. 

per  Day. 

S. 

^. 

S. 

rf. 

s.    d. 

s.     d. 

Peace   i]l^° 

2 
2 

6 
6 

2 
2 

6 
6 

2     6 
2     6 

3     0 
3     0 

War      i  I'^^^O 
^^"^      \  1745 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2     8 

3     0 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2     8 

3     6 

Peace       1750 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2     8 

2     6 

War      P"^^^ 
^^^      1 1760 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2     8 

2     6 

2 

6 

2 

6 

2     8 

2     6 

Peace   [Hf^ 

2 
2 

6 
6 

2 

2 

4 
4 

2     8 
2     8 

3     0 
3     0 

War      -f^^^^ 
^^"^      \  1780 

2 

6 

2 

4 

2  10 

3     0 

2 

6 

2 

4 

2  10 

3     0 

Peace   P^^^ 
reace   |  j^qq 

2 

6 

2 

4 

2  10 

3     3 

2 

6 

2 

4 

2  10 

3     3 

Here  then,  through  the  course  of  such  a  series 
of  years,  we  have  surely  proof  sufficient  that  it  is 
not  a  necessary  consequence  of  a  state  of  war  that 
the  prices  of  labour  *  of  agricultural  produce,  and 

*  It  has  been  contended,  that  the  government  expenditure,  by 
creating  an  extra  demand  for  men  for  the  army  and  navy,  raised 
the  general  rate  of  wages ;  and  that  the  rise  of  wages  enabled 
the  labouring  classes  to  expend  more  money  on  the  purchase  of 
food  and  other  necessaries.  If  the  demand  for  men  by  govern- 
ment was  not  a  substitution  only  for  the  demand  which  would 
otherwise  have  existed  by  individual  employers,  but  constituted 
a  clear  additio?ial  demand  for  labour,  the  supply  of  it  remaining 
the  same,  some  rise  in  the  general  price  of  labour  would  be  the 
consequence.  It  does  not  appear  that,  in  the  wars  preceding  the 
last,  there  was  any  sensible  increase  of  wages  ;  the  probability, 
therefore,  is,  that  the  employment  of  men  by  the  government  of 
those  times  was  merely  substituted  for  what,  but  for  the  war, 
would  have  been  their  employment  for  other  purposes.  And 
the  only  ground  for  distinguishing  the  operation  of  the  last  war 
from  former  wars,  in  that  respect,  is  the  larger  numbers,  rela- 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  99 

other  articles  not  taxed,  or  not  the  immediate 
objects  of  war  consumption,  should  rise ;  for  in  fact 
they  were  lowei',  in  the  majority  of  instances,  dur- 
ing the  periods  of  war,  than  in  the  intervals  of 
peace.  That  they  should  in  some  have  been  lower 
in  war  than  in  peace  might,  perhaps,  to  a  certain 
extent,  have  been  owing  to  a  disturbance  of  the 
channels  of  circulation,  and  to  an  increase  in  the 
functions  of  money,  while  the  principles  and  prac- 
tice of  banking  and  credit  were  so  imperfectly 
understood.  At  the  same  time,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  greater  cheapness  of  the  periods  of 
war  must  have  arisen  mainly  from  their  co-inci- 
dence with  more  favourable  seasons.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  the  flict  itself  of  the  relative  cheapness  of 
periods  of  war  in  tlie  whole  term  is  decisive  against 
the  effect  ascribed  to  it,  of  raising  the  prices  of 
provisions,    and   of  commodities  generally,    inde- 


tively  to  the  population,  who  were  employed  by  government  in 
the  last  war.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vicissitudes  of  manu- 
factures and  commerce  were,  from  the  character  of  the  last 
war,  more  frequent  than  in  former  wars  ;  and,  in  many  instances, 
the  government  demand  did  little  more  than  absorb  the  numbers 
thus  thrown  out  of  employ.  Mr.  M'  Culloch  in  the  following 
passage  seems  to  consider  that  the  demand  for  men  by  govern- 
ment is  a  mere  substituted  demand  :  — 

"  It  has  sometimes  been  stated  that  a  loan  occasions,  while 
government  is  spending  it,  a  greater  demand  for  labour  than  it 
would  have  afforded  had  it  continued  in  the  possession  of  indi- 
viduals. I  confess,  however,  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  dis- 
cover any  grounds  for  this  opinion.  If  the  government  expend 
the  loan  in  the  purchase  of  military  stores,  they  will  not  by 
doing  so  give  any  greater  stimulus  to  labour  than  the  capital- 
ists, who  have  made  the  loan,  would  have  given  had  they  em- 
ployed it  to  purchase  raw  or  manufactured  goods  ;  and  suppose 
government  employed  it  in  hiring  soldiers  and  sailors,  they  will 
not  thereby  occasion  a  greater  demand  for  labour  than  would 
have  been  occasioned  by  employing  it  to  hire  common  la- 
bour. That  there  is  frequently  a  very  brisk  demand  for  labour 
during  periods  of  war  is  no  doubt  true ;  but  we  shall  cer- 
tainly find  the  cause  of  it  in  something  else  than  the  mere  sub- 
stitution of  government  employment  for  that  afforded  by  in- 
dividuals."— Principles  of  Political  Economy,  2d  edit.  p.  498. 

H    52 


100  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

pendent  of  the  degree  in  whicli  they  were  taxed  ; 
and  what,  perhaps,  is  the  most  decisive  consider- 
ation of  all  against  the  assumption  of  that  prepon- 
derating influence,  is  that  the  period  of  the  greatest 
cheapness  in  the  whole  term  of  105  years,  viz.  the 
period  between  1740  and  1748*,  is  precisely  that 
of  an  uninterrupted  and  very  large  war  expendi- 
ture, defrayed  chiefly  by  loans. t 


Section  2.  —  Effect  of  the  extra  Demand  or  Con- 
sumption attributed  specialli/  to  the  last  JVar. 

So  far  as  to  the  presumption  of  the  eflPect  of  war 
generally,  in  raising  prices  :  but  it  has  been  asked, 
*'  who,  that  contemplated  the  character  of  the 
late  war,  that  referred  to  the  great  military  force 
which  was  employed  in  Europe,  and  to  the  conse- 
quent demand  of  all  the  great  articles  of  consump- 
tion, could  for  a  moment  think  of  comparing  the 
events  of  that  war,  and  the  state  of  things  growing 
out  of  it,  with  the  events  and  effects  of  former 
wars  ?"t  Now,  the  obvious  answer  is,  that  as  to  this 

*  There  is  in  this  instance  a  specific  cause  of  a  reduction  of 
the  price  in  consequence  of  the  war.  As  we  had  at  that  time  a 
large  exportable  surplus  of  corn,  chiefly  destined  for  France, 
with  which  we  were  at  that  time  at  war,  the  increased  freight  and 
insurance  would,  if  the  demand  from  abroad  were  not  so  urgent 
as  to  compel  the  foreign  buyer  to  pay  those  charges,  fall  on  the 
exporter,  and  consequently  form  a  deduction  from  the  price. 

f  The  government  expenditui'e  arising  from  the  war  of  that 
period  must  be  considered  to  have  been  very  large,  relatively  to 
the  ordinary  peace  establishment,  and  relatively  likewise  to  the 
general  level  of  the  prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  To  con- 
temporaries it  appeared  of  extraordinary  magnitude.  Lord 
Bolingbroke  says,  "  Our  parliamentary  aids,  from  the  year  1740 
exclusively,  to  the  year  174-8  inclusively,  amount  to  55,522,159/. 
16s.  3(/. ;  a  sum  that  will  appear  incredible  to  future  generations, 
and  is  so  almost  to  the  present." — Some  Reflections  on  llwpresent 
State  of  the  Nation,  1749,  edit.  1773,  vol.iv.  p.  137. 

:j:  Lord  Liverpool's  Speech,  16th  July,  1822. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  101 

particular  effect  of  war  consumption  upon  prices,  it 
is  only  a  question  of  degree,  whatever  the  difference 
of  the  nature  of  the  contest  may  have  been  in  other 
respects ;  and  further,  that,  upon  the  general 
grounds  before  stated,  the  extra  demand  for  such 
objects  by  the  belligerent  powers  must  be  compen- 
sated, and  probably  more  than  compensated,  by 
corresponding  privations  on  the  part  of  their 
subjects. 

With  regard  to  the  alleged  influence  of  war- 
demand  in  raising  the  price  of  provisions,  it  must 
doubtless  be  admitted  as  operating  in  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  large  armies  in  a  state  of 
active  military  operations ;  for  it  is  scarcely  pos- 
sible that  the  local  supply  can  accommodate  itself, 
except  at  a  great  advance  of  price,  to  so  sudden 
and  casual  a  source  of  extra  demand.  But  apply- 
ing to  this  country  the  supposition  of  extra  demand, 
arising  out  of  a  state  of  war,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  quantity  of  food  required  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  soldiers  and  sailors  composing  the 
war  establishment  is  not  all  so  much  beyond  what 
would  otherwise  have  been  consumed.  The  only 
effectual  addition  of  demand  is  for  that  part  which 
is  beyond  w^hat  would  have  been  the  consumption 
of  the  same  individuals  in  their  former  occupa- 
tions *  J  but  from  this  addition,  small  as  it  must 

*  This  additional  consumption  is  hardlj'^  worth  mentioning  ; 
for,  take  it  at  its  utmost  amount,  it  is  a  quantity  quite  insig- 
nificant compared  with  the  difference  between  a  good  and  a  bad 
crop  of  wheat.  —  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  extra  con- 
sumption is  four  bushels  of  wheat  per  head  for  each  (an  extra- 
vagant supposition)  of  the  men  composing  the  army  and  navy ; 
suppose  these  to  have  amounted  to  300,000,  there  is  an  extra 
demand  for  150,000  quarters.  While,  between  the  limits  of  a 
bad  harvest  like  1816,  which  has  been  computed  as  low  as 
9,000,000  quarters,  and  an  abundant  one  like  1820,  which 
was  supposed  to  have  yielded  16,000,000,  there  is  a  difference 
of  supply  of  7?000,000  quarters.  And  accordingly  it  is  well 
known,  by  recent  experience,  that  the  most  wasteful  consump- 
tion produces  very  little  impression  on  a  superabundant  crop. 

H    3 


10^  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

be,  compared  with  the  mass  over  which  it  is  dis- 
tributed, is  to  be  deducted  that  proportion  which 
was  suppUed  from  the  places  abroad  where  our 
fleets  and  armies  were  occasionally  stationed.  Sub- 
ject to  these  deductions,  the  mere  extra  quantity 
consumed  by  the  army  and  navy  must,  when  com- 
pared witli  the  total  production,  be  quite  insigni- 
ficant, and  not  calculated  to  have  any  perceptible 
influence  on  the  price  of  the  principal  articles  of 
food.* 

But,    as   consumption   is   the    measure    of   the 
extent  of  demand t,  and  as    consumption   has  of 


*  The  insignificance  of  the  extra  consumption  or  waste  of 
provisions  by  soldiers  is  expressly  admitted  by  one  of  the  ablest 
advocates  for  the  doctrine  of  the  great  influence  of  a  government 
expenditure  defrayed  by  loans,  on  general  prices.  "  That  part 
of  the  loan  which  is  distributed  in  pay  to  the  troops  is  mostly 
expended  in  provisions  for  their  maintenance.  Probably  a  greater 
quantity  may  be  consumed  by  them  as  soldiers  than  if  they 
continued  in  their  usual  occupation  :  and  this  is  much  dwelt 
upon  by  some  writers  as  the  great  cause  of  extra  consumption 
during  war  ;  but  I  think  more  importance  has  been  attached  to 
this  species  of  waste  than  can  be  justly  ascribed  to  it.'"  —  Ob- 
servations on  the  Effects  produced  by  the  Expenditure  of  Govern- 
ment during  the  Restriction  of  Cash  Payments,  by  William  Blake, 
Esq.  F.K.S.  page  69. 

-j-  This  is  the  sense  in  which  Mr.  Ricardo  uses  the  word  de- 
mand, and  he  expressly  objects  to  admit  the  use  of  the  term  when 
applied  to  a  rise  in  the  price  of  a  commodity  from  an  alteration 
in  the  value  of  money.  "  The  demand  for  a  commodity  cannot 
be  said  to  increase,  if  no  additional  quantity  of  it  be  purchased 
or  consumed  ;  and  yet  under  such  circumstances  its  money  value 
may  rise.  Thus,  if  the  value  of  money  were  to  fall,  the  price  of 
every  commodity  would  rise,  for  each  of  the  competitors  would 
be  willing  to  give  more  money  than  before  on  its  purchase  ;  but 
when  its  price  rose  10  or  20  per  cent.,  if  no  more  were  bought 
than  before,  it  would  not,  I  apprehend,  be  admissible  to  say, 
that  the  variation  in  the  price  of  the  commodity  was  caused  by 
the  increased  demand  for  it."  —  Principles  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy and  Taxation,  3d  edition,  page  46l. 

There  is  another  sense  in  which  the  word  demand  is  fre- 
quently used,  which  is,  in  my  opinion,  inadmissible  in  a  dis- 
cussion of  this  kind  ;  and  that  is,  where  it  is  applied  to  signify 
the  increased  eagerness  or  competition  of  buyers,  and  consequent 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  103 

late  been  considerably  greater,  and  has  increased 
at  a  more  rapid  rate  than  at  any  period  of  the  war, 
it  is  incumbent  on  those  who  ascribe  all  the  pheno- 
mena of  high  prices  of  provisions  to  war-demand, 
to  show  why  the  smaller  consumption  during  the 
war  should  be  the  cause  of  a  rise  of  prices,  while 
the  greatly  increased  consumption  since  the  peace 
should  have  been  attended  by  a  fall  of  prices. 
Considering  the  progressive  increase  of  population, 
with  the  rapid  improvement  of  our  manufactures, 
which  was  going  on  down  to  the  breaking  out  of 
the  war,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  but 
for  the  war,  there  would  have  been  a  still  greater 
demand  for  food  and  other  necessaries  than  ac- 
tually occurred ;  and  that  consequently,  supposing 


advance  of  price,  occasioned  by  the  scarcity  of  any  particular 
commodity,  or,  in  other  words,  by  an  under  supply  of  it  relatively 
to  the  average  rate  of  consumption. 

The  object  of  the  present  discussion  is  to  determine  whether 
the  high  prices  during  the  war  were  occasioned  by  an  extra 
consumption  arising  out  of  the  war,  that  is,  by  a  consumption 
beyond  the  average  rate  at  which  it  was  proceeding,  inde- 
pendent of  the  war,  or  by  an  under-supply,  compared  with  that 
average  rate;  it  is,  therefore,  of  the  greatest  practical  importance 
so  to  confine  the  use  of  the  term,  as  to  preserve  the  consideration 
of  the  alternative  of  these  two  causes,  or  of  the  proportion  in 
which  each  operated,  perfectly  distinct.  The  advocates  of  the 
doctrine  of  war-demand  have  not  attended  to  this  distinction;  and 
to  the  neglect  of  it  may  be  traced  a  good  deal  of  the  confusion  and 
looseness  of  reasoning  which  pei'vades  their  arguments  in  sup- 
port of  that  doctrine.  If,  in  their  use  of  the  term,  they  actually 
mean  an  under-supply,  relatively  to  what  had  been,  independent 
of  the  war,  the  average  rate  of  consumption,  there  is  no  difference 
between  us,  as  it  will  be  seen  that  I  admit  the  influence  of  the 
late  war  in  raising  prices,  by  increasing  the  cost  of  production,  and 
by  obstructing  and  diminishing  supply.  But  it  is  evident  from 
the  general  tenor  of  their  reasoning,  however  loosely  expressed, 
that  they  do  not  so  understand  the  term,  and  that  they,  in  fact, 
use  it  synonymously  with  consumption  ;  for  they  constantly 
refer  to  the  war  expenditure  as  having  afforded  the  means  of  an 
extra  consumption.  It  is  in  this  sense,  therefore,  that  I  under- 
stand and  use  the  term,  in  its  application  to  the  question  now 
under  discussion. 

H    4 


104  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

the  scarcity  arising  from  the  seasons,  and  the  ob- 
structions to  importation,  to  have  been  the  same 
in  peace  as  in  war,  we  should  have  had  prices  full 
as  high,  if  not  higher,  less  only  the  difference  be- 
tween paper  and  gold. 

There  are  particular  articles  of  which  the  demand 
for  naval  and  military  purposes  forms  so  large  a 
proportion  to  the  total  supply,  that  no  diminution 
of  consumption  by  individuals  can  keep  pace  with 
the  immediate  increase  of  demand  by  government; 
and,  consequently,  the  breaking  out  of  a  war  tends 
to  raise  the  price  of  such  articles  to  a  great  rela- 
tive height ;  but,  even  of  such  articles,  if  the 
consumption  were  not  on  a  progressive  scale  of 
increase  so  rapid  that  the  supply,  with  all  the  en- 
couragement of  a  relatively  high  price,  could  not 
keep  pace  with  the  demand,  the  tendency  is  (sup- 
posing no  impediment,  natural  or  artificial,  to 
production  or  importation)  to  occasion  such  an 
increase  of  quantity,  as  to  reduce  the  price  to 
nearly  the  same  level  as  that  from  which  it  had  ad- 
vanced. And  accordingly  it  will  be  observed,  by 
reference  to  the  table  of  prices,  that  saltpetre, 
hemp,  iron,  &c.,  after  advancing  very  considerably 
under  the  influence  of  a  greatly  extended  demand 
for  military  and  naval  purposes,  tended  downwards 
again  whenever  that  demand  was  not  progressively 
and  rapidly  increasing.  Any  fluctuation  indepen- 
dent of  variations  in  the  extent  of  government 
demand,  may  be  clearly  traced  to  the  greater  or 
Jess  obstructions  to  supply. 


EFFECT    OF   AVAR.  105 


Section  3.  —  On  the  Effects  of  the  Monopoly  of 
Trade  enjoyed  hy  this  Country  dui'ing  the  last 
War. 

It  has  been  contended  that,  admitting  no  influence 
by  war-demand  upon  prices,  except  of  articles  that 
are  used  as  naval  and  military  stores,  there  was  a 
considerable  effect  produced  on  general  prices  by 
the  monopoly  which  the  war,  as  a  consequence  of 
our  ascendency  at  sea,  and  of  our  exclusive  pos- 
session of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  conferred  on 
the  trade  of  this  country.  As  instances  of  the 
extent  of  the  monopoly  of  trade  which  we  thus 
enjoyed,  we  are  referred  to  the  number  of  British 
vessels,  which  were  progressively  increasing  (and 
employed  at  advanced  freights)  with  the  continu- 
ance of  the  war ;  to  the  crowded  state  of  the  river 
and  of  the  docks  ;  to  the  consequently  full  employ- 
ment of  the  various  branches  of  industry  con- 
nected with  the  building,  repairing,  and  outfit  of 
ships  in  the  port  of  London,  and  in  many  of  the 
outports ;  and,  in  short,  to  all  the  signs  of  great 
commercial  activity. 

A  part  of  this  description  is  true.  Never  before 
was  the  shipping  of  this  country  employed  at 
higher  freights  ;  and  scarcely  a  ship  belonging  to 
any  other  nation  could  sail  without  a  licence  from 
the  government  of  this  country.  The  whole  of 
the  exportable  produce  of  the  East  and  West 
Indies,  and  of  a  great  part  of  South  America, 
came  to  our  ports  ;  and  no  part  of  the  continent  of 
Europe  could  obtain  a  supply  of  coffee,  sugar, 
and  other  colonial  articles,  or  of  the  raw  materials 
of  some  of  their  manufactures,  except  from  this 
country.  So  far  we  may  be  said  to  have  enjoyed 
the  monopoly  of  trade ;  but  the  effects  of  this 
species  of  monopoly,  in  its  supposed  extension  of 


106  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

our  shipping   and  foreign   commerce,   have  been 
o'reatlv  mistaken  and  overrated. 

On  a  reference  to  the  parhamentary  returns,  of 
tlie  tonnage  of  British  shipping,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  rate  of  increase  of  it  during  the  war  was 
less  than  it  had  been  during  the  immediately  pre- 
ceding years  of  peace,  or  than  it  has  been  since 
the  termination  of  the  war. 

From  the  amount,  however,  of  the  tonnage  re- 
gistered during  the  war,  ought  to  be  deducted  the 
ships  which  were  engaged  as  transports,  and  which 
could  not  therefore  be  considered  as  forming  a 
part  of  our  mercantile  marine.  The  sliipping 
engaged  as  transports  amounted  to  no  less,  on  an 
average  of  the  latter  years  of  the  war,  than  about 
700  sail,  registering  nearly  200,000  tons ;  which, 
deducted  from  the  total  amount  of  registered  ton- 
nage, leaves  a  greatly  reduced  quantity  of  shipping 
appUcable  to  the  purposes  of  trade  during  the  war, 
compared  with  the  subsequent  years  of  peace.  It 
is  to  be  observ^ed,  too,  that  this  smaller  amount  of 
shipping  during  the  war  was,  in  consequence  of 
the  detention  of  convoys  —  circuitous  voyages,  to 
elude  the  anti-commercial  decrees  of  the  enemy  — 
occasional  embargoes,  and  other  causes  of  delay 
even  in  our  own  or  friendly  ports  —  incapable  of 
carrying  on  nearly  so  much  trade  then,  as  it  would 
at  present,  more  especially  since  the  introduction 
of  steam  navigation.  The  difference  hence  aris- 
ing, in  the  number  of  voyages  performed  by  the 
same  ship  in  a  given  time,  will  account  in  some 
degree  for  the  different  proportion  of  the  tonnage 
cleared  outwards,  to  the  amount  of  registered 
tonnage  at  the  several  periods.  The  same  cir- 
cumstance, combined  with  the  advanced  cost  of 
building  materials  and  of  stores,  will  account  for  the 
high  freights  which  prevailed  during  the  war. 

It  may  be  said  that  this  reduced  employment  of 
British    shipping,    for   commercial   purposes,    was 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  107 

compensated  by  a  greater  employment  of  foreign 
sliips  during  the  war.  True ;  but  does  not  this 
circumstance  militate  with  the  received  ideas  of 
the  nature  of  our  boasted  monopoly  of  trade  ? 
With  regard  to  the  crowded  state  of  the  river  and  of 
the  docks  during  the  war,  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  as 
a  matter  of  notoriety,  that  the  resort  of  shipping  to 
the  port  of  London  has  been  much  greater  since  the 
peace.  And  if  the  building  of  ships  in  the  river  has 
declined,  it  is  because,  in  consequence  of  the  greater 
expenses  attending  the  river  yards,  a  large  proportion 
of  that  branch  of  business  is  transferred  to  the  out- 
ports,  and  not  because  the  annual  amount  of  ship- 
building has  diminished  during  the  peace,  on  a 
comparison  with  the  average  of  the  war,  as  must 
be  evident  from  the  statements  of  the  relative 
amount  of  tonnage  at  the  several  periods.  The 
most  rapid  increase  of  ship-building,  however,  is 
that  which  has  been  going  on  in  British  America, 
in  consequence  of  the  great  cheapness  of  the  ma- 
terials in  that  part  of  the  world.* 

But  what  must  be  conclusive  on  this  and  all 
minor  points  referred  to,  in  proof  of  the  supposed 
effects  of  our  monopoly  of  trade  by  the  w^ar,  is 
that  the  aggregate  amount  of  our  foreign  trade, 
which  can  alone  be  in  question  as  affected  by  the 
monopoly,  was  not  nearly  so  great  during  the  war 
as  it  has  been  since  the  peace ;  and  that  the  rate 
of  increase  was  as  great  in  the  peace  preceding 
1793,  as  in  the  succeeding  interval  of  war. 

One  of  the  effects  of  our  monopoly  of  trade  was  an 
increase  in  the  exports  of  foreign  and  colonial  pro- 

*  Ships  built  in  that  quarter  are,  as  may  easily  be  supposed, 
from  the  nature  of  the  timber,  less  durable,  and  of  an  inferior 
description  in  every  other  respect  to  those  built  in  this  country. 
The  regulation  of  the  timber  duties,  acting  as  a  premium  for 
dry  rot,  and  yielding  in  impolicy  and  injustice  to  our  corn  laws 
only,  is  calculated  greatly  to  increase  the  proportion  of  that  in- 
ferior, and  in  every  way  objectionable,  class  of  shipping. 


lOS  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

diice,the  amountof  which  must  previously  have  swel- 
led the  imports  in  a  corresponding  degree.  In  the 
interval,  however,  between  1807  and  1814,  there 
was  no  corresponding  export  of  the  colonial  pro- 
duce compulsorily  brought  hither  ;  as  it  was  only  in 
1814  that  an  adequate  vent  could  be  found,  on  the 
opening  of  the  ports  of  the  Continent  by  the  peace, 
for  the  accumulation  of  sugar,  coffee,  &;c.  that  had 
taken  place  in  the  preceding  five  years.  The 
value  of  the  colonial  produce  so  accumulated  could 
be  little  short  of  fifteen  milhons  sterling. 

But,  grantingtheutmostthat  ever  has  been  claimed 
(upon  very  insufficient  grounds)  for  the  effects  of  the 
monopoly  arising  out  of  the  war,  in  extending  the 
shipping  and  trade  of  this  country,  it  still  remains  to 
connect  the  description  of  monopoly  with  the  high 
prices  ascribed  to  it.  Now  it  so  happens,  that  not 
an  article  which  was  the  subject  of  monopoly  was, 
as  far  as  I  am  aware,  at  a  higher  price  in  this  coun- 
try than  it  would  have  been  under  the  most  free 
competition.  While  that  monopoly  was  most 
strict,  viz.  in  1811  and  1812,  prices  of  sugar, 
coffee,  dye-woods,  spices,  and  some  descriptions  of 
manufacture,  which  were  the  objects  of  our  ex- 
clusive trade,  were  precisely  those  which,  if  a  de- 
duction be  made  for  the  difference  between  paper 
and  gold,  were  more  depressed  than  they  ever 
were  before  or  have  been  since.  And  it  was  only 
in  the  almost  certain  prospect  of  peace ^  and  con- 
sequently of  the  near  termination  of  the  monopoly ■> 
that  the  prices  of  those  commodities  experienced 
any  decided  advance,  viz.  in  1813  and  1814. 

Dr.  Johnson  defines  the  word  "  Monopoly"  as 
"  the  exclusive  privilege  of  selling :"  but,  if  the 
thing  to  be  sold  exists,  and  is  offered  for  sale  in  as 
unlimited  a  quantity  as  it  would  have  been  without 
that  privilege,  what  is  the  use  of  it  to  the  party 
invested  with  it  ?  If,  when  the  French  and  Dutch 
colonies  in  the  East  and  West  Indies  were  ceded 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  109 

to  this  country,  their  produce  had  been  suppressed 
or  destroyed,  and  their  cultivation  prohibited,  then 
indeed  there  would  have  been  something  sub- 
stantial in  our  monopoly,  as  far  at  least  as  related 
to  price ;  and  the  planters,  or  the  proprietors  of 
the  produce  of  our  old  colonies,  would  have  de- 
rived from  that  circumstance  a  decided  benefit. 
Instead  of  which,  by  a  large  outlay  of  British  ca- 
pital, the  French  West  Indian  islands,  and  the 
Dutch  settlements  of  Demerara  and  Surinam  in 
the  West,  and  Java  in  the  East,  were  rendered  more 
productive  than  they  ever  before  had  been.  The 
collective  and  increased  produce  from  all  these 
sources,  when  poured  into  this  country,  while  the 
export  to  the  Continent  was  restricted,  occasioned 
the  real  depression  attending  a  glut ;  the  very  op- 
posite state  to  that  which  is  commonly  supposed 
to  be  the  consequence  of  a  monopoly.  The  very 
high  prices  of  colonial  produce  in  1813  and  1814 
were,  as  I  have  already  shown,  in  great  part  the 
result  of  ill-judged  speculations  on  the  prospect  of 
peace  ;  and  those  prices  were  not  realised  by  the 
exporters  in  the  eventual  returns ;  but  even  sup- 
posing them  to  have  been  realised,  they  were  so 
transitory,  as  not  to  afford  a  compensation  for  the 
long  previous  depression  ;  and  they  cannot  at 
any  rate  be  considered  as  the  result  of  monopoly 
arising  out  of  the  war,  seeing  that  they  were  only  the 
consequence  of  the  opening  of  the  new  markets  by 
a  peace. 


Section  4. — Effects  of  the  Stimulus  or  Excite- 
ment supposed  to  have  been  occasioned  hy  the 
Government  Expenditure  during  the  last  War. 

The  advocates  of  the  theory  which  accounts  for 
the  high  prices  observable  during  the  late  war,  by 


110  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

the  excitement  supposed  to  arise  from  the  profuse 
government  expenditure,  assume  implictly  that 
the  operation  of  that  cause  was  distincitly  marked 
by  an  unusually  rapid  increase  of  population*,  of 

*  "  These  peculiarities  (that  is,  of  the  late  war)  were  the  un- 
iisually  rapid  increase  of  the pojmlation,"  &c. —  Quarterly  Review, 
No.  57.  p.  222. 

"  It  may  still  most  safely  be  said,  that  in  no  twenty-two  years 
of  our  history,  of  tvhich  tve  have  authentic  accounts,  has  there  ever 
been  so  rapid  an  increase  of  production  and  consumption,  both  in 
respect  of  quantity  and  value,  as  in  the  twenty -two  years  ending 
with  1814."  —  Ibid.  p.  229. 

"  The  population  increased  with  extraordinary  rapidity,  which 
necessarily  implies  such  a  rise  in  the  money  price  of  labour,  as, 
combined  with  more  general  employment,  and  other  advantages 
in  the  purchase  of  clothing  and  foreign  commodities,  would  enable 
the  labouring  classes  to  bring  up  larger  families  than  before." — 
Ibid.  p.  233. 

"  Examine  the  evidence  of  Alderman  Rothwell,  Mr.  Rous,  and 
various  other  witnesses,  who  all  agree  that  during  the  tvar  there 
were  both  greater  production  and  greater  consumption.''^ —  Ob- 
servations on  the  Effects  of  the  Expenditure  of  Government, 
p.  67. 

"  There  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  during  the  war  more  produce 
was  raised,  and  more  ivorh  doner  —  Ibid.  p.  72. 

"  It  is  to  be  observed,  too,  that  though  in  the  first  instance  the 
demand  might  be  for  the  materials  of  war,  it  tvould  gradually  ex- 
tend to  almost  every  commodity  ordinarily  consumed  by  man."  — 
Ibid.  p.  76. 

"  The  low  prices  ( 1822)  are  not  confined  to  corn  alone:  it  is 
well  known  that  manufactures  are  less  in  quantity,  and  less  in 
price  also."  —  Ibid.  p.  93. 

"  The  exciiement  was  not  confined  to  manufactures.  It  ex- 
tended to  the  producers  of  the  raw  materials  in  every  branch  of 
employment :  the  mines  of  copper,  lead,  tin,  iron,  coals,  were  all 
in  activity."  —  Ibid.  p.  89. 

"  It  appears  to  me,  that  in  whatever  degree  minor  circum- 
stances may  have  co-operated,  the  great  and  mighty  source  of  the 
distresses  felt  by  all  classes  of  producers  has  been  the  transition 
that  took  place  at  the  termination  of  the  war  ;  not  the  transition 
from  war  to  peace,  in  the  usual  acceptation  of  those  terms  ;  not 
the  transition  that  arises  iiom  the  diversion  of  capital  from  one 
employment  to  another  employment ;  not  the  transition  from  the 
waste  occasioned  by  the  extra  consumption  of  troops,  either  at 
home  or  engaged  in  actual  warfare ;  but  the  transition  from  an 
immense,  unremitting,  protracted,  effectual  demand  for  almost 
every  article  of  consumption  to  a  comparative  cessation  of  that 
demand."  —  Ibid.  p.  88. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  Ill 

production,  and  consumption  ;  and  that  the  trans- 
ition from  war  to  peace  occasioned  tlie  fall  of 
prices,  not  by  an  increased  supply  and  diminished 
cost  of  production  since  the  peace,  relatively  to  the 
same  or  an  increased  rate  of  consumption,  but 
but  by  a  diminution  of  demand  or  consumption, 
relatively  to  the  same  or  a  diminished  extent  of 
supply. 

Some  distinguished  writers,  too,  have  supposed 
that  the  greater  part  of  the  period  of  the  war  was 
marked  by  an  active  and  flourishing  state  of  our  ma- 
nufactures, and  that  this  was  a  cause  of  an  increased 
demand  for,  and  price  oi",  agricultural  produce. 
Thus,  in  the  article  before  quoted  of  the  Quar- 
terly Review,  No.  57.,  ascribed  to  the  pen  of  an 
eminent  writer,  is  the  following  passage:  —  "  It  is 
undeniable,  that  during  the  greater  part  of  that 
period  (from  1793  to  1814)  the  trade  of  the 
country  was  in  a  state  of  unexampled  prosperity." 
And  Sir  Edward  West,  in  his  very  able  treatise 
on  the  price  of  corn  and  the  wages  of  labour, 
builds  the  greater  part  of  his  theory  on  this  found- 
ation. 

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  the  principal 
arguments  in  favour  of  this  theory  were  brought 
forward  in  publications  and  speeches  of  some  years 
back,  when  the  transition  from  war  to  peace  was 
comparatively  recent,  and  when  many  otherwise 
well  informed  persons  entertained  the  belief  that 
there  was  a  retarded  rate  of  population,  and  less  con- 
sumed, and  less  produced,  and  less  trade,  after  the 
peace,  than  there  had  been  during  the  war.  The  as- 
sumption to  this  effect  is  essential  to  the  theory  of 
the  stimulus  of  war-demand ;  the  stimulus  being 
"distinctly  inferred  from  the  assumed  increase  of 
population,  production,  and  consumption  during 
the  war,  as  compared  with  the  period  which  had 
elapsed  after  the  peace  ;  and  if  the  facts  tallied  with 
the  theory,  the  conclusion  would  be  inevitable. 


11^  EFFECT    OF    WAR, 

that  the  state  of  war  was  more  favourable  than  the 
state  of  peace  to  the  progress  of  population  and 
wealth.  A  hypothesis  so  utterly  irreconcileable 
with  any  reasoning  upon  the  general  effects  of 
war,  or  with  any  experience  of  the  effects  of 
former  wars,  might  naturally  raise  doubts,  whether 
it  was  possible  that  it  could  be  sustained  by  facts. 
But  whatever  question  there  might  be  when  those 
theories  were  broached,  and  in  some  degree  of 
vogue,  the  statistical  information  since  collected, 
has  proved  incontestibly,  that  there  is  not  the 
shadow  of  a  foundation  in  fact,  for  the  assumptions 
on  which  the  theory  proceeds.  To  enter  into  a 
detailed  proof  to  this  effect  would  be  at  present 
a  work  of  superogation,  and  would  needlessly  swell 
this  branch  of  the  subject  to  a  disproportionate 
extent ;  inasmuch  as  an  easy  reference  may  be 
had  to  indisputable  evidence*  of  the  progress  of 
population,  production,  and  consumption,  by  which 
it  appears  that  these  were  in  a  greatly  accelerated 
ratio  from  1814  to  the  present  time,  as  compared 
with  the  long  interval  of  war. 

If,  then,  an  increased  rate  of  production  and  con- 
sumption be  going  on  at  the  end  of  two  and  twenty 
years  of  peace,  such  an  effect  must  be  referred  to  some 
other  cause  than  the  previous  war  expenditure  ; 
and  some  cause  must  be  found  for  the  fall  of  prices, 
other  than  a  supposed  diminution  of  demand  from 
the  cessation  of  that  expenditure.  What  the  cause 
or  causes  of  the  great  variation  of  prices,  beyond 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold,  may  have 
been,  is  what  will  be  matter  of  further  examin- 
ation. In  the  mean  time  we  may  safely  dismiss 
a  hypothesis,  which  proceeds  on  the  assumption 

*  See  Tables  of  Revenue,  Population,  &c.  from  the  statistical 
department  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  compiled  under  the  super- 
intendence of  Mr.  Porter  ;  Statistical  Account  of  the  British  Em- 
pire, by  J.  R,  M'Culloch,  Esq. ;  Progress  of  the  Nation  from  the 
l)eginning  of  the  19th  century  to  the  present  time,  1836,  by  G. 
R.  Porter,  Esq. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  113 

of  facts  which  never  had  any  existence,  which 
overlooks  the  most  important  of  the  facts  that  did 
occur,  and  is  utterly  irreconcil cable  with  any  ra- 
tional or  consistent  explanation  of  the  actual  phe- 
nomena. 

The  only  reason,  indeed,  for  having  entered 
into  this  examination,  brief  as  it  is,  of  the  doc- 
trine of  the  stimulus  of  war  demand  is,  that  the 
arguments  in  support  of  it  have  been  advanced  by 
very  distinguished  authorities  ;  and  that  although 
the  grounds  on  which  that  doctrine  has  been 
founded  fail  in  every  part^  there  is  still  a  vague 
but  strong  impression  in  favour  of  it,  by  persons 
who,  seeing  the  extravagance  of  the  ultra  cur- 
rency doctrine,  are  not  aware  of  any  alternative 
but  that  of  the  hypothesis  of  increased  consump- 
tion, to  account  for  the  high  prices  which  prevailed 
during  the  w^ar. 


114  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 


CHAP.  VII. 


EFFECT    OF    WAR,    AS    OBSTRUCTING     SUPPLY,    AND 
INCREASING    THE    COST    OF    PRODUCTION. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  prove  that  war  cannot 
operate  in  raising  general  prices  through  the  me- 
dium of  increased  demand  ;  and  that  there  is  no 
sufficient  ground  for  ascribing  any  effect  in  raising 
general  prices  to  the  monopoly  of  trade,  or  to  the 
increased  excitement  and  activity  which  charac- 
terized the  last  war. 

The  remaining  question  is,  what  effects  are  to 
be  ascribed  to  war  as  regards  supply  ?  And  the 
answer  may  be,  in  general  terms,  that  it  is  the 
tendency  of  war  to  diminish  supply. 

The  mode  in  which  war  may  be  calculated  to 
operate  to  this  effect  is,  1st,  by  a  diminution  of  re- 
production, and  2dly,  by  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction, and  by  impediments  to  commercial  com- 
munication. 

It  will  be  readily  admitted,  that  the  immediate 
and  obvious  tendency  of  a  state  of  war  is  to  ab- 
stract a  portion  of  the  capital  and  labour,  which 
would  otherwise  have  been  employed  in  reproduc- 
tion ;  and  if,  from  the  course  of  military  operations, 
or  from  arbitrary  government  exactions,  an  appre- 
hension should  be  superadded  of  insecurity  of 
property,  there  will  be  a  further  cause  for  dimi- 
nished production  ;  so  that  dearth  and  impoverish- 
ment are  likely  to  be  the  consequences  of  a  state 
of  war  in  a  country  thus  situated.  It  is  probable 
that  circumstances  of  this  knid  operated  in  dimi- 
nishing and  deteriorating  the  cultivation  among 
some  of  the  states  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  in 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  115 

different  periods  of  the  war.  In  the  early  part  of 
the  war,  the  extensive  miUtary  operations  were 
calculated  to  diminish  the  produce  of  the  Nether- 
lands, Germany,  and  Italy ;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  political  convulsions  attending  the  re- 
volutionary period  might  affect  the  extent  and 
quality  of  the  cultivation  of  the  land  in  France.  In 
the  subsequent  periods  of  the  war  the  course  of 
military  operations  can  hardly  have  failed  to  di- 
minish the  produce  of  Poland,  Prussia,  Saxony, 
and  Russia,  as  likewise  of  Spain,  Portugal,  and 
Italy.  And  while  causes  like  these  were,  perhaps, 
operating  in  a  diminished  reproduction  in  some  of 
the  countries  alluded  to,  there  were  circumstances 
arising  out  of  the  war,  which,  beyond  all  question, 
added  greatly  to  the  cost  of  production  in  this 
country  ;   these  were  — 

1.  The  increased  rate  of  interest  of  money, 
which,  more  especially  as  regarded  all  outlay  as 
fixed  capital,  formed  an  important  element  in  the 
calculation  of  the  price  at  which  reproduction  could 
be  continued,  or  a  new  production  afforded. 

2.  The  increased  rates  of  freight  and  insurance, 
which  applied  to  the  whole  period  of  the  war,  but 
which  in  the  last  six  years  of  it  amounted  (as  will 
be  seen  when  the  period  comes  under  consider- 
ation) to  an  enormous  charge  on  all  importations 
from  the  continent  of  Europe.  And,  although  the 
greatest  charge  under  this  head  applied  to  our 
foreign  trade,  there  was  also  a  great  increase  of 
freight  and  insurance  attaching  to  our  coasting 
trade,  forming  no  inconsiderable  item  in  the  cost 
of  all  commodities,  the  more  bulky  ones  especially, 
such  as  corn,  coals,  building  materials,  &c.  con- 
veyed coast-wise. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be,  coincidently 
with  a  state  of  war  in  any  particular  country,  cir- 
cumstances arising  from  other  causes  calculated  to 

I  2 


116  EFFECT    OF    WAR. 

counterbalance,  and  even  to  outweigh,   the  tend- 
ency in  question :  — 

1.  Increased  activity,  industry,  and  intelhgence, 
in  the  mass  of  the  population,  so  that  the  portion 
remaining,  after  the  abstraction  of  labourers  for 
the  purposes  of  war,  may  be  able  and  willing  to 
produce  as  much  as,  or  even  more  than,  was  pre- 
viously produced. 

2.  Increased  disposition  on  the  part  of  indivi- 
duals to  accumulate  capital,  so  as  to  compensate 
for  the  war  expenditure,  without  any  diminution  of 
the  funds  applicable  to  reproduction. 

3.  Improvements  in  agriculture  and  machinery, 
tending  to  increase  reproduction  with  the  same  or 
less  capital  and  labour. 

4.  Greater  security  of  property  relatively  to 
other  countries,  thus  inducing  an  influx  of  capital 
from  abroad. 

All  these  circumstances  concurred  in  this  coun- 
try, during  the  whole  of  the  last  war,  and  the 
consequence  was  an  increase  of  production  and  po- 
pulation in  spite  of  the  opposite  tendency  arising  out 
of  a  state  of  war. 

The  effects,  however,  of  the  preponderating 
tendency  of  circumstances  favourable  to  repro- 
duction, as  far  as  relates  to  agriculture,  were  re- 
pressed, or,  at  least,  prevented  from  receiving  their 
full  development,  by  a  course  of  seasons  which 
were,  as  will  be  seen,  more  than  usually  unpropi- 
tious. 

Although  the  war  cannot  be  said  to  have  oper- 
ated upon  the  supply  of  agricultural  produce  of 
our  own  growtli  and  of  other  native  commodities, 
sufficiently  to  outweigh  the  circumstances  favour- 
able to  reproduction,  it  operated  most  powerfully 
in  increasing  the  cost  of  production,  and  in  ob- 
structing the  supply  of  such  commodities  as  we 
stood  in  need  of  from  abroad.  It  is  therefore  to 
war  chiefly  as  affecting  the  cost  of  production  and 


EFFECT    OF    WAR.  117 

diminishing  the  supply,  by  obstructions  to  import- 
ation, at  a  time  when  (as  it  will  appear  hereafter), 
by  a  succession  of  unfavourable  seasons,  our  own 
produce  became  inadequate  to  the  average  con- 
sumption, that  any  considerable  proportion  of  the 
range  of  high  prices  is  to  be  attributed.  It  is,  in 
fact,  only  with  reference  to  the  nature  and  degree 
of  the  impediments  to  commercial  communica- 
tions, tliat  the  last  war,  as  fur  as  relates  to  prices, 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  former  wars  —  coincid- 
ing as  it  did  with  a  succession  of  seasons  which 
made  us  dependent  on  other  countries  for  an  ade- 
quate supply  of  food. 

Gigantic  and  terrific  as  that  contest  was,  of 
which  it  has  been  truly  said,  tliat  '*  compared  with 
that  crisis,  there  was  nothing  similar,  unless  it 
were  that  sera  at  which  the  irruption  of  the  Bar- 
barians subverted  the  Roman  empire,"  the  effect 
of  it  upon  prices  would  have  been  very  different, 
if,  allowing  the  same  scale  of  military  and  naval 
operations,  and  consequently  of  war  expenditure, 
it  had  been  divested  of  its  anti-commercial  charac- 
ter ;  or  if,  possessing  its  anti-commercial  charac- 
ter, it  liad  not  occurred  contemporaneously  with 
years  of  scarcity  in  this  country,  approaching  in 
some  instances  to  famine. 

But  the  extraordinary  nature  of  the  contest  should 
be  more  especially  borne  in  mind,  as  a  caution  against 
drawing  any  inference  from  average  prices  during 
last  war.  The  prices  were  regulated  by  the  increase, 
whicli  was  enormous,  of  the  cost  of  production 
arising  from  the  obstructions  to  commercial  inter- 
course, which  were  peculiar  to  the  last  war,  and 
not,  in  all  human  probability,  likely  ever  again  to 
occur.  To  compare,  therefore,  the  average  prices 
of  the  last  war  with  those  of  any  preceding  or 
succeeding  period,  is  perfectly  illusory  for  the 
purposes  for  which  they  have  usuall}'  been  brought 
forward. 

I  3 


PART  III. 

ON  THE  CURRENCY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    SUBJECT. 

At  the  time  when  the  paper  system  was  at  its 
height,  when  there  was  the  greatest  cUfFerence  be- 
tween paper  and  gold,  it  was  confidently  main- 
tained by  the  adv^ocates  of  that  system  (and  these 
then  included  not  only  the  government,  but  the 
great  majority  of  persons,  and  more  especially  of 
the  mercantile  class,  who  took  part  in  the  discus- 
sions on  the  subject),  that  it  was  not  the  paper 
that  was  depreciated  by  abundance,  but  the  gold 
that  had  become  scarce,  and  consequently  that  no 
part  of  the  advance  of  the  price  of  commodities 
was  attributable  to  the  Bank  restriction.  That 
doctrine  seems  now  to  be  generally  abandoned, 
and  to  have  been  replaced  by  one  of  an  exactly 
opposite  description.  An  opinion  has  since  arisen 
and  become  almost  universally  prevalent,  that  a 
depreciation  of  the  currency  was  caused  by  the 
Bank  restriction,  not  merely  to  the  degree  indi- 
cated by  the  rise  of  gold  above  the  Mint  price, 
but  to  a  much  greater,  and  almost  indefinite  extent; 
and  that  the  resumption  of  cash  payments  caused 
an  increase  of  the  value  of  the  currency  greatly 
beyond  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold. 


THE    CURRENCY.  119 

So  much  of  the  discussions,  which  have  arisen 
out  of  these  opposing  views,  has  turned  on  the 
word  depreciation  :  it  has  been  used  in  senses  so 
various,  in  some  being  a  matter  of  mere  definition, 
but  in  no  agreed  acceptation  ;  in  others,  involv- 
ing facts,  or,  rather,  disputed  assumptions  of  facts, 
leading  to  the  most  discordant  conchisions,  that  it 
is  impossible  to  advance  a  step,  having  for  its 
object  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  prices 
during  the  period  under  consideration,  without 
feeling  the  necessity  of  attempting  to  clear  the 
ground  of  this  difficulty,  which  presents  itself  i/i 
limine ;  and  the  follow^ing  explanations  are  offered 
accordingly :  — 

Depreciation  of  mone^,  in  its  most  extensive 
sense,  is  to  be  considered  as  signifying  a  dimi- 
nished ^•alue,  from  increased  quantity  of  money 
indicated  by,  and  commensurate  with,  a  general  rise 
in  the  prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  The  term 
has  not  unfrequently  been  used  to  designate  a  rise 
of  prices  of  some  of  the  leading  articles  of  con- 
sumption, without  reference  to  the  cause  of  the 
rise.  But  this  use  of  it  is  evidently  incorrect,  and 
at  any  rate  is  inconveniently  and  unnecessarily 
ambiguous. 

Depreciation,  or  diminished  value  of  money,  is, 
for  the  purposes,  at  least,  of  the  present  inquiry, 
to  be  understood  as  signifying  an  increased  price 
of  all  objects  measured  in  money,  the  alteration  of 
price  being  assumed  to  have  originated  in  an  in- 
crease of  the  quantity  of  money,  and  to  be  confined 
to  an  alteration,  exclusively  on  the  side  of  the 
money ;  while  the  cost  of  production,  and  the 
supply  relatively  to  the  rate  of  consumption  of 
commodities,  are  considered  to  be  unaltered. 

Depreciation  of  money  may  be  either  general, 
as  applying  to  the  world  at  large,  or  local,  as 
applying  to  a  particular  country  or  state.     When 

I  4 


120  THE    CURRENCY. 

applied  to  the  world  at  large,  it  is  synonymous 
with  a  diminished  value  of  gold  and  silver  among 
all  countries,  which  are  in  communication  by  inter- 
national exchanges.  This  is  the  sense  in  w^hich 
it  has  been  used  by  the  various  authors,  who  have 
treated  distinctly  of  the  value  of  money,  without 
reference  to  local  currencies  ;  and  when  it  is  said, 
that  since  the  discovery  of  the  American  mines, 
the  value  of  money  has  been  diminished  to  one 
fourth,  or  one  sixth  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  prices 
have  been  raised  by  that  event  fourfold,  or  sixfold, 
it  is  meant  that  the  rise  of  bullion  prices  to  that 
extent  has  been  general  throughout  the  commer- 
cial world,  according  to  certain  laws,  by  which 
the  distribution  of  the  precious  metals  among  dif- 
ferent countries  is  regulated. 

When  applied  to  local  currencies,  the  term  de- 
preciation of  money  has  been  used  indiscrimin- 
ately to  signify  a  rise  of  prices,  whether  caused 
by  a  diminished  value  of  the  precious  metals,  or 
by  a  degradation  of  the  standard,  or  by  an  excessive 
issue  of  paper. 

If  the  value  of  a  local  currency  is  diminished 
by  the  same  general  causes  only,  which  operate 
upon  the  value  of  money  in  the  commercial  world, 
it  is  hardly  consistent  with  the  correct  use  of 
language  ;  and  at  any  rate  it  is  inconvenient  to  apply 
to  such  diminished  value  the  term  depreciation  of 
the  currency. 

Depreciation  of  the  currency,  as  I  conceive, 
must  be,  in  strictness,  understood  to  mean  that 
«tate  of  it  in  which  the  coin  is  of  less  value  in  the 
market  than,  by  the  mint  regulations,  it  purports  to 
be,  or  in  which  the  paper,  if  compulsorily  current, 
is  of  less  value  than  the  coin  in  which  it  promises 
to  be  payable. 

A  debased  coinage,  or  one  subject  to  a  seignor- 
age,  if  not  accompanied  by  a  principle  of  limit- 
ation as  to  the  total  amount  of  money  in  circulation, 


THE    CURRENCY.  121 

will  naturally  not  be  of  the  same  value  in  exchange, 
as  if  the  coin  were  perfect,  or  if  a  principle  of 
limitation  were  strictly  enforced  and  maintained*; 

*  As  the  principle  of  limitation  here  alluded  to,  through 
which  alone  a  selgnorage  can  be  compatible  with  the  main- 
tenance of  the  full  nominal  value  of  the  coin  to  which  it  is  ap- 
plied, may  not  be  quite  familiar  to  all  my  readers,  I  subjoin  a 
short  explanation  of  It  from  a  paper  which  I  delivered  In  to 
the  Lords'  Committee  on  the  resumption  of  cash  payments  in 
1819.  (See  Appendix  to  the  Report,  p.  181.) 

"  Selgnorage  Is  synonymous  with  debasement,  unless  con- 
nected with  a  principle  of  limitation. 

"  The  rationale  of  this  principle  may  be  thus  illustrated. 
Suppose  the  circulation  of  the  whole  countVy  to  be  confined  to 
gold,  and  to  consist  of  twenty  millions  of  sovereigns  of  the 
present  weight  and  standard ;  If,  by  some  sudden  process, 
each  piece  were  reduced  by  one  twentieth,  or  five  per  cent., 
but  the  whole  number  of  pieces  strictly  confined  to  the  same 
amount  of  twenty  millions ;  then,  other  circumstances  being  the 
same,  the  relation  of  commodities,  <S:c.,  to  the  numerical  amount 
of  coin  being  undisturbed,  there  would  not,  it  is  evident,  be 
any  disturbance  of  prices ;  and  if  gold  bullion  in  the  market 
was  previously  at  3l.  lis.  lO^d.  per  ounce,  it  would,  other 
things  remaining  the  same,  continue  at  that  price  ;  or,  in  other 
words,  46/.  14s.  6d.  in  gold  coin,  weighing  nineteen-twentleths 
of  a  pound,  would  purchase  in  the  market  a  whole  pound  of 
uncoined  gold  of  the  same  standard. 

"  But  if  the  quantity  of  gold  thus  abstracted  from  each  piece 
were  coined  into  one  million  of  additional  pieces,  and  reissued 
into  circulation,  the  twenty-one  millions  would  then  exchange 
for  no  more  than  the  former  twenty  millions ;  all  commodities 
would  rise  5  per  cent.,  and  among  them  gold  bullion,  which 
would  then  be  at  4/.  \s.  9\d.  ;  or.  In  other  words,  46/.  14.9.  Qd. 
in  coin  would  only  purchase  nineteen-twentleths  of  a  pound  of 
uncoined  gold. 

"  This  is  the  keystone  to  all  reasoning  on  the  subject  of  cur- 
rency, and  the  application  of  It  is  clear  enough  as  to  the  power 
of  a  state,  by  the  monopoly  of  issue,  to  raise  the  nominal,  com- 
pared with  the  intrinsic,  value  of  the  coin  in  a  currency  wholly 
metallic.  The  only  limit  to  the  extent  of  this  power  is  the  in- 
ducement to  counterfeit  on  the  genuine  metal  ;  and  this  limit  I 
am  Inclined  to  think  Is  much  wider  tlian  is  commonly  imagined. 

"  But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  application  of  the  limiting 
principle  to  a  selgnorage  on  the  coin,  as  In  the  case  of  our  gold 
coin,  where  it  circulates  along  with  paper ;  for,  as  has  been 
justly  remarked  by  Mr.  Ilicardo,  on  the  supposition  which  he 
makes  of  a  selgnorage  of  5  per  cent,  on  the  gold  coin,  the  cur- 


122  THE    CURRENCY. 

and  the  difference  will  be  marked  by  an  excess  of 
the  market  price  above  the  mint  price  of  the  metals. 

With  regard  to  the  term  depreciation,  as  ap- 
plied to  paper,  if  bank  promissory  notes  be  issued 
in  a  deteriorated  state  of  the  coinage,  and  be 
really  convertible  on  demand  into  the  coin  in 
which  they  purport  to  be  payable,  they  cannot  be 
said  to  be  depreciated :  the  actual  payment  is 
equal  to  the  promise  to  pay  ;  the  fault  is  in  the 
coinage,  not  in  the  paper.  There  may,  therefore, 
be  a  depreciation  of  tlie  currency  in  which  paper 
circulates,  and  an  increase  of  the  market  price 
above  the  mint  price  of  the  metals,  without  any 
depreciation  chargeable  to  the  paper  :  such  was 
the  state  of  the  currency  in  this  country  imme- 
diately previous  to  the  great  reformation  of  the 
gold  coin  in  1773. 

But  if  the  metallic  part  of  the  currency  be 
really  deteriorated,  and  if  the  paper,  which  pur- 
ports to  be  payable  on  demand  in  that  coin,  be 
not  so  in  fact,  and  cannot  command  as  much  gold 
or  other  commodities  in  this  market  and  in  foreign 
markets,  as  the  same  nominal  amount  in  coin 
would  do,  the  paper  is  depreciated,  and  the  mea- 
sure of  its  depreciation  is  the  difference  of  the 
quantity  of  gold  which  the  coin  and  the  paper  can 
respectively  purchase. 

In  a  perfect  state  of  the  coin,  provided  the  ex- 
portation and  melting  of  it  be  allowed,  there  cannot, 
it  is  evident,  be  an  excess  in  the  market  price  above 
the  mint  price  of  the  metal,  as  measured  in  coin.  It 
is  possible,  in  such  a  case,  that  the  coin  may,  even 


rency,  by  an  abundant  issue  of  bank  notes,  might  be  depreciated 
5  per  cent.,  before  it  would  be  the  interest  of  the  holder  to  de- 
mand coin  for  the  purpose  of  melting  it  into  bullion.  A  remedy 
is  suggested  by  him,  viz.  that  the  holders  of  bank  notes  might 
demand  bullion  and  not  coin  in  exchange  for  them,  at  the  mint 
price  of  3/.  175.  lOhdr 


THE    CUIIRENCY.  123 

without  a  seignorage,  be  more  valuable  than  bullion ; 
but  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  it  should  be  less 
valuable:  if,  therefore,  in  a  perfect  state  of  the  coin, 
there  be  in  general  circulation  bank  notes  which, 
by  law  or  custom,  pass  current  in  all  transactions ; 
and  if,  under  these  circumstances,  the  market 
price  should  be  above  the  mint  price  of  gold — the 
whole  of  the  difference  would  constitute  the  exact 
measure  of  the  depreciation  of  the  paper. 

Till,  however,  the  act]of  of  1819,  the  gold  coin,  al- 
though not  materially  deteriorated,  could  not  by  law 
be  exported  or  melted  ;  if,  therefore,  there  happened 
to  be  an  extra  demand  for  gold,  for  exportation  or 
for  consumption  in  domestic  manufacture,  the  price 
of  bullion  might  rise  above  the  mint  price  by  the 
amount  of  the  risk  of  the  penalty  on  the  export  or 
melting ;  and  this  difference  might,  for  limited 
periods,  exist  in  a  purely  metallic  currency  consist- 
ing, it  is  true  of  undeteriorated  coin,  but  of  coin 
rendered  less  valuable  by  being  divested  by  law  of 
some  of  the  uses  to  which  it  might  otherwise  be 
applied.  This  difference  has  been  variously  esti- 
mated. In  the  treatise  by  Lord  Liverpool  "  on  the 
Coins  of  the  Realm,"  one  per  cent,  is  considered  as 
the  measure  of  the  risk  of  exporting  coin.  In  the 
evidence,  however,  before  the  Bullion  Committee 
of  1810,  it  was  stated,  that  the  difference  between 
the  value  of  gold  bullion  that  might  be  sworn  off 
for  exportation,  and  that  of  the  gold  produced,  or 
supposed  to  be  produced,  from  our  own  coin, 
amounted  to  between  Ss.  and  4.9.  per  ounce. 

As  far,  then,  as  this  difference  goes,  an  allow- 
ance may  be  made  in  deduction,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances supposed,  from  the  excess  of  the 
market  price  above  the  mint  price  of  gold,  as  a 
measure  of  the  depreciation  of  bank  notes  previous 
to  the  passing  of  Peel's  bill.  There  may,  therefore, 
it  is  evident,  be  cases  —  rare  ones  indeed,  and  to 
so  small  an  extent  that  they  may  safely  be  neg- 
lected —  in  which  the  depreciation  of  paper  may 


124  THE    CURRENCY. 

not  be  considered  as  being  exactly  commensurate 
with  the  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the  mint 
price  of  gold.  And  to  this  hmited  extent  is  there 
a  difference  in  estimating  the  depreciation  of  bank 
notes,  according  as  the  standard  is  assumed  to 
have  been  buUion  or  coin.* 

According  to  the  foregoing  explanation  of  the 
term  depreciation,  as  applied  to  coin  or  paper,  it 
is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  diminished  value  of 
the  currency. 

By  alterations  in  the  iialue  of  the  cuiTencij  are  to 
be  understood  variations  of  the  combined  value  of 
bullion  and  coin  and  paper,  or,  in  other  words,  of 
the  standard  as  well  as  of  the  coin  and  paper. 
For  instance,  if,  while  the  market  price  of  gold 
should  be  10  per  cent,  above  the  mint  price,  indi- 
cating a  depreciation  of  the  paper,  or  coin,  or  both, 
to  that  extent,  gold,  or,  in  other  words,  the  stand- 
ard itself,  should,  from  a  great  diminution  of  the 
produce  of  the  mines,  or  from  extended  functions, 
(as  for  military  purposes  or  hoarding,  or  for  a 
circulation  retarded  by  want  of  confidence  and 
credit,  or  for  a  very  general  substitution  of  gold 
for  paper,)  become  more  valuable  by  10  per 
cent.,  then  although  the  currency  would,  according 
to  the  definition,  be  depreciated  to  that  extent,  i.  e. 
be  less  in  price  than  it  ought  legally  to  be,  yet, 

*  But  it  was  not  a  difterence  to  this  limited  extent  that  was 
involved  in  the  controversy  between  the  Bullion  Committee  of 
1810  and  their  opponents,  upon  the  question  whether  coin  or 
bullion  should  be  assumed  as  the  standard  by  which  the  value 
of  bank  notes  was  to  be  measured.  It  was  distinctly  on  the 
ground,  and  on  the  ground  only,  that  coin  and  not  bullion  was 
the  standard  of  the  paper,  and  that  bank  notes  were  applicable 
to  all  purposes  to  which  coin  was  laivftdly  applicable,  that 
Mr.  Vansittart,  in  May,  1811,  brought  forward,  and  prevailed 
on  the  House  of  Commons  to  pass,  his  resolution  of  unhappy 
celebrity,  declaring,  "that  the  promissory  notes  of  the  Bank  of 
England  had  hitherto  been,  and  are  now  held,  in  public  estima- 
tion to  be  equivalent  to  the  legal  coin  of  the  realm,  and  generally 
accepted  as  such,  in  all  pecuniary  transactions  to  which  such 
coin  is  lawfully  applicable." 


THE    CURRENCY.  125 

the  standard  itself  being  increased  in  value  in  the 
same  degree,  there  would  be  no  alteration  in  the 
value  of  the  currenci).  On  the  other  hand,  if  while 
paper  and  coin  were  depreciated  by  excess  or 
debasement  10  per  cent,  compared  w^ith  iheir 
standard,  and  the  standard  itself  g^o/^/  were,  whether 
from  increased  produce  or  diminished  functions, 
reduced  in  value  likewise  10  per  cent.,  I  shoidd 
say  that  the  alteration  in  the  value  of  the  cur- 
rency generally  was  to  the  extent  of  20  per  cent. 
But  if  the  metal  of  which  the  standard  is  com- 
posed were  assumed  to  be  of  uniform  value,  the 
variations  of  the  value  of  the  currency  would  then, 
and  then  only,  be  measured  by  the  degree  of  con- 
formity of  the  paper  or  coin  to  its  standard. 

Of  variations  in  the  value  of  the  standard  itself 
there  is  no  infallible  criterion.  Variations,  therefore, 
in  the  value  of  the  standard,  if  they  occur,  can  only 
be  inferred  from  variations  of  considerable  extentand 
duration,  in  the  bullion  prices  of  commodities  and 
labour,  in  cases  in  which  these  variations  do  not,  ac- 
cording to  the  widest  induction  of  facts,  admit  of 
being  accounted  for,  by  circumstances  which  may 
have  influenced  the  prices  of  the  commodities  and 
labour  in  question,  independently  of  the  supposi- 
tion of  any  alteration  in  the  quantity  or  rate  of 
circulation  of  the  currency.* 

*  These  definitions  correspond  with  the  sense  in  which  Mr. 
Ricardo  has  used  the  terms  "  depreciation  of  the  currency,"  and 
"  value  of  the  currency  ; "  and  he  fully  and  accurately  defined  and 
illustrated  his  meaning,  in  his  speech  of  the  12th  June,  1822,  on 
a  motion  of  Mr.  Western.  The  following  is  an  extract  from  a 
printed  copy  of  that  speech  :  — 

"  Now  the  whole  difficulty,  in  reference  to  this  part  of  his 
opinions,  was  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  depreciation : '  it 
was  quite  evident  that  his  opponents  and  himself  attached  a  dif- 
ferent sense  to  that  word.  Suppose  the  only  currency  in  the 
country  was  a  metallic  one,  and  that,  by  clipping,  it  had  lost  10 
percent,  of  its  weight ;  suppose,  for  instance,  that  the  sovereign 
only  retained  nine  tenths  of  the  metal  which  by  law  it  should 
contain,  and  that,  in  consequence,  gold  bullion,  in  such  a  medium , 


126  THE    CURRENCY. 

These  definitions  and  the  deductions  from  them 
will,  probably,  by  those  whose  opinions  I  am  about 


should  rise  above  its  mint  price,  would  not  the  money  of  the 
country  be  depreciated  ?  He  was  quite  sure  that  his  opponents 
would  admit  the  truth  of  such  an  inference.  It  was  quite  possible 
that,  notwithstanding  this  depreciation,  some  of  those  general 
causes  which  operate  on  the  value  of  gold  bullion,  such  as  war, 
or  the  mines  from  which  gold  is  annually  supplied  becoming  less 
productive,  that  gold  might  be  so  enhanced  in  value  as  to  make 
the  clipped  sovereign  comparatively  of  greater  value  in  the  mar- 
ket than  it  was  before  the  reduction  in  its  weight.  Would  it  not 
then  be  true  that  we  should  possess  a  depreciated  currency, 
although  it  should  be  increased  in  value  ?  The  great  mistake 
committed  on  this  subject  was,  in  confounding  the  words  '  de- 
preciation,' and  '  diminution  in  value.'  With  reference  to  the 
currency,  he  had  said,  and  he  now  repeated  it,  that  the  price  of 
gold  was  the  index  of  the  depreciation  of  the  currency,  not  the  in- 
dex of  the  value  of  the  currency,  and  there  he  had  been  misun- 
derstood. If,  for  instance,  the  standard  of  the  currency  remained 
at  the  same  fixed  value,  and  the  coin  was  depreciated  by  clip- 
ping, or  if  the  paper  money  were  depreciated  by  the  increase  of 
its  quantity  5  per  cent.,  that  fall,  and  no  more,  would  constitute 
the  alteration  in  the  price  of  commodities,  as''afFected  by  the  de- 
preciation of  the  currency.  If  the  metal  gold  (the  standard) 
continued  of  the  same  precise  value,  and  it  was  required  to  re- 
store the  currency,  depreciated  5  per  cent.,  to  par,  it  would  be 
necessary  only  to  raise  its  value  5  per  cent.,  and  no  greater 
than  that  proportionate  fall  could  take  place  in  the  price  of  com- 
modities. In  these  cases  he  had  supposed  gold  always  to  remain 
at  the  same  fixed  value  ;  but  had  he  ever  said  that  there  were  not 
many  causes  which  might  operate  on  the  value  of  gold  as  well  as 
on  the  value  of  all  other  commodities  ?  No,  he  had  not,  but  just 
the  contrary.  No  country  that  used  the  precious  metals  as  a 
standard  was  exempted  from  variations  in  the  prices  of  commo- 
dities, occasioned  by  a  variation  in  the  value  of  their  standard. 
To  such  variations  we  had  been  subject  before  1797,  and  must 
be  subject  to  again,  now  that  we  have  reverted  to  a  metallic 
standard." 

On  this  I  have  further  to  remark,  that  if  the  currency  consisted 
exclusively  of  coin,  and  if  that  coin  were  reduced  in  value  below 
its  legal  standard,  whether,  by  increased  alloy,  or  diminished 
weight,  uncompensated  by  any  principle  of  limitation  of  issue, 
the  simplest  term  to  apply  to  that  state  would  be  "  debasement 
of  the  currency."  All  ambiguity  arising  from  the  word  depre- 
ciation, in  a  case  where  the  value  of  the  rnctal  had  risen  in  a  de- 
gree beyond  the  degree  of  debasement  of  the  coin,  would  thus 
be  avoided.  But,  in  the  case  of  paper  issued  to  such  an  extent  as 


THE    CURRENCY.  127 

to  examine,  be  admitted  to  prove  the  depreciation 
of  the  currency,  during  the  Bank  restriction,  to 
the  extent  for  which  I  contend ;  but  those  persons 
maintain  that  the  alterations  in  the  vahie  of  our 
currency,  that  is,  in  the  vahie  of  the  metals  as  well 
as  in  tlie  value  of  the  paper  measured  by  the 
metals,  as  a  consequence  of  the  suspension  of  cash 
payments,  were  greater  than  can  be  inferred  by  a 
reference  to  those  tests ;  that  those  tests  may 
be  allowed  in  proof  of  the  minimum,  but  not 
of  the  maximum,  of  its  effect  on  the  prices  of  corn 
and  other  commodities.  That  in  fact,  though 
other  causes  may  have  concurred  in  producing  the 
elevation  of  general  prices  in  this  country  between 
1797  and  1814,  and  the  decline  since  that  period; 
such  other  causes,  whether  in  detail  or  collectively, 
sink  into  utter  insignificance,  compared  with  the 
alterations  in  the  sifstem  of  our  currency.  Now, 
as  in  one  part  of  that  period  the  prices  of  neces- 
saries, and  of  many  other  articles,  advanced  to  the 
extent  of  from  50  to  100  per  cent,  and  upwards, 
and  have  subsequently  declined  to,  or  below  the 
level  from  which  they  had  risen ;  and,  as  the 
average  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the  mint 
price  of  gold  did  not,  in  the  first  twelve  years  after 
the  suspension  of  cash  payments,  exceed  about  4  per 
cent.,  nor  on  the  average  of  the  succeeding  hve 
years  about  20  per  cent.,  we  have  to  seek  in  the 
onocle  of  operation  of  the  Bank  restriction,  and  in  the 
state  of  facts  connected  with  prices  of  commodities, 
for  all  the  excess  of  the  alleged  effect,  beyond  the 
mere  difference  between  the  paper  and  its  standard. 


to  reduce  its  value,  and  that  of  the  coui  in  which  it  professed  to 
be  convertible,  below  the  standard,  the  term  debasement  would 
hardly  be  allowed  as  applicable  to  the  currency  in  general :  if  it 
were  so,  I  should  prefer  that  word.  But,  as  it  is,  I  am  not  aware 
of  any  adequate  substitute  for  the  term  depreciation  of  the  cur- 
rency, in  the  sense  to  which  I  have  confined  it. 


128  THE  CURRENCY. 


CHAP.   II. 

ARGUMENTS  OF  THOSE  WHO  ASCRIBE  A  GREATER 
EFFECT  TO  THE  BANK  RESTRICTION  THAN  THAT 
INDICATED  BY  THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE 
MARKET    PRICE    AND    THE    MINT    PRICE    OF    GOLD. 

The  arguments  in  support  of  the  opinion  that  the 
value  of  the  currency  was  depreciated  by  the  Bank 
restriction,  and  enhanced  by  the  resumption  of  cash 
payments,  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  that 
indicated,  at  any  time,  by  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold,  proceed  upon  the  following 
grounds : — 

1.  That  the  banishment  of  the  metals,  gold  prin- 
cipally, from  the  circulation  of  this  country  during 
the  restriction,  and  the  recall  of  them  for  the  re- 
sumption, affected  in  a  considerable  degree  the 
value  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  commercial  world, 
diminishing  their  value  during  the  former,  and  in- 
creasing it  in  the  latter  period. 

2.  That  the  compulsory  paper  system  established 
by  the  Bank  restriction,  had  the  effect  of  "  height- 
ening "  all  those  expedients  to  which  a  prosperous 
state  of  society  naturally  gives  birth,  for  economis- 
ing the  circulating  medium,  bringing  the  whole  of 
it  into  activity,  and  multiplying  it  virtually  by  the 
substitution  of  credit  for  currency. 

3.  That  the  restriction  was  the  cause  of  exces- 
sive issues  from  the  Bank,  a  fact  which  is  (as- 
sumed to  be)  hardly  open  to  dispute,  and  that, 
if  so,  it  must  be  charged  with  producing  that  ex- 
cessive issue  of  country  paper  also  which  was  an 
invariable  concomitant  of  Bank  of  England  paper. 


THE    CURRENCY.  129 

4.  That  "  the  increase  of  prices  was  progressive 
from  the  year  1797  to  1814,  subject  only  to  such 
fluctuations  as  arise  out  of  the  nature  of  the  re- 
spective commodities  ;"  and  "  that  it  was  not  ac- 
companied by  a  growing*  difference  in  the  value 
of  Bank  paper  and  gold."  "  That  the  constant  and 
invariable  connexion  of  increase  of  price  with  the 
Bank  restriction,  is  a  forcible  proof  of  such  a  re- 
lation as  that  of  cause  and  effect  subsisting  be- 
tween the  two  phenomena  ;  "  and  "  that  the  near 
approach  of  the  termination  of  that  restj'iction  has 
produced  a  fall  of  prices,  greatly  exceeding  the 
difference  between  paper  and  gold  ;  thus  still  fur- 
ther corroborating  that  connexion,  and  proving,  al- 
most demonstratively,  that  the  prices  from  1797  to 
1814  were,  to  a  certain  degree,  artificial ;  and  that 
the  comparison  of  paper  with  gold,  during  that  pe- 
riod, did  not  afford  a  test  of  the  real  amount  of  the 
fall  in  the  value  of  the  currency." 

This  summary  of  the  arguments  in  support  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  indefinite  depreciation  of  the  cur- 
rency caused  by  the  Bank  restriction,  is  extracted 
from  the  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xviii.,  and  was  re- 
ferred to  in  a  former  ])ublication  of  mine,  entitled 
"  Thoughts  and  Details  on  High  and  Low  Prices," 
as  the  ablest  and  m.ost  compendious  exposition  which 
had  then  appeared  of  that  doctrine.  And  among  the 
numberless  publications  and  speeches  in  which  the 
doctrine  in  question  has  been  since  asserted  and 
maintained,  there  are  none  in  which  the  supposed 
grounds  for  it,  untenable  as  I  consider  them  to  be, 
are  more  fully  and  intelligibly  stated.  These  argu- 
ments, therefore,  as  thus  set  forth,  it  is  now  proposed 
to  examine  under  their  several  heads. 


K 


130 


THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  1.  —  On  the  alleged  Effect  of  the  Bank 
Hesttiction  in  dep7'eciating  the  Value  of  the 
Precious  Metals. 

The  only  ground  that  is  at  all  intelligible  for 
the  opinion  that  the  value  of  gold  was  depreci- 
ated during  and  by  the  restriction,  and  increased 
in  value  subsequently  to  and  by  the  operation  of 
Peel's  bill,  is  that  by  which  it  is  to  be  inferred, 

"  That  the  banishment  of  the  metals,  gold  principally,  from  the 
circulation  of  this  country  during  the  restriction,  and  the  recall 
of  them  for  the  resumption,  affected  in  a  considerable  degree 
the  value  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  commercial  world,  diminish- 
ing their  value  during  the  former,  and  increasing  it  in  the  latter 
period." 

Of  this  theory  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  the  first 
place,  that  the  cause  assigned  is  wholly  inadequate 
to  have  produced  any  considerable  effect  on  bullion 
prices,  supposing  it  to  have  been  uncompensated 
by  circumstances  of  an  opposite  character;  and  in 
the  next  place,  that,  in  point  of  fact,  circumstances 
did  occur  of  a  description  calculated,  at  least,  to 
balance,  if  not  to  outweigh,  the  alleged  effect ;  and 
lastly,  that  the  periods  of  the  highest  prices  on  the 
Continent  do  not  accord  with  those  of  the  greatest 
disengagement  of  the  metals  from  this  country,  or 
the  periods  of  the  lowest  prices  abroad,  with  the 
greatest  influx  of  bullion  into  this  country. 

The  amount  of  gold  coin  circulating  in  this 
country  previously  to  1797»  has  been  variously  es- 
timated. Mr.  Rose,  in  his  speech  on  the  bullion 
question,  in  1811,  entered  into  an  elaborate  state- 
ment, with  a  view  to  prove  that  the  amount  of 
gold  coin  in  circulation,  previous  to  the  Bank  re- 
striction, was  at  least  forty  millions.* 

*  Mr.  Rose,  in  the  speech  here  referred  to,  rested  his  com- 
putation upon  the  returns  of  the  Mint  from  the  great  recoinage 
in  1773  to  1798,  making  an  aggregate  of  the  amount  of  gold 


THE    CURRENCY.  131 

The  first  Lord  Liverpool,  in  his  "  Treatise  on  the 
Coins  of  the  Reahn,"  stated  it  at  thirty  millions.  In 
the  Lords*  Bulhon  Report,  1819,  page  11.,  the 
amount  is  assumed  at  twenty-five  millions.  Mr. 
Whitmore  (Bullion  Report,  1810,  ])age  120.),  and 
Mr.  Harman  (Commons'  Report,  1819,  page  10.), 
computed  that  it  did  not  exceed  twenty  millions  in 
the  three  years  preceding  the  Bank  restriction. 

Upon  this  last  estimate,  the  writer  of  an  able  ar- 
ticle in  the  Supplement  to  the  "  Encyclopedia  Bri- 
tannica,"  under  the  title  of"  Money,"  remarks,  that 
though  it  is  probably  rather  below  the  mark,  there 
are  good  grounds  for  concluding,  that  it  is  the  most 
accurate  of  any  that  have  hitherto  been  framed, 
and  that  it  has  come  as  near  the  truth  as  is  perhaps 
possible  in  such  matters.  Allowing,  therefore,  that 
this  last  sum  is  a  little,  or  only  a  little,  underrated, 
and  that,  consequently,  the  estimate  in  the  Lords* 
Report  is  decidedly  beyond  the  mark,  a  medium 
between  these  will  leave  about  twenty-two  millions 
and  a  half,  as  the  utmost  probable  amount  of  gold 
coin  in  circulation  previous  to  1797* 

coined  of  43,355,119/.  And,  as  he  considered  that  there  hav- 
ing been  in  that  interval  no  temptation  to  send  coin  out  of  the 
kingdom,  or  to  melt  it,  the  price  of  gold  never  having  exceeded 
the  Mint  price  in  that  whole  period  (except  in  a  i'ew  months 
l^d.  an  ounce,  in  1783),  and  was  generally  below  it,  the  coin 
in  circulation  might  be  fairly  estimated  at  40,000,0000/.,  after 
making  a  large  allowance  for  wear.  Sec.  But  he  evidently  under- 
rated the  inducements  to  export  and  to  melting  of  the  coin,  for 
although  the  market  price  of  standard  gold  was  not,  and,  as  the 
paper  was  convertible  and  the  coin  perfect,  could  not  be  for  any 
length  of  time,  much  above  the  Mint  price,  the  exchanges  were, 
for  considerable  intervals  during  the  American  war,  so  much 
below  par,  and  the  price  o'ifoi'eiffn  gold  so  much  above  the  Mint 
price,  as  to  induce  a  considerable  exportation  and  melting 
of  gold,  notwithstanding  the  penalties  attached  to  it.  And 
so  far  from  supposing  that  a  sum  of  about  3^  millions  would 
cover  both  the  exportation  and  the  wear.  Sec.  in  the  long  in- 
terval of  twenty-five  years,  it  must  obviously  be  much  more 
probable, that  not  much  short  of  one  half  of  the  amount  that  had 
been  coined  must  have  disappeared  by  exportation,  melting,  wear, 
and  loss. 

K    2 


132  THE    CURRENCY. 

That  this  estimate  is  not  very  wide  of  the  truth, 
may  be  concluded  from  a  reference  to  the  amount 
of  sovereigns  issued  by  the  Bank  from  May,  1821, 
to  the  end  of  June,  1824.  This  comprises  the  in- 
terval from  the  first  issue  till  tlie  time  when  the  cir- 
culation may  be  considered  to  have  had  as  large 
an  amount  of  gold,  less  the  amount  of  country 
small  notes,  as  it  had  before  1797-  The  amount 
issued  witliin  the  above  interval  was, 

In  sovereigns  and  half-sovereigns,  16,671,030/. 

To  this  add  country  small  notes, 

a  large  estimate         _         .         .  5,500,000 


22,171,030/. 


There  were  considerable  additional  issues  of  sove- 
reigns after  June,  1821  ;  but,  as  the  exchanges 
then  became  adverse,  those  further  issues  were 
probably  exported,  or  replaced  only  those  which 
had  been  exported. 

Assuming  the  amount  to  have  been,  on  the 
grounds  stated,  at  the  utmost  22^:  millions,  there 
is  to  be  deducted  the  quantity  that  was  hoarded 
in  this  country ;  an  amount  that  must  have 
been  probably  much  larger  than  has  commonly 
been  supposed.  There  was  scarcely  an  individual 
of  a  class  above  that  which  is  limited  to  the  means 
of  bare  subsistence,  who  had  not  a  hoard,  greater 
or  less,  of  guineas  that  were  put  by  as  a  provision 
against  the  various  contingencies  whicli  were  con- 
sidered as  endangering  the  value  of  pa])er,  either 
in  degree,  as  by  depreciation,  or  totally,  as  by 
foreign  invasion  or  domestic  convulsion.  And  in 
proof  of  the  existence  of  the  practice  of  hoarding 
to  a  considerable  extent,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  refer 
to  the  fact,  that  between  the  summer  of  1815  and 
that  of  1817,  when  peace  had  been  fully  established, 
and  a  new  gold  coinage  was  about  being  issued, 
and  when,  by  the  notices  from  the  Bank  of  partial 


THE    CURRENCY.  133 

payments  in  specie,  there  was  a  near  prospect  of  the 
complete  restoration  of  the  value  and  security  of 
paper,  large  sums  of  guineas  were  poured  into  the 
hands  of  the  London  bankers,  by  their  correspond- 
ents in  the  country,  and  by  their  customers  in 
town.  Those  sums  have  been  variously  estimated  : 
but,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  probable  that  an  allow- 
ance of  from  four  to  five  millions  would  be  rather 
within  than  beyond  the  mark. 

The  following  quotation  from  the  evidence  of 
Mr.  Stuckey,  an  eminent  banker  in  Somersetshire, 
given  before  the  Lords*  Committee  of  1819,  will  serve 
as  an  instance  of  the  extent  of  the  practice  of 
hoarding :  — 

"  In  1817,  we  had  a  circulation  of  guineas,  wliich  we  found 
very  inconvenient.  It  cost  us  near  100/.  to  transmit  gold  and  sil- 
ver to  London  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  1817.  People 
were  then  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  our  bank  with  guineas,  re- 
questing we  would  give  our  notes  for  them.  I  suppose  they  had 
been  hoarded.  I  brought  up  1000  guineas  in  May,  1817,  and 
taking  them  to  our  London  banker,  they  requested  as  a  favour 
I  would  not  leave  them  ;  they  had  lately  sent  in  so  many  to  the 
Bank  of  England,  that  they  did  not  like  to  trouble  them  any  more. 
Besides,  the  Bank  only  took  those  which  were  quite  full  weight. 
The  result  was,  that  I  took  them  to  a  dealer  in  coin,  and  sold 
them  at  31.  17s.  6d.  per  ounce." 

Among  other  inducements  to  bring  out  hoards  in 
1816,  one  was,  that  light  guineas,  which  had  been 
previously  of  more  value  than  those  of  full  weight, 
from  being  legally  saleable,  were,  in  consequence 
of  the  fall  in  the  market  price  of  gold,  becoming  of 
less  than  the  current  value. 

Mr.  liuskisson  expressed  his  opinion  of  the  ex- 
tent of  the  practice  of  hoarding,  in  the  following- 
passage  of  his  pamphlet  on  the  currency  question, 
in  islo:  — 

"  A  great  quantity  of  gold,  which  is  now  hoarded,  would  also 
make  its  appearance,  if  guineas  were  restored  to  their  use 
and  value  as  currency.  In  this  respect,  the  country  is  in  the 
same  situation  as  it  was  in  King  William's  time,  when  our  me- 
tallic currency  was  so  much  depreciated.  Before  the  determin- 
ation to  restore  that  currency    to  its  standard,  pieces  of  full 

k3 


134i  THE    CURRENCY. 

weight  were  as  scarce  as  guineas  are  now;  but  when  tliat 
determination  was  taken  and  carried  into  effect,  a  great  quantity 
of  good  money  which  had  been  hoarded,  was  brought  back  into 
circulation." 

The  treasure  in  the  coffers  of  the  Bank  during 
the  twelve  years  immediately  following  the  re- 
striction, was  larger,  too,  than  it  had  been  on  the 
average  of  the  five  years  preceding  that  measure.* 

And,  although  guineas  rarely  appeared  in  circula- 
tion, yet  there  were  cases  of  payment,  for  which 
they  were  reserved  :  Mr.  Rose,  in  his  speech  on  the 
bullion  question,  in  1811,  supposed  although  as  a 
high  estimate,  that  three  millions  might  then  be 
still  in  circulation. 

From  these  considerations  it  should  seem,  that 
a  sum  of  from  twelve  to  fifteen  millions  is  an  ample 
allowance  for  the  quantity  of  gold  which  went  to 
increase  the  mass  of  the  precious  metals  in  the 
rest  of  the  world,  and  which,  so  far  as  it  went, 
must  have  tended,  ccptcris  paribus,  to  diminish 
their  value  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 

In  estimating  what  effect,  other  things  being  the 
same,  the  addition  of  twelve  or  fifteen  millions  to 
the  circulation  of  the  rest  of  the  commercial  world 
might  have  on  general  prices,  or,  in  other  words,  on 
the  value  of  the  precious  metals,  as  compared  with 
corn  and  other  commodities,  it  would  be  requisite 
to  have  some  idea  of  the  total  amount  of  gold  and 
silver  existing  in  the  world  for  the  general  pur- 
poses of  use  and  ornament,  viz.  as  coin,  bullion, 
plate,  and  jewellery.  By  some  authorities  the  total 
amount  has  been  computed  as  high  as  two  thousand 

*  There  cannot  be  a  stronger  ground  of  presumption  that 
the  Bank  had  in  view  the  eventual  resumption  of  cash  payments, 
than  that  which  is  afforded  by  the  large  amount  of  treasure 
in  its  coffers,  on  an  average  of  the  twelve  years  immediately 
following  the  suspension  ;  for  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  view, 
there  could  have  been  no  possible  motive  on  the  part  of  tlie  Di- 
rectors to  forego  the  obtaining  for  their  proprietors  the  interest 
which  would  be  made,  or  saved,  by  selling,  and,  at  any  rate,  by 
not  buying  bullion. 


THE    CURRENCY.  135 

millions.  But  Mr.  Jacob,  in  his  valuable  work 
"  On  the  Production  and  Consumption  of  the 
Precious  Metals,"  computes,  vol.  ii.  p.  347.,  the 
existing  amount  of  coined  and  uncoined  gold 
and  silver  in  Europe  and  America,  and  Asia, 
about  twelve  hundred  millions.  And,  as  in  his 
computations,  he  appears  to  be  disposed  in  no 
case  to  overrate  the  production,  wliile  on  every 
occasion  he  gives  the  utmost  weight  to  the  causes 
of  increased  consumption,  that  amount  may  safely 
be  assumed  as  the  lowest  upon  which  the  quantity 
disengaged,  and  resumed  in  consequence  of  the 
restriction  and  resumption  of  casli  payments  can 
have  operated.  Tliere  is  little  hazard,  therefore, 
in  assuming,  that  the  addition  or  abstraction  of 
from  twelve  to  fifteen  millions,  other  tilings  re- 
maining the  same,  would  make  Uttle  more  than 
1  per  cent.,  and  certainly  not  2  per  cent.,  difference 
in  their  value. 

In  this  view  of  the  utter  inadequateness  of  the 
quantity  of  gold  disengaged  from,  and  eventually 
restored  into,  the  circulation  of  this  country, 
to  have  produced  any  sensible  impression  on  the 
value  of  bulHon,  I  have  the  concurrence  of  very 
eminent  authorities.  Mr.  Malthus,  in  a  pub- 
lication entitled  "  On  the  Measure  of  Value,'* 
■18'23,  when  referring  to  the  fall  in  the  price  of 
labour,  as  indicating  a  greater  difference  than  that 
between  paper  and  gold,  adds, 

"  This  difference,  of  course,  includes  the  effects  which  have 
been  attributed  to  the  purchases  of  the  Bank,  with  a  view 
to  a  return  to  cash  payments,  the  amount  of  which  separately 
it  is  scarcely  possible  to  calculate  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  agree 
with  Mr.  Tooke  in  thinking  that  it  is  not  above  one  or  two  per 
cent." 

Mr.  Senior,  in  a  very  luminous  exposition  of 
an  ingenious  theory,  the  object  of  which  is  to 
account  for  some  remarkable  differences  in  the 
quantity  of  silver  awarded  as  the  price  of  labour 
in  different  countries,  has  the  following  passage :  — 

K  4 


136  THE    CURRENCY. 

"  It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  public  ignorance  on  these  sub- 
jects, that  the  general  fall  of  prices,  or,  in  other  words,  the  in- 
creasing difficulty  of  obtaining  the  precious  metals,  of  which  every 
one  is  sensible  should,  by  almost  every  one,  be  attributed  to  some 
causes  of  almost  ridiculous  inadequacy.  It  has  been  attributed 
to  our  return  to  a  metallic  currency,  as  if  the  subtraction  of 
twenty  millions  of  sovereigns,  or  less  than  four  hundred  thousand 
pounds  troy  of  gold,  from  the  ten  millions  of  pounds  troy  of  gold 
bullion  coin,  and  plate,  supposed  to  be  in  use  throughout  the 
world,  that  is,  the  removal  of  one  twenty-fifth  part,  could  sen- 
sibly affect  the  value  of  gold.  It  has  been  attributed  even  to 
the  substitution  of  gold  and  silver  for  the  three  or  four  millions  of 
one-pound  notes  lately  called  in,  as  if  the  value  of  the  two  thou- 
sand millions  sterling  of  gold  and  silver  bullion,  coin  and  plate, 
could  be  materially  afi'ected  by  the  subtraction  of  less  than  one 
five-hundredth  part  of  it."  —  On  the  Cost  of  obtaining  Money. 
1830.  P.  21. 

The  arguments  and  authorities  already  adduced, 
sliow  how  insignificant  this  supposed  influence 
must  have  been  ;  but  an  important  fact  may  here 
be  referred  to,  as  afibrding,  by  analogy,  a  strong 
confirmation  of  that  conclusion.  The  fact  alluded 
to,  as  bearing  upon  the  question  of  the  currency, 
was  first  noticed,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  by  the  late 
Lord  King,  in  a  publication  which,  at  the  time 
when  it  appeared,  deservedly  attracted  great  at- 
tention. 

"  On  the  supposition  of  the  whole  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
remaining  the  same,  they  must,  in  a  certain  degree,  be  rendered 
chea})  by  every  increase  of  paper  currency.  But  as  these  me- 
tals are  in  universal  request,  and  circulate  more  generally  than 
any  other  articles  of  commerce,  the  effect  thus  produced  cannot 
be  partial,  but  must  extend  to  all  other  countries  ;  and  it  will, 
therefore,  follow  that  the  actual  reduction  in  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver  which  is  produced  by  tlie  paper  circulation  of  any 
particular  country,  is  in  the  proportion  of  the  amount  of  such 
circulation  to  the  whole  quantity  of  the  precious  metals,  appli- 
cable to  the  purposes  of  coinage  and  commerce  throughout  the 
world.  It  is  probable  that  this  ])roportion  can  never  be  very 
great  ;  and  experience  seems  to  fhow  that  no  considerable  de- 
preciation is  ever  produced  in  this  manner.  Previous  to  the 
revolution  in  France,  the  currency  of  that  extensive  country 
was  carried  on  almost  entirely  in  silver ;  and  the  rapid  emission 
of  assignats,  which  was  the  consequence  of  that  event,  must 
liave  very  suddenly  withdrawn  a  considerable  quantity  of  that 
metal  from  circuliition.       Yet  this  violent  operation  does  n">t 


THE    CURRENCY.  187 

appear  to  liave  produced  any  perceptible  effect  on  prices,  or  even 
on  the  value  of  silver  in  Europe."  —  Thoughts  on  the  Bank  Re- 
stncliou,  180  k 

The  circumstance  alluded  to  by  Lord  King, 
namely,  thc3  total  absence  of  any  observable  effect 
on  bullion  prices,  by  the  large  amount  of  gold  and 
silver  displaced  from  circulation  in  France  as  coin 
by  the  assignats,  in  the  early  part  of  the  revo- 
lution, appears  to  be  quite  decisive  against  the 
hypothesis  of  a  considerable  influence  on  the  value 
of  the  metals,  by  the  quantity  disengaged  from  the 
circulation  of  tins  country.  The  amount  of  coin 
circulating  in  France,  immediately  previous  to  the 
revolution,  has,  by  some  authorities,  been  computed 
at  nearly  a  hundred  millions  sterling  ;  but  according 
to  Peuchet,  whose  estimate  appears  to  be  formed 
upon  the  best  grounds,  the  amount  was  about 
seventy-four  milUons.  Nearly  the  whole  of  this  was 
banished  from  circulation,  when  the  system  of  terror 
was  at  its  height  between  I79O  and  1791^.  It  is 
probable,  that  some  portion  of  the  coin  displaced 
by  the  assignats,  was  retained  in  a  dormant  state  in 
France ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  a  con- 
siderable proportion  must  have  been  brought  away, 
as  being  the  most  portable  and  valuable  descrip- 
tion of  property,  by  the  numerous  emigrants  from 
thence  to  the  other  parts  of  Europe,  and  chiefly 
to  this  country ;  besides  that,  the  export  of  coin 
was  a  necessary  effect  of  the  great  fall  of  the  ex- 
changes of  France  on  other  countries.  Supposing 
that  only  about  one  half  of  the  coin  was  exported 
from  thence,  it  would  amount  to  no  less  than  about 
thirty-six  m.iliions  of  gold  and  silver,  suddenly 
added  to  the  circulation  of  tiie  rest  of  the  world, 
and  in  the  first  instance  to  that  of  the  rest  of  Eu- 
rope. To  this  vast  amount  of  gold  and  silver, 
in  the  shape  of  coin,  must  be  added  a  great 
quantity  of  plate  belonging  both  to  the  cluirches 
and  to  individuals,  which  must  have  found  its  way 


138  THE    CURRENCY. 

out  of  France  about  tlie  same  period.  If  then, 
there  was  no  distinctly  perceptible  increase  of 
the  bullion  prices  of  commodities  between  1790 
and  1791s  notwithstanding  the  addition  of  about 
forty  millions  from  France  to  the  rest  of  Europe, 
the  effect  of  less  than  half  tliat  amount  disengaged 
from  the  circulation  of  this  country  cannot  but 
have  been  most  insignificant.  It  must  there- 
fore be  evident  fi'om  these  considerations  that 
the  utmost  effect  of  the  disengagement  and  re- 
absorption  of  gold  and  silver,  by  the  circulation  of 
this  country,  must  have  been  hardly  perceptible  on 
prices,  supposing  other  things  to  have  remained  the 
same. 

But  other  things  were  ?20^the  same.  For  while, 
as  a  consequence  of  the  Bank  restriction,  about 
twelve  or  fifteen  millions  of  our  coin  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  gone  abroad,  there  was,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  wars  on  the  Continent,  which  were, 
with  few  intervals,  coincident  with  the  period  re- 
ferred to,  a  great  and  unusual  demand  for  the  pre- 
cious metals.  The  mihtary  chests  and  the  treasuries 
of  the  great  belligerent  powers,  whose  operations 
were  on  so  vast  a  scale,  necessarily  absorbed  a  very 
large  amount  of  specie.  And  it  may  be  a  question 
wliether  a  still  larger  amount  was  not  absorbed  by 
the  very  extensive  practice  of  hoarding  which  pre- 
vailed among  the  inliabitants  of  those  states  of  the 
Continent  which  were  either  the  seat  of  war,  or 
which  had  issued  paper  to  excess.  There  were 
likewise  some  periods  of  the  war,  particularly  the 
hiterval  between  1808  and  1813,  when,  by  the 
violent  anti-commercial  decrees  and  regulations  of 
the  French  government,  there  was  great  difficulty 
and  danger  attending  the  transmission  of  bills  of 
exchange,  and  when,  in  fact,  commercial  oper- 
ations, depending  on  credit,  were  nearly  suspended. 
Such  obstructions  to  circulation  were  equivalent 
to  a  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  money. 


THE    CURRENCY.  139 

So  striking  were  these  circumstances,  both  sepa- 
rately and  collectively  considered,  that  they  were,  by 
the  great  majority  of  those  who  at  that  time  took  a 
part  in  the  discussions  on  this  subject,  appealed  to  as 
very  much  outweighing  the  effect  of  the  quantity  of 
gold  rendered  available  for  the  purposes  of  the  Con- 
tinent, by  the  substitution  of  paper  in  this  country. 
It  was,  as  has  before  been  stated,  the  general 
answer  to  all  charges  against  the  conduct  of  the 
Bank,  in  suffering  the  depreciation  of  its  notes, 
tliat  gold  liad  become  scarce,  and  not  paper  over- 
abundant :  and  it  must  be  admitted,  that  there 
was  ground  for  so  much  of  the  answer  as  went  on 
a  pr'nnd  facie  presum})tion  that  gold  had  become 
somewhat  scarce  relatively  to  a  former  period ; 
or,  that  supposing  the  precious  metals  to  have 
been  otherwise  of  a  aiven  value,  the  obvious  eflfect 
of  the  war,  and  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  attend- 
ing it,  was  to  enhance  their  value.  Accordingly, 
the  Bullion  Report  of  lS10(p.  ^2.),  nearly  at  its 
outset  states  as  follows  : — "  It  will  be  found  by  the 
evidence,  that  the  high  price  of  gold  is  ascribed 
by  most  of  the  witnesses  entirely  to  an  alledged 
scarcity  of  the  article,  arising  out  of  an  unusual 
demand  for  it  upon  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
This  unusual  demand  for  gold  upon  the  Contin- 
ent is  described  by  some  of  them  as  being  chiefly 
for  the  use  of  the  French  armies,  though  increased 
also  by  that  state  of  alarm  and  failure  of  confi- 
dence which  leads  to  the  practice  of  hoarding." 

It  seems  hardly  possible  to  resist  the  conclusion 
that  under  these  circumstances  there  must  have 
been  a  greatly  increased  demand  for  the  precious 
metals,  and  a  consequently  increased  value  of  them 
during  the  war,  more  tfian  sufficient  to  compensate 
for  the  utmost  quantity  spared  from  circulation  as 
coin  in  this  country,  or  even  for  the  utmost  rate  of 
annual  increase  from  the  mines. 

An  important  circumstance,  too,   may  here  be 


140  THE    CURRENCY. 

noticed,  as  affecting  the  value  of  the  precious  metals 
m  Europe  during  the  periods  under  consideration, 
and  that  is,  that  whereas,  previously  to  1820,  the 
exports  of  the  precious  metals,  chiefly  silver,  to  the 
East  Indies  and  China  were  on  a  large  and  increas- 
ing scale  ;  insomuch  that  in  the  three  years  ending 
witii  the  season  of  1819--0,  the  balance  of  import 
of  treasure  into  India,  on  the  Company's  and  pri- 
vate account,  amounted  to  nearly  nineteen  millions 
sterling;  the  stream  had,  after  1821,  reversed  its 
course,  and  for  some  years  thenceforward  there  was 
a  balance  of  e^\io\'i  from  the  East  into  Europe. 

Much  stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  circumstance 
of  Russia,  Austria,  and  the  United  States  of  Ame- 
rica, having  at  the  same  time  with  this  country 
substituted  a  paper  ibr  a  metallic  circulation,  there- 
by further  diminishing  the  value  of  the  metals 
during  the  war  and  the  restriction.  But  it  will  be 
found  that  the  flicts  are  erroneously  assumed. 

Russia  had  established  a  compulsory  paper  cur- 
rency for  many  years  before  our  Bank  restriction, 
and  the  circulation  of  that  em})ire  was  as  fully 
saturated  with  paper  to  the  exclusion  of  the  pre- 
cious metals  before  the  year  1797j  ^s  at  any  sub- 
sequent period.  * 

Austria  had  but  little  of  a  pure  metallic  currency 
remaining  in  1797-     And  that  country  being  often 

*  But  not  only,  liowever,  did  Russia  not  add  to  the  mass  of 
metals  by  disengagement  from  her  circidation,  but,  in  truth,  she 
absorbed  a  considerable  amount  of  bullion  in  1812;  for  the  fact 
is,  and  rather  a  curious  one,  that  the  value  of  the  Russian  paper 
money  increased  coincidently  with  the  advance  into  that  country 
of  the  French  armies  ;  insomuch  that  the  exchange  for  the  ruble, 
which,  a  'tew  months  before,  h.ad  been  14f/.,  rose,  by  the  time 
they  reached  Moscow,  to  'l\d.  Thus  gold  and  silver  formed 
the  best  remittance  from  this  country  to  Russia,  in  exchange 
for  her  produce,  which  was  then  in  great  demand,  from  the  fear 
that  the  French  might  cut  off  all  further  supplies  :  accordingly, 
a  good  deal  of  specie  was  sent  thither,  and  probably  did  not 
return  from  thence  till  between  ISH  and  1816,  when  the  q\- 
change  fell  again  below  its  former  lowest  level. 


THE    CURRENCY.  141 

the  seat  of  war,  the  tendency  among  its  inhabitants 
to  hoard  what  gold  and  silver  they  could  collect 
beyond  their  immediate  necessities  for  expenditure, 
would  probably  more  tlian  compensate  for  the 
quantity  liberated  by  paper  issues  from  circulation 
as  coin.  The  same  remark  applies  to  Prussia  and 
the  minor  German  States. 

The  United  States  of  America  never  till  recently 
possessed  any  large  stock  of  the  precious  metals  in 
circulation  as  coin.  And  it  was  not  till  1812,  after 
all  the  phenomena  of  high  bullion  prices  had  oc- 
curred, that  there  was  any  general  suspension  of 
payment  by  their  banks. 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  no  part  of  the  high 
bullion  prices  during  the  war  and  the  restriction 
can  be  accounted  for  by  any  increased  quantity 
of  the  precious  metals  disengaged  from  the  circu- 
lation of  the  countries  just  mentioned.  If,  how- 
ever, there  had  been  such  increase,  it  might  indeed 
have  been  an  accessory  circumstance  in  producing 
the  depreciation  of  the  metals  which  is  alleged. 
But  if  a  depreciation  from  this  cause  did  occur,  it 
has  not  and  ouglit  not  to  have  any  connexion  with 
tlie  question,  how  far  the  Bank  restriction  caused 
a  diminution  of  the  value  of  gold,  or  a  rise  of 
bullion  prices  beyond  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold  in  this  country.  As  far  as  regards 
the  disengagment,  if  such  there  had  been,  of  the 
precious  metals  from  other  countries,  coincidently 
with  our  Bank  restriction,  there  v/ould  equally,  to 
whatever  extent  that  cause  might  be  supposed  to 
operate,  have  been  a  rise  of  bullion  prices  if  the 
paper  of  this  country  had  continued  to  be  con- 
vertible. * 

*  The  same  observation  applies  to  the  effects  of  the  varying 
produce  of  the  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  If  the  increased  pro- 
duce of  the  mines,  anterior  to  1819,  was  an  element  in  the  high 
range  of  prices,  and  if  a  diminished  produce  subsequently  had 
been  one  of  the  causes  of  the  lov/er  range,  these  causes  of  varia- 
tion of  bullion  prices  must  be  viewed  as  totally  distinct  from 


Its  THE    CURRENCY. 

Whenever  a  reference  has  been  made  to  tlie 
rise  of  bulhon  prices  in  other  countries,  prior 
to  1819,  and  to  the  subsequent  fall,  the  only 
answer  given  has  been  that  the  alterations  in  our 
currency  deranged  the  currencies  of  other  coun- 
tries. I3ut  we  have  never  been  told  in  what  way 
our  alterations  produced  that  effect,  with  the  single 
exception  of  the  supposed  influence  of  the  quan- 
tity of  gold  disengaged  from  this  country  on  the 
value  of  that  metal  in  the  rest  of  the  world.* 

Independently  of  the  argument  derived  from  the 
insufficiency  of  the  cause  assigned  to  have  produced 
the  alleged  effect,  it  will  be  seen  in  the  historical 
sketch  which  Vv^ill  be  found  in  the  further  part  of 
this  work,  that  the  great  variations  of  bullion 
prices  abroad  do  not  correspond,  in  point  of  either 
time  or  magnitude,  with  the  variations  in  the  quan- 
tity of  metals  disengaged  from  use,  and  resumed  as 
coin  in  this  country. 

This  cause,  therefore,  namely,  the  quantity  of 
bullion  disengaged  from  circulation  as  coin  by  the 
suspension  of  cash  payments  in  this  country,  and 
added  to  the  general  mass  in  the  rest  of  the  world, 


those  which  can  be  imputetl  to  alterations  in  the  system  of  our 
currency.  But  in  the  opinions  which  prevail  among  the  sup- 
porters of  the  ultra  doctrine  of  depreciation,  there  is  an  extraor- 
dinary confusion  of  ideas  in  blending  as  the  effects  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  and  of  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  variations 
(greatly  exaggerated,  if  existing  at  all)  in  the  value  of  the 
metals,  arising  from  causes  avowedly  distinct,  by  the  very  assign- 
ment of  such  causes,  from  the  possibility  of  having  been  pro- 
duced by  the  operation  of  the  measures  affecting  exclusively 
the  footing  of  the  currency  of  this  country. 

*  The  influence  here  alluded  to  of  our  currency  on  the  cur- 
rencies abroad  does  not  refer  to  the  occasion;il  fluctuations  arising 
from  speculations  and  operations  on  credit,  and  from  the  neces- 
sary reactions  which  communicate  themselves  to  those  countries 
abroad  with  which  we  are  in  commercial  connection.  The 
argument  in  the  text  is  coniined  to  a  supposed  influence,  which 
applies  to  the  whole  period  of  the  restriction  in  raising  prices, 
and  of  cash  payments  in  reducing  them. 


THE    CURRENCY.  143 

may  be  considered  as  wholly  inadmissible  in  ac- 
counting for  any  part  of  the  great  elevation  of 
prices  observable  at  different  periods  during  the 
restriction. 

But  if  the  addition  to  the  general  mass  of  the 
precious  metals,  by  the  substitution  of  paper  for 
coin  in  this  country,  pending  the  Bank  restric- 
tion, cannot,  on  the  grounds  which  I  have  stated, 
be  fairly  inferred  to  have  produced,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances, a  sensible  effect  on  the  value  of  those 
metals  ;  and  if  there  were  circumstances  such  as 
those  already  mentioned,  which  were  calculated,  at 
least  to  compensate,  if  not  to  outweigh  that  effect : 
then  it  follows,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  that  the  re- 
absorption,  by  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  of 
a  similar  amount  of  bullion  to  that  which  had  be- 
fore been  spared,  cannot  have  been  attended  with 
a  greater  effect  in  an  opposite  direction.  This 
must  be  understood  mutatis  mutandis,  viz.  tlie  dis- 
engagement of  the  sums  employed  for  military 
purposes,  and  the  return  of  security  to  commercial 
intercourse,  renewing  the  facilities  of  circulation 
on  the  Continent,  and  diminishing  the  inducement 
to  hoarding. 

Having  thus  offered  arguments,  which  to  m}'- 
mind  are  conclusive,  against  the  presumption  of 
any  sensible  effect  from  the  alterations  in  the  system 
of  our  currency,  under  the  circumstances  in  which 
they  took  place,  on  the  value  of  the  ])recious  metals 
in  Europe,  I  shall  proceed  to  examine  what  influ- 
ence may  be  ascribed  to  the  second  class  of  circinn- 
stances,  wdiich,  as  a  consequence  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  are  stated  to  have  affected  the  value  of 
the  currency  in  this  country,  in  a  much  greater  de- 
gree than  that  indicated  by  the  difference  between 
paper  and  gold. 


14<4i  THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  2.  — Effect  of  the  Bcmk  ReHtriction  on  the 
economised  line  of  Money. 

The  expedients  for  economising  the  use  of  the 
currency,  althougli  they  date  from  a  period  long 
anterior  to  the  Bank  restriction,  and  certainly  had 
their  origin  in  causes  wholly  distinct  from  it,  did 
experience  a  considerable  improvement  about  that 
time.  But  the  economising  practices  which  were 
then  in  progress,  have  not  only  subsisted  in  full 
force  since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments,  but 
have  experienced  further  improvements.  Allowing, 
however,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  Bank 
restriction  was  the  cause  of  greater  economy  in  the 
use  of  the  currency,  and  that  this  greater  economy 
was  one  of  the  causes  of  a  diminution  of  the  value  of 
the  currency,  beyond  the  degree  indicated  by  the 
difference  between  paper  and  gold,  how  happens  it 
that,  although  all  the  refined  machinery  of  the  bank- 
ing system  subsists  unimpaired,  and  is  perhaps 
undergoing  further  improvements,  it  has  no  longer 
the  depreciating  eflect  ascribed  to  it?  *  Really,  in 
order  to  have  been  good  for  any  thing  in  the  argu- 
ment which  it  was  brought  forward  to  support,  this 

*  It  was  on  the  ground  of  the  economised  use  of  the  cur- 
rency that  the  Bullion  Committee  of  1810  endeavoured  to  ac- 
count, consistently  with  their  view,  for  the  striking  and  rather 
puzzling  fact  of  the  very  small  numerical  inciease  of  Bank  notes 
to  which  they  ascribed  such  depreciating  effects.  Their  infer- 
ence, from  the  improvements  referred  to,  might  have  been  jus- 
tified if  it  had  been  found  that  the  price  of  gold  had  not  lailen 
until  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  had  been  reduced,  as  compared 
with  that  which  had  been  pronounced  to  lu.ve  been  rendered 
excessive  by  those  improvements.  Whereas,  while  the  economy 
in  the  use  of  the  currency  was  undergoing  j^rogiessive  improve- 
ment, an  increased  amount  of  Bank  notes  was  found  to  be  re- 
quisite for  the  transactions  of  the  country,  consistently  with  a 
fall  of  the  market  j)rice  of  bullion  to  its  Mint  price,  and  with  a 
much  greater  fall  in  the  prices  of  commodities. 


THE    CURRENCY.  145 

economy  of  the  currency  should  have  been  proved, 
not  only  to  have  arisen  from,  but  to  have  terminated 
with,  the  restriction  :  and  it  is  proved  to  have  done 
neither.  On  the  contrary,  while  the  prevailing 
complaint  is  of  a  tendency  the  \ery  reverse  of  di- 
minution in  the  value  of  the  currency,  it  is  noto- 
rious that  circumstances  are  in  progress  calculated 
still  further  to  economise  the  use  of  it.  Not  only 
are  improvements  daily  taking  place  among  the 
bankers,  in  their  ])ayments  on  the  largest  scale ; 
not  only  is  the  practice  of  lodging  money  with  a 
banker  becoming  more  general,  as  including  a  large 
proportion  of  the  smallest  classes  of  tradesmen  ; 
but  there  is  less  detention  in  the  very  minutest 
channels  of  circulation,  inasmuch  as,  by  the  insti- 
tution of  savings'  banks,  the  most  inconsiderable 
sums,  which  must,  but  for  this  mode  of  investment, 
have  been  dormant  as  petty  hoards  in  tiie  hands  of 
mechanics  and  menial  servants,  have  become,  and 
are  becoming  daily,  more  available  to  swell  the 
amount  of  currency  applicable  to  general  purposes. 

So  large  is  the  aggregate  saving  of  the  use  of 
Bank  notes  and  coin,  from  the  foregoing  causes, 
which  have  acquired  their  principal  activitysince  the 
termination  of  the  Bank  restriction,  and  whicli  have 
not  yet  apparently  reached  their  utmostdevelopment; 
that,  notwithstanding  the  extended  functions  of 
money  consequent  on  an  increased  population,  and 
on  an  enlarged  scale  of  pecuniary  transactions,  it 
is  perfectly  conceivable  that  a  smaller  numerical 
amount  of  coin  and  bank  notes  is  now  requisite  to 
circulate  commodities  at  the  same  prices  than  be- 
fore that  period. 

We  may  therefore  safely  dismiss  the  economised 
use  of  the  currency  from  the  list  of  causes  concur- 
ring to  produce  the  diminution  and  subsequent 
increase  of  the  value  oftlie  precious  metals,  result- 
ing from  the  restriction  and  resumption  of  cash 
payments  by  the  Bank. 


146  THE    CURRENCY. 


Section  3.  —  Effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  Restric- 
tion of  the  Substitution  of  Credit  for  Currenci/, 
and  of  the  excessive  Issues  of  Country  Paper. 

The  next  effect  ascribed  to  the  Bank  restriction  is 
*'  the  miiltipUcation  of  the  circulating  medium 
virtually  by  the  substitution  of  credit  for  currency." 

The  manner  in  which  the  Bank  restriction  is 
supposed  to  have  produced  these  effects,  is  thus 
stated  in  the  review  already  quoted :  — 

"  In  such  a  system,  country  banks  find  a  less  stock  necessary 
to  answer  demands  than  they  would  keep  if  liable  to  pay  in 
specie.  In  the  former  case,  one  in  twenty  is  deemed  sufficient ; 
in  the  latter,  one-fifth,  or  perhaps  one-fourth,  would  be  the  safe 
proportion.  The  moral  certainty  that  a  banker  feels,  that  he 
shall  not  be  called  upon  to  discount  his  own  notes,  is  a  strong  temp- 
tation to  issue  them  to  the  utmost  practicable  extent.  He  sets  all 
the  canvass  his  vessel  will  carry,  more  than  in  common  prudence 
he  would  do  if  there  were  any  apprehensions  of  a  coming  gale. 
But  the  Bank  restriction  was  a  kind  of  security  against  all  sud- 
den and  unexpected  movements,  a  sort  of  monsoon,  which,  after 
passing  one  session  of  parliament,  he  was  sure  would  continue 
to  the  next  ;  and  wdiile  that  lasted,  nothing  was  likely  to  hap- 
pen that  could  disturb  its  course." 

"  All  the  merchants  examined  agree  in  stating,  that  country 
paper  increased  with  the  increase  of  Bank  paper.  If,  there- 
fore, the  Bank  restriction  was  the  cause  of  excessive  issues 
from  the  Bank  —  a  fact  which  is  at  this  time  hardly  open  to 
dispute  —  it  must  be  charged  with  producing  that  excessive  issue 
of  country  paper  also,  which  was  an  invariable  concomitant  of 
the  other." 

"  It  has  already  been  observed,  that  the  power  of  procuring 
money,  if  wanted,  is  tantamount  to  the  actual  possession.  To 
use  a  scholastic  phrase,  monej^  in  posse  is  equivalent  for  all 
purposes  of  trade  to  money  in  esse :  it  gives  an  equal  spirit  of 
enterprise  to  the  buyer  ;  and,  when  that  power  is  become  noto- 
rious, equal  confidence  to  the  seller.  Now,  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  this  hypothetical  wealth  was  greatly  augmented  by  the  sys- 
tem of  the  Bank  restriction.  If  the  Bank  was  always  ready  to 
discount  bills  upon  real  mercantile  transactions  ;  if  country 
banks,  in  imitation  of  this  example,  did  the  same  ;  not  only 
were  transactions  entered  into  which,  without  such  facility,  ne- 
ver could  have  taken  place,  but  numerous  contracts  were  effected 
for  which  actual  payment  was  not  required  at  the  time,  and 
was,  in  fact,  never  made  ;  other  transactions  in  the  mean  time 


THE    CURRENCY.  147 

having  taken  place  which  either  directly  or  indirectly  had  the 
effect  of  balancing  these  ;  thus  perforniiiig,  without  regular  book 
entries,  the  very  office  of  a  bank  :  the  seller  building  as  securely 
upon  the  credit  of  the  buyer  (a  credit  never  actually  put  to  the 
test),  as  upon  his  tangible  property." 

On  this  statement,  which  conveys  the  fullest  view 
that  I  liave  met  with  of  the  specific  manner  in 
which  the  excessive  issues  of  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land, asserted  to  have  been  caused  by  the  restric- 
tion, are  supposed  to  have  swelled  to  a  propor- 
tionate excess  the  whole  of  the  circulating  medium, 
the  following  observations  occur  :  — 

1.  It  is  possible  that  the  country  bankers  might  ha- 
bitually keep  a  somewhat  smaller  stock,  or  reserve, 
during  the  restriction  than  in  a  convertible  state  of 
the  paper,  and  there  might,  to  this  extent,  be  some 
increased  economy  in  the  use  of  the  currency, 
although  hardly  amounting  to  a  set  off  against  the 
progressive  improvements  which  have  since  taken 
place.  This  effect,  therefore,  if  it  existed  at  all, 
must  have  been  the  most  trifling  imaginable. 

2.  A  most  erroneous  impression  is  conveyed  by 
the  description  in  the  foregoing  extract,  and  is  en- 
tertained very  generally  to  this  day,  that  during 
the  restriction  there  was  a  sort  of  exemption  from 
the  penalties  of  overtrading  ;  that  bankers  might 
issue  ad  libitum,  and  merchants  trade  to  the  utmost 
extent  of  their  credit,  without  experiencing  the 
usual  penalties  of  loss  and  failure.  The  bank  re- 
striction is  supposed  to  have  operated  as  "a  kind  of 
security  to  the  banker  against  all  sudden  and 
unexpected  movements  ;  a  sort  of  monsoon, 
which,  after  passing  one  session  of  parliament, 
he  was  sure  would  continue  to  the  next,  and  while 
that  lasted,  nothing  was  likely  to  happen  that 
could  disturb  his  coiu'se."  But  it  did  so  hap])en, 
that  his  course  was  disturbed  by  exactly  the  same 
process  as  we  have  seen  exemplified  in  more  recent 
instances.     The  reaction  from  undue  specuhition 


148  THE    CURRENCY. 

seems  to  liave  been  as  iDevitable  during  the  re- 
striction as  before  and  since  ;  witness  the  extensive 
failures  in  1810  to  1812,  and  again,  in  1814  to 
1816,  which  will  be  more  distinctly  noticed  here- 
after. Of  the  latter  it  may  be,  as  it  has  been  said, 
although  without  the  slighest  foundation,  that  they 
were  the  consequence  of  preparations  for  cash  pay- 
ments ;  but  neither  this  nor  any  other  reason  con- 
sistent with  the  currency  theory,  can  be  brought  to 
account  for  the  former. 

3.  The  country  bank  paper  is  supposed  to  have 
increased  with  every  increase  of  Bank  of  England 
paper,  and  an  excessive  issue  of  the  one,  to  have 
been  an  invariable  concomitant  of  the  other. 

Of  the  amount  of  the  country  bank  paper,  it  is 
impossible  to  give  any  accurate  account.  No  ma- 
terials whatever  exist  for  the  computation  of  it  pre- 
vious to  1804,  when  first  a  separation  was  made 
of  the  stamps  for  bankers'  notes  from  those  for 
bills  of  exchange  and  notes  after  date.  In  1804,  dis- 
tinct stamps  were  issued  for  bankers'  notes,  which 
were  not  to  be  re-issued  after  three  years  from  their 
date.  Upon  the  stamps  so  issued,  computations 
have  been  made,  but  they  are  the  most  vague  and 
unsatisfactory  imaginable,  of  the  amount  actually 
in  circulation.  These  wall  occasionally  be  referred 
to  hereafter.  In  the  mieanwhile  it  may  be  re- 
marked of  this  portion  of  the  circulating  medium, 
that,  supposing  it  to  bear  for  local  purposes  a  cer- 
tain due  proportion  to  the  basis  of  the  currency, 
the  deviations  from  this,  its  due  level,  have  been, 
not  only  during,  but  before  and  since  the  restriction, 
very  considerable,  expanding  under  circumstances, 
and  in  a  state  of  opinion,  favouring  a  rise  of  prices, 
and  collapsing  under  the  opposite  circumstances ; 
and  these  expansions  and  contractions  have,  in  the 
majority  of  instances,  not  been  preceded  by  any 
corresponding  variations  of  the  Bank  issues,  al- 
though eventually  tliey  have  come  under  the  limit- 
ation and  control  of  the  Bank  regulation. 


THE    CURRENCY.  149 

The  same,  and  perhaps  in  a  still  greater  degree, 
maybe  said  of  those  other  component  parts  of  the 
circulating  medium,  bills  of  exchange,  and  book 
credits,  to  wliich  alhision  is  made  in  the  passages 
quoted  from  the  review.  The  expansion  and  con- 
traction of  these  and  of  country  bank  notes,  are,  as 
will  be  abundantly  exemplified,  tlie  consequences, 
and  not  the  causes,  of  a  rise  and  fall  of  prices. 

Credit,  in  its  ordinary  and  legitimate  application, 
forms  one  of  the  more  important  means  of  sparing 
the  use  of  the  currency,  as  well  as  of  effecting 
the  best  and  cheapest  distribution  of  capital  and 
revenue  among  the  several  orders  of  the  commu- 
nity. But  it  is  also  a  medium,  which  admits,  during 
short  intervals,  of  expansion,  under  the  influence  of 
the  spirit  of  adventure,  to  an  ahnost  indefinite  ex- 
tent. Some  striking  instances  of  this  expansiveness 
of  the  medium  of  credit  will  be  exhibited  in  the  fol- 
lowing historical  sketch.  But  it  will  be  seen,  that 
the  susceptibility  of  expansion,  and  the  consequent 
liability  to  coliapse,  have  not  been  confined  to  the 
inconvertible  state  of  ourcurrency.  And  a  reference, 
not  only  to  the  state  of  the  currency  in  this  coun- 
try anterior  to  the  Bank  restriction,  but  to  the  cur- 
rencies of  the  continental  states  of  Europe,  in 
which  the  basis  of  the  currency  has  been  purely 
metallic,  will  serve  to  show  that  a  great  abuse  of 
credit  has  not  been  peculiar  to  an  inconvertible 
currency.* 

*  The  following  notices,  extracted  from  contemporary  ac- 
counts, of  considerable  derangement  of  credit,  in  consequence 
of  a  previous  undue  extension  of  it  among  the  principal  com- 
mercial cities  of  the  Continent  of  Europe,  in  the  course  of  last 
century,  may  be  considered  as  not  altogether  uninteresting  or 
irrelevant  to  the  subject  under  discussion  : — 

"  Letter  from  the  Bankers  at  Hamburgh  to  the  Bankers  at 
Amsterdam." 

"  Hamburgh,  Aug.  4.  1763." 
"  Gentlemen, 
"  This  morning  at  eleven,  when  wc  were  met  to  consider  of 

L  3 


150  THE    CURRENCY. 

The  Bank  of  England,  in  the  regulation  of  its 
issues  of  notes,  which,  during  the  restriction, 
constituted  tlie  basis  of  the  currency,  and  into 
which,  with  the  small  and  diminishing  proportion 


the  methods  to  be  taken  to  assist  the  houses  at  this  place  that 
are  tottering,  we  received  a  fatal  express,  with  the  terrible 
news,  that  you,  the  gentlemen  of  Amsterdam,  would  leave  the 
Neufvilles  to  sink,  by  which  we  were  all  thunderstruck  ;  never 
dreaming  that  so  many  men  in  their  senses  in  your  city  could 
take  such  a  step  — a  step  which  will  infallibly  plunge  all  Europe 
in  an  abyss  of  distress,  if  not  remedied  by  you  whilst  it  is  still 
time.  We  therefore  send  this  circular  and  general  letter  to  you 
by  an  express,  to  exhort  and  conjure  you,  as  soon  as  you  re- 
ceive this,  to  undertake  still  to  support  the  Neufvilles,  by  fur- 
nishing what  money  they  want,  and  giving  them  two  or  three 
persons  of  unquestionable  probity  and  skill,  for  curators,  that 
their  affairs  and  their  engagements  may  be  concluded  and  ter- 
minated, without  causing  a  general  ruin,  which  will  otherwise 
infallibly  happen.  If  you  do  not,  gentlemen,  we  hereby  declare  to 
you,  that  our  resolution  is  taken,  that  is  to  say,  that  although  we 
represent,  a  very  respectable  body  of  rich  and  respectable  men, 
we  have  unanimously  resolved  to  suspend  our  own  payments  as 
long  as  we  shall  judge  it  proper  and  necessary  ;  and  that  we 
will  not  acquit  them,  or  the  counterprotests  that  shall  come 
from  you,  or  any  whatever. 

"This  is  the  resolution  which  we  have  unanimously  taken;  and 
from  which  we  will  not  depart,  happen  what  will.  The  fate  of 
the  general  commerce  of  all  Europe  is  at  present  absolutely  in 
your  hands  ;  determine,  gentlemen,  whether  you  should  crush 
it  totall3^  or  support  it.  You  are  all  too  intelligent  not  to  per- 
ceive, that  by  letting  the  whole  machine  fall  to  pieces,  you  will 
suffer  heavy  losses  in  all  parts,  which  you  may  prevent  to  your- 
selves, and  a  thousand  others,  by  assisting  the  Neufvilles  to  pay 
and  wind  up  their  affairs.  Let  us  have  your  final  resolution 
speedily,  by  express  ;  for  till  that  time  all  will  remain  in  sus- 
pense here,  and  none  of  us  will  pay  one  penny  of  the  bills  we 
have  accepted  till  we  know  what  you  will  do.  Meanwhile,  we 
have  the  honour  to  be,  c'v.'C. 

'•  Pierre  Corstens,  Albert  Schulte,  Hetling  and 
Ooni,  Venne  C.  Tanni  and  Moller,  Matthiessen 
and  Sillem,  Cornells  Jacob  Berenberg,  Wurmb 
and  Cvidorff,  Vierre  Bouvefils,  P.  Henry 
Trunaner,  J  .F.  Liscke,  Daniel  L.  Strenglin  and 
Co.,  Henry  Kornig."  —  Gentlemcms  Magazine, 
1763. 


THE    CURRENCY.  151 

of  coin,  all  pecuniary  engagements  were,  in  the  last 
resort,  resolvable,  controled  and  limited  the  other 
constituent  elements  of  the  circulating  medium, 
exactly  in  the  same  way  as  a  purely  metallic  basis 
controls  and  limits  the  convertible  paper  and  tlie 
credit  part  of  the  circulation. 

In    the  metallic  currency  of  commercial  com- 
munities,  there   are  expansions  and   contractions 


And  they  seem  to  have  stopped  accordingly,  as  such  appears 
to  be  the  alUision  in  the  following  extract  from  the  Annual  Re- 
gister for  1763:  — 

"Aug.  29.  1763." 

"  There  has  been  lately  at  Amsterdam,  Hambiu'gh,  and  some 
other  of  the  principal  towns  of  Germany,  a  surprising  number  of 
bankruptcies.  They  began  at  Amsterdam  about  the  29.  July, 
by  the  bankruptcy  of  two  brothers  named  Neufville,  who  failed 
for  above  330,000  guineas,  and  a  Jew,  who,  a  few  days  before, 
failed  for  between  30,000  and  40,000/.  This  was  followed  by  a 
stoppage  of  payment  by  no  less  than  eighteen  houses  in  that 
city  ;  and  soon  after  by  a  much  greater  number  at  Hamburgh 
and  other  places,  which  put  a  stop  to  private  credit,  that  no  bu- 
siness was  for  some  time  transacted,  but  for  ready  money.  But 
the  Lombard  houses  at  Amsterdam  and  Hamburgh,  having  sup- 
plied with  large  quantities  of  cash,  such  as  could  give  real  or 
personal  security,  enabled  many,  who  must  otherwise  have 
stopped,  to  stand  the  run. 

Another  recorded  instance  of  great  derangement  of  credit 
occurred  ten  years  later  :  — 

"  The  great  commercial  failures,  which  threw  such  a  damp 
last  year  upon  all  business  in  this  country,  arrived  at  their  ut- 
most extent  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  in  Holland,  and 
were  of  so  alarming  a  nature,  and  so  extensive  in  their  influence, 
as  to  threaten  a  mortal  blow  to  all  public  and  private  credit 
throughout  Europe.  These  failures  were  the  effect  of  an  arti- 
ficial credit,  and  of  great  speculative  dealings  in  trade,  as  well 
as  in  the  public  funds  of  different  countries,  and  though 
attended  with  an  immense  loss  to  individuals,  of  not  less,  perhaps, 
than  ten  millions  sterling,  took  nothing  out  of  the  general  stock, 
neither  money  nor  goods  being  thereby  lessened.  They  would, 
however,  by  lessening  the  value  of  those  commodities,  have 
been  as  pernicious  in  their  effects  as  if  the  loss  had  bean  real, 
and  nothing  but  the  most  judicious  and  timely  remedies  could 
prevent  this  fatal  consequence."  —  Amuial  Register  for  1773, 
vol.  xvi.  p.  ix. 

L   4 


15^  THE    CURRENCY. 

of  the  circulation,  without  any  corresponding 
movements  of  the  metallic  basis.  But  if  from 
accidental  circumstances  there  should  coincidently 
with  the  tendency  to  speculation,  through  the 
means  of  credit,  happen  to  be  an  enlargement 
of  the  metallic  basis,  an  increased  facility  would 
arise,  to  the  extension  of  the  circulation,  and 
to  the  spirit  of  speculation  ;  and  the  converse 
would  be  the  consequence  of  a  contraction  of  the 
basis  coinciding  with  a  reaction  from  speculation 
and  its  attendant  discredit. 

So  likewise  in  the  regulation  of  the  Bank  issues,  if 
an  undue  enlargement  of  them  happened  to  coincide 
with  a  tendency  to  an  extension  of  the  other  con- 
stituent parts  of  the  circulation,  there  would  be  a 
proportionate  excess  in  the  whole  of  the  circu- 
lating medium.  And  the  converse  under  the  op- 
posite circumstances. 

If,  therefore,  the  allegation  of  constant  excess  of 
issues  by  the  Bank  of  England  be  substantiated, 
there  can  be  no  hesitation  in  admitting  a  corre- 
sponding excess  in  the  whole  of  the  circulation. 
It  is  proposed  accordingly,  to  examine  the  grounds 
for  that  allegation  upon  which  the  question  of  de- 
preciation beyond  the  difference  between  the  paper 
and  gold  mainly  turns.  * 


*  In  the  comparisons  Instituted  for  the  purpose  of  judging  of 
the  relative  quantities  of  money  at  different  periods,  it  has  been 
made  a  question  whether  the  deposits  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank 
should  not  be  added  to  the  amount  of  the  circulation.  The  Bank 
is  doubtless  as  much  liable  to  the  payment  of  all  the  deposits,  in 
gold  if  so  required,  as  if  the  depositors  were  holders  of  bank 
notes.  And  it  may  be  said,  and  truly  said,  that  as  the  London 
bankers  now  are  in  the  habit  of  lodging  with  the  Bank  certain 
portions  of  their  reserves,  instead  of  holding  them,  as  they  for- 
merly did,  in  their  own  drawers  in  bank  notes,  so  much  of  the 
amount  under  the  head  of  deposits  in  the  Bank  returns,  should 
be  considered  as  forming  a  part  of  the  circulation.  In  fact, 
some  part  of  the  private  deposits  at  the  Bank,  besides  those  of 
the  London  bankers,  may  come  under  the  same  description  ; 
because  the  common  drawing  accounts,  if  they  had  been  kept 


THE    CURRENCY.  153 


Section  4.  —  On  the  alleged  constant  Excess  of 
Issue  by  the  Bank  of  England,  and  thence  of  the 
whole  of  the  Circulating  Medium. 

The  charge  of  excess  or  over-issues  of  paper 
from  the  Bank  of  England  cannot  but  be  admitted, 
if  by  tliat  charge  be  meant  only  that  during  the 
restriction  the  issues  were,  for  the  most  part,  larger 
than  could  under  the  unusual  circumstances  ope- 
rating on  the  exchanges,  have  been  maintained 
under  a  convertible  state  of  the  currency.  The 
issues  were  in  that  sense  excessive,  inasmuch  as 
the  amount  exceeded  that  which  was  compatible 
with  the  maintenance  of  the  value  of  the  paper 
on  a  level  with  that  of  its  standard.  And  as  al- 
ready noticed  of  the  term  depreciation,  the  mea- 
sure o^  excess,  in  this  case,  would  be  the  degree  in 
which  the  value  of  the  paper  fell  short  of  the 
value  of  the  specific  quantity  of  gold  in  which  it 


with  private  bankers,  would  have  added  to  their  reserves, 
and  wouUl,  consequently,  have  increased,  in  some  degree,  the 
bankers'  deposits  in  the  Bank  of  England.  These  are  reasons 
for  supposing  that  the  same  amount  of  bank  notes  issued  is  now 
much  more  effective  than  an  equal  amount  formerly  was,  before 
J;he  practice  became  so  extended,  that  is,  prior  to  1825.  And 
in  comparing  the  quantity  of  money  emanating  from  the  Bank 
of  England,  it  might  depend  upon  the  object  for  instituting  tbe 
comparison,  whether  or  not  to  blend  the  amount  of  the  private 
deposits  with  the  Bank  circulation.  But,  generally  speaking,  as 
it  is  the  Bank  issues  coming  under  the  head  of  circulation, 
which  enter  more  immediately  into  the  money  market,  and  thus 
influence,  directly,  the  rate  of  interest,  and,  eventually  and  in- 
directly, the  prices  of  commodities ;  and  as  it  is  the  amount  of 
the  Bank  circulation,  and  not  of  its  liabilities,  which  has  been 
the  standard  chosen  by  the  advocates  of  the  ultra  doctrine  of 
depreciation,  for  the  measure  of  the  expansion  and  contraction 
of  the  currency,  it  will  be  chiefly  to  the  circulation  that  in  the 
following  examination  of  the  supposed  influence  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  reference  will  be  made. 


154  THE    CURRENCY. 

purported  to  be  payable.  The  charge  o^  excessive 
issue  being  so  confined,  would  be  independent  of 
any  question  whether  tlie  difference  arose  from 
an  increase  of  the  circulation,  relatively  to  its 
functions,  the  value  of  gold  being  unaltered,  or 
from  an  increased  demand  for  gold,  the  quantity 
of  money,  or  in  other  words,  of  the  circulating 
medium  being  unaltered  in  its  relation  to  the  or- 
dinary amount  of  revenue  and  trade,  of  commo- 
dities and  labour,  to  be  circulated. 

But  this  is  not  the  common  acceptation  of  the 
term,  nor  evidently  so  intended  in  the  argument 
under  consideration.  The  restriction  is  supposed 
to  have  been  the  cause  of  a  constant  increase  of 
the  Bank  issues,  and  thence  of  the  quantity  of 
money,  not  only  beyond  that  amount,  which  under 
the  pressure  of  extraordinary  foreign  payments, 
could  have  been  maintained  consistently  with  the 
preservation  of  the  par  of  the  exchanges,  and  of 
the  price  of  gold  ;  but  much  beyond  that  which 
could  have  been  maintained  in  an  undisturbed 
state  of  politics  and  trade,  and  in  the  ordinary  state 
of  the  bahmce  of  payments,  without  raising  the 
price  of  gold,  and,  in  a  still  greater  degree,  the 
prices  of  commodities  and  labour.  The  question 
is  one  of  fact,  determinable,  however,  only  by  pre- 
sumptive evidence:  —  IVJiether,  in  the  altered  pro- 
portions between  money  and  the  objects  exchanged 
bi)  it^  the  variations  of  prices^  consequent  on  those 
altered  proportio7is,  originated  in,  and  ivere  depend- 
a7it  upon,  alterations  in  the  quantity  of  money  on 
tlie  one  hand,  or  in  the  cost  of  production,  and  the 
accidents  ajfccting  supply,  on  the  other. 

Of  the  circumstances  affecting  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction and  the  supply  of  the  objects  exchanged 
by  money  during  the  restriction,  a  historical  sketch 
will  hereafter  be  given.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is 
desirable  to  premise  some  general  observations 
on  the  nature  of  the  presumptive  evidence  to  be 


THE    CURRENCY.  155 

offered  as  to  the  relative  quantity  of  money  in  cir- 
culation, and  of  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  it 
as  to  its  influence  on  prices. 

We  have  had  occasion  to  observe,  that  although 
the  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes  con- 
trolled and  limited,  in  the  long  run,  the  other 
parts  of  the  circulating  medium,  there  might  be, 
as  indeed  tliere  have  been,  intervals  of  great  diverg- 
ence, which  might  equally  occur  for  limited  pe- 
riods in  a  convertible  state  of  the  paper. 

It  may  here  be  the  place  to  remark,  that,  whether 
in  a  convertible  or  inconvertible  state  of  the  paper, 
there  are,  and  must  be,  a  variety  of  circumstances  in 
constant  operation  to  affect  the  numerical  amount 
of  the  Bank  circulation,  without  justifying  the  in- 
ference of  any  corresponding  alteration  in  the 
quantity  of  the  circulating  medium,  or  of  its  being 
in  excess  or  defect,  with  reference  to  tlie  revenue 
and  commodities  to  be  circulated  by  it.  There  is 
a  constantly  varying  proportion  of  Bank  of  Eng- 
land notes,  applicable  to  country  payments  com- 
pared with  London  payments ;  this  was  probably 
more  the  case  during  than  subsequent  to  the  re- 
striction. And  in  cases  of  discredit  of  the  country 
banks,  sometimes  only  local,  sometimes  general,  a 
sudden  increase  of  Bank  of  England  issues  has 
taken  place,  in  order  merely  to  fill  the  temporary 
chasm  of  the  country  circulation.  The  amount 
too  of  London  payments  is  liable  to  vary  very 
considerably  in    short  intervals.  *     Sometimes  the 

*  Till  within  the  last  few  years,  there  was,  in  the  interval 
during  which  the  books  of  the  Bank  were  shut,  preparatory 
to  the  payment  of"  dividends,  a  very  considerable  reduction  of 
the  amount  of  Bank  notes  in  circulation,  and  a  corresponding 
increase  immediately  after  the  payment  of  the  dividends.  This 
cause  of  a  periodical  variation  in  the  amount  of  tiie  circulation, 
which  was  occasionally  found  to  be  inconvenient,  has  since  been 
remedied  by  the  practice  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  making  ad- 
vances, by  way  of  loan,  en  stock  and  other  approved  securities, 
for  the  few  weeks  immediately  preceding  the  payment  of  the 
dividends. 


156  THE    CURRENCY. 

prompts  for  periodical  sales  coincide  with  the  fall- 
ing due  of  large  acceptances  in  particular  branches 
of  trade.  The  payments  passing  between  the  re- 
ceivers of  the  taxes  and  the  exchequer,  and  be- 
tween the  exchequer  and  the  Bank,  influence  the 
amount  of  notes  issued  by  the  Bank  although  they 
may  not  pass  at  all  into  the  hands  of  the  public. 
The  same  sum,  circulating  in  times  of  confidence 
and  speculation  with  rapidity  from  hand  to  hand, 
will  perform  a  great  many  more  exchanges,  and 
act  upon  prices  with  much  greater  effect  than  a 
larger  sum  in  periods  of  dulness  and  absence 
of  grounds  for  specuhition  :  or  at  times  when 
alarm  and  want  of  confidence  induce  the  bankers 
and  possessors  generally  of  monied  capitals  to 
increase  their  reserves,  and  to  withhold  their  usual 
advances. 

This  would  equally  be  the  case  if  the  currency 
were  purely  metallic  ;  and  for  short  periods,  there- 
fore, considerable  variations  of  prices  might  take 
place  consistently  with  a  uniform  amount  of  money, 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  an  undisturbed  sate  of  prices 
might  prevail  consistently  with  marked  variations 
of  the  quantity  of  money. 

But  although  for  short  intervals  the  variations  of 
the  Bank  of  England  issues  afford  no  certain  criterion 
of  the  amount  of  the  circulating  medium,  or  of  its 
being  in  excess  or  defect,  yet  for  longer  periods  the 
regulation  by  the  Bank  of  England  of  its  issues  during 
the  restriction  can  be  shown  distinctly  to  have  ope- 
rated in  limiting  the  other  component  parts  of  the  cir- 
culation along  with  its  own,  in  such  a  manner  as  that 
the  whole  quantity  of  money,  or  of  the  circulating 
medium,  should  seem  not  to  have  exceeded  the 
amount  which,  but  for  the  circumstances  operating 
upon  the  exchanges,  might  have  existed  in  a  con- 
vertible state  of  the  currencv. 

The  grounds  of  presumption  on  which  this  opi- 
nion is  founded,  are  derived  from  observation  of  a 


THE    CURRENCY.  157 

circumstance  to  which  it  is  of  importance  tliat  tlie 
attention  of  the  reader  should  be  specially  directed, 
as  being  one  which  essentially  bears  upon  the  ques- 
tion of  alleged  excess  of  Bank  issues  during  the 
restriction.  The  circumstance  here  alluded  to,  the 
proofs  of  which  will  be  brought  forward  hereafter, 
is  that,  while  the  amount  of  the  Bank  issues  was 
from  1797  to  I8I7  undergoing,  with  trifling  excep- 
tions, a  progressive  increase,  the  exchanges  upon 
every  pause  from  the  pressure  of  exfraordinary 
foreign  payments  tended  to  a  recovery  *,  and  when 

*  The  authority  of  the  opinions  of  Mr.  Henry  Thornton  and 
Mr.  F.  Horner  may  be  adduced,  in  proof  of  the  importance  of 
the  inference  to  be  derived  from  the  fact  of  a  constant  ten- 
dency of  the  exchanges  to  a  recovery,  upon  every  occasion  of 
the  restoration  of  the  balance  of  foreign  payments  in  our  favour. 
Mr.  Tliornton,  in  his  work  on  Paper  Credit^  lias  the  following 
passage,  in  a  note  at  page  236.:  — 

"  In  general  it  may  perhaps  be  assumed,  that  an  excessive 
issue  of  paper  has  not  been  the  leading  cause  of  a  fall  in  the 
exchange,  (/'  it  aftenvards  turns  out  that  the  exchange  is  able  to 
recover  itself  without  any  material  reduction  of  the  cpiantity  of 
paper!'  And  at  page  24-2.,  when  referring  to  the  difficulty  of 
determining  the  effect  of  variation  in  the  amount  of  Bank  of 
England  notes  on  prices,  he  proceeds  to  observe,  "  The  per- 
plexities of  this  subject,  being  such  as  I  have  now  described,  it 
naturally  occurs  to  us  to  reason  from  the  eff"ect  to  the  cause, 
and  to  infer  a  too  great  issue  of  paper,  when  we  perceive  that 
there  is  an  excess  of  the  market  price  above  the  mint  price  of 
gold.  But  this  inference  is  one  which  should  be  very  cautiously 
made,  for  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  excess  may  arise 
from  other  causes  besides  that  of  a  loo  great  emission  of  paper. 
A  suspension  of  the  foreign  demand  for  British  manufactures, 
or  an  increase  of  the  British  demand  for  foreign  articles,  circum- 
stances which  may  arise  when  there  is  no  increase  of  bank  paper, 
are  the  much  more  frequent,  as  well  as  the  more  obvious,  causes 
of  a  fall  in  our  exchange,  and  therefore  also  of  a  high  price  of 
bullion." 

In  a  critique  on  Mr.  Thornton's  work,  in  tlie  first  number  of 
the  Edinburgh  Review,  Mr.  Horner,  the  writer  of  the  article, 
observes,  "  We  have  expressed  ourselves  with  unfeigned  doubt, 
with  regard  to  the  alleged  dependence  of  the  present  rate  of 
prices  on  the  state  of  our  paper  currenc}',  because  it  appears  to 
us  a  problem  of  which  a  satisfactory  solution  has  not  yet  been 
offered.     According  to  that  view  of  the  question  indeed,  which 


158  THE    CURRENCY. 

the  pressure  had  entirely  ceased,  the  exchanges  and 
the  price  of  gold  were  restored  to  par,  ivliile  tlie 
Bank  circulation  was  larger  in  amount  than  at  any 
preceding  period  :  tlius  affording  tlie  strongest 
presumption  that  the  previous  increase  had  not  been 
the  cause  of  the  fall  of  the  exchanges  ;  and  had  not 
been  greater  than  would  have  been  required  if  there 
had  been  no  restriction,  but  also  no  extra  foreign 
payments,  in  order  to  supply  the  extended  func- 
tions of  money  incidental  to  an  increased  popula- 
tion, and  to  a  vast  extension  of  trade  and  revenue, 
and  generally  of  pecuniary  transactions  ;  —  or,  in 
other  words,  that,  in  the  divergence  between  the 
paper  and  the  gold,  it  was  the  gold  that,  by  in- 
creased demand  departed  from  the  paper,  and  not 
the  paper  by  increased  quantity  from  the  gold. 

Admitting  such  to  be  the  fair  inference,  it  be- 
comes a  curious  matter  of  speculation  to  inquire 
how,  with  motives  so  strong  to  constant  and  pro- 
gressive excess,  and  under  the  guidance  of  maxims 
and  principles  so  unsound  and  of  such  apparently 
mischievous  tendency,  as  those  professed  by  the 
governors  and  some  of  the  directors  of  the  Bank 
in  1810,  such  moderation  and  (with  some  excep- 
tions which  will  be  noticed  hereafter),  such  regu- 
larity of  issue  should,  under  chances  and  changes 
in  politics  and  trade,  unprecedented  in  violence  and 
extent,  have  been  preserved,  as  that  a  spontaneous 


seems  to  us  the  most  correct,  as  well  as  the  most  simple,  a  suf- 
ficient answer  will  be  assigned,  if  the  excess  of  the  market  price 
of  gold  above  its  mint  price  shall  be  found  to  continue,  notwith- 
standing the  permanent  restoration  of  the  balance  of  trade  to 
its  accustomed  preponderancy  in  our  favour." 

The  foregoing  extracts  are  from  works  of  which  the  former 
was  written  in  1801,  and  the  latter  early  in  1802,  before  either 
of  the  authors  could  have  seen  that  without  any  diminution  of 
the  Bank  issues,  the  exchanges  and  the  price  of  gold  were  re- 
verting to  their  par  value,  when  a  fresh  set  of  disturbing  causes 
again  deranged  them. 


THE    CURRENCY.  loQ 

readjustment  between  the  value  of  the  gold  and  the 
paper  .should  have  taken  place,  as  it  did  without 
any  reduction  of  their  circulation. 

The  explanation  of  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  this. 
The  rule  by  which  the  Bank  directors  professed  to 
be,  and  were  in  the  main,  guided,  viz.  the  demand 
for  discount  of  good  mercantile  bills,  not  exceeding 
sixty-one  days'  date,  at  the  rate  of  five  per  cent, 
per  annum,  did,  with  the  necessary  policy  of  go- 
vernment in  periodically  reducing  the  floating 
debt  within  certain  limits  by  funding,  operate  as  a 
principle  of  limitation  upon  the  total  issues  of  the 
Bank.  And  the  reason  of  the  rule  having  so  ope- 
rated, is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  market 
rate  of  interest  for  hills  of  the  description  ichich 
were  alone  discountable  at  the  Bank,  did  not  materi- 
ally, or  for  any  length  of  time  together,  exceed  the 
rate  of  five  per  cent,  per  annum. 

But  the  Bank  directors  seem  to  have  been  una- 
ware of  the  precise  mode  of  operation  by  which 
their  rule  had  the  effect  of  a  principle  of  limitation 
against  great  or  permanent  excess  in  their  circula- 
tion ;  and  the  explanation  by  them  in  their  evidence 
before  the  bullion  committee  of  1810  was  so  un- 
guardedly given  as  to  expose  them  to  the  reductio 
ah  absurdum. 

In  the  bullion  report  of  1810  it  is  stated,  *'that 
the  Bank  directors,  as  well  as  some  of  the  merchants 
who  were  examined,  showed  a  great  anxiety  to  state 
to  the  committee  a  doctrine,  of  the  truth  of  which 
they  professed  themselves  to  be  most  thoroughly 
convinced, — that  there  can  be  no  possible  excess  in 
the  issue  of  Bank  of  England  paper  so  long  as  the 
advances  in  which  it  is  issued  are  made  upon  the 
principles  which  at  present  guide  the  conduct  of 
the  directors  ;  that  is,  so  long  as  the  discount  of 
mercantile  bills  is  confined  to  paper  of  undoubted 
solidity,  arising  out  of  real  commercial  transactions, 
and  payable  at  short  and  fixed  periods."     And  the 


160  THE    CURRENCY. 

following  are  extracts  of  the  evidence  to  that  effect. 
Mr.  Whitmore,  governor  of  the  Bank  :  — 

Mill.  p.  91.  "The  Bank  never  forces  a  note  in  circulation: 
and  there  will  not  remain  a  note  in  circulation  more  than  the 
immediate  wants  of  the  public  require,  for  no  banker,  I  presume, 
will  keep  a  larger  stock  of  bank  notes  by  him  than  his  immediate 
payments  require,  as  he  can  at  all  times  procure  them." 

Min.  p.  127.  "  The  bank  notes  would  revert  to  us  if  there 
was  a  redundancy  in  circulation,  as  no  one  would  pay  interest 
for  a  bank  note  that  he  did  not  want  to  make  use  of." 

Mr.  Pearse,  the  governor,  stated  distinctly  his 
concurrence  in  the  opinion  upon  this  particular 
point,  Min.,  p.  126.  He  referred  to  the  manner 
in  which  bank  notes  are  issued,  resulting  from  the 
applications  made  for  discounts  to  supply  the  ne- 
cessary want  of  bank  notes,  by  which  their  issue  in 
amount  is  so  controlled  that  it  can  never  amount 
to  an  excess. 

He  considered  "  the  amount  of  the  bank  notes 
in  circulation  as  being  controlled  by  the  occasions 
of  the  public  for  internal  purposes  ;  "  and,  page 
157.,  that  "  from  the  manner  in  v*'hich  the  issue 
of  bank  notes  is  controlled,  the  public  will  never 
call  for  more  than  is  absolutely  necessary  for  their 
wants." 

The  part,  however,  of  the  evidence  which  at- 
tracted most  notice,  and  created  no  little  surprise, 
was  the  following  :  — 

*'  Is  it  vour  opinion  that  the  same  security  would  exist  against 
any  excess  in  the  issues  of  the  Bank,  if  the  rate  of  the  discount 
were  reduced  from  5  to  4  per  cent.?"  Answer  by  Mr.  Whit- 
more: "The  security  of  an  excess  would  be,  1  conceive,  pre- 
cisely the  same."  Mr.  Pearse :  "  I  concur  in  that  answer." 
"If  it  were  reduced  to  3  per  cent.?"  Mr.  Whitmore  :  "  I  con- 
ceive there  would  be  no  diiference,  if  our  practice  remained  the 
same  as  now,  of  not  forcing  a  note  into  circulation."  Mr.  Pearse : 
"  I  concur  in  that  answer," 

If  the  governor  and  deputy-governor  had  added 
the  proviso,  that  the  market  rate  of  interest  should 
be,  in  the  cases  supposed,  viz.  of  discounting  at 
four  or  three  per  cent.,  as  near  to  the  I]ank  rate^r 
hills  of  the  prescribed  description,  as  it  then  was 


THE    CURRENCY.  l6l 

to  5  per  cent.,  they  would  have  escaped  the  severe 
criticisms  to  which  their  answers,  so  unguardedly 
given,  were  exposed. 

The  truth  is,  that  if  the  market  rate  of  interest 
for  such  bills  as  came  within  the  prescribed  rules  of 
the  Bank  had  fluctuated  more  than  it  did,  and  had 
likewise  on  an  average  very  materially  exceeded 
the  fixed  rate  of  discount,  and  more  especially  if  it 
had  risen  progressively  during  the  whole  period 
of  the  restriction,  not  only  would  the  fluctu- 
ations in  the  amount  of  bank  notes  have  been 
greater,  but  there  would  also  have  been  such  a  con- 
stant tendency  to  excess  through  this  channel  of 
issue,  as  would  not  have  admitted  of  compensation 
by  diminished  issues  through  other  channels,  and 
the  total  increase  of  the  circulation  would  have 
been  greater  than  it  has  proved  to  be.  But  it  so 
happened  that  the  market  rate  of  interest  for  such 
hills  as  came  within  the  Bank  rules  did  not  con- 
stantly nor  materially  exceed  5  per  cent.  ;  nor  did 
it  rise  progressively  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
interval  of  the  restriction.  The  rate  of  interest  for 
such  bills  was  at  its  highest  long  before  the  termi- 
nation of  the  war,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  cir- 
cumstance, that  in  the  three  last  years  of  it  the 
applications  for  discount  at  the  Bank  fell  oflT,  com- 
pared with  what  they  had  been  for  seme  years 
before. 

The  fact  of  a  rate  of  interest  in  some  degree 
steady  at  about  5  per  cent,  on  this  description  of 
securities  is  perfectly  compatible  with  a  consi- 
derably higher  rate  for  other  securities.  It  is 
well  known  that,  within  these  few  years  past, 
such  bills  have  occasionally  been  eagerly  sought  by 
bankers  and  other  capitalists  at  a  rate  as  low  as 
2  per  cent,  per  annum,  while,  on  mortgages  or 
other  securities  not  immediately  or  readily  con- 
vertible, advances  were  rarely  to  be  had  under  4, 
and  frequently  not  under  5,  per  cent.    On  the  other 

M 


lO'^  THE    CURRliNCY. 

hand,  during  the  war,  while  bills  of  undoubted  so- 
lidity, and  at  short  dates,  were  generally  discount- 
able at  about  .5  per  cent.,  it  was  difficult  to  raise 
money  on  longer  dated  bills  without  a  commission, 
or  on  mortgages  or  other  securities  imperfectly  or 
distantly  convertible,  on  any  terms  but  such  as,  by 
annuities,  premiums,  or  other  evasions  of  the  usury 
laws,  were  equivalent  to  from  6  to  10  per  cent,  per 
annum. 

It  was,  therefore,  the  coincidence,  through  the 
greater  part  of  the  interval  of  the  restriction,  be- 
tween the  market  rate  and  the  Bank  rate  of  in- 
terest, that  prevented  the  tendency  through  this 
medium  to  progressive  increase  and  irremediable 
excess  of  issues,  which  might  have  been  appre- 
hended if  the  Bank  rate  had  been  for  any  length 
of  time  much  below  the  market  rate. 

The  principal  causes  of  the  fluctuations  in  the 
amount  of  discounts  at  the  Bank  down  to  1816, 
besides  those  which  are  incidental  to  the  growth 
and  varying  exigencies  of  trade,  the  greater  or  less 
inducement  to  speculation  and  occasional  derange- 
ments of  commercial  credit,  may  be  traced  to  the 
financial  operations  of  Government. 

When  considerable  public  loans  were  negoti- 
ated, or  when  Exchequer  Bills,  to  a  larger  amount 
than  usual,  were  issued  on  the  money  market,  the 
immediate  effect  was  to  create  a  temporary  absorp- 
tion of  floating  capital,  and,  consequently,  to  oc- 
casion a  temj)orary  rise  in  the  rate  of  interest. 
This  would  naturally  be  followed  by  increased  ap- 
plications for  discount  at  the  Bank.  But  in  the 
intervals  between  loans,  or  when  Excliequer  Bills 
were  in  less  amount  than  usual,  either  by  Govern- 
ment not  issuing  so  many,  or  by  the  Bank  taking 
a  portion  of  them  off*  the  market,  that  is,  making- 
advances  upon  them,  there  would  be  diminished 
applications  for  discount. 


THE    CURRENCY.  \6S 


Section  5.  —  On   the   Regulation   of  the  Bank 
Issues  durmg  the  Restriction, 

With  reference  to  the  foregoing  explanation  it  is 
to  be  observed,  that  the  regulation  of  the  Bank 
issues,  when  the  pressure  on  the  exchanges  for 
foreign  payments  was  unusually  great,  became  in- 
evitably exposed  to  the  alternative  of  very  extensive 
and  sudden  variations  of  the  exchanges  or  of  the 
rate  of  interest.* 

If  the  circulation  had  been  regulated,  as  it  ought 
to  have  been,  by  a  view  to  the  exchanges,  and  had 
been  contracted  in  proportion  to  the  depressing 
causes  acting  upon  them,  the  consequent  diminution 
of  bank  notes  would  have  been  felt  in  a  severe  pres- 
sure on  the  money  market,  or,  in  other  words,  in  a 
considerable  rise  in  tlie  rate  of  interest,  attended 
with  serious  inconvenience,  both  commercial  and 
financial,  the  former  aggravated  by  the  operation 
of  the  mischievous  and  absurd  provisions  of  the 
usury  law.  During  the  intervals  of  such  forced 
contraction  of  the  circulation,  sales  of  land  and 
houses,  and  of  fixed  property  generally,  would 
have  been  difficult,  and  exposed  to  enormous  sacri- 
fices, in  cases  in  which  it  was  necessary  to  realise  ; 
and  the  prices  of  goods  would,  of  course,  have 
experienced  considerable  depression  in  all  in- 
stances in  which  the  supply  at  all  exceeded  the 
wants  for  immediate  consumption.  A  fall  of  the 
rate  of  interest  would  have  followed  upon  the 
cessation  of  the  causes  for  contraction,  and  upon 
the  consequent  necessary  enlargement  of  the 
circulation. 

*  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  rate  of  interest  is  affected 
by  the  variations  in  the  circulation,  an  explanation  will  be  found 
in  an  extract,  inserted  in  the  Appendix,  from  a  former  publi- 
cation of  mine,  entitled  "  Considerations  on  the  State  of  the 
Currency." 

M    2 


I64f  THE    CURRENCY. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  regulation  on  the  principle, 
if  such  it  can  be  called,  by  which  the  Bank  directors 
professed  to  be  guided,  disregarding  the  exchanges, 
and  allowing  the  amount  of  the  issues  to  be  governed 
by,  and  in  its  turn  to  act  upon,  the  rate  of  interest, 
was  calculated,  as  long  as  the  market  rate  did  not  ma- 
terially exceed  the  Bank  rate  of  discount  (for  bills 
coming  within  the  Bank  rules),  to  produce  a  consi- 
derable degree  of  uniformity  in  the  circulation,  and 
to  prevent  such  violent  changes  in  the  state  of  the 
money  market  as  would  otlierwise  have  occurred ; 
but  it  was  calculated  at  the  same  time  to  leave  the 
exchanges  liable  to  extraordinary  fluctuations,  and 
such  as  did,  in  point  of  fact,  occur  —  fluctuations 
which  exposed  all  transactions  connected  with  the 
foreign  trade  of  the  country  to  the  greatest  possi- 
ble hazards  and  losses,  in  addition  to  those  which 
were  necessarily  incidentalto  a  state  of  war.  The 
great  depression  of  the  exchanges  added  also  enor- 
mously to  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  to  the 
cost  of  production  of  all  imported  articles,  and 
the  depreciation,  thence  resulting,  of  the  paper 
compared  with  its  standard,  was  a  flagrant  breach 
of  faith,  and  a  national  discredit. 

In  other  words,  the  alternative  in  the  regulation 
of  the  Bank  issues,  presented  by  the  extraordinary 
state  of  things  which  prevailed  at  particular  pe- 
riods of  the  war,  but  more  especially  during  the 
closing  years  of  it,  was  that  of  causing  great  and 
rapid  changes  in  the  quantity  of  money,  with  cor- 
responding violent  alterations  in  the  rate  of  interest 
and  in  the  state  of  credit,  both  commercial  and 
flrmncial,  or,  of  preserving  a  greater  degree  of  uni- 
formity in  the  amount  of  the  circulation  and  in  the 
rate  of  interest,  at  the  expense  of  very  great  fluc- 
tuations of  the  exchanges,  and  their  enormous 
attendant  and  preponderating  evils. 

If  the  currency,  during  the  war,  had  been 
purely  metallic,  there   must  have  been  occasion- 


THE    CURRENCY. 


1(3,5 


ally,  and  sometimes  for  a  considerable  interval, 
a  very  great  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  money, 
caused  by  the  demand  for  gold  for  export, 
to  defray  the  unusually  large  foreign  payments 
beyond  the  amount  that  could,  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  trade,  be  met  by  increased  exports  of 
commodities.  But,  independently  of  the  interval 
which,  in  an  uninterrupted  state  of  foreign  inter- 
course, would  be  required  for  the  adaptation  of  an 
increased  amount  of  exports  of  commodities  to 
meet  the  demand  for  extra  foreign  payments,  that 
interval  was  greatly  extended  in  the  latter  years  of 
the  war,  inasmuch  as  insurmountable  impediments 
are  well  known  to  have  been  opposed  to  the  export 
of  commodities  from  this  country  to  the  Continent 
of  Europe  :  so  that  the  state  of  greatly  dimi- 
nished quantity  of  money,  by  export  of  coin,  in 
order  to  meet  the  foreign  expenditure,  would,  in 
a  purely  metallic  currency,  have  been  of  consider- 
able duration.  And  the  same  would  have  been 
the  case  if  the  regulation  of  the  Bank  issues  had 
been  guided  by  the  exchanges,  and  had  conse- 
quently been  such  as  to  have  preserved  the  value 
of  the  paper  on  a  level  with  that  of  gold. 

Thus,  for  example,  in  the  latter  years  of  the 
American  war,  and  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  last 
war  with  France,  prior  to  the  suspension  of  cash 
payments,  the  alternations  between  contraction  and 
enlargement  of  the  Bank  issues  (and,  as  far  as  can 
be  judged,  of  the  whole  circulation)  were  very 
much  greater  than  during  the  restriction. 

The  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes  was,  in 
February,  1773,  6,037,060/.,  and  in  February, 
1775,  9,135,930/.,  being  an  increase  of  upwards 
of  50  per  cent.  After  intermediate  considerable 
variations,  the  amount  which,  in  March,  1782, 
had  been  9,lC0,000/.,  was  in  December  follow- 
ing reduced  to  5,995,000/. ;  a  degree  and  sudden- 
ness of  contraction   to  which  there  was  nothing 

M  3 


166  THE    CURRENCY. 

approaciiing  to  a  parallel  during  the  restriction,  or 
subsequent  to  it.  * 

The  variations,  also,  between  1793  and  1797 
were  very  considerable ;  but  these  will  be  more 
{)articularly  noticed  in  the  subsequent  historical 
sketch. 

If,  however,  the  greater  exemption  from  violent 
changes  in  the  amount  of  the  circulation,  during 

*  The  extraordinary  degree  of  contraction  to  which  the  Bank 
was  obliged  to  resort  in  1782,  and  again  in  1796,  in  order  to 
counteract  the  drain  on  its  treasure,  by  the  pressure  on  the 
foreign  exchanges,  is,  independently  of  its  importance  in  other 
points  of  view,  deserving  of  remark,  with  reference  to  an 
opinion  entertained  by  the  partisans  of  the  currency  theory, 
namely,  that  the  penalty  on  melting  and  exporting  the  coin, 
which  existed  prior  to  Peel's  bill,  operated,  according  to  its 
extent,  as  a  protection  to  the  Bank,  in  maintaining  a  larger  cir- 
culation than  it  otherwise  could  have  done ;  or,  in  the  language 
of  that  theory,  that  it  operated  to  that  extent,  as  a  relaxation 
of  the  standard.  (Evidence  before  the  Agricultural  Committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  1836.  Third  Report,  p.  484-.)  But 
they  overlook  the  consideration,  that  in  proportion  as  the 
penalty  on  exportation  admitted  of  a  greater  enlargement  of  the 
circulation,  before  the  drain  commenced,  it  required  so  much 
greater  contraction  to  stop  the  drain,  and  still  more  to  bring 
back  the  coin  when  the  drain  had  been  established. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  great  fluctuation  of  the  exchanges,  and  of 
the  discrepancy  between  their  indications  and  the  primdfacie  in- 
ference presented  by  the  amount  of  the  bank  issues,  Mr.  Van- 
sittart  moved  the  following  resolution,  among  those  that  were 
passed  in  1811  :  — 

*'  That  during  the  latter  part  of,  and  for  some  time  after,  the  Ame- 
rican war,  during  the  years  1781,  1782,  and  1783,  the  exchange 
with  Hamburg  fell  from  34«.  \d.  to  31*.  5d.,  being  about  8  per 
cent.,  and  the  price  of  foreign  gold  rose  from  3/.  17*.  6d.  to 
4/.  2*.  5d.  per  ounce  ;  and  the  price  of  dollars,  from  5s.  4^c?. 
per  ounce  to  5s.  W^d.;  and  that  the  bank  notes  in  circulation 
were  reduced  between  March,  1782,  and  December,  1782, 
from  9,160,000/.  to  5,995,000/.,  being  a  diminution  of  above 
one  third,  and  continued  (with  occasional  variations)  at  such 
reduced  rate  until  December,  1784.  And  that  the  exchange 
with  Hamburg  rose  to  34*.  6f/. ;  and  the  price  of  gold  fell  to 
3/.  175.  6d.  and  dollars  to  5s.  \hd.  per  ounce,  before  the  25th 
Februar}',  1787,  the  amount  of  bank  notes  being  then  increased 
to  8,688,000/." 


THE    CURRENCY.  1^7 

the  restriction,  than  in  the  periods  anterior  and 
subsequent  to  it,  had  been  still  more  striking  than 
it  is,  it  would  not  be  a  compensation  for  the  mani- 
fold evils  and  dangers  attending  an  inconvertible 
paper  currency. 

The  observation  of  the  comparative  uniformity 
of  the  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation,  and  of  its 
not  having  exceeded,  during  the  suspension  of 
cash  payments,  the  quantity  which  was  found 
consistent  eventually  with  the  I'estoration  of  its 
standard  value,  is  not  here  introduced  for  the  pur- 
pose of  vindicating  the  policy  which  imposed  and 
continued  the  restriction,  but  it  may  fairly  be 
adduced  as  an  answer  to  the  charge  of  constant 
excess*  of  issue,  by  which,  in  the  arguments 
quoted,  the  whole  period  of  the  restriction  is  as- 

*  But  charges  still  wider  of  the  truth  have  been  urged 
against  that  measure.  The  most  exaggerated  statements  have 
been  made  in  general  terms,  of  the  violent  changes  occasioned  by 
it  in  the  quantity  of  the  paper  circulation.  The  following  speci- 
men of  such  charges  is  taken  from  a  publication  on  "  Corn  and 
Currency,"  by  Sir  James  Graham,  which  attracted  considerable 
notice  in  its  day  :  — 

"  Mr.  Pitt,  when  he  introduced  his  bold  measure  of  the  Bank 
restriction,  which  rendered  the  paper  of  the  Bank  of  England 
no  longer  convertible  into  cash  on  demand,  and  imposed  no 
h'mit  on  its  issues  beyond  the  will  of  the  Government,  or  the 
caprice  of  the  Directors,  declared,  with  prophetic  warning, 
(Hansard's  Parliamentary  Debates,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  71.)  *  That,  if 
the  country  be  once  surcharged  with  paper,  it  would  have  as 
ruinous  effects  as  would  be  produced  by  lessening  the  quantity 
of  the  paper  circulation ;  a  sudden  diminution  '^of  the  paper 
currency  would  prove  the  most  violent  shock  which  the  trade 
and  credit  of  this  country  could  receive.' 

"  Notwithstanding  this  sound  prediction  from  the  author  of 
the  measure,  his  successors,  who  profess  to  tread  in  his  steps, 
and  to  venerate  his  name,  have  despised  the  warning,  have 
rejected  the  admonition,  and  applied  the  power  precisely  in  the 
two  modes  which  Mr.  Pitt  thought  most  dangerous.  '  The 
country  has  been  surcharged  with  paper  ;'— there  has  been  a 
'  sudden  diminution  of  the  currency,'  not  once,  but  repeatedly; 
and  exactly  as  Mr.  Pitt  foretold,  each  violent  change,  in  either 
direction,  has  shaken  to  their  foundations  '  the  trade  and  credit 
of  the  country.' ''  P.  '28. 

M    4 


168  THE    CURRENCY. 

serted  to  have  been  characterised,  the  term  excess 
not  being  confined  to  mean  an  amount  beyond  what 
could,  under  the  extraordinary  circumstances,  be 
maintained,  consistently  with  the  par  value^  but  such 
an  increase  and  excess  as  would,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  have  entailed  depreciation. 


vSection  6.  —  On  the  Effect  of  the  Ba7ik  Restric- 
tion in  raising  the  Prices  of  Commodities. 

It  may  be  asked,  whether,  if  it  be  admitted  that 
there  was  no  excess  during  the  restriction  of  the 
amount  of  circulation  beyond  what  might  have 
been  maintained,  but  for  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments,  the  restriction  can  be  charged  with  any 
part  of  the  nominal  rise  of  prices,  which  prevailed 
during  the  suspension  of  casli  payments  ?  Tlie 
answer  would  necessarily  be  in  the  negative,  as 
far  as  relates  to  depreciation  attributable  to  an 
increase  in  the  quantity  of  money.  But  the  re- 
striction admitted  of  a  greater  depression  of  the 
exchanges,  than  could  have  occurred  in  a  con- 
vertible state  of  the  paper.  And  as  the  depres- 
sion of  the  exchanges  constituted  an  element  of 
increased  cost  of  all  imported  commodities,  and 
thus,  directly  or  indirectly,  affected  the  price  of 
a  considerable  proportion  of  native  productions, 
the  restriction  may  be  considered  to  have  been 
the  condition  without  which  so  much  of  the  rise 
of  prices  as  was  attributable  to  increased  cost  by 
adverse  exchanges  could  not  have  occurred.  Be- 
sides that,  it  is  the  general  tendency  of  a  fall  of  the 
exchange  to  raise  the  prices  of  exportable  com- 
modities. 

It  is  in  this  sense  only,  if,  even  in  this  sense,  the 
word  can  be  correctly  so  applied,  that  the  Bank 
restriction  can  be  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  so 
much  of  the  advance  of  prices,  as  may  be  measured 


THE    CURRENCY.  l69 

by  the  de])ression  of  the  exchanges  below  the  point 
to  which,  previous  to  the  restriction,  they  had,  un- 
der the  pressure  of  extra  foreign  payments  in  former 
wars,  occasionally  fallen.*  But  the  variations  of 
the  exchanges,  taking  them  in  the  aggregate,  and 
allowing  for  partial  discrepancies  of  occasional 
quotations  arising  from  impediments  to  exchange 
operations,  and  from  hazards  attending  the  trans- 
mission of  bullion,  allowing  also  for  the  difference 
arising  from  the  varying  proportions  between  silver 
and  gold,  will  be  found  to  correspond  in  the  main 
with  the  variations  in  the  price  of  gold.  There 
would,  therefore,  be  little  difference  in  the  result, 
whether  the  price  of  gold  or  the  exchanges  were 
taken  as  the  measure  of  the  utmost  advance  of 
prices  during  the  restriction,  beyond  the  rate  at 
which,  c(Eteris  paribus^  they  could  have  been  main- 
tained in  a  convertible  state  of  the  currency.  The 
same  reasoning  will  apply  as  to  the  measure  of  the 
utmost  fall  of  prices  that  can  be  ascribed  to  a  re- 
turn to  the  convertibility  of  the  paper.  But  the 
price  of  gold  is  the  simplest  and  clearest  expression 
of  the  result  of  the  quotations  of  all  the  different 
exchanges.  On  this  ground,  therefore,  as  well  as 
because  the  price  of  gold  is,  by  the  definition  of 
the  standard,  the  measure  of  the  depreciation  spe- 
cifically predicated  of  bank  notes,  the  explana- 
tion about  to  be  given  of  the  causes  of  the  great 
variations  of  prices,  in  the  period  which  is  to  come 
under  examination,  is  to  be  considered  as  subject 
always  to  an  allowance  (as  a  maximum,  however,) 
of  the  difference  between  j)aper  and  gold.  But  an 
admission  to  this  extent,  which  is  beyond  what,  in 
point  of  fact,  is  likely  to  be  found  necessary,  is 
utterly    insufficient,    according    to    the    currency 

*  During  the  American  war,  the  exchange  on  Hamburg 
was  occasionally,  and  for  some  length  of  time,  at  about  31*.  6d. 
And  it  is  only,  therefore,  for  the  fall  below  this  rate  that  the 
Bank  restriction  is  accountable. 


170  THE    CURRENCY. 

theory,  to  account  for  the  great  rise  of  prices  dur- 
ing the  restriction,  and  for  the  gi-eat  fall  subse- 
quently ;  the  rise  being,  by  that  theory,  ascribed  to 
an  excessive  enlargement  of  the  issues,  which  the 
Bank  was,  by  the  restriction,  enabled  and  induced 
to  make  and  maintain  ;  and  the  fall  being  attributed 
to  the  contraction  which,  by  the  same  theory,  is 
considered  to  have  been  necessarily  effected  as  a 
preparation  and  means  for  the  restoration  of  cash 
payments. 


Section  7«  —  On  the  alleged  invariable  Connection 
of'  Increase  of  Price  ivith  the  Bank  Bestrictiony 
and  on  the  Effect  of  the  near  Approach  of  the 
Termination  of  the  Restriction  producmg  a  Fall 
of  Prices  greatly  exceeding  theDiff'erence  between 
Paper  and  Gold. 

Proceeding  on  the  assumption  of  the  constant 
excess  of  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of  England,  and 
of  the  country  banks,  the  concluding  allegations, 
among  the  arguments  wliich  have  been  stated  in 
support  of  the  doctrine  of  ultra  depreciation,  are, 
*'  That  the  constant  and  invariable  connection  of 
increase  of  price  with   the  Bank   restriction  is  a 
forcible  proof  of  such  a  relation,  as  that  of  cause 
and  effect  subsisting  between  the  two  pheenomena  ; 
and  that  the  near  approach  of  the  termination  of 
that  restriction  had  produced  a  fall  of  prices,  greatly 
exceeding  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold  ; 
thus    still  further  corroborating  that   connection, 
and  proving,  almost  demonstratively,  that  the  prices 
from  1797  to  1814  were,  to  a  certain  degree,  arti- 
ficial, and  that  the  comparison  of  paper  with  gold 
did  not  afford  a  test  of  the  real  amount  of  the  fall 
in   the  value  of  our  currency.'*     Here  it  is  evi- 
dently meant  to  imply,  that  the  near  approach  of 


THE    CURUKNCY.  171 

the  termination  of  the  restriction,  and,  still  more, 
the  actual  passing  of  Peel's  bill,  had  been  the  ori- 
ginating and  the  cJiief,  if  not  only^  cause  of  the  fall 
of  prices.  And  of  course,  if  the  mere  removal 
of  the  restriction  was  the  chief  cause  of  the  fall, 
the  restriction  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  the 
chief,  if  not  the  only,  cause  of  the  previous  rise. 

It  appears  to  me  that  a  total  absence  of  know- 
ledge of  many  facts  bearing  upon  the  question,  a 
great  misapprehension  of  others,  and  a  general 
confusion  of  the  order  of  time,  in  which  the 
principal  circumstances  in  connection  with  prices, 
and  with  the  state  of  the  circulation,  are  supposed 
to  have  taken  place,  can  alone  account  for  the 
prevalence  of  opinions  so  erroneous  as  those  in- 
volved in  the  above  propositions  ;  opinions  which, 
destitute  as  they  are  of  any  real  foundation,  are 
almost  universally  prevalent. 

It  is  the  purpose,  therefore,  of  the  following 
historical  sketch  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  most 
prominent  of  the  facts,  which  are  calculated  to 
elucidate  the  causes  of  the  great  variations  of  prices 
from  the  close  of  1792  to  the  present  time ;  and 
as  the  result  of  the  view,  which  it  is  thus  proposed 
to  take,  I  expect  to  be  able  to  show  — 

1-  That  there  were  circumstances  during  the 
period  under  consideration,  affecting  the  cost  of 
production,  and  the  casual  supply  relatively  to 
the  rate  of  consumption  of  the  principal  articles, 
the  fluctuations  of  which  are  in  question,  sufficient 
to  account  for  the  variations  of  prices,  independ- 
ently of  any  supposed  influence  of  the  currency, 
beyond  the  degree  indicated  by  the  difference 
between  paper  and  gold. 

2.  That  the  theory  which  supposes  the  disen- 
gagement and  reabsorption  of  gold  by  this  country, 
arising  from  the  restriction  and  the  resumption  of 
cash  payments,  to  have  sensibly  affected  bullion 
prices  is  (independently  of  the  inadequateness  of  the 


172  THE    CURRENCY. 

supposed  cause  as  has  already  been  shown)  not 
borne  out  by  a  reference  to  the  periods  in  which, 
or  to  the  circumstances  under  which,  the  great 
alterations  of  price  took  place. 

3.  That  the  alterations  in  the  amount  of  the 
circulation  did  not  occur  in  such  order  of  time 
with  reference  to  the  variations  of  prices,  as  to 
justify  the  assignment  of  such  a  relation  as  that  of 
cause  and  effect ;  for  that  in  point  of  fact  in  the 
majority  of  instances  the  alleged  effects  preceded 
the  supposed  causes. 

4.  That  the  increase  of  the  Bank  circulation 
during  the  restriction,  although  excessive,  as  being 
beyond  what  could,  under  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments,  be  maintained  consistently  with  the  pre- 
servation of  the  par  of  the  exchanges,  and  of  the 
price  of  gold,  was  not  greater  than  it  is  probable 
would,  in  an  midisturbed  state  of  politics  and  trade, 
have  been  required  to  carry  on  the  greatly  ex- 
tended pecuniary  transactions  of  the  country  at 
bullion  prices  on  their  ordinary  level  with  those 
of  other  countries.  The  proof,  or  at  least  the 
strongest  possible  presumption  to  this  effect  being, 
that  upon  every  cessation  of  the  pressure  of  foreign 
payments  the  exchanges  tended  to  a  recovery,  and 
were,  when  those  payments  finally  ceased,  restored 
to  par,  not  only  without  any  reduction  of  Bank 
paper,  but  coincidently  with  an  increase  of  it. 

5.  That  the  growth  and  contraction  of  country 
bank  notes  greatly  beyond,  and  within,  the  extent 
to  which  they  served  for  ordinary  local  purposes, 
were  governed  during  the  restriction  by  the  same 
general  causes  as  operated  before  and  since. 
They  expanded  under  circumstances  favouring 
speculation,  and  a  rise  of  prices,  and  became  con- 
tracted under  the  opposite  circumstances. 

6.  That  a  contraction  of  the  currency  was  not 
a  necessary  consequence  of,  or,  in  point  of  fact, 
produced  by.  Peel's  bill,  or  by  any  anterior  prepar- 


THE    CURRENCY.  173 

ation  on  the  part  of  the  Bank  for  cash  payments  ; 
for  that,  according  to  the  rules  by  which  the  Bank 
regulated  its  issues,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that,  without  any  reference  whatever  to  that  bill, 
or  to  any  anterior  preparation,  the  circulation  of 
Bank  of  England  notes  and  coin  together,  con- 
stituting the  basis  of  the  currency,  would  have 
been  neither  more  nor  less  than  it  actually  proved 
to  be. 


17  J' 


PART  IV. 

HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  PRICES,  AND  OF  THE 
STATE  OF  THE  CIRCUL/iTION,  FROM  1792  TO 
1 8S7. 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  whole  qLiestion  of  the  degree  in  which  the 
causes  that  liave  been  severally  assigned  as  account- 
ing for  the  great  variations  of  price  in  the  period 
which  is  to  come  under  consideration,  viz.  from 
the  commencement  of  179^^  to  the  present  time, 
mainly  rests  upon  the  sequence  observable  between 
prices,  and  the  circumstances  connected  with  them 
in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  absolutely 
essential  in  this  view  to  trace  the  events  in  strict 
connection  with  prices.  In  a  former  work  of 
mine  on  prices,  a  cursory  glance  only  was  taken 
of  the  state  of  things  in  relation  to  prices  at  par- 
ticular periods,  without,  as  I  have  since  perceived, 
a  sufficiently  distinct  arrangement  of  the  whole 
series  of  them  in  chronological  order.  It  is  my 
present  purpose,  accordingly,  to  give  them  in  that 
order.  But  with  that  view  it  is  necessary  to  make 
a  division  into  points,  upon  which  the  attention 
may  rest,  or,  in  other  words,  into  epochs,  through 
which  the  several  sets  of  prices  and  circumstances 
may  be  traced  distinctly.  In  determining  the 
question  how  that  object  may  best  be  accomplished, 


HISTORICAL    SKKTCH.  17.^ 

the  most  convenient  mode  that  has  suggested 
itself  to  me  is  that  of  a  division  into  epochs  of 
about  five  years  each.  Shorter  intervals,  annual 
periods,  for  instance,  would,  properly  speaking,  be 
of  the  nature  of  annals,  and  would  weary  and 
distract  the  attention  by  the  inevitable  minuteness 
of  the  details,  besides  that  an  interval  so  short 
would  not  admit  of  continuous  observation  of  the 
whole,  or  even  of  the  greater  part  of  the  phases, 
within  which  the  changes  and  alternations  between 
periods  of  confidence  and  discredit,  of  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  and  despondency,  have  revolved.  On 
the  other  hand,  intervals  often  years  would  be  too 
long  for  the  purpose,  as  they  would  embrace  too 
many  particulars  to  admit  easily  of  such  arrange- 
ment and  classification  as  are  essential  to  the 
formation  of  any  clear  conclusions.  Not  only, 
therefore,  as  a  medium  between  these  extremes, 
but  because,  in  point  of  fact,  it  so  happens  that 
intervals  of  about  five  years  do  afford  resting- 
places,  at  each  of  which  an  examination  may  con- 
veniently take  place  of  the  rise  and  progress,  and 
in  many  instances  of  the  termination,  of  a  series  of 
events,  all  tending  to  throw  light  on  each  other, 
and  to  bring  out  a  legitimate  conclusion,  it  is 
heie  proposed  to  adopt  a  division  of  the  time 
which  is  to  pass  in  review  into  intervals  of  about 
five  years. 

The  first  division  will,  however,  most  con- 
veniently embrace  six  years,  viz.  from  the  com- 
mencement of  1793  to  the  close  of  1798  ;  and  the 
period  ending  1822  will  comprise  only  four  years, 
for  reasons  which  will  be  obvious  when  those 
epochs  come  under  consideration. 


176       PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION,    1793 1798. 


CHAP.  II. 

ON  THE  STATE  OF  PRICES,  AND  OF  THE  CIRCULA- 
TION, FROM  THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  1793  TO 
THE    CLOSE    OF    1798. 

The  commencement  of  1793  is  among  the  most 
memorable  in  the  annals  of  this  country,  and  of 
Europe,  and  indeed  of  the  civihsed  world.  It  was 
in  February  of  that  year  that  the  war  with  France, 
which,  with  the  intermission  of  a  few  months, 
lasted  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  was  declared.* 

There  had  been  immediately  preceding  that 
event  a  great  revulsion  and  derangement  of  com- 
mercial credit,  not  only  in  this  country,  but  in 
the  principal  trading  cities  of  the  Continent  of 
Europe. 

By  some  persons  it  was  supposed,  that  the  de- 
claration of  war  had  materially  contributed  to 
produce  the  derangement  of  credit.  Thus  Sir 
Francis  Baring,  in  a  pamphlet  published  in  1797» 
observed : — 

"  A  circumstance  which  very  materially  contributed  to  pro- 
duce the  distress  of  1793  was  the  sudden  unexpected  declara- 
tion of  war.  That  dreadful  calamity  is  usually  preceded  by 
some  indication  which  enables  the  commercial  community  to 
make  preparation.  On  this  occasion  the  short  notice  rendered 
the  least  degree  of  general  preparation  impossible,  and  which 
may  be  ascertained  by  the  prices  of  stocks  in  the  preceding 
month  of  October  and  various  collateral  authorities." 

Notwithstanding  this  deservedly  high  authority 
for  the  supposition,  that  the  breaking  out  of  the 

*  The  preparations  for  war  on  both  sides  were  made  in 
January,  but  the  actual  declaration  of  war  was  made  by  France 
against  this  country  on  the  1st  of  February,  1793. 


PRICES   AND    CIRCULATION,  1793 — 1798.      177 

war  had  contributed  in  a  considerable  degree  to 
the  memorable  derangement  of  commercial  credit, 
which  occurred  about  that  time  ;  I  am  disposed, 
both  from  my  own  recollection,  and  from  all  that 
I  have  been  able  to  collect  by  research,  to  doubt 
whether  the  war  had  much  influence  in  the  origin 
of  the  discredit,  although  it  can  hardly  have  failed 
of  operating  in  aggravation  of  the  main  causes. 
These  seem  to  have  been  pre-existing  in  a  great 
and  undue  extension  of  the  system  of  credit  and 
paper  circulation,  not  only  in  the  internal  trade  and 
banking  of  this  country,  but  in  the  commercial 
transactions  of  the  principal  cities  of  the  Continent 
of  Europe,  and  in  the  United  States  of  America. 

The  commercial  failures  both  here  and  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  and  in  America,  began  in 
the  autumn  of  1792,  while  the  price  of  the  funds 
was  still  comparatively  high,  the  3  per  cent.  Con- 
sols being  at  90  in  September,  and  at  88  in 
November  of  that  year,  and  while,  therefore,  it 
could  not  be  supposed,  that  the  alarm  of  impend- 
ing hostilities  could  have  had  much  effect.  Nor 
did  it  appear  from  the  character  of  the  mercantile 
failures  which  occurred,  and  which  proved  in  most 
instances  to  have  been  insolvencies  of  some  stand- 
ing, how  war,  or  the  apprehension  of  war,  could 
have  produced  tlieir  embarrassment.  At  the  same 
time  it  must  be  admitted,  that  the  breaking  out  of 
the  war,  although  apparently  not  an  originating 
cause,  must  necessarily  have  added  to  whatever 
were  the  pre-existing  causes  of  derangement,  not 
only  by  the  increased  rate  of  interest  occasioned 
by  the  loan  for  the  purposes  of  the  war,  but  by  the 
inevitable  disturbance  of  some  of  the  channels  of 
demand.* 

*  It  is  probable,  that,  although  the  failures  and  the  attendant 
commercial  discredit  began  in  1792,  before  any  great  fall  in  the 
funds  of  this  country  had  occurred,  the  further  failures  and  con- 
sequent discredit,  particularly  of  the  country  bankers,  were  ex~ 

N 


lyS  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATIONT, 

There  is  a  very  prevalent  impression,  that  the 
orighi  of  speculations  and  Ingh  prices  is  to  be 
dated  from  the  commencement  of  the  war  in  1793. 
The  fact,  however,  is,  that  there  was  a  very  gene- 
ral fall  of  prices,  from  the  close  of  1792  to  the  com- 
mencement of  1791'-  On  looking  over  the  Table 
of  prices,  it  will  be  seen  that  there  were  very 
few  commodities  which  were  not  lower  at  the 
close  of  1792,  and  at  different  periods  in  1793  and 
1791,  than  they  had  been  at  the  commencement 
of  1792.  And  the  real  fliU  was  still  greater  than 
the  apparent  one  ;  because  the  cost  of  production 
of  all  imported  commodities  was  greater  by  the 
difference  of  freights  and  insurance,  after  the 
breaking  out  of  the  war. 

This  fall  of  prices  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
a  direct  or  obvious  consequence  of  the  war :  it 
was  rather  the  effect  of  a  recoil  from  extensive  spe- 
culations, which  had  their  origin  two  or  three  years 
before,  connected  with  the  extensive  circulation  of 
mercantile  paper  already  alluded  to.  One  of  the  chief 
causes  of  those  speculations  seems  to  have  arisen 
on  the  ground  of  apprehended  scarcity  of  colo- 
nial produce  in  consequence  of  the  revolution  in 
St.  Domingo,  which  at  that  time  constituted  the 
largest  source  of  supply  of  sugar  and  coffee  to 
the  Continent  of  Europe.  Other  grounds  were 
afforded  by  the  unsettled  aspect  of  politics.  As 
usual,  in  times  of  confidence  and  tendency  to  spe- 
culation, many  articles,  for  the  rise  of  which  there 
was  no  sufficient  ground  of  actual  or  apprehended 
scarcity,    participated   in    the   advance.     But  the 


tended  and  aggravated  by  the  great  fall  of  the  funds  which  im- 
mediately followed  the  declaration  of  war.  And  there  is  reason 
to  believe,  that  some  of  the  failures  of  the  Continental  houses 
were  aggravated,  if  not  caused,  by  previous  speculations  in  the 
French  assignats  which  subsequently  experienced  the  extreme 
of  depreciation. 


1793—1798.  179 

rise  proved  to  have  been  greater  than  the  occasion 
justified,  and  prices  fell.  It  may  be  observed, 
however,  that  as,  during  the  previous  rise,  there 
had  been  no  manifestation  of  extravagance  of  ad- 
vance in  any  one  article,  so,  in  the  fall,  the  number 
of  articles  to  which  it  applied  was  extensive ;  but 
to  none  did  it  apply  in  a  very  marked  degree.  The 
lowest  point  of  depression  of  the  prices  of  such 
articles  as  had  risen  most  between  1790  and  1792, 
seems  to  have  been  reached  in  1794. 

It  was  not  till  the  latter  part  of  1794  and  the 
commencement  of  1795  that  circumstances  arose, 
which  were  calculated  to  create  a  great  disturb- 
ance of  prices,  both  of  corn  and  of  other  leading- 
articles  of  consumption.  In  proceeding  to  notice 
in  some  detail  and  consecutively  the  great  varia- 
tions in  prices,  which  henceforth  occurred,  those 
of  corn,  as  bearing  most,  according  to  general  opi- 
nion, on  the  doctrine  of  depreciation,  will  be  more 
particularly  referred  to  and  dwelt  upon.  Those  of 
other  commodities  will  be  noticed  only  when  un- 
der the  influence  of  extraordinary  circumstances, 
and  more  especially  hi  connection  with,  and  illus- 
trative of,  the  influence  of  the  circulating  medium, 
the  state  of  which  will  be  the  subject  of  consider- 
ation at  the  end  of  each  interval. 

The  general  character  of  the  seasons,  as  to  pro- 
ductiveness, will  be  noticed  with  more  or  less  of 
detail,  according  as  they  may  appear  to  have  been 
attended  with  less  or  more  of  influence  on  prices. 


Section  1. — On  the  Seasons  in  Connection  with 
the  Prices  of  Provisions,  from  1793  to  the  Close 
of  1798. 

Of  the  season  of  1793  it  is  said  by  Arthur  Young, 
in  the  Annals  of  Agriculture,  vol.  xxv.,   that  the 

N  2 


180  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Summer  was  a  very  dry  one,  in  which,  though  the  wheat 
was  moderate,  the  spring  crops  generally  proved  deficient." 

Moderate  only,  however,  as  the  crop  of  wheat  is 
described  to  have  been,  the  price  gave  way  after 
harvest.  The  quotation  of  the  Windsor  market, 
which  at  Lady-day,  1793,  had  been  5is.  Id.,  fell 
at  Michaelmas  following  to  45^.  And  the  ports, 
which  had  been  open  by  proclamation  in  the 
spring,  were  shut  again  at  the  low  duty  in  June 
of  that  year.* 

On  the  seasons  of  1794  and  1795,  the  results  of 
which  form  so  prominent  a  feature  in  the  history 
of  the  Corn  Trade,  it  is  necessary  to  dwell  some- 
what more  in  detail.  Arthur  Young,  writing  in 
1795,  says  of  the  former, 

"  In  the  last  summer,  1794,  the  wheat  turned  out,  very  un- 
expectedly  to  many  growers,  a  failing  produce;  the  drought  in 
many  parts  of  England  parched  the  spring  corn  to  that  degree, 
that  I  believe  the  leguminous  crops  have  scarcely  returned 
even  the  seed  committed  to  the  ground  for  them." 

"  Here  we  find  that  there  have  been  three  seasons  in  succes- 
sion unfavourable  to  the  production  of  some  kinds  of  grain  ; 
the  dearness  of  all  is  a  natural  consequence." 

The    spring  of  1794   was    the   most   forward, 
and    the  summer   tlie    most   uninterruptedly  hot 

*  According  to  the  Gazette  return  of  the  averages  for  Eng- 
land and  Wales,  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  so  great 
a  fall  in  the  price  of  wheat  immediately  following  the  harvest  of 
1793,  namely,  from  51,?.  to  47* ;  but  the  discrepancy  maybe 
explained  partly  by  the  very  incorrect  manner  in  which  the 
averages  were  taken  and  partly  by  the  circumstance  that  the 
harvest  weather  of  1792  had  been  wet,  while  that  of  1793 
was  dry,  which  would  account  for  a  greater  difference  than 
usual,  between  the  better  wheat  and  that  of  average  quality  in 
the  spring  of  1793.  Notwithstanding,  however,  the  objections 
which,  as  regards  cori'ectness,  apply  to  the  average  returns, 
they  will  henceforth  be  referred  to  in  preference  to  the  Eton 
Tables  for  two  reasons  :  the  one  is  that  the  currency  contro- 
versy has  proceeded  chiefly  upon  a  reference  to  those  returns  ; 
and  the  other  is,  that  these  admit  of  occasionally  introducing 
into  the  same  line  of  comparison  the  prices  of  spring  corn. 


1793—1798.  181 

and  dry,  of  wliich  I  have  been  able  to  meet  with 
any  record  :  as,  however,  the  degree  of  deficiency 
arising  from  the  excessive  drought  and  scanty 
crops  of  1794s  and  the  want  of  a  surphis  from 
1793,  had  not,  in  consequence  of  the  harvest 
being  unusually  forward  (the  cutting  of  wlieat 
having  been  begun  in  the  south  and  midhuid  dis- 
tricts, by  the  middle  of  July,  and  the  crops  mostly 
secured  by  the  end  of  that  month),  and  the  wlieat 
having  been  brought  in  line  condition  and  very 
early  to  the  market,  been  sufficiently  appreciated, 
the  price  did  not  rise  soon  enough  to  check  the 
consumption  ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  winter  and 
spring  following,  that  the  insufficiency  of  the  stock 
on  hand,  to  meet  the  average  rate  of  consump- 
tion, was  discovered. 

The  winter  of  1794-5  had  set  in  remarkably 
early,  and  proved  to  be  of  extraordinary  severity 
and  mclemency,  so  that  independently  of  the  in- 
creased consumption,  thence  arising,  of  the  stock 
of  dry  food,  apprehensions  were  justly  entertained 
of  injury  to  the  growing  crop.  A  very  general  alarm 
arose,  and  the  average  prices  advanced  as  follows : — ■ 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley. 

Oats. 

1  Jan.    1795, 

55s.  qd. 

34*.    2f/. 

21*.  \\d. 

1  July,   do. 

775.  '2d. 

41.9.  lOf/. 

Tin.    8d. 

Government  had,  early  in  1795,  and  indeed, 
for  some  time  before,  taken  the  alarm  at  the  indi- 
cations of  impending  dearth,  and  adopted  some 
extraordinary  measures  of  precaution.  All  neu- 
tral ships  bound  with  corn  to  France  were  seized 
and  brought  into  this  country,  and  their  cargoes 
paid  for,  with  an  ample  profit  to  the  proprietors. 
This  measure  was  adopted  with  a  double  view, 
of  relief  to  ourselves  and  distress  to  the  enemy, 
there  being  still  greater  scarcity  in  France  than  in 
this  country.  At  the  same  time  government  em- 
ployed agents  to  buy   corn   at   the  ports   in   the 

N   o 


182  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Baltic.  This  was  done  because  it  was  apprehended 
that  our  own  merchants  would  be  deterred  from 
purchasing  so  freely  as  was  desirable,  by  the  great 
advance  of  prices,  which  had  taken  place  in  the 
North  of  Europe,  in  consequence  of  large  purchases 
for  account  of  the  French  government. 

Of  the  })olicy  of  this  measure,  as  interfering  with 
the  ordinary  course  and  true  principles  of  trade,  Mr. 
Pitt  spoke  doubtingly ;  but  rested  the  justification  of 
it  upon  the  extraordinary  and  alarming  character  of 
the  emergency.  Sir  Francis  Baring  also  offered  a 
hesitating  opinion  in  justification  of  the  measure. 
Notwithstanding  all  these  precautionary  measures 
for  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  and  the  induce- 
ments held  out  by  an  unprecedentedly  high  price 
in  this  country,  such  was  the  scarcity  in  the  north 
of  Europe  and  in  America*,  and  such  the  com- 
petition of  the  government  of  France  with  ours, 
that  the  importation  in  the  whole  of  the  year  1795, 
after  deducting  small  casual  exports,  did  not  quite 
reach  three  hundred  thousand  quarters  of  wheat. 

The  spring  of  1795  was  very  cold  and  backward, 
the  summer  wet  and  stormy,  and  the  harvest  con- 
sequently unusually  late.  Under  these  threatening 
circumstances  the  prices  experienced  a  continued 
advance,  the  average  for  England  and  Wales  having 
reached  1086-.  4c?.  in  August  of  that  year.  The  wea- 
ther, however,  having  cleared  up  towards  the  latter 
part  of  August,  and  having  proved  fine  throughout 
September,  so  as  to  admit  of  securing  the  wliole  of 
the  crop  in  good  order,  the  markets  experienced 
a  decline,  the  average  price  in  October  having 
got  down  to  jGs.  Od-  But  tlie  original  de- 
ficiency  then   manifested   itself,    and   prices   rose 

*  In  the  United  States  of  America  the  crops  of  wheat,  in 
1795,  were  as  deficient  as  they  were  in  Europe.  The  deficiency 
was  mainly  ascribed  to  the  ravages  of  an  insect  called  the  Hes- 
sian Fly.  And  the  price  of  flour  reached  the  enormous  rate  of 
fifteen  dollars  the  barrel. 


1793—1798.  183 

again  considerably  before  the  close  of  the  year ; 
On  the  meeting  of  parliament,  29th  October,  1795, 
the  khig  in  his  speech  alluded  to  the  dearth  in  the 
following  terms :  — 

"  I  have  observed  for  some  time  past  with  the  greatest  anxiety, 
the  very  high  price  of  grain  ;  and  that  anxiety  is  increased  by 
the  apprehension  that  the  produce  of  the  wheat  harvest,  in  the 
present  year,  may  not  have  been  such  as  effectually  to  relieve 
my  people  from  the  difficulties  with  which  ihey  have  had  to  con- 
tend." 

And  concluded  with  an  assurance  of  his  Majesty's 
hearty  concurrence  in  whatever  regidations  the 
wisdom  of  Parliament  might  adopt. 

Animated  discussions  took  place  on  the  nature 
and  causes,  and  extent  of  the  dearth,  and  on  the 
remedies  to  be  applied  for  the  alleviation  of  its 
effects.  On  the  3d  November,  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer  moved,  that  a  select  committee 
be  appointed,  for  mquiring  into  the  circumstances 
of  the  present  scarcity,  and  the  best  means  of  re- 
medying it.  As  usual  on  such  occasions,  there 
was  a  disposition  to  account  for  the  high  price  of 
provisions  by  the  assignment  of  any  but  the  simple, 
sufficient,  and  true  cause,  casual  deficiency  of  sup- 
ply from  the  visitation  of  two  very  unproductive 
crops.  Monopoly  *,  forestalling  t,  andregrating  were 

*  The  following  extract  from  among  the  speeches  in  the 
House  of  Commons  may  serve  as  a  specimen  to  this  effect:  — 

Debate  3d  November,  1795,  Mr.  Lechmere  said,  "  We  had 
perhaps  had  as  plentiful  a  harvest  as  the  great  Author  of  all  bless- 
ings ever  gave  us."  "  One  of  the  great  causes  of  the  present 
distress  he  took  to  be  the  monopoly  of  farms." 

t  The  charge  of  Lord  Kenyon,  at  the  Assizes  for  Salop, 
in  1795,  will  afford  a  specimen  of  the  prejudices  which  exten- 
sively prevailed  at  that  period  as  to  the  influence  of  unfair  prac- 
tices in  raising  the  prices  of  provisions  :  — 

"  Here,  gentlemen,  since  I  have  been  in  this  place,  a  report 
has  been  handed  to  me  (without  foundation  I  sincerely  hope), 
that  a  set  of  private  individuals  are  plundering  at  the  expense 
of  public  happiness,  by  endeavouring,  in  this  county,  in  this 
most  abundant  county,  to  purchase  the  grain  now  growing  upon 

N    4 


184<  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

among  the  causes  assigned.  The  war,  howevei', 
was  very  generally  considered  as  having  had  great 
influence  in  the  rise  of  prices.* 

With  regard  to  the  extent  of  the  deficiency. 
Lord  Sheffield,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Decem- 
ber, 1795,  stated  it  to  be  from  y  to  ^  without  any 
old  stock,  and  without  any  prospect  of  adequate 
supply  from  abroad.  Various  remedies  were  pro- 
posed ;  that  which  was  mainly  relied  upon  and 
finally  adopted,  was  an  act,  granting  a  bounty 
of  from  l6s.  to  QOs.  the  quarter,  according  to  the 
quality,  on  wheat,  and  ()s.  the  cvvt.  on  flour  from 
the  south  of  Europe,  till  the  quantity  should 
amount  to  four  hundred  thousand  quarters  ;  and 


the  soil.  For  the  sake  of  common  Immanity  I  trust  it  is  untrue. 
Gentlemen,  you  ought  to  be  tlie  champions  against  this  hydra- 
headed  monster.  'Tis  your  duty  as  justices  to  see  justice  done 
to  the  country.  In  your  respective  districts,  as  watchmen,  be  on 
your  guard.  1  am  convinced,  from  my  knowledge  of  you,  that  I 
have  no  need  to  point  out  your  duty  in  this  case  ;  and  though  the 
act  of  Edw.  VI.  be  repealed  (whether  wisely  or  unwisely  I 
take  not  upon  me  to  say),  yet  it  still  exists  an  offence  at  com- 
mon law,  coeval  with  the  constitution  ;  and  be  assured,  gentle- 
men, whoever  is  convicted  before  me  (and  I  believe  I  may  answer 
for  the  rest  of  my  brethren),  when  the  sword  of  justice  is  drawn,  it 
shall  not  be  sheathed  until  the  full  vengeance  of  the  law  is  in- 
flicted on  them  ;  neither  purse  nor  person  shall  prevent  it."  — 
Annals  of  Agriculture  for  1795,  vol.  xxv.  p.  111. 

*  Mr.  Fox  said,  "  The  war  certainly  has  had  a  most  decided 
effect,  so  far  as  it  has  tended  to  increase  the  consumption,  to 
diminish  the  production,  and  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  ob- 
taining supplies,  which  might  have  been  drawn  from  other 
quarters." — Parliamentary  Debates,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  239. 

It  was  with  reference  to  this  opinion  that  Mr.  Burke  observed, 
"  As  to  the  operation  of  the  war  in  causing  the  scarcity  of 
provisions,  I  understand  that  Mr.  Pitt  has  given  a  particular 
answer  to  it ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  worth  powder  and  shot." 
(  Thoughts  and  Details  on  Scarcity,  p.  33.)  As  the  seasons  of 
1791<  and  1795  form  so  important  a  feature  in  the  general 
impression  of  the  high  prices  ascribed  to  the  war  and  the 
restriction,  and  as  those  seasons  were  in  every  way  remarkable, 
an  extract,  descriptive  of  them,  from  the  publication  by  Mr. 
Burke  here  quoted,  will  be  found  inserted  in  the  Appendix. 


1793—1798.  185 

from  America,  till  it  should  amount  to  five  hundred 
thousand  quarters  ;  and  12.y.  to  15,s.  from  any  other 
part  of  Europe,  till  it  should  amount  to  five  hun- 
dred thousand  quarters ;  and  8.9.  to  10*.  after  it 
exceeded  that  quantity,  to  continue  till  the  30th 
September,  179t). 

Among  the  minor  measures  was  a  sort  of  self- 
denying  ordinance*,  by  which  the  members  of  both 
houses  of  parliament  bound  themselves  to  reduce 
the  consumption  of  bread  in  their  households  by 
one  third,  and  to  recommend,  among  those  whom 
they  could  influence,  a  similar  reduction. t 

The  prices  of  all  other  provisions  having  risen  in 
a  greater  or  less  proportion  to  wheat,  and  there 
being  a  very  general  apprehension  of  a  continuance 
of  the  scarcity,  it  had  become  manifestly  impossible 
for  the  working  classes  to  subsist  on  their  ordinary 
wages.  It  was  partly  from  a  conviction  to  this 
effect,  and  partly  in  consequence  of  the  tendency 
to  disturbance  and  riots  among  the  agricultural 
labourers,  that  the  allowance  system  was  at  this 
time  introduced.  There  was  at  the  same  time  a 
general  acquiescence  on  the  part  of  employers  in 
the  necessity  of  some  advance  of  wages,  which, 
however,  when  conceded,  bore  still  a  very  inade- 
quate  proportion    to    the   increased   price    of  the 


*  "  Engagement  by  such  members  as  may  choose  to  sign  the 
same  :  — 

"  To  reduce  tlie  consumption  of  wheat  in  the  famihes  sub- 
scribing such  engagement  by  at  least  one  third  of  the  usual 
quantity  consumed  in  ordinary  times,  and  to  recommend  the 
same  in  their  neighbourhoods.  Agreement  to  be  in  force  till 
fourteen  days  after  the  commencement  of  next  session  of  Par- 
liament, unless  the  average  price  of  wheat  should,  in  the  mean 
time,  be  reduced  to  8*.  per  bushel."  —  ParliamentarT/ History, 
Dec.  11.  1795. 

f  It  was  as  one  of  the  means  of  diminishing  the  consumption 
of  wheat  on  the  occasion  of  this  scarcity,  that  the  notable  hair- 
powder  tax  was  imposed —  a  measure  which  hastened  the  dis- 
continuance of  that  strange  fashion. 


186  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

necessaries  of  life.  The  distress  *,  accordingly,  of 
the  working  and  poorer  classes  was  very  severe, 
and  tlie  privations  of  the  classes  immediately  above 
them,  and  generally  of  all  classes  depending  on 
limited  money  incomes,  were  great.  The  whole 
period,  indeed,  of  this  memorable  dearth,  was  one 
of  much  suffering  to  the  bulk  of  the  community. 
But  it  was  a  time  of  great  prosperity  to  the  landed 
interests,  that  is,  to  the  landlords  who  were  raising, 
or  had  the  prospect  of  soon  raising,  their  rents  ;  and 
to  the  farmers,  who  were  realising  enormous  gains 
pending  the  currency  of  their  leases.  The  follow- 
ing extract  from  an  article  by  Arthur  Young,  in  the 
Annals  of  Agriculture,  for  1796,  will  serve  as  a 
practical  illustration  of  the  principle  which  I  have 
had  occasion  to  notice  ;  viz.,  of  the  effect  of  a  defi- 
ciency in  raising  the  price  greatly  beyond  the  ratio 
of  the  defect,  and  of  the  consequent  larger  sum 
distributed  among  the  growers  than  could  be  de- 
rived from  medium  or  abundant  crops. 

"  The  average  price  of  wheat  for  the  twelve  months,  from 
May  1795  to  ApriJ  1796,  has  been,  on  an  average,  in  England 
and  Wales,  10*.  7c?.  per  bushel,  and  that  of  barley  4^.  9d.  Now 
the  price  for  twelve  years,  ending  1791',  was  for  wheat  5s.  lOd., 
and  for  barley  3*.  3d.  For  the  year  above  described,  therefore, 
the  price  has  exceeded  that  average  4*.  9d.  per  bushel  for  wheat, 
and  Is.  6d.  for  barley.  Let  us  suppose  the  annual  consumption 
of  wheat  to  be  8,701,875  quarters,  and  that  of  barley  10,545,000 
quarters ;  and,  further,  that  the  deficiency  of  the  crop  on  the 
average,  of  the  two  years,  so  far  as  they  affect  the  period  in 
question,  has  amounted,  in  wheat,  to  one  fifth  ;  and  that  the 
barley  has,  on  an  average  of  the  two  crops,  been  a  medium  :  in 
this  case  there  would  have  been  consumed  — 
Of  wheat  6,961,500  qrs.  the  extra  price  on  which 

at  4*.  9d.  the  bushel,  or  38*.  the  quarter,  is     13,226,849/. 
Of  barley.  10,545,000  qrs.  at  1*.  6d.  per  bushel, 

or  12*.  the  quarter  -  -  -       6,327,000/. 

19,553,849/. 


*  In  a  reference  to  this  period,  in  the  Annual  Register  for 
1796,  it  is  observed  that  "  the  scarcity  was  wofully  felt  by  the 
poorer  sort,  several  of  whom  perished  for  want."  p.  9. 


1793—1798.  187 

If,  therefore,  these  data  are  just,  and  they  are  ventured  merely 
as  calculation  on  uncertain  foundations,  the  farmers  have  received 
in  these  two  articles  only  near  20,000,000/.  sterling  beyond  the 
deficiency  of  the  crop,  supposing  the  deficiency  to  be  one  fifth, 
which  is  a  very  great  one,  and  without  adding  a  word  on  the 
price  of  meat  or  any  other  article."  —  Vol.  xxvi.  p.  469. 

The  dearth  of  provisions,  and  the  apprehensions 
of  further  scarcity,  reached  tlieir  height  in  the 
spring  of  1796,  the  av^erage  price  of  wheat  having 
advanced  to  100^.  When,  however,  the  influence 
of  the  Bounty,  in  addition  to  the  encouragement 
of  the  markets  in  this  country,  was  ascertained  to 
be  effectual  in  preparations  for  a  large  importation, 
the  prices  of  corn  began  to  give  way,  and  the  fldl 
was  hastened  by  the  mildness  of  the  season,  the 
winter  of  179-5-96  having  been  one  of  the  warmest, 
as  that  of  1794--95  had  been  one  of  the  coldest 
upon  record. 

The  harvest  of  1796  was  abundant,  and  toler- 
ably well  secured.  This,  with  the  addition  of  an 
importation  of  upwards  of  800,000  quarters,  re- 
duced the  average  price  of  wheat  before  the  close 
of  the  year,  to  5'^s.  3d.  ;  and  the  fall  continued, 
progressively,  till  the  summer  of  1797>  when  the 
average  ranged  between  49."^.  and  50.s-. 

In  1797>  the  spring  was  backward,  the  summer 
variable,  and  rather  cold,  and  the  harvest  wet  and 
stormy,  and  the  general  reports  of  the  crops  unfa- 
vourable, both  as  to  quality  and  quantity.  In  con- 
sequence of  the  apprehensions  entertained  of  injury 
from  the  weather,  the  prices  of  wheat  advanced 
from  an  average  of  50^.  in  June,  to  60s,  in  Octo- 
ber. But,  notwithstanding  that  all  that  could  be 
ascertained  of  the  crops  proved  the  existence  of 
some  deficiency  of  quantity,  as  well  as  inferiority 
of  quality,  the  price  declined  again  by  the  close  of 
the  year  to  an  average  of  52.s'.  9d.,  and  in  February, 
179s,  to  49.S".  lOd.  This  decline  was  apparently 
occasioned  by  the  surplus  of  the  former  year,  com- 


188  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

bined  with  a  further  importation  of  407,242  quar- 
ters of  wheat,  in  1797-  It  is  consequently  clear, 
that  if  this  year's  crops  had  been  abundant,  tlie  fall 
of  price  would  have  been  more  considerable. 

The  season  of  1798  proved  to  be  moderately 
productive.  The  summer  was  dry  and  warm,  the 
harvest  forward,  and  the  crops  secured  in  good 
order.  The  spring  crops  had  suffered  from  the 
heat  and  drought.  The  wheat  crop  was  the  best, 
although  not  considered  to  be  large  ;  but  coming 
early  to  market,  the  average  price  which  in  August 
had  been  5ls.  3d.,  fell  in  November  of  that  year 
to  a  fraction  below  48s. 

The  following  statement  of  the  average  prices 
will  show  the  subsidence  of  the  prices  of  corn  at 
the  close  of  1798,  to  nearly  the  level  of  what  they 
had  been  at  the  close  of  1792 — 


Years. 

Wheat. 

Barley. 

Oats. 

1792. 

Dec.  47*.  Qd. 

29.5.  10^. 

18.S.  6d. 

1798. 

Nov.  47^.10^. 

29s.  Od. 

I9s.  lOd. 

So  that  after  six  years  of  war,  involving  a  greatly 
increasing  expenditure,  defrayed  by  loans,  much 
larger  towards  the  later  than  at  the  earlier  period, 
we  see  the  prices  of  corn,  after  having  been  ele- 
vated by  scarcity,  obviously  arising  from  the  sea- 
sons, falling,  upon  the  return  of  only  moderate 
abundance,  to  the  level  whence  they  had  risen. 


Section  2. —  On  the  Prices  of  Coynmodi ties  from 
1793  to  1798. 

While  the  prices  of  provisions  had  been  under- 
going such  great  variations  from  the  vicissitudes  of 
the  seasons,  the  prices  of  other  articles  experienced 
also  an  extraordinary  fluctuation. 

There  had  been,  as  has  been  noticed,  a  general 


1793—1798.  189 

fall  of  prices  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and 
they  continued  at  a  comparatively  low  range 
through  the  greater  part  of  1794.  In  1795,  se- 
veral circumstances  combined  to  occasion  a  range 
of  high  prices,  besides  those  of  provisions.  Two 
successive  bad  seasons  on  the  Continent  of  Europe 
as  well  as  in  this  country  had  rendered  all  Euro- 
pean agricultural  produce  scarce  and  dear,  such  as 
linseed  and  rapeseed,  olive  oil,  and  tallow.  Silk  in 
Italy  and  the  vintages  in  France  had  suffered  from 
the  inclemency  of  the  season.  There  was  an  ex- 
traordinary competition  between  our  government 
and  that  of  France  in  the  purchase  of  naval  stores 
in  the  north  of  Europe,  thus  greatly  raising  the 
prices  of  hemp,  flax,  iron,  and  timber.  The  prospect 
of  a  war  with  Spain,  which  broke  out  in  the  year 
following,  affected  several  descriptions  of  Spanish 
produce.  Colonial  produce,  of  which  a  scarcity 
consequent  on  the  failure  of  the  supplies  from  St. 
Domingo  was  now  generally  felt  throughout  Eu- 
rope, experienced  a  fresh  rise.  All  these  classes  of 
commodities  continued  to  rise  through  1795  and 
part  of  1796.  Those  which  were  affected  by  the 
seasons  in  Europe,  fell  in  the  latter  part  of  1796, 
and  in  1797>  although  from  the  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction, and  in  the  case  of  naval  and  military  stores 
from  the  increasing  demand,  not  to  their  former 
level. 

The  following  are  specimens  of  the  fluctuation 
of  this  class  of  articles  :  — 


155. 


179:1-4 

17 

95-6 

17 

96-7 

Ashes,  per  cwt.- 

245.  to  3 1 5. 

605. 

to  705. 

395. 

to  55s. 

Flax,  per  ton 

28/.  -    32/. 

54/. 

-   57/. 

44/. 

-    45/. 

Hemp,    do. 

22/.  -    23/. 

58/. 

-   59/. 

32/. 

~    34/. 

Foreign  iron,  do. 

12/. 

22/. 

5s. 

19/. 

Linseed,  per  qr.    - 

355.  -   405. 

6O5. 

-  635. 

305. 

-  355. 

Oil,  Gallipoli,    pe 

r 

ton 

42/.  -    46/. 

70/. 

-   71/. 

,  60/. 

-    63/. 

Rice,  per  cwt.  - 

155.  -     165. 

4l5. 

-  435. 

155. 

to  I65. 

Tallow,  do. 

385.  -  395. 

785. 

-  8O5. 

465. 

-  475. 

Timber,  per  load 

435.   -  — 

8O5. 

-     — 

505. 

-  555. 

190  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

But  a  very  important  class  of  articles,  viz., 
coffee,  sugar,  indigo,  pepper,  cotton,  cochineal, 
and  other  articles  of  colonial  produce,  which  had 
begun  to  rise  in  1795,  continued  to  advance  till  the 
close  of  1798,  insomuch  that,  at  the  end  of  the 
latter  year  (and  in  the  first  two  or  three  months  of 
1799)  tliey  attained  a  greater  height  than  at  any 
subsequent  period  between  that  and  1814,  when 
the  great  speculative  exports  to  the  Continent  took 
place.  The  following  are  some  of  the  instances  of 
the  rise  of  prices  which  the  leading  articles  of  co- 
lonial produce  experienced  from  different  periods 
in  1793  and  1794  to  the  close  of  1798,  and  the 
three  months  following :  — 

Coffee,  Jamaica,  per  cwt. 
Sugar,  Muscovado,  do.  - 

,  East  India,  white 

Cotton,    bowed  Georgia, 

per  lb. 
Cochineal 

Indigo,  E.  I.  superior     - 
Pepper,  black,  per  lb.     - 
Logwood,  per  ton 
Tobacco,  per  lb. 

This  enormous  advance  of  prices  of  a  class  of 
articles  involving  a  vast  amount  of  capital,  had  its 
origin,  or  at  least  received  its  main  impulse,  in 
1796.  And  the  rise  continued  almost  uninter- 
rupted  through  1797  and  1798,  notwithstanding 
a  progressive  coincident  rise  of  the  exchanges  which 
in  the  latter  year  attained  an  unprecedented  height, 
that  on  Hamburg  having  reached  38s.  The  de- 
mand was  chiefly  for  export  to  the  Continent  of 
Europe,  and  the  principal  channel  was  Hamburg. 
It  is  further  to  be  observed,  that  this  large  class  of 
articles  was  rising  while  corn  was  falling  ;  and  that 
they  attained  at  the  close  of  1798,  some  a  little  less, 
and  some  a  great  deal  more  than  100  per  cent, 
above  their  previous  rate,  while  corn  had  fallen 
50  per  cent,  below  the  rate  which  it  had  attained 
in   1795-6. 


1793-4 

1798-9 

775.  to  955. 

1855.  to  1965. 

325.    -  585. 

625.  -     875, 

60s.  -  70s. 

965.  -  1155. 

Is.  Id.  -  Is.  4^. 

3s.  6d.  -  45.6 

-  125.  -  125.  3d. 

545. 

7s.  6d.  -  95.  6d. 

11 5.   -   135. 

13d. 

22^. 

61.  .    81. 

48/.    -  50/. 

3d.  -  5d. 

Uhd.-  I6d. 

1793—1798.  191 

I  have  been  the  more  disposed  to  dwell  upon 
this  remarkable  feature  of  the  state  of  prices  in 
tlie  interval  under  consideration;  because  I  am 
quite  satisfied  that,  among  those  who  recollect  or 
have  heard  of  those  enormous  prices  of  colonial 
produce,  there  is  a  vague  impression  that,  as  they 
occurred  two  years  after  the  Bank  restriction,  and 
in  the  height  of  the  war,  they  were  the  conse- 
quence of  one  or  the  other. 

That  these  high  prices  were  not  tlie  conse- 
quence of  any  enlargement,  but  were  in  spite  of 
a  great  contraction  of  the  basis  of  the  currency, 
will  be  seen  presently;  and  it  is  quite  clear  that 
they  were  not  caused  by  a  demand  arising  out  of 
the  expenditure  of  our  government,  seeing  that 
the  demand  was  chiefly  from  abroad,  and  they 
were  not  connected  with  war  on  the  Continent, 
seeing  that  tlie  powers  of  the  Continent  were  at 
peace  from  the  spring  of  1797  till  1799.  The 
negative  of  the  influence  of  war  applies,  however, 
only  to  the  supposition  of  any  extra  consumption 
or  demand  thence  arising  to  account  for  the  high 
prices.  That  the  effect  of  the  war  was  to  obstruct 
supplies  and  to  increase  the  cost  of  production,  if  it 
were  only  by  the  difference  of  freight  and  in- 
surance, has  been  already  stated,  and  is  in  this,  and 
all  other  instances,  to  be  considered  as  being  im- 
plied. But  this  is  not  the  sense  to  which  the  sup- 
posed influence  of  war  on  prices  divested  of  tax- 
ation is  commonly  confined. 

Thus,  we  have  seen  that  at  the  close  of  1798 
(and  this  is  the  reason  for  having  extended  the 
epoch  to  six  instead  of  five  years),  while  corn 
and  provisions  generally,  and  some  other  arti- 
cles of  European  produce,  had,  as  a  consequence 
of  two  remarkably  unproductive  seasons,  risen 
upwards  of  100  per  cent,  in  1795  and  1796, 
and  had  subsided  at  the  termination  of  the  in- 
terval  to  the  level  from  whence  they  had  risen. 


192  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

another  and  a  most  important  class  of  com- 
modities reached,  by  the  end  of  1798,  to  an  enor- 
mous and  unprecedented  height,  and  were  then 
much  higher  than  during  any  subsequent  period  of 
the  war. 


Section  3. — Bank  Circulation^  1793  to  1798. 

In  the  preceding  sketch  of  prices  they  have  been 
considered  without  reference  to  the  state  of  the 
circulation. 

To  what  extent,  if  at  all,  the  great  fluctuations 
were  influenced  by  the  currency,  will  appear  in  a 
clearer  point  of  view  by  taking  a  survey  of  the  state 
of  the  circulation  during  the  whole  of  the  interval 
which  has  been  under  consideration,  than  if  de- 
tached references  had  been  made  to  it  in  the  pro- 
gress of  the  examination  of  the  circumstances 
which  immediately  affected  the  prices  through  the 
medium  of  supply  and  demand  ;  and  this  mode  of 
examining,  at  the  close  of  each  interval  or  epoch, 
the  regulation  of  the  Bank  issues,  and  the  general 
state  of  the  circulation,  during  such  interval,  will 
be  adopted  in  the  succeeding  epochs. 

There  has  before  been  occasion  to  observe,  that  at 
the  commencement  of  1793,  the  general  circulation 
was  greatly  deranged  by  the  failures  of  many  of  the 
country  banks,  and  of  many  considerable  mercantile 
establishments.  The  commercial  discredit  and  dis- 
tress thence  arising,  surpassed  in  degree  and  extent 
of  suffering  any  of  which  there  had  been  any  pre- 
vious example.  The  causes  of  the  mercantile  failures 
and  consequent  commercial  discredit,  have  been 
before  noticed.  They  were  not  confined  to  this 
country  ;  but  were  connected  with  a  very  general 
excess  of  the  circulation  of  mercantile  paper,  and 


1793—1798.  193 

a  great  prevalence  of  the  spirit  of  speculation 
in  the  principal  trading  towns  of  the  continent 
of  Europe,  and  in  America.  But  the  peculiar  fea- 
ture, as  related  to  this  country,  was  in  the  failure 
of  an  extraordinary  nimiber  of  country  banks*: 
the  more  extraordinary,  as  the  previous  existence 
of  such  numbers  of  them,  and  such  an  extent  of 
circulation,  seems  hardly  to  have  attracted  notice, 
or  to  have  come  in  any  way  within  the  knowledge 
of  the  public.  In  this,  as  in  subsequent  instances, 
the  growth  of  the  country  circulation  followed  the 
extension  of  agriculture,  and  trade,  and  manufac- 
tures. It  is  observed  by  Mr.  Henry  Thornton, 
in  his  work,  published  in  1802,  on  Paper  Credit, 
that  "a  great  increase  of  country  banks  took  place 
during  the  time  which  intervened  between  the 
American  war  and  that  of  the  French  revolution, 
and  chiefly  in  the  latter  part  of  it ;  a  period  during 
which  the  population,  the  agriculture,  and  the 
trade  of  the  country  had  advanced  very  consider- 
ably." 

The  circumstances  of  the  period  following  the 
termination  of  the  American  war  were,  doubtless, 
very  favourable  to  the  extension  of  that  descrip- 
tion of  circulation. 

After  the  forcible  and  extraordinary  contraction 
which  the  Bank  of  England  had  resorted  to  in  1783 
and  1784,  with  a  view,  in  which  it  succeeded,  to 
stop  the  drain  of  its  treasure,  which  had  been 
reduced  to  the  lowest  ebb,  there  was  a  steady 
and  uninterrupted  influx  of  gold  into  its  coffers 

*  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  list  of  Bankruptcies :  — 

Total  number     Against  country 
of  commissions.  bankers. 

1791  -  -  -     769  1 

1792  -  ...     934  1 

1793  -  -  -  1956  26 

Appendix  to  the  Report  of  the  Lords'  Committee  on  the 
Resumption  of  Cash  Payments,  1819. 

o 


194i  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

during  the  five  following  years ;  and  the  basis 
of  the  currency  was  necessarily  increased  by  the 
issue  of  bank  notes  in  payment  for  the  gold.  The 
circulation,  accordingly,  of  the  Bank,  which  had 
ranged  at  a  little  more  than  6,000,000/.  between 
1788  and  1785,  had  in  3789  reached  11,121,800/., 
and  its  bullion  amounted  to  8,645,860/.*  This 
influx  of  bullion,  and  the  consequent  increase  of 
the  Bank  issues,  had  the  natural  effect,  as  it  was  in 
a  period  of  confidence,  of  reducing  the  rate  of 
interest ;  and  the  fall  of  the  market  rate  of  interest, 
while  the  Bank  did  not  lower  its  rate  of  discount, 
enabled  the  country  banks  to  extend  their  issues 
in  advances  and  discounts,  which,  if  the  current 
market  rate  of  interest  had  been  higher,  would 
have  been,  in  part  at  least,  applied  for  at  the  Bank. 
The  discounts  at  the  Bank,  which  in  1785  had  been 
4,973,926/.,  were  reduced  in  1789  to  2,035,901/. 

There  was  another  circumstance  which  had, 
probably,  more  than  any  other  single  cause,  con- 
tributed to  the  growth  of  the  country  circulation. 
It  is  well  known  that  rising  prices  of  corn  and 
farming  stock,  and  the  consequently  improved 
state  and  credit  of  the  farmers,  have  been  among 
the  principal  occasions  of  an  increased  issue  and 
circulation  by  the  country  banks :  and  this  was  a 
state  of  things  which  prevailed  between  I787  and 
1791.  During  that  interval,  after  a  low  range  of 
prices  preceding  the  harvest  of  1787>  there  was, 
without  any  extraordinary  scarcity,  such  a  degree 
of  comparative  deficiency  of  produce  as  raised  and 
maintained  a  relatively  high  range  of  prices  till  the 
harvest  of  1791,  the  abundance  of  which  occasioned 
a  temporary  considerable  fall  of  prices.  It  might 
be  thought  by  those  who  consider  every  increase 
of  the  circulation  as  a  cause,  of  a  rise  of  prices,  that 
those  of  agricultural  produce  from  I787  to  1792 

*  Being  one  half  of  its  liabilities,  which  were  17,524,250/. 


1793—1798.  195 

had  been  raised  by  tliat  increased  circulation.  But 
as  a  proof  that  the  rise  was.  not  the  effect  of  any 
increase  of  currency,  pecuHar  to  this  country,  it 
is  requisite  to  advert  to  the  fact,  that  the  ad- 
vance of  prices  had  been  greater  on  the  conti- 
nent of  Europe,  and  especially  in  France,  than 
here ;  and  that  in  order  to  prevent  the  effect  of 
that  higher  state  of  prices  abroad  from  drawing 
supplies  from  this  country,  our  own  crops  of  I788 
and  1789  having  been  considered  rather  deficient, 
the  exportation  from  this  country  was  prohibited 
by  proclamation  ;  and  if  the  prices  of  corn  had  been 
raised  by  the  amount  of  the  circulation  between 
1788  and  1790,  the  still  increased  amount  ought 
to  have  prevented  the  fall  which  occurred  at  the 
close  of  1791  and  the  beginning  of  1792. 

It  is  not  improbable,  indeed,  that  the  fall  of  prices 
of  agricultural  produce,  which  occurred  in  the  early 
part  of  1792,  as  a  consequence  of  the  abundant 
harvest  of  1791  >  had  the  eflect  of  impairing  the 
securities  of  the  country  banks,  through  that  me- 
dium of  issue,  and  may  thus,  concurrently  with 
the  recoil  from  overtrading  in  other  branches,  have 
occasioned  the  extensive  failures  and  discredit  that 
marked  the  close  of  1792  and  1793.  Of  that  ca- 
lamitous time,  some  contemporary  accounts  will  be 
found  in  the  Appendix. 

This  somewhat  detailed  explanation  of  the  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  the  country  circulation, 
which  experienced  so  great  a  derangement,  has  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  desirable,  as  affording  means 
for  the  better  judging  of  the  position  of  the  Bank 
of  England  in  1793,  and  of  the  influence  of  the 
regulation  of  its  issues  in  the  eventful  period  now 
under  consideration. 

The  treasure  of  the  Bank,  which  had  been 
8,055,510/.,  in  August,  1791,  was  reduced  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1793,  to  4,010,680/.,  while  its  circulation  was 
maintained  at  nearly  the  same  amount  of  between 

o  2 


196  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

eleven  and  twelve  millions.  There  had  been  a 
decline  of  the  foreign  exchanges  m  1792,  which 
may  account,  in  some  degree,  for  the  drain ;  the 
greater  part  however  of  the  drain  seems  to  have 
been  occasioned  by  a  demand  from  the  coun- 
try bankers,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  them  to 
meet  the  run  which  they  experienced.  But  al- 
though the  Bank  fully  kept  up  the  amount  of  its 
issues,  while  it  had  supplied  a  large  amount  of  gold 
to  the  country,  the  total  of  the  circulating  me- 
dium at  the  beginning  of  1793  was  in  a  very  con- 
tracted state,  or,  in  other  words,  the  pressure 
on  the  money  market  was  very  severe ;  and  this, 
notwithstanding  that  the  Bank  was  liberal  in  its 
discounts*,  which  had  increased  from  1,898,640/., 
in  August,  1791,  to  6,456,041/.,  in  February,  1793. 
It  has  been  already  observed,  that  prices  of  almost 
all  commodities,  with  the  exception  of  corn,  were 
lower  in  1793  than  they  had  been  in  the  two  years 
preceding ;  and  the  price  of  wheat  was  below 
the  average  of  the  three  years  previous  to  the 
harvest  of  1791.  Tiie  price  of  3  per  cent,  con- 
sols had  fallen  from  96,  in  1792,  to  72,  in  1793,  at 
which  price  the  first  loan  in  preparation  for  the 
war,  amounting  to  4,500,000/.,  was  contracted.t 

*  It  may  here  be  observed,  that  a  demand  for  increased  dis- 
counts at  the  Bank  of  England  is  rarely,  if  ever,  felt  in  the  early 
stages  of  a  speculative  tendency,  or  as  a  means  of  making 
purchases,  with  a  view  to  a  further  advance.  It  is  chiefly  when 
a  pause  takes  place  in  the  expected  advance,  and  still  more 
after  the  commencement  of  a  fall,  that  the  applications  for 
discount  become  urgent,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  parties 
to  meet  engagements  entered  into  some  time  before,  and  for 
which  they  may  be  supposed  to  have  reckoned  on  funds  to  have 
been  realised  by  advantageous  sales. 

+  "  It  was  originally  intended  to  have  raised  this  loan  on  a  4  or 
5  per  cent,  stock  ;  but  the  embarrassed  state  of  commercial 
credit  having  caused  a  scarcity  of  money,  the  minister  only 
received  offers  from  one  set  of  subscribers  ;  and  as  they  preferred 
3  per  cents.,  it  was  judged  expedient  to  conclude  the  bargain 
in  that  stock  at  the  above  price,  which  was  between  4  and  5 


1793—1798.  197 

This  general  depression  of  credit  and  of  prices 
was  the  main  cause  of  the  contraction  of  the  cir- 
culation, and  not  the  contraction  of  the  circu- 
lation a  cause  of  the  depression.  A  grant  had 
been  made  by  parliament  of  exchequer  bills  to  be 
advanced  on  loan  in  aid  of  commercial  credit. 
But  this  measure  appears  to  have  had  no  influence 
on  the  circulation,  or  on  the  state  of  prices.  And 
in  point  of  fact  the  pressure  and  discredit  and 
stagnation  had  ceased  before  the  proposed  advance 
of  exchequer  bills  came  into  operation. 

The  bullion  in  the  Bank  in  August*,  179 1^ 
amounted  to  considerably  more  than  one  third  of 
its  liabilities,  and  the  exchanges  till  the  autumn  of 
that  year  maintained  a  high  range  ;  but  they  after- 
wards gave  way,  that  on  Hamburg  having  fallen 
from  3(5-7,  in  May,  to  31-5,  in  November,  in 
consequence  of  the  large  foreign  payments  whicli 
were  then  to  be  made.  This  decline  of  the 
exchanges,  with  the  knowledge  or  intimation  of 
the  foreign  expenditure  in  progress,  should,  ac- 
cording to  a  correct  system  of  management,  have 
operated  as  a  warning  and  inducement  to  con- 
tract the  circulation.  But  as  under  circum- 
stances, in  some  respects,  analogous,  in  178->  and 
again  in  more  recent  instances,  when  the  critical 
moment  arrived,    upon    the    turn  of   which    de- 


per  cent,  under  the  current  price.  Mr.  Pitt  admitted  that  the 
terms  were  much  more  disadvantageous  to  the  pubHc  than 
might  have  been  expected;  but  having  done  every  thing  in  his 
power  to  excite  a  competition  without  effect,  they  were  the  best 
he  could  procure." — Terms  of  Loans,  by  J.  J.  Grellier,  1802. 

*  Circulation   -     10,286,780        Securities       -     12,446,460 
Deposits       -       5,935,710        15ullion  -       6,770,110 

Liabilities  16,222,490  19,216,573 


In  1794  the  Bank  first  issued  notes  under  10/. 
O   3 


198  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

pended  the  preservation  of  the  value  of  the 
paper,  the  regulation  of  the  issues  proved  to  be 
the  reverse  of  what  it  ought  to  have  been.  In- 
stead of  a  contraction  there  was  an  enlargement. 
And  although  the  increased  issue  was  of  very  short 
duration,  it  could  hardly  fail,  while  it  lasted,  of 
giving  additional  force  to  tlie  causes  operating  to 
a  depression  of  the  exchanges,  and  to  a  consequent 
increased  tendency  to  an  efflux  of  the  metals,  and 
greatly  increasing  the  difficulty  of  counteracting 
a  further  pressure  on  the  exchanges.  If  the  dif- 
ference of  the  issues  on  particular  days  be  taken, 
the  increase  will  be  very  striking : — Thus,  on  the 

SOth  Aug.  1791^  the  amount  was,  10,286,780/. 
28th  February,  1795  -  14,017,510/. 

a  difference  accounted  for  by  the  well  known 
circumstance  of  the  bills  drawn  for  account  of  the 
Austrian  government  on  the  treasury  of  this  country, 
and  accepted  by  the  treasury,  payable  at  the  Bank. 
But  this  comparison  of  particular  days,  although 
they  are  those  on  which  the  usual  returns  are  made, 
gives  an  exaggerated  view  of  the  case,  and  it  is 
more  fair  to  take  the  average  issues  for  the  quarter, 
thus  :  —  Quarter  ending 

30th  September,  1794  -         10,422,900/. 

Slst  December  -         -         -         10,964,980/. 
31st  March,  1795     -  -         12,421,260/. 

Here  in  the  last  quarter  of  1794,  there  was  an 
increase  of  5 00, 000/.,  and  in  the  first  quarter  of  1795 
an  increase  of  2,000,000/.  But  it  is  not  a  little 
singular,  and  the  fact  may  serve  as  a  proof  of  the 
anomalies  which  perplex  the  question  of  the  regu- 
lation of  the  bank  issues,  that,  coincidently  with 
this  increased  issue,  the  exchanges  actually  expe- 
rienced some  improvement.    The  quotations  were. 


1793—1798.  199 

On  Hamburgh,  Dec.  1794  -  34-9  to  34-6. 

Jan.  1795  -  34^*6  to  35*6. 

„  Feb.      ,,  -  S5'6  to  36'6. 

March  „  -  35-8  to  365. 

And  in  order  to  prove  that  this  rise  of  tlie  ex- 
changes was  not  partial  or  artificial,  it  may  be  ob- 
served that  the  price  of  standard  silver  fell  from 
5*.  2^d.  per  oz.  in  December,  1794,  to  5s.  Id. 
in  the  first  three  months  of  1795,  the  price  of  gold 
continuing  at  31.  IJs.  6d.  per  oz. ;  the  Lisbon 
exchange  improved  in  the  same  proportion  ;  and 
the  whole  of  the  reduction  of  the  treasure  of 
the  Bank,  between  August,  1794,  and  February, 
1795,  had  been  only  650,000/.,  leaving  still  a 
stock  of  0,127,720/.,  against  liabilities  amounting 
to  19,990,530/. 

It  must  be  added,  in  justice  to  the  Bank 
Directors  of  that  time,  that  they  thenceforth  re- 
traced their  steps,  and  resolutely  contracted  their 
issues,  which  in  the  quarter  ending  June  30.  1795, 
were  lower  by  one  million  and  a  half  than  they 
had  been  in  the  preceding  quarter,  and  lower  tlian 
they  had  been  on  the  average  of  the  preceding 
three  years.  And  if  a  specimen  of  the  degree  of 
reduction  be  taken  on  particular  days,  as  the  pre- 
vious increase  has  been,  it  would  stand  thus  in 
juxtaposition  with  the  exchange:  — 

Exchange. 
28th  February,  1795    -    14,017,510/.    -    36'0 
31st  August,         „       -    10,862,200/.    -   32'6 

the  Bank  treasure  having  been  reduced  in  the 
interval  from  6,127,720/.  to  5,136,350/.  But,  not- 
withstanding this  reduction  of  issue,  and  a  dimi- 
nution of  a  million  of  the  stock  of  bullion,  such 
was  the  overpowering  pressure  of  foreign  payment, 
now  increased  by  the  necessity  for  an  import  of 
foreign  grain,  and  by  the  enormous  prices  to  which 
the   competition   of  the  French   government   had 

o  4 


200  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

raised  the  prices  of  naval  stores  in  the  Baltic,  that 
the  exchanges  gave  way  rapidly,  as  is  seen  by  the 
above  quotation,  and  the  drain  on  the  treasure  of 
the  Bank,  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  for  export, 
continued  through  the  remainder  of  179«5,  and  the 
greater  part  of  1796. 

At  the  close  of  179<5,  a  notice  was  exhibited 
at  the  doors  of  the  Bank,  announcing  that,  in 
future,  only  a  certain  proportion  of  the  applications 
for  discount  would  be  complied  with,  however  high 
might  be  the  credit  of  the  parties.*  This  an- 
nouncement, combined  with  the  actual  contraction 
of  the  issues,  occasioned  a  very  severe  pressure  on 
the  money  market ;  and  in  the  spring  of  1796 
there  were  great  complaints  of  an  insufficiency  of 
circulating  medium  for  the  trade  in  the  metro- 
polis. As  a  specimen  of  the  feehng  of  the  time, 
it  may  be  worth  while  to  notice  the  heads  of  some 
resolutions  passed  at  a  meeting  of  merchants  and 
bankers,  held  at  the  London  Tavern,  on  the  2d 
April,  1796. 

"  At  a  select  meeting  of  gentlemen  interested 
in  and  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  internal 
circulation,  held  at  the  London  Tavern,  on  Satur- 
day, the  2d  April,  1796,  Sir  Stephen  Lushington, 
Bart.,  in  the  chair  :  —  Resolved, 

1.  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  meeting  that 
there  has  existed,  for  a  considerable  time  past,  and 
does  exist  at  present,  an  alarming  scarcity  of  money 
in  the  city  of  London. 

2.  That  this  scarcity  proceeds  chiefly,  if  not  en- 
tirely, from  an  increase  of  the  commerce  of  the 

*  The  notice  was  to  the  following  effect :  — 

"31.  Dec.  1795. 
"  That  in  future,  whenever  bills  sent  in  for  discount  shall  in 
any  day  amount  to  a  larger  sum  than  it  shall  be  resolved  to  dis- 
count on  that  day,  a  pro  rata  proportion  of  such  bills  in  each 
parcel  as  are  not  otherwise  objectionable,  will  be  returned  to  the 
person  sending  in  the  same,  without  regard  to  the  respectability 
of  the  party  sending  in  the  bills,  or  the  solidity  of  the  bills  them- 
selves.'' 


1793—1798.  201 

country,  and  from  the  great  diminution  of  mer- 
cantile discounts  which  the  Bank  of  England  has 
thought  proper  to  introduce  in  the  conduct  of  that 
establishment  during  the  last  three  months." 

After  some  other  resolutions  to  the  same  effect, 
a  committee  was  appointed,  consisting  of  the  Chair- 
man, Walter  Boyd,  Esq.,  Sir  James  Sanderson, 
Bart.,  Mr.  Alderman  Anderson,  Mr.  Alderman 
Lushington,  Joini  Inglis,  Esq.,  J.  J.  Angerstein, 
Esq.,  for  the  purpose  of  digesting  the  outlines  of  a 
plan  for  augmenting  the  circulating  medium  of  the 
country. 

A  plan  was  afterwards  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Boyd, 
for  a  board  to  be  constituted  by  act  of  Parliament, 
for  the  support  of  credit.  They  were  to  issue  pro- 
missory notes,  payable  six  months  after  date,  bear- 
ing interest  at  the  rate  of  l^d.  per  100/.,  or  1/.  18*. 
per  cent,  per  annum,  upon  receiving  the  value  in 
gold  and  silver,  Bank  of  England  notes,  or  in  bills 
of  Exchange  not  having  more  than  three  months 
to  run. 

The  details  of  the  plan  were  given  in  a  report 
drawn  up  by  Mr.  Boyd.  These  were  laid  before  the 
chancellor  of  the  exchequer,  with  w^hom  the  com- 
mittee had  an  interview.  They  there  learned  that 
it  had  been  proposed  by  the  Bank  directors,  as  the 
best  remedy  for  the  scarcity  of  money,  that  the 
floating  debt  should  be  funded.  The  minister  said, 
that  he  would  first  try  what  this  would  do  towards 
removing  the  scarcity  of  money,  and  if  it  should 
answer  the  purpose,  the  estabHshment  of  aboard  for 
the  support  of  credit  would  be  unnecessary. 

Mr.  Boyd,  in  his  pamphlet  from  which  these  ex- 
tracts are  made,  adds  :  — 

"  The  floating  debt  was  funded  by  means  of  the  loan  of 
7,500,000/.,  which  was  contracted  on  veiy  Hberal  terms,  upon  the 
prospect  held  out  to  the  contractors  of  a  total  change  of  system 
on  the  part  of  the  Bank.  How  this  prospect  was  realised,  the 
distresses  of  the  city  in  the  end  of  May,  1796;  can  testify." 


202  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  pressure  on  the  money  market  liere  re- 
corded, is  particularly  deserving  of  notice,  as  show- 
ing that  the  high  price  of  provisions,  in  the  spring 
of  1796,  was  not  in  any  degree  owing  to  an  en- 
larged circulation.  And  Mr.  Henry  Thornton 
appears  to  have  been  struck  by  the  same  circum- 
stance, as  he  observes,  — 

"  The  following  facts  furnish  a  convincing  proof  that  the  late 
high  prices  of  corn  have  not  been  owing  to  the  enlargement  of 
Bank  of  England  paper.  By  the  account  which  the  Bank  ren- 
dered to  Parliament,  it  appears  that  the  amount  of  Bank  of 
England  notes,  was,  on  the  25th  February,  1795*,  13,539,160/. 
In  the  three  months  immediately  following,  the  average  price  of 
wheat  in  the  London  market  was  about  57*.  per  quarter. 

By  the  same  account  it  appears  that  the  amount  of  Bank  of 
England  notes  was,  on  the  25th  February,  1796,  1 1,030,  II 6/.  In 
the  three  months  immediately  following,  the  average  price  of 
wheat  in  the  London  corn  market  was  about  94*.  per  quarter." 
p.  314. 

In  point  of  fact,  with  the  single  exception  of 
the  increase  which  took  place  in  the  first  months  of 
1795 J  and  which  was  withdrawn  before  the  expir- 
ation of  the  quarter,  the  Bank  circulation  was 
lower,  on  the  average,  during  the  prevalence  of 
the  highest  prices  in  the  interval  under  consider- 
ation, than  it  had  been,  on  the  average,  in  1791 
and  1792.  This  contraction  of  the  Bank  of  En- 
gland circulation,  coincidently  with  so  great  an 
advance  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  of  a  large 
proportion  of  commodities,  as  had  taken  place  in 
the  spring  of  179^,  seems  to  have  been  counter- 
vailed in  some  degree  by  an  expansion  of  country 
bank  and  private  credit  circulation  ;  that  expan- 
sion being  usually,  if  not  inevitably,  the  conse- 
quence of  a  tendency,  from  causes  real  or  imagined, 
to  an  advance  of  prices. 

*  The  difference  between  this  amount  and  that  which  has 
just  before  been  quoted  as  the  amount  on  the  28th  February, 
1795,  arises  from  the  amount  of  Bank  post  bills  being  included 
in  the  latter  and  not  in  the  former. 


1793—1798.  203 

The  very  circumstance  of  the  derangement  of 
the  country  bank  circulation  at  the  close  of  1790, 
supposes  a  previous  enlargement  of  it.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  the  great  fall  of  the  prices  of  corn  and 
cattle,  after  the  spring  of  1796,  was  among  the 
causes  tending  to  produce  the  derangement  of  the 
country  circulation. 

But  low  as  the  amount  of  the  circulation  had 
been,  on  the  average  of  the  last  nine  months  of 
1795,  and  the  early  part  of  1796,  it  was  still  fur- 
ther reduced  in  the  last  six  months  of  1796,  as  will 
be  seen  by  the  following  return  of  the  quarterly 
averages :  — 

January  to  March     -  -  10,824,150^. 

April  to  June       -  -  10,770,200/. 

July  to  September  -  9,720,440/. 

October  to  December  -  9,645,710/. 

It  might  have  been  imagined  that  the  contrac- 
tion had  thus  been  pushed  far  enough,  inasmuch  as 
the  exchanges  had  improved,  and  were  evidently 
improving,  so  as  almost  to  ensure  a  return  of  the 
bullion  that  had  been  exported.  But  a  fresh  cause 
of  drain  supervened.  This  cause  is  thus  explained 
in  the  report  of  the  Lords'  Committee  of  Secrecy 
in  1797:  — 

"  The  alarm  of  invasion  which,  when  an  immediate  attack 
was  first  appi'ehended  in  Ireland,  had  occasioned  some  extraor- 
dinary demand  for  cash  on  the  Bank  of  England,  in  the  months 
of  December  and  January  last,  began  in  February  to  produce 
similar  effects  in  the  North  of  England.  Your  Committee  find, 
that,  in  consequence  of  this  apprehension,  the  farmers  suddenly 
brought  the  produce  of  their  lands  to  sale,  and  carried  the  notes 
of  the  country  banks,  which  they  had  collected  by  these  and  other 
means,  into  those  banks  for  payment ;  that  this  unusual  and  sudden 
demand  for  cash  reduced  the  several  banks  at  Newcastle  to  the 
necessity  of  suspending  their  payments  in  specie,  and  of  availing 
themselves  of  all  the  means  in  their  power  of  procuring  a  speedy 
supply  of  cash  from  the  metropolis  ;  that  the  effects  of  this  de- 
mand on  the  Newcastle  Banks,  and  of  their  suspension  of  pay- 
ments in  cash,  soon  spread  over  various  parts  of  the  country, 
from  whence  similar  applications  were  consequently  made  to 


20i  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

the  metropolis  for  cash  ;  that  the  alarm  thus  diffused,  not  only 
occasioned  an  increased  demand  for  cash  in  the  country,  but 
probably  a  disposition  in  many  to  hoard  what  was  thus  obtained  : 
that  this  call  on  the  metropolis,  through  whatever  channels, 
directly  affected  the  Bank  of  England  as  the  great  repository  of 
cash,  and  was  in  the  course  of  still  further  operation  upon  it  when 
stopped  by  the  minute  of  council  of  the  26th  February." 

The  landing  of  some  troops  from  a  French  fii- 
gate  which  had  accidentally  got  into  the  port  of 
Fishgard,  in  Wales,  tended  to  increase  the  prevail- 
ing alarm. 

The  contraction  of  the  circulation,  immediately 
previous  to  the  issuing  of  the  order  in  council,  had 
been  carried  to  an  extreme  degree,  the  issues 
on  the  25th  February  liaving  been  reduced  to 
8,640,250/.  * 

*  The  policy,  on  the  part  of  the  Bank,  of  this  extreme  con- 
traction was  questioned  by  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  in  his  evidence 
before  the  committees  in  1797,  as  also  in  his  publication  on  paper 
credit  in  1802.  The  rationale  of  the  objections  that  have  been 
urged  against  that  degree  of  reduction  of  the  circulation  is,  that 
having  carried  it  to  a  degree  that  was  effectual  in  restoring  the 
exchanges,  and  thus  securing  the  return  from  abroad  of  the  gold 
that  had  been  exported,  the  expedient  course,  on  the  part  of 
the  Bank,  when  the  demand  for  gold  became  confined  to  the 
interior,  and  evidently  arose  from  the  discredit  of  the  country 
circulation,  was  to  enlarge  its  issues,  instead  of  further  contract- 
ing them,  as  the  Bank  did  ;  for,  by  such  further  contraction,  the 
difficulties  and  discredit  of  the  country  banks  were  aggravated, 
and  the  demands  upon  them,  and  by  them  upon  the  Bank,  for 
gold  became  more  urgent.  And  the  success  of  an  opposite 
course  in  a  memorable  instance  of  more  recent  date  has  given 
considerable  force  to  the  reasoning  upon  which  that  objection 
proceeds.  But  the  doctrine  is  to  be  received  with  great  caution, 
as  it  may  easily  be  perverted  into  a  justification  of  a  very  lax 
and  improvident  management. 

The  directors,  in  1797,  pursued  a  clear  and  steady  course  in 
the  reduction  of  the  amount  of  their  paper,  in  order  to  coun- 
teract the  drain  on  their  treasure;  and  tliere  is  reason  to  believe, 
that  if,  instead  of  applying  to  the  government  with  a  statement 
of  their  apprehensions,  which  led  to  an  interference  by  the 
order  of  council  of  the  26th  of  February,  they  had,  as  the  di- 
rectors in  1783  did,  gone  on  with  the  intention  of  paying  to 
their  last  guinea  (when  at  worst  they  could  but  have  stopped), 
they  would  have  surmounted  the  run.      The  reason  for  this 


1793—1798.  '205 

The  effect  of  this  extreme  contraction  was  felt 
chiefly,  as  may  be  supposed,  in  the  money  market. 
Exchequer  bills,  bearing  3\(L  per  day,  were  sold 
at  Si.  and  31.  10s.  per  cent,  discount,  and  it  was 
said,  that  in  some  instances  sales  were  made  at  5l. 
])er  cent,  discount.  Navy  and  victualling  bills 
were  also  at  an  enormous  discount,  and  the  3  per 
cent,  consols  fell  below  50.  Mercantile  bills,  ex- 
cepting such  as  came  within  Bank  time  and  regu- 
lations, were  hardly  negotiable  at  all,  or  were  sub- 
ject to  heavy  commissions,  by  way  of  evading  the 
operation  of  the  usury  law. 

But  while  in  the  rate  of  interest,  and  in  the 
price  of  public  securities,  the  effect  was  naturally 
very  great,  it  was  hardly  perceptible  in  the  markets 
for  goods.  The  price  of  corn  *  had  previously 
been  falling  from  restored  abundance,  while  from 
the  opposite  cause,  scarcity,  actual  or  apprehended, 
colonial  produce  continued  to  rise,  notwithstand- 
ing not  only  the  pressure  on  the  money  market, 

opinion  is,  that  the  circulation  was  ah-eady  so  contracted  that 
the  reduced  number  of  notes  then  out-standing  were  become  so 
much  wanted  for  immediate  payments,  as  to  be  less  and  less 
likely  to  be  returned  to  the  Bank  for  gold ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  tide  of  the  metals  was  setting  in  so  strongly  from 
abroad  as  almost  to  insure  a  sufficient  supply  to  meet  the  inter- 
nal demand.  A  strong  corroborative  ground  for  such  a  suppo- 
sition is,  that  before  the  order  in  council  for  the  restriction  had 
reached  Dublin,  the  run  on  the  Bank  of  Ireland  had  altogether 
ceased,  and  the  directors  of  that  establishment  expressed  great 
reluctance  at  being  prevented  from  continuing  to  pay  in  specie, 
which  they  considered  themselves  well  able  to  do.  And  it  is  a 
fair  presumption  that  as  a  demand  for  gold,  under  the  alarm  of 
invasion  in  Ireland,  had  been  one  of  the  predisposing  causes  of 
the  run  in  this  country,  the  same  general  circumstances  which 
restored  confidence  in  the  circulation  there  would  quickly  operate 
in  arresting  the  progress  of  discredit  here. 

*  So  buoyant  were  the  corn  markets,  notwithstanding  the 
contracted  state  of  the  currency,  that,  in  consequence  of  bad 
weather  at  the  harvest  of  1797,  the  price  rose  in  September  of 
that  year  10*.  the  quarter,  and  afterwards  fell  again  slowly  when 
the  sufficiency  of  the  supply  was  ascertained. 


206  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

but  notwithstanding  also  the  great  advance  of  the 
exchanges.* 

On  the  day  following  the  order  in  council,  the 
Bank  increased  its  issues,  and  on  the  28th  of  Feb- 
ruary t  the  amount  stood  at  one  million  higher 
than  it  had  done  on  the  25th.  The  average  for 
the  whole  year  was  somewhat  higher  than  it  had 
been  in  1796,  although  lower  than  in  1795.  But 
in  the  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation  in  1797 
are  included  notes  under  5/.,  amounting  to 
somewhat  under  a  million,  which  must  be  con- 
sidered as  wholly  in  the  place  of  so  much  gold, 
which  would  otherwise  have  circulated.  Indeed 
the  increase  of  Bank  notes  was  in  a  small  propor- 
tion only  to  the  increase  of  bullion,  which  was 
between  three  and  four  millions. 

The  exchanges,  which  had  given  way  a  little 
on   the  post  day  following  the  order  in  council, 

*  It  is  not  possible  to  adduce  an  instance  more  striking  than 
that  which  is  here  adverted  to,  of  the  inefficacy  of  a  contraction 
of  the  circulation  in  counteracting  the  tendency  to  an  advance 
of  prices  under  the  influence  of  actual  scarcity,  or  of  the  force 
of  opinion  of  prospective  scarcity,  relatively  to  the  estimated 
rate  of  consumption.  For  in  the  present  instance,  instead  of  a 
rise  of  prices  of  exportable  commodities  having  been  caused  by 
an  exchange  adverse  to  this  country,  and  therefore  holding  out 
a  compensation  to  the  foreign  buyer  for  a  higher  price,  the 
prices  of  such  commodities  advanced  50  to  100  per  cent.,  while 
the  exchanges  likewise  advanced  10  to  20  per  cent. 

f  The  position  of  the  Bank  on  the  28th  of  February,  1797, 
being  the  day  following  the  restriction,  was  :  — 

£  £ 

Circulation  -9,674,780  Securities,  public  -]1,714,4'31 
Deposits     -       -  4,891,530  private  -     5,123,319 


Liabilities  -     -  14,566,310  16,837,750 
Bullion         *           -     1,086,170 


17,923,920 


The  above  amount  of  liabilities  is  lower  than  it  had  been  since 

1787. 


1793—1798.  207 

under  an  impression  that  there  was  likely  to  be 
an  excessive  issue  of  paper,  rallied  immediately 
after,  upon  its  being  found  that  there  was  no 
tendency  to  such  excess.  And  as  a  great  part  of 
our  government  expenditure  abroad  had  ceased, 
in  consequence  of  the  peace  between  Austria  and 
France,  by  the  treaty  of  Leoben,  they  continued 
to  rise  till  they  got  considerably  above  par. 

The  Hamburgh  exchange  attained,  before  the 
close  of  that  year,  a  quotation  which  it  had  never 
before  reached,  viz.  38  ;  and  it  ranged  at  about 
that  high  rate  through  the  whole  of  1798.  This 
extraordinarily  high  state  of  the  exchange  was 
attended  with  a  great  influx  of  bullion,  the  stock 
of  which  in  tlie  Bank,  by  the  end  of  August, 
amounted  to  six  million  five  hundred  thousand 
pounds  *;  and  at  the  end  of  that  year,  was  above 
seven  millions,  being  in  the  proportion  of  more 
than  one  third  of  its  liabilities.  The  Bank  was,  in 
consequence,  in  a  condition  to  resume  its  pay- 
ments in  specie,  and  an  announcement  was  made 
by  the  directors  to  government  to  that  effect. 
The  government,  however,  from  a  consideration 
of  the  political  state  of  the  country,  deemed  it 
expedient  to  continue  the  restriction. 

But  the  great  rise  of  the  exchanges,  and  the 
rapid  influx  of  bullion,  and  a  great  fall  in  the  prices 

*  The  position  of  the  Bank  in  August  1798  was  :  — 

Circulation,      Bank  Securities,  public  10,930,038 

notes  of  51.   and  private    6,419,602 

upwards,  and  post  . 

bills       -       -       -  10,649,550                                     17,349,640 

under  5/.     -  1,531,060     Bullion       -         -     6,546,100 


12,180,610                                    23,895,740 
Deposits     -  -        8,300,720  *. 


Liabilities    20,481,330 


208  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

of  provisions,  were  coincident  with  an  increased 
issue  of  Bank  paper  ;  thus  proving  that  the  inter- 
mediate depression  of  the  exclianges,  and  the  con- 
sequent great  efflux  of  bullion,  were  not  caused 
by  an  increased  amount,  and  consequent  dimin- 
ished value  of  the  currency  of  this  country,  but 
by  a  great  and  sudden  emergency,  which  occa- 
sioned an  extraordinary  demand  for,  and  conse- 
quent temporarily  increased  value  of  foreign 
currencies,  as  measured  in  our  currency  ;  for 
immediately  upon  the  cessation  of  that  demand, 
the  value  of  those  currencies  fell  even  below  their 
usual  level  as  compared  with  ours. 

Of  the  magnitude  of  the  extra  demand  for 
means  of  making  immediate  payments  abroad, 
some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  following  state- 
ment of  the  foreign  expenditure  of  government, 
extracted  from  an  account  inserted  in  the  Ajjpen- 
dix  to  the  Report  of  the  Lords'  Committee  of  Se- 
crecy in  1797  *  ••  — 

^  s.       d. 

1794  .  -     8,335,592     5     5 

1795  -  -  11,040,236  13     0 

1796  -  -  -  10,649,916     0     8 

To  the  above  sums  is  to  be  added  4,702,818/. 
18*.  8G?.t,  as  excess  of  payments  abroad  for  naval 
stores  imported  in  those  years.  And  the  value  of 
grain  imported  was  in  t  — 

1794  -  -  -  1,983,856/. 

1795  '  -  -  1,535,672/. 

1796  -  -  -  3,926,484/. 

making  an  aggregate  of  extra  foreign  expenditure 

*  Appendix  to  Lords'  Report,  No.  23.  In  these  sums  are 
inckided  the  loan  and  advances  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria, 
5,570,000/. 

f   Appendix  to  Lords'  Reports,  No.  27.    - 

j  Appendix  to  Lords'  Reports,  1797,  No.  31. 


1793—1798.  209 

of  no  less  than  42,174,675/.,  in  those  three  years 
of  which  the  largest  proportion  fell  upon  the  two 
last. 

It  is  quite  clear  that,  practically,  no  conceivable 
increase  of  exports  in  the  way  of  trade  could  be  im- 
mediately brought  into  operation,  so  as  to  obviate 
the  pressure  on  tlie  exchanges  of  so  enormous  and  so 
sudden  an  increase  of  the  balance  of  payments  to  be 
made  abroad.  And  it  was  only,  as  has  been  seen,  by 
an  extraordinary  contraction  of  the  circulating  me- 
dium, and  by  the  transmission  of  all  the  bullion 
that  could  be  collected,  whether  from  the  coffers 
of  the  Bank,  or  from  the  channels  of  circulation, 
that  the  pressure  could  be  at  all  met,  consistently 
with  the  maintenance  of  the  convertibility  of  the 
paper.  But  the  contraction  of  the  issues  of  the 
Bank,  combined  with  the  export  of  bullion,  did 
prove  efficacious  in  restoring  the  value  of  the  cur- 
rency of  this  country,  as  compared  with  the  cur- 
rencies of  other  countries ;  and  it  was  only  an 
accidentally  supervening  cause  of  drain  for  internal 
circulation,  that  endangered  the  convertibility 
which  was  inematurely  suspended  by  an  inter- 
ference of  government.  Prematurely,  inasmuch 
as  the  stock  of  bullion  had  not,  on  the  26th  of 
February,  1797*  been  reduced  below  a  million, 
while  the  circulation  had  been  contracted  to  the 
very  low  amount  of  8,640,250/. ;  this  proportion 
of  the  circulation  to  the  treasure  of  the  Bank 
being  lower  than  it  had  been  in  1783,  or  again  in 
1825,  in  each  of  which  instances  the  run  had 
been  surmounted.  Whatever,  therefore,  might  be 
the  motives  of  policy  which  dictated  the  suspension, 
it  was  clearly  not  justified  at  that  precise  time  as 
a  measure  of  necessity. 


210  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION. 


Section  4.  —  Summarif  of  the  'preceding  Survey. 

From  the  preceding  view  of  the  state  of  the 
circulation  and  of  prices,  from  1793  to  1798,  it 
appears, 

1.  'Ihat  it  was  tlie  extraordinary  adverse  ba- 
lance of  foreign  payments,  and  not  an  increased 
circulation  or  quantity  of  money,  that  caused  the 
depression  of  the  exchanges,  and  the  efflux  of  bul- 
lion in  1795  and  1796,  inasmuch  as  the  exchanges 
rose  and  bullion  flowed  rapidly  back  coincidently 
with  an  increase  of  the  Bank  circulation,  when  the 
foreign  payments  ceased. 

2.  That  the  Bank  directors  of  that  time  acted 
upon  the  principle,  and  found  it  efficacious,  of  con- 
trolling the  exchanges  by  a  contraction  of  their 
issues. 

3.  That  in  consequence  of  the  two  very  defi- 
cient harvests  of  179^-  and  1795,  a  great  rise  of 
the  prices  of  provisions  took  place  in  1795  and 
I79G,  coincidently  with  a  remarkable  contraction 
of  the  Bank  circulation  ;  and  that  there  was,  coin- 
cidently with  an  enlargement  of  the  circulation, 
a  rapid  fall  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  a  com- 
plete subsidence  of  them  at  the  close  of  1798,  to 
the  level  of  what  they  had  been  at  the  commence- 
ment of  1793. 

4.  That  while,  from  1796  to  the  close  of 
1798,  the  prices  of  provisions  and  of  European 
produce  generally  were  falling,  the  prices  of  all 
transatlantic  produce  were  rapidly  rising,  coinci- 
dently with  a  great  rise  of  the  exchanges,  and 
reached  a  greater  height  than  they  ever  after- 
wards attained,  until  the  commencement  of  1814. 

.5.  That  the  great  fall  of  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  European  produce  generally,  from  1796  to 


1793—1798.  ^11 

the  close  of  1798,  took  place  coincidently  with  a 
progressively  increasing  government  expenditure, 
defrayed  chiefly  by  loans. 

6.  That  there  is  as  little  ground,  therefore,  for 
the  hypothesis  of  the  influence  of  war  demand 
(except  in  the  case  of  articles  constituting  naval 
and  military  stores),  as  there  is  for  that  of  the 
circulation,  in  accounting  for  the  very  extraordi- 
nary, and  thus  far  unprecedented,  fluctuations  of 
prices  which  characterised  the  interval  that  has 
passed  under  review. 


p  9, 


212  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 


CHAP.   III. 

ON     THE    STATE    OF    PRICES,  AND    OF    THE    CIRCULA- 
TION,   FROM    1799    TO    1803. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  period  now  com- 
mg  under  consideration,  while  the  prices  of  coffee, 
sugar,  cotton,  and  generally  of  all  transatlantic 
produce  were,  in  consequence  of  a  continued  spe- 
culative demand  for  export,  immoderately  high  ; 
and  while  various  other  articles  were  in  consequence 
of  increased  cost  of  production,  arising  out  of  the 
circumstances  of  the  war,  at  a  greater  or  less  ad- 
vance upon  what  had  been  their  ordinary  level 
before  the  war,  the  prices  of  provisions  were  mo- 
derate ;  or  rather  if  the  increased  cost  of  production 
of  a  foreign  supply,  of  which  it  was  supposed  that 
we  then  stood  habitually  in  need,  be  taken  into 
account,  might  be  considered  extremely  low. 

Of  corn,  the  Gazette  averages  for  England  and 
Wales  were,  in  January,  1799,  — 

For  Wheat  -  49*.  6d. 

Barley  -  29*.  4d. 

Oats  -  19.?.  lOd. 

And  the  following  were  the  prices  of  meat :  — 
Beef,  in  Smithfield,       -       36-.  to  3s.  4d.  per  st. 
Mutton  -  -       3s.  to  4*.  Qd 

Pork     -  -  -       2.9.  8d.  to  36-.  8^. 

Hay,  aver.  St.  James's  mar.  45*.  6d.  per  Id. 
Straw,      -      ditto,       -       31.9. 

Prices,  as  low  as  they  had  been  on  an  average 
of  several  years  before  1793.  And  the  ex- 
changes were  at  so  high  a  rate  as  indicated  a 
greater  value  of  the  currency  relatively  to  the 
currencies  of  other   countries,   than   had   existed 


1799—1803.  213 

with  a  trifling  exception  dining  tlie  preceding  part 
of  the  century.  But  a  great  cliange  was  about 
to  take  place ;  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  of 
other  P^uropean  produce,  rising  to  an  enormous 
height,  while  transatlantic  produce  experienced  a 
very  great  fill,  at  the  same  time  that  the  exchanges 
underwent  extraordinary  fluctuations. 


Section  1. — Rise  of  the  Prices  of  Provisions  and 
other  Articles  of  European  Produce  from  the 
Spring  of  1799  to  the  Spring  o/^1801. 

The  winter  of  1798-99  was  extremely  rigor- 
ous, and  had  set  in  very  early.  The  autumn 
of  1798  had  been  very  unfavourable  for  wheat 
sowing  (which,  partly  perhaps  from  this  cause,  was 
said  to  be  to  a  smaller  extent  than  usual),  and  the 
subsequent  weather  was  throughout  adverse  to 
vegetation.*  Severe  frosts  setting  in  early,  and 
alternating  with  rapid  thaws,  and  heavy  falls  of 
snow  occurring  into  an  advanced  period  of  the 
spring,  gave  a  general  character  of  untowardness 
to  the  season  of  1799,  which  the  subsequent  pro- 
gress of  it  more  than  realised. 

Under  this  unpromising  aspect  of  the  season, 
the  prices  of  grain  advanced,  slowly  however  at 
first,  the  averages  for  March  having  risen  in  a  very 

*  The  severity  of  the  frosts  and  the  suddenness  of  the  thaws 
during  this  month  have,  in  many  respects,  been  unfavourable  to 
the  young  wheats,  especially  those  which  were  sown  early. 
These  causes  have  likewise  prevented  the  operations  of  the 
plough  in  preparing  turnip  and  other  grounds  for  wheat,  rye, 
Sec,  as  well  as  for  the  making  of  summer  fallows.  In  the  more 
western  parts  of  the  island  our  reporters  also  observe  that  less 
wheat  than  usual  has  been  sown  on  account  of  the  frosts,  and 
some  other  impediments.  —  Monthly  Agricultural  Report  for 
January,  1799. 

p  3 


214  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

trifling  degree.     But  the  spring  proving  to  be  ex- 
cessively cold  and  ungenial,  and  the  appearance  of 
the  growing  crops  very  unpromising  a  rapid  rise 
took  place  in  May,  when  the  averages  for  grain 
were, 

Wheat  -  -  61*.  8^. 

Barley  -  -  35*. 

Oats  -  -  27*.  4c?. 

Beef,  in  Smithfield  -  3.9.  8^?.  to  5s.  per  st. 

Mutton  -  -  4.9.  4fd.  to  5s.  4<d. 

Hay         -  -  -  70.9. 

Straw         -  -  -  59,s. 

To  this  dry,  harsh,  and  ungenial  spring  suc- 
ceeded a  cold  and  almost  uninterruptedly  wet  sum- 
mer and  autumn.  The  consequence  was,  great 
injury  to  all,  and  destruction  to  some,  of  the  crops  ; 
and  henceforth  the  prices  of  grain  rose  without 
intermission.  At  the  close  of  the  year  the  averages 
of  corn  were. 

Wheat         -  -         94.9.  <2d. 

Barley       -  -         45*.  5d.* 

Oats  -  -         SSs.Sd. 

Although  parliament  had  met  in  September  1799, 
there  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  discussions 
in  it  on  the  high  price  of  provisions  till  the  18th 
of  February,  1800,  when  the  House  of  Commons 
resolved  itself  into  a  committee  on  the  report  re- 
specting the  assize  of  bread,  and  the  deficiency  of 
the  last  crop  of  grain.  Lord  Hawkesbury  then  took 
occasion  to  make  some  statements  which  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  record. 

"  As  to  the  quantity  of  wheat  consumed,"  he  said,  "  a  quar- 
ter of  wheat  in  the  year  for  each  nian  was  the  general  calcula- 


*  The  crops  of  barley  and  oats  had  not  suffered  in  the  same 
degree  as  wheat,  and  the  prices,  it  may  be  observed,  are  below 
their  ordinary  relative  rate. 


1799—1803.  Q15 

tion.  This  allowance  would  require  between  eight  and  nine 
millions  of  quarters  to  supply  this  country  for  a  year.  The 
produce  of  the  country  varied  in  different  years ;  but  the  aver- 
age computation  between  very  high  and  very  low  seasons  might 
come  nearest  tlie  truth.  This  average  did  not  feed  the  country  ; 
for  tlie  average  importation  for  several  years  back  might  be 
estimated  at  one  twentieth  of  the  consumption.  The  deficiency 
of  the  late  crop  might  be  estimated  at  one  third  of  the  usual 
crop,  which  must  be  added  to  the  one  twentieth  usually  imported, 
in  order  to  estimate  what  importation  would  be  necessary  this 
season.  It  must,  liowever,  be  considered  that  there  was  in  the 
country  a  stock  in  hand  from  the  preceding  harvest  sufficient  to 
supply  one  month.  But  if  we  also  take  the  foreign  supply  in 
the  country  at  the  same  period,  there  was  certainly  much  more 
than  would  be  consumed  in  a  month.  Considering  all  these 
circumstances,  the  probable  amount  of  importation  necessary 
this  season  would  be  about  600,000  quarters  of  wheat,  whereas, 
in  1796,  the  importation  was  more  than  800,000  quarters.  The 
millers  and  others  skilled  in  the  subject  had  recommended  some 
regulations  as  to  the  use  of  new  bread,  and  had  computed  that 
by  such  regulations  there  might  be  a  saving  of  one  fortnight  of 
the  whole  consumption.  It  had  also  been  stated  that  millers, 
when  the  price  of  grain  was  high,  and,  consequently,  when  bread 
was  dear,  extracted  from  the  grain  a  greater  quantity  of  flour 
than  they  did  at  other  times.  This  would  afford  a  second 
saving.  A  third  would  arise  from  the  use  of  substitutes  for 
bread.  As  the  price  of  grain,  even  in  those  countries  from 
which  we  could  receive  a  supply,  was  high,  it  was  to  be  feared 
that  the  high  price  of  grain  in  this  country  was  inevitable  ;  but 
from  a  review  of  all  the  circumstances,  it  might  be  collected 
that  there  was  no  real  danger  of  scarcity."  * 

If  this  very  statement  was  not  descriptive  of 
real  scarcity,  it  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  degree  of 
deficiency  the  term  could  with  propriety  be  applied. 
So  formidable  were  the  appearances  at  that  time  of 
increasing  deartli,  that,  in  pursuance  of  the  recom- 
mendation of  the  committee,  recourse  w^as  again 
had  to  a  bounty,  and  an  act  was  accordingly  passed, 

'^  Lord  Ilawkesbury  conch;dcd  by  moving  "  That  leave  be 
given  to  bring  in  a  bill  to  prohibit  an}^  person  or  persons  from 
selling  or  offering  for  sale  any  bread  which  has  not  been  baked 
for  a  certain  number  of  hours."  Leave  was  given.  The  blank 
for  specifying  the  number  of  hours  was  filled  up  with  "  twenty- 
four."  The  bill  went  through  all  its  stages  on  the  following 
day.  Various  other  regulations  were  afterwards  proposed,  and 
some  of  them  adopted. 

P  4 


216  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

guaranteeing  to  the  importer  the  difference  between 
the  average  price  of  English  wheat  in  the  second 
week  after  importation  and  90.9.  on  wheat  from 
the  south  of  Europe,  Africa,  and  America  ;  85*. 
from  the  Baltic  and  Germany  ;  and  90s.  from  Arch- 
angel, if  imported  before  the  1st  of  October,  1800. 
Notwithstanding  the  reasonable  probability  from 
the  encouragement  thus  held  out  of  a  large  forth- 
coming importation,  such  was  the  scantiness  of 
the  supply  in  the  markets,  and  such  the  apprehen- 
sion excited  by  the  unfavourable  appearance  of  the 
growing  crops  in  the  spring  of  1800*,  that  the 
prices  of  provisions  continued  to  advance  until 
June,  1800,  when  they  had  reached  the  following 
quotations  :  — 

Wlieat,  Gazette  average,   134.y.  5d. 
Barley  -  -  69s.  Id. 

Oats  -  -  51*.  Id. 

In  Smithfield  market. 

Beef  sold  for  4,s-.  6d.  to  6s.  4r/.  per  stone. 

Mutton  and  Pork    5s.  4d.  to  6s.  8d. 

In  Newgate  and  Leadenhall  markets. 

Beef  -  -  9d.tols.2d.iper\h. 

Mutton  -  -  8(7.  to  lOd. 

Veal         -  -  -  9^.  to  1*. 

Pork  in  St.  James's  market,  9^.  to  lOd. 

Hay,  -  -  -  64.9.  to  122.9.  per  Id. 

Straw  -  -  54<s.  to  63s. 

The  summer  of  1800  was  hot  and  dry,  and  as 
the  harvest  approached,  the  crops  assumed  a  more 
promising  appearance.  The  weather,  till  the  third 
week  of  August,  was  favourable  for  securing  the 

*  The  autumn  of  1799  had  again  been  unfavourable  for  sow- 
ing wheat ;  the  winter  had  been  somewhat  hke  the  preceding, 
marked  by  early  severity  of  frost,  with  alternations  of  rapid 
thaws;  and  the  spring  of  1800  was  exceedingly  wet. 


1799—1803.  217 

corn  in  the  more  forward  districts,  and  some  quan- 
tity was  well  got  in. 

At  the  same  tune  a  considerable  importation  was 
in  progress.  There  was,  in  consequence  a  sudden 
and  great  fall  in  all  the  principal  markets,  and  the 
averages  in  August,  1800,  declined  to 

96a-.  9.d.  for  Wheat. 
,54^.  Sd.  -  Barley. 
35^.9^.    -    Oats. 

The  promising  appearances  of  restored  abundance 
were,  however,  soon  changed  into  the  sad  reality 
of  renewed  and  aggravated  dearth. 

A  portion,  not  exceeding,  according  to  the  re- 
ports, one  half  of  the  crops,  was  secured  in  good 
order  before  the  19th  of  August,  when  heavy  and 
almost  incessant  rains  set  in,  accompanied  by  a 
high  temperature  and  a  close  atmosphere,  in  con- 
sequence of  which  a  great  deal  of  the  wheat  was 
sprouted,  and  otherwise  injured.  The  portion  that 
had  been  secured  in  the  southern  division  of  the 
kingdom,  before  the  rains  set  in,  and  therefore  good 
as  to  mere  condition,  and  greatly  superior  to  that 
of  1799,  proved  to  be  coarse  and  shrivelled  and 
light,  and  consequently  greatly  deficient  in  yield. 
Tiiis  description  applied  to  the  quality  of  the  grain 
generally.  But  the  rains,  which  came  on  in  August, 
caught  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  wheat  still 
in  the  fields,  even  in  the  home  and  some  of  the 
southern  districts,  and  injured  the  whole  of  the 
crops  in  tlie  northern  parts  of  the  island.  Accord- 
ingly, bad  as  the  crops  were  in  England,  they  were 
still  worse  in  Scotland,  and  considerable  purchases 
were  in  consequence  made  in  Mark  Lane  for  ship- 
ment thither.  Under  these  circumstances,  notwith- 
standing an  importation  of  foreign  corn  to  a  very 
large  amount,  that  of  wheat  alone  being  1,242,507 
quarters,  prices  rose  as  rapidly  as  they  had  just 
before  fallen. 


218  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  rise,  in  the  present  instance,  had  been  acceler- 
ated by  the  circumstance  of  the  Russian  government 
having,  in  tlie  autumn  of  1800,  laid  an  embargo 
on  British  shipping.  This  act  was  considered,  as 
it  proved  to  be,  equivalent  to  a  declaration  of  war; 
and  as  the  Danish  government  was  known  to  be 
unfriendly  to  ours,  apprehensions  were  naturally  en- 
tertained, as  they  were  eventually  realised,  that  in 
the  ensuing  season  the  Baltic  might  be  closed 
against  us.  The  Prussian  government,  moreover, 
had  a  few  months  before,  viz.  in  July,  imposed  a 
duty  of  lOs.  per  quarter  on  the  exportation  of 
wheat.  It  can  hardly  therefore  be  a  matter  of 
wonder  that  a  renewed  range  of  high  prices  should 
be  the  consequence,  and  accordingly  the  averages 
in  December  1800  were. 

For  Wheat  ..        133.9. 

Barley  -  76*.  7d. 

Oats  -  41*.  8f/. 

The  sufferings  of  the  bulk  of  the  community, 
under  this  severe  visitation  of  dearth,  were  very 
great.  The  expression  of  them  broke  out  in  tu- 
multuous meetings  and  riotous  proceedings  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  kingdom,  in  the  autumn  of 
1800,  and  the  peace  of  the  metropolis  was  with 
difficulty  preserved. 

Parliament  met  on  the  11th  November,  1800;  and 
the  speech  from  the  throne  stated,  that  the  meet- 
ing of  it  was  called  at  an  earlier  period  than  had 
otherwise  been  intended,  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
into  consideration  the  measures  proper  to  be  adopted 
with  a  view  to  alleviate  the  severe  pressure  of  dis- 
tress, which  was  felt  in  consequence  of  the  high 
price  of  provisions.  The  speech  also  alluded  to 
the  supposition  *   of  combination  and  fraudulent 


*  Tlie  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  in  their  report  on 
the  high   price  of  provisions,  referred  to  their  examination  of 


1799—1803.  219 

practices,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  the  price  of 
grain,  and  expressed  concern  with  reference  to  the 
disturbances  which  had  broken  out  in  some  parts 
of  the  kingdom. 

In  the  discussions  in  both  Houses,  to  which  the 
speech  and  the  motions  for  the  address  gave  rise, 
several  members  denied  the  existence  of  scarcity, 
or  admitted  it  only  in  a  quaUfied  degree,  and 
ascribed  the  high  prices,  some  to  war  and  taxation, 
and  excess  of  paper  circulation  ;  while  others  laid 
most  stress  on  monopoly  and  improper  practices 
on  the  part  of  farmers  and  dealers. 

Mr,  Pitt,  with  reference  to  the  allegation  of 
improper  practices,  deprecated,  only  in  general 
terms,  any  such  regulations  as  might  interfere  with 
the  freedom  of  trade,  and  of  the  application  of  in- 
dustry and  capital.  Bat  he  more  particularly 
applied  himself  to  answer  the  arguments  of  those 
who  ascribed  the  high  price  of  provisions  chiefly, 
if  not  exclusively,  to  war  and  taxation. 

"  Since  tills  question  has  been  started,"  he  said,  "  I  beg  leave 
to  hint  a  few  general  observations,  which  seem  completely  to 
overthrow  the  argument  of  those  who  impute  the  dearness  of 
provisions  to  the  war.  In  a  more  detailed  discussion,  I  shall  be 
ready  to  examine  separately  the  effect  of  every  tax  which  has 
been  imposed  since  the  year  1793;  to  state  the  utmost  effect 
which  it  could  be  supposed  to  have  produced  directly  or  in- 
directly on  the  price  of  grain  ;  and  to  prove  that  these  tfxes 
could  form,  even  on  the  most  exaggerated  computation,  a  very 
inconsiderable  part   of  the  increased  price  of  provisions.     To 


witnesses  on  the  alleged  malpractices,  and  stated  as  the  result, 
"  That  after  having  inquired  extensively  as  to  the  existence  of 
the  supposed  combination  and  fraudulent  practices  of  unfair 
dealers,  they  have  not  been  able  to  trace,  in  any  one  instance, 
any  thing  more  than  such  suspicious  and  vulgar  reports  as  usually 
prevail  in  times  of  scarcity  ;  and  that  they  are  of  opinion  that 
what  have  been  represented  as  deep  schemes  and  fraudulent 
practices  to  raise  the  market,  have  been  only  the  common  and 
usual  proceedings  of  dealers  in  all  articles  of  commerce,  where 
there  is  a  great  demand,  and  where  great  capital  and  great 
activity  are  employed." 


220  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

show  that  the  war  has  not  any  general  effect  to  raise  the  price 
of  grain,  consider  only  the  price  of  grain  at  different  periods 
of  the  present  war,  though  the  argument  would  be  strengthened 
by  a  review  of  former  wars.  Three  or  four  years  have  been 
years  of  comparatively  high  price.  In  1794<  and  1795,  the  price 
was  high ;  but  in  the  interval  of  nearly  three  years  that  suc- 
ceeded, that  is,  from  about  Michaelmas  1796  to  Midsummer 
1799,  the  price  sunk  perhaps  too  low  for  the  fair  profit  of  the 
farmer.  The  general  price  then  in  England  was  from  4-8*.  to 
49*.  a  quarter.  From  Michaelmas  1798  to  Lady-day  1799,  it 
was  not  above  48*.  How  then,  if  the  war  was  the  cause  of 
the  dearness,  did  it  happen  that  the  effect,  which  on  the  hypo- 
thesis should  have  been  increasing,  was  suspended  during  an 
interval  of  nearly  three  years  ;  and  when  likewise  some  of  the 
taxes  to  which  the  effect  is  chiefly  ascribed  had  been  imposed  ? 
Previous  to  the  last-mentioned  period  (one  of  great  cheapness) 
the  triple  assessment  had  existed  a  twelvemonth,  and  must  have 
produced  its  full  effect.  This  plain  fact  is  alone  worth  a  thou- 
sand instances  deduced  by  circuitous  reasonings.  I  shall  not 
enter  into  a  comparative  statement  of  the  prices  in  former  wars, 
nor  insist  on  the  ingenious  arguments  that  have  been  adduced 
to  show,  that  war  is  favourable  to  lowness  of  price.  It  is 
deserving  of  remark,  however,  that  this  country,  which,  from 
the  period  of  the  revolution,  for  a  great  part  of  the  present  cen- 
tury, had  been  used  to  export  great  quantities  of  grain,  ceased 
to  export  and  began  to  import  in  the  middle  of  that  peace  which 
succeeded  the  most  successful  war  in  which  this  country  was 
ever  engaged.  Thus  it  is  clear,  from  a  deduction  of  facts,  that 
war  of  itself  has  no  evident  and  necessary  connection  with  the 
dearness  of  provisions." 

He  added, 

"  As  to  the  extent  of  the  deficiency  of  the  late  harvest  (1800), 
it  would  be  no  less  rash  than  unnecessary  to  give  any  opinion. 
For  the  practical  remedies  proposed,  a  knowledge  of  the  precise 
deficit  is  not  required.  This,  however,  we  know,  that  notwith- 
standing the  clamour  about,  monopoly,  previous  to  the  harvest, 
it  is  now  universally  admitted,  that  the  old  stock  was  very  nearly 
exhausted.  An  early  harvest,  therefore,  found  us  with  less 
stock  than  usual ;  of  course,  that  stock,  unless  aided  by  im- 
portation from  abroad  and  economy  of  our  own  resources, 
must  be  appUcable  to  the  consumption  of  a  shorter  period  than 
usual." 

Of  the  assignment  of  the  Bank  circulation  as 
a  cause  of  the  high  price,  Mr.  Pitt  seems  to  have 
taken  no  notice  in  that  day's  debate  ;  but  in  a 
debate   a   few    days  after,    on    a    motion    of  Mr. 


1799—1803.  221 

Tierney's,  on  the  state  of  tlie  nation,  he  observed 
shortly,  — 

'  "  As  to  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  that  stoppage  has  taken 
place  for  some  time,  and  the  difference  between  the  paper  cir- 
culating medium  of  that  time  and  the  present,  is  very  incon- 
siderable."— Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxxv. 

On  the  24th  of  November,  Mr.  Ryder  pre- 
sented the  first  report  from  the  Commons'  com- 
mittee on  the  high  price  of  provisions,  from  which 
the  following  are  extracts  :  — 

"  There  appears  upon  the  whole  of  this  Information,  reason 
to  believe,  that  the  general  deficiency  of  the  crop  of  wheat  in 
England  and  Whales  does  not  amount  to  quite  so  much  as  one 
fourth." 

*'  The  accounts  of  the  stock  on  hand,  furnished  by  these 
returns,  are  necessarily  more  uncertain  ;  they  are  in  some  de- 
gree various ;  but  they  do  not  on  the  whole  furnish  any  ground 
for  doubting  the  prevailing  opinion,  confirmed  by  the  general 
information  of  the  members  who  have  attended  your  committee, 
that  the  stock  of  British  corn  at  the  harvest  was  reduced  far 
below  its  usual  amount,  and  was  in  most  places  nearly,  in  many 
absolutely,  exhausted," 

"  In  addition  to  what  has  been  stated  respecting  the  produce 
of  the  crop  and  the  stock  in  hand,  it  is  to  be  observed,  with  a 
view  to  the  state  of  the  markets,  in  the  time  which  has  elapsed 
since  the  harvest,  that  the  farmers,  during  that  period,  have 
had  a  double  demand  for  the  new  crop  for  consumption  and 
for  seed." 

"  It  appears  to  your  committee,  that  these  circumstances 
might  be  expected  to  have  produced  a  very  high  price  at  this 
season,  even  if  the  late  harvest  had  been  abundant ;  that  the 
degree  in  which  it  has  been  deficient  must  naturally  have  added 
to  such  prices,  whether  with  or  without  the  concurrence  of  any 
other  causes,  the  existence  and  effects  of  which  your  com- 
mittee propose  to  investigate." 

The  committee  then  state  their  expectation, 
that  the  deficiency  will  be  remedied  by  the  double 
operation  of  importation  and  economy.  With  re- 
spect to  importation  the  committee  state  that, 

"  Within  twelve  months  from  the  26th  of  September,  1799, 
to  the  27th  of  September,  1800,  there  have  been  imported  into 
Great  Britain  no  less  than  1,261,932  quarters  of  wheat  and 
flour,  67,988  of  barley,  479,320  of  oats,  and  300,6931b.  of  rice. 
This  happened  under  the  unfavourable  circumstances  of  a  harvest 


222  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

abroad  uncommonly  deficient  in  quality,  and  not  abundant  in 
quantity,  and  of  tbe  late  period  of  the  season,  when  the  bounty 
was  granted  by  parliament."  * 

The  committee  proceed  to  offer  various  sugges- 
tions ;  the  encouragement  of  the  fisheries,  the 
stoppage  of  the  distilleries,  a  bounty  on  import- 
ation, a  recommendation  from  the  highest  autho- 
rity, pointing  out  the  advantages  which  would  be 
derived  from  the  general  practice  of  economy  and 
frugality  in  articles  of  food.  And  with  reference 
to  this  last  suggestion,  the  committee  observes  :  — 

"  In  order  to  give  the  greatest  weight  and  solemnity  to  such 
a  recommendation,  your  committee  submit  to  the  House,  whe- 
ther it  may  not  be  proper  to  desire  the  concurrence  of  the  other 
House  of  parliament,  in  a  humble  address  to  his  Majesty,  re- 
questing that  his  Majesty  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  issue 
a  proclamation  for  this  purpose." 

A  royal  proclamation  was  issued  accordingly,  and 
circulated  by  the  magistrates  and  the  clergy  through- 
out the  kingdom.  An  act  was  passed,  granting  a 
bounty  which  guaranteed  the  difference  between* 
the  average  price  of  foreign  wheat  in  the  third 
week  after  importation,  and  100^.  to  the  importer 


*  In  a  sixth  report,  presented  in  December,  1800,  are  the 
following  computations  of  the  estimated  consumption,  and  of 
the  resources  to  meet  the  supposed  deficiency :  — 

The  usual  consumption  of  wheat  cannot  be  supposed  to  ex- 
ceed 7,000,000  quarters  per  annum. 

Amount  of  resources  to  meet  the  deficiency  : — 
Importation  of  wheat  since  the  beginning  of 

October  above  -  -  .  -    170,000  qrs. 

Importation  of  flour  from  the  United  States, 

equal  to  -  -  -  -   580,000 

Importation  of  wheat  from  Canada        -  -     30,000 

Rice,  equivalent  to  -  -  -   630,000 

Stoppage  of  starch  manufactory  -         -     40,000 

Stoppage  of  distilleries  -  -  .  360,000 

Use  of  coarse  meal  ...  -   400,000 

Retrenchment  ...  -  300,000 

2,510,000 


1799—1803.  ■         223 

of  all  wheat  weighing  53  lb.  per  bushel,  if  im- 
ported within  the  time  limited  by  the  Act.* 

These  proceedings,  while  on  the  one  hand  they 
had  the  effect  of  giving  the  assurance,  that  mea- 
sures were  in  progress  calculated  to  diminish  the 
consumption  and  to  increase  the  supply,  and  thus 
eventually  to  reduce  prices ;  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  naturally  conveyed  a  strong  impression 
of  alarm.  An  official  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Portland,  then  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home 
Department,  to  tlie  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  county 
of  Oxford,  strongly  dwelling  on  the  deficiency  of 
grain,  and  recommending  economy  in  the  use  of 
it,  was  animadverted  upon  at  the  time,  as  being 
calculated  to  increase  the  general  feeling  of  alarm. 

There  was,  doubtless,  sufficient  cause  for  ap- 
prehension; because  although  there  were  reason- 
able grounds  for  supposing,  that  the  measures  in 
progress  would  be  effectual  in  ultimately  re- 
ducing prices,  yet  various  contingencies  of  the 
season,  and  of  obstructions  arising  out  of  the  war, 
might  frustrate  the  expectations  of  relief;  and 
althouo'h  the  occurrence  in  immediate  succession 
of  a  third  year  of  deficient  produce  was  not  within 
moderate  probability,  it  was  not  to  be  considered 
as  out  of  calculation,  there  having  been  instances 
of  such  a  succession  of  unproductive  seasons. 

Under  these  circumstances  of  actual  and  appre- 

*  On  the  policy  of  this  measure  it  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  neces- 
sary to  remark,  as  it  is  not  probable  (although  our  subsequent 
policy  in  legislation  about  corn,  in  the  opposite  direction,  is 
hardly  less  absurd,  and  certainly  more  injurious,  as  it  is  more 
permanent),  that  any  such  gross  error  in  legislation  will  be 
repeated.  It  ought,  indeed,  to  have  been  quite  evident,  that 
the  enormously  high  prices  then  prevailing,  and  the  further  rise 
anticipated,  would  have  the  effect  of  inducing  preparations,  on 
the  part  of  the  merchants,  to  bring  forward  all  tlie  corn  that 
could  be  collected,  and  to  hasten  the  importation  as  much  as 
possible.  The  very  extravagance  of  the  measure,  however, 
proves  the  magnitude  of  the  apprehensions,  which  were  then 
entertained  of  the  further  progress  of  the  dearth. 


224<  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

h ended  deficiency,  the  prices  of  provisions  con- 
tinued to  advance.  The  averages  of  grain  in 
December,  1800,  have  already  been  given.  They 
advanced  progressively  till  March,  1801,  when 
they  were  — 

For  Wheat         -  156*.  2d 

Barley  -  906-.  qd. 

Oats  -  47*.  2rf. 

And  the  following  were  the  prices  of  meat :  — 

Beef,  in  Smithfield,  5.9.  to  6.9.  6f/. 

Mutton,            -  -           6.9.  6g?.  to  8.9. 

Veal,             -  -          6.9.  to  8*.  6r/. 

Pork,             -  -          6.9.  M.  to  7^. 
In  retail, 

Beef  -  -  lOd  to  \^\d. 

Mutton  -         -  llr/.  to  12f/. 

Veal  -  -  12d  to  14d 

A  rise  in  the  price  of  dairy  produce  would  na- 
turally follow  from  the  same  general  causes. 

And  not  only  had  there  been  this  enormous  rise 
in  the  prices  of  provisions,  between  the  close  of 
1798  and  the  spring  of  1801,  but  many  other  articles 
of  European  raw  produce  had  experienced  a  simul- 
taneous advance,  partly  as  the  consequence  of  the 
same  inclemency  of  the  seasons  as  had  prevailed 
in  this  country,  and  partly  from  the  extraordinary 
obstructions  to  importation  from  political  causes. 
Thus  wool  and  tallow  rose  from  the  twofold  cause 
of  the  seasons  in  diminishing  both  the  home  and 
foreign  produce,  and  flax,  hemp,  timber,  foreign 
iron,  linseed,  in  short,  all  articles  for  our  supply 
of  which  we  depended  wholly,  or  in  part,  on  im- 
portation from  the  Baltic,  experienced  a  very  con- 
siderable rise,  not  only  in  consequence  of  the 
embargo  in  Russia,  in  the  autumn  of  1800,  but 
also  in  consequence  of  the  threatened  hostility  of 


1799—1803.  225 

Denmark,  whicli  was  likely  to  close  against  us  the 
passage  of  the  Sound.  In  addition  to  this  exten- 
sive dearth  of  raw  produce  was  the  dearness  of 
many  articles  of  general  consumption,  occasioned 
by  the  progress  of  taxation,  such  as  the  heavy  duties 
of  excise  on  salt,  soap,  candles,  and  leather,  which 
may  be  considered  as  necessaries,  and  on  malt 
and  beer,  sugar,  tea,  and  tobacco  and  spirits,  which 
are  secondary  necessaries,  or,  perhaps,  more  cor- 
rectly speaking,  necessaries  to  all  the  classes  above 
the  very  poorest.  Fuel  of  every  description  had 
risen  considerably  from  the  same  general  causes. 


Section  2. — Rise  of  Wages  from  1799  to  1801. 

Such  and  so  great  being  the  rise  of  prices  of  pro- 
visions, and  of  nearly  all  consumable  commodities, 
it  was  quite  impossible  that  the  lowest  of  the 
working  classes  could,  upon  their  wages,  at  the 
rate  of  what  they  were  before  1795,  obtain  a  sub- 
sistence for  themselves  and  their  families,  on  the 
lowest  scale  requisite  to  sustain  human  existence; 
and  the  classes  above  the  lowest,  including  some 
portion  of  skilled  labourers,  could  do  little,  if  at  all, 
more  than  provide  themselves  with  food,  clothing, 
and  shelter,  without  any  of  the  indulgences  which 
habit  had  rendered  necessaries.  If  under  these 
circumstances  there  had  been  no  rise  of  wages, 
no  contributions  by  parishes  and  by  individuals, 
in  aid  of  wages,  great  numbers  of  the  people  must 
have  actually  perished,  and  the  classes  immediately 
above  the  lowest  would  with  difficulty  have  pre- 
served themselves  from  the  same  fate.  In  such 
case  the  suffering  from  dearth  would  have  been 
correctly  designated  as  a  famine,  a  term  whicli  has 
been  somewhat  loosely  applied  to  the  period  under 
consideration.      For,  severe  and  intense  as  were 

Q 


226 


TRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


the  sufferings  and  privations  of  the  people  of  this 
country,  in  the  dearths  of  1795  and  1796,  and  of 
1800  and  1801,  there  were  few  recorded  instances 
of  death  from  actual  destitution. 

A  rise  of  wages  was  imperatively  called  for  by 
the  urgency  of  the  case,  and  was  complied  with  to 
some  extent  in  most  of  the  branches  of  industry, 
the  claims  for  increase  being  aided  by  the  resource 
which  workmen  and  labourers  had  of  enlisting  in 
the  army  and  navy.  There  had  already  been  an 
advance  of  wages  in  1795  and  1796,  and  the  allow- 
ance system  had  been  begun  and  carried  to  some 
extent  in  those  years.  A  further  advance  of 
wages  took  place  in  1800  and  1801  *j  but  still  so 

*  Arthur  Young  (Annals  of  Agriculture,  vol.  37.  p.  265., 
1801,)  says,  "  a  person  is  now  living  in  the  vicinity  of  Bury  (Suf- 
folk) who,  when  he  laboured  for  5S'  a  week,  could  purchase  with 
that  5s. 

While  in  1801  the 
same  articles  cost 


A  bushel  of  wheat 

A  ditto  of  Malt    - 

A  pound  of  Butter 

A  pound  of  Cheese 

One  pennyworth  of  Tobacco  _ 


5s. 


^  s. 
0  16 
0     9 


1     6 
0  15 

5 
0 

0  11 

5 

Suppose  in  1801  his  wages  produced  him       -  9s.  \ 
Suppose  as  a  pauper  from  the  parish  rates    -  6s.  J 


"  So  that  to  enable  him  to  purchase  the  same  quantities  he 
procured  when  his  week's  wages  were  5s.,  would  now  require 
lis.  5d.  more  than  his  wages  and  the  parish  allowance  together. 
The  comparison  is,"  says  Mr.  Young,  "  fair  as  flir  as  it  goes,  be- 
cause the  extreme  in  both  cases,  the  very  lowest  in  the  first, 
and  the  very  highest  in  the  last." 

There  was  a  rise  also  in  artisan  and  manufacturing  labour,  be- 
tween 1792  and  1801  ;  but  in  a  smaU  proportion  only  to  the  rise 
in  the  prices  of  necessaries.  Various  statements  were  put  forth 
by  different  classes  of  artisans,  setting  forth  the  inadequateness 
of  the  rise  of  wages,  including  the  most  recent  advance  in  1801. 
Among  other  statements  was  one  from  the  journeymen  tailors, 


1799—1803.  227 

inadequate,  compared  with  the  prices  of  provisions, 
as  even  with  parish  allowances  and  private  contri- 
butions, to  leave  a  vast  mass  of  privation  and 
misery.  Mr.  Whitbread  had,  in  1795,  and  again 
in  1800,  proposed  bills  in  the  House  of  Commons 
for  regulating  the  wages  of  labour  by  the  price  of 
provisions,  and  prescribing  a  minimum  of  wages. 
There  was  enough  of  good  sense  to  cause  the 
rejection  of  such  a  measure.  If  it  had  been 
adopted,  high  as  the  prices  of  provisions  were, 
they  would  have  been  still  higher ;  as  on  the 
other  hand,  if  wages  had  not  risen,  and  if  there 
had  not  been  the  supplementary  aids  to  wages,  the 
prices  would  not  have  risen  so  much  as  they  did  ; 
for  it  must  be  evident  tliat  there  could  not  in  that 
case  have  been  so  large  a  sum  devoted  to  the  pur- 
chase of  necessaries.  The  rise  in  the  wages  of 
labour,  therefore,  with  the  parish  allowances,  may 
be  considered  as  having  been,  in  the  first  instance, 
a  consequence  of  the  high  prices  of  provisions,  and 
subsequently  a  cause  of  the  prices  reaching  a 
higher  level  than  they  could  otherwise  have  at- 
tained. 


by  which  it  appeared  that  their  wages,  from  1777  to  1795,  had 
been  1/.  1*.  9d.  per  week,  which,  at  the  price  of  7^^/.  for  tlie 
quartern  loaf,  would  purchase  thirty-six  loaves  ;  while  the  utmost 
advance  of  wages,  which,  in  1795,  was  to  25s.,  and,  in  1801,  to 
27s.  per  week,  would  purchase  only  eighteen  loaves  and  a  half 
in  the  latter  year.  A  statement  from  printers'  compositors, 
whose  weekly  wages  were  advanced  fi-om  2-is.  to  27^.  in  1795, 
and  to  30s.  in  1801,  gives  a  similar  result  in  the  disproportion 
of  the  advance  of  wages  to  the  rise  of  necessaries. 

By  the  Greenwich  Hospital  table,  the  wages  of  carpenters, 
bricklayers,  masons,  and  plumbers  appear  to  have  experienced 
very  little  advance,  according  to  the  quotations  of  1800,  as  com- 
pared with  the  twenty  yeai-s  preceding,  viz.  — 

s.  d.        s.  d.      s.     d. 
Carpenters        -         -         -  from  2  6  and  2  8  to  3     2  per  day. 
Bricklayers       -         -         --24  to  30 

Masons  -  -         --28  to  210 

Plumbers  -         -         -      -      3  0  to  3     3 

Q   2 


228 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


Section  3.  —  Statement  of  the  general  Causes  of 
the  Rise  of  the  Prices  of  Commodities  and  La- 
hour  from  1799  ^0  1801. 

If  the  circumstances,  such  as  they  have  been 
here  imperfectly  described,  leading  to  the  great 
elevation  of  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  of  raw 
materials,  and  of  articles  subject  to  the  duties 
of  excise,  and  the  consequent  necessary  rise  of 
the  wages  of  labour  from  1799  to  1801  be  carefully 
examined,  they  will  be  found  to  resolve  themselves 
into  the  agency  of  the  following  causes,  namely, 
two  seasons  in  succession  of  extraordinary  dearth, 
—  taxation,  —  and  impediments  arising  out  of  the 
war  to  importation  of  articles  which,  whether  as 
food  or  as  raw  materials,  for  our  manufactures 
were  of  indispensable  necessity.  * 

*  The  great  rise  of  the  price  of  provisions  and  other  neces- 
saries, combined  with  the  progress  of  taxation  consequent  on  the 
war,  occasioned  an  enormous  increase  of  the  rate  of  hving,  as  is 
instanced  in  the  following  :  — 

"  Estimate  of  the  Expenses  of  House-keeping,  between  1773 
and  1800,  by  an  inhabitant  of  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  extracted 
from  the  Appendix  to  the  Report  of  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Commons  in  the  year  1800. 


1773. 

1793. 

1799. 

1800. 

^ 

s. 

d. 

£  s. 

d. 

£  S.     d. 

£ 

s.    d. 

Coomb  of  Malt    -     - 

0 

12 

0 

1      3 

0 

1      3     0 

2 

0     0 

Chaldron  of  Coals     - 

1 

11 

6 

2     0 

6 

2     6     0 

2 

11     0 

Coomb  of  Oats    -     - 

0 

5 

0 

0   13 

0 

0  16     0 

1 

1     0 

Load  of  Hay         -     - 

2 

2 

0 

4   10 

0 

5     5     0 

7 

0     0 

Meat      -      -      .      - 

0 

0 

4 

0     0 

5 

0     0     7 

0 

0     9 

Butter      -      -      .     - 

0 

0 

6 

0     0 

11 

0     0  11 

0 

1     4 

Sugar  (Loaf) 

0 

0 

8 

0     1 

0 

0     1     3 

0 

1     4 

Soap      -       -      -      - 

0 

0 

6 

0     0 

8 

0     0     9^ 

0 

0  10 

Window  Lights  (30 

winds. )      -       -      - 

3 

10 

0 

7  10 

0 

12  12  0 

12 

12  0 

Candles      -     -     -     - 

0 

0 

6 

0     0 

8 

0     0     9^ 

0 

0  10^ 

Poor  Rates  per  Qr.   - 

0 

1 

0 

0     2 

6 

0     3     0 

0 

5     0 

8 

4 

0 

16  2 

8 

22  9     4 

25 

14   \\ 

As  far  as  the  items  included  in  this  estimate  are  concerned, 
and  they  appear  to  be  correctly  stated,  they  exhibit  an  increase 


1799— 1S03.  229 

But  simple  and  obvdoLis  as  were  the  causes  of 
the  great  advance  of  prices,  there  were  persons 
who  then  denied,  or  professed  to  doubt  the  exist- 
ence of  scarcity  to  account  for  the  high  prices,  as 
there  have  been  persons  who,  in  more  recent  times, 
have  denied  the  existence  of  abundance  as  ac- 
counting for  a  fall  of  prices.  And  a  complete  pa- 
rallel may  be  found,  mutatis  mutandis,  in  the  argu- 
ments against  the  belief  in  scarcity  at  that  time, 
to  tiiose  which  more  recently  have  been  lu'ged 
against  the  belief  in  abundance. 

The  following  extracts  from  a  pamphlet,  pub- 
lished by  Mr.  Boyd,  in  the  form  of  a  letter  to 
Mr.  Pitt,  in  the  autumn  of  1800,  which  attracted 
considerable  attention  at  the  time,  may  serve  as 
specimens  of  ingenious  arguments,  brought  forward 
to  disprove  the  most  palpable  facts,  and  to  substi- 
tute for  til  em  a  perfectly  unfounded  hypothesis. 

Nearly  at  the  outset  (page  3.)  the  writer  states 
his  suspicion  "that  the  increase  of  prices  of  almost 
all  articles  of  necessity,  convenience,  and  luxury, 
and,  indeed,  of  almost  every  species  of  exchangeable 
value,  which  had  been  gradually*  taking  place  dur- 
ing the  last  two  years,  and  which  had  recently  arrived 
at  so  great  a  height,  proceeded  chiefly  from  the  addi- 
tion to  the  circulating  medium,  which  he  conceived 
to  have  been  made  by  the  issue  of  bank  notes,  un- 
controlled by  the  obligation  of  paying  them  on  de- 
mand," He  then  proceeds,  in  terms  which  have 
been  almost  verbally  repeated,  in  recent  times,  by 
persons  who  apply  the  doctrine  of  depreciation  to 
the  state  of  prices  throughout  the  whole  period  of 
the  suspension  of  cash  payments:  — 


of  about  200  per  cent,  in  1800,  compared  with  1773,  and  this 
was  before  any  material  difference  between  paper  and  gold  had 
become  observable. 

*  A  rise  of  100  to  200  per  cent,,  in  two  years,  can  hardly 
be  called  gradual. 

Q   3 


230  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Can  you,  sir,  or  any  man,  assign  any  cause  sufficiently  ge- 
neral in  its  effects  and  powerful  in  its  operation,  to  account  for 
a  change  so  general  in  the  prices  of  all,  or  very  nearly  all, 
articles  of  necessity,  convenience,  and  luxury,  as  well  as  of 
every  species  of  property  or  exchangeable  value,  within  so  short 
a  space  of  time,  except  the  one  to  which  I  attribute  it?  I  by 
no  means  pretend  that  the  high  price  of  grain  (which  the  ge- 
neral voice  seems  to  attribute  to  the  effect  of  an  unfavourable 
season)  is  solely  occasioned  by  the  general  cause  of  excess  of 
paper  circulation,  not  founded  as  all  paper  circulation  ought  to 
be,  in  the  precious  metals.  I  only  contend,  that  if  there  be 
(as  is  alleged)  a  real  scarcity  of  grain,  the  effects  of  this  scarcity 
must  be  very  much  increased  by  the  general  cause  which  I  con- 
ceive to  have  produced  the  general  rise  of  the  price  of  every 
thing.  Your  mind  must  look  down  with  scorn  upon  the  stale 
and  inadequate  causes  of  the  high  price  of  provisions  which  have 
been  assigned  for  it  by  some  men,  more  distinguished  by  their 
station  than  their  acquirements.  You  well  know  that  partial 
causes  never  can  produce  general  effects.  You  cannot  fail  to 
have  sought  for  a  great  and  general  cause  for  the  solution  of  the 
phenomenon  which  excites  the  general  wonder.  That  pheno- 
menon, I  again  assert,  in  all  probability,  arises  from  an  increase  of 
the  representative  signs  of  money  totally  disproportioned  to  the 
time  in  which  it  has  been  effected,  and  to  any  progress  Avhich 
the  industry  of  the  country  can  possibly  have  made  within  that 
time  ;  and  such  an  increase  never  could  have  existed  but  for  the 
rash  attempt  to  extend  the  empire  of  credit  beyond  those  limits 
which  the  eternal  laws  of  nature  had  marked  out  for  it. 

A  great  rise  has  taken  place  in  every  species  of  exchangeable 
value  during  the  short  period  of  two  years.  The  public  mind 
is  on  the  rack  to  discover  the  cause  of  this  rise,  of  which  the 
most  alarming  effects  are  manifested  in  the  article  of  bread. 
One  says  that  there  is  a  real  scarcity  of  grain,  owing  to  an  un- 
commonly bad  season  last  year,  and  a  scanty  crop  this  year. 
How  this  knowledge  was  acquired,  I  am  utterly  ignorant ;  but 
as  it  comes  from  a  noble  duke,  (alluding  to  a  letter  addressed  by 
the  Duke  of  Portland  to  the  lord  lieutenant  of  the  county  of 
Oxford,)  high  in  the  administration  of  the  internal  affairs  of  this 
country,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  it  was  not  promulgated  on 
slight  or  doubtful  grounds.  This,  however,  I  must  be  permitted 
to  say,  that  if  there  did  exist  sufficient  reason  to  believe  the 
scarcity  to  be  real,  the  influence  of  that  cause  cannot  have  lost 
any  of  its  force  by  the  extraordinary  publicity  given  to  it. 

Another  says,  there  is  no  scarcity;  but  a  set  of  forestallers 
and  regraters  have  monopolised  the  grain  of  the  country,  and 
sell  it  out  at  such  prices  as  they  think  proper  to  fix  from  time 
to  time." 

The  writer  very  justly  ridicules  and  reprobates 


1799—1803.  231 

tliis  absurd  and  unjust  clamour,  but  at  greater 
length  than  the  topic  is  worth,  and  then  con- 
tinues :  — 

"  The  opinion  of  a  third  person  is,  that  tlie  scarcity  and  high 
price  of  bread  corn  proceed  from  a  great  addition  made  to  the 
popuhition  of  the  country.  How  such  a  cause  should  so  sud- 
denly produce  an  effect  of  such  magnitude  does,  I  own,  exceed 
m}'  comprehension.  At  what  period  the  seeds  of  this  extra- 
ordinary increase  were  sown  I  cannot  even  guess ;  but  it  is 
necessary  to  suppose  that  there  must  have  been  some  one  or 
two  years  of  uncommon  fecundity,  in  order  to  account  for  the 
extraordinary  addition  to  our  population  which,  in  this  parti- 
cular year,  has  so  greatly  enhanced  the  price  of  corn.  The  pro- 
gress of  population,  like  the  growth  of  an  individual,  is  so  gradual 
and  imperceptible  as  to  escape  the  notice  of  the  most  vigilant  ob- 
server, otherwise  than  in  its  eff'ects ;  and,  as  in  the  growth  of  an 
individual  it  can  never  happen  to  any  parent  to  be  surprised  with 
a  child  of  two  years  old  starting  into  the  dimensions  of  one  of 
twelve,  so,  in  my  humble  opinion,  it  is  not  probable  that  it 
should  happen  to  any  country  to  find  its  population,  in  one  or 
two  years,  made  such  an  extraordinary  shoot  as  only  could 
have  been  expected  in  half  a  century;  and  yet  such  a  shoot  it 
must  have  made,  if  an  increased  population  be  admitted  as  the 
cause  of  the  very  high  price  of  provisions  in  this  particular  j'ear. 

By  a  fourth,  the  high  price  of  provisions  is  placed  to  the 
account  of  the  war.  This  is  a  good  general  head  for  carr3'ing 
all  doubtful  points  to,  —  all  unappropriated  disasters,  all  stray 
calamities  and  incidental  disappointments  of  every  description. 
I  shall  not  touch  upon  this  extensive  subject  further  than  to  say, 
that  I  see  nothing  in  the  mode  of  conducting  this  ivar,  during 
the  last  two  or  three  years,  which  ought  to  occasion  any  result 
aff"ecting  provisions,  different  from  what  all  other  Avars,  and  this 
very  war  during  the  first  four  years  of  its  duration,  have  gener- 
ally produced.  Whether  the  mode  by  which  the  means  of  car- 
rying on  the  war  have  been  raised,  have  or  have  not  contributed 
to  the  high  price  of  corn,  as  well  as  of  every  other  necessarj'  of 
life,  is  quite  another  consideration,  and  belongs  to  the  general 
object  of  this  inquiry,  which  is,  to  consider  the  influence  of  the 
present  paper  currency  on  the  prices  of  commodities  in  general. 
It  is  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose  of  estimating  the  credit 
due  to  the  assertion,  that  the  high  price  of  grain  is  occasioned 
hi/  the  ivar,  to  say,  that  no  such  conclusion  is  warranted  by  what 
has  happened  in  other  wars. 

It  has  been  reserved  for  me  to  assign,  as  the  cause  of  tlie 
general  rise  which  almost  all  things  have  experienced  within 
the  last  two  or  three  years  (and  which  grain,  as  the  article  that 
comes  most  frequently  in  contact  with  money,  feels  the  soonest 
and  the  most),  the  existence  of  a  great  bank,  invested  with  the 

Q   4 


232  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

power  of  issuing  paper,  professing  to  be  payable  on  demand,  but 
which,  in  fact,  the  bank  which  issues  it  is  not  obhged  to  pay." 

These  are  the  very  arguments  conveyed  in  the 
lanffuaa^e  almost  verbatim  et  literatim^  of  the  more 
modern  partisans  of  the  doctrine  of  indefinite  de- 
preciation of  the  currency  during  the  Bank  restric- 
tion. There  is  the  same  disposition  to  profess  to 
doubt,  or  utterly  to  deny,  the  existence  of  the  fact 
of  scarcity  arising  from  political  and  physical 
causes,  in  spite  of  evidence  the  most  conclusive  in 
the  case  of  every  description  of  produce,  that  ex- 
hibited so  great  an  advance  of  price,  in  the  period 
under  consideration. 

The  writer  of  the  letter,  here  quoted,  is  a 
striking  instance  of  the  degree  in  which  the  de- 
sire to  maintain  a  tenet  hastily  adopted  is  apt 
to  render  a  person,  otherwise  well  informed,  blind 
or  averse  to  see  the  most  palpable  facts  passing 
around  him,  which,  if  seen  or  known  at  all,  must 
be  conclusive  against  him.  Else  how  could  it  be 
possible,  that,  whether  as  an  extensive  merchant, 
and  much  in  society,  and  still  more  as  a  member 
of  the  very  parliament  which  was  then  sitting, 
and  engaged  in  collecting  the  most  extensive 
information  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  on  the 
state  of  the  crops,  and  the  stock  of  provisions, 
he  could  seriously  entertain  a  doubt  of  the  exist- 
ence of  great  scarcity,  arising  from  two  conse- 
cutive remarkably  deficient  harvests,  is  wholly 
inconceivable.  But  what  would  be  still  more  mar- 
vellous, if  it  had  not  also  its  parallel  among  other- 
wise well-informed  persons  at  a  later  period  is,  that 
neither  in  Mr.  Boyd's  letter,  nor  in  the  publica- 
tions in  answer  to  him,  is  the  slightest  notice  taken 
of  the  important  fact,  that,  coincidently  with  the 
rising  prices  of  provisions,  and  of  other  Euro- 
pean produce,  all  Colonial  and  American  produce 
(rice  excepted),  which  during  the  three  preceding 
years  had  been  rising,  wdiile  corn  was  falling,  de- 


1799—1803.  QS3 

clined  rapidly  in  1799  and  1800,  while  com  was 
rapidly  rising ;  and  all  transatlantic  produce  was, 
at  the  date  of  that  letter,  in  a  state  of  great  depres- 
sion. 


Section  4.  — Great  Fall  of  the  Prices  of  Trans- 
atlantic Produce  from  the  Spring  o/'1799  to  the 
Spring  of  ISOl. 

In  the  examination  of  prices,  in  the  interval  end- 
ing in  1798,  we  have  seen  that  colonial  produce 
had  begun  to  rise  in  1796,  in  consequence  of  a 
demand  from  Germany,  and  that  the  demand  which 
had  become  extremely  speculative,  continuing  on 
an  increasing  scale,  the  prices  had  reached  an  un- 
precedented height  at  the  close  of  1798.  In  a 
few  instances,  the  rise  was  continued  through  the 
first  three  months  of  1799.  As  usual,  in  such 
cases,  the  consumption  of  the  commodities,  which 
liad  been  the  objects  of  speculation,  was  reduced 
by  the  advanced  cost,  and  consequently  proved  to 
be  much  less  than  had  been  anticipated,  while  the 
supplies  were  much  larger. 

The  prices  thenceforward  began  to  fall ;  and,  as  the 
circulation  by  bills  of  exchange  and  other  forms  of 
credit  had  expanded  with  and  promoted  the  rise  of 
prices,  so  it  was  contracted  by,  and  in  its  turn  acce- 
lerated the  fall  of  prices  until  the  final  adjustment  to 
the  metallic  standard.  This  process  was  attended 
with  very  disastrous  results  in  the  great  commercial 
towns  of  Germany  and  Holland.  The  number 
of  houses  that  failed  at  Hamburg,  between  August 
and  November,  1799,  was  eighty-two,  and  the 
amount  of  their  engagements  upwards  of  twenty- 
nine  million  five  hundred  thousand  banco  marks,  or 
about  two  million  five  hundred  thousand  pounds. 
The  rate  of  discount  at  Hamburg  rose  during  that 
interval  to  1.5  per  cent,  per  annum. 


234  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  fall  of  prices  and  the  commercial  failures 
in  Germany  entailed  a  corresponding  fall  of  prices 
in  this  country,  and  discredit  and  failures  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  not  only  among  the  houses  im- 
mediately embarked  in  the  trade  with  that  part  of 
the  Continent,  but  also  of  some  eminent  houses  in 
the  West  India  trade.  The  following  extracts,  from 
printed  commercial  reports  of  that  period,  convey  a 
description  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  fall 
of  prices  of  colonial  produce  :  — 

"1st  October,   1799 The   trade  of  this   country  with  the 

principal  part  of  Europe  having  of  late  been  confined  almost 
wholly  to  one  channel,  the  unusual  flow  of  business  it  produced 
to  those  places  through  which  it  was  carried  on,  led  many 
persons  to  extend  their  concerns  in  a  degree  to  which  their 
capital  was  inadequate,  and  encouraged  a  spirit  of  adventure 
and  speculation,  particularly  in  the  chief  articles  of  sugar  and 
other  West  India  produce,  which  at  length  has  been  carried  too 
far  ;  the  consequence  of  which  has  been  the  failure  of  some 
considerable  houses  at  Hamburgh  and  other  places,  which  has 
affected  their  connections  in  this  country,  so  far  as  to  cause 
the  stoppage  of  several  houses  which  had  hitherto  maintained 
no  small  degree  of  commercial  reputation." 

"  IstNovember,  1799. — The  embarrassments  of  the  merchants 
at  Hamburgh  have  increased  to  an  alarming  degree  ;  and  during 
the  whole  month  of  October  every  mail  that  has  arrived  has  added 
several  names  to  the  unfortunate  list  of  houses  which  have  stopped 
payment  in  that  city,  where  there  are  scarcely  any  persons  in  the 
mercantile  line^  whatever  may  be  their  wealth  and  connexions, 
who  have  not  experienced  considerable  difficulties,  while  the  ef- 
fects there  of  have  extended  to  Bremen, Frankfort,  Amsterdam,  and 
many  other  of  the  principal  trading  towns  on  the  Continent.  The 
general  and  extensive  connexion  which  has  of  late  subsisted  be- 
tween the  greater  part  of  our  merchants  and  those  of  Hamburgh, 
naturally  excited  apprehensi-ons  of  the  most  serious  consequences 
in  this  countiy,  which  have  been  in  part  too  justly  verified  by 
the  failure  of  several  commercial  houses,  in  addition  to  those 
alluded  to  in  our  last  report.  The  loss  of  the  Lutine  frigate, 
which  had  on  board  600,000  dollars,  destined  for  Hamburgh, 
has  been  a  very  unfortunate  circumstance,  both  in  itself,  and, 
with  respect  to  the  object  in  view,  as  it  must  occasion  a  great 
disappointment,  and  delay  the  intended  relief  considerably." 

The  losses  connected  with  the  Hamburg  failures, 
and  the  great  fall  of  prices  of  West  India  produce, 


1799—1803.  235 

seem  to  have  been  felt  with  peculiar  severity  in 
Liverpool.  Mention  is  made  in  the  Annual  Re- 
gister of 

"  An  act  passed  in  the  parliament  which  met  in  the  autumn 
of  1799,  granting  a  loan  of  500,000/.  in  exchequer  bills  to  the 
West  India  merchants  in  Liverpool,  in  order  to  avert  the  evils 
which  hung  over  their  heads  from  very  heavy  failures  in  Ham- 
burgh. Security  was  given  for  this  loan,  in  property  in  their 
warehouses  amounting  to  upwards  of  two  millions." 

The  subjoined  statement  will  show  the  extent 
of  the  depression  of  transatlantic  produce,  which 
took  place  between  the  spring  of  1799  and  the 
spring  of  1801,  being  the  interval  during  wliich 
all  European  produce  had  been  rising,  and  had 
reached  an  unprecedented  height :  — 

Coffee,  Jam.  Sup.,  per  cwt. 
Sugar,  Muscov.  Jam.,  do.     • 

,  East  India,  white,  do. 

Saltpetre,  do. 
Cochineal  per  lb. 
Cotton,  Bowed  Georgia   - 
Indigo,  East  India,  superior 
Spices,  Cinnamon 

5  Pepper 

Tobacco,  Virginia 
Logwood,  per  ton 
Rum,  per  gallon 

Tlie  prices  of  most  of  our  manufactured  articles 
likewise  experienced  a  considerable  fall  in  the  in- 
terval from  1799  to  1801.  The  following  is  from 
a  Monthly  Commercial  Report,  dated  1st  April, 
1801:  — 

"  The  trade  of  Birmingham  is  in  a  very  distressed  situation. 
A  large  proportion  of  the  workmen  are  entirely  out  of  employ  ; 
and  those  who  still  have  work  have  the  utmost  difficulty  to 
gain  a  subsistence,  from  the  exorbitant  price  of  all  kinds  of 
provisions.  The  ribbon  trade  of  Coventry  is  in  a  most  deplor- 
able state ;  and  the  woollen  trade  of  Yorkshire,  if  possible,  still 
worse."  * 

*  So  much  for  the  assertion  so  confidently  made  in  Mr,  Boyd's 
letter,  that  "  a  great  rise  had  taken  place  in  the  price  of  every 


17J 

)8-9. 

1800-1. 

185*. 

to  1965. 

116*.  to  130s. 

-    693. 

-  87*. 

28*.  -     50*. 

96s. 

-  115*. 

50*.  -     70*. 

UOs. 

-   U5*. 

60*.  -     61*. 

52s. 

-  54-*. 

14*.  -  19*. 

3s.  6d. 

-  4*.  6d. 

1*.  5d.  -  2s.  8d. 

lis. 

-  13s.  9d. 

8s.  -  9*.  6c?. 

8s. 

-  10*. 

4*.  -  5*. 

_ 

-  '22d. 

ISd. 

1 1  kd. 

-  \6d. 

id.  -         5d. 

48/. 

-  501. 

121.  -  151. 

7*.  2d. 

-  8s. 

3s.  -  5s.  6d, 

236  TRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

But  it  is  not  this  great  fall  only  of  prices  of  so 
many,  and  so  important,  articles  of  consumption, 
that  affords  a  negative  of  the  presumption  of  the 
agency  ofso  general  a  cause,  as  that  of  the  currency 
or  war-demand,  —  in  the  rise  which  took  place  from 
the  spring  of  1799  to  the  spring  of  1801,  in  the 
prices  of  provisions,  and  of  other  articles  of  Eu- 
ropean produce;  for  it  will  now  be  seen,  that,  upon 
the  cessation  or  abatement  of  the  operation  of  the 
seasons,  and  of  obstructions  to  importation,  the 
prices  of  provisions,  and  of  other  objects  of  ex- 
change (labour  alone  excepted)  which  had  so  risen, 
fell,  and  continued  to  fall  till  they  subsided  to  the 
level  from  which  they  had  been  raised. 


Section  5.  — Fall  of  the  Prices  of  Provisions  from 
the  Spring  of  1801  to  the  Close  of  1803. 

As  the  several  steps  of  the  rise  in  the  prices  of 
provisions  to  so  extraordinary  an  elevation  have 
been  noticed,  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  trace 
the  circumstances  leading  to  the  fall. 

After  the  great  elevation   of  prices  had  been 

species  of  exchangeable  value,  during  the  short  period  of  two 
years."  I  am  at  the  same  time  incHned  to  beheve,  that  tlie  writer 
expressed  what  was  really  the  impression  on  his  mind  ;  for  I  find 
that  even  among  men  of  business  there  is  a  very  great  vagueness 
of  recollection  within  even  moderately  short  periods,  of  the  order 
of  time,  within  which  large  classes  of  produce  have  fluctuated  rela- 
tively, each  to  the  other;  and  a  preponderating  impression,  pro- 
duced by  the  attention  having  been  at  the  time  drawn  more  to  one 
than  the  other,  is  applied  to  the  whole  mass,  although  it  maybe, 
as  it  was  in  the  case  here  alluded  to,  and  again  in  more  recent 
periods,  that  while  the  prices  of  one  great  class  of  commo- 
dities has  been  rising,  another  has  been  falling  in  nearly  the 
same  ratio.  The  simple  fact  of  the  opposite  tendencies,  more 
especially  where  in  each  case  the  tendency  may  be  explained, 
"*  by  distinct  circumstances  producing  it,  destroys  the  conclu- 
sion derived  exclusively  from  one  only  of  those  tendencies,  as 
to  the  universality  of  the  operation  of  a  given  cause." 


1799—1803.  237 

reached  in  Marcli,  1801,  the  aspect  of  thmgs, 
both  as  to  the  influence  of  the  seasons  and  the 
state  of  jDohtics,  experienced  a  marked  change  for 
the  better. 

The  winter  had  been  less  rigorous  than  the  two 
preceding.  The  seed  time,  both  for  wheat  and 
spring  corn,  had  been  favourable,  and  an  increased 
breadth  of  cultivation  was  in  progress.  The  spring 
of  1801  was  genial,  and  the  crops  were  forward 
and  promising.  The  death  of  the  emperor  Paul 
of  Russia,  and  the  peace  with  Denmark,  which 
followed  the  battle  of  Copenhagen,  had  re-opened 
the  navigation  of  the  Baltic  to  British  shipping,  thus 
removing  the  obstruction  which  had  been  appre- 
hended to  supplies  from  thence  ;  and  the  bounty, 
therefore,  with  the  high  prices,  insured  a  large 
importation  of  corn. 

Under  these  improved  prospects  of  future  sup- 
ply, the  markets  gave  way  rapidly.  The  averages 
of  corn  in  England  and  Wales,  on  the  30th  of 
June,  1801,  were, — 

For  Wheat  -  -     129*.  8^. 

Barley         -  -       69*.  Id, 

Oats  -  -       37*.  2f/. 

The  harvest  proving  to  be  of  moderate  abundance 
had,  with  the  large  importation*,  the  effect  of  re- 
ducing the  averages  by  the  end  of  1801 1,  to 

7.5*.  6(/.  for  wheat ; 
44.9.  for  barley  ;  and 
23*.  A>d.  for  oats  ; 

*  The  importations  in  1801  were,  of 

Wheat  -  1,424,766  quarters. 

Barley  -  113,966 

Oats         -         -  583,043 

•j-  The  preliminaries  of  peace  with  France,  which  were  signed 
in  October,  1801,  do  not  appear  to  have  had  any  material  in- 
fluence in  accelerating  the  fall,  the  greater  part  of  which  had, 
indeed,  taken  place  before  that  event,  which,  however,  was 
calculated  to  extend  the  sources  of  supply,  and  to  diminish  the 
cost  of  importation. 


238  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

being  a  fall  of  upwards  of  50  per  cent,  since  the 
month  of  March  preceding.  Beans  and  peas  fell 
in  the  like  proportion ;  but  meat  continued  to  be 
dear,  because  tlie  stock  of  cattle  and  sheep,  which 
had  been  reduced  by  the  previous  scarcities,  had 
not  time  to  be  restored. 

It  may  here  be  observed,  as  an  instance  of  the 
imperfect  information,  and  the  fallacy  as  to  any  cor- 
rect conclusion,  to  be  derived  from  a  mere  refer- 
ence to  annual  averages,  that,  although  the  year 
1801  saw  the  termination  of  the  great  dearth, 
that  it  was  in  fact  a  comparatively  abundant  sea- 
son, and  that  it  was  signalised  by  a  fall  of  upwards 
of  50  per  cent,  in  prices,  it  yet  passes,  according 
to  the  yearly  averages  of  the  price  of  wheat,  for  the 
dearest  of  the  whole  series ;  while  1799?  which 
was  the  most  disastrously  sterile,  might  from  sucli 
reference  be  inferred  to  have  been  but  slightly 
deficient.     Thus, 

1799,  yearly  average       -         -     67.^.  Qd. 

1800,  -  -  -         -  llSs.  7^. 

1801,  -  -         -         -  118*.  Sd. 

The  seasons  of  1802  and  1803  were  considered  to 
be  of  ordinary,  and  certainly  not  of  superabundant, 
produce ;  but  they  had  the  effect  of  progressively 
depressing  the  prices  of  grain.  The  averages  at 
the  close  of  1802  were,  — 

For  Wheat  -         -  57.9.  Id. 

Barley         -         -  25*.  7^. 
Oats  -  -  20.9. 

And  notwithstanding  the  renewal  of  the  war 
with  France  early  in  1803,  the  fall  of  prices  con- 
tinued, with  only  trifling  oscillations,  to  the  close 
of  that  year,  when  the  averages  were,  — 

For  Wheat         -         -         -  52*.  Sd. 
Barley         -         -  -  23*.  11^. 

Oats         -  -  -  21*.  Id. 


1799—1803.  239 

In  the  course  of  the  three  first  months  of  1804, 
the  price  of  wheat  experienced  a  further  decHne  to 
49.V.  Qd.  But  the  foregoing  quotations  sufficiently 
estabUsh  the  fact,  that  by  the  end  of  1803  a  com- 
plete subsidence  had  taken  place  in  the  prices  of 
grain,  to  the  level  from  which  they  had  been  dis- 
turbed ;  and  if  the  very  low  prices  at  which  barley 
and  oats  ranged  in  1803  be  taken  into  the  account, 
it  is  manifest  that  grain  generally  was  then  as 
cheap  as,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  months,  it 
has  been  in  the  whole  period  following  the  peace, 
and  since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments.* 


Section  6.  —  On  the  State  of  the  Circulation  from 
1799  to  1803. 

We  have  now  to  see  how  far  the  state  of  the  cir- 
culation, during  this  interval,  differed  from  what  it 
might  be  supposed  to  have  been,  if  the  paper  had 
been  convertible  under  the  usual  system  pursued 
by  the  Bank  ;  and  how  far  there  exist  any  grounds 
for  thinking  that  the  rise  of  prices  was  caused  by 
an  increase  and  the  subsequent  fliU  by  a  diminu- 
tion of  the  quantity  of  money. 

The  currency,  at  the  outset  of  1799,  may  be  con- 
sidered as  having  been  at  its  strict  bullion  level  with 
the  rest  of  the  commercial  world,  or,  if  any  thing, 
at  a  somewhat  higher  value,  inasmuch  as  the  ex- 
change on  Hamburg,  from  January  to  March  of 

*  The  prices  of  meat  declined  slowly.  The  extreme  dryness 
of  the  summer  of  1803  had  made  turnips  and  cattle  food  gene- 
rally scarce  and  dear.  The  quotations  at  the  close  of  that 
year  were, 

Beef,  in  Smithfield,  -  -  -  4*.  to  5s.  4o^ 

Mutton,  -  -  -  45.  to  45.  6d. 

But  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  prices  continued  to  fall  in  the  in- 
terval, which  is  to  come  next  under  consideration. 

The  prices  of  commodities,  exclusive  of  provisions,  were  not 
marked  in  1 803  by  any  such  variations  as  to  require  particular 
notice. 


240 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


that  year  was  37s.  7f^M  being  higher  than  it  had 
been  for  any  length  of  time  before  the  restriction. 
And  it  may  be  instanced,  as  a  proof  that  the 
directors  considered  the  position  of  the  Bank  to 
be  such  as,  but  for  the  restriction,  which  from 
poHtical  considerations  the  government  were  in- 
duced to  continue,  would  admit  of  their  paying  in 
specie,  that  on  the  3d  of  January,  1799,  the  fol- 
lowing notice  was  given  :  — 

"  That  on  and  after  the  l^th  instant,  the  Bank  will  pay  in 
cash  all  fractional  sums  under  five  pounds;  and  that  on  and  after 
the  1st  of  February  next,  the  Bank  will  pay  cash  for  all  notes  of 
one  and  two  pounds  value,  that  are  dated  prior  to  1st  July, 
1798,  or  exchange  them  for  new  notes,  at  the  option  of  the 
holder." 

The  position  of  the  Bank  on  the  28th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1799,  being  two  full  years  after  the  restric- 
tion, was  as  follows  :  — 

Circulation  of  Bank  notes 

of  51.  and  upwards,  and  Securities. 

Bank  post  bills       -        -  11,494,150     Public     -     11,510,677 

Under  5/.          -             -  1,465,650     Private     -      5,528,353 


Deposits 
Liabilities 


12,959,800 
8,131,820     Bullion 


17,039,030 
7,563,900 


21,091,620     Assets      -   24,602,930 


The  stock  of  bullion  was  thus  in  the  proportion 
of  more  than  one  third  of  the  liabilities,  and  was, 
in  fact,  larger  than  the  Bank  had  ever  before  (with 
the  exception  of  two  years,  from  August,  1789,  to 
August,  1791)  possessed. 

After  this  period  there  arose  a  combination  of  cir- 
cumstances, which  entailed  the  necessity  for  the  pay- 
ment of  unusually  large  sums  abroad.  The  violent 
commercial  revulsion,  which  took  place  at  Hamburg 
in  the  autumn  of  1799, 1'equired,  on  the  part  of  the 
merchants  here,  an  immediate  transmission  of  funds 
to  a  very  large  amoimt.  Good  bills  to  a  sufficient 
extent  (many  of  the  German  houses  here  being  in 


1799—1803.  241 

a  state  of  discredit)  could  not  be  procured,  and 
would  not,  if  obtained,  have  been  negotiable  at 
Hamburgh,  at  the  moment  of  such  a  suspension  of 
credit,  the  rate  of  discount  there  having  risen  to 
15  per  cent,  per  annum,  at  which  only  the  best 
bills,  and  to  a  limited  amount,  could  be  made 
available.  The  only  alternative  was  to  send  bul- 
lion, which  was  accordingly  exported  (chiefly 
silver)  in  large  quantities. 

The  harvest  in  this  country  had,  as  has  been 
seen,  failed  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  require  an 
unusually  large  importation  of  corn,  which,  as  it 
was  scarce  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  and  in  Ame- 
rica, could  only  be  obtained  at  very  high  prices. 
The  war  on  the  Continent,  by  the  second  coalition 
against  France,  had  been  resumed  on  so  large  a 
scale,  in  the  summer  of  1799,  as  of  itself  to  create 
a  great  absorption  of  gold  and  silver  for  the  mili- 
tary chests ;  and  it  was,  moreover,  accompanied 
by  subsidies  to  Russia  and  Austria.  The  celebrated 
expedition,  too,  under  the  Duke  of  York,  to  the 
Helder,  in  the  autumn  of  1799,  contributed  to 
swell  the  amount  of  foreign  payments. 

Under  this  combination  of  extraordinary  cir- 
cumstances requiring  an  immediate  transmission  of 
such  enormous  sums  abroad,  while  the  currencies 
of  the  principal  commercial  cities  of  the  Continent 
of  Europe  luere  greatlij  contracted  by  the  state  of 
mercantile  discredit,  and  by  the  demand  for  specie 
for  the  purposes  of  the  war,  the  exchanges  fell, 
without  any  previous  enlargement  of  the  Bank 
issues  worth  mentioning,  and  with  an  actual 
amount  of  circulation  below  what,  with  reference 
to  the  state  of  its  treasure,  the  Bank  would  have 
been  justified  in  issuing,  previous  to  these  occur- 
rences. 

The  following  are  the  quarterly  average  amounts 
of  the  Bank  of  England  notes  of  five  pounds  and 
upwards,  for  1799,  with  the  exchanges,  and  the 

II 


242  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

prices  of  gold  and  wheat  at  the  close  of  each  quar- 
ter :  — 

Ex.  on  Hainb.  Gold.  Wheat. 

March  25.   11,585,210     37*.  5d.  31.  17s.  9d.  52s.  6d. 

June     25.  12,118,690     36*.  —  3/.  175.  9^.  64*.  4d. 

Sept.    25.12,155,360     325.9c?.  No  price.  8O5.  8^. 

Dec.     25.  12,335,920     325.  6c?.  to  31 5. 6c?.  -  92*.  7d. 

It  will  here  be  observed,  that  a  great  fall  of  the 
exchange  (and  a  great  rise  in  the  price  of  wheat) 
took  place  by  the  end  of  September,  although  the  in- 
crease of  bank  notes,  as  compared  with  the  preceding 
quarter,  is  not  worth  notice,  and  that  the  circulation 
in  the  last  quarter  exceeded  that  of  the  two  preced- 
ing quarters,  by  only  the  insignificant  amount  of 
180,000/.,  while  the  exchange  was  lOper  cent,  lower, 
and  the  price  of  wheat  nearly  50  per  cent,  higher 
in  December  than  in  June.  But  considering  the 
state  of  commercial  discredit,  and  the  high  rate  of 
interest  which  prevailed  at  the  close  of  1799>  the 
presumption  is,  that  the  circulating  medium  was 
virtually  contracted,  and  that  the  value  of  money 
was  increased. 

It  is  true,  that  supposing  the  regulation  of  the 
issues  to  have  been  under  a  very  vigilant  and 
correct  system  of  management,  with  a  view  to 
preserve  the  value  of  the  paper  on  a  level  with 
its  standard,  the  Directors  would,  in  consequence 
of  the  great  fall  in  the  exchanges,  and  the  con- 
sequent drain  of  their  treasure,  have  reduced 
their  circulation  at  the  close  of  1799,  and  at  any 
rate  they  would  not  have  extended  it  as  they 
did  then,  and  further  under  a  still  increasing 
pressure  of  foreign  payments  in  1800.  But  in  the 
first  place,  the  exchanges  would  not  have  fallen  so 
much  if  the  Bank  had  then  been  paying  in  specie, 
inasmuch  as  the  gold  drawn  from  it  for  export- 
ation, would  in  so  far  have  diminished  the  demand 
for  bills.  And,  in  the  next  place,  judging  by  the 
conduct  of  the  Bank  in  178^,  and  again  in  1795, 
when  in  the  face  of  a  similar  fall  of  the  exchange, 
the  issues  were  extended  instead  of  being  con- 


1799—1803.  243 

tracted,  the  probability  is,  that  the  amount  of  the 
circulation  would  equally  have  been  extended  in 
1800.  As  in  point  of  fact  they  were  extended  by 
about  a  million  of  notes  of  51.  and  upwards,  as 
compared  with  1799,  or  by  a  million  and  a  half,  as 
compared  with  the  three  years  ending  in  1795,  the 
average  amount,  in  1800,  having  been  13,421,920.* 

*  It  was  upon  the  extension  of  the  issues  of  the  Bank,  in  1800, 
that  the  first  important  controversy  respecting  their  influence 
on  prices  arose.  The  letter  of  Mr.  Boyd  on  the  subject  has 
ah-eady  been  noticed,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  rise  of  prices.  In 
a  postcript  dated  31st  December,  1800,  he  adds  :  — 

"  By  the  return  to  an  order  of  the  House  of  Commons,  it  appears 
that  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  in  circulation  was  15,450,970/., 
which  exceeds  the  sum  in  circulation  on  the  the  26th  February, 
1797,  (viz.,  8,640,250,  by  nearly  four  fifths  of  that  circulation). 
Compared  with  the  average  circulation  of  three  years,  ending 
December,  1795;  viz.,  11,975,573,  the  circulation  on  the  6th  of 
December,  1800,  exceeds  that  average  circulation  by  nearly 
three  tenths  of  its  amount."  "The  exchange  with  Hamburgh, 
which,  when  this  letter  was  written,  was  S\s.  \0d.,  is  now 
29*.  \0d.,  by  which  means  the  difference  which  then  existed 
of  nearly  9  per  cent,  against  our  currency  is  now  increased  to 
upwards  of  l^  per  cent.  If,  therefoi'C,  a  person  residing  on  the 
Continent  remit  funds  to  this  country  to  be  invested  in  the 
3  per  cents,  at  the  price  of  62.  it  is  evident  that  by  purchasing 
the  money  so  remitted  at  14  per  cent,  discount  the  real  price  of 
his  3  per  cents,  will  be  B^t^'^^  or  nearly  53^.  The  price  of  gold 
has  fortunately  not  advanced  in  the  same  proportion  within  the 
same  period.  The  price  which,  on  the  11th  Nov.  was  4/.  5s.  per 
ounce,  is  now  4/.  6s.,  which  is  little  more  than  \l  per  cent., 
thus  making  the  whole  premium  upon  gold  10/.  Ss.  8d.  for  every 
100/.  or  something  more  than  10  j%  per  cent." 

This  letter  of  Mi*.  Boyd's  elicited,  among  other  answers,  one 
from  Sir  Francis  Baring,  in  which,  after  observing  upon  the  in- 
consistency of  Mr.  Boyd,  who  had  been  at  the  head  of  those 
persons  that  had  remonstrated  on  the  insufficiency  of  the  circu- 
lation in  1796,  in  now  attributing  such  vast  effects  to  the  in- 
creased amount  of  the  Bank  issues,  has  the  following  apt  remark  : 

"  Perhaps  Mr.  Boyd  is  not  aware  in  what  manner  his  own 
quotations  and  his  own  arguments,  may  return  against  him, 
by  the  delay  of  a  few  days.  In  the  postcript,  dated  the  31st 
December,  1800,  he  observes,  that  since  his  letter  was  writ- 
ten, the  exchange  on  Hamburgh  had  fallen  from  3\s.  lOd.  to 
29s.  lOd.,  which  he  considers  as  an  additional  proof  of  what 
he  has  advanced.  In  that  case,  he  must  admit  that  when  the 
exchange   rises,    it  must  produce  a   comparatively  favourable 

R   2 


244  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

But  admitting  that  there  liad  been  the  increase 
of  issues,  by  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  utmost 

effect.  On  the  2d  of  January,  1801,  the  course  of  Hamburgh  is 
printed  29^.  8^/.,  and  on  the  SOth  of  January  it  is  printed  31^.  8d. 
—  a  difference  of  very  near  7  per  cent. ;  and  yet  we  do  not 
perceive  the  slightest  effect  it  has  produced  in  lowering  the 
price  of  provisions  or  other  commodities  grown  and  consumed  in 
Great  Britain,  and  affords  a  most  unequivocal  correct  answer  to 
the  whole  of  his  argument  with  regard  to  the  foreign  exchanges." 

Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  in  his  work  on  Paper  Credit,  makes  the 
following  remarks,  suggested  by  Mr.  Boyd's  publication  : — 

After  observing  that  the  two  millions  of  notes  under  51.  issued 
by  the  Bank  of  England  should  be  considered  as  mere  sub- 
stitutes for  the  guineas  which  they  displaced,  and  should  there- 
fore be  deducted  from  the  total  amount  of  the  Bank  issues,  in 
any  reasoning  upon  the  effect  produced  by  these  on  the  cir- 
culating medium,  he  proceeds  to  say,  "  I  have  to  consider  how 
far,  allowing  for  that  difference  of  two  millions  of  which  men- 
tion has  been  made,  the  circulating  quantity  of  Bank  of  Eng- 
land paper  has  lately  corresponded  with  that  of  antecedent 
periods.  The  average  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes  in 
circulation  during  three  j'cars  ending  in  1795,  appears  to  have 
been  11,975,573.  The  amount  in  circulation  on  the  20th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1797,  the  day  antecedent  to  the  suspension  of  the  cash 
payments  of  the  Bank,  has  been  already  stated  to  have  been 
about  8,600,000,  this  being  that  very  low  sum  to  which  they 
vv^ere  then  reduced.  By  a  statement  of  their  amount  on  the  6th 
of  December,  1800,  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons,  they  ap- 
pear to  have  been  then  15,450,970.  This  last  mentioned  sum  in- 
cludes *  the  two  millions  of  one  and  two-pound  notes.  If  these  two 
millions  are  deducted,  the  amount,  on  the  6th  of  December,  1800, 
will  exceed  the  average  amount  in  three  years  antecedent  to  the 
suspension  of  the  cash  payments  of  the  Bank,  by  1,4'75,397/. 
It  remains,  however,  to  be  observed,  that  the  notes  of  the  Bank 
of  England  were  stated  to  the  House  of  Commons  by  the  gover- 
nor of  that  company  in  the  spring  of  1 801,  to  have  been  then 
reduced  to  a  sum  less  by  about  a  million  and  a  half  than  their 
amount  on  the  6th  of  December,  ]  800.  The  total  quantity,  there- 
fore, of  the  Bank  of  England  notes  in  circulation  in  one  part  of 
the  spring  of  1801,  if  the  two  millions  be  deducted,  almost  exactly 
agrees  with  their  average  amount  during  the  three  years  ending 
December,  1795." 

*  By  a  return  to  Parliament  from  the  Bank,  dated  6th  Feb- 
ruary 1801,  the  amount  of  notes  under  51.  in  circulation 

From  25  November  to  25  December  1800,  was     2,148,700 
And  from  25  December  to  25  January  1801        -  2,519,400 


1799—1803.  245 

extent  of  Mr.  Boyd's  exaggerated  view  of  it,  and 
allowing  also  for  an  increase  of  the  country  circu- 
lation, it  can  hardly  be  considered  as  compensating 
for  the  chasm  which  must  have  been  caused  in  the 
metallic  circulation  by  the  clandestine  export  of 
guineas,  which  the  low  exchange  must  have  forced 
abroad. 

The  amount  of  gold  in  circulation,  before  the 
restriction,  was  by  a  moderate  computation,  twenty- 
two  millions  five  hundred  thousand  pounds  (by 
some  it  was  estimated  at  forty  millions).  Sup- 
posing, therefore,  eight  millions  to  have  remained 
in  circulation  in  1800  (an  outside  supposition), 
there  would  be  fourteen  millions  and  a  half,  at 
least,  to  be  replaced  by  Bank  of  England  and 
country  bank  notes.  Now  the  increase  of  the 
Bank  of  England  issues,  including  the  small  notes 
in  1800,  as  compared  with  the  three  years  ending 
in  1795,  was  somewhat  under  three  millions  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds,  and  it  would  be  a  most 
extravagant  estimate,  which  would  assume  an  in- 
crease in  that  interval  of  country  bank  notes  to 
the  extent  of  eleven  millions,  which  would  be 
requisite  to  make  up  the  difference.  Indeed,  the 
increase  to  that  extent,  if  it  took  place  at  all,  must 
have  been  effected  in  a  wonderfully  short  space  of 
time,  because,  as  has  been  seen,  there  had  been  a 
great  reduction  of  the  country  circulation  in  1796, 
and  from  that  time  till  after  the  commencement  of 
1799  there  was  not  much  facility  or  inducement 
for  its  increase.  The  subsequent  rise  of  prices,  no 
doubt,  favoured  the  extension  of  the  country  bank 
issues  *,  but  it  is  utterly  improbable,  or  rather  abso- 
lutely absurd,  to  suppose  that  it  can  have  been  toany- 

*  With  reference  to  the  country  bank  circulation  at  this  pe- 
riod, the  following  further  extract  from  Sir  Francis  Baring's 
answer  to  Mr.  Boyd  may  not  be  without  interest.  "  An  alarm 
has  been  raised  against  country  banks,  which  have  been  accused 
of  enabling  the  farmers  to  hoard  their  corn  by  making  them  ad- 

R    3 


2i6  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

thing  like  the  above  amount.  The  fair  conclusion, 
therefore  is,  that  the  quantity  of  money,  during 
the  range  of  high  prices  in  1799  and  1800,  although 
greater  than  could  be  maintained,  under  the  pres- 
sure of  demand  for  foreign  payments,  was  not  only 
not  increased,  but  was  probably  less  than  it  had 
been  in  the  three  years  ending  in  1795,  without 
taking  into  account  the  great  increase  of  trans- 
actions, and  consequently  of  the  functions  of 
money  that  must  have  taken  place  since  that  time. 
But,  whether  less  or  greater,  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
Directors  of  the  Bank  to  preserve  the  value  of 
their  paper  on  a  level  with  gold,  and  this  they 
could  not  have  done  without  contracting  their 
issues,  or,  at  least,  without  limiting  the  amount  in 
1800  to  what  it  had  been  in  1799.  It  is  very 
possible,  that  the  simple  limitation  to  that  amount 
might  have  effected  a  restoration  of  the  exchanges 
and  the  price  of  gold,  because,  notwithstanding 
the  enlargement  of  between  a  million  and  a  million 
and  a  half  of  notes  of  5l.  and  upwards  in  1800, 
the  exchanges  w^ere  not  materially  lower  than  they 
had  been  a,t  the  close  of  1799 ;  whence  it  should 
seem  that  an  increase  of  our  commercial  exports 


varices  of  money  :  but  tlie  inhabitants  of  this  metropolis  are  not 
aware  of  the  total  change  in  the  situation  of  the  country  banks, 
in  consequence  of  the  war.  Those  who  are  established  in  sea- 
ports and  great  manufacturing  towns  may  still  be  considered  as 
having  commercial  deposits  with  which  they  must,  in  preference, 
accommodate  their  commercial  friends  ;  but  the  general  mass 
of  banks  through  the  country  look  to  the  farmers  for  deposits 
and  support,  as  the  only  persons  who  have  money  to  employ. 
It  is  very  rare  that  a  farmer  wants  to  borrow  ;  but  the  instances 
are  not  rare  when  he  is  able  to  accommodate  even  his  landlord 
with  a  loan." 

In  truth,  such  were  the  enormous  gains  of  the  farmers  at  this 
time,  that,  while  their  credit  must  have  been  so  high  as  would 
have  enabled  them  to  borrow  to  any  amount  they  might  desire, 
it  is  not  conceivable  that  they  could  have  had  sufficient  motive 
for  borrowing  on  an  extensive  scale.  It  is  much  more  probable, 
and  Sir  F.  Baring  mentions  it  as  a  fact,  that  they  were  rather 
lenders  than  borrowers. 


1799—1803.  247 

was  in  progress  to  accommodate  itself  to  the  in- 
creased and  increasing  foreign  payments,  which 
were  going  forward  nnder  the  two  important  heads 
of  government  expenditure  abroad,  and  of  imports  * 
of  grain. 

The  question  here  occurs,  what  would  have  been 
the  effects  on  commercial  credit  and  prices,  and  on 
the  rate  of  interest,  if  the  issues  of  the  Bank  had 
been  so  limited  at  the  close  of  1799,  and  through 
1800,  as  to  have  preserved  the  value  of  the  paper  on 
a  level  with  gold  ? 

All  hypothetical  reasoning,  as  to  what  might 
have  been,  instead  of  what  ivas,  admits  of  wide 
difference  of  conclusion,  and  is  at  best  unsatis- 
factory. According  to  the  best  of  my  concep- 
tion of  the  state  of  things,  under  the  supposed 
forcible  contraction  by  the  Bank  of  its  issues,  it 
would  have  been  this.  There  would  have  been  a 
greatly  increased  pressure  on  the  money  market, 
severe  as  it  already  was.  The  public  funds 
would  have  been  lower,  and  the  financial  opera- 
tions of  government  would  have  been  on  terms 
more  disadvantageous  to  the  public.  The  com- 
mercial discredit  and  failures  which  occurred  at 
the  close  of  1799,  and  the  commencement  of 
1800,  in  consequence  of  the  revulsion  of  credit  at 
Hamburgh  and  other  continental  towns,  would 
probably  have  been  aggravated,  and  the  fall  of 
prices  of  colonial  produce,  and  of  all  other  com- 
modities that  were  in  full  supply,  or  were  held  on 
credit,  or  depended  for  purchase  on  the  usual 
credit,  would,  great  as  it  was,  have  been  more 
rapid.  But  the  prices  of  corn,  and  of  other  pro- 
visions, and  of  articles  generally,  the  supply  of 
which  was  below  the  ordinary  rate  of  consumption, 
would  in  all  probability  have  been  full  as  high. 
The  prices  of  provisions  were  determined  by  the 

*  The  computed  value  of  grain  imported,  in  ISOO,  was 
8,755,995/.,  in  1801,  10,149,098/. 

R    4 


248  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

highest  sum  which  the  wages  of  the  lowest  classes, 
aided  by  contributions  from  parishes  and  indi- 
viduals, would  afford  for  food,  and  the  rate  of 
wages  would  not  be  affected,  or  in  the  most  trifling 
degree  only,  by  the  casual  expansion  or  contraction 
of  the  Bank  issues,  and  certainly  not  within  so 
short  a  period  as  a  twelvemonth.  There  appears, 
moreover,  in  the  rise  of  prices  of  provisions  follow- 
ing the  harvest  of  1799  to  have  been  little  of 
either  buying  or  holding  on  credit,  for  there  is,  as 
we  have  seen,  according  to  the  best  evidence  of 
which  the  subject  is  susceptible,  the  strongest  proof 
or  reason  for  supposing  that  the  stock  of  corn  was 
exhausted,  and  that  the  dearth,  great  as  it  was, 
would  have  been  more  severely  felt,  had  it  not 
been  for  the  earliness  of  the  harvest  of  1800. 

The  renewed  rise  of  the  prices  of  provisions 
after  the  harvest  of  1800,  took  place  without 
any  increase  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  of 
5l.  and  upwards,  which  for  the  last  six  months 
of  that  year  was  rather  less  than  in  the  first 
six  months.  And  the  avei'age  amount  for  the 
whole  of  the  year  1801  was  13,454,370,  being,  as 
nearly  as  might  be,  the  same  as  in  1800.  Now 
this  amount  upon  the  grounds  already  stated,  with 
the  addition  of  about  2,700,000/.  of  notes  under 
dl.f  and  with  the  utmost  probable  extension  of  the 
country  paper,  and  with  the  progressively  dimi- 
nishing number  of  guineas,  did  not  probably  make 
up  an  aggregate  nearly  equal  to  that  which  con- 
stituted the  currency  in  the  three  years  ending  in 
1795.  There  is  accordingly  the  strongest  possible 
reason  to  believe,  that  the  quantity  of  money  was 
not  increased,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  the 
cause  of  the  rise  in  the  price  of  provisions  between 
the  summer  of  1799  and  that  of  1801,  indepen- 
dently of  the  incongruity  which  attaches  to  the 
supposition  of  its  having  caused  the  rise  of  one 
class  of  commodities,  at  the  same  tune  that  another 


1799—1803.  2i9 

great  class  of  commodities  was  falling  in  nearly 
an  equal  proportion  to  the  rise  of  the  former, 
while  it  has  been  in  evidence,  that  there  was  a 
great  scarcity  of  the  commodities  which  did  rise. 
Tlie  argument,  therefore,  is  sufficiently  made  out, 
that  it  was  a  case  of  dearth  and  not  of  depreci- 
ation. 

If  any  doubt,  however,  should  still  remain  on 
that  score,  a  fact  decisive  against  the  suppostion, 
that  an  increase  of  the  quantity  of  money,  or  of 
the  circulating  medium,  as  indicated  by  the  Bank 
issues,  had  been  the  cause  of  the  rise  is,  that  co- 
incidently  with  an  increase  of  the  circulation  of 
tlie  Bank  of  England  notes,  prices  subsided  upon 
the  cessation  of  the  scarcity  to  the  level  from  which 
they  had  advanced.  For  if  it  was  the  amount  of 
Bank  notes  that  raised  prices  in  1800  and  1801, 
how  happened  it  that  an  increased  amount  in  1802 
did  not  sustain  the  prices,  and  much  more  prevent 
a  fall  of  above  50  per  cent.  ?  And  if  the  exchanges 
had  been  depressed,  and  the  price  of  bullion  raised 
by  the  amount  of  the  circulation,  how  happened  it 
that  they  tended  upon  the  abatement  of  foreign 
payments  to  their  par  level  coincidently  with  an 
increased  issue,  as  will  appear  by  the  following 
statement.    The  average  circulation  of — 

Ex.  Dec.  31.    Foieiirn  Gold.    Silver  Dllrs.   Wheat. 


£ 

s.    d. 

/.  s.  d. 

s.   d. 

s.   d. 

1800  was  13,421,920 

30  0 

4  6  0 

5     9 

133  0 

1801  —  13,454,370 

31  11 

4  3  6 

5   lOi 

75  6 

1802  —  13,917,980 

34  0 

4  0  0 

5  4| 

57  1 

In  as  far,  therefore,  as  a  negative  admits  of  being 
established,  it  is  clearly  so  in  favour  of  the  conclu- 
sion, that  the  Bank  restriction  had  not  the  effect 
of  depreciating  the  currency  beyond  the  degree 
indicated  by  the  difference  between  paper  and 
gold,  in  the  period  now  under  consideration,  and 
the  presumption  is  the  strongest  possible  that  the 


250  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

prices  of  provisions,  and  of  other  produce,  which 
attained  their  greatest  elevation  in  tlie  spring  of 
1801,  would  have  reached  the  same  height  under 
a  convertible  state  of  the  currency ;  and  that,  there- 
fore, as  regards  tliese,  it  is  doubtful  whether  any 
allowance  for  the  difference  between  paper  and 
gold  ought  to  be  made. 

But  although  in  a  convertible  state  of  the  cur- 
rency, the  articles  which  were  oi  first  necessity, 
and  which  existed  in  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
scarcity,  would,  in  all  probability,  have  been  as 
high  as  they  were,  all  articles  not  so  circum- 
stanced would  have  been  lower  in  consequence  of 
the  forcible  contraction  of  the  circulation,  which 
would  have  been  necessary  to  counteract  the 
pressure  on  the  exchanges,  of  the  unusually  large 
foreign  expenditure.  And  it  is  probable,  that  after 
the  spring  of  1801,  when  scarcity,  and  the  appre- 
hension of  it,  had  ceased,  the  fall  of  the  prices  of 
necessaries  would  have  been  more  rapid  than  it 
was.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  the  subsidence  would  have  been  to  a 
lower  level  than  that  to  which  prices  did  eventually 
fall  under  the  actual  system.  If  prices  had  fallen 
more  rapidly,  the  importations  of  1801  and  1802 
would  have  been  less  and  the  exportations  greater, 
and  the  prices  of  1803  would  have  been  probably 
liigher,  instead  of  continuing  to  fall  as  they  did. 
Among  the  grounds  of  presumption  in  favour  of 
this  view  is  the  fact,  that  the  prices  of  corn  and  of 
meat  were  in  1802  higher  in  France,  and  some  of 
the  other  countries  of  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
than  in  this  country.* 

*  In  truth  the  rise  and  high  range  of  prices,  with  short  inter- 
vals only  of  subsidence,  which  have  been  noticed  in  the  review 
of  this  and  of  the  preceding  epochs,  have  their  parallel  in  the 
state  of  prices  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  during  the  corre- 
sponding period.  Thus  Mr.  Jacob,  in  his  report  of  March, 
1826,  states  the  manner  in  which  the  competition  of  France  for 


1799—1803.  251 

The  circulation  of  the  Bank  in  1803  was  — 

Of  51.  notes  and  upwards,  including 

bank  post  bills       -  -  -  12,983,477^. 

And  of  notes  under  5/.      -  -     3,864,045^. 

Together,   16,847,522/. 

being  nearly  one  million  of  the  former,  but  only- 
two  hundred  thousand  of  the  total  less  than  in 
1802. 

The  comparative  diminution,  however,  was  in 
the  first  six  months  of  1803.  In  the  last  six  months 
of  that  year  there  was  an  increase,  as  compared 
with  the  last  six  months  of  1802,  and  the  prices 
of  corn  were  lower  at  the  close  of  1803  than  they 
had  been  at  the  close  of  1802  :  — 

Dec.  1802.  Dec.  1803. 

Wheat          -             -  57.9.     Id.  -  52s.     3d. 

Barley      -                  -  25*.     Jd-  -  23.9.  Ud. 

Oats              -              -  20^.     Od.  -  2U.      Id. 

The  great  fliU  of  prices  between  1801  and  1803 
was  followed,  as  might  be  supposed,  by  extensive 


foreign  corn  tended  to  raise  the  price  in  the  markets  of  the  rest 
of  Europe. 

"  During  the  ten  years  from  1791  to  1801,  there  was  a  con- 
stant demand  in  France  for  foreign  corn ;  several  deficient  har- 
vests had  been  experienced  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution. 
The  agents  of  France  were  employed  both  in  Europe  and 
America  in  purchasing  corn,  and  hiring  neutral  vessels  to  con- 
vey it  to  France,  paying  little  regard  to  the  price  they  paid  for 
it,  or  the  rate  of  freight  at  which  it  could  be  transported.  Hol- 
land, which  scarcely  has  ever  grown  corn  sufficient  for  its  own 
consumption,  felt  a  great  want,  owing  to  its  internal  sources  of 
suppl}^  from  Germany  and  Flanders  being  diverted  from  the 
usual  channels  by  the  circumstances  of  the  war."   (P.  51.) 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  France  either 
was  not  visited  by  such  great  dearths  in  1799  and  1800  as  pre- 
vailed in  this  country  and  in  the  north  of  Europe,  or  that  the  go- 
vernment, by  operating  On  the  averages,  endeavoured  to  conceal 
the  fact. 


252  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

failures.     A  comparison  of  the  number  of  bank- 
ruptcies stands  thus  :  — 

1798  -      911 

1799  -     717 

1800  -      951 


1801   . 

•   1199 

1802   . 

.   1090 

1803   . 

.   1214 

2579  3.503 

being  an  increase  of  more  than  one-third. 

It  is  probable  that  the  excess  of  fiilures  in  the 
latter  period  would  have  been  still  greater,  if,  in 
consequence  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  bounty 
on  importation  of  corn,  which  ensured  a  minimum 
price  till  the  1st  of  October,  1801,  the  importers 
had  not  been  preserved  from  the  full  effect  of  the 
decline  of  the  markets  between  the  spring  and 
autumn  of  that  year.  There  does  not,  at  the  same 
time,  appear  to  have  been  so  great  an  extension 
and  abuse  of  credit  during  the  rise  of  prices,  be- 
tween 1799  and  1801,  as  on  some  former  and  sub- 
sequent occasions,  nor,  consequently,  so  great  a 
derangement  of  the  circulation  in  consequence  of 
the  fall ;  nor  in  point  of  fact  were  there  any  failures 
of  consequence  among  the  country  bankers. 


Section  7*  —  Summarij  of  the  preceding 
Survey. 

On  a  review,  then,  of  the  whole  period  from  the 
commencement  of  1799  to  the  close  of  1803,  it 
appears  — 

1.  That  the  prices  of  provisions,  which,  at  the 
beginning  of  1799  were  as  low  as  they  had  been 
on  an  average  of  some  years  anterior  to  1793, 
advanced,  in  common  with  other  articles  of  Euro- 
pean produce,  to  an  unprecedented  height,  as  a 


1799—1803.  253 

necessary  consequence  of  the  two  very  deficient 
harvests  of  1799  and  1800,  combined  with  actual 
and  apprehended  obstructions  to  importation. 

2.  That  upon  the  recurrence  of  moderately 
productive  harvests  in  1801,  1802,  and  1803,  com- 
bined with  a  removal  of  some  of  the  impediments 
to  a  foreign  supply,  tlie  prices  of  corn  and  other 
European  produce  at  the  close  of  1803,  subsided 
to  the  level  from  which  they  had  been  raised  by 
the  before-mentioned  scarcities  from  seasons  and 
political  obstructions. 

3.  That  coincidently  with  the  great  rise  in  the 
prices  of  provisions  and  of  European  produce 
in  1799  and  1800,  a  very  great  fall  took  place  in 
all  trans- Atlantic  produce ;  thus  negativing  the 
inference  of  the  operation  of  a  common  cause, 
such  as  that  of  mere  increase  of  money. 

4.  That  tlie  rise  in  the  prices  of  provisions, 
and  of  European  produce  generally,  in  1799  and 
J  800,  was  attended  with  an  increase  of  the  Bank 
circulation,  and  with  a  rise  in  the  price  of  gold, 
and  a  fall  of  the  exchanges. 

5.  That  the  fliU  in  the  prices  of  grain,  and  of 
all  European  produce,  subsequent  to  the  spring 
of  1801,  and  a  fall  in  the  price  of  gold  and  a  rise 
of  the  exchanges,  were  attended  with  a  further 
increase  of  the  circulation  of  bank  notes  ;  thus 
affording  a  negative  of  any  inference  that  the 
increase  of  bank  notes  had  been  the  cause  of  the 
previous  alteration  of  prices  and  exchanges,  be- 
cause if  it  had  been  so,  the  further  increase  of 
bank  notes  should  have  prevented  the  subsidence 
of  prices,  and  the  restoration  of  the  exchanges. 

6.  That  the  prices  of  provisions,  and  of  many 
other  leading  articles  of  consumption,  were  lower 
in  1803,  a  period  of  war  on  a  most  extensive  scale, 
and  of  very  large  loans  raised  by  government  to- 
wards defraying  the  expenses  of  it,  than  they  had 
been  in  1802,  a  year  of  peace. 


254  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

And,  finally,  that  with  the  exception  of  the 
prices  of  naval  and  military  stores,  not  a  trace  can  be 
found  in  the  state  of  prices,  in  the  interval  that  has 
passed  under  review,  of  war-demand,  and  as  little 
of  depreciation  of  the  value  of  the  currency,  under- 
standing by  that  term  a  rise  of  prices  caused  by 
an  increase  of  money,  and  not  by  a  relative  scarcity 
of  commodities. 


1804—1808.  ^55 


CHAP.  IV. 

STATE  OF  PRICES  AND  OF  THE  CIRCULATION  FROM 
THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  1804  TO  THE  CLOSE 
OF  1808. 

The  state  of  stagnation  and  declining  markets 
wliich  has  been  noticed  as  prevailing  from  the  time 
of  the  renewal  in  the  spring  of  1803,  of  the  war 
with  France,  in  agriculture  and  trade,  but  more 
especially  in  the  former,  continued  through  the 
early  part  of  1804. 

The  prices  of  corn  by  the  gazette  averages  for 
England  and  Wales,  were,  — 

March,  1804,  Wheat         -         -  49.9.  Qd, 
Barley         -         -  225.  9^. 
Oats  -         -         -  19*.  9d. 
No  instance  in  the  whole  period  under  discus- 
sion from  1793   to  the  present  time,  nor  indeed 
any  in  the  whole  course  of  last  century  exhibits  so 
great  a  fall  of  the  price  of  wheat  within  the  same 
space  of  time,  as   that  which   occurred   between 
March   1801    and  March  1804,   namely  from   an 
average  of  155.^.  to  49*.  Qd.* 

*  Thus,  after  twelve  years  of  war,  and  eight  years  of  sus- 
pension of  cash  payments,  we  find  that  the  prices  of  corn  sub- 
sided a  second  time  to  the  level  from  which  tJiey  had  been,  in 
two  memorable  instances,  so  violently  disturbed  by  the  causes 
which  have  been  described.  And  as  this  renewed  subsidence 
forms  a  most  important  feature  in  the  discussion,  it  may  here 
be  desirable  to  exemplify  it  by  the  following  comparative  state- 
ment :  — 

Wheat.  Barlej'.  Oats. 

s.      d.  s.      d.  s.      d. 

1792,  December  -         -  47     2  29  10  18     6 

1798,  November         -         -  47  10  29     0  19  10 

1804,  March      -         .         -  49     6  22     9  19     9 

The  higher  price  of  wheat  in  1804  is  compensated  by  the 
lower  price  of  barley,  and  with  this  allowance  the  subsidence  is 
complete. 


Q56  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

This  fall  and  low  range  of  prices  is  the  more  ob- 
servable, because  the  cost  of  production  had  been 
considerably  increased.  The  wages  of  labour  had 
as  has  been  seen,  risen  considerably  in  consequence 
of  a  recurrence  of  periods  of  great  dearth ; 
and  all  the  implements  of  husbandry  had  expe- 
rienced a  very  great  advance  in  price.  The  rate 
of  interest  too  was  much  higher  in  consequence  of 
the  absorption  by  the  government  expenditure  of 
a  large  part  of  the  savings  of  individuals.  More- 
over some,  although,  perhaps,  an  inconsiderable 
proportion,  of  the  progressive  taxation  attached  to 
agricultural  production  ;  and  while  the  cost  in 
labour,  in  capital,  and  taxation,  applicable  to  native 
production  was  thus  raised,  the  cost  of  a  foreign 
supply  of  which  we  were  then  supposed  to  stand 
habitually  in  need,  was  also  raised  by  the  increased 
charges  of  freight  and  insurance  incidental  to  the 
state  of  war.* 

These  considerations  render  the  real  fall  of  the 
price  still  greater  than  the  apparent  one,  and  this, 
notwithstanding  the  continuance  of  the  war  on  an 
enlarged  scale  of  expenditure,  and  notwithstanding 
an  amount  of  inconvertible  Bank  of  England  notes 
greater  in  the  first  six  months  of  1804  than  it  had 
been  in  the  first  six  months  of  1801,  when  the 
price  was  200  per  cent,  higher. 

It  might  naturally  be  expected  that  a  fall  so 
tremendous  of  the  markets  for  grain  and  for  agri- 
cultural produce  in  general,  by  the  transition  from 
scarcity  to  abundance,  would  be  severely  felt  by 
the  agricultural  interests,  always  excepting  the  la- 
bourer.    Accordingly  there  were  meetings  held  in 

*  The  extra  charge  of  freight  and  insurance  cannot  be  taken 
at  less  than  from  5s.  to  10s.  per  quarter  on  wheat  from  abroad, 
in  the  interval  from  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  till  1806,  when, 
in  consequence  of  the  introduction  of  the  continental  system,  the 
risks,  and  consequent  charges  attending  commercial  intercourse 
with  the  Continent,  were  greatly  increased. 


1801—1808,  %51[ 

Essex  and  otlier  counties  for  the  purpose  of  peti- 
tioning parliament  for  additional  protection  as  a 
remedy  for  the  prevailing  agricultural  distress. 
The  committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  to 
whom  the  petitions  were  referred,  not  having  any 
theory  of  "  preparations  for  cash  payments,"  or  of 
"  transition  from  war  to  peace,"  by  which  to  ac- 
count for  the  recent  fall  of  prices,  or  for  their 
former  elevation,  give  the  following  very  rational 
explanation  of  the  causes  of  the  rise  and  fall  be- 
tween 1791  and  1804:  — 

"  It  appears  to  your  Committee,  that  the  price  of  corn,  from 
1791  to  the  harvest  of  1803,  has  been  very  irregular;  but,  upon 
an  average,  increased  in  a  great  degree  by  the  years  of  scarcity, 
has,  in  general,  yielded  a  fair  profit  to  the  grower.  The  casual 
high  prices,  however,  have  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  industry, 
and  bringing  into  cultivation  large  tracts  of  waste  land*,  which, 
combined  with  the  two  last  productive  seasons,  and  other  causes, 
have  occasioned  such  a  depression  in  the  value  of  grain,  as,  it  is 
feared,  will  greatly  tend  to  the  discouragement  of  agriculture, 
unless  maintained  by  the  support  of  parliament. 

A  bill  was  in  consequence  brought  in  by  Mr 
Western,  and  an  act  passed  by  which  a  duty  was 
imposed  of  24<5.  Sd.  per  quarter,  when  the  price 
should  be  under  QSs. ;  and  Q,s.  6d.  per  quarter,  when 
at  or  above  that  rate  and  under  66s.  j  and  6d.,  when 
above  66s.  It  would  be  foreign  to  the  purpose  of 
this  work  to  enter  into  a  consideration  of  the  jus- 
tice or  policy  of  this  measure,  which  proved  to  be 

*  The  number  of  inclosure  bills  had  been  :  — 


1795 

. 

-  39 

1796 

. 

-  75 

1797 

. 

-  86 

1798 

- 

-  52 

1799 

_ 

-  65 

1800 

- 

-  63 

1801 

. 

- 

-  80 

1802 

- 

. 

-  122 

1803 

- 

. 

-  96 

1804. 

- 

- 

-  104. 

258  TRICES    AND    CIllCUJ^ATION, 

inoperative.  It  is  only  here  mentioned  for  the 
purpose  of  showing  that,  neither  the  state  of  tlie 
currency  under  the  Bank  restriction,  nor  the  con- 
tinued and  increasing  consumption  arising  out  of 
the  war,  were  at  that  time  rehed  upon  for  the  re- 
covery, or  even  for  the  maintenance,  of  prices  by 
those  persons  who,  having  since  lost  sight  both  of 
the  facts  and  of  their  own  contemporaneous  ex- 
planation of  them,  now  adopt  a  purely  fanciful 
theory  on  the  subject.  .  If  the  Bank  restriction,  or 
war-demand,  had  been  the  cause  of  the  rise,  how 
happened  it  that  they  did  not  prevent  the  fall,  or, 
to  repeat  the  words  of  Mr.  Pitt,  applied  to  a  similar 
state  of  things  three  years  before,  "  How  happens 
it  that  the  effect  which,  on  the  hypotliesis,  should 
have  been  increasing,  was  suspended  during  an 
interval  of  nearly  three  years  ?  " 

There  were  then  no  preparations  for  cash  pay- 
ments, and  the  loans  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the 
war  were  on  a  larger  scale  than  ever.  So  hopeless, 
indeed,  would  be  the  task  of  endeavouring  to  re- 
concile the  state  of  prices  at  the  close  of  1803, 
and. in  the  first  half  year  of  1804,  witli  either  of  the 
two^theories  of  modern  times,  that  I  have  met  with 
no  ifi'stance  of  any  reference  to,  or  attempt  at  an  ex- 
planation of,  this  period  of  cheapness  consistently 
with  those  theories. 

It  could  not,  however,  have  been  so  slurred  over 
liad  it  not  been  for  the  shortness  of  its  duration. 
An  early  recurrence  of  scarcities  occasioned  a  fresh 
disturbance  of  prices,  and  buried  the  instance  of 
cheapness  here  referred  to  in  a  heap  of  high  ave- 
rages. 


Section  1.  —  Deficiency  of  the  Harvest  of  1804. 

If  the  harvest   of  1804  had  proved   only  mo- 
derately productive,  and  still  more  if  it  had  been 


1804^—1808.  259 

abundant,  a  continuance  of  low  averages  would 
very  materially  have  modified  the  character  of  all 
the  reasonings  on  the  effects  of  the  Bank  restric- 
tion on  the  price  of  corn.  But  the  crops,  more 
especially  that  of  wheat,  contrary  to  the  expect- 
ations entertained  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  season, 
turned  out  to  be  very  deficient. 

The  occurrence  of  this  year  of  deficiency,  be- 
tween two  periods  of  only  three  seasons  each,  of 
moderate  produce,  immediately  preceding  and 
succeeding,  is  an  essential  consideration  in  ac- 
counting for  the  high  average  price  of  corn  during 
the  war  and  the  restriction  ;  for  it  hence  ap- 
pears that  there  were  not  Jour  seasons  in  suc- 
cession without  the  occurrence  of  one  harvest  or 
lyiore  of  decided  and  acknowledged  deficiency.  So 
that  no  sooner  had  the  influence  of  the  preced- 
ing deficiency  ceased  to  operate,  and  the  price 
consequently  subsided  to  the  level  from  which  it 
had  been  greatly  raised  by  the  accidents  of  the 
season,  combined  with  political  obstructions  to  im- 
portation, than  a  fresh  disturbing  cause  came  im- 
mediately into  operation.  In  pro])ortion  to  the 
importance  in  this  point  of  view  of  the  result  of 
the  harvest  of  1804,  is  the  anxiety  on  the  part  of 
those  who  refer  all  the  phenomena  of  high  prices 
to  the  Bank  restriction,  to  represent  the  produce 
as  having  been  sufficient,  if  not  abundant.  In 
several  publications,  having  that  object  in  view, 
the  produce  of  that  harvest  is  represented  as  h:^'ing 
been  abundant. 

Sir  James  Graham,  in  a  tract  entitled  "Corn  and 
Currency,"  which  when  it  appeared  (1826)  attracted 
considerable  notice,  after  giving  a  table  containing 
the  amount  of  Bank  of  England  notes,  in  juxta- 
position with  the  average  prices  of  wheat  for  each 
year,  adds, 

"  From  the  comparison  of  the  issues  of  the  Bank  with  the 
correspondent  average  of  the  price  of  wheat  throughout  this 

s  2 


260  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

long  series,  it  will  appeav  that  an  increase  of  issues  has,  with 
wonderful  precision,  created  a  rise  of  price,  not  always  in  the 
same  year,  but  more  generally  in  the  one  immediately  succeed- 
ing ;  and  a  decrease  of  the  issue  has  produced  in  a  like  manner 
a  correlative  decline.  The  effect  of  increase  *  is  illustrated  by 
the  years  1803,  1804-,  and  1805,  in  which  the  harvests  were 
good  and  the  produce  abundant ;  vide  Joplin  on  Currency,  Ap- 
pendix, No.  14.,  and  in  which  the  rise  of  price  cannot  therefore 
be  attributed  to  a  deficiency  of  supply." 

Curiously  enough,  the  authority  quoted  in  the 
above  extract  gives  a  directly  opposite  and  a  true 
statement  of  the  fact,  the  following  being  the  descrip- 
tion in  Joplin,  on  the  currency,  Appendix,  No.  14. 
(extracted  from  the  Farmer's  Magazine),  "1804.  In 

*  Even  if  the  harvest  of  1804  had  been  as  abundant  as  it 
was  indisputably  deficient,  according  to  the  very  authority  quoted 
for  the  strange  assertion  of  the  reverse,  the  state  of  the  Bank 
circulation  would  most  assuredly  not  account  for  the  rise  of 
price.  The  following  is  a  comparison  of  the  annual  average  cir- 
culation of  bank  notes  with  the  average  prices  of  wheat  at  the 
end  of  each  year,  1803,  1804,  and  1805  :  — 


Bank  Notes 

Prices  of  Wheat 

of  51.  and  upwards. f 

in  December. 

1803, 

^12,983,477 

51*. 

1804, 

12,621,348 

86*. 

1805, 

12,697,352 

76*. 

And  the  discrepancy  between  the  state  of  the  circulation  and 
the  price  of  wheat  will  be  still  more  striking,  if  we  compare 
them  in  the  first  and  last  half  years  of  1804  respectively,  there 
having  been  an  actual  diminution  in  the  last  six  months  of  that 
year  coincidently  with  a  great  advance  in  the  price  of  wheat. 
But  what,  if  there  were  no  other  ground,  is  decisive  against  the 
hypothesis  of  an  excess  of  bank  notes  having  produced  this 
rise  of  prices  is,  that  coincidently  with  such  rise,  the  bullion  in 
the  coffers  of  the  Bank  was  experiencing  a  progressive  increase  ; 
for  instance, 

Bullion. 

February,  1804  -e^3,372,140 

August      -     5,879,190 

February,  1805  -     5,883,800 

August      -       7,624,50 


f  In  this  and  all  the  other  references  to  the  position  of  the 
Bank  the  amount  of  the  circulation  of  notes  of  5/.  and  upwards 
includes  Bank  post  bills. 


1804—1808.  261 

Scotland,  wheat  an  average  crop,  but  of  inferior 
quality ;  in  England,  a  very  short  crop,  and  the 
quality  very  inferior."  It  happens,  whimsically  too, 
that  Mr.  JopHn  (in  order  to  prove  his  theory,  tliat 
the  variations  in  the  price  of  corn  are  owing  more 
to  variations  of  demand  than  of  supply),  in  the 
text  of  the  pamphlet,  from  the  appendix  to  which 
the  above  quotation  is  made,  has  the  following 
passage  :  —  "In  the  years  1804  and  1805,  wheat 
rose  from  50*.  to  100*.  without  any  scarcity  at  all." 
The  assertion  of  abundance  is  repeated  in  a  publi- 
cation entitled,  "  A  Letter  to  Lord  Archibald 
Hamilton,  1823,  page  15,"  in  which  the  writer, 
in  contradiction  of  a  statement  of  mine,  expressly 
says,  "  1804  was  not  a  year  in  which  the  harvest 
was  deficient,  it  was  rather  a  year  of  plenty." 

It  has  been  requisite  to  notice  these  unfoimded 
assertions,  although  made  so  long  ago,  because  the 
state  of  the  corn  trade,  at  this  most  important 
period,  has  not,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  been  since  dis- 
tinctly adverted  to,  or  attempted  to  be  explained 
consistently  with  either  of  the  two  theories.  And 
such  assertions,  so  confidently  made  as  those  here 
referred  to,  have  served  to  confirm  the  impression, 
so  universally  prevalent,  that  there  was  nothing  in 
the  seasons,  excepting  the  notorious  scarcities  of 
1795-6  and  1800-1,  to  justify  the  high  prices 
during  the  remainder  of  the  war  and  the  restric- 
tion. 

The  fact  of  the  deficiency  of  the  harvest  of  1804 
is  attested  by  evidence  which  leaves  no  room  for 
doubt. 

The  forty-third  volume  of  the  Annals  of  Agri- 
culture, edited  by  Arthur  Young,  is  nearly  filled 
with  answers  from  persons  in  different  parts  of  the 
country,  to  whom  circulars  had  been  addressed  by 
order  of  the  Board  of  Agriculture,  containing  in- 
quiries as  to  the  nature  and  causes  of  the  failure  of 
the  wheat  crop  of  1801,  and  as  to  the  extent  of  the 

s  .3 


26^  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

deficiency.  The  cause  of  failure  seems  to  have  been 
an  extensive  prevalence  of  blight  and  mildew  ;  and 
nearly  all  the  answers  concur  in  stating  a  deficiency 
or  from  one  fourth  to  one  third  in  England  and 
Wales ;  while  in  Scotland,  to  which  the  cause  of 
injury  had  extended  only  partially,  there  was  an 
average  produce.  The  Farmer's  Magazine,  vols. 
V.  and  vi.,  contains  statements  in  great  detail  relative 
to  that  harvest,  and  the  effect  of  it  on  prices.  The 
following  is  an  extract  from  that  work  of  a  corn- 
factor's  circular :  — 

"  London,  Oct.  30.  1804. 
^'  From  the  general  bad  quality  of  the  new  wheat  presented 
-at  Mark  Lane,  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the  injury  from  blight 
appears  to  have  been  more  extensive  than  was  supposed  when  I 
wrote  you  last.  The  best  samples  are  inferior  to  last  year's  ; 
and  the  great  bulk  of  what  has  been  yet  produced  will  not  yield 
more  than  two  thirds  of  the  fine  flour  which  the  average  of  last 
year  produced.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  price  of  wheat  has 
very  considerably  advanced,  notwithstanding  the  considerable 
isupply  of  foreign  wheat  which  has  been  quickly  brought  to 
^market." 

The  average  prices  accordingly  which  had  been, 

Wheat.  Barley.  Oats. 

March   1804,  49*.  6d.     22s.  8d.     19*.  9^. 
>were,  Dec.  1804,      *S6s.  2d.     43*.  lOd.  26*.  lid. 

This  sudden  and  great  rise  of  prices  having  im- 

*  The  quality  of  the  wheat  being  very  inferior,  the  average 
price  gives  an  inadequate  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  rise,  which 
>vill  be  best  shown  by  the  quotations  of  wheat  in  Mark  Lane. 
April  23.  1804.  30.s.  45^.  52s.  per  quarter. 

Essex  and  Kent,  56s.  57s. 
Foreign  Red,  35^.  48*. 
W^hite  Dantzic,  50*.  54*.  58*. 
(Oct.  29.  1804.     New  48*.  63*.  72*.  78*.  84*. 

Old  52*.  76*.  88*. 

Fine  White,  90*.  to  92*. 
Foreign  Red,  52*.  78*.  82*. 
White  Dantzic  75*.  85*. 
Fine  90*. 

Jan.  28.  1805.      New  65*.  to  100*. 

Old  79*.  105*.  116*. 

Foreign  Red,  80*.  95*.  105*. 
White  Dantzic,  100*.  120*.  126*. 


1804—1808.  263 

mediately  followed  the  passing  of  the  Corn  Bill  in 
1804,  considerable  dissatisfaction  prevailed,  and 
petitions  were  presented  to  parliament,  in  the  spring 
of  1805,  against  the  bill,  alleging,  among  other 
things,  that  it  had  been  the  cause  of  the  rise  of  the 
price  of  corn.  In  the  opinion  of  some  of  the  wit- 
nesses examined,  the  first  tendency  to  an  advance 
of  prices,  in  the  summer  of  1804,  was  in  conse- 
quence of  the  new  corn  bill ;  but  they  all  agree 
that  the  subsequent  rise  was  in  consequence  of  the 
great  failure  of  the  wheat  crop.* 

*  The  following  are  extracts  from  some  of  the  evidence, 
May,  1805  :  — 

Mr.  John  Dixon,  cornfactor  (who  had  stated  his  opinion  that 
the  first  rise  had  been  caused  by  the  corn  bill),  was  asked, 
"  Do  you  know  of  no  other  causes  of  the  rise  ?  " — Answer,  "  I 
know  of  no  other  causes,  except  in  allusion  to  the  general  blight, 
which  was  not  known  till  a  few  weeks  before  harvest."  And 
when  further  asked,  "  Would  not  the  price  have  risen,  although 
the  act  had  not  passed?" — answered,  "  I  do  not  ascribe  the 
high  prices  which  we  have  vvitnessed  since  harvest  to  the  effect 
of  the  bill,  but  to  the  general  failure  of  the  last  year  s  crop.'' 

Mr.  Joseph  Stonard,  cornfactor,  said,  "  I  do  apprehend  that 
the  advances  from  the  2d  July  to  the  6th  August  were  in  con- 
sequence of  the  bill  then  before  the  house  ;  that  the  subsequent 
advances  arose  from  the  unfavourable  weather,  and  the  appre- 
hensions of  a  defective  harvest."  "  Did  you  hear  of  any  blight 
in  June  to  the  wheat  ? — No. — Did  you  hear  in  the  first  week  of 
July  of  the  wheat  harvest  being  likely  to  be  defective  ?  —  I 
recollect  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  July,  from  the  excessive 
cold  rain,  and  from  what  I  heard  afterwards  of  its  being  pretty 
general  through  England,  I  believed  that  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
great  defect  in  the  crop  of  wheat."  t 

Mr.  Peter  Giles,  cornfactor,  said,  "  I  think  wheat  and  oats 
advanced  in  July  from  8^.  to  IO5.  'per  quarter;  but  not  wholly 
occasioned  by  the  agitation  of  the  bill."  "  What  other  causes  ? 
— ^  The  appearance  of  the  crops  on  the  ground  not  being  very 
favourable.     When  did  you  apprehend  that  the  last  crop  might 


t  The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  Meteorological  Journal 
for  July,  1801:  —  "A  considerable  quantity  of  rain  fell  on  the 
7th  ;  on  the  8th  some  heavy  showers,  with  thunder  and  light- 
ning. The  mercury  in  the  barometer  rose  rapidly  till  the  next 
morning,  when  it  fell,  preparatory  to  that  heavy  rain,  which,  on 
account  of  its  long  continuance,  was  remarked  l)y  every  body." 

3    4 


SGi  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  acknowledged  failure  of  the  crop  was  quite 
a  sufficient  cause  of  the  rise  of  price,  without  the 
aid  of  the  corn  bill,  which,  in  point  of  fact,  be- 
came wholly  inoperative.  *  But,  if  the  corn  bill 
had  been  operative,  so  much  of  the  rise  as  might 
be  clearly  attributable  to  that  cause  would  obviously 
be  distinct  from  the  supposed  agency  of  war- 
demand,  or  of  the  currency. 

be  defective?  —  The  report  of  the  blight  and  mildew  com- 
menced the  first  week  in  August.  When  did  that  apprehension 
affect  the  price  of  grain  ?  —  It  began  the  first  week  in  August, 
and  continued  to  advance  till  the  last  week.  Do  you  attribute 
the  second  rise  entirely  to  the  apprehension  of  a  defective  crop  ? 
Entirely." 

Mr.  Samuel  Scott  (now  Sir  Samuel  Scott,  Bart.),  a  member 
of  the  house,  being  examined,  chiefly  upon  some  of  the  details 
of  the  bill,  was  asked,  "  Do  you  consider  any  material  rise  in 
price  to  have  taken  place  in  the  market  previous  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  blight  ?  " —  Answered,  "  No  material  advance  had 
taken  place  previous  to  the  first  rumour  of  an  injury  to  the  crop." 

*  On  the  continent  of  Europe  the  prices  of  corn  rose  con- 
siderably between  1802  and  1805.  It  appears  that  the  seasons 
of  1802  and  1803,  which  were  of  fair  average  produce  in  this 
country,  had  been  unfavourable  in  the  south  of  Europe.  So 
great  was  the  scarcity  in  Spain  during  those  two  years,  that 
the  price  of  wheat  rose  in  the  spring  of  1804  to  nearly  six  times 
what  it  had  been  in  1800. 

"  The  medium  price  of  the  load  of  four  funegas  of  wheat  at 
the  market  of  Medina  di  Rio  Seco  in  Leon,  which  was  in  May, 
1800,  at  115  reals  vellon,  rose  as  follows: — 

May,  1801,  172    reals  vellon. 

1802,  263     — 

1803,  247^    — 

1804,  620"    — 

{Appendix  to  Bullion  Report.,  1810,  page  185.) 

The  Monthly  Magazine,  in  its  commercial  report  for  July, 
1805,  has  the  following  passage  :  — 

"  In  the  late  general  rise  of  the  price  of  grain  in  Germany, 
the  bushel  of  wheat,  that  had  been  usually  sold  in  Saxony  for 
a  dollar  and  a  half,  rose  to  ten  dollars.  In  Lausitz,  the  price 
rose  as  high  as  fifteen  dollars  a  bushel.  \\\  Brunswick,  rye  had 
advanced  to  between  two  and  three  dollars  a  bushel.  Owing 
to  the  scarcity  and  dearness  of  provisions,  the  last  great  fair  at 
Vienna  was  ill  attended.  Goods  either  went  at  very  low  prices, 
or  remained  unsold." 


1 80  i— 1808.  265 

There  has  been  the  more  reason  for  dwelling 
uj3on  the  fact  of  the  great  rise  of  the  price  of  corn 
following  the  harvest  of  1804,  and  upon  the  causes 
of  that  rise,  not  only  because  it  negatives  the  theo- 
ries of  the  currency  and  war-demand,  as  applicable 
to  this  period,  but  because  this  renewed  dearth, 
so  quickly  following  that  from  which  there  had 
been  just  before  a  transition  to  plenty,  is  important 
in  other  points  of  view.  It  was  calculated  to  main- 
tain an  elevation  of  the  average  price  thrown  over 
a  series  of  years,  and  it  was  the  specific  occasion 
of  renewed  demands  by  the  working  classes  for 
advanced  wages  ;  claims  which  were  rendered  the 
more  effectual  by  the  resource  which  the  increasing 
employment  in  the  army  and  navy  held  out  to  the 
workmen  who  engaged  in  the  numerous  strikes  of 
that  time.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  price  of 
artisan  labour  especially  experienced  a  considerable 
advance. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  following  harvests,  com- 
bined with  the  state  of  politics,  were  not  of  a 
character  calculated  to  restore  abundance,  nor  con- 
sequently to  allow  of  a  subsidence  of  the  prices  of 
corn  to  the  level  from  which  they  had  been  dis- 
turbed by  the  failure  of  the  crops  of  1804.* 


Section  2. —  Seasons  of  1805  to  1808,  hotli 
included. 

The  winter  of  1804-5  was  mild;  but  the  spring 
was  ungenial ;  the  summer  cold  and  unsettled ; 
the    harvest   backward ;    and    the    appearance    of 

*  The  harvest  to  which,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  it  bears  the 
nearest  resemblance,  is  that  of  1828,  the  effect  of  which  was  to 
raise  the  average  price  of  wheat  from  50*.  in  January  to  76*.  in 
November,  and  this,  be  it  observed,  when  we  found  in  the  south 
of  Europe,  and  in  Spain  especially,  a  source  of  very  considerable 
supply,  instead  of  competition,  as  in  1804—5,  for  sharing  with 
us  in  supplies  from  the  north  of  Europe.  If  in  18^8  our  exter- 
nal relations  had  been  as  they  were  in  1801,  the  average  price 
of  wheat  would  inevitably  have  reached  upwards  of  lOOs. 


q66  prices  and  circulation, 

the  crops  at  the  approach  of  harvest  unfavour- 
able ;  the  consequence  was,  that  the  average  price 
of  wheat,  after  an  intermediate  fall,  reached  {)8s.  4<d. 
in  August.  But  the  weather  then  taking  up,  and 
continuing  propitious  for  securing  the  crops,  and 
these  turning  out  better  than  had  been  expected, 
although  far  from  being  considered  generally 
abundant,  the  price  of  wheat  fell  more  than  20a\ 
per  quarter  before  the  close  of  the  year,  and  con- 
tinued to  decline  till  the  spring  following,  when 
the  Gazette  average  was  74.?.  5d.,  or  a  fall  of  about 
246-.,  since  the  preceding  harvest. 

The  winter  of  1805-6  was  attended  with  more 
frost  and  snow  than  the  preceding  season,  but 
was  not  a  very  rigorous  one.  The  spring,  like  the 
preceding  one,  was  backward ;  and  the  appear- 
ance of  the  crops  was  unpromising.  This  circum- 
stance, combined  with  political  events,  namely, 
the  hostile  proceedings  of  Prussia*  against  this 
country,  under  the  dictation  of  France,  which 
threatened  in  their  consequences  to  cut  off  our  sup- 
plies of  corn  from  the  Baltic,  and  which  had  the  im- 
mediate effect  of  raising  greatly  the  rates  of  freight 
and  insurance,  occasioned  a  rally  in  the  average 
price  of  wheat  to  84.9.  in  June  ;  but  thenceforward, 
notwithstanding  that  the  weather  was  variable,  and 
rather  wet  during  the  harvest,  and  notwithstanding 
the  apprehension  of  increased  political  obstructions, 
in  consequence  of  the  overthrow  and  final  subju- 
gation of  Prussia  by  the  battle  of  Jena,  followed 
by  the  Berlin  decree,  in  the  autumn  of  1806,  prices 
declined  slowly,  but  progressively,  to  73.9.  5d. 
before  the  next  harvest.  The  quality  of  the  wheat 
was  considered  to  be  inferior  to  that  of  the  preceding 
year,  and  the  quantity  a  bare  average,  which  was  not 
then  computed^o  be  sufficient  for  the  consumption. 

*  The  Prussian  government  issued  a  proclamation,  dated  in 
March,  1S06,  ])r()hihiting  the  enti'ance  of  British  ships  into  any 
of  its  ports  or  rivers. 


1804—1808.  267 

The  winter  of  180G-7  presented  nothing  re- 
markable of  mildness  or  severity.  The  spring  of 
1807  was  rather  forward,  and  the  summer  fine  and 
dry,  to  nearly  the  completion  of  the  harvest  in  the 
southern  division  of  the  kingdom.  In  England 
and  Wales,  the  wheat  crop,  although  thin  on  the 
ground,  was  considered  an  average  in  point  of 
yield.  But  in  Scotland,  where  the  weather  was 
extremely  unfavourable  for  the  operations  of  the 
harvest,  the  wheat  crop  proved  to  be  very  deficient. 
Thus,  in  the  Farmer's  Magazine, — 

1807.  "The  crops  generally  of  little  bulk.  Wheat, 
in  some  districts,  equal  to  an  average,  but  in  others 
suffered  from  bad  weather." 

The  spring  crops  were  throughout  scanty,  and 
the  potato  crops  in  Ireland  had  failed  to  a  consi- 
derable extent.  Still,  as  the  wheat  in  England 
had  been  got  in  mostly  in  good  order  before  the 
bad  weather  set  in,  and  was  brought  early  to  market, 
prices  declined  to  66s.  in  November,  being  a  fall 
of  upwards  of  30s.  per  quarter  since  August  1305. 
This  fall,  be  it  observed,  took  place  notwithstanding 
the  increasing  gloom  of  the  political  horizon,  w^hich 
led  to  the  apprehension,  well  founded  as  the  events 
proved,  of  great,  and  at  one  time  nearly  insiumount- 
able,  impediments  to  importation. 

The  orders  in  council  issued  by  ourgovernment,  in 
retaliation  of  the  French  decrees,  formed  the  grounds 
for  the  non-intercourse  act  of  America,  the  year 
following.  And  the  bombardment  of  Copenhagen 
in  the  autinrm  of  1807,  was  followed  on  the  part 
of  Denmark  by  a  closing  of  the  passage  of  the 
Sound,  and  on  the  part  of  Russia  by  an  embargo 
on  British  shipping.  While  the  Prussian  ports  of 
the  Baltic  had,  under  the  dictation  of  France,  been 
for  some  time  before  shut  against  the  commerce  of 
this  country.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
farmers  were  naturally  induced,  as  by  their  increased 
capital   from  their  great  gains  of  late  years  they 


268  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

were  enabled,  to  hold  larger  stocks.  There  is,  there- 
fore, every  reason  to  suppose  that  if  political  ap- 
pearances had  been  less  threatening,  and  the  crops 
less  scanty,  the  subsidence  in  I8O7,  to  the  level 
from  whence  the  rise  in  1804  took  place,  would 
have  been  complete. 

But  in  1808,  and  at  the  very  commencement  of 
it,  the  grain  markets  began  to  recover.  The  scan- 
tiness of  the  preceding  crop  w^as  beginning  to  be 
felt,  and  at  the  same  time  the  apprehensions  which 
had  been  entertained  of  the  exclusion  of  the 
British  flag  from  trade  in  the  Baltic  were  realised. 
Thus  we  were  threatened  with  an  almost  total 
cutting  oft'  of  a  foreign  supply,  if  we  should  have 
occasion  for  it,  as  it  was  thought  inevitable  that 
we  should ;  it  being  considered  as  a  settled  point 
that  this  country  did  not  produce  corn  enough  for 
its  own  consumption. 

The  winter  of  I8O7-8  set  in  very  early,  which 
of  course  increased  the  consumption  of  all  kinds  of 
grain,  more  especially  as  hay  was  scarce  and  dear.. 
The  appearances  that  a  serious  scarcity  of  food 
was  likely  to  be  felt  before  the  coming  harvest,^ 
induced  parliament,  on  a  report  of  a  committee  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  to  prohibit  the  distillation 
from  grain.*  The  same  prospect  had  a  natural 
effect  on  the  corn  market,  and  prices  advanced 
accordingly  in  the  spring  of  1808. 

The  crops  of  1808  proved  more  deficient  than 
those  of  the  preceding  year.  The  memorably  hot 
days  in  the  early  part  of  July  t  were  considered 

*  One  of  the  motives  which  induced  the  legislature  to  pro- 
hibit the  distillation  from  grain  was,  doubtless,  to  afford  some 
relief  to  the  West  India  planters,  by  the  substitution  of  sugar 
in  the  distilleries  ;  but  the  immediate  occasion  and  the  professed 
object  of  the  measure  were  distinctly  stated  to  be  the  actual 
and  apprended  deficiency  of  grain  and  of  potatoes. 

-f-  The  temperature  on  the  13th  and  14th  of  July,  1808,  was 
higher  than  it  has  ever  since  been,  and  I  am  not  aware  that 
there  is  any  authentic  record  of  any  former  instance  of  so  high 


1804—1808.  26'9 

to  have  clone  great  injury  to  the  wlieat,  and  they 
were  followed  by  a  great  deal  of  wet  and  stormy 
weather,  from  that  tmie  till  the  getting  in  of  the 
harvest.  Some  of  the  other  crops  suffered,  although 
not  in  the  same  degree  with  wheat,  and  the  aggre- 
gate produce  was  estimated  to  be  below  an  average. 

a  temperature  in  this  climate.  Of  the  season  of  1808,  the 
following  extracts  from  the  Farmer's  Magazine  convey  the 
general  character :  — 

"  The  first  four  months  of  the  year  were  singularly  stormy 
and  cold,  displaying  all  the  horrors  of  winter,  even  till  the  last 
day  of  April.  The  month  of  May  was  ushered  in  with  the 
most  promising  appearances ;  and  vegetation,  from  that  time, 
proceeded  with  a  rapidity  rarely  witnessed  in  this  country.  The 
last  two  weeks  of  June,  and  the  first  three  weeks  of  July,  fur- 
nished warmer  weather  than  had  been  remembered  by  the  oldest 
man  living  *  ;  and  this  unprecedented  warmness  was  followed  by 
dreadful  thunder  storms  in  every  quarter  of  the  island,  accom- 
panied with  heavy  rains,  more  resembling  those  of  the  torrid 
zone  than  what  are  usually  experienced  in  the  temperate  climate 
of  Great  Britain.  The  loss  and  damage  sustained  by  such  heavy 
rains,  can  only  be  correctly  ascertained  at  an  after  period.  It 
is  enough,  in  this  place,  to  say,  that,  in  consequence  of  them, 
the  wheats  have  been  mildewed  considerably  ;  a  great  part  of 
the  hay  crop  absolutely  rotted ;  whilst  field  labour  hath  been 
thrown  out  of  shape,  and  placed  in  a  condition  not  to  be  reme- 
died at  this  advanced  period  of  the  season."  —  September,  1808. 
vol.  ix.  p.  375. 

"  The  failure  of  the  wheat  crop,  noticed  in  our  last,  proves 
greater  than  at  first  imagined,  and  appears  to  have  taken  place 
in  almost  every  district,  though  in  different  degrees,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  soil,  the  stage  of  growth  at  which  plants 
had  arrived  when  adverse  weather  set  in,  and  the  situation  of 
fields  occupied  with  that  grain." — December,  1808. 


*  Extract  from  a  Meteorological  Journal,  two  miles  north-ivest 
of  London  :  — 

"  July  1.  1808.  —  The  leading  feature  of  this  month  has  been 
the  extreme  heat  of  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th  days.  We  have 
paid  much  attention  to  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  as  the  reports 
in  this  work  will  show,  since  January,  1802;  and  remember 
nothing  approaching  to  the  heat  of  the  days  referred  to. 

"  We  have  used  the  same  thermometer  through  the  whole 
period,  nor  has  the  plan  been  changed ;  it  hangs  on  the  outside 
of  a  window  frame  looking  n.  e.     In  this  situation  on  the  12th, 


270  inXICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

This  was  the  period,  too,  when  our  communication 
with  the  Continent  had  become  very  much  ob- 
structed, so  as  to  preclude  the  expectation  of  any 
considerable  relief  from  foreign  supply.  In  point 
of  fact,  there  was  an  excess  of  export  of  about 
15,000  quarters  of  wheat,  occasioned  by  the  wants 
of  Spain  and  Portugal.  The  high  price,  therefore, 
(wheat  having  advanced  by  July  to  an  average  of 
Sis.  Id.  per  quarter,  and  by  January  following  to 
90s.  4fd.)  was  a  necessary  condition  for  eking  out 
a  reduced  supply  of  our  own  growth,  when  the 
obstructions  to  importation  had  become  great,  and 
were  thought  in  that  year  to  be  insurmountable. 
Nothing,  indeed,  can  better  prove  the  magnitude 
of  those  obstructions,  than  the  circumstance  that 
an  average  price  of  upwards  of  80*-.  when  the  ex- 
change and  the  price  of  gold  were  nearly  at  par, 
was  insufficient  to  bring  forward  any  foreign  supply 
worth  mentioning.  But  such  was  the  spirit  of 
caution  then  prevailing  in  the  corn  trade  which  had 
been  suffering  from  a  slow  but  long-continued  fall 
of  prices,  that  the  advance,  although  under  cir- 
cumstances so  favourable  to  it,  was  very  gradual. 
Tiius  it  was  not  till  May,  1808,  that  the  average 
got  up  to  72s.  6d.  for  wheat.  But  thenceforward 
a  backwardness  of  the  crops,  and  unfavourable  ap- 


it  was  as  high  as  881°  ;  on  the  13th,  91°  ;  and,  on  the  l^th,  it 
was  at  the  astonishing  height  of  93°,  at  which  it  continued 
nearly  an  hour.  At  the  timber  yard  near  Westminster  Bridge, 
Ave  were  informed,  it  was  at  the  same  height.  In  a  shop  in 
Holborn,  on  the  13th,  we  saw  the  thermometer  at  89°,  at  a 
time  that  the  shop  appeared  to  the  feehngs  very  cool  in  com- 
parison of  the  external  air. 

"  Mr.  Capel  Lofft  of  Troston,  writes,  that  on  the  12th  and 
13th,  his  thermometer  stood  both  days  at  91°,  and  his  observ- 
ations were  confirmed  by  those  of  a  neighbour;  and  at  Bury  St. 
Edmunds,  the  thermometer  was  93°  on  the  12th,  and  at  95° 
on  the  13th.  Mr.  Lofft  observes,  that  '  twenty-seven  years' 
observation,  very  little  interrupted,  has  never  given  me  an  equal 
result  in  two  days,  or  even  in  a  single  day.' " 


1«C)1<  — 1808.  ^i71 

pearances  of  them,  and  very  stormy  weather  during 
a  great  part  of  the  liarvest,  which  was  considered 
to  be  deficient,  occasioned  a  more  decided  rise, 
viz.,  to  9^*.,  at  the  close  of  the  year. 

Under  tliese  circumstances,  instead  of  having  re- 
course to  the  Bank  restriction  and  to  war  consump- 
tion, for  the  purpose  of  accounting  for  the  rise  in 
price,  it  should  be  rather  a  matter  of  wonder  that  it 
did  notgo  much  higher;  and  it  is  a  tribute  to  the  pru- 
denceof  thetrade  at  that  time,  that  there  was  somuch 
less  speculation  in  it  than,  as  will  be  seen,  prevailed 
contemporaneously  in  other  branches  of  trade,  in 
consequence  of  an  actual  or  apprehended  cessation 
of  all  foreign  supply.  It  is  at  the  same  time  worthy 
of  remark,  that  while  in  the  interval  under  consi- 
deration, viz.  from  the  commencement  of  1801  to 
the  end  of  1808,  so  great  a  rise  had  taken  place  in 
the  prices  of  corn  there  was  a  considerable  fall  in 
the  prices  of  meat  to  the  close  of  1808,  and  first 
quarter  of  1809. 

In  Smithfield  Market 

Beef.  Mutton. 

1 804^,  4.S.  6d.  to  5s.  8d.  5s,       to  6s. 

1808,  3s.         to  5s.  3s.  4r/.  to  5s.  4d. 

The  contract  by  the  Victualling  Board  for  the 
supply  of  fresh  beef,  was 

*  Dec.  1803,  at  55s.  6d.  per  cwt. 
Dec.  1808,        50.9. 

And  Irish  provisions,  which  might  be  considered 
to  be  directly  acted  upon  by  government  demand, 
were, 

Dec.  1803,   Mess  Beef,   152^.  to  1 60s. 

Mess  Pork,  105.9.  to  115.9. 

1808,   Mess  Beef,   120^.  to  125^. 

Mess  Pork,    65s.  to    92*. 

■*  In  November,  1801,  after  preliminaries  of  peace  with  France, 
the  contract  was  at  69^.  Id.  per  cwt.  This  is  the  first  date 
quoted  at  Deptford  -,  but  there  is  a  quotation  for  PI )» mouth  yard 
in  March,  1801,  as  high  as  80*. 


272  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

It  is  not  easy  to  find  a  more  striking  instance  than 
this  of  the  little  influence  of  government  demand  on 
the  general  prices  of  provisions,  seeing  that  in  that 
interval  the  demands  for  victualling  the  navy  and 
army,  were  on  an  enormous  scale,  and  progressively 
increasing,  more  especially  at  the  close  of  1808, 
when  fleets  and  armies  were  despatched  for  the  war 
in  the  Peninsula,  which  had  just  then  commenced. 
If  the  rise  in  the  prices  of  corn  is  to  be  explained 
by  the  supposed  operation  of  the  Bank  restriction, 
or  government  demand,  how  is  the  fall  in  the  price 
of  meat  to  be  accounted  for?  Leaving  the  sup- 
porters of  either,  or  of  both  of  the  two  theories, 
to  offer  a  consistent  explanation  of  the  opposite 
tendencies  of  those  two  great  classes  of  human 
food,  I  have  now  to  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to 
some  most  extraordinary  variations,  in  this  interval, 
of  the  prices  of  other  descriptions  of  produce. 


Section  3.  — Instances  of  some  of  the  most  promi- 
nent of  the  Variations  of  the  Prices  of  Commo- 
dities besides  those  of  Corn. 

It  would  be  irksome  to  the  general  reader  to 
trace  with  much  minuteness  the  changes  and  the 
causes  of  those  changes  in  the  great  number  of 
articles  which  underwent  those  fluctuations  (which 
any  person  wishing  to  follow  them  more  in  detail 
may  do  by  reference  to  the  list  of  prices  in  the 
Appendix),  I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to  a 
view  of  some  of  the  most  prominent  of  them,  for 
the  purpose  of  seeing  how  far  they  are  calculated 
to  countenance  the  theories  in  question. 

Sugar  and  coffee,  and  some  other  articles  of  Co- 
lonial produce,  which  had  reached  an  extreme  point 
of  depression  at  the  close  of  1801,  advanced  from 
that  time  till  1805.     The  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees, 


1804—1808.  273 

by  narrowing  the  channels  for  export,  depressed 
these  articles  in  1806  and  1807,  and  subsequently 
after  experiencing  a  short-lived  speculative  im- 
provement between  1807  and  1810,  they  were,  till 
the  opening  of  the  ports  on  the  Continent,  some 
years  later,  viz.  in  1813  and  1814,  at  a  ruinously 
low  range  of  prices. 

Copper,  in  consequence  of  a  greatly  increased 
demand,  not  only  for  the  sheathing  of  ships, 
but  for  an  extensive  coinage  which  was  then  in 
progress,  attained,  in  1805,  to  200/.  per  ton,  a 
price  which  it  never  afterwards  exceeded,  and  be- 
low which  it  has  constantly  ranged,  subsequently 
to  1808,  when,  for  a  short  time,  it  was,  after  inter- 
mediate fluctuations,  again  at  that  price.  Lead, 
which  had  ranged  at  about  20/.  per  fodder,  pre- 
vious to  1800,  rose  to  41/.  in  1805,  and  after  declin- 
ing again  to  28/.,  rose  in  the  autumn  of  1808  to 
43/.,  a  price  which  it  never  afterwards  reached. 
British  iron  attained,  in  1803,  as  high  a  price  as  it 
ever  subsequently  reached  till  1818  and  1819. 
Foreign  iron  had  been  at  its  maximum  in  1800 
and  1801. 

The  close  of  the  year  1807*  found  us,  by  the 
events  of  the  war,  excluded  from  direct  commer- 
cial intercourse  with  every  country  in  Europe, 
Sweden  excepted ;  and  there  was  consequently, 
besides  in  many  instances  a  short  actual  supply, 
a  prospect  of  scarcity  of  every  article  of  European 
produce,  required  as  raw  materials  for  our  ma- 
nufactures, or  as  naval  stores.  About  the  same 
time,  too,  began  our  disputes  with  the  United 
States  of  America,  which  produced  first  a  non- 
intercourse  act,  and  eventually  a  war.  The  pro- 
spect of  scarcity  thus  held  out,  naturally  excited 
a  spirit  of  speculation  ;  and  in  proportion  as  that 
prospect  became  realised,  was  the  speculative  de- 

*  The  celebrated  Milan  decree  was  issued  about  this  time. 

T 


274-  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

mand  extended  through  different  periods  in  1808, 
and  the  early  part  of  1809,  when  the  obstructions 
to  importation,  from  poHtical  causes,  nearly  reached 
their  height.  After  the  attack  on  Copenhagen,  and 
the  final  withdrawing  of  our  naval  and  military  forces 
from  thence,  Russia  and  Denmark  joined  in  the  war 
against  this  country.*  The  Baltic  being  thus  shut 
against  any  direct  commercial  intercourse  with  this 
country,  it  was  not  clear  that  any  part  of  our  usual 
supplies  of  necessary  articles  from  thence  could  be 
obtained  by  any  channel,  however  circuitous,  or  at 
any  expense,  however  great.  It  was  naturally 
supposed  that  Russia  might,  whether  compelled 
by  France,  or  of  her  own  accord,  make  a  point  of 
depriving  this  country  of  some  of  the  materials 
essential  to  the  maintenance  of  our  navy,  and  of 
these  the  foremost  was  hemp.  This  article,  in 
consequence  of  such  apprehensions,  in  aggravation 
of  actual  deficiency  of  supply,  advanced  from  58/. 
in  the  summer  of  1807  to  118/.  per  ton  in  the 
course  of  1808.  Flax,  on  nearly  the  same  grounds, 
rose  from  68/.  to  142/.  per  ton.  Memel  timber 
reached  17/.  per  load,  having  varied  during  180(3 
and  1807  from  3/.  13.v.  to  8/.  10s.  Deals  and  other 
descriptions  of  wood  rose  in  proportion.  Baltic 
linseed  rose  from  43*.  to  150.9.  per  quarter  ;  Russia 
tallow,  from  53.9.  to  112.9.  per  cwt. 

In  consequence  of  the  occupation  of  Spain  by 
the  French,  it  was  imagined  that  the  exportation 
of  wool  from  thence  would  be  rendered  imprac- 
ticable, or  that,  at  any  rate,  the  unsettled  state  of 
that  kingdom  would  materially  diminish  the  pro- 
duce. Under  this  impression,  a  very  great  specu- 
lation was  entered  into,  and  the  price  rose  from 
6.9.  Jd.  and  6s.  9^.  to  22.9.  and  26*.  per  lb.  for  the 
Leonessa,  and  from  2*.  6d.  and  56-.  to  13.9.  and  18.9. 
for  Seville  wools. 

*  A  Revolution  in  Sweden  in  Marcli,  1809,  ])]aced  that 
country  also  in  hostility  against  us. 


1804^—1808. 


275 


Our  principal  dependence  for  a  supply  of  silk 
was,  at  that  time,  on  Italy;  and  there  was  a  double 
ground  on  which  the  French,  who  then  exercised 
dominion  over  that  country,  might  be  expected  to 
do  then'  utmost  to  prevent  our  obtainmg  any  from 
thence.  One  motive  would  be,  that  of  distressmg 
us,  and  another  would  be,  that  of  giving  a  more 
decided  superiority  to  their  own  manufactures.  It 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that  this  article 
advanced  considerably, — viz.  Piedmont  thrown  silk 
from  30.9.  and  47*'.  in  1807,  to  9Gs.  and  112.v.  in 
1808  ;  China  raw  silk,  from  Ids-  and  22^.  to  33s. 
and  45*.  •,  and  Bengal,  from  25s.  and  33*.  to  52*. 
and  85*. 

The  orders  in  council,  on  our  part,  and  the 
non-intercourse  act  and  various  embargoes,  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States  of  America,  were 
calculated  to  favour  speculation  in  the  produce  of 
that  country ;  and,  accordingly,  Georgia  cotton 
advanced  from  9^/-  and  l.v.  to  2*.  and  2*.  Gd. 
per  lb. ;  and  Virginia  tobacco  from  4c?.  and  8^.  to 
1*.  4fd.  and  2*.  per  lb.* 

Under  an  impression  of  the  permanence  of  the 
causes  of  dearth  of  provisions  and  of  other  neces- 
saries, increased  as  these  were  by  the  effects  of 
progressive  taxation,  the  rate  of  wages,  particu- 
larly of  artizan  labour,  experienced  in  the  interval 
between  1803  and  1808,    a  further  advance,  and 

*  Of  the  falling  off  of  supply,  which  gave  occasion  to  this 
great  advance  of  prices,  take  the  following  instances.  Many- 
others  might  be  brought  forward,  which  it  would  be  tedious  to 
enumerate. 

Imports  into  Great  Britain. 


Sheep  and 
Lambs'  Wool. 

Raw  and 

Thrown  Silk. 

Cotton. 

Tallow. 

Hemp. 

1806 
1807 
1808 

lbs. 

7,333.993 

11,768,926 

2,353,725 

tbs. 

1,317,841 

1,123,943 

776,414 

lbs. 
58,176,283 
74,925,306 
43,605,982 

cwts. 

536,652 
367,398 
148,282 

cwts. 

729,786 
756,824 
259,687 

T    2 


^76  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

in  1808  and  1809  attained,  in  many  branches  of 
industry,  its  greatest  height. 


Section  4. — New  JieUh  of  enferprize  opeiied  for 
Exports. 

There  was,  coincidently  with  the  great  advance 
in  imported  commodities,  a  new  and  very  exten- 
sive field  opened  for  our  exports. 

The  transfer  of  the  seat  of  government  from  Por- 
tugal to  the  Brazils,  and  the  virtual  emancipation  of 
the  colonies  of  Spain  from  the  control  of  the  mother 
country,  opened  the  trade  of  a  great  part  of  South 
America  in  1808*  ;  and  as  by  the  course  of  the  war 
we  possessed  the  entire  dominion  of  the  seas,  it  was, 
in  fact,  to  this  country,  exclusively  of  the  rest  of 
Europe,  that  this  opening  was  presented.  So  vast 
and  comparatively  untried  a  field  was  not  held  out 
in  vain  to  the  merchants  and  manufacturers  of  this 
country  ;  and,  accordingly,  the  spirit  of  speculation 
was  on  the  alert  to  export  every  article,  not  only 
that  might  probably,  but  that  could  possibly,  come 
into  demand. 

Mr.  M'Cullocli,  in  illustrating  the  effects  of 
ignorance  and  miscalculation  in  the  overstocking 
of  such  new  markets  as  are  occasionally  opened,  and 
in  filling  them  with  articles  totally  unsuited  to  the 
wants  and  habits  of  the  people,  gives  the  follow- 
ing graphic  description  of  the  shipments  to  South 
America  in  1808  :  — 

"  The   exportations  consequent  on  the  first  opening  of  the 
trade  to  Buenos  Ayres,  Brazil,   and  the  Cai'accas  were  most 


*  There  had  been  in  1806,  a  considerable  excitement  in  the 
export  trade,  in  consequence  of  the  expedition  of  Sir  Home 
Popham  to  Buenos  Ayres.  But  both  the  expedition  and  the 
commercial  speculations  founded  upon  it  ended  disastrously. 


1804—1808.  277 

extraordinary.  Speculation  was  then  carried  beyond  the 
boundaries  within  which  even  gambling  is  usually  confined,  and 
was  pushed  to  an  extent  and  into  channels  that  could  hardly 
have  been  deemed  practicable.  We  are  informed  by  Mr. 
Mawe,  an  intelligent  traveller,  resident  at  Rio  Janeiro,  at  the 
period  in  question,  that  more  Manchester  goods  were  sent 
out  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks,  than  had  been  consumed  in 
the  twenty  years  preceding;  and  the  quantity  of  English  goods  of 
all  sorts  poured  into  the  city  was  so  very  great,  that  warehouses 
could  not  be  provided  sufficient  to  contain  them  ;  and  that  the 
most  valuable  merchandise  was  actually  exposed  for  weeks  on 
the  beach  to  the  weather,  and  to  every  sort  of  depredation. 
Elegant  services  of  cut-glass  and  china  were  offered  to  persons 
whose  most  splendid  drinking-vessels  consisted  of  a  horn,  or  the 
shell  of  a  cocoa  nut ;  tools  were  sent  out,  having  a  hammer  on 
the  one  side  and  a  hatchet  on  the  other,  as  if  the  inhabitants  had 
had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  break  the  first  stone  that  they 
met  with,  and  then  cut  the  gold  and  diamonds  from  it ;  and 
some  speculators  actually  went  so  far  as  to  send  out  skates  to 
Rio  Janeiro." — Pri?iciples  of  Political  Economy,  2d  ed.  p.  329. 

This  description  of  the  exports  in  1808  is  the 
more  especially  to  be  borne  in  mind,  as,  in  con- 
jtmction  with  the  speculations  in  imports,  and 
with  the  general  excitement  wliich  is  about  to  be 
noticed,  it  affords  reasonable  grounds  for  anticipa- 
tion of  the  great  reaction,  and  the  ruinous  results 
which  are  to  be  recorded,  as  having  occurred  in 
the  two  following  years. 


Section  .5.  —  General  Excitement  and  Specula- 
tions in  Shares  in  1807  d'^^d  1808. 

The  encouragement  thus  offered  for  speculative 
exports  cohiciding  with  the  inducements  held  out 
by  actual,  and  still  more  by  prospective  scarcity, 
to  speculation  in  so  many  articles  of  general  con- 
sumption, combined,  in  1807  and  1808,  to  produce 
an  almost  universal  excitement,  leading,  as  usual  on 
such  occasions,  to  hazardous  adventure,  and  ex- 
tending itself  to   nev/  projects  of  various  kinds, 

T  3 


278  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

such  as  canals,  bridges,  fire  offices,  breweries,  dis- 
tilleries, and  many  other  descriptions  of  joint-stock 
companies. 

The  speculations  in  shares  had  already  pro- 
ceeded to  a  considerable  extent  in  I8O7.*  In  many 
of  the  instances  these  speculations  as  well  as  those 
in  goods  reached  the  utmost  height  in  the  beginning 
of  1808,  and  the  greater  part  before  the  close  of 
that  year. 

*  This  will  appear  by  the  following  extract  from  one  of  the 
contemporary  periodical  publications  :  — 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Monthly  Magazine. 
"  Sir, 
"  Several  of  your  correspondents  have  noticed  the  prevailing 
disposition  for  the  establishment  of  joint-stock  companies  for 
almost  every  branch  of  trade,  but  none  of  them  have  attempted 
to  show  the  progress  we  had  made  towards  reviving  the  infatu- 
ation of  the  celebrated  year  1720.  These  stock-jobbing  specu- 
lations have  received  a  check,  which  will  probably  prevent 
their  increase  for  the  present ;  but  in  order  to  convey  to  future 
readers  of  your  Magazine  some  idea  of  our  commercial  inge- 
nuity and  enterprising  spirit,  you  probably  will  find  room  for 
the  enclosed  list.  All  the  projects  it  comprehends  have  been 
laid  before  the  public  in  the  course  of  the  last  year,  and  the 
greater  part  of  them  will  cease  to  be  publicly  known  before 
the  end  of  the  present  year.     Yours,  &c. 

"  January  12.  1808.  G. 

"  List  of  Public  Companies  proposed  to  be  established  by  Sub- 
scription in  the  Year  1807. 

"  1.  Hope  Fire  and  Life  Insurance  Company;  capital 
2,000,000/. 

"  2.  County  Fire  Office,  Southampton  Street  ;  capital 
350,000/. 

"  3.  Eagle  Fire  and  Life  Insurance  Company ;  capital 
2,000,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  4.  Rainbow  Fire  and  Life  Office,  Commercial  Road. 

"  5.  Atlas  Insurance  Company,  for  Fire,  Lives,  and  Annuities. 

"  6.  Golden  Lane  Bi'ewery,  Brown  and  Parry's ;  capital 
300,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  7-  The  Old  English  Ale  Brewery,  for  brewing  Ale,  Amber, 
and  Table  Beer,  from  Malt  and  Hops  only ;  capital  75,000/.,  in 
shares  of  25/.  each. 

"  8.  Maiden  Lane  Brewery. 

"  9.  Weston  Street  Brewery. 

"  10.  United  Public  Brewery,  Bankside  ;  shares  52/.  10*.  each. 


1804^—1808.  279 

The  Strand  Bridge  (now  Waterloo  Bridge)  and 
Vauxhall  Bridge  were  projected,  and  the  subscrip- 
tions for  them  raised  in  1808. 


"11.  British  Ale  Brewery,  Lambeth — Mainwaring's. 

"  12.  PubUc  Bre«-ery,  Deptford. 

"  1 3.  The  London  Genuine  Malt  Distillery,  and  Rectifying 
Company,  at  Vauxhall  ;  capital  140,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  14.  The  Public  Distillery  for  making  and  rectifj'ing  Ge- 
nuine British  Spirits,  Cordials,  and  Compounds;  capital  200,000/., 
in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  15.  Another  rectifying  Distillery,  on  a  smaller  scale. 

"  16.  Another  making  and  rectifying  Distillery,  on  a  large 
scale ;  capital  300,000/. 

"  17.  London  Genuine  Wine  Company,  for  importing  and 
supplying  Vintners  and  the  Public  in  general  with  Port,  Ma- 
deira, and  Sherry  Wines,  free  from  adulteration ;  capital 
500,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  18.  Britannic  and  India  Wine  Company;  capital  from 
250,000/.  to  500,000/.,  in  shares  of  100/.  each. 

"  19.  Genuine  Wine  Company;  capital  50,000/. 

"  20.  London  Subscription  Wine  Company,  for  supplying  the 
Public  with  Foreign  Wines  of  the  first  quality,  for  ready  money  ; 
capital  50,000/.  in  shares  of  50/. 

'<  21.  Genuine  Wine  and  Foreign  Spirit  Company. 

"  22.  The  London  British  Vinegar  Company;  capital  100,000/., 
in  shares  of  50/.  each,  with  power  to  the  Committee  to  increase 
the  capital  by  the  sale  of  additional  shares. 

"23.  Vinegar  Manufactory  Company;  capital  50,000/.,  in 
shares  of  25/.  each. 

"  24.  Corn,  Flour,  and  Provision  Companj^,  upon  a  very  large 
scale,  with  the  view  of  supplying  Government,  tvc. 

"  25.  United  Public  Dairy,  for  the  sale  of  milk. 

"  26.  New  Medical  Laboratory,  for  the  preparation  and  sale 
of  Genuine  Medicines  ;  capital  50,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  27.  British  Coal  Company ;  capital  300,000/.,  in  shares  of 
50/.  each,  with  power  to  the  Committee  to  increase  the  capital 
by  the  sale  of  additional  shares. 

"  28.  Newcastle  and  Sunderland  Coal  Company ;  capital 
100,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  29.  Shields  Coal  Company. 

"  SO.  National  Light  and  Heat  Company,  by  F.  A.  Windsor, 
97.  Pall  Mall ;  capital  1,000,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"31.  London  Clothing  Company,  for  supplying  the  Army, 
Navy,  and  Public  with  Clothes;  capital  100,000/.,  in  shares  of 
25/.  each. 

"  32.  United  Woollen  Company. 

T  4 


280  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Section  6.  —  On  the  State  of  the  Circulation  from 
1804  to  1808. 

All  the  excitement  which  has  just  been  de- 
scribed, the  enormous  advance  of  prices,  extending 
to  so  many  of  the  most  considerable  articles  of  con- 
sumption, and  the  speculations  in  shares  which 
then  prevailed,  and  a  further  advance  in  the  wages 
of  labour,  occurred  during  a  singularly  equable 
state  and  moderate  amount  of  the  circulation,  in 
as  far  as  depended  upon  the  issues  of  the  Bank  of 
England.  This  will  appear  by  the  following  state- 
ment. The  years  1802  and  1803  are  included,  for 
the  purpose  of  showing,  that  in  those  two  years  of 
low  prices,  the  average  circulation  of  notes  of  5l. 
an-d  upwards*,  was  larger  than  on  the  average  of  the 
subsequent  five  years,  and  the  prices  of  wheat  are 
placed  in  juxtaposition  for  the  purpose  of  showing 
their  want  of  connection  with  the  amount  of  the 
circulation :  — 


"  33.  Linen  Company  for  Commission  Sales;  capital  500,000/., 
in  shares  of  100/.  each. 

"  ?>^.  London  Commission  Sale  Company,  for  making  ad- 
vances on  Produce  and  manufactured  Goods,  and  selling  them 
to  advantage  ;  capital  1,000,000/.,  in  shares  of  50/.  each. 

"  35.  British  Commission  Company ;  capital  1,000,000/.,  in 
shares  of  100/.  each. 

"  36.  Albion  London  Information  Office,  for  Sale  or  Exchange 
of  Estates,  Manors,  Livings,  &c.,  the  disposal  of  appointments 
and  practice  in  the  liberal  professions,  8zc. 

"  37.  Company  for  purchasing  Canal  Shares,  and  lending 
Money  for  completing  Canals;  shares  of  10/.  each. 

*'  38.  British  Copper  Company  ;  J.  Jones,  Lambeth. 

"  39.  Cambrian  Copper  Company;  capital  100,000/. 

"  40.  Paper  Manufacturing  Company,  by  R.  Dodd. 

"  41.  The  London  Bank,  by  Mr.  Brown  of  the  Golden  Lane 
Brewery  ;  capital  5,000,000/.,  in  shares  of  100/.  each  ;  51.  to  be 
paid  on  subscribing. 

"  42.  National  Deposit,  Interest,  and  Credit  Bank,  by  F.  A. 
Windsor  ;  capital  5,000,000/.,  in  50/.  shares ;  to  commence  busi- 
ness on  the  1st  of  January,  1808." 

*  The  view  would  not  be  much  varied,  nor  the  conclusion 
materially  impaired,  the  notes  under  51.  were  taken  into  the 
account. 


1804—1808.  281 


Average  Price  of     Bank  notes  of  51. 
Wheat  31st  Dec.         and  upwards. 


Average  of  two  years, 
13,450,727/. 


57*.     1802,         13,917,977 

51*.     1803,         12,983,477 

86*.     1804,  12,621,3481 

76*.     1805*,      12,697,352     Average  of  five  vears 

76*.     1806,         12,844,170  }  ^^^'^^^Jlr^lllf''' 

66*.     1807,  13,221,988  |  i^,^oi,^v-ti. 

90s.  1808,  13,402, 160  J 
And  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  cir- 
culation anterior  to  the  Bank  restriction,  it  may 
be  worth  while  here  to  recall  to  the  reader's  recol- 
lection, that  the  average  amount  of  the  three  years 
ending  in  December  1795,  was  11,975,573/.  Thus 
the  average  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation  of  notes 
of  5l.  and  upwards,  in  the  five  years  ending  in 
December  1808,  exceeded  by  less  than  one  million 
the  average  amount  of  the  three  years  ending  in 
1795! 

The  position  of  the  Bank,  moreover,  while  all 
this  great  disturbance  of  prices  was  in  progress, 
and  attained  nearly  its  greatest  height,  was  such 
as  it  might,  and  probably  would  have  been,  if  it 
had  then  been  paying  in  cash  ;  for,  on  the  28th 
February,  1808,  it  stood  thus:^ — 

Circulation —  £  Securities —  £ 

Notes  of  5/.and  upwards,  14,093,690         Public       14,149,501 
Notes  under  51.  4,095,170         Private       13,234,579 


18,188,860  27,384,080 

Deposits  -  11,961,960       Bullion       f  7,855,470 


Liabilities    30,150,820         Assets        35,239,550 


*  There  was  a  fall  of  the  exchange,  and  an  efflux  of  bullion 
for  a  few  months  in  1805,  in  consequence  of  subsidies  to  Aus- 
tria and  Russia  ;  but  after  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  which  led 
to  a  peace  between  Austria  and  France,  the  exchanges  rallied, 
and  there  was  a  renewed  influx  of  bullion. 

t  There  cannot  be  a  stronger  presumption  than  is  afforded 
by  this  amount  of  bullion,  that  the  Bank  haol,  up  to  this  time, 
at  least,  in  view,  the  eventual  resumption  of  cash  payments  ; 
else,  why  have  bought  gold,  paying,  absurdly  enough,  4/.  the 
ounce  for  all  that  was  broui^ht  to  them  ? 


Q8'2  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  stock  of  bullion  was  larger  than  it  had  been 
during  the  twenty  years  preceding  the  Bank  re- 
striction, with  the  exception  of  the  short  interval 
from  1789  to  I79I.  And,  if  the  Bank  had  not 
fixed  the  price  of  gold  at  4/.,  by  buying  at  that 
rate  whatever  quantity  was  offered  to  them,  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  but  that  the  market 
price  would  have  subsided  to  the  Mint  price.* 
On  the  31st  Auj^ust  1808,  the  circulation  was 
reduced  by  somewhat  more  than  a  million,  and  the 
stock  of  bullion  by  about  a  million  and  a  half. 

31st  August,  1808. 

Circulation  £         Securities —         £ 

Notes  of  5/.  and  upwards    12,993,020         Public     14,956,394 
Notes  under  5/.  -     4,118,270        Private    14,287,696 


17,111,290  29,244,090 

Deposits  -  13,012,510         Bullion     6,015,940 


Liabilities     30,123,800         Assets    35,260,030 

The  exchange  on  Hamburgh,  in  the  mean  time, 
had  risen  from  SU.  4t/.,  in  February,  to  35s.  Qd. 
in  August.  In  this  state  of  the  exchange,  of  the 
stock  of  bullion,  and  of  the  circulation,  there  was 
assuredly  nothing  that  could  lead  to  the  supposi- 
tion of  any  influence  by  the  Bank  restriction,  in 
raising  general  prices,  and  in  favouring  the  specu- 
lations in  that  period,  or  to  the  inference,  that  the 
depreciation  of  the  currency  caused  hy  that  mea- 
sure, was  greater  than  the  difference  between  paper 
and  gold. 

The  very  moderate  amount,  but  more  especially 
the  equableness  of  the  annual  average  circulation 
of  the  six  years  from  1803  to  1808,  both  years 
included,  embracing  an  interval  in  which  there 
were  such  extraordinary  fluctuations,  and  so  high 

*  The  price  of  silver  in  1808,  although  a  little  above  the 
Mint  price,  was  loiver  than  it  had  been  during  the  greater  part 
of  last  century^  and  loiver  than  it  ivas  ^>^  1 792. 


1804^—1808.  283 

a  range  of  prices,  and  during  which  such  large  finan- 
cial operations  were  taking  place,  and  such  great 
political  changes  occurred,  are  curious  facts  in  the 
history  of  our  currency. 

How  happened  it  that  the  Bank,  having  such 
powerful  motives  of  interest,  with  a  view  to  its 
dividends,  to  extend  its  issues,  being  no  longer 
under  the  check  of  convertibility,  the  directors 
having  avowed,  moreover,  that  in  the  regulation 
of  the  amount,  they  disregarded  the  exchanges, 
^vhich  they  held  to  be  uninfluenced  by  the  quan- 
tity of  Bank  paper,  and  that  their  only  guide  was, 
the  demand  for  discount  of  good  bills  at  5  per 
cent.?  —  How  happened  it,  that  wdth  such  motives 
to  excess,  and  under  the  guidance  of  opinions  so 
unsound,  there  was  so  trifling  an  increase,  com- 
pared with  the  amount  before  the  restriction,  and 
so  small  a  variation  in  the  yearly  average  of  the 
issues  ? 

The  bullion  committee  of  1810,  from  whose  re- 
port the  foregoing  amounts  of  the  annual  circula- 
tion are  extracted,  do  not  advert  to  this  remarkable 
fact,  and  much  less  do  they  attempt  to  explain  it. 
They  notice  only  the  marked  increase,  which  took 
place  in  1809  and  1810  (and  which  I  shall  have 
occasion  to  remark  upon  hereafter),  observing, 
however,  as  an  important  principle,  that  the  mere 
numerical  return  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  in 
circulation  cannot  be  considered  as  at  all  decid- 
ing the  question,  whether  such  paper  is  or  is  not 
excessive. 

This  is  very  true,  and  accounts  for  some  of  the 
phaenomen-a  observed  in  former  periods,  as  also 
in  subsequent  ones,  of  great  alterations  in  the 
amount  of  Bank  notes,  consistently  with  a  state  of 
the  exchanges  at  variance  with  the  indications. 
But  it  does  not  explain  how,  under  the  varying 
but  progressive  increase  of  our  trade,  and  under  the 
very  extraordinary  circumstances  of  the  political 
and  financial  state  of  the  countiy,  so  equable  and 


284  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

SO  moderate  an  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation 
could  be  preserved ;  and  how,  above  all,  it  could 
be  consistent  with  so  enormous  an  advance  of 
prices.  In  order,  however,  to  account  in  some 
degree  for  the  comparative  smallness  of  the  amount, 
the  committee  add, 

"  But,  above  all,  the  same  amount  of  currency  will  be  more 
or  less  adequate,  in  proportion  to  the  skill  which  the  great 
money  dealers  possess  in  managing  and  economising  the  use  of 
the  circulating  medium." 

They  then  refer  to  the  increased  use  of  bankers* 
drafts,  and  to  the  practice  of  the  clearing-house 
among  the  London  bankers,  as  among  the  expe- 
dients by  which  the  currency  is  economised,  and 
the  same  sum  rendered  adequate  to  a  much  greater 
amount  of  trade  and  payments  than  formerly.  But, 
as  we  have  had  before  occasion  to  observe,  the  im- 
provements in  economising  the  use  of  the  currency 
have  been  progressive ;  and  yet,  a  very  greatly 
enlarged  circulation  of  Bank  notes  has  been  found 
necessary  for  carrying  on  the  transactions  of  the 
metropolis  and  the  country,  consistently  with  the 
maintenance  of  the  ftjll  value  of  tJie  paper.  Tliis 
circumstance  will,  therefore,  not  go  far  to  account 
for  the  very  small  increase  between  1803  and 
1808,  compared  with  the  amount  between  1792 
and  1795  ;  and  still  less  to  explain  the  smallness 
of  the  variations  of  the  annual  amount. 

An  explanation  has  already  been  suggested,  with 
a  view  to  accounting  for  the  general  moderation  of 
the  issues  of  the  Bank,  during  the  whole  period  of  the 
restriction  ;  and  the  solution  of  tlie  difficulty  was 
stated  to  be  in  the  circumstance,  that  the  coin- 
cidence between  the  Bank  rate  of  discount  and  the 
market  rate  of  interest  for  such  bills  as  came 
within  the  Bank  rules  operated  in  the  main,  in 
conjunction  with  the  financial  system  of  the  govern- 
ment, as  a  principle  of  limitation. 

That  coincidence  seems  to  have  been  more  uni- 
form in  the  interval  between  1803  and  1808,  than 


180i— 1808.  285 

in  equal  periods  preceding  or  subsequent,  as  may 
be  inferred  from  the  comparatively  small  variation 
in  the  total  amount  of  the  securities  held  by  the 
Bank,  which  did  not  during  the  whole  of  that  in- 
terval vary  by  more  than  three  milUons.  The 
most  material  variation  that  occurred  may  here  be 
instanced,  as  showing  the  manner  in  which  the 
two  descriptions  of  securities  held  by  tlie  Bank 
acted  upon  each  other.  In  February,  1805,  the 
securities  were :  — 

Public  -  -      ^16,889,501 

Private         -         -  -  11,771,889 


Together  -  -  28,661,390 

The  government  advances,  as  above,  being  be- 
yond their  usual  amount,  were  soon  after  reduced 
by  about  five  miUionsj  and  in  August,  1805,  the 
securities  were  :  — 

Public  -  -      ^11,413,266* 

Private         -         -  -  16,359,564 


Together  -  -  27,772,850 

And  it  may  be  observed  generally,  that  there  lias 
been  a  tendency  to  compensation  or  adjustment  be- 
tween the  private  and  the  public  securities  held  by 
the  Bank.  It  appears,  likewise,  to  have  been  the 
policy  of  the  government,  not  to  allow  an  accumu- 
lation of  the  unfunded  debt,  as  long  as  the  state  of 
the  money  market  admitted  of  funding  without  ob- 
vious disadvantage. 

The  amount  of  discounts,  too,  bore  a  nearer  and 
more  uniform  proportion  to  the  advances  to  govern- 
ment during  this  period  than  before  or  subse- 
quently. 

*  And  during  this  reduced  and  low  state  of  the  advances  to 
government,  the  average  price  of  wheat  in  August,  1805,  rose 
to  1005.  per  quarter. 


286  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Section  7.  —  Advances  by  the  Bank  to    Govern- 
ment. 

With  reference  to  the  advances  by  the  Bank  to 
government  on  land  and  malt,  Exchequer  bills 
and  other  securities,  the  bullion  committee  of 
1810  remark,  — 

"  That  the  yearly  advances  have,  upon  an  average,  since 
the  suspension,  been  considerably  lower  in  amount  than  the 
average  amount  of  advances  prior  to  that  event ;  and  the 
amount  of  those  advances  in  the  two  last  years,  though  greater 
in  amount  than  those  of  some  years  immediately  preceding,  is 
less  than  it  was  for  any  of  the  six  years  preceding  the  restric- 
tion of  cash  payments." 

This,  of  itself,  is  an  important  admission,  and  if 
the  attention  of  the  committee  had  been  suffi- 
ciently directed  to  the  inference  from  the  fact,  it 
might  have  led  them  to  hesitate  more  than  they 
did,  in  making  the  charge  of  depreciation  hy  exces- 
sive issue. 

But  there  is  one  point  of  view  in  which  the  mo- 
deration of  the  advances  of  the  Bank  to  govern- 
ment may  be  exhibited  in  a  still  more  striking 
manner. 

From  the  documents  laid  before  parliament,  in 
consequence  of  the  attention  called  to  the  subject 
by  the  repeated  motions  in  parliament  of  Mr. 
Grenfell,  to  whose  persevering  exertions  the  public 
are  indebted  for  a  considerable  abatement,  which 
about  that  time  was  made  in  the  charge  of  the  Bank, 
for  the  management  of  the  public  debt ;  it  appears 
that  the  average  of  the  government  deposits  in  the 
hands  of  the  Bank,  in  I8O6,  was  12,197,303/.,  and 
that  the  amount  fluctuated  for  some  years  after  be- 
tween eleven  and  twelve  millions.  Now,  the  average 
of  the  advances  by  the  Bank  to  government,  was 
in  those  3^ears  somewhat  under  fourteen  million  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  So  that  the  real  cash 
advance^  or  the  medium  for  the  issue  of  Sank  notes 


1804—1808.  287 

through  the  government^  as  also  the  real  amount 
available  to  the  government  beyond  its  own  cash 
balance  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank,  did  not,  in  the 
interval  now  under  consideration ,  much  exceed 
three  millions  ! 

This   comparative    smallness   of  the    advances 
to  government  negatives  the  supposition  so  com- 
monly entertained  and  reasoned  upon,  as  a  point 
beyond   doubt,   that  the    Bank  was  rendered   by 
the    restriction,  a  mere    engine    in    the   hands  of 
government  for  facilitating  its  financial  operations, 
and  that  the  war  could  not    have   been    carried 
on  without  the  restriction.      In  fact,    the  whole 
charge    of  an    undue    proportion    of   the    issues 
of  the   Bank  in  advances  to  government,  will  be 
found  to  have  been  confined  to  the  two  last  years 
of  the  war,  and  the  Jive  years  following  the  peace. 
But  the  comparative   smallness  of  the    advances 
to  government,  during  the  period  now  under  con- 
sideration, is  material  in  another  point  of  view;  for 
it  will  be  seen  hereafter,  that  the  partisans  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  paramount  influence  of  the    cur- 
rency upon  prices,  lay  great  stress  upon  the  cliannel 
through  which  the  Bank  notes  are  issued,  imput- 
ing a  great  superiority  of  effect  to  the  same  amount 
if   issued  or  withdrawn  through  the  medium   of 
advances  to  government. 


Section  8. —  General  Remarks  on  the  State  of 
Prices,  and  of  the  Circulation  at  the  Close  of 
1808. 

It  is  of  importance  to  remark,  that  this  was  the 
state  of  things  after  an  interval  of  twelve  years 
from  the  Bank  restriction,  during  which  interval 
there  was  only  one  period  of  a  few  months  in  1801 
and  1802,  in   which   tlie  price  of  gold  was  above 


288  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

4/.  per  ounce,  or  the  price  of  silver  higher  than  it 
had  been  during  the  greater  part  of  last  century. 
And  yet  at  different  times  in  this  interval  of  twelve 
years,  nearly  every  article  of  consumption  experi- 
enced a  rise  of  price  fully  equal  to,  if  not  surpassing, 
any  that  it  subsequently  attained,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  articles  of  colonial  produce,  which  were  ex- 
travagantly raised,  by  ill-judged  speculations,  on  the 
peace  in  1814.  The  price  of  labour,  too,  had,  by  the 
close  of  1808,  attained  nearly  its  maximum  height, 
more  especially  artizan  labour. 

It  has  been  shown  in  the  case  of  corn  more  espe- 
cially, and  of  many  other  articles,  and  it  might  be 
equally  shown  of  the  rest  of  those  that  had  risen,  that 
in  every  individual  instance  scarcity,  real  or  appre- 
hended, was  the  occasion  of  the  advance.  It  may  be 
true,  that  in  all,  or  in  the  greater  part,  the  rise  proved 
tobebeyond  the  occasion  And  itis  probable,  thatthe 
rise  could  not  have  proceeded  to  the  height  which 
it  attained  in  some  of  the  articles,  had  it  not  been 
for  an  extension  of  the  country  bank  issues,  and 
an  extension  generally  of  the  circulating  medium, 
by  bills  of  exchange,  and  other  forms  of  credit. 
But  such  has  been  the  case,  under  circumstances 
favourable  to  speculation,  both  before  the  restric- 
tion and  since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments ; 
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  restriction  did  not 
exempt  over  trading  in  the  present  instance  from 
its  ordinary  results. 

The  question,  however,  is  not,  whether  the  rise 
was  beyond  the  occasion,  but  whether  it  was  the 
scarcity,  real  or  apprehended,  of  the  commodities, 
or  the  abundance  of  money,  that  was  the  cause  of 
the  advance  of  prices ;  and  it  may  be  put  to  any 
one,  who  has  been  at  the  trouble  of  examining  the 
facts  referred  to  in  the  view  which  has  been  taken 
of  the  period  from  the  restriction  to  the  close  of 
1808,  whether  there  is  the  slightest  ground  to 
ascribe  the  rise  to  an  abundance  of  money,    and 


1804—1808.  289 

not  to  the  scarcity,  real  or  apprehended,  of  the 
commodities.  So  palpable,  indeed,  so  clear  is  the 
negative  of  any  thing  like  depreciation,  as  contra- 
distinguishing abundance  of  money  from  scarcity 
of  commodities,  that  a  reference  is  seldom  made 
by  the  supporters  of  the  doctrine  of  depreciation, 
as  arising  out  of  the  Bank  restriction,  to  the  period 
anterior  to  1809.  And  yet,  the  mass  of  high 
prices  of  commodities,  arising  from  the  circum- 
stances described,  have  constantly  been  included  in 
the  general  impression  which  the  public  entertain  of 
great  depreciation,  caused  by  excess  of  money,  as 
characterising  the  whole  period  of  the  Bank  restric- 
tion. 

It  may  be  right,  however,  here  to  add,  that  it 
was  only  down  to  the  autumn,  and  not  quite  to 
the  close,  of  1808,  that  the  position  of  the  Bank, 
and  the  quotations  of  the  foreign  exchanges,  w^ere 
in  a  satisfactory  and  sound  state.  In  the  last 
three  months  of  1808,  although  no  increase  worth 
mentioning  had  taken  place  in  the  circulation  of 
the  Bank,  the  exchanges  fell  rapidly,  and  there 
was  a  considerable  reduction  of  its  stock  of  bul- 
lion. But  this  alteration  may  be  considered  as 
more  properly  belonging  to  the  next  epoch  ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  impulse  given  to  the  great 
advance  of  prices  in  1808,  and  the  anterior  period, 
had  not,  in  some  instances,  operated  to  its  full  ex- 
tent till  the  beginning  of  1809-  The  alteration  of 
the  exchanges,  and  of  the  position  of  the  Bank,  in 
the  last  quarter  of  1808,  therefore,  will  be  con- 
sidered as  belonging  to  the  next  epoch  ;  while  the 
completion  of  the  rise  of  prices,  originating  in,  and 
anterior  to,  1808,  may  be  included  in  the  interval 
which  has  just  been  reviewed. 


iT 


290  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Section  9.  —  Summary  of  the  preceding  Survey. 

As  the  results  of  the  survey  of  the  period,  which 
has  passed  under  review,  it  appears  — 

1.  That,  during  the  first  year  after  the  renewal 
of  the  war  with  France,  the  prices  of  corn  were 
falhng,  and  w^ere,  in  the  early  part  of  1804,  as  low 
as  they  had  been,  on  an  average,  in  ten  years 
before  the  war  or  the  Bank  restriction. 

2.  That  the  harvest  of  ISOi  proved  greatly  defi- 
cient, and  was  the  cause  of  a  great  rise  of  the  prices 
of  provisions,  and  the  occasion  of  a  fresh  rise  of 
wages. 

3.  That  the  harvests  of  1807  and  1808,  although 
not  of  so  marked  a  degree  of  deficiency,  were  con- 
sidered to  have  yielded  only  scanty  crops,  which, 
seeing  the  increasing^  and,  in  the  last  of  tliose  years, 
the  insurmountable^  difficulty  of  obtaining  a  foreign 
supply,  rendered  a  high  price  the  necessary  con- 
dition, with  the  aid  of  the ^  prohibition  of  distilla- 
tion from  grain,  of  limiting  the  consumption  to 
the  reduced  sources  of  supply. 

4.  That  the  progress  of  the  power  of  France  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe  in  1807  and  1808,  and  the 
consequent  enforcement  of  the  Berlin  and  Milan 
decrees,  coincidently  with  the  non-intercourse  acts 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  rendered  our 
actual  importations  of  the  most  important  raw  ma- 
terials for  our  manufactures  deficient  in  an  extra- 
ordinary degree,  and  threatened  to  cut  off  all 
future  supply  ;  thus  justifying  a  great  rise  of  prices, 
on  the  ground,  not  only  of  actual,  but  of  prospective, 
scarcity. 

5.  That,  while  all  importable  commodities  were 
thus  naturally  the  subject  of  a  great  speculative 
rise,  the  opening  of  the  trade  with  the  Brazils 
and  Spanish  America  afforded  great  inducements 
to  speculations  in  exportable  commodities. 

6.  That  the  state  of  excitement,  usually  attendant 


1804—1808.  291 

upon  apparently  successful  speculations,  commu- 
nicated itself  to  various  other  objects  of  enter- 
prise, and  occasioned  the  projection  of  numerous 
joint-stock  companies,  and  other  manifestations  of 
the  spirit  of  adventure. 

7.  That  the  great  rise  of  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  other  leading  articles  of  consumption,  some 
of  them  to  a  height  beyond  any  which  they  ever 
afterwards  attained,  and  the  great  attendant  spirit 
of  speculation  and  general  excitement  in  1807  and 
1809,  took  place  under  a  remarkahly  restricted  and 
equahle  state  of  the  Bank  circulation^  and  in  a  state 
of  the  currency  which,  judging  by  the  exchanges, 
and  the  price  of  bullion,  and  the  position  of  the 
Bank,  as  to  its  treasure,  compared  with  its  liabil- 
ities, was  such  as  it  might  have  been  in  a  convertible 
state  of  the  paper. 

8.  That  this  was  the  state  of  things,  as  regarded 
the  position  of  the  Bank,  and  the  value  of  the  cur- 
rency, after  sixteen  2/ears  of  the  war  and  twelve  years 
of  the  Bank  restriction. 


u  € 


292  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


CHAP.  V. 

STATE    OF    PRICES    AND  OF  THE    CIRCULATION,    FROM 
1809    TO    1813. 

The  epoch  which  we  are  now  entering  upon,  viz., 
from  the  close  of  1808  to  the  commencement  of 
1814,  embraces  the  precise  interval  which  has 
commonly  been  fixed  upon  in  proof,  as  it  is  alleged, 
of  depreciation  of  the  currency  by  the  Bank  re- 
striction, greatly  beyond  the  degree  indicated  by 
the  difference  between  paper  and  gold.  And 
what,  in  a  historical  point  of  view,  as  relates  to 
the  commerce  of  this  country,  is  of  much  more 
importance,  the  interval  between  the  commence- 
ment of  1809  and  the  close  of  1813,  besides  the 
astounding  changes  which  were  wrought  in  the 
political  condition  of  the  principal  states  of  Europe, 
embraces  events  which  caused  greater  revolutions 
in  the  principal  channels  of  our  foreign  trade,  and 
more  signal  vicissitudes  in  the  fortunes  of  indi- 
viduals, than  can  be  found  in  any  other  equal  por- 
tion of  our  commercial  history. 

We  have  seen  that,  towards  the  conclusion  of 
the  last  epoch,  the  course  of  political  events  had 
been  such  as  tended  to  the  exclusion  of  this  coun- 
try from  commercial  intercourse  with  the  Conti- 
nent of  Europe,  and  with  the  United  States  of 
America.  The  consequence  had  been  a  great  fall- 
ing off  of  the  importation  of  all  European  and 
American  produce,  and  an  enormous  advance  of 
prices,  upon  the  speculation  of  continued  and  in- 


1809—1813.  293 

creasing  obstacles  to  our  receiving  further  supplies. 
The  corn  trade,  however,  as  was  before  observed, 
had  not  participated  to  the  full  extent  of  that 
speculation  ;  for,  high  as  the  price  was,  it  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  high  enough,  although  the 
ports  were  open,  to  induce  adequate  efforts  to  over- 
come the  impediments  which  then  existed  to  a 
foreign  supply.* 

In  the  examination  of  the  causes  of  the  great 
variations  of  prices  observable  in  the  epoch  now 
coming  under  review,  those  of  corn  and  other 
agricultural  produce  are  first  to  be  considered. 
And,  for  reasons  which  will  be  obvious,  the  exam- 
ination will  be  found  to  be  more  conveniently 
conducted  by  a  subdivision  of  the  epoch  into  two 
periods,  viz.,  from  the  commencement  of  1809  to 
the  summer  of  1811,  and  thence  to  the  commence- 
ment of  1814. 


Section  1.  —  Prices:  of  Agricultural  Produce,  from 
the  Commencement  of  1809  to  the  Smmner  of 
1811. 

The  strong  impression  which  had  prevailed  of 
the  insufficiency  of  the  crop  of  1808  to  meet  the 
consumption  till  another  harvest,  without  the  aid 
of  a  foreign  supply,  which  was  not  fortJicoming, 
preserved  a  high  range  of  the  price  of  wheat  through 
the  early  part  of  1809,  and  the  averages  reached  9-5.^. 
in  March  of  that  year.  But  it  then  became  apparent 
that  the  stock  on  hand  was  not  so  much  reduced 
as  had  been  apprehended,  and  that  it  was  likely  to 
suffice  for  the  consumption,  restricted  as  that  was 

*  The  whole  importation  of  wheat  from  abroad  in  1808  had 
been  81,466  qrs.,  while  our  exports  to  the  Peninsula  were  77,567. 

u  3 


g94i  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

by  the  high  price,  and  by  the  prohibition  of  dis- 
tillation from  grain.  As,  therefore,  the  harvest 
approached,  and  appearances  became  favourable  of 
the  growing  crops,  the  markets  gradually  gave 
way,  the  average  price  of  wheat  having,  in  the 
course  of  July,  got  down  to  86s.  6d. :  and  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that,  if  the  crop  of  1809  had 
turned  out  to  be  productive,  and  well  got  in,  a 
great  fall  of  prices  would  have  been  the  conse- 
quence. But  the  harvest  weather  proved  very 
adverse.  Heavy  rains  set  in  in  July,  and  from 
thenceforward,  till  the  middle  of  October,  the  sea- 
son was  exceedingly  wet.*  Scarcely  any  part  of 
the  crops  was  secured  in  good  order ;  and  a  very 
large  portion  of  the  wheat  suffered  from  mildew, 
and  from  sprouting. 

The  injury  from  these  causes  was  more  extensive 
than  in  any  seasons  here  recorded,  excepting  only 
1799  and  I8I6.  All  the  crops,  including  hay,  were 
very  much  damaged ;  and  the  wheat  and  barley 
proved  to  be  deficient  in  quantity,  as  well  as  inferior 
in  quality  and  condition.  Prices  rose  in  conse- 
quence ;  and  the  average  for  December  1809  were, 

Wheat         -         -         102*.  6d.f 
Barley         -         -  50*.  6d. 

Oats  -         -  30*.  3d. 

Previously  to  any  decided  indication  of  mischief 
to  the  crops  of  1809?  the  government  seems  to 

*  It  may  be  sufficient  to  bring  it  to  the  recollection  of  some 
readers,  if  they  be  reminded,  that  it  was  the  season  in  which 
the  ill-fated  expedition  to  Walcheren  took  place;  for  it  must 
be  still  remembered  how  much  the  calamitous  sickness  which 
attended  it  was  aggravated  by  the  rains  which  prevailed, 
almost  incessantly,  from  its  embarkation  to  its  return. 

-j-  The  very  indifferent  quality  and  condition  of  the  wheat  of 
the  crop  of  1809  kept  down  the  average  price  :  the  best  samples 
in  Mark-lane  were,  in  December  1809,  worth  1255.  The  price 
of  oats  was  comparatively  low  because  the  quality  had  been 
more  injured  than  the  quantity ;  besides  that  there  had  been 
an  importation  in  1808  of  about  500,000  quarters. 


1809—1813.  295 

have  been  alive  to  the  deficiency  of  the  growth  of 
the  preceding  year,  which  had  left  very  little  stock 
on  hand,  and  to  have  adopted  measures  for  facili- 
tating importation.  It  appears  to  have  suited  the 
views  of  the  French  government,  at  the  same  time, 
to  promote  an  exportation  of  corn,  which  happened 
then  (as  one  of  the  exceptions  to  the  observation 
of  a  general  similarity  of  seasons)  to  be  unusually 
abundant  and  cheap  in  France  and  the  Netherlands. 
Licenses  were  accordingly  obtained  from  both  go- 
vernments ;  and,  as  a  consequence  of  these  mea- 
sures, about  400,000  quarters  of  wheat,  besides 
other  grain,  were  imported  before  the  close  of  1809. 

Tiie  spring  of  1810  was  singularly  cold  and  un- 
genial :  a  series  of  dry  east  winds  prevailed  for  many 
weeks  together.  The  hay  crops  w^ere  remark- 
ably deficient.  *  The  wheats,  at  the  same  time, 
were  generally  thin  on  the  ground.  This  un- 
favourable appearance  of  the  coming  crops,  and 
their  general  backwardness,  combined  with  the 
known  deficiency  of  the  existing  stock,  raised  the 
averages  in  June  for  wheat  to  113.^.  5d.f ;  and 
the  weatlier  having  become  wet  and  stormy  in 
July,  and  the  first  fortnight  of  August,  prices  ex- 
perienced some  further  advance,  viz.,  to  an  average 
of  116.V.  for  wheat. 

These  high  prices,  and  the  speculation  on  the  pro- 
spect of  a  further  advance,  had  stimulated  extraor- 
dinary efforts  to  obtain  a  foreign  supply;  so  that, 
notwithstanding  the  enormous  expenses  of  freight, 
insurance,  and  licenses,  amounting  collectively  to 
from  30s.  to  50s.  per  quarter  on  wheat,  and  in 
proportion  for  other  grain,  the  importation  in  1810 

*  The  price  of  hay  rose,  in  the  winter  following,  to  11/,  per 
load. 

-f-  Barley  and  oats  did  not  participate  in  the  advance  ;  the 
averages  at  the  close  of  June,  1810,  being  4-9s.  9d.  and  30*.  6d. 
The  prohibition  of  the  distillation  from  grain  might  contribute 
to  keep  down  the  price  of  barley. 

U   "4 


296  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

amounted  to  about  1,500,000  quarters  of  wheat 
and  flour,  and  about  600,000  quarters  of  other 
gram  and  meal. 

Of  the  deficiency  of  the  wheat  crop  of  1809) 
and  of  the  degree  in  which  we  were  dependent  on  a 
foreign  supply  for  keeping  down  the  prices  between 
that  and  the  harvest  of  1810,  the  following  extracts 
from  the  Farmer's  Magazine  will  furnish  some  in- 
teresting details :  — 

"  Grain  markets,  taking  all  circumstances  into  consideration, 
have  seldom  been  worse  than  for  several  months  past.  Three 
causes  may  be  assigned  for  the  uncommon  dulness  of  the  markets 
from  one  end  of  the  island  to  the  other.  First,  the  bad  wea- 
ther before  and  during  harvest  last  year,  whereby  a  large 
proportion  of  grain,  wheat  especially,  was  in  some  degree  ren- 
dered useless  as  an  article  to  be  manufactured  into  bread. 
Secondly,  the  very  large,  and,  for  the  time,  uncommon  import- 
ation of  wheat  and  oats  from  France  and  Holland,  and  the 
partial  arrivals  of  wheat  from  America,  —  all  tended  to  make 
a  considerable  part  of  British  grain  absolutely  unsaleable,  — 
that  imported  being  in  fact  generally  of  superior  value,  har- 
vested in  a  better  climate,  and  free  of  the  diseases  and  acci- 
dents which  almost  ruined  the  last  crop  in  this  country.  Thirdly, 
the  prohibition  against  the  use  of  grain  in  the  distilleries  ; 
whereby  seven  or  eight  hundred  thousand  quarters  were  de- 
prived of  a  market,  at  a  time  when  a  considerable  part  of 
British  grain  was  fit  for  no  other  purpose  than  distillation." — 
Farm.  Mag.  vol.  xi.  p.  100.  March,  1810. 

"  Letter  from  London,  Mark-lane,  5th  March,  1810. 

"  The  character  of  the  cropof  1809  was  represented,  by  the  most 
intelligent  agriculturists  in  every  part  of  Great  Britain,  as  being 
unproductive,  especially  in  the  article  of  bread  corn.  The  de- 
ficient qualities  and  diminished  quantities,  and  consequent  high 
prices,  of  wheat  which  appeared  at  this  market  after  harvest, 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  foreign  merchants,  and  they  soon 
devised  means  of  obtaining  supplies  from  the  enemy's  coasts. 
Their  activity  has  already  had  the  effect  to  introduce  into  this 
port,  since  the  date  of  our  last,  in  the  end  of  November,  no 
less  than  220,348  quarters  of  wheat,  chiefly  from  the  ports  of 
France,  Holland,  and  Flanders  ;  a  quantity  within  8785  quarters 
of  the  whole  arrivals  of  British  w/ieat  at  this  market  in  the  year 
1809,  and  equal  to  more  than  a  half  of  both  the  English  and 
foreign  wheats  entered  inwards  during  the  above  period. 

"  These   large  foreign   supplies  have  certainly  checked  the 
tendency  to  higher  prices  during  winter;  and  have  drawn  hither 


1809—1813.  297 

buyers  from  all  parts  of  the  island,  as  well  as  coasting  counties, 
who  require  superior  qualities  to  work  off  their  otvn  inferior 
and  damp  descriptions  of  wheat. 

"  State  of  London  markets,  Monday,  5th  March. 

Wheat,  English  white  105*.  WQs.  115*.  per  qr, 

Ditto,  red  94*.  96*.  102*. 

Dantzic,  &c.  108*.  115*.   Wjs. 

Brabant  and  French  92*.  98*.   105*. 

Farm.  Mag.  vol.  xi.  p.  133.  March,  1810." 

"  The  value  of  grain  has,  in  some  respects,  increased,  chiefly 
owing  to  the  advanced  rate  of  freight,  and  the  high  price  given 
for  wheat  at  foreign  markets.  Grain  of  home  produce,  except 
such  as  is  sound  and  of  fine  quality,  meets,  however,  with  a 
dull  sale,  as  formerl3\  The  lamentable  deficiency  of  last  year's 
wheat  crop,  as  often  mentioned  in  this  work,  is  now  completely 
ascertained,  by  the  immense  importations  of  the  last  six 
months, — importations  greatly  exceeding  those  of  1800  or 
1801,  and  by  far  the  largest  that  ever  took  place  in  Britain 
during  such  a  short  period.  Without  them,  it  is  almost  certain 
that  a  kind  of  dearth  would  have  happened." — Farm.  Mag. 
vol.  xi.   p.  253.  June,  1810. 

"  Letter  from  London,  2d  June,  1810. 

"  The  arrivals  of  wheat  from  our  own  coasts,  between  3d 
March  last  and  this  day,  amount  only  to  about  36,000  quarters, 
while  those  of  foreign  growth  are  280,000  quarters,  forming  an 
aggregate  of  316,000  quarters.  The  sales,  during  the  same 
period,  are  within  1000  or  2000  quarters  of  this  vast  quantity. 
Both  accounts  are  returned  to  the  lord  mayor's  offices  ;  but,  as 
those  of  the  present  week  will  not  be  made  up  till  Monday,  the 
exact  figures  cannot  be  given.  The  quantity  imported  and 
sold,  in  these  three  months,  is  greater  than  the  total  sales  of 
either  of  the  two  preceding  years,  which  in  1808  were  276,077 
quarters,  and,  in  1809,  292,205  quarters.  The  quantity  of 
flour  imported  has  also  been  extensive." — Farm.  Mag.  vol.  xi. 
p.  277." 

"  Letter  from  London,  3d  August,  1810. 

"  The  quantity  of  English  wheat  which  has  appeared  at 
market  is  quite  trifling,  not  equal  in  some  weeks  to  one  eighth  of 
the  consumption;  but  we  continue  to  receive  a  full  supply  of 
foreign  grain,  whereby  the  great  deficiency  of  home  produce  is 
amply  made  up.  The  arrivals  this  week,  from  foreign  ports, 
exceed  25,000  quarters  ;  whereas  no  more  than  980  quarters 
have  been  imported  coastwise.  Good  qualities  are  worth  122*. 
and  128*.  per  quarter;  but  the  average  price  does  not  exceed 
101*.  6f/. ;  whence  it  will  appear  that  a  large  partis  of  inferior 
quality." — Farm.  Mag.  vol.  xi.   p.  416. 


298  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

A  great  turn,  however,  took  place  in  prices  after 
the  middle  of  August,  1810.  The  weather,  thence- 
forward, cleared  up,  and  continued  uninterruptedly 
propitious  to  the  progress  of  the  harvest  till  its 
completion,  insomuch  that  the  whole  of  the  crops 
was  secured  in  good  order.  The  wheats,  although 
considered  to  be  deficient  in  quantity*,  were,  by 
their  good  condition,  all  available  for  early  use ; 
and  from  this  circumstance,  combined  with  the  very 
large  foreign  supply,  the  markets  declined  thence- 
forth, the  prices  by  the  end  of  the  year  being 
upwards  of  20^.  lower  than  in  August  preceding. 
The  averages  at  the  close  of  1810  being  for 

Wheat  -  -         94.S-.  'Jd. 

Barley  -  -         41. v.  7^. 

Oats  -  -         26.V.  Sd. 

The  corn-dealers,  w^ho  had  speculated  on  the 
bad  weather  at  the  commencement  of  tlie  harvest, 
were  severe  sufferers,  and  many  were  ruined  ;  thus 
swelling  the  list  of  bankruptcies,  the  great  extent  of 
which  will  be  noticed  more  particularly  hereafter. 

The  prices  slowly,  but  progressively,  declined 
till  the  summer  following  ;  the  averages  for  June, 
1811,  being,  for 

Wheat  -  -  86^.  l\d. 
Barley  -  -  38.y.  (jd. 
Oats  -         .         9^8.    5d. 

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  in  the  discus- 
sions in  the  House  of  Commons,  in  May,  1811,  on 
the  bullion  report,  hardly  any  reference  was  made 
to  deficiency  of  the  crops,  arising  from  the  sea- 
sons, as  accounting  for  the  high  price  of  corn, 
and  the  large  importations  in  1809  and  1810.  It 
should  seem  that  the  disputants  on  both  sides, 
with   the  exception  of  Mr.  George  Rose,  had  no 

*  Farmer's  Magazine,  1810.  "  Wheat,  in  almost  every  case, 
excellent  in  grain,  but  in  many  districts  thin,  and  by  no  means 
an  average." 


1809—1813.  299 

notion  of  deficiency  of  crops,  as  justifying  or  ex- 
plaining high  prices,  except  in  the  peculiar  in- 
stances of  1794  and  1795,  and  1799  and  1800. 

Mr.  Horner  must  have  been  under  an  inexplicable 
misconception  of  the  facts  of  tlie  case,  if  the  report 
of  his  speech,  when  bringing  forward  his  resolutions 
on  the  6th  May,  1811,  be  correct.  According  to 
that  report,  page  812.  vol.  xix.  Parliamentary 
Debates,  he  is  stated  to  have  said,  — 

"  It  is  allowed,  that  the  principal  article  of  import  in  the  last 
year  was  grain,  and  that  import  was  enormous.  Now  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  the  House  should  most  seriously  consider 
what  could  be  the  reason  that  produced  a  necessity  for  about 
2,000,000  of  quarters  in  one  year,  which  was  not  a  year  of 
famine.  When  we  consider  the  great  part  of  our  population 
which  is  employed  in  manufactures,  and  the  great  and  increas- 
ing portion  of  that  population  which  is  on  the  list  of  paupers, 
no  man  can  look  to  the  possibility  of  another  year  of  dearth, 
without  feeling  the  most  painful  and  serious  alarm.  I  look 
upon  this  increase  of  the  price  of  corn  as  a  very  strong  argu- 
ment in  support  of  the  opinions  which  I  have  taken  the  liberty 
to  state  to  the  committee." 

It  is  here  perfectly  clear,  that  Mr.  Horner  either 
denied  the  scarcity  as  the  cause  of  the  high  price, 
or  that  he  confounded  dearth  with  depreciation. 
Now  dearth  means  dearness,  arising  from  scarcity 
of  the  commodity,  while  depreciation  supposes  no 
scarcity  of  the  commodity,  but  simply  an  increase 
of  money  raising  prices. 

Mr.  George  Rose  replied, 

"  The  honourable  gentleman  complains  of  the  large  import- 
ation of  corn  lately  as  a  great  evil,  and  threatens  inquiry 
respecting  it.  My  defence  will  be  short,  but,  I  hope,  satis- 
factory, —  had  the  importation  not  been  permitted,  the  distress 
for  bread  would  have  been  extreme.  With  the  aid  of  two  mil- 
lions of  quarters  of  foreign  corn,  the  quartern  loaf  was  at  fifteen 
pence,  and,  without  such  aid,  it  would  probably  have  been  at 
half-a-crown.  The  consequences  which  must  arise,  from  paying 
foreigners  for  so  large  a  quantity  of  corn  as  would  probably  be 
imported,  were  too  obvious  not  to  have  been  foreseen ;  but  in 
such  a  dilemma  there  was  no  hesitation  between  submitting  to 
the  inconvenience  of  the  nature  apprehended,  and  to  the  want 
of  bread  to  the  necessitous  part  of  our  population." 


300  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  retort  v;as  complete,  but  produced  no  im- 
pression. The  attention  of  the  house  and  of  the 
pubUc  was  absorbed  in  the  question  of  principle; 
and  the  utter  untenableness  in  argument  of  the 
principles  for  which  Mr.  Rose  and  his  colleagues  in 
the  ministry,  with  the  Bank  directors,  contended, 
cast  into  the  shade,  as  irrelevant  and  inconclusive, 
all  mere  matter  of  fact.  The  truth  is,  that  if  it  had 
not  been  for  the  very  large  importations  of  corn 
between  the  harvests  of  1809  and  1810,  the  scarcity 
would  have  been  most  severely  felt ;  and  when  Mr. 
Horner  asked,  what  could  be  the  reason  that  pro- 
duced a  necessity  for  about  two  millions  of  quarters 
of  corn  in  one  year,  which  was  not  a  year  of  famine, 
the  simple  answer  was,  that,  hut  for  that  importation^ 
it  ivould  have  been  a  year  of  famine. 


Section  2. — Fall  of  Prices  of  Commodities,  and 
Commercial  Distress,  from  1809  to  1811. 

But  while  the  price  of  corn  had  undergone  this 
fluctuation  of  a  rise  of  nearly  30^.  the  quarter, 
and  again  a  fall  to  the  same  extent,  between  the 
summer  of  1809  and  that  of  1811,  and  while 
some  descriptions  of  agricultural  produce,  such  as 
hay,  for  instance,  and  other  provender,  were  still 
scarce  and  dear,  all  other  productions,  whe- 
ther raw  materials  or  manufactured  articles,  ex- 
perienced a  very  great  fall  of  price,  between  the 
commencement  of  1809,  and  different  periods 
in  1810  and  1811. 

The  great  advance,  and  the  enormously  high 
range,  of  prices  in  this  country,  in  1808,  while 
on  the  Continent  they  were  low,  (by  the  operation 
of  the  same  causes  as  made  them  high  here),  in- 
duced the  merchants  on  both  sides  to  make  great 
efforts    to  overcome    or    elude    the    obstacles    to 


1809—1813. 


301 


importation,  opposed  by  our  own  orders  in  council, 
as  well  as  by  the  continental  system.  Accordingly, 
measures  were  taken,  by  means  of  licenses  from  the 
government  of  this  country,  and  of  simulated  papers, 
which  were  calculated  to  lull  the  vigilance,  or 
satisfy  the  scruples,  of  those  foreign  governments 
which  were  the  unwilling  tools  of  the  overbearing 
power  of  France  at  that  period,  for  the  purpose 
of  importing,  on  a  large  scale,  the  commodities 
which  had  experienced  so  great  a  rise. 

The  measures  so  taken  were  effectual ;  and  the 
importations,  accordingly,  in  1809  and  1810,  were, 
independently  of  corn,  which  has  already  been 
noticed,  of  overwhelming  magnitude,  as  will  ap- 
pear by  the  following  comparison  with  the  imports 
of  the  preceding  year  :  — 


Years.           Wool. 

Silk. 

Tallow. 

Hemp. 

Flax.          Linseed. 

Raw. 

Thrown. 

lbs. 

1808  2,353,725 

1809  6,845,933 

1810  10,936,224 

fts. 

637,102 

698,189 

1,311,475 

lbs. 
139,312 
501,746 
450,731 

cwts. 
148,282 
353,177 
479,440 

cwts. 
259,687 
858,875 
955,799 

cwts.             Bush. 
257,722       506,332 
533,367  11,119,763 
511,970    1,645,598 

But  not  only  was  there  this  enormous  increase 
of  importations  of  raw  materials  from  the  Conti- 
nent of  Europe.     Of  Cotton  the  imports  w  ere,  in 

1808  -  -  i3,605,982  lbs. 

1809  -  -  92,812/282 

1810  -  -         136,488,935 

Even  of  West  India  produce,  the  prices  of  which 
had  not  presented  so  great  an  inducement,  there 
was  a  considerable  increase,  thus  Sugar, ^imported  in 

1808  -  -  -  3,753,485  cwts. 

1809  -         -         -         4,001,198 

1810  -         "         -         4,808,663 

And  of  Coffee,    the    quantity  imported    in  1810 
was  double  of  \vhat  it  had  been  in  1807,  viz., 

1807  -         -         -         417,642  cwts. 

1810  -         -         -         828,683 


802 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


i«0- 

c 

'^ 

t-H 

S 

■—I 

8 
o 

O 

•**      CO 


'^^ 


►>:t-G^'?<5«00<:000000000  >-•  ooo 

|soO'-<00'^t^O^OOrtOOO'-iCO  'fi  o-*co 
o 

'^F^OOOOOlOOi^COcOCNt^rHi-Hi— I  ^^  .-hC^.— I 


0) 


'^       ^^^:-00'O^OOOOOOOOOOO     ^     OOO      rsS-S 
'-'-Sc^^G<lr-ii-i^^aiOO^CMO— lO'**      00      lOCOCN 

bD  rt    ^  rH         I— I  1— I 


'i^OOOOO-IOOCOO-^iOGOOOG^G^l     (>)     COX^iCi 
1:^  O  t^ 


^.^cn^oicooooooooooo    <o    ooo 


CqCMi-HG^CMCDOOOOOlOOaioOCO     o     ^oo 


^    s 


Ci'^f^OOOOvOr-iOCOO-liOt^^'^COO-l     CN     COCOiO 
I  1— c  -^  cc 

CO  l-H    r-H 

o 

CO 


a>ooo3Tiiot^^oooooooo    co    ooo 

O'-iOOOlCOG^OOOOlOt^OOD     vo      CDWJO 


'S       1-^^- 


-^OOOOi— iOOt^>J^0005C0CNi-(r-i 
;o  t-  CD 


1—  tJh  T^ 


_bO  "^ 


CNi— lOOCOOCiCOOOOOOOOO     o     oo 

f— I  r—t 

^— ii-iOC^ICOiOOOCMiOOC^COOO     t-     coo 


t^--^^:^ 


OOOOG^OOCOOcOOOOcOi-Hi— (     ^      CM  CO 
CD  CO  t- 


ooiO-*oi>cDOOoooooo  o    oo 

I— (         I— I 

O  0) 

Oi-^OOOCOCMOOcnoOO-^OO— I  rt     oc^ic 

1— I                                    r— I  1— (     O 

OOOOi-HOOt^«:)CM<>J'^<Mr-inH  rt     G-lio" 

lO  CO  CO 


a, 


.5  ?  c 


ci  ^ 


"    ^    s-    " 

t-     3     <U     !- 


03    CS    F, 

•    <"  I- 

N 


.=     r,  ca 


(U    O)     O     3J  J 


V 


'^    rt    C    CJ 

o  g  'o'j:  g 
:^  <;  «  c  J- 


« 


=2    c3 

3  B 

5?. 


u 


.ST         3  >-H 
•^    O  CO 

2    3^  00 


b.^  u  .2  i^ 
2  c  -S  > 

^  2  "^  == 

a>   o   oj  --H 
£j-    bfi  *j  '13 

^2  o) 

ca  ^ 


1  o  ., 


o 

c 


bJC--    OJ  •- 

3    (U  -a  -^ 

•"2  0 

tH    CO      g     +J 

CO  0)    ^ 

-Q    fi    !-    O 

°7,  ^-^ 

O    ^    F    "J 

^  •-  ^   o 
On,"'" 

to  .S     >     O) 

'^^■2'H 

*  "  -"  2 

*  CD  n:    H 


'M.S 


1809—1813.  303 

As  in  the  short  importations  in  1808,  combined 
with  the  apprehension  of  failure  of  future  supply, 
there  was  substantial  cause  for  a  great  advance  of 
price,  so,  in  the  superabundant  supplies  of  the  two 
following  years,  there  was  a  sufficient  cause  for  the 
great  fall  which,  in  many  instances,  left  to  the 
importer,  after  paying  for  the  enormous  charges  of 
importation,  ?iothing  whatever  for  the  iwime  cost. 

While  this  great  fall  was  taking  place  in  the  price 
of  the  bulk  of  imported  commodities,  a  total  stop 
was  put  to  our  exports  to  the  Baltic,  by  the  exten- 
sive confiscations  which  had  occurred  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1810  in  the  ports  of  Germany,  and  Prussia. 
The 'returns,  too,  from  South  America  were  now 
coming  round  ;  and  these  left  a  ruinous  loss  to 
the  exporters,  many  of  whom  had  bought  the 
goods  on  credits  maintained  by  the  circulation  of 
accommodation  paper. 

From  the  close,  therefore,  of  1809,  through 
1810,  there  was  a  complete  exemplification  of  the 
circumstances  which  are  conducive  to  a  reduction 
of  private  paper,  and  to  a  diminution  of  transactions 
on  credit,  viz.,  stagnation  and  despondency,  as  suc- 
ceeding to  a  state  of  speculation  and  over-trading. 
And  so  many  circumstances,  on  so  large  a  scale, 
combining  in  the  same  direction,  the  fall  of  prices, 
the  reduction  of  private  paper,  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  credit,  were  greater  and  more  rapid  than 
were  ever  before,  or  have  since,  been  known  to 
have  occurred  within  so  short  a  space  of  time.  A 
general  dismay  prevailed  throughout  nearly  all 
branches  of  trade,  during  the  last  six  months  of 
1810,  and  the  first  few  months  of  the  following 
year,  when  the  depressing  causes  had  produced 
their  greatest  effect.  The  following  extracts,  from 
the  commercial  reports  inserted  at  the  end  of  each 
number  of  the  Monthly  Magazine,  convey  the  best 
and,  according  to  my  recollection,  the  most  accu- 
rate description  that  I  have  met  with  of  the  state 
of  distress  which  then  prevailed  :  — 


304  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Monthly  Commercial  Report,  1st  August,  1810. 

"  The  failures  of  several  houses  of  the  very  first  respectability, 
both  at  London  and  in  different  provincial  towns  of  Great  Bri- 
tain, have,  within  the  last  month,  been  unprecedented  in  number 
and  importance.  A  West  India  broker,  who  has  long  been  con- 
sidered the  first  in  his  line,  was,  we  are  told,  the  prime  cause  of 
the  stoppage  of  a  banking- house,  whose  credit  was  previously  un- 
impeached.  The  several  banks  in  the  country,  connected  with 
the  London  house,  of  course  shared  its  fate  ;  and  ft-om  them  the 
evil  spread  to  merchants,  manufacturers,  traders,  and,  in  short,  to 
the  very  servants  and  dependents  of  these,  numbers  of  whom  are 
thrown  out  of  employment,  and  their  families  deprived  of  bread. 
Speculations  in  Spanish  wool,  an  article  which  has  fallen  about 
fifty  per  cent.,  are  considered  as  the  origin  of  those  unlooked-for 
disasters.  Five  Manchester  houses  have  stopped  payment  in  the 
city,  and,  we  are  sorry  to  add,  have  involved  numerous  industri- 
ous persons,  both  in  town  and  country,  in  their  ruin.  The  de- 
mands upon  the  five  houses  are  said  to  amount  to  two  millions  ; 
but  it  is  supposed  that  their  real  property  will  ultimately  cover 
all  deficiencies.  Speculative  exports  to  South  America  are  the 
rock  upon  which  these  houses  have  split.  In  consequence  of 
these  unexpected  events,  public  credit  is  at  the  present  moment 
as  low  as  ever  it  has  been  in  the  memory  of  man  :  the  fluctuation 
of  prices  in  the  money-market  is  unpi-ecedented,  and  the  depres- 
sion so  considerable,  that  omnium  is  fallen  to  two  and  a  half  per 
cent,  discount.  We  understand  that  some  respectable  merchants 
have  waited  upon  the  Bank  directors,  in  order  to  solicit  their  aid 
towards  the  alleviation  of  the  burdens  with  which  our  internal 
commerce  is  at  present  borne  down.  The  result  of  this  applica- 
tion is  not  as  yet  publicly  known  ;  we  trust  it  will  prove  favour- 
able. The  renewal  of  our  intercourse  with  the  United  States 
of  America  has,  in  some  sort,  benefited  the  manufacturing  in- 
terest ;  but  this  felicitous  effect  is  almost  swallowed  up  in  the 
vortex  of  those  calamities,  which  it  has  been  our  painful  duty 
to  record. 

"  Holland.  —  All  trade  between  Great  Britain  and  this  de- 
voted country  is  completely  put  a  stop  to  by  the  rigorous  exe- 
cution of  the  French  emperor's  anti-commercial  decrees.  It  is 
even  reported  that  the  captains  and  part  of  the  crews  of  two 
vessels  were  shot  for  violating  the  prohibition. 

"  Prussia.  —  Money  is  so  extremely  scarce  in  the  Prussian 
ports,  that  the  merchants  can  with  difficulty  collect  sufficient  to 
defray  the  import  duties;  and  interest  is  represented  to  be  at 
the  extravagant  rate  of  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  per  month." 

"  1st  December,  1810. 
"  A  numerical  evidence  of  the  present  state  of  trade  may  be 
deduced  from  the  number  of  bankruptcies  in  the  London  Ga- 
zette, inserted  in  this  magazine:  — 


1809—1813.  305 

They  amounted  this  month,  in  1810,  to  273 
The  same  month,  —  1809,  —  130 


Ditto      - 

.      _  1808,  —  100 

Ditto      - 

.       _  1807,  —     97 

Ditto 

,      _  1806,  —    65 

Ditto      - 

.      _  1805,  —    87 

Ditto 

.      _  1804-,  —    60 

Besides  stoppages  and  compositions,  eijual  in  number  to  half  the 
traders  in  the  kingdom  !  These  faiku-es  throughout  tlie  kingdom 
have  wonderfully  affected  the  manufacture  of  every  description 
of  goods ;  and  a  general  want  of  confidence  exists  between  the 
manufacturer  and  the  export  merchant.  The  speculators  at 
Liverpool  have  completly  overstocked  the  different  markets  of 
South  America,  where,  at  present,  English  manufactured  articles 
can  be  purchased  at  a  loss  of  twenty  per  cent,  to  the  exporter, 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  articles,  on  which  little  or  no  credit 
could  be  obtained  here." 

1st  January,  1811. 

"  In  our  last  Report  we  stated  the  vast  increase  of  bankrupt- 
cies within  the  last  month,  compared  with  similar  months  for 
seven  years  back ;  and  we  regret  to  say  that  they  still  continue 
to  increase  in  number,  and  that  confidence  in  the  mercantile 
world  seems  nearly  at  an  end. 

"  Discount,  unless  bills,  &c.,  of  a  few  of  the  first  houses  in  the 
city,  can  only  be  done  through  the  medium  of  bill-brokers,  at  an 
extra  commission,  exclusive  of  the  regular  interest. 

"  In  Lancashire  the  cotton  manufacturers  appear,  by  the  late 
Gazettes,  as  well  as  by  private  information,  to  be  greatly  dis- 
tressed, and  business  quite  at  a  stand.  In  Manchester,  and 
other  places,  houses  stop  not  only  every  day,  but  every  hour. 
Cotton  wool  is  in  no  demand  at  any  price,  and  no  export  of  the 
manufactured  goods,  except  a  few  fine  sorts  to  Rio,  &c.  The 
trade  of  Birmingham,  Sheffield,  &c.  quite  at  a  stand,  and  no 
orders  for  execution  there,  except  a  few  for  our  home-consump- 
tion. At  London,  Liverpool,  and  Bristol,  the  king's  stores  are 
full  of  all  kinds  of  colonial  produce,  as  coffee,  sugar,  rum,  Szc, 
for  security  of  their  duties,  and  the  proprietors  in  the  greatest 
possible  distress,  not  being  able  to  force  sales  of  these  articles." 

To  prove  that  these  are  not  exaggerated  descrip- 
tions of  the  commercial  distress  which  prevailed  in 
this  country  at  that  period,  I  need  only  refer  to 
the  parliamentary  debates  in  the  spring  of  1811, 
from  wliich  I  have  made  as  many  extracts  as  my 
limits  will  permit. 

X 


306  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

Extracts  from  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House 
of  Commons  on  the  State  of  Commercial  Credit,  7th  March, 
1811. 

"  Your  committee  found  that  memorials  had  been  presented 
to  his  Majesty's  treasury,  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  last  and 
the  beginning  of  the  present  year,  stating  the  great  embarrass- 
ments and  distress  which  were  felt  amongst  the  manufacturers 
in  the  cotton  trade  in  Glasgow  and  Paisley,  and  their  vicinity, 
and  praying  for  public  assistance  ;  that  the  same  were  confirmed 
by  the  representation  of  a  meeting  held  in  the  city  of  London 
on  the  12th  of  February,  which  sent  a  deputation  to  wait  upon 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  with  a  copy  of  the  resolutions 
adopted  at  that  meeting.  These  resolutions  your  committee 
have  inserted  in  the  appendix  to  this  report. 

"  Your  committee  found,  by  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses 
they  examined,  that  those  statements  and  representations  were 
founded  on  fact. 

"  It  appeared  to  your  committee  that  the  principal  part  of  the 
distress  which  was  complained  of  had  arisen  out  of  great  and 
extensive  speculations,  which  commenced  upon  the  opening  of 
the  South  American  markets  in  the  Brazils,  and  elsewhere,  to  the 
adventures  of  British  merchants. 

"  Your  committee  also  found  that  great  distress  was  felt  in  a 
quarter  which  was  much  connected  with  this  trade,  namely, 
amongst  the  importers  of  produce  from  the  foreign  West  India 
islands,  and  from  South  America. 

"  That  great  part  of  the  returns  for  the  manufactures  which 
were  exported  to  those  parts  of  the  world  came  home  in  sugars 
and  coffee,  which,  not  being  entitled  to  sale  in  the  home  market, 
there  were  no  immediate  means  of  realizing  their  value. 

"  These  representations  of  the  distress  experienced  in  the 
trade  of  the  cotton  manufacturer  and  exporter,  and  from  the 
want  of  market  for  foreign  colonial  produce,  were  also  con- 
firmed by  respectable  merchants  and  traders  in  London  ;  who 
also  stated  that  the  embarrassments  were  felt  in  other  branches 
of  trade,  not  connected  with  foreign  commerce  or  colonial 
produce." 

Extract  from  the  Speech  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in 
the  Debate  on  the  Commercial  Credit  Bill. 

"  The  consideration  of  this  important  subject,  he  observed, 
divided  itself  into  three  heads  :  —  first,  the  nature  and  extent  of 
the  evils  which  the  manufactures  and  commerce  of  the  country 
were  enduring  ;  —  secondly,  what  were  the  causes  of  those  evils  ; 
— and,  thirdly,  the  measures  by  which  the  evils  might,  with  the 
greatest  probability,  be  removed.  With  respect  to  the  first  of 
these  considerations,  he  apprehended  there  could  be  no  differ- 
ence of  opinion  whatever ;  but  that  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 


1809—1813.  307 

distress,  described  in  the  report  of  the  select  committee,  ren- 
dered it  advisable  that  parliament  should,  if  possible,  adopt  some 
measure  by  which  that  evil  might  at  least  be  diminished.  It  ap- 
peared distinctly  by  the  report,  that  the  distress,  originating  with 
the  merchant,  and  disabling  him  from  paying  the  manufac- 
turer, was  felt  most  severely  by  the  manufacturer  and  those 
employed  by  him.  All  the  principal  manufacturers  had  been 
compelled  to  contract,  and  some  wholly  to  suspend,  their  works. 
It  appeared  by  the  report  that  there  was  scarcely  a  cotton  ma- 
nufacturer in  the  kingdom  who  had  not  diminished,  by  one  half, 
the  number  of  persons  employed  in  his  mills;  and  that  many  of 
the  smaller  manufacturers  had  discharged  their  people  altogether. 
It  appeared,  also,  that  those  who  were  retained  by  the  first 
description  of  manufacturers  were  retained  at  a  reduced  rate 
of  wages.  The  consequences  must  necessarily  be,  as  they  were 
represented  to  be  in  the  report  of  the  select  committee,  that 
the  most  calamitous  distress  prevailed  throughout  many  of  the 
manufacturing  districts.  The  report  also  stated  that  the  mer- 
chants who  traded  with  the  western  world,  not  being  able  to 
find  an  adequate  market  for  their  produce,  this  circumstance 
aggravated  the  distress  of  the  manufacturers ;  and  the  whole 
operating  upon  the  other  branches  of  trade,  although  not  im- 
mediately connected  with  those  to  which  he  had  referred,  pro- 
duced a  general  want  of  confidence,  and  suspension  of  credit, 
which  required  the  prompt  and  effectual  application  of  some 
adequate  remedy," 

The  commercial  distress  of  that  period  was  not 
confined  to  the  United  Kingdom.  It  prevailed  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe,  as  may  be  observed  by 
the  foregoing  extracts  :  and  that  the  same  descrip- 
tion of  distress  appUed  to  the  commerce  of  the 
United  States  will  appear  from  the  following  ex- 
tract of  a  letter  from  New  York,  dated  11th  of 
February,  1811,  communicated  to  me  by  a  friend, 
largely  interested  at  that  time,  as  well  as  at  the 
present,  in  the  trade  with  that  country. 

"  Such  times  for  money  were  never  known,  and  all  confidence 
among  merchants  is  totally,  and,  indeed,  very  justly,  destroyed. 
Since  the  middle  of  December  we  have  had  between  sixty  and 
seventy  failures  in  this  city,  and  many  more  are  expected  to  fail 
in  the  course  of  this  and  the  following  month." 

I  am  indebted  to  the  same  friend  for  the  follow- 
ing extract  of  a  letter  from  his  Liverpool  house, 
to  a  mercantile  correspondent. 

x  2 


308  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

"  Liverpool,  Nov.  22.  1810. 
"  The  effects  of  a  vast  import  of  colonial  and  American  pro- 
duce, far  above  the  scale  of  our  consumption  at  the  most  pros- 
perous periods  of  our  commerce,  and  attaining  a  magnitude 
hitherto  unknown  to  us,  have,  in  the  present  cramped  state  of 
our  intercourse  with  the  Continent,  developed  themselves  in 
numerous  bankruptcies,  widely  spreading  in  their  influence,  and 
unprecedented  in  extent  of  embarrassment.  It  is  but  fair,  how- 
ever, to  ascribe  a  portion  of  these  evils  to  the  consequences  of 
a  sanguine  indulgence  of  enterprise,  in  extensive  shipments  of 
our  manufactures  to  South  America,  which  so  confidently  fol- 
lowed the  expedition  to  La  Plata,  and  the  removal  of  the  go- 
vernment of  Portugal  to  Brazil  :  they  are  further  aided  by  the 
speculations  which  prevailed  during  the  various  stages  of  the 
American  non-intercourse,  and  which,  unfortunately,  were  not 
confined  to  the  duration  of  the  circumstances  which  excited 
them.  In  the  struggle  to  support  themselves,  the  sjieculators 
have  had  recourse  to  new  and  extensive  engagements,  in  the 
face  of  probabilities  and  facts  too  incontrovertible  to  have  been 
slighted,  until  the  united  action  of  the  accumulating  imports, 
and  the  want  of  an  adequate  vent,  have  overwhelmed  them. 
The  event  only  can  enable  us  fully  to  appreciate  the  effects  of 
this  imprudence,  which,  more  than  any  preceding  defalcations, 
have  involved  the  mercantile  character  of  our  country,  and  de- 
stroyed confidence  in  a  degree  that  will  require  a  long  period 
of  prosperous  circumstances  to  retrieve." 

Great  as  was  the  fall  of  prices,  and  severe  as 
was  the  commercial  distress,  which  prevailed  in  the 
early  part  of  1811,  these  circumstances,  calculated 
as  they  were  to  modify  the  practical  application  of 
the  principles,  for  the  most  part  correctly  laid  down, 
by  the  Bullion  report  of  1810,  were  not  at  all  ad- 
verted to  in  that  report,  nor  were  suffered  to  oc- 
cupy any  prominent  part  in  the  discussions  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  to  which  that  report  gave  oc- 
casion, in  May,  1811.  Indeed,  the  Buhion  Com- 
mittee, in  their  report,  and  their  supporters  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  seem  equally  to  have  pro- 
ceeded on  the  assumption  that  all  commodities  had 
risen  ;  and  the  inference  held  out  was  that  they 
had  risen  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  bank- 
notes, and  in  common  with  the  rise  in  the  price 
of  gold.     No   evidence  whatever  had  been  taken 


1809—1813.  309 

by  the  Bullion  Committee  respecting  the  prices  of 
commodities  ;  and  the  only  allusion  to  these  is  in 
the  passage  wherein  it  is  said,  "  the  prices  of  all 
commodities  have  risen,  and  gold  appears  to  have 
risen  in  price  only  in  common  with  them.  If  this 
common  effect  is  to  be  'ascribed  to  one  and  the 
same  cause,  that  cause  can  only  be  found  in  the 
state  of  the  currency  of  tiiis  country."  This  ob- 
servation was  made  at  a  time  w^lien  all  commodities, 
provisions  alone  excepted,  which  were  scarce,  from 
the  season,  were  falling  rapidly  in  price^  and  had 
been  falling  when  gold  was  rising.  But  at  the 
time  when  the  discussions  in  parliament  took  place, 
namely,  in  May  1811,  even  corn  had  fallen  con- 
siderably in  price,  as  we  have  seen  ;  and  nearly  all 
other  commodities  were  at  a  ruinously  low  rate, 
compared  with  the  cost  of  production,  which  had 
been  so  greatly  increased  by  the  extravagantly 
high  freights  and  premiums  of  insurance  to  which 
the  importations  were  then  subject.* 

*  The  following  are  specimens  of  the  charges  of  importation, 
to  which  commodities  that  we  stood  most  in  need  of  were  sub- 
ject, between  1809  and  1812,  compared  with  the  charges  of  im- 
portation in  1837,  and  the  reader  will  thence  judge  whether  the 
high  prices  of  those  articles  are  attributable  to  war,  as  increasing 
the  demand,  or  to  war,  as  obstructing  the  supply. 

The  freight  and  premium  of  insurance  t  from  the  Baltic  to 
London,  on  the  average  of  the  seasons,  were  as  follows  :  — 

1809-12.  1837. 

^     s.  d.  £    s.  d. 

On  Hemp         -            -         per  ton     30     0  0  2  10  0 

Tallow         -           -             —         20     0  0  1    10  0 

Wheat         -            -     per  quarter     2  10  0  0     4  6 

Timber       -            -         per  load     10     0  0  1     0  0 

The  charges  of  importation  in  those  two  years  on  all  other 
commodities  from  the  Baltic  were  in  the  same  proportion. 


-j-  In  1809  there  were  instances  when  30/.  per  ton  was  paid 
for  i\\e  freight  cdone  of  hemp  ;  and  the  insurance  varied  from  20 
to  40  per  cent. ;  making  these  two  items  of  charge  amount  to 
between  40/.  and  50/.  per  ton  on  hemp,  and  in  a  similar  pro- 
portion on  other  articles  of  importation  from  the  Baltic.     But  1 

X  3 


310  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  strange  misconception  under  which  Mr. Horner 
laboured,  as  to  the  facts  of  the  case  in  regard  to  corn, 

The  expenses  attending  the  importation  of  silk,  which  was 
brought  by  a  circuitous  route  *  from  Italy?  through  the  north  of 
Europe,  were  enormous.  Some  came  likewise  through  France  ; 
and  the  charges  of  conveyance  from  Italy  to  Havre  and  duty  of 
transit,  amounted  to  nearly  100/.  per  bale  of  2401b.,  net  weight, 
exclusive  of  freight  and  insurance  from  Havre  hither.  The 
whole  expense  of  freight  and  insurance  from  Italy  does  not  at 
present  amount  to  more  than  61.  per  bale. 

But,  while  the  cost  of  articles  imported  from  the  Continent 
of  Europe  was  thus  enhanced  by  the  difficulty  of  communication, 
the  same  cause  raised  the  price  of  colonial  produce,  and  of  some 
kinds  of  British  manufactures,  to  a  still  greater  proportionate 
height  on  the  Continent,  inasmuch  as  the  vigilance  and  severity 
of  the  decrees  of  the  enemy  were  exercised  more  directly  against 
imports  from,  than  against  exports  to,  this  country.  One  or 
two  instances  may  serve  to  show  the  degree  in  which  these  ob- 
structions were  calculated  to  raise  the  prices  of  such  commodi- 
ties abroad. 

The  charges  of  freight  and  French  license,  on  a  vessel  of  little 
more  than  100  tons  burden,  have  been  known  to  amount  to 
50,000/.  for  the  voyage  merely  from  Calais  to  London  and  back  : 
this  made  the  proportion  of  freight  on  indigo  amount  to  4*.  6d. 
per  pound :  the  freight  at  present  is  about  Id.  per  pound  ! 

A  ship,  of  which  the  whole  cost  and  outfit  did  not  amount 
to  ^OOO/,  earned  a  gross  freight  of  80,000/.  on  a  voyage  from 
Bourdeaux  to  London  and  back. 

Among  the  means  devised  by  the  ingenuity  and  enterprise  of 
adventurers  to  elude  or  overcome  the  obstacles  presented  by 
the  decrees  of  the  enemy,  one  in  particular,  which  was  resorted 
to  on  an  extensive  scale,  deserves  mention,  as  illustrating,  in  a 
striking  manner,  the  degree  in  which  those  obstacles  were  cal- 
culated to  increase  the  cost  to  the  consumer.  Several  vessels 
laden  with  sugar,  coffee,  tobacco,  cotton-twist,  and  other  valuable 
commodities,  were  despatched  -f-  from  hence  at  very  high  rates 


have  rather  taken  the  medium  rate  which  prevailed  through  the 
season.  There  was  no  very  material  reduction  in  those  charges 
till  181. '5. 

*  On  one  occasion,  two  parcels  of  silk  were  despatched  from 
Bergamo  to  this  country  at  the  same  time,  one  hy  the  xoay  of 
Smyrna  and  the  other  hy  the  loay  of  Archangel :  the  former  was 
a  twelvemonth  and  the  latter  two  years,  on  its  passage. 

t  The  refined  sugar  was  packed  here  in  small  boxes,  made  at 
a  considerable  additional   expense,  for  the  express  purpose,  to 


1809—1813.  311 

has  already  been  noticed;  and  Mr.  Henry  Thornton, 
following  on  the  same  side,  seems  to  have  been 
under  an  equally  erroneous  impression  as  to  facts 
relating  to  commodities  generally ;  for,  in  the  debate 
of  the  6th  May,  1811,  he  is  reported  to  have  said, 

"It  was  material  to  observe,  that  there  had,  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  war,  been  a  continual  fall  in  the  value  of  money ; 
he  meant  of  money  commonly  so  called,  whether  consisting  of 
cash  or  paper.  This  had  by  some  been  estimated  at  60  or  70  per 
cent.,  and  certainly  was  not  less  than  40  or  50  per  cent. ;  which 
was,  on  the  average,  2  or  3  per  cent,  per  annum  :  it  followed 
from  hence,  that  if,  for  example,  a  man  borrowed  of  the  Bank 
1000/.  in  1800,  and  paid  it  back  in  1810,  having  detained  it,  by 
means  of  successive  loans,  through  that  period,  he  paid  back 
that  which  had  become  worth  less  by  20  or  SO  per  cent,  than  it 
was  worth  when  he  first  received  it.  He  would  have  paid  an 
interest  of  50/.  per  annum  for  the  use  of  this  money ;  but,  if 
from  this  interest  were  deducted  the  20/.  or  30/.  per  annum 

of  freight  and  insurance  to  Salonica,  where  the  goods  were 
landed,  and  thence  conveyed  on  horses  and  mules  through  Servia 
and  Hungary  to  Vienna,  for  the  purpose  of  being  distributed 
over  Germany,  and,  possibly,  into  France.  Thus  it  might  happen, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  the  Continent  of  Europe 
most  contiguous  to  this  country  could  not  receive  their  supplies 
from  hence,  without  an  expense  of  conveyance  equivalent  to 
what  it  would  be  if  they  were  removed  to  a  distance  of  a  sea- 
voyage  twice  round  the  globe,  but  not  subject  to  fiscal  and  po- 
litical obstructions.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  articles 
subject  to  such  expenses  should  be  sold  at  enormously  high 
prices,  viz.,  5s.  and  6s.  per  lb.  for  sugar,  7*.  per  lb.  for  coffee, 
18*.  for  indigo,  and  7.?.  and  8s.  for  cotton ;  for  these  prices  were 
the  condition  requisite  to  overcome  the  obstacles  to  supply. 

With  just  as  much  reason  might  the  high  prices  on  tlie  Con- 
tinent, of  articles  subject  to  such  obstructions,  be  resorted  to 
in  proof  of  the  effects  of  war-demand,  or  of  the  state  of  their 
currency,  as  the  high  prices  in  this  country,  of  timber,  hemp, 
flax,  silk,  &c.,  and  of  the  manufactured  articles  into  the  compo- 
sition of  which  these  raw  materials  entered,  be  considered  to 
prove  the  extra-demand  and  consumption  arising  out  of  the  war, 
or  to  indicate  the  depreciation  of  paper  beyond  the  difference 
between  the  market  price  and  the  mint  price  of  gold. 


contain  not  more  than  about2cwt.  each,  so  as  to  admit  of  being 
slung  one  on  each  side  of  a  horse  or  mule  for  conveyance  over- 
land. 

X  4 


312  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

which  he  had  gained  by  the  fall  in  the  value  of  the  money,  he 
would  find  that  he  had  borrowed  at  2  or  3  per  cent.,  and  not  at 
5  per  cent,  as  he  appeared  to  do.  By  investing  his  money  either 
in  land  or  in  successive  commercial  undertakings,  in  the  year 
1800,  and  then  finally  selling  his  land  or  his  commodities  in  the 
year  1810,  he  would  find  the  produce  amount  to  200^.  or  300/. 
above  the  1000/.  which  he  had  borrowed  ;  which  200/.  or  300/., 
being  deducted  from  the  500/.  interest  which  he  had  paid,  would 
make  the  neat  sum  paid  by  him  to  be  only  200/.  or  300/."  * 

It  is  clear  that  the  meaning  of  the  speaker  is 
that  the  rise  of  prices  here  supposed  was  caused 
by  the  Bank  restriction  ;  and  the  date  assigned  to 
the  first  operation  of  this  cause  is  the  year  1800, 
being  that  in  which  there  first  occurred  any  dif- 
ference between  paper  and  gokl.  Viewing  it  in 
this  hght,  the  hypothetical  case  here  put  involves 
a  total  misconception  of  the  state  of  facts ;  for 
there  were  very  few  commodities  in  which,  if 
1000/.  had  been  laid  out  in  1800,  a  loss  would 
not  have  been  sustained  of  20  and  30  per  cent, 
and  upwards,  in  addition  to  the  interest  upon 
finally  selling  the  commodities  in  1810.  The 
money,  indeed,  if  laid  out  in  land,  or  in  houses, 
or  in  shipping,  in  1800,  would  have  produced  a 
profit  upon  selling  in  1810  and  1811.  But  this 
exception  is  easily  accounted  for.  The  frequent 
recurrence  of  deficient  harvests,  when,  by  the  ob- 
stacles to  importation,  the  rise  of  the  prices  of 
agricultural  produce  was  in  a  greatly  increased  ratio 
to  the  deficiency,  had  given  a  character  of  per- 
manence to  the  range  of  high  prices,  which  enabled 
the  landlords  to  obtain  increased  rents  upon  every 
termination   of  a  lease.     In  several  instances  the 

*  I  have  been  induced  to  notice  and  comment  upon  this 
opinion  of  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  not  only  because  of  his  de- 
servedly high  authority  on  the  subject  of  the  currency,  but  be- 
cause the  particular  opinion  here  quoted  was  referred  to  by 
Lord  Ashburton,  in  his  evidence  before  the  Agricultural  Com- 
mittee of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1836,  as  confirmatory  of 
his  belief  that  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  at  that  time  was 
greatly  beyond  the  difference  between  paper  and  gold. 


1809—1813.  313 

rents  were  raised  to  treble  of  what  they  had  been 
in  1792,  and  speculations  in  purchases  of  land 
were  almost  certain  to  render  a  profit.  In  the  case 
of  houses,  the  increasing  taxes  upon  building-ma- 
terials, and  the  great  rise  in  the  price  of  timber,  in 
consequence,  not  only  of  the  heavy  duty,  but  of  the 
high  freight  and  charges  on  importation,  when 
combined  with  an  increasing  population,  operated 
as  a  premium  on  all  existing  buildings,  and  neces- 
sarily caused  a  great  rise  in  that  description  of  pro- 
perty. And  as  to  shipping,  there  was  not  only 
the  increased  and  increasing  cost  of  the  materials, 
which  raised  the  building  price,  but  the  employ- 
ment was  extended  by  the  demands  for  the  transport 
service,  which  required  tonnage  on  a  greatly  en- 
larged scale  for  the  war  in  the  Peninsula.  These 
descriptions  of  property  were  doubtless  higher  in  1 8 1 0 
than  in  1800  ;  and  the  price  of  labour  having  been 
slowly  but  progressively  advanced,  in  consequence 
of  the  frequent  recurrence  of  periods  of  dearth, 
the  increased  wages  had  acquired  the  character  of 
permanence.  But  with  these  exceptions,  which,  so 
explained,  afford  no  ground  for  ascribing  their 
comparatively  high  price  to  depreciation  of  money, 
nearly  all  other  objects  of  exchange  were  lower  in 
price  in  1810  and  1811  than  in  1800  ;  in  few  in- 
stances less  than  20  per  cent.,  and,  in  some  instances, 
upwards  of  50  per  cent.,  as  ^neasured  in  paper, 
ivhile  gold  had  risen  ^Z5  per  cent.  It  may  be  matter 
of  surprise  that  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  who,  in  his 
excellent  work  on  paper  credit,  in  1 802,  had  so  well 
exposed  the  hasty  conclusions  of  Mr.  Boyd,  as  to 
the  influence  of  the  bank  issues  in  causing  the 
high  prices  of  corn  in  1799  and  1800,  should,  in 
1811,  have  laboured  under  such  a  misconception  of 
the  actual  state  of  markets  as  to  be  led  into  an 
error,  so  similar  to  that  which  he  had  some  time 
before  animadverted  upon.  The  fact  is,  that  Mr. 
Thornton,    who    was    profoLuidly   and    acciu'ately 


314  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

acquainted  with  the  principles  and  details  of  bank- 
ing, had  not  necessarily,  from  his  occupation  as  a 
banker,  any  knowledge  of  markets  ;  and  nothing 
can  more  strongly  prove  how  little  aware  he  was 
of  the  actual  state  of  them,  and  of  the  fluctuations 
to  which  they  had  been  subject,  or  of  the  causes 
of  those  fluctuations,  than  the  passage  here  quoted 
from  his  speech.  His  exposition,  at  the  same 
time,  of  the  general  principles  of  currency  was  full 
and  clear,  and,  indeed,  the  best  that  had  then  been 
given  ;  and  his  exposure  of  the  inconsistencies 
and  fallacies  involved  in  the  maxims  avowed  by 
the  Bank  directors,  and  supported  by  the  govern- 
ment, was  unanswered  and  unanswerable. 

Mr.  Vansittart,  in  his  speech  on  the  same  occa- 
sion, presents  a  curious  and  somewhat  amusing 
contrast.  While  his  arguments  in  support  of  the 
views  of  the  government,  and  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Bank  directors,  and  of  the  proposition  embodied 
in  his  unfortunate  resolution,  form  a  model  of  in- 
geniously perplexed,  and  elaborately  unintelligible, 
general  reasoning,  his  statements  of  facts  indicate 
extensive  and  accurate  information  as  to  the  nature 
and  extent  of  the  disturbing  causes  which  were 
operating  upon  the  exchanges  and  upon  prices, 
and  which  accounted  for  them  independently  of 
any  supposed  influence  upon  them  by  the  state  of 
the  circulation. 

"  The  general  scale  of  prices,  he  observed,  had  been  pro- 
gressively but  slowly  advancing  for  many  years  previous  to  the 
Bank  restriction,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  affected  by 
that  event.  But  the  scarcity  in  1800  and  1801  produced  a 
great  and  permanent  eifect,  particularly  on  the  price  of  labour ; 
and  it  has  been  so  far  from  being  remarkable  in  the  two  last 
years,  that  though  the  price  of  provisions  has  been  high,  from 
causes  sufficiently  notorious,  that  of  most  articles  of  merchandize 
is  considerably  reduced.  The  last  period  of  three  or  four  years 
is,  indeed,  remarkable  for  great  and  sudden  fluctuations  of  the 
prices  of  merchandize,  corresponding  with  the  extraordinary 
and  violent  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  commercial  policy  ; 
but  the  present  state  of  prices  is  so  far  from  justifying  the  opi- 


1 809— 1813.  315 

nion  of  a  currency  depreciated  from  its  excess,  that  it  would 
rather  lead  to  a  contrary  inference,  if  it  were  not  easy  to  be 
accounted  for  by  obvious  causes." 

In  a  subsequent  speech,  on  tlie  13th  May,  1811, 
Mr.  Vansittart  pointed  out  how,  in  some  instances, 
taxation  perpetuated  prices  which,  in  their  origin, 
and  temporarily,  had  been  those  of  dearth. 

"  But  the  principal  reason,"  he  said,  "  which  produced  that 
remarkable  increase  of  prices,  which  has  subsisted  from  that 
time  without  any  extraordinary  variation,  was  the  great  addi- 
tional mass  of  taxes  imposed,  while  the  effects  of  the  scarcity 
were  passing  away,  and  prices  returning  to  their  former  level. 
It  may  serve  by  way  of  illustration  to  mention  a  particular  instance. 
The  price  of  beer  had,  among  other  articles,  been  considerably 
advanced  during  the  scarcity.  In  the  spring  of  1802,  the  price 
of  malt  having  fallen  that  of  beer  was  reduced ;  but  a  tax  was 
soon  after  imposed  by  parliament  to  the  exact  amount  of  the 
reduction.  The  price  was,  accordingly, raised  again,  and  remained 
the  same  to  the  consumer  as  during  the  scarcity." 

Lord  Castlereagh,  who  equally  failed  in  render- 
ing his  general  principles  intelligible,  observed, 
however,  justly  enough,  "  that,  if  the  Bullion  Com- 
mittee could  have  traced  any  advance  of  price  in 
the  leading  articles  of  consumption,  which  could 
be  fairly  shown  to  connect  itself  with  the  alleged 
excess  of  notes,  they  would  have  annexed  to  their 
report  tables  of  the  prices  current  during  the  period 
which  has  elapsed  since  the  restriction  bill  took 
place.  So  far  from  prices  having  advanced  in  the 
two  or  three  last  years,  since  exchanges  became 
unfavourable,  and  bank-notes  are  assumed  to  be 
depreciated,  he  believed  the  fact  to  be  the  reverse." 

And  in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  the  course  of 
the  debates  on  that  most  anomalous  measure,  lord 
Stanhope's  gold  coin  bill,  lord  Bathurst,  in  his 
reply  to  lord  King,  asked,  "  Was  there  a  general 
advance  in  the  price  of  commodities  ?  Let  the 
noble  lord  compare  the  current  prices  at  present 
with  those  in  1808,  and  he  would  find  that  a  large 
proportion  of  commodities,  and  those  by  no  means 


316  PRICES    AND     CIRCULATION, 

inconsiderable  commodities,  had  fallen  in  price. 
He  would  find  that  iron  and  wool,  unfortunately 
for  the  noble  lord  adduced  as  instances  of  a  rise 
in  price,  tallow,  cotton,  and  a  great  number  of 
other  commodities,  had  experienced  a  great  fall. 
When  there  was  a  depreciation  in  the  currency, 
there  would  be  a  general  advance  in  the  price  of 
commodities  ;  but,  if  there  was  a  general  advance, 
it  did  not  follow  that  there  was  depreciation.'* 

In  neither  of  the  two  houses,  however,  did  the 
principal  speakers  on  the  side  of  the  Bullion  Commit- 
tee seem  to  think  it  incumbent  upon  them  to  explain 
this  anomaly  of  prices  according  to  their  doctrine. 
They  were  intent  only  on  exposing  the  outrageous 
absurdity  and  inconsistency  of  the  proposition  in- 
volved in  Mr.  Vansittart's  third  resolution.*  In 
that  object  they  so  far  succeeded,  that,  although 
the  resolution  was  carried  by  a  large  majority  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  the  public  has  assented 
to  the  general  principles  for  which  the  Committee 
and  its  supporters  contended. 


Section   3.  —  Revival   of   Credit^    and   improved 
Prospects  of  Trade,  in  the  Summer  o/'1811. 

The  suffering  state  of  commerce,  which  has 
been  described  as  the  consequence  of  the  great 
fall  of  prices  in  1809  and  1810,  and  of  the  dis- 
astrous result  of  the  speculative  exports,  did  not 
continue,  however,  in  the  same  degree  of  intensity 
beyond  the  spring  of  1811,  when  it  seems  to  have 
reached  its  height. 

At  that  time,  as  we  have  seen,  it  attracted  the 
notice   and    interference    of  Parliament.     An    act 

*  Mr.  Vansittart  had  said,  "  I  wish  the  house  to  pledge  itself 
to  the  belief  that  bank-notes  still  are,  as  they  have  always  been, 
equivalent  to  legal  coin,  for  the  internal  purposes  of  the  country, 
the  only  purposes  to  which  they  ever  have  been  applicable." 


1809—1813.  317 

was  passed,   in  April,  1811,  granting  a  sum,  not 
exceeding  six  millions   of  Exchequer  bills,  to  be 
advanced  by  commissioners  to  the  distressed  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers,  by  way  of  loan  on  ade- 
quate security.     This  measure,  in  consequence  of 
which,  however,   not  more  than  two  millions  were 
eventually  advanced,   was  then,   as  it  probably  is 
still,  supposed  to  have  arrested  the   tendency  to 
depression,  and  to   have  contributed  to  the  subse- 
quent revival  of  trade.     In  that  opinion  I  did  not 
and  do  not  participate.   If  the  causes  of  abundance 
of  commodities  at  home,  and  our  exclusion  from 
foreign  ports,  had  continued,  there  would  have  been 
no  ground  for  a  rise  of  prices :  and,  if  prices  had 
not  risen,  the  parties  who  borrowed  the  Exchequer 
bills  would  have  been  injured  instead  of  benefited 
by  the    facility  of  holding  their  goods  so   much 
longer ;  as   they  would  thereby  have  incurred  loss 
of  interest,   warehouse-rent,   and  other  expenses, 
and  must  at  last  have  submitted  to  the  same,  if  not 
to  lower,  prices  than  they  might  originally  have 
obtained.     But  whether  the  measure  was   or  was 
not  calculated  to  do  the  good  intended,   there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  it  did  not  come  into  opera- 
tion at  all  till  circumstances  had  occurred  favour- 
able  to  a   reviv-al  of  the  activity  of  trade,   and, 
consequently,  to   a  removal  of  the  causes  of  the 
then  existing  distress. 

Those  circumstances  were,  the  complete  expul- 
sion of  the  French  from  Portugal,  and  the  progress 
of  the  British  army  in  Spain,  which  opened  nearly 
the  whole  Peninsula  to  a  commercial  intercourse 
with  this  country.  The  glut  of  our  exports  to  South 
America  and  the  West  Indies  had  been  carried  off 
by  low  prices,  and  a  brisk  demand  iiad  succeeded. 
The  intention  of  Russia  to  resist  the  French  was 
becoming  manifest ;  and  an  anticipation  was  confi- 
dently entertained  of  a  relaxation  of  the  prohibi- 
tions against  imports  into  the  Russian  ports. 


318  PRICES    AND  CIRCULATION, 

Tlie  progress  of  improvement  is  described  in  the 
following  extracts  from  the  periodical  work  which 
I  have  before  quoted  :  — 

Monthly  Commercial  Report,  1st  June,  1811. 

"  The  expulsion  of  the  French  out  of  Portugal  has  once  more 
opened  a  trade  with  that  country,  and,  in  consequence  of  it, 
vast  quantities  of  goods  of  the  manufacture  of  Great  Britain 
are  now  shipping  for  Lisbon  and  Oporto  ;  among  which  the  ma- 
nufactures of  Manchester,  &c.,  will  not  be  the  least  in  quan- 
tity. Linens,  calicos,  and  woollen  cloths  are  in  great  demand 
in  Portugal. 

"  South  America.  —  In  our  last  we  stated  the  trade  of  this 
country  to  be  rather  brisk,  and  have  the  pleasure  now  to  say 
that  every  mail  from  the  Brazils  confirms  it." 

1st  July,   1811. 

"  Since  our  last  report,  the  manufactories  have  revived  in  a 
great  degree,  chiefly  owing  to  large  orders  for  all  kinds  of  woollen, 
linen,  and  cotton  goods  having  arrived  here  for  the  markets  of 
Portugal  and  of  South  America.  The  goods  of  Birmingham  and 
Sheffield  are  also  in  great  demand  at  these  markets.  Credit  and 
confidence,  we  are  happy  to  say,  revive,  and  the  towns  of  Man- 
chester, Nottingham,  &c.  feel  vast  benefit  from  the  happy  change 
that  has  taken  place. 

"  The  West  Lidia  Islands  are  now  in  want  of  all  kinds  of  Bri- 
tish manufactured  goods,  as  the  stock  in  hand  in  these  islands 
has  been  purchased  up  with  avidity  for  the  Spanish  settlements. 
Irish  linen,  sheeting,  &c.,  render  a  full  profit  of  twenty  per  cent, 
more  than  the  usual  profit  attached  to  such  speculations." 

This  improvement,  however,  as  it  so  immedi- 
ately succeeded  to  a  period  of  great  distress,  was 
not  yet  marked  by  such  eagerness  of  speculative 
shipment  as  had  distinguished  1808  and  1809- 

While  our  export  trade  was  slowly  recovering, 
there  appeared,  towards  the  autumn  of  that  year,  a 
more  marked  tendency  to  a  general  advance  in  the 
prices  of  agricultural  produce,  and  of  imported  raw 
materials. 


1809—1813.  319 


Section  4.  —  Rise  of  the  Prices  of  Agricultural 
Produce,  and  high  Range  of  them,  Jjetween  the 
Harvest  0/I8II  and  the  Harvest  of\S\S. 

The  scanty  crops  of  corn  of  1810  had  been 
eked  out  by  the  aid  of  the  large  foreign  supply,  at 
rather  decHnmg  prices,  till  the  approach  of  the 
harvest  of  1811,  when,  in  consequence  of  the 
bareness  of  the  stock  on  hand,  and  the  unfavour- 
able appearance  of  the  crops,  combined  with  un- 
settled weather,  prices  began  to  rise  in  August, 
and  thenceforward  advanced  steadily  and  consi- 
derably till  the  eve  of  the  following  harvest,  when, 
as  will  be  seen,  they  attained  their  greatest  height. 

As  it  was  the  deficiency  of  the  crops  of  the 
harvest  of  1811  whicli,  with  little  stock  remain- 
ing from  the  preceding  year,  and  without  the  means 
of  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  occasioned  the  high 
prices  of  1812,  and  as  those  high  prices  form  the 
standard  a  decline  from  which  has  been  ascribed 
to  the  operation  of  Peel's  bill,  it  is  necessary  to 
notice  in  some  detail  the  circumstances  connected 
with  it.  The  more  especially  because  the  fact 
itself  of  any  deficiency  at  all,  as  resulting  from  that 
year's  crops,  appears  not  to  have  been  contemplated, 
or,  at  any  rate,  has  not  been  admitted,  or  even  ad- 
verted to,  by  the  supporters  of  the  several  theories 
of  depreciation  or  of  war-demand.  The  further 
presumptive  proofs  of  the  negative  of  those  theories 
will  be  pointed  out  hereafter.  In  the  mean  time, 
the  following  extracts  from  contemporaneous  publi- 
cations must  be  considered  as  forming  a  mass  of 
the  best  evidence,  of  which  the  nature  of  the  sub- 
ject is  susceptible,  of  the  deficiency  of  the  crops 
of  corn  in  this  country.  A  deficiency  quite  suffi- 
cient, when  considered  with  its  attendant  circum- 
stances, to  account  for  the  high  prices  which  have 
been  so  gratuitously  ascribed  to  the  currency  or  to 


320  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

war-demand.  The  following  is  an  account  of  it, 
from  one  of  the  circular  monthly  reports  of  that 
period  (Oct.  1811). 

"  The  state  of  the  wheat  crops  seems  now  to  be  ascertained 
with  probable  accuracy  throughout  the  island,  as  somewhat  below 
an  average  quantity,  and  far  inferior  to  that  of  last  year  in  point 
of  quality.  Reckoning  both  quantity  and  quality,  persons  of 
the  most  general  information  decide  upon  a  deficiency  of  a  full 
third.  There  will  be  a  considerable  quantity  of  black  wheat,  and 
in  many  parts  of  the  north  the  barley  is  strongly  smutted." 

This  estimate  was  fully  confirmed ;  for,  in  another 
monthly  report,  in  December,  1811,  it  is  said, 

"  The  former  statements  respecting  the  defects  of  the  crops 
of  wheat,  both  in  quantity  and  quality,  are  fully  and  unfortu- 
nately confirmed.  The  autumnal  price  of  wheat,  is  indeed,  at  an 
enormous  height,  although  the  farmers  have  been  universally 
liberal  in  supplying  the  markets,  considering  the  season ;  and,  as 
there  are  various  impediments  to  foreign  supplies  in  times  like 
the  present,  the  real  state  of  things  cannot  be  too  widely  pro- 
mulgated, with  a  view  to  timely  economy  in  expenditure." 

A  corroboration  of  the  general  estimate  of  the 
defective  state  of  the  crops  of  that  year  will  be 
found  in  the  following  extract  from  the  Farmer's 
Magazine,  more  minutely  descriptive  of  the  de- 
ficiency :  — 

"  December,  1811.  —  The  wheat  crop  is  less  or  more  a  de- 
fective one  in  every  district,  but  more  so  in  some  districts  than 
in  others.  According  to  our  accounts  it  can  rarely  be  estimated 
above  five  eighths  of  an  average  crop,  though,  what  is  surprising, 
the  quality  of  the  grain  is  generally  good,  a  circumstance  which 
seldom  happens  when  the  crop  is  a  failing  one.  Indeed,  as  the 
failure  this  season  was  not,  in  many  instances,  occasioned  by 
mildew  (at  least  in  Scotland),  the  grain  that  was  in  the  ear 
arrived  at  complete  maturity,  without  being  stinted  of  nourish- 
ment. The  deficiency  evidently  proceeded  from  wetness  in 
May  —  from  cold  frosty  nights  in  June  —  from  boisterous  winds 
when  the  plant  was  under  the  blossom  process  —  and  from  want 
of  sun  and  heat  when  the  grain  was  formed  in  the  ear  of  the 
plant.  Wheat  is  a  grain  always  comparatively  unproductive  in 
a  cold  season  such,  as  the  last  one,  and  the  same  remark  is  ap- 
plicable to  barley,  the  crop  of  which,  generally  speaking,  is 
below  an  average.  Oats,  and  peas,  and  beans,  may,  however,  be 
considered  as  fair  crops,   though,  according  to  our  accounts. 


1809—1813.  321 

many  of  these   grains,  upon  thin  soils,  suffered  so  much  from 
the  wetness  in  May  and  June  as  not  to  prosper  afterwards. 

"  From  all  these  circumstances  a  rise  of  corn  markets  was  the 
necessary  consequence,  though  at  this  time  it  would  be  rather 
rash  to  speculate  or  prognosticate  upon  their  state  at  a  more 
advanced  period  of  the  season,  when  prices  may  be  supposed  to 
have  gained  their  proper  level.  The  present  rate  of  markets 
will  be  seen  from  the  accounts  which  follow.  Hitherto  there 
has  been  little  or  no  importation  from  ibreign  countries,  and  it 
is  understood  that  the  crops  upon  the  Continent  are  scantier 
this  season  than  usual." 

And  the  following  copy  of  a  petition  from  Li- 
verpool will  place  beyond  a  doubt  the  fact  of  the 
general  impression  of  the  great  deficiency  of  the 
crop  of  1811. 

"  At  a  public  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  Liverpool,  held 
on  the  4th  of  November,  1811,  John  Bourne,  Esq.  Mayor,  in 
the  chair,  it  was  unanimously  resolved,  upon  the  motion  of  John 
Gladstone,  Esq.,  seconded  by  Thomas  llodie,  Esq.,  that  a  pe- 
tition should  be  presented  to  the  Prince  Regent,  praying  that 
he  would  suspend  the  further  distillation  of  spirits  from  grain 
until  the  meeting  of  Parliament. 

"  The  Humble  Petition,  <i-c.  &c. 
"  Showeth, 

"  That  your  petitioners  being  deeply  interested  in  the  welfare 
of  this  populous  town,  and  this  great  manufacturing  county, 
cannot  but  view  with  great  anxiety  the  progressive  and  alarming 
advance  in  the  prices  of  corn,  in  connection  with  the  fact  now 
ascertained,  that  the  produce  of  the  late  harvest  is  very  deficient, 
and  that  the  weather  for  gathering  it  in,  in  the  northern  parts 
of  Great  Britain,  and  for  preparing  the  wheat  lands  generally 
for  the  next  crops,  has  been  extremely  unfavourable. 

"  That  your  petitioners  are  well  informed  the  potato  crop  in 
Ireland  has  so  materially  failed,  that  this  important  necessary 
of  life  now  sells  in  the  Dublin  market  at  the  excessive  price  of 
6*.  per  cwt.,  from  which  circumstance  your  petitioners  appre- 
hend that  the  usual  supplies  of  corn  from  Ireland,  upon  which 
the  numerous  population  of  this  town  and  the  county  of  Lan- 
caster are  known  in  a  great  degree  to  depend  for  subsistence, 
are  likely  to  be  much  curtailed. 

"  That,  in  times  like  the  present,  when  no  dependence  can 
be  placed  on  receiving  supplies  of  foreign  corn,  it  becomes  of 
the  first  importance  to  husband  to  the  utmost  the  crops  of  this 
country. 

*'  That  the  average  weekly  prices  of  corn  in  England  and 
Wales,  according  to  the  returns  received  in  the  week  ending  the 

Y 


322 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


26th  of  October,  as  published  in  the  London  Gazette  of  the  2d 
of  November,  are  as  follows  :  — 


s.     d. 

Wheat 

101     6  per  quarter. 

Barley 

47     4 

Oats 

29  10 

Which  equal,  and,  in  several  instances,  exceed  the  prices  at 
the  different  periods  when  the  legislature,  in  their  wisdom, 
thought  fit  to  interpose  to  prevent  the  distillation  of  spirits  from 
grain  (the  year  of  extraordinary  scarcity  only  excepted),  as  will 
appear  from  the  following  comparative  statement  taken  from  the 
official  returns. 

"  Average  price  of  wheat,  barley,  and  oats,  in  England  and 
Whales,  according  to  the  weekly  returns  nearest  to  the  following 
periods. 

Nearest  Weekly  Returns. 


Date. 

Distillation. 

Wheat. 

Bar 

ey. 

Oats. 

5. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

s.       d. 

1795 

Prohibited. 

93 

10 

46 

0 

29     2 

1797 

Removed. 

52 

3 

28 

4 

15  10 

1800 

Prohibition. 

133 

0 

76 

7 

41     8 

1802 

Removed. 

76 

9 

44 

1 

23     4 

1808 

Pj'ohibition. 

81 

6 

44 

3 

38  10 

1808 

Continued. 

92 

7 

45 

10 

33     8 

1809 

Prohibition. 

95 

7 

46 

6 

34     4 

1809 

Prohibition. 

101 

9 

50 

7 

31   11 

1810 

Prohibition. 

101 

7 

46 

5 

27     5 

1811 

The  last  return. 

101 

6 

47 

4 

29  10 

"  That  on  these  grounds  your  petitioners  humbly  conceive 
there  exists  an  urgent  necessity  for  the  interposition  of  the  royal 
prerogative  before  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  more  especially 
as,  should  the  measure  be  deferred  till  that  period,  the  distillers 
will  have  laid  in  their  stocks  of  grain  for  the  season,  a  large 
proportion  of  which  will  either  be  distilled  or  converted  into  a 
state  vmfitting  it  for  the  food  of  man." 

In  the  spring  of  1812,  the  general  impression 
was,  tliat  the  stock  in  hand  was  very  defective. 
The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  printed  report, 
dated  in  May,  1812:  — 

"  The  stock  of  wheat  on  hand  in  the  most  productive  eastern 
counties,  is  alarmingly  deficient  according  to  the  best  accounts 
that  can  be  obtained." 


1809—1813.  SrS 

Whether  that  impression,  which  was  very  general, 
had  been  well  or  ill  founded,  it  was  equally  calcu- 
lated to  affect  prices.  This  deficiency,  real  or 
supposed,  of  the  stock  of  grain  in  the  country, 
and  the  absence  of  any  prospect  of  effectual  relief 
by  importation,  became  more  alarming  as  the  sum- 
mer advanced,  in  consequence  of  apprehensions 
which  were  entertained  of  the  result  of  the  ap- 
proaching harvest. 

The  whole  of  July,  and  part  of  August,  1812, 
proved  cold  and  wet,  and  the  harvest  commenced 
under  very  unfavourable  appearances.  From  a 
combination  of  these  circumstances,  there  was  a 
great  excitement  and  spirit  of  speculation  among 
all  persons  in  the  corn  trade  ;  and  as  the  range 
of  high  prices  (with  an  interval  of  depression 
between  the  harvests  of  1810  and  1811,  so  short 
as  not  to  have  been  felt  at  all  by  the  landlord, 
and  very  little  by  tlie  farmer,)  had  been  of  an 
unusually  long  continuance,  it  was  hastily  con- 
cluded, as  it  unfortunately  but  too  often  is  upon 
such  occasions,  that  the  causes  of  that  high  range 
were  permanent.  This  accordingly  was  the  period 
in  which  rents  experienced  their  greatest  rise,  and 
speculations  in  land  became  most  general.  And 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that,  under  these  circum- 
stances, the  country  circulation  must  have  recovered 
from  its  shock  of  1810,  and  have  acquired  a  renewed 
extension. 

In  August,  1812,  the  average  prices  were,  for 
England  and  Wales,  per  Gazette  average — 


s. 

d. 

Wheat, 

155 

0 

Barley, 

79 

10 

Oats, 

56 

2 

In  Mark  Lane,  the  finest  Danzig  Wheat  fetched 
180*.,  and  Oats,  in  one  or  two  instances,  were  sold 
at  the  enormous  price  of  84*. 

Y  2 


324  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

The  corn  markets  have  on  no  occasion  since  at- 
tained the  same  elevation. 

Meat  in  Smithfield  reached  the  following  quo 
tations  :  — 


s. 

d. 

s.      d. 

Beef, 

5 

2 

to 

6     2 

Mutton, 

5 

2 

6     4 

Veal, 

5 

6 

— 

7     6 

Pork, 

5 

4 

6  10 

The  weather  during  the  harvest  of  1812  was 
unsettled,  but  not  so  decidedly  wet  as  materially  to 
injure  the  crops.  There  were  conflicting  opinions 
as  to  the  yield.  The  following  are  extracts  from 
some  of  the  reports  of  the  time  ;  making  all  due 
allowance,  the  crops  of  grain  generally,  and  of 
potatoes  in  that  year,  appear  to  have  been  under  an 
average. 

Farmer's  Magazine,  August,  1812. 

"  There  has  seldom,  or  perhaps  never,  been  a  period  when 
the  new  crop  was  a  subject  of  greater  and  more  general  interest 
than  the  present ;  and  it  was  our  particular  wish  to  obtain  the 
best  and  fullest  information  of  its  appearance.  We  feel  very 
grateful  to  our  correspondents  who  have  enabled  us  to  present 
reports  of  it,  and  of  the  condition  of  the  industrious  poor  for 
the  last  quarter  ;  and  their  communications  will  certainly  be  per- 
used with  that  attention  which  their  peculiar  importance  must 
command. 

"  Though  appearances  are  different,  as  might  be  expected, 
from  the  diversity  of  soil  and  culture,  the  general  character  of 
the  ensuing  crop,  as  far  as  an  opinion  can  be  formed  of  it  at 
this  period  of  the  season,  must  be  represented,  we  fear,  as  rather 
unfavourable.  The  impression,  after  a  very  careful  examina- 
tion of  the  reports,  is,  that  unless  we  have  two  months  at  least 
of  singularly  warm,  clear,  and  dry  weather,  the  grain  crops 
will  not  reach  an  average  ;  that  common  oats,  particularly  in 
many  situations,  and"  peas  and  beans  generally,  must  be  very 
late  indeed.  From  recent  and  afflicting  experience  of  partial 
failure  in  the  crops  of  wheat,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  surprise  if 
a  few  of  the  intelligent  writers  are  a  little  alarmed  at  the  in- 
dications of  disease  which  that  crop  already  exhibits  in  some 
districts,  and  which  there  was  but  too  much  reason  to  expect 
from  the  late  cold,  humid,  and  ungenial  state  of  the  atmosphere." 

Agricultural  Report,     Monthly  Magazine, 
"  Wheat  harvest  has  been  protracted  and  extremely  tedious 


1809—1813.  S<25 

in  the  distant  counties  ;  the  farmers  being  obliged  to  wait  an 
unusual  length  of  time  for  the  grain  to  ripen,  which,  in  the  in- 
terval, has  taken  considerable  damage  from  wet.  This  unfa- 
vourable circumstance  will  add  to  the  stock  of  unsound  and  light 
corn.  The  last  year's  stock  is  literally  exhausted  in  all  quarters, 
and  markets  in  consequence  have  continued  to  rise  for  several 
weeks.  The  early  speculators,  who  hurried  their  wheat  to 
market,  to  the  great  deterioration  of  its  quality,  have  failed 
generally  in  their  object,  as  the  subsequent  rise  in  prices  has 
proved.  The  favourable  opinion  of  the  potato  crop  has  not  been 
realised  ;  they  yield  but  indifferently  ;  probably  in  the  propor- 
tion of  a  defect  of  one  fourth  of  the  variable  quantity  of  last 
year.  In  the  mean  time,  certain  ill  informed  newspapers  teem 
with  the  usual  deplorable  nonsense  about  monopoly,  forestalling, 
and  hoarding  farmers  and  dealers  !" — 3Iiddlesex,  October  27. 1812. 

There  was  still  no  prospect  of  a  foreign  supply, 
for,  high  as  the  price  here  was,  it  was  insufficient 
to  cover  the  great  expenses  of  importation,  added 
to  a  relatively  high  price  at  the  shipping  ports. 

The  deficiency  of  our  own  crops  in  1811  and  1812 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  so  great  as  it  had  been 
in  1794  and  1795  ;  or,  again  in  1799  and  1800.  It 
is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  prices  of  1811  and  1812 
would  not  have  been  so  high  if  there  had  not  been 
a  virtual  exclusion  of  foreign  supply,  which  ren- 
dered it  necessary  to  eke  out  our  own  produce  by 
economy ;  and  this  could  only  be  effected  through 
the  medium  of  a  relatively  high  range  of  prices. 

It  must  be  obvious  that,  the  effect  of  a  succession 
of  crops,  such  as  have  been  described,  more  or  less 
deficient,  in  raising  prices  so  much  beyond  the 
degree  of  defect,  must  have  been  to  aflbrd  a  great 
amount  of  gain  to  be  distributed  among  the  agri- 
cultural classes.  Independently  of  the  encourage- 
ment arising  from  these  profits,  continued  through 
so  great  a  length  of  time,  there  w^as  now^  a  con- 
fidence, which  had  not  before  existed,  in  the  pro- 
spect of  the  continuance  of  them.  The  average 
produce  of  five  seasons  was  supposed  to  represent 
what  would  be  the  utmost  that  any  five  succeeding 
seasons  were  likely  to  yield ;  and  as  there  was  not, 

Y  3 


326  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

till  the  close  of  1812,  any  appearance  of  a  relax- 
ation of  the  continental  system  of  exclusion  di- 
rected against  the  trade  of  this  country,  a  con- 
tinued absence  of  foreign  competition  was  fully 
anticipated. 

Under  these  circumstances,  rents,  upon  the 
expiration  of  leases,  were  advanced  in  full  propor- 
tion to  the  high  range  of  the  prices  of  produce ; 
and,  in  several  instances,  they  were  raised  threefold 
or  upwards  of  what  they  had  been  in  1792.  Every 
purchase  of  land  previous  to  1811,  whether  made 
with  or  without  judgment,  turned  out  favourably 
according  to  the  then  market  rates,  and  it  was  sup- 
posed, in  consequence,  that  money  could  in  no  way 
be  so  profitably  employed  as  in  buying  land.  Spe- 
culations, therefore,  in  land,  or,  as  it  is  termed, 
land-jobbing,  became  general,  and  credit  came  in 
aid  of  capital  for  that  purpose.  A  striking,  but 
not,  I  believe,  a  singular  instance  of  that  descrip- 
tion of  speculation,  was  exhibited  in  the  case  of  a 
petition  presented  to  parliament  some  years  after, 
representing  that  the  petitioner  had,  in  the  years 
1811  and  1812.  laid  out  150,000/.  partly  his  own 
and  partly  borrowed,  in  the  purchase  of  land,  which 
had  since  fallen  so  much  in  value,  that  he  was 
ruined  by  the  loss  ;  praying,  therefore,  to  be  re- 
lieved, by  what  it  has  been  the  fashion  to  term  an 
equitable  adjustment  of  contracts,  but  which  means, 
in  reality,  an  indemnification  for  bad  speculations. 

The  extension  of  tillage,  and  the  application  of 
fresh  capital  to  land  already  in  cultivation,  pro- 
ceeded in  full  proportion  to  the  great  gains  derived 
from  the  produce  at  such  high  prices.  The  number 
of  inclosure  bills  was  — 


1 805  * 

71 

1809 

122 

1806 

76 

1810 

107 

1807 

91 

1811 

133 

1808 

92 

1812 

119 

*  The  number  in  the  ten  years  preceding  1805  has  aheady 
been  given  at  p.  257. 


1809—1813.  327 

It  is  not  easy  to  imagine,  that  any  person,  not 
biassed  by  a  preconceived  theory,  who  will  have 
been  at  the  trouble  of  going  through  the  evidence 
which  has  been  here  adduced,  can  resist  the  con- 
clusion, that  the  produce  of  the  seasons  from  1808 
to  181^2,  both  years  included,  was  more  or  less  de- 
ficient. And  seeing,  according  to  that  evidence, 
that  of  the  five  seasons  embraced  in  that  interval, 
the  first  was  partially  deficient,  and  the  four  follow- 
ing decidedly  so ;  seeing,  moreover,  that  relief  by 
importation  was  attainable  only  in  two  of  them,  viz. 
1809  and  1810,  and  then  only  on  the  condition  of 
being  subject  to  expenses  of  licence  from  our  own 
and  from  the  foreign  hostile  governments,  and  of 
freight  and  insurance  amounting  collectively  to,  at 
least,  30,9.,  and  in  many  instances  to  50.9.  the  quar- 
ter on  wheat;  while  in  1811  and  1812*,  hardly 
any  foreign  supply  at  all  could  be  obtained,  there 

*  The  only  instance  that  I  have  met  with  in  the  evidence, 
appended  to  the  several  parliamentary  agricultural  reports,  of 
any  witness  Avho  appears  to  have  had  a  distinct  recollection  of 
the  state  of  things  connected  with  the  corn  markets  at  this 
period,  is  Mr.  Joseph  Sandars  of  Liverpool.  In  his  evidence 
before  the  committee  of  1833,   he   observed,  page  218:  — 

"  I  have  never  known  any  but  one  year,  in  which  there  was 
any  prospect  whatever  of  famine,  of  the  people  not  being  able 
to  get  sufficient,  and  that  was  in  the  year  1812,  resulting  from 
the  crop  of  1811,  when  we  were  shut  out  from  the  rest  of 
the  world  ;  wheat  gradually  advanced  from  10*.  a  bushel,  to  24s. 
or  25s.  That  year  we  were  on  the  very  verge  of  famine,  and 
I  can  give  a  remarkable  proof  of  it ;  in  ten  days  after  the 
crop  of  oats  had  begun  to  be  cut  in  Lancashire,  the  price  of 
oatmeal,  notwithstanding  it  was  at  three  times  its  present  price, 
that  is,  at  31,  a  load ;  notwithstanding  the  crop  was  within 
the  reach  of  consumption,  in  one  week  it  advanced  11.  from 
absolute  scarcity.  That  year,  I  recollect,  at  the  termination  of 
it,  we  never  showed  a  sample  of  corn  at  all ;  it  was  always  be- 
spoken." 

And  yet  it  is  with  reference  to  this  period  of  severe  dearth 
that  it  has  been  said  by  one  of  the  principal  authorities  for  the 
doctrine  of  depreciation,  "  Those  were  not  the  prices  of  dear 
corn,  but  of  cheap  money ;  not  of  scarcity,  but  abundance." 
Letter  to  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton. 

Y    4 


328  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

being  an  equal  dearth  on  the  Continent  of  Eu- 
rope, and  especially  in  France,  the  wonder  is 
rather,  not  that  prices  were  so  high,  but  that  they 
were  not  higher.  Of  this,  at  least,  I  feel  per- 
suaded, that  were  a  succession  of  five  such  seasons 
to  occur  again,  .subject  to  an  equal  difficultly  and 
expense  of  obtaining  a  foreign  supply,  or  to  a 
duty  on  importation  equivalent  to  the  difference  of 
freight  and  insurance  at  that  time  compared  with 
the  present,  and  if,  moreover,  an  alarm  were  su- 
peradded, by  the  prospect  of  not  getting  any  aid 
at  all  by  importation,  we  should  witness,  a  range  of 
prices,  at  least,  as  high  as  then  prevailed. 


Section  5.  ■ —  On    JVages   and    Salar^ies   as  con- 
nected with  the  Prices  of  Necessaries. 

It  may  be,  as  indeed  it  has  been,  observed  as  a 
ground  for  questioning,  whether  there  was  a  scar- 
city in  these  seasons  justifying  the  high  prices, 
that  although  the  prices  of  corn  were  as  high  as 
they  had  been  in  1795,  and  1796,  and  in  1800,  and 
1801,  there  was  nothing  like  the  same  importance 
attached  to  them.  No  committees  of  parliament 
to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  deficiency  and 
to   suggest  remedies.  *     The   answer  is   that  the 

*  In  the  Letter  to  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton  before  referred 
to,  the  writer,  after  adverting  to  the  years  1795  and  1800,  and 
admitting  them  to  have  been  years  of  real  scarcity,  goes  on 
to  say,  page  29.,  "  shortly  afterwards  ensued  years  not  of 
scarcity  but  abundance;  years  of  increasing  revenue,  and 
increasing  prosperity  among  the  poor ;  whilst  the}'  paid  year 
after  year  prices  for  wheat  of  87*.  9</.,  95*.  Id.,  106*.  2(/.,  94-*. 
Qd.,  125*.  5d.,  and  lOS*.  9d.,  which  last  five  prices  quoted  are 
the  average  prices  of  five  successive  years,  ending  with  1813. 
No  committees  sat  in  these  years  to  consider  of  the  high  price 
of  corn,  and  of  distress  arising  therefrom."  It  is  hardly  possible 
to  imagine  a  more  egregious  misapprehension  of  facts,  than  is 
contained  in  the  above  passage.  Upon  the  perversion  of  years- 
of  scarcity  into  years  of  abundance  I  have  already  remarked. 
With  regard  to  the  assertion  of  an  increasing  revenue,  the  fact, 


1809—1813.  329 

high  prices  of  17'95,  and  179^,  and  of  1800,  and 
1801,  came  abruptly,  combining  dearth  from 
failure  of  produce  with  the  effects  of  heavy  tax- 
ation, which  fell  directly  or  indirectly  on  consum- 
able commodities,  wiiile  wages  and  salaries  had 
been  adjusted  to  the  scale  of  prices  resulting  from 
a  state  of  peace  and  plenty.  It  has  already  been 
observed,  in  treating  of  those  earlier  periods  of 
dearth,  that  they  presented  the  alternative  of  the 
actual  starvation  of  considerable  numbers  of  the 
working  population,  or  of  a  rise  of  wages,  whether 
permanent,  or  temporary  and  variable.  A  great 
rise  of  wages,  but  still  far  short  of  the  rise  in  the 
price  of  necessaries  did  take  place,  partly  perma- 
nent, and  partly  temporary  and  variable,  including 
under  the  latter  description  parish  allowances  and 
individual  contributions.  And  not  only  did  a  rise 
of  wages  take  place  on  the  occasion  of  those  me- 
morable scarcities,  but  there  was  a  further  rise 
when,  after  a  short  intermediate  subsidence  of  the 
price  of  provisions,  between  1801  and  1808,  a 
recurrence  of  defective  crops  and  increasing  tax- 
ation, and  consequent  high  prices  of  food  and 
other  necessaries,  gave  occasion  to  further  claims 
for  advance  of  wages  :  in  most  occupations  these 
had  reached  their  maximum  before  1812. 

The  wages  of  agicultural  labourers  and  artisans 
had  been  doubled,  or  nearly  so.  Salaries  from 
the  lowest  clerks  up  to  the  highest  functionaries, 
as  well  as  professional  fees,  had  been  considerably 
raised  on  the  plea  of  the  greatly  increased  expenses 
of  living ;  the  expense  of  living  having  been 
increased,  not  only  by  the  increased  price  of  neces- 

on  the  contrary,  is,  that  the  produce  of  the  permanent  taxes 
fell  off  in  each  of  tlie  years  1811  and  1812.  And  it  is  well 
known  that  this  circumstance,  indicating  an  approach  to  the 
limits  of  the  power  of  further  taxation,  induced  the  resort  in 
1813  to  an  appropriation  of  the  nominal  sinking  fund  for  the 
interest  on  tiie  further  loans. 


330  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

saries,  but  by  a  higher  scale  of  general  expenditure, 
or  style  of  living,  incidental  to  the  progress  of  wealth 
and  civilisation  Thus,  upon  the  recurrence  of  the 
seasons  of  dearth  between  1808  and  1812,  there  was 
more  of  an  adjustment,  although  still  inadequate,  of 
the  pecuniary  means  of  a  large  part  of  the  different 
classes,  which  prevented  so  great  a  degree  of 
the  pressure  of  distress  as  had  been  observable  in 
the  previous  scarcity. 

But  while  the  wages  of  agricultural  labourers 
and  of  artisans  had  been  raised  in  a  considerable, 
although  still  inadequate  proportion  to  the  in- 
creased price  of  necessaries,  this  was  not  the  case, 
or  only  partially  so,  as  regarded  the  wages  of  the 
working  people  in  manufactories.  Considerable 
numbers  of  these  had  no  advance  of  wages  ;  or  if 
they  had,  the  advance  was  more  than  compensated 
by  reduced  hours  of  work.  In  the  branches  of 
trade  which  were  affected  by  the  state  of  stagnation 
and  discredit  in  1810  and  1811,  and  in  those  which 
depended  upon  a  demand  for  export,  many  work- 
men were  thrown  wholly  out  of  employ.  The  dis- 
tress accordingly  among  these  classes  was  very 
severe,  and  was  the  cause  of  considerable  disturb- 
ances in  the  manufacturing  districts.* 

*  The  Prince  Regent,  in  a  message  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, in  June  1812,  referred  to  the  violent  and  dangerous  pro- 
ceedings carried  on  in  several  counties  of  England.  In  further 
proof  of  the  distressed  state  of  the  working  classes  at  that 
time,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  poor  rates,  vi'hich  in  1803, 
a  period  of  low  prices  and  agricultural  distress,  had  amounted 
to  5,348,201/.,  rose  in  1812  and  1813  to  8,640,84-2/.  And  it 
was  stated  in  the  House  of  Commons  (Parliamentary  Debates, 
vol.  xxi.  p.  1004.),  that  a  committee,  appointed  at  Liverpool, 
to  examine  into  the  condition  of  the  poor,  reported  that,  there 
had  been  in  one  month,  namel}^,  January,  1812,  an  increase  of 
numbers  from  8000  to  15,350. 

Never  was  there  a  greater  delusion  than  that  which  prevails 
under  the  influence  of  the  currency  theory,  representing  this 
period  as  one  of  great  and  increasing  prosperity.  It  was  indeed 
a  period  of  agricultural  prosperity,  but  of  great  privation  and 
suffering   to   tlie  bulk  of  the  community. 


1809—1813.  331 


Section  6. —  Advance  of  Prices  on  the  Continent 
of  Europe  in  1811  and  1812. 

It  may  be  objected  by  persons  who  may  still 
profess  to  be  sceptical,  as  to  the  fact  of  scarcity,  in 
explaining  the  advance  of  prices  of  provisions"  and 
of  labour  in  the  period  referred  to,  that  these 
prices  were  purely  artificial ;  and  were  the  result, 
according  to  the  theory;  of  one  set  of  reasoners,  ofthe 
alteration  ofthe  system  of  our  currency,  and  accord- 
ing to  another,  ofthe  influence  of  war-demand,  aris- 
ing out  of  our  large  expenditure  defrayed  by  loans. 
Upon  either  hypothesis  the  rise  of  prices  and  of 
wages  is  supposed  to  be  from  a  cause  operating 
locally,  either  by  an  increase  of  paper  money,  or 
by  the  large  loans  raised,  in  this  country. 

It  so  happens,  however,  that  a  similar  rise  of  the 
prices  of  provisions  and  of  other  necessaries,  and 
of  labour,  took  place  in  1811  and  1812  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe  generally  as  well  as  in  this 
country,  during  the  })eriod  referred  to,  witli  only 
an  allowance  for  the  difference  of  the  ordinary 
level  of  their  prices,  compared  with  ours. 

It  has  before  been  observed,  that  some  similarity 
of  seasons,  in  point  of  marked  preponderance  of 
drought  or  wetness,  and  of  inclemency  or  propitious- 
ness,  and  consequent  prodiictiv-eness  or  otherwise, 
has  been  found  to  apply  generally  to  parts  of  tiie 
Continent  of  Europe,  but  more  especially  to  the 
principal  parts  of  France  and  Germany.  This 
observation,  however,  is  subject  to  considerable 
exceptions  ;  for  instance,  the  seasons  of  1808  and 
1809  appear  to  have  been  more  productive  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  and  in  France  especially, 
than  in  this  country  ;  the  prices  there  were  con- 
sequently low,  and  induced  the  large  exports  to 
this  country,  notwithstanding  the  enormous  ex- 
penses of  freight,  insurance,  and  licences  in  1809 


332  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

and  1810.  But  1810,  1811,  and  1812,  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  participated  of  the  character 
of  the  seasons  in  this  country,  and  the  rise  of 
prices  there  was  fully  in  the  same  proportion  as 
took  place  here  in  those  years.  That  the  scarcity 
in  France,  consequent  upon  the  unproductiveness 
of  those  seasons,  was  great  and  real,  admits  of 
being  proved  by  irrefragable  evidence.  The  fact 
is  alluded  to  by  all  the  writers  of  authority  on  the 
subject  of  the  corn  trade  and  of  the  corn  laws  of 
that  country,  and  is  described  as  entailing  a  state 
bordering  on  famine.  Mons.  J.  B.  Say,  the  justly 
celebrated  writer  on  political  economy  *,  so  cha- 
racterises those  seasons,  and  gives  the  following 
quotations,  as  those  of  the  important  market  of 
Roye  in  Picardy,  for  the  measure  equal  to  fifty-two 
litres  two  centimes :  — 

liv.   so.  der. 


1808 

- 

5  18  0 

1809 

- 

6  16  3 

1810 

- 

9     4  3 

1811 

- 

16     5  6 

1812 

- 

13     9  9 

3  average 

prices 

in  all  France  were  :  • — 

Per  Hectol. 

Per  Winchester  qr. 

fr.      cut. 

s.          d. 

1809 

- 

14  90 

38     Oh 

1810 

- 

19  63 

49     7i 

1811 

.- 

26  17 

67     1^ 

1812 

- 

31.  33 

87  IH 

Retui'7is  from  Consuls  abroad,  1th  December,  ]  826. 

But  these  averages  give  no  adequate  idea  of 
the  extent  of  the  real  rise  of  prices  in  an  exten- 
sive portion   of   that  country,     as    independently 

*  In  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  James,  which  appeared  in  the 

Morning  Chronicle  on  the  21st  of  August,  1822. 


1809—1813.  333 

of  the  imperfect  mode  in  which  they  are  taken, 
having  reference  only  to  the  prices,  and  not  to  tlie 
quantities  in  the  districts  making  the  returns ;  and 
their  embracing  districts  which  might  casually 
have  been  better  provided,  but  could  not  by  rea- 
son of  the  intercourse  by  sea  between  their  distant 
maritime  provinces  being  intercepted  by  our  fleets, 
equalise  their  produce  Avith  those  most  deficient; 
the  government  made  great  sacrifices  of  money  to 
keep  down  prices,  by  importing  from  abroad  and 
selling  at  prices  below  the  cost.  From  the  consu- 
lar returns  of  prices  in  some  of  the  departments  in 
France  the  rise  appears  to  have  been  greater  ;  thus, 
at  Nantes,  the  quotations  were,  in 

fr.     cnt. 

1809  -         12     4  per  hectol. 

1812  -         37  72 

And  at  Bourdeaux     14  85  in  1809, 
38  65  in  1812.* 

In  an  elaborate  work  on  the  corn  trade  and  corn 
laws  in  France,  published  at  Paris  by  P.  Labou- 
liniere,  entitled  "  De  la  Disette  et  de  la  Surabon- 
dance,"  vol.  ii.  p.  417.,  is  the  following  passage  : 
referring  to  the  year  1812,  he  says  — 

*  "  In  Germany  and  in  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal,  nearly 
a  corresponding  rise  of  prices  occurred.  The  following  are 
among  other  numerous  instances  of  the  great  rise  of  the  prices 
of  wheat :  — 

1808-9. 

Louvain         -         SU.  Id.   to 

Rotterdam    -         44*.  4f/.  — 

Christiania    -  24-5.  5d.  — 

Alicante        -         61s.  Sd.  — 

Bilboa  -         535.  Od.  — 

Lisbon  -         96s.  3d.  — 

Tables  by  the  Statistical  Department  of  the  Board  of  Trade. 
Vol.  V.   p.  450. 

Of  none  of  these  places  can  it  be  said,  that  the  rise  was  pro- 
duced by  a  demand  from  this  country;  for,  in  point  of  fact,  we 
imported  next  to  none  from  the  North  of  Europe  in  1811  and 
1812,  while  shipments  were  actually  made  from  this  country  to 
the  South  of  Europe. 


1811 

-12. 

685. 

8^. 

81s. 

9c?. 

73s. 

6d. 

141s. 

lOd. 

98s. 

6d. 

152s. 

6d. 

334f  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  La  recolte  fut  mauvaise,  la  cherte  devint  excessive  ;  le 
septier  de  ble  fut  vendu  dans  plusieurs  provinces  jusqu'a  100 
francs  (1505.  the  quarter),  et  la  misere  fut  tres  grande.  Les 
sacrifices  faits  par  le  gouvernement  Imperial  pour  ies  subsistences 
peuvent  etre  evalues  a  80  millions  (upwards  of  three  millions 
sterling).  Les  mers  a  cette  epoque  n'etoient  pas  libres ;  il 
fallut  done  etablir  par  terre  le  transport  des  grains  depuis 
Hambourg  jusqu'a  Paris  ;  quand  momentanement  on  put  profiter 
des  rivieres,  il  y  eut  des  frais  de  chargement  considerables." 

Here  most  assuredly  there  is  nothing  of  paper 
circulation  or  of  war-demand  defrayed  by  loans,  to 
account  for  the  rise  of  prices :  credit  was  nearly 
annihilated  in  France  in  those  times  ;  and  it  is 
well  known,  that  the  expenses  of  the  war  were  not 
defrayed  by  loans.  As  little  can  the  scarcity  in 
France  be  accounted  for  by  extra  consumption 
occasioned  by  the  war.  The  armies  of  France,  at 
that  time,  were  far  beyond  lier  own  territories.  The 
greater  part  were  in  tlie  North  of  Europe,  among 
the  cheapest  of  the  corn-growing  comitries ;  and, 
most  assuredly,  in  the  supphes  sent  from  France  for 
the  troops,  there  would  hardly  be  included  any  large 
proportion  of  mere  articles  of  food  ;  nor  at  any  rate 
of  the  more  cumbersome  ones,  such  as  corn. 

In  1809>  when  the  war  in  Germany  was  carried 
on  upon  a  very  large  scale,  the  prices  of  provisions 
were  comparatively  low  both  in  Germany  and  in 
France.  This  low  price  on  the  Continent  in  1809 
negatives  not  only  the  hypothesis  of  extra  war  con- 
sumption, but  it  negatives  also  the  opinion  of  tlie 
influence  on  continental  prices  of  the  addition  to 
the  stock  of  the  precious  metals  abroad,  by  the 
disengagment  of  them  from  this  country ;  for, 
in  1809,  all  the  bullion  that  could  be  spared 
from  hence  was  sent  for  the  purpose  of  defraying 
our  then  immense  foreign  expenditure.  And 
with  reference  to  this  supposed  operation  of 
the  Bank  restriction  in  depreciating  the  precious 
metals,  how  would  it  account  for  the  circumstance 


1809—1813.  335 

that  France  exported  corn  in  1809,  and  imported 
largely^  and  at  an  enormous  expense  to  tlie  govern- 
ment, in  1811  and  1812.  The  export  of  wheat 
from  France,  in  1809  and  1810,  was  637,273  quar- 
ters ;  while  the  imports,  in  1811  and  1812,  and  the 
early  part  of  1813,  amounted  to  1,337,219  quar- 
ters. 

The  fact  of  tlie  scarcity  and  high  prices  of  corn 
in  France  in  1811  and  1812  is  important  in  a 
twofold  point  of  view. 

1st.  It  favours  the  presumption  of  a  cause  com- 
mon to  the  two  countries,  of  which  none  more 
probable  than  the  influence  of  the  seasons ;  inas- 
much as  these,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  are 
known  to  have  some  similarity  of  character,  at  the 
same  time  that  there  is  direct  evidence  of  dearth 
from  those  two  seasons  in  the  present  instance. 

2dly.  It  accounts  for  our  prices  having  risen 
higher  than  with  a  similar  dehciency  of  our  own 
produce  they  would  have  done,  by  the  circum- 
stance, that  the  purchases  of  corn  in  Germany  by 
the  French  government,  combined  with  the  enor- 
mous charges  of  freight  and  insurance,  to  this 
country,  prevented  our  getting  a  foreign  supply, 
of  which  we  stood  in  need  in  those  years. 

It  is  not,  however,  the  price  of  corn  only  in 
France  at  the  period  here  referred  to,  that  affords 
the  strongest  presumption,  if  not  an  irresistible 
proof,  in  the  negative  of  the  theories  of  currency 
and  war-demand.  A  rise  of  prices  of  other  com- 
modities and  of  labour  took  place  in  France,  and 
generally  in  other  countries,  from  a  period  anterior 
to  the  Bank  restriction  till  1811  and  1812,  nearly 
corresponding  with  that  which  occurred  in  this 
country. 

The  corresponding  rise  of  prices,  and  the  rate 
of  living  abroad,  was  referred  to  by  Mr.  Rose  in 
the  course  of  the  discussions,  in  1811,  on  the  Bul- 
lion Report. 


336  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  Let  it  not  (he  said)  be  imagined  that  a  rise  in  the  articles 
of  life  has  been  confined  to  this  kingdom  alone.  A  most  at- 
tentive inquiry  has  satisfied  me,  that  the  expense  of  living  has 
gone  on  in  a  ratio  of  increase  throughout  various  parts  of  the 
Continent,  as  well  when  the  precious  metals  have  been  the  sole 
circulation,  as  when  paper  has  been  abundant ;  and  all  this  with- 
out any  connection  with  the  price  of  gold.  In  France,  where 
no  paper  circulates  except  in  tlie  capital,  and  there  onl^'  a  very 
limited  amount,  we  have  the  following  evidence  to  that  effect. 
In  a  report  to  the  Agricultural  Society  at  Paris,  in  1805,  M. 
Silvestre  observes,  that  '  in  most  of  the  departments  the  price 
of  labour  is  increased  since  17S9,  by  one  third  at  least,  and  in 
some  by  one  half;  in  a  faw  it  is  doubled  :  and  this  rise  is  more 
general  with  respect  to  workmen  than  to  servants  at  yearly 
wages.  The  society  has  ascertained  that  all  the  instruments  of 
cultivation  are  raised  in  price  in  a  proportion  nearly  similar ; 
that  building  materials  have  also  risen  from  a  third  to  a  fourth  ; 
beasts  of  burden  about  one  half;  and  all  other  articles  requisite 
for  the  maintenance  of  a  farmer's  family  in  the  same  proportion.' 
In  a  speech  of  Mons.  Daru  to  the  legislative  body  in  1810,  he 
observed  that  the  revenue  which  was  appointed  for  Louis  the 
XVIth,  in  1791,  and  continued  to  Napoleon,  was  no  doubt 
considerable,  but  if  attention  be  paid  to  the  difference  between 
the  real  value  of  money  at  that  time  and  at  present,  it  will  not 
be  thought  an  extravagant  assertion,  that  the  same  income 
does  not  now  represent  more  than  two  thirds  of  what  it  did 
then." 

The  following  statement,  however,  extracted 
from  M.  J.  B.  Say's  work,  entitled,  "  Coin's  complet 
d'Economie  politique,"  (tom.  3.  pp.  ^J,  ^8.  7iote\ 
will  exhibit  more  in  detail  the  great  rise  of  prices  in 
France  of  labour,  and  of  implements  of  husbandry, 
and  of  several  other  articles  in  1811,  as  compared 
with  1789. 

"  I  extract"  (he  observes)  "  the  following  document  from  an 
official  paper  :  — '  Comparative  prices  of  objects  for  the  use  of 
a  farmer  in  the  township  (Arrondissement)  of  Saint  Denis, 
before  1789,  and  under  Napoleon.' 

"  (From  a  report  made  to  Napoleon  by  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  in  1811.) 

"  N.  B.  Wages  by  the  year,  and  task  work  are  reduced  into 
wages  for  a  day." 

(French  money  reduced  into  Sterling,  at  the  exchange  of 
25  f.) 


1809—1813. 


337 


Before  the 
Revolution. 

Under 
Napoleon. 

Observations. 

£ 

s. 

d. 

i* 

s. 

d. 

Journeyman  cartwright    - 

0 

0 

5'^ 

0 

0 

^H 

"J 

farrier     - 

0 

0 

5:1 

0 

0 

9i 

■  Besides  board. 

harness-maker 

0 

0 

H 

0 

0 

7f 

'  Including  board,  but  not 

mason 

0 

] 

H 

0 

2 

H 

his  labourer  or  assist- 
ant. 

locksmith 

0 

1 

H 

0 

2 

4| 

carpenter 

0 

1 

H 

0 

3 

2i 

Including     board,     and 

tiler,    slater,  "1 
or  thatclier  J 

0 

2 

43 

0 

4 

9^ 

they  find  their  tools. 

Head  carter     -        _         - 
Under  ditto 

0 
0 

0 
0 

4? 

0 
0 

0 
0 

7| 
6i 

■  Besides  board. 

Head  shepherd 

0 

1 

2 

0 

2 

H 

Under  ditto 

0 

0 

7^ 

0 

I 

4 

Farm-yard  boy 
Poultry-yard  maid 

0 
0 

0 
0 

3 

0 
0 

0 
0 

75 
3 

|-  Besides  board. 

Thresher         _         .          . 

0 

1 

03 

0 

2 

0 

■Is  paid  by  measure. 

Reaper  and  mower 

0 

2 

0 

0 

4 

9§ 

Day  labourer  (man) 
(woman) 

0 
0 

0 
0 

5^ 

0 
0 

1 
0 

y  In  summer. 

A  plough         -         _         _ 
A  cart 

2 
9 

8 
0 

0 
0 

4 

17 

0 
0 

0 
0 

With  its  iron  work. 

A  cart  harness 

2 

8 

0 

5 

12 

0 

For  the  shaft  horse . 

Ropes  (the  quintal  108tb.  "1 

2 

8 

0 

4 

0 

0 

avoirdupois      -         -    J 

A  spade  or  a  hoe     - 

0 

2 

43 

0 

4 

0 

A  horse  shoe 

0 

0 

H 

0 

0 

n 

Nailed  on. 

Rough  building  stones     - 

1 

2 

n 

1 

12 

0 

r  The  cubic  toise  (about 
1^      261  cubic  feet  Eng.). 

Plaster  (of  Paris)     - 

0 

12 

9i 

0 

17 

n 

f  The  tmiid  of  36  sacks 
\      (about  22  bushels). 

Lime          _             .           . 

2 

1 

n 

3 

1 

H 

f  The  setier  (about  4g  old 
|_      bushels). 

Tiles  (the  100) 

0 

12 

0 

1 

4 

0 

r  Made  in  the  neighbour- 
ly     hood. 
The  cent. 

Bar  iron       -         - 

0 

14 

4? 

0 

17 

7-1 

A  plough  horse 

13 

8 

0 

24 

0 

0 

A  fat  pig     -          - 

3 

4 

0 

C 

0 

0 

f  Weighing  about  216  lbs. 
\      avoirdupois. 

A  sheep  (of  that  country) 

0 

9 

H 

0 

14 

4^ 

Chickens  (the  pair) 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

5k 

A  cloth  coat     -          -        - 

2 

12 

0 

4 

0 

0 

A  pair  of  leather  breeches 

0 

19 

n 

2 

8 

0 

A  pair  of  shoes 

0 

3 

n 

0 

5 

n 

A  hat 

0 

9 

n 

0 

14 

4f 

("The  double  Here  ow  voie 

Fire-wood         _         .       _ 

0 

16 

H 

1 

8 

H 

-|  (2  cubic  metres,  about 
|_      66  cubic  feet  English). 

Charcoal     -           -            - 

0 

2 

9i 

0 

5 

n 

The  sac  of  Paris. 

"  Napoleon  had  re-established  and  increased  all  the  taxes  of 
the  ancien  regime.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  farmers  who 
were  consulted  as  to  the  above  prices,  may,  from  discontent,  have 

Z 


338  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

slightly  exaggerated  the  difference;  for  it  does  not  appear  that 
prices  have  increased  since." 

It  is  probable  that  there  may  be  inaccuracies  in 
the  reduction  into  Enghsh  measure,  in  the  fore- 
going translation  ;  but  they  do  not  affect  the  main 
fact  of  the  proportionate  advance  of  prices. 

The  rise  of  the  prices  of  provisions  and  labour 
(and  of  most  other  objects  of  exchange)  abroad, 
corresponding  so  nearly  during  the  period  of  the 
restriction  with  those  in  this  country,  has  always 
been  a  point  of  difficulty  with  the  partisans  of 
the  doctrine  of  depreciation,  by  increase  of 
money,  as  resulting  distinctly  from  that  measure. 
Accordingly,  in  the  debates  in  1811,  on  the  bul- 
lion report,  and  again  on  the  gold  coin  and  bank 
note  bill,  the  topic  was  either  wholly  evaded,  or 
very  slightly  touched  upon,  by  those  who  argued 
from  the  high  prices  of  commodities  in  this  country, 
the  depreciating  effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  on 
the  value  of  the  currency.  A  vague  reference  was 
made  in  one  or  two  instances  to  the  operation  of 
the  metals  disengaged  from  this  country,  as  tend- 
ing to  raise  bullion  prices,  as  if  it  were  possible 
for  a  rise  of  prices  of  from  50  to  100  per  cent,  to 
have  been  produced  by  the  addition  of  about  12  or 
15  millions  of  gold  and  silver,  to  the  circulation 
previously  existing  in  the  commercial  world. 

In  the  course  of  those  debates.  Sir  George  Shuck- 
burgh's  table  was  adverted  to,  as  showing  that  a 
general  cause  of  depreciation  of  the  value  of  money 
had  been  in  steady  progress  from  the  time  of  the 
Norman  conquest.  Mr.  George  Rose  referred  to  that 
table  for  the  purpose  of  inferring  that  the  rise  of 
prices  was  from  a  cause  which  had  been  in  oper- 
ation anterior  to,  and  was  in  progress  independently 
of,  the  Bank  restriction.  And,  so  far  as  that  in- 
correct and  absurdly  constructed  table  *  could   be 

*  For   an  exposure  of  the  incorrectness  of  the  details,  and 
the  absurdity  of  the  principle  upon  which  that  table  has  been 


1809—1813.  339 

considered  as  an  authority,  it  served  to  favour  the 
argument  against  the  imputed  effect  of  the  restric- 
tion. But  it  was  likewise  referred  to  by  some  of 
those  who  were  most  strenuous  in  contending  for 
the  depreciating  effect  of  the  restriction.  Although 
how  it  could  strengthen  their  argument,  it  is  not 
easy  to  see.  For  surely  the  restriction  act  ought 
in  fairness  to  be  absolved  from  so  much  of  the  rise 
of  prices  as  could  be  referred  to  a  law  which  was 
supposed  to  be  in  steady  and  progressive  operation 
independently  of  that  measure. 

The  evidence  which  has  thus  been  adduced  of 
the  prevalence  of  scarcity  of  corn,  not  only  in  this 
country  but  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  cannot, 
if  fairly  followed  out,  fail  of  establishing  the  suf- 
ficiency of  that  cause,  combined  as  it  was  with 
extraordinary,  and  as  it  proved,  insurmountable 
impediments  to  importation  into  this  country,  to 
account  for  the  great  rise  and  high  range  of  prices 
which  prevailed  till  the  harvest  of  1813.  The 
effects  of  that  harvest,  both  in  this  country  and 
abroad,  will  be  noticed  presently ;  in  the  mean 
time  a  brief  view  may  be  taken  of  the  coincident 
state  of  prices  of  other  articles. 


Section   7.  —  Prices   of   Commodities  from    the 
Summer  oflSW  to  the  Summer  oflSlS. 

During  the  same  interval  as  that  in  which  we 
have  had  occasion  to  observe  upon  the  rise  of  the 
prices  of  provisions,  viz.  from  the  summer  of  1811 
to  that  of  1813,  there  occurred  a  renewed  scarcity. 


constructed,  see  Arthur  Young  "  On  the  progressive  Value  of 
Money,"  and  the  3d  volume  of  the  Edinburgh  Revieiv,  in  an 
article  headed  "  Wheatley  on  the  Currency." 

Z    2 


340 


PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 


partly  actual  and  partly  apprehended,  of  many  lead- 
ing articles  of  importation. 

In  consequence  of  the  discouragement  arising 
from  the  low  prices  in  this  country  in  1810  and 
the  beginning  of  1811,  there  was  little  inducement 
to  import  in  the  face  of  enormous  charges;  freights 
and  insurances  from  the  Continent  of  Europe  con- 
tinuing so  high  that,  without  an  advance  of  prices 
here,  little  or  nothing  would,  in  some  instances, 
have  been  left  for  prime  cost.  The  stocks,  there- 
fore, of  wool,  silk,  cotton  *,  hemp,  flax,  tallow, 
timber,  &c.  became  scanty  towards  the  end  of 
1811  ;  and  there  were  grounds  at  the  same  time 
for  apprehending  a  further  scarcity.  The  prepa- 
rations by  the  French  for  the  invasion  of  Russia 
gave  reason  to  fear  that,  however  disastrous  to  the 
former  it  might  eventually  prove,  the  intermediate 
consequence  would  be  a  cutting  off  of  the  supplies 
of  naval  stores  and  of  other  produce  from  thence  ; 
and  as  the  French  armies  spread  over  Prussia,  all 
shipments  from  that  country  became  more  difficult 
and  hazardous.  Our  differences  with  America  were 
then  rapidly  tending  to  an  open  rupture,  and  the 
produce  of  that  country  naturally  participated  in 
the  causes  of  advance. 

Thus  by  far  the  majority,  in  point  of  importance, 
of  imported  commodities,  requisite  as  raw  materials 
for  the  supply  of  our  manufactories,  and  essential 
for  the  support  of  our  navy,  became,  from  real  and 

*  This  will  appear  from  the  following  comparison  of  the  im- 
ports into  Great  Britain  :  — 


Year. 


Wool. 


Silk. 


Cotton. 


Hemp. 


Linseed. 


1810 
1811 


lbs.  I  His. 

10,9.'56,224     1,792,206 

4,7,'39,972         022,383 


tbs. 

136,488,935 

91,662,344 


cwt. 
479,440 
292,530 


cwt. 
955,799 
458,547 


cwt. 
511,970 
243,899 


bush. 

1,6^5,998 

594,016 


And  these  articles,  in  consequence  experienced  a  consider- 
able rise,  although  not  to  the  elevation  which  they  had  attained 
in  1808  and  1809. 


1809—1813.  341 

anticipated  scarcity,  objects  of  speculation  ;  tliese 
natmally  gave  rise  to  an  extension  of  mercantile 
transactions  on  credit,  both  with  and  without  the 
intervention  of  paper;  and  this  state  of  actual  and 
anticipated  scarcity,  and  consequent  expectation 
of  higher  prices,  which  formed  the  basis  of  the 
extension  of  credit  and  of  the  circulation  of  pri- 
vate paper,  continued,  with  only  a  few  variations 
incidental  to  peculiarities  of  demand,  till  different 
periods  in  1812  and  1813. 


Section  8.  —  Fall  of  the  Prices  of  Corn,   and  of 
other  European  Produce,  in  1813. 

The  prices  of  provisions,  and  of  European  pro- 
duce generally,  having  attained  their  greatest  height 
at  different  periods  in  18r2,  began  thenceforward 
to  fall.  The  decline  in  the  prices  of  corn  com- 
menced in  the  autumn  of  that  year,  and  was  at  first 
rapid,  having  been  between  August  and  November 
1812,  upwards  of  40.9.  ;  viz.  from  \55.s.  to  113*.  6g?., 
but  thenceforward  there  was  not  much  variation 
till  August,  1813. 

The  prices  gave  way,  however,  rapidly  after  the 
harvest  of  1 8 1 3  *,  which  proved  to  be  very  abundant. 

*  The  fact  of  a  great  fall  in  the  price  of  agricultural  produce 
having  preceded  both  the  termination  of  the  war  and  any  sup- 
posed preparation  for  cash  payments,  resting  as  it  does  on  most 
incontrovertible  evidence,  it  may  appear  strange  that  it  should 
not  have  been  more  generally  adverted  to  in  the  discussions  to 
which  the  questions  respecting  the  currency,  and  the  transitions 
from  war  to  peace,  have  given  rise.  The  wonder  will  cease, 
however,  when  it  is  observed  that  the  customary  mode  of  refer- 
ring to  the  prices  of  corn  in  treating  of  subjects  connected  with 
them,  has  been  to  take  tlie  average  of  the  year  ending  with 
December.  This  mode  involves  the  flillacy  which  has  already 
been  pointed  out,  and  is  calculated  to  convey  the  impression  that 
the  high  price  of  corn  continued  till  the  return  of  peace,  which 
is  supposed  to  have  induced  preparations  for  cash  payments.  By 
the  average  for  the  whole  of  the  year  1813,  the  price  appears 
to  be  107*.  10^6?.  which  makes   that  year  the  highest  with  the 

z  3 


342  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

It  was  this  decidedly  favourable  season  which  de- 
veloped the  full  effects  of  the  encouragement  that 
had  been  held  out  by  the  long  previous  range  of 
high  prices  to  the  application  of  great  additional 
capital  to  the  land.  The  extent  to  which  that  en- 
couragement had  operated  is  stated  by  the  Com- 
mittee on  the  Corn  Laws,  in  1814  (Report,  p.  3.), 
in  the  following  terms  :  — 

'•  It  appears  to  your  committee  to  be  established  by  all  the 
evidence,  that,  within  the  last  twenty  years,  a  very  rapid  and 
extensive  progress  has  been  made  in  the  agriculture  of  the  United 
Kingdom  :  that  great  additional  capitals  have  been  skilfully  and 
successfully  applied,  not  only  to  the  improved  management  of 
lands  already  in  tillage,  but  also  to  the  converting  of  large  tracts 
of  inferior  pasture  into  productive  arable,  and  the  reclaiming 
and  inclosing  of  fens,  commons,  and  wastes,  which  have  been 
brought  into  a  state  of  regular  cultivation." 

There  had  not  only  thus  been  an  increased 
breadth  of  land  in  improved  cultivation,  but  the 
produce  per  acre  was  unusually  large.  The  whole 
fall,  resulting  from  these  causes,  will  clearly  appear 
by  the  following  statement  of  the  average  prices  :  — 

Wheat.  Barley.  Oats. 

August,  1812,  155s.  Od.  79s.  lOd.  56s.  Qd. 
Dec.  —  121. v.  0^.  64*.  0^^.  44,s>.  Id. 
August,  1813,  112.9.  Od  55s.  7^  40s.  4^d. 
Dec.         -—        73s.  6d.         42*.  lid       ^7s.  7d.* 

Here  is  ajrdl  exceeding ^f?/  per  cent,  within  two 
years,  during  which  the  price  of  gold  had  been 
rising,  and  attained  the  greatest  height  that  it  ever 


exception  of  two,  viz.  1801  and  1812,  of  any  that  has  occurred 
in  the  annals  of  the  corn  trade  :  whereas  the  fact,  as  appears 
in  the  text,  is,  that  immediately  after  the  harvest  of  1813,  the 
price  fell  to  less  than  one  half  of  what  it  had  been  on  the  eve  of 
the  harvest  of  1812. 

*  The  price  of  oats  fluctuated  in  an  extraordinary  degree, 
the  average  price  had  been,  in 

January,  1812,  3Lv.  M. 

June  —       69s.  Od. 

Dec.        1813,    27s.  7d. 


1809—1813.  343 

reached,  and  was,  on  an  average,  liigher  tlian  at 
any  preceding  or  succeeding  period.  Moreover, 
while  the  decline  in  corn  was  most  rapid,  the  price 
of  gold  xvas  actually  rising  ;  viz.  from  June  1813, 
when  gold  was  at  5l.  Qs.  6d.  to  the  close  of  that 
year,  when  it  got  up  to  51.  lOs. 

The  fall  in  the  prices  of  commodities  imported 
from  the  Continent  of  Europe  was  taking  place 
in  proportion  as  the  opening  of  the  ports  from 
whence  they  were  shipped  diminished  some  of 
the  expenses  of  importation  ;  but  the  decline 
of  prices  was  at  first  slow,  because  the  con- 
tinued hostility  of  Denmark,  and  the  war  with 
the  United  States  of  America,  kept  freights  and 
insurances  at  a  high  rate.  Still  it  was  actual  or 
prospective  abundance  that  occasioned  the  tend- 
ency to  a  fall  at  the  close  of  1813. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  occurrence  of  a  single 
good  harvest,  and  the  removal  of  some  part  of  the 
political  obstructions  to  a  foreign  supply,  had  the 
effect  of  producing  a  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn, 
and  of  other  articles  of  European  produce  ;  or,  in 
other  words,  that  immediately  upon  the  cessation 
of  what  one  might  have  thought  had  been  obvi- 
ously enough  the  cause  of  advance,  prices  tended 
to  a  subsidence  to  the  level  from  which  they  had 
risen.  And  if  abundant  proof  had  not  already 
been  adduced  of  the  absence  of  the  causes  com- 
monly assigned,  viz.  of  the  Bank  restriction  or  war- 
demand,  it  would  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the 
Bank  issues,  and  the  war-demand  continuing  on  as 
large  a  scale  as  ever,  or  rather  on  a  greatly  increased 
scale,  prices  of  corn,  and  of  all  the  other  articles 
that  had  risen  with  corn,  were  falling  rapidly  in 
1813.  But  were  it  possible  that  the  conclusion  to 
that  effect  could  be  made  stronger,  it  would  be  so 
by  reference  to  the  circumstance  of  an  equal  fall  of 
prices  of  corn  in  France,  consequent  upon  the 
harvest  of  1813,   and  this  while  the  war  w^as  still 

z  4 


344-  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

carried  on  on  a  gigantic  scale,  and  nearer  to  her 
own  frontiers.  In  truth,  the  prices  continued  to 
fall  there  while  the  war  was  waged  within  her  own 
territory.  The  fall  in  the  price  of  wheat  in  France, 
between  1812  and  1814,  was  from  34  fr.  33  cents, 
the  hectolitre,  to  17  fr.  7^  cents.  ;  being  nearly 
50  per  cent.,  or  the  same  as  occurred  coinci- 
dently  in  this  country.  Now,  according  to  the 
theory  that  the  gold  disengaged  from  this  country 
diminished  the  value  of  the  precious  metals  on  the 
Continent,  and  was  the  sole  or  the  main  cause  ot 
the  rise  of  prices  there  during  the  restriction,  how 
is  this  fall  of  the  price  between  1812  and  1814  in 
France,  and  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  generally, 
to  be  accounted  for  consistently  with  such  hypo- 
thesis ;  this  fall  of  prices  having  occurred  when 
the  stock  of  gold  spared  from  this  country,  and 
added  to  the  circulation  of  the  commercial  world, 
was  precisely  at  its  maximum  ?  This  instance, 
however,  is  only  one  among  many,  that  not  only 
was  the  amount  of  the  metals  disengaged  from  this 
country,  totally  inadequate  to  produce  any  per- 
ceptible effect  on  prices,  but  that  the  facts  are  in 
the  order  of  time  of  their  occurrence,  at  variance 
with  the  hypothesis. 


Section    9.  —  Rise  of  Prices  of  e.vporiahle   Cofu- 
modities  in  1813. 

As  a  still  further  illustration  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  anti-commercial  character  of  the  war  and 
of  the  Continental  system  had  operated  on  prices,  it 
maybe  observed,  that  while  cOrn  and  other  European 
raw  produce  were  falling,  all  articles  of  export,  viz. 
West  India,  and  generally  all  transatlantic,  pro- 
duce began  to  rise  coincidently  with  the  first  tend- 
ency of  the  former  to  fall.  The  lowest  point  of 
depression  of  West  India  produce,  and  of  other 
commodities,  including  manufactures,  calculated 
for  the  markets  of  the  Continent  of  Europe,   and 


1809-181.3.  34^5 

the  United  States,  occurred  at  the  close  of  1811, 
and  in  the  early  part  of  1812.  All  these  articles  ex- 
perienced a  moderate  degree  of  improvement  to- 
wards the  close  of  1812,  with  the  exception  of  such 
descriptions  as  were  exclusively  or  chiefly  calculated 
for  export  to  the  United  States,  and  these  of  course 
were  much  depressed  by  the  war  which  then  broke 
out.  By  the  retreat  of  the  French  from  Moscow, 
not  only  the  ports  of  Russia  were  secured  from 
the  danger  of  being  again  shut  against  us,  but  daily 
tidings  were  received  of  other  ports  in  the  north  of 
Europe  being  opened  to  a  trade  with  this  country  ; 
and  sanguine  expectations  were  beginning  to  be 
entertained  that  the  ports  of  France  itself  would 
at  no  remote  period  be  open  to  us.  The  new  mar- 
kets— for  such  they  might  then  be  called — which 
were  thus  presented,  and  the  prospect  of  more, 
gave  rise  to  a  speculative  demand  for  all  the  articles 
really  wanted,  and  for  many  others  which  it  was 
anticipated  would  probably  be  wanted,  by  the 
countries  with  which  we  had  then  suddenly  come 
into  communication.  Colonial  produce,  as  it  had 
been  most  depressed  by  our  previous  exclusion 
from  those  markets,  experienced  the  greatest  and 
most  rapid  advance,  but  many  other  articles  of  ex- 
port participated  in  the  demand,  which  prevailed 
thenceforward  till  the  close  of  1813,  and  the  early 
part  of  1814,  with  greater  or  less  intensity  accord- 
ing as  the  events  of  the  war  seemed  to  hasten  or 
retard  a  general  peace.  The  conclusion  of  the  war 
was  then  hailed  as  holding  out  the  prospect  of  an 
unlimited  demand  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Continent,  for  the  articles  from  the  use  of 
which  they  had  been  so  long  debarred. 

The  earliest  shipments  of  such  exportable  com- 
modities as  had  been  bought  at  the  low  prices 
answered  of  course,  and  the  profits  thence  arising 
naturally  encouraged  the  subsequent  speculation. 
This  speculation,  and  the  consequent  over-trading, 


346  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

proceeded  to  a  most  extravagant  length  till  the 
spring  of  1814.  It  began,  as  has  already  been 
noticed,  with  the  great  reverses  of  the  French  in 
1812,  and  went  on,  with  fluctuations,  according 
to  the  vicissitudes  of  the  subsequent  military  oper- 
ations, till  the  peace  of  Paris,  which  was  the  con- 
summation of  the  views  of  the  speculators ;  the 
ports  of  France,  as  well  as  those  of  all  the  rest  of 
Europe,  being  then  opened  to  a  direct  commercial 
intercourse  with  this  country. 

It  had  been  usual,  in  former  periods,  to  con- 
sider that  colonial  produce  should  rise  in  war  and 
fall  in  peace,  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of 
the  charges  of  importation  ;  but  the  period  in  ques- 
tion was  supposed  to  form  an  exception  to  this 
general  rule  :  it  was  calculated  that  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Continent,  having  been  so  long  debarred 
by  the  anti-commercial  decrees  of  their  govern- 
ments from  the  enjoyment  of  sugar  and  coffee,  and 
of  various  other  descriptions  of  commodities  would, 
now  that  commercial  intercourse  with  this  country 
was  restored,  require  a  supply,  at  almost  any  price,  of 
most  of  the  articles  that  had  been  accumulated  here 
during  the  absence  of  foreign  demand.  Proceeding 
on  this  supposition,  a  great  number  of  adventurers, 
departing  from  their  ordinary  pursuits,  entered 
into  speculations  in  exports  with  the  greatest  avidity. 
Many  retail  tradesmen  who  failed  in  1814  and  1815 
were,  upon  a  disclosure  of  their  accounts,  found  to 
have  been  concerned  in  shipments  of  sugar  and  coffee 
to  the  Continent.  The  contagion  spread  to  the 
outports  (of  these,  Leith  and  Hull  were  most  pro- 
minent) ;  and  it  was  said  that  a  large  proportion 
of  the  shopkeepers  residing  in  them,  who  failed  at 
that  time,  owed  their  ruin  to  having  been  tempted 
into  speculations  of  the  kind  which  I  have  de- 
scribed. In  short,  the  spirit  of  overtrading  in 
that  extensive  class  of  commodities  reached  to 
the   most  extravagant  height,   as  may  be  judged 


1811-12. 

1813-14. 

54*.  73^. 

118*.  142*. 

36*.  42*. 

116*.  126*. 

34*.  lid. 

97*.  2d. 

30*.  46*. 

110*.  134*. 

7d.  9d. 

2*.  4(/.  2*.  6d. 

29*.  31*. 

47*.  .52*. 

8*.  9*.  6f?. 

12*.   16*; 

7c?.  7ld. 

20^.  21  d. 

2d.  Id. 

Is.  lOd.    5s.  6d. 

1809—1813.  347 

by  a  comparison  of  the  prices  of  the  following  ar- 
ticles in  the  years  1811-12,  and  1813-14,  exhi- 
biting an  extraordinary  contrast  of  the  extreme 
depression  in  1811  and  the  early  part  of  1812, 
with  the  speculative  elevation  in  the  latter  part  of 
1813  and  the  spring  of  1814. 

Coffee,  Jamaica,  per  cwt.     - 
St.  Domingo,  —     - 
Sugar,  Gazette  average, 
Havannah,  white. 
Cotton,  bowed  Georgia,  per  lb. 
Cochineal,  -         -         — 

Indigo,  E.  I.  superior,         — 
Pepper,  black,  -         — 

Tobacco,  Virginia,     -         — 
Logwood,  per  ton       -         -       -     10/.  toll/.     22/.  to  23/. 

This  extraordinary  rise  of  all  exportable  produce 
which  took  place  only  in  consequence  of  the  ap- 
proaching peace,  and  reached  its  greatest  height 
when  the  peace  was  concluded,  and  when,  accord- 
ing to  the  received  doctrine,  preparations  were 
begun  by  the  Bank  with  a  view  to  cash  payments, 
attended  by  a  reduction  of  the  quantity  of  money, 
is  commonly  blended  with  the  state  of  prices  of 
agricultural  and  generally  of  European  produce, 
which  had  begun  to  fall  when  exportable  articles 
had  begun  to  rise,  and  which  had  fallen  upwards 
of  50  per  cent,  before  1814,  which  is  the  earliest 
date  assigned  for  the  supposed  preparations  for  cash 
payments,  and  consequent  reduction  of  the  quan- 
tity of  money.  And  thus  a  mass  of  high  prices 
of  all  commodities  is  erroneously  assumed  to  have 
coincidently  prevailed,  until  according  to  one  theory 
the  war-demand  had  ceased,  and  according  to  the 
other  theory,  until  preparations  for  cash  payments 
had  commenced,  and  the  quantity  of  money  had 
been  reduced.  The  facts  already  stated  are  obvi- 
ously decisive  as  to  the  theory  of  war-demand  ; 
and  if  the  circumstances  which  have  been  detailed 


348  TRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

in  connection  with  the  fluctuations  of  prices  in  the 
whole  interval  between  1808  and  1814,  should  ap- 
pear to  be  sufficient  to  account  in  every  instance 
for  the  most  marked  variations,  it  will  follow  that 
alterations  in  the  quantity  of  money  cannot  have 
had  any  considerable  share  in  producing  those  fluc- 
tuations. Not  to  mention  the  incorrect  use  of  the 
term  depreciation  from  excess  of  money  to  desig- 
nate the  rise  of  one  great  class  of  objects  of  ex- 
change, when  another  equally  important  class  is 
undergoing  a  proportionate  fall. 

This  is  the  argument  a  priori  against  the  presump- 
tion that  the  effect  of  the  Bank  restriction  had  been 
that  of  raising  prices  by  increasing  the  quantity  of 
money  in  the  period  now  under  consideration. 
And  a  reference  to  the  state  of  the  circulation  will 
serve  to  show  that  there  was  no  such  increase  of 
the  quantity  of  money  arising  out  of  the  Bank 
restriction  as  would  account  for  those  effects. 


Section  10. — State  of  the  Circalation  from  1809 
to  1813,  both  Years  included. 

It  has  been  seen  that  in  the  earlier  part  of  1808, 
the  Bank  was  in  such  a  position  with  respect  to 
the  state  of  its  treasure,  compared  w^ith  its  liabi- 
lities, as  would  have  been  perfectly  consistent  with 
a  convertible  state  of  its  paper.  It  has  further  been 
seen,  that  while  such  was  the  position  of  the  Bank, 
a  spirit  of  speculation  had  arisen  from  a  view  of  the 
great  falling  off'  of  imported  commodities,  and  that 
an  enormous  rise  of  prices  had  been  the  conse- 
quence, without  any  preceding  increase  of  Bank 
issues.  That  great  rise  of  prices  held  out  the 
strongest  inducement  for  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
merchants  to  import  largely  in  the  coming  season. 
It  was  necessary  for  this  purpose  either  to  transmit 
considerable  funds  abroad,  or  to  lodge  extensive 
credits  for  drafts  on  this  country.     The  war  carried 


1809—1813.  349 

on  by  this  country  in  the  Peninsula  against  France, 
liad  commenced,  and  required  large  sums  in  specie 
to  be  sent  thither  for  the  pay  and  subsistence  of 
the  allied  armies  ;  and  treaties  for  a  subsidy  to 
Austria  were  on  foot,  with  a  view  to  her  declara- 
tion of  war  with  France,  which  took  place  in  the 
spring  of  1809. 

These  circumstances  were  calculated  to  operate 
powerfully  on  the  exchanges,  and  a  considerable 
depression  of  them  accordingly  took  place,  without 
being  preceded  by  any  increase  of  the  circulation 
of  the  Bank  of  England.*  The  average  amount 
of  Bank  notes  of  51.  and  upwards  had  been  for  the 
quarter  ending 

Exchange  on 
Hamburgh. 

30  June,  1808,     5£'13,189,270       1  July,  S5s.  3d. 

30  Sept.     ~  13,060,650     30  Sept.  33s.  9d.  \ 

31  Dec.     —  13,259,780     30  Dec.    31^.  3d. ' 

And  this  fell  of  the  exchanges  had  taken  place, 
notwithstanding  that  the  Bank  had  in  the  mean 
time  parted  with  bullion  to  the  amount  of  upwards 
of  three  millions.  There  was  no  price  of  gold 
quoted  at  the  close  of  1808  ;  but,  in  proportion  to 
the  exchanges,  it  should  have  been  about  4*/.  7*'-  6o?. 

Here  then  is  a  sudden  divergence  between  the 
value  of  the  paper  and  that  of  gold,  to  the  extent 
of  about  12  per  cent,  without  any  such  increase  of 
the  amount  of  the  Bank  issues  as  could  by  possi- 
bility be  assigned  as  the  moving  cause  of  that  di- 
vergence. Thus  far,  therefore,  there  can  be  no 
difficulty  in  concluding  that  in  this  divergence  it 

*  It  is  more  fair,  with  a  view  to  a  practical  conclusion,  to 
take  the  average  amount  for  a  quarter,  than  to  take  particular 
days.  But  the  same  conclusion  of  the  negative  of  any  increase 
of  Bank  notes,  to  account  for  the  first  great  depression  of  the 
exchanges,  will  be  manifest,  if  we  take,  as  points  of  comparison, 
corresponding  days,  thus  :  — 

Exchange  on 
Hamburgh. 

29  Feb.  1808,      ~  -       ^14,093,690         345.  6d. 

•28  Feb.  1809,      -  -  14,241,360         31 5.  Od. 


350  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

was  the  gold  that  by  an  extraordinary  and  sudden 
demand  for  it,  for  purposes  of  foreign  payments, 
had  become  of  increased  value,  and  not  that  the 
paper  (being  stationary  in  amount),  had  become 
of  diminished  value.  And  if  the  Bank  had  thence- 
forth continued  to  keep  down  the  amount  of  its 
issues,  although  the  probability  is,  that  under 
the  increasing  pressure  of  the  great  additional 
expenditure  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
notice,  the  exchanges  might  still  have  fallen,  the 
grounds  of  presumption  that  the  depression  of 
the  exchanges,  and  the  high  price  of  gold,  were 
not  caused  by  the  increase  of  Bank  notes,  would 
have  been  irresistible.  The  inference  too  would 
have  been  inevitable,  that  it  was  the  gold  that  had 
diverged  from  the  paper,  and  not  the  paper  from 
the  gold.  Not  but  that  the  amount  of  the  paper 
might,  consistently  with  the  rule  which  ought  to 
govern  the  Bank  issues,  be  considered  to  have  been 
excessive,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  duty  of  the  di- 
rectors to  have  contracted  their  issues,  in  order  to 
have  preserved  the  value  of  their  paper  on  a  level 
with  that  of  gold ;  but  the  question  immediately 
under  consideration  is,  whether  there  is  presump- 
tive evidence  of  an  increase  of  money  having  been 
the  moving  cause  of  the  fall  of  the  exchanges  and 
the  rise  of  the  price  of  gold.  It  is  possible — so  in- 
creased, apparently,  were  the  functions  of  Bank  of 
England  notes — that  if  the  amount  had  been  merely 
kept  down  in  1809,  at  what  it  had  been  in  1808, 
the  further  depression  of  the  exchanges  might  at 
least  have  been  stopped,  and  they  might  even  have 
rallied.  But,  notwithstanding  the  rapid  fall  of  the 
exchanges  at  the  close  of  1808,  the  Bank  issues, 
instead  of  being  reduced  or  simply  limited  to  what 
they  had  been,  were  for  some  time  thenceforward 
increased  in  amount. 

As  it  was  at  this  period  that  the  great  divergence 
between  paper  and  gold  occurred,  and  gave  rise  to 


1809—1813.  351 

the  bullion  controversy  which  has  in  vmions  forms 
ever  since  subsisted,  it  may  be  worth  while,  previ- 
ously to  examining  the  connection  between  the 
Bank  circulation,  as  it  actually  existed,  with  the 
state  of  the  exchanges,  and  of  the  price  of  gold 
and  of  commodities,  to  consider  hypothetically 
what  might  have  been  the  effect  in  a  commercial 
and  financial  point  of  view,  if  such  a  regulation  of 
the  amount  of  Bank  paper  had  been  adopted,  as 
might  have  been  effectual  in  preserving  the  value 
of  it  on  a  level  with  that  of  gold. 

In  considering  what  might  in  this  case  have  been 
the  state  of  things  compared  with  what  it  was,  we  are 
not  to  suppose  such  a  system  of  management  of  the 
Bank  as  prevailed  before  the  restriction,  and  has  pre- 
vailed since  the  resumption  of  cash  payments;  be- 
cause being,  in  1808,  fully  in  a  position  that  would, 
under  ordinary  circumstances,  have  admitted  of  pay- 
ing in  cash,  the  directors  would,  according  to  their 
former,  and  according  to  their  more  recent  practice, 
have  delayed  taking  the  measures  of  precaution 
which  the  extraordinary  circumstances  that  then 
arose  imperiously  prescribed.  They  would,  as 
they  had  formerly,  and  have  since  done,  neglecting 
the  early  indications  by  the  fall  of  the  Exchanges, 
and  the  consequent  drain  on  their  coffers,  of  the 
necessity  of  contracting,  and  at  any  rate  of  not 
enlarging  the  circulation,  have  yielded  to  the  in- 
creased and  urgent  applications,  whether  of  govern- 
ment for  advances,  or  of  the  mercantile  commu- 
nity for  discounts,  and  so  have  allowed  the  further 
pressure  on  the  exchanges,  and  the  drain  on  their 
coffers,  to  acquire  such  force  as  no  subsequent 
effort  would  be  sufficient  to  counteract.  It  is  there- 
fore perfectly  clear  that  if  the  restriction  had  not 
taken  place  in  1797»  and  if  the  convertibility  had 
proceeded  as  it  might  subsequently  have  done  (sub- 
ject to  some  effort  under  the  pressure  of  1800  and 
1801),  till  the  close  of  1808,  the  Bank  would, 
under  its  ordinary  mode  of  management,  have  in- 


S52  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

evitably  been  brought  to  a  stand  in  1809.  For  the 
disturbing  circumstances  which  have  ah'eady  been 
noticed  as  coming  into  operation,  in  depressing  the 
exchanges,  were  acquiring  an  enormously  increased 
force ;  and  the  amount  of  the  payments  abroad, 
for  which  it  had  become  necessary  to  provide,  in 
fulfilment  of  engagements  already  ente7^ed  into, 
had,  in  1809,  risen  to  an  amount  much  beyond 
that  which  could  be  met  by  exports  of  commodities 
in  sufficient  time,  or  upon  points  directly  applicable 
for  those  payments,  supposing  even  that  there  ex- 
isted no  political  obstacles  to  exportation. 

The  government  expenditure  abroad  amounted, 
in  1808,  1809,  and  1810,  to  upwards  of  thirty-two 
millions,  and  the  importations  of  grain  to  upwards  of 
ten  millions*,  making  together,  extra  foreign  pay- 
ments, to  the  amount  of  forty-two  millions.  But,  in 
addition  to  these  great  payments  to  be  made  abroad, 
there  was,  in  the  two  latter  years,  an  unusually 
large  importation  of  other  goods  besides  corn  ;  and 
these  goods,  as  well  as  the  grain,  being  imported 
wholly  in  foreign  ships,  and  being  of  a  very  bulky 
description,    the   freights  t,   which    were    extrava- 

*  Government  expenditure  abroad  :  — 

1808  -  -  -     9,552,000 

1809  -  -  -   10,235,000 

1810  -  -  -  12,372,000 


Value  of  grain  imported:  — 

1808  -              -             -  336,460 

1809  -             -             -  2,705,496 

1810  -           .             -  7,077,865 


32,159,000 


10,119,821 


42,278,821 
Appendix  to  Mr.  Vansittart's  Speech  on  the  Bullion  Ques- 
tion, 1811. 

f  In  the  year  1809,  when  freights  were  at  their  highest,  the 
freight  of  a  cargo  of  300  tons  of  hemp  from  St.  Petersburgh,  at 
30/.  per  ton,  with  primage  of  10  per  cent.,  and  hat  money,  came 
to  upwards  of  10,000/.  The  present  freight  by  British  ships,  at 
50*.  per  ton,  is  750/. 


1809—1813.  353 

gantly  liigh,  constituted  a  very  important  addition 
to  the  other  items  of  foreign  payments.  Mr. 
George  Rose  stated,  in  his  speech  on  the  Bullion 
Report,  in  1811,  that  not  less  than  five  millions  and 
a  half  had  been  paid  in  the  preceding  year  for 
foreign  freights,  from  the  impracticability  of  em- 
ploying British  shipping  to  the  ports  in  the  North 
of  Europe.  And  while  the  payments  to  be  made 
by  this  country  were  swelled  to  this  enormous 
magnitude,  the  rigours  of  the  Continental  system, 
aided  in  their  operation  by  the  effect  of  our  own 
orders  in  council,  tended  more  and  more  to  cir- 
cumscribe the  means  of  export  of  commodities  to 
meet  those  payments.  So  effectual  was  the  system 
of  exclusion  from  the  Continent  of  Europe,  of  the 
principal  articles  of  usual  export  from  this  coun- 
try thither,  that  while  coffee  here  was  under  4}d. 
the  pound,  it  was  worth  in.  to  5s.  the  pound  in 
France. 

And  it  has  been  argued  *,  and  justly  argued,  that 
as  the  prices  of  our  exportable  commodities  were 
already  so  low  here,  and  so  high  on  the  Continent 
of  Europe,  as  to  hold  out  all  possible  inducement 
to  overcome  the  obstacles  which  then  existed  to 
the  introduction  of  them  into  the  Continental 
markets,  no  additional  reduction  of  prices  of  those 
articles  in  this  country,  that  could  have  been 
effected  by  the  utmost  contraction  of  the  circu- 
lation, would  have  forced  the  export  of  an  addi- 
tional cask  of  sugar  or  coffee,  or  an  additional  bale 

*  This  point  has  been  urged  with  remarkable  force  and 
clearness  by  the  writer  of  a  series  of  letters  under  the  signature 
of  H.  B.  T ,  which  appeared  in  the  Morning  Chronicle  in 
December,  1833,  and  January,  1834',  and  have  since  been 
published  in  a  collected  form.  The  same  line  of  argument 
against  the  received  doctrine  of  depreciation  from  excess  of 
money  consequent  on  the  Bank  restriction,  has  been  followed, 
and  very  clearly  stated,  in  a  publication,  entitled,  "  Observations 
on  the  Report  of  the  Bullion  Committee  of  1810,  in  a  Letter 
addressed  to  the  Members  of  the  Political  Economy  Club,  by 
A,  G.  Stapleton,  Esq."  1837- 

A   A 


854  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

of  our  manufactures.  The  vast  accumulation  of 
colonial  produce  and  of  manufactured  exportable 
commodities  which  took  place  in  this  country  in 
1810  and  1811,  and  which  contributed  greatly  to 
the  distress  prevailing  at  that  period,  is  referred  to 
in  proof  of  the  insurmountable  impediments  then 
existing  to  exportation.* 

This  argument  is  correct  as  far  as  it  goest,  but 
it  takes  in  only  one  of  the  points  of  view  in  which 
the  influence  of  a  different  regulation  of  the  Bank 
issues  is  to  be  considered.  It  may  be  admitted, 
that  a  contraction  of  the  circulation  would  not,  or 
at  least  might  not;  have  been  effectual  in  inducing 
any  additional  exports  of  commodities.  But  it 
would,  if  timely  applied,  have  had  a  very  great 
effect  in  reducing  the  amount  of  the  imports,  and 
in  reducing  also  the  amount  of  the  sums  to  be 
transmitted  abroad  by  a  saving  of  the  difference  of 
exchange.  If,  seeing  the  enormous  speculations 
which  were  on  foot  between  the  close  of  1807  and 
the  summer  of  1808,  and  becoming  aware  of  the 
political  circumstances  which  inevitably  led  to  a 
very  large  government  expenditure  abroad;  feeling, 
indeed,  the  effect  of  those  circumstances  by  the 
demand  for  bullion  J,  of  which  the  stock  in  the  Bank 
was  rapidly  decreasing  ;  and  seeing,  moreover,  the 
strong  tendency  which,    early  in   the   autumn  of 

*  In  the  letters  of  H.  T.  B.,  already  referred  to,  the  writer 
says,  "  If  60,000  tons  of  coftee,  held  here  unsaleable  at  6d.  the 
pound,  while  coffee  was  45.  or  5s.  the  pound  on  the  Continent, 
is  not  evidence  that  the  impediment  was  more  than  all  the 
subtlety  of  mercantile  men  could  overcome,  it  is  in  vain  to  look 
for  proof  of  such  a  fact." 

t  It  applies,  perhaps,  more  distinctly  to  1810  and  1811,  than 
to  1808  and  1809;  as  it  was  not  till  the  actual  burning  and 
confiscation  in  the  Prussian  ports,  in  1810,  of  goods  shipped  to 
a  vast  amount  from  this  country,  that  the  system  of  exclusion 
became  so  effectual. 

J  Not,  indeed,  on  the  part  of  the  public,  as  the  paper  was  not 
convertible,  but  on  the  part  of  Government,  which  was  the  same 
in  effect,  as  regards  the  present  argument. 


1809—1813.  355 

1808  was  manifested  to  a  fall  of  the  exchanges,  the 
Bank  had  contracted  its  issues,  it  is  fairly  to  be  pre- 
sumed that  a  contraction  so  timed  wo[i\d,  altliough 
carried  only  to  a  moderate  extent,  have  had  a 
considerable  influence  upon  the  amount  of  the 
imports  in  the  following  season.  If  the  merchants 
had  become  apprized,  by  a  notice  similar  to  that 
which  the  Bank  had  given  in  December,  1795,  of 
a  limitation  somewhat  below  the  usual  or  the  ex- 
pected amount  of  accommodation  by  discount, 
and  by  a  generally  diminished  facility  in  the  money 
market,  which  would  have  followed  from  such  a 
limitation  by  the  Bank,  in  the  autumn  of  1808, 
that  they  were  not  to  rely,  in  entering  into  further 
engagements,  upon  the  accustomed  facilities,  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  their  orders  would 
have  been  under  lower  limits  of  price  ;  or,  if  they 
sought  consignments,  they  would  not,  indeed,  they 
could  not,  have  oflTered  such  large  advances  upon 
them.  The  consequence  of  such  lower  limits,  or, 
of  lower  offers  of  advance,  or,  in  other  words,  of 
greater  prudence  in  mercantile  engagements  for 
importation,  would  have  been  most  important  in  its 
influence  on  the  exchanges.  The  whole  of  the  im- 
ports in  1809  and  1810*  would  have  been  less,  and 
the  cost  of  the  smaller  quantity  would  have  been 
less,  not  only  in  the  ratio  of  the  lesser  quantity,  but 
also  of  the  lower  price.  But  if  the  whole  quantity 
imported  had  been  less,  there  would  have  been  a 
considerable  reduction  of  the  sums  to  be  paid  to 
foreigners  for  freight,  not  only  by  the  diminished 
quantity,  but  by  a  lower  rate,  in  consequence  of 
the  less  demand  for  foreign  shiproom.     From  the 

*  The  comparison  of  the  official  value  of  the  total  of  im- 
ports stands  thus :  — 

£ 

1808  -  -     29,629,353 

1809  -  -     33,772,409 

1810  -  -     41,136,135 
AA   2 


356  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

difference  under  these  two  heads  alone,  there  would 
have  been  a  great  abatement  of  the  pressure  for 
foreign  payment ;  and,  considering  the  very  circum- 
scribed sphere  of  exchange  operations  which  then 
exibted,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  this  saving 
of  tlie  sums  to  be  transmitted  from  hence  or  drawn 
for  from  abroad,  would  have  had  a  sensible  effect 
on  the  exchanges.  And  in  whatever  degree  the 
exchanges  had  been  higlier,  tlieir  improved  state 
would  have  caused  a  further  saving  of  the  sums  to 
be  transmitted  for  our  government  expenditure 
abroad,  inasmuch  as  it  would  have  diminished  the 
amount  to  be  paid  by  the  government  here  for  a 
given  amount  of  foreign  currency  required. 

It  is  hazardous  to  form  computations  reduced  to 
precise  figures,  on  data  so  vague,  but,  speaking  in 
general  terms,  it  may  be  assumed  to  be  highly  pro- 
bable that  the  saving  in  the  balance  of  foreign 
payments,  which  would  have  been  effected  by  a 
timely  and  systematic  contraction  by  the  Bank  of 
its  issues  in  the  autumn  of  1808,  would  have  been 
sufficient  to  have  prevented  the  exchanges  from 
falling  so  low  as  to  have  put  it  out  of  the  power 
of  the  Bank  to  continue  to  pay  in  specie,  if  it  had 
not  been  restricted  from  so  doing. 

It  may  be  objected  to  this  view,  that  although, 
by  an  early  and  somewhat  forcible  contraction,  the 
value  of  the  paper  might  have  been  preserved  on 
a  level  with  that  of  gold,  the  object  would  have 
been  too  dearly  purchased  by  the  inconvenience  to 
commercial  interests,  from  a  forced  limitation  of 
discounts,  and  by  the  financial  difficulty  which  it 
would  have  occasioned.  This  was  the  ground 
taken  by  ministers  in  defending  the  conduct  of  the 
Bank.  The  answer  is,  that  the  inconveniences 
which  the  merchants  might  have  experienced  from 
disappointment  as  to  the  extent  of  discounts,  and 
from  a  diminution  of  the  facilities,  generally,  on 
which  they  may  have  relied,  would,  taking  them 
as  a  body,  have  been  much  more  than  compensated 


1809—1813.  357 

by  a  saving  of  a  great  j3art  of  the  enormous  losses 
which  the  importations  of  those  two  years  entailed 
upon  them, — losses  which,  in  point  of  fall  of  markets 
embracing  such  a  variety  and  extent  of  articles,  have 
most  assuredly  no  parallel,  within  the  same  period,  in 
our  commercial  history.  The  state  of  commercial 
distress  and  discredit  consequent  upon  these  losses 
has  already  been  described  ;  the  number  of  bank- 
ruptcies in  1810,  1811,  and  181^2,  namely,  7042 
in  the  three  years,  having  been  unparalleled  be- 
fore or  since.*  The  system,  therefore,  upon  which 
the  Bank  acted,  and  which,  upon  principle,  the 
directors  justified  in  their  evidence  before  the  Bul- 
lion Committee,  viz.  that  they  could  not  issue  too 
much  paper  by  the  way  of  discount  on  good  bills  of 
limited  date,  at  5  per  cent,  per  annum,  was,  besides 
the  depreciation  of  Bank  paper  which  it  entailed, 
productive  of  much  more  loss  than  benefit  to  the 
mercantile  interests.  And  as  to  the  financial  dif- 
ficulty which  a  contraction  of  the  circulation  might 
have  entailed,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  in- 
creased rate  of  interest  at  which  the  loans  would 
have  been  raised,  would  not  have  been  more  than 
compensated  by  the  smaller  amount  which  would 

*  With  reference  to  the  state  of  cornmercial  distress  and 
discredit  which  prevailed  in  1810,  it  may  here  be  observed,  that 
Httle  notice  has  ever  been  taken  of  it  by  the  supporters  of  the 
currency  doctrine,  and  still  less  has  any  plausible  reason  been 
given  for  it,  consistently  with  that  doctrine.  The  discredit  and 
distress  were  clearly  the  consequence  of  the  great  fall  of  prices. 
Now  if,  as  according  to  that  theory  is  supposed,  the  rise  of  prices 
had  been  caused  by  an  increase  of  Bank  of  England  paper,  how 
happened  it,  that,  with  a  further  increased  issue,  they  should  have 
fallen  ?  and  if  that  increased  issue  had  not  been  enough,  why 
should  there  not  have  been  a  still  further  issue,  for  the  express 
purpose  of  supporting  prices,  and  thus  preventing  the  loss  and 
discredit  attending  the  fall  ?  It  may  be  said,  that  the  increased 
issue  by  the  Bank  in  1809  and  1810  was  not  more  than  suffi- 
cient to  compensate  for  the  failures  of  the  country  banks. 
True:  but  why  did  not  the  Bank,  as  by  that  theory  it  is  supposed 
that  it  could,  make  so  much  greater  an  issue  as  to  prevent  those 
failures? 

A  A    3 


358  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

have  been  required,  in  consequence  of  the  great 
saving  which  an  exchange  at  or  near  par  would 
have  made,  not  only  on  the  enormous  sums  which 
the  government  had  to  transmit  for  payments 
abroad,  but  also  on  all  the  contracts  for  naval  and 
military  stores,  the  cost  of  which  was  increased  by 
the  depression  of  the  exchanges. 

Upon  the  whole,  if  the  grounds  for  computation 
of  the  saving  in  the  government  expenditure  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  higher  interest  that  might 
have  been  payable  by  government  on  the  other, 
were  carefully  gone  over,  there  would,  perhaps,  be 
found  reason  to  conclude  that  the  one  would  have 
gone  a  great  way  to  balance  the  other.  At  any 
rate,  it  may  be  of  use  to  suggest  this  point  of  view 
for  consideration,  so  as  to  make  it  at  least  a  question 
whether,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  sufficient  ground 
for  the  opinion  so  generally  and  so  implicitly  re- 
ceived, that  the  manner  in  which  the  Bank  did 
regulate  its  issues,  afforded  a  facility  uncompen- 
sated by  disadvantages  at  least  equivalent,  arising 
out  of  the  same  system  ;  and  whether,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  public  did  not,  in  the  lower  rate  of  in- 
terest on  the  loans,  receive  a  compensation  for  the 
larger  sums  raised.  So  much,  however,  may  with 
confidence  be  asserted,  that,  according  to  any  legi- 
timate conclusion  from  fiicts  that  are  generally  ac- 
cessible, the  mercantile  classes  were  great  sufferers, 
and  the  government  were  not  gainers,  by  the  devi- 
ation on  the  part  of  the  Bank,  at  the  close  of  1808 
and  throughout  1809,  from  the  course  which  it  would 
have  been  compelled  to  pursue,  if  it  had  then  been 
under  the  obligation  of  paying  in  cash.  Or,  in  other 
words,  the  mercantile  interests  certainly,  and  the 
public  finances  probably,  would  have  been  gainers, 
if  the  Bank  directors,  disregarding  the  applications 
for  increased  discounts  or  advances,  had  steadily  ad- 
hered to  their  duty  of  preserving  their  paper  in  a 
sound  state  ;  that  is,  of  maintaining  the  equivalence 
of  their  promise  of  payment  to  an  actual  payment. 


1809—1813.  359 

Anyone  that  would  follow  out  step  by  step  what  they 
did,  and  compare  it  with  what  it  was  their  duty  to 
have  attempted,  must  be  satisfied  that  they  might 
have  succeeded,  with  less  advantage  indeed  to  their 
proprietors,  but  more  creditably  to  themselves,  and 
more  beneficially  to  the  public.  For  this  purpose, 
however,  it  was  requisite  that  they  should  have 
been  vigilantly  alive  to  the  premonitory  symptoms, 
which  were  observable  for  some  time  before  the  fall 
of  the  exchanges  in  1808,  and  then  to  have  instantly 
taken  measures  for  contracting  the  circulation. 

Instead,  however,  of  attending  to  the  premoni- 
tory symptoms  of  the  earlier  part  of  1808,  or  to 
the  more  decisive  indications  at  the  close  of  that 
year,  which  should  have  led  them  to  reduce  the 
circulation,  they  extended  it ;  thus  committing  the 
fault  of  which  they  had  been  guilty  in  1782  and  in 
179.5,  and  which  they  repeated  in  1824  ;  and  ren- 
dering it  more  difficult,  if  not  impracticable,  to 
restore  the  value  of  the  paper  to  its  standard  as 
long  as  the  pressure  of  foreign  payments  continued. 
The  increased  issues  were  as  follows  :  — 

Notes  of  51.  Under  51. 

and  upwards. 

Lastquarter  of  1808,  ^13,259,780  ^4,163,380 

1st           —         1809,  13,504,510  4,335,880 

2d           —           —  13,978,370  4,555,880 

3d           —           —  14,144,960  5,195,830 

4th           —           —  14,464,730  5,477,730 

The  circulation  having  been  enlarged  continu- 
ously throughout  1809,  while  the  exchanges  were 
falling,  afforded  a  strong  presumption  of  the  rela- 
tion of  cause  and  effect  between  the  increase  and 
the  fall,  and,  at  all  events,  removed  all  plea  of  attempt 
on  the  part  of  the  Bank  to  preserve  the  value  of 
its  paper.  It  was  this  coincident  increase  of  Bank 
notes  with  the  fall  of  the  exchanges,  and  the  rise 
of  the  price  of  bullion,  that  gave  occasion  to  Mr. 
Ricardo's   first   pamphlet,    entitled,    *'  The  High 

A  A  4 


S60  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

Price  of  Bullion  a  Proof  of  the  Depreciation  of 
Bank  Notes,"  and,  subsequently,  to  the  appointment 
of  the  Bullion  Committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons early  in  the  session  of  1810.  And,  doubtless, 
there  was  a  fair  prima  Jacie  ground  for  the  inference, 
that  the  divergence,  then  so  strikingly  observable 
between  the  gold  and  the  paper,  was  caused  by  a 
diminished  value  in  consequence  of  an  increased 
quantity  of  the  latter,  and  not  by  an  increased 
value  of  gold  in  consequence  of  the  greater  de- 
mand for  it  for  purposes  abroad.  But  although  it 
was  the  duty  of  the  Bank  directors  to  contract, 
and  at  any  rate  not  to  extend  the  circulation, 
under  the  circumstances  stated,  there  are  very 
strong  grounds  for  believing  that,  increased  as  it 
was  in  1809,  it  did  not  exceed  the  amount  that 
would  have  been  compatible,  but  for  the  extraor- 
dinary state  of  things  arising  out  of  the  war,  with 
a  maintenance  of  the  paper  at  its  full  value  in  gold. 

The  whole  increase,  it  is  to  be  observed,  of  notes 
of  5L  and  upwards,  in  the  first  quarter  of  1809, 
was  very  trifling,  and  left  the  amount  to  be  still 
very  much  below  the  lowest  point  to  which  the 
circulation  has  been  at  any  subsequent  time  re- 
duced ;  while  the  increase  of  notes  under  5l.  can 
hardly  have  been  adequate  to  replace  the  progressive 
disappearance  of  guineas,  which  must  have  been 
hastened  by  the  great  and  sudden  fall  of  the 
exchange.  For  that  fall  of  the  exchange,  the 
immense  amount  of  our  foreign  payments  fully 
accounts  ;  and  there  were  coincident  with  the  de- 
mand for  bullion  for  that  purpose,  circumstances 
in  operation,  which  conferred  a  still  further  value 
on  the  precious  metals  on  the  Continent  of  Europe. 

In  consequence  of  the  cessation  of  all  commercial 
credit  and  confidence,  and  of  security  of  property 
throughout  the  extended  seat  of  war,  there  was 
necessarily  a  great  absorption  of  the  metals,  not 
only  for  the  purposes  of  interchange,  which  would 
n   ordinary  times  have  been  performed  by  bills  of 


1809  — IS13.  361 

exchange,  or  simple  credit,  but  for  the  purposes 
also  of  hoarding,  which  in  times  of  such  insecurity 
must  have  been  practised  to  a  very  great  extent. 
From  these  causes  alone,  gold  and  silver  must  have 
acquired  a  greatly  increased  value.  But  if  to  these 
causes  be  superadded  the  absorption  of  specie  in 
the  military  chests  of  the  great  contending  powers, 
both  in  the  North  of  Europe  and  in  the  South,  the 
w^onder  should  rather  be,  that,  without  a  greater 
diminution  of  our  circulating  medium  than  had 
then  taken  place,  there  was  not  a  still  stronger 
manifestation  of  the  increased  value  of  the  metals, 
or  rather  of  foreign  currencies  as  measured  in  ours. 
In  truth,  the  circumstances  here  adverted  to  may 
be  considered  as  having  operated  in  a  great  con- 
traction, and  consequently  in  an  increased  value,  of 
the  currencies  of  the  Continental  States  of  Europe. 

These  causes  of  increased  value  of  the  metals  were 
in  operation  on  an  extending  scale  till  nearly  the 
termination  of  the  war.  And  the  effect  of  them 
would  have  been  still  more  marked  in  the  depression 
of  our  exchanges,  if  it  had  not  been  that  there  was, 
from  1809  to  1811,  coincidently  with  that  con- 
traction of  the  Continental  currencies,  a  great 
diminution  of  the  credit  part  of  the  circulation  in 
this  country,  as  a  consequence  of  the  great  fall  of 
prices.  For,  although  the  small  mcrease  of  the 
amount  of  the  Bank  circulation,  in  the  early  part 
of  1809,  might  seem  to  afford  a  presumption  of 
an  increase  of  the  quantity  of  money  ;  that  pre- 
sumption is  countervailed  by  the  consideration, 
that,  notwithstanding  a  further  increase  of  Bank 
notes,  tlie  prices  of  nearli/  all  commodities  fell  co- 
incidently with  such  increase. 

The  greater  part  of  the  commodities  which  had 
been  the  subject  of  speculation  on  the  extraordinary 
political  events  of  1 807  and  1 808,  and  the  consequent 
short  importations,  had  reached  their  greatest  height 
before  the  closeof  1808 :  but  afterthe  spring  of  1809, 


362  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

the  fall  was  general.*  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  fall  of  prices,  and  the  great  revulsion  of  credit, 
attested  by  the  numerous  failures  between  1809  and 
1812,  had  the  effect  of  contracting  the  country 
bank  and  credit  circulation,  and  thus  virtually  re- 
ducing the  quantity  of  money  in  a  greater  degree 
than  could  be  compensated  by  the  contemporaneous 
increase  of  the  Bank  of  England  issues.  As  the 
rise  of  prices  in  1807  and  1808  had  been  accom- 
panied by  an  increase  of  the  country  bank  and 
credit  circulation,  so  the  great  fall  of  prices  in 
1809  and  1810  was  attended  with  a  great  reduc- 
tion of  it :  the  increase  and  diminution  being  in 
each  case  obvdously  the  effect,  and  not  the  cause, 
of  the  alteration  in  prices. 

The  extensive  failures  of  commercial  and  bank- 
ing establishments  in  1810  have  already  been 
adverted  to  ;  the  commissions  in  that  single  year 
were  no  fewer  than  2314,  of  which  26  were  against 
bankers.  And  a  strong  presumption  that  the  in- 
creased issues  of  the  Bank  of  England  in  1810, 
amounting  to  about  2,500,000/.  in  notes  of  5l.  and 
upwards,  and  2,000,000/.  in  notes  under  5/.,  did 
not  fully  supply  the  vacuum  of  the  circulation  so 
created,  is  afforded  by  the  circumstance,  that  the 
foreign  expenditure  being  on  an  increasing  scale, 
the  exchanges  rose,  that  on  Hambiu'g  from  28*.  4rf. 
to  S\s.  9d.,  and  the  price  of  gold  fell  from  4/.  11.9. 
to  4/.  4.9.  6d.  The  rise  of  the  exchange  would 
probably  have  been  greater,  if  returns  could  have 
been  received  for  the  large  exports  which  were 
made  to  the  Baltic,  and  particularly  to  the  Prussian 
ports,  in  the  summer  of  that  year.  The  whole  of 
the    goods    so    shipped,    however,    were    seized, 


*  Wheat  participated,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  general  fall  of 
prices,  viz.  from  95s.  in  March,  to  86^.  6d.  in  July  following  ; 
and  it  was  not  till  the  bad  harvest  of  1809  that  the  prices  of 
corn  rose  again. 


1809—1818.  363 

burnt,  or  confiscated,  in  pursuance  of  the  decrees 
of  the  French  government. 

The  enlargement  of  the  Bank  circulation  in 
1810  had  been  entirely  the  consequence  of  an 
increase  of  discounts.  And  we  may  here  notice 
one  of  many  misconceptions  which  prevail  with 
reference  to  the  influence  ascribed  to  the  regulation 
of  the  Bank  issues  during  the  restriction.  It  has 
been  supposed  that  the  rule,  as  explained  by  the 
directors,  must  have  operated  not  only  in  a  con- 
stant tendency  to  excess,  but  that  the  readiness  of  a 
resort  to  the  Bank  for  discounts  aiforded  a  con- 
stant facility,  and  consequentinotive,  for  speculations. 
But  the  fact  is,  that  the  variations  in  the  amount 
of  the  private  securities  held  by  the  Bank, 
were  indicative  only  of  variations  in  the  market 
rate  of  interest,  as  compared  with  the  Bank  rate. 
And  so  far  from  the  truth  is  the  supposition,  so 
commonly  entertained,  that  an  increase  of  the 
Bank  issues,  through  the  medium  of  discounts, 
afforded  not  only  a  flicility,  but  an  inducement, 
to  the  speculations  which  occurred  during  the 
restiiction ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  while  the 
most  memorable  of  the  speculations  took  place 
without  any  such  increase,  the  most  striking  in- 
stances of  enlargement  of  the  amount  of  discounts 
followed  a  recoil  from  the  great  speculations,  and 
was  coincident  with  the  greatest  depression  of 
markets,  and  with  consequent  commercial  distress. 
Thus,  in  1808  *,  when  the  utmost  extravagance 
of  speculation  prevailed,    the  amount  of  private 

*  It  is  not  here  meant  to  contend  that  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  the  Bank,  by  a  refusal  of  applications  for  discount,  in  1808, 
to  have  forcibly  reduced  the  circulation,  and  thus  to  have  re- 
pressed much  of  the  spirit  of  speculation,  especially  of  that 
which  extended  to  prospective  engagements.  The  observation 
in  the  text  simply  applies  to  the  fact,  that  no  material  increase 
of  discount  at  the  Bank  had  preceded  or  accompanied  the  great 
rise  of  prices,  and  the  general  spirit  of  speculation  which  pre- 
vailed in  1807  and  1808,  so  as  to  admit  of  the  assignment  of 


364  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

securities  held  by  the  Bank  ranged  at  between  13 
and  14milhons, — being  no  perceptible  increase  upon 
what  it  had  been  during  the  three  or  four  years 
preceding.  But  the  fall  of  prices  thenceforward, 
was  followed  by  a  progressive  increase  of  issues. 


such  Increase  as  an  exciting  cause  ;  this  being  the  sense  in 
which  the  charge  is  commonly  made.  And  the  great  enlarge- 
ment of  the  issues  through  that  medium  in  1810  has  not  un- 
frequently  been  referred  to  as  being  the  supposed  cause  of 
raising  prices,— the  hypothesis  involving  an  error  of  fact  as  to 
the  time  in  which  the  rise  and  fall  of  prices  took  place. 

There  is  one  point  of  view  in  which  there  might  be  a  question 
whether,  if  the  Bankhad,  in  1808,  forcibly  limited  its  issues  through 
the  medium  of  discounts,  and  not  only  not  have  enlarged,  but  con- 
tracted, them  in  1809  and  1810,  the  ultimate  effect  might  not 
have  been  a  higher  range  of  the  prices  of  corn  and  of  other 
European  produce  in  1811  and  1812,  than  actually  prevailed. 
The  immediate  effect  of  such  violent  contraction  would  have 
been  a  more  rapid  fall  of  prices  in  1809,  and  there  would  thus 
have  been  both  diminished  inducement  and  diminished  means 
for  endeavouring  to  overcome  the  great  obstacles  which  then 
existed  to  obtaining  supplies  from  the  Continent  of  Europe. 
Now,  it  was  the  magnitude  of  the  importations  in  1809  and 
1810,  which  contributed  to  mitigate  the  scarcities  in  1811  and 
1812,  of  corn  and  other  European  produce.  On  the  supposi- 
tion, therefore,  that  the  circulation  had  been  forcibly  contracted 
at  the  close  of  1808,  and  through  1809  and  1810,  prices,  low  as 
they  were  vi-ith  reference  to  the  cost  of  production,  would  have 
been  still  lower  in  1810  ;  but  they  would,  from  increased  scarcity, 
have  been  higher  in  1811  and  1812.  Lord  Castlereagh  seems 
to  have  had  a  glimpse  of  this  view,  when  he  said,  in  the  course 
of  the  debates  in  1811,  "  But  the  effect  of  a  full  circulation 
upon  prices  at  home,  I  conceive  to  be  the  reverse  of  what  is 
supposed.  I  admit  that  the  first  effect  of  a  reduction  of  the 
circulating  medium  would  be  to  lower  prices,  —  the  value  of 
the  circulating  medium  itself  being  enhanced  in  proportion  to 
its  scarcity :  but  it  would  soon  operate  in  a  corresponding  de- 
gree to  check  reproduction  ;  and  although  the  produce  on  hand 
would  sell  cheaper,  less  being  produced,  the  prices  must  speedily 
rise  again,  the  demand  continuing  the  same  from  the  scarcity 
of  the  article."  This  reasoning  is  admissible  only  under  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  those  extraordinary  times ;  and  if  he 
had  used  the  term  importation,  instead  of  reproduction,  the 
expression  would  more  clearly  have  designated  the  supposed 
consequences. 


1809—1813.  36.5 

through  the  medium  of  discounts,  which  in  August, 
1810,  reached  the  enormous  and  unprecedented 
amount  of  23,775,093/.  This  greatly  increased 
amount  of  discounts,  and  the  consequent  enlarge* 
ment  of  the  Bank  circulation,  were  coincident,  as 
we  have  seen,  with  the  most  depressed  state  of 
markets,  and  with  the  greatest  commercial  distress. 
In  proportion  as  markets  and  commercial  credit 
tended  to  a  revival,  the  private  securities  held  by 
the  Bank  underwent  a  progressive  diminution  ;  and 
the  amount  in  February  1813, — a  period  which  was 
precisely  that  in  which  the  prices  of  both  imported 
and  exportable  commodities,  and  of  labour,  were 
in  the  aggregate  higher  than  in  any  former  or  sub- 
sequent period, — was  reduced  to  12,894,321/.,  being 
a  reduction  of  upwards  of  10  millions  ;  and  the 
amount  of  the  Bank  circulation,  which  in  August, 
1810,  had  been  17,570,780/.  of  51.  notes  and  up- 
wards, was,  in  February,  1813,  15,497,320/.,  being 
a  reduction  of  upwards  of  2  millions. 

The  diminution  of  discounts,  and  of  the  Bank 
circulation,  after  August,  1810  *,  till  the  com- 
mencement of  1813,  is  still  further  remarkable,  as 

*  Of  the  enlarged  issues  by  the  Bank  in  1810,  it  appears 
that  a  considerable  part  remained  unemployed  by  the  bankers, 
and  was  returned  by  them  to  the  Bank  within  six  months  after, 
without  having  been  in  circulation. 

Mr.  Manning,  a  director  of  the  Bank,  and  member  of  parlia- 
ment, when  replying  to  some  observation  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, on  the  Bank  circulation,  8th  December,  1812,  said,  "  In 
July  or  August,  1810,  it  would  be  remembered  that  the  number 
of  notes  in  circulation  was  about  25  millions ;  but  this 
excess  was  occasioned  by  the  failure  of  two  large  houses  in 
London,  which  produced  a  considerable  sensation  in  the  country. 
Bankers  in  the  various  principal  towns  then  made  demands  upon 
the  Bank,  to  insure  themselves  against  a  run  upon  their  firms ; 
but,  within  six  months,  the  greater  part  of  three  millions  was 
returned  to  the  Bank  of  England,  without  having  been  em- 
ployed." The  fact  that  so  large  a  proportion  of  the  increased 
issues  had  been  returned  to  the  Bank  unemployed,  proves  that 
there  Avas  a  principle  of  resistance  in  the  channels  of  circulation 
to  receive  bevond  a  limited  amount ;  or,  in  other  words,  that 


366  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

being  illustrative  of  the  principle  of  limitation, 
which  has  been  noticed  as  arising  out  of  the  rules, 
or  rather  the  routine,  by  which  the  Bank  was  guided 
in  its  issues  ;  for  it  should  seem  that  the  Bank  was 
as  passive  in  the  reduction  of  its  discounts  and  of 
its  issues  between  J  810  and  1813,  as  it  had  been  in 
the  enlargement  of  them  between  1808  and  1810. 

The  reduction  between  1810  and  1813,  more- 
over, shows,  accompanied  as  it  was  by  a  great  fall 
of  the  exchanges,  and  a  rise  in  the  price  of  gold, 
how  great  and  violent  a  contraction  below  that  re- 
duced  amount  would  have  been  requisite  to  coun- 
teract the  increased  pressure  on  the  exchanges, 
arising  from  the  enormously  increased,  and  progres- 
sively increasing,  foreign  expenditure  of  the  govern- 
ment. 

If  the  Bank  directors  had,  at  the  close  of  1808, 
acted  resolutely  upon  the  principle  of  regulating 
the  issues  by  the  exchanges,  instead  of  being  passive 
under  a  demand  for  discounts,  there  is  reason  to 
believe,  as  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe,  that, 
by  a  systematic  and  sustained  effort,  they  might 
have  succeeded  in  maintaining  the  value  of  their 
paper  on  a  level  with  that  of  the  gold  in  which  it 
professed  to  be  payable  ;  and  that,  by  so  regulating 
their  issues,  the  trade  of  the  country  would  have 
been  preserved  in  a  sounder  state,  while  the  go- 
vernment, if  liable  to  pay  a  higher  interest  on  the 
loans,  would  have  had  at  least  an  equivalent,  and 
perhaps  a  greater  saving  in  the  exchange.  This, 
however,  could  only  have  been  effected  by  early 
and  precautionary  measures  adopted  upon  the  first 
manifestation  of  the  tendency  to  a  great  decline  of 
the  exchanges  :  for  when  the  fall  of  the  exchanges 


there  was  in  the  system,  irregularly  as  it  worked,  and  imper- 
fectly as  it  was  explained,  a  principle  of  limitation  which 
operated  in  counteraction  of  all  the  supposed  motives  and 
tendencies  to  constant  excess. 


1809—1813.  367 

had  proceeded  to  the  length  which  it  had  done  be- 
tween 1808  and  1811  ;  and  when,  notwithstanding 
the  enlargement  of  the  Bank  issues,  the  revulsion  of 
prices  and  of  credit  had  been  so  great  as  it  was  in 
1810  and  1811  ;  and  when  the  foreign  expenditure 
was  proceeding  on  an  increasing  scale  ;  an  attempt 
on  the  part  of  the  Bank  directors  to  retrace  their 
steps,  with  a  view  to  raise  the  value  of  their  paper 
to  that  of  the  gold,  for  which  there  was  an  in- 
creasing demand,  would  have  entailed  the  neces- 
sity of  so  violent  a  contraction,  as,  without  insuring 
its  object,  would  have  aggravated  in  an  extra- 
ordinary degree  the  commercial  distress  which  then 
prevailed. 

But  it  is  of  importance  to  remark,  that  whereas, 
during  the  very  considerable  enlargement  of  the 
issues  in  1810,  when  they  reached  an  amount  be- 
yond the  average  of  what  they  were  subsequently 
until  1813,  prices  generally  fell,  so,  with  diminished 
c«>cw/o/?'o/i  of  Bank  of  England  notes  in  1811  and 
1812,  the  prices  of  corn  and  other  European  pro- 
duce rose  considerably :  and  again,  with  an  in- 
creased circulation  in  1813,  those  same  articles 
which  had  so  risen,  fell  most  rapidly.  The  negative 
of  the  so  often  imputed  connection  between  the 
issues  of  the  Bank  and  the  prices  of  wheat,  will 
strikingly  appear  from  the  following  comparison :  — 

Average   Circulation  of    Bank  Average  Price  of  Wheat  in  the 

Notes  of  5/.  and  upwards  in  Weeks  ending 

the  three  Months  ending  s.  d. 

31  Dec.  1809      -      14-,464<,730  31  Dec.         1809     -  102  6 

Do.      1810      -      16,873,760  Da.             1810     -     97  1 

Do.      1811       -       15,4-13,310  Do.             1811     -  106  8 

SO  June  1812      -       15,458,660  30  June          1812     -   133  10 

Qr\  C      t    1010  1  r  ooo  ►T-ri        f  31  Aug.       1812      -    155      0 

SOSept.1812   -   15,833,7/0  1 30  Sepl.  1812  -131  0 

31  Dec.  1812   -   15,64-7,350  31  Dec.    1812  -  121  0 

Do.  1813   -   16,092,590    Do.     1813  -  73  0 

The  reduction  of  Bank  issues  between  1810 
and  1813  is  remarkable,  not  only  as  accompany- 


368  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

ing  a  rise,  and  an  extraordinarily  high  range  of 
prices  of  European  produce,  but  as  being  fol- 
lowed by  a  renewed  fall  of  the  exchanges,  and  a 
great  rise  in  the  price  of  gold.  Thus,  at  the  close 
of  1811,  the  exchange  on  Hamburg,  although 
the  circulation  was  less  by  near  a  million  and  a 
half  than  at  the  close  of  1810,  fell  from  31.9.  ^d.  to 
24^.,  and  the  price  of  gold  rose  from  4/.  4.9.  Qd.  to 
4/.  196'.  6f/.* 

Notwithstanding  this  great  fall  of  the  exchanges, 
and  the  rise  of  the  price  of  gold,  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  quantity  of  money,  re- 
latively to  the  transactions  of  the  country,  was 
less  in  1811,  than  it  had  been  before  or  has  been 
since. t     The  amount  of  the  Bank  circulation  was 

•  In  order  to  show  how  much  of  the  fluctuation  of  the  ex- 
changes was  dependent  upon  the  greater  or  less  obstruction  of 
the  channels  of  intercourse,  it  may  be  observed,  that  the  quot- 
ation on  Hamburgh,  in  the  early  part  of  1813,  rose  to  30^.  Qd.y 
being  an  advance  of  near  25  per  cent.,  while  the  price  of  gold 
coincidently  rose  to  51.  5s.,  or  upwards  of  5  per  cent. 

-|-  In  an  article  of  the  Edinburgh  Review  for  1811,  contain- 
ing a  critique  on  several  publications  of  that  period  on  the  cur- 
rency, the  writer,  while  agreeing  to  consider  the  divergence 
between  the  paper  and  its  standard  as  constituting  a  depreci- 
ation of  the  paper,  calls  in  question  the  peremptoriness  of  the 
conclusions  of  Mr.  Ricardo  and  Mr.  Huskisson,  that  the  fall 
of  the  exchanges  necessarily  implied  an  increase  and  excess 
in  the  amount  of  the  currency  of  this  country,  and  illustrates 
his  own  view  by  the  following  hypothetical  cases,  of  which  the 
last  represents  the  state  of  things  as,  it  appears  to  me,  it 
actually  existed,  with  reference  to  the  currency,  in  1811:  — 
"  In  the  case  of  a  diminished  supply  from  the  mines,  or  a  greater 
consumption  of  the  precious  metals  in  some  of  the  principal 
states  of  Europe,  an  immediate  demand  would  be  felt  in  the 
rest  for  bullion  to  be  exported  ;  the  market  price  of  bullion 
would  be  raised  for  a  time  above  the  Mint  price  ;  the  notes  of 
the  different  banks  would  return  upon  them  to  be  exchanged 
for  coin,  which  would  be  sent  abroad.  The  consequence  would 
be,  that  the  whole  currency,  consisting  still  of  the  same  proportion 
of  paper  to  coin,  would  be  diminished  in  quantity  and  raised  in 
value  ;  the  market  price  of  bullion  would  soon  sink  to  the  Mint 
price  ;  the  exchanges,  which  had  been  unusually  unfavourable, 
would  be  restored  to    their  accustomed  state ;  and  no   other 


1809—1813.  369 

lower  than  it  had  been  in  the  year  preceding, 
or  has  since  been.  And  the  country  bank  and 
the  general  credit  circulation  must  have  been 
greatly  reduced  by  the  extraordinary  number  of 
failures,  and  the  general  state  of  discredit  then 
prevailing. 

Mr.  George  Rose  remarked,  and  dwelt  at  some 
length,  on  the  presumptive  evidence  of  there  being 
a  reduced  amount  of  circulating  medium  in  1811, 
as  compared  with  the  period  anterior  to  the  re- 
striction. And  if  he  was  right  in  his  computation, 
by  which  he  made  out  that  the  quantity  of  gold 
in  circulation  had  been,  in  1798,  forty  millions,  it 
must  have  been  beyond  question,  that  the  total 
of  the  circulating  medium,  in  1811,  must  have 
been  less  than  in  1798.  Mr.  Rose,  after  stating 
the  grounds  for  his  computation  of  the  quantity  of 
gold,  went  on  to  say, 


effect  would  be  felt,  than  a  general  fall  of  prices  throughout 
the  commercial  world. 

"  Now  if,  in  the  case  last  supposed,  the  paper  of  one  of  these 
countries  were  not  convertible  into  coin,  and  very  little  specie 
remained  in  circulation,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  currency 
would  not  have  the  means  of  assimilating  itself  to  the  currencies 
of  the  nations  with  which  it  was  connected ;  the  market  price 
of  bullion  would  rise  very  greatly  above  its  mint  price  ;  all  the 
gold  which  could  readily  be  collected,  would  be  exported ;  but 
as  this  would  be  inconsiderable,  and  as  the  great  mass  of  paper 
would  remain  undiminished,  or  perhaps  slightly  increased  to 
supply  the  vacancies  occasioned  by  the  gold  exported,  the 
great  excess  of  the  market  price  of  bullion  above  the  mint 
price,  and  the  very  unfavourable  exchanges,  would  become 
permanent,  (subject,  however,  still  to  variations  occasioned  by 
the  balance  of  trade  and  payments,)  and  the  currency  of  such 
a  country  would  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  depreciated, 
when  compared  with  gold  and  silver  and  the  currencies  of 
other  countries,  just  as  it  would  be  from  an  original  excess  of 
paper  issues,  although,  on  the  whole,  taking  paper  and  guineas 
together,  the  amount  of  the  currency  might  not  he  ijicreased  by  a 
single  pound." 

VOL.  I.  B    B 


370  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

"  If,  then,  in  estimating  the  coin  in  1798,  wc  rate  it,  instead  of 
40,000,000/.,  at  -  -  ■         £  35,000,000 

The  Bank  of  England  notes  then  in  circula- 
tion were         -  ....  11,278,000 


^'  46,278,000 


Coin  in  circulation  now  (perhaps  a  high 

estimate)         -         -  -  -    3,000,000 

Bank  of  England  notes  in  circulation  23,000,000 

26,000,000 


£  20,278,000 


*'  Here,  then,  is  a  sum  of  20,000,000/.  in  the  whole  less  than  in 
1798,  notwithstanding  the  immense  increase  of  our  revenue,  com- 
merce, and  manufactures  ;  from  which,  however,  should  be  taken 
the  amount  in  deposit  in  the  Bank,  whatever  that  may  be." 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  amount  of  gold  above 
stated  is  an  exaggerated  estimate  ;  and  the  country 
bank  circulation  is  wholly  omitted.  At  the  same 
tune  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  country  circulation, 
reduced  as  it  had  been  by  failures  and  general 
discredit  in  1811,  was  then,  exce])t  by  the  amount 
of  small  notes,  which  may  be  taken  to  have  been 
at  the  utmost  from  four  to  five  millions,  larger 
than  it  had  been  immediately  previous  to  the  com- 
mercial revulsion  in  1792-3.*    While,  on  the  other 

*  In  the  Report  of  the  Lords*  Committee  on  cash  payments 
in  1819,  (p.  12.)  a  reference  is  made  to  the  estimates  formed  of 
the  amount  of  the  country  bank  circulation  from  the  stamps 
issued. 

"  From  these  materials"  (the  committee  observe)  "  these  calcu- 
lations have  been  drawn.  The  committee  are  inclined  to  think, 
that  of  these  two  approximating  estimates,  the  second  is  best 
adapted  to  their  view  of  the  subject ;  but  they  submit  them 
both  to  the  House,  with  a  full  sense  of  the  imperfection  to 
which  they  are  necessarily  liable. 

F  7.  F  8. 

21,374,000         -  1810  -         21,819,000 

20,977,000         -  1811  -         21,453,000 

20,047,000         -  1812  -         19,944,000 

"22,342,000         -  1813  -         22,597,000" 

The  computations  are  then  given  for  the  five  years  following, 
which  will  be  noticed  hereafter.  And  the  committee  very  judi- 
ciously  add,  "  These   estimates    must   not    only  be  very  far 


1809—1813.  371 

hand,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  that  the 
enormously  increased  pecuniary  transactions  of  the 
country  did  not,  notwithstanding  the  continued 
improvements  in  economising  the  use  of  Bank 
notes,  require,  in  1811,  an  increased  circulating 
medium,  as  compared  with  the  period  preceding 
the  restriction. 

But  although  in  tiie  state  of  discredit  and  dis- 
tress, which  prevailed  in  1811  any  attempt  at 
forced  contraction  by  the  Bank  of  its  issues,  would 
have  been  in  the  highest  degree  unadvisable,  the 
case  was  very  different  in  1813.  Commercial 
credit  and  general  confidence  had  been  restored. 
The  country  circulation  was  evidently  experienc- 
ing a  renewed  extension.  And  although  corn  and 
other  European  produce  was  falUng,  a  general 
spirit  of  speculation  was  manifesting  itself  upon 
the  prospect  of  peace,  in  a  great  rise  of  prices  of 
all  colonial  produce,  the  eventual  extravagance  of 
which  has  been  described  (p.  3i<7.). 

Under  these  circumstances,  combined  with  the 
prospect  then  in  view  of  an  approaching  termin- 
ation  of  the  war,  an  effort  might  and  ought  to 


removed  from  accuracy,  respecting  any  particular  year,  but 
many  causes  of  uncertainty  attach  to  them,  even  if  they 
were  considered  merely  as  affording  data  for  calculating  the 
relative  circulation  of  different  years."  There  is,  indeed,  every 
reason  to  believe,  that  these  estimates  are  veri/  fa?'  removed 
from  accuracy  respecting  any  particular  year,  the  amount  being 
obviously  overrated ;  and  if  they  were  to  be  considered  as 
affording  data  for  calculating  the  relative  circulation  of  different 
years,  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  them  would  be  strangely 
incongruous  with  the  currency  theory.  According  to  one  of 
these  estimates,  the  amount  of  country  bank  notes  was  less  by 
1,300,000/.,  and  in  the  other,  by  nearly  two  millions,  in  1812 
than  in  1810.  And  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  observe, 
that  the  circulation  of  the  Bank  of  England  notes  of  51.  and 
upwards  was  also  less  in  1812.  How,  then,  consistently  with 
that  theory,  is  a  rise  of  50  per  cent,  in  the  price  of  corn  from 
1810  to  1812  to  be  explained,  siipjjosing  these  calculations  of 
the  country  bank  issues  to  be  correct  ? 

B    B    2 


372  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

have  been  made  by  the  Bank,  to  counteract  the 
increasing  pressure  of  foreign  payments,  and  the 
increasing  depreciation  of  its  paper  compared  with 
its  standard,  by  a  reduction  of  its  circulation. 
Such  a  measure  would  have  involved  a  departure, 
by  the  Bank,  from  the  system  which  the  directors 
avowed  and  defended  ;  and  it  was,  therefore,  not  to 
be  expected.  But  it  would  have  been  in  every 
point  of  view  beneficial.  It  would  have  repressed, 
in  some  degree,  the  extravagance  of  speculation, 
on  the  prospect  of  a  peace,  in  exportable  commo- 
dities, and  thus  have  prevented  some  of  the  great 
losses  of  the  two  following  years.  It  would,  in- 
deed, at  the  same  time,  have  accelerated  the  fall 
of  agricultural  produce,  which  was  already  in  pro- 
gress ;  but  an  accelerated  fall,  instead  of  being 
injurious,  would,  in  1813,  have  been  beneficial  to 
the  agricultural  interests.  If,  instead  of  tlie  linger- 
ing fall  between  the  harvest  of  1813  and  the 
close  of  1815,  the  price  of  wheat  had  fallen,  as,  but 
for  the  resistance  of  the  farmers  (aided  by  the 
facility  with  which,  being  in  good  credit,  they 
could  obtain  advances),  it  ought,  by  at  least  10.9. 
per  quarter  more  than  it  did  in  the  autumn  of 
1813,  the  ports  would  have  been  shut,  under  the 
corn  law  of  1804,  and  a  great  part,  of  the  im- 
portation of  1813,  and  the  whole  of  that  of  1814, 
would  have  been  kept  out,  and  the  markets  would 
not  have  been  so  much  depressed  as  they  were  in 
1815.  The  foreign  payments  would  have  been 
diminished  by  that  amount,  and  by  a  reduced 
scale  of  importation  of  other  European  produce  ; 
but  in  a  much  more  important  degree  would  they 
have  been  diminished  by  the  less  unfavourable  ex- 
changes which  would  have  been  the  consequence 
of  a  forcible  contraction  of  the  circulation. 

But  although  the  circulation  was  not  contracted 
in  1813,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  there  was  very 
little  extension  of  it — indeed,  hardly  any  worth  men- 
tioning; the  whole  increase  of  that  year,  or  of  the 


1809—1813.  873 

last  six  months  of  it,  being  only  from  two  to  three 
hundred  thousand  pounds,  in  notes  of  5/.,  and 
upwards,  beyond  what  it  had  been  in  1812  :  and  the 
entire  amount,  namely,  sixteen  millions,  was  con- 
siderably below  that  which  was  soon  after  found 
to  be  compatible  with  a  rise  of  the  exchanges  and 
a  fall  of  the  price  of  gold  to  par :  thus  affording 
the  strongest  possible  presumption,  that  the  quan- 
tity of  money  was  not  greater  in  1813,  than  might, 
but  for  the  great  and  increasing  pressure  of  the 
enormous  foreign  expenditure,  have  been  main- 
tained in  a  convertible  state  of  the  ciu'rency. 


Section  11. — Summary  of  the  preceding  Survey. 

As  the  result  of  the  view  thus  presented  of  the 
great  variation  of  prices,  in  connection  with  the 
state  of  the  circulation,  during  the  interval  here 
under  consideration,  it  appears  — 

1.  That  there  were  four  deficient  harvests  in 
succession  ;  viz.  1809,  1810,  1811,  and  1812.  The 
scarcity  arising  from  the  deficiency  of  the  two  first, 
was  relieved  by  a  large  importation,  chiefly  from 
France,  and  from  ports  under  the  dominion  of 
France ;  but  in  the  two  last  years,  there  being  a 
severe  dearth  also  in  France,  and  the  charges  of 
importation  being  nearly  50s,  per  quarter,  the  de- 
ficiency of  our  own  crops  was  unrelieved  by  any 
foreign  supplies  worth  mentioning. 

2.  That  immediately  after  the  harvest  of  1813, 
of  which  the  crops  were  abundant,  and  after  the 
opening  of  the  ports  of  the  Continent,  while  tlie 
charges  of  importation,  although  still  high,  were 
greatly  reduced,  the  prices  of  corn  fell  rapidly, 
and  before  the  end  of  that  year  were  more  than 
50  per  cent,  lower  than  they  had  been  in  1812. 

3.  That  the  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn,  and 
of  all  European  produce,  in  the  last  six  months  of 
1813,  was  preceded  by  an  enlargement  of  the  Bank 


37-1'  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION, 

circulation,  and  was  coincident  witli  a  great  rise  in 
the  price  of  gold  :  on  the  other  hand,  a  rise  of  the 
prices  of  corn  and  other  European  produce  in 
1811  and  1812,  had  been  immediately  preceded  by 
some  reduction  of  the  amount  of  Bank  notes  :  thus 
affording  a  conclusive  negative  of  the  imputed  in- 
fluence of  the  amount  of  the  circulation,  in  having 
produced  the  great  rise  and  subsequent  fall  of  those 
descriptions  of  produce. 

4.  That  in  the  great  fluctuation  of  prices  observ- 
able in  this  interval,  while  corn  and  other  European 
produce,  of  which,  from  the  seasons,  combined 
with  obstructions  to  importation,  there  was  a  great 
scarcity,  rose  very  considerably,  all  other  descrip- 
tions of  produce  and  manufactures  (except  in  as 
far  as  these  were  raised  in  value  by  the  high  price 
of  the  raw  materials)  experienced  a  great  fall  of 
prices,  and  were,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
lower  in  1811  and  181'2,  than  they  have  been  on 
an  average  since  1819  :  on  the  other  hand,  when 
corn  and  other  European  produce  began  to  fall, 
all  other  produce,  which  had  previously  been  low, 
began  to  rise  ;  and  the  further  progress  of  the  fall 
of  the  former,  and  of  the  rise  of  the  latter,  pro- 
ceeded almost  simultaneously,  and  with  nearly 
equal  rapidity  in  opposite  directions  :  thus  proving 
that  they  were  under  the  influence  of  opposite 
causes ;  whereas  it  is  the  character  of  depreciation 
arising  from  increased  quantity  of  money,  to  raise 
all  prices,  although  some  more  and  some  less,  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  the  articles. 

5.  That  the  great  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn  and 
other  European  produce,  in  1813,  occurred  wliile 
the  expenditure  of  government  in  the  prosecution 
of  the  war,  defrayed  by  loans,  was  proceeding  on 
a  scale  of  greater  magnitude  than  in  any  former 
period  of  the  war,  or,  indeed,  than  in  any  former 
period  of  our  history  :  thus  negativing  the  theory 
of  war-demand  in  accounting  for  the  previous  rise 
of  prices ;  because,  if  war-demand  raised  the  prices. 


1809—1813.  375 

why  did  it,  when  on  an  increased  scale  of  expend- 
iture, suffer  tlicm  to  fail  ? 

6.  That  the  rise  of  prices  on  the  Continent  of 
Europe,  and  in  France  esjiecially,  between  1809 
and  1812,  had  been  as  great,  relatively  to  their  usual 
rate,  as  in  this  country ;  and  the  rise  was  more 
general,  inasmuch  as  while  sugar  and  coffee,  and 
all  articles  of  transatlantic  produce,  were  in  this 
country  extremely  low,  they  were  on  the  Continent 
extravagantly  high.  Thus,  coffee  and  sugar  in 
bond,  which  would  not  fetch  6d.  the  pound  in  this 
country,  were  worth  from  5s.  to  6s.  the  pound  in 
France  ;  and  all  other  transatlantic  produce  was 
high  there  in  the  same  proportion. 

7.  That  a  fall  in  the  prices  of  corn  and  other 
European  produce,  took  place  in  France,  and  on 
the  Continent  of  Europe,  in  1813,  fully  equal  to, 
or  rather  exceeding,  the  fall  in  this  country.  And 
as  that  fall  was  coincident  with  the  lowest  state,  in 
point  of  quantity,  of  the  precious  metals  in  this 
country,  and  consequently  with  the  largest  addi- 
tion that  was  at  any  time  made  from  hence  to  the 
stock  of  bullion  on  the  Continent,  a  fresh  proof  is 
afforded  of  the  absence  of  the  influence  ascribed 
to  the  disengagement  from,  and  the  reabsorption 
by,  this  country,  of  the  quantity  of  gold  requisite 
to  sustain  a  convertible  state  of  the  paper. 

8.  That  the  unusually  large  government  expend- 
iture abroad,  and  the  extraordinary  siniis  paid  for 
freights  to  foreigners,  during  the  greater  part  of  the 
interval  under  consideration,  while  the  Continent 
was  almost  hermetically  sealed  against  exports  from 
this  country,  (so  that  a  vast  amount  of  transatlantic 
produce  and  manufactured  goods,  which  would, 
in  an  ordinary  state  of  commercial  intercourse,  have 
served  to  discharge  the  greater  part  or  the  whole 
of  those  payments,  were  locked  up  and  unavailable,) 
account  for  the  great  pressure  upon,  and  the  low  state 
of,  the  exchanges,  Vv'ithout  the  supposition  that  an 
excess  of  paper  (except  by  mere  comparison  with 


376  PRICES    AND    CIRCULATION. 

its  standard),  was  the  originating  and  determining 
cause  of  that  depression. 

9.  That,  according  to  all  the  means  accessible  for 
forming  a  computation  of  the  amount  of  the  cir- 
culating medium,  there  was  no  such  increase  of  it, 
taking  into  consideration  the  greatly  extended  pe- 
cuniary transactions  of  the  country  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  tendency  to  an  economised  use  of 
the  currency  on  the  other,  as  would  not  have  been 
compatible  with  a  maintenance  of  the  value  of  the 
paper  on  a  level  with  that  of  gold,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  enormous  foreign  expenditure,  which,  under 
the  extraordinary  impediments  that  existed  to  the 
export  of  commodities  to  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
operated  as  a  violently  depressing  cause  upon  the 
exchanges,  and  conferred  a  great  temporary  increase 
of  value  on  gold. 

10.  That  there  were  causes  in  operation,  arising 
out  of  the  circumstances  affecting  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction, and  the  supply  of  and  demand  for  each 
commodity,  which  account  fully  for  the  great 
variations  of  prices  during  the  period  under  con- 
sideration, without  having  recourse  to  the  sup- 
position of  alterations  in  the  quantity  of  money  as 
having  been  calculated  to  produce  those  effects. 
And  that,  as  far  as  presumptive  evidence  goes, 
there  were  no  such  alterations  of  the  quantity  of 
money  occurring  in  such  order  of  time  as  to  jus- 
tify the  assignment  of  them,  in  the  relation  of  cause 
and  effect,  with  the  great  variations  of  prices  which 
are  observable  in  the  period  that  has  passed  under 
consideration. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


London : 

Printed  by  A.  Spottiswoode, 

Ncw-Strect-Sqiiare., 


55  ^q  2^ 


