Htbrarg 
Itttersttg  of  Ptttsburgli 

Darlington  Memorial  Library 

(ClaHH- 

look 


."J  II 


1^  Ca 

V 


RAMBLES 

IN 

EGYPT   AND  CANDIA, 

WITH  DETAILS  OF  THE 

MILITARY  POWER 

AND  RESOURCES  OF  THOSE  COUNTRIES, 

AND     OBSERVATIONS    ON    THE 

OOVERNMENT,    POLICY,    AND    COMMERCIAL 
SYSTEM 

OF 

MOHAMMED    ALL 


C^ROCHFORT   SCOTT, 

CAPTAIN,  H.  P.,  ROYAL  STAFF  CORPS. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  11. 

LONDON: 
HENRY    COLBURN,    PUBLISHER, 

13,  GREAT  MARLBOROUGH  STREET. 

1837. 


^■'^ 


LONDON : 
r.  SHOBERI.,  JDN.,  LEICESTER   STREET,  LEICESTER  SQUARE. 


CONTENTS 


THE   SECOND   VOLUME. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Temple  of  Luxor  — System  of  Plunder— Solitary  Obelisk— Grand 
Avenue  of  Sphinxes — Temple  of  Karnac — Its  vast  extent — Ruined 
Propylee  —  Lateral  Temples  —  Cross  to  the  Western  side  of  the 
Nile  —  The  Memnonium  —  Specimen  of  the  Wonderful  Capacity 
of  the  Hieroglyphical  Language— Palace  of  Sesostris— Sculpture 
of  the  Egyptians — Remarks  on  Champollion's  Hieroglyphical  Dis- 
coveries— Dammy  and  Shammy— Temple  of  Dair— Tombs  of  the 
Kings— Belzoni's  Tomb— Village  of  Gournou— Traffic  in  Mum- 
mies— Anecdote  of  a  post  mortem  Ambitious  English  Traveller — 
Remains  at  Deuderah— Dinner  at  Sheik  Hassan's         .  Page     1 

CHAPTER  H. 

Departure  for  Kosseir — Pace  of  the  Dromedary — Wells  at  El  Gay- 
tah — Observations  on  the  Desert— Pass  of  Issud — El  Megrib— 
The  Consular  Agent  at  Kosseir — American  Trickery — The  Ci- 
tadel— Hospitality  of  Said  Mohammed — An  Arab  Dinner — New 


CONTENTS. 

Route— Mountain  Pass— Wad-el-Ash  —Hints  to  the  Traveller — 
Nomadic  Arab  Tribes — Partridges  and  Grouse — Return  to  Khe- 
neh — Seizure  of  our  Boatmen  for  the  Nizam — Visit  to  Girgeh — 
Apprehension  of  the  Delinquents  —  The  Bastinado  —  Town  of 
Akhmin — Minieh — Return  to  Cairo   .  .  .  .35 


CHAPTER  III. 

Departure  for  Suez — The  Ras  el  Wadi,  or  Wadi  Toumlet — Traces 
of  the  Canal  of  the  Ptolemies — Salt  Lake  —  Disagreeable  Pickle 
—  Wells  of  Adjeroud — Suez  —  Fortifications  —  Population,  &c. 
— Canal  connecting  the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile — Market  of  Suez 
— Climate — Anchorage — Trade — Difficult  Navigation  of  the  Gulf 
of  Suez  —  Steam  communication  with  India- — Difficulty  of  Main- 
taining it  at  all  Seasons  —  Advantages  of  the  Line  by  the  Red 
Sea  over  that  by  the  Euphrates  —  Proposed  Line  by  Kosseir  — 
Passage  of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  Israelites  —  Failure  of  all  At- 
tempts to  disprove  the  Miracle — Land  of  Goshen — March  of  the 
Jews  —  Return  to  Cairo  —  Observations  on  the  Line  of  the  pro- 
jected Rail- road  .  .  .  .  .  .67 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Form  of  Government — Character  of  Mohammed  Ali — Former  State 
qf  the  Country — Difficulties  to  Overcome  in  Effecting  Improve- 
ments—Unwarrantable Abuse  of  Foreigners — Parallel  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali  and  Napoleon — System  of  Administration — Ameliora- 
tions Effected — Council  of  State — Faulty  Position  of  the  Viceroy 
of  Egypt  in  his  Intercourse  with  the  Diplomatic  Agents  of  the 
European  Powers  —Errors  in  his  Foreign  Policy — The  Advantage 
of  his  Ceding  Canada  to  Great  Britain — Policy  of  England  towards 
Mohammed  Ali — Views  of  Russia — Necessity  of  Increasing  the 
Power  of  Egypt  to  counteract  them — Feebleness  of  Persia — 
Policy  of  Recognising  the  Independence  of  Egypt,  and  of  Guar- 
ranteeing  the  Succession  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  to  the  Throne      .  100 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Character  of  Ibrahim  Pasha — His  Conduct  in  Syria — In  the  Morea 
— Popularity  of  Mohammed  Ali  —  Grievances  of  his  Subjects  — 
Difficulties  he  has  to  contend  against  —  Wasteful  Expenditure  of 
Money  on  the  Wild  Schemes  of  Foreign  Adventurers  —  Project 
to  throw  a  Dam  across  the  Nile — Railroads — Concluding  Remarks 
upon  the  system  of  Government       .  .  .  .140 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Revenues  of  Egypt — Taxes — Expenditure — Government  Monopo- 
lies— Necessity  of  retaining  many  of  them,  in  the  present  state  of 
the  Country — Agricultural  System — Extent  of  Land  susceptible 
of  Cultivation — Productions  of  Egypt — State  of  her  Commercial 
Relations  with  other  Countries — Imports  and  Exports — Amount 
of  Population  —  Different  nations  composing  it  —  State  of  the 
Fellahs  as  compared  with  the  Peasantry  of  other  Countries — 
Paupers — Good  effects  resulting  from  the  Establishment  of  Manu- 
factories—Manners and  Customs  of  the  Inhabitants — Education 
of  the  Lower  Orders — Arts  and  Sciences — Music — Gradual  Im- 
provement in  the  Condition  of  the  Inhabitants— Anecdote  of  the 
March  of  Mind,  and  of  the  drag  upon  it — Smoking  .  .156 

CHAPTER  VII. 

First  Attempt  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  Organize  the  Army  of  Egypt  on 
the  European  Model  —  Revolt  of  the  Troops — War  with  the  Wa- 
habees  —  Expedition  to  Senaar  —  Formation  of  the  Nizam,  and 
Dispersion  of  the  Janizaries  and  Albanians — Renewal  of  Hostili- 
ties with  the  Wahabees — Excellent  Conduct  of  the  new  Levies — 
War  in  the  Morea  —  Uninterrupted  Success  of  the  Arab  Army — 
Affair  of  Mylos  —  Siege  of  Missolonghi — War  in  Syria — Strength 
and  Composition  of  the  Present  Egyptian  Army — Pay  —  Rations 
— Conscription  —  Good  Qualities  of  the  Fellah  —  Dress  of  the 
Troops  —  Remarks  on  theEffieiency  of  the  Army,  &c. — Sulieman 
Pasha 195 


VI  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Public  Schools — Encouragement  given  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the 
Education  of  the  Lower  Orders — Artillery  and  Naval  College  at 
Tourah — Cavalry  School  at  Ghizeh — Medical  and  Veterinary 
College  at  Abouzabel — Disadvantage  under  which  it  labours 
from  the  want  of  a  common  Language  between  the  Professors 
and  Students — Instance  of  a  Dragoman's _/re<?  Translation — Con- 
cluding Remarks  on  the  College — Clot  Bey  .  .  .  230 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Voyage  to  Candia  —  A  Health  Establishment  ill-adapted  to  the 
Establishment  of  Health  —  Fine  View  from  the  Lazaretto  Mole — 
A  Sicilian  Guardiano  —  Description  of  the  Island  of  Crete  —  Its 
Population  —  City  of  Candia  —  Mustapha  Pasha  —  Difficulty  in 
procuring  Horses — Departure  for  Canea  —  Villages  of  Defnes, 
Evegenichi,  and  St.  Tomas  —  View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Pass 
on  the  Eastern  side  of  Mount  Ida —  Change  in  the  appearance  of 
the  Country  —  Agius  Decca  —  Ruins  of  Gortyna  —  Road  to  the 
Celebrated  Cretan  Labyrinth  —  Description  of  that  "  Wonder  of 
the  World  " — Arrival  at  Apodoulo    ....  248 

CHAPTER  X. 

Journey  Continued  —  Convent  of  Asomatos — Mountain  Pass  — 
Beautiful  Scenery — Execrable  Road — Villages  of  Keriana,  Adil, 
and  Maroulas — Arrival  at  Retimo — Description  of  that  Town — 
Citadel — Population — Trade — Provincial  Council — Departure  for 
Canea — Dangerous  Road — Armyro — Mineral  Waters — Splendid 
Scenery— Neo  Horio— The  Capo's  House — The  Ridiculous  and 
the  Sublime  —  Day  of  Waterloo  —  Bay  of  Suda  —  Arrival  at 
Canea — Description  of  the  Town — Great  Increase  of  its  Popula- 
tion    :  .  .  •  .  ,  .  .281 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Trade  of  Candia —  Productions  —  Exports  and  Imports  —  Injurious 
Consequences  of  the  total  want  of  Inland  Communication  —  Re- 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

venue — Taxes  —  Greek  Church  Establishment — Price  of  Labour 
and  Provisions — Character  of  the  Inhabitants — Wretched  Condi- 
tion of  the  Island — Summary  Account  of  the  State  of  Candia  dur- 
ing the  War  in  Greece — Effects  of  the  Battle  of  Navarin — Can- 
dia given  up  to  Mohammed  Ali  —  Insurrectionary  Movement  — 
Desertion  of  Osman  Pasha — Form  of  Government — The  acquisi- 
tion of  the  Island  not  beneficial  to  Egypt  —  Advantages  its  Pos- 
session holds  out  to  Great  Britain — Conclusion         .  .  313 


RAMBLES 


EGYPT  AND  CANDIA. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Temple  of  Luxor  —  System  of  Plunder — Solitary  Obelisk — Grand 
Avenue  of  Sphinxes — Temple  of  Karnac — Its  vast  extent — Ruined 
Propylse  —  Lateral  Temples  —  Cross  to  the  Western  side  of  the 
Nile —  The  Memnoniura  —  Specimen  of  the  Wonderful  Capacity 
of  the  Hieroglyphical  Language — Palace  of  Sesostris — Sculpture 
of  the  Egyptians — Remarks  on  ChampoUion's  Hieroglyphical  Dis- 
coveries— Dammy  and  Shammy— Temple  of  Dair— Tombs  of  th« 
Kings — Belzoni's  Tomb — Village  of  Gournou — Traffic  in  Mum- 
mies— Anecdote  of  a  post  mortem  Ambitious  English  Traveller — 
Remains  at  Denderah — Dinner  at  Sheik  Hassan's. 

Without  pretending  to  any  such  exqui- 
sitely fine  antiquarian  feeling  as  Count  Forbin, 
who  was  driven  from  this  very  spot,  if  I  re- 
collect right,  by  seeing  an  English  lady,  with 
a  bright  silk  spencer,  clambering   amongst 

VOL.  II.  B 


2  TEMPLE  OF  LUXOR. 

the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Diospolis  ;  yet  we 
were  sufficiently  alive  to  the  "  gout  detestable'' 
displayed  in  the  white-washed  villa  of  his 
countrymen,  to  be  induced  to  change  our  pre- 
viously-arranged plan  for  staying  some  days 
at  Luxor.  Ordering  the  Reis,  therefore,  to 
drop  down  the  river  with  the  cange  to  the 
landing-place  abreast  of  Karnac,  we  pro- 
ceeded to  explore  the  splendid  ruin  before  us. 

The  effect  of  the  interior  of  the  temple  is  as 
much  spoilt  by  its  containing  an  Arab  village, 
as  is  the  exterior,  by  the  French  **  Rus  in  urhe.'' 
The  quantity  of  sand  that  has  drifted  in  also 
tends  greatly  to  rob  it  of  its  fair  proportions. 

The  sculpture  on  the  exterior  walls  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  coarser,  and  of  worse  ex- 
ecution, than  usual,  although  stated  by  Cham- 
pollion  to  be  extremely  fine.  The  chariot  of 
the  hero  of  the  sculptured  tale  looks  as  like  a 
wheelbarrow,  drawn  by  a  Giraffe,  as  a  car 
by  a  pair  of  horses. 

Two  splendid  obelisks  of  red  granite  for- 
merly stood  in  front  of  the  principal  entrance 
of  this  temple  ;  but  one  of  them  was  carried 


SYSTEM  OF  PLUNDER.  O 

off,  a  few  years  since,  to  embellish  the  French 
capital. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  feeling  that 
leads  to  such  a  sj'^stem  of  plunder.  The  ab- 
straction of  this  characteristic  ornament  is 
much  felt  here,  where  it  was  in  keeping  with 
the  rest  of  the  building — whereas  it  is  divested 
of  all  interest  amongst  the  gravel  walks  of 
(that  constant  arena  of  strife)  the  Place  de  la 
Concorde,  where  it  has  recently  been  erected. 

No  people  have  exclaimed  so  vehemently  as 
the  French  at  Lord  Elgin's  carrying  off  the 
bassi  relievi  on  the  freize  of  the  Parthenon, 
where,  had  they  been  suffered  to  remain  but  a 
few  years  longer,  they  would  have  been  com- 
pletely destroyed,  and  yet  the  arrival  of  the  in- 
destructible Egyptian  obelisk,  at  Paris,  was 
hailed  with  as  much  classic  enthusiasm,  as  if 
the  great  Ammon  Ra  himself  had  started  into 
life,  and  come  to  the  French  capital  to  pre- 
side over  "  La  societe  pour  la  propagation  des 
connoissances  scientiJiquesJ" 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment will  not  be  induced  to  follow  so  bad  an 

B  2 


4  AVENUE  OF  SPHINXES. 

example,  by  removing  the  great  obelisk  yet 
standing  at  Karnac,  which,  report  says,  has 
been  presented  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the  Eng- 
lish nation. 

The  grand  entrance  to  the  temple  of  Luxor 
faces  the  north,  and  is  still  adorned  by  the 
remaining  granite  obelisk  and  four  colossal 
statues.  From  thence,  the  whole  way  to  the 
southern  propylon  of  the  Temple  of  Karnac 
— a  distance  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half — an 
avenue  of  Sphinxes  is  supposed  to  have  ex- 
tended. It  is  even  now  visible  for  several 
hundred  yards,  on  approaching  the  outer 
gateway  of  the  latter  temple ;  but  the  tra- 
veller, on  his  first  visit  to  this  magnificent 
pile,  should  enter  it  by  the  gateway  in  the 
western,  or  principal,  propylon. 

What  a  sight  then  bursts  upon  him ! 
Whilst  he  stands  in  a  splendid  court — which 
itself  equals  in  grandeur  anything  of  the  kind 
ever  executed  by  the  hand  of  man — his  eye  is 
directed  by  an  avenue  of  enormous  pillars 
that  passes  entirely  through  the  centre  of  the 
building,  to  an  endless  perspective  of  gate- 


TEMPLE  OF  KARNAC.  5 

ways,  columns,  and  obelisks — an  extent  of 
one  thousand  six  hundred  feet ! 

The  edifice  now  presented  to  his  view  not 
only  surpasses  in  splendour  and  magnitude 
all  the  other  temples  of  Egypt,  but  makes  the 
works  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  sink  into 
insignificance,  for  the  celebrated  Temple  of 
Minerva  at  Athens  might  stand  within  the 
Dromos,  whilst  the  court,  enclosing  the  sanc- 
tuary, could  contain  the  Roman  Colosseum ! 

Passing  through  the  second  propylon,  the 
astonished  spectator  enters  an  immense  apart- 
ment, the  roof  of  which — composed  of  enormous 
flat  slabs — is  supported  by  one  hundred  and 
thirty-six  pillars,  of  infinite  variety  of  shape 
and  ornament,  disposed  in  sixteen  rows. 

From  thence,  a  passage  through  a  third 
propylon  leads  him  into  the  principal  court 
of  the  temple,  nearly  in  the  centre  of  which 
stands  the  sanctuary,  built  entirely  of  polished 
granite. 

Ere  admittance  could  be  gained  to  the  Holy 
place,  there  was  yet  another  small  pylon  to  be 
passed,  at  the  angles  of  which  formerly  stood 


b  THE  SANCTUARY. 

four  granite  obelisks.  Of  these  two  only  are 
now  erect :  a  third  lies  broken  on  the  ground, 
and  the  other  has  either  been  carried  away, 
or  is  buried  under  the  surrounding  ruins. 

These  obelisks  must  have  stood  within  an 
hypoethral  naos,  or  open  cella,  which  appears 
to  have  been  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  of 
Caryatic  figures  (if  the  anachronism  may  be 
permitted)  each,  with  arms  folded  across  the 
breast,  holding  the  Sacred  Tau,  or  Key  of  the 
Nile. 

On  either  side  the  entrance  to  the  sanctuary 
is  a  beautiful  little  Obelisk  of  rose-coloured 
granite,  having  their  north  and  south  faces 
carved  (in  relievo),  with  a  lotus  flower  shoot- 
ing from  a  long  stem,  and  their  other  sides, 
with  two  figures  bound  together,  in  amity. 
One  of  these,  painted  white,  is  somewhat 
larger  than  the  other,  which  is  a  reddish 
brown  divinity,  and  holds  the  sacred  tau. 
The  bird  of  the  mighty  Jove  hovers  over 
their  heads,  and,  though  the  hieroglyphics 
appear  to  refer  to  the  lesser  figure,  the  other 
is  evidently  the  more  powerful,  and  superior 


THE  SANCTUARY.  7 

in  rank.  They,  probably,  are  emblematic  of 
Alexander  the  Great  and  Egypt,  or  may  be 
yet  more  modern,  and  refer  to  Julius  Caesar 
and  Cleopatra. 

These  obelisks  are  clearly  the  work  of  a 
much  later  date  than  any  portion  of  the  tem- 
ple, rendering  it  probable  that  the  sanctuary 
was  restored  by  the  politic  Greeks,  after  the 
destruction  of  the  building  itself  by  Cambyses. 

The  central  passage  that  leads  through  the 
sanctuary  is  sixty  feet  long.  A  narrow  ave- 
nue branches  off'  from  it  to  the  North,  which 
is  lined  with  grey  granite ;  and,  though  ob- 
structed by  the  ruins  of  the  fallen  roof,  may 
be  traced  to  lead  to  a  small  chamber  occupied 
by  an  enormous  block  of  calcareous  spar,  the 
mummy  of  a  colossal  statue,  but  of  which  not 
a  feature  can  now  be  distinguished.  It  pro- 
bably was  the  principal  deity  of  the  temple 
(Osiris,  or  Jove),  and,  therefore,  the  first  ob- 
ject to  fall  under  the  holy  rage  of  the  Persians. 

Another  immense  apartment,  larger  even 
than  any  of  the  preceding  divisions  of  the 
temple,  and  containing  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
eight  columns,  has  to  be  traversed  ere  reach- 


O  GROUP  OF  FIGURES. 

ing  the  posticum.  In  a  niche,  on  the  northern 
side  wall  of  this  chamber,  is  a  handsome  sar- 
cophagus of  white  marble,  and  nearly  under 
it  a  gateway. 

In  a  small  recess  over  the  posticum  is  a 
group,  carved  in  one  block  of  crystallized  lime- 
stone, consisting  of  two  figures,  very  similar 
to  those  on  the  obelisks  in  front  of  the  sanc- 
tuary ;  and  in  advance  of  the  gateway  are  four 
statues,  which,  from  their  posture  and  folded 
arms,  seem, like  those  before  mentioned,  to  have 
been  caryatic  figures  :  and — facing  outwards 
— to  have  stood  in  a  kind  of  opisthodomus. 

In  front  of  them  (or,  to  speak  correctly, 
of  their  pedestals,  for  only  one  of  the  statues 
was  standing)  is  another  open  court,  or  dro> 
mos,  which  appears  to  have  carried  the  great 
temple  yet  further  to  the  east,  or  rather  to 
have  connected  it  with  a  temple  dedicated  to 
some  inferior  deity,  which  is  built  on  the 
same  alignement. 

In  front  of  the  western  entrance  to  this  edi- 
fice (that  is,  facing  the  posticum  of  the  great 
temple)  are  two  mutilated  granite  colossi. 
The   dimensions   of   the   building   itself  are 


HANDSOME  PYLON. 


small,  but  immediately  beyond  it  is  a  spacious 
(though  much  ruined)  peristyle  court,  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  which,  standing  apart 
from  any  other  building,  is  a  small  but  hand- 
some pylon,  having  a  gateway  in  its  centre, 
corresponding  with  the  grand  avenue  that 
passes  through  the  great  temple,  and  making 
its  entire  length,  from  west  to  east,  sixteen 
huiidred  feet. 


Beyond  the  north  wall  of  the  mother  temple 


10  RUINED  PROPYL.E. 

are  the  ruins  of  several  others.  The  largest 
of  these  communicated  with  it  by  the  lateral 
gateway,  already  noticed  ;  the  avenue  passing 
through  its  various  courts  and  apartments 
being  directed  upon  it.  A  double  row  of 
sphinxes  prolongs  this  avenue  to  a  gateway 
similar  in  all  respects  to  that  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  great  temple. 

On  the  south  side  of  the  great  temple,  and 
distant  from  it  about  two  hundred  feet,  is  a 
large  walled  tank,  beyond  which  are  the  ruins 
of  other  buildings,  but  so  embedded  in  sand 
as  to  be  traced  with  difficulty. 

To  the  westward  of  the  tank  are  four  huge 
ruined  propylae,  standing  parallel  to  each 
other,  and  to  the  south  wall  of  the  great 
temple,  but  disposed  slightly  "  en  echellon," 
so  that  their  gateways  are  not  aligned.  They 
are  of  unequal  dimensions,  but  all  built  of 
immense  blocks  of  sandstone ;  the  first  and 
last,  only,  have  their  gateways  lined  with  gra- 
nite. Two  colossal  statues  formerly  adorned 
the  front  of  each  propylon,  and  the  most  dis- 
tant of  the  four  has  also  two  facing  the  rear. 


LATERAL  TEMPLES.  U 

These  latter  are  of  sandstone — the  others  of 
granite. 

The  distance  of  the  most  advanced  propy- 
lon,  from  the  south  wall  of  the  temple  (in 
which  there  is  a  gate  of  communication),  is 
about  eleven  hundred  feet.  An  avenue  of 
sphinxes  extends  nine  hundred  feet  further, 
terminating  at  a  detached  gateway,  similar 
to  those  before  mentioned.  This  communi- 
cates with  yet  another  group  of  temples,  the 
principal  of  which  seems  to  have  been  dedi- 
cated to  Jupiter  Ammon.  It  is  defended  on 
three  sides  by  a  wide  tank,  or  pond,  but  ap- 
pears to  have  been  entirely  surrounded  by 
an  inner  fosse  or  dry  ditch,  which  is  lined 
throughout  with  sphinxes  of  dark  coloured 
granite  and  basalt. 

The  north  front  of  this  temple  is  orna- 
mented with  a  double  row  of  columns,  behind 
which — on  either  side  the  entrance — an  ad- 
mirable grotesque  figure  of  the  abominable 
Typhon  decorates  the  wall.  The  budding 
lotus  and  sacred  eagle  are  on  his  left ;  and, 
at  his  right  hand,  is  a  serpent  climbing  up 


12  AVENUE  OF  SPHINXES. 

the  stem  of  a  lotus.  But  little  can  be  made 
out  of  the  other  figures  carved  upon  the  walls, 
which  have  been  much  mutilated. 

The  roof  of  the  principal  apartment  of  the 
temple  was  supported  by  finely  reeded  columns, 
of  which  two  fragments  only  are  now  stand- 
ing. The  Pronaos  appears  to  have  contained 
twelve  columns  of  the  same  kind,  but  larger. 

The  foundation  walls  of  various  buildings 
maybe  traced  in  all  directions  round  the  tank 
that  encloses  this  temple,  and  about  midway 
between  it  and  the  modern  road  to  Luxor, 
(distant  about  two  hundred  yards  to  the  west), 
is  the  avenue  of  sphinxes,  that  in  former  ages 
is  said  to  have  reached  the  whole  way  be- 
tween that  place  and  Karnac. 

At  this  spot,  however,  all  traces  of  it  are 
lost  under  a  high  embankment,  that  has  been 
thrown  up  round  the  tank  to  retain  the  water 
of  the  inundation  :  but,  when  arrived  at  the 
distance  of  three  hundred  yards  from  a  gate- 
way, through  which  another  temple  is  ap- 
proached, two  rows  of  tigers'-heads  begin  to 
protrude   above  the  soil,  and   soon  after  the 


VAST  TEMPLE.  -13 

whole  of  the  animals'  figures  are  displayed, 
arrang-ed  in  compact  order. 

The  length  of  this  temple  is  four  hundred 
feet,  and  it  is  distant  about  five  hundred  from 
the  main  temple,  with  which  it  does  not  stand 
quite  at  right  angles.  The  intervening  space 
is  covered  with  mounds  of  sand  and  ruins  ; 
and,  from  a  spot  about  midway  between  the 
two  buildings,  but  rather  to  the  eastward, 
— that  is,  towards  the  great  lateral  propylae — 
was  taken  the  admiral  panoramic  view  of  the 
temples  lately  exhibited  in  London. 

From  no  one  point,  however,  can  an  ade- 
quate idea  be  conveyed  of  the  vast  extent  and 
grandeur  of  the  principal  temple.  To  form 
a  just  conception  of  the  size  and  proportions 
of  its  interior  courts,  its  long  lines  of  columns, 
their  varied  forms  and  ornaments,  &c.,  the 
spectator  must  be  within  the  wall  of  the  tem- 
ple ;  but  then  the  vast  extent  of  the  building 
in  all  its  parts,  its  huge  propylae,  gateways, 
&c.,  are  lost  sight  of — to  say  nothing  of  the 
distant  mountains  and  other  requisites  for 
making  a  picture. 


14  VAST  TEMPLE. 

From  the  posticum  of  this  lateral  temple 
the  grand  approach  from  Luxor  was  doubtless 
continued  by  an  avenue  of  sphinxes,  to  a 
gateway  in  the  side  wall  of  the  first  court  of 
the  great  temple  of  Karnac ;  but  this,  from  the 
accumulation  of  sand,  is  no  longer  visible. 

The  grand  propylon  faces  the  Nile,  and  is 
the  largest  edifice  of  the  kind  in  Egypt,  being- 
three  hundred  and  sixty-six  feet  in  length. 
It  is  also  approached  by  an  avenue  of  sphinxes, 
which,  in  all  probability,  commenced  at  the 
river,  distant  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile. 

From  the  uniformity  of  plan  in  all  the 
Egyptian  temples,  (which  is  to  diminish  gra- 
dually in  width  from  the  front  propylon)  it 
may  be  adduced  that  this  was  the  largest  of 
all  those  of  which  any  traces  now  remain.  It 
appears  to  have  stood  in  the  centre  of  a 
group  of  temples,  dedicated  to  the  worship 
of  various  deities,  with  each  of  which  there 
appears  to  have  been  a  communication, 
though  some  of  the  gateways  are  now  choked 
up  with  sand  and  rubbish.  Those  which  are 
still  open,  (besides  the  grand  entrance  and 


VAST  TEMPLE.  15 

posticum)  are  a  doorway  in  the  south  wall  of 
the  third  court  (in  the  centre  of  which  is  the 
sanctuary)  facing  the  four  propylae  leading* 
to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  and  another, 
(before  noticed)  in  the  north  wall  of  the  fourth 
court,  corresponding  with  the  temple  and 
avenue  of  sphinxes  on  that  side. 

Although  but  four  avenues  of  sphinxes  have 
as  yet  been  discovered,  it  can  scarcely  be 
supposed  that  the  eastern  approach  to  the 
temple  was  not  equally  ornamented.  The 
dimensions  of  the  great  temple  within  the 
walls  may  be  said  to  be  one  thousand  six  hun- 
dred feet  in  length,  i.  e.  from  east  to  west,  and 
three  hundred  and  sixty  in  breadth ;  but  the 
circuit  of  the  space  occupied  by  the  various 
temples  and  buildings  connected  with  it  (ex- 
clusive of  the  northern  and  western  avenues 
of  sphinxes)  is  two  miles. 

The  date  of  the  foundation  of  this  temple, 
or  city  of  temples,  is  beyond  the  utmost  reach 
of  the  knowledge  of  man  to  establish.  It  is 
evidently  the  work  of  various  ages,  and  some 
parts  of  it,  according  to  the  best  authorities, 


16  VAST  TEMPLE. 

are  considered  to  be  more  ancient  than  any  of 
the  other  ruins  now  to  be  met  with  in  Egypt. 

Some  of  the  sculpture  on  the  walls  is  in 
the  very  best  style  of  the  Egyptian  art ;  but 
to  whose  valorous  deeds  it  refers  is  yet  a 
matter  of  uncertainty,  since  we  are  by  no 
means  sure  of  the  order  of  succession  of  the 
sovereigns  of  Egypt. 

It  is  evident  that  some  one  of  the  heroes 
whose  exploits  are  here  engraven  was  a  con- 
queror of  the  Jews,  since  long  files  of  suppli- 
cants, whose  peculiar  features  sufficiently 
mark  them  as  belonging  to  that  people,  are 
following  his  triumphal  car. 

These  matters  I  shall,  however,  leave  for 
the  decision  of  the  learned  in  the  zoolotrous 
language,  and  merely  add  that  the  ruins  of 
this  splendid  edifice — in  whatever  age  it  may 
have  been  erected  —  proclaim  it  the  most 
wonderful  work  that  has  been  executed  by 
the  hand  of  man,  even  in  this  land  of  wonders. 

We  repeated  our  visits  daily  for  an  entire 
week;  !ind  always  found  fresh  cause  for  admi- 
ration and  astonishment  in  the  venerable  pile 


THE  MEMNONIUM.  17 

—  the  ruin  of  nearly  four  and  twenty  cen- 
turies ! 

With  regret  we  at  length  turned  our  backs 
upon  it,  and  crossed  over  to  the  opposite  bank 
of  the  river,  to  visit  the  western  half  of  the 
ruins  of  immortal  (if  any  city  is  to  be  so) 
Thebes. 

The  remains  of  temples,  tombs,  statues,  &c., 
are  here  scattered  over  nearly  the  whole  space 
between  the  Nile  and  the  Lybian  chain,  but 
they  have  been  so  fully  described,  that  I  shall 
readily  be  excused  from  undertaking  the  task. 

Numerous  trifling  errors  have  been  made 
by  my  precursors,  but  it  would  be  useless  to 
correct  them,  excepting  for  the  gratification 
of  the  hieroglyphico-maniac.  To  the  general 
reader  it  can  signify  but  little  whether  the 
hero  of  the  Memnonium  is  receiving  offerings 
in  the  pronaos,  or  in  the  cella. 

This  temple,  by  the  bye,  is  now  called  the 
Rhamsseion,  and  both  it  and  that  of  Medinet 
Abou  face  the  east.  On  the  outer  wall  of  the 
latter  is  a  battle  scene,  that  has  been  most 
poetically  described  by  Dr.  Richardson.      ft 

VOL.  ir.  c 


18  THE  HIEROGLYPHIC  LANGUAGE. 

is  in  every  respect  worthy  of  his  three  grand- 
iloquent pages  on  the  horrors  of  war. 

Monsieur  Champollion,  determined  not  to 
be  outdone,  describes  it  in  equally  glowing 
colours.  The  four  sons  of  the  heroic  Rhamses 
Meiamoun,  who,  he  says,  are  making  a  "  hor- 
rihle  carnage,''  are  standing  together,  bending 
their  bows  with  outstretched  arms,  very  much 
in  the  attitude  of  the  Horatii  in  David's  cele- 
brated picture — which,  perhaps,  excited  this 
excessive  admiration  for  the  Egyptian  sculp- 
ture on  the  part  of  his  '*  compatriote." 

The  speech  of  the  victorious  hero  to  his  as- 
sembled chiefs — as  translated  by  the  learned 
Frenchman — shows  the  wonderful  variety  of 
terms  and  energy  of  expression  that  the 
hieroglyphical  language  admitted  of.  It 
approaches  nearer  to  the  "  sublime  and  beau- 
tiful "  of  one  of  Napoleon's  bulletins  than  any 
thing  I  have  ever  read  — par  exemple :  "  Les 
etrangers  sontrenverses  par  ma  force  ;  la  terreur 
de  mon  nom  est  venue  — leurs  cceurs  en  ont  ete 
remplis^e  me  suis  presente  devant  eux  comme 
un  lion — -je  les  ai  poursuivis  semhlable  a  un 


PALACE  OF  SESOSTRIS.  19 

^pervier,"  &c. ! !  One  could  hardly  have  sup- 
posed that  any  combination  of  beetles,  geese, 
and  ibises,  could  have  produced  such  an  over- 
flow of  eloquence. 

The  Rhamsseion,  Monsieur  Champollion 
assures  the  world,  was  the  palace  of  the  great 
Sesostris;  but  where  the  mighty  monarch  could 
possibly  find  accommodation  in  it  for  himself, 
family,  and  suite,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive. 
The  whole  palace,  including  the  outer  courts 
and  the  propylse,  is  but  five  hundred  feet 
long  and  about  two  hundred  wide,  and  could 
have  contained  but  two  apartments,  besides 
the  great  salle  hypostyle.  This  he  states  to 
have  been  a  grande  salle  d'Assemblee,  and 
maintains  that  even  one  of  the  two  smaller 
apartments  was  a  library. 

If  there  were  other  chambers,  as  Monsieur 
Champollion  supposed,  (of  which  there  is  not 
the  least  appearance)  then  his  laborious  at- 
tempt to  prove  that  this  edifice  is  the  one 
described  by  Diodorus  Siculus  as  the  monu- 
ment of  Osymandyas  falls  altogether  to  the 
ground.   But  the  truth  is,  the  building  resem- 

c  2 


20  ART  OF  PERSPECTIVE. 

bles  in  its  general  plan  all  the  other  ancient 
Egyptian  temples ;  the  grande  salle  d'assemblee 
of  which  was  most  probably  the  place  of  worship 
of  the  multitude — for  I  question  much  whether 
politics  were  ever  discussed  in  a  general  as- 
sembly of  the  people  in  the  days  of  Sesostris. 
This  is  quite  a  French  idea  of  the  nineteenth 
century. 

Carried  away  by  his  enthusiastic  admira- 
tion for  the  works  of  the  ancient  Egyptians, 
Monsieur  Champollion  has  even  gone  so  far 
as  to  express  a  doubt  of  the  value  of  the  art 
of  perspective.  **  Chaque  groupe  consider e 
apart,"  says  he  on  this  subject,  *'  sera  trouve 
certainement  defectueux  dans  quelques  points 
relatif  a  la  perspective,  oil  aux  proportions 
comparativement  aux  parties  voisines,"  and 
then  adds,  that  "  les  plus  beaux  vases  grecs, 
representant  des  combats,  pechent  precisement, 
(si  pecJie  il  y  a),  sous  les  memes  rapports  que 
ces  bas  reliefs  Egyptiens." 

Now,  let  the  demerits  of  the  Grecian  vases 
be  what  they  may,  I  do  not  see  how  the 
value  of   the  Egyptian  work  can   be  at  all 


EGYPTIAN  SCULPTURE.  21 

raised  by  the  comparison  ;  since  he  might  as 
well  have  said  that  the  rules  of  perspective 
are  violated  on  the  pictorial  soup  tureens  of 
our  modern  crockery-ware. 

The  sculpture  of  the  Egyptians,  to  which 
Champollion  alluded,  was  not  carved  on  com- 
mon vases,  but  on  the  tombs  of  their  kings, 
or  on  the  walls  of  their  temples  ;  and  it  may 
fairly  be  looked  upon,  therefore,  as  the  work 
of  the  best  artists  the  country  could  produce 
at  the  time  of  its  execution. 

No  one,  however,  ever  yet  saw  an  Egyptian 
figure  represented  in  any  posture  in  which  the 
human  form  as  now  constructed  could  possi- 
bly stand.*  The  hands  also  are  nearly  always 
either  both  right  or  both  left,  and  the  eye  is 
invariably  full,  though  the  face  is  always 
in  profile.  It  must,  therefore,  I  think  be 
admitted,  in  spite  of  Monsieur  Champollion's 
doubt  on  the  subject,  that  "  peche  il  y  a.'' 

Whatever  merit  has  hitherto  been  allowed 
to  the  Egyptians  for  their  knowledge  in  the 

•  Some  author  (I  think  Winkelman)  has  said  the  Egyptians 
sacrificed  to  every  divinity  but  the  Graces. 


22  EGYPTIAN  SCULPTURE. 

arts  of  painting  and  sculpture,  Monsieur  Cham^ 
pollion's  arguments  goto  deprive  them  of,  since 
he  says  that  the  inscriptions  on  the  walls  of  the 
numerous  temples  erected  to  commemorate  the 
conquests  of  Sesostris  were  executed  '*  c?e  su 
vivant."  Now,  Diodorus  Siculus  asserts  that 
this  same  great  sovereign  made  it  his  boast 
that  none  of  his  subjects  were  employed  on 
ciny  of  the  w^orks  executed  during  his  reign — 
amongst  which  he  enumerates  a  temple  in 
every  city  throughout  Egypt.  It  consequently 
follows  that  the  specimens  of  sculpture  which 
Monsieur  Champollion  admired  so  much  were 
the  works  of  foreigners. 

The  Rhamsseion,  or  Memnonium,  whether 
a  temple  or  a  palace,*  is,  next  to  the  Temple 

*  I  have  already,  in  a  preceding  note^  pointed  out  an  apparent 
inconsistency  on  the  part  of  Mons.  ChampoUion,  in  ascribing  the 
hieroglyphical  deeds  sculptured  on  the  walls  to  persons  who  evi- 
dently did  not  understand  the  language  in  which  such  flattery  was 
offered  to  them.  I  do  not,  however,  mean  to  maintain  that  the 
hieroglyphics  were  used  merely  as  ornaments,  for  I  think  they 
were  originally  conventional  signs,  adopted  by  the  priesthood,  under- 
stood only  by  them,  and  lost  on  their  "  occupation  ceasing,"  when 
their  temples  were  thrown  down  by  the  Persians.  Mons.  Cham- 
pollion may  have  discovered  the  clue  to  this  conventional  language. 


SHAMMY  AND  DAMMY.  ,23 

of  Karnac,  the  finest  specimen  that  remains 
of  Egyptian  architecture.  It  is  not  quite  so 
large  as  the  Temple  of  Edfou,  nor  by  any 
means  so  perfect,  but  it  presents  a  great 
variety  of  ornaments  and  a  higher  degree  of 
finish. 

The  two  celebrated  colossal  statues  of 
Memnon,  commonly  known  as  *'  Shammy  and 
Dammy,"  are  chiselled  from  blocks  of  highly 
crystallized  grit-stone,  with  numerous  agates 
embedded,  and  of  a  similar  nature  to  some 
rocks  I  saw  in  the  bed  of  the  Nile,  at  Hagar 
Silsilis,  from  whence,  in  all  probability,  these 
colossi  were  brought.  They  face  the  east, 
(nearly  opposite  the  temple  of  Luxor),  and, 

but  his  pretending  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  it  was  going  rather  too 
far. 

Is  it  not  probable^  that  the  arts  having  revived  in  Egypt  when 
under  the  dominion  of  the  Greeks,  whilst  the  meaning  of  the  hiero- 
glyphical  characters  had  been  lost  daring  the  two  eventful  centuries 
that  elapsed  between  the  conquests  of  Cambyses  and  that  of 
Alexander,  they ,  were  thenceforth  copied  without  change,  either  in 
form  or  arrangement  ?  It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  such  might  again 
be  the  case  if  Egypt  were  left  to  itself  for  even  half  a  century,  and 
during  that  period  its  inhabitants  should  acquire  a  taste  for  sculpture 
and  painting,  without  having  better  models  before, their  eyes  than 
those  remaining  on  the  walls  of  their  ruined  temples. 


24  TEMPLE  OF  DAIR. 

from  being  situated  in  a  vast  plain,  apart 
from  any  other  objects,  can  be  seen  at  a  great 
distance  ;  and  look  very  like  two  gouty  old 
gentlemen,  with  their  legs  wrapped  up  in 
flannel.  The  most  northerly  of  the  two  has 
been  broken  and  put  together  again ;  this 
was  the  celebrated  vocalist  described  by 
ancient  writers  ;  and  some  modern  travellers, 
doubtful  of  the  loss  of  his  musical  talent — have 
been  persuaded  to  sit  by  his  side  all  night  in 
the  hope  of  hearing  his  morning  song. 

A  short  distance  behind  the  two  colossi  are 
the  ruins  of  another  temple,  but  they  now 
scarcely  protrude  themselves  above  the  level 
of  the  sand  that  has  drifted  round  them. 
Some  of  the  remaining  stones  are  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  of  the  two  statues. 

The  Temple  of  Dair  is  cut  in  great  part  in 
the  perpendicular  face  of  the  mountain  that 
rises  behind  it,  and  nearly  fronting  the  grand 
propylon  of  the  Temple  of  Karnac.  The 
figures  of  animals  carved  on  the  walls  of  this 
building  are  particularly  good.  It  has  evi- 
dently  been   used   as   a   place   of  Christian 


TOMBS  OF  THE  KINGS.  25 

worship,  and  the  plaster  with  which  the 
heathen  figures  were  covered  has  kept  them 
in  excellent  preservation. 

The  Temple  of  Dair  Medinet  Abou  is 
situated  considerably  to  the  south  of  Dair, 
and  stands  some  distance  from  the  foot  of  the 
mountains.  The  only  thing  for  which  it  is 
remarkable  is  the  sculpture  on  its  walls.  In 
one  place,  the  great  Osiris  is  receiving  offer- 
ings from  an  inferior  deity  —  amongst  which 
a  female,  in  a  state  of  nudity,  is  presented 
for  his  acceptance.  Another  deity  of  the  fair 
sex  turns  her  back  upon  the  scene. 

The  tombs  of  the  kings  (Biban  el  Malook) 
are  in  a  rocky  ravine,  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Lybian  chain,  nearly  behind  the  Mem- 
nonium.  The  mountains  are  of  a  fine  white 
lime-stone,'having  numerous  flints  and  agates 
embedded  in  it,  and  rest  upon  a  schistose 
foundation.  Some  of  the  rents  in  the  rock 
are  filled  with  beautiful  crystallizations, 
and  there  are  numerous  petrifactions,  zoo- 
phites,  shells,  &:c. 

The  tomb  discovered  by  Belzoni  is  by  far 


26  BELZONI'S  TOMB. 

the  most  interesting',  from  the  freshness  of 
the  colouring  and  comparatively  perfect  state 
of  its  walls,  but  the  admission  of  air  and 
Monsieur  Champollion  have  tended  much  to 
destroy  its  beauty.  It  has  been  cruelly  mu- 
tilatecl  by  every  traveller  since  the  scientific 
Frenchman  set  the  example. 

The  supposition  that  the  passage  discovered 
by  Belzoni  under  the  sarcophagus  (and  in 
which  he  penetrated  to  the  distance  of  three 
hundred  feet)  leads  to  the  eastern  side  of  the 
mountains  is  rather  fanciful,  since  its  direction 
is  about  s.s.w.  It  probably  communicates 
with  some  other  entrance  to  the  tomb  from 
another  ravine. 

There  are  otlier  tombs  niore  extensive  than 
Belzoni's,  (as  it  is  usually  called)  but  I  think 
none  in  which  the  figures  are  so  well  executed,' 
which,  in  it,  by  the  way,  are  almost  all  in  re- 
lief ;  whereas  the  others  are  mostly  intaglio. 
There  is  a  great  similarity  in  the  plan  of  all. 
A  small  square  vestibule,  from  whence  a  lon^^ 
passage  inclining  gradually  downwards,  and 
communicating  with  various  small  apartments, 


INTERIOR  OF  THE  TOMBS.  27 

or  cells,  right  and  left — reaches  a  rectangular 
transverse  chamber,  the  roof  of  which,  in  most 
instances,  is  carved  in  the  form  of  an  arch, 
out  of  the  solid  rock.  Thence,  continuing-  its 
downv^^ard  course,  the  passage  finally  arrives 
at  the  sepulchre  of  the  great  personage,  w^hose 
bones  the  mania  for  the  "  diffusion  of  useful 
knowledge  "  will  no  longer  allow  to  remain 
quietly  in  the  red  granite  sarcophagus,  pre- 
pared with  so  much  labour  and  expense  for 
their  reception. 

The  figures  with  which  the  walls  are  co- 
vered throughout  are  of  the  same  deformed 
brute-headed  divinities  that  decorate  the  tem- 
ples. They  are  carved  without  the  least 
regard  to  perspective,  or  proportions,  and 
daubed  all  over  with  the  most  gaudy  colours 
that,  in  early  ages,  the  vegetable  and  mineral 
worlds  were  known  to  produce. 

The  village  of  Gournou  is  situated  on  the 
acclivity  of  the  mountain,  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  valley  of 
the  Nile.  Its  inhabitants  dwell  mostly  in 
caverns  and  tombs  practised  in  the  face  of 


28  TRAFFIC  IN  MUMMIES. 

the  hills,  and  are  notorious  for  carrying  on  a 
considerable  trade  in  mummies  and  other  ar- 
ticles of  virtu.  Of  late  years,  however,  their 
traffic  has  been  attended  with  some  risk, 
Mohammed  Ali  having  prohibited  the  digging 
for,  and  carrying  away,  antiquities,  through- 
out his  dominions.  He  has,  in  consequence, 
been  accused  of  having  monopolized  this 
branch  of  commerce ;  but  this  statement  is  by 
no  means  borne  out  by  facts,  as  he  himself 
takes  no  part  in  and  derives  no  part  from  the 
disgusting  trade  in  old  bones  and  dried  flesh. 

The  Viceroy's  reasons  for  putting  a  stop  to 
the  unprofitable  and  sacrilegious  violation  of 
the  tombs  of  the  ancients  is,  that  it  took  a 
number  of  hands  from  the  much  more  bene- 
ficial occupation  of  husbandry ;  for  the  fields 
were  neglected,  whilst  the  tombs  were  dug  up 
and  rifled.  He  is  always  ready,  however,  to 
grant  permission  to  explore  to  such  persons 
as  are  actuated  solely  by  scientific  motives. 

Ibrahim  Pasha  employs  a  number  of  per- 
sons constantly  in  excavating  amongst  the 
various  ruins :  and  most  of  the  foreign  Consuls, 


AMBITIOUS  TRAVELLER.  29 

also,  avail  themselves  of  the  Viceroy's  libe- 
rality in  bestowing  resurrection ising  diplo- 
mas. His  indulgence  to  foreigners  on  this 
score  (as  indeed  on  most  others)  is,  of  course, 
much  abused ;  for  the  eagerness  with  which 
every  sort  of  trash  is  purchased  by  travellers 
makes  the  trade  a  very  profitable  concern, 
and  opens  a  wide  door  for  fraud,  by  the  en- 
couragement it  gives  to  the  manufacture  of 
mummies.* 


•  The  following  story  was  in  circulation  whilst  I  was  in  Egypt, 
which,  though  I  will  not  vouch  for  its  "  whole"  truth,  is  not  suffi- 
ciently improbable  (considering  the  eccentric  habits  of  my  country- 
men) to  be  altogether  regarded  as  fiction. 

An  English  traveller  had  a  great  desire  to  be  mummified  after  the 
manner  of  the  ancient  Egyptians ;  and,  having  paid  in  advance  to  the 
operators,  bound  them  by  a  solemn  oath  to  do  his  bidding,  prepared 
his  sarcophagus,  and  written  a  long  notice  of  his  life  and  opinions, 
swallowed  a  dose  of  arsenic.  He  was,  of  course,  "  gathered  to  his 
fathers;" —  his  body  underwent  the  embalming  process,  and — the 
papyrus  having  been  placed  on  his  ambitious  breast — was  enclosed 
in  the  red  granite  case,  and  deposited  in  a  tomb  that  had  been  pre- 
pared for  its  reception. 

Not  many  years  afterwards,  some  roguish  Arabs  sold  the  precious 
relic  to  a  learned  Frenchman,  who  carried  it  to  Paris  —  vain  beyond 
belief  of  having  acquired  such  a  treasure,  which—judging  from  the 
splendour  of  the  case — he  thought  must  be  a  Pharaoh  at  least.  A 
party  of  brother  savans  were  invited  to  assist  at  the  ceremony  of 
unrollment,  when— after  some  hundred  yards  of  fine  linen  had  been 


30  SHEIK  HASSAN. 

Taking  a  reluctant  leave  of  the  ruined  city 
of  the  Hundred  Gates,  we  once  more  got  un- 
der weigh ;  and,  favoured  by  a  light  breeze, 
dropped  down  in  the  course  of  a  night  to  the 
landing-place  of  Kheneh. 

We  proceeded  at  once  to  the  house  of  our 
old  acquaintance.  Sheik  Hassan,  to  request 
his  aid  to  procure  us  camels  and  guides  to 
take  us  to  Kosseir.  He  undertook  to  have 
every  thing  requisite  ready  for  us  on  the  day 
appointed,  and  letters  prepared  for  his  son, 
who  filled  the  office  of  British  consular  agent 
at  that  port. 

Our  curiosity  in  matters  of  Arab  domestic 
economy  induced  us  to  accept  his  invitation 
to  dinner  for  the  morrow  :  and  these  matters 
being  arranged,  we  crossed  over  to  the  left 
bank  of  the  river,  and  passed  the  rest  of  the 
day  in  exploring  the  extensive  ruins  of  Den- 
derah. 

The  temples  at  Denderah,  being  the  first, 

removed — the  papyrus  was  discovered,  vi'hich,  in  plain  English,  de- 
clared the  great  defunct  to  have  been  a  Mr.  Peter  Simpkins  of  Fen- 
church  Street  and  Camberwell  Grove,  soapboiler  and  salt-refiner  to 
the  Royal  Family,  and  many  years  an  inmate  of  St.  Luke's. 


TEMPLES  AT  DENDERAH.  81 

on  a  large  scale,  that  are  met  with  in  ascend- 
ing the  Nile,  make  an  impression  upon  the 
traveller  that  has  given  them  an  undeserved 
celebrity  as  compared  with  those  that  he 
afterwards  meets  with. 

There  are  the  remains  of  two  temples  yet 
visible,  both,  I  am  inclined  to  say,  of  a  mo- 
dern date.  One  is  but  small,  faces  the  south, 
and  must  have  opened  into  one  of  the  outer 
courts  of  the  Great  Temple,  which  stands  at 
right  angles  to  it,  facing  the  east.  It  appears 
to  have  been  dedicated  to  the  evil  spirit,  Ty- 
phon,  whose  hideous  form  is  carved  above  the 
capitals  of  the  columns  in  the  portico.  On 
the  interior  walls,  Isis  is  represented  suckling 
Horus,  and  attended  by  Typhon  and  his  cara 
sposa.     The  figures  are  all  in  relief. 

The  propyla  of  the  Great  Temple  are  nearly 
destroyed,  but  its  magnificent  pronaos  of 
twenty-four  Isis-headed  columns  is  in  excel- 
lent preservation.  The  columns  are  nearly 
seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  their  distance  from 
centre  to  centre  is  twenty-four  feet ;  so  that 
the  intercolumniations  are  about  equal  to  two 


32  DINNER  AT  SHEIK  HASSAN  S. 

diameters  and  a  half  of  the  pillars — a  nearer 
approach  than  any  other  I  met  with  in  Egypt 
to  the  due  proportions  prescribed  by  Grecian 
taste. 

On  the  ceiling  of  the  pronaos,  the  signs  of 
the  zodiac  are  painted.  The  Temple  contains 
three  large  apartments  en  suite,  from  which 
passages  and  staircases  lead  to  an  upper 
range  of  small  chambers,  curiously  sculptured 
and  painted. 

On  our  arrival  at  Sheik  Hassan's,  at  the 
appointed  dinner-hour,  he  informed  us  that 
six  camels  had  been  engaged  for  the  morrow 
to  carry  us  to  Kosseir,  for  which  and  the  re- 
turn (staying  there  two  entire  days)  we  were 
to  pay  the  moderate  sum  of  forty-five  piastres 
each — about  twelve  shillings  and  sixpence  in 
English  money. 

After  enumerating  the  various  precautions 
we  must  take,  over  a  preparatory  pipe,  dinner 
was  brought  in,  and  we  sat  down  to  table,  a 
partie  quarree,  in  most  Christian  fashion,  each 
person,  besides  a  chair,  being  provided  with 
a  knife,  fork,  and  spoon. 


SUBSTANTIAL  HEPAST.  33 

Our  fare  consisted  of  a  lamb  roasted  whole, 
and  stuffed  with  a  farci  of  rice,  raisins,  and 
pistachio  nuts.  This  was  followed  by  a 
turkey,  dressed  in  the  same  manner,  and  va- 
rious stews  of  meat  and  vegetables.  These 
were  in  turn  succeeded  by  two  immense  dishes 
of  a  kind  of  paste,  of  the  consistence  of  ra- 
violi, one  flavoured  with  cheese,  the  other 
with  honey. 

A  huge  bowl  of  rice  and  cream  closed  the 
substantial  repast,  which  was  washed  down 
with  some  tolerable  wine,  and  a  bottle  of 
*'  Hodgson's  pale  ale,''  that  had  been  pre- 
sented to  our  host  by  an  English  gentleman, 
who  passed  through  Kheneh  on  his  way  home 
from  India,  and  which  the  worthy  old  Sheik — 
telling  us  it  was  Bengal  wine — thought  must 
needs  be  a  great  treat. 

We  were  waited  upon  at  dinner  by  the 
Sheik's  two  sons  and  grandson,  who  changed 
our  plates  as  required,  and  handed  the  dishes 
off  to  the  domestics,  ranged  in  second  line, 
near  the  door  communicating  with  the  base 
of  operations. 

VOL.  II.  D 


34  MERRIMENT. 

They  were  quite  lost  in  astonishment  at 
our  strangely  circuitous  mode  of  conveying 
the  food  to  our  mouths  ;  and,  judging  by  a 
suppressed  female  giggling  we  occasionally 
heard,  they  were  not  the  only  persons  that 
derived  amusement  from  the  curious  ma- 
noeuvres of  our  knives  and  forks.  The  usual 
ablution  over,  we  resumed  our  seats  on  the 
divan,  and  replenished  pipes. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  KOSSEIR.  35 


CHAPTER  II. 

Departure  for  Kosseir — Pace  of  the  Dromedary — Welis  at  El  Gay- 
tah — Observations  on  the  Desert — Pass  of  Issud — El  Megrib — 
The  Consular  Agent  at  Kosseir — American  Trickery — The  Ci- 
tadel— Hospitality  of  Said  Mohammed — An  Arab  Dinner — New 
Route— Mountain  Pass — Wad-el- Ash — Hints  to  the  Traveller — 
Nomadic  Arab  Tribes — Partridges  and  Grouse — Return  to  Khe- 
neh — Seizure  of  our  Boatmen  for  the  Nizam — Visit  to  Girgeh — 
Apprehension  of  the  Delinquents  —  The  Bastinado  —  Town  of 
Akhmin — Minieh — Return  to  Cairo. 

At  an  early  hour  the  following  morning  v/e 
mounted  our  camels  on  the  beach,  and  started 
for  Kosseir.  The  road,  after  leaving  Kheneh, 
takes  a  south-easterly  direction,  skirting  the 
cultivated  land  that  hereabouts  extends  some 
distance  from  the  bank  of  the  river. 

In  four  hours  we  reached  the  village  of 

Beerahambah,  beyond  which  all  cultivation 

ceases.     It  is  a  wretched  place,  containing 

about  one  hundred   inhabitants.      After   an 

hour's  rest,  which  we  stood  in  some  need  of, 

we  resumed  onr  exalted  seats,  but  it  took  us 

d2 


36  PACE  OF  THE  DROMEDARY. 

six  hours  to  reach  the  wells  of  El  Gaytah, 
where  we  arrived  dreadfully  fatigued  froLi 
our  inexperience  in  this  new  mode  of  travel- 
ling— for  the  motion  of  the  dromedary  is,  to  a 
novice,  peculiarly  wearying.  The  animal's 
long  step  throws  the  body  forward,  and  pro- 
duces a  constant  action  of  the  back,  which  is 
painfully  increased  if  the  saddle  be  not  placed 
quite  even  on  the  animal's  broad  shoulder. 

At  his  usual  pace,  the  dromedary  gets  over 
the  ground  at  the  rate  of  about  two  miles 
and  a  half  an  hour,  but  when  made  to  step 
out,  he  will  travel  three  and  a  half.  His 
pleasantest  pace  is  a  sort  of  amble,  or  what 
the  Spaniards  call  paso,  at  which  he  goes  at 
from  five  to  six  miles  an  hour.  His  trot  is  to  be 
recommended  only  to  rheumatic  subjects,  and 
is  utter  destruction  to  all  friable  articles.  His 
stumble — at  whatever  pace  he  may  be  pro- 
ceeding— is  awful ! 

A  dromedary  is  merely  a  finer  race  of  camel, 
whose  paces  are  rather  quicker,  and  motion 
more  springy,  and  therefore  less  disagreeable. 
These   animals   undergo   hunger  and   thirst 


WELLS  AT  EL  GAYTAH.  37 

with  great  patience ;  but  they  by  no  means 
carry  a  burthen  in  proportion  to  their  size.  I 
have  seen  a  little  donkey  with  half  a  camel 
load  upon  his  back  outwalk  them  with  ease. 

In  crossing  the  desert,  however,  travellers 
will  find  it  to  their  advantage  to  use  the 
larger  animal ;  the  rider  being  removed  to  so 
much  greater  a  distance  from  the  heated 
sand,  and  put  in  the  way  of  getting  any  little 
air  there  may  be  stirring.  We  found  a  won- 
derful difference  in  the  heat  whenever  we  dis- 
mounted. That  operation,  by  the  way,  is  by 
no  means  an  agreeable  one,  particularly  to 
the  tyro  in  camelestrianism,  who,  from  the 
suddenness  with  which  the  animal  drops  on 
his  knees,  risks  having  his  nose  brought  in 
collision  with  the  camel's  poll. 

El  Gaytah,  where  we  arrived  very  late, 
consists  of  three  wells  of  bad  water,  and  two 
wretched  hovels  for  the  accommodation  of 
travellers,  but  has  no  permanent  inhabitants. 
We  found  a  large  caravan  encamped  round 
the  wells,  but  the  buildings  unoccupied ;  so, 
giving  up  the  larger  of  the  two  to  our  ser- 


38  MOUNTAIN  RANGE. 

vants  and  camel-drivers,  we  spread  our  mat- 
tresses and  carpets  upon  the  floor  of  the 
other,  (a  small  mosque  or  the  tomb  of  some 
saint)  glad  to  have  four  walls  to  shelter  us 
from  the  cold  night-blast  of  the  desert. 

Resuming  our  march  at  daybreak,  much 
refreshed  by  our  night's  rest,  we  pushed  our 
camels  on  at  a  brisk  pace  ;  and,  in  about  an 
hour  and  a  half,  reached  the  foot  of  the  intri- 
cate belt  of  mountains  that  extends  between 
the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea,  spreading  its  la- 
byrinth of  ramiflcations  in  all  directions. 

Since  leaving  the  village  of  Beerahambah, 
our  road  (a  hard  sandy  track,  covered  with 
large  coarse  pebbles)  had  been  perfectly  level ; 
the  country  on  all  sides  a  dreary  expanse  of 
desert,  the  horizon  broken  only  by  occasional 
ranges  of  shifting  sand-hills.  Not  a  house, 
nor  a  tree,  was  to  be  seen  any  where ;  and 
there  was  nothing  but  the  extraordinary  ef- 
fects of  the  mirage,  and  an  occasional  drove 
of  camels,  bearing  supplies  to  the  Egyptian 
army  employed  in  Arabia,  to  break  the  wea- 
risome sameness  of  the  journey. 


MOUNTAIN  RANGE.  39 

The  change  to  a  narrow  valley,  bounded  by 
hills,  which  gradually  increased  in  height  as 
we  proceeded  onwards,  was,  at  first,  pleasing 
enough ;  but  the  reflected  heat  from  the  white 
cliffs,  and  want  of  air,  soon  made  us  regret  the 
open  desert. 

The  numberless  windings  of  the  valley  al- 
ways gave  us  something  to  look  forward  to, 
however ;  and,  as  we  got  further  into  the 
heart  of  the  mountains,  we  did  occasionally 
see  an  old  tower  perched  upon  the  summit  of 
some  crag  that,  in  former  days,  interdicted 
the  advance  of  an  enemy  by  the  narrow  pass. 

The  formation  of  this  mountain  range  is 
very  peculiar  ;  stretching  from  the  confines  of 
Nubia,  as  far  north  as  the  latitude  of  Cairo 
— where  it  terminates  abruptly  in  the  steep 
cliffs  of  the  Mokattan  and  Ettagah  ranges — 
the  chain,  though  broken  constantly  by  iso- 
lated peaks,  no  where  presents  a  continuous 
ridge,  running  north  and  south.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  furrowed  laterally  by  innumerable 
valleys,  whose  rugged,  bounding  ledges  com- 
pletely intersect  it  from  east  to  west. 


40  IxNTRICATE  COUNTRY. 

The  beds  of  these  valleys  are  very  narrow, 
and  so  flat,  that  in  proceeding  along  them, 
the  rise  and  fall  of  the  ground  is  barely  per- 
ceptible. The  mountains  sometimes  rise 
perpendicularly  along  them  for  several  miles, 
broken  only  by  the  gorges  of  other  ravines. 

The  road,  by  constant  traffic,  has  become 
well  defined ;  otherwise,  without  a  guide,  it 
would  be  next  to  impossible  to  make  one's 
way  across  this  intricate  country,  the  ravines 
being  all  so  much  alike,  and  that  by  which 
the  road  proceeds  often  winding  in  the  very 
direction  you  think  you  ought  not  to  take. 

Besides  the  tramp  of  feet,  the  way  has  now 
become  well  marked  by  the  bleached  bones  of 
the  numerous  animals  that  have  fallen  under 
the  joint  weight  of  years  and  an  oppressive 
burden.  Sometimes  a  flight  of  hungry  vultures 
swoops  round  the  startled  traveller,  fixing 
their  keen  eyes  upon  the  emaciated  brute  he 
rides,  as  he  moves  slowly  and  mournfully 
along,  as  if  to  judge  what  length  of  time  he 
will  yet  have  to  wait  for  his  repast.  At  others, 
they  may  be  seen  disputing  over  the  carcase 


EL  HAMAMAT.  41 

of  some  recently  deceased  animal,  heedless  of 
the  approach  of  man  —  unscared  even  by  the 
whizzing  of  his  bullet.  They  afforded  us  ex- 
cellent pistol  practice. 

In  four  hours  and  three  quarters,  we  arrived 
at  some  ruined  wells,  and  crossed  the  head  of 
a  wide  valley,  opening  to  the  north.  Beyond 
it  a  lofty  granite  range  of  mountains  stretches 
away  to  the  east.  Continuing  our  journey,  in 
seven  hours  and  a  half  from  the  time  of  our 
setting  out,  we  reached  the  well  of  El  Hama- 
mat  (baths),  the  descent  to  which  is  by  a  cir- 
cular stone  staircase.  The  well  is  sixty  feet 
deep,  but  we  found  no  water  in  it.  Several 
sarcophagi  were  lying  about,  that  had  served 
as  troughs  for  watering  cattle.  Some  of  them 
were  made  of  a  very  hard  and  beautiful  brec- 
cia verde,  numerous  blocks  of  which  were  ly- 
ing scattered  about. 

A  little  beyond  the  well,  an  old  tower  frowns 
upon  the  narrow  ravine  from  a  steep  hill  on 
the  left;  and,  some  distance  further  on,  we 
reached  the  foot  of  a  lofty  peak,  that  had 
served  us  all  day  as  a  kind  of  directing  mark. 


42  EL  MEGRIB. 

We  reached  the  well  of  Issud  after  ten 
hours  and  a  half's  riding,  and  pitched  our 
tent  at  the  mouth  of  a  cavern  that  had  served 
as  a  burying'-place  in  former  ages,  and  was 
swarming  with  bats.  The  water  of  the  well 
is  strongly  impregnated  with  salt  and  sulphur, 
which  obliged  us  to  have  recourse  to  our  buf- 
falo-skins of  Nile  water. 

The  pass  of  Issud  is  about  half  a  mile  long, 
very  narrow,  and  rough ;  and  may  be  con- 
sidered as  the  connecting  link  of  the  great 
mountain-chain  that  divides  the  Nile  from 
the  Red  Sea — for  the  ascent  and  descent  in 
the  road  are  both  very  perceptible. 

We  reached  El  Megrib  in  an  hour  and 
three  quarters  :  it  consists  only  of  some  ruined 
buildings.  From  thence,  during  the  follow- 
ing eight  hours,  our  way  was  bounded  on  the 
left  by  a  range  of  lofty  mountains,  and  to- 
wards sunset  we  arrived  at  some  wells  si- 
tuated in  a  small  plain,  under  the  peaked 
Gibel  Abumelad,  where  we  encamped  for  the 
night. 

W^e  reached  the  Bir  Inglese  (Well  of  the 


KOSSEIR.  43 

English)  in  three  hours  and  a  half  from  our 
resting-place.  The  valley  there  becomes  more 
open,  and  the  hills  gradually  lower.  A  lime- 
stone stratum  again  overlays  the  granite  and 
sand-stone,  and  the  blue  surface  of  the  Red 
Sea  may  be  seen  in  the  distance.  In  three 
hours  more  we  reached  Kosseir,  which  is 
screened  from  view  until  arrived  close  under 
its  walls,  by  a  point  of  land  that  projects  into 
the  sea,  sheltering  it  to  the  south-west. 

To  persons  arriving  from  the  banks  of  the 
Hoogley,  I  can  conceive  Kosseir  must  appear 
a  miserable  place  enough ;  to  one,  however, 
who  has  recently  left  the  mud-built  towns  on 
the  banks  of  the  Nile,  it  wears  an  aspect  of 
comfort  and  cleanliness,  quite  refreshing  to 
the  senses.  It  is  far  cleaner,  and  infinitely 
better  built,  than  any  Egyptian  town  south 
of  Cairo. 

We  found  the  consular  agent  (who  some- 
how or  other  had  been  apprized  of  our  ap- 
proach) a  most  obliging  person.  He  had  pre- 
pared a  house  for  our  accommodation  ;  and  a 
clean  room,  carpeted  and  divaned,  some  excel- 


44  CONSULAR  AGENT. 

lent  coffee,  and  a  plentiful  supply  of  fresh 
water,  were  "  impayable''  luxuries  after  the 
discomforts  of  the  wilderness.  Having  "  made 
ourselves  decent,"  we  accompanied  the  Consul 
to  visit  the  Governor.  A  band  of  music  was 
stationed  at  his  door,  consisting  of  four  ket- 
tle-drums of  various  sizes,  upon  which  the 
performers  played  with  all  their  might,  on 
our  approach.  We  found  his  excellency  had 
made  an  extraordinary  advance  in  Frank  in- 
novation and  activity,  being  seated  on  a  chair 
— the  pipe,  however,  was  at  his  mouth. 

He  was  a  pleasant,  and,  for  a  Turk,  well- 
informed  man,  talked  politics  freely,  and  said 
that,  but  for  the  English,  French,  and  Rus- 
sians, (he  would  not  give  the  credit  to  any 
one)  Mohammed  Ali  would  now  have  been 
master  of  Constantinople.  After  the  usual 
coffee  and  pipes,  we  took  our  leave,  urgently 
pressed  by  the  governor  to  repeat  our  visit 
ere  we  took  our  departure  from  his  government. 

The  population  of  Kosseir  is  probably  about 
three  thousand  souls.  I  could  obtain  no  very 
precise  ansicer  to  my  inquiries  on  the  subject 


AMERICAN  TRICKERY.  45 

— the  reply  being  always  truly  Turco- Arabic. 
"  Caffier  !  mini  araf?  "  (Many  !  who  knows  ?) 

The  town  has  increased  considerably  of 
late  years,  and  its  trade  is  evidently  thriving-. 
The  marl^et  is  dear — many  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  are  particularly  so — yet  I  saw  far  less 
misery  in  the  place  than  in  most  Arab  towns. 
Wood,  for  instance,  is  brought  from  a  dis- 
tance of  thirty  miles,  and  water — fit  to  drink 
— is  not  to  be  had  nearer  than  fourteen. 

The  only  things  to  be  procured  at  a  rea- 
sonable price  are  fish  and  Mocha  coffee,  or 
rather  what  is  sold  as  such,  for  the  Americans 
have  of  late  years  played  us  Europeans  a 
trick,  by  taking  their  own  produce  to  Mocha 
and  bartering  it  for  that  of  Arabia. 

This  patriotic  conduct  on  the  part  of  cousin 
Jonathan  was  found,  in  the  outset,  to  be  so 
beneficial  to  Mohammed  Ali's  coffers,  that 
every  encouragement  was  given  to  the  traffic, 
but  the  fraud,  having  been  detected,  will  pro- 
bably have  the  effect  of  driving  all  coffee  that 
passes  through  Egypt  out  of  the  European 
markets. 


46  SHELL  FISH. 

The  principal  trade  of  Kosseir  is  with 
Jedda  and  the  other  ports  on  the  eastern  coast 
of  the  Red  Sea.  It  is  likely  to  increase  con- 
siderably, when  a  communication  with  India 
by  steam  comes  to  be  permanently  established, 
as  goods  can  be  much  more  conveniently 
landed  here  than  at  Suez,  and  there  is  nothing 
whatever  to  prevent  a  railroad  being  laid 
down  to  Kheneh.  In  fact,  by  merely  levelling 
the  road  through  the  pass  of  Issud,  a  steam- 
carriage  might  almost  travel  now  without 
the  necessity  for  a  railway. 

The  anchorage  of  Kosseir  is  bad,  being 
completely  open  from  seaward,  and  only 
partially  sheltered  from  the  northerly  winds 
by  a  sandy  point,  which  juts  some  distance 
into  the  sea,  terminating  in  a  coral  reef. 

The  Red  Sea  abounds  in  shell-fish  of  infi- 
nite variety,  offering  a  great  treat  to  the  con- 
chologist,  but  valued  only  by  the  inhabitants 
of  Kosseir  according  to  their  possessing  nu- 
tritious qualities,  or  otherwise  ;  for  they  have 
no  notion  of  the  superiority  in  rank  claimed 
by  a  thorny  woodcock  over  a  yellow  admiral. 


THE  CITADEL.  47 

One  small  garden  on  the  sea-shore  is  the 
only  speck  of  vegetation  within  sight  of  the 
town  ;  but  the  distant  mountain  scenery  to 
the  south  is  strikingly  fine. 

The  governor  very  politely  sent  his  stud, 
consisting  of  a  restive  mule  and  a  donkey, 
to  take  us  to  old  Kosseir — a  distance  of  five 
miles  from  the  modern  town — ^but  there  is 
little  to  excite  interest,  the  foundations  of  the 
fort  alone  remaining  to  mark  its  site. 

I  could  not  obtain  admission  to  the  citadel 
— as  it  is  ostentatiously  called — the  governor 
assigning  as  an  excuse  for  his  refusal  of  my 
request,  that  some  part  of  his  female  esta- 
blishment was  living  in  it.  It:  is,  however,  but 
little  worthy  of  notice — a  mere  square  fort  of 
rough  masonry,  unprotected  by  a  ditch  and 
flanked  only  by  circular  bastions,  and  strength- 
ened by  a  kind  of  couvre-porte  on  the  side  to- 
wards the  town. 

Several  old  pieces  of  artillery  are  mounted 
on  the  walls,  which,  if  brought  into  play, 
would  do  more  mischief  to  the  firers  than  the 
fired  at.  I  perfectly  satisfied  my  curiosity  from 


48  ARAB  CUISINE. 

the  exterior,  committing  my  notes  to  paper 
free  from  the  obtrusive  gaze  of  sentinels. 

During  our  stay  at  Kosseir,  we  were  most 
hospitably  entertained  by  Said  Mohammed, 
son  of  our  good  friend  Sheik  Hassan,  the  con- 
sul at  Kheneh,  and  himself  his  Britannic 
Majesty's  agent  at  Kosseir.  He  kindly  pro- 
vided us  with  all  things  needful,  and  always 
favoured  us  with  his  company  at  our  seven 
o'clock  dinner. 

The  Arab  cuisine  produces  many  dishes 
that  are  far  from  being  unpalatable ;  but  the 
Arabs  are  by  no  means  pleasant  dinner  com- 
panions. Their  custom  of  hurrying  over  the 
affair  as  if  it  were  a  punishment,  and,  more- 
over, their  habit  of  dipping  hands  into  the 
various  dishes  on  table — wandering  from  one 
to  another  as  fancy  or  appetite  prompts — are 
particularly  disagreeable. 

The  worst  of  all  their  practices,  however, 
is,  when  wishing  to  be  particularly  marked 
in  their  attention,  they  tear  a  tit-bit  off  the 
joint  before  them,  and  throv/  it  across  the 
table  into  your  plate,  or,  perchance — if  your 


RETURN  TO  KHENEH.  49 

mouth  should  unhappily  be  within  their  reach 
— insist  on  cramming  it  therein.  I  shuddered 
whenever  T  saw  dear,  old  Said  Mohammed's 
fat  hand  plunge  into  the  very  innermost  re- 
cesses of  a  turkey's  craw,  dreading  lest  I  was  to 
be  selected  as  the  victim  of  his  kind  attention. 

Water  was  our  only  beverage  during  the 
repast — and,  the  operation  of  washing  hands 
over,  (in  which,  by  the  bye,  they  improve  upon 
our  custom,  by  using  hot  water)  we  resumed 
our  pipes  —  which  had  only  quitted  our 
mouths  on  dinner  being  placed  on  the  table — 
and  we  were  served  with  coffee. 

On  the  third  day  after  that  on  which  we 
had  arrived  at  Kosseir,  we  bade  ^dieu  to 
our  worthy  host,  who  was  very  unwilling  to 
allow  even  his  servants  to  receive  a  present 
from  us  ;  and,  loaded  with  good  things  for 
the  journey,  started  on  our  return  to  Kheneh. 

By  way  of  varying,  in  some  measure,  the 
scenery,  we  determined  to  take  a  different 
road  back  from  that  by  which  we  had  come  : 
and,  though  we  lengthened  the  distance  by  the 
change,  (increasing  it  from  ninety-six  to  one 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  NOVEL  ROUTE. 

hundred  and  two  miles),  to  attempt  effecting 
the  journey  in  three  days. 

The  route  we  now  selected,  besides  the 
advantage  of  novelty,  possessed  that  of 
having  some  wells  of  drinkable  water  upon 
it.  In  other  respects,  it  was  equally  uninte- 
resting, yet  more  lonely,  and  the  country 
quite  as  arid. 

It  strikes  off  from  the  former  road  at  the 
Bir  Inglese,  (three  hours  from  Kosseir)  enter- 
ing a  valley  that  debouches  on  the  little  plain, 
in  the  centre  of  which  the  wells  have  been 
sunk.  After  travelling  eight  hours  from  thence, 
under  an  unseasonably  hot  sun,  and,  conse- 
quently, over  an  abominably  hot  sandy  road, 
I  got  so  bad  a  headache  that  I  was  obliged 
to  beg  a  halt ;  and  we  pitched  our  tent  for  the 
night  by  the  road  side,  having  rendered  our- 
selves independent  of  the  wells  by  a  provision 
of  two  skins  of  Kosseir  water. 

We  resumed  our  journey  before  daybreak, 
and,  in  an  hour,  reached  some  wells,  situated 
in  the  mouth  of  a  very  narrow  valley — I  may 
say  chasm — for  it  is  contracted  by  high  per- 


WAD-EL- ASH.  51 

pendicular  cliffs,  to  a  width  that  barely  ex- 
ceeds that  of  the  road.  Half  an  hour's  riding 
brought  us  to  two  more  wells,  (Bir  Moilah) 
and  yet  a  little  further  on  are  some  others, 
but  the  water  of  all  is  equally  bad.  Soon  after 
passing  the  last  wells  the  valley  again  widens. 

The  whole  length  of  this  extraordinary 
mountain  gorge  is  about  two  miles  and  a 
half,  and  such  is  its  nature  that  fifty  deter- 
mined men  would  prevent  the  advance  of  a 
whole  army. 

A  much  more  open  country  than  any  we 
had  hitherto  traversed  extended  for  about 
five  miles,  from  the  pass  to  the  wells  of  Wad- 
el-Ask.  The  water  of  these,  though  having  a 
soft  vegetable  taste,  that  is  not  pleasant,  is, 
nevertheless,  wholesome — and  indeed  may  be 
considered  the  only  water  drinkable  by  man 
in  this  part  of  the  great  desert.  The  position 
of  the  wells  is,  therefore,  important.  They 
are  calculated  as  being  distant  ten  Arab 
miles*  from  Kosseir,  twelve  from  Kheneh, 
and  twenty-four  from  Edfou. 

*  The  Arab  mile  is  about  five  English. 

e2 


52  HINTS  TO  THE  TRAVELLER. 

In  travelling  from  Kheneh  to  Kosseir,  when 
expedition  is  the  object,  this,  though  rather 
the  longer  of  the  two  roads,  is  decidedly  to 
be  preferred,  on  account  of  the  advantage 
offered  by  these  wells;  for,  by  employing 
dromedaries,  the  distance  may  be  easily  ac- 
complished in  two  days,  but,  if  water  has  to 
be  carried,  two  and  a  half  are  required.  By 
making  Wad-el-Ash,  therefore,  the  halting- 
place  for  the  night,  the  necessity  for  carry- 
ing water  is  avoided.  Besides  this,  an 
animal  cannot  travel  fast  when  laden  with 
two  skins  of  water.  The  element,  too,  does 
not  improve  by  being  jolted  a  whole  day  on 
the  back  of  a  camel  and  exposed  to  a  hot 
sun. 

The  traveller  should  carry  a  tent  with  him, 
as  there  is  no  shelter  on  this  road  between 
Beerhambah  and  Kosseir,  and  exposure  to  the 
night  air  is  very  dangerous  in  this  climate. 
We  experienced,  indeed,  some  smart  showers 
of  rain  during  the  last  night  of  our  journey: 
and,  on  that  of  our  return  to  our  boat,  at 
Kheneh,  we  were  completely  drenched  by  a 


ARAB  TRIBES.  53 

tremendous  storm  ;  —  so  much  for  Upper 
Egypt's  being  exempt  from  rain  ! 

We  pushed  on  from  Wad-el-Ash  after  get- 
ting- some  breakfast,  and  ten  hours  more  hard 
riding  (thirteen  and  three  quarters  from  our 
previous  night's  bivouac)  brought  us  to  our 
old  quarters  in  the  mosque  at  Beerhambah, 
at  which  the  two  roads  from  Kosseir  re- 
unite. 

I  cannot  say  that  the  southern  road  pos- 
sesses any  greater  interest  than  the  other. 
It  traverses  a  more  open  and  somewhat 
higher  level  of  country,  but  the  slopes  are 
equally  gradual.  There  is  not  a  tree,  and 
scarcely  a  bush,  to  break  the  wearying  same- 
ness of  the  barren  mountain  scenery — not\a 
house  nor  even  ruin  to  indicate  that  the 
country  ever  has  been  inhabited. 

Round  the  different  wells  on  both  roads, 
we  found  nomadic  tribes  of  the  Ababde  Arabs 
encamped,  whose  shaggy  dress,  wild  looks, 
and  thick,  bushy,  uncombed  hair  were  in  strict 
keeping  with  the  savage  scenery  around. 

On  approaching  the  wells,  we  met  with  a 


54  PARTRIDGES  AND  GROUSE. 

few  coveys  of  sand  partridges  and  flocks  of 
pigeons  that  gave  us  some  amusement,  but 
scarcely  a  meal,  for  they  were  extremely  shy 
and  wary.  The  former  have,  perhaps,  more 
of  the  character  of  the  grouse,  both  in  their 
plumage  (inasmuch  as  that  they  are  fea- 
thered down  to  the  feet)  and  call.  The  colour 
of  the  feathers  of  their  backs  and  wings  so 
nearly  resembles  that  of  the  sand,  that  it  is 
with  difficulty  they  can  be  distinguished,  ex- 
cepting when  in  motion  ;  but  under  the  wings 
their  feathers  are  very  dark. 

There  is  another  kind  of  grouse  met  with 
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  whose  plumage  is 
mottled  ;  of  this  the  flesh  is  excellent,  which 
cannot  be  said  of  that  of  the  sand  partridge 
of  the  desert. 

To  the  geologist,  the  journey  across  the 
desert  is  highly  interesting,  by  whatever 
route  he  travels.  The  surface  of  the  earth, 
unveiled  by  a  particle  of  vegetation,  is  fully 
exposed  to  his  observation,  and  the  changes 
from  the  lime-stone  to  the  sand-stone  forma- 
tion, and  afterwards  successively  to  the  argil- 


ARRIVAL  AT  KHENEII.  55 

laceous,  schistose,  basaltic,  and  granitic,  are 
very  marked  and  curious.  In  some  places, 
we  passed  high  cliffs,  composed  entirely  of 
serpentine — in  others,  huge  mountains  of 
breccia  verde. 

We  reached  Kheneh  in  nine  hours  from 
Beerahambah,  having  taken  nearly  thirty- 
four  hours  (exclusively  of  stoppages)  to  per- 
form the  journey.  We  found  that  our  boat 
had  only  that  morning  returned  from  Girgeh 

with  our  friend  D ,  who,   from  previous 

indisposition,  had  not  felt  quite  equal  to  the 
journey  to  Kosseir,  and  had  been  amusing 
himself  during  our  absence  in  visiting  the 
towns  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kheneh. 

His  return  had  been  retarded,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  seizure  of  the  Reis  and  one  of 
the  crew  of  our  boat  (at  the  village  of  Lem- 
bieh,  where  they  had  been  sent  on  shore  to 
purchase  provisions),  to  serve  in  the  Nizam ; 
and  a  personal  application  to  the  governor 
of  the  district,  whose  head-quarters  were  at 
Girgeh,  had  been  necessary  to  obtain  their 
release. 


56  SEIZURE  OF  BOATMEN. 

The  Detenus  were  given  up,  on  an  order  to 
that  effect  having  been  sent  off  to  the  village 

— my  friend  D wisely  remaining  at  Girgeh 

until  they  were  delivered  up  to  him ;  but  the 
poor  fellows  had  been  robbed,  beaten,  pini- 
oned, and  confined  for  two  days  in  a  well. 
The  Governor  screened  the  perpetrators  of 
this  barbarity  from  punishment,  by  declaring 
that  the  kawasses  he  had  sent  to  Lembieh 
had  not  been  able  to  secure  them,  as  they  had 
fled  into  the  desert. 

Having  ascertained  that  the  Sheik  ei  Belled's 
deputy  was  the  chief  offender,  and  that  it  was 
to  save  two  of  his  dependents  from  the  con- 
scription that  our  boatmen  had  been  seized, 
we  determined  that  he  should  not  escape  the 
punishment  he  so  richly  deserved,  and  accord- 
ingly we  laid  a  plan  to  kidnap  and  take  him 
to^Girgeh  ourselves,  and  compel  the  Governor 
to  do  justice  between  the  parties. 

The  Reis  and  boat's  crew  entered  warmly 
into  our  well-concerted  plan,  but  the  first  act 
of  our  melo-drama  failed,  from  unavoidable 
circumstances.    Remaining  a  day  at  Kheneh, 


VISIT  TO  GIRGEH.  tj 

to  replenish  our  stock  of  provisions  and  throw 
our  friends  at  Lembieh  the  more  off  their 
guard,  we  timed  our  departure  from  thence 
so  as  to  reach  the  village  by  dawn  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning. 

We  immediately  landed  a  strong  and  well- 
armed  party,  and,  guided  by  the  Reis,  pro- 
ceeded straight  to  the  Sheik's  abode. 

The  village  dignitary  was  taken  completely 
by  surprise,  and  was  dreadfully  alarmed  at 
our  hostile  attitude  ;  but,  on  learning  our 
purpose,  declared,  by  all  that  was  holy  in 
Cairo,  Mekka,  and  Medina,  that  the  offenders 
had  been  sent  to  Girgeh  some  days  previously, 
and  were  consequently  then  in  the  governor's 
hands,  and  doubtless  undergoing  punishment 
in  prison. 

Having  satisfied  ourselves  that,  at  all  events, 
the  first  part  of  this  story  was  correct  (which 
proved  the  Governor  of  Girgeh's  duplicity), 
and  compelled  the  Sheik  to  refund  the  mo- 
ney of  which  the  boatmen  had  been  robbed, 
we  re-embarked,  and  proceeded  on  our  voyage 
to  Girgeh,  where  we  arrived  in  the  afternoon. 


58  ARREST  OF  THE  DELINQUENTS. 

We  landed  forthwith,  and  were  on  our  way 
to  the  governor's  house,  when  our  Reis  espied 
his  two  quondam  acquaintances  comfortably 
seated  at  a  coffee-shop,  smoking  their  chi- 
bouques. They  had  the  impudence,  in  the  first 
moment  of  recognition,  to  greet  their  victims 
with  a  most  friendly  salaam.  Their  second 
impulse — at  the  sight  of  **  Dick's"  wrathful 
countenance — was,  however,  to  run  away ;  but 
his  strip  of  hippopotamus  hide  overtook  them 
in  a  trice,  and,  whilst  his  powerful  arms  pini- 
oned the  principal  delinquent,  the  other  was 
secured  by  our  Maltese  servant  and  the  Reis, 
and  both  were  marched  prisoners  through  the 
town,  to  their  unspeakable  horror  and  the 
great  astonishment  of  the  inhabitants. 

We  proceeded,  of  course,  to  the  governor's 
house,  and,  being  informed  that  he  was  holding 
a  grand  levee,  presented  ourselves  to  his  Ex- 
cellency without  any  announcement.  He  was 
not  a  little  surprised  at  the  cortege  that  fol- 
lowed us,  and  looked  extremely  sheepish.  It 
was  clear  that  he  had  not  intended  to  punish 
the  offenders, unless  some  further  notice  should 


DEMANDED  PUNISHMENT.  59 

be  taken  of  the  affair  by  us  ;  and,  even  now — 
after  he  had  had  time  to  regain  his  self-pos- 
session— seemed  disposed  to  shuffle  off  doing 
what  we  required. 

Producing  the  Viceroy's  firman,  we  de- 
manded respectfully,  but  firmly,  that,  in  vir- 
tue of  the  injunctions  therein  contained,  to 
**  render  us  aid  and  assistance,"  &c.,  he  would 
instantly  punish  the  perpetrators  of  an  offence 
so  heinous  against  the  laws  of  their  own  coun- 
try, and  so  insulting  to  us,  foreigners,  travel- 
ling under  the  protection  of  its  sovereign, 
Mohammed  Ali. 

The  Arabs  like  to  hear  Mohammed  Ali 
called  their  Soldan.  A  murmur  of  approba- 
tion ran  through  the  crowd  of  satellites  that 
encircled  the  Viceroy's  lieutenant  (himself  an 
Arab) — our  flourish,  in  fact,  had  produced  the 
desired  effect.  The  witnesses  were  at  hand  : 
their  evidence  clear — the  delinquents  stood 
before  him.  So,  after  sundry  Mashallahs ! 
and  numerous  protestations  of  his  respect  for 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  regard  for  all  Franks — 
Englishmen  in  particular  —  his    Excellency 


60  THE  BASTINADO. 

most  composedly  asked,  if  we  should  like  to 
have  one  of  the  culprits  hanged  ! 

This  obliging  offer,  which,  no  doubt,  was 
dictated  by  the  most  refined  politeness  (for 
the  power  of  inflicting  death  being  no  longer 
in  his  hands,  we  were  aware  that  his  proposed 
sacrifice  could  be  intended  only  as  a  compli- 
ment), we  begged  leave  to  decline,  adding 
(moved  a  little  thereto,  I  must  confess,  by 
curiosity),  that  a  slight  bastinadoing,  admi- 
nistered on  the  spot,  would  quite  satisfy  us, 
though  the  crime  perhaps  called  for  a  much 
more  severe  punishment. 

A  ring  was  instantly  formed.  The  feet  of 
one  of  the  delinquents  were  fastened  by  iron 
clamps  to  a  stake,  and,  after  being  hand- 
bound,  he  was  thrown  flat  upon  his  belly  ; 
the  soles  of  his  feet  were  then  turned  up  by 
means  of  the  stake,  and  two  Kawasses  pro- 
ceeded to  belabour  them  most  unmercifully 
with  strong  thongs  of  hippopotamus  hide, 
and  he  to  bellow  Am  an  !  aman  !  (mercy  ! 
mercy  !) 

Unconscious  of  the  etiquette  observed  on 


THE  BASTINADO.  61 

these  occasions,  I  was  beginning  to  get  very 
much  disgusted  with  this  mode  of  punish- 
ment, which  had  already  proceeded  to  a  great 
length,  when  I  perceived,  by  certain  anxious 
glances  cast  by  the  spectators,  first  on  us, 
and  then  on  the  governor,  that  we  were  *'  out 
of  order,"  somehow  or  other.  Calling  upon 
Dick  to  explain,  I  learnt,  to  my  consterna- 
tion, that  I  was  expected  to  signify  when  I 
wished  the  punishment  to  cease.  This  I  im- 
mediately did,  amidst  the  approving  exclama- 
tion of  Taibe !  taibe  !  (good)  from  all  the  old 
magnates  assembled. 

I  was  sorry  that  such  a  mistake  had  oc- 
curred, as  the  principal  offender  was  still  to 
be  punished,  to  whom  I  felt  but  little  inclined 
to  be  merciful.  The  Kawasses,  however,  for 
what  reason  I  know  not,  unless  that  they  ex- 
pected a  backschis  from  us  proportioned  to 
their  exertions,  resumed  their  work  with  in- 
creased vigour  when  the  feet  of  the  adjunct 
of  the  Sheik  el  Belled  of  Lembieh  were  placed 
before  them. 

Not  content  with  crimping  his  soles,  they 


b2  THE  GOVERNOR  S  CIVILITY. 

inflicted  a  portion  of  their  blows  upon  a  part 
of  his  body,  that  must  have  effectually  pre- 
vented his  sitting  a  la  turque,  with  any  degree 
of  comfort,  for  a  fortnight. 

The  culprits  were  then  conducted  to  jail, 
and  limped  off  in  a  most  pitiable  plight,  to 
the  no  small  amusement  of  the  crowd  of 
spectators.  The  office  of  executioner  ap- 
peared to  be  much  sought  after — Kawasses, 
slaves,  eunuchs — all  seemed  to  be  equally 
amateurs  of  the  art. 

The  business  over,  pipes  and  coffee  were 
brought  in,  and  the  governor  was  remarkably 
civil,  offering  us  the  use  of  his  horses,  grey- 
hounds, &c.  We  had  to  give  a  handsome 
present  to  his  suite,  as  well  for  the  active 
service  they  had  been  doing  us,  as  for  a 
peace-offering  of  lambs,  fowls,  and  eggs,  that 
were  sent  down  to  our  boat  as  we  were  get- 
ting under  weigh. 

The  next  place  that  attracted  our  attention 
on  our  return  to  Cairo,  was  Akhmin,  a  large 
town  standing  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Nile,  on  the  site  of 


TOWN  OF  AKHMIN.  63 

the  ancient  Chemnis.  It  was  formerly  noted 
for  the  number  of  its  Coptic  inhabitants,  and, 
indeed,  to  this  day,  contains  a  large  propor- 
tion, but  it  has  fallen  much  from  its  high 
estate,  the  total  population  not  exceeding 
six  thousand  souls. 

This  town  is  of  a  rectangular  shape,  en- 
closed by  a  wall  of  sun-burnt  bricks.  The 
streets  are  wide  and  regular,  but  the  houses 
are  poor  and  in  a  ruinous  condition.  The 
convents,  for  which  it  was  celebrated,  are 
in  as  dilapidated  a  state  as  the  houses,  and 
the  mosques  in  nearly  the  same  condition. 
In  fact,  the  only  tenantable  edifices  are  the 
pigeon-houses. 

The  place  is  strewed  with  fragments  of 
marble  and  granite  columns,  and  contains 
the  ruins  of  an  ancient  temple,  on  the  founda- 
tion walls  of  which  a  party  of  workmen 
were  busily  engaged,  clearing  out  the  stones 
for  exportation ;  so  that,  by  this  time,  the 
lime-stone  Isises  and  other  divinities  are, 
probably,  hiding  their  heads  within  the  walls 
of  some  cotton  factory. 


64  CULTIVATED  COUNTRY. 

From  the  number  of  Copts  at  Akhmin,  I 
expected  to  find  some  commerce  going  on,  as 
these  people  seldom  congregate  in  places 
where  money  or  litigation  is  not  rife:  but, 
excepting  a  little  flax-spinning  and  indigo- 
dyeing,  I  saw  nothing  going  on  within  the 
walls,  almost  all  the  inhabitants  being  era- 
ployed  in  agriculture. 

The  adjacent  country  is  remarkably  well  ir- 
rigated, and  produces  abundant  crops  of  corn. 
There  are  also  some  thriving  groves  of  lemon, 
pomegranate,  and  other  fruit-trees  near  the 
town,  but  it  is  a  bad  place  for  obtaining 
general  supplies.  On  the  bank  of  the  river, 
several  diahbiehs  and  other  boats  were  build- 
ing and  repairing. 

Proceeding  on  our  voyage,  we  ran  quickly 
down  to  Manfalout,  a  short  description  of 
which  place  has  already  been  given.  Between 
it  and  Melawi,  but  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river,  a  high  precipitous  cliff  overhangs  the 
stream  for  several  miles.  The  entire  range 
is  pierced  with  excavations,  most  of  which  I 
visited,    but    found    neither    paintings    nor 


TOWN  OF  MINIEH.  65 

sculpture  on  the  walls.  It  is  probable  that, 
originally  excavated  for  abodes  for  the  dead, 
they  were  converted  into  habitations  for  the 
living,  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of 
Christianity  and  the  ascetic  life  into  Egypt, 
and,  perhaps,  served,  at  a  yet  more  recent 
date,  as  places  of  refuge  for  the  inhabitants 
of  the  flat  country,  when  it  has  been  flooded 
by  any  unusual  rise  of  the  river. 

Minieh  was  the  next  town  that  induced  us 
to  bring  to,  for  the  desire  for  a  stroll  through 
the  refreshing  groves  by  which  it  is  sheltered 
was  irresistible.  It  contains  some  fine  build- 
ings of  recent  construction,  amongst  others, 
a  palace  for  the  governor,  barracks,  cotton 
factories,  &c. 

The  streets,  though  narrow,  are  clean,  and 
the  houses,  excepting  those  on  the  outskirts 
of  the  town,  are  mostly  built  either  of  stone 
or  baked  bricks.  The  bazaars  are  inferior 
to  those  of  Siout,  but  Minieh  is  decidedly  the 
best  looking  town  of  Upper  Egypt.  It  con- 
tains about  ten  thousand  souls,  exclusively  of 
a  pretty  strong  garrison.     There,  as  at  most 

VOL.   II.  F 


G6  RETURN  TO  CAIRO. 

of  the  principal  ports  on  the  Nile,  a  show  is 
made  of  a  naval  force — a  kind  of  gun-boat 
being  fixed  immoveably  in  the  mud  abreast  of 
the  town. 

On  leaving  Minieh,  a  northerly  gale  delayed 
us  for  several  days  ;  for,  with  all  our  exertions 
and  the  stream  in  our  favour,  we  could  make 
no  way  against  it. 

We  reached  Boulak  on  the  last  day  of  the 
ninth  week  from  the  time  of  our  leaving  Old 
Cairo. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  SUEZ.  CIJ 


CHAPTER  III. 

Departure  for  Suez— The  Ras  el  Wadi,  or  Wadi  Toumlet— Traces 
of  the  Canal  of  the  Ptolemies— Salt  Lake  —  Disagreeable  Pickle 
—  Wells  of  Adjeroud — Suez  —  Fortifications  —  Population,  &c. 
— Canal  connecting  the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile — Market  of  Suez 
— Climate — Anchorage — Trade — Difficult  Navigation  of  the  Gulf 
of  Suez  —  Steam  communication  with  India  —  Difficulty  of  Main- 
taining it  at  all  Seasons  —  Advantages  of  the  Line  by  the  Red 
Sea  over  that  by  the  Euphrates  —  Proposed  Lhie  by  Kosseir  — 
Passage  of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  Israelites  —  Failure  of  all  At- 
tempts to  disprove  the  Miracle — Land  of  Goshen — March  of  the 
Jews  —  Return  to  Cairo  —  Observations  on  the  Line  of  the  pro- 
jected Rail- road. 

Being  desirous  of  visiting  the  Ras  el  Wadi, 
a  belt  of  land  which  has  recently  been  brought 
into  cultivation,  that  stretches  some  distance 
into  the  great  desert  of  Suez  (to  which  allu- 
sion has  already  been  made),  we  lost  no  time, 
on  our  return  to  Cairo,  in  making  the  neces- 
sary arrangements  for  our  journey,  the  sea- 
son being  already  far  advanced  for  travelling 
over  burning  sands. 

f2 


68  THE  RAS  EL  WADI. 

I  started  on  this  excursion,  contrary  to  the 
advice  of  all  the  old  Egyptians,  just  as  a  dread- 
ed Khampseen  wind  had  set'  in  ;  and  accom- 
panied only  by  my  relative  C ,  our  ser- 
vants, and  two  guides,  all  mounted  on  drome- 
daries. 

We  agreed,  after  visiting  the  Ras  el  Wadi, 
to  proceed  to  the  site  of  the  ancient  canal  of 
the  Ptolemies,  thence  to  Suez,  and  return  to 
Cairo  by  the  route  across  the  desert,  which 
the  Viceroy  has  selected  for  laying  down  a 
rail-road. 

Taking,  therefore,  the  great  Syrian  road, 
we  passed  through  El  Hankah ;  and,  diverg- 
ing slightly  to  the  left,  to  visit  the  College  of 
Abouzabel,  (of  which  an  account  will  be  found 
hereafter),  regained  that  road  a  few  miles  be- 
fore it  reaches  Zoameh.  The  day  was  so  far 
spent,  however,  ere  we  left  the  interesting  es- 
tablishment at  Abouzabel,  that  night  overtook 
us  before  we  reached  that  village. 

Having  a  lively  recollection  of  all  the  desa- 
gremens  experienced  at  the  Capo's  house  on 
my  way  to  Cairo  from  Damietta,  we  deter- 


THE  RAS  EL  WADI.  69 

mined  to  encamp  for  the  night  in  a  grove  of 
date-trees,  at  the  outskirts  of  Zoameh ;  de- 
clining a  guard  of  honour,  which  the  Sheik 
volunteered  to  send  to  watch  over  our  slum- 
bers. 

We  struck  our  tent  at  daybreak,  and  rode 
to  Belbeis  to  breakfast,  where  we  were  obliged 
to  procure  another  guide,  as  we  found  that 
neither  of  the  camel  drivers  that  accompanied 
us  was  acquainted  with  the  part  of  the  desert 
we  purposed  traversing. 

Remounting  our  dromedaries,  and  keeping 
a  little  to  the  right  of  the  Syrian  road  on 
leaving  Belbeis,  we  arrived,  in  about  two 
hours  and  a  half,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Ras  el  Wadi,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the 
Wadi  Toumlet.  It  is  a  narrow  valley,  that 
stretches  about  eighteen  miles  east  by  north 
into  the  heart  of  the  Great  Desert,  and  must 
be  that  along  which  the  Canal  of  the  Ptole- 
mies was  carried  to  connect  the  Red  Sea  with 
the  Nile.  The  bed  of  the  valley  is  perfectly 
flat,  and,  perhaps,  twenty  feet  below  the  level 
of  tbe  sandy  desert  that  presses  upon  it  on 


70  THE  RAS  EL  WADI. 

both  sides,  contracting  it  to  a  width  of  about 
a  mile. 

It  receives  the  annual  fertilizing  deposit 
brought  down  by  the  inundation  of  the  Nile ; 
and,  what  with  embankments,  reservoirs,  and 
two  small  canals,  that  extend  nearly  its  whole 
length,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water  is  re- 
tained to  irrigate  it  throughout  the  year. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  one  of  the  few  spots  in 
Egypt  where  a  want  of  agricultural  labourers 
is  clearly  perceptible ;  for,  with  all  this  com- 
mand of  water,  we  found  a  great  portion  of 
the  valley  lying  waste. 

A  vast  quantity  of  rnulb^ ;  y-trees  were 
planted  here,  some  years  sincft  tly  Mohammed 
Ali ;  and  several  colonies  oP^Bedouins  and 
Nubians  were  settled,  and  houses  built,  for 
propagating  the  silkworm ;  but  the  specula- 
tion failed  —  principally  from  the  insalubrity 
of  the  place,  caused  by  the  constant  exposure 
of  the  inhabitants  to  the  exhalations  from  the 
pools  of  stagnant  water  and  decayed  vegeta- 
ble matter.  The  villages  are,  for  the  most 
part,  deserted,  and  the  mulberry-trees  have  a 


EL  MASHAMET.  71 

very  unhealthy  appearance.  The  chief  pro- 
duce of  the  valley  is  now  corn,  and  the  mud- 
hut  villages  of  its  cultivators  are  scattered 
thickly  over  it ;  but  they  are  extremely  wretch- 
ed, and  scarcely  contain  more  than  twenty  or 
thirty  families  each. 

The  principal  village  of  the  district  is  Tal 
el  Kebeer,  situated  near  the  mouth  of  the  val- 
ley, and  indicated  by  a  large  white-washed 
edifice,  that  assumes  a  viceregal  pre-emi- 
nence over  a  dense  mass  of  mud  cottages  that 
are  huddled  together  round  about  it.  This 
house  was  the  residence  of  Mohammed  Ali, 
during  his  sojourn  in  the  valley  to  superin- 
tend the  laying  out  his  mulberry  plantations, 
and  is  now  used  as  a  silk  depot. 

The  road  keeps  on  the  south  side  of  the 
valley  ;  and,  on  arriving  opposite  the  last  vil- 
lage, (El  Mashamet),  which  is  about  thirteen 
miles  from  the  entrance,  we  pitched  our  tent 
for  the  night,  near  a  well  of  very  good  water. 

All  cultivation  ends  here,  though  the  val- 
ley continues  as  marked  a  feature  as  ever 
for  five  miles  further,  the  whole  of  which  dis- 


r^  ARTIFICIAL  EMBANKMENT. 

tance  it  is  thickly  covered  with  dwarf  cypress, 
and  other  shrubs.  A  belt  of  the  same  kind  of 
jungle  continues  to  stretch  in  the  direction  of 
the  Ras  el  Wadi,  yet  many  miles  into  the 
sandy  desert ;  but  the  valley  may  be  said  to 
terminate  in  a  wide  far-spreading  hollow, 
some  f^w  feet  below  the  level  of  the  surround- 
ing sand-hills. 

Here  all  semblance  of  a  road,  or  even  beaten 
track,  is  lost ;  and  our  march  became  hence- 
forth really  "journeying  across  a  desert,"  un- 
marked by  a  single  bush  or  mound,  that  could 
serve  to  direct  the  course  of  any  but  the  prac- 
tised eye  of  a  Bedouin. 

At  the  expiration  of  five  hours,  we  arrived 
at  an  artificial  embankment,  running  for  about 
a  mile  in  a  north-west  direction.  Along  it 
we  observed  many  fragments  of  pottery,  and 
pieces  of  decomposed  limestone  and  scoriae. 
The  ground  falls  slightly  to  the  east,  and  bears 
evident  traces  of  being  occasionally  covered 
with  water,  which  can  only  be  from  rain :  its 
surface  presented,  for  some  distance,  quite  a 
forest  of  dwarf  cypress. 


SALT  LAKE.  73 

Turning-  now  more  to  the  south,  we  arrived 
in  about  an  hour  and  a  half  at  a  low,  flat 
expanse  of  sand,  strewed  with  blocks  and 
intersected  with  natural  walls  of  crystallized 
salt,  and  having  at  a  little  distance  all  the 
appearance  of  the  ruins  of  a  large  Arab 
town.  After  proceeding  along  it  for  some 
time,  our  attention  was  attracted  by  a  shin- 
ing, narrow  line  that  intersected  our  path, 
resembling  a  bright  scaly  serpent  winding 
through  the  sandy  desert.  We  soon  ascer- 
tained that  it  was  water.  Our  guide  seemed 
puzzled ;  and,  as  a  high  bank  of  crystallized 
salt  edged  the  little  stream  on  the  opposite 
side,  I  went  forward  with  "  Arab  Dick  "  to 
look  out  for  a  fordable  place. 

We  had  not  advanced  far  on  our  reconnois- 
sance,  when  our  camels  sank  suddenly  up  to 
their  girths,  and  we  had  to  jump  off  their 
backs  in  great  haste,  to  save  ourselves  from 
being  pickled  along  with  them  in  this  salt  bog 
— for  such  it  proved  to  be — on  the  hard  trea- 
cherous surface  of  which  we  had  been  travel- 
ing for  some  distance.     It  covers  an  area  of 


74  SALT  LAKE. 

several  hundreds  of  square  miles,  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  desert. 

Fortunately,  we  had  left  our  baggage 
camels  on  a  sound  footing,  for  it  required  the 
exertions  of  the  whole  party  to  deliver  the 
two  struggling  animals  from  their  unpleasant 
situation.  The  great  difficulty  was  to  turn 
their  heads  round,  as  every  plunge  forward 
planted  the  huge,  awkward  beasts  deeper 
and  faster  in  the  brine.  They  were  much 
terrified,  and  trembled  during  the  rest  of  the 
journey  whenever  they  put  their  feet  upon  a 
treacherous  piece  of  sand. 

After  heavy  rains,  large  lakes  are  formed 
here  by  the  torrents  poured  down  from  the 
ravines  in  the  side  of  the  mountain  range 
that  bounds  the  plain  some  miles  to  the  south, 
but  a  stratum  of  salt  must  underlay  the 
greater  part  of  the  desert  of  Suez,  for,  dig 
where  you  will,  and  to  whatever  depth,  the 
I  water  is  always  strongly  impregnated  with  it. 
We  passed  near  and  tasted  the  water  of  one 
large  pond,  which  was  quite  as  salt  as  that 
of  the  Red  Sea,  and  clear  as  crystal.      It  is 


WELLS  OF  AD.IEROUD.  7^ 

evident,  also,  that,  at  some  distant  period, 
the  sea  has  swept  over  this  vast  plain,  as  beds 
of  marine  shells,  bleached  by  the  sun  of  cen- 
turies, are  scattered  about  on  all  sides. 

About  two  hours  after  our  corning,  (to  avoid 
a  repetition  of  which,  we  took  a  yet  more 
southerly  direction),  we  reached  the  foot  of 
the  hills,  and  pitched  our  tent  for  the  night 
in  a  ravine,  sheltered  from  the  Khampseen 
wind,  which  blew  strong  and  cold. 

We  resumed  our  journey  at  sunrise,  and, 
ascending-  the  hills,  after  a  four  hours'  scram- 
ble across  them,  reached  the  wells  of  Adje- 
roud,  the  precipitous  cliff  in  which  the  lofty 
Gibel  Ettagah  terminates  at  the  east,  having 
served  as  a  directing  point,  until  we  got  sight 
of  the  wells.  These  being  situated  on  a  gen- 
tle rise,  are  seen  several  miles  off.  The  fort 
of  Adjeroud  is  left  about  two  miles  off  on  the 
right. 

The  water  of  the  wells  is  quite  undrink- 
able,  excepting  for  camels.  A  gradual  slope, 
of  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in  length, 
brought  us  to  Suez. 

Suez  stands  at  the  extremity  of  a  low  sandy 


76  TOWN  OF  SUEZ. 

cape,  that,  jutting-  into  the  Red  Sea,  forms  a 
kind  of  estuary  of  that  part  of  it  which  is 
situated  to  the  north  of  the  town.  On  the 
land-side,  it  is  enclosed  by  an  old  and  badly 
flanked  stone  wall,  in  which  there  is  but  one 
gate  to  enter  by. 

With  the  exception  of  a  rusty  old  iron  gun, 
that,  protruding  its  muzzle  from  a  decomposed 
embrasure  made  to  flank  the  gate,  threatens 
destruction  to  all  who  might  be  bold  enough 
to  fire  it,  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  a 
fortified  town  are  no  where  perceptible. 

A  lazy  authority  (whether  civil  or  military 
puzzled  us  to  divine)  laid  down  his  pipe  to 
have  an  uninterrupted  stare  at  us.  His  curi- 
osity being  satisfied,  he  threw  himself  back 
on  his  divan,  without  troubling  himself  or  us 
with  either  question  or  salutation. 

The  town  does  not  occupy  one  half  the 
space  enclosed  by  the  walls,  and,  though 
apparently  in  a  ruinous  condition,  is  said  to 
contain  from  twelve  to  sixteen  thousand  in- 
habitants —  principally  boatmen  and  fisher- 
men. It  is,  perhaps,  from  their  occupations 
calling  them  frequently  from  home,  and  the 


SITE  OF  ARSINOE.  Tl 

great  influx  of  Hadji  bound  to  the  Holy  City, 
and  other  less  devout  travellers,  that  the  fair 
skins  and  light  hair  of  most  of  the  rising  ge- 
neration are  to  be  attributed. 

The  site  of  an  old  city  (Arsinoe)  is  indicated 
by  a  heap  of  rubbish  and  broken  pottery,  a 
little  distance  to  the  north-east  of  Modern 
Suez  ;  and  the  remains  of  a  line  of  entrench- 
ments, thrown  up  by  the  French  during  their 
occupation  of  Egypt,  and  somewhat  more 
scientifically  arranged  than  the  works  of  the 
town,  may  yet  be  traced  in  advance  of  the 
walls. 

The  estuary  stretches  inland  about  two 
miles  and  a  half  from  Suez,  and,  at  its  head, 
passes  the  road  from  Cairo  to  Tor  and  Mount 
Sinai,  which  strikes  off  from  the  Suez  road 
before  reaching  the  wells  of  Adjeroud. 

The  course  of  the  canal  that  formerly  con- 
nected the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile  can  be  but 
imperfectly  traced.  It  seems  to  have  com- 
menced at  a  point  where  the  coast  bends  to 
the  eastward,  and  where  two  brick  ruins, 
running  in  a  northerly  direction  for  some  dis- 


78  TEMPERATE  CLIMATE. 

tance,  have  very  much  the  appearance  of  pier 
heads.  It  must  have  been  carried  through 
the  low  part  of  the  desert — now  a  salt  bog — 
and  thence  by  the  Ras  el  Wadi  to  Belbeis. 

The  present  state  of  this  desert  tract  would 
completely  prevent  such  a  communication 
between  the  two  seas  from  being  re-opencd. 
The  level  of  the  Red  Sea  is  thirty  feet  higher 
than  that  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  about 
eighteen  lower  than  that  of  the  Nile  at  Cairo. 

The  market  at  Suez  is  ill-supplied  with  pro- 
visions, fish  being  the  only  consumable  article 
that  is  abundant.  The  water  is  so  bad,  that, 
for  culinary  purposes,  the  place  is  supplied 
from  the  fountains  of  Moses,  situated  on  the 
opposite  shore  of  the  Red  Sea. 

The  climate  is  said  to  be  very  temperate. 
Rain  is  nevertheless  as  infrequent  here  as  in 
the  rest  of  Egypt.  In  the  months  of  January 
and  February  a  few  showers  refresh  the  parch- 
ing sands,  but  rarely  at  any  other  period  of 
the  year. 

The  place  has  been  constantly  visited  by 
plague  ;   and  the  cholera,  in  its  devastating 


TRADE  OF  SUEZ.  J9 

tour,  made  a  long  sojourn  at  Suez,  carrying 
off  nearly  half  its  inhabitants. 

The  anchorage  is  between  two  and  three 
miles  from  the  town,  and,  though  good — as  far 
as  affording  firm  holding  ground — is  exposed 
to  every  wind  that  blows.  Fortunately,  the 
northerly  gales,  which  are  the  most  prevalent, 
are  the  least  dangerous,  being  off  shore. 
Several  sandy  reefs  must  be  crossed  to  gain 
the  anchorage,  rendering  the  landing  and 
shipment  of  goods  both  hazardous  and  tedi- 
ous. The  present  trade  of  Suez  is  principally 
with  Tor,  Jedda,  and  the  other  ports  of  the 
Red  Sea,  and  carried  on  in  small  bottoms 
that  can  get  up  to  the  town  at  high-water. 
The  mariners  are  by  no  means  bold,  never 
going  to  sea  when  it  blows  hard,  and  seldom 
venturing  far  from  the  coast  under  any  cir- 
cumstances. 

It  is  expected  (though  I  much  doubt  it) 
that  the  contemplated  rail-road  to  Cairo  will 
draw  to  Suez  a  great  part  of  the  English 
trade  with  China  and  India.  The  establish- 
ment of  a  steam  communication  with  Bombay 


80  OBSTACLES  TO  COMMERCE. 

will  certainly  give  an  impetus  to  the  com- 
merce of  the  place ;  but  there  are  too  many 
difficulties  in  the  way  ever  to  permit  of  its 
carrying  on  a  flourishing  trade  by  means  of 
sailing 'vessels,  for,  besides  the  insecurity  of 
the  anchorage  and  the  risk  in  landing  goods, 
a  northerly  wind  blows  from  Suez  to  Jedda, 
almost  uninterruptedly  from  March  to  Sep- 
tember, against  which  but  few  merchant  ves- 
sels could  make  head,  even  with  plenty  of  sea- 
room  ;  whereas,  here  they  would  be  confined 
to  a  very  narrow  space,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  with  dangerous  coral  reefs,  and  without 
a  port  on  either  coast  to  seek  shelter  in.  At 
the  straits  of  Jubal,  indeed,  the  entrance  to 
the  Gulf  of  Suez  is  contracted  by  these  reefs 
to  the  width  of  only  a  few  miles. 

The  same  obstacles,  though  presenting 
great  difficulties,  are  not  so  insurmountable 
for  steam  navigation ;  but,  though  the  English 
government  may  find  it  worth  while  to  incur 
the  expense  of  keeping  up  such  a  mode  of 
communication  with  our  Eastern  possessions, 
yet,  as  a  commercial  speculation,  there  is  not, 


SOUTH-WEST  MONSOON.  81 

at  this  moment,  the  slightest  chance  of  its 
answering. 

There  is,  however,  a  terrible  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  keeping  up  a  constant  communication 
even  by  steam  between  Bombay  and  Suez ; 
an  obstacle  which,  if  not  altogether  insur- 
mountable during  several  months  of  the  year, 
will  be  found  so  hard  to  overcome  as  to  ren- 
der the  intercourse,  during  that  period,  at  all 
events,  very  uncertain.  I  allude  to  the  south- 
west monsoon,  which  blows,  from  the  month  of 
May  until  the  autumnal  equinox,  between  the 
coast  of  Adel  and  that  of  India.  Difficult  as 
this  obstinate  wind  would,  under  any  circum- 
stances, be  to  contend  against,  even  with 
steam  power,  yet  perseverance  would  even- 
tually prevail,  could  fresh  supplies  of  fuel  be 
furnished  to  make  good  the  consumption 
occasioned  by  such  a  contest.  But  that,  in 
the  present  case,  is  out  of  the  question. 

From  Bombay  to  Mucala  (the  nearest  port 
where  a  supply  of  fuel  could  be  deposited)  is 
a  distance  of  one  thousand  four  hundred  miles, 
and  no    steamer  could    possibly  contrive  to 

VOL.    11.  G 


82  COMMUNICATION  WITH  INDIA. 

carry  a  sufficient  quantity  of  coals  to  make 
such  a  distance  against  a  constant  strong 
adverse  wind.  The  remainder  of  the  voyage 
could  be  accomplished  without  much  diffi- 
culty, as  between  Mucala  and  Suez  (a  distance 
of  one  thousand  six  hundred  miles)  the  ports 
of  Mocha,  Jedda,  and  Kosseir,  successively 
present  themselves,  at  any  of  which  fuel  could 
be  procured,  as  occasion  might  require. 

In  one  respect,  and  in  one  only,  the  pro- 
jected communication  with  India  by  the  Eu- 
phrates holds  out  an  advantage  over  that  by 
the  Red  Sea,  namely,  that  steamers  proceed- 
ing to  the  Persian  Gulf,  during  the  prevalence 
of  the  south-west  monsoon,  would  neither  have 
to  contend  against  that  wind  for  such  a  dis- 
tance, nor  have  it  so  directly  opposed  to  them, 
the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf  being  only 
nine  hundred  miles  from  Bombay,  and  its 
bearing  about  e.  n.  e. 

On  entering  the  Euphrates,  however,  the 
difficulties  of  this  line  commence;  and  they 
are  such  as  will  have  to  be  encountered  at  all 
seasons,  and  at  every  step,  consisting  of  rocks, 
shallows,  rapids,  (rendering  steaming  by  night 


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  EUPHRATES.  83 

out  of  the  question),  scarcity  of  fuel,  insecu- 
rity of  the  depots  from  the  hostility  of  the 
natives  and  wandering  tribes,  intolerable  heat, 
insalubrity  of  climate,  and,  finally,  a  long  land 
journey  across  a  mountainous  country  from 
Bir  to  Scandaroon.  This  journey  may,  at  the 
present  moment,  (thanks  to  Mohammed  Ali) 
be  undertaken  with  confidence,  but,  if  any 
change  should  take  place  in  the  government 
of  Syria,  might  next  year  expose  travellers 
to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  "  poor,  oppressed" 
inhabitants. 

In  comparing  the  two  routes,  therefore, 
though  it  be  admitted  that  the  voyage  from 
Bombay  to  the  Red  Sea  is  impracticable  for 
four  months  of  the  year — namely,  from  June 
till  September — yet  it  is  doubtful  whether, 
during  that  same  period,  any  Europeans  could 
bear  up  against  the  intolerable  heat  of  the 
Persian  Gulf:  and,  for  the  remaining  eight 
months  of  the  year  —  even  should  the  thou- 
sand obstacles  that  the  navigation  of  the 
Euphrates  nmv  presents  be  eventually  over- 
come— that  route  must,  without  dispute,  cede 

g2 


84  GULF  or  SUEZ. 

to  the  other,  on  the  score  both  of  expedition 
aild  security. 

Regarding'  the  two  routes,  in  a  military 
point  of  view — as  lines  of  communication  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  her  eastern  posses- 
sions— that  of  the  Euphrates  would  be  thrown 
so  forward  towards  the  enemy's  frontier,  as 
to  be  exposed  to  be  intercepted  at  the  very 
commencement  of  hostilities ;  whereas,  the  line 
by  the  Red  Sea  would  be  perfectly  secure  un- 
til the  enemy  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  pos- 
session of  Lower  Egypt.  It  is  superfluous  to 
observe,  that  the  friendship  of  Egypt  is  neces- 
sary for  the  security  of  either  line. 

The  navigation  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez  (as  that 
portion  of  the  Red  Sea  to  the  north  of  the 
Straits  of  Jubal  is  called)  has  already  been 
noticed  as  attended  with  danger  and  difficulty 
as  regards  sailing  vessels ;  but  a  steamer, 
provided  with  a  pilot  and  abundance  of  coals, 
would,  by  being  able  to  steer  a  direct  course, 
be  comparatively  free  from  risk. 

Kosseir,  whilst  it  offers  a  better  anchor- 
age, and  more  convenient  landing-place  than 


STEAM  NAVIGATION   ON  THE  NILE.  85 

Suez,  is  not  so  well  calculated  for  the  termlmis 
of  the  voyage  from  Bombay,  for  though  a  rail- 
road could  be  laid  down  to  Kheneh,  by  which 
letters,  goods,  &c.  might  be  conveyed  to  the 
Nile,  within  an  hour  of  the  same  time  as  by 
that  about  to  be  established  between  Suez 
and  Cairo,  yet  steam  navigation  on  the  Nile 
is  open  to  one  of  the  objections  that  present 
themselves  on  the  Euphrates,  namely,  the  dif- 
ficulty of  "  progressing"  at  night;  conse- 
quently, much  more  time  would  be  occupied 
in  getting  from  Kheneh  to  Cairo,  than  from 
Kosseir  to  Suez.  Could  this  difficulty  be 
overcome,  (which,  by  establishing  a  series  of 
floating  lights  on  the  river,  I  think  it  might 
be)  Kosseir  should  be  fixed  on  as  the  point 
of  communication  rather  than  Suez ;  since 
the  most^dangerous  part  of  the  Red  Sea  to 
navigate,  as  well  as  that  over  which  the 
northerly  winds  are  most  prevalent,  would 
thereby  be  avoided. 

There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  possibility 
of  improving  the  port  of  Suez,  or,  I  should 
rather  say,  any  means  of  making  one,  for  it 


86  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

is  a  mere  roadstead.  The  channels  through 
the  shoals  that  lie  between  the  anchorage  and 
the  town,  even  at  high  tide,  are  very  shallow  ; 
whilst,  at  low  water,  they  are  practicable 
only  for  small  boats  ;  and,  with  the  least  wind, 
such  a  surf  is  raised  as  to  cut  off  all  com- 
munication between  the  town  and  shipping. 

It  is  the  received  opinion  that  the  pas- 
sage of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  Israelites  was 
effected  at  Suez  ;  and  it  has  been  maintained, 
that,  without  any  miraculous  interposition, 
such  a  host  as  Moses  and  Aaron  led  might 
have  passed  between  the  ebbing  and  flowing 
of  the  tide. 

The  objections  to  this  hypothesis  are  nume- 
rous. In  the  first  place,  the  breadth  of  the 
Red  Sea  at  Suez  is  about  three  miles  ;  which 
space,  at  high  water,  is  completely  covered  to 
the  depth  of  upwards  of  six  feet  in  the  most 
shallow  parts.  At  low  tide,  the  greater  part 
of  this  distance  is  laid  dry ;  but  it  is  inter- 
sected by  various  channels,  which  are  even 
then  from  four  to  five  feet  deep.  Now,  since 
"  The  children  of  Israel  went  into  the  midst 


BY  TPIE  ISRAELITES.  87 

of  the  sea  upon  the  dry  ground^"  it  follows 
that,  without  a  miracle,  they  could  not  have 
done  so  here. 

We  will  suppose,  however,  that  the  Jewish 
leaders  were  learned  enough  to  calculate  their 
movements  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  the 
period  when  the  tides  were  at  the  flood  (which 
is  granting  a  great  deal,  since  their  departure 
depended  on  Pharaoh's  permission  being  ob- 
tained)— and,  further,  that  by  "  dry  ground" 
is  simply  meant  that  the  Israelites  had  not  to 
swim  for  it ;  and  that  "  the  waters  being  as  a 
wall  to  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their 
left,''  should  be  considered  only  as  the  cus- 
tomary hyperbole  of  Eastern  language.  Still, 
could  a  multitude  of  two  millions  of  souls,  en- 
cumbered with  some  thousands  of  camel  loads 
of  baggage,  and  numerous  flocks  and  herds, 
pass  along  a  defile  *  of  the  kind  {up  to  their 
waists  in  water),  in  the  short  space  of  time 
allowed  between  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of 

•  A  defile  it  must  in  any  case  have  been,  for  the  IsraeUtes  were 
confined  by  deep  water  on  the  one  side,  and  the  host  of  the  Egyp- 
tians on  th^  other.  Their /ro»t  must  necessarily,  therefore,  have  been 
but  small. 


88  PASSAC4E  OF  THE  REI>  SEA 

the  tide  ?  Any  one,  who  has  an  idea  of  the 
time  a  disciplined  army  of  one-tenth  that 
amount  would  occupy  in  effecting  such  a  pas- 
sage, must  say  it  would  have  been  perfectly 
impossible. 

That  the  passage  was  effected  near  Suez 
will,  from  the  nature  of  the  country,  hardly 
admit  of  a  doubt,  whatever  difference  of  opi- 
nion may  exist  as  to  the  situation  of  the  land 
of  Goshen.  On  this  latter  point,  it  appears 
to  me  that  no  discrepancy  should  exist,  as 
the  tract  of  country  about  Salehieh  and  San 
is  clearly  pointed  out  in  the  Scriptures  as  the 
land  given  to  the  Israelites  ; — "  Marvellous 
things  did  he  in  the  sight  of  their  fathers,  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  field  of  Zoan." 

Again,  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  Pharaoh 
allotted  to  the  Israelites  the  land  that  was 
best  calculated  for  their  following  the  occu- 
pation to  which  they  were  at  that  time  de- 
voted— namely,  the  tending  and  breeding  of 
cattle — and  which  was  not  of  any  great  value 
to  the  natives,  who  were  all  agriculturists. 
Now,  the  tract  of  land  along  the  right  bank 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  89 

of  the  pelusic  branch  of  the  Nile  exactly  an- 
swered these  purposes  ;  the  uncertainty  of  the 
inundation  of  the  river  rendered  the  cultiva- 
tion of  this  part  of  the  Delta  very  precarious  ; 
whereas,  the  flocks  and  herds  could  be  driven 
from  one  part  to  another,  according  as  pas- 
turage was  to  be  found,  having  the  desert  to 
retire  to  whenever  the  flood  was  general. 

Again,  the  locality  of  Goshen  is  established 
by  another  passage  of  Scripture ;  for,  when 
the  time  was  come  for  the  people  of  Israel  to 
leave  Egypt,  "  God  led  them  not  through  the 
way  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  although 
that  was  near — lest,  peradventure,  the  people 
repent  when  they  see  war  and  they  return  to 
Egypt ;  but  God  led  the  people  about  through 
the  way  of  the  Red  Sea."  This  can  apply 
only  to  the  most  eastern  pare  of  Egypt,  be- 
cause, from  any  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile, 
the  wilderness  of  the  Red  Sea  would  be  on 
the  direct  line  to  go  either  to  Canaan,  or 
Mount  Sinai. 

The  whole  march  of  the  Israelites  is  evi- 
dently marked  by  the  Divine  hand,  to  impress 


90  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

upon  their  stubborn  hearts  the  conviction  of 
His  omnipotence.  They  might  easily  have 
been  made  victorious  over  the  Philistines  and 
over  the  Egyptians  ;  but  they  would  have  at- 
tributed their  success  rather  to  their  superior 
prowess  than  to  Divine  interference  in  their 
favour.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  by  a 
series  of  indisputable  miracles,  to  convince 
them  of  their  dependence  upon  a  Divine  ruler ; 
and  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  was  one 
chosen  for  that  purpose. 

When  permission  for  the  Israelites  *'  to  de- 
part" was  at  length  wrung  from  Pharaoh,  it 
was  not,  however,  to  leave  Egypt,  but  merely 
to  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness 
to  offer  sacrifices.  Pharaoh,  it  is  true,  ex- 
pressed himself  in  these  words,  '*  Get  ye  forth 
from  amongst  my  people,  and  go  serve  the 
Lord,  as  ye  have  said."  Had  they  understood 
this  to  imply  a  permission  to  leave  Egypt,  (a 
favour  that  it  does  not  appear  Moses  and 
Aaron  ever  asked,)  their  march  would  at  once 
have  been  directed  to  the  eastward.  Such 
was  not  the  case,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter. 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  91 

"  They  journeyed  from  Rameses  to  Succoth," 
and  "  they  took  their  journey  from  Succoth 
and  encamped  at  Etham,  in  the  edge  of  the 
wilderness — and  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that 
they  turn  and  encamp  before  Pi-hahiroth,  be- 
tween Migdol  and  the  sea,  over  against  Baal- 
Zephon,  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the 
sea." 

Now,  Rameses  was  evidently  another  name 
given  in  those  days  to  the  land  of  Goshen,  * 
and  not  to  any  particular  city.  Succoth  (which 
we  may  suppose  to  be  Salahieh)  was  the  place 
appointed  for  the  assemblage  of  the  different 
tribes  of  Israelites — who  could  not  possibly, 
previously  to  the  permission  for  them  to  de- 
part was  granted,  have  been  kept  collected 
together  on  any  one  point — and  there,  ere 
Pharaoh's  suspicions  of  their  ulterior  designs 
could  be  verified,  they  stopped  to  bake  their 
bread. 

Resuming  their  march  towards  the  wilder- 
ness, they  reached  Etham  (El  Khereen)  situated 

*  See  Genesis,  chap.  47,  v.  6  and  11. 


92  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

on  its  edge.  Thus  far  their  route  had  been 
directed  towards  the  nearest  range  of  moun- 
tains, on  the  summit  of  which  they  had, 
doubtless,  expressed  a  wish  to  offer  up  their 
sacrifices,  *  but  now  they  received  directions 
to  turn  towards  the  Red  Sea,  and  henceforth 
they  marched  day  and  night  to  gain  its 
northern  extremity,  ere  Pharaoh  could  cut 
them  off. 

In  this  endeavour,  it  was  intended  they 
should  be  frustrated  ;  for  Pharaoh — who,  it  is 
evident,  had  all  along  suspected  their  intention 
was  to  fly  from  Egypt,  and  had  kept  his  forces 
collected  ready  to  pursue  them — no  sooner 
learnt  *'  that  the  people^et?,"  than  he  marched 
towards  the  head  of  the  Red  Sea,  calculating 
on  coming  up  with  the  fugitives  "  entangled 
in  the  land,  and  shut  in  by  the  wilderness." 

Had  not  Pharaoh  been  deceived  by  the  pre- 
vious southerly  direction  of  the  march  of  the 

*  It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  Jews  wished  to  offer  their 
sacrifices  on  high  ground — otherwise,  much  less  than  a  three  days' 
journey  (which  they  constantly  requested  permission  to  make) 
would  have  carried  ihem,  from  avy  part  of  Egypt,  to  a  sufficiently 
secluded  spot  for  their  purpose. 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  93 

Israelites,  they  would  not  have  gained  a 
day's  march  upon  him ;  and  he  would  natu- 
rally, on  hearing  of  their  flight,  have  pursued 
immediately  and  overtaken  them  in  the  de- 
sert, where  no  miracle  so  convincing  as  that 
which  was  contemplated  could  have  been 
wrought,  to  render  God's  power  evident  to 
such  a  stubborn  race  as  the  Jews. 

It  was  necessary,  therefore,  that  Pharaoh's 
suspicions  should  be  confirmed  in  time  only 
to  allow  of  his  reaching  the  Red  Sea  before 
them.  We  may  suppose  he  came  up  with 
them  encamped  about  the  wells  of  Adjeroud, 
having  the  Red  Sea  before  them,  and  the 
rocky  cliffs  of  Pi-hahiroth  (Gibel  Ettagah) 
hemming  them  in  to  the  south.  The  Egyp- 
tian army,  therefore,  taking  post  for  the  night 
on  the  left  flank  of  the  Jewish  encampment — 
between  it  and  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez 
— seemed  to  cut  them  off"  from  all  chance  of 
escape. 

It  is  by  many  persons  supposed  that  Old 
Cairo  stands  on  or  near  the  site  of  the  city  of 
Rameses,  (from  which  two  millions  of  souls 


94  MARCH  OF  THE  ISRAELITES. 

departed ! !)  and  that  Belbeis  is  the  Succoth 
of  Scripture.  In  that  case,  where  is  Etliam 
("on  the  edge  of  the  wilderness")  to  be 
placed  ?  Why  should  not  the  Israelites  have 
turned  at  once  from  Succoth  (or  even  before) 
towards  the  Red  Sea  ?  for,  if  they  were  de- 
parting out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  full 
permission,  then  all  deceit  on  their  parts  was 
unnecessary  ;  and,  by  proceeding  to  Etham, 
they  were  going  a  day's  journey  out  of  their 
direct  way,  without  any  object  in  view. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  considered  that 
they  had  merely  Pharaoh's  permission  to  go 
and  sacrifice  as  they  had  often  requested,  and 
it  therefore  became  an  object  with  them  to 
deceive  him  as  to  their  ulterior  intentions, 
still,  they  gained  nothing  by  continuing  their 
march  a  second  day  towards  Pelusium,  ere 
they  turned  towards  the  Red  Sea — since  Ra- 
meses  (if  Old  Cairo)  was  as  near  Pihahiroth  as 
Etham  was,  (supposing  it  to  be  on  the  edge 
of  any  part  of  the  desert),  and  the  road  much 
better. 

If  the  Israelites  pretended   to   be    merely 


LAND  OF  GOSHEN.  96 

going*  to  a  sandy  desert  to  offer  up  their  sa- 
crifices, their  not  striking  at  once  off  the  direct 
road  to  Palestine  would  naturally  have  con- 
firmed the  suspicions  of  Pharaoh,  instead  of 
allaying  them,  as  they  could  have  no  possible 
excuse  for  continuing  their  march  for  two 
entire  days  along  the  edge  of  a  desert  that 
was  in  every  way  suited  to  their  purpose. 

I  think,  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the  land 
of  Goshen  was  the  north-eastern  part  of  the 
Delta ;  and  that  all  the  attempts  which  have 
been  made  to  account  for  the  deliverance  of 
the  Jews  from  bondage,  and  the  destruction 
of  Pharoah's  host  otherwise  than  by  the  means 
recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  are  founded  on  the 
supposed  occurrence  of  natural  phenomenay 
equally  as  dependent  as  the  miracle  itself,  on 
the  will  of  an  Almighty  power  ;  without,  in 
the  result,  being  attended  with  the  same 
convincing  proof  of  the  Divine  interference. 

During  our  stay  at  Suez,  we  were  most 
hospitably  entertained  by  Kodsi  Manoulli, 
his  majesty's  consular  agent,  whose  judgment 
in  old  East  India  Madeira  compensated  for 


96  ROUTE  FROM  SUEZ  TO  CAIRO. 

his  want  of  musical  taste  —  a  defect  that  has 
been  before  recorded  of  him.  Some  Mount 
Sinai  wine,  to  which  he  treated  us,  we  should 
have  considered  excellent  under  other  circum- 
stances ;  the  admirers  of  the  **  fine,  rough- 
flavoured"  port,  might  even  have  preferred  it 
to  his  old  Cercial. 

There  are  several  roads  from  Suez  to  Cairo. 
That  which  is  most  usually  taken  passes 
by  the  Birket  el  Hadjee,  as  it  offers  the  ac- 
commodation of  two  trees,  upon  which  pilgrims 
on  their  route  to  the  Holy  City  can  hang  their 
old  garments  ;  whereas,  on  none  of  the  other 
roads  is  there  more  than  one  of  these  conve- 
nient old  clothes'-pegs.  I  believe,  also,  that 
the  two  tree  road  affords  more  pasturage  for 
their  camels,  if  the  long  rank  grass  that  grows 
scantily  here  and  there  can  be  so  called.  One 
road  turns  the  Gibel  Ettagah  to  the  south, 
reaching  the  Nile  at  Old  Cairo,  and  to  this  has 
most  preposterously  been  given  the  name  of 
"  The  Wandering  of  the  Israelites." 

We  returned  to  Cairo  by  the  middle  road, 
which  is  the  best  and  shortest,  and  that  by 


PROJECTED  RAIL-ROADS.  9/ 

which  it  is  proposed  to  carry  the  rail-road. 
The  ascent  to  the  wells  of  Adjeroud  is  very 
gradual.  From  thence,  the  road  keeps  along 
the  perpendicular  face  of  the  Gibel  Ettagah, 
(distant  about  three  miles),  leaving  the  fort 
of  Adjeroud  (five  miles  from  the  wells)  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  on  the  right.  It 
encloses  only  a  well,  mosque,  and  a  large 
storehouse  belonging  to  the  Viceroy,  and  occa- 
sionally— when  the  town  of  Suez  is  full — serves 
to  lodge  Hadjee  bound  to  Mekka.  In  the  year 
1833-4,  no  less  than  ten  thousand  of  these 
devout  pilgrims  bent  their  steps  by  this  one 
route  to  the  shrine  of  the  prophet. 

After  passing  Adjeroud,  the  road  traverses 
a  nearly  flat  and  perfectly  uninteresting  coun- 
try, presenting  at  times  a  surface  of  hard 
sand  and  pebbles,  but  generally  exposing  to 
view  the  bare  lime  and  sandstone  rocks.  At 
the  distance  of  sixteen  miles  from  Suez,  the 
road  by  the  Birket  el  Hadjee  turns  off  to  the 
right — keeping  on  the  northern  side  of  the 
Gibel  Aoutah — a  rocky  range  that  stretches 
northward  some  little  distance  into  the  desert. 

VOL.  n.  H 


yo  REMARKABLE  TREE. 

The  direct  road  passes  between  this  chain 
and  the  western  roots  of  the  Gibel  Ettagah ; 
and,  at  thirty-seven  miles  from  Suez,  arrives 
at  the  tomb  of  some  Mohammedan  Santon, 
which  is  considered  just  half  way  between 
Suez  and  Cairo.  Near  it  is  a  well  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet  deep,  but  no  water.  About 
three  miles  beyond  the  wall  is  the  tree. 

It  is  hung  all  over  with  the  tattered  gar- 
ments of  the  Hadjee,  which,  in  default  of 
foliage,  afford  a  shade  for  the  weary  traveller 
to  repose  under.  The  many-coloured  canopy 
was  not  sufficiently  attractive  to  induce  us  to 
accept  its  shelter  —  on  the  contrary,  it  had  a 
plaguey  look  that  made  us  give  it  a  wide 
berth ;  so,  jogging  on  yet  some  miles  further, 
we  reached  a  low  hill  on  the  right  of  the  road, 
under  which  we  pitched  our  tent  for  the  night. 

The  remainder  of  the  road  is  perfectly  un- 
interesting :  it  crosses  several  slight  undula- 
lations,  but  none  of  sufficient  importance  to 
cause  a  rail-road  to  diverge  from  its  direct 
course,  for  they  may  be  cut  down  with  the 
greatest  ease.      The  rock  is  always  close  to 


RETURN  TO  CAIRO.  99 

the  surface,  and  in  no  part  of  the  road  is  there 
any  deep  sand  to  contend  against. 

When  arrived  within  five  or  six  miles  of 
Cairo,  a  dead  level  extends  all  the  way  to 
Boulak,  upon  which  place  a  branch  rail  will 
doubtless  be  directed,  as,  for  all  useful  pur- 
poses, the  bank  of  the  Nile  is  the  point  to  be 
gained  rather  than  Cairo. 

The  whole  distance  from  Suez  to  Cairo  is 
reckoned  eighty  one  miles,  (which  is  certainly 
the  maximum),  and  took  us  eighteen  hours  and 
a  half,  dromedary  riding,  to  accomplish.  The 
only  drawback  to  this  line  for  a  rail-road  is  the 
want  of  water,  for,  although  there  are  several 
wells,  yet  not  a  drop  of  water  is  to  be  had 
between  Cairo  and  Adjeroud. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  give  my  readers 
more  '*  pencillings  by  the  way  :"  suffice  it  to 
say,  that  when  I  next  get  under  weigh,  it  will 
be  by  the  vessel  that  conveyed  me  from  Alex- 
andria to  Candia.  In  the  meanwhile,  I  shall 
introduce  a  few  chapters  on  the  present  state 
of  affairs  in  Egypt. 


H  2 


lOO  FORM  OF  GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Form  of  Government — Character  of  Mohammed  All — Former  State 
of  the  Country — Difficulties  to  Overcome  in  Effecting  Improve- 
ments— Unw^arrantable  Abuse  of  Foreigners — Parallel  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali  and  Napoleon — System  of  Administration — Ameliora- 
tions Effected — Council  of  State — Faulty  Position  of  the  Viceroy 
of  Egypt  in  his  Intercourse  vi^ith  the  Diplomatic  Agents  of  the 
European  Powers  —Errors  in  his  Foreign  Policy — The  Advantage 
of  his  Ceding  Canada  to  Great  Britain— Policy  of  England  tow^ards 
Mohammed  AU — Views  of  Russia — Necessity  of  Increasing  the 
Power  of  Egypt  to  counteract  them — Feebleness  of  Persia — 
Policy  of  Recognising  the  Independence  of  Egypt,  and  of  Guar- 
ranteeing  the  Succession  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  to  the  Throne. 

Egypt,  "  terre  classique  de  VEsclavage,' 
continues  to  be  governed  with  the  same  de- 
spotic sway,  as  when  under  the  dominion  of 
the  Pharaohs,  Ptolemies,  and  Caesars — the 
Khaiifs,  Mameluke  Sultans,  and  Turkish 
Pashas.  As  the  power  of  the  last  of  this  long 
list  of  tyrants  diminished,  on  the  decadence 
of  the  Turkish  empire,  the    wretched  inhe- 


THE  MAMELUKE  BEYS.  lOI 

ritors  of  this  hereditary  oppression  became 
subjected  to  a  yet  more  intolerable  yoke,  and 
plunged  yet  deeper  in  the  abyss  of  misery  by 
exchanging  the  single  despot  for  a  multitude 
of  tyrants — the  power  of  the  satrap  appointed 
by  the  Sultan  having  been  usurped  by  the 
lawless,  self-elected  Mameluke  Beys. 

This  detestable  race  having — after  a  period 
of  the  utmost  misery  to  the  country — been  at 
length  got  rid  of,  by  an  act  as  unjustifiable  in 
principle  as  it  was  beneficial  in  consequences, 
the  undivided  power  passed  once  more  into 
the  hands  of  the  Sultan's  lieutenant.  But 
Mohammed  Ali  had  not  imbrued  his  hands  in 
the  blood  of  the  Mamelukes,  to  deliver  over 
the  power  of  which  he  dispossessed  them  to 
the  wily  Sultan.  He  knew  full  well  how  un- 
willingly he  was  continued  in  the  Pashalic  of 
Egypt,  and  was  quite  aware  of  the  snare  that 
had  been  laid    to    deprive  him  of  it.*     He 

•  The  Sultan  (Mahmoud  II.)  was_  most  desirous  to  remove  Mo- 
hammed Ali  from  the  Pashalic  of  Egypt ;  but,  all  his  firmans  having 
failed  to  produce  his  head,  he  thought,  by  ordering  him  to  undertake 
the  war  against  the  Wahabees,  his  purpose  might  be  effected.  This, 
as  a  war  of  religion,  he  knew  his  faithful  lieutenant  could  not  refuse 


102  CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

most  wisely  resolved,  therefore,  to  reap  him- 
self the  benefit  of  his  crime,  by  assuming,  in 
all  things  but  the  name,  the  sovereign  svs^ay  of 
the  former  rulers  of  Egypt. 

In  the  commencement  of  his  ambitious 
career,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  Mo- 
hammed Ali  had  any  other  views  than  those  of 
his  own  personal  aggrandizement  in  liberating 
Egypt  from  the  yoke  of  the  Porte  ;  but,  con- 
scious that,  in  relieving  the  country  from  the 
oligarchical  tyranny  of  the  Mameluke  Beys, 
he  exposed  himself  to  a  danger  yet  more 
urgent  than  the  hatred  of  the  Sultan,  namely, 
the  envy  of  his  Turkish  subordinates ;  he 
saw  the  policy  of  calling  forth  the  energies 
of  the  natives  to  shield  him  from  the  impend- 
ing storm.  Whilst,  in  effecting  this,  much 
good  has  been  done  to  the  country,  so  com- 
pletely  have  its   interests  become  identified 

to  engage  in,  and  lie  trusted  in  his  absence  to  stir  up  the  Mamelukes 
— who  were  even  more  inimical  to  Mohammed  Ali  than  to  himself — 
to  prevent  his  return,  and  receive  a  more  compliant  Pasha  from  his 
hands.  Mohammed  Ali  had  no  excuse  to  plead  for  not  marching 
against  the  Wahabees,  but  he  rendered  the  Sultan's  plan  abortive, 
by  murdering  all  the  Mamelukes  ere  he  set  out  on  his  expedition. 


CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL  103 

with  those  of  its  ruler,  that  to  speak  of  the 
government,  commerce,  policy,  &c.,  of  Egypt, 
is  to  speak  of  the  character  of  Mohammed 
Ali,  who  may  most  justly  apply  to  himself 
the  noted  words  of  an  equally  despotic  poten- 
tate— VEgypte  "  c'est  moi.'' 

It  may  be  as  well,  therefore,  before  pro- 
ceeding further,  to  sketch  an  outline  of  the 
character  of  this  extraordinary  man.  His 
early  history  and  rapid  advancement  from  a 
simple  tax-gatherer  to  the  three-tailed  dignity 
of  a  pasha  are  too  well  known  to  require 
dilating  upon ;  and,  indeed,  are  events  of 
such  common  occurrence  in  Turkish  history, 
as  to  excite  no  surprise ;  but,  that  a  Moham- 
medan should  shake  off  his  early  prejudices, 
and  take  a  lead  in  the  march  of  innovation,  is 
a  phenomenon  that  calls  forth  general  asto- 
nishment. 

Possessed  of  great  acuteness  of  perception, 
which  enables  him  at  a  glance  to  see  the 
drift  and  tendency  of  affairs — endued  with 
tact  and  presence  of  mind  to  turn  them  to  his 
advantage,  and   with  a   self-possession   and 


104  CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

calmness  that  seldom  can  be  shaken — inde- 
fatigable in  business,  and  finding  time  to 
attend  personally  to  every  thing — courageous, 
generous,  tolerant,  and  merciful,*  Mohammed 
Ali  wanted  but  education  to  have  made  him 
the  greatest  man  that  Islamism  ever  pro- 
duced. But  that  want,  unfortunately,  obliges 
him  to  see  with  the  eyes  of  other  people,  to 
hear  through  the  polluting  channel  of  a 
dragoman,  to  pick  up  knowledge,  in  fact,  as 
he  best  can,  from  the  herd  of  needy  foreigners 
that  surround  him. 

It  is  thus,  that,  led  astray  by  vague  notions 
of  the  wonderful  powers  of  steam — its  bene- 
ficial application  to  various  purposes  to  save 
manual  labour — of  the  extraordinary  facilities 
afforded  to  commerce  by  the  introduction  ol 
rail-roads,  &.C.,  he  has  been  induced  to  engage 
in  many  ruinous  undertakings,  that  have 
gained  for  him,  with  some,  the  character  ol 
a  mere  "  homme  a  projets." 

But  it  should  be  recollected  that  he  is  ar 

•  Merciful  for  a  Turk— in  whose  breast  the  feeling  of  self-pre 
servation  is  paramount  to  all  others. 


CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL  105 

uneducated  Turk,  to  whom  all  these  things 
are  new — that,  thwarted  in  all  his  plans  for 
the  improvement  of  the  country  by  his  brother 
Osmanlees  —  assisted  in  them  but  little  by 
the  ignorant  natives,  and  suspicious  of  the 
motives  of  his  Frank  advisers,  (by  whom  he 
has  so  often  been  deceived)  it  requires  more 
than  human  penetration  —  amongst  the  nu- 
merous schemes  proposed  for  his  adoption 
— to  sift  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  and  obliges 
him  to  purchase  experience  at  an  enormous 
cost. 

Thus  much,  therefore,  must  be  admitted  in 
his  praise  : — That,  whilst  many  of  his  innova- 
tions have  benefited  the  country  very  mate- 
rially, other  plans  which  have  been  laid  for 
its  improvement  have  failed,  either  through 
the  ignorance  or  cupidity  of  the  projectors, 
or  been  overturned  by  Mohammed  Ali's  own 
anxiety  to  push  the  march  of  intellect  into  a 
trot: — that,  whilst  invested  with  despotic 
power,  he  has  governed  the  country  with  a  jus- 
tice and  clemency  unheard  of  in  the  Moham- 
medan dominions,  since  the  days  of  Haroun-el- 


106  PRESENT  STATE  OF  EGYPT. 

Raschid  :  that,  the  few  acts  of  cruelty  and  op- 
pression which  he  has  occasionally  been  led  to 
commit,  have  been  forced  upon  him  by  the  un- 
ceasing enmity  of  the  Porte — and  that  the  con- 
tinuance of  a  system,  which  certainly  presses 
hard  upon  the  resources  of  the  country,  is  an 
unavoidable  consequence  of  the  inexplicable 
policy  of  the  great  European  Powers.  Many 
of  the  evils,  however,  under  the  weight  of 
which  Egypt  still  groans,  are  the  growth  of 
ages — and  by  time  only  can  they  be  eradi- 
cated. 

If,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  ambitious  pro- 
jects, Mohammed  Ali  had  plunged  Egypt  in 
greater  misery  than  she  formerly  suffered, 
then,  indeed,  with  justice,  might  be  applied 
the  opprobrious  epithets  that  have  so  pro- 
fusely been  lavished  upon  him ;  but  what,  let 
me  ask  his  detractors,  could  possibly  be 
worse  than  the  condition  of  the  native  Egyp- 
tian, under  the  satraps  of  the  Sultan,  or  the 
Mameluke  Beys  ? — each  bent  on  extracting 
the  utmost  amount  of  treasure  from  the  land, 
in  the  least  possible  time. 


EGYPTIAN  PEASANTRY.  lOJ 

In  the  more  remote  ages,  the  state  of  the 
Egyptian  peasant  was  probably  somewhat 
better:  for  then,  though  the  agriculturist 
was,  perhaps,  as  much  the  property  of  the 
upper  classes  (the  priesthood  and  military) 
as  the  ground  he  was  employed  to  till,  yet, 
estates  being  hereditary  in  the  different 
classes,  the  proprietors  of  the  land  were  in- 
terested in  the  well-being  of  their  dependents. 

But,  from  the  period  of  the  Persian  con- 
quest, the  natives  of  Egypt  have  toiled  only 
for  the  benefit  of  strangers,  who  had  but  a 
passing  interest  in  the  country.  Their  em- 
bracing the  religions  of  their  various  con- 
querors served  them  nought ;  they  remained 
mere  slaves,  whose  bonds  every  succeeding 
set  of  masters  tightened :  and  when,  at  last, 
Egypt  fell  a  prey  to  the  Turks,  under  the  fe- 
rocious Selim,  those  masters  being  themselves 
barbarians,  the  degradation  of  its  inhabitants 
could  go  no  further.  From  that  period  they 
have  been  worse  treated,  and  considered  of 
less  value  than  the  ox  or  buffalo  they  were 
condemned  to  goad. 


108  RELIGIOUS  PREJUDICES. 

Mohammed  Ali  found,  therefore,  the  native 
Egyptians  sunk  in  the  lowest  depth  of  misery 
and  degradation — a  race  of  beings  human 
only  in  form  and  the  faculty  of  speech. 
Hence,  to  judge  of  the  correctness  of  the 
abuse  that  has  been  heaped  upon  him,  we 
must  compare  their  present  state  with  their 
condition  at  that  period,  when  an  obvious 
improvement  is  apparent — bearing  in  mind, 
at  the  same  time,  that,  even  amongst  civilized 
nations,  there  is  no  short  cut,  no  royal  road, 
to  secure  their  well-being.  Whilst  the  path  of 
the  Egyptian  Viceroy  appeared  to  be  strewed 
with  almost  insuperable  difficulties,  the  pro- 
gress that  has  been  made  towards  this  de- 
sirable end  has  been  wonderfully  great,  for  not 
only  had  Mohammed  Ali  to  remove  the  over- 
whelming mass  of  religious  prejudices  that 
weighed  down  the  Egyptian  nation,  and  to 
break  through  the  barrier  of  ignorance  that 
blinded  it  to  its  state  of  degradation,  but  he 
had  to  overcome  the  opposition  of  all  those 
powerful  chieftains,  whose  interest  it  was  to 
keep  their  vassal  Fellahs  in  this  debased  and 


SYSTEM  OF  THE  SULTAN.         109 

ignorant  condition,  and  to  brave  the  authority 
of  the  Vicegerent  of  the  Prophet. 

In  the  execution  of  this  dangerous  and  de- 
licate enterprise,  he  exhibited  a  rare  combi- 
nation of  boldness,  foresight,  and  perseve- 
rance— liberating  himself  successively  from 
the  vassalage  of  the  Sultan,  the  control  of 
the  Mameluke  Beys,  the  baneful  influence  of 
the  Turkish  local  authorities,  and  the  rule  of 
his  insubordinate  Albanian  soldiery  ;  playing 
off  one  against  another  with  the  most  con- 
summate ability,  until  he  had  rid  himself  of 
all,  and  called  into  existence  a  power  which 
he  hopes  to  be  able  to  control  and  hand  over 
as  an  inheritance  to  his  successor. 

How  far  this  latter  part  of  his  plan  may 
succeed,  it  is  not  easy  to  divine ;  but,  if  his 
system  be  persevered  in  but  for  a  few  more 
years — whether  his  dynasty  govern  Egypt  or 
not — the  country  will  be  for  ever  freed  from 
the  dominion  of  the  Turks.  Thus,  therefore, 
if  Mohammed  Ali  has  acted  solely  in  further- 
ance of  his  own  designs,  in  producing  this 
change,  and  if  the  Egyptian  people  have  for 


no  BENEFICIAL  DESPOTISM. 

the  present  changed  only  an  oligarchical  ty- 
ranny for  that  of  a  despot — still,  to  that 
despot  are  they  indebted  for  the  chance  he 
has  afforded  them  of  eventually  liberating 
themselves  from  the  oppression  of  foreigners. 

But,  though  it  is  not  probable  they  will 
ever  again  submit  to  be  tyrannized  over  by 
others — having  tasted,  if  not  of  the  sweets  of 
liberty,  at  all  events  of  those  oi  power — yet,  if 
too  soon  deprived  of  the  firm  hand  which  now 
rules  them,  civil  dissentions  may  arise  nearly 
equally  detrimental  to  civilization.  Fortunate 
will  it  be  for  them,  therefore,  if  they  continue 
some  years  longer  subjected  to  the  despotism 
of  their  present  ruler — a  despotism  that  con- 
sists in  compelling  an  ignorant,  debased,  but 
by  no  means  incapable  people,  to  work  out  its 
own  liberation.  Still,  the  impulse  only  has 
been  given ;  much  remains  yet  to  be  done, 
which  time  only  can  accomplish  ;  for  it  would 
be  unreasonable  to  expect  that  a  country  go- 
verned, as  for  ages  Egypt  has  been,  could  at 
once  start  into  civilization. 

Those  Europeans,  therefore — who,  after  vi- 


COMPLAINTS  AGAINST  THE  VICEROY.  HI 

siting*  Egypt,  return  home  and  criticize  the 
present  state  of  things  in  that  country,  be- 
cause it  is  not  what,  according  to  their  theo- 
retical notions,  it  ought  to  be — surely  do  not 
sufficiently  consider  the  difficulties  that  were 
to  be  encountered.  Arriving  with  preconceived 
ideas  of  the  regeneration  of  the  country,  and 
of  the  despotic  power  to  do  good  of  its  quasi- 
civilized  ruler,  they  see  every  thing  through 
a  medium  of  disappointment,  and  throw  all 
the  blame  of  what — according  to  their  scheme 
— is  wanting  on  Mohammed  Ali. 

One  complains  of  his  not  cultivating  more 
land.  He  orders  a  canal  to  be  excavated,  and 
another  instantly  raises  an  outcry  at  his  com- 
pelling the  ''  starving  Fellah"  to  work  at  it : 
quite  forgetting  —  or  not  being  aware  —  that 
they  are  not  to  be  hired,  like  the  starving  pea- 
santry of  some  other  countries.  Another  finds 
fault  with  him  for  his  monopoly  of  corn,  with- 
out remembering  that  famine  has  constantly 
resulted  from  a  free  trade  in  Egypt. 

Others,  again  — w^ho  incline  to  the  fabulous, 
—  lend  their  willing  ears  to  all  the  stories  of 


112  COMPLAINTS  AGAINST  THE  VICEROY. 

the  banishment  of  foreign  merchants,  drown- 
ing of  prime  ministers,  &c.  &c.  tales,  which — 
though  they  serve  very  well  to  fill  up  a  dull 
letter  —  are,  perhaps,  yet  more  destitute  of 
foundation  than  the  "  Arabian  Nights'  Enter- 
tainments ;  but  are  abundantly  fabricated  by 
the  tribes  of  Greeks,  Levantines,  and  Arme- 
nians, who — perceiving  that  their  hitherto  in- 
dispensable intervention  in  all  affairs  is  no 
longer  needed :  that  the  peculations  and  im- 
positions by  which  they  lived  can  no  longer 
be  practised  with  impunity  —  endeavour,  in 
every  possible  way,  to  cry  down  the  system 
of  Mohammed  Ali. 

The  Franks  who  have  been  discharged 
from  the  Viceroy's  service,  either  from  their 
exorbitant  demands,  or  their  proved  incapa- 
city, join  in  the  clamour.  ,  Those  who,  over- 
rating their  abilities  or  services,  consider 
themselves  ill  rewarded  or  neglected,  pro- 
nounce Mohammed  Ali  to  be  "  an  ungrateful 
old  monster ;"  whilst  by  others,  whose  swind- 
ling schemes  he  has  seen  through,  he  is  called 
"  a  cunning  old  fox." 


CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALT.  113 

His  parasites,  on  the  other  hand,  would  fain 
persuade  him  that  he  is  a  second  Napoleon ; 
and,  in  some  respects  indeed,  he  may,  without 
flattery,  be  compared  to  that  wonderful  man. 
Like  him,  he  has  had  the  courage  to  grasp  a 
sceptre,  that  threatened  to  wither  the  hand 
that  touched  it  —  like  him,  he  has  had  the 
talent  to  unite,  under  his  despotic  sway,  men 
whose  opinions  and  characters  were  as  oppo- 
site as  day  and  night  —  like  the  French  Em- 
peror, he  has  improved  his  dominions  by  nu- 
merous useful  institutions  and  public  works — 
has  rewarded  munificently  those  who  served 
him  faithfully.  He  drains  the  resources  of  his 
conquered  provinces,  to  pay  the  immense 
standing  army  that  is  necessary  to  hold  his 
empire  together  —  he  oppresses  his  subjects 
with  a  heavy  conscription,  to  fill  the  ranks  of 
that  army :  and  here  the  Egyptian  despot 
loses  much  in  the  comparison  in  the  opinion 
of  his  subjects,  who  consider  the  word  "  glory" 
a  poor  backschis,  for  the  sacrifices  they  are 
obliged  to  submit  to,  to  obtain  it. 

Mohammed  Ali  has  victories  also  to  boast 

VOL.  II.         •  I 


114  PARTING  WORDS  TO  IBRAHIM. 

of,  though  not  of  the  same  stupendous  kind  as 
those  of  the  French  conqueror.  The  massacre 
of  the  Mamelukes  may  be  considered  Ids  Jaffa, 
but  the  cold-blooded  murder  of  the  innocent 
Due  d'Enghien  remains  without  a  parallel. 
Mohammed  Ali  is  not  cruel  without  necessity : 
his  parting  words  to  Ibrahim,  on  his  proceed- 
ing to  the  Morea,  do  him  infinite  honour :  — 
*'  May  God  give  3^ou  the  victory,  my  son ; 
and,  if  He  give  it  to  you,  may  He  grant  you 
the  virtue  of  clemency!  Be  an  enemy  with 
your  enemies,  but  with  the  weak  be  mer- 
ciful!" 

Conscious  of  the  precariousness  of  his  posi- 
tion, the  government  of  Mohammed  Ali  has, 
from  the  very  commencement  of  his  career, 
been  founded  on  a  system  of  balance.  Thus, 
to  shelter  himself  from  the  anger  of  the  Porte, 
his  first  care  was  to  gain  over  the  Turkish 
officers,  his  immediate  subordinates :  his  next, 
to  compromise  them  with  the  Sultan ;  and,  by 
giving  them  a  share  of  his  hatred,  to  bind 
them  to  his  own  interest. 

To  establish  himself  yet  more  firmly  in  his 


DEATH  BY  IMPALING.  115 

rule,  and  to  enable  him  to  dispense  with  the 
support  of  his  Osmanlee  adherents,  his  next 
step  was  to  gain  the  affections  of  the  native 
inhabitants  of  the  country ;  and  in  this  he  has 
succeeded,  by  introducing  milder  laws,  dis- 
tributing justice  with  an  impartial  hand,  re- 
lieving them  of  the  numerous  petty  exactions 
of  his  subordinates  in  authority,  and  promot- 
ing them  to  situations  of  trust  and  emolu- 
ment. 

Amongst  the  many  benefits  for  which  the 
natives  are  indebted  to  Mohammed  Ali,  by 
these  changes  in  the  institutions  of  the 
country,  that  of  the  abolition  of  the  punish- 
ment of  death  by  impaling,  *  or  by  any  other 
barbarous  means,  deserves  particular  notice  : 
as,  also,  the  stop  that  has  been  put  to  the 
wholesale  butcheries  that  were  formerly  arbi- 
trarily committed  by  the  Governors-  of  Pro- 
vinces, and  other  petty  authorities :  the  Vice- 
roy having  reserved  to  himself  alone  the 
power  of  disposing  of  his  subjects'  lives,  f   Of 

•  Excepting  in  extreme  cases. 

f  The  power  of  inflicting  death,  without  a  reference  to  the  Vice- 

i2 


116  COUNCIL  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

this  privilege,  however,  he  avails  himself  but 
seldom — so  unwilling,  indeed,  is  he  to  be  the 
judge,  even  in  trifling  matters,  where  he  is  a 
party  concerned,  that  for  offences,  however 
slight,  committed  in  his  own  household,  the 
culprits  are  handed  over  for  trial  to  the  usual 
authorities.  A  remarkable  instance  of  this 
occurred  during  my  stay  at  Cairo. 

To  shelter  himself  from  the  odium  that 
some  of  his  measures  might  excite  amongst 
the  people,  as  well  as  to  keep  open  the  breach 
that  has  been  effected  between  the  Sultan  and 
his  Turkish  adherents,  Mohammed  Ali  has 
called  to  his  assistance  a  council,  consisting 
of  some  thirty  or  forty  of  the  principal  officers 
of  State  and  Ministers,  to  whose  considera- 
tion all  the  acts  of  his  Government  are  sub- 
mitted, ere  they  are  promulgated.  The  sit- 
tings of  this  Council  are  constant ;  but  its 
functions  are  deliberative  only:  for  no  act 
originates  with  it — nor  is  it  permitted  to  dis- 

roy,  still  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  Governors  of  Provinces,  in  cer- 
tain cases,  where  immediate  punishment  is  considered  necessary — 
such,  for  instance,  as  open  resistance  to  the  laws,  &c. 


THE  LATE  WAR  WITH  TURKEY.  117 

CUSS  the  merits  of  any  other  matters,  than 
those  submitted  for  its  opinion  and  advice. 

Each  member  gives  his  opinion  separately 
and  in  writing — but  the  Council,  being  com- 
posed entirely  of  the  dependents  of  the  Vice- 
roy, who  are  nominated  by  him,  and  remove- 
able  at  his  pleasure,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that 
it  is  in  the  habit  of  thwarting  his  views.  In- 
deed, the  French  Chambers,  under  Napoleon 
in  prosperity,  were  hardly  more  compliant. 

The  Council  of  Mohammed  Ali  possesses, 
however,  this  advantage  over  those  of  his 
great  prototype;  namely,  that  whilst  it  screens 
him  from  unpopularity  at  home,  it  involves 
many  in  the  responsibility  of  his  foreign  po- 
licy— which,  where  it  militates  against  the 
interest  of  the  Porte,  is  very  important. 
Thus,  the  late  war  with  Turkey  was  not  un- 
dertaken (although  there  can  be  no  doubt  it 
was  fully  determined  on,)  until  the  policy  of 
the  measure  had  been  submitted  to,  and  ap- 
proved of  by  this  complaisant  assembly  of 
grandees — and  it  consequently  became  very 
popular. 


118  INTERFERENCE  OF  THE  PORTE. 

For  the  better  administration  of  justice,  and 
to  facilitate  the  collection  of  the  revenues  and 
imposts,  the  country  has  been  divided  into 
provinces,  and  these,  again,  into  departments ; 
and  proper  officers  have  been  appointed  to 
perform  these  several  duties,  by  which  means 
the  Fellahs  are  in  a  great  degree  relieved  from 
the  petty  exactions  to  which  they  were  for- 
merly subject. 

The  governors  of  provinces  are  nearly  all 
Turks ;  but  amongst  the  Mamours  (or  chiefs 
of  districts)  are  now  to  be  found  many  Arabs, 
and  the  Sheiks  or  heads  of  villages  are  inva- 
riably chosen  from  amongst  the  natives.  All 
these  appointments,  as  well  as  those  of  Ca- 
dees,  Nazirs,  &c.,  are  made  by  the  Viceroy ; 
but,  strange  to  say,  a  Cadeeliskier,  or  Chief 
Judge,  is  still  sent  periodically — as  heretofore 
—from  Constantinople ;  although  in  the  more 
important  concerns  of  the  country — its  com- 
merce, foreign  relations,  &c — the  interference 
of  the  Porte  is  totally  disregarded,  excepting 
where  policy  obliges  Mohammed  AH  to  shelter 
himself  from  responsibility.    This  he  is  some- 


APPOINTMENT  OF  AN  EFFENDI.  119 

times  driven  to  do,  from  the  embarrassing 
demands  of  the  European  Powers ;  for,  though 
the  Council  of  State  is  an  admirable  shield 
against  the  Firmans  of  the  impotent  Sultan, 
yet  it  affords  no  protection  against  the  pro- 
tocols directed  against  his  commercial  system, 
from  all  parts  of  Europe. 

A  great  disadvantage  that  the  Viceroy  of 
Egypt  labours  under  in  this  respect  is  his 
being  placed  in  personal  contact  with  the 
Ministers  accredited  to  him  by  the  European 
Powers.  In  conversation,  promises  are  ex- 
acted on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  which  a 
moment's  reflection  shows  the  impolicy  of  his 
having  made.  Mohammed  Ali  is  in  this  way 
constantly  engaged  in  a  struggle  between  the 
sacredness  of  his  word,  and  the  expediency  of 
keeping  it. 

From  this  embarrassing  position,  nothing 
but  the  appointment  of  an  Effendi  for  Foreign 
Affairs  can  possibly  relieve  him.  This  useful 
medium  would,  in  the  first  place,  afford  him 
the  means  of  returning  an  evasive  answer  to 
any  unconscionable  demand,  (which  as   an 


120  THE  sultan's  foreign  policy. 

absolute  sovereign  he  cannot  give  ;)  and,  in 
the  next,  would  allow  time  for  the  matter  to 
be  viewed  in  all  its  bearings,  and  for  feeling 
the  pulses  of  any  other  European  Powers  that 
might  be  affected  by  the  measure.  Finally, 
it  would  furnish  him  with  a  scape-goat  on 
which  to  throw  the  blame,  when  driven  to  the 
last  extremity.  A  Potentate,  who  admits  a 
Foreign  Minister  to  the  conviviality  of  a 
Chibook,  does  not  stand  the  same  chance  in 
diplomacy,  as  the  Sovereign  who  is  hedged 
round  by  chamberlains,  lords  in  waiting, 
gentlemen  ushers,  and  aides-de-camp. 

In  his  foreign  policy,  as  in  many  acts  of 
his  home  administration,  Mohammed  Ali  has 
been  led  astray  from  his  true  interest  by  the 
needy  sycophants  about  him.  Persuaded  that 
the  wealth  and  greatness  of  England  are  de- 
rived from  her  numerous  manufactories  and 
powerful  navy — the  political  consequence  and 
strength  of  France  and  Russia,  from  the  size 
and  discipline  of  their  armies — he  has  been 
induced  to  establish  factories  and  arsenals, 
build  a  large  fleet,   and  raise   an  immense 


THE  EGYPTIAN  NAVY.  121 

body  of  troops,  with  the  idea  of  exciting  the 
respect  of  those  powers.  Though  these  esta- 
blishments were  certainly  called  for,  and  have 
been  eminently  useful  in  promoting  the  poli- 
tical regeneration  of  Egypt,  and  insuring  its 
internal  tranquillity,  yet  they  have  totally 
failed  in  effecting  the  purpose  for  which  they 
were  set  on  foot,  whilst  the  scale  on  which 
they  have  been  instituted  was  far  too  great 
for  the  necessities,  and  the  expense  of  main- 
taining them  is  totally  disproportioned  to  the 
resources,  of  the  country. 

The  navy  of  Egypt  is,  for  the  purposes  of 
either  defence  or  aggression,  perfectly  use- 
less. To  nations  which,  like  England  and 
France,  carry  on  an  extensive  trade  to  all 
parts  of  the  world  under  their  own  flags,  a 
state  navy  is  essentially  necessary;  but  Egypt 
has  no  merchant  vessels  of  her  own  to  protect, 
nor  will  she  possess  any,  whilst  the  present 
monopolizing  system  is  continued.  When 
she  has  capitalists  and  merchants  of  her 
own,  then,  and  not  before,  will  she  possess  a 
mercantile  navy ;  and  then  it  will  be  time  for 


122  THE  EGYPTIAN  NAVY. 

the  country  to  have  vessels  of  war  for  its 
protection. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Navy  of  Egypt  is 
not  powerful  enough  to  cope  with  the  fleets 
of  the  great  European  powers,  and  is  not  re- 
quired to  defend  her  shores  from  the  attacks 
of  any  others.  It  is  true,  without  it,  the  Sul- 
tan— should  he  feel  inclined  to  try  the  hazards 
of  another  war,  to  regain  his  lost  Asiatic 
provinces — and  should  the  European  powers 
permit  him — might  declare  the  blockade  of 
the  Egyptian  ports.  But,  it  would  be  merely 
a  declaration  —  for  the  nature  of  the  coast, 
from  Alexandria  to  Scandaroon,  is  such  as 
to  prevent  a  Turkish  fleet  from  carrying 
a  blockade  into  effect;  whilst  an  attack  on 
his  Syrian  frontier  would  quickly  bring  the 
Sultan  to  terms,  or  occasion  the  recall  of  the 
Turkish  fleet  to  the  sea  of  Marmora,  for  the 
defence  of  Constantinople. 

Candia  is  the  only  part  of  Mohammed  Ali's 
dominions,  for  the  protection  of  which  a  fleet 
could  be  required ;  and  its  possession  is  not 
worth  retaining,  at  the  cost  of  his  present 


POSSESSION  OF  CANDIA.  123 

navy,  much  less  at  that  of  a  war  with  any 
European  power.  A  few  frigates  would  de- 
fend it  from  the  Greeks,  as  well  as — perhaps 
better  than  —  a  fleet  of  line-of-battle  ships. 
From  the  Turks,  an  attack  on  their  own  do- 
minions would,  as  before  stated,  at  all  times 
relieve  it ;  whilst  the  jealousy  of  Great  Bri- 
tain may  quiet  his  apprehensions  of  having 
it  to  protect  from  any  other  European  power. 

Mohammed  Ali  would,  indeed,  act  wisely 
in  giving  up  this,  to  him,  unprofitable  posses- 
sion ;  by  which,  not  only  would  he  save  the 
great  expense  attendant  on  its  maintenance, 
but  remove  all  cause  for  collision  with  the 
Greeks,  with  whom  it  is  so  clearly  his  inte- 
rest to  be  on  good  terms,  not  only  from  their 
being  the  great  consumers  of  the  produce  of 
Egypt — and  its  principal  carriers — but  from 
their  friendship  being  of  the  utmost  conse- 
quence to  him,  in  the  event  of  a  rupture  with 
the  Porte. 

The  Sultan  would,  I  have  no  doubt,  most 
willingly  make  over  Candia  to  the  Greeks, 
but,  as  such  a  transfer  would  not  be  permit- 


124  ALLIANCE  WITH  ENGLAND. 

led,  he  ought  to  make  the  best  bargain  he 
can  for  it  with  Great  Britain* — the  power,  of 
all  others,  whose  friendship  it  is  of  the  great- 
est importance  to  him  to  cultivate,  since  her 
enmity  could  at  any  time  effect  his  ruin ;  for, 
it  is  a  truth  that  cannot  be  too  strongly  im- 
pressed upon  his  mind,  that,  whilst  it  would 
be  extremely  difficult  for  any  power  what- 
ever to  attack  Egypt,  without  the  consent  of 
England — so  long  as  she  maintains  her  mari- 
time superiority — so,  on  the  other  hand,  she 
can,  at  any  time,  and  in  spite  of  the  whole  of 
Europe,  effect  his  downfall.  A  simple  block- 
ade of  the  Egyptian  ports  would  do  this, 
without  firing  a  shot  or  landing  a  soldier — 
whilst  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  men  would 
effect  the  conquest  of  the  country. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  that  it  is  the 
obvious  policy  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  court  the 
friendship  and  alliance  of  Great  Britain,  we 
must  not  lose  sight  of  the  advantage  that  it 
also  is  to  England  to  maintain  the  indepen- 

•  Of  the  value  of  this  possession  to  Great  Britain,  I  have  offered 
some  remarks  in  treathig  more  particularly  of  that  island. 


ULTIMATE  VIEWS  OF  RUSSIA.  125 

dence  of  Egypt :  for,  chimerical  as  I  cannot 
but  consider  the  fears  of  a  Russian  invasion 
of  India,  at  the  present  day  —  where,  sup- 
posing all  the  difficulties  to  be  encountered 
on  the  march  to  have  been  overcome,  and  the 
Tartar  hordes  to  have  reached  the  frontiers 
of  Hindostan,  they  will  be  met  by  soldiers 
fully  equal  to  themselves  in  discipline  and 
courage,  and  superior  in  numbers — yet,  there 
is  no  foreseeing  what  changes  the  course  of  a 
few  years  may  bring  about. 

That  the  ultimate  views  of  Russia  are  di- 
rected towards  India,  I  am  not  by  any  means 
inclined  to  dispute ;  and,  as  she  would,  with- 
out doubt,  endeavour  to  possess  herself  of 
Egypt,  before  carrying  her  ultimate  plans 
into  execution  (since  it  would  be  madness  to 
push  an  army  to  the  southward  of  the  Cau- 
casian range,  leaving  Si  powerful  nation,  like 
modern  Egypt,  under  the  control  of  England, 
on  its  flank),  it  becomes  the  policy  of  Great 
Britain  to  prepare  beforehand  to  meet  this 
aggression,  against  the  execution  of  which 
no  insuperable  objections  present  themselves. 


126  LOSS  OF  THE  TURKISH  FLEET. 

Turkey  no  longer  offers  a  barrier  against 
the  designs  of  Russia.  The  loss  of  her  for- 
tresses was  the  unavoidable  consequence  of 
the  destruction  of  her  fleet ;  and  thus,  by 
the  influence  of  one  '*  untoward  event,"  was 
the  Ottoman  empire  laid  crouching  at  the 
feet  of  her  persevering  and  implacable  foe. 
"Not  a  hundred  English  line-of-battle  ships 
on  the  Euxine  would  now  affect  the  march  of 
a  Russian  army  on  Constantinople."*  The 
attempt  of  Turkey  to  resume  her  station 
amongst  the  European  powers,  byre-modelling 
her  army  on  their  plan,  is  but  a  fruitless  waste 
of  money.  She  possesses  not,  within  herself, 
the  materials  required  for  the  accomplishment 
of  such  an  undertaking.  Her  crafty  enemy, 
well  aware  of  this,  encourages  her  in  the 
vain  attempt,  which  helps  to  drain  her  re- 
sources, and  watches  but  the  favourable 
moment  to  effect  the  long-meditated  plan  of 
effacing  Turkey  from  the  map  of  Europe. 

Great  Britain,  having  thus  suffered  the  first 
and  great  outwork  that  secured  her  Indian 

*  Slade's  Turkey. 


POLICY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN.  12/ 

possessions  to  be  razed  to  the  ground,  must, 
necessarily,  erect  some  other  barrier  for  their 
protection,  and  Egypt  presents  herself  as  that 
best  suited  to  the  purpose.  Whilst,  there- 
fore, it  is  the  policy  of  England  to  strengthen 
the  new  power  that  has  started  into  existence 
in  every  possible  way,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  interest  of  Russia  to  keep  Egypt  in  its 
present  half-dependent  state; — not  exactly 
subject  to  the  Porte,  because  Turkey  would 
be  thereby  strengthened — and  Turkey  is  per- 
mitted to  drag  out  its  existence  yet  a  few  years 
longer  —  and  not  altogether  independently 
of  the  Porte,  because  the  power  of  Egypt 
would  be  thereby  doubled,  and,  consequently, 
the  better  prepared  to  resist  the  ulterior  am- 
bitious projects  of  Russia. 

The  policy  of  Great  Britain  (whatever  may 
be  its  intention)  tends  rather,  I  fear,  to  assist 
Russia  in  her  designs,  and — for  the  sake  of 
retaining  some  paltry  commercial  advantages 
— to  keep  Egypt  in  a  state  of  dependence 
upon  the  Sultan.  The  outcry  that  has  been 
raised  at  the  iniquity  of  assisting  Mohammed 


I 


128  EGYrT  AND  TURKEY. 

AH  against  his  liege  lord  (so  consistent  in  a 
people  that,  in  the  same  breath,  advocates  the 
independence  of  Poland)  is  too  absurd  to  be 
listened  to. 

Has  not  England  been  the  abettor — if  not 
the  prime  mover  —  of  most  of  the  revolts 
and  rebellions  that  have  distracted  both 
hemispheres  during  the  last  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury, whenever  it  was  her  interest  to  be  so  ? 
Has  she  been  deterred  by  any  such  fine 
chivalric  feeling  as  she  is  called  upon  to 
display  in  the  case  of  Egypt  and  Turkey, 
from  acknowledging  the  independence  of  the 
Brazils,  of  Mexico,  Columbia,  Greece,  Bel- 
gium, &c.  ?  And  is  she  to  be  prevented,  by 
a  senseless  clamour,  from  interfering  in  the 
case  oi  two  perfectly  distinct  people — connected 
by  no  one  bond  of  common  interest  or  affec- 
tion— in  whose  separation  no  ties  of  family 
are  torn  asunder,  no  one  class  of  men  ruined 
to  enrich  another,  no  misery  inflicted  on  the 
liberated  people  beyond  the  onerous  war- 
taxes  necessarily  imposed  upon  it,  to  meet 
the  expenses  of  the  immense  establishments 


DESIGNS  OF  RUSSIA.  129 

kept  up  to  secure  its  independence  ? — evils 
for  which  Egypt  is  indebted  to  the  vacillating 
policy  of  the  great  European  powers,  (but, 
above  all,  that  of  England)  in  not  frankly 
recognising  the  independence  of  Mohammed 
AH. 

Our  delaying  this  act  of  justice  to  the 
Egyptian  people  is  so  completely  playing  the 
game  of  Russia,  that,  in  the  event  of  the  pre- 
sent Viceroy's  death,  and  a  determination  on 
the  part  of  the  Sultan  to  resist  the  succession 
of  his  son  Ibrahim,  it  will  afford  that  power 
an  excellent  pretext  for  interfering  openly  in 
reducing  revolted  Egypt  to  subjection.  May 
not,  indeed,  the  secret  treaty  that  binds 
Turkey  hand  and  foot  to  Russia  contain  some 
provision  of  the  sort  ? 

Russia,  since  the  days  of  Catherine  II.,  has 
been  constantly  persevering  in  an  insidious 
scheme  of  aggrandizement.  At  the  conclusion 
of  each  succeeding  war,  she  has  invariably, 
either  under  the  pretence  of  protection,  or  as 
an  absolute  conquest,  added  some  portion  of 
her  adversary's  territory  to  her  dominions ; 

VOL.  II.  K 


130  DESIGNS  OF  RUSSIA, 

thereby  furnishing  herself,  in  the  former  case, 
with  a  never-faiiing  pretext  for  engaging-  in 
another  war ;  in  the  latter,  with  the  means 
of  re-commencing  hostilities  with  increased 
advantage. 

All  this  has  been  effected  in  so  subtile  a 
manner,  with  so  many  declarations  of  good 
faith  and  such  professions  of  moderation,  as 
to  allay  the  fears  of  the  other  European 
powers ;  which,  however  sensible  of  the  ad- 
vantages obtained  by  Russia  to  their  eventual 
prejudice,  still  scarcely  thought  each  fresh 
aggression  of  sufficient  consequence  in  itself, 
to  dispute  at  the  cost  of  a  general  war. 
Thus,  without  being  absolutely  duped  by  the 
protestations  of  Russia,  the  southern  powers 
of  Europe  have  quietly  shut  their  eyes  to  her 
ulterior  designs. 

In  the  mean  time,  that  power  has  neglected 
no  opportunity  of  improving  and  augmenting 
her  navy,  which  now  rides  in  undisputed  pos- 
session of  the  Black  Sea,  ready  to  favour  her 
operations  against  Egypt,  Persia,  or,  per- 
chance, India  ;  and  what  power  will  be  able 


POLICY  OF  AUSTRIA.  131 

to  prevent  her  armies  penetrating  to  the 
south,  when  the  time  for  carrying  her  am- 
bitious projects  into  execution  arrives  ? 

We  shall  turn  our  eyes,  perhaps,  to  Austria 
in  this  emergency  ;  but  what  interest  has  that 
power  in  preserving  India  to  England  ?  or  in 
checking  the  growth  of  Russia,  provided  she, 
herself,  gains  strength  in  a  like  ratio  ?  Does 
not  one  glance  at  the  map  of  modern  Europe 
show  what  the  interest  of  Austria  will  he,  if 
not  what  her  intentions  now  are  ?  Her  terri- 
tories, stretching  along  the  eastern  shore  of 
the  Adriatic,  whilst  they  shelter  the  attack  of 
the  Russians  on  Constantinople,  place  her  in 
a  position  to  seize  on  her  portion  of  the  spoil, 
whenever — throwing  off  the  mask — these  two 
ambitious  powers  determine  on  dividing  the 
Ottoman  dominions  between  them.  The  im- 
potent kingdom  of  Greece  will  offer  no  resist- 
ance. Great  Britain,  from  her  outports — 
Corfu  and  Zante — will  have  the  satisfaction  of 
witnessing  a  catastrophe,  which  her  distance 
deprives  her  of  the  possibility  of  averting  : 
and  France  will,  in  all  probability,  be  other- 

K  2 


132  VIEWS  OF  FRANCE. 

wise  occupied.  Indeed,  no  very  urgent  rea- 
son can  be  advanced,  why  France  may  not 
be  tempted  to  join  in  the  crusade — "  L'Expe- 
dition  de  I'Egypte  n'y  est  pas  oubliee"  has 
been  stated  by  a  recent  writer  ;  and  may  she 
not  be  actuated  by  a  "  morbid  desire"  of  ag- 
grandizement, as  well  as  Russia?  Has  her 
conduct,  of  late  years,  been  such  as  to  war- 
rant our  coming  to  a  different  conclusion? 

It  behoves  Great  Britain,  therefore,  to  leave 
no  means  untried  of  averting  the  impending 
danger  ;  and,  though  the  subjugation  of  Tur- 
key in  Europe  appears  inevitable,  to  endea- 
vour to  render  that  calamity  as  little  disas- 
trous as  possible,  by  taking  up  a  position  her- 
self, and  forming  fresh  combinations  amongst 
the  Asiatic  nations,  for  driving  back  the 
Kalmucs  to  their  native  steppes,  should  they 
attempt  to  penetrate  yet  further  to  the  south. 

To  do  this,  a  new  power  must  be  called 
into  existence  in  Asia  Minor,  and  every  sup- 
port given  to  the  tottering  empire  of  the 
Shah.  The  possession  of  the  Island  of  Can- 
dia  becomes  also  imperatively  necessary,  to 


POLICY  OF  ENGLAND.  133 

enable  Great  Britain  to  watch  the  operations 
of  the  enemy,  and  serve  her  as  a  rendezvous 
for  an  army,  which,  thus  centrically  situated, 
could  threaten  so  vast  an  extent  of  coast. 
The  power  that  must  be  called  into  existence 
is  clearly  E^ypt ;  for,  though  that  country 
itself  is  far  distant  from  the  seat  of  war,  yet 
its  frontier  possessions  have  wisely  been  ad- 
vanced to  meet  the  coming  danger  :  so  that, 
whilst  her  armies  will  be  at  hand  to  move 
forward  on  the  first  alarm,  her  inexhaustible 
resources  will  remain  in  perfect  security ; 
and,  under  the  protection  of  an  English  fleet, 
can  be  forwarded  quickly  to  the  scene  of  ope- 
rations. 

But  England  ought  not  to  rest  satisfied 
here.  It  is  her  policy  to  increase  the  power 
of  Egypt  by  every  possible  means,  and  not 
only  to  acknowledge  but  to  guarantee  her  in- 
dependence, and  even  ensure  the  succession 
to  the  throne  to  the  present  dynasty.  Her 
frontiers  should  be  extended  until  they  reach 
the  Tigris  on  the  side  of  Persia,  and  come  in 
contact  with  Russia  to  the  North  :  so  that  any 


134  PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  PERSIA. 

further  encroachments  on  the  part  of  that 
power  would  at  once  occasion  a  rupture.  In 
fact,  to  meet  Russia  with  a  chance  of  suc- 
cess, the  order  for  the  first  cossack  to  cross 
the  Balkan  should  be  the  signal  for  Ibrahim 
to  advance  on  Scutari  and  Trebizonde ;  for 
the  English  fleet  to  take  possession  of  Smyrna 
and  the  castles  on  the  southern  bank  of  the 
Dardanelles;  and  for  the  transfer  of  Candia 
to  the  protection  of  Great  Britain. 

Persia,  far  too  feeble  to  contend  single- 
handed  against  Russia,  and  cut  off  by  her 
position  from  receiving  any  effectual  assist- 
ance from  Great  Britain,  might,  nevertheless, 
by  the  help  of  such  an  ally  as  Egypt  would 
then  become,  be  able  to  resist  any  further  en- 
croachments upon  her  territory. 

The  aggrandizement  of  Russia,  at  the  ex- 
pense of  Persia,  has,  of  late  years,  been  rapid 
indeed ;  but  far  more  detrimental  to  the  inte- 
rests of  England  have  been  the  insidious  in- 
trigues of  that  Northern  Power  at  the  Court  of 
Tehraun,  than  even  the  success  of  her  arms  in 
the  field.     The  influence  of  Russia  is  already 


RUSSIAN  INVASION  OF  INDIA.  135 

nearly  equal  to  that  of  Great  Britain ;  and 
should  a  Prince  ever  be  placed  by  her 
means  upon  the  throne  of  Persia,  our  pre- 
ponderance will  cease  altogether,  and  the  in- 
vasion of  India  need  no  longer  be  regarded 
as  so  Quixotic  an  enterprise  as  it  appears  to 
be  at  the  present  day ;  for  the  base  of  opera- 
tions for  such  an  enterprise  might  then  be 
considered  as  advanced  to  Esterabad  ;  be- 
tween which  place  and  Astrakhan,  the  undis- 
puted possession  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  the 
use  of  steamers,  would  render  the  transmis- 
sion of  troops  and  supplies  both  certain  and 
immediate. 

It  is,  therefore,  only  by  threatening  the 
last  named  place  that  such  a  plan  could  be 
thwarted ;  and,  from  the  Egyptian  territories 
(if  advanced  to  the  shores  of  the  Bosphorus 
and  Euphrates)  this  might  be  done  :  whereas, 
if  they  continue,  as  at  present,  to  be  confined 
to  the  narrow  strip  of  coast  at  the  eastern 
extremity  of  the  Mediterranean,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  undertake  an  operation  of  the 
kind,  leaving  Persia  on  the  right  flank. 


136  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  EGYPT. 

The  course  of  the  Tigris,  or  Euphrates, 
(even  should  Persia,  by  conquest  or  alliance, 
become  a  party  in  the  war  on  the  side  of 
Russia)  can  never  be  taken  as  a  line  of  ope- 
rations for  attacking  India ;  for,  besides  the 
natural  difficulties  that  present  themselves  by 
that  route,  and  its  being  a  diverging  line,  it 
is  one  which,  by  leading  towards  the  shores 
of  the  Persian  gulf,  would  be  liable  to  be 
cut  off,  by  a  force  despatched  from  England. 
It  would  be  still  further  objectionable,  from  its 
being  exposed  to  attack  from  Egypt :  and 
this  again  shows  the  advantage  it  would  be 
to  Great  Britain,  to  strengthen  that  power, 
and  attach  her  to  our  interest ;  as,  by  her 
means,  we  should  at  all  times  have  it  in  our 
power  to  attack  Persia,  and  so  bind  the  Shah 
to  us  by  fear,  when  other  means  fail ;  and 
the  Egyptian  army  is  even  now  more  than 
a  match  for  the  disunited  and  undisciplined 
Persians.* 


*  The  total  population  of  Persia  is  eight  millions  of  souls,  two 
millions  of  which,  perhaps,  are  Nomads.  Indeed,  the  entire  popula- 
tion is  divided  into  independent  tribes,  having  different  habits  and 


COMMERCE  WITH  EGYPT.  137 

Turning  now  to  other  considerations,  that 
urge  Great  Britain  to  adopt  a  friendly  line  of 
policy  towards  Egypt,  besides  the  preserva- 
tion of  her  eastern  empire,  it  must  be  evident 
to  every  one,  that  the  great  change  which 
has  been  wrought  in  the  state  of  Egypt  must 
produce  a  corresponding  one  in  her  com- 
mercial relations  with  other  countries.  The 
greater  the  advance  of  Egypt  towards  civili- 
zation, the  greater  will  be  the  amount  of  her 
produce — the  more  numerous  her  wants  :  and 
here  again  it  becomes  the  policy  of  Great 
Britain  to  be  early  in  the  field  to  counteract 
the  intrigues  of  other  powers,  particularly  of 
France,  our  principal  competitor  for  commer- 
cial advantages. 

The  advocates  of  the  system  of  free  trade 
will  say — only  let  the  ports  of  Egypt  be  thrown 

interests,  and  presenting  but  slight  means  of  resistance  to  an  in- 
vader. The  regular  army  amounts  only  to  about  twenty  thousand 
men — cavalry,  infantry,  and  artillery ;  but  the  troops  that  might  be 
brought  into  the  field,  in  any  popular  war,  would  amount  probably 
to  three  hundred  thousand,  two-thirds  of  which  would  be  cavalry. 
But  such  an  army  is  little  to  be  depended  upon — the  annual  reve- 
nue which  reaches  the  Shah's  treasury  being  under  two  millions 
sterling — far  too  small  a  sum  to  pay  so  large  an  army. 


138  SUPPLY  OF  EGYPT. 

open  to  all  nations  alike,  and  England  will  be 
sure  to  have  the  advantage  ;  doggedly  main- 
taining that  in  no  case  can  we  stand  in  need 
of  commercial  favour. 

When,  however,  we  see  the  artful  manner 
in  which  France  is  using  every  means  to  mo- 
nopolize the  supply  of  Egypt — when  we  con- 
sider the  advantages  she  derives  from  situa- 
tion—  and  the  preference  she  claims  as  the 
principal  consumer  of  Egyptian  produce,  we 
must  indeed  be  wedded  to  a  theory,  to  which 
practice  is  so  diametrically  opposed.  It  be- 
hoves Great  Britain,  therefore,  on  this  score 
also  to  unite  herself  firmly  with  Egypt  by 
the  tie  of  recipi^ocal  inteixst ;  and  the  ad- 
vantages we  have  to  offer,  are  —  security 
to  her  commerce — and  release  from  foreign 
control. 

Any  attempt  to  attain  our  end  by  bullying 
Mohammed  Ali  would  be  the  acme  of  impo- 
licy. If  he  ceded  to  our  demands  through 
necessity,  he  would  be  our  pretended  friend 
and  concealed  enemy.  If  he  resisted  them, 
though  he  would  inevitably  succumb,  Russia 


GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  EGYPT.  139 

would  be  the  only  party  benefited  by  his 
fall.  Let  Great  Britain,  therefore,  throw  off 
the  mantle  of  hypocrisy,  and  bind  Egypt  to 
her  by  gratitude  as  well  as  mutual  advan- 
tage. That  the  tie  may  be  lasting,  and  the 
benefits  conferred  on  the  country  greater  than 
those  which  would  be  produced  by  a  mere  ac- 
knowledgment of  her  integrity,  let  a  spur  be 
given  to  her  industry  by  insuring  her  against 
falling  into  the  hands  of  a  Turkish  oligarchy, 
equally  as  baneful  to  the  prosperity  of  the 
nation  as  the  tyranny  of  the  Mameluke  Beys  ; 
and  this  can  only  be  effected  by  guaranteeing 
the  succession  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  to  the  throne 
of  his  father. 


140  IBRAHIM  PASHA. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Character  of  Ibrahim  Pasha — His  Conduct  in  Syria — In  the  Morea 
— Popularity  of  Mohammed  Ali  —  Grievances  of  his  Subjects  — 
Difficulties  he  has  to  contend  against  —  Wasteful  Expenditure  of 
Money  on  the  Wild  Schemes  of  Foreign  Adventurers  —  Project 
to  throw  a  Dam  across  the  Nile — Railroads — Concluding  Remarks 
upon  the  system  of  Government. 

Travellers  do  not  differ  more  in  their 
measurements  of  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyra- 
mid of  Ghizeh  than  in  that  of  the  intellect  of 
Mohammed  Ali's  son.  Indeed,  whether  Ibra- 
him be  really  his  son,  or  merely  the'  child  of 
his  adoption,  is  even  matter  of  dispute.  I 
incline  to  the  former  opinion ;  but  it  signifies 
very  little  whether  such  be  the  case  or  not, 
provided  he  is  acknowledged  to  be  so  by 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  has  sufficient  talent  to 
follow    in    his   soi-disant   father's    footsteps. 


IBRAHIM  PASHA.  141 

This  last  point,  as  before  observed,  is  that 
whereon  accounts  most  differ. 

Judging  from  Ibrahim  Pasha's  actions,  he 
cannot  be  denied  the  possession  of  the  quali- 
ties of  courage  in  the  field  and  tact  in  the 
cabinet;  whilst,  by  the  encouragement  he 
gives  to  agriculture,  the  protection  he  affords 
to  foreigners,  and  the  establishment  of  nume- 
rous schools  and  colonies  at  his  own  expense, 
it  may  be  presumed  he  is  desirous  of  promot- 
ing the  welfare  of  the  country  over  which  he 
looks  forward  to  rule. 

In  his  manner,  he  is  lively  and  impetuous, 
but  affable  and  communicative,  with  a  slight 
disposition  to  sarcasm.*  In  person,  he  is 
short  and  thick  set. 

A  great  deal  of  virtuous  indignation  has  of 

*  At  an  inspection  of  the  French  army  sent  to  the  Morea,  in  1827:, 
Ibrahim  Pasha,  pointing  to  some  particularly  ill-conditioned  and 
badly  clothed  regiments,  asked  Marshal  Maison  what  troops  they 
were  :  "  They  are  some  that  have  just  arrived  from  Spain/'  replied 
the  French  Generalissimo,  "  and  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity 
of  receiving  new  appointments."  "What!  "  exclaimed  the  Turk, 
with  well  feigned  astonishment,  "  do  you  employ  the  same  troops 
to  give  liberty  to  the  Greeks  that  have  been  making  slaves  of  the 
Spaniards  ? " 


142  IBRAHIM  PASHA  IN  SYRIA. 

late  been  expressed  at  the  extortions  and 
atrocities  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  in  Syria:  but 
what  do  all  his  acts  of  tyranny  amount  to  ? 
The  levying  taxes  on  a  turbulent  population 
which  had  been  accustomed  from  time  im- 
memorial to  beard  all  authority  with  impu- 
nity—  in  raising'  an  army  by  conscription 
amongst  a  set  of  lawless  bandits  that  had 
lived  by  rapine  and  plunder,  and  relieving  the 
peaceable  portion  of  the  inhabitants  from 
their  exactions  —  in  allowing  the  Franks  to 
remain  undisturbed  with  their  hats  on  their 
heads,  and  their  heads  on  their  shoulders  — 
the  putting  on  the  one  having  but  a  few  years 
since  been  deemed  quite  sufficient  excuse  for 
taking  off  the  other.  In  fact,  if  the  whole 
population  of  Palestine  had  been  cut  off  by 
"  one  fell  swoop  "  of  the  despotic  sword  of  the 
**  ferocious  Ibrahim  " — great  as  would  have 
been  the  loss  of  human  life,  it  would  have 
been  a  gain  to  civilization. 

The  war  in  the  Morea  was  certainly  carried 
on  in  the  most  barbarous  manner,  but  in  this 
species  of  warfare  the  Greeks  have  the  honour 


POPULARITY  OF  MOHAMMED  ALI.  143 

of  the  initiative — and  to  Ibrahim's  credit  be 
it  stated  that,  on  his  troops  carrying  the 
fortress  of  Anatolico  by  assault — when  even 
by  the  European  code  of  martial  law  the 
garrison  might  have  been  put  to  the  sword, 
— he  granted  the  Greeks  their  lives,  merely 
disarming  the  men  and  sending  them  with 
their  wives  and  families  to  Arta.  Ibrahim  is 
beloved  by  his  own  troops  and  feared  by  those 
of  the  enemy — and  if  he  does  occasionally — 
as  report  says — take  something  stronger  than 
sherbat,  Alexander  the  Great  and  other 
heroes  have  done  so  before  him.  He  is  not, 
however,  so  generally  liked  as  his  father. 

That  Mohammed  Ali  is  popular  in  Egypt 
cannot,  I  should  think,  be  questioned  by  any 
one  who  has  seen  him  ride  almost  unattended 
through  the  streets  of  Cairo,  dense  with  a 
fanatic  population.  To  all  my  inquiries  on 
this  point — and  I  questioned  persons  of  all 
ranks  and  of  every  nation — ^the  answers  were 
invariably  in  his  favour.  Each,  it  is  true,  had 
some  one  grievance  to  complain  of,  that  bore 
particularly   hard    on    himself    individually. 


144  EVILS  IN  THE  GOVERNMENT. 

The  Levantine,  whilst  he  praised  Mohammed 
Ali's  justice  and  liberality  generally,  com- 
plained of  the  laws  affecting  commerce.  The 
Jew,  though  he  admired  the  Viceroy's  tole- 
rance, disliked  his  system  of  monopolies.  The 
Arab  peasant  complained  only  of  the  con- 
scription ;  and  his  sole  regret,  after  becoming 
a  soldier,  is  that  his  new  calling  obliges  him 
to  leave  his  native  land.  The  Turk  alone 
finds  no  one  thing  to  praise,  and  fear  only 
checks  him  from  uttering  his  abuse  of  the 
whole  system  of  Mohammed  Ali's  govern- 
ment. 

That  there  are  faults  in  it  cannot  be  de- 
nied ;  but  the  seeds  of  many  of  the  evils  that 
retard  the  prosperity  of  the  country  —  evils 
that  are  equally  detrimental  to  the  interest 
of  Mohammed  AH  and  of  Egypt  —  are  too 
deeply  sown  to  admit  of  being  removed  but 
by  a  cautious  system  of  weeding  —  avoiding 
the  rooting  them  out  with  a  rash  hand,  lest 
the  good  seed  that  has  already  shot  up  might 
run  the  risk  of  being  also  destroyed. 

The  great  evil  that  weighs  down  the  coun- 


I 


APPROPRIATION  OF  LAND.  145 

try  —  pressing  particularly  on  the  springs  of 
industry  —  is  the  necessity  which  obliges  Mo- 
hammed Ali  to  constitute  himself  the  sole 
proprietor  of  the  soil ;  but  who  else  could,  in 
the  present  condition  of  Egypt,  possess  it  with 
greater  advantage  ?  If  the  country  were  par- 
celled out  in  grants  to  the  different  grandees 
of  his  court,  they,  being  all  Turks,  would 
regain  the  influence  of  which  it  has  (most 
wisely)  been  his  constant  aim  to  deprive 
them.  The  Arab  Sheiks  of  the  old  school 
are  not  sufficiently  enlightened  to  be  trusted, 
whilst  those  natives,  who  have  been  fitted  by 
education  for  such  charges,  are  not  old  enough 
to  have  the  requisite  influence  with  the  peo- 
ple, (whose  hereditary  respect  for  grey  beards 
is  unabated),  and  they  are,  besides,  wanted  for 
other  purposes.  If  the  lands  were  divided 
amongst  the  people  themselves,  each  Fellah 
would  cultivate  merely  the  quantity  of  ground 
sufficient  to  afford  him  subsistence. 

Mohammed  Ali  sees  the  necessity  of  creat- 
ing a  class  of  hereditary  landed  proprietors, 
who  would  have  an  interest — beyond  that  of 

VOL.  II.  L 


146  CAUSES  OF  MONOPOLY. 

the  moment  —  in  the  improvements  of  the 
country  and  the  condition  of  its  inhabitants 
— a  class  whose  well  being"  would  be  dependent 
upon  that  of  his  government,  and  which  could 
be  relied  upon  to  rally  round  him  in  resisting 
any  attempt  of  the  Turks  to  resume  their 
blighting  supremacy.  But  where  are  the 
materials  for  forming  this  class  to  be  found  ? 
He  has  commenced,  as  an  experiment,  by 
granting  lands  to  several  Europeans  ;  but  the 
Mohammedan  law  obliges  them  to  hold  their 
estates  in  the  names  of  natives  of  the  country, 
which,  in  a  great  degree,  defeats  his  object. 
He  has  also  bestowed  lands  on  some  few  of 
his  Moslim  adherents,  but  they  enjoy  only  a 
life  interest  in  them ;  whereas  it  is  a  body  of 
hereditary  landed  proprietors  that  is  called  for. 
It  is  the  want  of  this  substantial  class  that 
in  like  manner  has  forced  Mohammed  Ali  to 
burthen  himself  with  the  various  monopolies 
for  which  he  is  so  generally  abused,  and  to 
become  the  sole  merchant  of  the  country  ; 
but  where  are  the  capitalists  in  Egypt  that 
could  embark  in  manufacturing  or  mercantile 


EXPERIMENTS  OF  ADVENTURERS.  147 

speculations?  The  natives  and  Turkish  in- 
habitants are  out  of  the  question .  The  Greeks, 
Copts,  and  Egyptian  Jews,  are  too  pettifog- 
ging in  their  dealings  to  engage  in  com- 
mercial transactions  on  a  large  scale,  whilst 
the  Franks  resident  in  the  country  are  not 
wealthy  enough  to  do  so,  even  if  they  were 
sufficiently  trustworthy ;  respectable  Euro 
pean  merchants  would  hardly  be  found  willing 
to  hazard  their  capital  in  the  enterprises  of  a 
government,  which,  whilst  its  independence 
remains  unacknowledged,  can  offer  no  gua- 
rantee for  the  fulfilment  of  its  engagements. 
The  existence  of  Egypt  as  a  nation  depends 
entirely  upon  that  of  its  present  ruler.  His 
death  might  either  plunge  the  country  into 
civil  war,  or  engage  it  in  a  ruinous  contest 
with  Turkey  and  Russia. 

The  greatest  fault  with  which  the  adminis- 
tration of  Mohammed  Ali  can  be  charged  is 
the  outlay  of  large  sums  of  money  (obtained 
by  an  onerous  taxation)  upon  the  wild  experi- 
ments of  the  Viceroy's  Frank  advisers.  These 
needy  adventurers  —  mostly   refugees   from 

l2 


148  WORKS  INJUDICIOUSLY  PERFORMED. 

France,  Spain,  Piedmont,  and  Naples  —  with 
the  word  honour  on  their  lips,  and  a  bit  of 
ribbon  at  their  button-holes,  have  no  other 
object  in  view  than  to  cut  out  work  that  will 
put  them  in  a  way  of  making  fortunes  at  his 
expense,  in  as  short  a  time  as  possible. 

It  is  thus,  that  even  the  useful  public 
works,  the  execution  of  which  has  been  en- 
trusted to  their  direction,  have  all  been 
hurried  on,  for  the  sake  of  being  done  quickly 
rather  than  with  a  view  to  their  being  done 
well.  The  canals,  bridges,  factories,  forts, 
&c.,  all  partake  of  this  radical  defect.  The 
Egyptian  ships  of  war  are  said  to  be  falling 
to  pieces  from  the  same  cause.  Much  as  this 
system  of  roguery  is  to  be  regretted,  the 
wasteful  expenditure  of  money  on  wild  spe- 
culations, that  can  —  in  the  present  state  of 
Egypt — tend  to  no  possible  good,  is  yet  more 
seriously  to  be  deplored.  That  steam-power, 
railroads,  &c.,  are  of  infinite  service  in  a 
country  that  is  already  in  an  advanced  state 
of  civilization,  and  in  which  they  can  be  used 
cheaply,  will  not  admit  of  dispute ;  and  it  is  to 


PROJECT  TO  DAM  THE  NILE.  149 

be  hoped  that  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when 
Eg-ypt  will  be  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  benefit 
from  their  introduction ;  but  at  present,  the 
cheap  rate  at  which  human  labour  is  obtained 
there  —  the  facility  of  water  carriage  in  that 
level  and  intersected  country  —  the  bulky 
nature  of  the  commodities  it  produces  —  the 
expense  attendant  on  the  purchase  of  foreign 
machinery,  and  on  its  repairs  —  the  want  of 
fuel,  and  want  of  science,  cause  them  to  be 
applied  to  the  purposes  of  commerce  and 
manufactures  at  a  dead  loss. 

All  Mohammed  Ali's  bubbles  sink,  however, 
into  insignificance,  when  compared  to  his 
project  to  dam  the  Nile.  This  notable  enter- 
prise has  been  undertaken  at  the  suggestion 
of  the  sect  of  St.  Simonians  resident  at  Cairo, 
and  the  "  Pere  enfantin  "  has  been  pleased  to 
extend  his  fatherly  care  towards  it,  as  chief  en- 
gineer and  treasurer,  assisted  in  his  labours  by 
a  Monsieur  Lelan — an  eleve  of  the  Polytechnic 
School  at  Paris.  The  spot  selected  for  the 
stupendous  work  is  a  few  miles  below  the 
bifurcation    of    the    Rosetta   and   Damietta 


150       DAM  TO  BE  FORMED  OF  STONES. 

branches  of  the  river,  and  its  object  is  to 
raise  the  water  to  the  height  of  ten  feet  above 
its  usual  level  at  low  Nile,  so  as  to  form  a 
head  of  water,  from  which  every  part  of  the 
Delta  can  be  irrigated  at  all  seasons  of  the 
year. 

The  work,  as  originally  projected,  was 
feasible,  though  sufficiently  daring  to  have 
made  even  a  Brunei  pause  before  undertaking- 
it:  but  the  enormous  expense  that  would 
have  been  occasioned  for  timber  fit  for  piles 
to  make  a  foundation  has  caused  that  part  of 
the  plan  to  be  abandoned,  and  the  dam  is  to  be 
formed  altogether  of  stones,  and  to  rest  on  the 
sandy  substratum  of  the  Delta !  None  of  the 
stones  which  I  saw  collected  for  the  work  ex- 
ceeded four  feet  in  length,  and  the  whole  bu- 
siness looks  so  like  a  job,  as  almost  to  make 
one  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  cosmopolitan 
father's  profession,  that  he  acts  solely  ''pour 
V amour  de  lafamille  universelle  des  hommes." 

It  is  proposed  to  have  bridges  across  the 
two  branches  of  the  river,  and  an  intermediate 
one  over  the  canal,  which  must  necessarily  be 


DOUBTS  AS  TO  ITS  PRACTICABILITY.  151 

made,  to  convey  the  irrigating  stream  into  ttic 
Delta.  The  two  principal  bridges  will  be 
about  five  miles  apart,  the  whole  of  which 
distance  must  be  banked,  to  resist  the  con- 
stant pressure  of  this  immense  head  of 
water.  Should  this  work  ever  be  brought  to 
a  happy  conclusion — which,  without  profess- 
ing a  knowledge  of  hydromancy,  I  will  ven- 
ture to  predict  it  will  not  —  the  consequences 
inevitably  must  be,  that  the  whole  system  of 
canals,  dykes,  and  sluices  of  the  Delta,  will 
have  to  undergo  an  alteration,  and  its  inha- 
bitants will  be  constantly  exposed  to  the  risk 
of  being  themselves,  and  (what  will  then  be 
of  minor  importance),  having  their  cattle, 
fields,  date  groves,  and  habitations,  swept 
away ;  either  by  the  river's  forcing  the  dam,  or 
by  its  making  itself  another  channel. 

In  a  commercial  point  of  view,  this  barrage 
of  the  Nile  is  objectionable,  by  presenting  a 
fresh  impediment  to  the  navigation  of  the 
stream  between  Cairo  and  the  sea-ports  ;  on 
military  grounds,  by  affording;  terrible  fa- 
cilities   to    an   enemy   for    laying. waste    the 


152  SCHEMES  FOR  RAILROADS. 

country.  The  first  of  these  objections  it  is 
proposed  to  remove — as  far  as  the  trade  with 
Alexandria  is  affected  —  by  making  a  canal 
along  the  left  bank  of  the  Rosetta  branch 
of  the  river,  to  communicate  between  the 
reservoir,  and  the  existing  Mahmoudieh 
Canal. 

The  schemes  for  railroads  (for  any  present 
use  they  will  be  of)  are  yet  more  absurd  than 
this  great  experiment  in  hydraulics.  That 
which  is  about  to  be  laid  down  between  Cairo 
and  Suez  may  hereafter  be  a  profitable  con- 
cern, but  at  this  moment  it  occasions  a  use- 
less outlay  of  money,  that  might  be  much 
more  beneficially  employed. 

To  Egypt,  this  rail  communication  offers 
no  advantages  at  all  likely  to  compensate  for 
the  immense  expense  incurred  in  its  construc- 
tion ;  for  the  trade  between  Egypt  and  Arabia 
is  very  trifling,  and,  whilst  the  scheme  of 
steaming  on  the  Euphrates  occupies  the  at- 
tention of  the  British  government,  our  inter- 
course with  India  by  this  much  shorter  route 
is   neglected,   which    may   eventually    cause 


GOVERNMENT  OF  EGYPT.  153 

Mohammed  Ali  to  abandon  his  expensive  en- 
terprise. 

He  has  already  (most  wisely)  given  up  the 
projected  line  of  railroad  from  Cairo  across 
the  desert  to  Alexandria,  and  indeed  the  only 
railway  that  has  yet  been  completed  in  this 
country  is  one  from  the  quarries  of  the  Mo- 
kattan  Hill  to  Boulak,  a  distance  of  but  a  few 
miles.  This  has  been  laid  down  at  the  urgent 
request  of  the  "  Pere  enfantin,''  to  facilitate 
the  transport  of  building  stone  for  the  com- 
pletion of  his  benign  undertaking  of  deluging 
the  Delta. 

In  conclusion,  I  may  say  of  the  government 
of  Egypt,  that  it  is  efficient  without  being 
tyrannical,  which  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the 
small  amount  of  crime.  Murders  and  high- 
way robberies  are  unheard  of,  and  more  thefts 
are  committed  amongst  the  Frank  population 
of  Alexandria,  than  in  the  whole  of  the  rest 
of  the  country. 

The  local  authorities  experience  but  little 
difficulty  in  enforcing  obedience  to  the  laws  ; 
but  when,  as  sometimes  will  happen,  a  contu- 


154  DESPOTIC  GOVERNMENT, 

macious  resistance  to  the  conscription  mani- 
fests itself,  the  troops  are  called  upon  to  aid 
in  bringing  the  refractory  Fellahs  to  order. 
This  is  generally  effected  without  bloodshed, 
and  without  exposing  the  soldiers  to  a  shower 
of  abuse  and  brickbats,  until  some  aged 
Sheik  has  been  found,  who  can  and  will  read 
a  riot  firman.  Neither  is  the  Bim  bashee,  or 
other  officer  in  command,  deterred  from,  or 
delayed  in,  doing  his  duty  when  called  upon, 
by  having  to  consider  how  the  Cadee  General's 
opinion  bears  upon  the  case,  and  whether  he 
may  not  be  bastinadoed  for  doing  what  he  is 
taught  to  consider  the  first  duty  of  a  Mussul- 
man— obeying  his  orders. 

That  a  despotism  is  the  only  form  of  go- 
vernment suited  to  Egypt  in  its  present  con- 
dition is  very  evident,  and  fortunate  is  the 
country  (since  it  must  have  a  Mohammedan 
ruler)  in  having  such  a  despot  as  Mohammed 
Ali  to  govern  it. 

Of  the  difficulties  he  has  had  to  contend 
against,  few  except  those  who  have  visited 
Egypt  can  form  an  idea ;  but  they  are  in  part 


DESPOTIC  GOVERNMENT.  155 

SO  accurately  described  by  Machiavelli  in  II 
Principe,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting 
the  passage. 

"  E  debbesi  considerare  come  non  e  cosa  piii  difficile  a  trattare 
ne  piu  dubbia  a  riuscire,  ne  piii  pericolosa  a  maneggiare,  che 
farsi  Capo  ad  introdurre  nuovi  ordini.  Perche  I'introduttore  ha 
per  nemici  tutti  coloro  che  degli  ordini  vecchi  fanno  bene ;  e  tepidi 
defensori  tutti  quelli  che  degli  ordini  nuovi  farebbono  bene :  la 
qual  tepidezza  nasce  parte  per  paura  degli  avversari,  che  hanno  le 
leggi  in  benejicio  loro,  parte  della  incredulita  degli  iiomini,  i  quali 
non  credeno  in  verita  una  cosa  nuova,  sennon  ne  veggono  nata 
esperienza  ferma." 


156  REVENUE  OF  EGYPT. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Revenues  of  Egypt — Taxes— Expenditure — Government  Monopo- 
lies— Necessity  of  retaining  many  of  them,  in  the  present  state  of 
the  Country — Agricultural  System— Extent  of  Land  susceptible 
of  Cultivation— Productions  of  Egypt— State  of  her  Commercial 
Relations  with  other  Countries — Imports  and  Exports — Amount 
of  Population  —  Different  nations  composing  it  —  State  of  the 
Fellahs  as  compared  with  the  Peasantry  of  other  Countries — 
Paupers — Good  effects  resulting  from  the  Establishment  of  Manu- 
factories—Manners and  Customs  of  the  Inhabitants — Education 
of  the  Lower  Orders — Arts  and  Sciences — Music — Gradual  Im- 
provement in  the  Condition  of  the  Inhabitants— Anecdote  of  the 
March  of  Mind,  and  of  the  drag  upon  it — Smoking. 

The  revenue  of  Egypt  is  calculated,  in  the 
years  of  "  a  good  Nile,"  to  amount  to  twenty 
millions  of  dollars  ;  (four  and  a  half  milliions 
sterling,  nearly ;)  but  at  other  times  it  does 
not  exceed  fifteen  millions.  This  is  exclusive 
of  Syria  and  Candia,  both  of  which  are  at 
present  sources  rather  of  expense  than  profit 
to  the  Egyptian  treasury  ;  the  former,  how- 


REVENUE  OF  EGYPT.  157 

ever,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  Mrill  pro- 
bably become  a  source  of  revenue — the  latter 
never. 

The  principal  sources  from  which  the  re- 
venue of  Egypt  is  derived,   are  the  Miri,  or 
land-tax  (more  properly  ground  rent),  which 
amounts  to  about  a  million  and  a  half  ster- 
ling ;  the  Capitation  tax,  calculated  at  half  a 
million,  and  the  customs  and  excise  at  three 
hundred   and  fifty   thousand   pounds.      The 
rest  of  the  gross  amount  is  made  up  by  the 
farming  out  of  fisheries,    monopolies,*   and 
various  minor  taxes  ;  amongst  which,  one  on 
jugglers,    dancing   women,   and   courtesans, 
amounts  annually  to  thirty  thousand  pounds. 
This  statement  is  taken   from  an   official 
return  of  the  state  of  the  revenues  of  Egypt 
in  the  year  1830,  when  they  amounted  only  to 
three  millions,  six  hundred  thousand  pounds. 
Another  official  document  gives  the  principal 
expenses  of  the  government  during  the  same 
year,    in   round    numbers,    as    follows :    the 

•  Under  this  head  must  be  classed  the  sale  of  the  -produce  of  the 
country,  which  almost  all  belongs  to,  and,  until  lately,  was  sold 
exclusively  by  the  Government. 


158  EXPENDITURE. 

army,  one  million  and  a  quarter,  sterling ; 
navy,  five  hundred  thousand  pounds ;  ar- 
senals, manufactories,  and  public  works,  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds ;  civil  administra- 
tion, secret  service,  and  gratuities,  eight 
hundred  thousand  pounds  ;  Envoys,  and  pre- 
sents to  Constantinople,  one  hundred  and  sixty 
thousand  pounds  ;  the  Viceroy's  household, 
seventy-five  thousand  pounds. 

The  revenues  of  Egypt  that  reached  the 
Sultan's  coffers,  under  the  Mameluke  Beys, 
amounted  only  to  two  millions  and  a  half 
sterling,  but  that  sum  was  increased  to  four 
millions,  when  the  country  was  again  brought 
under  the  more  immediate  dominion  of  the 
Porte.  Considering,  therefore,  the  new  sources 
of  revenue  that  have  been  opened  to  Egypt 
under  Mohammed  Ali,  by  the  cultivation  of 
the  cotton  plant,  olive,  and  mulberry  trees, 
&c.,  and  the  increased  facilities  afforded  to 
its  agriculture  by  the  excavation  of  canals, 
and  the  improved  system  of  irrigation,  a 
corresponding  increase  of  revenue  ought  to 
have  followed,  had  the  inhabitants  continued 


THE  VICEROY  FARMER  GENERAL.  159 

subject  to  the  same  rate  of  taxation  as  under 
former  administrations.  It  appears,  however, 
that,  with  all  these  increased  means,  the 
amount  of  revenue  raised  from  the  country 
continues  much  the  same  as  formerly. 

The  revenues  of  Egypt  might  be  very  con- 
siderably augmented  in  various  ways,  but  I 
am  sceptical  as  to  the  expediency  of  abandon- 
ing altogether  the  manufactories,  monopolies, 
&c.,  and  opening  the  trade  ;  for,  as  I  have 
already  attempted  to  show,  the  possession  of 
manufactories  is  called  for  by  the  uncertainty 
of  Mohammed  All's  foreign  relations,  and  the 
government  monopoly  on  the  export  of  corn, 
to  save  the  country  from  famine :  whilst  the 
want  of  landed  proprietors  and  capitalists 
obliges  the  Viceroy  to  constitute  himself 
the  farmer  general  and  sole  merchant  of 
Egypt. 

I  doubt,  therefore,  whether,  under  all  cir- 
cumstances, Mohammed  All's  monopolizing 
system  be  not  the  best  that  could  be  adopted, 
until  knowledge,  and  with  it  confidence,  can 
be  imparted  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country. 


160  OBSTACLES  TO  AGRICULTURE. 

It  is  security  that,  above  all  things,  is  wanting  ; 
for,  besides  that  agricultural  pursuits  cannot 
be  followed  without  considerable  funds,  (which 
none  of  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  possess,)  it 
is  security  alone  that  stimulates  industry,  and 
renders  labour  productive  ;  without  it,  though 
the  Arab  Fellah  should  possess  the  treasures 
of  Haroun-el-Raschid,  he  would  not  venture 
to  make  use  of  them  to  improve  his  land. 

It  has  been  observed  by  a  talented  writer 
on  political  economy,  **  that  all  men  are  by 
nature  disposed  to  idleness  ;  [an  axiom  that 
applies  peculiarly  to  the  ignorant  inhabitant 
oi fertile  Egypt]  and  this  disposition  is  a  great 
obstacle  to  the  pursuit  of  agriculture,  which 
requires  a  considerable  degree  of  foresight 
and  knowledge,  and  a  firm  reliance  on  the 
security  of  property  to  labour  at  one  season, 
in  order  to  reap  the  fruits  at  another.  The 
minds  of  men  should  be  freed  from  the  de- 
grading fetters  of  ignorance,  before  they  can 
reap  advantage  from  personal  emancipation. 
In  all  cases,  we  shall  find  that  gradual  and 
progressive  improvement  is  conducive  to  the 


THE  sultan's  monopolies.  161 

happiness  of  mankind,  whilst  sudden  and 
violent  revolutions  are  always  attended  with 
danger." 

Ignorant,  indolent,  and  distrustful,  as  th^e 
inhabitants  of  Egypt  are,  I  doubt,  therefore, 
whether  the  fellah  would  labour  with  more  zeal 
and  activity  if  the  ground  he  tilled  were  his 
own.  At  this  moment,  being  quite  destitute 
of  property  of  any  sort,  he  is  a  mere  *'  me- 
chanical engine,"  working,  it  is  true,  for  his 
own  subsistence,  but  principally  for  the  benefit 
of  those  who  will  follow. 

Mohammed  Ali  is,  nevertheless,  modifying 
his  system,  according  as  he  sees  his  subjects 
acquire  knowledge  and  throw  off  their  pre- 
judices: and  is  gradually  giving  up  his  mono- 
polies, beginning  with  those  which  bear  most 
heavily  on  the  fellah  population.  Amongst 
that  number,  may  be  enumerated  those  on  the 
sale  (not  export)  of  corn  and  barley — of  oil, 
fowls,  eggs,  and  other  articles  of  produce ; 
on  the  spinning  of  flax  and  manufacture  of 
mats ;  and,  doubtless,  he  will  proceed  in 
liberating  the  inhabitants  from  other  vexa- 

VOL.  11.  M 


162  COPTS  AND  NAZEERS. 

tious  restrictions,  when  he  perceives  that  it 
may  be  done  without  detriment  to  the  finances 
of  the  country,  and  without  the  risk  of  eventu- 
ally proving  injurious  to  their  own  interest. 

The  collection  of  the  revenues  is  still,  in  a 
great  degree,  entrusted  to  the  Copts — the  only 
persons  who  are  at  present  sufficiently  learned 
in  financial  matters  to  undertake  so  compli- 
cated an  affair.  The  Nazeers  are  mere  land- 
stewards  of  the  Viceroy,  who  collect  his  rents 
and  see  that  the  lands  are  cultivated  according 
to  his  directions  ;  he  having,  as  before  stated, 
made  himself  the  proprietor  of  almost  the 
whole  of  Egypt,  The  estates  possessed  by 
various  mosques  have,  however,  in  most  cases, 
been  respected,  and  small  patches  of  ground 
round  the  villages  are  appropriated  to  the 
growth  of  vegetables,  &c.,  for  the  inhabitants, 
amongst  whom  the  rest  of  the  land  is  allotted 
for  cultivation,  in  portions  varying  in  extent 
according  to  their  own  desire,  which,  of 
course,  depends  upon  the  strength  of  their 
families  ;  but  they  have  not  the  option  of  re- 
fusing to  cultivate  any,  nor  of  choosing  the 


MODE  OF  CULTIVATION.  163 

kind  of  produce,  that  is  prescribed  by  the 
Nazeer,  who  furnishes  the  seed  and  takes  the 
Viceroy's  proportion  of  the  crop.  The  residue 
used  formerly  to  be  taken  also,  and  paid  for 
at  a  price  fixed  by  the  Nazeer ;  but  the  cul- 
tivator is  now  allowed  to  seek  a  market  for 
what  remains  for  himself,  after  the  lion's 
share  has  been  taken — a  change  which  has 
been  of  infinite  benefit  to  the  peasant,  but 
has  occasioned  a  sad  falling  off  in  the  receipts 
of  the  Nazeer,  who  generally — between  his 
absent  employer,  the  Viceroy,  and  the  trem- 
bling peasant — made  a  very  profitable  busi- 
ness.*    Out  of  the  profits  made  on  the  sale  of 

•  It  has  been  so  often  asserted  as  at  length  to  have  become  firmly 
believed  by  most  Europeans,  that,  in  levying  the  taxes,  &c.,  it  is 
part  of  Mohammed  All's  system  to  make  those  vpho  possess  the 
means  pay  the  contributions  of  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  same 
district  as  from  idleness  or  misfortune  cannot.  A  proceeding  so 
calculated  to  nip  industry  in  the  very  bud,  and,  at  the  same  time,  so 
extremely  unjust,  struck  me  as  being  most  improbable,  and  induced 
me  to  make  particular  inquiries  on  the  subject.  A  gentleman,  high 
in  the  Viceroy's  confidence,  to  whom  I  applied,  said,  that  he  also 
had  often  heard  the  same  assertion;  that  such  a  circumstance 
might  have  occurred,  but  he  could  say  from  his  own  experience 
(and  he  held  lands  under  the  Viceroy)  that  it  was  not  the  general 
practice.  He  had  an  opportunity  very  shortly  after  our  conversa- 
tion of  putting  the  case  to  Mohammed  Ali  himself,  stating  that  such 

M  2 


164  ANNUAL  RENT   OF  LAND. 

his  share  of  the  crop,  the  peasant  has  to  pay 
the  annual  rent  of  the  ground.  This,  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  Delta,  is  about  thirty 
piastres  per  feydan  ;  near  Cairo,  sixty  ;  and 
in  Upper  Egypt,  about  seventy ;  but  every- 
where subject,  of  course,  to  considerable 
variation,  according  to  the  distance  of  the 
land  from  a  market,  from  the  banks  of  the 
river  or  of  a  navigable  canal,  the  quality  of 
the  soil,  and  the  means  of  irrigation. 

This  last  named  is  the  principal  source  of 
expenditure  to  the  cultivator,  and  that  of  all 
others  w^hich  most  calls  for  improvement. 
The  Persian  wheel  is  still  considered  the  ne 

was  the  general  belief  in  Europe.  The  Viceroy  in  reply  said,  that 
such  malpractices  had  certainly  taken  place  formerly,  and  he 
brought  to  his  interrogator's  recollection  an  instance  where  the 
governor  of  a  district  had  been  displaced  for  such  abuses — adding, 
if,  therefore,  they  are  yet  continued,  it  is  not  only  without  my  know- 
ledge, but  at  the  risk  of  my  most  severe  displeasure.  This  merely 
goes  to  prove,  perhaps,  that,  with  the  best  intentions,  Mohammed 
Ali's  plans  for  the  amelioration  of  the  country  are  defective,  from 
their  depending  too  much  on  himself.  He  cannot  be  every  where ; 
and  where  he  is  not,  he  is  likely  to  be  cheated,  and  his  subjects 
oppressed.  Such  has  been  the  system  for  ages.  It  is  a  kind  of 
prerogative  that  the  govermment  oflBcers  of  Egypt  have  enjoyed, 
and  a  tyranny  that  the  natives  have  been  obliged  to  submit  to,  from 
time  immemorial. 


WATERING  MACHINES.  165 

plus  ultra  of  watering  machines  by  the  Arabs, 
but  in  Egypt  it  is  of  the  rudest  description. 
The  water  is  brought  up  in  leather  buckets, 
made  fast  to  a  rope,  which  admits  of  being 
lengthened  at  pleasure  so  as  to  reach  the  level 
of  the  Nile  at  all  seasons.  When  the  river 
is  low,  it  hangs  down  far  below  the  wheel, 
describing  an  oval  figure,  the  bottom  part  of 
which — owing  to  its  distance  from  the  wheel 
— is  propelled  with  but  slight  force  into  the 
water,  and  the  buckets  consequently  bring  up 
but  a  scanty  supply.  A  water-wheel,  turned 
by  an  ox,  supplies  as  copious  a  stream  as 
three  couple  of  men  with  baskets,  and  waters 
seven  feydans*  of  ground.  The  average  crop 
of  corn  is  four  ardebs  per  feydan.  The  price 
of  labour  in  Upper  Egypt  is  twenty  paras  a 
day. 

The  quantity  of  land  susceptible  of  cultiva- 
tion in  Egypt  may  be  computed  at  about  four 
million  five  hundred  thousand  feydans,  but 
not  more  than  three-fourths  of  that  quantity 

*  The  feydan  is  a  measure  nearly  equal  to  one  and  a  quarter 
acre  English. 


166  PRODUCTIONS  OF  EGYPT. 

can  be  reached,  so  as  to  be  rendered  pro- 
ductive, by  the  present  means  of  irrigation. 

The  chief  productions  of  Egypt,  of  the 
vegetable  kind,  are  cotton,  hemp,  flax,  indigo, 
sugar,  rice,  corn,  barley,  millet,  peas  and 
beans,  clover,  tobacco,  and  dates.  Vast 
tracts  of  land  have  been  planted,  in  various 
parts  of  the  country,  with  olive  and  mul- 
berry trees.  The  former  thrive  in  an  extra- 
ordinary way,  producing  fruit  in  the  third 
year.  This  valuable  acquisition  has  been 
gained  from  Candia,  (where,  however,  it  takes 
five  years  to  bear  fruit)  and  Egyptian  oil  will, 
ere  long,  enter  the  European  market  with 
great  advantage.  Rose-water  is  produced  in 
the  Fayoum.  The  silk  of  Egypt  is  on  the 
decline :  principally,  I  should  think,  from  the 
ill-chosen  spots  for  the  plantations  of  mulberry 
trees.  The  mineral  productions  of  Egypt  are 
emeralds,  copper,  silver,  and  other  metals 
(the  mines  of  which  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  worked  since  the  days  of  the  Romans)  ; 
salt,  nitre,  soda,  sal-ammoniac,  &c. 

Besides  the  above  articles  of  produce,  which 


CONSUMERS  OF  THE  PRODUCE.  167 

Egypt  exports  to  a  vast  amount,  may  be 
enumerated  buffalo,  ox,  and  goat  skins. 

A  number  of  very  valuable  articles  pass 
through  Egypt,  in  search  of  a  market,  from 
Nubia  and  Arabia,  such  as  gums,  spices, 
drugs,  ivory,  and  coffee. 

The  principal  consumer  of  Egyptian  pro- 
duce (after  Turkey)  has  hitherto  been  Austria, 
which  took,  some  years  since,  nearly  twice  as 
much  as  England  ;  Austria,  in  return,  sent 
more  than  double  the  amount  of  goods  sup- 
plied by  England;  but  the  trade  with  that 
power  is  on  the  decline,  in  consequence  of 
Syria  now  furnishing  Egypt  with  timber, 
which,  formerly,  was  almost  all  procured  from 
Dalmatia.  In  the  rank  of  consumers,  England 
takes  the  next  place,  followed  very  closely 
by  France  and  Tuscany.  In  supply,  this  last 
named  nation  takes  precedence  of  both  France 
and  England,  and  nearly  furnishes  goods  to 
an  equal  amount  with  Austria. 

In  the  year  1831,  the  exports  of  Egypt 
amounted  to  £1,650,000;  the  imports,  to 
£1 ,568,000.    Of  this,  raw  cotton  was  exported 


168  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

to  the  amount  of  £620,000 ;  and  manufactured 
cotton  imported  to  the  value  of  £325,000. 
But,  since  the  above  period,  an  enormous  in- 
crease has  taken  place  in  the  production  of 
cotton.  In  1835,  (before  the  breaking  out  of 
the  plague)  the  cotton  crop  was  valued  at 
one  and  a  half  million  sterling. 

The  principal  articles  procured  from  Austria 
are  timber,  copper,  iron,  manufactured  cot- 
tons, cloth,  glass,  and  hardwares  ;  from  Tus- 
cany, manufactured  cottons,  silk  and  woollen 
goods,  iron,  and  straw  plait.  England  sup- 
plies iron,  cutlery,  coals,  manufactured  cottons, 
and  warlike  stores  ;  and  France,  cloth,  silk 
goods,  sugar,  lead,  and  wine.  Egypt  supplies 
Turkey  with  every  thing,  but  since  the  cession 
of  the  province  of  Adana,  takes  hardly  a 
single  one  thing  in  exchange.  Her  trade  with 
Greece  is  also  nearly  all  for  money.  Amongst 
the  numerous  articles  furnished  to  these  two 
powers,  the  principal  one  is  rice. 

A  census  of  the  population  of  any  Moham- 
medan country  is,  from  the  sacredness  of  the 
hareems,  very  difficult  to  be  obtained  with  any 


POPULATION  OF  EGYPT.  169 

degree  of  correctness,  even  by  the  govern- 
ment itself,  and  renders  it  the  less  surprising 
that  the  population  of  Egypt  should  have 
been  so  differently  estimated  by  foreigners. 
For  my  own  part,  judging  from  the  quantity 
of  land  under  cultivation,  the  number  of  hands 
that  must  necessarily  be  required  to  till  it, 
the  great  waste  of  human  labour  in  Egypt, 
and  the  thick-set  way  in  which  the  towns  and 
villages  are  strewed  over  its  surface ;  and 
comparing  it,  in  these  respects,  with  other 
countries,  1  do  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  the 
population  to  amount  to  at  least  three  and  a 
quarter  millions  of  souls. 

The  population  of  Egypt,  under  the  first 
Ptolemies,  is  stated  to  have  amounted  to 
three  millions;  and,  considering  the  sangui- 
nary contests  that  had  been  carried  on  be- 
tween the  Egyptians  and  Persians,  during 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  two  centuries  pre- 
ceding the  Macedonian  invasion,  it  is  pro- 
bable that  at  that  period  it  did  not  amount 
to  more.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  by  any 
means  likely  that  the  population  ever  much 


170  CULTIVATED  LAND. 

exceeded  the  number  at  which  I  now  estimate 
it,  notwithstanding  that  the  ancient  writers 
affirm  it  amounted  to  seven  millions ;  for  the 
mountains  that  hem  in  the  Nile  are  the  same 
that  always  existed — and,  though  the  sand 
that  has  drifted  from  them  may  have  con- 
tracted the  width  of  the  valley  in  a  slight  de- 
gree, yet  large  tracts  (according  to  the  ac- 
counts of  these  same  writers)  have,  in  the 
interim,  been  gained  from  the  sea,  to  counter- 
balance this  loss  of  cultivated  land,  above  and 
on  the  skirts  of  the  Delta.  Calculating,  there- 
fore, the  superficial  contents  of  Egypt  {i.  e.  of 
the  land  that  is  susceptible  of  cultivation)  to 
have  been  then  as  it  now  is  —  six  thousand 
eight  hundred  square  miles* — a  population 


•  In  making  this  calculation,  I  suppose  the  cultivatable  land  of 
the  Delta  to  form  an  isosceles  triangle ;  of  which  the  base  is  one 
hundred  and  twenty  miles  long,  and  perpendicular  height  sixty-five 
miles.  The  valley  of  the  Nile,  from  the  apex  of  the  Delta  to  Assou- 
an, I  consider  a  rectangle,  five  hundred  miles  in  length,  and  five 
in  breadth;  and  that  the  Fayoum  contains  four  hundred  square 
miles— thus,  therefore,  3900  +  2500  +  400  =  6800. 

These  are  geographical  miles  —  and  it  must  be  borne  in  mind, 
that,  although  the  valley  of  the  Nile  considerably  exceeds  five 
miles  in  width,  yet,  that  the  extent  of  cultivation  is  seldom  so  much 


DECREASE  OF  POPULATION.         IJl 

of  seven  millions  would  have  given  upwards 
of  one  thousand  souls  to  every  square  mile — 
an  hypothesis  that  is  quite  unreasonable. 
We  read,  moreover,  in  Scripture,  that  Pha- 
raoh said — "  Behold  the  people  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  are  more  and  mightier  than 
we."  Now,  since  the  people  of  Israel,  that 
left  Egypt  with  Moses,  amounted  only — on 
the  most  liberal  calculation  —  to  two  millions 
of  souls  ;  it  would  make  the  entire  population 
of  Egypt,  at  that  time  (including  the  Jews), 
under  four  millions  :  and  it  cannot  be  sup- 
posed that  its  population  was  ever  greater 
than  during  the  sojourn  of  the  Israelites. 

It  is  generally  imagined  that  the  popula- 
tion of  Egypt  has  been  on  the  decrease  for 
the  last  few  years,  although  the  official  re- 
turns give  a  different  result ;  and,  certainly, 
the  large  army  maintained,  and  the  extermi- 
nating wars  the  country  has  been  engaged 
in  —  occasioning  a  constant  drain  upon  its 

— sometimes,  indeed,  it  is  not  half  a  mile  wide.  It  is  also  to  be 
recollected^  that,  although  tlie  Nile  winds  very  much  in  its  course, 
yet  the  valley  does  not. 


172  IMPROVED  HABITS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

youth — cannot  but  be  against  the  increase  of 
population ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  various 
causes,  that  periodically  swept  off  the  popu- 
lation by  thousands,  have  been  removed  or 
very  much  diminished  in  their  effects.  Fa- 
mine, for  instance,  has  been  felt  but  once, 
during  a  long  period  (on  which  occasion  Mo- 
hammed Ali  had  thrown  open  the  corn-trade), 
and  the  country  has,  by  the  adoption  of  sana- 
tory precautions,  been  relieved,  to  a  very 
great  degree,  from  the  ravages  of  the  plague. 
The  habits  of  the  people,  also,  are  daily 
improving ;  they  are  becoming  more  cleanly, 
both  in  their  persons  and  food  ;  and  their 
prejudices  are  giving  way  to  the  virtues  of 
medicine  and  wine.  To  their  previous  filth, 
wretched  fare,  and  contempt  for  medicine, 
are  to  be  attributed  the  havoc  caused  by  oph- 
thalmia, small-pox,  typhus  fevers,  and  other 
endemic  disorders,  which  now  do  compara- 
tively but  little  injury. 

Sickness,  I  should  say,  prevails  to  a  very 
small  extent  amongst  the  adult  portion  of 
the   Arab   population   of  Egypt.      Numbers 


MIXED  POPULATION.  173 

have  hitherto  perished,  at  a  very  early  age, 
from  the  absolute  ignorance  of  the  science  of 
medicine ;  for,  those  of  weak  constitutions 
fell,  without  resistance,  before  the  successive 
diseases  by  which  mankind  is  attacked  in  in- 
fancy ;  and,  consequently,  such  only  as  were 
naturally  robust  reached  maturity,  and  have 
continued  healthy  in  after-life ;  and,  though 
many  of  these  bear  evidence  of  the  ravages 
made  by  ophthalmia,  yet  the  plague  and  old 
age  are  the  only  enemies  they  have  now  to 
encounter. 

The  population  of  Egypt  is  made  up  of  a 
medley  of  almost  all  the  nations  of  the  East. 
The  Arabs  (fellahs  and  Bedouins)  constitute 
about  twelve-thirteenths  of  the  total  amount ; 
that  is,  nearly  three  millions  of  souls.  The 
Copts  are  the  next  most  numerous  body. 
They  are  the  mongrel  descendants  of  the 
various  people  that  in  turn  conquered  Egypt, 
and  with  whose  decadence  they  have  kept 
pace ;  possessing,  at  this  day,  a  rare  mixture 
of  the  rapacity  of  the  Greek,  the  depravity  of 
the  Roman,  and  effeminacy  of  the  Persian. 


174  NATIVE  CHRISTIANS. 

The  Copts,  at  the  period  of  the  Saracenic  in-= 
vasion,  were  the  proprietors  of  the  soil  and 
the  principal  merchants  of  Egypt :  in  the 
dark  ages  that  followed,  though  stripped  of 
their  possessions,  their  smattering  of  learn- 
ing gave  them  considerable  influence  in  the 
administration ;  to  all  the  minor  posts  of  which 
they  were  admitted. 

They  are,  yet,  distinguished  by  the  generic 
term,  *'  writers  ;"  but  their  numbers,  as  well 
as  influence,  is  very  much  reduced ;  for,  at 
the  present  day,  they  cannot  be  estimated  at 
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
souls.  They  profess  Christianity  ;  but,  as  a 
writer  on  Egypt  has  most  justly  observed — 
"  All  that  bears  the  name  of  Christianity,  in 
Egypt,  is  but  the  sightless  and  hideous  mum- 
my of  a  Christian  church." 

The  Turks,  Albanians,  &,c.  —  the  last  con- 
querors of  Egypt  —  have  in  their  turn  been 
much  reduced  in  number  by  the  events  of  the 
last  few  years.  They  continue,  however,  to 
hold  the  first  rank  in  the  land,  filling  most  of 
the  principal  military  posts,  and  may  still  be 


ETHIOPIANS  AND  LEVANTINES.  1/5 

estimated  at  ten  thousand.  The  Ethiopians, 
on  the  other  hand,  have  increased  consider- 
ably in  numbers,  and  may  be  calculated  at 
fifteen  thousand  souls.  They  are  the  most 
daring  soldiers  of  the  Egyptian  army,  but 
neither  so  tractable  nor  so  enduring  as  the 
native  fellah.  It  appears  contradictory — but 
such  nevertheless  is  asserted  to  be  the  case — 
that,  whilst  Nostalgia  has  nearly  cleared  the 
ranks  of  the  Egyptian  army  of  these  tropical 
people,  they  have  been  found  to  succeed  re- 
markably well  in  colonies. 

The  Levantines — under  which  term  may  be 
classed  Syrians,  Armenians,  and  Greeks  — 
amount  to  about  thirty  thousand :  they  em- 
ploy themselves  principally  in  trade  —  as  in- 
terpreters, &c.  The  Georgians,  Circassians, 
and  other  female  and  neuter  inmates  of  the 
hareems,  may  be  calculated  at  twenty-five 
thousand ;  the  Franks  at  six  thousand,  and 
Jews  at  twenty  thousand. 

The  character  of  the  native  Egyptian,  or 
fellah,  has  already  been  given  in  treating  of 
the  Delta,  where  certainly  the  best  specimen 


176  THE  NATIVE  FELLAHS. 

of  the  genus  is  to  be  met  with.  In  ascending 
the  Nile,  he  descends  in  the  scale  of  humanity 
— gradually  changing  in  colour,  features,  and 
make,  until  at  length  all  trace  of  Arab  blood 
is  lost.  The  change  in  his  moral  qualities 
keeping  pace  with  that  of  his  physical,  the 
condition  of  the  inhabitant  of  the  Saide  is 
naturally  much  worse  than  that  of  the  fellah 
of  the  Delta.  Throughout  Egypt,  the  state 
of  the  lower  orders  is,  according  to  our  notion, 
very  wretched ;  although,  comparing  their 
condition  with  that  of  the  corresponding  class 
in  some  countries  that  can  boast  of  a  much 
greater  degree  of  civilization,  and  a  more 
liberal  form  of  government,  I  do  not  see  that 
the  "  starving  fellah"  of  Egypt  is  more  en- 
titled to  pity  than  the  European  pauper,  who 
begs  his  bread  from  door  to  door ;  nor  that  the 
government  of  Mohammed  Ali  is  deserving  of 
abuse,  whilst  that  of  the  Swiss  Cantons  is 
lauded  to  the  skies.  We  see  daily  the  persons 
of  the  lower  orders  of  many  European  na- 
tions clothed  in  rags,  and  swarming  with  dis- 
gusting vermin  :  a  sight  which,  whilst  it  makes 


CONDITION  OF  THE  LOWER  CLASSES.  177 

a  Frenchman  or  an  Englishman  shudder, 
merely  produces  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders  from 
a  Neapolitan  or  a  Portuguese.  The  Arab 
finds  his  mud  habitation,  his  bare  feet,  coarse 
bread,  and  fried  beans,  neither  disagreeable 
nor  unpalatable ;  and,  rather  than  work  harder 
to  procure  more  comforts,  he  would  be  con- 
tented to  live  on  in  the  same  miserable  way 
to  the  last  day  of  his  existence.  So  likewise 
the  Neapolitan  or  Portuguese  rests  perfectly 
satisfied  with  the  scanty  pittance  that  will 
produce  him  his  daily  allowance  of  maccaroni 
or  baccalao ;  and  submits  to  the  irritating 
poll-tax  levied  on  his  indolence,  rather  than 
work  a  little  harder  to  earn  the  price  of  better 
food  and  a  hair-comb. 

The  Arabs  are  all  beggars,  but  this  arises 
not  from  their  being  all  in  want,  but  from 
their  being  all  covetous,  and  not  deterred  by 
a  feeling  of  shame  from  asking  for  anything 
they  think  you  are  possessed  of — particu- 
larly if,  by  your  looks,  they  imagine  their 
demand  is  likely  to  be  complied  with.  This 
applies  to  the  whole  Arab  race,  from  the  go- 

VOL.   II.  N 


178  HABITS  OF  THE  ARABS. 

vernor  of  a  province  to  the  common  field-la- 
bourer. 

The  food  of  the  fellah  is  coarse,  and  his 
mode  of  eating  as  well  as  cooking  it  is  dis- 
gusting to  persons  of  cleanly  habits,  which 
occasions  his  being  charged  with  the  vice  of 
gluttony ;  but  it  is  the  manner  of  eating 
rather  than  the  quantity  he  eats  that  has 
given  rise  to  this  accusation.  He  has  his 
meals  as  regularly  three  times  a  day  as  any 
field-labourer  in  Christendom,  but  place  the 
Arab's  simple  and  quickly  despatched  meal 
by  the  side  of  an  English  peasant's  solid  fare, 
and  it  sinks  into  insignificance.  All  the  Arab 
race  are  addicted  to  the  use  of  the  pipe,  and 
to  this  pernicious  habit  may  be  traced  the 
origin  of  most  of  their  vices,  and  a  great  por- 
tion of  their  misery. 

The  Fellah's  clothing,  in  the  v/inter  season, 
is  quite  sufficient  for  the  mild  climate  in 
wdiich  he  lives,  whilst,  in  summer,  any  more 
than  what  decency  requires  would  be  irksome 
to  work  under.  His  habitation  is  certainly  as 
good  as  the  cabin  of  the  Irish  peasant — with- 


CHARITABLE  TURKS.  179 

out  taking  the  difference  of  climate  into  the 
comparison  —  of  furnishing  it,  he  has  no  no- 
tion— a  mattress  stuffed  with  cotton  or  wool, 
a  wooden  bowl  to  contain  the  meal  of  the 
family  circle,  and  an  earthen  jug  for  its 
beverage  of  milk  or  Nile  water,  are  all  the 
necessaries  he  possesses  :  a  carpet  and  divan, 
a  low  circular  metal  table,  and  coffee  cups, 
are  luxuries  to  be  met  with  only  in  the  dwel- 
ling of  a  Sheik  el  belled. 

The  lower  orders  of  the  population  of 
Egypt  are  not  encouraged  by  any  faulty  sys- 
tem of  poor  laws,  to  give  way  to  habits  of 
extravagance,  improvidence,  and  profligacy. 
Mendicity  is  permitted,  and  consequently 
seen,  in  all  its  disgusting  nakedness,  uncon- 
cealed by  the  cloaks  of  poor-houses,  peniten- 
tiaries, and  houses  of  correction.  The  Turks, 
as  well  as  the  wealthy  Arabs,  are  extremely 
charitable,  and  the  Mosques  also  relieve  an 
immense  number  of  those  whom  actual  mis- 
fortune has  driven  to  seek  a  subsistence  in 
the  streets.  At  Cairo,  one  Mosque  alone  sup- 
ports eight  thousand  blind. 

N  2 


180  FAILURE  OF  THE  NILE. 

The  establishment  of  factories  in  Egypt,  if 
it  has  done  no  other  good,  has  considerably 
alleviated  the  condition  of  the  lower  orders, 
by  giving  employment  to  many,  (children  as 
well  as  adults)  who  formerly  depended  on  a 
precarious  agriculture  for  their  subsistence ; 
for  it  not  unfrequently  happened,  in  times 
past,  that  the  able-bodied  population  of  a 
whole  district — by  the  failure  of  the  Nile  to 
fertilize  their  grounds — could  not  find  employ- 
ment, and  required  relief  as  much  as  those 
who  were  incapacitated  from  working  by  sick- 
ness, old  age,  or  bodily  infirmities.  To  such, 
relief  could  be  afforded  but  in  two  ways,  either 
gratuitously,  or  in  exchange  for  labour. 

In  almost  any  other  country  than  Egypt,  the 
evil  resulting  from  the  uncertainty  in  the  cul- 
tivation of  their  fields  could  not  be  so  much  felt 
by  the  inhabitants  ;  and  if  it  were  experienced, 
they  would  seek,  and  be  sure  to  find,  employ- 
ment elsewhere  ;  so  that  the  price  of  labour 
only  would  be  effected  by  it,  and  that  gejie- 
rally,  and,  therefore,  in  but  a  slight  degree  : 
now,  in  Egypt — besides  that  the  inhabitants 


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  MANUFACTORIES.  181 

are  mere  serfs,  to  whom  the  land  is  portioned 
out  for  cultivation,  and  who  receive  a  tithe 
on  the  produce  in  payment  of  their  work — 
such  a  mode  of  equalizing  and  lowering  the 
price  of  labour  could  not  be  brought  into 
practice,  even  if  it  were  understood  ;  for  the 
ground  would  not  receive  any  after-benefit 
by  the  additional  number  of  cultivators  em- 
ployed upon  it ;  the  crop  produced  would  not 
be  increased  by  their  assistance ;  and,  as  the 
quantity  that  would  feed  ten  labourers  would 
not  satisfy  twelve,  the  loss  would  fall  entirely 
upon  the  landholder.  Therefore,  though  the  es- 
tablishment of  manufactories,  &c.  has  thrown 
large  tracts  of  laud  per maiiently  out  of  cultiva- 
tion, by  giving  employment  to  the  hands  that 
formerly  occasionally  tilled  them,  yet,  until 
machinery  supersedes  human  labour,  no  injury 
will  have  been  thereby  done  to  the  peasant.  On 
the  contrary,  he  has  been  relieved  from  the 
risk  of  starvation,  attendant  on  this  periodical 
dearth  ;  and  spared  the  misery  of  witnessing 
the  sufferings  of  his  family,  struggling  against 
the  various  endemic  diseases  generated  by  it. 


J82  POLYGAMY  PERMITTED. 

By  the  time  machinery  can  be  worked  in 
Egypt,  so  as  to  produce  goods  at  a  cheaper 
rate  than  by  manual  labour,  (which  must  be 
the  case  as  knowledge  spreads,  and  the  price 
of  human  labour  increases),  then  it  may  be 
expected  that  improved  means  of  irrigation 
will  also  have  been  adopted,  to  enable  the 
Fellah  to  return — with  a  certainty  of  gaining 
his  livelihood — to  his  original  and  destined 
occupation. 

The  Arabs,  though  permitted  by  their  re- 
ligion to  have  four  wives,  seldom  possess 
more  than  two,  and,  indeed,  (as  they  must  be 
in  "  comfortable  circumstances  "  to  support 
even  that  number,)  most  of  them  are  obliged 
— like  hapless  Christians — to  be  content  with 
one.  A  very  small  stock  of  worldly  goods 
enables  them,  however,  to  make  a  settlement 
— the  moderate  sum  of  three  hundred  piastres 
being  considered  quite  sufficient  to  set  up  an 
establishment.  Concubines  are  maintained 
only  by  the  rich. 

The  inmates  of  the  hareems  describe  their 
lives  as  being  very  happy,  and,  deprived  as 


INMATES  OF  THE  HAREEMS.  183 

they  are  of  all  education,  they  possibly  may 
not  find  their  confinement  very  irksome.  Their 
acquirements  amount  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
arts  of  embroidery,  confectionary,  and  sham- 
pooing-; to  which  some  few  add  the  accom- 
plishments of  music,  dancing,  and  smoking. 
They  make  themselves  as  captivating  as  pos- 
sible, by  tinging  their  nails  and  fingers  with 
hennah,  and  colouring  the  insides  of  their 
eye-lids  with  a  dark  poivder,  which  they 
doubtless  suppose  makes  their  eyes  sJioot 
stronger.  They  are  extremely  vain  of  show- 
ing their  wardrobes,  and  curious  to  examine 
the  costume  of  the  Frank  ladies,  who  are  oc- 
casionally permitted  to  visit  them.  Of  course, 
the  monotony  of  their  lives  is  broken  by  nu- 
merous little  bickerings  and  jealousies,  and 
not  unfrequently  by  amatory  intrigues.  The 
wives  of  the  fellahs  are  not  subjected  to  the 
restraint  of  the  hareem ;  they  work  in  the 
fields  with  their  lords  and  masters  ;  and,  when 
they  are  near,  hide  their  faces  very  scrupu- 
lously from  Christian  eyes.  As  one  ascends 
the  Nile,  this  mock  modesty  wears  off. 


184         IGNORANCE  OF  THE  ARABS. 

Their  dress  has  already  been  described, 
and  I  need  only  further  remark  of  it,  that,  as 
one  approaches  the  tropic,  it  diminishes  in 
quantity  as  one  would  wish  it  to  increase, 
until  at  length  a  leather  band  round  the  waist 
is  the  only  screen  that  conceals  the  sex  of  the 
wearer,  leaving  all  their  natural  deformities 
exposed  to  view. 

Amongst  such  of  the  Arabs  as  are  in  easy 
circumstances  —  particularly  the  young  men 
—  the  eccentricities  of  dandyism  are  by  no 
means  unknown  or  uncultivated,  and  the 
Nizam  dress  (that  worn  by  the  new  troops)  is 
becoming  very  fashionable,  admitting,  as  it 
does,  of  great  latitude  in  cut,  colour,  and  en- 
richments. 

As  might  be  expected  in  a  country  so  long 
under  the  dominion  of  Turks,  the  Arab  po- 
pulation of  Egypt  was  in  the  most  profound 
ignorance,  until  Mohammed  Ali,  by  establish- 
ing schools  at  Cairo,  Boulak,  and  other  places, 
set  an  example  that  has  been  generally  fol- 
lowed in  all  the  large  towns.  One,  which  I 
visited  at  Kheneh,  was  very  numerously  at- 


EXTENT  OF  EDUCATION.  185 

tended,  and  contained  some  very  promising 
scholars. 

The  education  at  these  schools  extends 
only  to  reading  and  writing  in  Arabic,  and 
arithmetic ;  but  an  almost  insuperable  objec- 
tion to  a  finished  education  in  any  Moham- 
medan State  is  the  early  age  at  which  mar- 
riages are  contracted  : — a  father  provides  a 
wife  for  his  son,  when  he  ought  to  be  still  at 
school;  so  that  the  youths  themselves  have 
the  cares  and  distractions  of  a  family  upon 
them,  ere  they  are  of  an  age  to  be  removed 
from  under  the  rod  of  the  schoolmaster  ; — 
and,  it  may  be  here  observed,  that  precocity 
of  intellect  is  by  no  means  remarkable 
amongst  the  Arabs,  so  that  their  education 
cannot  commence  at  an  earlier  age  than  in 
more  northern  climates. 

The  arts  and  sciences,  of  which  Egypt 
"claims  the  honour  of  having  been  the  cradle, 
(though  she  certainly  never  brought  any  to 
maturity,)  are  in  the  same  mummy  state  as 
the  bodies  of  the  philosophers  and  savans 
that   formerly  cultivated   them.     All   know- 


186  SONGS  OF  THE  ARABS. 

ledge  of  astronomy,  chemistry,  medicine, 
sculpture,  and  painting,  is  quite  lost.  Arab 
music  is  mere  noise,  without  the  slightest  pre- 
tensions to  harmony  ;  and  obtains  favour  in 
Egyptian  ears  in  proportion  to  the  din  and 
discord  produced.  The  common  instruments 
in  use  amongst  the  Fellahs  are  the  reed  pipe, 
and  a  kind  of  drum,  or  tambourine,  made  of 
an  earthenware  pot,  covered  with  a  sheep- 
skin, on  which  they  thrum  with  their  hands 
most  unmercifully  and  unceasingly.  There 
are,  also,  several  kinds  of  stringed  instru- 
ments, of  the  lyre  and  guitar  kind  ;  but  they 
are  seldom  heard  outside  the  walls  of  the 
hareems. 

The  songs  of  the  Arabs  are  monotonous 
ditties,  set  to  the  simplest  airs.  The  awali 
and  dancing  girls  usually  accompany  their 
voices  by  castanets.  The  boatmen  on  the 
Nile  always  have  recourse  to  singing,  when 
any  extraordinary  exertion  is  required  of 
them  ;  and  the  buffo  of  the  crew  improvises 
on  any  subject  that  suggests  itself,  connected 
with  the  voyage  or  the  passengers,  his  com- 


FUNERAL  CEREMONIES.  18/ 

panions  joining*  in  chorus,  and  generally  ap- 
pearing to  derive  great  amusement  from  the 
wit  of  their  leader — sometimes,  he  encourages 
them  by  a  noise  resembling  the  neighmg  of  a 
horse,  which  I  observed  always  gave  the  boat 
additional  way.  I  cannot  convey  a  better 
idea  of  what  the  Arabs  consider  music,  than 
by  repeating  a  description  with  which  our 
worthy  consular  agent  at  Suez  favoured  me, 
of  the  sufferings  of  his  family,  under  the 
pangs  of  cholera — after  imitating,  in  a  kind 
of  cadenza,  all  the  varieties  of  moans,  groans, 
shrieks,  and  other  disagreeable  sounds,  inci- 
dental to  the  complaint — from  the  sharp  and 
piercing  cry  of  his  young  children,  to  the  low 
grunt  of  his  aged  mother — he  concluded  by 
saying  that,  in  fact,  "  it  was  just  like  music." 
The  ceremony  of  mourning  on  the  death  of 
a  near  relative  continues  to  be  practised  by 
almost  all  the  different  species  of  inhabitants 
of  Egypt,  with  all  the  curious  peculiarities 
described  by  Herodotus.  The  females  of  the 
family  bewail  their  loss  with  loud  cries,  beat- 
ing  their    breasts,    and   throwing   dirt   and 


188  MUSSULMAN  FANATICISM. 

ashes  against  the  walls,  &c. — but,  as  there 
needs  must  be  a  turn  to  this  extravagant 
effort  to  be  mournful,  after  a  certain  lapse  of 
time,  persons  are  hired  to  continue  the  lamen- 
tations, until  the  body  of  the  deceased  is 
committed  to  the  earth. 

It  has  been  stated  as  an  objection  to  Egypt 
ever  becoming  a  powerful  nation,  that  the 
Mussulman  fanaticism  of  its  inhabitants  has 
passed  away,  and  been  succeeded  by  a  laxity 
of  religious  feeling,  amounting  in  many  cases 
to  absolute  atheism  ;  that  the  only  bond  of 
union  by  which  the  followers  of  Islamism  were 
linked  together,  having  thus  been  burst 
asunder,  without  any  other  system  of  theology 
having  been  substituted  for  it,  Egypt  must 
in  a  short  time  fall  to  pieces. 

It  is  certainly  true,  that  the  Egyptian 
Fellah  is  a  less  rigid  observer  of  all  the  prac- 
tices prescribed  for  the  faithful  followers  of 
Mohammed,  than  either  the  Turk,  Persian, 
or  Moor  of  Western  Africa ;  yet  I  do  not  see 
that,  by  clothing  himself  in  a  different  raiment 
from  that  of  his  father,  allowing  his  wife  or 


MUSSULMAN  BAKER.  189 

daughters  to  go  at  large,   his  eating  food, 
hitherto  considered  unclean*,  or  his  giving 

•  A  ridiculous  instance  of  the  change  effected  in  pubhc  opinion  of 
late  occurred  a  short  time  previously  to  my  arrival  at  the  Egyptian 
capital :  a  Levantine  tradesman  of  Cairo,  wishing,  probably,  to  do 
honour  to  his  patron  St.  Anthony,  and  at  the  same  time  give  his 
friends  a  treat,  took  a  joint  of  pork  to  be  cooked  at  a  Mohammedan 
bakehouse.  The  backsliding  baker  of  the  faithful  made  no  scruple 
in  admitting  the  unclean  flesh  to  cook  in  company  with  orthodox 
meats,  but  one  of  his  customers — a  more  rigid  observer  of  the  Koran 
— on  coming  for  his  bit  of  buffalo,  discovered  it  with  horror,  baking 
alongside  the  smoking  ribs  and  crackling  skin  of  the  abominated 
beast,  and  raised  an  outcry  against  the  offending  baker,  who  was 
instantly  dragged  before  Habib  Effendi  (a  sort  of  sitting  Magistrate 
of  the  Egyptian  metropolis)  and  ordered  to  explain  forthwith  his 
reason  for  daring  thus  to  set  the  mandates  of  the  Prophet  at  de- 
fiance. "  Truly,"  said  the  trembling  culprit,  "  I  have  lately  wit- 
nessed such  changes  in  Egypt,  that  I  thought  I  was  committing  no 
sin.  Do  I  not  daily  see  Moslim  soldiers  equipped  as  Franks  ?  Beys, 
half-dressed  as  Franks  ?  Women  shamelessly  exposing  their  faces 
like  Franks  ?  Frank  dishes  eaten — nay,  even  Frank  wines  drank  ? 
Could  I,  with  such  sights  before  my  eyes,  suppose  there  was  any  sin 
in  allowing  a  piece  of  Frank  pork  to  bake  quietly  by  the  side  of  Mus- 
sulmanish  meats  ?" — adding  that,  in  what  he  had  done,  he  had,  in  fact, 
but  acted  up  to  the  "  spirit  of  the  age."  The  Mohammedan  sage 
was  a  little  staggered ;  he  admitted,  however  true  all  that  had  been 
stated  might  be,  (and  he  regretted  to  say  that  there  was  much  in 
the  example  of  some  who  should  know  better,  to  lead  away  ignorant 
men  like  the  culprit,)  yet  he  was  placed  there  to  see  that  all  the 
faithful  inhabitants  of  Cairo  acted  up  to  the  spirit  of  the  Koran — 
that  pork  was  pork ;  and  the  precepts  of  the  Prophet  must  be  obeyed, 
A  quibbling  Moolah  here  observed  thatyire  was  a  puiifier  of  all  things 
—  upon  which,  after  a  consultation,  it  was  decided  that  no  harm 
could  have  been  done  to  the  other  meats  in  the  oven,  bv  the  steam  of 


190  DIFFUSION  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 

up  any  other  equally  absurd  prejudices,  can 
make  him  a  worse  man,  or  is  likely  to  have  a 
deteriorating  effect  upon  the  Egyptians  as  a 
nation.  The  Mohammedan  Protestantism, 
(if  I  may  be  allowed  so  to  call  it)  that  has 
been  introduced,  has,  on  the  contrary,  given 
birth  to  a  social  system,  which  tends  to  bind 
a  people  together  more  firmly  than  mere  ac- 
cordance in  religious  opinions.  The  finer 
feelings  of  human  nature — affection  for  their 
kindred,  friendship,  patriotism,  (which  may 
be  said  to  have  been  hitherto  unheard  of  in 
the  annals  of  Islamism,)  are  beginning  to  find 
a  place  in  the  breasts  of  the  people  of  Egypt 
— 1  myself  have  witnessed  repeated  instances 
of  those  virtues. 

At  the  same  time,  a  wide  and  general 
stream  of  knowledge  is  spreading  over  the 
whole  land,  sapping  to  the  very  foundation 
the  already  crumbling  fabric  of  Mohammed. 
Every  fresh  contact  with  the  more  enlight- 

the  Levantine's  pork^  and  the  complaint  was  dismissed.  The  tri- 
umphant baker  now  professes  to  roast  "  Frank  and  other  meats/'  and 
has  had  a  thriving  bnsiness  ever  since  the  wise  decision  of  the  judnje 
ill  his  favour. 


DIFFUSION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  191 

ened  European  removes  from  the  mind  of  the 
Egyptian  some  one  of  the  precepts  inculcated 
by  the  Koran.  He  already  admits  the  infi- 
nitely superior  knowledge  of  the  Christian  in 
every  branch  of  science,  and,  such  being  the 
case,  it  cannot  but  be  supposed  that  ulti- 
mately his  eyes  may  be  opened  also  to  the 
truths  of  our  holy  religion. 

I  do  not  for  one  moment  mean  to  assert, 
that  Mohammed  Ali  has  any  such  ulterior 
object  in  view ;  but  I  do  fully  and  faithfully 
give  him  credit  for  wishing  to  raise  the  peo- 
ple of  Egypt  from  the  degraded  rank  they 
have  for  years  held  in  the  scale  of  nations, 
and  cannot  join  in  the  abuse  of  an  "  iron 
despotism,"  which,  whilst  it  promotes  and 
causes  a  diffusion  of  knowledge  that  wars 
against  the  religious  prejudices  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, benefits  the  country  in  various  other 
ways.  To  it,  the  country  is  indebted  for  the 
adoption  of  quarantine  restrictions,  which, 
though  they  have  not  afforded  it  perfect  im- 
munity from  the  plague,  have  certainly  on 
several  occasions  prevented  its  spread,  and  in 


192  PROHIBITION  OF  SMOKING. 

others  mitigated  its  direful  ravages.  It  is  this 
despotism  which,  by  confining  the  youths 
within  the  walls  of  their  colleges,  gives  a 
check  to  the  early  marriages,  that  tend  to 
unfit  them  for  all  active  employments ;  and, 
by  prohibiting  the  use  of  the  pipe  at  these 
public  seminaries,  takes  the  first  step  towards 
eradicating  this  predominant  vice  of  Moham- 
medanism. * 

*  Nothing  tends  so  much  as  the  pernicious  and  universal  habit  of 
smoking  to  retard  all  improvement  amongst  the  nations  of  the  East, 
producing  habitual  indolence,  and  occasioning  an  irreparable  loss  of 
time — an  instance  I  witnessed  of  this,  though  trifling  as  to  its  con- 
sequences, is  laughable  enough  to  be  recorded. 

Having  expressed  a  wish  to  be  present  at  the  operation  of  casting 
at  the  great  foundry  of  Boulak,  Mr.  Galloway  obhgingly  sent  one 
morning  to  acquaint  me  that  a  grand  exhibition  was  to  take  place 
there  at  mid-day,  under  the  personal  superintendence  of  Athem 
Bey,  one  of  the  first  oiBcers  of  state.  I  accordingly  proceeded 
at  the  hour  appointed  to  witness  the  operation.  As  might  be  ex- 
pected, the  heat  was  overpowering ;  for,  besides  six  large  smelting 
furnaces,  and  the  fire  and  boilers  of  a  steam-engine,  we  were  in  the 
month  of  May.  Despite,  however,  the  heat,  smoke,  and  coal-dust, 
unconscious  of  the  din  of  voices,  hammers,  and  bellows,  there  lay 
extended  at  full  length  on  a  sofa,  a  fat,  swarthy,  sleeping  lump  of 
human  flesh,  which  I  expected  every  moment  to  see  run  melting 
into  the  channels  laid  down  for  casting  ship's  ballast.  A  host  of 
secretaries,  chiboukdgees,  and  cafedgees,  with  their  respective  im- 
plements of  office,  were  in  attendance,  and  immediately  held  a  con- 
sultation as  to  the  propriety  of  awakening  the  great  man ;  for  this 


THE  ARAB  FELLAHS.  ]<)3 

By  Mohammed  All's  tyranny,  the  Arab  fel- 
lahs— considered  but  a  short  time  since  fit 
only  to  direct  the  ox  that  drew  their  plough, 
or  turned  their  water-wheel — have  been  raised 
to  fill  offices  of  trust  in  every  branch  of  the 
administration  of  their  country.  If  they  are 
now  compelled  to  cultivate  eight  times  the 
quantity  of  land  beyond  what  is  necessary  for 
their  own  subsistence ;  to  excavate  canals, 
construct  roads,  bridges,  and  other  public 
works ;  to  receive  instruction  in  the  arts  and 
sciences  as  taught  in  the  various  arsenals, 
manufactories,  schools,  and  colleges,  that  have 
been  established ;  and,  finally,  to  serve  in  the 
military  service,  by  which  the  whole  system 
is  upheld  ;  it  is  by  a  tyranny  that  must  even- 
tually improve  their  condition,  by  invigorat- 
ing their  minds  as  well  as  bodies :  and,  if  this 


personage  was  no  other  than  Athem  Bey  himself,  a  general  of  artil- 
lery, chief  engineer,  and  superintendent  of  all  the  scientific  establish- 
ments of  Egypt ;  the  greatest  philosopher  and  mathematician  of  the 
universe,  and  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  Mohammedan  Mecaenas ! 
What  a  picture  for  the  pencil  of  Crnikshank  !  He  had  smoked  him- 
self to  sleep,  and  the  whole  operation  that  he  came  to  inspect  was 
performed  before  his  closed  eyes, 

VOL.   II.  O 


194  RESULT  OF  CIVILIZATION. 

new  order  of  things  tends  to  civilize  tlie  conn- 
try,  and  civilization  produces  happiness,  then 
has  Mohammed  Ali  been  a  benefactor  to 
Egypt. 


EGYPTIAN  ARMY.  J95 


CHAPTER  VII. 

First  Attempt  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  Organize  the  Array  of  Egypt  on 
the  European  Model  —  Revolt  of  the  Troops — War  with  the  Wa- 
habees  —  Expedition  to  Senaar  —  Formation  of  the  Nizara,  and 
Dispersion  of  the  Janizaries  and  Albanians — Renewal  of  Hostili- 
ties with  the  Wahabees — Excellent  Conduct  of  the  new  Levies — 
War  in  the  Morea  —  Uninterrupted  Success  of  the  Arab  Army — 
Affair  of  Mylos  —  Siege  of  Missolonghi — War  in  Syria — Strength 
and  Composition  of  the  Present  Egyptian  Army — Pay  —  Rations 
— Conscription  —  Good  Qualities  of  the  Fellah  —  Dress  of  the 
Troops  —  Remarks  on  the  Efficiency  of  the  Army,  &c. — Sulieman 
Pasha. 

Mohammed  Ah  judged  correctly  in  suppos- 
ing that  by  compulsion  only  could  a  new 
order  of  things  be  introduced  into  a  country, 
which,  though  degraded  to  the  lowest  depth 
of  misery  and  ignorance,  and  long  accus- 
tomed to  be  governed  with  the  most  despotic 
sway,  was,  nevertheless,  imbued  with  nine 
centuries  of  religious  prejudices,  all  opposed 
to  innovation.    He  erred,  however,  in  the  out- 

o  2 


196  CHARACTER  OF  THE  SOLDIERS. 

set,  by  imagining  that  the  lever,  by  the  help 
of  which  he  trusted  to  overturn  these  ob- 
stacles, could  be  itself  re-modelled.  The  tur- 
bulent Turks  and  Arnauts  composing  the 
army  that  had  raised  him  to  the  Pashalic  of 
Egypt,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  Sultan, 
were  prepared  to  go  any  lengths  to  maintain 
him  in  his  independence  of  the  Porte;  but 
they  had  been  too  long  accustomed  to  look 
upon  the  natives  of  the  soil  as  their  slaves, 
and  to  regard  the  Pasha  himself,  indeed,  as  a 
mere  instrument  to  work  their  will,  during 
their  pleasure ;  to  brook  being  subjected  to 
any  rules  of  discipline  that  trenched  upon 
their  long  abused  prerogatives. 

Possessed,  moreover,  with  a  Greco-Mussul- 
man idea  of  their  being  quite  able  to  cope 
with  the  best  troops  in  Christendom,  these 
lawless  soldiers  were  naturally  averse  to  sub- 
mit to  the  drudgery  of  a  system,  which — set- 
ting prejudices  aside  —  they  conceived  their 
superior  valour  placed  them  above  the  neces- 
sity of  learning ;  and,  accordingly,  Moham- 
med Ali's  order  for  organizing  his  army  on 


EUROPEAN  SYSTEM.  197 

the  European  model  was  received  with  gene- 
ral and  undisguised  dissatisfaction.  This  oc- 
curred in  1815. 

The  Pasha's  popularity  with  the  troops  — 
founded  on  his  oft  proved  courage  and  libe- 
rality—  induced  them,  however,  to  give  his 
plan  a  trial,  and  the  first  orders  were  sullenly 
obeyed.  Mohammed  Ali,  regardless  of  the 
clouded  brows  of  his  soldiery,  persisted  in 
the  attempt  —  perhaps  he  pushed  on  his  va- 
rious innovations  too  rapidly,  (it  is  his  pre- 
vailing fault),  and  thereby  hurried  on  the 
crisis  ;  but,  under  any  circumstances,  I  doubt 
much,  whether  the  men  with  whom  he  had  to 
deal  could  ever  have  been  rendered  efficient 
for  his  purpose.  —  Men  who  looked  with  con- 
tempt on  a  bayonet  as  compared  with  a  yata- 
gan,  and  who  for  six  hours  a  day  were  re- 
quired to  submit  to  the  privation  of  their 
pipes,  could  be  little  expected  to  find  pleasure 
in  musket  exercise,  and  the  "  goose  step." 
The  result  was,  that  the  Pasha's  obstinacy 
produced  a  revolt,  which  nearly  cost  him  his 
life ;  and  was  appeased  only  by  giving  the 


198  TACT  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

indignant  soldiers  back  their  pistols  and  pa- 
pouches,  and  allowing'  them  to  domineer,  as 
before,  over  ail  the  other  classes  of  his  unof- 
fending subjects. 

Mohammed  All's  eyes  were  now,  however, 
opened  to  the  error  he  had  committed ;  and, 
with  Machiavellian  tact,  he  adopted  a  plan, 
which,  whilst  it  unobtrusively  accomplished 
his  long  cherished  purpose,  crushed,  at  the 
same  time,  the  very  power  that  had  thus,  at 
the  commencement,  successfully  opposed  it. 
These  same  refractory  Janizaries  were  em- 
ployed to  compel  a  more  pliant  race  to  learn 
the  tactics,  and  submit  to  the  discipline  which 
they  themselves  despised.  Blinded  by  their 
self-sufficiency,  they,  not  till  it  was  too  late, 
discovered  that  they  had  given  away  their 
power  ;  that  the  men  on  whom  they  had  look- 
ed with  contempt  were  become  their  masters  ; 
and  having,  at  the  same  time,  become  sen- 
sible of  the  advantage  they  had  gained  by 
the  change,  v/ere  determined  to  retain  it. 

The  first  step  towards  effecting  this  change 
had  been  the  getting  gradually  rid  of  the  un- 


WAR  WITH  THE  WAIIABEES.  199 

disciplined  hordes,  that  composed  the  existing 
army ;  and  Fortune  favoured  Mohammed  Ali 
with  an  exceiient  opportunity  for  so  doing, 
the  Sultan  having'  saddled  upon  him  the 
charge  of  carrying  on  the  war  against  the 
Wahabees. 

The  wily  Pasha  was  well  aware  that  this 
distinguished  mark  of  favour  was  bestowed 
much  less  with  the  view  of  putting  down  the 
schismatic  Arabs  than  with  that  of  crippling 
his  own  growing  power.  He  had  conse- 
quently, of  late  years,  carried  on  the  war  very 
supinely :  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  the  Waha- 
bees had  at  one  time  even  possessed  them- 
selves of  Jedda,  Mekka,  and  Medina ;  and,  at 
about  the  period  of  the  revolt  of  the  Janiza- 
ries at  Cairo,  had  obtained  some  marked  suc- 
cesses over  the  Pasha's  army  in  the  field: 
which,  the  year  following,  had  also  to  regret 
the  loss  of  its  young  General,  Toussoun 
Pasha,  (Mohammed  Ali's  third  son),  who  fell 
a  victim  to  the  plague. 

Mohammed  Ali,  now,  in  good  earnest,  set 
about  executing  the  pressing  orders  of  the 


200  MEKKA  PLACED  IN  SECURITY. 

Porte.  To  redeem  the  character  of  the  sol- 
diers of  the  true  faith,*  and  preserve  the  holy 
city  from  profanation,  were  strong  incentives 
to  his  fanatic  troops  to  embark  wilhngly  in 
the  enterprize,  and  were  excellent  pretexts 
with  him  for  the  adoption  of  energetic  mea- 
sures ;  but  the  most  potent  of  all  the  reasons 
that  actuated  him  —  though  the  least  appa- 
rent—  was  policy.  Ibrahim  Pasha  was  ac- 
cordingly despatched  to  the  Edjaz,  late  in 
the  year  1816,  with  a  large  force;  in  which, 
as  may  easily  be  imagined,  most  of  the  Ar- 
nauts  were  incorporated,  who  had  rendered 
themselves  conspicuous  by  their  opposition 
to  Mohammed  All's  innovations. 

After  a  series  of  combats,  Ibrahim  finally 
succeeded  in  capturing  the  chief  of  the  Wa- 
habees,  and  placing  the  Pashalic  of  Mekka 
in  security ;  but  his  army  was  reduced  to  a 
mere  handful  of  men,  with  whom,  in  Decem- 
ber, 1819,  he  returned  to  Egypt. 

*  Aboul  Waliiab,  the  founder  of  this  new  sect,  maintained,  how- 
ever, that  his  was  the  true  faith;  and  that  his  object  was  merely  to 
bring  back  Islamism  to  its  original  purity. 


CONQUEST  OF  SENAAR.  201 

The  favourable  time  for  the  execution  of 
Mohammed  All's  long  projected  plan  had 
now  arrived  —  the  ranks  of  his  refractory 
army  had  for  the  present  been  sufficiently 
thinned  to  answer  his  purpose — and,  with 
what  remained  of  his  Albanian  troops,  he 
determined  on  undertaking  the  conquest  of 
Senaar,  calculating  that  whilst,  on  the  one 
hand,  this  war  would  still  further  diminish 
the  number  of  his  intractable  countrymen,  it 
would,  on  the  other,  supply  him  with  cap- 
tives of  a  more  docile  race,  with  whom  he 
purposed  forming  his  new  levees,  or  Nizam. 
Accordingly,  in  June,  1820,  Ishmael  Pasha 
(Mohammed  All's  second  son)  set  off'  for  Se- 
naar, with  an  army  of  three  thousand  men, 
and,  after  some  hard  fighting,  obtained  pos- 
session of  the  capital.  In  the  course  of  the 
following  year,  a  reinforcement  of  an  equal 
number  of  troops  arrived,  under  the  com- 
mand of  the  Defterdar  Bey  (a  son-in-law  of 
Mohammed  Ali),  to  whom  was  entrusted  the 
conquest  of  Cordofan. 

On  the  death  of  Ishmael — who,  falling  into 


202  DEATH  OF  ISHMAEL  PASHA. 

a  snare,  was  burnt  alive* — the  Defterdar  as- 
sumed the  command  of  the  army,  which  con- 
tinued to  occupy  both  Senaar  and  Cordofan 
until  the  latter  end  of  1824,  when  it  was  re- 
lieved by  a  body  of  the  black  slaves  who  had 
been  captured  and  sent  to  Egypt  by  thou- 
sands, on  the  first  arrival  of  the  Defterdar, 
and  who  now  returned,  formed  into  regiments 
and  drilled  in  the  European  manner.  The 
astonishment  of  the  undisciplined  Janiza- 
ries was  unbounded  —  resistance  fruitless — 
so,  sheathing  their  scimitars,  and  exclaiming 
"  Allah  akhah'' — God  is  great — they  took  their 
way  back  to  Egypt,  from  whence  the  greater 
portion  of  them  was  shortly  afterwards  ship- 
ped for  Candia. 

Mohammed  Ali  had  commenced  carrying 


*  Ishmael  Pasha  fell  a  victim  to  the  revenge  of  the  Sheik  of  a 
village,  on  vrhom  he  had  inflicted  a  blow.  The  hut,  in  which  he 
and  his  suite  had  taken  up  their  quarters  for  the  night,  was  sur- 
rounded with  dried  logs  of  wood  and  straw,  whilst  they  were  asle^, 
and  set  on  fire.  They  attempted  to  force  their  way  out,  and  killed 
several  of  their  besiegers,  but  were  eventually  overcome  by  the 
smoke  and  heat,  and  all,  excepting  one  attendant,  thus  miserably 
perished.  The  horrid  Defterdar  Bay  devoted  twenty  thousand 
heads  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  manes  of  Ishmael. 


ARMY  RE-MODELLED.  203 

into  execution  his  plan  of  re-modelling  the 
Egyptian  army,  immediately  after  the  depar- 
ture of  the  Defterdar  Bey  for  Senaar,  with  the 
last  of  the  Janizaries.  For  this  purpose,  he 
ordered  a  camp  to  be  formed  at  Esneh  (after- 
wards moved  to  Assouan),  where  a  kind  of 
military  school  was  established,  to  which  he 
directed  all  his  own  Mameluke  attendants,  as 
well  as  those  of  his  principal  officers,  to  re- 
pair —  appointing  one  of  his  most  devoted 
adherents  its  commandant,  and  giving  him,  as 
an  instructor,  Monsieur  Seves,  formerly  a  co- 
lonel in  the  French  service,  and  aid-de-camp 
to  Marshal  Ney. 

The  persons  here  brought  together  and  in- 
structed, were  to  become  the  officers  of  the 
new  levees.  The  slaves  from  Senaar  and 
Cordofan,  who  were  to  fill  the  ranks,  soon  ar- 
rived in  crowds,  and  were  incorporated  with 
a  certain  proportion  of  native  Egyptians,  ob- 
tained (in  the  first  instance)  by  voluntary 
enlistment.  The  army  was  formed  upon  the 
French  model,  and  divided  into  regiments  of 
five  battalions  of  eight  hundred  men  each. 


204  SIX  REGIMENTS  COMPLETED. 

This  organization  (which  has  since  under- 
gone some  modification)  was  considered  as 
the  best  calculated  for  the  kind  of  warfare  in 
which  the  Egyptian  army  was,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, likely  to  be  engaged ;  each  regiment 
forming,  as  it  were,  a  small  corps  d'arm^e, 
that  could  be  employed  separately,  under  its 
own  colonel.  By  this  plan,  also,  a  saving- 
was  effected  in  the  staff  and  superior  officers, 
who,  in  the  outset,  were  difficult  to  be  met 
with  :  Mohammed  Ali  soon  discovering  that 
the  most  perfect  Chiboukdgee  oftentimes 
made  but  an  indifferent  Chef  de  Bataillon. 

In  the  course  of  three  years,  six  regiments 
were  completed,  making  an  army  of  twenty- 
four  thousand  men.  The  soldiers  (the  drudgery 
of  learning  the  elements  of  their  profession 
over)  soon  took  a  liking  to  their  new  life, 
which  they  found  was  not  one  of  greater 
labour  than  that  to  which  they  had  been 
brought  up  ;  but  the  Turkish  officers  regretted 
much  their  former  otium  cum  dignitate,  and 
adopted  the  new  costume  with  a  very  bad 
grace.     Ibrahim  Pasha  did  all  in  his  power 


MOHAMMEDAN  PREJUDICES.  205 

to  overcome  this  Mohammedan  repugnance 
to  march  forward  in  the  road  of  innovation, 
himself  setting  an  example  of  the  most  perfect 
submission  to  the  directions  of  the  Frank 
instructors,  and  holding  out  rewards  to  those 
who  should  soonest  make  themselves  masters 
of  the  European  tactics.  But  prejudice  has 
too  strong  a  hold  of  the  present  generation  of 
Turks  to  be  easily  shaken,  and  the  instructions 
of  the  officers  did  not  keep  pace  by  any  means 
with  that  of  the  soldiers. 

When  the  regiments  were  prononnced  to  be 
in  a  fit  state  to  take  the  field,  (1824)  one  pro- 
ceeded, as  before  mentioned,  to  relieve  the 
force  occupying  Senaar  and  Cordofan,  and 
another  was  despatched  to  reinforce  the 
troops  that  had  been  left  for  the  protection 
of  the  Paslialic  of  Mekka :  the  Wahabees 
having  again  taken  the  field,  and  drawn  near 
the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea. 

In  this  quarter,  hostilities  soon  commenced. 
The  Wahabees,  despising  the  new  levees  sent 
against  them — so  differently  equipped  from 
the  splendidly  attired  troops  with  vsrhom  they 


206    CONDUCT  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  TROOPS. 

had  hitherto  been  engaged — quitted  their 
strong  positions,  with  the  intention  of  sur- 
rounding and  cutting  to  pieces  these  pitiful 
adversaries.  They  had  soon  cause,  however, 
to  repent  their  temerity,  and  to  regret  the 
fiery  coursers  and  gaudy  trappings  of  their 
old  opponents.  The  Egyptian  infantry  be- 
haved with  great  steadiness  and  gallantry, 
and  obtained  a  complete  victory.  Such  is 
the  superiority  of  discipline,  however  slight, 
over  mere  brute  courage,  however  great. 

Throughout  the  campaign  that  followed, 
(the  first  in  which  the  new  levees  were  actively 
employed)  the  Egyptian  troops  earned  the 
reputation  of  possessing  the  principal  qualities 
requisite  in  a  soldier — courage,  endurance  of 
privations  and  fatigue,  and  sobriety ;  whilst 
their  Turkish  officers  proved  themselves  to 
be  totally  unworthy  of  commanding  them. 
In  1826,  this  regiment  (the  2nd)  was  relieved, 
and,  on  its  return  to  Egypt,  the  soldiers  re- 
ceived a  decoration  in  testimony  of  their  good 
conduct  and  gallantry. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  into  a  de- 


THE  WAM  IN  THE  MOREA.  207 

tailed  account  of  all  the  campaigns  of  the 
Egyptian  army,  but,  in  justice  to  it,  I  am  bound 
to  say  a  few  words  relative  to  the  war  in  the 
Morea,  where  the  long  despised  fellah  of 
Egypt  first  came  in  contact  with  Europeans, 
— undisciplined  and  intractable  Greeks,  it  is 
true,  but  a  race,  neyertheless,  to  whom  persons 
generally  —  (so  apt  are  we  "  d  prendre  les 
souvenirs  pour  des  esperances")  would  be  in- 
clined to  award  the  palm,  over  their  less  in- 
tellectual opponents. 

Of  the  impolicy  of  Mohammed  Ali  in  enter- 
ing upon  this  contest,  it  is  not  my  intention 
to  offer  any  observations :  suffice  it  to  say, 
that,  pressed  by  the  importunate  supplications 
of  the  Sultan,  and  tempted,  perhaps,  by  the 
promise  of  the  Pashalic  of  the  Morea  for  his 
son  Ibrahim,  he  undertook  to  prop  up  the 
tottering  empire  of  the  Crescent ;  for  which 
purpose  a  force  of  about  seventeen  thousand 
men  was  collected  at  Alexandria,  early  in  the 
year  1824,  and  placed  under  the  command  of 
Ibrahim  Pasha. 

Although   the   fleet  conveying  the  first  di- 


208  SIEGE  OF  NAVARIN. 

vision  of  this  army  left  the  shores  of  Egypt  in 
the  month  of  July,  yet,  retarded  by  an  in- 
surrection which  broke  out  in  Candia,  and 
other  causes,  it  only  reached  its  destination 
on  the  26th  of  March  of  the  following  year. 

At  that  period,  the  fortresses  of  Modon, 
Coron,  and  Patrass,  and  the  castle  at  the 
southern  side  of  the  Straits  of  Lepanto,  were 
the  only  points  in  the  Morea  still  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Turks.  The  garrisons  of  these 
places,  pent  up,  without  the  means  of  com- 
municating with  each  other,  either  by  sea  or 
land,  and  without  a  hope  of  succour,  could 
not  have  held  out  many  days. 

Ibrahim  landed  at  Modon,  and  commenced 
operations  by  laying  siege  to  Navarin  and 
raising  that  of  Coron  ;  and,  before  the  month 
of  July — that  is  to  say,  in  three  months — he 
had  made  himself  master  of  the  fortresses 
of  Old  and  New  Navarin ;  relieved  all  the 
others ;  defeated  the  Greeks  in  three  general 
actions,  besides  numerous  minor  affairs ;  and 
marched  his  victorious  troops  across  the 
Morea  to  the  very  gates  of  Nauplia.     The 


DEMETRIUS  IPSALANTI.  209 

solitary  skirmish  of  Mylos  (claimed  by  the 
Greeks  as  a  signal  victory,  and  regarded  by 
them  as  a  second  Thermopylae*)  being  the 
only  check  that  his  arms  sustained. 


•  Ou  Ibrahim  Pasha's  first  advance  on  Argos,  he  found  Demetrius 
Ipsalauti  occupying,  witli  five  hundred  men,  the  almost  inattackable 
post  of  Mylos.  This  position  extends  about  five  hundred  yards, 
between  a  rocky  precipice,  that  overhangs  the  road  from  Tripolizza 
to  Argos,  and  the  sea.  Its  front  is  covered  so  effectually  by  the 
Lermean  marsh  as  to  leave  merely  the  breadth  of  the  road  itself  to 
advance  by.  Behind  the  marsh  (which  the  inhabitants  to  this  day 
maintain  is  unfathomable)  are  the  scattered  mills  and  houses  of  Mylos, 
surrounded  by  gardens,  walls,  ditches,  &c.  The  right  flank  of  the 
Greeks  was,  of  course,  the  only  assailable  point  of  their  line ;  but  even 
this  was  protected  by  the  fire  of  several  gun^boats,  which,  anchored 
close  to  the  shore,  on  the  left  of  the  position,  these  were  enabled 
to  sweep  the  whole  front  of  the  Hne  with  their  fire.  The  advanced 
guard  of  the  Egyptian  army,  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
attacked  the  Greeks  along  their  whole  front ;  but  Ibrahim  Pasha, 
coming  up  and  discovering  how  matters  stood,  withdrew  his  troops, 
turned  the  position,  by  crossing  a  low  mountain  ridge  on  his  left, 
regained  the  road  in  the  rear  of  Mylos,  and,  without  troubling  himself 
about  the  five  hundred  Greeks  behind  him,  continued  his  march  to 
Argos.  The  Greeks  made  no  attempt  to  disturb  him,  but  immedi- 
ately took  to  their  boats  and  hastened  to  Nauplia,  and  so  ended  the 
affair  of  Thermopyke  Mylos. 

Demetrius  Ipsalanti  was  a  brave  man,  and,  what  was  yet  more 
strange,  amongst  modern  Greeks,  an  upright  one.  No  person  was 
better  calculated  than  himself  to  play  the  part  of  Leonidas  ;  but  he 
might  have  looked  in  vain  for  three  hundred  brother  heroes  to  lay 
down  their  lives  to  save  their  country — there  being  a  vast  difference 

VOL.   II.  -  P 


210  SIEGE  OF  MISSOLONGHI. 

The  remainder  of  the  year  1825  was  oc- 
cupied in  reducing  the  Morea  to  submission  ; 
and,  early  in  the  following  spring,  Ibrahim, 
crossing  over  to  Roumelia,  halted  before 
Missolonghi,  which  fell  into  his  hands  after 
a  siege  of  three  months.  This  success  was 
purchased  at  an  enormous  cost  of  human 
life,  but  without  any  loss  of  reputation  to  the 
Arab  troops.  The  difficulties  they  had  to 
contend  against  were  very  great ;  the  season 
selected  for  undertaking  the  siege  the  very 
worst  of  the  whole  year — being  that  at  which 
the  entire  face  of  the  country  round  the 
fortress  becomes  a  perfect  bog,  rendering  an 
attack  by  regular  approaches  almost  im- 
possible— and  the  Greeks,  emboldened,  pro- 
bably, by  the  recent  failures  of  the  Turks 
against  these  same  walls,  defended  themselves 
with  a  degree  of  resolution  and  courage  that 
they  certainly — on  land — in  no  other  instance 
evinced. 

between  the  Spartans  of  old  and  the  Palicari  of  this  age — tliat  is  to 
say,  if  we  credit  all  that  we  read  of  the  former,  and  only  what  we 
see  of  the  latter. 


BATTLE  OF  NAYARINO.  '  2l"l 

The  events  which  followed  need  not  be  dwelt 
upon — the  Morea  again  bent  to  the  Moham- 
medan yoke ;  the  fortresses  of  Nauplia  and 
Napoli  di  Malvasia  alone,  of  all  its  strong- 
holds, remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Greeks 
(and  these,  without  the  co-operation  of  a  fleet, 
may  be  considered  impregnable) ;  the  piratical 
Mainotes  had  been  driven  and  confined  to  the 
fastnesses  of  their  native  peninsula ;  and  the 
more  peaceful  inhabitants  of  the  plains,  re- 
leased from  the  dread  of  the  wandering 
bands  of  "  Palicari,"  once  more  returned  to 
the  cultivation  of  their  vineyards,  or  resumed 
their  long-interrupted  commercial  intercourse 
with  the  Turks. 

The  Egyptian  army,  having  fulfilled  its 
task  in  the  Morea,  was  about  to  be  trans- 
ported to  some  other  part  of  the  theatre  of 
war,  when  the  parties  to  the  triple  alliance 
interfered  to  arrest  it.  The  battle  of  Navarino 
followed,  and,  in  September  1828,  the  victorious 
Ibrahim  was  compelled  to  return  to  Egypt — 
stript  of  all  his  conquests,  but  certainly  not 
of  his  well-earned  laurels. 

p2 


^212  THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY. 

The  war  in  Syria  broke  out  soon  after  ;  and 
the  siege  of  Akka  and  battle  of  Konieh 
added  to  the  reputation  of  the  Arab  troops 
and  their  commander. 

It  is  here  necessary  to  remark,  that  a  con- 
siderable change  had  been  effected  in  the 
Egyptian  army  since  it  first  took  the  field 
against  the  Wahabees,  when  it  was  composed 
principally  of  the  black  slaves  captured  in 
the  wars  of  Senaar  and  Kordofan.  Those 
natives  of  a  tropical  region  had,  in  the  course 
of  a  very  few  years,  been  swept  off  by  diseases 
brought  on  by  change  of  climate,  food,  &c., 
and  Mohammed  Ali  then  determined  on  filling 
up  the  vacancies  in  his  ranks  exclusively 
with  the  native  fellahs.  Of  these,  the  army 
which  conquered  the  Morea  was  principally 
composed,  and  the  regular  army  of  Egypt 
continues,  in  a  great  measure,  to  be  recruited 
to  this  day  from  the  same  class. 

It  would  be  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty 
for  any  foreigner  to  ascertain  the  exact 
numerical  strength  of  the  Egyptian  army,  as 
well  from    its   being    so   dispersed  over   the 


THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY.  213 

various  provinces  that  are  now  comprised 
within  the  government  of  Mohammed  Ali,  as 
from  the  want  of  returns  that  can  at  all  be 
depended  upon.  But,  if  all  the  regiments  of 
which  it  is  composed  were  kept  to  their  full 
establishment,  it  would  amount  to  about 
ninety  thousand  men,  organized  as  shown  in 
the  following  table  : — 


200 
480 
1800 
1200 
Total  Artillery  3760 

Sappers,  Miners,  and  Pontoniers       .....        2000 

Cavalry.      .     13  Regiments  of  Chasseurs  and  Lancers      .        6890 

Infantry       .       3  Regiments  of  Guards  (9  Battalions  only)       7200 

do.  22  Regiments  of  the  Line  .         .         .      70400 

do.  3  Companies  of  Veterans  (in  the  Fortresses)         300 

Total  of  Regular  Troops  of  all  Arms  90,550 


The  complement  of  men  to  each  regi- 
ment of  cavalry  is  five  hundred  and  thirty, 
formed  into  six  companies,  or  three  squad- 
rons ;  and  the  strength  of  the  regiments  of 
infantry  is  three  thousand  two  hundred  men, 


Horse  Artillery  of  the  Guard 

.     1  Company 

Foot        do.              do. 

2  Companies 

Horse  Artillery 

6  Companies 

Foot  Artillery 

.     3  Battalions  of  6  Companies 

Field  Train 

214  STAFF  OF  THE  REOIMENTS. 

divided  into  four  battalions  of  eight  companies 
each. 

As  but  few,  if  any,  of  the  regiments  are 
complete,  (indeed,  some  of  them  are  mere 
skeletons)  the  strength  of  the  regular  Egyp- 
tian army,  even  including  the  staff  and 
military  schools,  cannot,  however,  be  cal- 
culated at  more  than  eighty  thousand  men. 
Even  this  number  is  an  enormous  force  to 
raise  out  of  the  population  of  Egypt. 

The  staff  of  each  regiment  consists  of 
a  colonel,  lieutenant-colonel,  four  chefs  de 
bataillon,  four  adjutant-majors,  four  assist- 
ant adjutant-majors,  one  surgeon,  four  assist- 
ants, four  accountants,  and  an  iman  (priest)  ; 
each  company — officered  by  a  captain,  lieu- 
tenant, and  sub-lieutenant — is  composed  of 
a  serjeant-major,  four  Serjeants,  eight  cor- 
porals, two  drummers,  and  eighty  rank  and 
file. 

•  This  force  is  supposed  to  be  raised  and  kept  complete  by  con- 
scripts, levied  exclusively  in  Egypt.  The  troops  raised  in  Syria, 
tog^ether  vpith  irregular  Bedouin  and  other  tribes,  kept  in  pay  by 
Mohammed  All,  would,  perhaps,  swell  his  ranks  to  nearly  double 
that  amount. 


TAY  OF  THE  ARMY. 


215 


The  pay  of  the  different  ranks  is  as  fol- 
lows : — 


Of  a  Colonel    . 

per 

FlASTKBa. 

mensem      .         .     8000  about  £88 

"  Lieutenant-Colonel 

.    4000 

"  Chef  de  Bataillon 

.     2000 

"  Adjutant-Major 
"  Assistant    do. 

.     1500 
.        .     1000 

"  Captain    . 
"  Lieutenant 

.       500 
.      350 

"  Sub-Lieutenant 

.      250 

The  Non-Commissioned  C 

)fficers 

"       from  30  to         40 

"  Private    . 

.         .         20 

The  soldier  is  furnished  yearly  with  two 
complete  suits  of  clothing,  and  his  daily  ration 
consists  of  half  a  pound  of  meat,  a  pound  and 
half  of  bread,  with  a  small  quantity  of  rice, 
beans,  oil,  vegetables,  and  wood. 

The  war  in  which  Mohammed  Ali  continues 
to  be  constantly  engaged  in  the  Yeman, 
the  threatening  attitude  of  the  Porte,  and  the 
military  occupation  of  Syria  and  Candia, 
impose  on  him  the  necessity  of  maintaining 
an  army  so  totally  disproportioned  to  the 
resources  of  the  country,  in  men  as  well  as  in 
money  ;  whilst,  to  make  good  the  constant 
deficiencies  caused  in  its  ranks,  both  by  the 


216  SYSTEM  OF  CONSCRIPTION. 

sword  of  the  enemy  and  the  unhealthy  climate 
of  Syria,  he  has  been  forced  to  adopt  the 
system  of  conscription. 

This  was  orig^inally  of  the  most  arbitrary 
and  unsparing  kind :  indeed,  so  ill  was  it 
understood,  that  an  instance  is  recorded  of 
forty-eight  thousand  men  having  been  sent 
from  all  parts  of  Egypt  to  the  camp  of 
Hankah,  from  which  twelve  thousand  only 
were  to  be  selected.  Lame,  blind,  decrepid, 
all  were  sent  without  distinction.  Twenty- 
two  thousand  women  and  children  accom- 
panied this  levee  en  masse,  so  that  the  fields 
were  left  without  hands  to  cultivate  them, 
and  many  villages  without  an  inhabitant. 

The  system  has,  however,  undergone  many 
improvements  of  late  years  ;  amongst  others, 
that  of  dividing  the  country  into  military 
arrondissements,  and  sending  proper  officers 
— as  well  medical  as  military — to  inspect  the 
conscripts  at  the  depots  of  the  different  dis- 
tricts. Still  many  glaring  abuses  remain  to 
be  corrected,  and  that  of  all  others  which 
cries  out  for  a  remedy  is  the  power  left  in 


CONDUCT  OF  THE  SHEIKS.  217 

the  hands  of  the  Sheiks-el-Belled,  whose 
business  it  is  to  furnish  the  quota  of  con- 
scripts prescribed  for  each  village,  and  of 
whom  —  provided  the  specified  number  be 
forthcoming — few  questions  are  asked  touch- 
ing the  mode  by  which  it  was  levied. 

The  Sheiks  are,  consequently,  by  no  means 
scrupulous  of  laying  their  hands  upon  any 
eligible  persons  who  come  within  their  reach, 
in  order  to  save  their  own  relations  or  friends. 
Whole  boats'  crews  have  been  thus  kidnapped 
to  save  the  inhabitants  of  a  village,  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  itself  are  selected  completely  at  his 
whim  or  caprice,  without  being  allowed  a 
chance  of  escape,  by  ballot  or  substitute. 
Those  who  mutilate  themselves  (which  num- 
bers formerly  did)  to  avoid  being  taken  for 
the  army  or  navy — if  found  to  have  rendered 
themselves  incapable  of  being  turned  to  ac- 
count in  the  cotton  factories,  &c,, — are  sent 
to  labour  in  chains  at  the  public  works  ;  and 
thus,  in  addition  to  the  pain  and  loss  (some- 
times even  of  a  hand)  which  they  have  in- 


218  THE  EGYPTIAN  FELLAH. 

flicted  on  themselves,  are  subjected  to  a  much 
harder  fate  than  if  they  had  quietly  submitted 
to  become  useful  members  of  society,  though 
in  a  way  that  appears  to  have  but  few  charms 
for  them. 

The  dislike  that  the  fellah  of  Egypt  has  to 
quit  his  native  place  is  unconquerable.  To  us 
Englishmen,  it  appears  almost  incredible  that 
young  men  of  from  eighteen  to  twenty-five 
years  of  age  should  regard  as  a  hardship  the 
being  obliged  to  leave  home  :  it  is  with  them, 
nevertheless,  the  grievance  universally  com- 
plained of,  and  may  be  accounted  for  by  the 
ties  of  early  marriages ;  the  indolence  in  which 
men  grow  up  who  possess  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence at  the  cost  of  but  little  exertion  and 
fatigue  ;  the  total  want  of  mental  cultivation, 
and  consequent  ignorance  of  there  being  any 
other  pleasures  in  this  life,  besides  the  grati- 
fication of  the  passions  in  common  with  the 
brute  creation  :  the  full  enjoyment  of  which  is 
the  reward  held  out  to  the  good  Mussulman, 
in  the  sensual  paradise  of  his  prophet. 

The  Egyptian  fellah  sees  a  companion  — 


CONSCRIPTION  UNAVOIDABLE.  219 

perhaps  a  brother  —  who  wallowed  in  the 
same  filth,  and  was  covered  with  the  same 
disgusting*  vermin  as  himself;  who  fed  on  the 
same  coarse  food,  and  was  clothed  with  simi- 
lar rags  ;  dragged  in  handcuffs  from  his  native 
village  to  be  made  a  soldier  or  sailor.  He 
sees  him  return  in  a  few  years,  metamor- 
phosed into  a  half-civilized  being,  provided 
with  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  smart  in  his 
appearance,  and  liking  his  new  state  of  exist- 
ence ;  but  neither  his  envy  nor  his  ambition  is 
excited.  Of  patriotism  he  has  little  notion, 
except  that  he  would  rather  be  governed  by 
the  Sheik  el  belled,  his  countryman,  than 
spurned  and  bullied  by  his  former  oppressor, 
the  Turk. 

With  such  men  as  these,  a  conscription  is 
an  unavoidable  evil — for  a  recruiting  party, 
with  all  the  allurements  of  drums,  ribbons, 
and  promises,  might  march  from  Rosetta  to 
Assouan  without  picking  up  a  single  volun- 
teer— and  yet,  the  first  prejudices  overcome, 
the  fellah  takes  a  great  liking  to  the  military 
life  ;  and  his  carriage  and  deportment  clearly 


220  DREAD  OF  THE  MILITARY  SERVICE. 

show  that  he  is  quite  conscious  of  having 
taken  a  higher  grade  in  the  scale  of  society. 

Desertion  is  very  rare,  but  it  is  much  to  be 
regretted  (at  least  by  those  who  wish  to  see 
Egypt  become  civilized)  that  the  constant 
wars  in  which  Mohammed  Ali  has  been  en- 
gaged since  the  establishment  of  the  Nizam 
have  not  allowed  the  soldiers  such  frequent 
opportunities  of  visiting  their  friends  and  na- 
tive places  as  is  desirable.  This,  therefore, 
tends  to  keep  up  the  dread  entertained  for  the 
military  service,  it  being  considered  as  certain 
death  to  enter  it ;  for  writing  being  altogether 
unknown  amongst  the  lower  orders  of  the  Arab 
population  of  Egypt,  and  the  opportunities  of 
conveying  information  by  other  means  ex- 
tremely rare ;  the  relatives  of  a  conscript, 
after  a  lapse  of  some  time  without  hearing  of 
him,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  has  fallen 
a  victim  to  the  sword  or  disease. 

It  is  said  that  the  number  of  men  taken  by 
conscription  in  the  Delta,  which  is  the  most 
productive  part  of  Egypt,  bears  no  propor- 
tion to  that  levied  in  the  other  provinces.     I 


EFFECTS  OF  THE  CONSCRIPTION.  221 

believe  this  to  be  the  case,  for  I  certainly,  as 
I  before  mentioned,  saw  no  want  of  young 
men  there  ;  whereas,  I  observed  that  the  fields 
in  Upper  Egypt  were  frequently  cultivated 
exclusively  by  old  men  or  boys,  and  females. 
I  cannot,  however,  admit  that  mischief  to 
the  extent  generally  represented  has  arisen 
from  the  conscription.  It  is  true  that,  both  in 
the  Delta  and  in  Upper  Egypt,  large  tracts 
of  country  susceptible  of  cultivation  are  lying 
waste ;  but  then  it  frequently  would  happen, 
from  the  Nile  not  rising  to  the  necessary 
height,  that  the  cultivators  of  those  tracts 
would  be  thrown  out  of  employment.  I 
think,  the  sacrifice  of  those  lands  is  fully 
counterbalanced  by  the  degree  of  security 
with  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  more  fa- 
voured parts  of  the  country  now  cultivate 
their  fields ;  freed  by  this  army  of  conscripts 
from  the  marauding  visits  of  the  Bedouins, 
and  the  oppressive  exactions  of  the  Mame- 
lukes and  Janizaries.  The  mischief  to  be 
apprehended  is  that  the  country  will  not  be 
able  to  furnish   for  any  length   of  time  the 


222        INSTRUCTORS  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY. 

number  of  conscripts  required  to  recruit  the 
present  immense  standing*  army,  without 
drawing  upon  the  cultivators  of  the  lands 
that  may  always  be  rendered  productive. 

The  native  of  Egypt  is  in  many  respects 
fitted  to  make  a  good  soldier;  he  is  hardy, 
and  equal  to  great  bodily  fatigue  ;  temperate, 
and  satisfied  with  the  coarsest  food ;  docile, 
and  easily  led,  particularly  by  kindness ;  re- 
spectful to  his  superiors,  and  obedient  to  the 
rules  of  military  discipline ;  but  the  Frank 
instructors  of  the  Egyptian  army  know  not 
themselves  the  true  meaning  of  the  term  dis- 
cipline, nor  are  they  of  that  class  of  men  to 
excite  much  respect,  even  from  ignorant 
Arabs.  For  the  most  part,  outcasts  from  so- 
ciety, and  natives  of  those  countries  of  south- 
ern Europe  that  are  the  least  distinguished 
for  military  conduct,  they  are  by  no  means 
qualified  for  the  task  they  have  undertaken, 
and  are  quite  satisfied  with  the  degree  of  dis- 
cipline they  have  instilled  into  their  disciples, 
which  amounts  to  little  more  than  the  timid 
obedience  of  a  flock  of  sheep  to  the  bark  and 


DRESS  OF  THE  TROOPS.  223 

worry  of  the  shepherd's  dogs.  —  For  the  qua- 
lities of  alertness  on  their  posts,  order  and 
regularity  in  their  quarters,  or  cleanliness 
and  respectability  in  their  appearance,  it 
would  be  in  vain  to  seek  in  the  soldiers  of  the 
present  army  of  Egypt. 

I  know  not,  however,  what  Egyptian  troops 
a  modern  traveller  can  have  seen,  who  asserts 
that  they  are  the  dregs  of  Lower  Egypt,  and 
that  he  hardly  saw  a  soldier  in  the  ranks  who 
had  not  lost  one  eye.  The  defect  of  vision  must 
decidedly  have  been  on  his  side  —  for  such 
a  want  in  a  conscript  Fellah  would  cause 
him  to  be  rejected  from  the  military  service. 

The  dress  of  the  troops  is  certainly  not 
calculated  to  set  them  off  to  advantage  in 
European  eyes,  but  it  is  as  convenient  a  cos- 
tume as  could  have  been  adopted,  considering 
the  prejudices  to  be  encountered  ;  and  its  de- 
scription will  furnish  an  exemplification  of 
the  transition  state  of  every  thing  in  this 
country.  The  nether  garment,  without  hav- 
ing been  actually  fashioned  into  trowsers,  is 
in  a  kind  of  chrysalis  state,  between  the  Turk- 


224  SHOES  AND  HEAD-miESS. 

ish  shaksheer  and  what  used  to  be  called 
**  Cossacks  ;"  the  upper  part  having  the  sem- 
blance of  breeches,  but  being  furnished  with 
'*  continuations  "  fitting  tight  from  the  knee 
down,  in  the  style  of  leggings.  The  jacket 
fits  close  to  the  body,  is  unencumbered  with 
skirts,  and  convenient  enough.  These  gar- 
ments, as  also  a  wide  sash  that  folds  round 
the  waist,  >  are,  for  winter  wear,  made  of  a 
coarse,  red*  woollen  stuff,  but  others  of  white 
cotton  are  substituted  in  summer.  The  feet 
roam  about  in  a  pair  of  large  red  leather 
shoes,  which  —  pointed  and  turned  up  at  the 
toes — are  altogether  against  file  marching. 
The  head  dress  is  the  common  red  cloth  cap, 
or  turbouch  ;  which,  besides  that  it  affords 
no  protection  to  the  eyes  against  sun,  wind, 
and  dust,  (thereby  multiplying  the  causes  of 
ophthalmia),  must  be  very  disadvantageous 
when  the  sun  has  sided  with  the  enemy,  and 
has  to  be  faced  as  well  as  their  fire  :  for  the 
glare  of  the  one  would  effectually  prevent  a 
correct  aim  being  taken  in  returning  the  other. 

*  The  guards  are  clothed  in  dark  brown. 


DRESS  OF  THE  OFFICERS.  225 

The  muskets  are  rough,  but  good,  and  are 
invariably  in  excellent  order.  The  accoutre- 
ments are  of  white  leather,  and  inconveniently 
long. 

The  dress  of  the  officers  is  provided,  in  the 
first  instance,  at  the  Viceroy's  expense.  It  is 
covered  with  gold  lace — tasteless  and  tawdry, 
but  is  uniform,  and  bears  some  resemblance 
in  colour  to  that  of  the  soldiers.  From  its 
costliness,  however,  the  officers  are  afterwards 
permitted  to  indulge  their  own  fancies,  and  I 
have  seen  them  on  parade  decked  out  in  all 
sorts  of  colours — blue,  green,  brown,  and  even 
yellow  —  the  red  skull-cap  and  pointed  shoes 
being  the  only  articles  that  are  common  to 
all.  This  sweeping  permission  to  "  depart 
from  the  regulation  "  has  probably  been  given 
to  the  officers,  from  the  greater  difficulty  ex- 
perienced in  overcoming  the  prejudices  of  the 
Turks,  who  still  fill  all  the  upper  ranks  of 
the  Egyptian  army ;  the  Arabs,  except  in 
very  few  instances,  being  confined  to  the 
lower  grades.* 

*  They  seldom  rise  beyond  the  rank  of  Ueutenant. 
VOL.   II.  Q 


226       ARMY  COMMANDED  BY  TURKS. 

In  the  formation  of  the  Egyptian  army, 
Mohammed  Ali's  greatest  difficulty  was  to 
find  a  class  of  men  of  whom  he  could  make 
officers.  The  Arabs — with  all  their  ignorance 
— were  probably  more  fit  for  the  purpose  than 
the  Turks  ;  but  he  was  justly  fearful  that  the 
officers,  if  taken  from  the  same  class  as  the 
soldiers,  would  acquire  an  influence  which 
might  prove  subversive  of  his  plans ;  and 
cause  his  own  destruction,  without  effecting 
any  permanent  good  for  the  country  ;  whereas, 
by  persuading  the  Turks  to  accept  the  supe- 
rior offices,  he  kept  them  in  his  interest,without 
apparently  doing  any  injustice  to  the  con- 
temned native  Fellah. 

Aware,  however,  that  this  state  of  things 
cannot  last ;  whilst  Mohammed  Ali  affects  to 
favour  the  Turks,  and  is  obliged  to  humour 
their  prejudices;  he  is  at  the  same  time  pre- 
paring the  natives  of  the  country  —  who  are 
by  no  means  so  inveterately  opposed  to  Frank 
innovations,  and  do  not  possess  the  overbear- 
ing conceit  and  obstinacy  of  the  Osmanlees — 
to  take  the  stations  to  which  their  superior 


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  SCHOOLS.  227 

acquirements  will  entitle  them.  By  the  en- 
couragement given  to  talent  and  the  establish- 
ment of  schools,  they  are  already  made  aware 
of  the  debt  of  obligation  they  owe  Mohammed 
Ali.  They  are  also  daily  losing  some  portion 
of  the  awe  with  which  they  have  been  ac- 
customed to  regard  their  Turkish  oppressors, 
and  it  is  to  be  hoped  will — when  they  become 
aware  of  their  strength,  which  they  inevitably 
must  do  ere  long — see  the  necessity  of  remain- 
ing united,  and  the  advantage  of  following 
up  a  system  that  has  wrought  so  happy  a 
change  in  their  condition. 

It  follows,  from  what  I  have  above  stated, 
that  at  the  present  moment  the  officers  com- 
pose by  far  the  worst  class  of  the  Egyptian 
army.  Hence  it  must  be  evident  that  the 
Arab  troops  cannot  be  what  our  neighbours 
call  "  manoeuvrieres ;"  indeed,  their  utmost 
knowledge  of  tactics  amounts  to  deploying 
from  column  into  line,  reforming  column, 
and  a  few  similar  simple  movements  ;  and 
even  these  are  executed  in  a  loose  and  slovenly 
manner,   and    occupy   a  space  of  time   that 

q2 


228  DISCIPLINE  OF  THE  TROOPS. 

would  cause  their  utter  destruction  before 
most  European  troops. 

But,  if  Mohammed  Ali  has  not  succeeded 
in  bringing'  his  army  to  a  very  high  state  of 
either  instruction  or  discipline,  he  has,  at  all 
events,  organized  a  body  of  men  fully  equal 
to  cope  with  any  enemy  against  whom  he  is 
for  some  time  likely  to  have  to  contend ; — 
a  force  to  which  the  country  is  indebted  for 
its  release  from  the  thraldom  of  the  Porte  and 
for  its  present  state  of  civilization  ;  the  com- 
munity at  large,  for  the  security  which  it 
affords  to  trade,  science,  and  industry ;  by 
whose  means,  in  fine,  an  order  of  things  has 
been  established,  which,  if  fortunately  followed 
up,  will  make  Egypt  once  more  a  rich  and 
powerful  nation. 

Let  not  Mohammed  Ali  deceive  himself, 
however,  by  supposing  (as  his  parasites  con- 
stantly assure  him)  that  his  troops  are  quite 
a  match  for  the  best  disciplined  soldiers  in 
Europe :  indeed,  regarding  the  Egyptian  army 
in  that  light,  there  is  something  quite  ludi- 
crous in  its  present  F'ranco-mussulman  state  : 


THE  ARAB  SENTINEL.  229 

from  the  short  affair^  g-ait  of  the  French 
Pasha,*  its  instructor  general  —  whose  ex- 
christian  legs,  encumbered  in  a  Turkish  nether 
garment,  struggle  in  vain  for  the  mastery- 
over  its  cumbersome  and  ample  folds  —  to 
the  listless  Arab  sentinel  posted  at  his  door, 
who  —  regardless  of  all  decorum,  civil  and 
military — having  laid  his  firelock  down  in  a 
corner,  sits  at  his  ease,  ''faccendo  la  caccia 
del  pidocchi  /" 

*  Sulieman  Pasha  (Colonel  Seves.)  To  this  officer  is  due  the 
credit  of  having,  with  infinite  pains,  patience,  and  perseverance, 
despite  of  jealousies,  backbitings,  and  prejudices,  and  with  but 
slight  assistance  from  his  subordinates,  brought  the  Eg)'ptiau  army 
to  its  present  state  of  discipline  —  such  as  it  is —  a  task,  which  cer- 
tainly bespeaks  the  possession  of  rare  military  qualities.  From  his 
services  in  the  Morea,  where  he  was  the  principal  adviser  of  Ibra- 
him Pasha,  it  may  be  inferred  that  he  is  equally  as  capable  of  direct- 
ing an  array  in  the  field  as  of  preparing  one  for  it — au  reste,  accord- 
ing to  the  general  testimony  of  his  countrymen  (for  I  had  not  the 
honour  of  his  acquaintance)  he  is  in  social  life  "  un  brave  gar^on," 
and,  as  far  as  having  three  wives  and  a  handsome  service  of  pipes 
and  coffee  cups,  he  does  his  "  petit  possible  "  to  convince  the  world 
that  he  is  a  good  Mussulman. 


230  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 


CHAPTER  Vlli. 

Public  Schools  —  Encouragement  given  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the 
Education  of  the  Lower  Orders— Artillery  and  Naval  College  at 
Tourah  —  Cavalry  School  at  Ghizeh — Medical  and  Veterinary 
College  at  Abouzabel  — Disadvantage  under  which  it  labours 
from  the  want  of  a  common  Language  between  the  Professors 
and  Students — Instance  of  a  Dragoman's //-ee  Translation — Con- 
cluding Remarks  on  the  College — Clot  Bey. 

If  to  the  army  Egypt  be  indebted  for  the 
progress  she  has  made  towards  civilization — 
to  the  public  schools  that  have  been  founded 
must  she  henceforth  look  for  completing  her 
regeneration :  and,  although  many  persons 
are  disposed  to  accuse  Mohammed  Ali  of  hav- 
ing solely  had  the  furtherance  of  his  own  am- 
bitious projects  in  view  by  establishing  the 
former,  he  must  certainly,  considering  his 
advanced  age,  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  of 
educating  the  i^ising  generation  for  any  selfish 
purpose. 


COLLEGE  OF  TOUR  All.  231 

The  principal  colleges  that  have  been 
founded  by  the  Viceroy  are,  it  is  true,  devoted 
exclusively  to  the  preparation  of  youths  for 
the  military  services ;  but,  at  the  same  time, 
he  gives  every  encouragement  to  the  esta- 
blishment of  schools  in  all  the  towns  and  vil- 
lages of  Egypt.  He  is  himself  at  the  expense 
of  maintaining  one  near  Cairo,  at  which  two 
thousand  male  children  (chiefly  the  sons  of 
poor  people)  are  not  only  educated,  but  fed, 
clothed,  and  even  paid,  to  induce  the  parents 
to  overcome  their  pertinacious  opposition  to 
the  march  of  intellect. 

The  establishment  that  first  claims  notice 
is  the  College  of  Tourah,  where  the  candi- 
dates for  commissions  in  the  artillery,  engi- 
neers, and  navy,  are  educated. 

The  village  of  Tourah  is  situated  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Nile,  about  eight  miles 
above  Old  Cairo.  The  College  stands  upon  ^ 
the  margin  of  the  river,  and  its  various  build- 
ings are  disposed  so  as  to  enclose  a  large  open 
space,  which  serves  the  double  purpose  of  a 
play-ground  and  place  of  instruction.     A  brig 


232  NUMBER  OF  STUDENTS. 

of  war,  fully  equipped,  is  moored  abreast  of 
the  College,  to  afford  the  students  practical 
means  of  learning  naval  exercises  and  gun- 
nery. 

The  students  are  three  hundred  and  forty 
in  number,  and  are  divided  into  eight  com- 
panies. By  far  the  greater  proportion  are 
Arabs,  the  rest  Turks  and  Candiote  Greeks. 
During  my  visit,  two  of  the  Viceroy's  nephews 
were  receiving  their  education  at  the  College. 
They  were  treated  —  excepting  that  they  got 
a  somewhat  better  dinner  —  in  every  respect 
like  the  other  lads. 

The  age  of  admission  is  from  eleven  to  fif- 
teen, but  Mohammed  Ali  has  broken  through 
the  rule,  in  some  instances,  by  sending  young 
men  of  nineteen  or  twenty.  Several  have  even 
come  to  school  with  an  establishment  of  wives. 

The  students,  on  first  joining  the  College, 
are  merely  required  to  be  able  to  read  and 
write  Arabic  :  their  course  of  studies  after- 
wards comprises  arithmetic,  geometry,  alge- 
bra, military  and  landscape  drawing,  fortifi- 
cation, and  foreign  languages.     In  the  last- 


COURSE  OF  INSTRUCTION,  233 

named,  they  receive  instruction  according  to 
the  particular  service  for  v^^hich  they  are  des- 
tined ;  those  intended  for  the  navy  being 
taught  English,  those  for  the  army  French, 
and  such  as  have  either  taste  or  capacity  for 
more  tongues,  learn  Italian  also.  The  Turk- 
ish language  forms  a  part  of  the  education  of 
all 

I  remarked  that  the  Arab  youths  acquired 
the  pronunciation  of  French  with  much  greater 
facility  than  that  of  either  English  or  Italian, 
which  was  explained  to  me  as  arising  from  its 
greater  similarity  to  the  Turkish.  They  are 
occupied  ten  hours  a  day  at  their  various 
studies,  and  an  hour  and  a  half  at  out-dcor 
instruction,  in  artillery  practice,  or  small  arm 
and  sword  exercise ;  leaving  them  by  far  too 
small  a  proportion  of  the  day  for  recreation ; 
in  fact,  they  all  looked  mentally  fatigued. 

The  conduct  of  the  lads  appeared  very  cor- 
rect and  orderly,  and  great  attention  is  evi- 
dently paid  to  the  cleanliness  of  their  habits. 
The  principal  v*'ant  of  the  establishment  is 
that  of  properly  qualified  professors,  particu- 


234  HALLS  OF  STUDY. 

larly  of  languages  and  drawing.  English  and 
Italian  were  taught  by  a  young  Spaniard ; 
French  by  a  German,  who,  after  a  vain  at- 
tempt to  persuade  Mohammed  Ali  that  High 
Dutch  was  the  most  useful  of  modern  dialects, 
succeeded  at  length  in  convincing  him  that  a 
wide  Saxon  mouth  gives  a  peculiarly  soft 
turn  to  the  final  ants  and  merits  of  the  French 
language. 

The  halls  of  study  are  small,  but  lofty  and 
airy,  and  occupy  the  whole  of  one  side  of  the 
square.  Another  division  of  the  building  con- 
tains the  dormitories  —  eight  large  apart- 
ments, each  capable  of  accommodating  an 
entire  company  of  students.  They  are  scrupu- 
lously clean,  and  to  each  is  attached  a  wash- 
ing-room. Every  cadet  has  a  separate  bed 
made  up  on  boards  and  iron  trestles,  and  is 
furnished  with  a  garde-robe  for  his  clothes,  &c. 

The  refectory  and  kitchen  occupy  another 
side  of  the  square,  and  do  equal  credit  to  the 
establishment.  The  students  are  formed  in 
messes  of  ten,  and  squat  down  round  circular 
tables,  the  place  of  each  being  marked  by  a 


THE  HOSPITAL.  235 

piece  of  bread  and  wooden  spoon.  They  are 
furnished  with  but  two  meals  a  day — (for  a 
crust  of  bread  issued  at  daybreak,  though  lite- 
rally a  breakfast,  can  hardly  be  called  a  meal) ; 
the  first  at  mid-day,  the  other  at  sunset.  Each 
consists  of  soup,  a  stew  of  meat,  vegetables, 
and  maccaroni.  The  habit  of  eating  out  of 
the  same  dish — helping  themselves  generally 
with  their  fingers — still  obtains  ;  rendering  a 
plentiful  supply  of  copper  kettles  and  hot 
water  necessary,  to  remove  any  obstinately 
adhesive  particles  of  paste  or  grease,  v^^hich 
cannot  be  displaced  from  the  fingers  by  the 
usual  Arab  process. 

The  hospital  is  on  the  western  side  of  the 
square,  facing  the  Nile.  I  was  surprised  to 
find  that,  out  of  so  many  youths,  seven  or 
eight  was  the  average  number  of  its  inmates  ; 
and  of  these  the  greater  portion  are  victims 
to  a  too  easy  access  to  the  dissipations  of  the 
capital. 

Under  the  hospital  is  the  armoury,  which 
might  be  better  arranged,  and  its  contents  in 
better  order. 


236  DRESS  OF  THE  STUDENTS. 

The  dress  of  the  students  is  a  step  further 
advanced  towards  the  European  costume  than 
even  that  of  the  army.  It  consists  of  a  close- 
fitting,  single-breasted  jacket  of  blue  cloth, 
with  red  "  stand-up"  collar  and  cuffs ;  blue 
cloth  trow^sers ;  a  broad  white  cotton  sash  ; 
red  shoes  ;  and  turbouch.  The  two  last-named 
are  the  only  objectionable  articles  of  their 
attire. 

At  the  period  of  my  visit  to  the  College  of 
Tourah,  it  was  under  the  direction  of  Sequera 
Bey  —  a  Spanish  ofEcer,  to  whose  scientific 
acquirements  and  indefatigable  exertions 
Pvlohammed  Ali  owes  the  foundation  of  most  of 
his  thriving  military  establishments.  But  the 
envy  and  self-sufficiency  of  the  Turkish  au- 
thorities, with  whom  he  was  called  upon  to 
act,  have  since  led  this  gentleman  to  throw 
up  all  his  appointments. 

The  cavalry  school  is  at  the  village  of  Ghi- 
zeh,  nearly  opposite  Old  Cairo  ;  and  stands  on 
the  site  of  the  palace  of  the  celebrated  Mame- 
luke, Mourad  Bey.  This  school  was'  esta- 
blished in  1830,  and  is  Under  the  direction  of 


THE  CAVALRY  SCHOOL.  23/ 

a  French  officer.  It  contains  one  luindred 
and  ninety  cadets,  mostly  Arab  youths  of 
from  thirteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age.  They 
are  formed  into  two  squadrons,  are  tolerably 
good  horsemen,  and  well  instructed  in  the 
sword  and  lance  exercises ;  but,  beyond  these 
accomplishments,  their  education  is  very  su- 
perficial; comprising,  besides  reading  and 
writing  their  own  language,  a  very  slight 
knowledge  of  the  Turkish.  I  was  informed 
that  French  was  about  to  be  added. 

An  apartment  has  been  fitted  up  as  a  kind 
of  theatre,  in  which  the  theory  of  the  profes- 
sion is  taught  by  the  evolutions  of  sundry 
wooden  squadrons  upon  a  table  placed  in  the 
centre  of  the  stage — rather  a  farcical  exhibi- 
tion. 

The  students  are  badly  lodged,  eight  in  a 
small  room,  with  a  vile  smell  of  oiled  arms 
and  appointments  ;  each  cavalry  aspirant  hav- 
ing the  charge  of  his  own  equipment,  saddle 
and  bridle  inclusive.  Except  in  the  single 
article  of  dress,  the  cadets  of  Ghizeh  are  in 
every  respect   far  behind   those  of  Tourah : 


238  SCHOOL  FOR  TRUMPETERS. 

their  costume,  however,  has  been  pushed  one 
degree  further  towards  the  Frank  ;  their  Mo- 
hammedan legs  being  actually  installed  in 
red  Cossack  trowsers,  whilst  their  green  jack- 
ets,with  red  collars,  cuffs,  and  braiding,  "  Wel- 
lington" boots,  and  fixed  spurs,  are  perfectly 
European.  The  only  Arabic  remains  about 
them  are  the  white  cotton  sash  and  abomina-' 
ble  red  skull-cap. 

The  students  receive  a  rate  of  pay,  varying 
according  to  their  respective  classes,  from  ten 
to  fifteen  piastres  a  month. 

Strange  as  it  may  appear,  particularly  to 
the  hussar  and  lancer  officers  of  our  service, 
this  establishment  contains  a  school  for  trum- 
peters ;  who,  except  in  point  of  pay,  are  as 
well  treated  as  the  candidates  for  cornetcies 
in  the  *'  crack"  regiments  of  the  Egyptian 
army ;  and  with  whom  (though  they  eat  and 
sleep  in  different  apartments)  they  associate 
on  the  most  perfect  footing  of  equality. 

This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  want 
of  a  gradation  of  ranks  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  country  ;  an  eviJ,  which,  whilst  it  lasts, 


MILITARY  SCHOOLS.  239 

must  ever  prevent  Egypt  attaining  to  any 
great  degree  of  prosperity,  or  the  troops  ac- 
quiring the  requisite  degree  of  subordination 
that  might  place  them  on  a  footing  with  the 
soldiers  of  the  disciplined  armies  of  Europe. 
Education  will  eventually  produce  this  gra- 
duated scale  of  society,  by  bringing  forth  ta- 
lent, and  occasioning  an  unequal  distribution 
of  wealth  ;  at  present,  its  want  is  felt  in  every 
department  of  the  state. 

The  other  military  schools  of  Egypt  are  at 
Boulak.  and  Damietta.  The  former  has  only 
recently  been  established,  and  is  intended  ex- 
clusively for  the  education  of  cadets  for  the 
engineers  (who  have  hitherto  been  prepared 
at  Tourah) ;  the  other  is  for  officers  of  in- 
fantry, and  contains  near  three  hundred  stu- 
dents. I  shall  readily  be  excused  from  enter- 
ing into  a  detailed  account  of  these,  and  pro- 
ceed to  describe  the  medical  college  of  Abou- 
zabel. 

This  truly  useful  establishment  was  origi- 
nally a  mere  military  hospital,  to  which,  from 
its  healthy  situation,  the  sick  were  sent  from 


240  MONSIEUR  CLOT. 

the  neighbouring  camp  at  Hankah.  It  now 
contains — besides  an  hospital  on  a  magnifi- 
cent scale  —  schools  of  medicine,  anatomy, 
and  chemistry,  and  one  also  of  the  veterinary 
art.  The  whole  are  on  a  scale,  and  in  a  de- 
gree of  order,  that  would  do  credit  to  any 
country. 

The  present  building  was  erected  about  ten 
years  since,  under  the  directions  of  Monsieur 
Clot  (a  Frenchman),  lately  created  a  Bey, 
and,  at  this  moment,  Hakim  Effendi  of  Egypt. 
The  hospital  contains  thirty-two  wards,  each 
capable  of  accommodating  thirty  patients. 
They  are  all  on  the  ground-floor,  lofty  and 
well  ventilated,  but  certainly  too  large. 

The  number  of  sick,  at  the  time  I  visited 
the  hospital,  was  about  two  hundred.  The 
most-  common  diseases  were  fevers,  oph- 
thalmia, &c.  A  separate  ward  is  appropri- 
ated to  the  treatment  of  each  disease,  and 
every  attention  appeared  to  be  paid  to  the 
cleanliness  and  comfort  of  the  patients,  of 
which  they  seemed  to  be  fully  sensible :  in- 
deed, the  change  that  has  taken  place  in  the 


MEDICAL  KNOWLEDGE.  241 

opinions  of  the  Arab  population  of  Egypt,  as 
to  the  utility  of  medicine  and  surgery,  is  one 
of  the  greatest  victories  that  has  been  gained 
over  their  early  prejudices.  Not  only  are  the 
soldiers  become  fully  aware  of  their  value, 
but  the  women,  who  formerly  repelled  all 
medical  aid  with  the  utmost  contempt,  now 
anxiously  seek  it  both  for  themselves  and 
children ;  and,  awful  as  have  been  the  re- 
sults of  the  late  visitation  of  the  plague,  yet 
this  change  of  feeling  was  most  conspicuously 
seen  during  its  continuance,  and  certainly 
tended  to  diminish  its  fatal  effects. 

The  college  contains  one  hundred  and 
ninety  students — all  Arabs  ;  and  has  already 
supplied  the  military  services  with  many  sur- 
geons, who,  however  slight  their  acquire- 
ments may  be  (and  such  as  left  the  college 
in  the  first  few  years  after  its  establishment 
could  not  be  expected  to  be  very  learned), 
are  certainly  better  than  the  totally  unedu- 
cated quacks,  who,  until  then,  lent  their  as- 
sistance to  thin  the  ranks  of  the  Egyptian 
army. 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  COLLEGE  OF  ABOUZABEL. 

The  pupils  are  now  taken  at  an  earlier  age 
than  they  were  in  the  first  instance,  when  the 
urgent  want  of  medical  men  caused  them  to 
be  admitted  long  after  they  had  passed  the 
period  up  to  which  Arabs  (I  may  say  Mus- 
sulmans) learn  any  thing.  The  complaint, 
therefore,  which  has  very  generally  been 
made,  that  the  surgeons  hitherto  furnished 
by  the  College  of  Abouzabel  have  done  very 
little  credit  to  that  establishment,  will  not,  it 
may  be  hoped,  be  urged — with  justice — here- 
after. 

All  the  appointments  to  the  medical  de- 
partments, both  of  the  navy  and  army,  must 
(excepting  in  the  case  of  Franks)  be  given 
from  Abouzabel.  The  students  are  well 
lodged,  fed,  and  clothed,  and  receive  a  rate 
of  pajr,  varying,  according  to  the  classes  into 
which  they  are  divided,  from  thirty  to  one 
hundred  and  fifty  piastres  a  month. 

No  expense  appears  to  have  been  spared 
in  furnishing  the  schools  with  chemical  ap- 
paratus, anatomical  drawings,  models  in  wax, 
&.C.     The  establishment  is  well  supplied  also 


SURGICAL  INSTRUMENTS.  243 

with  subjects  for  dissection ;  the  moslem  stu- 
dents suffering  themselves  to  be  persuaded 
that  none  but  the  bodies  of  Copts,  Jews,  or 
Franks,  are  submitted  to  their  examination. 
The  surgical  instruments — infinite  in  variety, 
and  models  of  French  ingenuity — struck  me 
as  having  been  supplied  on  the  principle  of 
Peter  Pindar's  razors,  and  to  be  of  very  rude 
workmanship. 

Within  the  court  of  the  hospital  is  a  bota- 
nical garden,  and  adjoining  it  is  the  veteri- 
nary college,  which  promises,  under  the  able 
superintendence  of  Monsieur  Hamond,  to  be 
of  infinite  service.  From  this  school,  each 
cavalry  regiment  of  the  Egyptian  army  has 
already  been  supplied  with  a  veterinary  sur- 
geon. The  number  of  pupils  is  one  hundred 
and  twenty.  They  are  paid  and  treated  the 
same  as  those  of  the  medical  college.  The 
lecture  room  is  fitted  up  as  an  amphitheatre, 
and  is  well  supplied  with  anatomical  subjects, 
models,  and  drawings. 

The  stable  is  only  capable  of  receiving- 
eighty  horses — but  there  was  not  a  third  of 

r2 


244  ARAB  MODE  OF  SHOEING  HORSES. 

that  number  in  it.  Those  I  saw  had  mostly 
been  sent  from  the  army  in  Syria,  were  all 
entire  horses,  and  many  of  them  under  treat- 
ment for  a  disease,  to  which  I  had  always 
supposed  the  human  race  was  alone  subject. 
Monsieur  Hamond  informed  me  that  to  him, 
also,  it  was  quite  a  new  disease  in  the  horse  ; 
and  one  for  the  contracting  of  which  he 
could  not  possibly  account ;  but  stated  that 
it  assumed  all  the  appearances  of  the  same 
malady  in  the  human  frame,  and  gave  way 
to  the  same  remedies. 

The  Arab  method  of  shoeing  horses  is  ex- 
tremely bad  ;  a  plate  of  iron  covers  the  entire 
foot,  preventing  all  expansion,  and  pressing 
upon  the  frog,  so  as  to  lame  the  poor  animal 
the  moment  he  leaves  his  native  sands  or 
meadows,  to  travel  upon  a  stony  road.  It  is 
a  Turkish  prejudice  that  Monsieur  Hamond 
seemed  to  think  will  be  difficult  to  overcome. 
Far  greater  have,  however,  been  conquered, 
since  the  establishment  of  the  College  of 
Abouzabel — for  what  barriers  of  ignorance 
and  fanaticism   have   not  given  way  to   the 


PLAN  OF  INSTRUCTION.  246 

persevering  industry  of  the  present  ruler  of 
Egypt ! 

A  great  disadvantage  under  which  this 
establishment  at  present  labours  is,  that  the 
professors  are  all  foreigners,  who,  not  under- 
standing Arabic  sufficiently  to  lecture  in  that 
language,  are  under  the  necessity  of  having 
their  instructions  translated.  Now,  besides 
the  inconvenience  that  cannot  but  be  felt  by 
such  a  circuitous  mode  of  communicating 
knowledge,  the  indispensable  Dragoman  must 
himself  be  a  proficient  in  the  languages  of 
both  the  lecturer  and  the  pupil,  and  should, 
moreover,  have  a  very  clear  head — desiderata 
that  are  rarely  to  be  met  with,  even  in  the 
most  accomplished  Dragomans. 

One,  indeed,  (considered,  too,  a  perfect 
master  of  his  business)  whom  I  had  occa- 
sion to  request  to  officiate  as  my  interpreter, 
translated  "  Tell  him  to  go  to  the  devil."  "The 
Effendi  says  he  is  extremely  sorry  for  what 
has  happened."  Though  fully  expecting  my 
brief  and  not  over  civil  request  would  be  in- 
stantly followed  by  the  departure  of  the  com- 


246  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE. 

plainant — if  not  for  the  place  of  destination  I 
pointed  out,  at  all  events  from  the  room  in 
which  our  conference  took  place — yet,  I  was 
by  no  means  prepared  to  witness  the  degree 
of  satisfaction  his  countenance  expressed  on 
making  his  salaam  —  my  surprise  ceased 
only  on  learning  afterwards  what  a  turn  had 
been  given  to  my  unpalatable  words,  in  the 
polite  mouth  of  Signor -. 

The  inconvenience  caused  by  the  want  of  a 
common  language  between  the  instructor  and 
his  pupils  will,  in  some  degree,  be  overcome 
by  the  attention  now  paid  at  Abouzabel  to 
the  study  of  the  French  language,  for  which 
there  are  three  professors. 

The  situation  of  the  college  is,  perhaps,  as 
good  as  any  that  could  have  been  selected  in 
Egypt.  The  students  are  sufficiently  re- 
moved from  the  distractions  of  the  capital 
(distant  about  seventeen  miles)  without  being 
beyond  the  personal  observation  of  the  Vice- 
roy— and  in  no  country  more  than  in  Egypt 
is  shown  the  truth  of  the  Spanish  proverb, 
that  "  el  ojo  del  amo,  engorda  al  cavallo."  * 

•  The  Master's  eye  fattens  the  horse. 


SITUATION  OF  ABOUZABEL.  247 

As  an  hospital,  Abouzabel  possesses  the 
advantages  of  being  on  a  good  carriage-road, 
and  of  enjoying  a  freer  circulation  of  air, 
than  could  be  had  in  any  part  of  the  valley  of 
the  Nile ;  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it  is 
slightly  removed  from  the  sandy  desert,  and 
elevated  above  the  level  of  the  Delta.  From 
the  baneful  Khampseen  w^ind,  it  would  have 
been  vain  to  seek  for  shelter  any  where  in 
Egypt. 

In  every  respect,  this  establishment  does 
credit  to  Clot  Bey,  its  projector  and  super- 
intendent—  however  much  envious  Franks 
may  sneer  at  his  crimson  trowsers  and  red 
morocco  boots. 


248  DEPARTURE  FOR  CANDTA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Voyage  to  Candia  —  A  Health  Establishment  ill-adapted  to  the 
Establishment  of  Health  —  Fine  View  from  the  Lazaretto  Mole — 
A  Sicilian  Guardia7io -^  Descr'vption  of  the  Island  of  Crete  —  Its 
Population  —  City  of  Candia  —  Mustapha  Pasha  —  Difficulty  in 
procuring  Horses  —  Departure  for  Canea  —  Villages  of  Defnes, 
Evegenichi,  and  St.  Tomas  —  View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Pass 
on  the  Eastern  side  of  Mount  Ida —  Change  in  the  appearance  of 
the  Country  —  Agius  Decca  —  Ruins  of  Gortyna  —  Road  to  the 
Celebrated  Cretan  Labyrinth  —  Description  of  that  "  Wonder  of 
the  World  " — Arrival  at  Apodoulo. 

On  leaving  Egypt,  it  had  been  the  intention 

of  my  friend  D and  myself  to  proceed  by 

way  of  Smyrna  to  Constantinople  ;  but  the 
appearance  of  the  plague  at  both  those  places 
obliged  us  to  alter  our  course,  and  Candia 
lying  conveniently  on  our  route  to  the  Morea, 
we  thought  a  few  weeks  might  be  agreeably 
passed  in  a  visit  to  that  interesting  island. 
A  homeward-bound  English  merchant  brig 
presented  a  favourable  opportunity  for  carry- 


A  HEALTH  ESTABLISHMENT.  249 

ing  our  wishes  into  effect,  the  skipper  — 
tempted  by  a  liberal  offer — engaging  to  land 
us  at  any  port  in  the  island  that  he  could 
most  readily  make. 

An  obstinate  Etesian  wind  inflicted  on  us  a 
tedious  passage  of  nine  days,  in  the  course 
of  which  our  eyes  were  successively  regaled 
with  distant  views  of  the  fine  bold  coasts  of 
Rhodes  and  Scarpanto,  and  the  magnificent 
mountain  ranges  on  the  terra  firma  beyond. 
We  reached,  at  length,  the  port  of  Candia, 
and,  on  casting  anchor,  learnt,  to  our  dismay, 
that  a  '*  health  establishment "  had  recently 
been  formed  there ;  indeed,  the  display  of 
bright  yellow  flags,  iron  tongs,  palisadoes, 
and  fumes  of  sulphur,  sufficiently  declared 
that  it  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  youth,  and 
consequently  held  out  the  prospect  of  our 
being  subjected  to  an  unusually  strict  anti- 
pestilential  surveillance.  By  way  of  consola- 
tion— or  temptation — we  were  informed,  how- 
ever, that,  if  we  determined  on  landing,  seven 
days  would  be  the  extent  of  our  sanatory 
imprisonment. 


250  THE  LAZARETTO. 

There  was  no  help  for  it :  we  must  either 
submit  or  proceed  on  to  Malta,  where  a  worse 
fate  would  have  befallen  us  ;  we  disembarked, 
therefore,  and  were  forthwith  conducted  to 
the  Lazaretto,  in  which  we  were  assured  every 
attention  should  be  paid  to  our  comfort. 
Nothing  could  be  more  libellous  than  that 
term,  as  applied  to  the  accommodation  the 
place  afforded  —  namely,  a  dark  unventilated 
cell,  on  the  bare  walls  of  which  rheumatism, 
catarrh,  pleurisy,  and  consumption  were  writ- 
ten in  ever-trickling  streams  of  water. 

We  had  fortunately  brought  hammocks  and 
a  tent,  which  rendered  us  in  a  great  measure 
independent  of  the  unwholesome  den  allotted 
for  our  use ;  and  brandy  and  tobacco,  which 
enabled  us  to  counteract  the  effects  of  its 
damp  walls  and  the  night  dews.  From  the 
town  we  procured  tables  and  chairs,  as  well  as 
all  things  needful  to  satisfy  our  wants,  and,  on 
the  whole,  I  am  not  sure  but  that  I  should 
prefer  being  again  immured  within  the  old 
Venetian  galley  docks  of  Candia,  to  incar- 
ceration in  any  other  Lazaretto,  of  which,  in 


HARBOUR  OF  CANDIA.  261 

my  peregrinative  life,  it  has  been  my  misfor- 
tune to  be  an  inmate.  There,  at  all  events,  we 
enjoyed  a  splendid  view,  a  bustling  scene, 
and  a  bracing  sea  breeze — our  sanatory  tether 
being,  by  special  favour,  extended  so  as  to 
admit  of  our  walking  on  one  of  the  old  moles 
by  which  the  harbour  of  Candia  is  formed. 

The  view  from  thence  is  singularly  fine. 
Looking  over  the  clear  blue  surface  of  the 
harbour,  which  is  studded  with  an  infinite 
variety  of  vessels  of  the  most  fantastic  rig, 
the  spectator's  eye  dwells  with  interest  on 
the  ruined  vaults  of  an  extensive  range  of 
buildings,  (the  Venetian  docks)  the  bold  arches 
of  which  are  reflected  far  back  on  the  surface 
of  the  liquid  mirror.  Beyond  the  docks,  rise 
the  walls  and  houses  of  the  city,  their  bright, 
but  picturesque  outlines,  standing  finely  out 
from  a  dark  mountain  ridge,  which  runs  east 
and  west  through  the  centre  of  the  island, 
Ida's  snow-capped  peaks  rising  gracefully 
above  all  the  other  points  of  the  chain. 

When  driven  by  the  heat  of  the  mid-day 
sun  from  basking  in  the  enjoyinent  of  this 


252  A  SICILIAN  GUARDIANO. 

lovely  scene,  or  watching  the  constant  bustle 
of  the  port,  we  retired  to  the  shade  of  the 
vault  appropriated  to  our  use :  in  one  corner 
of  which  was  our  cell.  This  also  was  one  of 
a  range  of  Venetian  docks,  but  perfectly  dis- 
tinct from  that  before  noticed.  Here  our 
amusement  was  to  draw  out  the  little  ill-be- 
gotten man,  appointed,  with  the  Italian  title 
of  Guardiano,  to  watch  over  us.  His  tales, 
extremely  amusing  in  themselves,  were  render- 
ed doubly  entertaining  by  the  polyglot  nature 
of  his  vocabulary.  By  birth  a  Sicilian,  he  had, 
during  the  threatened  invasion  of  his  native 
island  by  the  French,  served  on  board  the 
flotilla  of  English  gun-boats,  and,  in  his  inter- 
course with  our  tars  had,  as  may  readily  be 
supposed,  picked  up  many  choice  expressions. 
His  deeds  of  valour  were  dwelt  upon  with 
great  complacency,  but  it  was  quite  evident 
that  grog  had  been  mainly  instrumental  in 
getting  up  his  courage  to  the  sticking  place, 
for  he  candidly  confessed  that  the  whizzing 
of  the  French  shot  and  shells  was  particularly 
disagreeable  until  after  the  second  allowance 


MONSIEUR  CAPORAL.  253 

had  been  issued — neat.  After  that — "G —  d — , 
pull  away  ;  "  "Viva  il  buon  grog- ;  "  "  Huzza 
for  King  George,"  &,c.,  &c.  He  always  spoke 
with  great  affection  of  the  English  nation  ; 
but,  so  identified  was  his  love  of  us  with 
that  of  his  favourite  liquor,  that  he  never 
failed  terminating  his  discourse  with  an 
eulogium  on  the  virtues  of  *'  quel  buon  grog." 
Next  to  his  deeds  of  arms,  our  guardian's 
favourite  theme  was  the  wonderful  talent  and 
extraordinary  influence  of  a  certain  Monsieur 
Caporal.  Of  the  station  and  title  of  this  im- 
portant personage,  we  were  doomed  for  a 
length  of  time  to  remain  in  ignorance,  never 
being  able  to  elicit  more  from  the  little  man, 
than  that  Monsieur  Caporal  was,  at  that 
very  time,  on  a  visit  at  Candia,  and  was 
"  Vistesso  come  il  Pasha."  In  saying  this,  he 
used  to  shove  out  his  little  fin-like  right  arm 
and  make  a  sidelong  motion,  as  if  it  would 
be  no  disgrace  to  either  to  walk  arm  in  arm 
with  the  other — repeating,  always,  "I'istesso 
come  il  Pasha."  Monsieur  Caporal,  we  at 
length  learnt,   was   a  French  gentleman,   at 


254  ISLAND  OF  CRETE. 

the  head  of  the  board  of  health,  and  Monsieur 
Caporal,  having  come  one  afternoon  to  take  a 
look  at  us  through  the  palisades,  was  so  well 
satisfied  with  our  appearance,  that  he  thought 
the  health  of  the  island  would  not  be  en- 
dangered by  our  release  on  the  following 
morning,  thereby  kindly  reducing  our  con- 
finement to  six  days. 

On  once  more  becoming /rce  agents,  we  re- 
paired to  the  dwelling  of  our  worthy  consular 
agent,  whose  attentions  had  been  unremitting 
whilst  we  were  in  the  lazaretto,  and  who  now, 
assuring  us  that  not  a  lodging  could  be 
procured  in  the  city,  on  any  terms,  in- 
sisted on  our  accepting  apartments  at  his 
house. 

The  island  of  Crete,  as  it  is  still  called  by 
the  Greeks,  is  about  one  hundred  and  sixty 
miles  in  length,  and  thirty  in  its  greatest 
breadth.  It  is  divided  into  three  districts, 
which  bear  the  names  of  their  principal 
towns,  viz.  Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea ;  all  of 
them  sea-ports  on  the  north  side  of  the 
island.     The   first-named   is  the  seat  of  go- 


MOUNT  IDA.  255 

vernment,  but  Canea  is  the  principal  place  of 
commerce. 

A  serrated  range  of  mountains  stretches 
from  east  to  west,  quite  through  the  island, 
but  this  chain  is  not  equally  lofty  and  rugged 
throughout ;  indeed,  in  some  places  it  loses 
altogether  its  asperity,  and  is  cultivated  to 
the  very  summit ;  but  these  mountain-passes 
are  few,  and  the  roads  traversing  them  are, 
for  the  most  part,  cut  off  from  each  other  by 
cragged  impracticable  peaks. 

The  mountains  of  the  eastern  division  of 
the  island  never  attain  any  very  great 
elevation,  but  are  rough  and  barren,  fall 
precipitously  to  the  sea,  and  present  an  unsafe 
and  inhospitable  shore.  On  stretching  to 
the  westward,  the  chain  attains  a  great 
height,  and  we  found  most  of  its  peaks  still 
covered  with  snow  in  the  month  of  June.  It 
falls  suddenly  on  approaching  the  centre  of 
the  island,  leaving  a  wide  gap  between  its 
western  extremity  and  the  rugged  side  of 
Mount  Psitorite  or  Ida.  The  conical  peak 
of  this  magnificent  mountain   towers  above 


256  ABSENCE  OF  RIVERS. 

all  the  other  points  of  the  island,  and  it  may 
be  considered  almost  an  isolated  mount,  for 
another  low  pass,  on  its  western  side,  divides 
it  from  the  mountains  of  Levka,  whilst,  to  the 
north  and  south,  its  wide-spreading  roots 
are  washed  by  the  waves  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean. 

The  mountains  at  the  western  extremity 
of  Candia  are  yet  more  savage  and  impracti- 
cable than  those  already  described,  are  very 
lofty,  assuming  the  most  fantastic  and  pic- 
turesque forms,  and  fall  suddenly  to  the 
sea,  presenting  an  indented  and  inaccessible 
coast. 

The  island  is  watered  by  no  great  rivers, 
but  every  little  ravine  in  the  furrowed  sides 
of  the  different  mountain  ranges  bears  its 
own  tribute  of  melted  snow  to  the  rich 
alluvial  valleys  lying  at  their  feet.  At  the 
present  day,  however,  they  are  mostly  doomed 
to  flow  for  no  more  useful  purpose  than  to 
slake  the  thirst  of  the  wild  boar  and  ibex, 
with  which  the  forests  abound ;  or,  perchance, 
that  of  some  lonely  traveller,  led  by  curiosity 


POPULATION  OF  CANDIA.  257 

to  visit  this  neglected  garden :  for  such  the 
greater  part  of  the  island  is.  On  every  side 
are  to  be  seen  villages  razed  to  the  ground, 
olive  groves  cut  down,  uprooted  vineyards, 
and  un weeded  crops. 

The  population  of  Candia,  from  the  raising 
of  the  standard  of  Greek  independence  to 
the  present  day,  has  been  reduced  from  two 
hundred  and  eighty  to  one  hundred  thousand 
souls  !  Of  this  number,  the  city  of  Candia 
alone  contains  from  twelve  to  fourteen  thou- 
sand. It  stands  near  the  site  of  the  ancient 
Heraclea,  and  is  defended  by  a  formidable 
bastioned  enceinte  of  Venetian  workmanship, 
having  lofty  cavaliers,  deep  retired  flanks, 
and  orillons  a  la  Pagan  ;  but,  excepting  the 
scarp  wall  of  the  body  of  the  place  (a  beautiful 
specimen  of  the  art,  which  still,  in  most  places, 
presents  a  perpendicular  height  of  fifty  feet) 
the  fortifications  are  in  a  very  dilapidated 
state.  The  ditch  is  wide,  partially  choked 
up  with  ruins  and  overgrown  with  bushes, 
and  the  out-works  are  in  a  yet  worse 
plight,    and   have    not    capacity   enough    to 

VOL.  II.  s 


258  STATE  OF  THE  FORTIFICATIONS. 

cover  the  attackable  points  of  the  principal 
line. 

The  artillery  with  which  the  walls  are 
armed  is  in  a  wretched  condition ;  the  iron 
guns  being  rusted  and  honeycombed — their 
carriages  rotten.  The  brass  pieces  are  in  a 
more  serviceable  state,  and  there  are  four 
guns,  of  immense  length,  on  the  sea  wall, 
which  ships  would  find  very  troublesome 
acquaintances ;  though  the  state  of  their 
carriages  would  not  permit  of  an  interchange 
of  civilities  being  long  maintained  on  their 
parts. 

The  sea  wall  is  not  above  twenty  feet  high, 
very  irregular,  and  but  badly  flanked.  It  is 
protected  in  some  measure  by  the  nature  of 
the  beach,  which  is  broken  by  ledges  of  flat 
rocks  that  stretch  a  considerable  distance 
into  the  sea,  rendering  a  debarkation  ex- 
tremely difficult  if  there  be  the  least  wind ; 
otherwise,  there  are  several  spots  of  sandy 
beach,  on  which  boats  may  be  run  without 
danger.  The  western  mole  of  the  harbour 
would,  if  properly  armed,  present  a  formidable 


DESCRirXION  OF  THE  HARBOUR.  259 

flanking  fire  along  the  greater  part  of  the 
sea  wall ;  but,  besides  that  the  artillery  is 
dismounted,  the  work  itself  is  in  a  very 
crazy  state. 

The  harbour  is  a  mere  basin,  formed  by 
two  moles,  which,  bending  towards  each 
other,  project  about  two  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  into  the  sea,  and  are  defended,  at  their 
extreme  points,  by  forts.  That  at  the  head 
of  the  western  pier  encloses  a  light-house, 
which  is  highly  necessary  to  enable  vessels 
arriving  at  night  to  discover  the  harbour; 
for,  such  is  the  velocity  with  which  an  easterly 
current  sets  along  the  shore,  that,  if  the 
entrance  be  missed  by  ever  so  little,  great 
risk  is  incurred  of  shipwreck  on  the  rocky 
coast  beyond ;  or,  if  that  misfortune  be 
avoided,  a  considerable  delay  must  inevitably 
be  experienced  in  working  a  vessel  up  against 
the  stream. 

The  two  castles  that  defend  the  harbour 
do  not  appear  to  be  in  a  state  to  stand  even 
the  concussion  that  would  be  occasioned  by 
the   fire   of    their  own    guns.     The   channel 

s2 


260  NUMBER  OF  VESSELS  IN  THE  POUT. 

between  them  opens  rather  to  the  eastward, 
and  is  so  very  narrow  as  barely  to  allow  two 
small  vessels  to  pass,  but  the  harbour  is 
thereby  completely  sheltered  against  every 
wind.  It  is,  at  the  present  day,  choked  up 
with  sand  and  the  ruins  of  the  old  Venetian 
docks  and  arsenal,  so  that  it  serves  only  for 
vessels  of  one  hundred  tons  burthen.  Large 
vessels  are  obliged  to  anchor  under  the 
island  of  Standia  ;  abreast  of,  and  about  three 
miles  distant  from  the  harbour,  where  they 
are  sheltered  from  the  north-east  wind, 
which  prevails  on  this  coast  during  the 
greater  part  of  the  year. 

During  my  stay  at  Candia,  the  number  of 
vessels  in  the  port  averaged  about  twenty. 
They  were  mostly  Greek  misticos,  of  from 
eighty  to  one  hundred  tons  burthen.  The 
basin  is,  however,  capable  of  containing  three 
times  that  number. 

Under  the  Turkish  Government,  the  export 
trade  of  the  island  was  confined  exclusively 
to  the  port  of  Candia ;  but,  since  Mohammed 
Ali   has  assumed  the  sovereignty,  the  place 


ENTRANCE  TO  THE  TOWN.  261 

has  been  deprived  of  this  privilege,  and  has, 
consequently,  succumbed  to  its  rival,  Canea, 
which  stands  in  a  more  productive  country, 
and  possesses  a  better  harbour. 

There  are  now  but  three  gates  to  the  city 
of  Candia,  (exclusive  of  that  communicating 
with  the  harbour.)  That  of  Canea  opens  to 
the  west,  near  the  sea  shore — the  "Porta- 
nuova"  to  the  south,  about  the  middle  of  the 
enceinte — and  the  Lazaretto-gate  towards  the 
east.  Between  this  last  and  the  sea,  the  ram- 
parts are  somewhat  lower  than  elsewhere, 
and  the  multiplied  outworks  that  cover  the 
town  on  that  side  form  so  many  stepping- 
stones  into  it.  The  ground  there  also  favours 
an  attack  in  other  respects.  The  principal 
streets  of  the  city  are  wide,  but  roughly 
paved  ;  they  are  furnished  with  fountains  and 
adorned  with  clumps  of  trees,  which  give 
them  an  agreeable  and  refreshing  look.  The 
houses  are  mostly  low,  seldom  exceeding  one 
story  above  the  ground-floor,  and  are  built 
with  wide  projecting  roofs,  which,  being  sup- 
ported by  wooden  pillars,  form  a  shady  co- 
lonnade the  whole  length  of  the  street. 


262  PUBLIC  BUILDINGS. 

The  bazaars  are  good  ;  and  there  is  an  air 
of  freshness  and  cleanliness  extremely  pleas- 
ing, after  the  narrow  filthy  lanes  of  Alex- 
andria. 

The  city  walls  enclose  a  very  considerable 
space ;  but  the  upper  or  eastern  part  of  the 
town,  having  sustained  much  damage  from  an 
earthquake  a  few  years  since,  is  almost  de- 
serted, and  has  altogether  a  different  cha- 
racter to  that  just  described — the  few  habit- 
able streets  that  remain  being  narrow  and 
unpaved — the  houses  lofty,  more  scattered, 
and  interspersed  with  gardens. 

Amongst  the  public  buildings  of  the  place, 
the  most  conspicuous  are  the  barracks  and 
hospital  for  the  troops,  the  palace  of  the  go- 
vernor, and  the  metropolitan  cathedral  of 
the  Greeks — the  size  of  this  last  gives  but  an 
unfavourable  idea  of  their  devotion ;  and  its 
condition  furnishes  rather  an  argument 
against  the  *'  voluntary  principled  The  city 
contains  another  small  place  of  worship  for 
the  Greeks — numerous  mosques — and  the  re- 
mains of  two  Roman  Catholic  churches.    One 


MUSTAPIIA  PASHA.  263 

of  these  has  been  repaired  and  converted  into 
a  mosque  ;  and  it  was  the  wish  of  Mohammed 
Ali,  that  the  other  should  be  fitted  up  as  a 
public  school,  but  the  inhabitants  of  the  island 
will  not  suffer  their  children  to  be  instructed, 
fearing  that  by  education  they  might  be 
turned  to  some  honest  account,  and  sent  out 
of  the  country. 

The  city  is  well  supplied  with  water  by 
means  of  two  aqueducts  ;  but  as  these,  in  the 
event  of  a  siege,  are  liable  to  be  cut  off,  every 
house  in  the  place  is  provided  with  a  well ; 
the  water  found  on  the  spot  is  not,  however, 
by  any  means  good.  There  are  some  old 
tanks  belonging  to  the  Government,  but  they 
are  no  longer  serviceable.  The  market  is 
tolerably  well  supplied  with  meat ;  but  poultry, 
fruit,  and  vegetables,  are  scarce,  and  appeared 
to  us,  who  had  just  come  from  Egypt,  particu- 
larly dear. 

The  introduction  to  one  Turkish  authority 
is  so  similar  to  that  of  another,  that  I  will  ab- 
stain from  any  account  of  our  presentation  to 
Mustapha  Pasha  (the  Governor  of  the  island), 


264  DIFFICULTY  IN  PROCURING  HORSES. 

further  than  by  observing,  that  the  pipes 
with  which  he  honoured  us  were  very  hand- 
some—  the  coffee  very  bad  —  that  he  is  a 
young  man  of  about  two  or  three  and  thirty ; 
very  good  looking  ;  possesses,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  the  suaviter  in  modo  of  all  well  bred 
Turks ;  is  said  to  be  very  much  given  to 
break  the  precepts  of  the  Koran,  touching 
abstinence  from  wine;  and  is  distinguished 
for  the  courage  and  moderation  he  evinced 
throughout  the  turbulent  period  of  the  insur- 
rectionary war,  when  he  commanded  the  gar- 
rison of  Canea. 

We  were  detained  several  days  beyond  the 
period  we  had  fixed  for  our  departure  for 
Canea,  by  the  difficulty  experienced  in  pro- 
curing horses  to  convey  ourselves  and  lug- 
gage ;  and  it  was  only  at  last  overcome  by  the 
interference  of  the  Pasha,  who  kindly  took 
upon  himself  to  order  the  horse-owners  to 
furnish  us  ;  answering  for  their  safe  return. 
We  were  obliged,  nevertheless,  to  be  satisfied 
with  three  ;  and  to  send  the  greater  part  of 
our  baggage  by  water. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  CANEA.  265 

The  direct  road  to  Canea  skirts  the  sea- 
coast,  nearly  the  whole  way ;  we  determined 
to  vary  the  scenery,  by  crossing  to  the  south- 
ern side  of  the  island,  visiting,  on  our  route, 
the  ruins  of  Gortyna,  and  the  celebrated  la- 
byrinth. Striking  off,  therefore,  from  the 
Canea  road,  about  a  mile  from  Candia,  we 
commenced  ascending,  by  a  narrow  valley, 
towards  the  mountain-pass,  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Ida.  Our  road  soon  became  a  mere 
mule  track,  though  here  and  there  traces  of 
an  old  Venetian  pav^  gave  evidence  of  its 
having  seen  better  days.  The  country  is 
broken  and  steep  —  the  soil  light  and  thin, 
lying  over  a  stratum  of  calcareous  rock.  The 
sides  of  the  valleys  are  clothed  with  rank 
grass,  which  affords  but  poor  food  to  the 
flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  that  are  doomed  to 
remain  thin  upon  it.  The  crops  of  barley 
and  corn  in  the  bottoms — where  a  deep  rich 
soil  and  flowing  stream  promise  abundance 
— are  scanty  and  neglected.  Groves  of  olive 
trees  are  scattered  sparingly  along  the  way- 
side,   and   occasionally    some    stunted    vines 


266  VILLAGE  OF  DEFNES. 

force  their  young  shoots  through  the  en- 
tanglement of  weeds,  that  overshadows  and 
renders  them  fruitless :  but,  excepting  the 
dwarf  alders  and  ash  growing  on  the  edges 
of  the  rivulets,  and,  as  we  advanced  further 
into  the  interior,  a  few  mulberry  trees,  no 
other  foliage  presented  itself,  for  many  miles, 
from  the  walls  of  Candia. 

In  three  hours  and  a  half,  we  reached  a 
wretched  village,  called  Defnes — situated,  like 
an  eagle's  nest,  on  the  summit  of  a  barren 
rocky  ledge.  It  is  now  an  abandoned  heap 
of  ruins ;  but  was  evidently,  in  former  days, 
a  flourishing  place.  The  walls  of  the  houses, 
solidly  built  of  blocked  stone  ;  the  well-turned 
arches,  over  the  doors  and  windows ;  have  in- 
deed resisted  the  hand  of  the  destroyer — but 
roofless,  comfortless,  blackened  by  the  Mos- 
lem torch — in  revenge  for  the  vineyard  up- 
rooted the  day  before,  by  the  Greek  inmate  of 
this  now  wretched  abode — the  place  offers  a 
most  heart-rending  example  of  the  sad  effects 
of  civil  war  !  and  such  is  the  picture  of  almost 
every  village  of  Candia  ! 


EVEGENICHI  AND  ST.  TOMAS.  2(>7 

On  leaving  Defnes,  the  road  enters  a  more 
fruitful  country,  and,  at  two  miles  and  a  half 
from  that  village,  passes  under  the  equally 
miserable  one  of  Evegenichi.  Its  ruined 
church  and  roofless  houses  are  extremely 
picturesque,  and  contrast  finely  (I  mean  in 
colour)  with  the  darkly  wooded  ravine  on  the 
brink  of  which  they  stand  ;  where,  flourishing 
in  unpruned  luxuriance,  the  fig,  pomegranate, 
almond,  and  other  fruit  trees,  vie  with  the 
stately  oak  and  plane,  that  clothe  the  sides  of 
the  valley. 

Ascending  and  crossing  over  the  summit 
of  the  ridge  on  the  right  side  of  the  ravine, 
we  entered  a  wood  of  well-grown  oaks ;  and, 
thence,  scrambling  up  the  side  of  another 
steep  chain — our  path  overhung  with  ivy- 
covered  rocks,  and  shadowed  by  indigenous 
vines,  clinging  in  graceful  festoons  to  fruit 
trees  of  every  variety — reached  the  village  of 
St.  Tomas. 

The  roofless  and  almost  tenantless  houses 
of  this  once  thriving  village  are  clustered 
round  the  foot  of  a  rocky  knoll,  at  the  sum- 


268  nuiNs  OF  meralibuisi. 

mit  of  the  mountain  ridge  —  its  population 
reduced  from  three  hundred  to  thirty  fami- 
lies !  The  position  of  the  place,  the  pic- 
turesque church,  impending  rocks,  and  lux- 
uriant overshadowing  groves,  make  it  quite 
a  scene  of  romance ;  and,  from  the  top  of  the 
conical  eminence,  rising  in  the  centre  of  the 
ruined  village,  a  superb  panoramic  view  is 
obtained.  It  lies  nearly  due  south  of  the 
town  of  Candia,  and  is  distant  from  it  about 
fourteen  miles. 

From  St.Tomas  the  road  gradually  ascends 
amongst  vineyards  and  orchards,  for  some- 
thing more  than  a  mile,  to  the  ruins  of  Mera- 
librisi,  embosomed  in  groves  of  mulberry  and 
apple  trees  ;  from  thence,  continuing  still  to 
ascend  for  another  mile,  it  at  length  reaches 
the  summit  of  the  pass  in  the  great  mountain 
chain  that  runs  through  the  island  from  east 
to  west,  where  a  fine  view  is  obtained  of  the 
southern  side  of  Candia.  The  rich  vale  of 
I\Iassara  extends  far  to  the  west,  directing 
the  eye  to  the  Mediterranean,  from  the  blue 
surface  of  which  rises   the   rocky  island  of 


ASPECT  OF  THE  COUNTRY.  269 

Paximades,  distant  but  a  few  miles  from  the 
shore;  whilst,  far  beyond,  the  bolder  outline  of 
Gozo  di  Candia  breaks  the  line  of  the  horizon. 
The  face  of  the  country  presents  a  very 
different  look  from  that  which  we  had  hither- 
to traversed.  It  is  much  less  wooded.  The 
valleys  are  wider,  less  tortuous,  and  easier  of 
cultivation ;  and  being,  from  their  southern 
aspect,  exposed  to  the  full  influence  of  the 
sun,  their  crops  are  sooner  ripened  than  on 
the  other  side  the  mountains,  so  that  we 
found  nothing-  standing  but  a  few  neglected 
fields  of  corn  and  oats — scarcely,  I  should 
have  conceived,  worth  the  trouble  of  gather- 
ing in.  The  greater  part  of  the  country  had 
not,  however,  been  cultivated  for  many  a  year. 
Villages  are  scattered  throughout  the  plains, 
and  the  olive  groves  that  once  formed  the 
chief  source  of  the  riches  of  the  country  still 
grow  round  them  ;  but  the  hands  that  tilled 
the  fields,  and  pruned  and  rendered  the  trees 
productive,  have  been  swept  off,  and  the  fer- 
tile country  will  soon  assume  the  appearance 
of  a  wilderness. 


270  VILLAGE  OF  AGIUS  DECCA. 

The  road,  now  little  more  than  a  rough 
stony  track,  descends  to  Gurguliete,  seven 
miles  from  St.  Tomas  ;  from  whence,  crossing 
another  steep  ridge,  and  traversing  a  rocky 
defile,  overhung  by  precipitous  cliffs  of  dark 
grey  marble,  it  enters  the  celebrated  valley 
of  Massara — extending,  east  and  west,  nearly 
ten  miles.  Near  the  head  of  the  valley,  and 
distant  about  three  miles  from  the  last  named 
village,  is  that  of  Agius  Decca  —  a  dirty 
place,  containing  some  sixty  or  eighty  ill- 
built  houses,  shaded  by  a  few  fruit  trees.  It 
stands  near  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Go- 
tyna,  which,  judging  from  the  vast  extent  of 
ruins,  must  have  stretched  for  several  miles 
down  the  valley.  We  found  the  walls  of  the 
village  church  yet  standing,  as  also  some 
marble  pillars  that  once  supported  its  roof. 
The  floor  is  paved  with  slabs  of  the  same  and 
breccia  verde,  which,  I  imagine,  must  have 
been  quarried  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. 

The  Capo  of  the  village,  a  Greek,  received 
us  into  his  house,  or  rather  into  his  garden, 


THE  GREEK  CAPO.  271 

where  we  pitched  our  tent — and  asked  us, 
mysteriously,  in  the  few  words  of  Italian 
of  which  he  was  master,  whether  we  were 
English  or  French  ;  saying,  on  my  acknow- 
ledging to  belong  to  the  former  locomotive 
nation,  *'Inglez!  buono" — immediately  putting 
my  assertion  to  the  test,  by  asking  for  a  knife 
and  fork  out  of  our  canteen.  He  volunteered 
his  services  as  guide  and  Cicerone  to  the 
labyrinth,  which  we  purposed  visiting  next 
morning,  and,  on  the  plea  of  laying  in  a  pro- 
vision of  twine,  tapers,  he,  extracted  a  sum 
of  money  in  advance,  which  would  have  pur- 
chased all  the  hemp  and  wax  in  the  village. 
His  own  stores,  however,  furnished  the  re- 
quired articles,  which  had  already  been  used 
and  paid  for  a  hundred  times  over  by  former 
travellers. 

We  set  out  at  day-break,  and,  at  about 
half  a  mile  from  the  village,  reached  a  bridge 
thrown  across  a  crystal  stream  that  gushes 
out  of  a  ravine  in  the  wide-spreading  roots  of 
Mount  Ida.  On  the  margin  of  the  torrent 
stands  an  extremely  picturesque  ruin,  over- 


272  RUINS  OF  GOTYNA. 

shadowed  by  a  group  of  wide-spreading  plane 
trees.  A  dilapidated  bridge  affords  a  passage 
across  the  stream,  which,  however,  is  fordable 
at  most  seasons  of  the  year.  The  surface  of 
the  plain,  on  the  left,  is  strewed  as  far  as  the 
eye  can  reach  with  fragments  of  marble  co- 
lumns, building  stones,  and  ruins;  the  remains 
of  Gotyna. 

At  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  our  sleep- 
ing-place is  the  village  of  Avenuson,  which  is 
a  much  more  inviting  locale  than  Agius  Decca, 
being  embosomed  in  groves  of  fruit  trees,  and 
watered  by  a  limpid  rivulet.  Soon  after  pass- 
ing this  village,  the  pathway  to  the  labyrinth 
strikes  off  to  the  right,  ascending  the  steep 
mountain,  on  the  acclivity  of  which  this  won- 
der of  the  world  is  situated.  It  requires  a 
scramble  of  three  quarters  of  an  hour  to  reach 
it ;  for,  although  but  a  short  distance  from  the 
road,  it  is  elevated  at  least  six  hundred  feet 
above  the  plain,  and  the  pathway  is  obstructed 
by  rocks  and  bushes. 

The  entrance  cannot  be  discerned  until 
within  one  hundred  paces  of  it.     It  faces  the 


NATURAL  CAVERNS.  273 

south,  and  is  evidently  one\>f  the  natural  ca- 
verns so  common  in  the  island,  and  indeed  in 
the  sides  of  all  mountains  of  the  same  geolo- 
gical character. 

From  this  vestibule,  a  passage  of  consider- 
able width,  but  obstructed  by  huge  blocks  of 
rock,  leads  for  some  distance  into  the  heart  of 
the  mountain,  when,  turning  sharply  to  the 
left,  and  diminishing  suddenly  to  a  width  and 
height  of  between  four  and  five  feet,  it  con- 
tinues in  that  direction  for  about  eighty 
paces.  This  inconvenient  hoyau  is  the  only 
passage  in  the  labyrinth  that  obliges  one  to 
bend  the  back.  At  its  termination,  we  arrived 
at  a  kind  of  star  chamber,  (I  mean  a  chamber 
in  the  form  of  a  star),  from  which  passages 
branch  off  in  all  directions,  leading  to  other 
chambers,  where  new  radii  conduct  still  fur- 
ther into  the  interior  of  the  mountain,  form- 
ing, indeed,  a  very  intricate  net-work,  of 
which  some  idea  may  be  formed  by  those  who 
are  acquainted  with  the  purlieus  of  St.  Giles's, 
by  merely  imagining  a  succession  of  subter- 
ranean seven  dials. 

VOL.  II.  T 


274  CIIARLATANERIE  OF  THE  GUIDES. 

The  roof  of  all  these  numerous  passages 
and  chambers  is  one  uninterrupted  even  sur- 
face, for  though  they  differ  materially  in 
height,  yet  this  irregularity  is  chiefly  caused 
by  the  greater  or  less  accumulation  of  stones 
and  rubbish  heaped  upon  the  floors,  over 
which  the  adventurer  has  sometimes  to  make 
his  way  at  the  risk  of  his  neck.  Some  of  the 
chambers,  however,  are  entered  by  steps,  the 
floors  bemg  sunk,  but  even  of  these  the  roof 
is  invariably  on  the  same  hanging  level. 

The  passages  are  sufficiently  complex  and 
tortuous  to  puzzle  any  one  who  visits  them 
for  the  first  time,  but  to  persons  accustomed 
to  thread  their  mazes,  like  our  guides,  I  should 
say  the  huge  hanks  of  twine  and  extravagant 
supply  of  torches  and  wax-tapers  were  called 
for  merely  by  the  "  chai^latanerie  "  of  their 
profession  ;  and  I  feel  persuaded  that,  bearing 
in  mind  the  before-noticed  peculiarity  in  the 
formation  of  the  roof  of  this  extraordinary 
place,  any  one  provided  with  plenty  of  wax 
candles,  presence  of  mind,  a  box  of  lucifers, 
and  the  organ  of  locality,  ought  to  find  his 


APPEARANCE  OF  THE  INTERIOR.  275 

way  out  of  it.  The  direction  of  the  chain  of 
hills  is  east  and  west ;  their  composition  a  soft 
limestone,  disposed  in  thin  parallel  strata, 
underlying  slightly  north.  Recollecting, 
therefore,  that  the  roof  is  always  the  under 
part  of  the  same  stratum — it  is  clear  that  all 
the  passages  which  are  on  an  inclined  pliane 
parallel  to  that  of  the  roof  must  run  north 
and  south — whilst  those  which  are  level  must 
be  in  the  direction  of  the  range  of  hills,  and 
cannot,  therefore,  lead  to  the  entrance,  facing 
the  south,  which  must,  consequently,  be  sought 
for,  by  attaining  the  very  highest  level  of  the 
passages  on  an  inclined  plane. 

One  passage  that  we  followed,  with  every 
appearance  of  caution  on  the  part  of  our 
guides,  brought  us,  after  divers  windings,  to 
a  small  chamber,  of  which  the  roof  having 
given  way  to  the  constant  action  of  a  trick- 
ling stream,  and  formed  numerous  stalactites, 
has  assumed  the  appearance  of  the  interior 
of  a  Gothic  spire.  The  water  is  constantly 
dripping,  and  some  charitable  person  has 
furnished  the  chamber  with  an  earthenware 

t2 


276  THE  HALL  OF  SACRIFICE. 

vase  to  collect  the  stream  and  enable  the 
traveller  to  quench  his  thirst.  This  is  the 
only  part  of  the  labyrinth  that  we  found  un- 
comfortably damp,  and  in  no  place  was  the 
air  hot  or  disagreeable. 

Another  passage  conducted  us  to  a  large 
chamber,  which  we  were  informed  was  the  ne 
plus  ultra  in  that  direction — I  think  our  guides 
called  it  the  hall  of  sacrifice.  The  venture- 
some persons  who,  by  the  aid  of  flambeaux 
and  twine,  penetrate  "  thus  far  into  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,"  consider  themselves 
entitled  to  lay  claim  to  immortality  by  in- 
scribing their  names  on  the  wall.  Amongst 
others  were  those  of  Mustapha  Pasha,  and  of  a 

French  lady,  Madame  C ,  whom  her  tender 

husband  described  as  being  '*  enceinte  de  5 
mois." 

The  purpose  for  which  this  labyrinth  was 
formed  is  yet  a  matter  of  conjecture.  There 
is  not  the  slightest  indication  of  its  having 
been  a  place  of  burial,  and  the  narrow  en- 
trance is  very  much  against  the  supposition 
of  its  having  been  a  stone  quarry  —  indeed  it 


CELEBRATED  LABYRINTH.         277 

is  quite  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
builders  of  Gotyna  should  have  come  here 
for  stone  when  they  had  plenty  of  the  same 
kind  much  nearer  at  hand. 

It  most  probably  was  a  natural  cavern, 
which  served  in  early  ages  as  a  place  of  refuge 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  plain  below,  against 
the  marauding  visits  of  their  more  powerful 
neighbours,  and  thus  came  to  be  enlarged 
to  contain  their  stores  of  grain  as  well  as 
their  families,  and,  finally,  to  assume  its  pre- 
sent regular  appearance. 

Some  doubts  have  been  started  as  to  this 
cavern  being  the  famed  labyrinth  from  which 
Theseus  was  delivered  by  the  contrivance  of 
the  love-stricken  Ariadne.  Far  be  it  from 
me  to  throw  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  on  the 
truth  of  a  tale  of  such  true  love,  but  I  needs 
must  confess  that  the  locale  but  ill  agrees 
with  the  account  handed  down  to  us  of  the 
Minotaur's  abode,  for  veracious  Greek  authors 
state  that  it  had  an  opening  on  the  sea 
shore — now  this  certainly  never  possessed 
such  a  back-door,  for  it  is,  at  least,  six  miles 
from  the  coast. 


2^8 


THE  BAY  OF  MKSSARA. 


On  leaving  the  labyrinth,  we  descended  the 
mountain  in  the  best  way  we  could  to  regain 
the  road  in  the  valley,  from  which  we  had  pre- 
viously struck  off,  as  by  it  we  purposed  gaining 
the  pass  on  the  western  side  of  Mount  Ida  and 
proceeding  to  Retimo.  The  road  soon  quits 
the  plain,  inclining  slightly  to  the  right,  and 
traverses  a  broken  country,  of  which  the 
gravelly  surface  is  thickly  clad  with  gorse, 
heather,  and  aromatic  shrubs  of  infinite  variety. 
On  attaining  the  summit  of  a  barren  ridge, 
an  agreeable  view  burst  upon  us.  The  beau- 
tiful village  of  Faneromegnie,  nestled  in  the 
bottom  of  the  ravine,  lies  below,  shadowed  by 
magnificent  carob  trees,  and  encompassed  by 
orchards,  bending  under  the  weight  of  their 
own  riches.  From  thence,  a  level  country 
stretches  all  the  way  to  the  sea,  but  the  road, 
when  arrived  at  within  a  mile  of  the  coast,  in- 
clines again  to  the  right,  keeping  parallel  to 
the  eastern  shore  of  the  Bay  of  Messara,  and 
crosses  the  beds  of  several  mountain  torrents. 
The  soil  of  the  plain  is  red  clay  and  gravel, 
and  it  is  covered  with  aromatic  plants  that 
give  out  a  delightful  fragrance. 


VILLAGES.  279 

On  approaching   Clima,   which   is   about 
twelve  miles  from  Agius  Decca,  the  country 
again  becomes  hilly  and  wooded  with  carob, 
olive,  and  other  trees,  intermixed  with  patches 
of  corn.     The  village  stands  on  the  acclivity 
of  a  mountain,  and  is  miserable  in  the  ex- 
treme.    The  road  zig-zags  up  the  side  of  the 
steep  ridge  beyond  Clima,  and  in  the  valley, 
on  the  reverse  side,  reaches  as  far  as  Santa,  a 
wretched  ruined  hamlet  that  affords  shelter  to 
some  sixty  or  eighty  souls.    Crossing  another 
steep  chain,  and  leaving  on  the  right  the  pic- 
turesque  village  of  Sanota,  which  nestles  in 
the  intervening  valley,  we  passed  a  mass  of 
ruins,  once  known  as  the  village  of  Dafiaco, 
and,  traversing  a  wild  and  partially  wooded 
valley,   arrived    at    Apodoulo,    where   a  few 
decent  houses,  but  more  especially  a  litter  of 
sucking  pigs,  tempted  us  to  stay  for  the  night. 
We  sent  our  Greek  servant  forthwith  in  search 
of  the  owner  of  the  unclean  little  beasts — our 
christian    appetites  craving    strangely  at   a 
sight  with  which  our  eyes  had  not  been  feasted, 
during  the  whole  of  our  residence  in  Egypt. 


280  SITUATION  OF  APODOULO. 

Apodoulo  is  about  twenty  miles  from  Agius 
Decca.  It  is  agreeably  situated  on  a  knoll, 
projecting  from  the  western  side  of  Mount 
Ida,  and  commands  a  fine  view  over  a  wide 
and  deep  lateral  valley,  that  stretches  many 
miles  into  the  interior  of  the  island.  The 
accommodation  it  ojffered  was  poor,  but  our 
tent  rendered  us  independent  of  house-room, 
and  our  squeaker,  placed  on  two  blocks  of 
stone,  was  soon  crackling  over  a  blazing  fire  ; 
bread,  fruit,  and  eggs  we  were  able  to  procure 
in  the  village,  and  wine  we  had  brought  with 
us  from  Candia  —  for,  whilst  there,  we  had 
ascertained,  that  not  a  drop  could  then  be 
obtained  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 


BARREN  COUNTRY.  281 


CHAPTER  X. 

Journey  Continued  —  Convent  of  Asomatos — Mountain  Pass  — 
Beautiful  Scenery — Execrable  Road — Villages  of  Keriana,  Adil, 
and  Maroulas — Arrival  at  Retimo — Description  of  that  Town — 
Citadel — Population — Trade — Provincial  Council — Departure  for 
Canea — Dangerous  Road — Armyro — Mineral  Waters — Splendid 
Scenery— Neo  Horio— The  Capo's  House — The  Ridiculous  and 
the  Sublime — Day  of  Waterloo — Bay  of  Suda — Arrival  at  Canea 
— Description  of  the  Town — Great  Increase  of  its  Population. 

We  resumed  our  journey  on  the  following 
morning  as  the  sun  first  broke  upon  the 
snowy  peaks  of  Ida.  The  early  part  of  our 
ride  was  over  a  rough  and  barren  country, 
the  soil  of  which,  mostly  gravel  and  ferrugi- 
nous clay,  is  friendly  to  the  growth  of  no 
other  forest  trees  than  the  carob  and  wild 
olive.  From  the  underwood,  our  dogs  sprang 
a  great  many  partridges,  of  the  common 
brown  kind,  and  our  guides  told  us  that  wild 


282  ROUTE  FROM  APODOULO. 

boars  are  very  plentiful  in  that  part  of  the 
island. 

Our  road  conducted  us  across  a  succession 
of  very  rugged  ridges  and  deep  ravines,  that 
furrow  the  side  of  Psilorite.  Near  the  head 
of  one  of  these  dells — yet  screened  from  the 
sun's  rays  by  the  lofty  summit  of  the  moun- 
tain— is  the  large  village  of  Stenefavri,  and, 
a  little  farther  on,  we  passed  that  of  Isigiani, 
situated  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the 
road,  on  the  left. 

After  having  travelled  about  five  miles 
from  Apodoulo — our  sleeping  place — we  de- 
scended to  the  bed  of  the  great  valley  men- 
tioned in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  water  of 
which  flows  to  the  southern  sea  of  Candia, 
and  into  which  the  numerous  minor  ravines 
that  we  had  previously  traversed  finally 
open. 

The  valley  presents  a  wide  pebbly  bed, 
but  is  so  thickly  covered  with  myrtle  and 
oleander,  that  the  windings  of  the  transparent 
stream  which  waters  it  cannot  be  followed, 
even  with  the  eye.     feo  luxuriant,  indeed,  is 


CONVENT  OF  ASOMATOS.  283 

the  growth  of  these  shrubs,  that  their  boughs, 
loaded  with  blossoms,  hung  high  above  our 
horses'  heads,  and  screened  us  from  the 
rapidly  increasing  heat  of  the  sun.  The  side 
of  the  mountain  range  on  our  left  was  clothed 
with  corn,  vines,  and  olives,  and  studded  with 
villages  and  orchards,  rendering  the  ride 
perfectly  beautiful.  In  three  hours  and  a 
half,  we  reached  the  convent  of  Asomatos, 
and — though  yet  early  in  the  day — were  in- 
duced, by  its  lovely  situation,  to  make  a  halt 
of  some  hours. 

The  convent  is  much  fallen  in  estate 
(literally  as  well  as  figuratively)  since  the 
time  when  Candia  was  under  the  Venetian 
rule.  It  consists  now  of  but  a  few  ruined 
out-houses  and  a  small  chapel.  Its  only  in- 
mates are  three  Capuchin  monks,  who  depend 
entirely  on  j:he  cultivation  of  their  garden  for 
subsistence. 

From  the  garden,  a  splendid  view  is  ob- 
tained of  the  mountain  range  to  the  east ;  and 
the  little  white  chapel,  with  its  picturesque 
belfry,  occupying   the  foreground,   is  set  off 


281  DRESS  OF  THE  MONKS. 

to  great  advantage,  by  a  rich  belt  of  foliage 
that  springs  up  behind.  In  the  court-yard, 
in  front  of  the  chapel,  are  some  of  the  finest 
cypresses  I  ever  saw. 

The  monks,  truly  good  souls,  {A<Tcafxxro; — 
incorporeal)  volunteered  to  provide  for  our 
bodily  wants  by  furnishing  breakfast  —  an 
offer  which  our  early  ride  made  us  accept 
without  much  solicitation,  although  our  cold 
pig  (at  which  they  cast  most  longing  glances) 
rendered  us  in  some  measure  independent  of 
their  hospitality.  Coffee,  milk,  bread,  eggs, 
and  fruit,  were  quickly  produced,  as  also 
wine  and  vinegar — all,  they  assured  us,  the 
produce  of  the  convent  lands.  With  respect 
to  the  first  article  on  the  list,  there  was  evi- 
dently some  little  mistake ;  the  two  last,  I 
gave  the  worthy  monks  full  credit  for  having 
manufactured  —  and  they  were  clearly  the 
production  of  the  same  barrel. 

The  dress  of  this  religious  order  is  very 
peculiar ;  it  is  altogether  of  black.  The 
jacket  and  shaksheer  are  of  cotton,  made  in 
the  usual  Greek  fashion,   but  bound  round 


PSILORITE  AND  LEVKA.  '  285 

the  waist  by  a  broad  black  leather  belt. 
The  legs  are  encased  in  strong  leather  boots, 
or,  more  properly,  leggings,  sewn  on  to  shoes. 
A  high  stand-up  fur  cap  completes  the  sin- 
gular costume. 

Resuming  our  journey  in  the  afternoon,  an 
ascent  of  a  couple  of  miles  brought  us  at 
length  to  the  head  of  the  valley,  where  a 
rocky  pass  presents  itself  between  the  two 
great  mountain  ridges  of  Psilorite  and  Levka. 
The  view,  looking  back,  is  very  fine,  and  the 
pass  itself  is  wild  and  beautiful,  being  thickly 
clothed  with  dwarf  oak  and  myrtle^  shadowed 
with  carob  and  wild  vines,  and  overhung  by 
precipitous  rocks. 

After  descending  a  little  way  on  the  north 
side  of  the  pass,  the  road  enters  a  wooded 
ravine,  in  which  the  varied  foliage  of  the 
oak,  plane,  olive,  and  arbutus,  spreading 
out  in  unrestrained  luxuriance,  presents  an 
impenetrable  barrier  to  the  sun's  rays — 
whilst,  beneath  their  shade,  the  ground  is  clad 
with  fern,  heather,  and  mastic.  A  spring 
of  icy  cold  water,  that  issues  gurgling  from 


286  VILLAGE  OF  ACADES. 

the  rocks  bordering  the  road,  invites  the 
traveller  to  stay  his  horse,  moisten  his 
parched  lips  at  the  rustic  fount,  and  enjoy 
the  rich  sylvan  beauty  of  the  spot. 

The  scenery  undergoes  a  rapid  change  on 
emerging  from  the  wood,  when  the  northern 
side  of  the  island  again  opens  to  the  view. 

A  fine  valley  lies  at  the  spectator's  feet,  its 
sides  covered  with  the  brilliant  verdure  of 
long-neglected  vineyards,  backed  by  rocky 
cliffs,  its  mouth  apparently  closed  by  the 
lofty  serrated  ridge  of  Levka,  still  capped 
with  its  winter  covering  of  snow.  In  two 
hours,  we  arrived  at  the  summit  of  a  moun- 
tain, much  higher  than  the  pass  we  had  pre- 
viously traversed,  from  whence  the  northern 
sea  of  Candia  first  bursts  upon  the  view. 
The  intervening  country  is  rugged  and  bar- 
ren, and  the  valleys  are  not  so  abundantly 
watered  as  those  on  the  south  side  of  the 
island.  The  village  of  Acades  is  seen  just 
below  the  road,  which  winds  to  the  left, 
keeping  along  the  summit  of  the  ridge, 
and,   in  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  reaches 


WRETCHED  ROAD.  287 

Mesi,  around   which  we   found  a  few  corn- 
fields. 

A  little  farther  on,  but  situated  off  the  road 
— to  the  left — is  the  village  of  Cavous.  A  hor- 
rible road  commences  here,  on  the  side  of  which 
—  the  first  half  mile  having  been  safely  got 
over — a  mosque,  covering  the  tomb  of  some 
Mohammedan  santon,  presents  an  opportunity 
of  offering  up  prayers,  for  a  safe  passage  over 
the  portion  that  yet  remains  to  be  traversed. 
The  way  winds  down  the  side  of  a  rugged 
mountain,  and  is  marked  only  by  the  absence 
of  furze  and  briars,  the  rest  of  the  steep  bank 
being  thickly  covered  with  them.  There  is 
no  attempt  at  road-making  :  a  natural  pave- 
ment, rising  in  sharp  pyramidical  points,  be- 
tween which  our  horses  could  hardly  find  a 
footing,  is  apparently  considered  quite  suffi- 
cient for  every  purpose  that  a  road  is  required 
in  Candia.  I  had  travelled  over  mountain 
roads  in  Greece,  in  Switzerland,  yea,  and  in 
Spain  —  where  a  camino  de  perdices  is  an 
awful  thing — but  never  before  did  I  ever 
meet  with  any  thing  so  bad,  called  a  road,  as 


288  VILLAGE  OF  KERIANA. 

this  :  the  main  communication  between  the 
fields  where  the  riches  of  the  country  grow, 
and  the  harbour  whence  they  are  shipped  for 
exportation.  It  can  be  likened  only  to  the 
inside  of  a  shark's  lower  jaw. 

Making  a  vow  never  again  to  grumble  at  the 
payment  of  tolls  on  an  English  turnpike-road 
— should  I  be  fortunate  enough  to  live  to  see 
one — I  gave  my  horse  his  head,  and  abandoned 
myself  to  reflection.  My  thoughts  naturally 
recurred  to  Egypt,  and  rested  with  gratitude 
on  Mohammed  Ali,  who,  by  the  establishment 
of  the  school  of  surgery,  at  Abouzabel,  had 
qualified — as  I  fondly  hoped — the  assistant 
Galen  of  the  regiment  quartered  at  Retimo, 
to  set  a  broken  limb  in  a  case  of  emergency. 

Fortunately  no  opportunity  of  putting  his 
capability  to  the  proof  occurred,  as,  after 
sundry  stumbles,  we  reached  the  village  of 
Keriana  in  sound  skins.  It  is  situated  nearly 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  is  distant  about  two 
miles  from  the  sea,  the  intervening  country 
being  gently  undulated,  and  covered  with  fine 
crops  of  corn  and  plantations  of  olive-trees. 


VILLAGE  OF  PERIVOGLIA.  289 

After  traversing  Keriana,  the  road  inclines 
slightly  to  the  west,  sloping  down  towards  the 
coast;  and,  in  about  a  mile,  reaches  the  vil- 
lage of  San  Demetrio,  the  church  of  which  is 
an  interesting  ruin.  A  short  distance  farther 
on  is  Adil,  a  place  with  more  claims  to  be 
called  a  town  than  any  we  had  seen  since 
leaving  Candia ;  and,  between  it  and  Marou- 
las,  the  country  is  very  productive  in  corn 
and  oil.  The  latter  village  is  finely  situated 
on  the  left  of  the  road,  some  little  way  up  the 
side  of  the  mountain  ridge  we  had  descended. 
About  half  a  mile  beyond  it,  we  rejoined  the 
direct  road  from  Candia  to  Retimo,  which 
keeps  along  the  coast  on  the  north  side  of 
Mount  Ida. 

After  crossing  a  fine  stream  of  water,  we 
arrived  at  Perivoglia — the  gardens  of  Retimo 
— a  long,  straggling,  ruined  village;  and,  in 
another  half  hour,  were  at  the  gates  of  the 
town.  The  latter  part  of  the  road  (from 
Adil)  is  very  good.  The  total  distance  from 
the  convent  of  Asomatos  is  about  fifteen 
miles,  and  occupied  us  six  hours. 

VOL.  II.  u 


290  SITUATION  OF  RETIMO. 

Retime  stands  on  a  low  cape  that,  jutting 
about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  into  the  sea, 
terminates  in  a  rocky  eminence,  which  is 
crowned  by  the  citadel.  From  the  foot  of  the 
hills  to  the  town  —  a  distance  of  three  hun- 
dred yards — the  isthmus  gradually  diminishes 
in  breadth  from  one  thousand  two  hundred  to 
five  hundred  yards :  and  here  an  old  embat- 
tled wall,  of  Turco-Venetian  construction, 
extends  across  it  diagonally  from  sea  to  sea. 
The  western  part  of  the  line  is  thus,  in  mili- 
tary phrase,  refused,  on  account  of  a  high 
conical  knoll,  that  stands  out  from  the  hills  in 
front  of  the  place,  which  would  favour  an 
attack  on  that  side,  if  the  walls  were  ad- 
vanced nearer  to  it. 

There  are  two  gateways  in  the  land  front, 
one  near  the  sea-shore  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  isthmus,  the  other  towards  the  centre  of 
the  line.  The  wall  is  about  twelve  feet  thick, 
loop-holed  for  musquetry,  and  irregularly 
flanked  by  artillery.  From  both  the  extre- 
mities of  the  line,  slightly  built  walls  retire 
along  the  sea-shore,  until  they  meet  the  pre- 


i 


THE  CITADEL.  291 

cipitous  cliffs  of  the  citadel-hill,  and  so  com- 
plete the  enceinte  of  the  place.     The  whole 
town  thus  lies  between  the  land  front  and  the 
citadel,  and,  consequently,  that  work,  though 
on  very  commanding  ground,  is  not  in  a  situa- 
tion to  assist  much  in  the  defence  of  the  forti- 
fications on  the  land  front  of  the  place.     It, 
however,  covers  it  most  effectually  from  an 
attack  on  the  sides  washed  by  the  sea.     It  is 
a  Venetian   work,    presenting    towards  the 
town  three  well  planned,  though  irregularly, 
bastioned  fronts,  whilst  sea-wards  the  walls 
follow  the  sinuosities  of  the  rocks,  which  are 
high,  and  difficult  of  access ;  and  are  yet  fur- 
ther strengthened  by  ledges  of  shelving  rocks, 
which  jut  a  considerable  distance  into  the 
sea.     The  only  advanced  work  of  the  citadel 
is  a  kind  of  demi-lune,  covering  the  curtain 
of  the  eastern-most  front,  in  which  is  the  gate. 
The  walls  are  thirty-five  feet  high,  and  rest 
upon  the  rocky  foundation  afforded  by  the 
hill  itself,  which,  being  elevated  about  fifty 
feet  above  the  town,  most  completely  com- 
mands it. 

u2 


292  POPULATION  OF  THE  TOWN. 

There  was  not  a  single  piece  of  artillery 
mounted  that  would  stand  three  rounds  of 
firing.  The  mortars  could  not  be  fired  at  all. 
The  front  towards  the  town,  indeed,  was 
armed  principally  with  petareros.  The  guns 
are  all  brass,  and  towards  the  sea  there  are 
some  very  long  pieces.  The  tanks  and  ma- 
gazines are  no  longer  serviceable,  and  the 
citadel  altogether  is  in  a  very  unhealthy 
state.  It  is  inhabited  (for  it  contains  nume- 
rous streets  and  mosques)  by  five  hundred 
Turks,  who  carefully  and  prudently  exclude 
all  of  Grecian  blood  from  their  stronghold.  It 
is  garrisoned,  however,  by  a  detachment  of 
Egyptian  troops,  a  battalion  of  whom  is  con- 
stantly quartered  at  Retimo. 

The  population  of  the  town,  including  the 
inhabitants  of  the  citadel,  is  estimated  at 
eight  thousand  souls ;  the  greater  portion  are 
Turks,  who  employ  themselves  principally  in 
agriculture  ;  but  the  place  contains  also  some 
tanneries  and  silk-looms  on  a  small  scale, 
which,  likewise,  are  worked  by  the  hands  of 
the  faithful.    The  Greek  inhabitants,  amount- 


STATE  OF  THE  HARBOUR.  295 

ing',  perhaps,  to  one-third  of  the  whole  popu- 
lation, are  fishermen,  mariners,  and  shop- 
keepers. 

The  town  covers  a  considerable  space  of 
ground,  and  is  well  built  and  clean.  The 
streets  are  wide,  straight,  well  paved,  and 
abundantly  supplied  with  water.  The  houses, 
except  those  on  the  outskirts,  are  lofty  and 
good ;  the  bazaars  well  furnished,  and  pro- 
visions cheap.  The  place  is  supplied  with 
water  by  means  of  an  aqueduct,  but  that  of 
the  wells  is  excellent. 

The  trade  of  Retimo  has  fallen  off  greatly, 
from  the  neglected  state  of  the  port ;  for  the 
mole  forming  the  harbour  has  nearly  disap- 
peared, and  sand  and  mud  have  accumulated 
to  such  a  degree  within  it,  that  no  vessels  of 
more  than  thirty  tons  burden  can  now  shelter 
there.  Steps,  however,  are  takings  to  deepen 
the  harbour  and  repair  the  mole,  at  the  head 
of  which  a  small  light-house  has  been  erected. 
Large  vessels  can  anchor  off  the  eastern  side 
of  the  town,  sheltered  from  the  north-west 
wind,  which  prevails  on  this  coast  nine  months 


294  COUNCIL  OF  RETIMO. 

in  the  year;  but  a  sudden  change  would 
oblige  them  to  go  to  sea  immediately. 

The  trade  of  the  place  is  principally  with 
the  Morea,  and  the  islands  of  the  Grecian 
Archipelago,  exporting  oil  and  soap,  and 
taking  in  exchange  corn  and  oats. 

The  garrison  consists  of  a  battalion  of  the 
Nizam,  varying  in  strength  from  six  to  eight 
hundred  men.  Its  colonel  is  Governor  of 
the  place  for  the  time  being.  The  province 
is  governed  in  civil  matters,  by  a  Council 
composed  of  a  president  and  twelve  members  ; 
and  holds  its  sittings  at  Retimo.  But  the 
rule  laid  down  for  the  composition  of  these 
assemblies  has  here  been  unavoidably  broken 
through,  from  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  suf- 
ficient number  of  persons  who  could  or  would 
read  and  write,  amongst  the  rural  population 
of  the  different  districts.  The  members  of 
the  Provincial  Council  of  Retimo  are,  conse- 
quently, almost  all  Mohammedans  and  inha- 
bitants of  the  city  itself. 

The  road  to  Canea  skirts  the  sea-beach  for 
the  first  half  hour  after  quitting  Retimo ;  it 


ROAD  TO  CANEA.  295 

then  ascends  the  rocky  cliffs  that  for  the  suc- 
ceeding five  miles  border  the  coast,  along 
which  a  paved  road  has  been  formed,  pre- 
senting an  obstacle  that  one  would  conceive 
had  been  purposely  and  cunningly  devised  to 
impede  the  march  of  an  enemy  upon  the  for- 
tress. It  winds  up  and  down  continually,  at 
times  being  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  steep 
staircase,  at  others  skirting  some  awful  pre- 
cipices, which  threaten  annihilation  in  the 
event  of  a  false  step. 

Our  horses  were  good  and  tolerably  fresh, 
so  that  we  managed  to  scramble  safely  over 
this  work  of  art,  accomplishing  the  task  in 
something  under  two  hours  and  a  half ;  but 
deeply  to  be  commiserated  is  the  luckless 
wight  who  arrives  here  on  a  jaded  hack,  after 
riding  from  Canea !  For  the  benefit  of  future 
travellers,  it  is  earnestly  to  be  hoped  that 
some  Mohammedan  M'Adam  may  arise  to 
amend  the  ways  of  the  island,  and  conduct 
Mohammed  Ali's  Candiote  subjects  by  more 
safe  and  less  tortuous  paths,  from  one  town 
to  another.     On  reaching  the  foot  of  the  hill, 


296  BAY  OF  ARMYRO. 

we  found  an  unfortunate  gentleman  "in  ar- 
ticulo  mortis,"  from  a  fall  he  had  just  had  with 
his  donkey. 

The  hills  are  furrowed  by  numerous  deep 
fissures,  across  which  the  solid  Venetian 
bridges  continue,  fortunately,  to  be  in  toler- 
able repair  ;  but  the  consciousness  of  their 
vicinity,  and  of  the  dilapidated  state  of  their 
parapet  walls,  would  not  add  to  the  pleasu- 
rable sensations  of  the  traveller,  should  he 
chance  to  be  benighted.  On  a  steep  crag,  on 
the  left  of  the  road — about  mid-way — is  perch- 
ed the  almost  inaccessible  village  of  lerame ; 
but  its  flickering  lights  would  but  bewilder 
the  night  wanderer,  for  they  would  not  serve 
to  guide  him  up  the  rugged  mountain  path, 
and  the  village  is  just  sufficiently  distant  to 
be  out  of  reach  of  the  human  voice. 

The  view  before  us  offered  some  compen- 
sation for  what  was  under  our  feet  —  the 
glassy  bay  of  Armyro,  a  richly- wooded  coast 
beyond,  and  splendid  mountains  in  the  dis- 
tance. We  rejoiced  on  again  reaching  the 
sea-beach  ;  and,  pushing  our   horses  into  a 


VILLAGE  OF  EPISCOPI.  297 

canter,  arrived  at  the  end  of  about  two  miles 
(eight  from  Retimo)  at  a  fine  clear  stream  of 
water,  that  issues  from  a  dark  rocky  fissure 
in  the  cliffs,  bounding  the  coast.  On  the  edge 
of  the  chasm  stands  the  village  of  Episcopi ; 
and,  at  its  gorge,  are  the  picturesque  ruins 
of  a  bridge,  which  probably  has  been  de- 
stroyed by  some  unusual  flow  of  the  moun- 
tain torrent. 

From  thence,  a  deep  sandy  beach  extends 
for  about  six  miles ;  whilst  a  plain,  planted 
with  vines  and  corn,  and  studded  with  ham- 
lets and  farm-houses,  stretches  some  distance 
inland.  On  the  coast  stands  a  Casa  forte,  in- 
tended, in  times  past,  as  a  defence  against 
pirates,  but  now  dismantled.  Soon  after 
passing  it,  the  road,  leaving  the  sea-shore, 
inclines  to  the  left,  and  enters  a  narrow  valley, 
opening  to  the  eastward,  when  we  reached  Ar- 
myro,  distant  fifteen  miles  from  Retimo. 

The  place  consists  merely  of  a  few  farm 
houses,  scattered  over  the  sides  of  the  steep 
hills,  bounding  the  valley,  and  two  castellated 
buildings,  which  occupy  the  narrowest  part 


298  MINERAL  WATERS. 

of  the  defile.  It  takes  its  name  from  the  nu- 
merous springs  of  mineral  waters  that  rise  in 
its  vicinity,  and  which,  in  former  days,  were 
held  in  great  repute.  Perhaps,  by  some  va- 
gary of  fashion,  they  may  yet  eclipse  the 
fame  of  Spa,  Selzers,  and  Langen  Schwalbach. 
They  certainly  are  copious  enough  to  cleanse 
the  biliary  ducts  of  all  the  valetudinarians  in 
Christendom.  Collecting  immediately  in  one 
body,  they  form  a  deep  and  rapid  stream, 
which  it  is  physically  impossible  to  pass ; 
whilst  the  noise  they  make  in  gushing  from 
the  side  of  the  mountain  is  heard  at  a  con- 
siderable distance,  resembling  that  of  the  fall 
of  a  cataract. 

The  road  advances  by  the  right  side  of  the 
valley ;  and,  after  making  a  slight  detour,  to 
avoid  the  stream,  by  crossing  the  springs 
near  their  source,  passes  close  under  the  walls 
of  one  of  the  castles,  being  hemmed  in  on  the 
other  side  by  a  steep  hill.  The  Valley  is 
watered  by  another  fine  stream,  which  takes 
its  rise  in  the  mountains  more  to  the  west- 
ward,  and,  after   passing  between   the   two 


VALLEY  OF  ARMYRO.  299 

castles,  receives  the  tribute  furnished  by  the 
salt  springs,  and  discharges  itself  into  the 
bay  of  Armyro.  The  village  of  Agiromoun 
stands  on  the  acclivity  of  the  mountain,  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  stream. 

This  must  have  been  a  very  formidable 
pass  in  the  olden  time,  when  artillery  could 
not  be  moved  about  with  the  ease  it  is  at 
present ;  and  even  now  it  is  a  military  post 
of  some  importance,  from  its  commanding 
the  only  practicable  road  between  the  land- 
ing place  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  and 
Canea. 

The  valley  is  extremely  beautiful.  The 
machiolated  walls  of  the  old  castles,  overhung 
with  ivy,  peer  out  from  amidst  a  grove  of 
wide-spreading  carob  and  walnut  trees ;  the 
foaming  torrent,  dashing  impetuously  over 
its  rugged  bed,  washes  their  feet :  beyond  are 
steep  hills,  covered  to  their  very  summits 
with  vineyards  and  orchards,  and  yet  above 
these  rise  the  snow-clad  peaks  of  the  lofty 
mountains  of  Sphackia. 

About  three  miles  from  Armyro,  we  arrivtd 


300  VIEW  OF  THE  MEDITERRANEAN. 

at  some  water-mills,  where  a  picturesque 
old  bridge  carries  the  road  to  the  left  bank 
of  the  stream.  The  view  looking-  back  is  yet 
more  beautiful  than  that  described.  The 
glassy  Mediterranean  lies  apparently  at  the 
spectator's  feet,  reflecting  the  successive  ranges 
of  grey  mountains  that,  between  Retimo  and 
Candia,  stretch  far  into  its  bosom ;  the  splendid 
peaks  of  Ida  rise  gracefully  above  all  the  in- 
termediate ridges,  casting  their  broad  shadows 
over  the  eastern  part  of  the  island.  The 
richly-wooded  slopes  of.  the  valley,  warmed 
by  the  rays  of  a  setting  sun,  formed  a  natural 
frame  to  this  enchanting  picture ;  equal,  per- 
haps, to  any  thing  in  Europe. 

On  approaching  the  head  of  the  valley,  it 
contracts  once  more,  so  as  to  become  a  mere 
defile  ;  and,  on  gaining  the  summit  of  the 
ridge,  another  magnificent  view  bursts  upon 
the  sight,  looking  over  the  western  portion  of 
the  island.  The  day  was  too  far  gone,  how- 
ever, to  admit  of  our  enjoying  it  in  perfec- 
tion; and,  indeed,  soon  after  crossing  the 
mountain,  night  overtook  us,  our  guide  missed 


NEO  HORIO.  301 

his  way,  and  we  were  doomed  to  wander  in 
the  dark  for  upwards  of  an  hour — scrambling 
over  a  most  execrable  collection  of  blocks  of 
stone,  which  our  conductor  persisted  in  calling- 
a  road.  At  length,  we  got  sight  of  a  lime- 
kiln, and,  making  our  way  to  it,  induced  one 
of  the  workmen  to  guide  us  to  Neo  Horio, 
where  we  were  glad  to  find  our  baggage 
safely  arrived,  having  been  sent  on  from  Re- 
timo  early  in  the  day. 

We  had  not  left  Retimo  ourselves  until  past 
mid-day,  and  had,  consequently,  been  exposed 
to  a  scorching  sun  during  the  whole  after- 
noon. The  slow  pace  at  which  we  had  been 
condemned  to  travel,  from  the  badness  of  the 
road,  had  also  wearied  us  exceedingly  —  al- 
though the  distance  we  had  travelled  hardly 
exceeded  twenty-three  miles  —  so  that,  tired 
and  feverish,  we  were  glad  enough  to  throw 
ourselves  down  on  our  carpets  in  the  Capo's 
house,  and  be  spared  the  trouble  of  pitching 
our  tent. 

The  place  allotted  for  our  dormitory  was 
a  kind  of  loft,  formed  by  some  loose  boards, 


302  THE  VILLAGE  CHIEF'S  DORMITORY. 

spread  across  the  rafters  of  one  corner  of  the 
village  chief's  large  but  only  room,  the  ascent 
being  effected  by  means  of  a  ladder.  To  this 
snug  retreat  our  host,  with  his  prolific  help- 
mate, and  some  half  dozen  of  their  progeny, 
were  in  the  nightly  habit  of  congregating,  and, 
I  dare  say,  of  sleeping  soundly  ;  but  I,  alas  ! 
closed  my  eyes  in  vain  ;  Morpheus  was  blind 
to  my  intreaties,  and  never  did  I  pass  a  more 
miserable  night.  The  heat  of  the  place  was 
excessive,  for,  independently  of  the  foul  and 
heated  atmosphere  occasioned  by  our  exalta- 
tion above  the  family  and  domestic  animals, 
sleeping  on  the  ground-floor  below,  we  dis- 
covered that  directly  beneath  us  was  a  huge 
oven,  wherein  a  week's  consumption  of  bread 
was  baking  for  the  whole  village.  Mean- 
while, myriads  of  insects,  of  divers  kinds, 
ceased  not  for  an  instant  puncturing  my 
unfortunately  tender  skin  —  pleased,  ap- 
parently, like  human  kind,  to  vary  the 
sameness  of  "  toujours  perdrix  "  —  and,  no 
doubt,  relishing  the  '*  grand  mousseux  "  state 
of  my  blood,  after  the  flat,  sluggish  stream 


ANNIVERSARY  OF  WATERLOO.  303 

which  flowed  in  the  veins  of  the  fat  phleg- 
matic Capo. 

It  was  the  night  of  the  J  7th  of  June ; — from 
the  sublime  to  the  ridiculous  ''  il  rCy  aqu'un 
pas ;  at  least,  we  have  the  authority  of  Na- 
poleon for  saying  so;  whilst  lying  in  this 
unenviable  state,  exposed  to  the  reiterated 
attacks  of  these  persevering  enemies,  I  looked 
as  impatiently  for  the  dawn  of  the  anniversary 
of  the  glorious  day,  as  England's  immortal 
captain  is  erroneously  said  to  have  invoked 
its  close,  or  the  arrival  of  the  Prussians. 

I  say  erroneously,  because  I  feel  persuaded 
that,  though  the  unconquered  chief  might 
possibly  at  one  time  have  despaired  of  ob- 
taining the  complete  fruits  of  the  combination 
planned  by  his  master  mind,  yet  that  he 
never  for  an  instant  felt  the  dread  implied  by 
that  oft-quoted  invocation.  If,  from  any 
fault,  not  his,  the  Prussians  had  failed  alto- 
gether in  executing  the  movement  of  con- 
centration prescribed  for  them,  though  the 
victory  would,  probably,  have  thereby  been 
less  brilliant,  yet  the  British  general  knew 


304  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  VICTORY. 

too  well  the  character  of  his  soldiers,  to  mis- 
trust their  ability  to  hold  the  ground  he  had 
so  judiciously  chosen  for  them. 

The  well-contested  field  has,  however,  been 
described  by  far  abler  pens  than  mine,  and 
has  little  to  do  with  Candia.  I  feel  con- 
fident, nevertheless,  that  this  digression  will 
be  pardoned  on  the  morning  of  tne  **  Day 
of  Waterloo,"  at  least,  by  all  good  and  true 
Britons,  whose  bosoms  still  —  spite  of  the 
lapse  of  years — cannot  but  feel  a  glow  of 
pride  on  the  anniversary  of  a  victory  which, 
from  the  importance  of  its  results  to  the 
human  race,  stands  unequalled  in  the  annals 
of  the  world — a  victory  compared  to  which 
the  glorious  days  of  Cressy,  Agincourt,  and 
Blenheim  sink  into  insignificance,  and  even 
a  shade  is  cast  on  those  of  Marathon  and 
Pharsalia. 

I  return,  unwillingly,  to  the  mosquitoes, 
and  other  un-nameable  phlebotomizing  in- 
sects, that  inhabit  the  sleeping-place  of  the 
chief  magistrate  of  Neo  Horio  ;  from  which, 
seeing   no  hope   of  deliverance,   but   in   the 


BAY  OF  SUDA,  305 

coming  day,  it  may  easily  be  conceived  with 
what  joy  I  greeted  the  crowing  of  a  cock, 
perched  but  a  few  feet  above  my  head,  and 
who,  during  the  night,  had  several  times 
given  me  notice  of  the  vicinity  of  himself  and 
hareem,  by  obliging  me  to  drag  my  carpet 
into  a  corner. 

We  lost  no  time  in  awaking  the  still  snoring 
occupants  of  the  lower  region,  when,  after 
performing  our  ablutions,  and  mounting  our 
steeds,  we  were  glad  enough  to  get  into  a 
purer  atmosphere,  and  to  depart,  even  with- 
out breakfast. 

The  road  descends  into  a  fertile  valley, 
watered  by  a  clear  stream,  and,  after  con- 
tinuing along  it  for  about  a  mile,  ascends  the 
ridge  bounding  it  on  the  western  side,  by 
a  rugged,  stony  track,  leaving  a  small  village 
within  pistol-shot,  on  the  left.  In  an  hour  and 
a  half  (or  a  distance  of  four  miles  and  a  half) 
we  arrived  at  the  brink  of  some  stupendous 
cliffs  that  fall  precipitously  to  the  bay  of  Suda. 
The  road  now  inclines  to  the  left,  skirting 
along   and    looking  down  upon   the   mirror- 

VOL.   II.  X 


306        GRANDEUR  OF  THE  SCENERY. 

like  expanse,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it 
is  itself  overhung'  by  a  range  of  lofty  moun- 
tains. 

The  scenery  is  very  grand,  and  the  bay 
as  fine,  perhaps,  as  any  in  the  world,  being 
capacious  enough  to  contain  the  entire  navy 
of  Great  Britain,  and  so  situated  as  to  be 
sheltered  from  every  wind.  It  stretches  in- 
land six  miles,  and  is  about  three  miles  across, 
but,  at  its  mouth,  the  width  is  compressed  to 
little  more  than  a  mile  ;  and,  towards  the 
centre  of  this  narrow  channel — but  rather 
within  the  bay — are  two  low  rocky  islands, 
the  larger  of  which,  occupied  by  the  little 
fortress  of  Suda,  completely  commands  the 
entrance. 

The  bay  opens  to  the  east,  but  is  screened, 
in  that  direction,  by  a  high  promontory,  which, 
jutting  some  distance  into  the  northern  sea 
of  Candia,  serves  as  a  breakwater  to  the  har- 
bour. To  the  north  and  south,  the  bay  is 
sheltered  by  ranges  of  mountains,  but  from 
its  western  extremity  a  comparatively  level 
country  stretches  all  the  way  to  Canea. 


.SITUATION  OF  CANEA.  oOJ 

The  road  is  execrable  during  the  first  two 
miles  of  the  descent,  but,  after  passing  a  ruined 
castle,  it  improves ;  and,  in  three  hours'  time 
from  Neo  Horio,  we  reached  the  head  of  the 
Bay  of  Suda  ;  from  thence,  over  the  level  coun- 
try to  Canea,  the  road  is  very  good,  even  ad- 
mitting of  the  passage  of  carriages.  The  soil 
of  the  plain  is  light  and  sandy,  and  is  covered 
with  unpruned  olive  trees  and  scanty  crops 
of  corn.  It  is  abundantly  watered,  but  the 
means  of  irrigation  are  totally  neglected,  so 
that  stagnant  pools  have  been  formed  along 
the  courses  of  the  streams,  round  which  a 
rank  vegetation  has  sprung  up,  rendering  the 
tract  extremely  insalubrious.  Numerous  vil- 
lages are  scattered  along  the  foot  of  the  hills, 
bounding  the  plain  to  the  south,  but  some 
distance  from  the  road. 

We  came  very  suddenly  upon  Canea,  which 
is  sheltered  to  the  east  by  a  low  hill,  and  is 
about  twelve  miles  distant  from  Neo  Horio — 
from  Retimo  thirty-five  miles.  It  stands  on 
the  site  of  the  ancient  Cydonia,  but  covers 
only  a  small  portion  of  the  ground  occupied 

X  2 


308  THE  FORTIFICATIONS. 

by  that  city.     Its   present   walls   were  con- 
structed by  the  Venetians,  but  they  are  far 
inferior  to  those  of  Candia,  both  in  regard  to 
elevation  and  disposition.     The  general  lines 
of  the   fortifications    describe    an    irregular 
quadrilateral  figure,  of  which  the  longest  side 
is  towards  the  sea;  the  three  others  present 
bastioned    fronts,    and    are    furnished   with 
ditches   and   cavaliers ;    but,   excepting    the 
eastern  curtain  of  the  south  front,  are  unpro- 
tected by  any  kind  of  outworks.     There  a 
small  demi-lune  serves  as  a  couvre-porte  to 
the  only  carriage  entrance  to  the  town.     The 
walls  are  tolerably  well  covered,  however,  by 
the  height  of  the  counterscarps  of  the  ditches, 
from   the   crest    of    which   (for   there   is   no 
covered   way)  the  ground  falls   in   a  gentle 
slope  towards  the  country.     The  walls  are  in 
a  tolerable  state  of  repair,  and  vary  in  height 
from  twenty  to  thirty  feet.     The  ditches  have 
been  converted  into  gardens  and  sheep-folds. 
Towards  the  sea,  the  fortifications  have  in 
great  part  been  demolished,  and  replaced  by 
houses.     The  harbour  is  tolerably  spacious  ; 


ENTRANCE  TO  THE  HARBOUR.        309 

it  is  formed  by  a  long  narrow  mole,  built  on 
the  prolongation  of  the  western  face  of  the 
north-east  bastion  of  the  town,  and  parallel 
to  and  extending  nearly  the  whole  length  of 
the  sea-wall.  About  midway  on  it  are  the 
remains  of  an  old  castle,  which  terminates  in 
a  circular  tower,  also  in  ruins ;  indeed  the 
whole  work  is  in  a  wretched  state,  and  is  in- 
debted for  its  'present  existence  to  a  ledge  of 
sunken  rocks,  that  serves  both  for  a  foun- 
dation and  breakwater. 

The  entrance  to  the  harbour  is  between 
the  ruined  tower  and  an  elevated  battery  ;  the 
termination  of  the  western  fortifications  of 
the  town.  The  channel  is  deep  but  narrow, 
and  quite  open  to  the  north ;  the  anchorage  is 
consequently  exposed  to  a  rolling  sea,  when- 
ever the  wind  is  from  that  quarter. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  town,  and  over- 
looking the  harbour,  is  a  kind  of  citadel,  evi- 
dently a  work  of  much  more  remote  date  than 
any  other  portion  of  the  fortifications.  It 
covers  a  considerable  extent  of  ground,  and 
is   slightly   elevated   above   the  rest   of  the 


310  THE  ANCIENT  CITADEL. 

place.  Indeed,  it  may  be  regarded  as  an 
inner  town,  for  it  contains  numerous  and 
thickly  populated  streets ;  and  is  furnished 
with  gates,  to  cut  off  the  communication  at 
pleasure  with  the  rest  of  the  fortress.  It  for- 
merly contained  the  arsenal,  docks,  &c.  The 
old  Venetian  galley-vaults  are  still  in  toler- 
able preservation,  but  the  walls,  battlements, 
&c.  looking  towards  the  harbour,  are  in  a 
very  bad  state. 

The  harbour  is  much  obstructed  by  the 
ruins  of  the  mole  and  docks,  but  a  few  vessels 
of  three  hundred  tons  burden  can  still  lie  in 
its  deepest  part,  which  is,  however,  the  most 
exposed  ;  and  there  is  sufficient  space  behind 
the  mole  to  shelter  two  or  three  hundred 
small  craft.  The  whole  is  about  to  undergo 
repairs  and  improvements. 

The  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  port  of  Can- 
dia  under  the  dominion  of  the  Turks  having 
wisely  been  abolished,  Canea,  which,  besides 
being  the  best  harbour,  is  also  that  which  lies 
nearest  to  the  most  fertile  districts  of  the 
island,   has  naturally  become  its  great  com- 


POPULATION  OF  CANEA.  311 

iiiercial  mart.  The  population  of  the  place 
has  increased  proportion  ably,  for,  although 
not  one-third  the  size  of  the  capital,  Canea 
contains  now  nearly  an  equal  number  of  in- 
habitants. Of  late  years,  the  increase  has 
been  extraordinarily  great;  confidence  in  the 
government  of  Mohammed  Ali  having  induced 
no  less  than  three  thousand  "  mediatised" 
Greek  pirates  to  settle  at  Canea,  since  the 
island  has  been  annexed  to  the  Egyptian  do- 
minions. 

The  streets  are  wide  and  well  paved,  but 
by  no  means  clean,  and  an  oily  Greek  smell 
pervades  the  whole  place.  The  shops  are 
good,  but  offer  no  great  variety  of  merchandize. 
The  houses  are  wretched,  without  a  single 
exception  ;  lofty,  old,  and  ricketty.  The  mos- 
ques and  churches  are  propped  up  on  crutches, 
and  even  the  flag-staffs  of  the  European  Con- 
suls partake  of  the  general  tottering  cha- 
racter of  the  place ;  the  old  foretop-mast, 
from  which  the  union  jack  is  displayed,  seem- 
ed disposed  to  part  company  with  the  roof  of 
Mr.  Capogrotiso's  house,  whilst  the  consular 


312  EARTHQUAKES. 

pole  of  the  King  of  the  French  appeared  to 
be  quite  overweighted  with  the  enormous  out- 
spread charter  of  the  *'  three  glorious  days." 

One  would  suppose  that  a  smart  shock  of 
an  earthquake  would  make  Canea  a  heap  of 
ruins  ;  it  has,  however,  withstood  so  many — 
for  the  island  is  very  subject  to  them — that 
the  inhabitants  appear  to  have  no  fears  of 
such  a  catastrophe. 


TAXATION  IN  CANDIA.  313 


CHAPTER  XL 

Trade  of  Candia  —  Productions  —  Exports  and  Imports  —  Injurious 
Consequences  of  the  total  want  of  Inland  Communication  —  Re- 
venue— Taxes  —  Greek  Church  Establishment — Price  of  Labour 
and  Provisions — Character  of  the  Inhabitants — Wretched  Condi- 
tion of  the  Island — Summary  Account  of  the  State  of  Candia  dur- 
ing the  War  in  Greece — Effects  of  the  Battle  of  Navarin — Can- 
dia given  up  to  Mohammed  Ali  —  Insurrectionary  Movement  — 
Desertion  of  Osman  Pasha — Form  of  Government — The  acquisi- 
tion of  the  Island  not  beneficial  to  Egypt  —  Advantages  its  Pos- 
session[^holds  out  to  Great  Britain — Conclusion. 

The  trade  of  Candia,  though  in  a  more 
thriving  state  than  during  the  latter  years  of 
the  Turkish  domination,  is,  nevertheless,  far 
from  being  in  the  flourishing  condition  that 
the  extreme  productiveness  of  the  island,  and 
its  admirable  commercial  position,  might  na- 
turally lead  one  to  expect.  It  is  taxed,  like 
that  of  Egypt,  with  a  three  per  cent  ad  va- 
lorem duty  on  all  imports ;  and  most  articles 
of  produce  pay  the  same  rate  of  duty  on  ex- 


314  TRADE  THROWN  OPEN. 

l)ortatioii.  Some,  however,  are  charged  much 
liighcr ;  soap,  for  instance,  pays  ten  and  a 
half  per  cent  duty  on  its  value ;  silk,  eight 
per  cent ;  oil,  seven  and  a  half. 

Although  the  productions  of  the  island  are 
thus  taxed  rather  heavier,  perhaps,  than  they 
were  under  the  Turkish  government,  yet  the 
removal  of  several  most  vexatious  restrictions 
offers  more  than  counterbalancing  advantages 
to  the  country  generally ;  for  instance,  many 
of  its  productions  —  amongst  others,  all  the 
oranges  and  lemons!  —  were  obliged  formerly 
to  be  shipped  at  the  port  of  Candia,  and  to  be 
sent  exclusively  to  Constantinople !  so  that 
perishable  articles  had  sometimes  to  undergo 
a  land  journey  of  a  hundred  miles,  ere  they 
reached  their  place  of  embarkation. 

The  trade  has  now  been  thrown  open,  and 
the  duties  have  been  equalised  at  all  the  ports 
of  the  island.  The  same  fixed  rate  of  export 
duty  is  now  also  charged  on  the  various  arti- 
cles of  produce,  to  whatever  foreign  ports 
they  may  be  consigned,  which  was  not  for- 
merly the  case. 


PRODUCTIONS  OF  THE  ISLAND.  315 

The  exports  of  Candia  are,  at  the  present 
day,  but  few,  and  consist  principally  of  con- 
sumable articles  ;  oil,  soap,  honey,  wax,  a  few 
raisins,  oranges,  and  other  fruits,  and  a  small 
quantity  of  raw  silk. 

Of  every  thing-  else,  the  island  may  be  said 
to  be  actually  in  want,  not  even  a  sufficiency 
of  corn  being-  grown  for  the  subsistence  of  its 
scanty  population.  It  possesses,  neverthe- 
less, a  soil,  and  enjoys  a  temperature,  that 
should  render  it  independent  of  any  produc- 
tions but  those  of  a  tropical  climate.  The 
woods  of  oak,  chesnut,  walnut,  and  pine,  with 
which  its  mountains  are  clothed,  ought  even 
to  be  a  valuable  source  of  profit ;  but  there  is 
not  a  practicable  road  to  any  one  port  of  the 
island,  and,  consequently,  timber  is  imported ! 
The  olive-tree  is  better  calculated  than  any 
other  for  making  charcoal,  but  though  the 
whole  island  is  covered  with  old  and  unpro- 
ductive trees  that  can  be  turned  to  no  other 
account,  yet  the  want  of  communications, 
and  the  expense  of  labour,  occasion  fuel 
to  be  procured  cheaper  from  abroad  !     Both 


316  PRODUCTIONS  OF  THE  ISLAND. 

flax  and  cotton  are  successfully  cultivated  on 
the  island,  but  neither  in  a  sufficient  quantity 
to  meet  the  demand  of  its  inhabitants :  what 
they  do  grow  is  manufactured  by  the  pea- 
santry for  their  own  use. 

The  fruits  and  vegetables  of  Candia  are 
particularly  fine,  and  the  list  of  them  includes 
almost  every  variety,  not  omitting  those  mon- 
sters of  the  vegetable  world,  the  aloe  and 
prickly  pear  (jicus  indicus),  neither  of  which, 
however,  is  held  in  such  estimation,  or  turned 
to  such  useful  purposes,  as  in  other  coun- 
tries. 

The  greater  portion  of  the  produce  of  Can- 
dia is  exported  to  Turkey,  but  its  oil  (which, 
indeed,  is  the  principal  source  of  revenue  of 
the  island,  and  considered  particularly  fine), 
finds  a  sure  market  at  the  Austrian  ports  of 
the  Adriatic,  and  even  at  those  of  the  south 
of  France.  The  island  is  badly  stocked  with 
cattle  (goats  only  excepted),  and  the  breeds 
are  extremely  small.  Horses  and  mules  are 
now  imported  in  considerable  numbers.  Rep- 
tiles of  all  sorts  are  scarce,  but  the  forests 


WANT  OF  ROADS.  317 

abound  with  the  ibex,  wild  boar,  and  wolf. 
Game  is  also  plentiful  in  some  parts  of  the 
island,  and  poultry  is  every  where  abundant. 

Candia  is  indebted  to  Egypt  for  the  corn 
and  flax  she  stands  in  need  of,  as  well  as  for 
rice,  soda,  hides,  and  cured  fish :  most  of  the 
other  articles  for  which  she  has  occasion  are 
procured  from  Austria — timber  and  manufac- 
tured goods  in  particular. 

In  the  interior  of  the  country,  the  articles  of 
home  produce  are  to  be  obtained  at  a  very 
cheap  rate,  for  the  same  reason  that  every 
thing  foreign  is  extravagantly  dear,  viz.  the 
want  of  roads.  This  want  is  particularly  felt 
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  division  of 
the  island ;  for,  all  the  ports  being  on  the 
northern  coast,  the  produce  of  the  fertile  plains 
lying  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  mountains  must 
necessarily  be  sent  on  mules'  backs  over  the 
barely  practicable  tracks  that  I  have  at- 
tempted to  describe  ;  and  this  mode  of  trans- 
port entailing  a  considerable  expense,  occa- 
sions, of  course,  a  corresponding  advance  on 
the  price  of  the  commodities. 


318  SOURCES  OF  REVENUE. 

There  are,  it  is  true,  two  small  ports, 
Sphackia  and  Girapetra,  on  the  south  side  of 
the  island  ;  but,  in  addition  to  being*  difficult 
of  access  by  land,  they  are  very  insecure:  and 
even  were  they  otherwise,  the  export  trade  of 
the  island  being-  directed  to  Europe,  and  not 
to  Africa,  the  ports  on  the  northern  coast 
would  always  be  preferred  to  ship  from. 

The  principal  source  of  revenue  in  Candia 
is  the  miri,  or  land  tax — a  duty  of  seven  and 
a  half  per  cent  on  the  produce  of  all  the  land 
of  the  island  :  besides  this,  vineyards  are  sub- 
ject to  an  additional  impost,  according  to 
measurement :  and  a  tax  is  levied  on  every 
head  of  cattle,  that  on  sheep  being  forty-two 
paras  (about  threepence)  per  annum.  The 
inhabitants  cannot,  however,  be  considered 
highly  taxed,  since  they  are  not  subject  to 
either  a  poll  tax,  or  house  and  window  taxes ; 
nor  have  they  poor's  rates  to  pay  —  nor  a 
church  establishment  to  support;  both  the 
churches  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  mosques  of 
the  Mohammedans,  being  endowed  with  lands 
for  their  maintenance. 


THE  GREEK  CHURCH.  319 

The  Greek  church,  nevertheless,  draws 
heavily,  in  the  way  oi voluntary  contributions 
SiuA  penances,  on  the  purses  of  its  superstitious 
disciples  ;  so  that  in  this  respect  the  Candiote 
Mussulmans  are  exempt  from  a  charge  that 
their  Christian  brethren  have  to  bear,  and  it 
is  the  only  kind  of  tax  they  do  hear  with  any 
degree  of  patience.  Superstition  is,  however, 
stronger  with  them  than  even  the  love  of 
gain ;  and,  working  upon  that,  their  ghostly 
preceptors  induce  them  to  contribute  pretty 
largely  to  the  support  of  the  various  religious 
establishments  —  that  is,  of  the  priesthood  — 
which  is  the  only  department  of  the  Greek 
church  that  appears  to  have  derived  benefit 
from  these  free  gifts.  The  island  is  divided 
into  eleven  bishoprics,  under  the  archiepis- 
copal  see  of  Candia. 

The  price  of  labour  in  the  rural  districts 
varies  from  three  to  four  piastres  a  day.  In 
the  vicinity  of  the  towns,  it  amounts  to  six, 
and  carpenters,  masons,  and  other  artificers, 
are  paid  as  high  as  eight  or  ten.  Provisions 
of  all  sorts  are  much  dearer  than  in  Egypt; 


320  EXPENSE  OF  TRAVELLING. 

but  the  lower  orders  of  Candiotes  manage, 
nevertheless,  to  feed  better  than  the  corre- 
sponding classes  in  the  sister  kingdom — that 
is  to  say,  according  to  our  English  notions  — 
for  a  Greek's  daily  consumption  of  animal 
food  is  equal  to  that  of  the  entire  population 
of  an  Arab  village. 

The  expense  of  travelling  keeps  pace  with 
the  advance  in  price  of  provisions  and  labour, 
it  being  at  least  four  times  greater  than  in 
Egypt.  The  sum  for  which  a  camel  can  be 
hired  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  will  not  pro- 
cure an  ass  in  Candia,  and  in  all  their  deal- 
ings the  Candiotes  are  equally  as  distrustful 
of  strangers  as  the  Arabs,  less  faithful  to 
their  engagements,  and  more  cunning  and 
extortionate. 

Here,  as  in  every  other  part  of  the  world 
that  has  long  bent  under  the  Mohammedan 
yoke,  smoking  is  a  prevailing  vice.  The 
Greek,  however,  is  not  such  a  perfect  slave  to 
his  pipe  as  either  the  Turk,  Arab,  or  Persian 
— not  that  he  loves  smoking  less,  but  because 
his  pipe  is  shorter.     He  can,  therefore,  move 


DESOLATE  COUNTRY.  321 

about  with  it  in  his  hand,  puffing  as  he  goes  ; 
and  from  morning  to  night  it  is  at  his  mouth, 
excepting  during  the  time  he  feeds  —  a  duty 
he  never  fails  to  perform  at  the  usual  stated 
periods,  for  a  Greek  can  eat  in  spite  of  to- 
bacco-smoke. 

Theije  is  nothing  very  peculiar  in  the  cha- 
racter or  manners  of  the  inhabitants  of  Can- 
dia.  The  Turks  are  Turks  ;  the  Candiotes 
very  Greeks.  The  former  continue  to  dwell 
within  the  walls  of  the  towns,  to  which  they 
were  driven  during  the  late  civil  war ;  the 
latter  are  scattered  thinly  over  the  face  of  this 
beautiful,  productive,  but  devastated  country. 

Great  as  have  been  the  exertions  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali,  to  induce  confidence  and  pro- 
mote the  prosperity  of  the  island,  it  remains 
nearly  in  the  same  desolate  state  in  which  it 
was  left  at  the  termination  of  the  late  long 
and  sanguinary  struggle  between  its  Greek 
and  Mussulman  inhabitants.  Large  villages, 
that,  but  a  few  years  since,  contained  some 
hundreds  of  families,  have  not  now  that 
number  of  souls  sheltered  under  their  crum- 

VOL.   II.  Y 


322  EVILS  OF  CIVIL  WAR. 

bling  walls  Not  a  mosque  is  to  be  seen  out- 
side the  fortified  towns  —  scarcely  a  church 
but  what  is  roofless  and  deserted.  The  wells 
are  choked  up  —  reservoirs  and  irrigating 
channels  ruined  —  roads,  bridges,  and  aque- 
ducts destroyed — vineyards  uprooted — olive 
trees  hewn  dov/n,  or,  from  neglect,  become 
barren  and  profitless.  Nothing,  in  fact,  can 
be  more  perfectly  wretched  than  the  state  of 
Candia  ;  nothing  could  picture  more  forcibly 
the  evils  resulting  from  civil  war. 

This  inhuman,  exterminating,  conflict  had 
not  even  the  cloak  of  religious  enthusiasm  to 
cover  its  revolting  barbarity ;  for,  neither  the 
Turks  nor  Greeks  of  Candia,  who  commenced 
it,  were  very  warm  supporters  of  their  respec- 
tive tenets — so  lax,  indeed,  had  they  become, 
that  intermarriages  had  connected  by  ties  of 
consanguinity  the  Mohammedan  and  Chris- 
tian families  of  every  village  on  the  island. 
Nor  had  the  Greek  portion  of  the  population 
cause  to  be  discontented  with  the  Turkish 
government,  which  interfered  but  little  with 
the  internal  management  of  the  island,  pro- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  CANDIA.  323 

vided  the  taxes  were  regularly  paid,  and  the 
productions  of  its  fruitful  fields  sent  to  the 
prescribed  markets  —  imports  and  restric- 
tions to  which  Turks  and  Greeks  were  alike 
subject. 

It  could  hardly,  therefore,  under  such  cir- 
cumstances, have  been  expected  that  the 
Candiote  Greeks  should  have  joined  their 
less  favoured  brethren  of  the  Morea,  in  the 
attempt  to  throw  off  the  Ottoman  yoke — an 
attempt  that  has  caused  them  to  be  handed 
over  to  a  more  powerful  master  —  and  one, 
who,  knowing  that  he  holds  the  island  but  in 
trust,  cannot  be  expected  to  have  its  pro- 
sperity much  at  heart. 

Before  offering  any  remarks,  however,  on 
the  actual  government  of  Candia,  a  Precis 
of  the  most  remarkable  events  which  occurred 
in  that  island,  during  the  nine  years  previous 
to  its  being  placed  under  the  dominion  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali,  may  not  be  unacceptable ;  since 
no  succinct  account  has  been  published  (at 
least  to  my  knowledge)  of  this  episode  of  the 
Greek  revolution  ;    and  the  fragments,  that 

y2 


324  REVOLT  OF  THE  GREEKS. 

from  time  to  time  have  appeared  in  the 
European  newspapers,  have  evidently  been 
derived  from  sources  polluted  by  Greek  men- 
dacity, without  passing  through  the  filter  of 
personal  observation. 

In  the  barbarities  and  horrors  that  marked 
the  first  outbreak  of  the  revolt  of  the  Greeks, 
the  Candiotes  took  no  part ;  but  the  ties, 
which,  as  before  mentioned,  connected  them 
with  their  Turkish  compatriots,  did  not,  un- 
fortunately, extend  to  the  inhabitants  of  every 
part  of  the  island.  The  savage  natives  of  the 
mountainous  district  of  Sphackia  were  a  dis- 
tinct people,  who  had  long  been  accustomed 
to  live  by  rapine  and  piracy  ;  and  seeing,  in 
the  general  anarchy  that  must  follow  an 
insurrection,  an  advantageous  opening  for 
pursuing  their  favourite  avocation,  required 
but  little  encouragement  from  their  Moreote 
brethren  to  raise  the  standard  of  revolt. 
The  contagion  spread  quickly  throughout 
the  whole  island  ;  such  of  the  Greek  inha- 
bitants as  were  inclined  to  remain  quiet  soon 
finding,  that,  if  they  did  not  join  in  sacrificing 


ARRIVAL  OF  IBRAHIM  PASHA.        325 

the  Turks,  they  would  themselves  fall  victims 
to  the  barbarians  of  Sphackia. 

The  Turks,  as  usual,  every  way  unpre- 
pared, were  immediately  driven  into  the  for- 
tified towns,  where  they  were  secure  from  the 
attacks  of  their  enemies,  and  from  which  they 
issued,  as  favourable  opportunities  presented 
themselves  for  carrying  off  the  crops  and  cattle 
of  the  Greeks,  and  destroying  their  villages, 
vineyards,  and  olive  grounds. 

This  unnatural  warfare  was  carried  on  for 
nearly  four  years,  during  which  period  the 
greater  part  of  the  island  was  laid  waste ; 
and  was  brought  to  a  close  only  by  the  ar- 
rival of  Ibrahim  Pasha,  on  his  way  to  the 
Morea,  in  November,  1824.  The  Candiotes, 
seeing  that  resistance  to  the  Egyptian  troops 
would  be  unavailing,  tendered  their  submis- 
sion, and,  having  obtained  the  promise  of 
a  general  amnesty,  gladly  returned  to  the 
peaceable  cultivation  of  their  fields.  The 
promises  of  Ibrahim  were  faithfully  kept ; 
and,  wretched  as  was  the  state  to  which  the 
island  had  been  reduced,  yet,  the  eighteen 


326  BATTLE  OF  NAVARIN. 

months  that  followed  the  visit  of  the  Egyptian 
army  was  a  period  of  perfect  happiness  to 
the  Candiotes,  after  the  years  of  bloodshed, 
rapine,  and  dearth,  which  they  had  previously 
endured. 

The  duration  of  this  state  of  tranquillity 
was  doomed  to  be  but  short:  the  battle  of 
Navarin  took  place,  and  extended  its  baneful 
influence  even  to  Candia.  The  Greeks  mis- 
took that  "  untoward"  demonstration,  for  an 
overt  act  of  hostility — or  thought,  at  all  events, 
the  Turks  would  do  so — and  calculated,  con- 
fidently, that  this  hitherto  ill- understood 
mode  of  mediating  would  be  resented  by  an 
indiscriminate  massacre  of  the  Christians 
throughout  the  Ottoman  empire,  and  thus 
render  a  war  inevitable. 

The  subtle  President  of  Greece  immediately 
sent  his  emissaries  to  Candia,  (where  he  al- 
ready maintained  a  number  of  paid  agents,) 
to  point  out  to  its  inhabitants  that  the  favour- 
able moment  had  arrived  for  renewing  the 
war ;  and  the  Candiotes  could  not  but  per- 
ceive that,  whilst  the  destruction  of  the  Turco- 


INTRIGUES  OF  CAPO  D'ISTRIAS.  327 

Egyptian  fleet  had  relieved  them  from  the 
dread  of  another  visit  from  the  Arabs,  it  had 
rendered  their  communication  with  their  own 
friends  in  the  Morea  perfectly  secure. 

Still,  however,  so  large  a  portion  of  the 
population  was  averse  to  plunge  again  into 
the  horrors  of  a  civil  war — attended  with 
certain  loss  to  the  proprietors  of  the  soil, 
which-ever  side  came  off  victorious — so  that, 
for  a  time,  the  intrigues  of  Capo  d'Istrias  were 
fruitless ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those 
amongst  the  inhabitants  who  had  lost  their 
all  in  the  past  struggle,  or  who,  never  having 
possessed  anything  to  lose,  were  reckless  of 
the  destruction  of  the  property  of  others,  and 
longed  to  take  advantage  of  so  favourable  an 
opportunity  of  possessing  themselves  of  the 
estates  of  their  Turkish  compatriots,  were 
determined  to  drive  matters  to  the  last  extre- 
mity, and  waited  only  for  the  promised  means 
— leaders  and  money — to  re-commence  their 
devastating  warfare. 

The  pile  was  thus  all  prepared,  and  waited 
but  the  application  of  the  torch,  to  involve 


328         DESPERATE  CHARACTERS. 

again  this  ill-fated  island  in  one  extermin- 
ating blaze  ;  and  England,  as  if  determined 
to  enact  the  part  of  Herostratus  on  the  occa- 
sion, selected  this  moment  for  letting  loose 
upon  it  the  nest  of  political  firebrands  col- 
lected at  Carabousa, 

This  little  rock,  by  nature  extremely  diffi- 
cult of  access,  and  strengthened  by  art,  so  as 
to  be  rendered  almost  impregnable,  lies  close 
to  the  shore,  at  the  north-eastern  extremity 
of  Candia.  Delivered  by  treachery  into  the 
hands  of  the  insurgent  Greeks,  it  had,  at  the 
pacification  of  the  island,  remained  in  the 
possession  of  a  band  of  miscreants,  composed 
of  the  most  desperate  characters  of  the  whole 
Grecian  Archipelago;  who,  allured  to  Candia 
by  the  prospect  of  plunder,  as  the  vulture  is 
attracted  to  the  battle-field,  had,  since  the 
termination  of  hostilities  there,  perched  them- 
selves on  this  inaccessible  rock,  ready  to 
pounce  again  upon  their  prey. 

Keeping  up  an  active  and  friendly  corre- 
spondence with  the  Philhellenists  of  theMorea 
and  the  intriguing  President  of  Greece,  this 


LOSS  OF  A  BRITISH  FRIGATE.  329 

band  of  miscreants,  under  pretence  of  a  state 
of  war  with  the  Porte,  committed  the  most 
infamous  acts  of  piracy  on  vessels  of  all 
nations ;  but  at  length,  having  drawn  upon 
themselves  the  observation  of  the  allied  fleets, 
a  combined  English  and  French  squadron 
was  sent  under  the  late  gallant  Sir  Thomas 
Staines,  to  dislodge  them  from  their  strong- 
hold. 

This  difficult  enterprise  was  accomplished 
with  the  loss  of  a  British  frigate,  which 
unfortunately  got  upon  a  reef  of  rocks  ;  the 
pirates,  loaded  with  their  booty,  escaped  to 
Candia,  and  took  refuge  with  their  friends 
the  Sphackiotes ;  in  the  impracticable  fast- 
nesses of  whose  mountains  they  were  more 
secure  from  attack,  and  much  more  danger- 
ous to  the  peace  of  Candia,  than  even  at 
Carabousa.  There,  aided  by  the  remittances, 
and  instigated  by  the  promises  of  Capo 
d'Istrias,  they  soon  succeeded  in  re-kindling 
the  war  ;  resorting  to  the  most  violent  mea- 
sures to  co7?ipel  the  peaceably-disposed  part 
of  the  Greek  peasantry  to  join  in  the  insur- 


330  renp:wal  of  civil  war. 

rection  ;  the  houses  of  such  as  refused  to  take 
up  arms  in  the  cause  of  liberty  being  most 
tyrannically  rased  to  the  ground. 

Thus  was  the  island  again  plunged  into  civil 
war ;  and  this  second  struggle  was  yet  more 
destructive  than  the  former.  Nothing  was 
now  spared ;  and,  the  entire  country  having 
been  laid  waste,  by  each  party  destroying  all 
that  belonged  to  the  other,  the  Turks,  as 
before,  retired  to  their  fortresses. 

The  President  of  Greece,  (who  appears  to 
have  been  freely  permitted  by  the  three  me- 
diating Powers  to  direct  the  revolt  of  the 
Candiotes,)  seeing  the  impossibility  of  cap- 
turing the  fortified  towns  by  force  of  arms, 
determined  to  call  in  the  aid  of  famine  ;  and, 
accordingly,  (8th  March,  1828,)  declared  the 
blockade  of  the  island,  on  the  plea  that  {being 
in  the  hands  of  the  Greek  insurgents!)  it 
furnished  provisions  to  the  army  of  Ibrahim 
Pasha,  still  detained  inactive  in  the  Morea,  in 
consequence  of  the  destruction  of  the  fleet. 

This  bold  measure  on  the  part  of  Capo 
d'Istrias  soon,  however,  led  to  such  a  system 


BLOCKADE  OF  THE  COAST.  331 

of  piracy,  that  the  three  mediating  Powers, 
who  had  quietly  suffered  it  to  be  carried  into 
effect,  were  obliged  to  interfere ;  and,  no  better 
means  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  evil  suggest- 
ing itself,  the  Greek  vessels  were  sent  into 
port,  and  an  English  squadron  was  entrusted 
with  the  honourable  task  of  blockading  the 
coast  of  Candia. 

This  step,  though  still  rather  one-sided — 
considering  that  the  three  Powers  had  pre- 
viously destroyed  the  fleet  of  one  of  the  belli- 
gerents— would  not  have  been  so  glaringly 
unjust,  had  the  blockade  excluded  the  vessels 
of  both  parties,  and  left  them  to  depend  on 
their  respective  prowess  and  resources  to  ter- 
minate the  contest ;  but,  so  far  from  that 
being  the  case,  the  insurgent  Greeks  were  suf- 
fered to  receive  money,  ammunition,  and  re- 
cruits ;  in  fact,  everything  necessary  for  carry- 
inp-  on  the  war,  whilst  not  a  mistico  was 
permitted  to  enter  the  ports  occupied  by  their 
adversaries. 

It  being  thenceforth  vain  for  the  Turks  to 
look  for  supplies  from  without,  the  war  within 


332  EXPEDITK^OF  MUSTAPHA  PASHA. 

assumed  a  yet  more  sanguinary  character. 
The  gallant  Mustapha  Pasha,  collecting  the 
few  troops  under  his  command,  sallied  out  of 
Canea,  driving  the  Greek  blockading  army 
before  him,  and,  crossing  the  mountains,  pos- 
sessed himself  of  Castel  Franco,  the  principal 
port  of  the  insurgents,  on  the  south  side  of 
the  island ;  but,  unable  to  penetrate  into  the 
fastnesses  of  Sphackia,  and  expel  them  from 
their  hiding  places,  he  was  obliged  to  rest 
satisfied  with  the  plunder  of  the  open  country, 
destroying  all  that  he  could  not  carry  off.  On 
his  return  from  this  predatory  expedition, 
the  Greeks  ventured  to  attack  him  in  the 
mountain  passes,  hoping  to  be  able  to  cut  him 
off  from  Canea  ;  but  though,  from  the  nature 
of  the  ground,  they  occasioned  the  Turkish 
cavalry  a  severe  loss,  yet  they  were  com- 
pletely foiled  in  the  attempt  to  prevent  his 
return. 

It  was  absurd,  therefore,  whilst  the  Turks 
thus  possessed  the  power  of  moving  out  of 
their  fortresses,  and  scouring  the  country 
whenever  they  pleased,  to  maintain  that  the 


THE  INSURGENTS  ORGANIZED.  333 

Greeks  were  masters  of  the  island.  Such, 
however,  was  the  footing  on  which  all  nego- 
tiations for  the  pacification  of  Candia  were 
required  to  be  based. 

In  September,  1828,  Capo  d'Istrias,  finding 
that  matters  did  not  progress  according  to 
his  desires,  sent  a  trusty  agent  to  Candia,  to 
organize  the  insurgents  and  direct  their  move- 
ments ;  but  though  the  "  Condottlere  "  se- 
lected for  this  purpose  was,  by  the  influence 
and  money  of  his  employer,  enabled  to  assume 
the  post  allotted  to  him,  and  thereby  to  give 
a  little  more  unity  of  action  to  the  military 
operations  of  the  insubordinate  Greek  bands, 
and  infuse  some  slight  unanimity  into  the 
councils  of  the  different  chiefs  ;  still  his  mis- 
sion ended  in  complete  disappointment.  The 
Greeks  could  not  even  be  brought  to  face  the 
Turks  when  they  sallied  from  their  fortresses, 
much  less  to  undertake  the  siege  of  any  of 
them. 

The  crops  being  no  longer  on  the  ground 
— the  Turks  now  wisely  determined  to  hus- 
band   their  small  store   of  ammunition   and 


334         RAGE  OF  THE  TURKISH  INHABITANTS. 

provisions,  by  remaining  on  the  defensive  ; 
for,  the  open  country  having  been  thoroughly 
sacked,  it  would  have  been  a  mere  waste  of 
blood,  as  well  as  throwing  aside  a  decided 
advantage,  to  have  taken  the  field  against  an 
enemy  who  could  always  baffle  pursuit,  by 
retiring  to  the  mountains.  Trusting,  there- 
fore, that,  by  the  blessing  of  Allah,  mediation, 
or  a  happy  turn  in  the  tide  of  Mohammedan 
affairs,  would,  sooner  or  later,  release  them 
from  their  unpleasant  situation,  they  quietly 
squatted  to  their  pipes,  on  the  ramparts  of 
Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea. 

It  required,  however,  all  the  address  and 
influence  of  the  Seraskier  Pasha  of  the  island, 
and  Mustapha,  his  lieutenant,  to  restrain  the 
rage  of  the  Turkish  inhabitants  of  the  country, 
who,  thus  compelled  to  abandon  their  homes, 
and  leave  their  crops  to  be  gathered  by  their 
enemies,  burned  to  take  revenge  on  the  Greek 
inhabitants  of  the  towns.  The  Albanian 
troops,  also,  who  were  upwards  of  a  year  in 
arrears  of  pay,  wished  much  to  help  them- 
selves from  the  tills  of  the  good  citizens. 


MASSACRE  OF  THE  GREEKS.  335 

To  the  credit  of  the  Turkish  authorities  be 
it,  however,  recorded,  but  one  instance  of 
disorder  occurred,  and  that  was  occasioned 
by  the  unprovoked  murder  of  an  old  man — 
one  of  the  principal  Turks  of  Candia — almost 
within  sight  of  the  city,  to  which  he  was 
returning  from  a  visit  to  his  country-house. 

The  public  feeling  was  so  excited  by  this 
cowardly  act,  that  a  tumult  arose,  and  up- 
wards of  a  hundred  Greeks  were  massacred 
in  the  streets  of  Candia.  The  Seraskier 
Pasha  succeeded  only,  with  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty, in  putting  a  stop  to  the  slaughter,  and 
saving  the  rest  of  the  Christian  population* 
of  the  place. 


•  Contrast  this  with  the  account  pubhshed  by  an  English  gentle- 
man— himself  an  eye-witness — of  the  horrible  massacre  perpetrated 
by  the  Greeks  at  Hydra,  but  a  short  time  before ;  a  gentleman 
who  certainly  cannot  be  accused  of  a  leaning  towards  the  Turks, 
On  the  mere  rumour  that  a  Hydriote  vessel  had  been  blown  up  by 
a  "  refractory  Turkish  slave,"  whom  the  captain  had  struck,  (of 
the  truth  of  which  story,  by  the  way,  there  never  could  be  any  con- 
firmation, since  all  on  board  perished, "  refractory  Turk  "  inclusive,) 
the  inhabitants  of  Hydra  assembled  to  put  to  death  every  Turk  in 
the  place.  The  inmates  of  the  prison  were  first  despatched ;  they 
were  driven  forth  and  butchered  07ie  by  one.  Not  satisfied  with 
this  unparalleled  atrocity,  search  was  then  made  for  every  slave,  as 


336  BLOCKADE  OF  THE  ISLAND. 

At  length,  in  January,  1829,  the  English 
blockade  of  the  island  was  raised,  all  attempts 
at  negotiation  having  been  thwarted  by  the 
arrogant  pretensions  of  the  Greeks,  and  the 
two  parties  were  left  to  settle  the  matter  as 
they  could. 

So  prompt  was  Mohammed  Ali  in  taking 
advantage  of  this  return  to  justice  on  the 
part  of  the  interfering  powers,  that  an 
Egyptian  armed  squadron,  despatched  from 
Alexandria,  surprised  and  captured  some 
Greek  vessels  in  the  bay  of  Suda,  when 
some  curious  correspondence  between  Capo 
d'Istrias  and  his  agents  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  Egyptian  commander.  This  led  to  the 
recall  of  Baron  Renech,  to  whom,  neverthe- 
less, a  successor  was  appointed,  to  take  the 
direction  of  affairs.  His  military  exploits 
were,  however,  still  less  brilliant  than  those 

well  in  the  houses  as  on  board  ship,  and  "  two  hundred  wretches  " 
were  thus  sacrificed  to  the  "fury  of  the  mob."  "During  the  con- 
tinuance of  this  scene,  which  lasted  for  many  hours,  no  attempt  was 
made  by  the  primates  to  check  the  fury  of  the  crowd,"  and  "  the 
noble  Canaris  "  was  "  lying  on  a  bench,  drowned  in  tears  !  "  And 
yet  these  people  call  themselves  christians,  and  consider  themselves 
civilized ! 


IXSURGEXT  CANDIOTES.  337 

of  his  predecessor ;  and,  not  possessing  his 
tact,  the  different  parties  into  which  the 
Greeks  were  divided  soon  became  altogether 
unmanageable.  The  chief  of  each  band, 
thenceforth,  acted  entirely  according  to  his 
own  whim ;  rapine  and  murder  continued, 
as  before,  to  lay  waste  the  country ;  but,  all 
the  Turks  having  long  since  disappeared, 
Greek  now  turned  upon  Greek,  and  their  cup 
of  misery  was  full. 

Had  a  small  reinforcement,  or  even  a  supply 
of  ammunition,  been  despatched  from  Egypt 
at  this  juncture,  the  island  would  have  been 
quickly  reduced  to  subjection  ;  but  Moham- 
med Ali,  justly  mistrusting  the  actions  of  the 
mediating  powers,  was  afraid  to  commit  him- 
self. Matters  were,  therefore,  allowed  to  take 
their  course,  and  the  insurgent  Candiotes, 
finding  that  they  had  destroyed  all  belonging 
to  the  Turks,  and  plundered  all  they  possibly 
could  from  each  other;  that  the}^  could  no 
longer  look  for  aid  from  Greece,  and  had  no 
means  of  disposing  of  the  produce  of  their 
lands ;  gladly  consented  to  receive  a  master 


338        CANDIA  ANNEXED  TO  EGYPT. 

from  the  hands  of  the  allied  powers.  Thus, 
after  a  period  of  nearly  nine  years,  ended 
the  revolt  of  Candia  —  a  revolt  brought 
about  by  the  intrigues  of  revolutionary  pro- 
pagandists, fomented  by  Capo  d'Istria  to 
further  his  own  ambitious  views,  and  abetted 
by  the  three  great  powers  that  signed  the 
treaty  of  London  "  to  prevent  the  effusion  of 
blood  " — a  revolt  that  caused  the  destruction 
of  more  property  than  fifty  years  of  uninter- 
rupted prosperity  can  repair,  and  that  de- 
luged the  island  with  the  blood  of  two-thirds 
of  its  inhabitants. 

By  the  arrangement  which  was  now  effect- 
ed, Candia  was  annexed  to  the  dominions  of 
the  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  who,  tied  down  to 
govern  it,  without  imposing  fresh  taxes,  was 
expected  (Heaven  knows  why)  to  be  in  the 
possession  of  some  secret  for  conciliating  both 
Turks  and  Greeks.  The  short  period  of  tran- 
quillity that  followed  gave  some  colour  to  the 
belief  of  his  having  discovered  this  panacea ; 
but  the  true  cause  of  it  was  his  order  to  dis- 
arm   the  inhabitants,   and   the  arrival  of  a 


VISIT  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL  S6\) 

body  of  Egyptian  troops  to  overawe  both 
parties. 

In  the  summer  of  1833,  Mohammed  Ali 
visited  his  newly-acquired  possession,  when  he 
directed  several  useful  public  works  to  be  un- 
dertaken; and,  in  his  addresses  to  the  different 
provincial  councils  of  the  island,  he  called 
upon  them  to  second  him  in  affording  protec- 
tion and  encouragement  to  the  cultivators  of 
the  soil,  on  whom  the  prosperity  of  the  country 
so  much  depends.  To  these  appeals  most 
"  loyal  and  dutiful  "  replies  were  returned,  but 
no  steps  have  been  taken  to  carry  out  his  plans ; 
first,  from  the  disbelief  of  all  Greeks  in  the  pos- 
sibility of  anybody's  working  disinterestedly 
for  their  good — secondly,  from  a  latent  hope, 
on  the  part  of  the  leading  men,  of  being  able 
eventually  to  form  a  snug  little  republic  of 
their  own — a  project  which  every  act  that  is 
likely  to  render  Mohammed  Ali  popular  tends 
to  thwart. 

This  feeling  manifested  itself  soon  after  the 
return  of  the  Viceroy  to  Egypt.  The  turbu- 
lent chiefs  of  the  former  insurrection — under 

z2 


340  INSURRECTIONARY  MOVEMENT. 

the  pretence  of  its  being  in  contemplation  to 
levy  new  imposts — succeeded  in  collecting 
several  thousand  inhabitants — Turks  as  well 
as  Greeks  —  who  refused  to  pay  any  taxes 
whatever. 

Mustapha  Pasha  possessed  now,  however, 
the  means  of  putting  a  speedy  stop  to  the 
insurrectionary  movement,  and  did  not  fail  to 
avail  himself  of  it ;  advancing  quickly  with 
the  Egyptian  troops,  he  succeeded  without 
difficulty  in  dispersing  the  mob  and  securing 
several  of  the  ringleaders.  These  were  con- 
ducted to  Candia,  tried  and  condemned  to  ten 
years'  hard  labour,  whilst  their  deluded  fol- 
lowers were  permitted  to  return  to  their 
homes,  thankful  for  not  being  deprived  of 
their  ears  as  well  as  their  guns  and  yatagans. 
The  affair  would  have  terminated  here,  and 
the  lenity  exhibited  might  have  had  a  good 
effect,  but,  unfortunately,  Mohammed  Ali, 
on  receiving  the  first  report  of  the  insurrec- 
tion —  the  extent  of  which  was,  as  usual, 
greatly  exaggerated  —  conceiving  that  the 
local  authorities  had  not  sufficient  means  at 


EXECUTION  OF  THE  DELINQUENTS.  341 

their  command  to  put  it  down,  had  despatch- 
ed the  Egyptian  fleet,  under  Osman  Pasha,  to 
render  assistance ;  and  had  empowered  him  to 
inflict  summary  punishment  on  certain  indi- 
viduals known  to  be  the  promoters  of  the 
revolt. 

These  instructions  the  drunken  admiral 
chose  to  carry  into  effect,  although  he  did  not 
reach  Candia  until  some  time  after  the  insur- 
rection had  been  suppressed  by  Mustapha 
Pasha,  who,  feeling  that  his  honour  was  some- 
what compromised  by  this  departure  from  the 
terms  he  had  granted,  interfered  strongly,  but 
in  vain,  on  behalf  of  the  delinquents.  The 
execution  of  these  miscreants — who,  for  the 
preceding  ten  years,  had  caused  the  island  to 
be  deluged  with  innocent  blood — could  excite 
but  little  commiseration  :  yet,  under  the  pecu- 
liar circumstances  of  the  case,  this  act  of  seve- 
rity was  to  be  regretted,  as  it  was  looked 
upon  as  a  breach  of  faith,  and  tended  to  make 
Mohammed  Ali  very  unpopular. 

It  was  at  first  attributed  to  Osman  Pasha's 
habitual  inebriety  and  consequent  stupidity  ; 


342  CONDUCT  OF  OSMAN  PASHA. 

and  his  subsequent  desertion  from  the  Egyp- 
tian service  was  supposed  to  have  been  from 
the  dread  of  his  master's  displeasure.  But 
the  whole  of  this  man's  conduct  leads  to  the 
belief  that  he  acted  in  the  affair  with  premedi- 
tation ;  for,  in  a  letter  addressed,  shortly  after 
his  desertion,  to  Mr.  Borgos,  (one  of  the  Vice- 
roy's principal  secretaries)  he  stated  that,  on 
quitting  Egypt  for  Candia,  he  had  made  up 
his  mind  to  embrace  the  first  favourable  op- 
portunity of  leaving  Mohammed  Ali's  service  ; 
and,  since  that  opportunity  presented  itself 
the  moment  he  left  the  port  of  Alexandria,  it 
is  pretty  evident  that  he  delayed  carrying  his 
intention  into  efTect,  until  he  could  do  some 
mischief  to  his  employer.  Finding,  therefore, 
on  his  arrival  at  Candia,  that  the  insurrection 
had  been  quelled,  he  adopted  the  only  means 
remaininginhispowerto  injure  Mohammed  Ali 
by  putting  in  force  his  severe  orders,  given  in 
the  antici])ation  of  a  much  more  serious  crisis. 
By  this  act,  he  hoped  to  throw  again  the  brand 
of  discord  between  the  Viceroy  and  his  Can- 
diote  subjects,  and  perform  a  service  which 


ODIUM  CAUSED  TO  MOHAMMED  ALL  343 

he  well  knew  would- find  favour  with  Sultan 
Mahmoud,  whose  protection  he  immediately 
sought  and  obtained. 

In  Candia,  the  whole  odium  of  this  act  of 
treachery  fell,  naturally  enough,  upon  Moham- 
med Ali,  and  was  a  death-blow  to  his  rising 
popularity ;  but  that,  under  any  circumstan- 
ces, his  government  should  be  disliked,  is  by 
no  means  surprising,  considering  the  previous 
lawless  state  of  the  island  and  the  composition 
of  its  inhabitants.  The  Greeks,  (forming  still 
the  bulk  of  the  population),  have  an  innate 
distaste  for  any  government  that  will  punish  an 
infringement  of  its  laws,  and  put  down  rapine 
and  piracy.  The  Turks,  accustomed  to  con- 
sider themselves  the  rulers  of  the  land,  cannot 
brook  being  kept  in  subjection  by  Arabs. 
The  former,  long  unused  to  contribute  towards 
the  expenses  of  a  government,  consider  all 
imposts  as  grievances.  The  latter,  whose 
property  has  been  ruined  by  their  opponents, 
conceive  that  they  are  entitled  to  exemption 
from  taxation,  in  consideration  of  their  losses. 
Mohammed  Ali  finds  it,  therefore,  a  difficult 


344  THE  ISLAND  GOVERNED  BY  A  PASHA. 

task  to  frame  laws  that  will  meet  the  views  of 
his  dissatisfied  Candiote  subjects,  without 
burdening  the  Egyptian  treasury  with  the 
expense  of  enforcing  them  ;  but  his  addresses 
to  the  provincial  councils  of  the  island  are 
certainly  not  traced  by  the  hand  of  a  "  san- 
guinary tyrant,  whose  only  idea  of  govern- 
meiit  is  taxation/'* 

The  island  is  governed  by  a  Pasha,  nomi- 
nated by  the  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  who  is 
assisted  in  his  arduous  duties  by  the  pro- 
vincial councils  of  Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea. 
These  three  provinces  are  subdivided  into 
districts,  (of  which  the  whole  island  contains 
twenty-four)  each  governed  by  a  Boulak 
Bashee  ;  and  every  village  has  two  chiefs — one 
Greek  and  one  Mohammedan. 

The  provincial  councils  are  composed  of  a 
president  and  two  deputies  (one  Greek  and 
one  Turk)  from  each  of  the  districts  contained 
in  the  province.  Their  duties  are  both  of  a 
legislative  and  judicial  nature  ;  the  laws  being- 
framed  by  them,  and  all  offences  punished  at 

*  See  Addenda,  No.  2. 


NUMBER  OF  TROOPS.  345 

their  award.  Death,  however,  cannot  be  in- 
flicted without  the  approval  of  the  governing 
Pasha.  The  other  duties  of  the  councils  are, 
to  watch  over  the  public  health,  to  regulate 
the  price  of  provisions,  superintend  the  public 
works,  &c.,  in  their  respective  provinces.  The 
deputies  receive  a  trifling  salary,  and,  being 
rather  nominated  by  the  governor  than  elected 
by  the  people,  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  very 
independent.* 

The  number  of  troops  maintained  in  the 
island  is  scarcely  five  thousand.  This  amount  is 
made  up  of  five  weak  battalions  of  the  Nizam 
(about  three  thousand  five  hundred  bayonets) 
and  an  irregular  force  of  Albanians.  The 
guard  of  the  fortresses  is  entrusted  to  the 
Egyptian  troops,  the  Turkish  soldiers  being 
scattered  in  small  parties  throughout  the 
island.  In  addition  to  the  three  cities  on  the 
north  coast  and  the  island  of  Suda,  the  other 
fortified  points  of  Candia  are  Spina  longa, 
Gira  petra,  and  Castel-Franco — all  mere  forts  ; 

•  The  unavoidable  departure  from  the  rule  for  the  composition  of 
tlipse  provincial  councils  has  already  been  noticed  in  the  case  of 
Retimo.     The  other  two  adhere  pretty  rigidly  to  it. 


346  CANDIA  USELESS  TO  MOHAMMED  ALL 

the  former  also  on  the  northern,  the  two 
others  on  the  southern,  shore  of  the  island. 

The  paltry  revenue  raised  in  the  island  is 
barely  sufficient  to  pay  the  current  expenses 
of  the  government,  and  the  cost  of  the  Egyp- 
tian troops  necessary  for  its  protection,  the 
number  of  which  is  certainly  as  small  as  pru- 
dence will  admit ;  and,  at  this  moment, 
Candia,  far  from  being  a  source  of  profit  to 
Mohammed  Ali,  obliges  him  to  expend  on  its 
protection  part  of  the  taxes  levied  on  the 
people  of  Egypt.  The  expense  of  putting 
Candia  mto  thorough  repair  would  occasion 
an  outlay  that  the  treasury  of  the  Viceroy 
could  at  this  moment  ill  afford ;  and,  even  if 
the  island  were  in  ever  so  sound  a  state,  still 
it  would  not  furnish  Egypt  with  a  single 
thing  of  which  she  stands  in  need. 

Candia  is  thus  worse  than  useless  to 
Mohammed  Ali.  Its  possession  drains  his 
finances,  gives  jealousy  to  the  Greeks,  and 
weakens  him  in  every  possible  way.  In  the 
event  of  a  war  with  Turkey,  a  large  force 
would  be  required  for  its  defence,  which  might 


ITS  POSSESSION  ADVANTAGEOUS  TO  ENGLAND.   347 

be  much  more  advantageously  employed  else- 
where ;  in  the  case  of  a  rupture  with  Greece, 
it  would  be  subject  to  constant  marauding 
visits,  which  his  cumbersome  line  of  battle 
ships  would  never  be  able  to  prevent ;  and, 
whenever  a  general  war  again  convulses 
Europe,  far  from  being  allowed  to  remain 
quietly  in  his  hands,  it  would  be  9ne  of  the 
points  first  contested  for  by  the  belligerents. 

Mohammed  Ali  is  too  clear-sighted  not  to 
be  aware  of  these  circumstances,  and  to  see 
that  it  is  merely  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the 
European  powers  that  causes  this  valuable 
island  to  be  placed  as  a  kind  of  deposit  in  his 
hands ;  and  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  he 
would  willingly  barter  away  the  honorary 
distinction  of  being  its  governor  for  any  per- 
sonal benefit,  however  slight. 

The  advantages  offered  to  Great  Britain 
by  the  possession  of  Candia  are,  on  the  other 
hand,  incalculable ;  and,  since  the  boundaries 
of  Russia  may  now  be  considered  as  advanced 
to  the  Dardanelles  and  Cape  Matapan,  (for  the 
impotent  kingdom  of  Greece,  if  suffered  to 


348  AMBITIOUS  PROJECTS  OF  RUSSIA. 

exist,  must  always  act  in  obedience  to  the 
Czar's  dictates),  it  behoves  Great  Britain  to 
take  up  a  position,  to  be  at  hand  to  frustrate 
the  further  ambitious  projects  of  that  power. 
Malta  is  no  longer  sufficiently  near  the  Le- 
vant to  protect  our  trade  and  give  timely 
support  to  Greece,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  in  case 
of  need ;  particularly,  keeping  in  view  the 
change  that  will  be  effected  in  naval  warfare 
by  the  application  of  steam.  The  same  may 
be  said  of  all  the  Ionian  Islands,  except  Ce- 
rigo,  which,  however,  does  not  possess  a  port 
that  could  contain  a  collier,  much  less  shelter 
a  fleet. 

Candia,  whilst  it  is  so  situated  as  to  watch 
the  whole  of  the  Levant,  the  entrances  to  the 
Dardanelles  and  Adriatic,  and  the  northern 
coast  of  Africa,  possesses,  in  the  Bay  of  Suda, 
a  harbour  without  its  equal  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  which  might  be  rendered  as 
strong  as  either  Port  Mahon  or  La  Valletta. 
The  island  is  capacious  enough  to  contain  a 
force  of  sufficient  strength  to  he  of  service,  in 
the   event  of  an   armed   intervention   being 


ACQUISITION  OF  CANDIA.  349 

necessary :  and  it  would  not,  like  most  of  the 
present  possessions  of  Great  Britain  in  the 
Mediterranean,  be  dependent  upon  other 
countries  for  its  supplies.  The  expense  at- 
tendant on  its  occupation  would,  doubtless, 
in  the  first  instance,  be  heavy,  considering; 
the  wretched  condition  of  the  fortified  points, 
harbours,  roads,  &c.  &c. ;  but  the  extraordi- 
nary fertility  of  its  soil  would,  under  proper 
management,  soon  enable  it  to  repay  this 
outlay;  and,  in  the  meanwhile,  England  might 
spare  herself  the  expense  of  protecting  five 
of  the  seven  islands  composing  the  absurd 
Ionian  Republic. 

Whilst  Great  Britain  would  thus  improve 
her  own  position  by  the  acquisition  of  Candia, 
she  would  at  the  same  time  be  strengthening 
Egypt,  (which  it  is  clearly  her  policy  to  do), 
by  ridding  that  power  of  an  incubus,  and 
allowing  it  to  direct  its  undivided  energies 
towards  Syria. 

From  what  I  have  here  stated,  it  may,  I 
think,  be  inferred  that  Mohammed  Ali  would 
gladly  dispose  with  this,  to  him,  worse  than 


350  POLICY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

useless  possession  to  any  power  that  would 
give  him  any  thing  for  it :  but  if,  contrary  to 
his  own  interest,  he  should  demur,  the  alterna- 
tive is  to  take  it. 

Such  a  step,  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain, 
mig'ht  occasion  a  vast  deal  oi  protocoling,  but 
what  considerations  should  deter  her  from 
taking  it  ?  Could  Russia  remonstrate  — 
having,  without  her  concurrence,  possessed 
herself  successively  of  Poland,  Bessarabia, 
Moldavia,  Wallachia,  and  Georgia  ?  Could 
Austria  or  Prussia — both  daily  interfering  in 
the  affairs  of  the  petty  states  of  Germany 
and  Italy?  Could  France — which  continues 
to  occupy  Ancona,  and,  in  contempt  of  the 
pledged  word  of  her  king,  retains  possession 
of  Algiers  ? 

The  best  answer  to  our  own  objection  is, 
that  the  surest  way  of  avoiding  a  war  is  to 
be  prepared  for  one  ;  and,  if  our  prepon- 
derance in  the  East  be  worth  preserving,  it 
can  now  only  be  upheld  by  occupying  Can- 
dia  and  supporting  Egypt. 


ADDENDA. 


No.  I. 

The  following  note  is  so  perfectly  characteristic  of 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  evinces  such  a  consciousness  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  value  of  his  friendship  to  certain  Euro- 
pean powers,  that  it  will  be  read  with  interest  by  such 
as  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  judging  of  the  Vice- 
roy of  Egypt's  diplomatic  calibre. 

I  make  no  scruple  in  giving  publicity  to  this  docu- 
ment, which,  though  certainly  not  intended  to  meet  the 
public  eye,  has  been  given  at  length  in  a  recent  French 
work. 

The  harsh  expressions  it  contains,  with  reference  to 
Russia,  have  doubtless  been  long  since  explained  away^ 
leaving  the  two  powers  much  in  the  state  of  a  couple  of 
dogs  with  a  bone  in  expectancy — each  wagging  his  tail 
with  most  amicable  demonstration,  but,  at  the  same,  shift- 
ing his  ground,  so  as  to  secure  the  best  possible  posi- 
tion for  falhng  upon  the  prey  the  moment  it  should  be 
dropped. 


352  ADDENDA. 

This  Mohammedan  protocol  (written  under  the  Vice- 
roy's own  dictation)  was  addressed  to  the  diplomatic 
agents  of  Great  Britain  and  France,  pending  the  media- 
tion to  arrest  the  march  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  on  Constanti- 
nople after  the  victory  of  Konieh,  and  thereby  to  deprive 
Russia  of  all  pretext  for  interference. 

"  I  have  fully  penetrated  the  spirit  of  your  instructions, 
and  understood  how  the  Ottoman  empire  is  an  object  of 
your  deep  solicitude  and  interest.  As,  on  my  part,  I  have 
no  other  desire,  and  meditate  nothing  more  than  to  with- 
draw that  empire  from  the  controlling  power  of  the  Rus- 
sians, who  rule  it  in  the  character  of  masters,  and  of 
rescuing  my  unhappy  nation  from  the  disgrace  which 
oppresses  it ;  those  benevolent  intentions  of  the  English 
and  French  governments,  in  accordance  as  they  are  with 
my  own  sentiments,  claim  the  expression  of  my  unre- 
served gratitude.  Nevertheless,  as  we  do  not  all  agree 
in  the  means  of  rendering  that  empire  strong  and 
powerful,  I  must  now  declare,  as  a  zealous  patriot,  my 
inward  convictions  on  this  point,  in  order  that,  if  they 
should  receive  from  both  governments  that  attention  of 
which  their  wonted  justice  and  impartiality  assure  me, 
the  interest  they  possess  towards  my  country  may  produce 
the  happy  results  we  may  expect  from  them. 

"  1st.  His  Excellency  M.  Roussin,  ambassador  from 
France  at  the  Porte,  being  desirous  of  removing  every 
ground  for  the  detention  at  Constantinople  of  the  Rus- 
sian vessels  which  have  arrived  there,  has  written  a 
pressing  letter,  urging  me  to  accelerate  the  conclusion  of 
peace  between    the  Porte   and  Egypt,  and   proposing 


ADDENDA.  353 

that  I  should  be  content  to  accept  of  the  four  districts 
composing  the  government  of  Saida.  By  the  adoption  of 
this  course  he  has,  in  reahty,  departed  from  the  system  of 
benevolent  protection,  adopted  as  the  principal  object  to 
be  attained ;  for  such  a  proposal  too  well  harmonizes  with 
the  views  of  Russia,  who  aims  at  weakening  the  Ottoman 
empire. 

"  2nd.  Russia,  on  account  of  her  proximity  to  Turkey, 
and  her  subsisting  intercourse  with  Constantinople,  is 
fully  sensible  of  the  inertness  of  the  Porte,  and  of  the 
steady  progress  made  by  Egypt,  when  she  pledges  herself 
that  the  mere  province  of  Saida  shall  be  annexed  to 
Egypt,  and  that  the  other  provinces  occupied  by  the 
Egyptian  forces  shall  remain  under  the  power  of  the 
Grand  Signor  in  their  former  state  of  destitution ;  her 
object  is  to  retain  the  superiority  she  has  acquired,  and 
to  destroy  the  Ottoman  empire  at  any  moment  she  may 
think  proper.  This  proposal  being  thus  at  variance  with 
the  policy  of  England  and  France,  it  should  naturally  be 
rejected. 

'*  3rd.  Tlie  provinces  which  Egypt  has  demanded  of 
the  Porte,  through  the  channel  of  Halil  Pacha,  have  been 
so  demanded,  like  the  governments  usually  granted  to 
other  viziers,  under  the  title  of  a  revocable  nomination, 
and  not  in  absolute  property.  Susceptible  as  those  pro- 
vinces are  of  cultivation  and  improvement,  and  of  shortly 
becoming  so — witness  the  rapid  prosperity  of  Egypt — it  is 
evident  that  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  them 
would  accrue  to  the  Porte,  and  that  England,  France, 
and  the  other  powers  of  Europe  would,  owing  to  the 
VOL.  II.  A  A 


354  ADDENDA. 

intercourse  which  would  result  from  their  position,  reap 
every  benefit  from  them.  In  the  contrary  case,  of  those 
countries  still  continuing  under  the  authority  of  the 
Porte,  they  would,  owing  to  her  improvidence  and  neg- 
lect, remain  wild,  uncultivated  deserts ;  so  far  from 
affording  the  means  of  strengthening  her  power,  they 
would  be  wholly  unable  to  assist  her.  Let  them  be, 
therefore,  united  to  Egypt,  and  they  will  soon  be  found 
well  cultivated,  teeming  with  population,  and  supplying 
all  the  resources  of  which  they  are  susceptible.  The 
Porte  would  thus  become  strong  and  powerful,  and  be 
naturally  relieved  from  the  oppression  of  Russia.  Should 
the  interest  so  kindly  taken  by  England  and  France  in 
the  welfare  of  Turkey  manifest  itself  by  such  results, 
they  will  assuredly  have  rendered  the  Ottoman  Porte  a 
signal  service,  and  my  own  most  fervent  wishes  will 
have  been  crowned  with  success. 

"  4th.  My  whole  nation,  without  distinction  of  ranks, 
is  fully  sensible  that  such  has  been  my  exclusive  object 
in  devoting  myself,  as  I  have  done,  and  in  exposing  my 
fortune,  my  family,  and  my  worthiest  servants.  Through- 
out Arabia,  in  Anatolia,  on  the  very  shores  of  the  Black 
Sea,  that  is  to  say,  in  Daghestan  and  Lazistan,  in  Bosnia 
and  Roumelia,  at  Constantinople  itself,  the  greater  part 
of  the  ministers,  ulemas,  and  inhabitants,  have  addressed 
themselves  to  me.  They  have  successively  transmitted 
supplications  and  despatches,  both  openly  and  in  private, 
purporting  that  the  whole  Mussulman  nation,  revolted  at 
the  unworthy  conduct  of  Sultan  Mahmoud,  behold  him 
with  repugnance,  and  that,  having  failed  to  obtain  from 


ADDENDA.  365 

him,  by  persuasive  means,  the  organization  of  his  domi- 
nions, they  are  compelled  to  resort  to  the  influence  of  a 
powerful  personage ;  that,  failing  to  discover  any  other 
than  myself  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  earnestly  im- 
plore my  aid  and  support. 

"  Let  the  countries  which,  at  the  instigation  of  so  many 
suffrages  and  prayers,  I  have  demanded  of  my  govern- 
ment, be  granted  to  me ;  and  I  trust  that,  thanks  to  the 
good- will  of  England  and  France,  I  shall  soon  succeed  in 
augmenting  my  revenue,  increasing  my  army,  completely 
organizing  every  branch  of  the  service,  and  ever  faithful, 
as  a  vassal,  to  my  government,  be  found  prepared,  at  the 
first  bidding,  to  wage  war  against  the  Russians. 

"  Should  they  attempt  to  manifest  their  perfidious  de- 
signs against  Turkey,  uniting  myself  with  the  whole  of 
Persia  and  of  Lesguistan,  I  should  proceed  to  encounter 
and  inflict  such  severe  losses  upon  them,  that  my  un- 
happy nation  would,  at  last,  be  rescued  from  their  re- 
lentless tyranny.  These  considerations,  so  easy  of  ap- 
prehension, are  still  more  evident  to  Russia,  contiguous 
as  she  is  to  Turkey ;  she,  accordingly,  strains  every  nerve 
to  prevent  my  receiving  the  grant  of  the  desired  terri- 
tory. This  concession  would  militate  too  much  against 
her  policy,  not  to  make  her  endeavour  to  obstruct  it. 
England  and  France,  on  the  other  hand,  will  assuredly 
not  favour  the  wishes  of  Russia  to  the  detriment  of  their 
own  policy,  and  in  opposition  to  the  interest  they  mani- 
fest towards  the  Ottoman  empire.  Now  that  her  projects, 
which  had  hitherto  been  disguised,  have  been  laid  open 
to  view,  it  behoves  the  honour  and  dignity  of  both  go- 


356  ADDENDA. 

vernments  to  afford  the  proof  of  their  friendly  feelings  in 
my  regard. 

^'  5  th.  In  short,  finding  myself  powerful  amongst  my 
people,  acting  consistently  with  our  sacred  code,  that  is  to 
say,  in  virtue  of  the  judicial  fetwas  which  have  been 
openly  sent  to  me  by  all  the  Ulemas  of  Arabia  and  Ana- 
tolia, I  am  enjoined  by  the  law  to  resort  to  every  means  of 
strengthening  my  nation  and  government.  Now,  as  such 
means  can  only  be  realised  by  my  receiving  a  concession 
of  the  countries  which  I  have  just  demanded,  I  feel  war- 
ranted in  persisting  in  my  demand,  until  it  shall  have 
been  assented  to.  I  have  thus  ardently  laboured  hitherto, 
with  no  other  view  than  to  leave  the  world  with  some 
degree  of  renown. 

'*  Since  my  nation  has  so  confidently  had  recourse  to  me, 
rather  than  incur  the  reproach  of  having  abandoned  her, 
and  preferred  indulging  in  repose,  I  shall  gladly  court  a 
glorious  death  in  her  service.  It  is  under  the  inspiration 
of  these  sentiments  that  I  humbly  beseech  England  and 
France  to  adopt,  in  my  regard,  a  determination  consistent 
with  justice,  equity,  and  their  own  interest." 


No.  IL 

Extract  from  a  Firman,  addressed  by  his  Highness  Mo- 
hammed Ali,  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  to  the  Members  of  the 
Provincial  Council  of  Canea,  dated  1  Qth  August,  1 833 . 

***** 
"  Although  the  island  of  Candia  contains  within  itself 

all  the  seeds  of  prosperity,  and  combines  all  the  conditions 


D 


Temple  ot'  Jupiter  Aiv 


L^y 


riuc  of  Sphviufc 


Moud  to  Luxor 


Sc  a  1, 

L — 1 — 


Shef./ud   bv 

C.  A'ochr'oi-t  Scott 


356  ADDENDA. 

vernments  to  afford  the  proof  of  their  friendly  feehngs  in 
my  regard. 

"  5th.  In  short,  finding  myself  powerful  amongst  my 
people,  acting  consistently  with  our  sacred  code,  that  is  to 
say,  in  virtue  of  the  judicial  fetwas  which  have  been 
openly  sent  to  me  by  all  the  Ulemas  of  Arabia  and  Ana- 
tolia, I  am  enjoined  by  the  law  to  resort  to  every  means  of 
strengthening  my  nation  and  government.  Now,  as  such 
means  can  only  be  realised  by  my  receiving  a  concession 
of  the  countries  which  I  have  just  demanded,  I  feel  war- 
ranted in  persisting  in  my  demand,  until  it  shall  have 
been  assented  to.  I  have  thus  ardently  laboured  hitherto, 
with  no  other  view  than  to  leave  the  world  with  some 
degree  of  renown. 

'*  Since  my  nation  has  so  confidently  had  recourse  to  me, 
rather  than  incur  the  reproach  of  having  abandoned  her, 
and  preferred  indulging  in  repose,  I  shall  gladly  court  a 
glorious  death  in  her  service.  It  is  under  the  inspiration 
of  these  sentiments  that  I  humbly  beseech  England  and 
France  to  adopt,  in  my  regard,  a  determination  consistent 
with  justice,  equity,  and  their  own  interest," 


No.  11. 

Extract  from  a  Firman^  addressed  by  his  Highness  Mo- 
hammed AH,  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  to  the  Members  of  the 
Provincial  Council  of  Canea,  dated  1 6th  August,  1 833 . 

***** 
"  Although  the  island  of  Candia  contains  within  itself 
all  the  seeds  of  prosperity,  and  combines  all  the  conditions 


IX 


Di 


PLAIN   ofthe   RUINS 
of  the  TEMPLES  at  KARNAC 

Reference 

b   ?  Granite  coltanris  carvid'  wi^  J^ums  &c 
c  f'm^ment  of  a  CoUtssal  ■stutue 
d  Seinaop/iaffU.f  of  wfiiic-  niarblf 


h 


t:ii.'^ 


lH/a^e    of  Kanicu 


jiLikiuT^ibliiheaVHeniyColbUinlS.lJifeatltajl'botoug'liS 


MiMd^Zuxor   „_ 


Skcfi/u'd  by 

C  h'oc^ubrt  Scolb . 


ADDENDA.  357 

necessary  for  rendering  it  rich  and  prosperous,  yet  doomed 
for  many  years  past  to  be  distracted  by  internal  broils 
and  dissensions,  a  great  portion  of  its  fertile  soil  has  been 
left  untilled,  and  the  olive-tree,  which  may  be  considered 
its  richest  production,  still  remains  totally  neglected. 

*'The  cause  of  this  is,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  land 
devoted  to  its  cultivation  is  owned  by  individuals  who  do 
not  possess  the  means  indispensably  requisite  for  render- 
ing it  productive. 

*'  Now,  it  is  evident,  that  if  such  a  state  of  things  con- 
tinues much  longer,  the  result  must  be  that  this  valuable 
production  will  become  extinct.  To  check,  therefore,  the 
progress  of  an  evil  that  every  day  grows  more  serious, 
some  means  must  be  devised  for  improving  the  culture 
of  the  olive ;  and,  to  effect  this  desirable  purpose,  the 
inhabitants  have  no  better  method  than  that  above  re- 
commended, which  consists  in  their  mutually  lending 
each  other  aid  and  assistance. 

"  The  government,  on  its  part,  moved  thereto  by  a  sense 
of  justice  and  equity,  will  charge  itself  with  the  manu- 
facture of  all  the  implements,  &c.  necessary  for  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  country,  for  such  of  the  inhabitants  as 
have  not  the  means  of  otherwise  procuring  them. 

"  It  will,  at  the  same  time,  chastise  those  malevolent 
persons,  whose  conduct  may  tend  to  hurt  the  interests  of 
the  country.  It  will  undertake  to  lay  the  foundation  of 
the  mighty  structure  of  civilization,  using  every  possible 
means  of  delivering  the  inhabitants — Mussulmans  as  well 
as  Christians — from  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  by  open- 
ing their  eyes  to  the  beneficent  light  of  science." 


358  ADDENDA. 

The  Firman  then  proceeds  to  give  directions  to  the 
government  of  Canea  to  clean  out  and  improve  the  port 
—  to  estabHsh  two  schools  for  the  education  of  the  chil- 
dren of  the  inhabitants — Mussulmans  and  Christians. 

The  whole  to  be  effected  at  the  cost  of  the  government. 

Another  paragraph  decrees  the  abolition  of  the  tax, 
estabhshed  "from  time  immemorial"  on  cattle. 


Extract  of  a  Firman,  addressed  by  his  Highness  Moham- 
med Ali,  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  to  the  jjrincipal  Inhabitants 
of  Canea,  dated  Ca?iea,  20th  August,  1833. 

*'  We  are  pleased  to  believe,  that  each  of  you,  moved 
by  a  noble  emulation,  will  have  at  heart  the  amelioration 
of  the  condition  of  his  children,  and  will  consider  it  a 
duty  to  co-operate  in  forwarding  the  well-being,  civiliza- 
tion, and  glory,  of  his  native  land." 

Proceeding,  then,  to  point  out  his  intention  of  giving 
each  village,  of  which  the  inhabitants  are  all  Christians, 
a  chief  of  their  own  selection ;  and  to  such  as  contain  a 
mixed  population,  a  Mussulman  and  Christian  chief,  for 
the  government  of  his  co-religionists  repectively,  the 
Viceroy  concludes  in  the  following  words  :  "  If  you  have 
any  observations  to  offer  relative  to  the  resolutions  of  the 
council,  do  not  hesitate  in  forthwith  making  them  known 
to  us." 

THE  END. 


LONDON  : F.  SHOBERL,  JUN.,  I.RICESTER  STKEET,  LEICESTER  SQUARE. 


MR.    CO  LB  URN 

Begs  to  acquaint  his  Literary  Friends  and  fhe  Public,  that  he  has 
resumed  General  Publishing  at 

13,  GREAT  MARLBOROUGH  STREET; 

whence  his  Periodical  Works  have  been  issued  since  he  left  New  Bur- 
lington Street  in  1832  j  and  that  he  is  preparing  for  Publication 

WORKS, 

By  the  following  Distinguished  Writers  : 


AUTHOR  OF  "TREMAINE. 

CAPTAIN  ALEXANDER. 

H.  L.   BULWER,  ESQ.,  M.P. 

LADY  CHARLOTTE  BURY. 

THOMAS  CAMPBELL,  ESQ. 

T.  CROFTON  CROKER,  ESQ. 

B.  D'iSRAELI,  ESQ. 

MRS.  GORE. 

DR.  GRANVILLE,   F.  R.  S. 

THEODORE  HOOK,    ESQ. 


MRS.  S.  C.  HALL. 
DOUGLAS  JERROLD,  ESQ. 
MISS  LANDON. 
LADY  MORGAN. 
M.  J.  QUIN,  ESQ. 
CAPTAIN  SCOTT. 
MRS.  SHELLEY. 
HORACE  SMITH,  ESQ. 
ROBKRT  SUHVAN,  ESQ. 
H.  G.  WARD,  ESQ.,  M.  P. 


The  following  are  nearly  ready  for  Publication : 
LETTERS  FROM  THE  SOUTH; 

By  THOMAS  CAMPBELL,  Esq. 

Author  of  the  "  Pleasures  of  Hope." 
In  2  vols.  8vo.,  with  12  Plates  of  Scenerj-,  Costume,  &c. 

n. 
PERSONAL  MEMOIRS  OF  GENERAL  SHAW, 

Late  Colonel  in  the  Portuguese  Service,  &e. 
Comprising  his  Adventures  in   HOLLAND,    FRANCE,   BELGIUM,    GER- 
MANY, ITALY,  SPAIN,  and  PORTUGAL.     2  Vols.  8vo. 

III. 

POSTHUMOUS  MEMOIRS  OF  A  PEERESS; 
Or,  THE  DAYS  OF  FOX. 

Edited  by  the  LADY  CHARLOTTE  BURY.     3  Vols.  Post  8vo. 
IV. 

HUMAN  NATURE  3 

By  the  Author  of  "  Tremaine  and  "  De  Vere."     3  Vols. 
V. 

AN  EXPLORATORY  VOYAGE 

ALONG  the  WEST  COAST  of  AFRICA,  and  the  NARRATIVE  of  a  CAM- 
PAIGN in  KAFFERLAND  in  1835. 
By  Capt.  J.  E.  ALEXANDER,  42nd  Royal  Highlanders. 
Author  of  "  Travels  in  the  East,"  &c. 
Illustrated  with  Plates  and  Maps,  by  Major  C.  C.  Mitchell,  Surveyor  General 
and  Civil  Engineer,  Cape  of  Good  Hope.     In  2  Vols.  8vo. 


New  Boohs,  Just  Published. 
FLITTINGS  OF  FANCY; 

By  ROBERT  SULIVAN,  Esq.     Author  of  "  The  Silent  River,"  "  Faithful 
and  Forsaken,"  &c.     2  Vols.  Post  8vo. 

CHATEAUBRIAND'S  SKETCHES  OF  ENGLISH 
LITERATURE ; 

With  CONSIDERATIONS  on  the  SPIRIT  of  the  TIMES,  MEN,  and 
REVOLUTIONS.     2  Vols.  8vo.  24«. 


EDiTED  13Y  THEODOIIE  HOOK,  ESQ., 

Ami  illustrated  with  a  Portrait  of  the  Lady  Charlotte  Bury. 

THE  FIRST  NUMBER  FOR   1837   OF 

COLBURN'S 
NEW     MONTHLY     M  A  G  A  Z  I  N  E,^ 

EDITED  BY  THEODORE  HOOK,  Esq. 

WHO   COMMENCES    THE    NUMBER    FOR    JANUARY    WITH 

THE    GURNEY    PAPERS. 


Those  persons  who  intend  to  avail  themselves  of  the  favourable  oppor- 
tunity of  the  new  year  for  commencing  this  Periodical,  are  requested  to 
send  their  orders  immediately  to  their  respective  Booksellers. 

Among  numerous  other  distinguished  Contributors  to  this  Popular 
Miscellany,  besides  the  Editor,  Mr.  Colburn  has  the  pleasure  to  name — 


Author  of  "  Tremaine." 

Authors  OF  "  Rejected  Addresses 

Alfred  Crowquill. 

Haynes  Bayly,  Esq. 

S.  Beazley,  Esq. 

Laman  Bi.anchard,  Esq. 

J.  B.  Buckstone,  Esq. 

Thomas  Campbeli,,  Esq. 

Crofton  Croker,  Esq. 

B.  D'Israei.i,  Esq. 

Ebknezer  Elliott. 

Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig. 

Mrs.  Gore. 

Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall. 

Benson  Hill,  Esq. 

The  New  Publication  announced  under  the  title  of 

THE    HUMORIST 

is,  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Hook,  incorporated  with  the  New  Monthly, 
and  forms  a  prominent  feature  of  Wit  and  Comicality  in  that  Magazine, 
which  is  accordingly  increased  in  quantity,  and  contains  various  other 
improvements. 

The  New  Series  of  Literary  Portraits  (lately  commenced)  con- 
tinues to  form  a  distinguishing  Embellishment  of  this  Periodical. 


Leigh  Hunt,  Esq. 

Douglas Jerrold,  Esq. 

Miss  L.  E.  Landon. 

Miss  Mitford. 

Sir  Charles  Morgan. 

Lady  Morgan. 

The  Hon.  Mrs.  Norton. 

R.  B.  Peake,  Esq. 

J.  R.  Planche,  Esq. 

John  Poole, Esq.   (Author of"  Paul 

Pry.") 
Hamilton  Reynolds,  Esq. 
Leitch  Ritchie,  Esq. 
Author  of  "  Glances  at  Life." 
N.  P.  Willis,  Esq. 


CONTENTS  OF   THE 

The  Gurney  Papers,  No  I.  By  Theo- 
dore Hook,  Esq. 

R  etrospections,&  Anticipations  for  1837. 

Tlie  Late  George  Colnian.  His  Wit 
and  Genius. 

The  Mother's  Heart.  By  the  Hon. 
Mrs.  Norton. 

A  Tale  of  the  Voyage  of  Hendrick 
Hudson.     By  N.  V.  Willis,  Esq. 

Subjects  for  Pictures.     By  L.  E.  L. 

Recreations  in  Nsitural  History,  No.  I. 

Memoir  of  the  Lady  Charlotte  Bury 
(with  a  Portrait.) 

Notes  on  Literature,  the  Arts,  etc. 

State  of  Agriculture  and  Commerce. 


JANUARY  NUMBER. 

The  IIuMonisT  : — 
The    Manager's    Room  at  Little  I'ed- 

lington.     By  John  Poole,  Esq. 
Achates  Digby.     By  Alfred  Crowquill. 
The  Grand  Kentucky  Balloon.    By  One 

of    the   Authors  of  "  The    Rejected 

Addresses." 
The  Disasters  of  Carfington  Blundell, 

Esq.     By  Leigh  Huut,  Esq. 
Songs  of  the  Blacks.     By  J.  R.  Buck- 
stone,  Esq.      1.  The  New  Jim  Crow. 

2.  A  Nigger's  Reasons. 
Moralities  for   Families.      By  Doiiglds 

Jerrold,  Esq. 
Club  Law — Christmas,  etc. 


HENRY  COLBURN,  PUBLISHER, 

NO.  13,  GREAT  MARLBOROUGH  STREET,  LONDON  ; 
Arid  to  be  had  of  all  Booksellers  in  the  kivgdom. 

AGENTS  :    FOR  IRELAND,  MR.  J.  CUMMING,  DUBLIN  ;    FOR  SCOTLAND, 
MESSRS.  BELL  AND  BRADFL'TE,  EDINBURGH. 


mmmmm 


sm 


■/^j.-i" 


m- 


