


r II K 


P C) L r T 1 C A L 

HISTORY OF INDIA, 

1 ' ROM 

1784 TO lS2:i 

HY 

MAJOR-GENEIIAI, SIR JOHN MALCOLM. 

li.f.r. , K.r s., , A'- A< 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
Vor.. fl. 

LONDON : 

JOHN MURRAY, A LBEM A R LE-ST R E ET 


\nKx:;cxxvK 



l.*»NJ>UN . 

KIM'KO M\ \Ml.I,r.AM 

N\.»i)iuiv*l>cr!:oul n>*‘V», 



t ONI’ E NFS 


oi 


rUK SECOND VOEUiME. 


('hapter VIII. — Political History of India. 

l*mfi 

India (x)mpaiiy*s Progress to Political Power. — Lord 
Clive's Services, — His Sentiments on Indian Affairs. — 
Scheme of Supervisors. — An Oflicer of the Navy Am- 
bassador to the Nabob of the Carnatic. — Mr. Warren 
Hastings Governor-general. — Opposed by Members of his 
Council. — Neutral Policy; how far adhered to under the 
different Administrations in India: Mr. Hastings's, Lord 
Cornwallis's, Lord Teignmouth’s, Lord Wellesley’s, and 
Lord Minto's. — The Wars there ultimately sanctioned in 
England . i 


(hi AFTER IX. 

Observations and Reflections on the general Adminis- 
tration of the Indian Government in England . . , Ut 

Chapter X. — Local Government of India. 

Power of Governor-general. — Proj)osed (djurige in his 
Duties. — Nomination of Lieutenant-governors to distant 
Parts of our Possessions. — Considerations on the System 
of Judicature: of Police: and Revenue. — Civil and Mili- 
tary Establishments 13;3 


Chapter XL 


Observations on the British Community in India : Half- 
Castes, or Anglo-Indians. — Propagation of (’hristianity. — 

Pivc Press in India 240 



IV 


t 0NTKNT8- 


APPENDIX 


No. I. — Abstract of Conference between the Commis- 
sioners of tlie Flonoiiraljle East- India Company, the Nizam 
(or Soubahdar of the Deckan), and the Paishwali, oii one 
part ; and tliose of Tip)X)o Sultaun, on the other, to 


negotiate the Treaty of Seringapatam, 1702 ... * i 

No. 11.-— Sir John Shore’s Minute xliv 

No. III. — Lord Wellesley’s Minute Ixvii 

No. IV. — Letter from Major-General Sir John Malcolm 
to the Marquess of Hastings ........ cxxviii 


No. V. — Narrative of the Proceedings of Brigadier- 
General Malcolm, from the Ibth of January till the 20tl< 
of June, ISIS, including those connected with the Sul)- 
mission and Abdication of the Paishwah Badjerow . cciii 

No. VI. — Speech of Sir Jolin Malcolm, G.C.B., &c. &c., 
delivered at a General Court of Proprietors of East-India 
Stock, on Friday, July 9th, 1824 ccxxxii 

No. VII.* — Proclamation previous to the Commencement of 
Hostilities with the Rajah of Nepaul eexlix 


No. VIII. — Instructions by Major-General Sir Jolin Mal- 
colm, G.C,B. K.L.S., to Officers acting under liis Orders 
in Central India, in 1821 cclxiii 



POLITICAL HISTORY OF INDIA. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


India Company’s Progress to Political Power. — Lord Clivers 
Services — His Sentiments on Indian Affairs. — Scheme of 
Supervisors. — An Officer of the Navy Ambassador to the 
Nabob of the Carnatic. — Mr. Warren Hastings Governor- 
general. — 0])posecl by Members of his Council. — Neutral 
Policy ; how fjir jiidhered to under the different Administra- 
tions in India : Mr. Hastings’s, Lord Cornwallis’s, Lord 
Teignmoiith’s, Lord Wellesley’s, and Lord Minto’s. — The 
VV^ars there ultimately sanctioned in England, 

Before wc proceed to an examination of the 
many important points connected with tlic actual 
(rondition and govenimont «d' India, it would 
appear expedient to take a snmniai’y view of the 
origin ot our political power, giving jjarticular 
attention to the characters of those by whom its 
foundations were laid, and to the astonishing ra- 
jndity of its growth from the days of Clive to the 
close of the administration of the Marquess of 
Hastings ; a period ot not more than seventy years, 
hut which includes events and (‘hanges beyond 
those that usually occupy centuries in the history 
of other states. 

Vnr,. II. 



RISE TO POWER 


flTlC. 




From tlie time that the India Company first 
fonmxl factories, and lairricd on a coinincrcial 
iutcrcour.s<' with the East, a century and a Inilf 
clajiscd before they attained political })ower. This 
great change in their condition is to he ascribed 
to the hostility of the French, more than to all 
other causes combined. The scheme of establishing 
an eastern cm])ire for his nation was first formed 
by Duplcixj the most able and ambitious of the 
governors of Pondicherry ; and this plan, which 
he prosecuted almost to complexion, comprehcntled, 
as a certain conscxpicncc, the destruction of the 
India Company, who, in tlnnr struggle to defeat it, 
were fighting for existence. 

The first great contest betwc<'n the English and 
French, on the coast of Coromandel, which tta-mi- 
nated in the complete overthrow of the latter, in- 
volved the India Company in all the complexity of 
political r(dations with the native states, whom 
they had supported, while it made them just objects 
of future apprehension to those whom they had 
opposed. 

'rhe sudden rise of the Company on the coast 
of Coromand(*l w'as followed by a still more rapid 
and greater stride to power in Bengal, llie cap- 
ture of Calcutta, the plunder of their factory, the 
imprisonment and consequent death of a great 
proportion of their servants, were events which 
left them only tin; alternative of abandoning the 
sliorcs <jf that part of liuliii, or the employnuuit 



nsT.] 


IN INDIA. 


3 

of all tlic'ir military incJins to punish unprovoked 
aggression, and to establish themselves in a man- 
ner that should prevent its recurrence. They those 
the latter; and the conduct of this great enter- 
prise was intrusted to the talents and genius of 
Clive, %vho, aided by the skill and valour of Admiral 
Watson, not only recovered their possessions, hut 
defeated and dethroned the sovereign by whom 
they had been attacked, establishing, in his place, 
a prince whose condition made him subservient 
to the dictates of those by whom he had been 
elevated. 

Sujah Dowlah was deposed, and Mccr Jaffier 
ci’eatcd Nabob of Bengal, in 1757. The desire of 
sovereignty made tin; latter promise beyopd his 
power of performance. 'I'his circumstance, and 
the protection afforded by the English to natives 
of rank, whom he desired to ojipress, rendered him 
(even before Colonel Clive left Bengal) very impa- 
tient under the burdens and restrictions which 
had been the price of his throne. From these he 
desired to frei; himsclfj as far as he could. His 
principal objects were to elude the payment of 
what Avas due to the treasury of Calcutta, and to 
displace some of the official persons, for whose 
continuance in their situations both the British 
government and himself were pledged. “ He en- 
dc^avoured,” a Avell-informed and intelligent writer* 


* Vitle Grant’s History of (lie East rrulia Company, j). 17Sf. 



4 


COLONEL CLIVE. 


[ 1759 . 


observes, “ to gain the concurrence of Clive in 
these points, by individual liberality towards that 
chief. But Clive, who luid neither asked nor 
stipulated for the presents whieh he had personally 
received, inflexibly demanded a fulfilment of the 
treaty and accompanying engagements.” 

While Colonel Clive opposed the attempts of 
Jatficr to evade his obligations, he gave him an 
cxamj)lc of his own adherence to faith, in rejecting 
the overtures* of the Shah Zada, or heir-apparent 
of the emperor of Delhi, who tempted his tunbi- 
tion by an offer of any terms he chose to di(;tate 
for the advantage of the Company and himself, 
provided he would desert Jalfier, whose, territories 
that prince had invaded. 

A short period before he left India, the reputation 
of Colonel Clive was greatly increased by his de- 
stnit^tion of a Dutcli armament fi-om Batavia, sent, 
as was suspected at the moment, and afterwards 
ascertained, in communication with the Nabob, and 
with the exclusive object of co-operating with him 
in the expulsi(.)n of the English from Bengal. 

The disint(*restedness'|’, promptness, and energy, 
which Colonel Clive displayed on this occasion, 
places this act amongst the most brilliant of his life, 

• A.D. 1759. 

t The greater part of Lord Clive’s fortune was at this pe- 
riod in the hands ot the Dutch East India Company, tli rough 
whom he had remitted it to EiigUmd. Vide Parliamentary 
PeporL 



17 ( 51.1 


MU. VANSITTARI'. 


5 


Besides the defeat of a daring attempt of an 
European rival, it had the salutary effect of putting 
an end, for tin' moment, to the intrigues of the 
Nabob, and of all other native princes, against the 
yet unsettled power of the English ; but the de- 
parttireof Clive from India, in 1761, was the signal 
for the recommencement of intrigm^ and the rt;- 
vival of hope in every enemy, secret or avoAved, 
of the Company, 

Mr. Ilolwell succeeded to the government till the 
arrivail of Mr, Vansittart. The invasion of Bengal 
by the Mahrattas and by the emperor of Delhi, 
and several rebellions, spread terror and desolation 
throughout the country; and though in all the mi- 
litary operations Avhich occurred, the British troojjs 
supported their character, our situation became 
every day more critical, Mr. Holwidl, in the first 
instance, and Mr. Vansittart afterwards, entertained 
the strongest suspicions of Jaftier Ali’s fidelity, and 
were decided as to his personal incapatnty for go- 
vernment. These impressions were heightened by 
the continued collision which took place at this pe- 
riod, in every part of his dominions, between the 
Nabob and his officers on one part, and the servants 
of the Company on the other. Unfortunately for 
the political interests of the government, the latter, 
from the commercial spirit which still pervaded all 
branches of the administration, were remunerated 
for their services by dues, presents, and privileges. 
The privilege of trading free of duty with every part 



6 


AFFAIRS IN’ 


[17fiO. 


of the interior a^'iis one of tlu; most baneful. It was 
hurtful to the revenue of the Naliob, oppressive 
to his subjects, and, from the daily complaints and 
recriminations to which it gave rise, subversive of 
all harmony between the two states. 

Mr. Holwell was decided in his opinion, that it 
was not only injurious but dangerous to the in- 
terests of the Company to leave JatHer Ali any 
longer tlu' possession of power ; and his successor, 
Mr. Vsuisittart, was so strongly impressed with the 
same sentiments, that, w’ithin a month of his as- 
suming charge of the government *, a secret treaty 
was concluded with Cossim Ali, the son-in-law 
and general of the Nabob, by which he was guaran- 
teed in full poiver as ruler of Bengal, under the 
titlc of Dewan or Minister. He agreed to cede to 
the Company, in payment for the troops with which 
they aided him, the jirovinces of Burdwan, Mid- 
napore, and Chittagong. 

. This treaty was carried into execution at Moor- 
shedabad by tlui governor in person. Though 
Jafficr acknowledged his deficiencies, and repre- 
sented Cossim Ali as the fittest person to introduce 
reform, force was lu'ccssary to make him resign his 
power, and he indignantly rejected the name of 
sovereignty when the substance was taken from 
him. All that he stipulated for was, to return to 
Calcutta and live with his family under the protec- 
tion of the English. 

* August, 1700. t September, 1760. 



1T63.] 


BENGAL. 


7 


Cossim AH knew the violent opposition which 
many meml)ers of the English government hud 
made to his elevation. He tried to arain them to 
his interests, but in vain: the spirit of party in 
Bengal was at this juncture so strong among the 
members of eonneil and military commanders, that 
it superseded all other considerations. Added to 
the apprehensions which these divisions created in 
the Nabob’s mind, he appears, l)y his letters and 
representations, to have been goaded almost to 
desperation by the continual quarrels betwe{?n his 
subjects and the seiwants of the Company. The 
claim of the latter to exemption from duti(;s was 
extended to their native agents, who were also 
vested with judicial power; and every act of the 
Nabob, or. of his local officers, that affected the 
interests of these privileged traders, n^as brought 
forward as an indirec;t attack upon the rights of the 
Company. The measures taken by tht; Nabob, to 
remedy the evils of which he complained, were 
certainly too abrupt and violent : this was felt by 
Mr. Vansittart, who repaired to Monghyr, and, 
with the aid of Warren Hastings, negotiated a 
treaty, by which it was fixed that the dustucks or 
passports granted to Company’s servants should 
be limited to foreign exports and imports, and that 
there sln)uld be, henceforward, no exclusiAx: privi- 
leges in the inland trade. The duties on British 
goods were fixed by this treaty at a fair and mode- 
rate rate ; and it was further stipulated, that the 



RUPTURE WITH 


ri7G3 


a 

native agents of the English should cease to exer- 
cise any Judicial power, or enjoy that privilege of 
person which they had assumed, but shendd prefer 
tlicir complaints when aggrieved, and become ame- 
nable when they injured others, to the native ma- 
gistrates of the country. 

This eft'ort to correct existing evils had a directly 
contrary eftect, owing t<» the violence of the Nabob 
and that of tin? majority of the council at Calcutta. 
The former, without waiting for that confirmation 
which he know this treaty rccpiired, proclaimc^d it, 
the moment it was signed, as a triunnih over his 
enemies. He sent orders for the execution of its 
stipulations, and his local oflicers, outsti'pping the 
imprudence? and precipitation of their sovereign, 
furnished, by their acts of retaliative .oppression, 
ample grounds to confirm tin* majority of the 
council in their resolution, to refuse their confir- 
mation to the engagement which had been con- 
cluded by the governor. The Nabob, irritated at 
this proceeding, had irnmediatt' recourse to a \cry 
indiscreet and violent measure. He abolished all 
customs for two years. This was deemed an indi- 
rect breach of faith with the Company, for it de- 
stroyed the advantages of the exemption they en- 
joyed under former treaties. A deputation of two 
of their body, Mr. Amyat and Mr. Hall, was sent 
by the majority of the council to the Nabob, to 
demand the annulment of this order. The irrita- 
tion of the parties was now, however, too much 



1763 .] 


COSSIM AI.I. 


0 


hiflained to admit of a peaccfid termination of their 
disputes. Every event tended to accelerate a rup- 
ture, but above all the Auohuit conduct of Mr. Ellis, 
chief of Patna. He had been avowedly averse to 
the elevation of Cos.sim Ali, and all his acts shewed 
a very hostile feeling towards that prince, Avith 
whose local officers he was at constant variance. 

Unfortunately, when affairs were in this state, 
two boats, laden with arms for the troops at 
Patna, happened to pas.s Monghyr; Cossim Ali, 
connecting this supply of arms with his belief of 
Mr. Ellis’s designs, stopped the boats. It Avas in A^ain 
that the gentlemen Avho had been d(‘put<;d to him 
remonstrated against this proceedure. H(; added 
to it a demand that the English troo])s should b(! 
recalled from Patna; or, at all events, that Mr. Ellis 
should be relieved l)y a more temperate person. 

l’h(! statement of these demands Avas etonsidered 
by the deputies, and the majority in council who 
had de])Uted them, as almost tantamount to a pro- 
clamation of AA'ar; and the chief of Patna, Mr. JiCllis, 
AA'as A'csted with authority to seize upon the fort at 
that jduce, should he deem such a step necessary in 
anticipation of actual hostilities. 

It Avas in vain that the (iovernor and Mr. Warren 
Hastings recorded their dissent against such dis- 
cretionary poAver being given to one who. had shewn 
hinAself so di.sposed to extremities. It destroyed, 
they stated, all hopes of an amicabh^ settlement. 
'I'heir prediction AA^as fully A-euified. The Nabob, 



10 


MEEU JAFFIEB RESTOHED. 


[nes. 


when war seemed certain, appears to have taken 
alanii, and released the boats laden with arms, and 
at the same time invited a renewal of negotiations ; 
but the accounts he received from Patna made 
him withdraw this pacific overture: and the surprise 
of the fort at that place by the English troops, be- 
fore any declaration of war, gave an apparent jus- 
tification to all that he had anticipated. 

The carelessness of the English at Patna allowed 
the Nabob’s troops to surprise them in their turn, 
the day after they had taken the fort ; and those 
who were not slain, on this occasion, were made 
prisoners. 

One of the deputies, Mr. Hall, had been de- 
tained by the Nabob as a hostage, while the other, 
Mr. Amyat, was allowed to return to Calcutta; 
but he had only reached Moorshedabab, when he 
was attacked and murdered, by order of the Nabob, 
who, from the hour the fort of Patna was surprised, 
had declared himself the irreconcilable enemy of 
the Company. 

'Phe first step taken by the Governor and coun- 
cil was, the restoration* of Meer Jaffier to his 
dignities as Nabob. An army was pushed forward 
against Cossim Ali, who, after his troops had suf- 
fered some defeats, fled to Patna, having first put 
to death several of the principal Hindus of his 
kingdom, whom he suspected of being friendly to 
the English. 


♦ Tth July, 1763. 



1764.] 


COSSIM AU EXPELLED, 


11 


From Patna, Cossim Ali* wrote to the English 
commander — “ If you advance, I will cut oft' the 
heads of Mr. Ellis and the rest of your chiefs, and 
send them to you,” 

There were at this time fifty gentlemen, and one 
hundred persons of lower rank, in confinement at 
Patna. Major Adams, feeling for their situation, 
addressed a letter to them, entreating that they 
would, at any price, obtain their release. Messrs. 
Ellis and Hay, to whom this letter was addressed, 
answered in a spirit that redeemed any errors they 
might have committed. “ Their escape,” they said, 
“ was impossible, but they were resigned, and de- 
sired that opej-ations might not be suspended for a 
moment on their account.” This letter was trans- 
mitted to Mr. Vansittart, who wrote to Cossim 
Ali, deprecating his intended cruelty. He also ad- 
dressed him with menaces of vengeance ; but all 
was in vain. Every Eiuropcan in the power of this 
cruel chief was barbarously murdered f, except one, 
Mr. Fullarton, a surgeon, who owed his escape to 
the respect entertained for his profession. 

Patna was taken by storm, but Cossim AH fled 
to the territories of the Vizier, who was called upon 
to surrender him, and the German Sumroo, who 
had been the instrument of this horrible massacre. 
The Vizier of Oude, Sujah Dowlah, not only refused 

*Vide letter from Cossim Ali to Major Adams, dated 9th 
September, 1763* 
t In 1763. 



J2 ADMINISTRATION tl76S. 

to comply with those demands, hut advanced at 
the head of a large force to attack the British 
army. He was repulsed near Patna, and soon af- 
terwards suffered a signal defeat at Buxar. The 
British army, now commanded by Major Munro*, 
entered his dominions, and defeated the Mahratta 
chief, Malhar Row, whom the Vizier had called to 
his aid. In this predicament, Sujah Dowlah acted 
a part worthy of his former character. He could 
not consent to bring a stain upon his honour by 
sacrificing those who had sought his protection. 
Cossim Ali and Sumroo were told to depart be- 
yond his territory, and he repaired to the British 
camp, declaring that he threw himself unreservedly 
upon the clemency of that nation. 

The state of Bengal, during the last three years, 
had caused the greatest anxiety and alarm in Eng- 
land ; and the consequence was, that Colonel, now 
Lord Clive, had been nominated, with a select 
council, to re-assume the management of the 
public interests in that country. He arrived at 
this period, and to that complete confidence in his 
character, which Sujah Dowlah had in common 
with every native prince, may be ascribed the step 
which he took on this occasion ; nor had he any 
cause to regret the reliance he placed on British 
generosity. A treaty was concluded with him by 
Lord Clive, aided by General Carnac, by which 
the Vizier, on paying fifty lacs of rupees towards 

• Afterwards Sir Hector Munro. 



17C5.] 


OF LORD CLIVE. 


13 


t'lui expenses of the war. and assigning the pro- 
vinces of Corah and Allahabad for the support of 
the emperor of Delhi, was restored to all his do- 
minions, inclusive of the country of Benares, which 
the king had granted to the Company. 

Jafficr, the Nabob of Bengal, had died before 
Lord Clive’s an-ival, and his son Nudjmn u Dowlah, 
a minor, had been raised to the musnud, with 
a stipulation that the administration of the country 
should be intrusted to certain high officers named 
by the British gov(;rnment. Lord Clive, after he 
bad settled the treaty with the Vizier of Oude, 
negotiated an agreement with the emperor of 
Delhi, by which the dewannee, or administration 
of the countries of Bengal and Bahar, was Axsted 
in perpetuity in the English government, which, by 
a subsequent engagement with the Nabob of Bengal, 
agreed to pay him and his heirs the annual sum of 
fifty lacs of rupees. 

Previous to the submission of the Vizier, the 
emperor Shah Alhun had joined the British camp, 
where, though only attended by a few followers, 
he had displayed the imperial standard. Major 
Munro had transmitted the emperor’s propositions 
for an alliimce with the Company ; and the gover- 
nor in council had not only entertained them, but 
promised him, under certain conditions, the terri- 
tories of Oude. Of tliis agreement Lord Clive 
highly disapproved. The emperor had personally 
no possessions, and his character was not such as 
promised success, cither in the attainment or rule of 



14 


ENGr-tSil POWER 


[iTsr. 


a kingdom. His name, which was still revered 
and recognised as the source of power, might have 
been used by the English as a pretext for the ex- 
tension of dominion, if such had been their object ; 
but Lord Clive very justly deprecated any such 
baseless project, and while he obtained fame to the 
Company’s govei-nment by the generous restora- 
tion to power of Sujah Dowdah, a monarch of high 
reputation, he laid the foundation of the future 
greatness of the British empire in the east by ac- 
quiring the direct rule of a compact territory, fertile 
in soil, and abundant in all the resources which 
could render its future improvement valuable to the 
commercial and political strength of his country. 

The political power of the English in India, 
groiinded as it now was upon great territorial pos- 
sessions, had risen with all the celerity * of an 
Asiatic conquest. 

In our endeavour to examine the real chiuacter 

* By the engagements with the Nabob of Bengal (1757), 
the Company had tlie privilege given them of coining money 
in the name of the emperor of Delhi, 

In the same year, the lordship of twenty-four districts, ad- 
jacent to Calcutta, was granted to them in perpetuity, and 
their facilities of trade were greatly extended. In 1760, the 
rich provinces of Midnapore, Burdvvan, and Chittagong, were 
made over to them by Cossim Ali, for the payment of a spe- 
cified subsidiary force (a). 

In 1763, at the restoration of the Nabob Jaffier Khan, the 
above provinces were ceded in perpetuity. In 1764, a grant 
from Shah Allum, emperor of Delhi, gave them the coun- 
(^) 500 European cavalry, 2000 infantry, and 8000 sepoys. 



15 


]r65.3 INDIA. 

of this extraordinary power, and to dcvelope the 
causes which have since raised it to such magni- 
tude, our first attention must be given to the 
opinions of Lord Clive, who contributed beyond all 
others to its establishment. 

He ascribed the great change in our condition 
at Madras to the ambition of the French, and he 
appears to have deemed our situation in Bengal as 
nearly similar ; for there, as on the coast of Coro- 
mandel, our European were intimately connected 
with our Asiatic enemies. 

tries of Benares and Gazeepore ; and in the following year, 
1765 , the same authority made them nominal administrators, 
hut real rulers of the rich and fertile provinces of Bengal, 
Bahar, and Orissa. 

Considerable cessions of territory were made to the Com- 
pany, at this period, on the coast of Coromandel, in addition 
to some valuable lands made over in 1763 , by the Nabob Ma- 
homed Ali Khan. A jagheer, or estate, was granted in 1765 , 
which included some of the most fertile districts in the Car- 
natic. A grant of the northern circars had been obtained 
from the Subah of the Deckan, by Bussy ; but when Massule- 
patam was taken, and the French were expelled from tliis pos- 
session, in 1759 , by the English, the circars were transferred 
to them, and their right to this territory, as well as to the 
lands ceded hy the Nabob of the Carnatic, was confirmed in 
1765 , by a deed from the emperor of Delhi. 

Bombay, the most ancient of the territorial possessions of 
the Company, was, in 1765 , the most limited ; but it had im- 
portance from its fine harbour, and its numerous dependent 
factories, among which it numbered Surat. TJiis town and 
island, originally ceded hy the Portuguese to King Charles II., 
as a part of the dower of his queen, the Infanta Catherine^ was 
made over by the king to the Company in J668. 



16 


LORD CLIVE’S VIEW 


[1T65. 


Referring to this union, and the feelings which 
would be produced on the mind of Jaffier AH by 
the attack of the principal settlement of the 
French, he expressed his opinion very strongly to 
the committee intrusted with the management of 
aiiiurs at Calcutta. 

“ If you attack Chandemagore,” he observes, 
“ you cannot stop there, you must go further ; 
haying established yourselves by force, and not by 
the consent of the Nabob, he, by force, will en- 
deavour to drive you out again. 

“ We have at last arrived,” he states in another 
letter* “ at that critical period which I have long 
foreseen; I mean that period which renders it 
necessary for us to determine whether we can or 
shall take the whole to ourselves. 

“ I could have wished that our operations had 
been carried on upon a plan of more moderation, 
and that we had not been obliged to maintain any 
other military force than what might be suffi- 
cient to preserve and pursue our comnuircial ad- 
vantages ; but since our views are extended, and 
since commerce alone is not the whole of the Com- 
pany’s support, we must go forward ; to retract is 
impossible.” 

Similar sentiments were afterwards expressed by 

• These sentiments of Lord Clive on the progress of our 
arms in India, and the ambitious px'ojects to which success had 
given birth, are vividly expressed in a letter to a gentleman 
high in the Direction, written immediately after his landing in 
India. 



1765 .] 


OP INDIAN AFFAIRS. 


17 


Lord Clive and his council, in a letter* to the 
court of directors. 

“ The time now approaches,” they observe, 
“ when we may be able to' determine with some 
degree of certainty, whether our remaining as 
merchants, subjected to the jurisdiction, encroach- 
ments, and insults of the country government, or 
the supporting your privileges and professions by 
the sword, are likely to prove most beneficial to 
the Company. Whatever may be the consequence, 
certain it is, that after having once begun, and 
proceeded to such lengths, we have been forced 
to go on from step to step, until your whole pos- 
sessions were put to the risk by every revolution 
cfiectcd, and every battle fought.” 

Lord Clive, though satisfied that wc were pro- 
pelled in our career of empire by causes which 
were unavoidable, wisely endeavoured, by every 
effort, to render that progress slow and gradual. 
He tried to reconcile, as far as it was possible, the 
princes and natives of India to the dominion of 
strangers, by making every sacrifice to their habits, 
prejudices, and feelings, that could be made, with- 
out abandoning that power which had now become 
necessary to our existence. 

The system of rule he established had too many 
serious defects to be permanent, but it displays 
in every part the mind of a great practical states- 
man, who suited his work to his materials, and 
♦ 30th September, 1765. 

VOL. II 



18 


LORD CUVE’S VIEW 


tires. 


who, while he accommodated himself to circum- 
stances which he could not control, was content 
to he reproached with having done too little, rather 
than hazard the benefits he had secured by at- 
tempting too much. 

The difficulties he had to encounter were ren- 
dered greater by his want of instruments. There 
were some individuals of distinguished talent, but 
nothing could he more defective than the general 
condition of every branch of the civil and military 
service at this period. While he laboured to 
reform these, he endeavoured to rouse the Com- 
pany’s goveniinent in Jingland to a proper sense of 
the extraordinary change that had taken place in 
their affairs. 

” Circumstances* are now widely different,” he 
observes, “ from what they were a few years since, 
when you confined your whole attention to com- 
merce, and were happy in being able to complete 
your investments without insult or exaction from 
the country governments. You are now become 
the sovereigns of a rich and potent kingdom; 
your success is beheld with jealousy by the other 
European nations, who maintain settlements in 
India ; and your interests are so extended, so com- 
plicated, and so connected with those of the several 
surrounding powers, as to form a nice and difficult 
system of politics.” 

Lord Clive, in the same letter, after taking a 
* Letter to Court of Directors, 30th Sept. 1765. 



1758—65.] 


OP INDIAN AFFAIRS. 


19 


comprehensive view of the condition of the Com- 
pany’s affairs in India, and referring to those 
feelings and sentiments which recent events had 
produced among the native princes, observes, The 
princes of Hindustan will not readily imagine us 
capable of moderation, nor can we expect they 
will ever be attached to us by any other motive 
than fear. Meet Jaffier, Cossim Ali, and the 
Nabob of Arcot (the best Mussulman I ever 
knew), have afforded instances sufficient of their 
inclination to throw off the English superiority. 
No opportunity will ever be neglected that seems 
to favour an attempt to extirpate us, though the 
consequences, while we keep our army * complete, 
must be fatal to themselves.” 

We find in a letter, before noticed, nearly similar 
observations : — 

" The very Nabobs,” he remarks, " whom we 
support, would be cither covetous of our posses- 
sions, or jealous of our power. Ambition, fear, 
avarice, would be daily watching to destroy us. 
A victory would be but a temporary relief to us ; 
for the dethroning of the first Nabob would be 

• “ Peace,” Lord Clive observes, in a letter to Mr. S. Law, 
dated 29th December, 1758, “ is the most valuable of all 
blessings, but it must be made sword in hand in this country, 
if we mean to preserve our present possessions. There is no 
alternative ; either everything in India must be reduced to their 
first principles, or such a standing force kept up as may oblige 
the Mussulmen literally to execute their treaties.” — C/iveMSS. 

C 2 



30 LORD CLIVE’S VIEW flIGS. 

followed by the setting up of another, who, from 
the same principles, would, when his treasure ad- 
mitted of his keeping up an army, pursue the 
very path of his predecessor. We must, indeed, 
become Nabobs ourselves, in fact if not in name ; 
perhaps totally so, without disguise.” 

It is impossible to peruse the history of India, 
during the last fifty years, without subscribing to the 
truth of every word here written. Events have 
verified all Lord Clive’s predictions. These were 
made from a correct knowledge of hmnan nature, 
combined with an intimate acquaintance with the 
feelings, sentiments, and passions of the princes of 
India, and of the construction of Asiatic society and 
governments. His opinions, however, obtained 
little attention from men of whom a great part 
valued India only as it contributed to their own 
profit and that of their friends, or to the loss or 
increase of party influence. 

Lord Clive, in his celebrated speech in the House 
of Commons, in 1772, adverting to the extent of 
the dominion which the English possessed when 
he left India, and of the light in which it had been 
viewed by the administration, observes * ; “the Com- 
pany acquired an empire more extensive than any 
kingdom in Europe, France, and Russia excepted. 
They had acquired a revenue of four millions ster- 
ling, and a trade in proportion. 

« It was natural to suppose that such an object 


* Vide Parliamentary Debates. 



I7T2.] 


OF INDIAN AFFAtnS. 


21 


would have merited the most serious attention of 
administration ; that in concert with the court of 
directors they would have considered the nature of 
the Company’s charter, and have adopted a plan 
adequate to such possessions. Did they take it 
into consideration ? No, they did not. They 
treated it rather as a South Sea bubble, than as any- 
thing solid and substantial ; they thought of nothing 
but the present time, regardless of the future : they 
said, let us get what we can to-day, let to-morrow 
take care of itself : they thought of nothing but 
the immediate division of the loaves and fishes ; 
nay, so anxious were they to lay their hands upon 
some immediate advantage, that they actually went 
so far as to influence a parcel of temporary proprie- 
tors to bully the directors into their terms. It was 
their duty to have called upon the directors for a 
plan ; and if a plan, in consequence, had not been 
laid before them, it would then have become their 
duty, with the aid and assistance of parliament, to 
have formed one themselves. If administration had 
done their duty, we should pot now have heard a 
speech from the throne, intimating the necessity of 
parliamentary interposition to save our possessions 
in India from impending ruin.” 

It will not be a matter of surprise that with such 
sentiments of the mismanagement of the affairs of 
the Company, Lord Clive became a strenuous advo- 
cate for parliamentary interference in the govern- 
ment of India, " If salvation can come to the 



22 


CONDUCT OP 


[1T56. 


Company, it must ccime through this house*,” were 
his eiiiphatic words when opposing a petition which 
the directors had presented, praying against a bill 
which went to the limitation of their power. 

Great efforts were made at the period in which 
he lived to detract from the opinions and authority 
of Lord Clive ; and more recent writers, when re- 
ferring to the various luminous records which he 
has left to illustrate the early history and govern- 
ment of British India, appear either to have given 
undue weight to the testimony of his enemies, or to 
have been incapable of appreciating the motives 
and views of this great statesman : but his character, 
as it tends to increase or diminish the value of his 
opinions, is too intimately connected with the 
examination of the progress of our political power 
to be passed over in silence. 

Tlie early part of Lord Clive’s career meets from 
all parties with unqualified praise. It is, however, 
a great mistake to suppose that even during that pe- 
riod he displayed no qualities but those of a soldier : 
he evinced, from his first efforts in the public ser- 
vice, the most complete knowledge of the natives 
of India. He viewed, with a liberal and humane 
spirit, their weakness and prejudices ; he addressed 
himself to all their higher qualities ; and, by 
granting them his confidence, gained as much ad- 
miration in the performance of his political and 
civil duties as by his heroic achievements. 

* Letter from Lord Clive to Mr. Grenville. 



1767.] 


LORD CLIVE. 


23 


The revolution and changes which Lord Clive 
effected in Bengal opened a new scene to his am- 
bition, and raised him to great and sudden wealth. 

In accordance with the usages of the Com- 
pany’s service in India, at that period, he received 
presents, as commander-in-chief, to a very large 
amount. His acceptance of this reward (as it was 
termed) of his labours and success was * open and 
avowed ; and, though subsccpiently made the subject 
of a charge against him, we do not find that at the 
time any oue arraigned either the amount of the 
donation or the principle of receiving it. The fact 
was, that, at this epoch of our Indian government, 
the public officers of the Company had very limited 
salaries. Their perquisites and advantages, when 
employed on civil, military, or political stations, 
appear to have been such as had been enjoyed by 
native functionaries performing the duties to wliich 
they, in times of conquest and revolution, had suc- 

* In Lord Clive’s letter of the 21st of August, 1757, to 
Mr. Mabbot, one of the directors, after giving an account of the 
revolution he had effected, he adds — “ I have the pleasure to 
acquaint you, that the greatest success at Golconda could not 
have equalled the present one for advantages, either to the 
Company or myself. Indeed,” he concludes, “ there is nothing 
but the good of the service can induce me to stay in this un- 
healthy climate.” In all his letters to his attorneys, to his 
friends and relatives, we find the amount of this donation repre- 
sented as great ; and he distinctly states in one letter, that be 
had no desire whatever to conceal the Nabob’s liberality, which 
he evidently thought was as honourable to that prince as to 
himself. 



24 


CONDUCT OF 


[1756. 


ceeded. These, on ordinary occasions, were derived 
from a per centage on particular branches of reve- 
nue, privileges of trade, or presents from inferiors, 
and were always considerable: but when such 
events occurred as negotiating a peace*, or re- 
placing a monarch upon a throne, the money, gifts, 
and territorial grants to the chief instruments of 
such changes, were limited only by the moderation 
of one party and the ability of the other. 

When the alarm of the Indian government in 
England led to Lord Clive’s second appointment 
to Bengal, eight years after he had returned home 
to the enjoyment of the noble fortune which he 
had acquired, every arrangement made, and every 
act during his short administration, showed a mind 

* A remarkable instance of this mode of paying those con- 
cerned in such great transactions is afforded in the treaty of 
peace with Tippoo Sultaiin, concluded by Lord Cornwallis in 
1792. Thirty lacs of rupees were demanded and given, as 
Durbar Khurutch, or Durbar expenses, avowedly to be distri- 
buted amongst the officers concerned in settling the treaty. 
Lord Cornwallis, it may be observed, obtained no share of this 
money ; but it may be answered, that, while a commander 
in Ijord Clive’s situation had not 3000/. per annum of direct 
salary, and could cherish no expectation of pecuniary reward in 
England, Lord Cornwallis had 30,000/. per annum, besides a 
doation of 100,000/. from the government he so honourably 
served. 

The opjiosite principle, now established for the reward of 
services, will be noticed hereafter. It is alluded to here, to 
guard against opinions which we are too apt to form of the 
superior virtue of our own times, grounded, as that is in the 
present instance, upon a totally different state of circumstances- 



)T67.J 


IX>BD CLIVE. 


25 


as superior to the sordid * influence of self-interest, 
or personal considerations, as it was above the dic- 
tates of fear. 

His knowledge of the true source of those 
growing evils and dangers which, at this period, 
shook to its foundation our unsettled power in 
India, led him to propose a plan (which was carried 
into execution) for binding himself, his successors, 
and all the officers of the Company’s civil and mili- 
tary government by oaths and covenants, not to 
derive emoluments from any sources except those 
fixed for their remuneration. 

The condition of the public service, when Lord 
Clive arrived at Calcutta, is described in his letter 

♦ Lord Clive, in his letter to the committee, dated 7th May» 
1765, when he took charge for the second time of the govern- 
ment of Bengal, observes : — 

“ I shall now repeat what you have often heard me declare, 
that I totally disclaim any emolument to myself; I will not add 
to my fortune one single rupee by the opportunities I might 
have as Governor. 

“ On the other hand, be assured, that every advantage to 
others, consistent with my idea of the Company’s honour and 
interest, shall be promoted to the utmost of my power here, 
and my influence at home.” 

This pledge was faithfully kept, for he returned to England 
flve thousand pounds poorer than he left it. Of his great 
liberality many instances might be adduced, amongst which 
none is more prominent than his willingness, and, indeed, 
desire, to give up part of his received donation at the elevation 
of Meer Jaflier, to make up the share to which he deemed 
Admiral Watson so justly entitled. To such an arrangement, 
bowever, the members of the committee refused their assent. 



26 


CONDUCT OF 


[i7se. 


to the court of directors so often quoted. In this 
he gives a forcible picture of the general demorali- 
zation of the civil and military servants of the Com- 
pany, and of the speedy ruin that must result from 
a continuance of that laxity, insubordination, luxury, 
and rapacity which pervaded every branch of the 
administration, and influenced the conduct of 
almost every agent employed. 

The situation in which he was placed by this 
state of aflliirs when he arrived in India is eloquently 
described in his speech in the House of Commons *. 

“ Three paths,” he says, “ were before me,— one 
was strewed with abundance of fair advantages — 
I might have put myself at the head of the govern- 
ment as I found it — I might have encouraged the 
resolution which the gentlemen had taken, not to 
execute the new covenants, which prohibited the 
receipt of presents ; and although I had executed 
the covenants myself, I might have contrived to 
have returned to England with an immense fortune, 
infamously added to the one before honourably 
obtained : such an increase of wealth might have 
added to my weight in this country, but it would 
not have added tt) my peace of mind ; because all 
men of honour and sentiments would have justly 
condemned me. 

“ Finding my powers thus disputed, I might, in 
despair, have given up the commonwealth, and 
have left Bengal, without making any effort to save 


• 30th March, 1767 . 



1T6T.] 


I.ORD CLIVE. 


27 


it — such a conduct would have been deemed the 
effect of folly and cowardice. 

** The third path wa.s intricate : dangers and 
difficulties were on every side, but I resolved to 
pursue it. In short, I was determined to do my 
duty to the public, although I should incur the 
odium of the whole settlement. The welfare of 
the Company recjuircd a rigorous exertion, and I 
took the resolution of cleansing the Augean stable. 
It was that conduct which has occasioned the pub- 
lic papers to teem with scurrility and abuse against 
me, ever since my return to Kngland. It was that 
conduct which occasioned these charges ; it was 
that conduct which enables me now to lay my 
hand upon my heart, and most solemnly to declare 
to this house, to the gallery, and to the world at 
large, that I never, in a single instance, lost sight 
of what I thought the honour and true interest of 
my country and the Company; that I was never 
guilty of any acts of violence or oppression, unless 
the bringing offenders to justice can be deemed so; 
that as to extortion, such an idea never entered 
into my mind; that I did not suffer those under 
me to commit any acts of violence, oppression, 
or extortion; that my influenct; was never em- 
ployed for the advantage of any man, contrary to 
the strictest principles of honour and justice; and 
that so far from reaping any benefit myself from 
the expedition, I returned to England many thoti- 
sand pounds cftit of pocket.” 

Lord Clive justly attributes the virulent attack 



28 


CONDUCT OF 


[ 175 « 5 . 


which was made upon his character, and the at- 
tempt, with which it was associated, to deprive 
him of his fortune as well as his fame, to that host 
of enemies which his conduct on this memorable 
occasion had raised against him, all whom he 
had dismissed or superseded, and the list was nume- 
rous, and contained high names, both civil and 
military. All whom he had checked in their ca- 
reer of plunder, or had crossed in their path of 
ambition, combined iigainst him; and, through 
the means of their fortune, their ability, their ad- 
vocates, their friends, and their relations, they 
sought his ruin. He was described as a man 
wallowing in wealth gained by undue means, who 
had turned upon those who were pursuing the 
same road to fortune, and who desired, by inform- 
ing against them, and by using the power vested in 
him for their punishment, to raise his character for 
honour and disinterestedness. His talents, both as 
a soldier and a statesman,’ were questioned, and his 
success was ascribed to those he had employed, 
to the weakness of the enemies he [had conquered, 
and to a concurrence of fortuitous events. 

The acquisition of great dominion by the Com- 
pany in India had been so sudden, that we are not 
surprised to find the minds of those who directed 
their alffairs in England did not keep pace with .it. 
They clung to their commercial views, and looked 
with apprehensions at political power, one of the 
earliest results of which was to weaken the control 
over their servants; while the latter, in their in- 



ItfiT.] 


LORD CLIVE. 


29 


trigues and struggles against each other, sought, as 
their only means to avert supercession, or obtain 
advancement, the support of friends in England. 
From such causes, the public interests, even when 
comprehended, were often compromised, to raise or 
to depress individuals. The most extraordinary of all 
the measures to which these combined motives 
gave birth was, the nomination, in the year 1757, 
of what has been termed a rotation government 
for Bengal, in which four of their civil servants 
were appointed by the Directors to succeed eiich 
other every three months; and what rendered it 
more remarkable was, the omission of the name of 
Clive from this favoured list of periodical rulers. 
The changes which had taken place, subsequent to 
the date of this measure, rendered its execution im- 
possible, without the most serious haisard to the 
public interests. Impressed with this feeling, the 
four gentlemen who had been nominated governors 
(acting in a spirit of disinterestedness which does 
them high honour), in conjunction with the other 
members of the committee * at Bengal, unanimously 
solicited Colonel Clive to take charge of the admi- 
nisti-a'tion. He complied with their request, and 
their resignation in his favour proved an anticipa- 
tion of the resolution which the court of directors 
came to on hearing of the victory of Plassey. 

Lord Clive’s second appointment to India, 

* Vide letter from the Committee to Colonel Clive, in the 
Parliamentary Report. 



30 


CHARACTER OF 


titse. 


though called for by the proprietors and the public, 
was warmly opposed by a considerable party in the 
Direction ; and his enemies iu that body, recruit- 
ing their strength from all whom he had disgraced 
or punished, subsequently obtained a majority. 
Neither their efforts, however, nor the combined 
talent which was arrayed against him in Parlia- 
ment, could daunt his courage, and he defended his 
own cliaracter with a manliness and eloquence that 
gave him a complete triumph over all his oppo- 
nents. 

The character of Lord Clive is associated with 
the rise of our power in India, and in that view 
merits much of our attention. Whether we con- 
sider his military or political career; the know- 
ledge he displayed of the natives of India, their 
institutions, and government; his efforts to intro- 
duce order and principle into what was shapeless 
and without system ; the promptness and courage 
with which he cpelled a mutinous and insubor- 
dinate spirit in the military and civil officers of 
government ; his use of victory ; the efforts he made 
and recommended to consolidate the strength, and 
to improve the administration of our empire in the 
East; we arc equally astonished at the eJrtraordi- 
nary extent of his powers of mind. Nevertheless, 
no man was ever more violently assailed and 
calumniated by his cotemporarics. When events, 
over which he had no control, disappointed those 
hopes which his successes had raised, his opponents 



iTffr.] 


LORD CLIVE. 


31 


took advantage of the change in the public mind 
to reproach him with results which were chiefly to 
be attributed to their own factions and mismanage- 
ment. The prejudices excited by their eflforts have 
been continued by orators and authors, who, treat- 
ing Indian subjects without reference to those 
local circumstances and considerations which pecu- 
liarly embarrass them, have pleased ahd satisfied 
general and uninformed men, by reducing the most 
complex points of policy to an easy abstract ques- 
tion. The necessity under which those who ex- 
ercise power in India act, the comparative dangers 
they have to encounter or avoid, the means they 
have of executing one plan, or the want of means 
for another, the feelings and character of princes, 
and of nations, which they may flatter or oftend, 
are to such persons matters of little conse- 
ciuence. Their conclusions are drawn from simpler 
sources, and they reject, as prejudiced and polluted, 
that minute information and local experience, 
which, if admitted, might destroy their favourite 
theories, or cast a doubt upon the validity of those 
fixed rules and principles by which they consider 
that the wisdom of every measure ought to be tried 
and decided. 

With these persons the scene of Indiim warfare 
and policy is degraded to a low level, and the 
actors reduced to insignificance, when compared 
with those who appear upon the stage in the west- 
ern hemisphere. Nothing in India, if we refer to 



32 


CHARACTER OP 


[1767. 


such authorities, is upon a great scale, except the 
errors and crimes of British rulers, to the actions 
of all of whom they apply a standard framed for a 
wholly different state of society and government. 
According to such self-constituted judges, the claim 
of Lord Clive to the admiration of posterity is very 
equivocal. But his fame will rise, the more the 
particulars * of his eventful life are made known. 
These will prove that his qualities as a statesman 
almost surpassed those he displayed as a military 
commander. 

In a letter addressed by Lord Clive to those to 
whom he left the government, when impaired 
health compelled him to return to England, he 
evinced great apprehension of the danger to which 
the empire would be exposed by the revival of that 
spirit of corruption and insubordination which he 
had with so much difficulty subdued. 

" It has been too much the custom,” he ob- 
serves, “ in this government to make orders and 
regulations, and thence to suppose the business 
done. To what end and purpose arc they made, if 
they be not promulgated and enforced ? No regu- 

* The author has stated in the preface his obligations to 
Loi:d Powis, who has given him free access to all the letters 
and papers of his father, the late Lord Clive. These are nu- 
merous, and many of them very interesting ; they will furnish 
excellent materials for a memoir, that will alike serve to 
illustrate the character of that great man, and the rise of the 
British power in India. 



JteT.J LORD CLIVE. 33 

lation can be carried into execution, no order 
obeyed, if you do not make rigorous examples 
of the disobedient. Upon this point I rest the 
welfare of the Company in Bengal. The servants 
sire now brought to a proper sense of their duty ; 
if you slacken the reins of government, affairs 
will soon revert to their former channel ; anarchy 
and corruption will again prevail, and, elate with 
a new victory, be too headstrong for any future 
efforts of government. Recall to your memories 
the many attempts that have been made in the 
civil and military departments to overcome our 
authority, and to set up a kind of independency 
against the court of directors. Reflect also on the 
resolute measures wc have pursued, and their 
wholesome effects. Disobedience to legal power 
is the first step of sedition ; and palliative measures 
effect no cure. Every tender compliance, every 
Condescension on your parts will only encourage 
more flagrant attacks, which will daily increase in 
strength, and be at last in vain resisted. Much 
of our time has been employed in correcting 
abuses. The important work has been prosecuted 
with zeal, diligence, and disinterestedness, and we 
have had the happiness to see our labours crowned 
with success. I leave the coimtry in peace. I 
leave the civil and military departments under 
discipline and subordination : it is incumbent upon 
you to keep them so. You have power, you have 
abilities, you have integrity: let it not be said 
VoL. ir. D 



34 


MB. VERELST. 


[H6». 


that you are deficient in resolution. 1 repeat that 
you must not fail to exact the most implicit obedi- 
ence to your orders. Pismiss or suspend from 
the service any man who shall dare to dispute 
your authority. 

“ If you deviate from the principles upon which 
we have hitherto acted, and upon which you are 
conscious you ought to proceed ; or if you do not 
make a proper use of that power with which you 
are invested, I shall hold myself acquitted, as I do 
now protest against the consequences.” 

Such was the parting advice which Lord Clive 
gave to his former colleagues; but the task of 
reform which he had commenced could have been 
completed by his own commanding talents alone, 
aided by the impression of his high personal cha- 
racter, It was far too great for the strength of 
those on whom it devolved. 

The character of Mr. Verelst leaves no doubt 
of his disposition to pursue the path traced out to 
him ; but he appears to have been too lenient, and 
to have early relaxed from that spirit of unyielding 
authority which Lord Clive had so forcibly in- 
culcated. Had it been otherwise, it is not likely 
that he or any person could have long resisted 
the desire which the proprietors of East-India 
stock evinced at this period to control and parar 
lyze the power of the local administration in India;. 
Disappointment in their hopes of increased divide 
ends, a wish to promote individuals, feelings of 



1760.J SUPERVISORS. 35 

resentment for injuries real or supposed to their 
friends and relations^ combined to render the general 
court: at this period an arena of discord and vio- 
lence, in which different interests alternately pre- 
vailed, till the majority agreed in the expedient 
of appointing three officers as supervisors, who 
were to proceed to India with powers equal to 
those exercised by the government at home^ and 
from whose knowledge, virtue, and moderation, 
the greatest benefits were expected. 

Some objections were’i*aised to this measure. 
They were, however, overruled, and the super- 
visors left England. But the vessel in which they 
sailed perished at sea, and this event put an end 
to a plan which, notwithstanding the high qualities 
of the individuals* selected for its execution, was 
not likely to realize the sanguine anticipations of 
those by whom it was adopted. 

In the settlement of the definitive treaty of Paris, 
in 1763, an article was introduced to terminate the 
disputes, and to define the rights of the two nations 
in India. 

By this article, Mahomed Ali Khan was acknow- 
ledged as lawful nabob of the Carnatic, and Salabut 
Jung, as Subahdar of the Deckan. The former was 
the ally of the English,, the latter that of the 
French. Nothing could be more incongruous or 
more liable to error than this mixture of European 
with Indian diplomacy. The recognition of their 
* Mr. Vansittlart, Mr. 3crafton, and Colonel ford. 



36 


A NAVAL OFFICER 




ally, Mahomed Ali Khan, was sought by the di- 
rectors, and it was only at the suggestions of Lord 
Clive, who took alarm at the terms of the article, 
that it was modified in such a manner as would 
probably have rendered it innoxious, had it not been 
converted by his Majesty’s ministers into a pretext 
for one of the most unjustifiable and mischievous 
acts of interference with the powers of the Com- 
pany that is to be found on the page of Indian 
history. 

The pretext for investing Sir John Lindsay, the 
commander of his Majesty’s squadron in India, with 
full powers as minister plenipotentiary to Mahomed 
Ali Khan, in 1770, was, that the King of Great 
Britain, having become party to an article of a 
treaty, had a right, without communication with the 
directors, to take care that the article was properly 
executed. The real fact was, that the Nabob of the 
Carnatic had for some years used every endeavour 
to free himself from the restraints in which he was 
placed by his engagements with the local govern- 
ment of Madras ; and the English gentlemen by 
whom he was surrounded, expecting their own im- 
portance and fortune would increase with that of 
their patron, stimulated his ambition to an attempt 
to cast off his dependance on the Company, through 
the establishment of a direct communication^ if not 
an alliance, with the King of England. 

It is not surprising that Mahomed All Khan 
should have been the dupe of such advisers. His 



ITTO.J 


AMBASSADOR. 


37 


object, the attainment of more power and conse- 
quence than he enjoyed, was fair and legitimate, 
nor can we wonder at the conduct of men, who, 
from a desire to raise their fortunes, encouraged 
him to such efforts ; but where can we look for the 
motives, or rather the apology, of those who, by Sir 
John Lindsay’s appointment, not only gave their 
countenance and support, but became principals in 
this attack upon the constituted authorities of their 
country ! An able historian has drawn a true and 
forcible picture of this extraordinary transaction, 
and the subject has sufficient importance, not only 
as a record but as a lesson, to make us insert the 
passage : — 

“ An ambassador, Sir John Lindsay,” he ob- 
serves*, " with concealed powers, was deputed in 
the ostensible character of the commander of a 
frigate, and decorated with a ribbon and star of the 
order of the Bath, as a representative of the sove-? 
reign of Great Britain to Mahomed Ally. With 
these dignities the ambassador burst at once upon 
the governor and council, as if by ambuscade, and 
became, from that time, a partisan of this foreign 
power, to which he was deputed against the dele- 
gated government of his own nation.” 

The proceedings of the royal envoy were all 
directed to the same point, that of elevating the 
prince to whom he was deputed, and depressing, as 
far as he had the power, the local government, 

* Vide Wilkes s Southern India^ voL ii., p* 16 . 



38 


WARREN HASTINGS, 


[1718. 


“ The honour he sought on this occasion,” the 
directors remark, was that of humbling the Com- 
pany before the throne of Mahomed Ali Khan.” 

Those who desire to be informed of the extent to 
which this extraordinary effort against our own 
power was carried must refer to the pages of the 
historians who have recorded the events of the 
period. It is mentioned here only to shew the cha- 
racter of that interference which his Majesty’s 
ministers then exercised in Indian affairs. This it 
is essential to understand, for it gave rise to 
struggles for patronage and power, the effects of 
which soon pervaded every part of our eastern 
empire. 

During the heat of this violent collision of parties, 
in 1772 , Warren Hastings was nominated Governor- 
general. This extraordinary man has recently paid 
the debt of nature. He outlived (in the full pos- 
session of all the faculties of his rich mind) that 
violent spirit of hostility which a Combination of 
causes had raised against him ; and towards the close 
of a life marked by singular events, he not only was 
honoured by his sovereign, but received an unex- 
ampled tribute of personal* respect from the House 
of Commons, who, twenty-five years before, had 
voted his impeachment. 

* In 1814 Mr. Hastings was called before the House, of 
Commons to give his evidence on points connected with the 
renewal of the Company’s privileges. All the members iwe 
as if by one impulse when he entered the house. 



11'84.J 


GOVERNOR^ENERAL. 


39 


The long period Mr. Hastings passed in India ; 
the various offices he had filled from the commence- 
ment of his career, till he attained the high station 
of Governor-general ; his acquaintance with the 
languages and usages of the natives of that country, 
added to the high qualities of his mind, gave him 
advantages without which he could hardly have 
saved the empire committed to his charge : but he, 
as well, as Lord Clive, has been harshly judged by 
men who haVe listened to his enemies and accusers, 
and who, when drawing their general inferences 
from particular facts, have given little, if any, atten- 
tion to the extraordinary circumstances in which 
be was placed, the necessity under which he acted, 
and the obstacles which 'he had to overcome. 

'Fhe aet of 1773 made the East India Company 
more dependant than before upon the king’s mi- 
nisters. Mr. Hastings was nominated Governor- 
general, but in the 'same commission three gentle- 
men* were appointed to council, who had learned 
the lessons on Indian government in England, and 
whose views were in direct opposition to his upon 
almost every point. The consequence was, that 
the administration passed into their hands as the 
majority in council, and remained with them, till the 
death of General Clavering restored the prepon- 
derance to the appointed head of the government. 
The effect of such a state of affairs may be imagined. 
The spirit of discord which prevailed at the council- 

* Oeneral Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Mr. Francis. 



40 ADMINISTRATION OF £1779. 

board spread throughout every branch of the ser- 
vice, and the natives of India saw in our divisions 
a source of weakness from which they argued our 
downfal. 

The intentions of those who created and main- 
tained this evil might have been pure, but they 
possessed little knowledge of that tenure by which, 
we hold India, or they would not have hazarded, a^- 
they did, the very existence of our power by such 
an efibrt to limit and control its local exercise. 
Mr. Hastings has drawn a forcible picture of his 
own situation. He may be objected to as an un- 
fair evidence in his own case ; but this only applies 
to facts and statements ; general reflections, when 
drawn from admitted premises, and when grounded 
on experience and wisdom, do not alter their cha- 
racter, because they proceed from a partial quarter. 
On the contrary, avc give opinions more weight, 
when the knowledge of those feelings which called 
them forth docs not impair the impression of their 
truth. When describing the effect which the ac- 
tual condition of the government had in obstruct- 
ing reform, and perpetuating abuse, Mr. Hastings 
observes, To enumerate every case would be end- 
less. In a word, while the power of government 
is in the hands of many, and the smaller the num- 
ber is, the greater is the evil in this case ; while 
each hand holds an equal share of it; while the 
members of government retain their places by suf- 
ferance ; and the terrors of dismission and disgrace 



1761.1 MR. 11AST1N09. 41 

are held out against them at home ; when their 
accusers and the expectants of their places are the 
judges of their conduct, and preparers of the evi-« 
dence on which it is to be tried ; when the members 
of the government themselves are in disagreement, 
and that disagreement (with regret and shame I 
suppose it) is excited by the voice of authority ; 
when each member stands in need of support from 
home, and owes returns for the support which he 
receives ; when each claims an indulgence from the 
others, and has it in his power to retaliate every 
disappointment, which may be easily understood, 
but can never be imputed; and lastly, when the 
most meritorious conduct is denied its credit, and 
even the sacrifices of interest are branded with 
the reproach of venality; from a government so 
constituted, what reformation can be expected?” 

After these strong observations on the effects of 
an administration so constituted as that of which 
he was the head, in a subsequent part of the same 
memoir, he speculates on what would have been 
the result had a different system been adopted. 

“ If,” he observes, “ the same act of the legislature 
which confirmed me in my station of president 
over the Company’s settlements in Bengal had in- 
vested me with a control as extensive as the new 
denomination I received by it indicated ; if it had 
compelled the assistance of my associates in power, 
instead of giving me opponents; if, instead of 
creating new expectations which were to be accom- 
plished by my dismission from office, it had im- 



^ ’ ADMINISTRATION OF [ 1119 . 

posed silence on the interested clamours of faction,- 
and taught the servants of the Company to place 
their dependance upon me, where it constitutionally 
rested ; if, when it transferred the real control over 
the Company’s affairs from the direction to the mi> 
nisters, instead of extending, it had limited the 
claims of patronage, which every man possessing 
influence himself, or connected with those who 
possessed it, thought he had a right to exert ; and 
if it had made my continuance in office to depend 
upon the rectitude of my intentions, and the vigour 
with which they were exerted, instead of annexing 
it to a compliance with those claims, 1 should have 
had little occasion, at this period, to claim the pub- 
lic indulgence for an avowal of duties undischarged.^ 
But the reverse took place in every instance. 

“ If the interests of the nation,” he continues, 
" are truly consulted, a total change in the system 
must take place; for whilst private interests are 
allowed to stand in competition with, or in opposi- 
tion to arrangements founded on the public good ; 
whilst those who censure the concessions made to 
them, in all instances which have not a reference 
to themselves or to their connexions, still persist in 
recommending them ; and whilst the official exist- 
ence, public reputation, and private fame, of the 
members* of the government in Bengal. are main- 
tained or sacrificed in proportion to the concessions 
made or withheld, the interests of the British na- 
tion must in it verge to a decline. 

“ Enough has been said, to shew the pernicious 



1784.3 


MR. HA£rriN6S. 


m 


consequences of this system, which is publicly pro- 
scribed, and privately supported ; which no tnan 
dares avow, yet many combine to maintain. To 
discuss it more minutely would be invidious, and 
perhaps entail upon me resentments, which, though 
I do not fear, I would wish to avoid. I have made 
a sufficient sacrifice to truth: my successors in 
office may perhaps benefit by this confession. The 
duties and functions of the supreme government in 
India will never be well discharged, unless it meets 
with the consideration due to it.” 

Mr. Hastings, justly considering that our political 
strength depended chiefly upon the excellence of 
our internal administration, laboured against many 
local and practical difficulties, to give it some shape 
and solidity. He effected as much, perhaps, as any 
man could in his situation. A board of revenue 
was established — collectors appointed — regula- 
tions published — courts of civil and criminal indi- 
eatnre were instituted, and their powers defined. 

These naeasures were a great advance towards 
the consolidation of our power. Lord Clive, at the 
period of his rule, could go no farther than an en- 
deavour to fix the principles of our interference 
with dependant states, and to lay down general 
rules for the management of our own territories, 
correcting, as far as a very limited selection enabled 
him, the evils of a loose and corrupt system by the 
qualities of the individuals he employed. Mr. 
Hastings took the next step towards the introduc- 
tion of a better order of affairs, and all persons 



44 ADMltiUTRATlON OF {17T2. 

minutely versed in Indian history, and who under- 
stand our condition and that of the natives of India 
at the epochs these changes were made, must be 
satisfied that those who effected them did as much 
as was practicable, without incurring the most 
serious hassard to the safety of the state by attempt- 
ing too precipitate reforms. 

Mr. Hastings, in a memoir which he published 
after his return to England, has given us a forcible 
and vivid description of the origin and ^owth of 
our power in India. The seed of this wonderful 
production (he observes) was sown by the hand of 
calamity. It was nourished by fortune, and culti- 
vated and shaped (if I may venture to change the 
figure) by necessity. Its first existence was com- 
mercial ; it obtained in its growth the sudden ac- 
cession of military strength and territorial dominion 
to which its political adjunct was inevitable. It is 
useless to inquire whether the Company, or the 
nation, has derived any substantial benefit from 
the change, since it is impossible to retrace the 
perilous and wonderful paths by which they 
have attained their present elevation, and to 
re-descend to the humble and undreaded character 
of trading adventurers. Perhaps the term of the 
national existence in India may have become sus^ 
ceptible of a shorter duration by it; but it is that 
state which it must henceforth maintain, and it 
must, therefore, adopt those principles which are 
necessary to its preservation in that state.” 

No one will doubt the truth of this description 



1784 .] 


MU. HASTINGS. 


46 

of the rise and actual condition of our Indian 
empire. In a subsequent passage in the same 
memoir, Mr. Hastings, drawing his deductions from 
personal experience of the system by which it 
was then governed, makes the following impressive 
observations ; — 

“ From the vehemence and perseverance with 
which my immediate superiors laboured during the 
course of ten years to weaken my authority, to 
destroy my influence, and to embarrass all my mea- 
sures, at a time when their aflairs required the most 
powerful exertions to sustain them, which I alone, 
by my office, could direct; and from the great im- 
portance which they have ascribed to points, some 
of which had no relation to their interests, and 
others were even repugnant to them; I much fear 
that it is not understood as it ought to be, how 
near the Company’s existence has, on many occa- 
sions, vibrated to the edge of perdition, and that it 
has been, at all times, suspended by a thread so 
fine, that the touch of chance might break, or the 
breath of opinion dissolve it; and instantaneous 
will be its fall, whenever it shall happen. May 
Godj in his mercy, long avert it ! 

“I affirm, as a point incontestable, that the 
administration of the British government in Ben- 
gal, distant as it is from the reach of more than 
general instruction from the source of its au- 
thority, and liable to daily contingencies, which 
require both instant decision, and a consistency of 



46 


ADMINISTRATION OF 


tint. 


system, cannot be ruled by a body of men variable 
in their succession, discordant in opinion, each 
jealous of his colleagues, and all united in common 
interest agniost their ostensible leader. Its powers 
are such, that, if directed by a firm and steady hand, 
they may be rendered equal to any given plan of 
operation ; but may prove the very instruments of its 
destruetion if they are left in the loose charge of 
unconnected individuals, whose interests, passions, 
or caprices may employ them in mutual contests, 
and a scramble for superiority. * * * 

m * « * m * * m * 

" The inference to be drawn from these premises 
is, that whatever form of government may yet be 
established for these provinces, whether its control 
be extended to other presidencies, or confined to 
its own demesnes ; it is necessary that the Gover- 
nor, or first Executive Member, should possess a 
power absolute and complete within himself^ and 
independent of actual control. Though the state 
of kingdoms is liable to dissolution, from causes as 
moiiial as those which intercept the course of 
human life, and though my opinion of the dis- 
tempers which threaten that of the Briti.sh empire 
in Bengal may obtain credit fi’om all who read it, 
yet I fear that few will yield to its impression. 
Eikc the stroke of death, which every man knows 
will come, but no man acts as if he felt the con- 
viction which he avows and thinks he feels, the 
very magnitude of the catastrophe may, in this 



IW.J 


MR. HASTINGS. 


case, blunt the sense of those to whom it is visibly 
apparent.” 

We cannot be surprised that sentiments recom-^ 
mended by information and experience, and so 
enforced by truth and eloquence, should have 
carried conviction even to the minds of those who 
were hostile to the writer; nor is it to be con- 
sidered as the least of the obligations which the 
country owes this great man, that his advice point- 
ed out the only scheme of rule by which we could 
hope to preserve our power in the East. No one 
ever better understood the materials of which that 
vast fabric is constructed than Warren Hastings, 
and no man ever appears to have looked with less 
confidence to its durability; but his opinions upon 
this subject were expressed at a moment when, from 
the constitutional jealousy of the government of 
England, he did not anticipate the delegation of 
that absolute, but responsible authority to the 
Governor-general which he deemed indispensable, 
not only for the prosperity, but for the safety of 
our Indian possessions. 

It is not meant to enter upon the merits of the 
political measures adopted by Mr. Hastings ; these 
were violently opposed by his colleagues. We 
collect from a minute* of General Clavering, Mr. 
Francis, and Colonel Monson, (which was written 
a short period after their arrival in India,) the 
grounds on which they acted. 


• Dated November 30th, 1779. 



48 


AOMINISTEATION OP 


riTTS. 


“ The general principle,” they observe, ^on which 
we have acted, and which we mean to make the 
rule of our future policy and conduct, is no other 
than that which your authority and that of the le- 
gislature have equally prescribed to us — ^to main- 
tain peace in India. The preservation of peace 
necessarily includes the vigorous defence of your 
own possessions, with such parts of the dominions 
of your allies as are guaranteed by treaty. On 
the other hand, it excludes every idea of conquest, 
either for yourselves or others. Adhering to this 
system, we never can engage your arms in any 
offensive operations for the aggrandizement of our 
Indian state, at the expense of another; much less 
could we have suffered the little states, which at 
the same time formed your barrier, and looked up 
to you for protection, to be swallowed up by the 
great ones.” 

I Mr. Hastings was accused by his colleagues of 
making unjust wars, and these accusations were sub- 
sequently made articles of parliamentary impeach- 
ment. This is not the place to enter into the dis- 
cussion of that question, but while the soundness 
and justice of the opinions (taking them in their 
general sense) given in the minute that has been 
quoted are admitted, none can deny the truth and 
wisdom of the principle which Mr. Hastings states 
as that which governed his conduct on such occa- 
sions. It is one applicable to all great states, and 
above all to India. 



1T84.] 


MR. HASTINGS. 


49 


“ Though I profess,” he ob.serves, ‘‘ the doctrine 
of peace, I by no means pretend to have follovred 
it with so implicit a devotion as to make sacrifices 
to it. I have never yielded a substantial right 
which I could assert, or submitted to a wrong 
which I could repel, with a moral assurance of 
success, proportioned to the magnitude of either ; 
and I can allude to instances in which I should 
have deemed it criminal not to have hazarded both 
the public safety .and my own, in a crisis of un- 
common and adequate emergency, or in an occasion 
of dangerous example. 

“ I have ever deemed it even more unsafe than 
dishonourable to sue for peace, and more con- 
sistent with the love of peace to be the aggressor 
in certain case.s, than to see preparations of in- 
tended hostility, and wait for their maturity, and 
for their open cftect, to repel it.” 

It appeared difficult to arrive at any correct con- 
clusion from the general reasoning of Mr. Hastings, 
or his opponents, with respect to those principles 
which would best apply to our extended political 
relations in India, or to define, by any prescriptive 
line, the exact demarcation between acts of defen- 
sive and oftensive policy;, but the general impres- 
sion in England was so strong, at this period, re- 
garding the ambition of our Indian rulers, and the 
consequent necessity of restraining their power of 
engaging in war within the narrowest limits, that 
the House of Commons voted resolutions to that 
VoL. If. E 



50 


NEUTRAL POLICY 


effect; and in the same act of the legislature 
which appointed the Board of Control, and granted 
the Governor-general power adequate to his sove- 
reign functions, a clause was inserted, declaring, 
“ that to pursue schemes of conquest and extension 
of dominion in India, arc measures repugnant to 
the wish, the honour, and the policy of Great 
Britain.” It was further made unlawful, as has 
been already stated, for the supreme government 
to engage in hostilities with any state that had not 
commenced, or made preparations to commence, 
war upon them, or upon an ally whom we were 
bound by our engagements to protect, unless in 
cases where the previous sanction of the govern- 
ment in England had been obtained. The local 
government was also prohibited by this act from 
making any treaty guaranteeing the possessions of 
any native prince, except in cases where each party 
had engaged to aid the English in a war actually 
commenced, or al)out to commence. 

The spirit and object of this law was just and 
wise ; for the great danger we have had to em 
counter from the first was the too rapid extension 
of our empire ; but our success in retarding, if we 
could not arrest the growth of our greatness, must 
evidently depend on the means we employed for 
this purpose, and the letter of the act in question 
went to fetter our government in the exercise of 
the most essential of these means. It forbade the 
seasonable ust; of that power and influence which 



CONSIDERED. 


51 


we possessed, to check combination or to counter- 
act, while yet immature, the plans of ambition ; and 
prescribed to a state situated amongst despotic 
princes, who recognised no objects but conquest 
and power, a ci>ursc of policy they could not ap- 
preciate, nor even understand. These princes were, 
consequently, liable from their ignorance and their 
presumption to mistake, our motives of action, to 
deem moderation and forbearance fear and weak- 
ness, and under that delusion to venture on a course 
of action which precipitated their ruin, and ren- 
dered our cautious and unwise policy productive of 
those very ends which it had been framed to 
avoid. 

The preceding pages of this work have afforded 
abundant proofs of this fact; and a concise review 
of more recent events will bring it still more 
strongly under observation. 

Lord Cornwallis had in his character an union 
of firmness and moderation, which gave the best 
promise of preserving peace with the native states, 
had that been possible. The aggression of Tippoo 
Sultaun, however, forced him into a war. Success 
led to his making a great accession to the Com- 
pany’ s territories, and the alliance with the Nizam 
of the Deckan, into which he was compelled to 
enter in order to ensure the reduction of Tippoo, 
became the fruitful source of political embarrass- 
ment to his successor. It was before remarked,' 
that Lord Cornwallis, by a communication to 



52 


MEASURES OP 


Madlityee Sindia, kept danger at a distance, by 
an alacrity to meet it.” But it may be safely 
asserted that, had that nobleman felt himself at 
liberty to adopt measures of preventive policy, he 
might, with hardly a hazard of hostilities, have 
arrested the growth of a state which, within ten 
years of his leaving India, had accumulated means* 

♦ Mr- Janies Anderson, the able resident at the court of 
Madhajee Sindia, gives, in his communications witli the acting 
Governor-general, Sir John M‘Pherson, and with Lord Corn- 
wallis, the completest account of the progress and character of 
the power of that ambitious chief. After expatiating (a) upon 
the just grounds we had to expect that Sindia would better 
have appreciated the motives of our conduct in not obstructing, 
as we easily might have done, the progress of his ambition, 
he adds, “ I am sorry, however, to observe, that the behaviour 
of Madhajee Sindia has been in many respects very unsuitable 
to the delicacy of our conduct towards him : in some instances 
he has presumed too much on the moderation of our conduct, 
and in all his transactions with the other powers he has laboured 
to interpret the delicacy of our behaviour towards him into a 
complete submission to his power. In short, it has become 
evident, that whatever reliance wc may have formerly placed 
in his disposition must now be totally transferred to the cir- 
cumstances of his situation.” 

After describing Madhajee Sindians actual condition ; his pro- 
gressive efforts to make himself master of all Hindustan, 
under the name of the powerless emperor Shah Allum ; the 
difficulties he had still to encounter from the numerous chiefs 
who were yet unsubdued ; from the constitution and temper of a 
great proportion of his army ; and from the dissatisfaction ex- 
cited amongst his new subjects by his ‘‘ various acts of trea- 
chery, cruelty, and rapacity,” Mr. Anderson observes, “ From 

(a) Vide Mr. Anderson^s Letter to Lord Cornwallis^ 24th Nov. 1786. 



LOUD CORNWALI4S. 


53 


which rendered it one of the most formidable 
enemies that the British government in the cast 
ever had to encoimter. 

Lord Cornwallis, in abstaining from those mea^ 
sures which would have prevented the family of 
Sindia from obtaining a power which was likely to 
be directed eventually against us, acted in con- 

this detail your lordship will perceive that Sindia’s situation is 
yet in some degree precarious^ and that at all events much 
^me must necessarily elapse before he can realize his prospects. 
He has, undoubtedly, many advantages in his cunning and 
intrigue, and his persevering management, which he often 
uses successfully to supply the want of real power and other 
defects in his situation ; but, on the other hand, he is fre- 
quently prompted by his avarice to act with little policy or 
foresight. From this latter circumstance, I was for some time 
inclined to think that his views in this quarter were rather 
of a temporary than permanent nature. It is, indeed, most 
likely that the expectation of treasure was at first his princi- 
pal object in this undertaking, but that his views opened and 
enlarged themselves with the favourable events which after- 
wards fell out. It seems now almost as certain as any politi* 
cal point can be, that his object is, by connecting his own 
provinces of Malwa and Ajmere, with those of Agra and 
Delhi, to erect an independent empire of his own, and to 
shake off all subjection to the Paishwah.” Mr. Anderson 
then expresses his opinion, that, after the dangerous ambition 
which Sindia has displayed, and the abuse he has made of the 
delicacy with which we have acted towards him, it will be 
“ extremely necessary we should watch him narrowly;” and 
he concludes by stating, that, on some occasions, perhaps it 
may be necessary for us to check him in his progress, where 
we may have favourable opportunities of doing it, without the 
actual commission of hostilities against hiiA.” 



64 


LORD TElCNMOtlTH. 


formity to the views and sentinnmts of his supe- 
riors in England, and to the provisions of the act 
of the legislature already cited ; but this nobleman 
took advantage of every occasion (as we have 
already shewn) to satisfy the princes and chiefs 
of India that such conduct proceeded from motives 
of moderation, not of apprehension. 

Lord Tcignmouth acted throughout his adminis- 
tration with still more scrupulous conformity to 
the prevailing sentiments in England, and to the 
letter of parliamentary restrictions. He did this 
from a strict sense of duty, and with the full 
knowledge of all the evils which were likely to 
result from his non-interference ; and his minutes 
and letters upon the political state of India at 
this period exhibit (like all the other productions 
of this virtuous nobleman) an intimate knowledge 
both of the condition of the British government, 
and that of the native states. The consequences 
of the efforts he made to preserve a system of rigid 
neutral policy have been fully described in the 
former chapters. Tippoo Sultaun wanted no motives 
to stimulate him to action, whenever he saw an 
opportunity favourable to his cherished designs 
against the British nation; but we may question 
whether the encouragement he received from our 
abandonment of the Nizam had not more weight 
in influencing him to the hostile measures ‘he 
adopted than the advice of French emissaries, or 
the expected aid from the government of the Mau- 
ritius. 



LORD WELLESLEY. 


55 


The reduction of Tippoo ; the restoration of a 
Hindu prince to the throne of his ancestors in 
Mysore ; the alliance with the Nizam, which stipu- 
lated for the dismissal of a strong French corj^s in 
his service, and of his aid in the war with the 
Sultaun, altered all our relations in the south of 
India. These were the first measures of Lord 
Wellesley, to the adoption of which he was com- 
j)elled by a necessity that all admitted. The point 
to which success had carried him was one where 
he could not remain stationary. He must either 
retreat or advance. I’he first of these courses 
offered a temporary exemption from present evilsj 
at the price of future security. The second led 
through difficulty and embarrassment to peace and 
prosperity. To enable him to subdue Tippoo and 
his French allies. Lord Wellesley had been obliged 
to pledge himself to protect the Nizam against 
the Mahrattas. This, like every step towards the 
establishment of order and tranquillity, was an 
attack upon a nation whose armies were not, and 
could not, from their numbers and construction, be 
supported, except by the annual attack of their 
neighbours, and who for nearly a century had 
deemed the territories of the Nizam as an inherit- 
ance of plunder. Lord Wellesley, satisfied of this 
fact, determined to direct all his efforts to the 
abolition of a predatory system which, under recent 
changes^ it was quite evident could not be coexistent 
with the British power in India. The view he took 



56 


POLICY OF 


of this question has been fully given, as well as 
those means through which he carried his great 
plans to the very brink of completion ; but his 
career was arrested in the hour of victory over 
the last of those Mahratta princes, who avowedly 
fought for the continuance of rapine and desolation. 

The alarm taken by the authorities in England 
at this period was excessive. They arraigned the 
principles of the policy that had been pursued sub- 
sequent to the conquest of Tippoo Sultaun, the war 
with whom they acknowledged to be just and una- 
voidable. But in admitting so much, they admit- 
ted everything; for if the British faith was to be 
preserved, we had very little option as to the mea- 
sures consequent to our alliance with the Nizam. 
The increase of our subsidiary force with that 
prince was the first step : the establishment of a 
similar force at Poonah, the second ; the great ob- 
ject of Lord Wellesley’s policy was, to extend such 
alliances, and through them, as they afforded an in- 
crease of force without increase of expenditure, and 
gave us the mo^t commanding military, positions, 
to secure the general peace of India ; which, as was 
proved by the fullest experience, could not be even 
partially disturbed without involving us in war, or 
placing us in a condition which, from its effect on 
our reputation and resources, was more embarrass- 
ing and dangerous than war itself. 

Though there can be no doubt that subsidiary 
alliances gave us the means of success in the ac^- 



INDIAN AUAANCES. 57 

complishment of objects of policy, which we were 
compelled by pledges of faith and considerations of 
safety to pursue, it is equally a fact, that they in- • 
volved us in great embarrassments, and that they 
had the effect of weakening the protected state, 
whose princes either lost their crowns in an effort 
to regain their independence, or sunk into a sloth 
and luxury which deteriorated every branch of their 
government. But this was the consequence of the 
establishment and progress of our power in India, 
not of those alliances which formed the most mo- 
derate of all means by which we could regulate 
that march to conquest, on which we were pro- 
pelled (as has been before shewn) by causes and 
events far beyond our power to control. 

Alliances of the same character as those formed 
by Lord Wellesley had been entered into by almost 
all his predecessors, and, from Lord Clive down- 
wards, the chief motive had been to preserve as 
long as possible the existence of the native states 
with whom they were contracted. The frequency 
of the expedient is a proof of its wisdom and neces- 
sity. There has seldom been an alternative be- 
tween its adoption and measures which must have 
terminated in the introduction of our direct rule, 
and with it all those sudden changes in society 
which, independent of the misery they bring, have 
been, from the first hour of our existence in India, 
to the present moment, pregnant with the greatest 
danger. 



58 


ADMINISTRATION OF 


In consequence of the ascendency in England of 
those who condemned Lord Wellesley’s measures, 
the high name of Lord Cornwallis was sought and 
obtained to ffive character to an effort to revive a 
system of neutral policy. ITiat venerable nobleman, 
worn out more by infirmities than age, dying soon 
after his arrival, was succeeded by Sir George 
Barlow ; who, acting upon the principles which the 
authorities in England had prescrilied, withdrew 
from every interference to which we were not spe- 
cifically pledged by treaty. In one case, however, 
which has been noticed*, he found himself com- 
pelled to a departure from this course ; and the ar- 
guments by which he justified his cimduct on this 
occasion are a convincing comment of the imprac- 
ticability of that system to promote which a sense 
of duty made him give the full aid of his great 
knowledge and experience. 

The administration of Lord Minto presents us 
with a cautious, but gradual, return to the only 
principles by which our empire could be miuntained. 
The tone in which he asserted the rights of the Bri- 
tish government, whenever these were threatened, 
corrected, as far as was possible, the impressions 
daily made by the growing insolence and excesses 
of those freebooters to whom we had abandoned 
all the central provinces of India as an arena, in 
which it was vainly imagined they would continue 
to war upon each other. 

* Vol. I.,page 37't. 



LORD MINTO. 


59 


Lord Minto, foreseeing the results to which this 
state of alfairs must lead, sought, like his prede- 
cessors, to strengthen the government he ruled, by 
returning to the system of subsidiary alliances, and 
it was a matter of regret to him, as ■well as to the 
government in England, that he failed in his efforts 
to conclude one with the Rajah of Nagpore. This 
moderate and able nobleman, after describing with 
much truth and discrimination the nature and eflPect 
of such engagements, and pointing out, in the most 
forcible langtiage, all their admitted evils (particu- 
larly as illustrated in the case of Hyderabad), con- 
cludes by observing * ; It is not the intention of 
these remarks to question the policy of those sub- 
sidiary alliances, or their great and be: eficial in- 
fluence on the condition of the British empire in 
India, in time past, present, and to come. They 
have added, most materially, to our power and re- 
sources, and they have placed for ever at a distance 
dangers far greater than any to be apprehended 
from the evils above described. But these alliances, 
like all other human arrangements, bear -within 
them the sources of their own decay, and require the 
application of corrective measures to ob-\nate their 
natural and progressive tendency to dissolution.” 

Lord Hastings, in every political measure of his 
government) evinced his sense of the necessity of 
an early return to those principles which had dis- 

* Letter from Lord Minto to the resident at Poonali, dated 
11th November, 1 SI 1. 



60 


ADMINISTRATION OF 


tinguishcd the administration of Lord Wellesley, 
and of resting, as that nobleman had desired to do, 
the fame and prosperity of the British empire, upon 
the safe and honourable foundtition of the general 
tranquillity of India, established and maintained by 
its commanding influence and power. 

These sentiments were, as has been stated, fully 
expressed in a most able minute *, in which this 
distinguished nobleman, after painting in warm 
colours the excessive misery and desolation which 
had been the consequence of the neutral system 
. pursued by us for ten years past, takes a view of 
the , different results which might be fairly antici- 
pated from a contrary policy. 

His powerful arguments, enforced as they were 
by illustrations drawn from the history of other 
countries, as well as of India, might still have failed 
of effect, had they not been seconded by the oc- 
currence of events which made it impossible for 
any person to advocate a system, the further ad- 
herence to which twelve years had proved to be 
impracticable. 

The complete success of the war against the 
Pindaiies and Mahrattas led Lord Hastings to pro- 
claim the paramount power of the British govern- 
ment, and constitute it the arbiter of all disputes, 
and the conservator of the general peace of India. 
Such was the change of opinion in England, that 
not a voice was raised against a measure, tlie very 
• December, 1815. 



LORD HASTINGS. 


61 


contemplation of which, a few years before, had 
been denounced as a dieam of ambition. Events 
and fuller information have convinced the enlight- 
ened part of the public, that the opinions long 
j)revalent in England, regarding the local adminis- 
tration in India, were founded in error. That the 
system prescribed by the legislature, however de- 
sirable, was altogether impracticable; for though 
parliament might dictate the course to be pursued 
by British rulers, its influence did not extend to the 
native states, with whom they were in constant 
collision, and whose despotic princes were urged 
by jealousy, by avarice, by ambition, by pride, and 
by love of independence, to continual efforts, secret 
or avowed, to destroy the English government, and 
to expel every individual of that nation from India. 
If this be the fact, who can doubt but that we 
have been impelled to the attainment of supreme 
power as the only means of maintaining our ex- 
istence, in any shape, in that country. 

The most eminent statesmen who have learnt 
their lessons in England, and those who have 
gained their experience in India, have uniformly 
concurred in the opinion, that extension of terri- 
tory was not only undesirable, but hurtful. Those 
to whom the local government of our Eastern 
empire was intrusted, have had every motive to 
preserve peace, and to avoid war. Nevertheless, 
they have almost all engaged in war, and those 
who have avoided doing so, have confessedly left 



62 


OPINIONS ON 


it as an inheritance to their successors; and let us 
add to this strong fact, that the different presidents 
of the board of control, the very institution of 
which was associated with the object of preventing 
the pursuit of schemes of aggrandizement, and the 
extension of dominion, have almost in every in- 
stance concurred* in the wisdom and necessity of 
those measures of the local administration which 
have been attended with such results. This forces 
us to a conclusion, that all the English statesmen 
which this observation includes have cither been, in 
their turns, tainted with that culpable ambition of 
which the Indian Governors arc accused, or that 
their fuller information obliged them to give the 
sanction of their approbation to such wars, from 
being satisfied that they were just and expedient. 
There may be some cases where it is possible to 

• Tlierc is one remarkable exception in the case of the late 
Lord Londonderry, who differed from Lord Wellesley as to 
the principles upon which the treaty of Bassein was concluded. 
The arguments on both sides are fully given in the body of 
this work: but the whole lies in a narrow question. Was it 
possible, after the conquest of Mysore, and the treaty of 
Hyderabad, for the British government, governed according 
to its established principles and usages, to remain without 
collision with the Mahrattas, whose system was predatory ? 
If it was not, the only difference of opinion that could arise 
was, as to the measures which could render the existence of 
tliese two great powers compatible with each other. The only 
mode of effecting this, with any hope of avoiding war, was 
through alliances (of which Bassein was the first) that divided 
the interests of the great chiefs of this nation of plunderers. 



WARS IN INDIA. 


63 


prove that the temperament, or the judgment of 
individuals, has precipitated a contest; but on the 
other hand, it is clear that the most moderate have 
been compelled to the same course, and that the 
orders of superiors, and the enactments of law, 
have not only failed in the end proposed, that of 
arresting the growth of our power, but have ac- 
tually caused it to be more rapid than it otherwise 
would have been. 

These arc the deductions which must be drawn 
from the events that have occurred; hut the law 
which forbade conquest and interference is now a 
dead letter. We are the acknowledged lords of 
India; and there exists not a sovereign prince, or a 
chiei^ in that vast country, with whom we have 
not ties that imply friendship and protection on 
our part, and dependance or allegiance on the 
other. Such being the case, it becomes important 
to consider our actual condition, and those changes 
W'hich an altered state of affairs may call for in 
the shape and principles of our government, both 
at home and abroad. 

These important subjects will occupy the next 
chapters. 



64 


CHAPTER IX. 


Obsei'vations and Reflections on the general Administration 
of the Indian Government in England. 

The retrospect of the origin and progress of 
our political power, in the preceding chapter, has 
been offered with no view of reviving useless dis- 
cussions regarding the comparative merit of in- 
dividuals, or of any measures which they advo- 
cated or adopted. Whatever men’s sentiments 
may be upon these subjects, every one will agree 
that the question respecting our power in India 
has altogether changed its shape. We are ar- 
rived at the summit long dreaded by many; and 
a knowledge of the paths by which we advanced, 
where our march was impeded, and where pro- 
pelled with a velocity that we could not regulate, 
much less arrest, appears essential to enable us 
to understand the nature and character of the 
materials from which the fabric of our future 
power must be constructed; and we may rest 
satisfied that, unless the structure is suited to 
its component parts, it will not endure. We 
have conquered all our enemies on the con- 



GOVERNMENT OP INDIA. 


65 


tinent of India, but that very consummation of our 
efforts exposes us to greater danger. In the faci*- 
lities of improvement which our condition presents, 
we may find, if we do not use them aright, the 
seeds of early destruction. 

Those who reflect upon the actual condition of 
our power in India will be satisfied, that the task 
of conquest was slight in comparison with that 
which awaits us, the preservation of the empire 
acquired. To the acquisition, men have been encou~ 
raged and impelled by the strongest of all the im- 
pulses of the human mind: fortune and fame have 
attended success ; the preservation must be eftected 
by that deep and penetrating wisdom, which, look- 
ing far to its objects, will oftener meet reproach 
than praise, and the very excellence of which will 
consist in the gradual and almost unseen operation 
of its measures. It must not only tuke into con- 
sideration the actual state of the English public 
servants, and residents in India, and that of the 
native population, but, judging from experience 
of the past, the general laws of our nature, the 
habits, prejudices and institutions of the rulers, as 
well as the ruled, it must calculate the various 
changes to which these communities are likely to 
be exposed, in order that care may be taken to 
avert those evils and misfortunes which the too 
sudden occurrence of such changes would inevitably 
occasion. 

Sufficient has been said in the introduction to 
VoL. ir. F 



6 « 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


this work regarding the changes that the Indian 
administration in England had undergone previous 
to the year 1811. The act of parliament passed 
in 1813, renewing the Company’s privileges for 
twenty years, did not directly make any material 
altorntion in the power of that branch of the Indian 
government ; but the measure of opening the trade 
with India, by creating a large commercial body 
with separate interests from those of the Com- 
pany, greatly weakened the latter, while it pro- 
portionally increased the strength of the ministers. 
From the earliest period, the court of directors 
had sought influence in the House of Commons, 
and on many occasions they had successfully com- 
bated the ministers of the king ; but the present 
act imbodied a powerful party upon whose aid the 
latter could depend on all questions that went to 
a limitation of, the Company’s privileges and au- 
thority. 

The right of nominating to the high oflices of 
Governor-general, Governors, and Commanders-in- 
chief, at the different presidencies, was, by this 
act, as by former acts, vested in the court of di- 
rectors, subject, however, to the approbation of 
the king. If that was withheld, a second person 
was to be nominated, and so on till the two au- 
thorities concurred: but jto obviate the evil of a 
eontinued difference of opinion as to a proper per- 
son, a clause in the act provided that, on such ap- 
pointment not being made by the court of directors 



ilN ^INfiLAm 


67 


within two months from the date of the vacancy- 
being known, the right of nomiiuiting lapsed to the 
king. This act supposes, and almost compels, 
agreement between the com! of directors and his 
majesty’s ministers on this most essential of all 
points, as connected with the welfare and perma- 
nency of our Eastern empire; and though its 
provisions may appear calculated to produce em- 
barrassment and weakness, . by dividing responsi- 
bility, they arc framed in the true spirit of the. 
British constitution. They impose a check, :a]|^ 
no slight one, upon the abuse of patronage; and 
oblige the parties, when they differ, to come, to a 
certain degree, to the bar of public opinion. This 
must always do good, for we cannot anticipate 
the period' when men exercising power in Eng- 
land can be indifferent to the sentiments of the 
public upon points which their acts force into 
discussion. 

The court of directors, who, by this act, had the 
power* of recalling the Governor-general, Gover- 
nor, or Commander-in-chief, as being thcir'f' officers 

♦ When we consider the nature of this right of recall, and 
the constitution of the. court of directors, we are not surprised 
that it has never been exercised ; but though they have, even 
when dissatisiied with the high functionaries in India, shrunk 
from the responsibility of recalling them in opposition to 
ministers, their possessing the power to do so must have in- 
fluence on the conduct of ministers. 

t The Company cease to have the right of recalling in cases 
where the vacancies to the offices of Governor, Governor- 

F2 



68 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


or servants, without the concurrence of his ma- 
jesty’s ministers, were by one of its clauses re- 
strained, except with the consent of the commis- 
sioners of the India board, from appointing pro- 
visionally, or otherwise, to any offices in India, 
except members of council, generals on the staffi 
and a few other selections specifically left to their 
selection and nomination. The same concurrence 
and confirmation were rendered necessary to the 
exercise of the power, which they before enjoyed, 
of restoring civil and military officers who had 
been suspended or removed* by act of a local 
government. 

Such limitation of the power of the directors 
was at once wise and salutary. Nothing could 
tend more to lessen the weight and authority 
of the local governments, and to discourage the 
efforts of those who laboured for their approbation, 
than appointments made from England, and the 
frequent restoration of persons who had been sus- 
pended the service, or removed from office in India. 

general, or Commander-in-chief, in India, has been filled by the 
ministry, in consequence of the court of directors not nomi- 
nating within the prescribed period. Vide S3 Geo. III., cap. 
3i sec. 36. 

* This Act did not include military officers dismis.sed by a 
court-martial; such cases were provided for by the 51 Geo. 
III., cap. 75, sec. 4 and 5. The latter act was passed in con- 
sequence of doubts whether the Act of 1793, 33 Geo. III., 
cap. 53, sec. 69, did not absolutely interdict the restoration of 
an officer dismissed by a court-martial. 



m ENGLAND. 


69 


The present state of the law renders it difiictdt 
for either the court of directors, or the board of 
control, to interfere with the local governments 
abroad, on any points connected with the conduct 
or employment of public servants. This re« 
striction of the authorities in England is equally 
beneficial as it checks the operation of private 
patronage, and limits undue personal influence, 
and as it directs the exclusive attention of public 
servants abroad to their local superiors. 

The court of directors long owed their chief 
consideration to their having the management of 
the great commercial concerns of the East India 
Company ; but these, of late years, have been quite 
secondary to their other duties ; and it is upon their 
competency to the latter, and their importance as 
a constituent part of the Indian government, that 
it is intended to offer some observations. 

The merits of every species of government arc 
comparative, and it can be no ground for rejecting 
any form or substance of rule, that it is income 
patible with received ideas; that it is contrary to 
general opinion, or even inconsistent with com- 
mon maxims of rule: all these are good grounds 
for not establishing a particular government, but 
they are not conclusive for destroying one that is 
established. If we had to constitute an adminis- 
tration for British India, as it now exists, the man 
would justly be deemed insane who should pro- 
pose the present system. But the case is widely 



70 


GOVERNMETNT op INDIA 


altered when we recollect, that it has grown with 
our empire ; that the managing partners of a body 
of merchants have gradually risen from the details 
of a factory to the charge of kingdoms: that 
their departments, in every branch of government, 
have kept pace with their enlarged functions; and 
that the result of the whole has been success and 
prosperity. Those, indeed, who are hostile to the 
Company, ascribe this result to the interference 
of the legislature, and the institution of a board of 
control. Much, no doubt, of the great reform 
that has been effected is to be attributed to those 
causes; but because the board of control has 
proved a good instrument for the purposes for 
which it was instituted, we must not conclude that 
it is a safe depositary for greater power. In the 
exercise of all with which it has hitherto been in- 
trusted, it has acted under a restraint as great as it 
has imposed. The court of directors, rendefed 
jealous and vigilant by their reduced condition, 
have scrutinized every proceeding of the board, in 
a manner that has rendered them a very efficacious 
check against the abuse of its influence or authority. 

When the pretensions of the East India Com- 
pany to have continued to them the share they now 
enjoy in the civil, military, and political govem- 
liient of India were discussed, previous to the 
last renewal of their privileges*, several members 

, * The charter of the Company is perpetaa!. The Act of 
1813 renewed, to a further terni, certain territorial and com- 



IN ENGLAND. 


n 

of* both houses of parliament were against that 
renewal; but the reasons they adduced for the 
abolition of the powers of this body were very dif- 
ferent from the arguments brought forward thirty 
years before. They eould no longer charge the 
Company, or their servants, with acts of tyranny 
or corruption; there was a happy and acknow- 
ledged change in the whole system : but the incom- 
petency of the court of directors to their enlarged 
duties; the anomaly of the whole frame of the 
government, and the magnitude of the evils likely 
to arise from continuing to rule so great aU 
empire through such an inadequate body, were 
strongly urged. The opponents of the Company 
admitted ' that there was a difficulty in disposing 
of the patronage enjoyed by the directors, which 
(they were agreed) it would be unwise to give 
to the crown; but various expedients were sugi 
gested, which, it was believed, would obviate any 
injury to the public interests from this cause. It 
was not difficult to reply to such general reason- 
ing. The first admission made, namely, that a 
great change had taken place in the Company’s 
government, proved that the defects of the sys^ 
tem were not irremediable; and it is a maxim con- 
genial to English legislation, not to destroy what 

mercial privilegea of the chartered Company, hut the charter 
does not expire with that term. This is a distinction not un- 
important, in reference to any arrangement that may be con- 
templated for altering the system. 



72 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


is capable of improvement. With regard to the 
anomalous nature of this branch of our Indian 
government, it shared that character with all other 
parts of' our free constitution; and as to its inade- 
quacy to its enlarged duties, all that had occurred 
within the last twenty years was assuredly encou- 
ragement to proceed with ameliorations and re- 
forms, instead of rushing upon the work of de- 
molition, uncertain whether any authority could be 
substituted equally efficient. 

Serious changes have taken place in the con- 
stitution of the Company, subsequent to the act 
of 1784; but none require more of our attention 
than those which have affected the court of pro- 
prietors. As long as the court of directors acted 
independently of the control of ministers, the pro- 
prietors interfered on almost all occasions, and fre- 
quently influenced nominations to high stations in 
India, as well as important politiciil measures. But 
when the government became a party in the admi- 
nistration of Indian affairs, it was deemed necessary 
to prevent their arrangements being embarrassed 
by the general court, which was done by clauses in 
the enactments * of the legislature very seriously 
curtailing its power. Other circumstances have 
contributed, in no slight degree, to alter the views 
and principles of a great proportion of the pro- 
prietors, amongst which we may consider the 

• The first of these passed in 1784, 24 Geo. III., cap. 25, 
sec. 29. The second in 1793, 33 Geo. III., cap. 25, sec. 23, 



IN ENGLAND, 


73 


opening of the trade with India as the most pro- 
minent. The directors used to recommend to the 
proprietors a candidate on any vacancy that oc- 
curred in the direction; this recommendation, sup- 
ported as it was by their individual and collective 
efforts, usually succeeded; and the new director 
came in with a strong feeling of gratitude towards 
the body of which he was a member, imd with a 
disposition to maintain that principle of unity by 
which he had profited. For several years past 
the case has been very different; and candidates 
who are supported by some members of the direc- 
tion, are frequently opposed by others. They 
consequently enter upon their duties with party 
feelings, which must have a tendency to break that 
union which was once the strength of this body. 

These changes in England have extended their 
eftect to India. The nature of those ties which for- 
merly subsisted between the Company and their 
servants abroad, is greatly altered; and the latter no 
longer look exclusively to the court of directors. 

A concurrence of events has tended, within the 
last thirty years, to bring the civil and military 
officers of the Indian service into general and pro- 
minent notice in England; and the consequence has 
been a very favourable impression of their character 
and advancement of their reputation. The army of 
India owes great obligations to the late Lord Buck- 
inghamshire, for the manner in which he brought 
their claims to the notice of their sovereign, on the 



74 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


extension of the order of the Bath. To Mr. Cannings 
■when president of the board of control, the public 
are chiefly indebted for the appointment of the two 
distinguished men * who have, for several years 
past, filled the stations of governors at Madras and 
Bombay. Some solicitude was felt, and expressed, 
lest these appointments should effect the practice -J* 
of the court of directors to look rather to eminent 
men in England to fill such stations, than to the 
Company’s servants ; but the result of these selcc-^ 
tions must have satisfied all, that when the Indian 
service produces men like the individuals men- 
tioned the practice which excludes them from a 
fair and equal competition for any honours or cm" 
ployments that it is in the power of their king and 
country to bestow must be as contrary to smmd 
policy as to justice. 

One of the common-place objections made in 
England to India candidates for high office abroad 
is, the too near connexions which they are supposed 
to have with the public servants of that country- 

♦ Sir Thomas Munro and the Honourable Mountstuart Elr 
phinstone. 

t Vide Mr. Canning's letter to the chairman of the court of 
directors, under date the 21st of September, 1818. 

X This history closes with the administration of Lord Hastings, 
or it would have been the duty of the author to have noticed 
the measures of the late Mr. John Adam, who, while acting 
Governor-general, previous to the arrival of Lord Amherst, 
evinced a mind every way suited to the discharge of the duties 
of that high station. 



IN ENGLAND. 


75 


There might he some ground for this objection, if 
it was probable that men of ordinary pretensions 
would be raised to such stations ; but as we can 
never expect, considering the disadvantages under 
which they labour, that any persons are likely to 
be brought forward by the authorities at home 
till they have outstripped others in the race abroad, 
it may be asked, what friendships or connexions 
are such men likely to have in India? Certainly 
none but with the ablest and best of their fellow- 
servants. They must, no doubt, be personally ac- 
quainted with the abilities and deficiencies of tbose 
placed under their orders, and this cannot but give 
them incalculable advantages in the performance of 
their public duties. Standing distinguished amongst 
their compeers, they must be anxious to justify, by 
their conduct, the honour which their selection has 
conferred on the service to which they belong. 
Thus every motive arising out of the India con- 
nexions and acquaintances of men of superior c,ha- 
racter will tend to public benefit. Let their con- 
dition be contrasted with that of a person who has 
no previous knowledge of the scene on which he 
is to act, and no personal acquaintance or connexion 
whatever with any of those placed under his au- 
thority. Such a man, if he has attained any emi- 
nence, is likely to belong to a political party, and 
to have parliamentary interests ; from such ties, in- 
dependent of family claims, and of those of per- 
sonal friendship, he must be exposed to solicita- 
tions in favour of many persons in India. If it is 
II. • 



76 


GOVEIINMENT OF INDIA 


admitted that examples have been found of men 
who had public virtue sufficient to resist the in- 
fluence of all such ties and claims, still, even 
this rare individua], as a stranger to India, must, 
for a period, be dependent upon others for all 
infoi*mation regarding the character and qualifi- 
cations of the men to whom his choice is limited, 
and upon the judicious selection of whom for the 
various duties they have to perform the success of 
his administration will chiefly depend. 

The power exercised by British rulers in India 
has none of that prejudice in its favour which often 
supports hereditary monarchies and national go- 
vernments, even at a period of decline. It can 
obtain respect only by the intrinsic qualities of 
the person by whom it is exercised: great talents 
and active virtue will always obtain the suffrage of 
both the [European and native subjects of our Indian 
empire, and in all human probability preserve it in 
peaces or, at all eyents, overcome danger; but mo- 
derate abilities, even though combined with inform- 
ation, will be found uneqmd to the great task in 
any times; and if the government of India ever 
passes into weak or inadequate hands, the high 
station will fall into disrepute, and all the dangers 
that flow from the contempt of a governing autho- 
rity will be generated. The only safe view that 
Great Britain can take of her empire in India is, 
to consider it . (as it really is) always in a state of 
danger, and to nominate persons to rule it compe- 
tent from their knowledge of its interests, and from 



IN ENGLAND. 


77 


superior energy of character, to meet every emer- 
gency that can arise ; for it appears quite impossible 
ever to introduce any system of government into 
our possessions in that country which will render 
them secure, except under the management of able 
and firm rulers. If a succession of men of great 
talents and virtues cannot be found, or if the opera- 
tion of any influence or party feelings and principles 
prevents their being chosen, we must reconcile 
ourselves to the serious hazard of the early decline, 
if not the loss, of the great power we have founded 
in the cast. 

There has been much speculative opinion on the 
subject of such selections: some have conceived 
that military men were best qualified for these 
stations; others, that they should be exclusively 
filled by those who had risen in civil life. It has 
been argued, that noblemen, carrying with them the 
impression of high rank and birth, should be alone 
appointed; while many believe that they would be 
best filled by servants of the Company possessing 
local knowledge, and a large and detailed ac- 
quaintance with the afiairs and the people of India. 

Any principle which excludes knowledge, talent, 
and virtue, in whatever rank or condition of life 
these qualities are found, from such fair and legiti- 
mate objects of honourable ambition, must destroy 
the competition necessary to form men for the 
government of British India: whether these be 
filled by persons who have risen in civil or military 



78 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


life, provided such be qualified for the duties they 
have to perform, appears to be a matter of indifler- 
encc; when talent for civil rule and military com- 
mand are found combined, there is an advantage per- 
haps in vesting both powers in the same individual. 
That the high rank of the person employed, as it 
adds to that impression which such stations require, 
is of some consequence, cannot be denied; but that 
consequence can never be sufficient to supersede 
the claims ol superior merit, or to remedy the 
detects of inefficiency. With regard to the servants 
of the Company, their local experience, unless 
attended with other qualifications, is but a poor 
recommendation to stations which do not so much 
require an acquaintance with details as that en- 
larged knowledge of human natiu-e, that active 
energy of character, and that commanding talent 
for rule, which has, in all ages, distinguished those 
who have exercised power to the benefit of their 
country and mankind. 

Whatever person is nominated, either to the high 
station of Governor-general, or to the governments 
of Madras or Bombay, should receive a foil and 
liberal confidence from the authority by which he is 
appointed; nor should he be continued in his station 
one moment after that is withdrawn. The dangers 
which assail our empire in India from internal 
weakness are much greater than we can ever ap- 
prehend from external power ; and these dangers 
will always increase, in an alarming degree, when 



m ENGLAND. 


79 


the administratioa abroad has not the decided 
support of the government in England. 

There is an acknowledged necessity for those 
persons who fill the highest offices in India being 
vested with a power which is offensive to the 
feelings of an Englishman, and hardly in tmison 
with any part of the character of our free consti- 
tution. But we cannot assimilate the rules and 
principles of British government with those which 
are essential to the maintenance of our sovereignty, 
as foreign conquerors, over the vast population of 
the continent of India. We may and do cast a 
heavy responsibility * on those to whom almost 
absolute power is intrusted ; but the checks which 
are placed on those in authority in England are 
incompatible with the condition of a ruler in India. 
Under such circumstances, we can contemplate no 
improvement of more consequence than one calcu- 
lated to form men capable of fulfilling duties of a 
nature so peculiarly delicate and important, both as 
they respect the peace and happiness of our Indian 
subjects, and the rights and privileges of the Euro- 
pean community in our eastern dominions; but 
before any plan is suggested for the promotion of 
this purpose, it will be useful to see how far the 
object is impeded or advanced by the existing system. 

His majesty’s ministers have hitherto been, and 

* One of the most effectual of the checks under which a 
governor in India acts is that publicity consequent on the 
positive necessity of making every act, however unimportant, 
a written record to be transmitted to England, 



80 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


will continue to be, actuated, in all matters that 
relate to high appointments in India, by motives 
which must mix in their minds the objects of pa- 
tronage and party interest with those of duty to 
the country ; and it is from this cause that they 
will, in general, be fbtmd the advocates of a system 
which, under various pleas, excludes (as much as 
possible) the pretensions of Indian service. To 
admit these to a fair and liberal competition would, 
in many cases, be fatal to their views of promoting 
friends, of rewarding services performed in other 
quarters of the globe, and of making arrangements 
essential to the continuance of their own power. 
These are considerations too intimately connected 
with the fnime of the English government, and 
with the interests of the individuals by whom that 
is administered, ever to cease to operate ; but that 
does not render their operation less baneful to the 
Indian empire. Their action is least pernicious 
when that empire appears in danger; but better 
knowledge would teach that it is, as already re- 
marked, every moment in danger, and never more 
requires superior ability and energy to govern it, 
than when, apparently, in perfect peace ; for that is 
the moment to take preventive measures to avert 
those troubles to which the very nature and mag- 
nitude of our possessions in the east renders them 
so liable, and of which nothing but the continued 
watchfulness and wisdom, of those who rule them 
can prevent the recurrence. 

Among the many grounds taken to palliate, if 



IN ENGLAND. 


8t 

not excuse the appointment of persons to high 
stations in India, who are acknowledged to have 
little or no acquaintance with the interests of that 
empire, one of the most prominent is, the assumed 
information and competence of those servants of 
the Company who are in council, or who fill the 
subordinate and executive offices of the state: hut 
those who assume this ground of confidence forget, 
that selecting and employing others is one of the 
first qualities of a superior mind ; while incompe- 
tence too often takes alarm at talent, and is much 
more likely to rouse its resentment by neglect or 
jealousy, than to gain its support in aid of its own 
inefficiency. 

It has been urged that, if his majesty’s ministers 
had the sole responsibility of appointments in India, 
their fear of public opinion, and of attack in 
the House of Commons, would make them more 
guarded than when they have only, as at present, a 
concurrent or dissentient voice in the nomination 
of the court of directors. This might be true, if 
the affairs of the Indian government were as well 
understood, or excited the same interest as the 
affairs of Europe; but as this is likely never to 
happen, and as ministers must be expected to con- 
tinue treating all that relates to the former as 
secondary, there would appear a necessity for a 
more constant, as well as a more efficient, check, 
and that can alone be found in an improved system, 

which would bring forward talent; and, through 

Voi.. II. O 



82 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


respect for knowledge and weight of character, 
limit the improper action of prejudice, influence, or 
patronage, on points where the very existence of 
our Indian empire is at stake. 

These observations refer, exclusively, to general 
principles ; they have no allusion to any particular 
instances in the conduct of the court of directors, 
or of any set of ministers. Their choice of persons 
to fill the office of Governor-general, as these vo* 
lumes have exhibited, has often fallen on men of 
great talent, who, aided by the able and well-quali- 
fied public officers they found in India, have ad- 
vanced our power to that high but dangerous 
pinnacle which renders it more essential than ever 
to use the greatest caution and judgment in select- 
ing those who are to govern it. The field of se- 
lection is very limited. The qualities requisite in 
the mere English statesman will seldom be found 
combined in any one individual; and, under present 
circumstances, the fitness of those whose chief 
claims rest upon ludiiui service will every " day 
become more doubtful. The wars and negotiations 
of the last thirty years called into prominent action 
all the talent which belonged to that class, and the 
notice and applause bestowed upon individuals ex- 
cited a high and honourable spirit of ambition ; but 
this, if not cherished, must subside and perish. In 
ordinary times*, men soon fall into a lifeless routine 

* The changes that have occurred in the political condition 
of India, within the last twenty-dve years, have lessened, in a 



IV ENGLAND. 


83 


of action, . and those who return to England, dis- 
couraged by the construction of the Indian govern?* 
ment at home from all hope of pursuing lliat 
course of life in which they would be most useful, 
will either devote themselves to pleasure, lapse into 
indolence, or give the whole weight of their opinions 
and reputation against a system, which, by almost 
destroying their hope of advancement, has generally 
the effect of arresting their public career exactly 
at the time when its continuance would be most 
beneficial to their country. 

If this is admitted to be a true picture, the 
necessity of changes, opening wider the path of 
ambition to the servants of the Company, both 
in India and England, cannot be denied. Few 
would succeed, but all, by the objects being within 
their view, would be stimulated to efforts that 
could not fail of being essentially beneficial to the 
best interests of our Indian empire. Before, how- 

great degree, those opportunities which persons in the ser- 
vice had of distinguishing themselves. 

Those now employed in the highest stations are seldom 
called upon to exercise their discretion regarding measures of 
importance*. Their duties have almost become those of routine, 
and the tendency of the actual system is, to place them as much 
under minute check and control as a collector of the revenue 
of a small district. 

The effect of this system will be remarked upon elsewhere : 
it is noticed here, merely to establish the fact, that the civil 
and military officers of India have not the same means they 
before enjoyed of bringing themselves forward to public notice. 



84 


GOVERNUENT OF INDtA 


ever, such changes as have been alluded to can be 
effected, many deep-rooted prejudices must be over- 
come. The interests of individuals and of classes 
of men must yield to those of the public, and 
some parts of our Indian administration, by many 
deemed fundamental, must be modified or altered: 
but the necessity is paramount; and it may be 
asserted that, unless changes are made for en- 
couraging and elevating, instead of excluding and 
depressing those who acquire experience, know- 
ledge, and reputation in India, our administra- 
tion of that empire will never preserve the health 
and vigour necessary for its permanent prosperity. 

According to the established form of the Indian 
government in England, the board of control con- 
sists of a president, two active members *, a secre- 
tary, who is in parliament, and clerks in every de- 
partment. We may assume that the four first 
stations of this board, to all of which liberal salaries 
are attached, are appointments which, generally 
speaking, will be given with more attention to the 
claims of those who form or support the adminis- 
tration, than with any reference to their peevdiar qua- 
lifications for the situation. The office of president, 
though often filled by men of eminence, has not 
been considered as among the first in his majesty’s 

* There are several others, inclusive of the principal minis- 
ters ; but all, except the president and two mfembers, may be 
deemed honorary, as they neither receive salary nor perform 
any duty. 



IN ENGLAND. 


8S 

cabinet. This is unfortunate, for it leads to fre- 
quent changes; and few persons have held the 
office long enough to attain the knowledge neces- 
sary for the fulfillment of its important functions*. 
It happened lately at a critical period, (and the oc- 
currence was favourable to the public interests) that 
a distinguished nobleman'^, who had filled high 
station in India, presided at this board, and that 
he was ably aided by a near relative who had 
passed the early part of his life in the Conapany’s 
service ; but these nominations were to be referred 
to other causes than the competence of the indi- 
viduals in point of personal knowledge and experi- 
ence. Generally speaking, the president of this 
board, on entering upon his duty, is compelled to 

• From the passing of the Act 24 Geo. III., 1784, the 
following secretaries of state for the Home Department, were 
presidents of the India hoard, ex~qfftcio^ and without salary : 
Lord Viscount Sydney; Lord (then Mr.) Grenville; Lord 
Melville (ttien Mr. Dundas.) 

The system was changed in 1793, when the presidentship 
was made a separate appointment, with a salary ; since which 
it has been filled by Henry Viscount Melville (then Mr. Dan- 
das); ISOl, Irf>rd Viscount Lewisham (afterwards Earl of 
Dartmouth); 1802 , Viscount Castlereagh ; 1806, Earl Minto; 
Mr. Thomas Grenville ; Mr. Tierney ; 1807, Mr. Robert Dun- 
das; 1800, Earl of Harrowby (about three months); Mr. 
Robert Dundas (now Viscount Melville) ; 1812, Earl of Buck- 
inghamshire; 1816, Mr. Canning; 1820, Mr. Bathurst (abou^ 
a year); 1822, Mr. Williams Wynne. 

t The late Lord Buckinghamshire. 

I The Right Honourable John Sullivan. 



86 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


look to Others. The members are usually m the 
same situation as the president ; they, like him^ have 
their lesson to learn, and sometimes commence in 
complete ignorance of Indian aflairs. 

The parliamentary secretary* of the board, being 
nominated on the same principle as the president 
and members, is not likely to be better informed. 
It is the derks at the heads of departments on 
whom the board must depend. These are fixed; 
their sole attention is given to the duties of their 
respective offices, and the afiairs under their super- 
intendence are understood as well as it is possible 
to be by men who have only records to guide 
them : but supposing their industry and ability in 
their stations to be ecpial to that of any public 
functionaries in England, (and this is supposing no 
more than the truth,) still that system must be bad 
where the recognised depositaries of information are 
subordinate and irresponsible. This, it will be as- 
serted, is to a great extent the case in other offices of 
the state. But a knowledge of the duties of other 
offices is familiar, easily attained, and may be said 

♦ No deduction is to be drawn from the circumstance of 
the bighly-respectable person now in that office having held it 
during a period of thirteen years. His remaining so long in 
the situation, where the experience he has gained is so useful, 
is solely referrible to the long continuation in office of the 
present ministers, and his not being nominated to another 
situation. In other words, the knowledge and experience 
which this public officer has gained is to he ascribed more to 
accident than to system. 



IN ENGLAND. 


87 


to belong to tbie education of every English states- 
man^ which is not the case with Indian affairs ; 
they are foreign to the common studies of such 
persons^ and, from their remote interest, can never 
be otherwise. It is consequently most desirable 
that there should be such a change in the composi- 
tion of this board as would ensure to the state 
a greater portion of experience, and more accurate 
knowledge of Indian affairs. That can be done 
only by an arrangement which shall direct the 
hopes of those who have served with ability and 
distinction in India to the attainment of a share in 
this branch of the administration. 

It will be urged, that the board of control is as 
open to those who have acquired experience and 
knowledge in our eastern empire as to any others; 
that there is no declared bar to their attainment 
of a scat, or even presiding at it, when returned 
from service in India, enjoying as they do the same 
rights as any other of his majesty’s subjects. But 
what are the facts ? — for it is by these we must 
be guided in deciding upon practical questions. 
Those who enter the Indian service are seldom 
men of high family connexion. Their early life is 
devoted to their public duties abroad, and they can 
therefore enjoy but few opportunities of forming 
those friendships with individuals, or those ties 
with parties, which so often help to bring into 
useful action men of information and talent. In 
former times the servants of the Company exclu- 



88 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


sively filled all the high stations* in India^ and the 
large and rapid fortunes they made in those sta- 
tions, or in the exercise of military conunand, 
enabled them to come forward in parliament, and 
to establish influence through the means of wealth ; 
but this is no longer the case. Riches are attained 
in India, as elsewhere, by commercial men, by 
agents, and by some few of the servants of the 
Company, who make that their chief or sole object. 
But it is a remarkable fact, that, amongst all who 
have been most distinguished during the last forty 
years, there is not one who possesses a fortune 
which can be deemed more than a competence ; and 
several of them, after more than thirty years’ ser- 
vice, have not acquired that. The reasons are 
obvious. Men seldom reach high office till after 
many years’ service, and then their salaries, though 
liberal *1*, are not so considerable as to enable 
them to accumulate a large fortune, were that to 
become their pursuit: but their duties are of a 
character which raises the mind above the accumu- 

• Lord Macartney, who was nominated governor of Fort 
St. George in 178S, was the first appointment of any British 
subject, not a Company’s servant, to such a station. 

t The salary of a political resident of the first class, which 
is one of the highest in India, does not exceed 3500/. per 
annum, and, though his establishment and expenses are paid to 
a certain extent, he cannot calculate on a leas disbursement 
from it than 1000/., which leaves him an annual saving of 
2300 /., in a station which he is not likely to have attained 
bpfore a service pf from twenty to twenty-five years. 



IN ENGLAND. 


89 


lation of money ; and this high tone in those who 
fill the first stations in India has been wisely che- 
rished, for the integrity of the service* depends 
on their example. 

What has been stated will sufficiently account 
for persons of local experience and knowledge 
being most unlikely to attain aiiy share in that 
branch of the administration of India which be- 
longs to the crown ; but the very circumstances 
which place them at a distance from such objects 
of ambition are those which, if the public interests 
were consulted, ought to approximate these objects. 
It is not more necessary to have naval lords at the 
Admiralty than to have Indian members of the 
board of control, nor indeed so much so ; and, 
should a sense of its expedience ever introduce such 
a usage, its benefits would be very great. 

Besides the aid w^hich the minister of Indian 
affairs would receive from well-selected Indian 
members, the very prospect, however distant, of 
attaining such honourable stations at home would 
stimulate to action all the best talent in the Indian 
service. Those who obtained such distinction 
would receive and impart knowledge, and while 

* It is difficult to make those who are locally unacquainted 
with India understand the vital importance of the preserva- 
tion of this high tone in all who fill prominent political situa- 
tions in that country ; but in no government is the truth of 
the Persian adage more applicable, which says, “ If the king 
takes an egg, there will not be a fowl left in the land.” 



90 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


they enjoyed an opportunity of bringing themselves 
into a notice that might be attended with further 
preferment, if they were fit for it, they would be 
placed in a situation which would enable them to 
preserve and improve the information they had 
acquired in India, and to offer useful information 
and advice daily to those who are called upon to 
decide on the most important questions connected 
with our eastern empire. 

The president and members of the board of 
control may, and no doubt often do, seek informa- 
tion and counsel from the most experienced of the 
Company’s servants in England ; but these are only 
casually and partially consulted. Their judgment 
is asked on insulated points, affected by many cir- 
cumstances and events of which they have no know- 
ledge. It is also to be recollected that our Indian 
empire is, and, from its composition, must be, 
always in a state of change. Men who retire from 
the service, and do not, cither from want of incli- 
nation or of means, keep up their information, may 
be said to be out of date in a very few years ; but 
being naturally tenacious of preconceived opinions, 
we may assert, with the fullest respect for well- 
acquired reputation, that such persons are often the 
most misleading advisers ; and an appeal to such 
may become the more pernicious, from error being 
sanctioned by high name and authority. 

The adoption of the measure suggested would 



IN ENGLAND. 


91 


do more than remedy this defect. It would pro- 
duce a succession of men thoroughly informed, 
and with the opportunity as well as the ability of 
imparting their information to others. No good 
government can wish for mystery or concealment ; 
such can be desirable only as veils to weakness 
and mismanagement. There never was a state 
to which publicity is calculated to be of more 
benefit, both as a check and as an encouragement 
to those by whom it is administered, than that we 
have established for India ; but in order that the 
wise and just principles upon which it is conducted 
should be understood and appreciated, its real 
condition, and the nature of those peculiar cir- 
cumstances under which it acts, should be fully 
before the public. 

With reference to this principle, it is to be 
regretted that questions relating to India are so 
seldom agitated in parliament, and that the an- 
nual budget for the financial affairs of that em- 
pire, which it was long the usage to bring before 
the house of Commons, has been discontinued. 
This practice might have been attended with in- 
convenience, and perhaps occasional embarrassment, 
to the ministers of the crown; but its disuse, in- 
asmuch as it has a tendency to perpetuate igno- 
rance and apathy on all that relates to Indian admi- 
nistration, is unfavourable to the interests of that 
country, and, consequently, to those of Great 
Britain. Without speculating upon the reasons 



9‘i 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


which have led to past proceedings, it may be as- 
sumed, that men in official situations in England, 
who added to their practical knowledge of India 
the advantage of direct reference to the most au- 
thentic information in England concerning that 
country, would be able not only to correct errors 
and expose mis-statements, but to convey, when re- 
quired, the most useful knowledge. Their minute 
acquaintance with persons, places, and circum- 
stances in India would give them a confidence in 
the performance of such a duty far beyond what the 
mere study of records can ever impart; and on all 
such subjects they would receive an attention pro- 
portionate to the impression of their local experi- 
ence, information, and judgment. 

It has been asserted that the directors are more 
disposed to nominate, to the first and civil and mi- 
litary stations, persons who have acquired cha- 
racter at home, in the West Indies, or on the con- 
tinent of Europe, than the officers of the Company. 
This belief, which is very general among their ser- 
vants abroad, is not exactly grounded in fact. In 
such appointments, the directors alluded to are ge- 
nerally overruled by his majesty’s ministers, though 
there can be no doubt that the victory is in most 
cases not very difficult. This arises from their par- 
ticipation in the greater admiration which the puh- 
h'c bestow on services performed on scenes that are 
near than on those which are remote; from their 
yielding more respeet to men whom they have 



IN ENGLAND. 


93 


seen, or met in the highest sphere of society in 
England, than they do to persons whom, from their 
original nomination and career, they almost deem 
beings of their own creation, and in some respects 
below them ; from their habits and feelings mak> 
ing them less attentive to the qualities which fit 
individuals for high stations, than to those which 
give them a value as subordinate instruments ; and 
from being restrained, particularly in recommend- 
ing for appointments to high military command, 
hy a consideration of seniority*, which must, 
while persevered in, be fatal to the hopes of the 
Indian army. 

Whatever may be the solid advantages of the 
Company’s service, and they are neither few in 
number nor small in amount, all those who aspire 
at distinction must be hostile to a system which 
they believe unfavourable to their hopes of future 
elevation. Men of high and disinterested minds 
may occasionally divest themselves of self, so far 
as to advocate on general grounds what they feel 
as personally injurious; but such instances will be 
rare, and the ordinary motives of human nature 
will lead men to desire the abolition of an autho- 

♦ Not one commander-in-chief has been chosen from the 
Company’s army since Mr. Pitt’s Bill. On an occasion when the 
court of directors sought to do away with this injustice, they 
brought forward the name of one of their oldest officers who 
had not served for many years ; his character was highly re- 
spectable ; but the objections taken against such a recommen- 
dation were just and unanswerable. 



94 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


rity which they deem to be, either from its want of 
power or of disposition to support them, unfavour- 
able to their advancement. ' 

Mr. Pitt’s Bill, though it subjected the court of 
directors, to ministerial control in every branch of 
their administration, except in that which related 
to the management of the commercial concerns 
of the Company, made no changes either in the 
form of their election or the mode of executing 
such duties as were left to them : but one of the 
most important, the secret and political depart- 
ment, was, by this act, and a subsequent one, in a 
great degree taken out of their himds. This is 
one of the most delicate parts of the machinery of 
the present system, and, therefore, requires to be 
well understood. 

In all cases of political negotiation with native 
powers, involving questions of peace and war, 
and requiring secrecy, the responsibility rests with 
the board of control, who, by the law, are empow- 
ered to frame despatches upon those subjects; 
which despatches the secret committee* are bound 
to forward to India under their signature. The com- 
mittee may remonstrate verbally, or in writing, 
against instructions framed in opposition to their 
judgment ; but their right to do so is not recog- 

* This committee is formed of the chairman and the senior 
director, not filling one of the chairs. If the latter, from illness 
or other cause, is absent for any pei'iod, his place is filled by 
the next senior director. 



IN ENGLAND. 


95 


I 

niaed by law*, as in the case of the puUic-f* de- 
spatches, and can, therefore, only be deemed one of 
courtesy and usage. 

The proposed benefit of making the secret com- 
mittee the medium for conveying orders in the 
secret and political department is, to uphold the 
authority of the Company in India, which, it is 
thought, would be injured by a direct official cor- 
respondence between the board of control and the 
government in that country. The signing of such 
despatches, when contrary to their judgment is, 
however, stated by an act of parliament to be 
purely ministerial on the part of the committee; 
but though the latter have not a legal right to pro- 
pose alterations, or to delay the transmission of 
the board’s despatches, still their condition as the 
head of a branch of-^the Indian government, and 
the means which, as such, they must possess of 
aiding or obstructing the minor measures connected 
with any importtmt resolution the board of control 
may adopt, must always make it a matter of solici- 
tude and importance for the board to carry this com- 
mittee along with them; and the latter must give 
an influence in such affairs proportionate to the in- 

* Vide Geo. III. cap. 3, sect. 19, 20, 21. 

t The public despatches are framed by the court of directors, 
and approved or altered by the India board. If the court 
of directors delay, after requisition from the board, to frame 
des|)atches upon any subject connected with their civil or mili- 
tary government, the board have the power to frame them; 
and • they must be forwarded by the directors. Vide Geo. Ill, 
cap. 8, sect. 15. 



96 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


formation and talents of those of whom it is com- 
posed. 

It is to be remarked, however, that the value of 
the privilege which courtesy and usage have given 
to the committee, of expressing, or even recording, 
dissentient opinions must, like many others that be- 
long to the different parts of the Indian government, 
depend upon its rare and temperate exercise; for 
the frequency of that would convert a salutary 
restraint into a source of embarrassment; but if 
such consideration operates, as it no doubt does, 
to make the secret committee, in most cases, 
aid and promote, instead of weaken and impede, 
the action of that power which is vested in the 
superior board ; the latter should, on the same 
principle, refrain, as much as possible, from inter- 
ference in less important affairs. The right of con- 
trol is much more exercised at present than it was 
for a long period after the Indian board was esta- 
blished. This has been occasioned by a variety 
of causes, and in many cases may have had a bene- 
ficial effect ; but we must not overlook the great 
evils which may arise out of such gradual encroach- 
ment. If the interference of the board descends 
into every minute question, and its power of dic- 
tation is in frequent exercise, the court of directors 
will either sink into a mere channel for its orders, 
or the respect for the board will be diminished^ 
and there will be an end of that feeling and good 
understanding which it is essential should subsist 
between these two authorities. 



IN ENGLAND. 


97 


In such case, we might apprehend the complete 
fulfilment of Mr. Burke’s prediction* of the result 
of the present form of our Indian administration : 
that can alone be averted by the temper, modera- 
tion, and knowledge, of those at the head of its 
separate branches. 

When the board of control was first instituted, 
the same general letters from the different pre- 
sidencies contained every subject. This was 
changed. The correspondence was divided into 
four departments; the public, the revenue, the 
military, and the commercial. The convenience 
of this new arrangement was recognised by the 
supreme government ; and, at its suggestion, a fifth 
or political department, which included all the cor- 
respondence, not secret, with or regarding Euro- 
pean or native powers in India, was added to the 
other four. 

The court of directors divide themselves, accord- 
ing to usage of long standing, into committees, 
for the performance of their various duties ; those 
divisions have reference to seniority of standing in 

* The scheme of reconciling a direction really and truly 
deliberative,” said Mr. Burke, ** with an office really and 
substantially controlling, is a sort of machinery that can be 
kept in order only a short time. Either the directors will 
dwindle into clerks, or the secretary of state, as has hitherto 
been the case, will leave everything to them ; often through 
design, and often through neglect. If both should affect ac- 
tivity, collision, procrastination, delay, and, 'in the end, utter 
confusion, must ensue.” 

Vot. II. H 



98* GOVERNMENT :pP INDIA 

the direction, not the qualification and fitness of 
the individuals. 

The chairmen are almost invariablj chosenTrom- 
the senior directors. Tlie most important of the 
committees for affairs, not secret, is that of the 
correspondence, which is formed of eleven of the 
senior directors^ inclusive of the chairman and 
deputy chairman.. On this committee devolve 
the reading, examining, and answering of all the- 
despatches; from India, except those in the secret 
or commercial departments. Almost all measures 
of importance originate with them, and their 
opinion is, in most cases, a guide for the court. 

Generally speaking, a period of at least ten 
years must elapse from the election of a director, 
before he can become a member of the committee 
of correspondence ; previous to that, he is attached 
to one of the junior conmiittces *, and his time is 
chiefly occupied with its duties t detail, having no 
concern with the larger questions that relate to the 
general administration of India, except when those 
are agitated in court. It is true that every mem- 
ber of the court has a right, not only to call, for 
papers (not secret), but to originate measures^ 
This right, however, is rarely exercised ; for the 

* The ioferior committees are divided into classes, and the 
^rectors succeed to them also by -seniority, without referened 
to qualification : they are numerous, and embrace every de- 
partment competed with the comnierce and property of the 
Company. 



IN ENGLANP. 


99 : 


sense of the inconvenience which must attend tak- 
ing subjects out of those departments to which 
they belong creates a salutary forbearance frdm 
this course of proceeding. 

From the 'mode in which the duties of the court 
of directors are at present allotted, it is obvious 
that the election of an individual who, from the 
stations he may have filled abroad, possesses fall 
and valuable information respecting the actual con- 
dition and government of that empire is, as far as 
the political interests of India are concerned, of 
little or no benefit to the public. On entering the 
direction, he is almost exclusively employed on 
duties of a totally opposite character to those 
which have occupied his past life; and when 
seniority advances him to a place in the com- 
mittee of correspondence, or secret department, 
he carries with him, not that fresh and useful 
knowledge which he would have done had his 
mind gone along with events, but the bias of an 
attachment to old opinions, many of which may 
have become obsolete. 

These facts cannot be controverted, and it fol- 
lows as a consequence, that a minute knowledge of 
the afiairs of India, and of the political interests of 
that country, is rarely possessed by any of the 
senior directors.. It is possessed by the secretaries 
and head clerks, many of whom arc men distin- 
guished by talent, as well as industry ; but to them, 
as the principle depositaries of knowledge, there 



100 GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 

exists the same objection as that which' applies to 
Ae constitution of the board of control. 

There are many causes which give a vacillating 
character to the proceedings of the court of di- 
rectors, and tend, at times, to precipitate, and at 
others, . to retard, measures of vital importance ; 
but one of the most prominent is the shortness 
of the period that each chairman fills the chair. 
His business during that period is overwhelm- 
ing, and much of it must be hurried through, or 
neglected, or transferred, half done, to his successor ; 
who, very possibly, has different sentiments upon 
several of the points nnder consideration. We may 
add to this cause of frequent and sudden changes 
in their 'views, that of the annual retirement and 
re-election of six members* of this body. The 
ex-directors for the year having no right to see any 
papers, or to have access to official documents 
during their recess, they return to their duties 

* Those six ex-directors must he re-elected ; they form what 
is tenned the house list; their re-election« except in extraor- 
dinary cases, is almost certain : it is most desirable it should be 
so, for where it otherwise, the situation of a director, which it 
IS politic to raise, would be greatly decreased in value. Many 
respectable and highly-qualified individuals are deterred, by 
the nature of the first canvass, from seeking a seat in the di- 
rection. If this canvass was to be repeated every six years, 
some of the most useful members might be lost to this body ; 
and among those that remained, a greater spirit of conciliation 
towards their constituents might be introduced than was con- 
sistent with the impartial performance of their public dutiea. . 



IN ENGLAND. JOt 

ignorant of the measures under discussion, or at 
least with the disadvantage of having the chain of 
information entirely broken. 

The government of the court of directors is 
marked by strict attention to rule, and alarm at 
every measure contrary to usage, or that can 
create a precedent for future deviation from it. 
These are good general maxims of ordinary admi> 
nistration, for limited and unchanging states ; but, 
in an empire like that of India, their constant and 
cold observance must be fatal to that life and ani- 
mation which ought to pervade the whole system. 
Every latent spark of honourable ambition should 
be kindled, and the anxiety should be to promote, 
by encouragement and by reward, the efforts of 
individuals to attain distinction in the public ser- 
vice. No government can be highly respected 
which, entrenching itself in forms, is more solicitous 
to avoid the reproach of injustice, than to inspire 
zealous exertion. Its acts may be just, and even 
liberal; but unless they are suited to the character 
of the individuals and classes subject to its autho- 
rity, and evince complete competence in the rulers 
to go along with the rapid changes of the pe- 
culiar empire they have to rule, such government 
must fall into disrepute with those by whom they 
are served. That this has been the case with the 
court of directors, no man acquainted with facts 
can deny; and an increase of information and 
knowledge is not more necessary in that court to 



GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

enable it to withstand the daily attempts made in 
England to lessen and degrade it, than to maintain 
its reputation with its servants abroad, many of 
whom, under the induence of personal feelings, 
contemplate the termination of the power of the 
Company with little reflection on the probable 
consequences of such an event to India, and to 
Great Britain. 

This is not the place, nor is it, perhaps, the 
period to suggest the details of any plan of reform ; 
but those who desire the continuance of the Com* 
pany may be satisfied, that all who aim at its 
destruction will be enemies to. any change in the 
constitution of the court of directors which shaU 
tend to raise that body, by making it more efficient 
to the performance of its large and increasing 
duties. It is to a system of depression they trust 
for ultimate success; but nothing can be more 
hazardous to the interests of the Indian empire 
than this mode of killing, as it were, by inches, 
the body through whom it is governed. The court 
of directors should not only be maintained in all 
their rights and privileges, but elevated, if it is de- 
sired to render it a useful and efficient branch of 
the Indian government : if not, the sooner it is 
abolished the better. To understand this question, 
let us look to its actual condition. Tlie character 
of this' court has undergone groat alterations; the 
changes which have taken jdace in the views and 
sentiments of the proprietors have extended to the 



103 


•m ENGLAND. 

directors. A separate and extehsive commercial 
interest has already gained the greater part of the 
trade of the Company, and threatens the re- 
mainder. That service, which once exclusively 
looked to them, no longer docs so; the public 
press, which is every day becoming a more power- 
ful engine of change, is, from many reasons, far 
from favourable to them: that all these causes 
have combined to lower the court of directors in 
public estimation cannot be denied ; but there are 
others of equal, if not greater force. The acts 
of 1793 and 1813, by transferring almost all real 
territorial and political powers to the ministers of 
the crowp, deprived the court of directors of much 
of that consequence which they before enjoyed; 
and their unpopularity has been recently increased 
by the growing dislike of all monopolies, and ah 
increasing desire for new openings of trade. This 
desire, so far from being lessened, has been greatly 
augmented by the partial opening of the India 
trade; the benefit of which, to the public, is con- 
sidered to be much impaired by the command 
which the Company still maintain over the foreign 
market. The consequence has been, that the Com- 
pany, by ceasing to be rulers, and by remaining 
monopolists, have lost the consideration which be- 
longed to their former character ; while the odium 
ever attached to the latter has been increased. 

No person, possessing a knowledge of the con- 
stitution of England, can desire to change the 



104 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

compositiou of the court of directors in any manner 
that would more approximate them to his majesty’s 
ministers. Their separation from the latter, even 
in the common intercourse of life, owing to their 
different occupation and connexions, has its im- 
portance; but the useful check which it constitutes 
must be weakened, if not destroyed, unless it is 
supported by personal character, and acknow- 
ledged information and talent. The deterioration 
of the court in public estimation must deteriorate 
it as respects the talent and character of its in- 
dividual members. The office of director will 
every day become less an object of ambition to 
men of high feeling, and who have already obtain- 
ed distinction. 

Under the present circumstances, it appears dif- 
ficult for the Company to maintain their ground 
as an efficient branch of the administration of In- 
dia; perhaps, indeed, impossible, unless changes 
take place which shall give to the court of di- 
rectors, as a body, more weight and consideration 
than they now enjoy with the public: this weight 
and consideration, all who are favourable to their 
existence must desire to see them attain. 

The limitation of the Company’s monopoly in 
trade has produced considerable changes as to per- 
sons chosen for directors ; but still no qualifica- 
tions are required beyond the possession of a 
certain amount of stock; and the condition and 
avocation of a great majority of the voters of both 



IN ENGLAND. 


105 


sexes offer no security as to the fitness of a can> 
didate for the direction. There existed^ until 
lately, restrictions which barred any person * who 
continued in the service from being a director, 
notwithstanding he had acquired a right, unless 
specially called upon to reside in his native country. 
Such restrictions, which had their birth in that 
spirit of narrow and jealous policy that charac- 
terized the early days of the Company, are ill 
suited to its present condition, and at variance with 
the usage of the government of England. The 
latter admits unemployed officers to every office'J* of 
the state, wisely obtaining all the advantage it can 
from that increased knowledge and experience 
which the duties of their profession enable them to 
acquire ; and even when these are not publicly em- 
ployed, they are often officially called upon to give 

The excluslon'of such persons from being directors was con* 
tinued by a bye-law, which has been lately expunged, as being 
contrary to the provisions of the legislature, from which it ap- 
pears there is no restriction against officers so situated as com- 
mandants of regiments residing in England entering the di- 
rection. The only pretext on which an objection could be 
raised is, their liability to be called upon for foreign service ; 
but every officer of his majesty’s service, in civil or political 
employ in England, is in the same situation, and the usage of 
the Company’s service since 1796, when colonels of coi^ were 
entitled to live in England, establishes, that their return to 
India is deemed optional. 

t There are several situations in England in which the em- 
ployment of officers, who continue in the Indian army, would be 
{dike honourable to the service and henedcitd to government. 



106 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


their opinions individually, or collectively in com** 
mittees, upon points on which their professional 
experience, or recent knowledge, enables them to 
judge with accuracy. Such calls are seldom, if 
ever, made upon Indian civil or military officers 
who are retired, or on furlough in England; and 
yet it would be difficult to point out any govern- 
ment in the world, which, from the character of its 
duties, stands so much in need of this kind of aid. 
But until considerable changes are made in the 
construction, both of the India board and the 
court of directors, this assistance will never be. at- 
tained in any degree that can render it beneficial 
to the country. 

The increasing difficulties of governing such an 
empire as that we have established in the east 
imperiously call upon us to avail ourselves of all 
the means we possess to enable us to overcome 
them : but we must not deceive ourselves as to the 
real cause of opposition to measures of alteration, 
such as have here been suggested. It is the alarm 
of individuals and classes of men lest injury 
should arise to their own interests ; but in this 
conclusion they are assuredly deceived. The effect 
would be the reverse, for the admixture of men 
who have knowledge of India with those who have 
a knowledge of England would early destroy those 
baneful prejudices which both parties entertain 
towards each other; and, while it difi'used correct 
information and just principles, would give strength. 



IN ENGLAND. 


107 


and permanence to a system which cannot much 
longer exist on its present foundation. 

• : In the actual condition of our Asiatic posscssionsj 
there is no principle in their administration of such 
consequence as that of keeping those who are em- 
ployed abroad as much European as possible, 
consistent with their attainment of the qualities 
essential to fit them for their local duties in India. 
We can contemplate no diinger equal to their 
looking to the latter iis the country in which they 
are to pass their lives ; such a sentiment, if ever it 
becomes prevalent amongst the public servants, 
must ultimately prove as fatal to the interests of 
England as of India. This is fully miderstood by 
the government at home; and whilst they have 
very properly done away those means of accumu- 
lating wealth which were at variance with our im- 
proved system of rule, they have recently made 
liberal arrangements to facilitate the return of those 
who have served a certain period, either in the 
civil or military service; but one eftect of this 
branch of expenditure will be, to make numbers 
(many of whom are in the prime of life) pass 
the remainder of their days in an unprofitable 
manner, unless objects* are presented to their 
ambition both in India and in England. In the 

♦ The liberal measures lately adopted are so far a benefit, as 
they prevent men fixing in India, and accelerate promotion ; 
hut their utility stops here ; and it will probably be found, that 
measures will be hereafter necessary to regain services which 
will be lost by the effect of this liberality, unless some objects 



108 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


pursuit* of these in the latter country, men of in- 
formation and talent would soon lose their limited 
and local feelings. Their importance with themselves 
and others would rise as the sphere of their utility 
became enlarged. Their patriotic attachment to 
their native land will be strengthened, and the 
weight and influence of their character will be the 
means of keeping alive such sentiments in others, 
who will give more ready assent to the wisdom and 
expediency of measures that are associated with 
names to which they have long and habitually 
given respect and confidence. 

Some who admit that the mode proposed is the 
best by which prejudices can be removed, and 
attachment to their native country revived and 
strengthened, will perhaps startle at a plan that 
suggests the necessity of facilitating to tho&e who 
have served abroad the attainment of employment 
in both branches of the Indian administration in 
England; hut such ol^cction stands on narrow, 
indefensible, and most unconstitutional grounds. 
Has any officer, political, civil, military, or naval, 

are held out to lead men of talent to continue to serve their 
country in India after they have attained a title to return on a 
competence to England. 

• It has heen sometimes stated, that men generally return 
from India at an age when they are more fit to retire than to 
enter on new scenes of public employment. This assertion is > 
not supported by facts; besides, the employment to which it is 
proposed to turn their attention would not be new, but an useful 
continuance of the labours of their past lives, 



IN ENGLAND. 


109 


of his majesty’s service, when retired upon pension, 
half or fall pay, ever been considered as less quali- 
fied to enter any department of the state, because 
he had been in a particular line of service, or might 
^ain be called upon to act in it if his country re- 
quired? Do we not meet with persons of this 
description in various offices and stations? Do 
they not often fulfil duties which lead them not 
merely to differ with, but to control and censure 
those very authorities under whom they had for- 
merly acted, and may again act? 'Diat such is 
the case cannot be denied ; and who will codtend 
that there is any principle in the administration 
of India which should constitute a difference to 
this practice. 

Some will argue, that employment in India is re- 
served for a privileged few, and that those who 
enjoy it should not repine if it, in a great degree, 
throws them out of public life in their native 
country ; and they will perhaps add, that the persons 
with whose prospects they might interfere, if such 
facilities were given as have been suggested towards 
their obtaining office in England, might justly com- 
plain unless the India service was opened to their 
ambition. Such arguments might have force, if the 
English public officers were qualified for stations in 
India, or if, in the administration at home, we could 
dispense with that information and knowledge which 
is alone possessed by India public officers. But we 
must hot try this important question by a reference 



110 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


to the claims or privileges of individuals, or classes 
of men. It is one of state policy, and intimately 
connected with the preservation and good govern- 
ment of one of the most extraordinary empires that 
ever was founded in the universe. With all the 
means we can prepare and employ, we shall be too- 
likely to fail in these objects •; but that &.ilure will 
be certain, if we allow our efforts for their attain- 
ment to be circumscribed by ordinary maxims, and 
rules adapted to the routine administration of petty 
colonies, or the regulated forms of the most admired 
national constitutions, which differ from that in 
question either by the temper and genius of the 
governed, or the principles and system of the 
government. 

The education of the youth who enter the service 
in India is liberal: their occupations abroad are of 
a character to enlarge their minds. The evils and 
misfortunes they continually contemplate as arising 
from despotic rule must render them more attached 
to the free government of their native country; and 
no great class of men can be placed under circum- 
stances more calculated to give them extended views 
of national policy, or to qualify them for different 
public duties. Acting in countries rem-ote from 
each other, and whose inhabitants differ in language 
and customs as much as the nations of Europe, 
some members of this class rise to the exercise of 
almost kingly rule; others fill political, civil, judicial) 
fiscal, and military stations. Such a variety of occu- 



IN ENGLAND. 


Ill 


patiou must in India, as elsewhere, produce an in- 
finite variety of character, and qualify men to pursue 
the most opposite courses, if such arc open to them 
in England. It is a sense of injury alone, at the, 
operation of causes which virtually almost exclude 
tliem ItQjn public life, that can unite them in hos- 
tility against a system, which, under other circum- 
stances, it must be their interest to support : nor 
would the prejudices they may have imbibed from 
a residence in India long survive their return to 
England, unless they found themselves placed 
under circumstances discouraging to their am- 
bition, and almost compclle ^into a community of 
sentiments and feelings by being considered as a 
distinct class. This is, to a great degree, their pre- 
sent situation, and no reflecting man can doubt its 
injurious eflects on the public interests, which re- 
quire a mixture of Indian and European knowledge 
that cim only be effectually obtained, by the union 
in . public office as well as general society, of those 
whose lives, though passed in different hemispheres, 
have been directed to one object, the good of their 
country. The useful approximation of such per- 
sona to each other must, however, depend on a 
parity of condition, which, while it promotes inter- 
course, gives birth to that respect and attention 
which men do not readily entertain for the opinions 
of those whom they consider to be their inferiors in 
rank or in knowledge. 

Amongst those whose industry and talent have 



113 


GOVERNME^^T OF INDIA 


contributed to the good government of India sub- 
sequent to the establishment of the board of control, 
the secretaries and clerks at the heads of depart- 
ments of that board, as well as those of the India- 
House, 'must not be passed over. It would be 
difficult to point out any class of men in similar 
situations who have laboured harder, or more to the 
benefit of the public, or who have preserved a 
higher character for integrity and ability. The in- 
formation and minute knowledge of Indian afiairs 
which some of these have attained from the huge 
volumes of the records of our Eastern empire, is 
quite surprising ; but the good that the public might 
derive from their labour and talents is diminished, 
not only (as noticed before) from the disadvantages 
inseparable from their own want of local knowledge 
and experience, but also from their superiors often 
but imperfectly understanding the details of the 
matter laid before them. The latter, even when 
they have the disposition and the leisure, must 
wade through a mass of writing on subjects, of 
which a minute knowledge is rendered more un- 
attainable by the local references, and the very 
names of persons, places, and things, as foreign to 
the ear as confusing to the sense of the English 
reader. Any change of system, giving increase of 
knowledge to their superiors, must ultimately prove 
most beneficial to the interests of this elass. Men 
who had confidence in their own competency could 
have no reserve as to the resources from which they 



m ENGLAND. 


113 


derive assistance, and their experience and discrimi- 
nating judgment would be favourable to the rise* 
of all whose industry and talent rendered them 
conspicuous. 

Existing establishments must always be liable to 
attack, and in a free and enlightened nation like 
England we may trace much of their excellence to 
this cause. They are kept in a state of vigilance 
and activity by their assailants : the public opinion 
must go along with them, or th(;y would soon ctasc 
to exist ; but that public opinion is not to be taken 
from the speeches of members of parliament con- 
tending for victory ; nor from the daily effusions of 
contradictory papers and publications ; nor from the 
clamour of numbers acting under some momentary 
impulse; nor from the pages of philosophers, who 
theorize upon institutions that are to give a new 
character to the human race : but though no one of 
these is the representation of public opinion, they 
all influence and help to form it, and as education 

* The duties of the suboi'dinate officers at the board of 
control and the India*house are quite distinct from those of any 
other offices in England. The great application and study ne- 
cessary to attain that competent knowledge which it is essential 
the heads of departments should possess must withdraw the 
persons filling such stations from all other studies and views. 
This consideration demands that such functionaries should be 
placed on as high a footing as the nature of their situation will 
permit. Their elevation, while it rewards their efforts, will 
stimulate that of others, and be every way productive of public 
benefit. 

Vouir. 



114 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


is diffused they will daily gain more strength. Let 
us hope, however, that, as knowledge advances, the 
sound national sense of an English public will keep 
pace with it, and judge all questions that are con- 
stitutionally important, free from the party feeling, 
the interests, the passions, or the theories of those, 
from the active exercise of whose ambition, in- 
dustry, talent, and enthusiasm, it derives its best 
lights. 

Notwithstanding that happy tenacity of usage 
and respect, even for the forms of establishments, 
which characterizes the majority of Englishmen, 
there exists in the present state of society an 
expectation of their progressive improvement. 
Such iinijroveincnts, however, must be made with 
great caution, lest more be sacrificed than gained ; 
and we may lay it down as an axiom, that the 
true value of all institutions depends upon their 
being in unison with the community and govern- 
ment to which they belong. If we desire their 
stability, we must adapt them to the strength, 
the weakness, the prejudices, the virtues, the vices, 
all the qualities, in short, of those human beings 
for whose benefit they arc founded. 

That sound public opinion, which it is so essen- 
tial to carry along with every branch of our free 
government, has been very partially exercised in 
respect to the administxution of Indian affairs. 
The problem of the best imode of governing that 
country is so difficult to he solved, the interests 



m ENGI^ANn. 


115 


affected by it so remote and complicated, that few 
have given it any deep attention. When the 
privileges of the Company were last renewed, the 
question was considered as being at rest for twenty 
years. The expiration of this term is not yet 
sufficiently near to excite the activity of those 
parties which that event will bring into collision ; 
hut it is most desirable that, before the arrival of 
that period, the subject should undergo the fullest 
investigation, for it involves questions of great 
national importance, the consideration and decision 
upon which should not be left to the hurried mo- 
ment of a conflict between parties swayed by their 
respective interests, and striving to attain their ob- 
jects through every means that temporary impres- 
sions can make upon minds uninformed of the na- 
ture and merits of the question which they are 
called to decide. 

Viewing the actual establishments with reference 
to the facts and principles which have been stated, 
it should be calmly examined how far they are, or 
can be, rendered efficient to the purposes for which 
they were intended ; considering that, of all go- 
vernments, that is least likely to command respect, 
and gain strength, over which a sword is always 
suspended, and which holds existence under respite, 
it would be better either to abolish the Company 
as a medium of governing India, or to give to 
that body a broader, more solid, and more perma- 
nent foundation. To judge this point, it would be 

I 8 



116 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


necessary to look minutely to the benefits which 
might be anticipated from its preservation ; to its 
defects as an organ of rule; to the possibility ot 
remedying these defects ; to the practicability of 
substituting a better medium; and, lastly, to the 
probable consequences of placing our vast territo- 
ries in the East under the direct rule of the king’s 
government. In forming our judgment upon these 
important questions, we must never for one 
moment lose sight of the peculiar character of 
our empire in India, which hears little analogy 
to any power that ever existed in the universe. 
This compels us to look, almost exclusively, to its 
own history for those lessons which are to guide 
us through the difiioulties wc must expect to 
encounter in its future administration ; and the 
experience which that aftbrds is limited, for the 
government we have established has hardly one 
feature in common with that of former conquerors, 
most of whom became inhabitants of the land 
they had subdued. It would, however, fill a 
volume to treat these subjects in the manner their 
importance merits ; and it is, jierhaps, impossible 
at this distance of time to anticipate the changes 
in Europe or in India that may influence the 
question. It will suffice therefore, for the present, 
to offer some general observations on the more 
prominent points which have been brought under 
notice. 

No government has ever evinced a ereater dis- 



IN ENGLAND. 


117 


position towards a just and humane rule than that 
of the East India Company. It has been as prompt 
to correct abuses as zealous and liberal in the sup- 
port of all acts of the local authorities that pro- 
mised benefit to the natives of its vast territories. 
An anxious desire to improve the finances has, at 
times, given a direction to the zeal of its servants 
not favourable to the increasing prosperity of the 
country, from many parts of which too large a re- 
venue has been exacted ; but this desire has never 
led to the countenance of any violence or injus- 
tice. The same principle has given the authori- 
ties in England a strong but salutary prejudice 
against all those contests with native princes into 
which the governments abroad have been compelled 
to enter. This has had a happy operation ; for 
though neither their instructions nor orders could 
prevent our attainment of that power which our 
condition in India forced upon us as a law of exist- 
ence, the known disposition of the directors and 
the legislature certainly impeded the progress of 
conquest, and, by doing so, has, in all probability, 
given our dominion more solidity than it would 
have had if its conquest had been effected, as it 
might have been, in half the period. 

The court of directors are in a great degree in- 
dependent of the favours of the ministers of the 
crown, who find it diflficult to bend them to any 
purposes which they deem injurious to their repu- 
tation, or to the rights or privileges of those whom 



118 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


they consider as immediately tinder their protec- 
tion. This renders them an invaluable shield, to 
guard from attack and encroachment the rights of 
the service abroad ; but it is a remarkable fact that 
those whose interests, as a body, they are so 
prompt to defend, are not so sensible, as might be 
expected, of the saf ety they derive from this inter- 
mediate authority. The causes of this are obvious: 
the highest and most distinguished of these public 
officers, whose opinions and actions have a great 
influence over the rest, are too often discontented 
at their condition, and hostile to this branch of the 
Indian administration. The supposed disposition 
of the court to look chiefly to exjienditurc *, oc- 
casions every rc'diiction either to be ascribed to 
them, or to a desire of conciliating their favour; 
while all acts of grace or liberality arc referred 
either to the representations of local superiors in 
India, or to the interference of his majesty’s govern- 
ment. These conclusions arc often unjust, but 
they are always made ; and they operate to prevent 

• There is no service in which pay is so good, and the means 
of retirement so liberally provided for, as that of the Company. 
The nature of this service requires that it should be so. Money 
long constituted the only reward to which those who went to 
India could look ; and it still constitutes the leading object of 
the great majority. The desire of attaining this object pro- 
duces many ungrounded accusations against the court of direc- 
tors, all of whose economical measures are invariably ascribed 
to narrowness of commercial feeling, from their being a com- 
mercial body. 



IN ENGLAND. 


119 


those feelings of respect and attachment which it 
is so desirable men should entertain for that autho- 
rity under which they arc placed : those feelings, 
however, never can be maintained in large classes 
by a system that employs no means hut those of 
circumscribed rules and cold, inanimate justice. 
There must be parts of the community kindled into 
warmer sentiments than such means can ever inspire, 
or a government will never acquire the popularity 
which it is essential for it to possess. This ingre- 
dient of rule is singularly wanting in the Company’s 
government. It has few if any zealous and active 
advocates, to meet those attacks with which it is 
continually assailed ; and the consequence is, that, 
though serious reflection should tcadi the great 
body of those who are in its service that no change 
is likely to be for their advantage, all that they arc in 
the daily habit of hearing and reading is calculated 
to make a different impression upon their minds. 

The manner in which the directors exercise 
their great patronage has satisfied the public that 
it could not be in safer or more honourable hands ; 
but it is to be regretted that this patronage should 
form the principal object in seeking the direction, 
and the chief reward after having attained it. ITie 
first circumstiincc induces some to become candi- 
dates for the office of director whose views are 
limited to the attainment of a provision for their 
families, relations, and friends ; and the second de- 
prives this government of one of the greatest means 



120 GOVKUNMENT OF INDIA 

wLicli all other governments possess, that of en- 
couraging, rewarding, and attaching those by whom 
they are served, by admitting, to a certain extent, 
the claims of sons and near connexions of persons 
who have been distinguished in the public service. 
These are not only rejected by the directors in 
their corporate capacity, but their advancement is 
considered as an infringement of their most valued 
privilege. This is the fault of the system, not of 
the directors ; they arc paid in patronage, and a 
deduction from its amount would operate as a de- 
duction from the wages of their labour. This 
fact clears them of all blame, but it does not render 
the evil less. It may, perhaps, be asserted that the 
interest and connexions of men in the service, com- 
bined with the humanity and consideration of in- 
dividual directors, palliates, if it does not remedy, 
this defect of the system ; but this is a mistake, for 
the very mode in which such favour is bestowed, 
though it may raise the reputation of him who 
confers it, lowers that of the body to which he 
belongs : besides, it is not seemly to see the sons of 
those who have stood the highest in the civil ser- 
vice of the Company, or of officers who have fallen 
in some memorable engagement, enter the list of 
common solicitors, or carrying their petitions from 
door to door of those who preside for the season 
over the interests of that empire, the prosperity of 
which the parents of the supplicants have laboured 
with distinction, or died with glory, to promote. 



IN ENGLAND. 


121 


The court of directors arc often very generous 
to the widows and families of deceased officers of 
distinction left in distress^ and they have always 
given a most liberal support to the funds insti- 
tuted for their relief: but this liberality imparts 
little if any of that feeling which would be spread 
throughout the service by the son* receiving such 
notice and protection on account of the services 
of his father. To estimate the value of this 
principle, we have only to look to its effects in the 
navy or army of England. Notwithstanding that 
eagerness for patronage which pervades these 
services, hereditary claims are seldom neglected 
or rejected, and the attention known to be given 
to them stimulates the highest minds to action 
in a degree beyond all other motives. 

There is no part of the conduct of the dii’cctors 
in which they merit more praise than the attention 
paid of late years to the education of youth for 
the different bnuiches of the service abroad. Dif- 
ferent opinions may exist as to the modes they 
have taken of promoting that important object, 
hut all are agreed in commending the spirit of libe- 
Kvlity in which it has been pursued. 

The court of proprietors is necessarily a popular 
body, and will always consist principally of that 
class which are termed the monied interest; but 

• If any part of the patronage of India is ever allotted to 
this purpose, care must he taken to make arrangements that 
would secure the greatest possible benefit from its exercise. 



122 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


with this advantage, that- almost all who return 
from India with fortunes purchase India stock, 
from the interest they take in the affairs of that 
country; and we may always look to this class 
as favourable to the pretensions of candidates for 
the direction whose claims are groimded on ac- 
knowledged talents and high reputation in the pub- 
lic service. The privilege possessed by the court of 
proprietors of investigating every act of the court 
of directors, or of those they employ abroad, which 
may in any way affect the prosperity of the 
corporation, gives a wide and useful range to their 
debates. Their confirmation being necessary to 
all pecuniary grants, above a small amount, renders 
their opinion of importance on all such measures ; 
and there is a decided benefit in the publicity 
which the proceedings of the proprietors give to 
such cjucstions. The utility of this body, as a 
check upon the abuse of power, should be cal- 
culated, like other parts of our free constitution, 
less with reference to what they do, than to what 
they prevent others from doing. A great majo- 
rity of the proprietors stands alike independent of 
ministers and the court of directors, and this 
position gives them much value as a branch of 
Indian legislature. 

Many objections have been taken to the com- 
position and form of the court of proprietors, 
and some of them are no doubt well-grounded. 
Every question is discussed in open court, an4 



IN ENGLAND. 


123 


decided by the majority of those present ; but the 
minority may call for a ballot at which all pro- 
prietors, whatever be their sex or condition, are 
entitled to vote. 

Sufficient has been said to enable us to judge, 
first, whether the government of the Company, as 
at present established, is competent to its increasing 
civil and political duties ; and, secondly, if it is 
not, how far its form and constitution will admit 
of improvements which will better fit it for its 
sovereign functions. If it be determined, as it 
probably will be, that some alterations are indis- 
pensable, we may assume that the changes which 
have lately occurred, and those which are to be 
anticipated in its character, are most favourable to 
the. making of any reforms that may be deemed ex- 
pedient, either in the mode of election, the necessary 
qualification of candidates, or in the allotment of 
their duties after being nominated directors. Suffice 
it to say, that any plan for effecting such reforms 
will be incomplete, that does not unite the objects 
of improving the direction without taking from it 
that distinctive character which gives it a particular 
value, as part of our Indian legislature. 

* The usage of secret ballot, which is that resorted to on 
such occasions, is not limited to the court of proprietors. It 
continues to he practised by the directors whenever they are 
divided in opinion, and must tend to diminish in that body 
the personal responsibility which it is desirable to impose 
upon every man having such public duties to perform. 



GOVERNMENT OE INDIA 


m 

It is presumed tbat increase of knowledge, and 
more competenee to the particular duties allotted 
to the different ineniljcrs of this hody, would give 
them more weight and consequence, not only with 
all under their authority hut with the public, than 
they enjoy at present ; and it is believed this 
might he eft'ected without any changes of a violent 
nature. Many motives which at present lead men 
to desire a seat in the direction might be lost, but 
others would be created, more suited to the altered 
condition of the Company and the Indian empire. 
Nor is there any part of such a reform that would 
materially affect the principles of the actual go- 
vernment, though it would gradually introduce 
a considerable change in the duties of those by 
whom it was administered. 

However we may be disposed to think that the 
Indian government in England, as now constituted, 
is not adequate to its increasing duties, we should 
not hurry to the extreme of its abolition, without 
calmly considering whether it is not capable of re- 
form ; but the consequence of preserving it under 
an improved system will be best established by a 
view of the most prominent of those evils which 
must inevitably result from its destruction. 

It is not necessary to dwell upon the character 
and composition of any intermediate body that 
might be established in its place. The ingenuity 
of our ablest statesmen has been exhausted to de- 
vise plans for such an authority, and we should no 



IN ENGL/VND. 


125 


donbt have a repetition of such expedients : but no 
rational being can doubt that the ministers who 
could desire the annihilation of the Company, and 
had strength, to carry that measure into effect, 
would take care, in whatever manner they might 
mould their departments for the rule of India, to 
make the whole subservient to their own power. 
It is therefore nei^essary at present to offer some 
observations upon the probable consequences that 
would result from our vast eastern territories 
coming xmder the direct authority or influence of 
tlie crown. 

The first inevitable change on siuk an event 
would be in the difterent view taken of the Indian 
empire by the authority under which it was then 
placed. With the Company’s government it has 
always been, and must remain, a primary considera- 
tion ; with his inipesty’s government it must be a 
secondary one. This has been too often shown, in 
cases where the latter had a right to interfere, to 
leave a doubt of the fact ; and who can calculate 
the injury that would' arise in India, when every 
measure which regarded that empire should be con- 
sidered with reference to other and more imme- 
diate questions of expediency ? 

The urgent desire of satisfying friends, and of 
disarming opponents, of conciliating the public, or 
of avoiding parliamentary discussions, would often 
outweigh all interests connected with our remote 
possessions in the minds of the wisest and strongest 



126 


GOVERNMENT OE INDIA 


ministers ; and at a period of weakness, the most 
serious evils might justly be apprehended from this 
source : nor could we look to the House of Com- 
mons as that check which they form upon other 
occasions to any abuse or unwise exercise of power. 
Questions of a magnitude to excite the attention 
of that body would seldom be brought forward ; 
and when they were, they would be so enveloped 
in details, that few would understand them ; for a 
general and familiar acquaintance with the affairs 
of India can never be anticipated. 

Under such circumstances, that great country 
might be treated as a colony, without having those 
defences against misgovernment which colonies, 
in general, possess. The West Indies, for in- 
stance, besides their local colonial assemblies, have 
an embodied interest, whieh is strong in parlia- 
ment, and can advocate their rights whenever these 
arc assailed; but we can look to no period when 
there can be any representation of the nations of 
India. On the contrary, we may look for associ- 
ated interests against them, particularly when a 
system is adopted that will make every question 
connected with that country secondary to numerous 
other considerations. 

The alarm taken by the public at the transfer of 
the patronage now enjoyed by the direetors to the 
ministers of the crown, has hitherto contributed, 
more than all the other reasons, to the preservation 
of the Company; alid this is a rational and constitu- 



m ENGLAND. 


127 


tional ground of fear, both as to its probable effects 
in India and England. The general view that has 
been taken of this subject, is, however, very limit- 
ed. The actual patronage of the Company has been 
taken as that which, in the event of the abolition 
of the corporation, would fall to the crown; but 
those who have computed in this manner, have 
forgotten the weakness of one party, and the 
strength of the other. It would not be difficult to 
arrange, without much increase of the influence of 
the crown, for the disposal of the appointments of 
writers and cadets, nor is it of much consequence 
by whom, or how, these arc selected, provided 
means are taken to ensure their possessing the re* 
quisitc qualifications : but who will pretend to find 
a sufficient guard against the encroachments of the 
ministers on the rights and interests of the service 
abroad ; and who, that understands this subject, but 
must be satisfied that the very existence of the 
empire depends upon every branch of that service 
being sufficiently protected ? It will be asserted, 
that if India was under the direct authority of the 
crown, men of superior talent, who distinguished 
themselves in the country, would be brought much 
more forward, both at home and abroad, than they 
are at present, and that such a change would re- 
medy this prominent defect in the actual system* 
This might be true ; but though it is not meant to 
deny that his majesty’s ministers, as enlightened 
statesmen, would seek through such instruments to 



128 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


promote the good administration of our Eastern 
empire, can there be a doubt that they would 
also use this mean in aid of those efforts which 
their condition must compel them to make in order 
to extend their patronage? 

The Indian government, when transferred en- 
tirely to the ministers of the crown, would, even in 
• England, present a much greater number of places 
than is at present imagined; and supposing, as no 
doubt would be the case, the departments abroad 
were defended by regulations and acts of parlia- 
ment, numerous inroads nevertheless might, and 
would be, made upon them. There are many ap- 
pointments, civil and military, which can hardly lie 
said to belong to any particidar branch of the ser- 
vice; these are dependant upon events, and the 
exigencies of the moment, and must be left, in 
a great degree, to the discretion of the local au- 
thorities. The latter, supposing such motives to 
exist at the fountain-head as those under which 
ministers arc likely to act, might be multiplied to 
almost any extent ; sinecures, now unknown, might 
be gradually introduced, and pensions multiplied. 
It may be asked, why all these abuses do not now 
take place; the reason is obvious; the local go- 
vernments are checked in the exercise of every power 
that tends to the creation of such patronage by the 
directors, who, in their tuni, arc controlled by the 
India board, over which they watch with a vigi- 
lance that has in it almost a spirit of retaliation. 



IN ENGLAND* 


129 


Besides these checks, the ablest servants of the 
Company are forward to take alarm at the slightest 
acts of the local governments, or the authorities in 
England, which trench, in the most remote degree, 
upon what are deemed the exclusive rights of the 
different branches of the India service. This forms 
a chain of defence against the increase or abuse 
of patronage that cannot be broken ; but there is no 
doubt that the Company is the most important link 
in this chain. If that intermediate body did not 
exist, there would not be the smallest difficulty in 
reconciling those who filled the highest stations 
abroad to give their cordial aid to advance a system, 
in the benefits of which they would participate, and 
which would be favourable to their views of wealth 
and ambition ; nor would this aid be limited to per- 
sons appointed from Engliuid. The price of dis- 
tinction and high employment to men who had risen 
in the service in India, might often be the sanction 
of their names, and efforts to promote measures 
calculated to depress and injure that body to which 
they belonged, but from which their personal in- 
terests were separated. 

With such aids to protect their patronage in a 
distant and ill-understood scene, who can believe 
that parliamentary interference would constitute an 
efficient check upon the proceedings of the minis- 
ters of the day, to defend which they had gained 
those who possessed the best talent and the most 
authentic sources of information. 

VoL. II. K 



130 


GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 


It will not seem unfair to draw a conclusion of 
what would happen to our territories in India, if 
transferred to the crown, from the history of those 
colonies which have been, and are, under its direct 
authority. It is believed that an investigation as 
to the mode in which patronage has been exercised 
in those distant possessions would not be favourable 
to the arguments of persons who advocate this 
change in our Indian government. 

If we desire that our rule over India should be 
permanent, we must take care that its constitution 
shall suit that of England ; and we must view the 
operation of the latter, not at any moment when 
extraordinary causes produce extraordinary effects, 
but as it is in ordinary times. We cannot, for 
instance, calculate upon ministers remaining so 
long Hn office, and being so strongly supported by 
public opinion, as the present arc. These circum- 
stances may render them less dependent on pa- 
tronage than any of their predecessors have been, 
or any of their successors arc likely to be; but 
suppose opposing parties nearly balanced, will the 
successful party hesitate at any means within their 
power to maintain themselves ? and when their ad- 
versaries prevail, what changes might we not anti- 
cipate? Such changes habit has rendered not 
merely familiar, but beneficial to England ; but if 
they extended to India, their frequent occurrence 
would sap the very foundations of our power ; for 
it is not too much to add, that our hopes of pre- 



IN ENGLAND. 


131 


serving that empire must rest chiefly on our being 
able to keep its administration free from the certain 
injury consequent to its being subject to the in- 
fluence of the politics in England. 

The foregoing arguments are meant to show the 
evil efiects which we may anticipate to India, and 
eventually to England, from the abolishing of the 
East India Company as a medium for the govern- 
ment of India ; but the danger to be apprehended 
is not so much from the amount of patronage that 
would fall into the hands of the ministers of the 
crown, as the manner in which the latter, from 
their obligations, and the frequent changes to which 
they arc subject, would be likely to exercise it. 
The patronage of the crown has, of late years, 
apparently greatly increased; but the strength gained 
by this part of our constitution has been more 
than eountcrbalanced by the increased influence of 
public opinion on every measure of the state. We 
have seen, however, that the salutary check which 
this constitutes neither does nor can apply in any 
efficient degree to the administration of India, 
that country being too remote, and its interests too 
imperfectly understood, to admit a hope of advan- 
tage from such influence. On the contrary, there is 
cause to fear that the action of public opinion at 
home might give rise to measures which, while 
they brought partial and doubtful benefit to Great 
Britain, would be productive of serious injury to 
India. 




133 


CHAPTER X. 

LOCAL GOVERNMENT OP INDIA. 


Power of Governor-general. — Proposed Change in his Duties. 
— Nomination of Lieutenant-governors to distant parts of 
our Possessions.— Considerations on the System of Judica- 
ture, of Police, and Revenue. — Civil and Military Esta- 
blishments. 

The next object of attention is the construction 
of our government in India. Mr. Pitt’s bill, how- 
ever defective in other points, remedied a serious 
defect of the local administration of our eastern 
territories, by giving ample powers to the Governor- 
general in council of Bengal over the other presi- 
dencies. It has been ascertained from the fullest 
experience, that the internal tranquillity of our pos- 
sessions in India, as well as their security against 
external attack, has been very greatly promoted by 
the measure of placing one head over our wide 
territories in that quarter, which has put an end to 
contentions with subordinate authorities, and given 
combination to the resources of our empire. 

Since this bill was passed, many circumstances 
have occurred to increase the duties of the Gover- 
nor-general in an extraordinary degree. They are. 



134 


duties of 


at present, more than almost any individual can 
perform. From this and other causes it would 
appear a very desirable improvement of the present 
system, to relieve this high public officer from 
details connected with the internal administration 
of the government of Bengal. His emancipation 
from those limited and local proceedings, in which 
much of his time is now consumed, would, in every 
way, be productive of public benefit, leaving him 
more at liberty than he now can be to attend to 
duties of higher importance, and to visit the dis- 
tant parts of the empire he governs. The nu- 
merous occasions, during the last thirty years, in 
which the internal administration of Bengal has 
devolved upon a vice-president, has proved from 
experience that, as far as its internal rule is con- 
cerned, the interests of the Company would not 
suffer by such a change ; indeed, a governor, who 
was confined to that duty alone, might be expected 
to fulfil it better than one whose attention is con- 
tinually demanded by objects of more importance 
to the empire at large. 

The clause* in the Act of Parliament which 
vests in the Governor-general the power of acting 
upon his own responsibility, without the concur- 
rence, or contrary to the opinion of his council, " in 
cases of high importance, and essentially affecting 
the public interest and welfare,” had a particular 

• Vide Geo. III. cap. 3, sec. 4.7 ; by the same clause a similar 
power is vested in the governor of Madras and Bombay. 



GOVERNOIUGENERAL. 


135 


reference , to political measures which he may deem 
it his duty to adopt. It would, therefore, be neither 
contrary to the principle nor to the usage of the 
present local government of India to devolve upon 
the Governor-general, personally, its complete poli- 
tical administration. In all measures of internal 
administration, he would act, with rcsj)ect to Bengal, 
as he now does in the cases reported or referred 
for his approbation or decision from Madras and 
Bombay; and he would, consequently, as far as 
these were concenied, be more limited * in the per- 
sonal exercise of power than he is at present. With 
regard to political affairs, he certainly would be less 
restrained ; but then his direct responsibility to his 
superiors in England would be greater. 

By such arrangement, the Governor-general 
would lose the benefit he derives from the informa- 
tion and experience of his present counsellors ; 
but that deficiency would be well supplied by an 
arrangement that should give him the aid of the 
best talents the public service produced, to fill the 
highest situations in his establishment. That of 
political and foreign secretary, instead of being a 
station to which persons rise (as has been the 
usage) from labours in an office at Calcutta, should 

• It would, for instance, be a much more responsible exercise 
of the power committed to him, to disapprove an act of a 
governor and council of Bengal, than it is at present to exercise 
his prerogative of adopting a measure from which his council 
dissent. 



136 


DUTIES OF 


be placed upon a footing, both as to pay and rank, 
that would render it an office of ambition to the 
first officers in the political department. The same 
should be the case regarding the. secretaries in 
the public* judicial, revenue, and military depart- 
ments. If this plan were adopted, those high 
officers, and all who aid them, should be selected 
from the whole service, and not from any par- 
ticular presidency. The benefit of this part of the 
arrangement would be incalculable. It would 
excite and reward talent, diffiise the; best informa- 
tion of every part of India, elevate the services 
of Madras and Bombay (as far as pretension to 
these high employments went) to an equality 
with Bengal, remove jealousies, and make im- 
pressions favourable to the supreme authority. Its 
tendency would be to enlarge men’s minds, and 
to carry them beyond the local, to a consideration 
of the general, interests of the empire; and, in 
this view, its effects would infallibly be productive 
of great good. There is no disposition to detract 
from the merits of those* who have filled, or 
continue to fill, the high executive offices at Cal- 
cutta, some of whom have been distinguished 
men ; but the constant residence of a great majo- 
rity of this class on one spot, their feelings towards 
the particular services to which they belong, their 

* Higb and respected names might be here adduced of 
persons who have filled these offices ; but men like those could 
never suffer from the field of competition being enlarged. 



GOVERNOR'GENEUAL. 


137 


natural attaclimcnt to institutions and establish- 
ments, to promote the success of which the best 
efforts of their lives have been devoted, must give 
them a bias which cannot but in some degree 
narrow the judgment on points that relate to the 
general administration of India. No objections 
could be offered to such a measure, on the ground 
of the public functionaries attached to the Governor- 
general not having the local knowledge of particular 
parts of India. That knowledge would be possessed 
by those who held similar offices under the subor- 
dinate governments, to whom would belong all the 
details. The secretaries of the departments, with 
the Governor-general, would be selected from their 
high ability and general acquaintance with the va- 
rious interests and systems of the whole empire. 

There is no cause produces such bad effects in 
our government in India as the continued efforts 
to apply* the same general rules, principles, and 
institutions, to every part of our extended and 
diversified empire ; and no remedy could be ap- 

* This is perceptible 'not only in the measures of govern- 
ment ; it is to be found in almost all the writings published 
from observation of particular provinces, but rendered general 
in their application, either by the ignorance or the vanity of 
the authors. This spreads to England, where we have printed 
accounts of the habits, manners, customs, religious usages, 
and character of the inhabitants of India, specifically true, but 
which, if taken generally, are as remote from truth as a de- 
scription of Europe would be if drawn from an account of 
France or Spain. 



138 


DOTIES OF 


plied so likely to obviate this, evil as the arrange- 
ment now suggested ; but it never could be adopted, 
unless tbe Governor-general’s duties were separated 
from those that belong to the internal affairs of 
the presidency at which he resides. 

There would be a further advantage in separating 
the duties of a Governor-general* from those of 
the local government of Bengal, in its withdrawing 
his high name from those minor acts which must 
always agitate a community composed like that 
of Calcutta. This separation Avould in no material 
degree diminish his power, but it would prevent 
the necessity of its daily exercise, in any manner 
that could lessen or injure those general impres- 
sions of rcspeci; which are so essential to the 
success of his administration. But, in forming 
this and other parts of the plan, great care must 
be taken that no diminution be made of the Go- 
vernor-general’s influence and patronage. These 
are necessary for the performance of his large 
duties, inasmuch as they increase that consideration 
and power which it is essential the person filling 
this high station should enjoy. 

* Tbe expense necessary to form what would be viewed 
by many as a new establishment would not be great. It 
would include but little beyond the pay of a governor or 
vice-president of Bengal, equal probably to that of the other 
presidencies. With regard to other parts of the arrangements, 
as the same duties would only have to be done in a different 
mode, it would be little more than a transfer of offices, with 
some increase of pay to those at the head of each department. 



GOVERNOR-GENERAL. 


139 


Under the present system, the Governor- 
general, when at Madras or Bombay, has the 
right of presiding at the council-board; and the 
objects proposed in Bengal might be effected 
without any material change of system, by the 
nomination of a permanent vice-president, to 
whom the details of the presidency would belong; 
leaving, however, the Governor-general the option 
of presiding on all occasions on which he might 
deem his doing so of importance. This arrange- 
ment would prevent the collision which, under other 
circumstances, might, perhaps, be apprehended from 
the constant or frequent residence of the Governor- 
general at Calcutta. 

Recent events have carried our direct or con- 
trolling power to the remotest parts of India, and a 
change is imperiously called for in the form of the 
administration of these distant possessions. This 
subject has been very fully treated in another 
work *, in which the appointment of a Lieutenant- 
governor for Malwa, and the adjoining countries, is 
strongly recommended ; suffice it here to say, that, 
in the actual state of our empire, it appears not 
only expedient to introduce a new system of local 
government into Central India, but into other f 
parts of our vast possessions. Such a measure 

♦ Vide Central India, voL I. page S71. 

t A similar plan to that proposed for Central India, might 
be introduced with good effect into the Deckan, inclusive of 



140 


PLAN OF 


would tend, in a very great degree, to inspire con- 
fidence in our subjects, promote tranquillity, and 
suppress danger when it arose. It may be added 
to these great advantages, that it would enable us 
to effect, with much more facility than we can at 
present, such improvements in our internal system 
as are recommended by experience, and are required 
by the diflerence of chswacter and condition in the 
inhabitants of the countries we have to govern from 
those of the provinces for whose benefit our esta- 
blished institutions were framed. Nor is it unim- 
portant to state, that this scheme of ruh;, while it 
gave strength to ovir power, would ultimately bo 
attended with economy ; for, through it, we might 
expect to diminish our most expensive establish- 
ments, by arrangements which would be favourable, 
not only to the preservation of whatever of rank 
or high feeling still remains among the natives of 
India subject to our power and control, but to the 
desirable object of employing them in our intenial 
government. Many persons who profess a great 
desire to enlighten and improve the natives of India, 
exclaim against plans which are calculated to confer 
upon these natives high and confidential employ- 
ment, on the ground of their being, as a people, 
ignorant, corrupt, and immoral. Allowing for a 

the Nagpore territories, and north- westei’n parts of Hindustan 
Proper. Mr. James Stuart, in a very able paper on the police, 
(vide Fifth Report, i)age 586) suggests a subordinate govern- 
ment for the latter country. 



LlEUTENAJJT-GOVERNdRS. l4l 

moment this melancholy picture to be correct, can 
it enter into the mind of any man who has the 
slightest knowledge of human nature or of human 
communities, that mere instruction, whether moral 
or religious, will ever advance men in civilization 
while they are excluded * from all that stimulates 
the mind to good and great actions ? We may teach 
them to understand, better than they now do, their 
own depressed and degraded condition ; but if we 
wish that, as they acquire knowledge, they should 
maintain their allegiance and attachment to those 
by whom it is imparted, we must grant them con- 
fidence and respect; and if we succeed in giving 
them consequence in their own estimation, they 
will soon attain it in that of others. 

* Mr. James Stuart, in the report before alluded to, treats 
this part of the subject with great ability. “ Are the natives of 
Hindustan (he asks) a different order of beings, that they are to 
be stinted into honesty, and degraded into principle?*’ — Report 
V, page 681. The same able public officer, after remarking on 
the importance of gradations in society amongst the natives, and 
the necessity, if we mean improvement, for building our plans 
on the existing basis of their ancient institutions, and to adopt 
them to their habits and manners, — comments upon the 
probable result of the existing systerti, and forcibly observes, 
“ As we proceed, these provinces will sooii present the singular 
spectacle of a great empire, the government of which rigidly 
excludes its subjects from every object of fair ambition which 
in the pursuit could stimulate men to cultivate their faculties, 
or, in the possession, enlarge their understanding, and elevate 
their minds.** — Fifth Report, page 684. 



14;i EMPLOYMENT OP NATIVES. 

It is not to be expected tbat we can ever com- 
pletely succeed in establishing any cordial or social 
union with the natives of India. We are, as fo- 
reigners diftering in manners, language, religion, 
and feelings, too much opposed to them to admit 
of our ever realizing such hopes ; but our efforts 
should nevertheless be continually directed to the 
object of reconciling them to their condition. 
Nothing can tend so much to this as their em- 
ployment. The chai’acter of our government de- 
bars us from intrusting them with military or po- 
litical power ; but this is the strongest of all reasons 
for bringing them forward in every manner that is 
unattended with danger. The acquisition of know- 
ledge, under a system which almost excludes the 
higher classes of our native subjects from any par- 
ticipation in the government of their own country, 
must either rouse them to efforts against our au- 
thority, or sink them into a state of abject submis- 
sion, and leave them with few objects in life beyond 
indolence and sensual indulgence. 

The great evil of our Indian administration, 
throughout all its branches, arises out of the en- 
deavour to simplify, through the means of uniform 
systems, the whole scheme of our government 
over the natives. This, by rendering a know- 
ledge of its details apparently easy, gives to those 
employed at the seat of government a confidence in 
their competency to minute superintendence, which 



JUDICATURE. 


143 


renders them adverse to all deviations and changes 
from prescribed rules, however such may be recom- 
mended by local circumstances. It is to this feeling, 
and a natural love of power, that we must ascribe 
the dislike evinced to any delegation of authority 
which lessens their consequence, by investing an 
individual with that rank and station which gives 
him a latitude of action beyond their daily check 
and control. The period, however, is arrived when 
all minor considerations must give way to the great 
object of securing the peace and promoting the 
prosperity of our extended territories ; and full ex- 
perience leads us to a conclusion, that no one mea- 
sure would contribute more to these ends than that 
which has been here suggested. 

JUDICIAL SYSTEM. 

What has been said naturally leads to observa- 
tions upon the system of judicature, which was 
first established in Bengal, and afterwards extended 
to Madras and Bombay. A minute examination of 
the merits of this system would occupy a volume. 
It is here meant to limit inquiry to one important 
point, which is, not whether the existing courts of 
judicature within our former possessions should 
undergo a change or reform, but whether they 
should be extended to our newly-acquired terri- 
tories. 



144 


judicature. 


The parliament of Great Britain decreed that the 
natives of India should be governed by their own 
laws and customs. The supreme government of 
Bengal established the existing system, on the 
ground, no doubt, of its being best suited to the 
country of Bengal, where Mahomedan rule had 
been for a long time established. They were pro- 
bably induced to give the Mahomedan code*, with 
all its defects, the preference over that of the Hindus, 
from the latter having nothing that can be well 
termed a defined and comprehensive system of juris- 
prudence upon which any courts of justice under our 
authority could act. But the situation of Bengal, 
in which this measure was first adopted, was widely 
different from other parts of India, which, it cannot 
be too often repeated, consist not of one but many 
nations, and has not one but many systems of rule 
and of law. Almost every province has different 
established customs, or, in other words, laws, from 
that next to it. These were not written, it is true ; 
but observance of them from time immemorial has 
given them all the sanction and authority of laws, 
and their very forms are associated with the most 
ancient and revered of the Hindu usages and 
institutions. The Mahomedan conquest of India 

• This refers to the criminal law : the civil law has regard to 
the religion and usages of all classes of our native subjects ; the 
forms and habits of our courts are borrowed from those of the 
Mahomedan rulers of India. 



OP INDIA. 


145 


was never complete. The Hindu princes and chiefs, 
though tributary, maintained the internal manage- 
ment of a great proportion of India; and even in 
other parts of the empire, Hindu usages were seldom 
interfered with, except for purposes of extortion or 
oppression. It may, therefore, be assumed, that, not- 
withstanding that spirit of domination, and that con- 
tempt for infidels, which marked the Mahomedan 
rulers, their law was never more than formally intro- 
duced* among their Hindu subjects, who continued, 
inalmostall cases, to be governed by their own usages. 
Subsequent to the introduction of the judicial 
system, the original law has been almost buried 
under volumes of regulations and ordinances, ren- 
dered necessary to adapt it to our principles of rule. 
The best talents of the civil service of the Company 
have been devoted to the judicial department ; but 
it may be remarked that, although the courts of 
justice have been supported by the most liberal ex- 
penditure, and although those who preside in them 
are, generally speaking, as remarkable for their 
laborious application and abilities, as for their in- 
tegrity, the establishment has never become popular 
among that people, in conformity to whose real or 
supposed prejudices it was constituted. 

* There was, it is true, a Mahomedan cauzee in almost every 
town and village, hut where the Hindu population prevailed, 
his duties were limited to his own tribe. This, on investiga- 
tion, appears to have been the general rule ; the exceptions to it 
were cases of oppression. 

voL. ir. L 



146 


JUDICATURE 


What has been stated will sufficiently account 
for this impression amongst the Hindus*; and we 
may affirm of the Maliomedans^ that the nume- 
rous changes necessarily made both in the civil 
and criminal code, and the circumstance of a 
Christian judge presiding in the court, must have 
effaced much of that respect and awe which he 
may be conceived to have for a system of law 
founded on the Koran. Concluding such to be 
the general feeling of all classes, we cannot, con- 
sidering the condition of society in which we 
found them, be surprised that a considerable pro- 
portion of the higher ranks of our native sub- 
jects, both Hindu and Mahomedan, should have 
felt dissatisfied at the introduction of a system 
which, in seeking the ends of rigid and im- 
partial justice, give more attention to general 
principles and strict forms than to persons and 
prejudices. 

• A Bengal civil servant of experience and reputation, 
remarking on the code of criminal law we have adopted from 
the Mahomedans, observes, “ As to the Hindus, not one in 
a thousand of their pundits (domestic teachers, or learned 
men) can read Persian, much less Arabic ; and, added to this, 
when these persons would consider it a defilement to peruse 
the books wherein alone the law can be found, it is easy 
to credit the fact, that the whole Hindu race has been, and 
ever will continue, ignorant of those rules which determine 
their liberty and existence.”— Letter from Mr. Fortescue, offi- 
ciating judge at Benares, to Chief Secretary Bayley, dated 
Juonpore, 17th Feb. ISlc. 



OP INDIA. 


147 


The nature of the present work will not admit 
of entering at any length upon a subject on which 
the opinions of able men are so divided as that of 
our judicial establishments. It is a much easier 
task to detect the errors of a system than to point 
out a remedy by establishing the superiority of one 
that is untried. There are some defects, however, 
of our judicature, on which almost all appear 
agreed. 

The delays and expenses attendant upon the 
courts we have instituted form a very constant 
subject of complaint ; and, while the purity of the 
English judges is recognised by all, there is an 
universal impression of the insolence and venality 
of their subordinate native officers, whose' exer- 
cise of the authority in which they are clothed 
has been rendered more unpopular from their 
being often taken from persons in the lowest ranks 
of society. 

The prejudices which exist against our courts 
of judicature in the country of Rohilcund, where 
a great proportion of the inhabitants are Maho- 
medans, have been already noticed *. The opinion 
of the commissioners and of several of the judges 
in that country was given in very strong and 
decided language; and many other names of the 
best-informed and ablest civil servants in Bengal 
might be brought forward to establish the fact, 
that, in the countries under that government, 

* 'Vol. I., p. 686. 

L2 



148 


JUDICATURE 


where alone the system has had a full trial, there 
has been considerable disappointment; and that, 
notwithstanding the improvements which have 
been introduced, much remains to be done before 
our judicial institutions can be made to fulfil the 
objects contemplated by their benevolent founder. 
It is not meant to state that great good has not 
resulted from the institution of our courts of 
justice: with such principles as government has 
acted upon ; with such industry and talent as 
have been applied to promote this system ; and 
with the blessing of undisturbed tranquillity for 
forty years in the provinces of Bengal and Bahar, 
it was impossible that any system of judicature 
administered during so long a period should not 
have been productive of good. It is also admitted 
that our present subjects in the countries men- 
tioned must now be more reconciled to this 
system than they were at first, and that to intro- 
duce any change subversive of an institution so 
long established, would on every ground be most 
unwise and impolitic ; but on the other hand, all 
must agree that it is our duty to continue our un- 
wearied efforts to remedy its defects *. 

• The alleged defects of our present system are, that it 
excites a spirit of litigation ; that its delays are great ; that 
the expense attending suits is considerable; that the laws, 
from their original narrow basis, and from being framed more 
as expedients to meet particular cases than on general princi* 
pies, have become so voluminous and complicated that a 



OF INDIA. 


140 


‘ The furnishing* of native law officers with the 
best means of instruction ; the obliging of them to 
possess certain qualifications and respectability of 
character ; and the increased employment and more 
extended jurisdiction of the courts of native com- 
missioners f and Punchayets will be found the 

complete knowledge of them is hardly attainable ; that they 
are, consequently, understood by few ; and that among the 
natives who study them, many have no object but to take 
advantage of their complexity to screen guilt, or as the means 
of involving or defrauding others Avith impunity. 

* The native law officers should be educated at public 
institutions, founded and supported on principles calculated 
not merely for the professional, but general improvement; and 
no individual should receive a license to practise, Avho did not 
add good character to the necessary acquirements. We should 
also create some objects of profit and distinction, to which 
men of talent and integrity might aspire: the natives, who 
devoted themselves to this branch, Avould, from their efforts to 
obtain such hoTiourable rewards, rise in the estimation of their 
countrymen ; and, from such a change, we might expect great 
benefit to such a system of judicature. 

t In 1821 , the jurisdiction of the native commissioners was 
extended to suits of 500 rupees. The success of this experi- 
ment will probably cause a greater extension of their poAver, 
and Ave may, perhaps, anticipate a period Avhen the English 
zillah judge Avill have few causes but those of appeal from the 
native courts. 

+ It is often stated by those that are adverse to the extension 
of the judicature of Punchayet, that the records of the go- 
vernment of India prove that they are not a popular court, 
because they are not so much resorted to by the natives as 
the courts of Adawlut. The cause of this has been elsewhere 



150 


JUDICATURE 


best mode of dirninisliing delays and expense : but 
the most essential of all measures would be, a com- 
plete revision of the whole of the laws and regula- 
tions, and the formation of an almost new code. 
To the accomplishment of such a task the very 
highest talents in the service should be directed ; 
and it would not so much require superiority of 

stated. Under a native prince, when complaints were made 
or accusations brought forward, and he, instead of a despotic 
award, directed, in a spirit of justice or moderation, that a 
punchayet should assemble to investigate them, can any man, 
acquainted with the principles upon which such states acted, 
and the feelings of those subject to their authority, believe 
that the defendant or complainant (though each had the privi- 
lege of a fair challenge) deemed himself at liberty, whatever 
nominal forms might exist, to refuse to submit his case to the 
tribunal ordered to investigate it ? He could not but know 
that such conduct would be deemed contumacy, and subject 
him to all the hazard of a summary and violent proceeding. 
Under the British government men can have no such appre- 
hension, and, unless the rule is made absolute for trial of 
certain cases in these courts, it would not be in one out of a 
hundred that the two parties would assent. Both the plaintiff 
and defendant would calculate whether tliey had the best 
chance of gaining their suit by applying to a punchayet or 
zillah ; and whenever they did not agree, the latter court, in 
which the forms are compulsory, would he that in which the 
case was at last tried. But this result must not be brought 
forward as a decided proof of its superior popularity. Before 
such a fact can be admitted, it must be established whether 
the preference to it is given by the honest men or the rogues.^* 
—•Vide Central India, vol, ii. p. 296 . 



OF INDIA. 


151 


legal skill in those employed * upon it, as that they 
should be endowed with minds unfettered by preju- 
dice for or against any particular system, and be 
disposed to take the fullest advantage of the facts 
and experience which late years have accumulated. 
No expense would be too great to incur for the 
completion of such an object ; but it is not likely 
this general code could be very large, for unless we 
continue a desire to impose, at all hazards, the same 
rules and reguLations upon the whole of India, each 
division of our empire should have a subsidiary 
code of its own, framed with attention to the par- 
ticular character and usage of its inhabitants. 

It is here to be remarked, that we cannot be too 
careful how we extend our judicial system. Bengal 
Proper, from the character of its submissive inha- 
bitants, was the safest part of our dominion upon 
which we could make such an experiment. Its intro- 
duction into Hindustan became more dangerous ; 
and the Hindu inhabitants of Malwa and Raj- 
pootana, whose habits and customs have never 
undergone any great changes, even under the Ma- 
homedan government, would ill receive such an 
intended benefit ; but this subject has been treated 
elsewhere, and a plan has been suggested f for ad- 
ministering justice, which is believed to be better 
suited to the actual condition of those countries. 

• Such a commission would, of course, be aided by the 
information and opinions of the ablest natives from the different 
parts of our dominions. 

t Vide “ Central India,” vol. ii. page 246. 



152 


JUDICATURE 


We cannot better illustrate the principles of this 
plan, than by quoting the work to which we have 
alluded. 

Supposing,” the author observes, "a local go- 
vernment established over Central India every way 
efficient for its permanent administration, the 
manner in which it should exercise its functions 
ought (as far as general principles are concerned) 
to be settled. The first question would be, the 
mode in which it should aihninister justice, both in 
cases occurring in its own territoides, and in those 
referred to its arbitration and decision by dependent 
states. It will however, before we treat this part 
of the sxibjcct, be useful to offer some general 
observations that have particular application to 
countries in the situation of Central India. 

"The most serious part of this question, and one 
which lies at the very threshold, is, whether we 
are, in the shape and substance of our admi- 
nistration of justice, to pay most attention to our 
own rules, principles, and prejudices, or to those 
of the nation, or rather nations, we have to go- 
vern? We may lay it down as a first principle, 
that no system can be good that is not thoroughly 
understood and appreciated by those for whose 
benefit it is intended. The minds of men can 
never be tranquillized, much less attached, until 
they are at repose regarding the intentions of 
the authority under which they live, which they 
never can be till all chisscs see and comprehend 
its principles of government. If our system is 



OF INDIA. 


153 


in advance of the community, if it is founded 
on principles not comprehended by them, and has 
forms and usages adverse to their habits and 
feelings, we shall experience no adequate return 
of confidence and allegiance. To secure these 
results, we must associate ourselves with our sub- 
jects. We could never have conquered India 
without the assistance of the natives of that 
country, and by them alone can we preserve it. 
Our actual condition makes this necessity more 
imperative. We are not called upon to lower 
ourselves to their standard, but we must descend 
so far from the real or supposed eminence on 
which we stand as to induce them to accompany 
us in the work of improvement. Great and 
beneficial alterations in society, to be complete, 
must be produced within the society itself; they 
cannot be the mere fabrication of its superiors, 
or of a few who deem themselves enlightened. 
Every chord of the instrument must be in tunc, 
or there will be no good harmony. This com- 
pels men, who desire real reforms in large com- 
munities, to dread what is often termed reason, 
because the majority, whom it is desired to be- 
nefit, are not rational, in the abstract and refined 
acceptation of the word; and because no pro- 
jected benefit can be operative till it is under- 
stood and recognised as such by those for whose 
good it is intended. This rejisoning applies to 
all the legislative measures that we have adopted. 



154 


POLICE 


or may hereafter adopt, in our eastern empire ; 
but it is meant in this place to limit the deduc- 
tions from it to those which appear expedient 
for Central India. The great majority of the in- 
habitants of that country arc Hindus : — ^to in- 
troduce therefore, a jurisdiction grounded, even 
in its forms, on the imperfect code of the Maho- 
medans, who do not bear a proportion* to the 
whole population of five to the hundred, would be 
an innovation almost as great as the introduction 
of the English law, and one, from causes which 
have already been stated, much more repugnant to 
the feelings of the inhabitants. If we desire to 
conciliate the latter, or to benefit by their aid, we 
must adopt a system that is familiar and intelligible 
to them ; and, as the groundwork of that, we must 
preserve and restore the courts of Punchayet.” 

POLICE. 

The passive character and quiet domestic habits 
of a great proportion of our Indian subjects, leads 
them to place as much, if not more, value than any 
other nation upon an efficient police, to secure them 
in the enjoyment of that peaceful routine of life 
which they so generally prefer. Their respect for 

* The proportion of the Mahomedans to the Hindus, in Ceni- 
tral India, has been computed as one to twenty-one and a half. 
Vide p. 225. It is still less in the neighbouring country of 
Rajpootana. 



OP INDIA. 


155 


the government under which they live is measured 
more by the success with which it protects them 
from the thief, the plunderer, and the murderer, 
than by any other of its acts. The arrangements . 
for the duties of police, introduced in Bengal at the \ 
period of the permanent settlement, were far from ' 
successful. At one period, indeed, the failure of this 
system was cpiite alarming : opinions were divided 
whether this proceeded from the inactivity or ineffi- 
ciency of those intrusted with its execution, or the 
radical defects of the system ; but one point was 
clear, that while we prided ourselves in the liberal 
and just general principles upon which our judicial 
and revenue systems were grounded, the district all 
around Calcutta became infested with robbers and 
murderers in a degree that I’endercd, for many years, 
life and property more insecure than they were in 
the most barbarous * countries. Efficient measm'es 

* Lord Minto, in a despatch dated in May, 1810, states that 
the evidences lately adduced, exclusive of a multiplicity of 
other proofs, establishes, beyond a question, the commission of 
robberies, murders, and the most deliberate cruelties ; in a 
word, an aggregate of the most atrocious crimes : nor let it 
be supposed, he adds, that these offences were of rare occur- 
rence, or confined to particular districts ; they were committed, 
with few exceptions, and with slight modifications of atrocity, 
in every part of Bengal. 

Mr. Dowdeswell, chief secretary to government, in an able 
report on the police, observes, “Were I to enumerate only a 
thousandth part of the atrocities of the deceits, and of the 
unjust sufferings of the people; and were I to soften that 
recital in every mode which language would permit, 1 should 



156 


POLICE 


were adopted to correct this great evil^ and the sub- 
ject of police has since received much attention, 
both from the government at home and abroad, 

A question has been long agitated, whether we 
should employ the collector of the revenue as a 
magistrate or not. The objections to our doing so 
have their foundation on general reasoning, drawn 
from analogy of the practice of other states, and in 
that jealousy of the misapplication of power which 
belongs to the constitution of England, and which 
it is good to preserve in our administration of India, 

still despair of obtaining credit, solely on my own authority, 
for the accuracy of the narrative'. * * * * * Volumes 

might be filled with the atrocities of the deceits, every line of 
which would make the blood run cold with horror/’ 

Mr. Edward Strachey, judge of circuit, whose opportunities 
of observing the extent of this evil were ample, gives bis 
opinion on this subject very fully in a letter, under date ISth 
of June, ISOS, to Mr. Bayley, register of the Nizamut Adaw- 
lut. “ That decoity,” he observes, “ is very prevalent in 
Rajeshahye has been often stated ; hut if its vast extent were 
known, — if the scenes of horror, the murders, the burnings, 
the excessive cruelties, which are continually perpetrated here, 
were properly represented to government, I am confident that 
some measures would he adopted to remedy the evil ; certainly 
tliere is not an individual belonging to the government who 
does not anxiously wish to save the people from robbery and 
massacre ; yet the situation of the people is not sufficiently 
attended to. It cannot be denied that, in point of fact, there 
is no protection for persons or property ; and that the present 
wretched, mechanical, inefficient, system of police is a mere 
mockery/’ — Vide Fifth Report, and Collection of Revenue 
I’apers. 



OF INDIA. 


157 


as fur as we can without injury to our means for 
its efficient government. It is on the latter ground 
that the advocates for employing the collector rest 
their chief arguments. They assci’t that the duties 
of the collector must lead to an intercourse with 
the inhabitants of his district, which will give him 
the means of preventing crime, and of seizing crimi- 
nals, beyond what any other can possess. Without 
denying that the influence and power which he 
possesses as magistrate may be sometimes abused, 
they argue, that no evil is likely to arise from such 
occasional misconduct which can in any way ba- 
lance the benefit to be derived from his agency 
in the efficient administration of police. 

The above arguments have certainly more of 
Asiatic than of English principles, but they arc not 
on that account less worthy of attention ; for, after 
all, the question is not, what is most eronsonant to 
our own views and feelings, but what will be pro- 
ductive of the greatest good> and tend most to the 
hajjpiness and security of our eastern subjects. 

The employment of a civil servant having no 
other functions, as a magistrate, has this strong ob- 
jection; that if his talents render hini capable of 
efficiently fulfilling the important duties attached 
to that office, he must be early promoted to other 
stations, and there is no line in which experi- 
ence is of so much consequence as in the depart- 
ment of police. The best recommendation of this 
plan is, that it forms a good education for a person 



158 


POLICE 


who is to rise to the office of judge, hut such in- 
struction is only necessary when the judicial and 
revenue lines are kept distinct. Where the con- 
trary is the case, there is no such school for judicial 
duties as the office of a collector. It has been 
justly observed* by a distinguished civil officer, 
“ that the assistant of the collector comes in daily 
colloquial intercourse with the cultivators and pro- 
prietors of the soil. In every ministerial act, he 
gains an insight into their domestic habits, their 
social depcndance, and their more public concerns. 
He discovers the origin of their individual influence, 
of their mutual necessities, of their reciprocal de- 
pendance, and of their ultimate connexion with 
the government. He thus acquires a notice of the 
springs and motives which actuate them, and, by 
the nature of his duty, is engaged rather in concili- 
ating and arbitrating, than in dictating and en- 
forcing his opinions. 

“ But how widely different,” he adds, “ is the 
situation of an assistant to the magistrate, who 
instantly begins by being a judge in every case, 
before he has an ojiportunity of forming even any 
very general ideas on the nature of the affairs he 
must daily determine. After a course of practice, 
he may establish rules for his guidance, founded on 
the tiniformity of his own decisions, or by other 
means ; but, at starting, he can have had no ele- 

* Vide Letter from Mr. Fortescuc to Mr. Secretary Bailey, 
ISth February, 1816 . 



OP INDIA. 


159 


ments to regulate their principles ; every thing is 
necessarily new and strange to him, from a want 
of any previous familiarity with the propensities 
and peculiarities of the people. To begin, then, 
by first deciding, and afterwards learning the matter, 
is surely preposterous. 

" The revenue assistant,” he concludes, " com- 
mences his course by placing himself among the 
people in an easy and unreserved manner; the 
judicial, by elevating himself above them with a 
distant and commanding air. The former is first 
employed in learning, from its springs and ties, the 
rudiments of a novel species of policy; the latter, 
without any lights, in determining its rights and 
usages.” 

What has been quoted from this long and able 
despatch is merely to establish that, even if a 
regard for general principles, and alarm at the pos- 
sible abuse of power, may prevent our blending 
magisterial duties with those of the collector, we 
may rest satisfied that the former will, when in- 
trusted to youth, be best performed by those who 
have been schooled in the revenue department. 
It is in its minute details that a true knowledge of 
the art of Indian administration can alone be 
learnt ; and whenever this branch of the govern- 
ment is thoroughly well-administered, and those to 
whom the police is committed ate every way effi- 
cient to their duties, a great burden will be mken 
from the higher branches of the judicial department. 



160 


POLICE 


and our subjects will become more satisfied with 
our rule when the effects of our system are to re- 
press, not to produce litigation; and to prevent 
crimes by decreasing the hope of escaping detection 
and punishment. 

The introduction of a new system of police in 
Bengal was contemporaneous with the peimanent 
settlement of the revenue, and was framed, in a 
great degree, to meet the changes which that 
measure made in the community. The fluctuating 
state of the rcA'cnue of the provinces which it was 
desired to settle ; the great abuses which pre- 
vailed among all clothed in authority, from the 
highest Zemindar to the lowest officer of a village, 
suggested the complete abolition of their power, as 
the most effectual remedy of the evils which resulted 
from the tyranny and oppression of this host of 
petty authorities. The motives that led to this 
sweeping act can never be doubted: it was dictated 
by a pure sjjirit of benevolence and justice; but 
a better and more minute knowledge of the interior 
of the frame of Hindu communities would have 
prevented our casting away such means of pre- 
serving the internal peace of the country. It would 
have led to an effort to reform those, whose place 
in the society in which they were bom would have 
rendered them, if we had succeeded, as efficient 
instruments of good as, under a different system, 
they had been of bad order ; but no such effort 
was made, and a police establishment was given to 



OP INDIA. 


161 


each magistrate of persons taken indiscriminately 
from the population of the country. • 

'Fhe failure of the system in the province of 
Bengal has led to great efforts at improving the 
police in that part of India; and, to a certain extent, 
they have been successful. In Cattack, where the 
village establishments have been reformed and re- 
novated, and every power, consistent with the prin- 
ciples of our rule, delegated to the principal natives, 
the effects have been most happy to the peace of 
the country*. 

An improved and more effective system of police 
has been introduced into several of our recently- 
acquired possessions. We may, however, lay it 
down as a maxim, that our success in this, as in 
other branches of our rule, will chiefly depend on 
our preserving those institutions and gradations of 
society which we found established, and on our 
giving to the most respectable of our native subjects 
local employment of a description that will raise 
instead of lower them in the community to which 
they belong ; nor are we to expect any health or 
efficiency in our internal system, till it thus encou- 
rages this class of our subjects to the most active 
personal exertions for the preservntion of the pub- 
lic peace of their native districts. 

It has often been proposed 'j* to employ a propor- 

• Vide Letter from Bengal, dated 11th January, 1822. 
t The court of directors, in a letter to Bengal, dated the 8th 
November, 1818, desire government to take into “ early consi- 
Voi,. II. ' M 



162 


POUCE 


tion of the native officers and men of our army in 
the duties of the police, and no plan could be more 
calculated to encourage and reward a class of men 
on whose fidelity and valour the duration of our 
empire must depend. This subject, however, will 
be noticed hereafter ; suffice it here to state, that 
we must not allow ourselves to be deterred from the 
adoption of the measure (which is much more im- 
portant in a politiciil than a financial view) by any 
arguments that do not prove it to be an injustice to 
our other subjects, or pregnant with danger instead 
of security to the internal peace of the country and 
the general interests of the empire. 

deration the test mode of employing a certain number of the 
native commissioned and non-commissioned officers and privates 
in the Bengal police establishments, to be taken either from 
the invalid or pension lists, or such as government might think 
proper to allow to be withdra\vn from the regular service for 
that particular purpose/' The court trusted that “ a consi- 
derable saving might be made by the employment of native 
officers and soldiers in the discharge of police duties ; as, 
notwithstanding a considerable inducement ought to be held 
out to the native police officer and soldier to stimulate him to 
exertion in such srituations, some deduction might be mader 
say one-third, for the allowance he would continue to derive 
from his military service.” 

The court did not enter into any specification of the parti- 
cular posts in the police establishments to which they wished 
to see deserving native officers and soldiers appointed ; but 
they observed, that they “ confidently trusted that no minor 
objections or particularities would be allowed to frustrate or 
ohstmet so great a political object as the proposed arrange- 
ment had in view." 



OP INOiA. 


163 


European officers are employed at the Tannah * 
establishment of Bengal, and -would be required 
wherever similar institutions are made; but an 
important question would arise, how far tlieir ser- 
vices might be essential in the event of a change of 
system, that should improve the whole police esta-' 
blishment of India, and convert it into means of 
encouraging and rewarding the native soldiery. 
There is one fact connected -with this question 
which must not be omitted. The feelings and 
principles imbibed by military habits are distinct 
from all others, and it may be asserted that it very 
rarely happens that a person educated and employed 
in civil life understands how to treat soldiers. This 
particularly applies in India, where the change pro- 
duced on the natives from entering our army is 
very considerable. The nature of the duty de- 
volved on native soldiers employed in the police, 
would require their being kept under strict order; 
and, perhaps, the best mode of securing the success 
of such an arrangement would be to select from 
the army well-qualified officers -J*, of a certain stand- 
ing, as superintendents of police, or as magistrates. 
This would not be depriving the civil service of em-' 
ployments that are or ever can be objects of profit 

* This is an establishment for providing for old soldiers ty 
grants of land. 

t Several military officers have been employed in this line, 
and particularly at Madras, where the success that has attended 
this limited experiment warrants the most sanguine antici*' 
pations of its success on a more extended scale. 


M S 



164 


POLICfi 


or ambition ; and they would soon discover the ad- 
vantage of relief from a mass of petty and vexatious 
duties, which, if sedulously attended to, must inter- 
fere with other and higher labours, and which, on 
the other hand, cannot be neglected, even for a 
moment, without danger to the property and, per- 
haps, the life of some member of the community. 

Many objections may be made to this plan. It 
will be urged that the very rapidity of execution, 
which forms the excellence of military officers in 
the field, would be a serious fault when they were 
acting as civil officers ; that from habit they would 
be prone in peace to a vigour beyond the law; and 
that a clashing with the civil authorities might be 
apprehended. It may, perhaps, be added, that in the 
event of the European officers of the army ever 
forgetting their duty to government, they would find 
aid instead of obstruction from those to whom, by 
this plan, the charge of the public peace would be 
confided. 

In this question, as in every other of any magni- 
tude connected with the government of India, mea- 
sures must be decided by the balance of the advan- 
tages against their defects. It is always a choice 
of difficulties. Ifi from a consideration of the pub- 
lic safety, it is indispensable to employ any pai’t 
'of the native soldiery in the police, and if it is ex- 
pedient to have this description of persons com- 
manded by those who arc accustomed to them, 
iindaus must be adopted to render the system as 



OF INDIA. 


165 


little hurtful as possible to the other pai ts of the 
administration, and to obviate all apprehension of 
its ever being attended with danger to the state. 
To effect this, a complete separation perhaps of 
those who entered the police department from the 
army might be necessary ; in such case, they might 
be selected for the lower situations of this new line 
as soon as cpialified for them, and rise by merit and 
exertion to the higher gradations of the department. 
The army would in fact become an ordeal of cha- 
racter, while to a certain extent it formed the habits 
of men who would constitute, what is much re- 
(juired, a second class of civil officers, limited to 
specific and subordinate duties. It would perhaps 
be better to commence by trying this plan on a 
limited scale, and if it succeeded, it could easily 
be extended. 

REVENUE. 

The limits of this work will admit only a few 
general observations on the collection of the re- 
venue of our Indian empire. This question, which 
is of primary consequence to our prosperity in a 
financial view, acquires still more importance from 
its intimate connexion with the subjects that have 
been previously treated; for it may be asserted, 
without fear of contradiction, that, as we succeed or 
fail in our revenue settlements, we shall increase or 
decrease litigation and crime. The real fact is, 
that from the character and construction of Indian 
communities, the happiness and comfort of^nine- 



166 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 


tenths of the population depends more upon our 
fiscal than our judicial or political arrangements. 

From time immemorial the inhabitants of India 
have been an agricultural people; thence that extra- 
ordinary and minute division of land^ imd of all the 
claims and rights "which are connected with it, from 
the share of the sovereign of the country, and the 
dues of his officers, down to the smaller portions 
which belong by hereditary right to the lowest 
among those who form part of the village commu- 
nity, or who cultivate the soil. The period of such 
division of the land cannot be exactly traced, but 
it probably existed for many centuries before the Ma- 
homedan invasion. Tliese conquerors^ if they could 
spread their power, appear to have been content, 
with few exceptions, not only to leave the Hindu 
institutions undisturbed, but to incorporate them 
in their own government. It was not however to 
be expected, amid the wars and revolutions widi 
which India has so often been afflicted, that her 
provinces would continue under an uniform system, 
even if they ever had one. The change in popula- 
tion of some, the complete desolation of others, 
conld not but alter the forms as well as the prin- 
ciples of tbe most ancient and revered institutions; 
but still, from the extremity of Cape Comorin to 
the north-western limits of India, a striking sinji- 
larity of general features may be found in all that 
regards the culture of the soil and the rights at- 
tached to it. 



OP INDIA. 


167 


Where the sword of the conqueror has not 
violated the rights of the proprietor or the culti- 
vator, he claims the land of his fathers, (subject to 
the land tax, or government share) as well as all 
that belongs to his condition in his native district, 
as his indefeasible inheritance ; and where violence 
and usurpation have destroyed these rights, they 
have generally been re-created by the tendency of 
the inhabitants to return to the ways of their pro- 
genitors, or by the policy of their rulers, who saw 
'in those institutions aids to their own government. 

The new head of the village, where such was the 
case, and all under him, had claims or rights con- 
ferred upon them, more or less, as circumstances 
dictated, resembling their former shape ; and the 
mere fact that his ancestors had, for two or three 
generations, tilled certain fields, established the right 
of the cultivator in the soil he cultivated, which 
nothing but injustice and tyranny could violate. 
The local differences in the value and extent of 
such rights were numerous ; but everywhere they 
existed, and were so well understood and sanc- 
tioned by usage, that they not only formed the 
foundation of every revenue arrangement, but pre- 
served, amid wars and changes, amid rapine and 
plunder, ties ^d principles which had an effect in 
restoring order and prosperity that could hardly be 
credited, except by those by whom it has been 
witnessed*. 

* The rights of the native hereditary officers of a viiiage 
ve mudh respected in Central India ; and never did a country 



168 


HE VENUE ADMINISTRATION 


The first great and decisive step of the English 
government towards establishing a fixed revenue 

afford such proofs of the imperishable nature of this admirable 
institution. After the Pindarie war, every encouragement 
was held out for the. inhabitants to return to their desolate 
homes. In several districts, particularly those near the Ner- 
budda, many of tJie villages had been waste for more than 
thirty years. The inhabitants, who had been scattered, fol- 
lowed all occupations : many poteils, who had been obliged to 
leave their lands, had become plunderers, and remained at or 
near their ruined villages ; some of their relations and friends 
followed their example ; others cultivated grounds at a dis- 
tance of several hundred miles from their homes ; while a great 
majority went to the large towns, were they found a tempo- 
rary asylum, and obtained subsistence by labouring in gardens 
or fields. But there is no people in whose hearts the love of 
the spot where they were born seems more deeply implanted 
than the Hindus ; and those of Central India, under all their 
miseries and dispersion, appear never for a moment to have 
given up the hope of being restored to their homes. The fa- 
milies of each village, though remote from each other, main- 
tained a constant communication ; inter-marriages were made, 
and the links that bound them together were only strengthened 
by adversity. When convinced that tranquillity was esta- 
blished, they flocked to their roofless houses. Infant poteils 
(the second and third in descent from the emigrator) were in 
many cases carried at the head of these parties. When they 
reached their villages, every wall of a house» every field, was 
taken possession of by the owner or cultivator, without dispute 
or litigation amongst themselves, or with government ; and in 
a few days everything was in progress, as if it had never been 
disturbed. There was seldom any difficulty from the claims of 
othex occupants ; for local authorities, which appeared to he- 
sitate at no means that promised profit, rejected the most ad- 
vantageous offers from new settlers, while a hope remained 
that an hereditary officer or cultivator, who had claims to tli^e 



OP INDIA, 


169 


system in India^ was the permanent settlement 
made of the territories of Bengal, in 1789. This 
measure, the merits of which have given rise to 
great discussion*, is now admitted, by its warmest 
advocates, to have been too much hurried, and to 
have been adopted with very incomplete informa- 
tion, both as to the extent and resources of the 
countries settled, and to the various claims, rights, 
and relations of its inhabitants. 

It is not meant to enter upon this large ques- 
tion further than is necessary to determine, how 
far, and in what mode, it may bci expedient to ex- 
tend the permanent settlement to more recently- 
acquired territories. 

The fundamental principles of this measure are, 
to facilitate the collection of the revenue, to put an 

management or cultivation of its lands, was likely to return. 
The worst of these rulers are not insensible to the necessity of 
preserving from injijry this admirable and well* constructed 
foundation of their civil government and revenue system. — • 
Central India, Vol, IL, p. 20, 

* Colonel Wilks, the able historian of the South of India, 
has devoted a chapter to the examination of the nature of land- 
ed property in India ; his opinions, confirmed and illustrated 
as they are by the labour of his research, and the soundness 
of his judgment, are entitled to the greatest attention: his 
work (a) was the first which treated this subject in a manner 
worthy of its importance, and none of the facts it contains, or 
the general principles it has laid down, have ever been success- 
fully controverted. We are also indebted to the same intelli- 
gent author for the first full and clear account of village insti- 
tutions, and courts of Piinchayet. 

(a) Vide vol. i. c. v. 



170 REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 

end to all fluctuations in our receipts from the 
land, and to encourage improvements, by giving the 
benefit of them to those by whom they are made* 
It was assumed by Lord Cornwallis, when he in- 
troduced this system, that, supposing the right of 
the zemindar * to the soil not to be the best, (which 
he believed it to be) it was expedient, for many 
reasons connected with the improvement of the 
country, to vest it in him, or some other person : 

it being (to use his own words) immaterial to 
government what individual possesses the land, 
provided he cultivates it, protects the ryut, and 
pays the revenue/* 

> ^ The term zemindar, literally landholder, is sometimes used 
in the provinces of India to describe a person holding a small 
property in land, but oftener as the head or representative of 
the agricultural class in a district. Such persons were in ge- 
neral employed by the Mogul governors of provinces as col- 
lectors of the revenue ; and as such, established fees, and nan- 
kar zumeen, or land for their support, was assigned to them. 
Of this assigned land, which was proportioned in extent to 
their duties, they had only the government share. These offi- 
cers become, according to Hindu usage, hereditary ; and in the 
decline of the Mabomedan empire, they usurped on its weak- 
ness, and many of them used the force allowed them for the 
purpose of maintaining the police, to defend their zemindaries, 
now converted into principalities, from the authority they or 
their ancestors had served. But even when their usurpation 
succeeded, they had only the right to the government share of 
the soil, unless, perhaps, to some small lands of which their 
family were original possessors. For the particulars of the 
rights and occupations of zemindars, vide Central India,’* 
vol. II., page 7. 



OP INDIA. 


171 


The above is sufficient to show the character 
of that fundamental general principle upon which 
Lord Cornwallis acted. Experience, and more in- 
timate acquaintance with the usages, the feelings, 
and the institutions of the natives of India, led his 
colleague. Sir John Shore*, to make every effort 
to obtain delay in a measure of which he foresaw 
the evils ; but. the ardent desire of Lor4 Cornwallis 
to confer what he believed would prove a blessing 
to our subjects, and a benefit to government, made 
him overrule every objection to the immediate ac- 
complishment of his favourite plan. 

This great measure was confessedly adopted 
without a minute or correct notion of the actual 
state of property, and the rights of the various 
classes of the inhabitants, particularly those of the 
lower orders. It seems to have been expected 
that certain broad general principles which sim- 
plified the revenue system, and combined the 
interests of great landholders with the prosperity 
of the country, would produce such good as to 
make amends for all the minor evils that were 
anticipated. How far these expectations have been 
confirmed will be judged by those who attentively 
peruse the volmnes of official documents which have 
been published on this important subject. 

The zemindars, whom it was the desire of this 
system to elevate, became its earliest victims. 
lU suited, from their habits and character, to fulfil 

• Now Lord Teignmouth. 



172 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 


the duties which their new condition required, 
they abused the power it conferred upon them, to 
oppress the minor proprietors and cultivators. 
The latter were loud in their complaints, and 
pleaded prescriptive' usages. Their plea was list- 
ened to. Regulation upon regulation was brought 
forth to defend them. Presuming upon this sup- 
port, they fortified themselves with volumes of law, 
and, in their turn, resisted the zemindar, who 
could only recover by suits, which incurred great 
delay and expense, that rent, which, according to 
his tenure, he must pay, or, in default of payment, 
expose his land to he sold. I’he government 
vested itself with a power it had denied him, to 
proceed by a summary process, and without ex- 
pense. It is hardly necessary to add, that, in 
consequence of this regulation, and their general 
character and habits, almost the whole of the 
zemindars of Bengal who had been confirmed in 
their real or supposed rights were swept away, 
and their estates purchased by another class ; who 
possessed wealth, but had seldom any previous 
connexion with the cultivators of the soil. This 
unhappy result was chiefly referrible to the pre- 
cipitance with which the permanent settlement was 
introduced, and to a want of that intimate know- 
ledge of the constitution and rights of the dif- 
ferent classes of the society which should have 
preceded a change, which, affecting as it did all 
the rights of landed property, was, perhaps, thq 



OF INDIA. 


173 


greatest ever made in any country by a mere act 
of legislation. 

The principal motive to the permanent settle- 
ment was, to put an end to a very great evil, the 
constant fluctuation of our former plans for col- 
lecting the revenue. But, in examining the merits 
of this system, we must be careful to distinguish 
between the object and the means adopted for 
its accomplishment. The establishment of a re- 
gulated and moderate assessment is one beyond 
all otlicrs in wisdom and justice; but that might 
as easily have been applied to those who had real 
property and right in the soil as to the zemindars 
or landholders whom wc found or created. It is 
j)lcasing to see a rich landlord expending his 
wealth in improvements ; but the sacrifices made 
by government to promote the general prosperity 
will not be rewarded, unless the frugal and in- 
dustrious of the cultivating class have the path 
open to obtain property, as well as to preserve 
what they already possess. A government which 
precludes itself from any increase of territorial 
assessment must look to the general difiPiision of 
wealth for the future improvement of its resources ; 

'*Und though a long period may elapse before it can 
venture to subject to direct taxation any of the 
possessors of that aflluence which its liberal policy 
has created, it may expect to receive an early and 
constantly-increasing return, through the enlarged 
demand for the necessary commodities and luxu- 
ries of life rccpiired for a population advancing 



174 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 


in numbers and comfort, and the consequent pro- 
gressive improvement of duties and customs. 

The experience derived from the errors com- 
mitted in the permanent settlement of Bengal, were 
useful as lessons in the introduction of a settle- 
ment over part of our territories of Madras and 
Bombay; but serious doubts* soon arose as to 
the policy of a further extension of this revenue 
system, and its progress was arrested. The ob- 
jections urged were more to the mode than the 
principle of it; no one could deny the benefits 
that must result both to the state and to its 
subjects, from the demands of the former and 
the payments of the latter being regulated as early 
as complete knowledge would admit of this being 
done with justice to all parties. The importance 
of moderate assessments was also universally ac- 
knowledged as the foundation of all improvement. 
The wisdom of recognising long-established zc- 
mindary rights was not denied; but it was urged, 
that, by the creation of landholders, and the sale 

Lord William Bentinck, governoi’ of Madras, in conse- 
quence of those doubts, prepared and circulated a set of 
queries, for the purpose of obtaining further information for 
his guidance in the settlement of the districts not yet alienated. 
The result of this investigation, afterwards recorded on the 
proceedings of the government, strengthened the opinions 
which he had previously formed, and induced his lordship to 
majee a journey to Calcutta, for the express purpose of obtain- 
ing the sanction of the Governor-general for suspending the 
further operation of the zemindary system. — ^Vide “ Wilks’s 
South of India,” vol. i. p. 17fl. 



OF INDIA. 


175 


of lands to the highest bidder, we must either 
diminish our receipts by the admission of thft 
purchaser to a part of the government share . of 
the produce, or vest him with a right of exacting 
more than is accordant with usage from minor 
proprietors and hereditary cultivators, classes of 
men who, it was ai'gucd, had the best title to 
benefit from any remission we could afford to 
make in our demands from the soil. Many of 
these arguments were grounded upon local differ- 
ences, both as to the tenure of the lands and the 
character of the people ; and, with, reference to 
this difference, it was represented to be as incora-' 
patible with our interests and policy as it was 
inconsistent with humanity and good sense to 
insist, for the sake of uniformity, in our own 
institutions and establishments, upon tribes and 
nations so various as those under our dominion in 
India being all subject to the same mode of re- 
alizing the revenue: and upon this point it may 
be observed, that though we cannot retract the 
past, nor withdraw the pledges we have given, we 
should not deny ourselves the benefit of experi- 
ence to regulate our conduct for the future. If 
we have found, on minute investigation, that the 
inhabitants of one province have been for genera- 
tions adverse to the usages of another ; that their 
rights vary; that they have been accustomed to a. 
different mode of collecting the revenue, ' and of 
adjusting their disputes; it comes to the plain 



176 tlEVENUE ADMINISTRATION 

question, whether we are to accommodate oar 
rule to the various prejudices, habits, and opinions 
of the natives under our sway, or to study our own 
convenience by forcing them all into one system. 

If it is deemed politic (as no doubt it is) to 
make a sacrifice of any part of the revenue to which 
we are entitled, for the object of raising a superior 
class of natives, from whose rank and respectability 
we may look for aid in the internal rule of the 
country, we should elevate in his native district 
the military officer wlio has served with distinction 
in our army ; the meritorious and honest native 
law officer, or judge ; the respected Mokh, or pre- 
sident of a court of Punchayet ; the most indus- 
trious and deserving of the heads of districts or 
villages : we may imitate with advantage the na- 
tive governments, Avhich grant certain portions of 
waste lands to him who constructs a well, or any 
other work beneficial to the community ; like them, 
we may shape our system to admit the rise of the 
frugal and industrious cultivator : all these are legi- 
timate modes by which we may I’ewiud service, 
stimulate to exertion, and strengthen our internal 
government. They form indeed our only means of 
effecting this object; and wc should not improvi- 
dently waste them by admitting, on the mere 
ground of their ability to advance a small sum, a 
set of men without personal respectability or local 
ties ,to occupy this vacant^ but important niche in 
the community. 



OP INraA. 


177 


In districts that are in the immediate vicinity 
of capitals, or large commercial towns in different 
parts of our eastern empire, the influx of wealth 
will alw^ays produce changes in society and in pro- 
perty. The waste will become a field, the field a 
garden ; the cultivator will either part with hia 
hereditary or prescriptive rights, or, partaking of 
the desire of gain that pervades the community in 
which he lives, will carry his labour to market, and 
be satisfied with changes arising out f>f circum- 
stances which, through the allurements of profit 
and luxury, gradually w'can him from the ways of 
his forefathers. But the measures necessary to 
facilitate this progressive alteration of the condi- 
tion and relations of such a society must be limited 
and local. They arc quite unadapted to a great 
proportion of our cxtc.nde<l territories, and the 
attempt to introduce them in some of these must 
have consequences directly opposite to what we 
desire. They will outrage those w'hom we wish to 
conciliate ; they will disturb where our object is to 
settle ; and, from not being understjjod, and from 
being at variance with cherished feelings and usages, 
they will have the effect of rendering unjjopular a 
government whose great objects are peace, huma- 
nity, and justice. 

Opposite syst(?ms of collecting the revenue have 
been pursued by the native governments in differ- 
ent parts of India. 'I'hcy have at times employed 
Zemindars, and at others, resorted to the Mo- 
Voi.. ir. N 



178 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 


zuarree, or village, and the Ryut-warree * settle- 
ment. To the latter, which has been lately intro- 
duced into some countries under the Madras go- 
vernment, many objections have been made. It 
has been urged that it enters too much into detail ; 
that it requires more application and talent in a 
collector than can generally he found ; and that from 
its raising rent in proportion to industry, it is cal- 
culated to depress the cultivators, and, in short, to 
make a population of paupers. It has also been 
urged as a strong general ground of objection to 
this system, that it necessarily requires that the 
revenue officers should be vested with an authority 
which they must be prone to abuse, because their 
interests and their duties will be in opposition. 
To the first of these objections it is answered, that 
it is better for the cultivator that the details of his 
settlement should be arranged with the European 
collector than through a middle man, like the Ze- 
mindar. To the second it is stated, that an efficient 
revenue officer, when once acquainted with the de- 
tails of his district, will find his labours easy, and the 
minuteness of his investigations, and the effects of 
his constant intercourse with the inhabitants, will 


* The Kiihvar or Ryut-warree settlement is one made by 
government immediately with the Ryuts individually, under 
which the government receives its dues in the form of a money- 
rent dxed on the land itself in cultivation, and not being a 
pecuniary commutation for its share of the produce, varying 
as the extent of the produce may vary in each year. 



OP INDIA. 


179 


in a great degree save tlie labour of the judge. In 
reply to the third objection, it is denied that rent 
is raised on industry, though it rises with produce : 
and with regard to the objections grounded on mis- 
trust of the integrity, and jealousy of the power, of 
the revenue officers, it is answered, that such prin- 
ciples, however just, are more adapted to the go- 
vernment of England than of India, and that, in 
our administration of the latter, we are too often 
misled by oxir theories on such points to aim at an 
abstract excellence of rule, which is at equal va- 
riance with the habits of our subjects and the cha- 
racter of our government. 

Such is a brief view of the arguments for and 
against a system of revenue which has been intro- 
duced, or rather continued, in several of our pro- 
vince's with eminent success. It would, perhaps, 
be as remote from wisdom to extend it over all 
India as the permanent settlement. There are 
many territories in our possession so situated that 
nothing but the liberal efforts of government can 
restorp them to prosperity and maintain them in it. 
To fix their revenues would be a security against 
nothing but the possibility of our deriving benefit 
from their improvement. Riches must flow into 
countries through other sources than agriculture, 
before government can be secured against losses 
from bad seasons, famine, and war ; and until it 
has such security, it seems reasonable that it should 
have a share of the advantage resulting from in- 



180 


REVENUE administration 


creased produce. This principle is (jiiitc congenial to 
the habits and sentiments of the cultivators. They 
require no more than a just and moderate assess- 
ment upon their receipts ; generally speaking, 
they do not understand our more enlarged views 
of £scal administration, and, consequently, cannot 
appreciate them. The governments in India 
which preceded ours never made a permanent 
settlement of revenue ; yet experience proves that 
where the rulers were just, their system of col- 
lecting the revenues was quite compatible with 
the improvement of the country, the diffusion 
of wealth, and the creation of landed property*. 
The agricultural classes of our subjects are more 
than any other attached to their usages ; all 
changes, even when intended for their benefit, 
alarm them. This arises from their having no 
power tjf resistance. They know the extent of 
the burden they have been accustomed to bear, 
but from ignorance dread that for which it may 
be exchanged. From these causes, it is as unwise 
to adopt any general system over our various 
possessions as it is fallacious to argue that our 
subjects may not be as happy and as prosperous, 

* That will arise, tliougli more gradually, under a ryut- 
warree system, whenever the assessment is moderate, and fixed 
upon principles tliat are understood, nnd deemed subject to 
no variation. But it is tlie principles upon which the collec- 
tion is made that require to be understood and fixed, move 
than the land-tax or government share which it regulates. 



OF INDIA. 


181 


under systems to which they arc accustomed, as 
under those we would introduce to meet our own 
convenience, and our ideas of amelioration. 

The improvement in the appearance of the 
country from extended cultivation is hardly to 
be deemed a test of any system. That may, in all 
cases, be referred chiefly to the increase of the 
portion of the population whose pursuits are exclu- 
sively agricultural, consequent to exemption from 
war. I'liis last conclusion appears to be proved by 
the condition of every part of India that has for 
many years enjoyed that exemption ; and it is 
certain that many provinces, under the most arbi- 
trary rule of native governments, arc, from the 
operation of this cause, as flourishing as any lands 
in the possession of the Company. 

Many have taken alarm at that sjjirit of minute 
investigation* which has lately prevailed, consi- 

• The province of Guzerat has been surveyed witi^ as much 
minuteness as a gentleman’s estate ; but it never has been 
asserted that this has led to any vexatious or oppressive conduct 
towards the inhabitants ; on the contrary, there is no part of 
our dominions where they are more content or prosperous. 
The measurement of the land was, with some exceptions, 
general throughout India, under the Mogul government. Al- 
most every village had a record of its measurement, and where 
that is lost, our reviving this usage is more likely to be con- 
sidered by the mass of the cultivators as a proof of our dispo- 
sition to be just than to become extortionate, ' It creates dis- 
content and alarm amongst zemindars and others, who manage 
or rent lands, from which they extort to the last rupee, but of 



182 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION 


derin^ that it would prove injurious to our sub- 
jects in its operations and results; but the more 
perfect the knowledge which is possessed by those 
who govern the country, the less exposed its 
inhabitants must be to misrule and imposition, 
unless we suppose a case where such information 
be sought as the means of extortion and oppression. 
It may be, and has been, urged that, in some parts 
of India where this system has been introduced, 
we have used the information w^e acquired, for 
no puiqiose but to bear harder upon the cultivators, 
and that our desire of increase of revenue has 
deprived them of every hope of benefit that could 
stimulate men to industry and exertion. Allowing, 
in order to try the question, that such an assertion 
is correct, it would prove no more than that we 
have made a bad use of our knowledge, not that 
the knowledge was unnecessary. We may, in- 
deed, assume, that without it we must continue in 
many material points to rule and legislate in the 
dark, and that our desire to promote the general 
prosperity of our subjects l)y a moderate assess- 
ment, regulated by just principles, will never be 
essentially done till the fullest and most detailed 
information enables us to efiect the object with 

the precise value of which they desire we should remain in 
ignorance. The measurement of the lands should not be 
enforced in countries where it never has been an usage, unless 
with consent of the cultivators. The right of resisting it 
Avas claimed and admitted upon this ground by the inhabitants 
of some districts in Central India. 



OP INDIA. 


183 


a clear understanding of what is consonant to 
the usages, appropriate to the condition, and ac- 
cordant with the true interests of every class of 
the various inhabitants of our territories. Much 
has recently been done by an active spirit of 
minute inquiry into revenue, and other matters 
connected with the good government of India ; 
but our knowledge has yet gone little beyond 
a discovery* of our ignorance, and a long period 
must still ela[)se before we have accumulated facts 
and experience on which we can venture to esta- 
blish permanent and unalterable arrangements. 
But this period, though comparatively long in 
the life of man, is but a short sjiace in that of 
an empire. 

These general observations upon the judicial, 
police, and revenue administration of our Indian 
territories are the result of much study of the 
details of those branches of our government. The 
most important of the lessons we can derive from 
past experience is to be slow and cautious in every 
procedure which has a tendency to collision with 
the habits and prejudices of our native subjects. 
We may be compelled by the character of our 
government to frame some institutions different 

* For the truth of thfs assertion, let the reader refer to the 
voluminous collections of judicial and revenue papers recently 
published. He will find that as inquiries proceed, new and 
important facts are daily discovered, affecting, from their 
relation to usages and rights, every question connected with 
claims to property in the soil. 



184 


REVENUE ADMINISTRATION. 


from those we found established, but we should 
adopt all we can of the latter into our system. The 
progress of our jiGwer has been favourable to the 
comincrcial community, and to some of the poorest 
and most defenceless of our subjects ; but it has 
been the reverse to the higher orders of the natives, 
and to the military classes. On the remedying of 
these defects, the duration of our dominion will in 
a great degree depend. From the success of our 
arms in extending it, we have lost the great advan- 
tage that we btd'ore had in the contrast of the mis- 
rule and oppression of former governments. This 
loss can be rt^paired only by that security which Wc 
may obtain through the wisdom of our internal go- 
vernment ; but that should be administered on a prin- 
ciple of humility, not of pride. We must divest our 
minds of all arrogant pretensions arising from the 
presumed superiority of our own knowledge, and 
seek the accomplishment of the great ends we have 
in view by the means which are best suited to the 
peculiar nature of the objects. By following another 
course, we may gratify self love; we may receive the 
praise of each other ; we may be applauded in Eng- 
land for the introduction of plans and institutions 
which Englishmen undei'stand and appreciate; but 
neither the abstract excellence of our systems, nor 
the industry, purity, and talent of those employed in 
carrying them into execution, will avert the evils 
which must result from every measure that is in 
opposition to prejudices so fixed, and habits so 
rooted, as those of the natives of India. That time 



CIVIL SEttVlCE. 


185 


may gradually effect a change, there is no doubt ; 
but the period is as yet far distant when that can 
be expected : and come when it will, td be safe or 
beneficial, it must be, as these pages inculcate, the 
work of the society itself. All that the government 
cun do is, by maintaining the internal peace of the 
country, and by adapting its principles to the va- 
rious feelings, habits, and character of its inha- 
bitiints, to give time for the slow and silent opera- 
tion of the desired improvement, with a constant 
impression that every attempt to accelerate this end 
will be attended with the danger of its defeat. 

CIVIL SERVICE. 

These observations upon the various branches of 
the internal government of our Indian t(?rritories 
lead to a consideration of the character of that 
body of public officers by whom it is administered. 

The civil service of the Company has undergone 
many changes, but it has, at all periods, and under 
every system, produced men of eminence and dis- 
tinction. 

The prudence of those who governed India in 
the earlier stages of our power did not precipitately 
depart from institutions which they found esta- 
blished for the administration of the territories of 
which they had gained possession. The natives 
were continued for a period, associated -with the 
Europeans, both in fiscal and judicial duties. As 
long as this was the case, the European civil servant, 
who presided over a district or department, was 



186 


CIVIL SERVICE 


often ignorant of the languages of India*, and little 
versed in the details of his office. These were in- 
trusted to some of the higher classes of the natives, 
who, according to their station, shared in the emo- 
luments, which continued the same as had been 
customary in the same offices under the Indian 
governments. This system had its advantages and 
defects; a more abrupt change would, probably, 
have raised serious obstacles to the advance of our 
power, which was most essentially promoted by the 
rank and influence of the natives employed in asso- 
ciation with the European servants; but who, as 
the latter acquired practice in the duties of detail, 
lost the consideration and emolument which they 
had previously enjoyed. This change milking many 
of them retire from employment, their place was 
supplied by persons of lower rank and more sub- 
servient character, who were less scrupulous as to 
the means of enriching themselves, and possessed 
little or none of that weight with the inhabitants of 
the country which gave value to the services of 
their predecessors. This new class, by still grasping 
at profits which had been declared illicit, and by 
eflbrts to maintain undue influence and power, 
brought obloquy, not only on themselves, but on 
all those by whom they were trusted and.employcd. 

* This remark, as far as relates to a knowledge of the na- 
tive languages, apx>lie3 more to Madras and Bombay than 
Bengal, in which, from the earliest time, many civil servants 
were conversant in the dialect of the country, and some were 
accomplished Persian scholars. 



OF INDIA, 


187 


It is a subject of congratulation, that a change- 
has taken place by which the civil servants of the 
Company have become personally better qualified 
for the performance of their duties ; but we must 
not hasten to a conclusion that the former system 
had no advantages, and the present no defects. 
The severe reflections so frequently made against 
the former state of the civil service arc far from 
being just. This body of functionaries, it has been 
admitted, had neither such general acquaintance 
wdtli the languages of India, nor with the details of 
their severtd stations, as they now possess. It is true 
also, that recompense for their services was derived 
from sources more undefined, and more liable to 
abuse than those at present established; but a 
knowledge of the native languages, though a most 
important aid to the personal transaction of busi- 
ness, was, from the nature of our first rule, and the 
manner in which that was exercised, of compara- 
tively small consequence. Under the reformed 
and more exact system of the administration of our 
territories, it very projierly enters into the educa- 
tion of youth, and is made an indispensable qualifi- 
cation for oflicc ; but in the estimate of character, 
it should have no more than its just weight, and 
should rank subordinate to industry, strict principle, 
general knowledge, and sound judgment, which 
must combine to form the able public servant. As 
an auxiliary to the developemcnt and useful action 
of these qualities, an acquaintance with the lan- 
guages of India is most desirable ; but unassociated 



188 


CJVII. SERVICE 


with them, it is nothing, and injury has sometimes 
resulted to the public from a too exclusive con- 
sideration being given to this attainment. 

Though the former civil servants of the Com- 
pany did not disf:hargc the minuter duties of their 
stations as they do at present, the records of the 
state fully show that this proceeded from no infe- 
riority of general knowledge, or of individual cha- 
racter, but was the mere result of the diftercnce of 
the mode of government. The same cause pro- 
duced a difference in the sources from which they 
derived the remuneration of their services. In re- 
ceiving, instead of a n'gulated salary, the fees and 
profits which had been enjoyed by the natives to 
whose offices they succeeded in newly^acciuired ter- 
ritories, they only followed the usage of the coun- 
try ; and they were sanctioned in it, by their own 
government. It suited the character of the Indian 
administration in England, and was altogether 
adapted to that of our first rule in India. That it 
was loose, undefined, and liable to great abuse, is 
admitted. The evils of such a system became ma- 
nifest, and were remedied ; but assuredly, while it 
continued, the civil servant who drew his emolu- 
ments from open and recognised sources was no 
more blamable than some of the first men in Eng- 
land who hold offices that continue to be paid by fees, 
or fines, in the manner established by our ancestors. 

There arc some considerations connected with 
the actuiil state of the civil service of the Company 
which demand very serious attention. From the 



OF INDIA. 


189 


days of Lord Clive to the present, there have been 
the same complaints regarding this class. They 
have been represented as being prone to extrava- 
gance on their first arrival in India; as very generally 
involving themselves deeply in debt, and thereby 
contracting habits and obligations adverse to their 
own happiness and respectability, as well as to the 
interests and good of the public service. The ge- 
neral fact is admitted, but the remedy has not yet 
been found. An increased liberality of allowances 
has tended only to augment that propensity to 
thoughtless extravagance, natural to their age and 
prospects in life. Youth is ever sanguine, and its 
calculations of the means it wdll obtain of over- 
coming difficulties arc too commonly fallacious. 
Yet we observe that, in other walks of life, mo- 
tives have been discovered of sufficient powx*r 
over young minds to check such dispositions, and 
to inculcate habits of economy grounded on a ge- 
nerous desire of independence, and altogether free 
from any mean or sordid spirit of saving. Such 
effects, which we, observe around us in young men 
of the best prospects, while trained to their as- 
signed duties in houses of commerce, in the law, 
and in public offices, should satisfy us that the end 
we seek is attainable even amid scenes of tempta- 
tion ; for it will not be denied that the capital of 
England holds forth more allurements to extrava- 
gance than that of India. 

It is imjmrtaut to consider whether there is any- 
thing in the education and the duties of the young 



190 


CIVIL SERVICE 


civil servant of the Company which can account 
for this striking difference. It has been objected 
to the fonner, that it proceeds more upon the 
principle of forming the future man for the im- 
portant stations to which, from the nature of the 
India service, he is liable to be hereafter called, 
than to make an unpretending assistant to a col- 
lector or judge, who is gradually, through the 
means of industry and infonnation, to advance to 
higher employment. It is admitted to be indispen- 
sable that young men should attain the acquire- 
ments suited to their destinations in life ; but it is 
contended, and with truth, that all that education 
can effect, is forming the youth by discipline and 
by habits, in a manner that will give him the power 
of increasing his knowledge from facts and experi- 
ence ; and that knowledge, to be useful, must grow 
with the man, go hand in hand with the habits 
and occupations of his life, and wait upon the gra- 
dual developement of his character. 

The young civil servant of the Company knows 
that he cannot fail to be employed in some branch of 
the service ; his want of acquirements may obstruct 
his advance, but irregular habits and being in debt 
(which in some cases must lead to deterioration of 
feeling and of prineijile) is no impediment. How 
different is the situation of the young men in Eng- 
land, with whom any comparison may be drawn ! 
However liberal their education, their attention is 
constantly fixed upon the first step of the ladder : 
they know that dissipation and debt will at any 



OF INDIA. 


191 


stage arrest their career ; and the examples they see 
around them operate as a most salutary check, to 
keep them regular and steady in their efforts to 
ascend to the head of the line in which they are 
placed. 

No part of this question has undergone more 
discussion than that which relates to the colleges 
established for the education of the youth of the 
Indian civil service. Tliose of Calcutta * and Hai- 
leybury have, like other institutions, their advan- 
tages and defects. The former certainly redeemed 
youths from some bad habits consequent to their 
being sent too early to sequestered stations in the 
country. It diffused j' more general competence to 
their duties among the civil servants ; and, from the 
opportunity of becoming acquainted with their 

* The college at Madras is upon a principle wholly different 
from that at Calcutta. It educates and supplies native in- 
stnictors, and the young civilians who study at their homes 
are subject to an annual examination. At Bombay, they must 
qualify themselves, and pass certain examinations in the lan- 
guages, before they can receive any increase of allowance or 
employment. 

t The college of Fort William is only mentioned here, as a 
place for the instruction of civil servants on their arrival in 
India. This excellent institution has other and high claims to 
distinction, from the numerous works which tlie combined 
labours of the learned Europeans and natives attached to it 
have given to the public. This college should always be con- 
sidered by government as much, if not more, a seat of learning, 
founded and liberally endowed for the purposes of diffusing 
useful knowledge over an empire, as a school for youth. 



192 


CIVIL SERVICE 


character, enabled government to allot them to the 
various departments of the service for which they 
were best qualified. A spirit of emulation was 
also excited, and young men, studying under the 
immediate observation of those by whom they 
were to be employed, made efforts to distinguish 
themselves beyond what they would probably have 
otherwise done. These were great advantages; 
the chief evil was the congregating of so large a 
body of youth iu a luxurious capital, where it was 
difficult, if not impossible, to check extravagance, 
to which they had every imaginable temptation 
both as to objects of expense and facility of at- 
taining them. In such a scene, a more rigid 
discipline than has hitherto been deemed com- 
patible with the age and condition of these young 
men was necessary to a complete or efficient check 
over their conduct. 

The college in England is upon the most liberal 
scale, and the students have every advantage that 
the tuition of able and enlightened men can afford 
them. 

It is not meant to enter upon an examination of 
the varidiis arguments which have been recently 
brought forward for and against this institution. 
One part of the subject, however, upon which 
opinions are divided, demands particular attention ; 
it is the age at which young men should be sent to 
India. Those who have minutely watched the 
progress of youth in all branches of the public ser- 



IN INDIA. 


193 


vice, will probably be of opinion that, taking the 
balance of good and evil to be found in different sys- 
tems, there is more hope of good from a regulation 
which would send the well-instructed youth of seven- 
teen, or at farthest eighteen, to that country, than at 
a later age. He might, it is true, gain much learning 
by staying a year or two more, and some students 
might eventually rise to greater fame in conse- 
quence of having the advantage of more mature 
instruction ; but the object is to form, not eminent 
individuals, (these will always form themselves,) 
but a class of men competent to certain duties ; 
and it is of great consequence that they should be 
of an age when the mind will easily adapt itself 
to the condition in which they arc first placed. 
A very humble sense of their own deficiencies will 
be of more benefit, on their entering upon their 
subordinate duties in India, than all the know- 
ledge they can attain, if accompanied by that pride 
and sclf-sufiiciency which in youth arc too often 
its concomitants. The general argument in favour 
of their remaining to a more mature age is, that 
besides their education being more complete, their 
good principles will be more fixed, and they will 
be imbued with a love and knowledge of their 
own country. Nothing can be more desirable 
than such results, if they were certain ; but though 
there may be many exceptions, speaking generally, 
we must assume that, from the age of seventeen 
to twenty, the habits and jjrinciples arc oftener 
VoL. II. O 



194 


CIVIL SERVICE 


injured and unsettled than improved and fixed;, 
particularly when youth are exposed to the in- 
creased haziirds that will arise from their numbers 
in the best-regulated establishment, and that at a 
period when they are likely to receive more than 
common indulgence from parents and relatives on 
the point of losing them for a long term of years, 
if not for ever : moreover, a taste for the pleasures 
of their own country, which is generally acquired 
in the first years of manhood, is not a happy pre- 
paration for the life to which they are destined. 
They arc too often disposed, when so advanced in 
age, cither to turn with disgust from scenes amid 
which they must pass the greater part of their lives, 
or to seek, in a course of thoughtless extravagance, 
some solace for what they conceive they have 
abandoned. 

That there are dangers, and some of magnitude, 
to the youth who commences his Indian career at 
an early age, is not to be denied; but there is a 
better prospect tor him of being contented and 
useful throughout the different stages of the ser- 
vice, than for one who enters upon the same career 
at a later period. 

'riierc are certain qualifications, and, above all, 
testimonies ot good conduct, without which no 
youth ought to be billowed to proceed to India in the 
civil service ; but if in that country regulations were 
rigorously enforced, making their increase of salary, 
as well as their promotion, to depend on their attain- 



TN INDIA. 


195 


m<^nts, and rendering the incurring * of debts and 
habits of extravagance a serious obstruction, if not 
an absolute bar to advancement, we might expect 
to create a reform in the greatest defects of the 
present system ; but to do this effectually many 
changes are required. The civil servant is, at pre- 
sent, compelled to attain certain acquirements 
before he can be employed, and when in office he 
must give a great portion of his time to his public 
duties ; but, unless in extreme cases, improper habits 
of life, or large debts, are deemed no disqualification 
for office, though these (according to the opinion 
of every statesman who has treated the subject) 
are not only likely to deaden his best feelings and 
to endanger his principles, but to place him under 
an influence which may be exercised in a manner 
alike injurious to his reputation and the interests 
of the state. 

The example we have in the conduct of youth in 
other departments of life, shows that the object in 
view is quite attainable, and points out the only 
mode by which an efficient remedy can be applied 
to this evil; but care should be taken that this is 

* This regulation has repeatedly been made, but never 
rigorously enforced : the causes of which arc obvious. There is 
nothing so adverse to the feelings of an English goveminent 
as any measure that wears the appearance of inquisition into 
the private conduct or concerns of a public servant ; but the 
performance of this duty must not be evaded, when called for 
by considerations associated with the reputation and interests 
of our country. 



196 


CIVIL SERVICE 


efiected in a manner that will elevate, instead of 
depress the service. While consideration for the 
young men who enter it, for their relatives, and 
the public, compels us to establish stricter discipline 
than has hitherto existed in India, the education 
of youth should be more exclusively directed than 
it has hitherto been to qualification for the first 
duties they will have to perform ; and from these 
they should not be kept one instant, after they have 
attained the necessary qualifications, and evinced 
sufficient steadiness of conduct to enable them to 
aid the superiors under whom they will have to act. 

The reports made by the latter of the progress 
and conduct of those under them should regulate 
promotion; and if any young men neglected to 
qualify themselves for employment, or continued 
idle and irregular, after a limited number of years, 
they should be sent to England. This might 
appear harsh ; but if known to be the inevitable 
consequence which attended incompetence or 
misconduct, the penalty would be rarely incurred. 
Parents would not desire such a trial* for sons of 

* It has often been stated as matter of complaint, that in the 
college of Hailey bury, a student of sixteen, if indisposed to go to 
India, has it in his power to cast away all his prospects in life 
by an act of boyish mischief, which commits an offence against 
its institutions ; and it is admitted that there may be some reason 
why a government, that is compelled to be so strict regarding 
those whom it admits into its service, should relax from its 
rules, in consideration of extreme youth : but this lenity 
should not extend to the man who is confirmed in habits of 



IN INDIA. 


197 


whose conduct and abilities they had doubts ; and 
every man of feeling and principle would be 
checked in his career of folly, extravagance, or 
guilt, by the dread of the shame and misery he 
would bring upon himself and others. But, sup- 
posing that it should sometimes happen otherwise, 
the merited punishment of a few would be most 
salutary cxiunples ; and, looking to the virtue and 
talent of the civil service for the present as well 
as the future good government of India, who will 
recommend that indulgence to youth, or considera- 
tion to their connexions, should interfere with the 
adoption or rigid execution of any plan expedient 
for that great object ? 

Many minor arrangements might aid the succes.s 
of the measure suggested; but we may be assured, 
from the moment those strong steps were decidedly 
taken, examples of idleness and extravagance would 
become rare. Not only the feelings of the indi- 
viduals and their friends would be roused against 
them, but the sources of supply would fail; credit* 

idleness or dissipation. The objection, that some would seek 
that mode of effecting their return to England, supposes a 
depraved mind in a maturer age, precluding every hope of 
amendment. 

* All lesser expedients than those recommended have been 
tried, and have failed. A regulation has been often suggested, 
rendering debts incurred by young men, under a certain age 
and circumstances, not recoverable by law; but while such debts 
are no bar to employment, other pledges and securities would 
be proffered and accepted. The premium on advances would, 



198 


CIVIL SERVICE 


would no longer be given to men whose prodigal 
career was certain to deprive them of the means of 
repayment. 

To carry any plan of this nature into eflFect, it 
would be necessary to increase the number of 
young men in India, that the local government, 
even at the commencement of their service, might 
have the power of selection; and this principle 
should, within the prescriljcd limits as to periods 
of service, continue to regulate every future pro- 
motion. Any other system must be unfavourable 
to the development of those varions and superior 
powers of mind wliich it is essential should be 
possessed by all who fill, or aspire to fill, the high 
offices in the Indian empire. 

A seat in council is now the chief object to 
which a civilian aspires ; and the change that oc- 
curs every five years has a happy effect in keeping 
alive that portion of the ambition of the service 
which is directed to this object. 'ITiere appears 
no good reason why others who fill the high offices 
of presidents of the board of tiude, and revenue, 
and of the court of Sudder Duwanee *, sliould not 
also be periodically changed -1“. The local govern- 

no doubt, be increased ; but this would be no obstacle to unre- 
flecting youth, whose embarrassments would only be augmented 
by such insuflScient efforts to prevent them. 

* The chief civil court of justice, held at the seat of go- 
vernment. 

' t If such a change was ever made, it would be but justice to 



IN INDU. 


199 


mentSj with whom the nomination'*^ to these sta- 
tions should rest, might re-appoint where very ex- 
traordinary ability demanded an exception from a 
practice which would animate the system, by excit- 
ing an active spirit of emulation'. 

The objection that will be offered to such a mea- 
sure is, that the salary of a counsellor, if enjoyed 
for five years, aftbrds the means of independence, 
which not being the case with the other situations 
in question, it would, therefore, be hard upon 
individuals who had attained such offices to be 
compelled to vacate them in five years : but it may 
be answered, that one of the most essential prin- 
ciples in a government like that of India is, to 
combine reward to individuals with the promotion 
of the public interests, and that, upon this principle, 
it is better to increase the pay attached to those 
situations than to lose the advantages which the 
arrangement promises to the state. This, and 
every other practicable measure, should be adopted, 
that can have the effect of directing the views of 
the ablest civil servants to objects of distinction 
and high employment, both in India and in Eng- 
land. The prospect of accumulating great wealth, 

allow to persons now filling these stations the full term of five 
years, if they chose to remain. 

* To the objections which may be made from the probable 
abuse of this patronage, there cannot be a better answer than 
reference to the list of civil servants who have been recom- 
mended by the local governments to seats in council. 



200 


CIVIL SERVICE 


which once stimulated the civil service of India, 
no longer exists : the means of living comfortably, 
and the attainment of a moderate competence at 
rather an advanced stage of life, is all that they can 
now expect. 'liic state cannot aftbrd to give them 
higher allowances* than they now enjoy ; and it is 
not desirable that this class, particularly those who 
fill the first stations, should have a money-making 
disposition, which, even when remote from corrup- 
tion, is adverse to the high tone so essential for 
them to preserve and to impart, by shewing an ex- 
ample of perfect freedom from snch propensity ; nor 
would this by any means preclude attention to just 
economy, which is alike essential to independence 
of mind, and of action. 

Notwithstanding any arrangements that can he 
made, or any order that can he given, the success 
of every plan for the maintenance or improvement 
of this branch of the public servi(;c will chiefly de- 
pend on the character and talent of those at the 
head of the local governments. On their know 
ledge, impartiality, and unbending firmness of ac- 
tion, will rest this as well as all other points con- 

* There is one point which merits special consideration, con- 
nected with the condition of this and other classes of public ser- 
vants in India — the serious loss on remittance to England : 
this, if it continues, may have results, both as to the education 
of their children and their own retirement, which are unfavour- 
able to the fundamental principle of binding public servants 
by every means to their native country. 



IN INDIA. 


201 


nccted with the good administration of India. We 
can regulate and reduce to a system every other 
part of our government in a manner that renders 
us, to a certain degree, independent of extraordinary 
ability ; hut we cannot escape from the necessity of 
having a succession of enlightened and able men to 
preside over the councils of a state, which, from its 
singular construction, is almost as much aftccted by 
the personal characters of its rulers as if it were a 
despotic monarchy. 

INDIAN ARMY. 

However much the success of our internal govern- 
ment may depend upon the civil administration 
of our eastern empire, our efforts to improve that 
might be given in vain, unless we maintain a com- 
manding military power; and this consideration 
gives the utmost importance to every question 
connected with our military establishment in that 
country, as being the only means by which we can 
preserve India, and as too likely, if mismanaged, 
to prove our ruin. This latter position has been 
so fully proved by the evidence of past events, that 
any argument in support of it must be superfluous. 
As his majesty’s troops employed in India are 
composed solely of Europeans, and differ in no 
respect from the British army, of which they arc 
a detachment, remarks upon the constitution of 
that part of the force there will not be necessary. 
We shall, therefore, proceed to examine the orga- 



202 


AHMY 


nization and principles of the Company’s army, 
which now consists of nearly two hundred and fifty 
thousand men*. We shall commence by taking 
a glance at the plans which have been formerly 
suggested to remedy the defects of the general 
system, and then consider the changes which cir- 
cumstances would now appear to render expedient. 

Lord Cornwallis was requested by Mr. Dundas, 
his majesty’s minister for India, to give a plan by 
which the transfer of the Indian army to the king 
should be effected ; the chief grounds for which 
measure are stated to have been-J-, “ To give safety 
and security to our Indian empire, and to prevent 
the continuance or revival of those discontents or 
jealousies which have so often manifested them- 
selves between the King’ s and Company’s troops, as 
well as the Company’s troops belonging to the 
different presidencies in that part of the world.” 
From his lordship’s reply, it appears to have been 
his deliberate conviction, that lio system could be 
devised of permanent utility and satisfaction to the 
individuals of both services, and for the public 
good, unless there was a preliminary measure, by 
which the whole force, native as well as European, 
in India, should be “ transferred to his majesty’s 
service ; and, with a few modifications, be regulated 

* The natives alone of the Company’s army are now 332,366 
rank and file. 

t Vide letters from Lord Cornwallis to Mr. Dundas, dated 
November 7th, 1794. 



OF INDIA. 


203 


and conducted, in future, according to the rules 
which have long operated in the king’s army.” 
Lord Cornwallis stated his opinion, that although 
the army were transferred to the king, it should 
remain perfectly subordinate to the Comptmy ; and 
that those intrusted with the local government 
should have the full power of suspending and 
sending to England any officer, from the highest 
to the lowest rank, it remaining with the king to 
examine into the conduct of the officer so sent 
home; but the local government being alone re- 
sponsible to the court of directors for such peremp- 
tory exercise of power. Lord Cornwallis, in the 
letter alluded to, strongly inculcates as a principle, 
that measures should be taken to induce Europeans 
of all classes, particularly military officers, to return 
to England. He recommends leave and retirement 
on full pay for officers of each rank, after a certain 
period of service *. While he proposes a continuance 
of rise by seniority, he is the advocate of the sale 
of commissions under certain restrictions “1“; he 
suggests an entire separation between the European 
and native branches of the army, and is unfriendly 
to future interchanges betwixt them, lest it should 

• Lieutenant colonels twenty-six years ; majors twenty-three ; 
captains eighteen ; and cornets and ensigns six. 

t The commandei'-in-chief he, recommends to have the 
power, should he think fit to exercise it, of permitting an officer, 
not in the regiment in which the vacancy occurs, to purchase ; 
but this power not to authorise him to introduce any officer who 
is not senior to the person in the class who is ready to purchase. 



204 


ARMY 


open a door for abuse of patronage, and tlie intro- 
duction of inefficient officers into the native corps. 
He expresses himself very strongly as to the neces- 
sity of protecting the latter. “ Officers,” he observes, 

whose services are so unalterably fixed in so 
distant a quarter of the globe, ought to be protected 
by established regulations against the hazard of 
suffering by the abuse of patronage in any com- 
mander-in-chief.” 

In 1811, when the Company petitioned for a 
renewal of their exclusive privileges, the subject 
of the transfer of the army was again brought 
forward. Those by whom it was advocated rested 
their chief argument on the same basis, the 
indispensable necessity of putting an end to the 
jealousies and divisions which existed between the 
officers of the King’s and Company’s armies in 
India. But the principles of the transfer now 
proposed diftcred in some essential points from 
those proposed by Lord Cornwallis. A greater 
latitude of power as to promotion, particularly in 
the higher ranks, was proposed to be given to the 
commander-in-chief. As an incitement and reward 
to the native local service, it was suggested that, 
on reaching the r<mk of colonel, they should be 
eligible to employment in any quarter of the 
globe ; and such a measure, it was anticipated, 
would not only be an encouragement to this branch, 
but render the experience of men of talent and 
acquirements available to the general seiwice of 



OF INDIA. 


205 


the country. It was proposed that exchanges 
should take place between the two branches of the 
army, restricted only by such regulations as were 
indispensable to preserve the efticiency of the local 
service, which required in those that entered it 
a knowledge of the language, and a certain period 
of residence in India. It was not intended to 
admit the officers of the native branches of the 
army to sell their commissions, but they were to 
have the right they now enjoy of retirement on 
full pay, after a certain period of service. It was 
proposed that, upon this change being made, the 
armies of the different presidencies should be 
consolidated into one. This was strongly recom- 
mended, on the ground of that leading principle 
which has been the foundation of every large and 
liberal plan suggested for the reform of the Indian 
army, that of putting an end to feelings of jealousy 
and irritation, which arise out of distinctions as to 
allowances and promotion between the armies of 
Bengal, Madras, and Bombay. 

Strong arguments were brought forward against 
any transfer. The peculiar constitution of the 
native army, and the education necessary for the 
European officers attached to it, were strenuously 
urged ; and it was assumed, that recent measures 
had given a strength and efficiency to this branch 
of the service which did not belong to it when 
Lord Cornwallis suggested that transfer; and it 
was added, that the principal objects that noble- 



206 


ARMY 


man had in view were attained by the regulations 
of 1796, which, by giving equal rank and con- 
sideration to the officers of the Company’s army, 
had approximated them as much to those of his 
majesty’s service as it was expedient or politic to 
do with an army so situated and so constituted. 

’JThe danger to the character and efficiency of 
the local army of India, from being under the 
same authority with that of England, was forcibly 
dwelt upon ; and it was assumed that, if a transfer 
took place, no merit or pretensions of the former, 
and no sense of tlie wisdom of general rules for 
their protection, could be expected to resist the 
tide of influence and interest which would always 
be in favour of the latter. The certain consequences 
must be, that the local army, when transferred to 
the king, would gradually become inferior and 
secondary, a result which, there was every reason 
to fear, would be fatal to the existence of our 
Indian empire. 

The constitutional objection, so often urged, of 
transferring to the crown such a great portion of 
patronage, as the command of an army of such 
magnitude, was repeated ; but the strength of all 
the arguments brought forward on this occasion 
by the chairmen of the directors rested on po- 
litical grounds. Their reasons cannot be better 
given than in their own words. The Company’s 
government,” they observe, "has hitherto been 
respected, both by its own subjects and foreign 



OP INDIA. 


207 


powcrS) because it possessed a great military force ; 
organizing this force, enlarging or reducing it at 
pleasure, appointing its officers, rewarding merit, 
punishing the unworthy, providing for the comfort- 
able retirement of the veteran officer and soldier, 
and, in short, exercising all the functions of a go- 
verning power over a very numerous body of men 
of high military spirit, it has possessed all the re- 
spectability and the benefit of their attachment and 
fidelity. Looking upon the members of civil go- 
vernment, and the body of civil servants, as belong- 
ing to the same masters with themselves, and as 
the first order in the state, they have paid a willing 
obedience t<j their authority, and have thereby up- 
held their internal administration, and their conse- 
quence abroad. The introduction of certain king’s 
regiments has been understood, as it was intended, 
to be merely in support of the public interest 
under the existing system; but if the Company 
were to be divested of the whole of their military 
force and power, if they were to be no longer mas- 
ters of a single regiment, no longer capable of en- 
tertaining any soldiers, nor of giving one subaltern’s 
commission ; if the immense body of men who have 
so long looked up to them were to be transferred 
from them, the people must consider their power 
as fallen, and drawing rapidly to a close. Conti- 
nuing still to their government a general control 
over the employment of the army, and to their 



208 


AHMY 


civil servants the intcnial administration of their 
officers^ would give the people no assurance to the 
contrary. Those servants, in the discharge of their 
different functions, of judges, magistrates, collec- 
tors, could not expect the same respect and sup- 
port, either from public opinion or the attachment 
of the native troops, as when all looked to the 
same head for protection, patronage, and reward. 
Indeed to make so wide a separation of the military 
from the civil power, to take away the organiza- 
tion, the interior regulation, and with these the 
patronage of the army, from the local government, 
to place all these powers in the hands of the com- 
rnander-in-chief, subject only, in the exercise of 
them, to an authority at the distance of half the 
globe, would throw the means and temptations of a 
dangerous ascendancy into the scale of the military 
department, which, constituted by his majesty, 
might easily he led to slight the civil servants of a 
meaner master, and their chance of distant redress. 
Among the natives of India, it has been usual to 
consider the military power and those possessing it 
as pre-eminent ; and they see, in some examples of 
the present day, that power, under the idea of as- 
sisting the civil and political administration, ac- 
tually controlling it. The Company’s government, 
in short, lowered and overshadowed in this way, 
Would not, in the opinion of the court, continue to 
possess the authority necessary for the proper ad- 



OP INDIA. 


209 


ministration of the aftiiirs of that great empire ; and 
it might then be conceived that a further change 
only could supply what is defective 

These arguments were deemed of sufficient 
weight to prevent the transfer ; and as they may 
probably meet with attention when the subject is 
again brought under discussion, it becomes of im- 
portance to examine how far the defects of the 
actual system can be remedied, and the interests of 
the different branches of the military service of our 
common country be placed upon a permanent 
footing, that, by adding to their efficiency, will give 
strength to the state. 

The opinion of all wise statesmen and able 
military commanders has been invariably the same 
with regard to the indispensable necessity of putting 
an end to the jealousies -f- and divisions which have 
so often arisen between the officers of the king’s 
army and those of the Company’s, and between 

* Vide Negotiation for the Renewal of the Company’s privi- 
leges, page 37. 

t There is no part of their duty that requires such constant 
attention from officers high in command as the employment of 
the different branches of the service under their orders in a 
manner that shall at once promote their union and add to their 
efficiency. The separate employment of King’s and Com- 
pany’s troops, or the corps of the different establishments, when 
on the same service, should ever be avoided ; it is pregnant with 
evil, exciting jealousy and bad temper ; while emulation and 
harmony are certain to be the result of men sharing the same 
hardships and d.angers, and being alike associated in failure 
and success. 

VoL. If. 


p 



210 


ARMY 


the different military establishments of the latter. 
Some narrow-minded men have whispered their 
belief that there was safety to the state in the 
existence of such differenees : but such persons 
have forgot that the very alarming events which 
form the grounds of their dread have been, in 
almost every case, the result of those jealousies 
and divisions which are deprecated. They are 
ignorant also that it is much more easy to create 
and maintain a bad spirit amongst a limited body 
of men, who are affected by the same local circum- 
stances, than it is to spread such a spirit through- 
out more extended numbers, and a wider sphere. 
But these considerations hardly merit mention, for 
we may safely assume that, if ever it is a principle 
of our policy to rule by keeping divided the 
European officers, to whom we must chiefly trust 
for the safety of our empire in India, that empire 
will soon verge to its decline. The competency, 
the spirit, and the loyalty of this class, constitute 
our strength, and it will be increased by their 
union, but will be decreased by all causes which 
tend to perpetuate or create jealousies, distrac- 
tions, or divisions amongst men^ who, though 
placed in different branches to meet peculiar cir- 
cumstances, serve one common countrv, their 
attachment to which can have none of those mo- 
tives to slnikc it which exist where men colonize, 
and are almost naturalized, in a distant land. 
The truth and force of this fact has ifever been so 



OP INDIA. 


211 


Strongly illustrated as in the course of those tem- 
porary aberrations from duty which have occurred 
in different parts of the Indian army since the 
first establishment of our power in that country. 

The supporting and elevating of the Company’s 
army is a point not more necessary than difficult. 
It cannot he done without the cordial co-operation 
(arising out of a sense of its necessity) of the crown.* 
It must enjoy an equal share of the favour and 
consideration of the sovereign as that which bears 
his name : in commands, in honours, in every dis- 
tinction, it must be Upon a par; and every measure 
must he adopted that can counteract the depressing 
influence of the circumstances in Which it is placed, 
if kept, from political reasons, distinct in name, it 
Should be associated in feeling and interests, and 
every arrangement formed that could bring the two 
Services nearer to each other. 

To effect these objects, some concessions, both 
on the part of his majesty’s government and of the 
Company, will be necessary. The booh of em- 
ployment on general service to officers of high rank 
in the Company’s army might be granted. It would 
elevate the local service of India; it might eventu- 
ally be of benefit to the country, and could never 
inflict the slightest injury on his majesty’s service. 
Exchanges*, under strict regulations, might be 

* Sucli exchanges would require, in the officer entering the 
native branch, a competence in knowledge of the languages 
and a period of service in India proportionate to his rank. 

PS 



212 


AHMV 


permitted between officers in the King*s and Com- 
pany’s army. These, however seldom they occurred, 
would be very beneficial, and tend more than any 
measure to raise’ the feeling of the latter, and to 
unite the two branches of the service*. 

It has been a constant theme of complaint with 
the officers of his majesty’s service in India, that 
they are debarred by usage from many situations 
of honour and emolument which are exclusively 
filled by Company’s officers. This complaint ap- 
pears just, or otherwise, exactly as it is considered 
with reference to individuals or the whole service. 
That there always have been some few of his 
imyesty’s officers in India qualified for such em- 
|doyments is certain; and that many have served 
in that country a period which fully entitled them 
to sucli situations, is equally so; but general ques- 
tions that aflert. the interests of large bodies of men 
must be decided on general principles. Placed in 
the condition in which the Company’s officers 
have hitherto been, they have viewed, with a reason- 
able jealousy and apprehension, any approach to 
interference with those advantages to which usage 
had given them, what they deemed, a prescriptive 
iright. They had little dread of the few officers of 

'* Officers with whom the climate of India disagreed, or who 
9ial3l soquired or succeeded to fortune, but desired to remain in 
4he .army, would exchange into king’s corps, and their places 
'would be supplied by men willing and able to pass their life 
«ai foseign service. 



OF INDIA. 


213 


the king’s army who were competent, and the 
justice of whose claims to participation in staff 
e'mployments was not deniable; but they feared, 
and with justice, that if the path were opened, 
another class, with less pretensions as to local qua- 
lifications, but with better interest, would step 
between them and these hopes, on the fulfilment 
of which every prospect of revisiting their native 
country was grounded. 

Should exchanges between the two services be 
established, the door would be opened through 
which qualified officers of his majesty’s scrvicei 
might enter and participate in those stations from 
whicli they are now excluded. No other expedient 
can be adopted to accomplish this object, that will 
not be liable to abuse, and calculated to affect most 
seriously the temper and interests of the Indian army. 

The proposition for consolidating the forces of 
the three presidencies into one army was recom- 
mended, fifteen years ago, as a measure of expe- 
diency. The events which have since taken place 
have rendered it one of necessity. The territories 
of our different governments are no longer divided 
by seas and continents. Though we do not ac- 
tually possess the whole of India, we have military 
occupation of every province of that extensive 
country ; and constantly maintain from twenty to 
thirty thousand men in stations, which, as far as 
the position of forces is concerned, experience ^as 
proved to be alike convenient to Bengal, Madras, 



m 


ARMY 


or Bombay. Besides this faet, no internal rebel- 
lion, much less foreign war, can occur, without the 
troops of the different presidencies being called 
upon to co-operate. Yet such continues to be 
their distinct organization, with regard to the pay 
and establishments both of fighting men and fol- 
lowers, that they can never be brought together 
without danger of serious discontents, if not mu- 
tiny. It would be superfluous to expatiate on 
causes and effects, the nature and consequences of 
which must be ol)vious to the most superficial ob- 
server. Those w'hosG experience has enabled them 
to form a better judgment upon the question must 
see, not merely serious inconvenience, but danger in 
continuing to leave it unsettled. The remedies are 
easy, and the application can be opposed only by 
men whose minds are fettered by local prejudices, 
or who desire to foster distinctions and divisions 
amongst those whose harmony constitutes the true 
safeguard of the state. 

From the character of the native army, and the 
similarity of habits and language of a great pro- 
oortion of these military classes, of whom it is 
composed, no mconvenience or embarrassment 
could result from making the three armies of India 
three divisions of one army. Each division would 
remain as at present ; cadets would be nominate4 
to it, and be appointed as vacancies occurred to its 
regiments. On such an organization taking place, 
it would be better that officers should rise regir 



OP INDIA. 


215 - 


mentally to the rank of lieutenant-colonel, instead 
of that of major, as they now do ; as such an alter- 
ation in the actual system would prevent their re- 
moval from distant parts of India, except when an 
increase was made to the army. -On such an occa- 
sion, the senior officer of each rank would be pro- 
moted, not those of any division. The above plan 
would disturb nothing that is established; the staff 
would continue as at present, unless it were deemed 
expedient to select the generals * employed upon 
it from the whole army, instead of the division 
where the vacancy occurred. The off-reckonings 
to commandants of regiments arc at present con- 
solidated in one general list ; and officers would 
succeed, if this plan were adopted, to be colonels of 
corps by seniority in the Indian army, not in the 
division to which they had as regimental officers 
belonged. The pay and allowances of all nuiks, 
from the general who commanded to the lowest 
public follower, would, on this change taking place, 
be regulated by clear and understood principles of 
equality and justice, so as to leave no ground of 
complaint of any one part of the army, from the 
comparison of its condition with that of another part 
employed on the same service and the same duty. 

That there might be petty difficulties in carrying 
into execution some of these changes in the consti- 
tution of our Indian army, cannot be denied. The 

• This discretionary power might safey be intrusted with 
the commander-in-chief of India. 



216 


ARMY 


chief objections will occur to the minds of men who 
have not served in that army during the last ten or 
twelve years ; and such will be least sensible of the 
necessity of making them. Those who know the 
military stations we now occupy, and who have had 
opportunities of observing the recent intermixed 
employment of the troops of the different presi- 
dencies, will well understand the absolute necessity 
of putting an end to distinctions which have em- 
barrassed, and will, if not altered, continue to em- 
barrass the public service. The feelings and pre- 
judices of individuals may lead them to suggest 
doubts as to the wisdom of a plan which proposes, 
in some cases, to transfer officers from one division 
to another. They may bring forward the difference 
of character of the sepoys, and the different treat- 
ment they require ; and it may be also alleged, that 
the removal of an officer from one extreme of 
India to another will be a hardship. To the first 
of these arguments it may be said, that whatever 
was formerly the case, there is at present no essential 
difference either in language, habits, or character of 
the native troops of our establishments, and that, 
whatever may be their usages, they all require to be 
treated in the same manner. With respect to the 
JEuropean officer, it is desirable, on every ground, 
that he should never be local. The more he is ex- 
posed to the vicissitudes of the service, and to be 
employed in different parts of the empire, the more 
his experience and knowledge will be enlarged ; fuad 



OP INDIA. 


217 


those qualities, with whatever of inconvenience or 
hardship their attainment is attendedj must ulti- 
mately prove as beneficial to the individual as to 
the government. 

Many and essential benefits would result from 
consolidating the local armies of India into one : 
there would then be an end to those discontents 
which have so often arisen concerning a diflerence in 
pay and allowances, and from an increase of one 
establishment to the real or supposed injury of 
another. This was not felt formerly in the manner 
it must be at this period, when the third of our mi- 
litary stations can be occupied with equal facility 
by the troops of any one of the presidencies. 
Wherever an increase of corps is required, it be- 
comes a question of judgment with the (iovernor- 
general to which army it shall be given ; and a 
slight previous change in the disposition of the 
forces will make it easy to transfer the apparent 
expediency of an increase from one presidency to 
another. Whatever may be the talent, the justice, 
or the impartiality of the Governor-general, he can 
never hold the balance in a manner that will prevent 
discontent. Bodies of men will always have their 
feelings agitated by measures which so seriously 
concern their future prospects in life, when these 
are so liable to be aficcted by the decision of an in- 
dividual in power ; and if that decision is unfavour- 
able to them, they will impute to him, however in- 
sufficient the grounds, motives of partiality, or weak 



5218 


ARMY 


submission to the influence of those by whom he is 
surrounded. The nature and efFect of the feelings 
to which the present system must give rise will be 
perfectly understood by all acquainted with the 
temper and constitution of armies. The remedy 
of this evil should not be deferred. If there is a 
dislike to direct the immediate adoption of an 
arrangement, making the benefit of increase of 
corps general ; at any rate, all regiments raised 
in future might be equally distributed between 
Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, commencing with 
that of which the officers are most backward 
in promotion. What has been before stated will 
show that not the slightest difficulty could occur on 
the ground of tin; increase being more wanted at 
one presidency than at another, as that would be 
obviated by the transfer of the duties of a station, 
which, from its position, was equally convenient 
to the presidency receiving the benefit of the 
augmentation. 

A second advantage from amalgamating the 
local armies of India would result from the first. 
When the nomination of European officers from a 
general list to newly-raised corps was adopted, it 
would be a matter of indifference to those where 
the men were recruited, or where employed. The 
consequence would be, that the whole native army 
would be more disposable than it is at present 
to serve in any quarter of our dominions. Occa- 
sions have occurred, and are more likely than ever 



OF INDIA. 


219 


to occur, when our safety may depend on our 
power to employ the natives of Bengal in the 
territories of Madras or Bombay, or those of the 
latter in Bengal or Hindustan. Looking to those 
internal commotions from which we cannot expect 
exemption, there is no principle of policy likely to 
be' more conducive to the security of the empire : 
but we must in a great degree be deprived of the 
advantage it offers, till a plan is adopted which 
shall put an end to the separation of interests now 
existing among the European officers. 

The third advantage of the plan proposed is of 
consequence for the same object, that of rendering 
our native army more available in every part of 
India, and of enabling us to employ them together, 
without creating a spirit of discontent which has 
often approached to mutiny. This can be done 
only by assimilating, on the principles suggested, 
the pay and allowances of the native soldiery and 
public followers. These should be fixed wdth 
reference to certain general principles, and not be 
dependant on the establishment to which this or 
that soldier of the same government belonged. 
Tlic military equipments and departments * of 
the forces of the different presidencies should be 

* This particularly applies to that most important of all 
military departments, the Commissariat. The difference of 
principle in that of Bengal, and those of Madras and Bombay, 
is such, that it becomes almost impossible to employ the 
troops together during any long period of operations. 



220 


ARMY 


constituted on the same general principles, and be 
as little different in practice as local circumstances 
would permit ; otherwise we shall never have our 
Indian armies possessed of that efficiency and 
strength which they should have for united opera- 
tions. 

The rise of European officers in the native 
army of India must continue to be by seniority; 
but every measure consistent with their interests, 
and with those of the public, should be taken, 
to accelerate the attainment of rank and command 
for those who have gained experience in this 
branch of the service. The frequent stagnations 
of promotion which have occurred have been 
hitherto relieved by expedients that gave an im- 
pulse for the moment, but were followed by a 
re-action that often left men in a worse situation 
than they were before. We must not judge of the 
effects of such stagnation of promotion in the 
local army in India by what we observe from the 
same cause in England. There is hardly any 
analogy ; the power of exchanging into other corps ; 
of purchasing and selling their commissions ; that 
of living with their relations and friends ; the 
connexions they form, and the different walks 
of life open to men in their native country, place 
them in a situation totally different from those who 
are in a manner banished to a foreign land, where 
they may almost be considered aliens from all 
family ties and connexions, with their prospects 



OF INDIA. 


221 


limited to their profession, to which they are in 
fact bound, from the day they enter it, as the only 
means they have of subsistence. The officers of 
his majesty’s service, if disappointed or discontented, 
have generally the means of escape', and if, in effect- 
ing that, their condition becomes worse, their com- 
plaints are not heard; they produce no effect on 
others; young and more sanguine candidates fill 
the niche they occupied: nor does the state suffer 
by the change ; for the constitution of the army to 
which they belong, requires in its inferior officers 
no qualifications that may not be easily acquired. 
But how different is the situation of those who 
enter the Company’s service! Their youth must be 
devoted to the attainment of acquirements, without 
which they are unfit even for the subaltern duties 
of a native coqjs ; they have no escape from their 
lot in life; discontent and disappointment in it 
not only corrode their own minds, but spread a 
baneful influence over the minds of others: their 
place, after they arc in any degree advanced, cannot 
be easily supplied, for certain qualifications, which 
time and study alone can give, are requisite to 
those who succeed them. All these circumstances 
(and many more might be adduced) show that the 
question of the improvement of the Indian army 
should be considered on its own grounds, and not 
with the reference which is too often made to the 
comparative condition and pretensions of an army 
from which its constitution is altogether difterent. 



222 


ARMY 


. To give opportunity of acquiring distinction to 
tlie officers of the local army of India, (without 
which no military body can ever attain and support 
a character, and least of all a body that is in con- 
stant comparison with troops of the same nation, 
regulated on other principles) high rank ought to 
be conferred by local commissions, while the indi- 
viduals to whom it is granted are yet efficient for 
the duties to which it may call them. The privi- 
lege of nominating general officers to the staff 
must soon become as useless to any objects of am- 
bition , in tbe Indian army as of service to the state, 
under the slow progress of brevet rank in England, 
consequent to peace in Europe. Every general 
belonging to the Indian service must he superan- 
nuated before he can be employed. There would 
appear no objection to grant local brevets to colo- 
nels of the Indian service to serve on the staff of 
that country, as the same can be extended to his 
majesty’s service. The adoption of such a measure 
would, of course, prevent officers being permitted 
to proceed w'ith regiments to India, whose rank 
was above that of officers within the limits of 
selection for the general staff; but this would be 
attended with no injury to the service, and would 
be a slight sacrifice to obtain a great benefit. 

The sale of commissions and exchanges between 
the English and local branches of the army em- 
ployed in India, under regulations which guarded 
the efficiency of the local branch, would be most 



OP INDIA. 


22S 


beneficial, both from introducing good and effective 
officers, and accelerating promotion in the local 
army ; but there is no measure so requisite for the 
latter as the formation of a staff corps, which would 
furnish the means of supplying vacancies in regi- 
ments occasioned by the removal of their officers 
to other duties. 

The native corps in India were, perhaps, in as 
efficient a state as they have ever since been, when 
they had only two or three European officers ; but, 
at that period of the service, their commandant was 
their chief, and they were his followers. The ties 
and the feelings from which both acted were alto- 
gether different from those which now subsist; and, 
under the present system, the deficiency of Euro- 
pean oflScers is felt, particularly on service, as a great 
evil. '^This evil inust continue till the regular staflP 
of the army, and those necessary for distinct de- 
partments, are separated from that list which it is 
essential to keep complete for regimental duties. 
If this measure is determined upon, the formation 
of a plan* for carrying it into effect will not be 

* Various modes have been proposed to effect this object. 
The most practicable appears, the formation of corps of officers 
lidthout men, from whom vacancies caused by appointments to 
the staff could be filled ; who might be employed on the staff ; 
and who could join corps with whom their services might be 
required; who should, in short, be disposable in any way, but 
should rise in unattached corps. There are fewer objections 
to this plan than any other, for it could, in no degree, disturb 
the regular rise of other corp$, or produce those inequalities of 



224 


ARMY 


difficult ; but great care must be taken that it com- 
bines a due regard for the interests of individuals »■ 
with those of the public. 

Should the same reasons which prevented the 
transfer of the Indian army to the crown, when the 
exclusive privileges of the Company were last re- 
newed, continue to operate, this will be no reason 
why the measures which have been suggested for 
the improvement of the condition of the European 
officers of the Indian army should not take place. 
There is nothing required to give them full eftect, 
but a cordial and li])eral spirit of co-operation in 
the different authorities in England. But this 
large question must be viewed as one of national 
policy, and not as the settlement of the compa- 
rative pretensions of individuals. We must con- 
tinue dependent on the fidelity and efficiency of 
our native army for the prese^ation of India. 
The European officers are the links by which we 
must preserve its attachment, and maintain its re- 
putation. Their peculiar condition requires favour 
and support ; and it is not too much to affirm, that 
any means which have a tendency to depress this 
body of men, or to introduce any claims but those 
of Indian service, and complete competence, into a 
competition for those objects of reward which this 

promotion that must result from filling the vacancies made by 
nominations to the staff from the' regiments to which they 
belonged. These unattached corps would be fomed, in the 
first instance, as an augmentation. 



OP INDIA. 


225 


branch has hitherto exclusively enjoyed, will be 
fatal to our best hopes of preserving our eastern 
empire. The constitutional jealousy that will be 
called into action, whenever this important subject 
is agitated, must not be lulled "by a consideration 
of the character and influence of the present com- 
mandcr-in-chief of the British forces, which, as long 
as that illustrious personage may hold the office, 
would, no doubt, aftbrd to the local branch of the 
army of India every security for liberal and just 
treatment. 


NATIVE TROOPS. 

Among the many political considerations likely 
to affect the future prosperity and security of the 
British empire in India, there appears hardly one 
of more magnitude than the attachment of the na- 
tives of our army. 

The great proportion of the inhabitants of India 
are devoted to peaceful occupations, and are conse- 
quently, to a certain degree, unable, if they were 
willing, to defend that government, to which a sense 
of benefit may have rendered them well affected. 
The object of our laws and institutions is to repress 
if not destroy those habits which distinguish the 
military tribes subject to our rule; but such changes, 
to be safe, must be gradual ; we cannot otherwise 
expect to escape the dangers and convulsions with 
which they are likely to be attended. As long 
VoL. If. Q 



226 


NATIVE TROOPS 


however, as we can repose on the fidelity of our 
native army, we are safe from internal danger ; but 
every disquietude must assmne an alarming appear- 
ance, when associated with disalFection in that 
army ; nor can we obtain relief by an accession of 
Suropean force, for the very means which would 
give us security for the moment, would aggravate 
the evil, (from causes which will be noticed here- 
after,) as they would tend to lessen the efficiency, 
and weaken the attachment of those native troops, 
by whose courage and fidelity alone we can pre- 
serve India. As the truth of these observations 
will hardly admit of dispute, we can contemplate 
no measures of more importance than those which 
are calculated to incite and confirm the obedience 
and allegiance of the native corps employed in our 
service. The rigid principles of economy, and the 
precise forms of our civil rule, should both yield to 
the establishment of this corner-stone of our 
strength ; as, without it, the vast fabric which has 
been raised with such pains must totter to its base 
at every tempest with which it is assailed. 

The native army has undergone many changes 
from its origin * to the present day. 

When the British government first established 
itself in India, military tactics in Europe were in a 
less advanced state than at present, and the caution 

• A correct general view of the rise and progress of the 
native armies of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay will be found 
in the “ Quarterly Review,” vol. xviii., p. 385. 



OF INDIA. 


227 


with which a few European.s, endeavouring to 
conciliate the natives of India to fight their 
battles on a foreign shore, were obliged to act, pre- 
vented the introduction of any part of those tactics 
which could in the least interfere with their preju- 
dices, habits, or religion. A jacket of English 
broad cloth, made up in the shape of his own dress, 
the knowledge of his manual exercise, and a few 
military evolutions, constituted the original sepoy ; 
and with this qualification, and his English fire- 
arms, he was found to possess an incalculable supe- 
riority over the other natives of India, who, igno- 
i-ant of the fii'st principles of discipline (which 
enable men to act in a body), were easily defeated, 
however great their numbers, by a small corps of 
their brothers, armed, disciplined, and directed, by 
the art, intelligence, and energy of European 
leaders. 

It was natural that the early sepoy should share 
in that feeling of pride which his superiority in dis- 
cipline obtained him over his countrymen ; and the 
native officers in the employment of the Company 
were gratified not only by the opportunities which 
they had of acquiring military distinction, but of im- 
proving their fortunes. There were but few Eu- 
ropean officers in the first sepoy liattalions. A 
captain, an adjutant, with a serjeant to each com- 
pany, was the original establishment. Commands 
frequently fell to soubahdars and jemadars ; and the 

comparative laxity of discipline, as well as the 

Q a 



228 


NATIVE TROOPS 


general corruption of the times, enabled the whole 
of the native army, from the soubahdar to the sepoy, 
to derive pecuniary benefit from the nature of the 
services* on which they were occasionally em- 
ployed. To this advantage, which rendered the 
service of the Company desirable, and often lucra- 
tive, was added a still more powerful attraction in 
the kind treatment which they generally received 
from their European officers, the number of whom, 
to every battalion, was so small, that from necessity, 
if not from inclination, they acted as much upon 
principles of conciliation as coercion, and their au- 
thority in their coips rested more on affection than 
fear. They were most particular in their conduct 
to the native officers, towards whom they behaved 
with regard and respect proportionate to the re- 
sponsibility of their situations. One of those na- 
tive officers, who held the rank of native com- 
mandant, often possessed an influence in the corps 
nearly equal to the European commander. As a 
strong and convincing proof of this, it may be men- 
tioned, that many of the oldest battalions of the 
native army of Madras are respectively known to 
this day by the name of some fonner native com- 
mandant. 

This system, which had, undoubtedly, many de- 
fects, had also much to recommend it ; for though 

* They were frequently detached in small parties into dif- 
ferent parts of the country, from the inhabitants of which they 
obtained money on various pretexts. 



OF INDIA, 


229 


the European commanding officer, who acted with- 
out check in the exercise of a great trust, generally 
made his corjis a source of pecuniary advantage, in 
which he was aided by the native commandant, who 
shared in this indirect emolument ; yet both had a 
strong interest in the character and conduct of the 
corps, to the men of which they were almost always 
kind and generous. 

An increase of their European officers, a great 
alteration in their dress, and an improvement in 
their discipline, made material changes in the con- 
stitution of the native corps, and these took 
place through several causes. The native princes 
had trained sepoys in European tactics ; and to 
maintain a superiority over them it became ne- 
cessary that the native aimy of the Company’s go- 
vernment should make further advances in the mili- 
tary art, which they were cnahled to do, not only from 
the great improvements which had taken place in 
that science in Europe, and from the example 
furnished by some of the king’s regiments sent to 
India, hut] from the number of officers of liberal 
education and respectable character, whom a pro- 
spect of advantage had at this period drawn to 
the service of the Company. According to the 
opinion of many able officers, it was under this 
system that the men became most attached to 
their officers, and the native army attained as 
great a degree of efficiency as it has ever known. 



230 


NATIVE TROOPS 


Captains were selected to the command of corps *, 
which was an object of sufficient emolument and 
trust to limit the views of officers of that rank 
(then one of the highest in the service) to its 
attainment. These officers were almost invariably 
chosen from their reputation as sepoy officers; 
that is, officers who united to all the military 
qualifications of a soldier a particular knowledge 
of the jircjudices, habits, and characters of the 
men whom they were appointed to command. It 
was observed under this system, that though many 
of the corps were brought to a great perfection 
of dress and discipline, there was hardly an in- 
stance in which this was done at the expense 
of the temper of the men ; on the contrary, those 
corps which were the most remarkable for their 
discipline were almost uniformly most attached 
to their commanding officers, whom they found as 
liberal to their wants, and attentive to their preju- 
dices, as they were anxious for that superiority 
and, excellence, in their appearance, discipline, and 
attachment, upon which they grounded all their 

• These selections were made from the captains in the 
regiments of Europeans in the service of the Company ; and it 
often happened that olHcers who had neglected to acquire the 
languages of the countrj', and Avho, from violence of temper, 
were judged unfit to command natives, remained subordinate 
in an European corps, till they reached the rank of field 
officers. Ten subaltern officei’s were attached to every bat- 
talion under this system. 



OF INDIA. 


231 


hopes of reputation and preferment in the service 
to which they belonged. 

The native officers continued under this system 
to enjoy great respect and regard. This circum- 
stance was chiefly owing to the European com- 
manding officer, who, from his station, and the 
emoluments attached * to it, enjoyed a consi- 
deration and consequence which enabled him not 
only to confer distinction by his personal favour 
and regard, but to keep in complete check and 
control the younger officers of the service, and to 
direct their minds to a moderate and indulgent 
conduct towards all the natives ; but particularly 
to those who, from their gallantry or long services, 
were entitled to respect and attention, and which it 
was proper to show them on every ground of policy 
as well as of generosity. 

The native service underwent another great 
change in the year 1796, when new regulations 
were introduced, which a train of events, connected 
with the comparative rank of the Company’s 
officers with those of his majesty serving in India, 
had rendered indispensably necessary. By these 
regulations, two battalions of native infantry were 
formed into one regiment; to which the same 
number of officers were allowed as to a regiment 
in the king’s service. Regimental rise to the 
rank of major was, at the same time, introduced ; 

* He had the off-reckonings of his corps, and, in generai, 
the eommand of a station, with further emoluments. 



232 


NATIVE TROOPS 


and this, it was hoped, by attaching the officers to 
corps, would confirm and strengthen reciprocal 
confidence and connexion between the European 
officers and the Sepoys, ivhich had ever been 
deemed the most essential principle in the consti- 
tution of the native army. It was also expected 
that the increased number of European officers 
would greatly add to the efficiency of the native 
corps, as the smallest parties that could be detached 
would be commanded by an European officer, and 
have the advantage of his knowledge and expe- 
rience. 

The most unhappy cflbct of these regulations 
was the alteration they produced in the condition 
of the commanding officers, whose situation, under 
the operation of them, w'as attended with little of 
either advantage or distinction. It was, in fact, no 
longer an object of ambition, as it had been for- 
merly. It had become a station of trouble, without 
influence and consideration: and every officer of 
interest or reputation in the service exerted himself 
to avoid it, and to obtain a government command, 
or a situation on the general staff. The bad con- 
sequences of this part of the constitution of a native 
corps have been felt and acknowledged; a partial 
remedy has been applied ; but none will be com- 
plete, or give efficiency to this importiuit branch of 
our military establishment, that does not make it 
an object of more value, both in point of profit and 
reputation, for an officer of rank and character to 



OF INDIA. 


233 


comiiiand a native regiment, than to fill any station 
on the staff except the heads of a department. 

The condition of the native officers of our sepoy 
corps has often been the subject of the most se- 
rious attention of government ; hut though their 
allowances have been a little increased, no mea- 
sures* have yet been taken which we can consider as 
adequate to the object of creating and maintaining 
motives for their continued fidelity and attachment. 
In an army of nearly^ two hundred and forty thou- 
sand natives, the highest pay which a soubahdar of 
infantry can attain is 174 rupees per month and 
after attaining that rank, he enjoys no consideration 
which can save him from the harshness of an Eu- 
ropean officer, a boy, perhaps, who has just joined 
that corjis to w'hich he, the native officer, has per- 
haps belonged for thirty or forty years. He has in 
barracks, and in camp, no other accommodation 
than that provided for the sepoys ; and although on 
his retiring to the invalid list, his pay is continued, 
that is become, from habit, necessary for his sup- 
port, so that he can make no provision for his 
children ; and as pride in his own condition, or 
alarm at their being subject to corporeal pnnish- 

♦ The most beneficial measure of this nature recently adopted, 
is the appointment of a soubahdar major to each corps. 

t The last returns of the native army made that amount to 
832,366, rank and file. 

J This is the pay of a soubahdar of cavalry at Madras. A 
soubahdar of cavalry at Bengal has 1 05 rupees per mensem. 



234 


NATIVE TROOPS 


ment, prevents in most cases his bringing them up 
in the army, they are generally a burden on him 
while he lives ; and when he dies they are left poor 
and discontented. 

There are, no doubt, a few instances in the army, 
where a small pension has been given to a native 
ofticer, and part of it, in some very rare cases, has 
been continued to his family; but such instances 
have seldom occurred, except when the person to 
whom the reward was granted had an opportunity 
of distinguishing himself beyond all the common 
chances of the service; and even then, to obtain 
this notice has required the exertion of all the in- 
terest and influence of those under whom that for- 
tunate native officer acted. It cannot be expected 
that the few rewards, so obtained, should have any 
general effect as an encouragement to the efforts of 
this class of our native army. Under such a com- 
plete limitation of their views, can it be a subject 
of surprise that in cases of severe trial, particularly 
of mutiny, the native officers have seldom displayed 
a spirit of activity and zeal ? They have in such 
cases been almost always objects of suspicion, and 
have often evinced a sullen indifference of conduct*, 

* The conduct of the native officers at Vellore, in 1806, and 
of those in the recent mutiny at Barrackpore, was nearly simi- 
lar : they acted in hoth cases like men who, while desirous of 
not forfeiting what they possessed, were without adequate 
motives to make them perform with spirit a difficult and dan- 
gerous duty. 



OF INDIA. 


235 


which appeared to be produced by the absence of 
those motives of action which were necessary to 
support men in their situation. Placed between 
officers they were bound to obey, and offenders 
with whom they had kindred and national ties, 
they had a difficult and dangerous task to perform ; 
if they have failed, w’e must blame the system, 
not them : but when we can infuse life into that 
system, and elevate their minds to further objects 
of ambition, w’e shall succeed in animating them 
to continued efforts in our service ; until then, they 
will stop where we do, and be more anxious to 
enjoy in repose the small objects they may have 
already attained, than to incur hazards dispropor- 
tioned to any hopes they have reason to indulge 
with regard to the future. 

If the nature of our power in India requires, as it 
certainly does, the exclusion of the native officers 
from the exercise of high military command, and 
that gate to distinction is barred by policy, others 
should be opened. In the strictest conformity to 
those principles upon which the native army is 
formed, we might lead the minds of these troops to 
expect comfort and distinction in civil life, as the 
reward of approved military service ; and by direct- 
ing their ambition to the natural and seductive ob- 
ject of acquiring importance in their own tribe, and 
enjoying some privileges, however trivial, which, 
under certain regulations, might descend to their 
children, we should not only discover a motive suffi- 



23G NATIVE TROOPS 

ciently powerful to supply the place of that which 
a jealous but wise policy obliges us to withhold, 
but place their fidelity beyond the power of cor- 
ruption. If such measures were adopted, the native 
service would become popular and respected ; it 
would be embraced with eagerness by men of the 
first families in the country ; and in the course of 
years we might expect the attachment of our sub- 
jects to be greatly improved by a spirit of active 
allegiance, which would be generally diffused by 
veterans and their descendants, whose claim to their 
rank or land was founded in the gratitude of a state 
w'hom they had served with fidelity and distinction. 

The men who form the native, army of the Com- 
pany are almost all sober, and of good conduct in 
private life. Drunkenness, as a general vice, is, 
indeed, unknown ; and notorious immorality is rare. 
But their virtues are more of a passive than an ac- 
tive nature. They consist more in forbearance, 
from fear of offending against their civil institutions 
and the rigid tenets of their religion, than from any 
sense of the beauty of virtue, or the deformity of 
vice. These men appear, in many cases, hardly to 
consider themselves as free moral agents ; they often 
blindly resign their judgment to the law of usage, 
the dictates of their priest, or the influence of their 
superiors in cast or station ; and, under such influ- 
ence, they change, in an instant, their mild, inoffen- 
sive, and pliant character, for that of the most de- 
termined obstinacy and savage ferocity. 



OF INDIA. 


237 


All the natives of India, but particularly those of 
military classes, arc fond of show and of high 
titles ; and they often seem to prize the semblance, 
almost as much as the reality of power. It is in- 
deed surprising to see the consequence which they 
attach to every mark of outward respect, especially 
when bestowed by their superiors : and, partaking 
of the character of his countryman, the native sol- 
dier of the Company, intelligent and quick in his 
conception, full of vanity and a love of pre-emi- 
nence, if not of glory, is of all men the most sen- 
sible to attention or neglect. Though the climate 
disposes him to inertness, and his frame is seldom 
very robust *, he may be flattered and encouraged 
to make the most extraordinary exertions ; while 
harshness or cruelty serves only to subdue his 
spirit, and sink him into apathy, if it does not 
rouse him to resentment. 

It may be stated as the result of the fullest ex- 
perience, that the native troops of India depend 
more than any in the world upon the officers who 
command them ; when treated by these with notice 
and kindness, and when marked consideration is 
shewn to their usages, they become attached, and 
evince, on all occasions, a zeal and valour that can 
hardly be surpassed ; but when they have not con- 
fidence in those who command them, when they 
are made secondary, or treated in any manner in- 
dicating a want of reliance on them ; much more 

* The Bengal native soldier is an exception. 



238 


NATIVE TROOPS 


when any act of their commanders betrays igno- 
rance or contempt of their prejudices or religion, 
they become spiritless or discontented. This is the 
natural consequence of their condition, as merce- 
naries of a nation with whom they have no ties 
beyond those that compel them to a cold perform- 
ance of their duty, and such as they form with 
their immediate officers ; but able leaders, who un- 
derstand how to infuse their own spirit into those 
they command, find no difficulty in making what 
impressions they desire on the minds of men, whose 
education and sentiments predispose them to par- 
ticipate in every feeling associated with military 
fame and distinction. 

An army so constituted, and formed of men of 
such tempers, may appear very susceptible of being 
corrupted, and made instrumental to the destruc- 
tion of that power which it is employed to protect ; 
but of this there is no danger, unless in the impro- 
bable case of our becoming too presumptuous in 
what we may deem our intrinsic strength, con- 
fiding too exclusively in our European troops, and 
undervaluing our native army. From the day of 
that fatal error, (should wc ever commit it,) we 
may date the downfiil of our eastern empire. Its 
finances would not only sink under the expense of 
a greatly-increased European force, but the natives 
of India in our ranks would lose the opinion which 
they entertain of their own consequence to the go- 
vernment they serve, and their whole tone as an 



OP INDIA. 


239 


army would be lowered in a degree that would im- 
pair our strength far beyond any addition it could 
receive from the superior efficiency and energy of 
a few more English regiments. 

The employment of native troops associated with 
Europeans^^ is a point that merits the most serious 
attention. The ablest of those commanders who 
have led them to victory^ however impressed with a 
just sense of the superior courage and energy of a 
British soldier, have carefully abstained from every 
act that could show the least want of confidence in 
the native part of their force, or convey to the latter 
an impression that they were viewed in a secondary 
light. By mixing them in every operation with 
English troops, they have succeeded * not only in 

* Amongst those who have been most happy in exciting such 
feelings in the minds of our native troops may be enumerated 
the names of Lord Clive, Sir Eyre Coote, Lord Cornwallis, 
General Meadows, Lord Lake, and the Duke of Wellington. 
In the article of the Review (vol. xviii. p. 392), to which we 
have before alluded, we find a just compliment to that excellent 
officer, the late General Sir John Floyd, which very fully illus- 
trates the effects of attention to this point. “ The distin- 
guished commander,^’ the reviewer observes, “of that gallant 
regiment (the 19th dragoons) had, from the day of its andval 
in India, laboured to establish the ties of mutual and cordial 
regard between the European and the native soldiers. His 
success was complete ; his own fame, while he remained in 
India, was promoted by their combined efforts ; and the friend- 
ship which he established, and which had continued for many 
years, w’as, after his departure, consummated upon the plains 
of Assaye. At the most critical moment of a battle, which ranks 



240 


NATIVE TROOPS 


exciting an emulation and pride in the minds of 
the native soldiers, which greatly added to their 
efficiency, hut ditlused a spirit of cordiality and 
good feeling, not more calculated to promote the 
success of their immediate operations than the ge- 
neral interests of the empire. 

These observations will help to show the peculiar 
character of the native army, and the consequence 
of all arrangements that relate to the European 
officers of every rank who are to command and 
lead them, and upon whose disposition, knowledge, 
and ability, the hdelity and efficiency of this branch 
of our strength must depend. 

Viewing the sxibjcct in this light, it ajipears 
most important to provide at an early period a re- 
medy for the defects of the existing system. This 
should be done by measures grounded on sound 
principles of liberal policy, suited to the character, 
composition, and actual condition of the men of 

amongst the hardest fought of those that have been gained 
hy tlie illustrious Wellington, the British dragoons, when 
making their extreinest efforts, saw their Asiatic fellow-sol- 
diers, ‘ keep pace for pace, and blow for every blow.’ A 
more arduous task awaited the latter, when the battalions of 
native infantry whicli formed the garrison of Vellore were 
led, by the infatuation of the moment, to rise upon and murder 
the Europeans of that garrison. The fidelity of the native ca- 
valry did not shrink from this severe trial ; and after the gates 
of the fortress were blown open, their sabres were as deeply 
stained as those of the English dragoons with the blood of 
their misguided and guilty countrymen.” 



OP INDIA. 


241 


otir native army. There is every reason to appre- 
hend that, if these measorcs are long neglected, 
our local governments may be forced upon ex- 
pedients which may remove partial or local evils, 
but which will lay the seeds of iiiorc general dis- 
content and danger. The dittercnce between a 
wise foresight, which prevents demand, and that 
weakness, which meets it with concession, is im- 
mense : the former is the characteristic of a rising, 
the latter of a falling government. 

It would occupy too much space to enter into a 
fuller detail of the plan best calculated to animate 
the zeal and confirm the fidelity of our native 
troops; but if the importance of these objects is 
acknowledged, there will be no difficulty in de- 
vising the means for their accomplishment. 

Whatever measures we adopt must provide re- 
wards suited to their condition for a certain num- 
ber of the most deserving native officers ; and these 
rewards should be of a character not only to give 
life to this class, but to raise the hopes of all who 
shall be striving to obtain similar rank and consi- 
deration. We have been compelled to cast down 
much in India, and almost all whom we found 
raised above others in the community have pe- 
rished under our levelling rule. The necessity of 
creating and maintaining a superior class amongst 
the natives is i*ecommended by every consideration 
of wise and generous policy ; and assuredly there 
is no measure more calculated to aid in obtaining 
VoL. II. R 



242 


NATIVE TROOPS 


this end than that of conferring on the veteran, 
who has gained reputation in the army, rank and 
consideration in his native district, so as to render 
him an objeet of respeet to his countrymen, who 
will sec in his services to the state a legitimate 
claim to favour and distinction, whatever may have 
been his former condition. This mode of reward 
is quite accordant with the usage of all Asiatic 
states, and its adoption by us would be congenial 
to the habits and feelings of the whole popidation. 

The consideration given to distinguished native 
officers should, in a greater or less degree, accord- 
ing to their claims, be extended to their descend- 
ants ; and their sons might be permitted to pass 
through the grades of our army with a trivial 
addition of pay, and exemption from corporal 
punishment. 'I’hc constitution of the army will 
never admit of our introducing volunteers, or 
native cadets. Every man who enters it must 
work his way, by his own efforts, from the station 
of a private to that of a soubahdar ; but nothing 
could be more popular with the sepoys than to 
see the sons of their officers mingled in their ranks, 
yet enjoying a notice and respect that added to the 
value of that station in life to which they all 
aspired. 

Native commissioned officers, when employed 
on the staiF, as they frequently are, should receive 
a fixed allowance, and not be left, as they have 
hitherto been, to look to a future reward, depend* 



OP INDIA. 


243 


ing as much on the influence of the officer under 
whom they acted as the services they performed. 
The value of their cflbrts, if judiciously directed in 
this line of duty, is very great, and cannot, in some 
cases, be supplied by those of any European officer. 
They are also frequently required for specific charge 
or command, and this employment should come 
under the head of staff duty. The selection for such 
stations, when pay was attached to them, would 
constitute both reward and encouragement to the 
class to which they belonged. 

The above measures would be very beneficial, and 
not attended with any large expenditure ; but their 
operation would be limited to the higher ranks; 
and however much the favour and notice extended 
to them might influence others, more is required 
to cement the union of the interests of the state 
with that of the general body of tbe troops by 
whom it is defended. To do this effectually, the 
sepoy should be taught to look to meritorious ser- 
vices in the army as the road to employment under 
the civil administration of his native province. A 
certain period of service in the regular army shoidd 
he an indispensable qualification in all candidates 
for situations suited to persons of military habits ; 
and there is no doubt that all the duties of police, 
which are distinct from the hereditary village es- 
tablishment, would be as well performed by inen 
who had passed through the army, as by any other 
class, if not better. The sepoys employed in 



244 


NATIVE TROOPS 


police duties might have a privilege of getting part 
of their pay commuted, if they wished it, for grants 
of waste land, provided they possessed the means 
of bringing it into cultivation. 

The general introduction of such a plan would 
be attended with great and manifold advantages. 
If well organized, it would encourage recruits and 
reward service, and would promote internal order 
and prosperity ; nor is it a slight recommendation 
that, while it gave the best hold upon the conti- 
nued attachment of our native army, by multiply- 
ing our means of rewarding meritorious individuals, 
it would be attended with a saving instead of an 
increase of expense. The only difficulty that could 
impede its successful accomplishment has been 
before noticed, and the necessity of the measure 
may be adduced as another argument in favour of 
selecting the magistrates and snperintendants of 
police from a class of men who arc accustomed to 
command soldiei's. 

Sudden changes in any system of administration 
are unwise, and it would be sufficient, if this plan 
were approved, to make its gradual introduction 
imperative. The details would be adapted to local 
circumstances, but no deviation should be allowed 
as to the fundamental principles on which it is 
grounded. These are political, and connected with 
our very existence in India. Our government of 
that country is essentially military, and our means of 
preserving and improving our possessions through 



OF INDIA. 


245 


the operation of our civil institutions depend on our 
wise and politic exercise of that military power on 
which the whole fabric rests. This is a recognised 
fact ; but, unless a conviction of its truth is conti- 
nually impressed on the minds of those placed at 
the head of the Indian administration, it will be in 
vain to attempt plans which will meet with every 
obstacle that partial and local views, a desire of 
personal* influence and power, or attachment to 
established system, can devise or create to impede 
and defeat their execution. 

* The nomination of natives to situations in the police de- 
partment appears to be a patronage on which the judge or 
magistrate, from the absence of all ties with those who fill 
them, can place little value ; but these appointments arc great 
objects to men under such functionaries, and all their influence 
w’ith their superiors will bo exerted to prevent any change in 
the system. 



246 


CHAPTER XL 


Observations on the British Community in India ; — Half Castes, 
or Anglo-Indians : — Propagation of Christianity ; — State of 
the Press. 


BRlTISIt COMMUNITY. 

This work would be incomplete without some no- 
tice of that part of the British community in India 
living under the protection of the Company’s go- 
vernment, hut not in their service. This body has 
of late years greatly increased *, and is likely to 
become much more numerous ; and the questions 
which relate to its privileges and pretensions- will 
require very particular attention. 

His majesty’s courts of justice, established at the 
capitals of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, are a 
legal defence, to all English subjects within the 
limits of their jurisdiction, against any arbitrary 
acts of the local government, unless in certain cases 

* The total numbers of English in India, not in the public 
service, has been computed at three thousand, of which two 
thousand are given to Bengal, five hundred to Madras, and 
five hundred to Bombay. This calculation is probably beyond 
the actual numbers, including oven those in the shipping of the 
country. 



BRITISH COMMUNITY. 


247 


where the legislature has given to the latter the 
power* of sending to England any individual 
who may be residing in India without licence, or 
other lawful authority. 

When the judges of the crown were first nomi- 
nated to Bengal, their power was extended over all 
the provinces subject to the Company; but a very 
short trial of this system shewed that it could not be 
maintained ; and experience has since proved that, 
even within the confined limits to which their 
jurisdiction is circumscribed, it is liable to come 
into such violent collision with the local authorities, 
that we can only hope to avert the evils flowing 
from this internal source of division and weakness 
by a most careful selection of individuals to offices 
which require in those who fill them not only 
perfect acquaintance with the law, of which they 
are the organs, but calm temper, enlarged judg- 
ment, and a competent knowdedge of the peculiar 
scene in which they have to act. Unless men 
with such qualities are nominated to the high 
stations of judges in India, we must anticipate, un- 
der the growing numbers of the population of our 
Indian capitals, very serious embarrassment in the 
future operation of this, the most delicate of all 
parts of the frame of our eastern administration. 

The jurisdiction of the supreme courts of law is 
limited to a few miles beyond the capitals where they 


* Vide Act 53 Geo. III. Cap, 155. Sec. 104. 



248 


BRITISH-COMMUNITY 


arc established^ and a long period must elapse, and 
great changes take place, before it can be in any 
degree extended*. Those whom it protects are 
essentially distinct from the great body of our 
Indian subjects. The mixed population of Cal- 
cutta, Madras and Bombay, made up of Euro- 
pean Half Castes, or Anglo-Indians f , and that part 
of the natives who are associated by their ties, 
their interests, and their occupations with English 
laws and usages, and a great proportion of whom 
have been born and educated under the influence and 

♦ The idea has often been suggested of extending the juris- 
diction of his majesty's courts in India ; but it is difficult to 
believe that any man of enlarged mind, who understands the 
history and present state of English law, and who surveys any 
eastern or foreign country, would recommend a transfer of the 
one to the other. What all Englishmen adore is the principle 
of English law, the freedom and security to person and pro- 
perty on which it is bottomed. But the forms of English law, 
or its proceedings, are not a necessary part of this principle ; 
on the contrary, except in England, where they have grown up 
accidentally and from peculiar circumstances, they would only 
be an evil and an embarrassment; and in an Indian community 
they would come into c\)llision with its most ancient usages. 

t There has been much discussion regarding the name by 
which this race ought to be distinguished, and latterly some 
amongst them have thought that of Half Caste, by which they 
have been long known, is opprobrious. It certainly is not so, 
any more than Creole, or men of colour, when applied to per- 
sons of mixed race in the West Indies ; amongst names chosen 
by themselves, that of Anglo-Indians appears to be the most 
descriptive and unexceptionable. 



IN INDIA. 


249 


operation of these laws, form a community as sepa- 
rate in habits and sentiments from that which exists 
in a town or village at the distance of twenty 
miles from these capitals, as if they belonged to 
different nations. There are no people so abhor- 
rent of change as the inhabitants of India ; and if 
its progress has been so slow that it has not as yet 
travelled beyond the walls of our chief settlements, 
we may judge of the period which must elapse 
before we can expect to see complete success crown 
our efforts for the improvement of our subjects in 
what we deem the blessings of civilization, but 
which arc viewed by those whom wc desire to 
adopt them as innovations on their cherished habits, 
and the religion of their forefathers. 

The difference between our capitals and their 
surrounding districts, is not greater than that which 
exists between the countries that have been long in 
our possession and those we have recently acquired. 
The various provinces which form our wide em- 
pire may not unaptly be compared, as far as relates 
to their knowledge of the principles of our rule, 
our character, and our institutions, to a family of 
children, from the mature man to the infant. 
What long acquaintance has made familiar to the 
one, scares the other ; the diet that nouiishes the 
adult may poison the child. These considerations 
should make us proceed with great caution, other- 
wise we shall plunge into difficulties from which 
there is no retreat. 



250 


BRITISH COMMUNITY 


An arbitrary government can make experiments 
with comparative safety. It can retract a boon 
which does not promise advantage. It can abrogate 
to-day the rights which it granted yesterday ; but 
this is not the case with the British government of 
India. Its favours and concessions to its subjects, 
on any points connected with their rights and pri- 
vileges, cannot be recalled without a real or apparent 
outrage to the free spirit of the constitution of Eng- 
land, and without impairing the confidence of the 
natives in its good faith, which is the basis on which 
it rests all prospect of permanent improvement. This 
consideration renders it essential that no measures 
should be adopted creative of such rights and pri- 
vileges, unless we have the clearest conviction that 
they can be permanently maintained, without in- 
jury or danger to our native subjects, and to the 
general interests of our empire in India. 

'rhe first question regarding the English com- 
munity in India is, how far it is wise and safe to 
allow the settlement of Englishmen in India, and to 
open to their energy of character the paths of agri- 
cultural as well as commercial improvement ? This 
branch of the subject has the more importance, as 
it is evident that no extensive colonization can take 
place unless men are admitted to have property in 
the soil as well as in its produce. 

The grounds upon which the impolicy and danger 
of admitting Englishmen to follow agricultural pur- 
suits in India rest, are, in a great degree, referrible 



IN INDIA. 


251 


to the peculiar nature of our eastern possessions, 
which (it cannot be too often repeated) must never 
be viewed as a colony, but as a subject empire, to 
the inhabitants of which we have guaranteed, by 
every pledge that rulers can give to their subjects, 
the enjoyment of their property, of their laws, of 
their usages, and of their religion. We may and 
ought to impart such improvement as will promote 
their happiness, and the general prosperity of the 
country ; but we are bound, by every obligation of 
faith (and it would be a princij^le of imperative 
policy, even if we had given no pledge,) not to asso* 
eiate with our improvement any measures of which 
the operatiem is likely to interfere with their inte- 
rests, to offend their prejudices, or to outrage their 
cherished habits and sentiments. 

That colonization on any extended scale would 
have this effect no man can doubt, who is acquainted 
with the nature of the property in the soil, and the 
character of the population. The different rights 
which are involved in every field of cultivated land 
in India have been particularly noticed, and those 
who have studied that subject will be satisfied that 
in many of our provinces there is no room for the 
English proprietor. Such might, no doubt, pur- 
chase land where our regulations have made that 
saleable, and they might settle in the vicinity of 
great cities, where, from causes already stated, 
landed property has, in a certain degree, changed its 
character. 



252 


BRITISH COMMUNITY 


There are throughout our territories many waste 
tracts, but almost all the lands capable of being 
occupied have claimants, who can produce strong 
title to the eventual occupation of them. This 
extends even to jungles and wilds, in which the 
right of pasture, and of cutting wood and grass, 
usually belongs to the villages in their vicinity. 
Besides, as has been before stated, when peace and 
prosperity augment the agricultnral population, 
those that want employment, compelled as they are 
by their usages to follow the occupation of their 
fathers, must spread over waste lands, to a share in 
the produce of which they assert an hereditary claim. 
The government, which makes advances to enable 
them to settle in such rcclaim(?d lands, is early re- 
paid by increase of revenue ; and when, from any 
considerations, it is disposed to resign the whole or 
part of its proprietary rights in order to benefit in- 
dividuals, there are, as has been elsewhere shewn *, 
classes amongst its native subjects who have the 
first claim to benefit by such grants of the con- 
tingent rights that may have devolved upon it. 

If the facts here stated arc correct, English 
colonists could only be partially admitted into 
India, without an interference with the property 
in actual possession or just expectation of our 
native subjects of the cultivating class, or those 
of the higher orders ; and whatever might be our 
intention, wc could not adopt the measures for 

* Vide vol. II., p. 165. 



IN INDIA. 


253 


' raising thcso colonists to that consideration which 
would be requisite to render them an useful and 
contented part of the community, without a cor- 
responding depression of the native part of the 
population. 

The danger of offeno<j to the prejudices, usages, 
or religion of the native, from the settlement of 
British agricultural colonists, would be great ; and 
this danger, it is to be remarked, would not spring 
so much from the acts of the latter, as from the 
apprehensions and the impressions of the former, 
who would believe any such settlement to be the 
commencement of a system for the subversion of 
the existing order of society. They would view 
the settlers as invaders of their rights, and no 
benefit they could derive from the introduction of 
capital, or the example of industry and enterprise, 
would reconcile any to such a change, except the 
very lowest of the labouring classes ; all others 
would either shrink from a competition with what 
they would deem a higher and more favoured 
class, or be irritated to a spirit of personal hos- 
tility, which, in wdiatcver way it might shew 
itself, would be most injurious to the public in- 
terests. 

English agricultural colonists in India would, 
in a very few generations, degenerate both in body 
and mind. This, in spite of every eftbrt to prevent 
it, must be the effect of the climate, of the con- 
nexion with the ignorant imd low females with 



254 


BRITISH COMMUNITY 


whom their circumstances would inevitably lead 
them to associate, and of those habits and senti- 
ments which they would acijuirc from being sur- 
rounded with a distinct population whom they 
would look upon as their infcrioi's. This change, 
whenever it came to pass; would bring into dis- 
repute that nation to whom they continued to 
belong in name, and, instead of adding to its 
power, they would become a source of weakness 
to it. In the present scale of our Eastern empire, 
we can never exjiect to count numbers with the 
natives, and it is upon their continued impression 
of the superiority of our character* that our 
existence must depend. We ought, therefore, to 
be most cautious as to the adoption of any mea- 
sure having a tendency to lower the opinion they 
entertain of their rulers ; and that the colonization 
of some scattered English families over our pro- 
vinces would have this effect, no one can doubt 
who knows the country and its inhabitants. 

* There is no one regulation of our government that 
impresses reflecting natives with so high an opinion of our 
public virtue as the self-denying ordinance whicli prohibits 
Europeans from being proprietors of land. Colonel Wilks, 
in a communication upon this subject, states that Napoleon 
Buonaparte appeared never to have heard of this regulation, 
and could scarcely believe the Colonel to he serious when he 
assured him that it not only existed but was rigidly observed ; 
although sufficiently chary of his admiration of any thing 
English, Colonel Wilks adds that he did not suppress it on 
this occasion. 



IN INDIA. 


255 


Tlie profits attendant on commerce, and on me^ 
chanical science, have carried many of our country- 
men to India ; and their numbers are likely to in- 
crease, from the changes that have occurred and 
are in operation. Our empire there has already 
derived, and must continue to derive, the greatest 
benefit from the enterprise of British merchants, 
which has difi'used wealth, encouraged industry, 
and promoted the general prosperity of the country, 
adding by the increase of its resources to the 
strength of the government. English artisans have 
also, within a narrower sphere, been most useful; 
neither of these classes lun'c, in any way, come 
into collision with our native subjects, by trenching 
upon their rights and claims : on the contrary, they 
have been their benefactors ; they have given them 
an example of the benefits that accrue to individuals 
and nations from largo and liberal principles of 
trade ; they have taught them the useful and 
orniuncntid arts of life, and it is to them that we 
must chiefly look, as aftbrding examples for the 
natives to follow in every improvement of civilized 
society. The civil and military officers of govern- 
ment are, from their stations and duties, too dis- 
tant from the population to be copied; but in the 
merchant with whom he deals, or competes, and 
the mechanic for whom he labours, or whom he 
tries to rival, our Indian subjects view classes to 
which they are near; and notwithstanding the in- 
veteracy of habits, many may unconsciously become 



256 


BUlTIStl COMMUNITY 


imitators of customs which time may satisfy them 
are preferable to their own. 

These considerations give great importance to 
the mercantile and mechanical classes of the com- 
munity; and their growth is desirable, provided 
it is accompanied with the strict observance of 
those covenants and legal restrictions under which 
they are placed. From these, a government so 
constituted as the English in India cannot relax. 
Some of its powers, particularly that of deporting 
any British subject from India to England, is at 
variance with every principle of our free constitu- 
tion, and repugnant to the feelings of Englishmen ; 
but it is not at variance with the constitution of 
our Indian empire, and it is strictly accordant with 
the covenants into which Englishmen enter before 
they obtain leave to reside and pursue their several 
occupations in that empire. We must, neverthe- 
less, expect, from the nature of English society, 
that on every exercise of absolute power, however 
necessary, there will be a rccurrimce of struggle 
between the government and this part of the jiojm- 
lation of our Indian capitals ; and the sympathy 
which the latter will meet with in England is 
such, that it will require all the wisdom and firm- 
ness of the authorities at home and abroad to with- 
stand the eftbrts that will be made to weaken and 
degrade the local administration. 

The number of English merchants and artisans 
who have been allowed to settle at any distance 



IN INDIA. 


257 


from tlie presidencies * is not considerable : some of 
them are fixed at the principal stations, civil and 
military, in the interior ; and others, who have esta- 
blished manufactories'^, reside in provinces which 
have been long- under our rule. The number of 
the latter is very small, and many reasons concur 
to make the increase of it impolitic. At all events, 
before we venture to do so, we must make some 
changes in the law to which they are subject. 
They should be amenable to the local courts of 
justice in all but offences of tlie highest descrip- 
tion, and both the judges and magistrates must 
have such an extension of power as is necessary to 
enable them to check the excesses of Europeans 
in their district ij;. That power can be made subject 

♦ No British subject is allowed to reside more than ten 
miles from tlie presidency, unless leave is given by a certificate 
signed by the chief secretary of government, which certificate 
must specify the place at Avhich he is to reside, and the period 
for which wsuch leave is granted. Vide 53 Geo. III., cap, civ., 
sec. cviii. 

t These manufactories are usually for indigo or sugar. 

+ All Europeans, except British subjects, are amenable to 
the provincial criminal courts ; but British subjects can, at 
present, only be prosecuted on any criminal charge before the 
king’s court at the presidency, and the same jurisdiction must 
be referred to before any penalty beyond a fine of five hundred 
rupees, or, in failure of payment, two months’ imprisonment, is 
awarded. This is often a great hardship upon natives who have 
to prefer charges against them, but who cannot afford either 
the time or money necessary for a prosecution at such a 
distance. 

VoL. n. s 



258 


BRITISH COMMUNITY 


to appeal ; but it must be efficient to the object of 
saving the natives from those inequalities of justice 
(for so they may he termed) which now exist be- 
tween them and the English merchant, or artisan, 
with whom they have litigation or disputes. 

The settlement of Europeans, not in the service 
of government, should be limited to those countries 
which have been long in our possession, and are 
familiar ^vith our rule. If unattended with bad 
consequences, it can be gradually extended. The 
differences between such provinces and those more 
recently acquired has been mentioned. In the 
latter, the ignorance of the inhabitants identifies 
every European with the government. Many 
years must elapse before th(?y can comprehend the 
distinctions which exist in our society ; and, until 
they have attained this knowledge, their peace and 
good government are liable to be affected, in a 
degree hardly to be believed, by the words and 
actions of every individual Englishman who visits 
or resides amongst them. Better knowledge will, 
in process of time, correct these delusions and 
alarms, but until this excited feeling subsides, and 
our administration and habits arc perfectly under- 
stood, it is most hazardous to admit any Europeans 
except those who are under the strict restraints of 
the civil and military seiwice. 

Though a desire to defend their exclusive privi- 
leges of trade might, at one period, have led the 
Company’s government to oppose itself to Euro- 



IN INDIA. 


259 


peans proceeding to India, nothing can be more 
groundless than the accusations recently made 
against the court of directors, of having, from 
an illiberal and short-sighted policy, endeavoured 
to prevent, by prohibitions and restraints, the settle- 
ment of Englishmen in that country. They have, 
on the contrary, permitted their settlement as far 
as was compatible with the welfare of the settlers, 
the interests of their native subjects, and the peace 
and prosperity of the empire. The principles 
upon which they have acted are alike essential for 
the safety of the state, and of that community of 
whom many, from a confined view of their own 
condition, adopt erroneous opinions on this im- 
portant subject ; and it is to be hoped that the 
specious representations and popular clamours to 
which those opinions give birth may never pre- 
vail so far as to make us lose sight of that caution 
which has hitherto been our guide and safeguard. 
The advantages expected from the concessions 
called for by speculative men would, in all proba- 
bility, be found visionary. Their tendency would 
be to create divisions in the English commimity in 
India, and, by injudiciously yielding to them, we 
might inflict irreparable injury on our native sub- 
jects, without conferring a benefit on our own 
country, that could in any way compensate for the 
evil consequences of such a measure. 



260 


ANGLO-INDIANS. 


ANGLO-INDIANS. 

The descendants of Europeans by native mothers, 
usually termed half-castc.s, or Anglo-Indians, if they 
do not form a part of the English community in 
India, are closely allied to it. Independent of those 
relations of blood by which many of them are united 
to this community, their common language, educa- 
tion, habits, and religion, form ties which must 
always connect them ; but, on the other hand, dif- 
ference of complexion, and situation in life, sepa- 
rates a great proportion of this race from the 
English society ; and, as they are still more distinct 
from the native pai*t of the population, they must 
he considered as forming a class of themselves. 
This body of our subjects in India has of late years 
occupied much of the attention of government, both 
at home and abroad, and there appears an anxiety 
to adopt every measure which can raise it from its 
equivocal condition, and render it useful and 
respectable. 

The numbers of this class are not considerable*; 
and many causes combine to prevent their rapid 
increase. A great proportion being illegitimate, 
they seldom possess much property ; and this cir- 
cumstance, with the difficulty they have in providing 
for their children, prevents their early marriages. 

* It is believed that no correct census has ever been, taken 
of this part of the population. 



ANGL0.1ND1ANS. 


261 


The male, part rarely marry with European women, 
and their connexions with their own class, or with 
the native females of India, produce a race still 
darker than themselves, many of whom, when the 
parents are poor, mix with the lower orders of the 
native Christian* population, and lose in the next 
generation all trace of the distinctive body from 
which they sprang ; while, on the other hand, the 
children of females of this class who have inter- 
married with Europeans, from being fairer, and be- 
longing to another society, become, in one or two 
generations, altogether separated from that race of 
natives from whom they are maternally descended. 

With the exception of a few, who have acquired 
fame and fortune as military adventurers, the 
superior as well as the most industrious branches 
of this community arc found at the capitals of our 
different presidencies, and at the principal civil and 
military stations ; and they may be said almost to 
monopolize the situations of clerks and account- 
ants, in the offices of government as well as in those 
of public servants and private European merchants. 
The whole of this class speak English, as well as the 
provincial dialect of the comitry in which they were 
born. With a few distinguished exceptions, how- 
ever, they have no political influence W’ith the na- 
tives. It has not hitherto been their interest to 
attain [such influence, and many obstacles would 

* This population consists of the descendants of the Portu- 
guese and native converts. 



262 


ANGLO-INDIANS. 


oppose their success if they made it their oljject. 
The respect which the natives of India pay tO an 
Englishman is associated with their allegiance to 
the government imder which they live. This feeling 
does not exist towards a person whom they view as 
more approximated to themselves, and yet without 
any common interest, or any of those claims from 
superiority of Indian tribe or caste to which they 
habitually pay deference. The character, conduct, 
or achievements of an individual of this class may 
gain and fix their attachment, but we can look to 
no period when the Anglo-Indians, as a body, are 
likely to form any dangerous ties with the Maho- 
medan or Hindu part of the community. The 
date at which this part of our population can arrive 
at any numerical strength as a separate body is 
very remote ; but they are almost all wcll-cducatcd, 
and have from this a consequence beyond what 
they derive from their numbers. They are natu- 
rally connected with a part of the English society, 
and politically with the native Christians ; and as 
associated with those branches they may early 
attain importance. A just and generous govern- 
ment will not however have recourse to that narrow 
principle which apportions benefits by the power 
any class of its subjects have of enforcing them, 
nor will it withhold any reasonable boons, because 
it is offended by the temper in which they are so- 
licited. Acting on different grounds, it will give to 
this, as to every other class of its subjects, that 



ANGLO-INDIANS. 


263 


consideration which is due to their condition, and 
which fulfils their reasonable hopes without a sacri- 
fice of any essential interest of the empire. 

Though placed under circumstances of depres- 
sion and discouragement, this -body of men has 
lost few opportunities of becoming useful and 
respected in the different walks of life to which 
their pursuits have been directed. We should 
continue, therefore, to cultivate their moral and 
religious principles, and while we institute and 
encourage seminaries for their instruction, upon an 
extended scale, we should provide the means of 
their future employment in the conditions of life 
best suited to their respective situations and quali- 
fications. If the justice of this proposition is ad- 
mitted, the means of carrying it into execution will 
not be difficult, as they require no change in those 
salutary restraints in which the principles of both 
the civil and military services in India are now 
grounded. The execution of it will not impair our 
present, but lay the foundations of future strength, 
by the care which we bestow on an increasing 
class of our population, to render them useful and 
attached subjects. 

'I’he real consequence^of the Anglo-Indians, in 
the eyes of the natives and in their own, arises 
chiefly from their connexion with Europeans. 
They cling to an origin which seems to exalt 
them, and are only driven by the rebuffs of slight 
or contempt to take measures by themselves as 



264 


ANGLO-INDIANS. 


a detached body, with separate and opposite in- 
terests. The very pride they have in placing 
themselves in the rank of Europeans, while it 
makes them feel with peculiar sensibility every 
instance of scornful repulse which, from their 
anomalous situation, they must often be doomed 
to experience, aftbrds the means of making them 
useful allies. In being so, they are in their na- 
tural situation : they are adopting the policy most 
beneficial to themselves; and, on the other hand, 
in treating them with kindness and considera- 
tion, wc are only acting the part of wise and 
benevolent rulers ; and the policy of our extending 
every consideration we can to this class, is greatly 
increased by their recognised rights of holding 
lands*, and of sitting upon juries, whicli latter has 

* Strong objections have been taken to the measure of al- 
lowing the Anglo-Indians to hold lands. It has been represented 
as opening an indirect road to colonization, as the fathers would 
often be the real proprietors of land bought in the name of 
their illegitimate children; and it has been further stated, 
that the latter through marriage might become the progenitors 
of colonists who would be very proximate to Europeans. It 
has been answered to such arguments, that subjecting this 
class, as we do, to the same laws as the natives, we could not 
easily refuse them the right of attaining property in the soil, 
where that could be purchased by the wealth they inherited, 
or gained as the fruits of their industry; that, by this boon, 
we gave them a valuable stake in the general welfare of the 
empire, and one of all others most likely to attach them to 
our government ;and that, although they might approximate to 



CimiSTJANlTY. 


265 


been given them recently. These privileges must 
gradually augment the influence of this class, and, 
by giving them importance with the English com- 
munity and themselves, will tend to improve their 
condition, and confirm their attachment to the state 
to which they owe allegiance. 

PROPAGATION OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION IN 

INDIA. 

There is no subject more intimately connected with 
the preceding remarks on colonization, and the 
attention due to the descendants of Europeans, than 
the question that has been so much agitated, as to the 
propriety or policy of maintaining and propagating 
the Christian religion within the limits of our 
Indian territories. The first is the duty of govern- 
ment ; with the latter its name or authority should 
never be associated. It is our duty, as a Christian 
nation, and it is politic in us, as rulers of India, to 
support our church in that country on the most 
respectable footing. We are bound to give the 

their European forefathers in language, manners, and religion, 
they were, from complexion, from habits, and from being 
excluded from the civil and military branches of the service, 
sufficiently distinct to prevent that alarm on the part of the 
natives of India which would be produced by European colo- 
nization ; and it has been assumed, from this last circum- 
stance, that they were likely to prove the safest of all mediums 
through which we might gradually introduce knowledge and 
improvement into India. 



266 


CHRISTIANITY 


Christian inhabitants of our territories the means 
of spiritual instruction ; and it is of importance, 
even in a worldly sense, that they should improve 
in the knowledge and prtictice of religion. By 
decorous attention to the exercise of divine worship, 
and the observance of the pure tenets of our faith, 
the character of this class of our subjects will be 
elevated. They will rise in general estimation, and 
their example will be more likely to effect the con- 
version of the native population, than any other 
means that can be adojited. But in every effort 
we permit beyond this, for the propagation of our 
faith among a people who are attached to the reli- 
gions transinitted to them from their forefathers, 
and which, however false, arc rendered venerable 
in their eyes by their connexion w'ith the great 
principles of morality and social duty, we should 
be guided by our experience of the past, and know- 
ledge of the present, and use that caution which 
is alike recommended by regard for the safety of the 
state, and for the ultimate accomplishment of our 
hopes for the enlightening of our Indian subjects. 

The Portuguese, who were the first European 
settlers in India, hastened * their downfal by that 
bigoted spirit with which they endeavoured to 
introduce their religion. They surrounded them- 
selves, in their settlements and towns, with native 

* The chief cause of the decline of this nation in India was, 
the fall of their power in Europe ; but there is no doubt that 
it was hastened by their bigotry. 



IN INDIA. 


267 


Christians. By so doing, they drew a line of sepa- 
ration between those natives who adhered to them 
and all others, and rendered themselves an object 
of dread to all out of the pale of their church. 
Their advancement in power, therefore, was op- 
posed, not merely on a principle of independence, 
but of religion. 

The French, though not so bigoted and super- 
stitious as the Portuguese, adhered, in some de- 
gree, to their imprudent policy in this respect; and 
the native inha1)itants of their setthunents, and the 
servants in whom the principal officers of govern- 
ment reposed trusts, were almost all Christians. It 
was remarked when their power was at the highest, 
in the days of Dupleix and Lally, that, instead of 
scrupulously res})ecting the prejudices and religious 
feelings of the Maboraedans and Hindus, they al- 
lowed the most sacred usages of both to be fre- 
<|uently violated. On the other hand, from the 
whole career of the British in India, one Would 
conclude, that in every stage of their progress they 
had looked for success in avoiding the great errors 
of their rivals. The government and all its servants 
have hitherto refused public support and counte- 
nance to efforts for converting the natives of India. 
The consequences of the impressions made by such 
conduct will never be appreciated, perhaps, till the 
charm which upholds this great empire is broken. 

By the introduction of a judicial system, founded 
upon their own laws, which are completely incor- 



268 


CHRISI'IANITY 


porated with their religious * usages and supersti- 
tions, we have given a tacit, but most solemn 
pledge to withhold all inteiposition of authority 
or influence in their conversion. Should the 
dictates of a conscientious, but overheated zeal, 
ever lead to a breach of this pledge, the alarm will 
be great; the consequences may be fatal to our 
power; and a good Christian would regret to see 
an effort made to propagate his religion, by means 
so unsuited to its character and divine origin. In 
the pursuit of that object, he would deprecate the 
exercise of an influence which has been obtained 
by a confidence studiously inspired of its never 
being so employed. 

We have recently placed our church-establish- 
ment in India on a high and respectable footing. 
Let us continue to give it every proper attention; 
let the clergymen sent thither be men of exemplary 
conduct and character, and their number be suffi- 
cient to secure to the European part of the com- 
munity the best means of learning and practising 
the duties of their religion ; but let the clergymen 
in the employ of government, whether as ministers 
of religion, or professors of colleges, be prohibited 
from using their endeavoirrs to make converts. 
This task might be left, as it has hitherto been, to 

* The laws both of the Mahomedans and Hindus are com- 
pletely incorporated with their faith. The Cazee and Pundit 
are at once the expounders of their religion and law, both of 
which are deemed of divine origin. 



IN INDIA. 


269 


the labours of the humble missionary, whose habits 
and zeal give him more prospect of success, and 
whose unnoticed efforts will excite less alarm, when 
wholly unassociated * with the aid and support of 
government. 

The jealousy which numbers of the inhabitants 
of India entertain, touching our designs upon their 
religion, has naturally increased with our growing 
power. The local government, aware of the pro- 
gress of this feeling, has taken every opportunity 
to counteract it, and to give their native subjects a 
continued confidence in the principle which they 
have acted upon, by abstaining from all proceedings 
that could, in the remotest degree, be construed 
into an intention of interfering themselves, or coun- 
tenancing those under their authority in interfering, 
with their faith and usages. 

* The example of the celebrated Swartz has been adduced 
as a proof of efforts at conversion being aided, and the confi- 
dence of the natives being increased, by the notice and support 
which a missionary received from government ; but the cha- 
racter of that pious and able man was as extraordinary as the 
circumstances under which he was placed ; his influence with 
the natives, from princes to peasants, was established by his 
personal conduct, and Swartz may be said to have given more 
aid to government than he ever received from it. Besides, the 
condition of our power in India, at the period he lived, was so 
very diflferent from what it is at present that, supposing the un- 
likely occurrence of a man of as rare talents and virtue en- 
tering upon the same field of action, we should have no right 
to anticipate the same results from his efforts in such altered 
circumstances. 



270 


CHRISTIANITY 


In 1804, the subject proposed for a public dispu- 
tation at the annual examination in the college at 
Fort William, was, " The advantages which the 
natives of this country might derive from transla- 
tions, in the vernacular tongue, of the books con- 
taining the principles of their respective religions, 
and those of the Christian faith.” The belief that 
this discussion would involve topics offensive to 
the religious prejudices of the Mahomedans led a 
number of the most respectable and learned of that 
faith to address a memorial to the Govern or- gene- 
ral, Lord Wellesley, remonstrating against this 
supposed infringement of the unequivocal tolera- 
tion which they gratefully acknowledged the go- 
vernment had till then afforded to the unmolested 
exercise of the religions of its subjects. In reply, 
a declaration was addressed to the memorialists, in 
the name and by the authority of the Governor- 
general, in which, after adverting, as a fundamental 
principle of the British government, to the solici- 
tude with which it abstained from all interference 
with the religions of its Mahomedan and Hindu 
subjects, the memorialists were assured, that the 
discussion of any subject connected with religion, 
or which was degrading to the religions of India, 
was quite foreign to the principles of the institution 
of the college; and the Governor-general stated that, 
although he saw no objection of the nature alleged 
in the proposed thesis, yet, in order to remove every 
doubt as to that unlimited toleration which the 



IN INDIA. 


271 


British government had always obsen^ed, he had 
positively prohibited the disputation, the moment 
he learned its subject. Copies of this declaration 
were circulated to all the principal stations, and to 
every foreign court in India. 

Nothing can better illustrate than the above 
incident the slight cause which will produce alarm 
upon any point touching the religion of our native 
subjects ; and the pains taken by a wise and vigilant 
government to diffuse its principles .and sentiments 
upon an occasion apparently so trifling, shews the 
opinion it entertained of the danger of allowing the 
least erroneous impression to go forth on such a 
subject. 

The mutiny and massacre at Vellore, though 
owing to a combination of causes, were distinctly 
proved to have been occasioned in a great measure 
by the success of discontented and designing men 
in persuading the mass of their ignorant fellow- 
soldiers that a serious design was entertained by 
government of changing their religion. The 
grounds on which they founded their assertion were 
slight and fallacious ; but they well knew that such 
an impression alone could work upon the minds of 
men like the sepoys, in such a manner as to make 
them unite to murder their officers, to whom they 
were attjiched, and rebel against the government by 
which they were maintained. The spirit * which 

♦ The following remarks were made in a despatch from the 
Governor-general in council to the Secret Committee, dated 
7th December, 1807:~ 



272 


CIIRTSTTANITY 


led to these horrid acts spread to other stations ; 
but its further progress was arrested by the judi- 
cious measures of governnient^ which issued a 
proclamation containing the most solemn disavowal 
of the intention maliciously ascribed to it by evil 
men, and disclaiming every thought of interference 

“ The practical effect of this sanguinary spirit of bigotry, 
as exemplified in the mutiny of Vellore, and in the events 
which succeeded it, can hardly escape observation. For*, al- 
though Mr. Buchannan, on the ground of his personal commu- 
nications with some of the natives on the coast, is of opinion 
that the insurrection at Vellore had no connexion with the 
Christian religion, directly or indirectly, immediately or re- 
motely, we are compelled to form a different judgment, from 
the mass of authentic evidence and information on that un- 
happy event recorded in the public proceedings of govern- 
ment ; and we ai*e satisfied that a persuasion (a most erroneous 
one, indeed, but a firm and sincere persuasion) in the breasts 
of a great proportion of tlie sepoys who were thus betrayed into 
the execution of the massacre of Vellore, and of those who 
subsequently manifested a spirit of insurrection, that a design 
existed on the part of the British government to operate a 
general conversion of the inhabitants of India to Christianity, 
was one of the most efficient causes of that horrible disaster.'' 

These opinions of the supreme government were in concui’- 
rence with all whose public duty obliged them to investigate the 
causes of that catastrophe. Those who instigated the sepoys 
to mutiny, and to murder their officers, could never have found 
in the lesser causes which combined to produce this result, 
sufficient motives to excite these hitherto faithful men to such 
atrocity. They succeeded in persuading them that their reli- 
gion was in danger ; and they brought forward the removal of 
marks of caste and slight alterations of dress as evidence to 
the truth of those general and false assertions, which were cir- 
culated at this period throughout the coast army. 



IN INDIA. 


273 


with their customs or religion. The court of 
directors, on hearing of these proceedings, declared 
their sentiments on the subject in the following 
paragraphs of a letter* to Fort St. George. In 
the whole course of our administration of the 
Indian territories, it has been our known and 
declared principle to maintain a perfect toleration 
of the various religious systems which prevailed 
in it, to protect the followers of each in the un- 
disturbed enjoyment of their respective opinions and 
usages, and neither to interfere with them our- 
selves, nor to suffer them to be molested by others. 

When we afforded our countenance and sanc- 
tion to iiiissionai'ies who have from time to time 
proceeded to India for the purpose of propagating 
the Christian religion, it was far from being in 
our contemplation to add the influence of our 
authority to any attempts they might make ; for, 
on the contrary, we were perfectly aware that the 
progress of real conversion will be slow and 
gradual, arising more from a conviction of the 
principles of our religion itself, and from the pious 
example of its teachei-s, than from any undue 
influence, or from the exertions of authority, which 
are never to be resorted to in such cases.” 

About this period the attention of the Governor- 
general -j- in council was called to the public preach- 
ing of the missionaries, and the issue from the 
press (which had been recently established at 

• May 89th, 1S07. 

Voh. IF. 


t Lord Minto 

T 



274 


CHRIOTIANITY 


Seranipore) of works in the vernacular language of 
the country, the contents* of which were highly 
ofl'ensivc to the religious feelings of the natives. 

The supreme government, in consequence of 
the latter proceeding, ordered the press at Scram- 
pore to be removed to Calcxitta. This press, 
though established at a Danish settlement, was 
recognised both by the missionaries and the Danish 
governor to be virtually under English authority^. 
The order for its removal was afterwards revoked 
on the respectful ajxplication of the Rev. Mr. Carey, 
who expressed his willingness, and that of the 
other missionaries, to submit, for the future, to the 
inspection of the officers of government all works 
intended for circulation in the British territories. 

The Governor-general in council reported this 

* According to the statements of the missionaries, the most 
violent passages, and those which had given most offence, 
were inserted by the zeal of a new convert who had been 
employed to translate a tract from the Bengalee into the 
Persian language ; which translation was stated to have been 
printed without examination. 

t The press of the Baptist missionaries was only placed at 
Serampore for their convenience. There was no employment 
for it at that small town, though it was useful, as the Danish 
governor stated, in publishing advertisements of puhlie and 
private sales. All the books it printed were for distribution 
in the English territories. The pious and respectable mission- 
aries were English subjects. Mr. Carey, the chief member of 
the society, held the situation of Sanscrit and Bengalee pro- 
fessor in the college of Fort William, and the press was 
chiefly supported by the aid of the college. 



IN INDIA. 


275 


proceeding to the secret coraniittee of the court of 
directors, and, when alluding to the memoriid* re- 
ceived from the missionaries at Serampore, ob- 
served, “ Wc have great satisfaction in acknow- 
ledging the temperate and respectful spirit of that 
memorial, and in expressing our entire conviction 
of the correctness of the statement which it con- 
tains relative to the motives and objects of the zeal 
of the missionaries for the propagation of the 
sacred doctrines of Christianity; and our duty as the 
guardians of the public welfare, and even a consen- 
taneous solicitude for the diffusion of the blessings 
of Christianity, mei’ely require us to restrain the 
effects of that commendable zeal within those limits, 
the transgression of which would, in our decided 
judgment, expose to hazard the public safety and 
tranquillity, without promoting its intended object, 
and would be incompatible with a just adherence 
to the obligations of jjolitical interest, and of public 
faith, in the degree in which both are involved in 
the unequivocal toleration of every religious sect 
among the inhabitants of these dominions. 

“ The niissionai’ies have related the progress and 
result of labours similar to their own during a long 
course of years, and from, the negative fact that the 
zeal of the propagandcses has not, on any occasion, 
produced the dangers which we a2>prchend, have 
inferred that neither the publication of the works 
which have attracted our attention, nor the practice 

* Vide Lord Miato’s l<etter, 2nd Nov. 1S07. 

T8 



276 


CHRISTIANITY 


of public preaching, is calculated to produce them ; 
hut two material circumstances, which have escaped 
the observation of the missionaries, appear to in- 
validate the force of this conclusion. 

“ While the British government in India conti- 
nued to he a subordinate power, the efforts of the mis- 
sionaries in the work of conversion were not likely to 
excite among the natives of India any apprehension 
either of the disposition or the power of the British 
government to impair the stability of the prevailing 
systems of religion. Possessing, from the general 
system, and even under the specific laws of the 
British administration, every degree of security for 
the free and undisturbed exercise of their religious 
ceremonies and devotions, they had no cause to 
connect the proceedings of the missionaries with 
the acts of the government ; and, deprived of that 
connexion, the mere personal labours of the former 
on the work of conversion were inadequate to pro- 
duce a general sentiment of religious jealousy and 
alarm, more especially because the efforts of the 
missionaries were almost exclusively directed 
towards the class of Hindus, who are free from that 
spirit of bigotry and fanaticism which distinguishes 
the class of Mahomedans. 

‘‘ In the present ascendency of the British power 
in India, however, the natives may naturally be led 
to apprehend that the augmented efforts of the 
missionaries, exercised under the immediate pro- 
tection of the government, are supported and en- 



IN INDIA. 


277 


couraged by its authority ; they may be induced to 
imagine that the possession of unrivalled power, in 
a dominion extending over a great proportion of the 
continent of Hindustan, and of an ascendant influ- 
ence or control over all the primary states of India, 
may suggest the accomplishment of an object which 
the comparative inferiority of our power and influ- 
ence had hitherto excluded from the contemplation 
of government, the gradual substitution of its reli- 
gion for the actual religion of its subjects. Under 
these circimistances, therefore, the labours of the 
missionaries arc calculated in a far greater degree 
to excite alarm among our native subjects than 
they were at any former period of time. 

“ We shall conclude this discussion,” the supreme 
government says, in another part of this able letter, 
“ by observing, that it has never been in the 
contemplation either of the present or preceding 
administrations of this government to control or 
impede the pious labours of the missionaries, while 
conducted in the manner which prudence dictates, 
and which the orders of the honourable Court have 
distinctly described ; but when the mistaken zeal 
of the missionaries exceeded those limits which 
consideration to the public safety, and even a soli- 
citude for the propagation of Christian knowledge 
among the misguided natives of these countries, 
have wisely imposed ; when publications and public 
preachings calculated, not to conciliate, but to 
irritate the minds of the people, were brought to 
the notice of government, the inteiposition of the 



27S 


CIiniSTlANITY 


ruling power became necessary, to preclude the 
apprehended effects of these dangerous and unpro- 
fitable proceedings.” 

This transaction has been dwelt upon not only as 
giving facts that elucidate the subject, but as it ex- 
hibits the calm yet firm proceedings which an admi- 
nistration characterized by temper and moderation 
felt itself compelled to adopt under circumstances of 
much delicacy and embarrassment. The lesson it 
conveys is important ; nor can we reject it without 
renouncing those generous and liberal principles of 
toleration which hav(> hitherto guided the conduct 
of the British government in India, and introducing 
the doctrine that, in our conduct to our native 
subjects, we may allow ourselves to indulge in 
arbitrary exertion of oxtr power over them, for the 
purpose of forcing upon their minds opinions which 
(however recommended by truth) are most hostile 
to all their prejudices, manners, and feelings. 

The great incrc'ase of <jur territory within the 
last eight years has added force to the just reason- 
ing of Lord Minto upon the tdiange which the 
feelings of our subjects have undergone from this 
cause. They see us without a rival in power ; and, 
if once persuaded that we have formed the design 
of altering their religion and usages, their minds 
are too contracted to believe tlrat any pledges we 
have given, or any restniiuing principles wc may 
proclaim, will divert us from such an object. The 
sense of degradation which they must feel as a 
conquered people is soothed by the uninterrupted 



IN INDIA. 


279 


enjoyment of religious tenets and ceremonies 
handed down from their forefathers. Around these 
they will rally, on the slightest apprehension of 
attack; and experience has taught us that this 
feeling creates an union between Mahomedans and 
Hindus which no other cause can produce. It 
places the ignorant of both these classes of our 
subjects at the mercy of the designing and seditious, 
in a degree which none can believe whose duties 
have not led them to a long and minute considera- 
tion of the various elements of which the popula-» 
tion of our Indian empire is composed. 

We have seen the sedition of Bareilly* in 1816, 
though it originated in causes wholly unconnected 
with religious feeling, assuming that shape the 
moment the latent spirit of jealousy and alarm 
was awakene<l ; and perhaps no occun*encc in our 
history more completely shews the power which 
our secret enemies possess of arraying our subjects 
against us. This power can be lessened only by 
our studiously avoiding all measures that can give 
them any means of imposing upon the ignorance, 
the credulity, or bigotry of the great mass of the 
population. 

The provisions in the act of legislature passed in 
1812 gave a new impulse to the labours of mission- 
aries in India, where many different societies are 
now established, connected with those in England 
with which their peculiar tenets correspond -f”. The 

♦ Vol. i., page 577. 

t Were there no other impediment to the progress of con- 



280 


CHUISTIANITY 


efforts of these societies arc variously directed to 
the object of conversion and education. It appears, 
however, to be now generally admitted by the most 
able as well as pious of their members, that no 
rational hopes can be entertained of success in pro- 
pagating Christianity until a foundation has been 
first laid by a more general diffusion of knowledge. 
This conviction has been acted upon, during the 
last twelve years, to a very considerable extent ; and 
government, while it has been vigilant in repressing 
inconsiderate zeal=^, has given its liberal aid to 
measures which it deemed likely to improve and 
benefit its subjects without exciting jealousy and 
alarm dangerous to the public trancjuillity. On the 
continuance of such a course will depend, not only 

version, tlie difference in the tenets of the numerous persona 
now prcacliinf^ the gospel in India must of itself he a great 
one. 

* See a very full account, by Mr. Charles Lushington, of 
the institutions for education now existing in Bengal. The 
j)rinc3pal of these is the Bishop’s College, which chiefly owes 
its foundation to the late Bishop Middleton. Its object is “ the 
“ instruction of Christian youth in sacred knowledge and sound 
‘‘ learning, and in the principal languages in India, that they 
“ may he qualified to preach among the heathen.” Among the 
lesser institutions which have the instruction of the natives in 
view, that founded by the late Rev. Mr. May, at Chinsurah, 
merits particular attention. Its object is not change, but im- 
provement ; and in making the village schools the medium of 
conveying knowledge, and cautiously abstaining from all mix- 
ture of religious subjects with his course of instruction, this 
inous and sensible man adopted the best and safest course by 
which the end in view can be obtained. 



IN INDIA. 


281 


the safety of the empire, but any hope that can be 
entertained of ultimate success in the difiusion of 
knowledge and true religion. 

Those who have to govern our eastern empire 
will often have an unpopular task to perform in op- 
posing their authority to what may appear, to num- 
bers of their countrymen, a clear and direct road 
to a great and good object; but if the day ever 
arrives when change of sentiment in the authorities 
in England, or weakness and mistaken zeal in the 
local riders of India, shall lead to the adoption of 
other principles than those which government has 
hitherto pursued, the danger ivill be imminent ; and 
all those fair hopes of gradual improvement which 
we may now entertain will be lost in the vain and 
rash attempt to accelerate their accomplishment. 

There arc only two modes from which any safe 
progress can be anticipated in our endeavours to 
convert the natives of India. The first is, by means 
of unaided and unconneeted missionaries : — ^the 
second is by education. The first, to give the 
slightest hope of success, must be attempted by 
missionaries, who are not only, by their condition, 
removed from the suspicion of any connexion 
with government, but who stand alone, and trust 
solely to their own eftbrts, and the support of the 
Almighty. These pious persons should have no 
worldly tics that could embarrass or impede their 
efforts. They should cheerfully abandon all the 
comforts and pleasures of the community to which 



282 


CHRISTIANITY 


they have been accustomed, and submit, with a 
resigned and humble spirit, to all the privations 
and dangers to which they may be exposed. They 
should neither have, nor desire to have, their names 
pronounced beyond the field in which they labour, 
and their chance of success would be in exact pro- 
portion to the degree in which they were unnoticed 
and unknown beyond the limits of their ministry. 
This mode of inculcating religious doctrines is 
congenial with the sentiments entertained on such 
subjects by the greater part of the Indian popu- 
lation, who, when they view such instructors as 
men entirely dependent on them, and from whom 
they might derive benefit, and could fear no evil, 
would not connect, as they often now do, their 
mission with the support of government, nor con- 
sider them as persons ])aid for professional labours 
by societies and institutions, and as noting down 
the errors and crimes of those amongst whom they 
sojourn for publication in a distant land. That 
these arc the sentiments of the people of India 
towards many who are now endeavouring to (convert 
them, there can be no doubt; and it is equally true 
that such imjjressions, whether just or otherwise, 
are attended with danger to the state, and will 
seriously obstruct all progress to conversion; but, 
on the other hand, it must be confessed that the 
mode proposed as most likely to propagate the 
Christian faith, through the means of missionaries, 
appears more suited to the primitive ages of the 



IN INDIA. 


283 


church than the present; and that a prospect of 
success, through such means, may almost be deemed 
visionary. We must, therefore, advert to the 
second course, — the maintaining and founding of 
institutions for the improvement of our Indian 
subjects, on principles unassociated with any 
efforts for their conversion, trusting that better 
knowledge may hereafter dispose their minds to 
renounce their own error's and superstitions, and to 
embrace the doctrines of the gospel, when cajiablo 
of appreciating their real character. That this is 
the true path to our object there can be no doubt ; 
but we must not deceive ourselves; generations 
must pass away before it can be accomplished; 
it will be liable to rude and violent shocks; and, 
perhaps, the greatest of all dangers will occur when 
our subjects, taught by us, slrall cast off those ex- 
cellent moral restraints and maxims witli which 
their religion, Avith all its errors and superstitions, 
abounds, and yet not adopt that sincerity of faith 
in the divine precepts which woidd fill and elevate 
their minds. This is a danger which we may be 
compelled to incur; Ave can only hope to escape 
the ruin with which it threatens both us and those 
we desire to improve by the extreme of caution, 
and being satisfied with a slow and almost imper- 
.ccptible progress. We must lay it doAvn as a funda- 
mental principle, that it is better for our great 
purpose to give full knowledge to a few, than 
superficial knoAvledge to numbers. We must strictly 



284 


CHRISTIANITY 


confine oiir first efforts at such improvements to 
those countries* where our views are least likely 
to be mistaken, and carefully repress every ex- 
uberance of zeal that can hazard our final success. 
When we have furnished the means of instruction, 
we must leave to our subjects to seek the benefit. 
If they desire to drink at the fountain of knowledge, 
they will repair to it. To scatter abroad its 
waters, and to force them upon those who do not 
thirst, is to diminish their value and to injure their 
reputation. 

The chief obstructions we shall meet in the pur- 
suit of the improvement and reform of jthe natives 
of India will be caused by our own passions and pre- 
judices. Those who are sanguine in their hopes of 
rapid progress will endeavour to obtain aid by ex- 
aggerating (perhaps unconsciously) the evils it is 
desired to remedy, and diminishing the obstacles 
that present themselves. Others, again, will see 
dangers beyond those which really exist, and deem 
every difficulty insupemble. These two extremes 
must produce an angry collision, unfortunate for 
the cause. Those who are employed in the work 
of conversion should shun all exaggeration of facts, 

* It may be stated generally, that no country in which our 
government has not been established fifty years is safe for 
such experiments. Beyond these limits, knowledge will slowly 
spread itself through channels in which there is no danger ; 
but its progress will be more likely to be obstructed than 
facilitated by our direct and open efforts to promote it. 



IN INDIA, 


285 


which must ever verge upon falsehood. Placed in 
such situations as they arc, it is a crime to speak 
positively without full knowledge, and it is a greater 
crime to deceive others by drawing general conclu- 
sions of the state of tribes and nations in India, de- 
rived from observation of superstitious usages in 
any one particular district, province, or kingdom. 
They should seek, not to inflame, but to calm the 
minds of those with whom they correspond in Eng- 
land, and who have to form their judgment upon 
trust, at such a distance from the scene. The deep 
errors of races of men, ■which arise from their 
blindly following the ways of their fathers, should 
be painted in colours calculated to excite pity and 
commiseration, not horror and detestation. This 
theme should he approached with humility, not 
pride, by all who venture to treat it. Wc may and 
ought to be grateful that superior knowledge has 
removed us far from the ignorance and errors of our 
Hindu subjects, hut we should be humbled to think 
in how many points, in how many duties of life, 
great classes of this sober, honest, kind, and in- 
oflfensive people excel us. That they have some 
usages revolting to reason and to nature is certain. 
At the sacrifice of life in the shocking practice of 
suttee and infanticide, all must shudder, except 
those whom habit has reconciled to such acts of in- 
humanity; but while we feel and express abhorrence 
at them, we must not forget that they are compara- 



280 


CHRISTIANITY 


tively locals and limited, and that one of them, 
infanticide “f”, is held in as great horror by all but 
a few families of Hindus as by us. While all 
agree in sentiment regarding the siniiilness of die 
voluntary sacrifice of widows, a great difference 
of opinion exists as to the mode of terminating 
the practice. The diffusion of knowledge,! the 
force of example, the mild and conciliating but 
strong remonstrances of superiors, with the undis- 
guised feelings of shocked humanity, will, we may 
hope, gradually eradicate a barbarous rite which has 
already fallen into disusage in many parts of India, 
from ceasing to excite that sympathy in the people, 
and, consequently, to meet with that encouragement 
from their priests and superiors, which it formerly 
did. But such sympathy and encouragement will be 
maintained where they still exist, and revived where 

* Suttees have decreased, and, indeed, are almost un- 
known in many of the southern jiarts of India ; and in the 
countries of the Deckan, Malwa, and Hindustan, they are of 
rare occurrence. In Bengal Proper this shocking usage is 
more prevalent than in any part of India. It appears that iu 
1819, 650 had taken place within the Company's territories in 
Bengal ; of these, 421 were in the Calcutta division. In 1820, 
tlie number was 597; those in the Calcutta division, 390. 

t For an account of infanticide, see Central India/^ vol. ii. 
p. 208. This cruel practice, wdiich is limited to some Rajpoot 
families, has been most unjustly attributed to the whole of this 
race of men, of whom there are about 100,000 in the ranks of 
our army ; and, in the whole of that numerous and gallant 
body, there cannot be found one example of this horrid usage. 



IN INDIA. 


287 


they have ceased, if we are so unwise as to at- 
tempt to suppress, by the strong arm of power, 
this or any other of the superstitious customs of 
our native subjects. The merit of resisting what 
they will consider intolerance arid persecution will 
be added to the other motives for such sacrifices ; 
besides, the impression made by such use of our 
authority would be attended with great hazard: 
they who argue otherwise, because they perceive 
no immediate danger result from particular cases 
where there has been partial interference, cannot 
have much knowledge of the character of the 
Hindu population, or of the nature of the means 
which the secret enemies of our power endeavour 
to array against us. Every such act of interfer-' 
ence is an item in their account, and adds to their 
hopes of uniting their countrymen in what they 
would deem a patriotic and pious cause, that 
of subverting the rule of strangers and usurpers, 
who, under the plea of humanity and improve- 
ment, made an open and violent attack upon 
usages respected by the most bigoted and tyran- 
nical of their Mahomedan conquerors, and sanc- 
tioned by their own practice during thirty cen- 
turies*. 

These sentiments relative to the propagating 

* The following details of a suttee are given by Diodorus 
Siculus in his History (lib. xix.), and cited by Rollin, vol. ix. 

After the battle between Antigonus and Eumenes, the 
latter obtained permission from the former to bury his dead. 



288 


CHRISTrANITY 


of the Christian religion and the diffusing of 
knowledge, which were publicly* expressed by 

During this ceremony a singular dispute occurred. Among 
the dead was an Indian officer, who had brought with him his 
two wives ; one of whom he had but recently espoused. The 
law of India permitted no woman to survive her husband ; if 
she refused to be burned with him on the pile, she was for 
ever dishonoured, and obliged to remain a widow during the 
rest of her life, not being allowed to be present at sacrifices or 
any other religious ceremony. The law mentioned only a 
single wife ; here were two, each of which claimed the pre- 
ference. The eldest alleged her right from antiquity ; the 
youngest replied, that the law itself excluded her rival from 
the pile, because she was pregnant; and so it was decided. 
The former retired in grief, bathed in tears, rending her 
clothes and tearing her hair, as if some great calamity had 
befallen her. The other, on the contrary, in triumph, attended 
by a numerous body of relatives and friends, decked in her 
richest ornaments, as on her wedding-day, advanced with 
firmness to the place of the ceremony : there, after distributing 
her jewels and trinkets among her relations and friends, and 
bidding them a last farewell, she was placed on the pile by 
her own brother, and expired in the midst of the applause 
and acclamations of nearly all the spectators!” 

This account will be recognized by every one who has wit- 
nessed a suttee to be, in every particular, in exact conformity 
with the feelings and usages of the Hindus of the present 
day — a circumstance not more worthy of attention, as it shews 
the deep-rooted prejudice on which this barbarous practice 
rests, than as an example of that strong and almost invincible 
tenacity of usage which characterizes this ancient and extraor- 
dinary people. 

* Vide examination before the House of Lords in 1813> and 
Sketch of Political India, page 468. 



IN INDIA. 


289 


the Autnor some time ago, have been confirmed 
by his more recent experience*, and are given 

♦ The following extract of a letter, dated Camp Mhow, 7tli 
November, ISIS, to the Reverend Mr. Marshman, who had 
requested the author, on the part of the Baptist Missionary 
Society of Serampore, to become a patron of their college, 
was written amid scenes which gave him a full opportunity of 
judging every part of these important questions. 

“ I am flattered by your letter of the 1st September ; any 
man must be gratified by possessing so much of the good opi- 
nion of a society like yours at Serampore. I should, however, 
ill deserve the sentiments you express, if I were to have any 
reserve in my reply ; I shall be proud to become one of the 
X)atroiis of your college, and to add my subscription to its sup- 
port, if you think me worthy of the honour, after the follow- 
ing explanations. Though most deeply impressed with the 
truths of the Christian religion, and satisfied, were that only to 
be considered in a moral view, it would be found to have dif- 
fused more knowledge and more happiness than any faith man 
ever entertained ; yet I do think from the construction of our 
empire in India, referring both to the manner in which it has 
been attained, and that in which it must (according to my 
humble judgment) be preserved, that the English government 
in this country should never directly or indirectly interfere in 
propagating the Christian religion. The pious missionary 
must be left unsupported by government, or any of its officers, 
to pursue his labours, and I will add that I should not only 
deem a contrary conduct a breach of faith to those natives 
whom we have conquered, more by our solemn pledges given 
in words and acts, to respect their prejudices and maintain 
their religion, than by arms, but likely to fail in the object it 
sought to accomplish ; and to expose us eventually to more 
serious dangers than we have ever yet known. The reasons 
for this opinion I have more than once had occasion publicly to 
state ; I shall not therefore trouble you with the repetition. 

VoL. II. U 



290 


CHRISTIANITY 


in this place as the result of the most conscientious 
conviction. 

“ I come now to the second part of the subject, and your more 
immediate concern, that of spreading knowledge. 

In contemplating the probable future destiny of our extraor- 
dinary empire in Asia, it is impossible not to think but that 
the knowledge we are so actively introducing may in the 
course of time cause great changes, hut how these may atfect 
our power, is a question that the wisest of us will find it diffi- 
cult to answer. I must ever think that to impart knowledge 
is to impart strength to a community, and that, as that be- 
comes enlightened, the love of independence, combined with a 
natural pride in self-government, which God appears to have 
infused into the spirit of man and of nations, will be too strong 
for all the lessons of duty, of meekness, and of gratitude to 
their intellectual benefactors, that we can teacli our Indian 
subjects, but I am not deterred by the possibility (nor should I 
be by the probability) of such consequences from being the ad- 
vocate for their instruction in all the arts of civil life. We live 
in an age which is above such policy, and we belong to a coun- 
try which has recently made itself too conspicuous for destroy- 
ing the fetters which had for ages enslaved the body, to tole- 
rate arguments in support of a system for keeping the human 
mind in ignorance of any knowledge that is calculated to pro- 
mote its happiness ; hut the question here assumes its most 
difficult shape. It is the nature of the knowledge, and the 
mode we pursue in imparting it, that is likely to make the dif- 
ference between it.s proving a curse or a blessing to India — 
between its supporting (at least for a long period) our power 
over that quarter of the globe, or accelerating its downfal ; 
enthusiasm or over-zeal is quite competent to effect the latter, 
while the former requires for its accomplishment a steadiness 
of purpose, a clearness of head, and a soberness of judgment, 
that are seldom found united with that intentness on the object 



IN INDIA. 


291 


which is also quite essential. I wish, my dear Sir, I could he 
certain, that your successors in the serious task you propose 
would have as much experience as you and your fellow- 
labourers at Serampore ; — that they would walk, not run in 
the same path ; — I would not then have to state one reserve. 
I should be assured that it would be considered as safer to 
commence by giving a good deal of knowledge to a few than a 
little to many ; — that efforts would be limited to countries 
where the people are familiar with our government, and would 
understand the object ; — that men, in short, would be satisfied 
with laying the foundation-stone of a good edifice, and not 
hazard their own object and incur danger, (for in all precipi- 
tate or immature attempts of this nature there is danger) by 
desiring to accomplish in a day what must be the work of a 
century. 

“ I have given you my sentiments as fully as I can in this 
short letter. I really have not time to enter more into details, 
I hope this explanation will be satisfactory, but it is a justice 
due to you and to myself to declare, that while I shall be proud 
to be a patron, and to support the plan now proposed, I shall 
steadfastly and conscientiously oppose (as far as I have the 
power) any deviation from the original principles, or any 
departure from that moderate spirit of gradual and rational 
improvement in wliich it has originated, and in which I trust it 
will be conducted.’' 

The above communication was received and acknowledged in 
terms flattering to the feelings of the writer, who was elected 
a patron of the college. 



292 


FREfi PRESS 


FREE PRESS. 

The subject of the free press in India^ which has 
of late occupied much attention in England, is of 
such importance as to require the fullest consi- 
deration. 

It is little more than half a century since the 
first newspaper was printed at Calcutta. The 
times Avere favourable for the profit and popidarity 
of an editor prepared to promulgate the acts, 
the misrepresentations, the calumnies, the public 
and private scandal, which distracted and disgraced 
the period at which his labours commenced. A 
contest for power between his majesty’s supreme 
court of law and the Bengal government was at its 
height. The latter was compelled to seek, and it 
found, some safety in conciliating the support of 
the chief judge of his miyesty’s court, without 
which it must either have perished or have been 
forced upon the most extreme and arbitrary acts to 
maintain its existence. Amid such scenes, every in- 
dividual high in station had his advocates and his 
calumniators, and the violence of public and private 
feelings was gratified and aggravated by a journal 
which gave publicity to every word and deed that 
suited the views and sentiments of a party. The 
open scurrility of its abuse exceeded perhaps that of 
any periodical paper now published in England. 
The civil government, which was then from its 



IN INDIA, 


293 


constitution weak, took what steps it could to re- 
medy the serious evil of a paper directed against 
its reputation and authority, by confining the cir- 
culation as much as possible, by frequent prosecu- 
tions for libellous matter, and by establishing 
another paper, in opposition. But though these 
measures had ultimately the effect of ruining a bold 
and indiscreet individual*', there can be no doubt 
that the place in the community which he was 
forced to abandon would have been soon occupied, 
had not the acts of the legislature which immedi- 
ately followed altered the frame of the civil govern- 
ment, and given it a power completely adequate to 
defend itself against insults and attacks. 

From the discontinuance of the periodical paper f 
to which wc have alluded, no publication in India 
demanded the serious interposition of the authority 
of government, till 1791, when Lord Cornwallis 
directed the arrest and transmission to England of 
an editor in consequence of an oflFensive para- 
graph reflecting upon a French public officer and 
some of his countrymen then residing at Calcutta. 

The editor applied to the supreme court for a 
writ of Habeas Corpus, which was granted. The 
serving of the writ upon the town-major of Fort 
William, who had charge of the prisoner, gave rise 
to a long discussion between the government and 
the supreme court of judicature ; which terminated 

* Mr. Hickey. t Hickey’s Bengal Gazette. 
f Mr. William Duane, Editor of the Bengal Journal. 



294 


FREE PRESS 


in a soUiinn and unanimous decision of the judges, 
recognising the right exercised by the government ; 
and the editor, on being brought into court, was 
remanded to the custody of the town-major. The 
intercession of the French agent at Calcutta, how- 
ever, saved him from being sent to England on this 
occasion ; but the publication of a number of im- 
proper and intemperate articles subsequently, caused 
this penalty to be indicted on him in 1794 ; a pro- 
ceeding of which the court of directors highly ap- 
proved. 

In 1796, several paragraphs appeared in the pub- 
lic papers which excited the displeasure of govern- 
ment ; but on the editors expressing regret, and 
promising more care for the future, no extreme 
measures were resorted to. In 1798, there ap- 
peared in the Telegraph, a periodical publication 
of Calcutta, a paper signed Mentor, which was 
thought to be calculated to excite discontent and 
disaffection in the Indian army. On Captain Wil- 
liamson of the Bengal establishment being' dis- 
covered to be the author, he was suspended the ser- 
vice. The court of directors afterwards gave this 
officer the half pay of his rank, but refused to com- 
ply with his petition to be allowed to return to 
India. In the same year a letter appeared in the 
Telegraph, signed Charles M‘Lean, reflecting upon 
the judge and magivStrate of Ghazepore. The 
editor and Mr. M'Lean were called upon by go- 
vernment to make an apology to that public officer. 



IN INDIA. 


295 


The former complied ’W'ith the requisition, hut the 
latter refused ; and in consequence of this contu- 
macy, and of previous misconduct in quitting the 
ship to which he was attached, and remaining 
in India without permission, he was sent to Eng- 
land. The court of directors fully approved of this 
proceeding. 

The editor of the Telegraph incurred in the en- 
suing year the further displeasure of government, 
by the insertion of several offensive paragraphs ; 
and this incident, together with some of a similar na- 
ture in' other newspapers, led the Governor-general 
in council to establish the following rules for the 
regulation of the press at Calcutta 

1. Every printer of a newspaper to print his 
name at the bottom of the paper. 

2. Every editor and proprietor of a paper to de- 
liver in his name and place of abode to the secretary 
of government. 

3. No paper to be published on a Sunday. 

4. No papet to be published at all, until it shall 
have been previously inspected by the secretary to 
the government, or by a person authorized by him 
for that purpose. 

5. The penalty for ofiending against any of the 
above regulations to be, immediate embarkation 
for Europe. 

The court of directors, on receiving the report of 
this regulation, gave it the sanction of their appro- 
bation ; as they did to further restrictions issued 



296 


FREE PRESS 


under the adiuinistratiou of Lord Wellesley, which 
interdicted newspapers from giving any general 
orders, or naval intelligence, (such as the arrivals 
and departures of ships) unless such articles, had 
appeared in the Gazette, thereby to ensure the 
authority of government to their publication. 

The first of these restrictions proceeded from 
a desire that the orders of government should not 
come before the public before they had an official 
and authentic form ; and the latter was designed to 
protect the commercial interests and those of the 
state from our enemies. The Indian seas were at 
this period filled with French privateers ; and it 
was discovered that the shipping intelligence, in- 
serted to gratify the ctiriosity of the readers of 
newspapers, was sent to every point where it could 
reach the commanders of these vessels, whom it often 
enabled to intercept merchantmen, and to avoid 
the British cruizers. This last restriction, which 
the carelessness or contumacy of editors compelled 
government often to repeat, will shew, in the 
strongest point of view, the great difference be- 
ween the character of the press in India and Eng- 
land. At first view, it will certainly appear very 
harsh, and almost tyrannical, to prohibit the public 
papers from inserting arrivals and departures of 
vessels, these being occurrences in which it may be 
said many are deeply interested ; but we shall be 
sensible, on reflection, that the government could 
hardly have shewn more negligence of its duty, or 



IN INDIA. 


397 


more injustice to those living under its protection, 
than to permit this to be done at the expense of its 
commercial subjects, of its own reputation, and that 
of his majesty’s naval commander. The chief end 
to be answered by the articles published would be, 
to gratify the curiosity of the English inhabitants 
of Calcutta, not amounting in numbers to those of 
some large village in England, and to convey to 
public servants and residents in the interior of India 
information which, if at all interested in it, they 
were certain of receiving through private channels. 

This case may be deemed an exception ; but the 
nearer wc look at the question of a free press in 
India, the more exceptions we shall find, and be 
compelled to confess that, as long as the necessity 
exists for the maintenance of absolute power, it is 
far better, both for the state and individuals, that 
it should be exercised to prevent than to punisli 
such offences, particularly where the punish- 
ment is so severe. In the latter case, government 
has no option, it has only one course to pursue ; 
and when its authority is slighted, and its disposi- 
tion to moderate measures treated with contumacy, 
it is compelled to proceed to the extreme exercise 
of its prerogative, or present to its subjects the 
spectacle of its authority contemned and defeated. 

After the establishment of the office of censor, 
there were no cases of offence, except what were 
comparatively trivial, and which seem to have origi- 
nated more in negligence than design. 



298 


FREE PRESS 


The steps taken in Lord Minto’s administration, 
to prevent the publication* of religious works 
offensive to the nation, has been already detailed. 
During the whole of the government of this noble- 

• Lord Minto’s exercise of his authority upon this occasion 
was represented by the Rev. Mr. Buchanan, then a clergyman 
at Calcutta, to be contrary to the practice of former Governors- 
general; but his lordship, in a despatch to the secret com- 
mittee of the court of directors, (7th Nov. 1807,) fully repelled 
this attack upon the measures of government. He adverted 
to the proceedings, already noticed, of Lord Wellesley relative 
to the proposed thesis of disputation at the college of Fort 
William. He also adverted to the recent massacre at Vellore, 
and to the sentiments which the court of directors had ex- 
pressed on hearing of that disaster. With regard to publica- 
tions, he observed, “ that the existing restrictions upon the 
press in India had been in force many years, and that it could 
not be supposed that any former administration would have 
deemed it consistent with the public safety, or with the obli- 
gations of the public faith, as pledged to the native subjects of 
the Company for the unmolested exercise of their religions, to 
permit the circulation of such inflammatory works as those 
which had been brought to notice.'^ 

Lord Minto, in reference to the discussions with the mis- 
sionaries at Serampore, observes “ that no innovation has taken 
place in the principles and practice of this government relative 
to the control of the productions of the press, that no new and 
specific imprimatur has been established for works on theology ; 
but that the restrictions which virtually existed with regard to 
publications in general, were practically applied to theological 
works only when works of that class, containing strictures on 
the religions of the country in terms the most irritating and 
offensive, by being circulated among our native subjects, ex- 
posed the public tranquillity to hazard.'* 



IN INDIA. 


299 


man there appears to have been a very vigilant 
superintendence of the press*. In 1811 the names 
of the printers were directed to be affixed to all 
works, advertisements, papers, &c. ; and two years 
afterwards, further regulations directed not only 
that the newspapers, notices, handbills, and all ephe-r 
mcral publications, should be sent to the chief 
secretary for revision, but that the titles of all works 
intended for publication should be transmitted to 
the same officer, who had the option of reejuiring 
the work itself to be sent for his examination, if he 
deemed it necessary. 

These additional restrictions upon the press were 
made under the government of a nobleman who, 
from his character, was the most unlikely of men 
to impose any restraint that he could avoid upon 
the liberty of his countrymen. They were a strong 
confirmation of the wisdom and foresight of his 
predecessor, and evinced the necessity of increased 
vigilance to check a growing evil. They had the 
effect of preventing his being forced upon any harsh 
measures to individuals; and it is worthy of obser- 
vation, that from the time the office of censor was 
established, though there were never less than five 
newspapers published at Calcutta, in which every 

• The editors of the newspapers were censured, in 1807 , 
for publishing intelligence about the distribution of his ma- 
jesty’s fleet, such articles being contrary to orders ; and these 
restrictions were directed to be observed at Madi-as and 
Bombay. 



300 


FREE PRESS 


kind of European intelligence, and all matters of 
general and local interest, were inserted, there did 
not occur, from 1801 till 1820, a period of twenty 
years, one occasion on which government was com- 
pelled even to threaten to send any individual to 
England. 

During the first three years of the administration 
of Lord Hastings, frequent censures had been 
passed on the editor of a paper, called the Asiatic 
Mirror, for what was deemed improper conduct. 
THie editor, for one of his pleas of justification, 
remonstrated * upon the varied mode in which dif- 
ferent individuals who filled the office of censor 
performed its duties, and the consequent difficulty 
there was in understanding exactly the course which 
an editor was to pursue. No notice was taken of 
this remonstrance ; but in the subsequent year, the 
office of censor was abolished, and as a substitute, 
regulations 'f' for the conduct of editors of news- 
papers were issued. 

By this measure the name of an invidious office 

* Letter from Dr. Bryen, editor of the Mirror, dated Febru- 
ary, 1817. 

t These regulations were as follows : — 

“ The editors of newspapers are prohibited from publishing 
any matter coming under the following heads ; — 

“ 1. Animadversions on the measures and proceedings of the 
honourable court of directors, or other public authorities in 
England, connected with the government in India ; or disquisi- 
tions on political transactions of the local administration ; or 
offensive remarks levelled at the public conduct of the members 



tN INDIA. 


301 


was abolished, and the responsibility of printing 
oftensive matter was removed from a public func- 
tionary to the author or editor ; but this change, so 
far from rescinding any of the restrictions upon the 
press, in reality imposed them 'in as strong, if not 
in a stronger degeee, than any measure that had 
been before adopted. This conviction would, no 
doubt, have been general, but for the misinterpre- 
tation of a passage in the answer given by Lord 
Hastings to an address from the inhabitants of 
Madras. In this address, his lordship was compli- 
mented on the adoption of a measure “ calculated 
to give strength to a liberal and just government, 
to which freedom of inquiry and the liberty of dis- 
cussion was the best support;” and his lordship’s 
answer was couched in terms *, which were in some 


of council, of the judges of the supreme court, or of the lord- 
hishop of Calcutta. 

“ 2. Discussions having a tendency to create alarm or sus- 
picion among the native population of any intended interference 
with their religious opinions. 

“ 3. The republication, from English or other newspapers, 
of passages coming under any of the above heads, or otherwise 
calculated to affect the British power or reputation in India. 

“ 4. Private scandal and personal remarks on individuals, 
tending to excite dissension in society.” 

• Lord Hastings, in his reply to the address from the inha- 
bitants of Madras, observes, “ My I’emoval of restrictions from 
the press has been mentioned in laudatory language. I might 
easily have adopted that procedure without any length of cau- 



302 


FREE PRESS 


quarters altogether misinterpreted. It was erro- 
neously inferred that his lordship was disposed to 
give a very great latitude to freedom of publication ; 
and that the restrictions which had heen before im- 
posed, if not virtually repealed by this public de- 
claration of his opinions, would, at least, not be 
enforced by the arbitrary punishment inflicted 
by former Governor-generals of sending offenders 
to £nglimd. The editor* of the Calcutta Jour- 
nal was forward to declare this impression and to act 
upon it. This paper early evinced a talent and 

tious consideration, from my habit of regarding the freedom of 
publication as a natural right of my fellow-subjects, to be nar- 
rowed only by special and urgent cause assigned. The seeing 
no direct necessity for tliose invidious shackles might have 
sufficed to make me break them — I know myself, however, to 
have been guided in the step by a positive and well-weighed 
policy. If our motives of action are worthy, it must be wise to 
render them intelligible throughout an empire, our hold on 
wliich is opinion. Further, it is salutary for supreme authority, 
even when its intentions are most pure, to look to the control 
of public scrutiny : while conscious of rectitude, that authority 
can lose nothing of its strength by its exposure to general 
comment. On the contrary, it requires incalculable addition 
of force. That government which has nothing to disguise 
wields the most powerful instrument that can appertain to 
sovereign rule. It carries with it the united reliance and effort 
of the whole mass of the governed: and let the triumph of our 
beloved country in its awful contest with tyrant-ridden France 
speak the value of a spirit to be found only in men accustomed 
to indulge and express their honest sentiments.’’ 

* Mr. Buckingham. 



IN INDIA. 


303 


industry that would have given it success under 
any circumstances ; and when its pages added, to the 
excellent matter with which they were often filled, 
attacks upon public measures, with strictures oni 
the highest official personages in India, its cir- 
culation greatly increased. The very disputes of 
the editor with individuals and with government 
gave a piquancy to his pages, while his display 
of attachment to English principles, in the hold 
assertion of the liberty of the press, and his 
resistance to what was reprobated as arbitrary 
power, gained him, many and zealous advocates, 
who, awakened as it were at his call to feelings 
congenial to their native country, forgot for the 
moment the vast difference between that and the 
land in which they had chosen to reside. Encou- 
raged by their approbation, and by the profit and 
popularity which for a short period attended his 
labours, the editor persisted in his course, which 
terminated in his being sent to England. The 
legality and justice of this extreme measure were 
confirmed by the decision of the court of direc- 
tors, and by the king in council, to both of which 
authorities he made his appeal against the severity 
of his treatment in India. 

It would occupy too much space to detail the 
measures which Lord Hastings took before he 
left Bengal to restrain the licentiousness of the 
press, or to give the sentiments he recorded 
expressive of the disappointment at the effects 



304 


FRfiE PRESS 


produced by the latitude which he had desired 
to give to this cherished English privilege. The 
moderation with which he performed his duty on 
this occasion did not save him from the attacks 
of those who had a short time before hailed him 
as the bcstower of that freedom which he was 
now represented as anxious to destroy. His suc- 
cessors, Mr. Adam and Lord Amherst, were viru- 
lently assailed for the acts which the continued 
ofleuetjs of the successive editors of the Calcutta 
Journal compelled them to adopt ; and the former 
incurred more obloquy from a popular party on 
account of the regulations established by him, with 
the sanction of the supreme court of Calcutta, by 
which every printer is obliged to have a license 
before he is authorized to print newspaper, pamph- 
let, or work of any description whatsoever ; which 
licenses are to be withdrawn on the transgression 
of any of the restrictions under which the press 
is placed. This measure applies to all classes, and 
is deemed, for that reason, better than the restora- 
tion of the office of c<;nsor, which, as far as the 
arbitrary act of banishing from India operated, 
could apply to Europeans only ; while the Anglo- 
Indians and natives could consequently print and 
publish what they pleased, without being amenable 
to any punishment but what the ordinary course of 
law inflicted. 

The history of the press at Madras and Bombay 
is, on a small scale, not unlike that of Calcutta. 



IN INDIA. 


305 


At the former presidency one case occurred, thirty 
years ago, of an editor* being ordered to England 
for publishing a libellous paper; but no similar 
act of severity has been required there since, 
owing, no doubt, to the office of censor having 
been continued in that presidency. It is impor- 
tant, however, to state that, when that able and 
respectable nobleman. Lord William Bentinck, was 
at the head of this government, one of his majesty’s 
judges* sent to the government a copy of his 
charge to the grand jury at the preceding sessions, 
with a request that it should be printed ; which 
request was not complied with, as the charge in 
question was considered to contain an attack on 
the civil government of the country. The go- 
vernor took this occasion of expressing his senti- 
ments in the most decided manner regarding all 
such publications. 

It is necessary, in my opinion,” his lordship 
observed, “ for the public safety, that the press 
in India should be kept under the most rigid con- 
trol. It matters not from what pen the dangerous 
matter may issue; the higher the authority the 
greater the mischief.” 

This was the just and deliberate opinion of 
a nobleman deeply imbued with the true principles 
of English freedom, but, at the same time, too 

* Mr. Humphries. He made his escape from on board 
the ship in which he was embarked, 
t Sir Henry Gwillim. 

VOL. II. 


X 



306 


FREE PRESS 


well acquainted with the frame of our Indian 
government to admit any part of that to aufier 
injury when in his hands, from; a desire either to 
evade responsibility or to court popularity. 

The press at Bombay was placed under the su- 
pervision of a government officer in the year 1791; 
and the censorship continued until it was done 
away at Odcutta, when it was also abolished at 
Bombay. Though various discussions had arisen, 
no extreme act of authority was resorted to until 
lately that the governor in council directed the 
editor* of the Bombay Gassettc to be sent to Eng- 
land, on a complaint from one of his majesty’s judges 
at that presidency, founded on an alleged mis-state- 
ment of the legal proceedings of the court in which 
he presided. The quarter from which this appeal 
was made to the civil government, unless wc impugn 
the conduct of the judge who made it, must carry 
with it irresistible evidence of the necessity of that 
authority whose aid was solicited ; and with respect 
to the extreme resorted to, in affording this aid, 
there is one unanswerable plea to be preferred, 
which is, that a government so situated cannot 
suffer the commands it has issued to be success- 
fully opposed by an individual, without a loss of 
that impression of its power which is quite essential 
to the fulfilment of its various and important 
duties. 

The foregoing is a short history of the press in 
* Mr. Fair. 



IN INDIA. 


307 


India^ from its first establishment till the present 
date. It is not necessary to notice the many dis- 
cussions and publications to which the more recent 
occurrences at Calcutta have given rise in England, 
'rhe airthor’s sentiments upon that question, as 
given at a debate at the India house, will be found 
in the Appendix*; but he must, in this place, offer 
some general observations, which, he trusts, will be 
perused with that calmness and consideration which 
a subject of such vital importance to our Indian 
empire demands. It is no easy task to reconcile 
Englishmen to any principles which have an ap- 
pearance of militating against that freedom, to 
which, from their very birth, they are so fondly 
attached; but they will not refuse assent to the 
reasonableness of some departure from these prin- 
ciples, if proved to. be alike essential to maintain 
the prosperity and glory of their country, and to 
promote the good and tranquillity of distant nations, 
who, though subject to its power, are, and must 
long continue, in a totally different state of society. 

The mode in which we can best arrive at a safe 
conclusion upon this important point is, to examine 
carefully the general character of a free press, and 
the effects which its introduction would be likely to 
have upon the different classes of our subjects in 
India. Throughout the civilized world, a free press 
is a powerful engine for good or for evil. When 
the knowledge of the people, their institutions and 
* Vide Appendix, No. VI-. 

XS 



308 


FREE FRES3 


form of government are such as to admit of Its 
freedom^ tlic good preponderates ; when the reverse 
is the case, the evil. It is safe to admit the press 
to comment freely upon the acts of government 
and the conduct of its functionaries, when there is 
an independent public to whom its observations 
and strictures are addressed, and by whom it is 
salutary, for the general welfare, that they should 
be canvassed and understood, in order that their 
opinion should check misrule; and that the fear of 
oifending or outraging it, should temper with mode- 
ration and justice every act of those intrusted with 
the administration of state aftairs ; but no part of 
this description of an independent public applies to 
our empire in India. The English part of the po- 
pulation is, perhaps, as respectable a community 
as any in the world ; but they are not what an 
Englishman would designate as a public. The 
great majority are civil and military servants, of 
whom a very considerable proportion hold their 
offices at the pleasure of the local government 
under which they serve ; and the other part, com- 
posed of merchants, free-traders, missionaries, shop 
keepers, and artisans, not in the service of govern- 
ment, enjoy, under the protection of British courts 
of law, every privilege of an Englishman, cicept 
such as the interests of the Indian empire would 
make it dangerous for them to possess. But the 
want of these excepted privileges is rarely felt, for 
such is the happy effect of our free constitution. 



IN INDIA. 


309 


that a portion of it attends and guards Englishmen 
in whatever soil and situation they are placed. Its 
beneficial influence tempers the actions of the most 
absolute power with which an English government 
over foreign countries can be vested, having for 
its support the sympathy of all who are born 
Britons ; and, in the respectable community now 
formed by the English in India, this feeling has 
gained, and will continue to gain, a strength that 
must rank it among the most powerful of the 
checks we can expect to have upon a government 
which circumstances require to be strong, and in 
some cases almost despotic. 

There can be no doubt that, in substance, there 
exists in our empire in India as much of personal 
liberty as is compatible with our sovereignty of that 
country; but if, from a desire to assimilate with the 
national government of England the unnational go- 
vernment which extraordinary events have given us 
in India, any individuals are to be suflered to exer- 
cise the same rights there as are exercised in Eng- 
land, in commenting upon the acts of local admi- 
nistration, animadverting upon its functionaries, 
publishing complaints and grievances, discussing 
questions of internal and external policy, and ex- 
posing as objects of ridicule and detestation the 
usages and religion of our native subjects; they 
will create insubordination, contention, and dis- 
affection. Unless strong and political restrictions 
are enforced, neither the grave admonitions of those 



FREE PRESS 


SIO 

in authority, nor an occasional appeal to the law, 
will stop men in a career where their profit and 
popularity will be so commensurate to the bold- 
ness of their attacks as always to indemnify them 
•for the slight hazard they incur from judges 
bound by the letter of the law, or juries, consisting 
of men who, from their condition, will look with 
no hostile feeling at those who rail at persons in 
office, or attack the measures of their superiors in 
society. But the evils likely to result in the 
European part of the community from the admis- 
sion of a free press appear slight to those which 
would be produced, and at no distant date, amongst 
the natives* of India; and it is the consideration of 
their good, even more than of our own, wlxich de- 
mands attention to this subject. It is impossible 
England should desire to withhold from her sub- 
jects in India the benefit of knowledge ; but on the 
manner in which this benefit is imparted, her glory 
and their happiness depend. On this point, there- 
fore, it is our duty to exert our best judgment ; and 
■what person that has studied the past history of 
the natives of India, and fully understands their 

* At the courts of most of the native prihees, papers of 
news, termed Ackbars, arc produced ; which are court-gazettes, 
.giving a statement of occurrences, true or falsey as matters of 
fact, without comment or opinion. From the situation of 
the writers under such governments, it will easily be coh- 
ccived that these Ackbars bear no affinity to an English 
newspaper. . ... 



IN INDIA. 


311 


present character and condition^ will venture to re- 
commend us to commence this improvement by the 
agency of a free press? That may, perhaps, be 
the last boon ^jiven to a people whom, with a policy 
unknown to former ages, we shall have gradually 
matured into a state of society fit to receive it; 
the gift will be ennobled by the conviction that 
the existence of a spirit of national feeling and 
indep'endence, which it is calculated to spread and 
maintain, is irreconcilable with the continuance of 
submission to a foreign rule, however enlarged the 
views and just the principles upon which that rule 
is founded. 

The establishment of a free press in India is con- 
genial with the interests and feelings of a number 
of that class of Europeans who dwell at the presi- 
dencies under English law. ' It is from their sup- 
port that it has lately derived, and will hereafter 
derive, confidence in its attacks upon the local ad- 
ministration, and upon the usages and religion of 
the natives of India. There is no preventing this 
effect if the law is exclusively appealed to, and the 
victories which editors obtain over government and 
its officers will daily stfen^heri a cause which has 
gained^ in a short period, much ground both in 
India and in England ; for even in the former 
country thfe great majority of English residents are 
but little acquainted with the true character of those 
ties by which we hold our eastern empire. The 
gehertd sentiments of persons connected with the 



312 


FREE PRESS 


courts of English law are, from education and from 
habit, favourable to what appears the cause of 
liberty. Many members of the European part of 
the community are discontented with their condition 
and prospects ; others continue at the presidencies 
with unchanged English ideas and feelings, and 
ignorant of the condition of the country and its 
native population beyond the limits of the capitals 
in which they reside. Such persons often cherish 
a hatred (which they flatter themselves is constitu- 
tional) to all that, in their opinion, approaches to 
oriental despotism. A great number (and this 
class increases rapidly) are so ardent for the propa- 
gation of education and religion, that they wel- 
come, with an inconsiderate zeal, every aid which 
they think will accelerate the early attainment 
of their objects, and we cannot be surprised that 
among those they deem a free press one of the 
most essential, 'llius professional feeling, igno- 
rance, disaffection, prejudice, and enthusiasm, swell 
the numbers of the advocates of a free press in 
India ; and these meet with coinciding sentiments 
in England in all who are ignorant or but superfi- 
cially acrpiainted with the history and condition of 
India. Better informed men, however, iirill be 
convinced that the good of the latter country needs 
a mixture of some principles happily uncongenial 
to England; and that not only the interests of 
Great Britain, but those of humanity and of know- 
ledge, require our firm resistance to this an4 9ther 



IN INDIA. 


313 


points similar in their spirit of innovation, and 
unseasonable excitement. 

The establishment of a free press in India has 
been represented as a mean of advancing the know- 
ledge and promoting the utility of that class of our 
subjects denominated “half-castes,” or Anglo-In- 
dians. The attention Avhieh this class has lately re- 
ceived has been already noticed; and it may be 
added, that the success of the measures which have 
been adopted with a view to their improvement 
would be much more likely to be defeated than ad- 
vanced by a free press, which might prove a fatal 
boon to a society yet in its infancy of knowledge. 
That freedom would be more likely to instil prin- 
ciples of insubordination, division, and misplaced 
ambition, than to convey lessons of virtue and mo- 
deration to a community whose rise into respect- 
ability and consideration in the state depends on 
habits of active industry and solid acquirements. 
The press, as at present licensed in India, affords 
to this body of our subjects all that can be well 
desired of instruction. If its freedom were extended 
beyond this point, it might work them evil; it 
could render them no good: but a view of the 
benefit or injury it might bring to this class, or to 
a few Europeans*, sinks into insignificance when 
we contemplate its probable eflfects upon eighty 
millions of our native subjects. In treating this 

* The estimated numbers of all the Europeans in India, not 
in the civil or military service, is about 3000 . 



314 


FREE PRESS 


J)art of the subject, we may commence by assuming, 
that there never was a government actuated with 
more just and liberal views, nor one more anxious 
to exercise its sovereign functions in a spirit of 
mildness and toleration, than that of the British in 
India. Arrived as it now is at a state of unrivalled 
power, it may look to an undisturbed progress in 
the execution of its plans for a substantial and 
gradual improvement of the natives of its vast em- 
pire; but this fair prospect must be destroyed, if 
we unwisely anticipate the period when the blessings 
we intend can be safely imparted. By doing so, 
we shall not only hasten our own destruction, but 
replunge India into a greater state of anarchy and 
misery than that in which we found it. Of all the 
means that could be devised to accelerate this de- 
plorable crisis, none is so efficient as the admission 
of a press restrained only by laws adapted for a 
free and independent country, into one where, 
before freedom and independence can be under- 
stood, the mind of the people must be wholly 
changed, and where, before they can be worthy of 
these blessings, they must have thrown off the yoke 
of foreigners. But to understand the ground of 
those opinions, we must examine the character of 
the people in question. 

The two great divisions of our Asiatic subjects 
are Mahomedans and Hindus: the former, who are 
the least numerous, have been the greatest sufferers 
by our establishment in India; but their means of 



IN INDIA. 


315 


subverting onr power are slight compared with 
those possessed by the Hindus. Though the Ma- 
homcdans arc no longer actuated by that enthu- 
siastic spirit of religion which, at one period, gave 
them strength and union, their idleness and bad 
habits, combined with their courage, render them 
dangerous ; for they arc prone to change, and have 
strong passions, with an unrestrained appetite for 
sensual pleasures, for the gratification of which 
they will incur any hazard. 

Such a race have hitherto been, and will continue 
to be, apt instruments for the purjiose of the de- 
signing and disaffected. 

The Hindu population of India comprises all 
descriptions of human beings, from the most intel- 
ligent to the most ignorant, from the most cou- 
rageous to the most timid : but, though divided by 
their tribes and castes, as well as by their various 
dispositions, pursuits, and qualities, there are some 
general feelings that Avill unite them; and of these 
the more instructed part of the conununity under- 
stand how to take full advantage whenever it suits 
their purpose. The Brahmins and the civil classes 
have for ages been the nominal servants and real 
masters of the turbulent and bold, but ignorant 
and superstitious, military tribes of their country- 
men. Their skill in wielding this dangerous power 
has become complete by frequent exercise; and 
iwhen we consider what they have lost by the in- 
troduction and extension of our dominion, it would 



316 


FREE PRESS 


be folly to expect that they should not have a wish 
to subvert it. 

Contemplating, as we always should, the possi* 
bility of such an attempt, wc ought to be very 
careful that we do not ourselves contribute means 
for its success ; and it may be asserted that, until 
the minds of the natives of India are changed, 
their prejudices subdued, and knowledge gradually 
diffused, w'e could give to the Brahmins, and others 
of the instructed classes of India, no weapon which 
they would know better how to use against us than 
a free press. Their efforts would be chiefly directed 
to corrupt our native soldiery, who arc neither in- 
sensible to their owm consequence, nor inobservant 
of the depressed scale on which they serve. It is our 
duty, as it is our interest, to guard these brave and 
attached men from insidious attacks upon their 
fidelity. A contest with any part of our native 
army must commence with a destruction of links 
essential to our existence. If we oppose English 
to revolted Indian troops, the best result would 
give success only for a short period ; for, from the 
moment that we began to rely upon our physical 
strength, the chain by which we hold our eastern 
empire would be broken, and we should have to 
struggle through recurring difficulties and dangers 
to an inglorious termination of our power. 

The measures hitherto employed by artful ene- 
mies to produce dissatisfaction in our subjects and 
native troops, and their partial success, give earnest 



IN INDIA. 


317 


of the dangers to be apprehended from the disse- 
mination in the native languages of printed tracts 
and papers, such as might be expected from a free 
press. It is not necessary to enumerate the in- 
stances to which allusions are' here made* ; suffice 
it to say, they are numerous, and all directed to 
the same object, the excitement of a feeling hostile 
to the existence of our power. 

Upon a view of these facts, we can imagine no 
precaution of such consequence as a watchful re- 
straint of the press. If that is not restricted from 
publications tending to lower the respect in which 
govCrnrnent and its officers are held, from offending 
and weakening princes and chiefs, by lessening their 
estimation with their subjects, from alarming and 
irritating the natives of India, by attacks on their 
usages and religion, and from disseminating prin- 
ciples of sedition and rebellion, it will gradually un- 
dermine and destroy our power ; and it may compass 
this without any serious transgression against the 

* It may be affirmed, from the most authentic documents, 
that, for the. last thirty«liv6 years, there has been, in different 
parts of India, a most active circulation of inflammatory papers, 
in the form of proclamations, letters, and prophecies, directed 
to the subversion of the British power. These have, in almost 
all cases, been addressed to the interests and passions of our 
native troops. They have too often made deep impressions ; 
but the difficulty of multiplying copies, and the fear of de- 
tection, has limited their circulation to particular parts of the 
country, aiid,’ in a great degree, prevented the mischiefs which 
such efforts of our enemies were calculated to produce. 



318 


FREE PRESS 


law of England, or, indeed, without the slightest 
evil intention of some of those who aid in working 
the mischief. Their limited knowledge and imper- 
fect information, combined with their zeal, may 
blind them to the dangers they engender; and 
others, who have deeper designs, will court their 
names in a cause that must be popular with many, 
from its supposed association with the propagating 
of freedom, useful knowledge, and true religion. 

We must necessarily deduce from what has been 
stated, that the existence of a press, free in the same 
degree as that of England, is incompatible with a 
government such as that we have established in 
India. It would accelerate the destruction of our 
power long before its dissolution could be a benefit 
to the natives of that country : it would impede 
instead of promote the progress to improvement 
now making by the Anglo-Indians and Europeans 
whose curiosity, national prejudices, and personal 
feelings, which it might amuse and gratify, would 
be thrown by its unlicensed action into parties and 
dissensions every way injurious to the happiness 
and interests of this small but important part of the 
population. 

That a spirit of emulation might be excited, and 
some latent talent be elicited, by the freedom of 
the press, cannot be denied ; nor is it meant to 
deny that good might arise from its observations 
on public men and measures, and that it might 
occasionally constitute a check against abuses ; 



IK INDIA. 


3]9 


but, in a government like British India, such good 
would be partial and uncertain, whereas the mis- 
chief to which a free, unlicensed press would open 
the door, would be general and incalculable. The 
present press in India is under no restrictions 
that can prevent its doing good on as large a 
scale as can be rationally wished. It is restricted 
from attacking a government so placed and con- 
stituted that it would lose by such attacks the 
impression which is indispensable to fulfil its 
duties ; it is interdicted from publishing any ar- 
ticles that have a tendency to disturb the society, 
and to excite passions and feelings that would lead 
through discontent and disaifection to sedition and 
revolt. These salutary interdictions excepted, it has 
every freedom and every encouragement that a 
friend to publicity (which every friend to just go- 
vernment must be) could desire. There is no re- 
strictions that- can prevent the spread of intelli- 
gence, and the dissemination of science and in- 
struction, in every art and improvement of civilized 
life. But it is important to observe that our con- 
tinued ability to give the press that latitude which 
will make it a great and useful instrument to fur^ 
ther our plans of improvement, depends on the 
strict^ and vigilant manner in which we check 

• No individual in authority can have a right to act upon 
his personal feeling or discretion for the toleration of departure 
from established regulations. The moment the rule ceases to 
be imperative in all cases,its application in particular ones be'* 



320 


FREE FRESS 


any trespass upon the limits which have been pre- 
scribed to those by whom it is conducted. 

It has been argued that a free press in India 
would prove a channel through which complaints 
would be heard; that it would be a protection 
to the weak and oppressed ; that it would convey 
wrongs and abuses to the ear of government and 
its high functionaries, and would prove in this and 
in other ways an efficient check to the abuse 
of power: but it is sufficiently obvious that such 
benefits could alone result when those that con- 
ducted the press had complete information and 
perfect knowledge of the languages, the manners, 
the character, and concerns of the people ; where, 
in short, all their feelings were congenial with 
those of the society of which they were the advo- 
cates ; otherwise their representations would be 
full of erroi’, and their observations superficial and 
inconclusive. No English editor of a paper can 
have the means of becoming qualified for au 
impartial and useful advocate of our Indian sub- 
jects ; and with regard to native editors, we cannot 
expect them to exercise such a privilege within 
limits that could be tolerated by a government 

comes invidious or unjust. The temptation to pass the line of 
demarcation will always be great. Profit and popularity will 
attend the person who outsteps it, and his example will soon 
have followers. Checks will he daily more difficult, and the 
effects of injudicious forbearance and lenity may even cause an 
abridgment of the latitude now given to useful publications. 



m INDIA. 


321 


whose power is ut variance with those principles 
of national independence and fi'cedom which it 
would be their duty, if worthy of the task they 
undertook, to disseminate amongst their country- 
men. We are too separated'from the great bulk 
of the population of India to be enabled to judge 
with precision the progress of change in their 
feelings and sentiments ; but it must be obvious 
to all who are acquainted with their character and 
the construction of their society, that freedom of 
discussion and of action, to be beneficial amongst 
such a people, must be a plant of slow growth. 
A very long period must elapse before it is natu- 
ralized in a land to which its very name is hitherto 
unknown ; nor can this great gift ever be a blessing 
till men’s minds are prepared to receive it. Through 
the institution and maintenance of well-regulated 
colleges and schools, and the circulation of good and 
useful compositions, we can alone look with confi- 
dence to the accomplishment of our just and liberal 
views. By such rational means we shall disse- 
minate instruction in process of time amongst 
those peaceable classes of our subjects where it 
will be most beneficial, and our efforts for their 
improvement may increase as their minds expand.^, 
In such a course there is safety and benefit ; but 
very different would be the effects of the im- 
mediate toleration of papers, pamphlets, and tracts 
which, without any violation of law, might be 
filled with matter that would be too intelligible 
VoL. 11. Y 



S22 


FREE PRESS 


to the turbulent and luilitary part of our population, 
whose passions they would provoke by published 
contempt of their religion and usages ; while they 
excited their ambition, and invited their attack, by 
exposing and decrying the authorities to which 
they are subject. I’he very men whom we have 
armed for our defence would, in all likelihood, 
be among the first whose principles of obedience 
and duty such a press would undermine, nirough 
it, seductive but false lessons would be taught them 
by the discontented and designing. They are 
already at a stage of knowdedge and condition 
which renders it (as cx[)ericncc has shewn) too 
easy to delude their credulous and ardent minds. 
By the aid of an unrestricted press our enemies 
would soon make this brave, and hitherto faithful, 
body of men believe that their independence and 
advancement w'ould be achieved bv our downfal 
and destniction. 

To conclude, it is not from ephemeral publica- 
tions, nor from the desultory efforts of talent with- 
out experience, and enthusiasm without judgment, 
that we are to expect the improvement of the 
natives of India. Such may dazzle and attract 
Individuals, and form a few bands and societies 
who, proud of their imagined superiority, separate 
themselves from the population to which they be- 
long, and thus create a collective body, powerless 
to eflPect good or great ends, but efficient to work 
much evil. The change we seek, to be beneficial, 



IN INDIA. 


323 


must l)(* general ; it must be wrought by tlie society 
itself, and come as the result, not as the object of 
our p(^^severing and unwearied luliours. By tin; 
extreme of care in the selection of those who 
are to rule over this people', who "are to com- 
mand our armies, and to distribute justice ; by 
stimulating the zeal and ambition of those employed 
in the public service ; by liberal encouragement to 
commerce, and to the introduction of the useful 
arts of civilized life; by addressing ourselves not 
only in the substance but mode * of administration 
to the understanding and feelings of those we have 
to govern ; by useful public works ; by a moderate 
assessment of revenue from our subjects, and tole- 
ration of their religious and superstitious usages ; 
by institutions founded on sound and solid prin- 
ciples ; by raising into consideration and distinction 
those of the native population whose services, su- 
perior talent and integrity, or weight and influence 
with their countrymen, make it wise and politic to 
elevate ; and above all, by governing our vast territo- 
ries in India with more attention to their interests, 
and to the character and condition of their inha- 
bitants, than to the wishes and prejudices of those 

* There is no consideration of more consequence than the 
manner as well as conduct of every public servant towards the 
natives of all classes and ranks. This subject has been care- 
fully treated in the instructions which the author gave to his 
assistants before he left India in 1821 . These instructions 
form Appendix VIII. 



324 


I' BEE PRESS IN INPIA. 


of England, we shall succeed in ultimately accom- 
plishing every plan now in progress for the benefit 
of this singular and great empire. But the conduct 
and direction of all these plans must be left to the 
local administration, the members of which, anxious 
as they must ever be for their reputation and good 
name in their native land, will be found more 
desirous to accelerate, than to retard the march of 
improvement. We may change the character of the 
natives of India in the course of time, but we never 
can change the character of our government over 
that country. It is one of strangers, and cannot 
endure but in the shape in which it now exists, well 
regulated, but absolute; acting under the strictest 
responsibility in England, but vested with a power 
in India efficient to prevent and repress every 
danger to which it may be exposed from the in- 
temperate zeal, the contumacy, or the opposition of 
its subjects, as well as from the machinations or 
the aggressions of its enemies. 



APPENDIX. 


No. I. 

Abstract of Conferences betweeji- the Commissioners of 
the Honourable Ea^t India Company, the Nizam 
{or Subadar of the Deccan)^ and the Paishwah, on one 
part^ and those of the Tippoo Sltltaun, on the others 
to negotiate the Treaty of Skiungapatam, 1792. 

Sir John Kennaavay, English, 

Meer Allum, Nizam's, 

Ghoolam Alt, Ali Reza (recentl^^ returned from the Em- 
bassy to Constantinople), Tip2)Oo's. 

Govind Row Kisiien, Rheekajee Pundiiit, 
Paishwa/Cs, 

The commissioners met at a tent, pitched near the Eedgah 

Feb, 13^A. — The first day‘‘s conference has been lost — ^but 
little appears to have passed, except ceremony and the 
arrangement of future meetings. 

Feb, — The allied deputies stated as a sine qua non 

the cession of the half of Tippoo’s territories, and also the 

* Tlie Ecdgali is an open temple, where the sacrifice of Isaac and 
other public festivals of the Mahoinedan relii^ioii arc annually cele- 
brated. 

VoL. If. 


a 



II 


CONFERENCES TO NKGOTfATE 


[Apr. 


payment of six crores (six millions stci’ling), towards 
defraying the expenses of the war. 


Feb, \Hlh , — Persons and place of meeting the same as 
before. 

Ali Rcza, one of Tippoo’s envoys, W'as willing to cede 
one-fourth of his master’s country, and to pay three crores 
of rupees. Sir John Kennaway observed that if this was 
Tippoo’s final answer, the conference must cease, and hosti- 
lities be renewed, as the allies could not depart from their 
demands. He added to this observation his desire, grounded 
on reasons he was not at liberty to divulge, that Tippoo’s 
vakeels should quit the ground they occupied, and return to 
Seringapatam that night. However irksome,” he said, 
it is to my private feelings to insist on this point, with per- 
sons whose manner and conversation has so much attached 
me to them, my public duty and attention to the injunctions 
of the orders which I act requires it of me.” This observa- 
tion made a serious impression on Tippoo’s envoys, Avbo 
pleaded, earnestly, their master’s inability to pay such a sum, 
and remonstrated against the hardness of the terms. They 
were answered by Sir John Kennaway, that Tippoo’s 
aggression had given the' allies the right, now they had the 
power, to strip him of all his possessions which v/ould not 
pay tlieir expenses in the war. 

The vakeels reiterated their master’s inability to pay more - 
than two cTores and a half (two millions sterling) of rupees : 
offered their own oaths on the Koran to this effect; and 
requested a reference to the public accounts of the treasury 
to prove his inability. They stated Tippoo’s expenses in 
fortifications, public works, and his disbursements during 
the war, to have been enormous : from these and other 
considerations, they entreated that their first offer might be 
accepted. 



I.] THE TREATY OF SERINGAPATAM. iii 

Sir John Kennaway replied tliat he could only repeat the 
substance of his former demand, wliich was founded in prin- 
ciples of moderation, and finally, that he and his colleagues 
were only deputies acting from powers strictly defined and 
limited by their respective principals. After a long interval 
had elapsed, and after Tippoo’s vakeels had consulted apart, 
Ghoolam Ali said he would undertake to guarantee the 
cession of half the country, with fifty lacs more, in all, three 
crores (three millions sterling) of rupees; he added, that 
even this could only be ^ven by eight or ten of Tippoo s 
sirdars aiding their master’s means. Sir John Kennaway 
repeated his former answer, and insisted on the vakeels re- 
turning to Seringapatam. The vakeels entreated to be per- 
mitted to remain, and to have their last offer re]K)rted to 
Lord Cornwallis. Wo this Sir John Kennaway at length 
assented, cautioning them against the hope of their proposal 
being accepted, or their being permitted to remain where they 
were longer than to-morrow morning ; and as it would be 
unpleasant to him to issue harsh orders to them, he re- 
quested that if they saw his tent struck next morning, 
they would consider it as necessary to remove their own. 

In some of the pauses and intervals of the above confer- 
ence, Ali Heza, conceiving that Tippoo had been repre- 
sented to Lord Cornwallis as a cruel and tyrannical prince, 
entered into a laboured defence of his sovereign. As an ex- 
ample of his liberality, he instanced his conduct to the gar- 
rison of Mangalore: to which Sir John Kennaway replied, 
that that garrison had capitulated on terms which had not been 
infringed. He also instanced his good behaviour to the gar- 
rison of Bidenore, under General Mathews. Sir John Ken- 
naway answered, that the terms of this latter capitulation had 
been violated by Tippoo in a shameful manner. Ali Heza 
replied, it was true, but the violation of the terms had 
commenced with General Mathews, who was discovered 



iV CONFEHENCES TO NKOOTIATE [App. 

carrying away treasure from the forf®^. Cruelty to his 
prisoners, he said, was often imputed to his master unjustly. 
Their hard usage had been caused by the treachery (jf his 
public servants, who had applied to their own use the 
money allowed for their support. Sir John Kennaway 
allowed that this might, in part, extenuate particular cases, 
but the treatment of the prisoners in general had been that 
of brutes rather than men. He expressed to the vakeel 
the satisfaction Lord Cornwallis felt at the offer which had 
been made to release those now in Seringapatam, which, 
however, could not at present be accepted ; but his Lordship 
trusted they would ra^eive the same treatment whicli 
Tippoo’s prisoners received from us. The conference then 
broke up about nine o’clock. 

jFVA. 19/A. — At live oVlock, p.in.. Sir John Kennaway 
waited, by Lord Cornwallis’s orders, on the Nizam’s mi- 
nister, and requested his opinion of the answer that should 
be given to Tip})oo’.s offer. The minister stated his readi- 
ness to agree to wliatover was Lord Cornwallis’s determina-’ 
tion, and demanded what the determination was likely to be. 

Sir John Kennaway told him that his lordship considered 
three crores a lai’ge sum to be paiil down at once, and as 
Tippoo's envoys had expressed their readiness to make oath 
as to his want of means to pay more, and had offered to shew 
the treasury accounts, he doubted whether nioi’c could by 
possibility be had. The j)oint, tliereforc, to decide was, 
whether they should accept the offer, or protract the war, by 
sticking out for another crore. The minister thought it also 
a large sum, yet before agreeing to the offer, he was of opinion 
we ought to call on Tippoo for the revenue accounts of his 
territories, tliat it might be ascertained what was the value 

* He s:ii(l tfie hollow p:irt of the pole of the paliinkcen (bamboo) was 
filled with g^old lace ami jewels. 



I.] THE TRK.ITY OF SEEING APATAM. V 

of the proposed cessions. Sir Jolin Kennaway answered, that 
by calling for papers, the negotiation would be protracted, 
which was iinadvisable, and moreover, that until Tippoo’s 
hostages were in our possession, his gcx>d faith, and adherence 
to one article of the agreement, could not be depended on. 
When that took place, papers might be called for at our 
leisure. The minister reiterated his wish to be entirely 
guided by his lordshijj’s decision. Sir John Kennaway then 
took leave, and accoin})anied by Meer Alluin, proceeded to 
Hurry Punt’s tent. 

The conversation witli the Mahratta chief commenced in 
the same manner as it had done with the Nizam’s minister. 
On understanding that Sir John had just come from the 
latter, he asked what answer or opinion he had given. Meer 
Allum replied, that the minister’s answer would be Hurry 
Punt’s. 

Hurry Punt then said, he w'ould be happy at Tippoo’s 
entire extirpation, and he should revel in the spoil and 
conquest of liis territory; yet that great men, in Lord 
Cornwallis’s predicament, guided their conduct in two w^ays. 
The first was, when fortune favoured them, and the enemy 
was at their feet, to be deaf to prayers and entreaties, and 
to destroy him utterly. The other alternative, and, without 
doubt, the preferable, Avas to have compassion on him, when 
he was humble and sued for mercy ; and to restore him to 
power Avithout neglecting their own advancement and security. 
Sir John KennaAvay said, that Lord ComAvallis preferred the 
alternative of mercy, and being also of opinion that it would 
be difficult for Tippoo to pay more than he had offered, Avas 
not inclined to protract the Avar by any more demands. 
To this the Mahratta cliief assented, using a proverb equi- 
valent to taking time by the forelock, or striking w'hiJe the 
iron was hot. 

Meer Allum recurred to the minister’s plan of declining a 



vi CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

definite answer till we had obtained the accounts necessary 
to ascertain the value of the proposed cessions. Hurry Punt 
objected to this delay, and said he would be responsible for 
Tippoo^s territories yielding a net revenue of three crores. 

He then desired Sir John Kennaway would suggest to 
Lord Cornwallis the propriety of demanding from Tippoo 
a sum for Durbar charges, as a gratuity to the officers of 
the three states employed in the war: unless a sum of 
this nature were obtained, the Nizam’s ministers and other 
civil officers would not benefit a rupee by the war. Such 
demand, he said, was usual on similar occasions, and could 
not impede the negotiations, and that sixty lacs might be 
demanded, and thirty accepted. Sir John Kennaway then 
taking leave of Hurry Punt, waited on Lord Cornwallis, 
and from thence repaired to meet Tippoo’s envoys at the 
conference tent. 

Persons, the same as before; time of meeting half-past 
eight, p.m. 

Sir John Kennaway opened the conference by saying, 
that Lord Cornwallis having deeply considered the offer they 
had made, and consulted the representatives of the allies ; 
having also duly considered their solemn averment of the im- 
possibility of Tippoo’s paying more than he had offered, and 
their proposal of showing to competent persons their treasure 
and accounts ; and being averse to press too severe terms^ 
he was willing to accept the offer they had made; but in 
addition to the three crores now accepted, an additional 
article must be inserted in the treaty, granting sixty lacs for 
Durbar expenses. 

Ghoolam Ali Khan, after the expression of his deep sense 
of Lord Cornwallis’s consideration for the state of his mas- 
ter’s affairs, requested Sir John Kennaway to state, candidly, 
the lowest sum that would be insisted on for Durbar ex- 



I.] THE TREATY OF SERIJVG APATAM. vH 

penscs, that tlie treaty might not be delayed by discussing 
that ai'ticle. Sir John answered, tliat thirty lacs was the 
minimiiin. They then proceeded to form the draft which 
was to form tlic basis of a treaty, and to discuss it article by 
article. Tliis ended, the paper stood as follows : — 

Article I. — Preamble as usual, noticing the names and 
jx)wers of the envoys, and by whom deputed. 

Half of Tippoo\s territories to be ceded to allies, adjacent 
to their own boundaries, and according to tlieir selection. 

Remarks , — Meer Ali Reza olijected to the words at 
their selection,” as it would leave the allies at liberty to 
deprive Tippoo of his hereditary possessions*, for instance, 
Calicut. He had objected to this in the conference of the 
17th. 

Article II. — Three crorcs of ready money shall be de- 
livered to the allies. 

Remarks . — Ali Reza asked whether bullion, jewels, or 
goods, would be taken in payment of this sum. Sir John 
Keiinaway replied, that ready money being the terms, ru- 
pees, pagodas, or gold mohms, could only be accepted. 

Article III. — Thirty lacs shall be paid to the allies for 
Durbar expenses, or civil contingencies. 

Article IV. — All prisoners, whether made during Hyder 
Ali’s time, or since, to be immediately given up. 

Article V. — ^Until the above four articles are carried into 
effect, Tippxi’s two eldest sons to be given as hostages, 
when hostilities shall cease. 

Remarks . — Sir John Kennaway assured the vakeels, from 
liOrd Cornwallis, that the princes would receive the most 



VllI 


CONFKRKNCKS TO JVEGOTIATE 


[Arp. 

honourable and respectful attentions. Glioolam Ali said 
Tippoo would, from a feeling of shame, object to this article, 
and probably propose other persons, but they must dispute 
the point with him on the morrow. 

Article VI. — When the above articles have been signed 
and sealed by Tippoo, a counterpart will be signed, sealed, 
and delivered by the Governor-general, the Nizam’s mi- 
nister, and Hurry Punt. 

Before the conference (wliicli lasted till near one o'clock in 
the morning) broke up, Sir John Kennaway addressed 
Ali Reza, desiring him to reflect seriously on the critical 
situation of his master’s affairs, as he thought it would be 
eminently advisable to accelerate the conclusion of the 
treaty. Ghoolam Ali said he would hasten with his col- 
league to the fort, and would return as soon as possible. 

Fch. 21^/. — Mccr Alhim sent a message to Sir John 
Kennawjiy, saying that Govind Row Kishen and Govind 
Row Buswunt, the Mahratta vakeels, were with him, and 
wished to wait upon Sir John. Sir John Kennaway 
being at table, said he would go to Meer Allum's tent, and 
went at five, p.m. The vakeels stated, that it appearing 
that there was to be but one treaty, comprising the interests 
of all parties, they wished that it should recognise all former 
treaties, and stij}ulatc that Tipjxjo should not circumcise any 
more Hindus. Sir John Kennaway asked if they knew the 
contents of these former treaties? — they answered in the 
negative, but would inquire. Sir John Kennaway observed, 
with regard to circumcision, that if it could be made to 
appear that any advantage would result, it should be in- 
serted in the treaty, as Europeans had also been sufferers. 

Tippoo's vakeels having returned from tlic fort at five. 



I/] THE TREATY OF SER IJVG AP ATAM. ix 

p.m., the conferences commenced: persons, Sfc., the same as 
before. 

After a short conversation, the envoys proceeded, with 
the paper of contents in their hands, to a particular dis- 
cussion of the proposed articles. They said their master 
wished that the preamble should in its terms be binding on 
his successors in the government as well as on Lord Corn- 
wallis. Sir John Kennaway replied, that hostilities having 
ceased, the definitive treaty which must be concluded would 
In all respects be conformable to their wishes. 

With regard to Article I., they said their master objected 
to ' the alienation of any part of the hereditary depen- 
dencies of the rajahship of Seringapatam, which they then 
could not specify; among them were Calicut, Bangalore, Se- 
vendroog, Oosoor, Iloydroog, Bidenore, and Gooty. 

In regard to Article II., Tippoo, they said, was ready 
to pay one crore fifty lacs immediately, of which fifty 
lacs should be ready money, and the remainder in jewels, 
goods, horses, elephants, SfC. That the remaining crore and 
fifty lacs should be paid in instalments within a year or less. 

Respecting Article III., they said Tippoo objected to 
its being recognised as a formal article of the treaty : that 
the avowal of such a charge was not customary, but, without 
any public stipulation, it ought to be left to his own option 
to increase or decrease. 

With regard to Article IV-, Tippoo wished its benefits 
to be reciprocal. 

Article V. The vakeels said their master was willing to 
deliver up one of his sons as a hostage, but that family rea- 
sons prevented his parting with more, and they hoped Lord 
Cornwallis would be prevailed on to relax in his demand. 
The vakeels having finished. Sir John Kennaway replied, 
that he was happy to perceive the appearance of sincerity in 
Tippoo’s conduct, indicated by his agreeing to deliver up even 



X 


CONFERENCKS TO NEGOTIATE 


[APr. 


one of his sons : that lie would report their request to Lord 
Cornwallis, but gave them no hopes that their request would 
be granted : that had it been possible to relax in the security 
demanded, Lord Cornwallis’s feelings, as a father, would 
have operated in Tippoo’s favour. 

In respect to part payment in jewels, Sir John Ken- 
naway reminded them that we had no means of getting rid 
of such articles, but he deferred giving a definite answer to 
this, as well as to their objections to the other articles, until 
he had consulted Lord Cornwallis, Meer Allum, Bheekajee 
Pundhit, Azeem ul Omrab, and Hurry Punt, save that in 
regard to prisoners, he ivould take upon himself to guarantee 
that the arrangement should be reciprocal. Conference 
broke up at eight o’clock, to meet next morning, 

Feb- 9Slnd.y 11, a.m. — Persons the same as before. 

Sir John Kennaway addressing the envoy, said that Lord 
Cornwallis having, on their solemn asseverations of the utter 
inadequacy of Tippoo’s means, relaxed from the original de- 
mand of six crores, might have shewn Tippoo the moderation 
and the kind consideration of the allies ; he was sorry to per- 
ceive that they had not been appreciated by Tippoo, as was 
evident from the disposition to cavil and object, evinced the 
preceding evening. That Lord Cornw^allis having entered 
into the war by compulsion, and having formed engagements 
with the Rajah or Zamarin of Calicut, it was impossible, 
with honour, to allow it again to be surrendered to Tippoo. 
That although the acquisition of Bangalore, Sevendroog, 
Oosoor, had been arduous, and they were valuable 
possessions, yet that liord Cornwallis having hopes that a 
time should amve when a thorough friendship might subsist 
between the two states, and being unwilling to occasion any 
jealousy or irritation to Tippoo, by retaining them, had long 
ago determined to restore them, thereby to prove to Tippoo 



1] THE TREATY OF SERINGAFATABI. Xl 

that instead of wishing to overturn his family and empire, 
he was desirous of upholding both . Ghoolam Ali, in his 
reply, dwelt, at some length, on the sentiments of justice and 
generosity above expressed, concluding by saying, that it 
was better to have a wise and considerate enemy, than a 
short-sighted and time-serving friend.'’ 

Regarding Article II., Sir John Kennaway informed 
the vakeels, that the Company liad never been in the habit 
of receiving goods in lieu of cash ; that such could not be 
disposed of ; and that if any great quantity of jewels were 
thrown on the market, the price would immediately fall. 
To this it was answered, that the loss would be Tippoo’s : 
upon which Sir John Kennaway replied, that such being 
the case, there were bankers in camp, through whose agency 
a sale might be cftectcd, but that Lord Cornwallis declined 
any concern with them ; but that to show his accommodating 
disposition, he was willing to take gold or silver bullion. 

In regard to Article II L, Sir John Kennaway in- 
formed them that the thirty lacs of Durbar expenses should 
as assuredly be exacted, as that not one rupee further of a 
private nature should be taken ; that his lordship and the 
allies were united on this point, and that it should be added 
to the three crores : that out of the total of three crores and 
thirty lacs, one crorc and sixty-five would only be required 
in cash or bullion immediately, and the remainder in in- 
stalments Muthin twelve months. 

With regard to the sons of Tippoo, to be given as host- 
ages for the due fulfilment of the treaty, Sir John Kenna- 
way said, that it was in his private capacity very repugnant 
to Lord Cornwallis’s feelings, to be obliged to exact such 
terms, but that his public duty demanded it ; that bis 
lordship had himself but one son, but that Tippoo’s 
children would be treated with equal kindness and aflection 
as this only son, and that, to meet the Sultaun’s wishes as 



xii CONFEUENCEB TO NEGOTIATE [Api-. 

much as he could on this point, he consented to receive any 
two out of his three eldest sons. 

The vakeels asserted their inaster'’s cntii’o confidence in 
Lord Cornwallis’s kindness to his children, but that out of 
the three children specified, the eldest, Hyder Sahib, 
fourteen years old, was obnoxious to his father, and he 
therefore disliked parting with him. The second, Abdul 
Khalick, eight years old, was diseased from his iinfancy, 
and unfit to be removed from the Zenanah (Seraglio), and 
that the third son, Moyuz-ood-Dccn, the favourite son, 
five years old, destined by his father, and considered by 
the courts as his successor, would be given ii]^. That Tip- 
poo in doing this was actuated by the wish of shewing his 
sincerity and good disposition, and at the same time of 
making his successor known to the principal persons of the 
three allied states. 

The three younger sons, the vakeels added, were still at 
the breast, and they therefore demanded whether two or 
three of Tippoo’s sirdars would not be taken in lieu of the 
second hostage? Sir John Kennaway replied in the nega- 
tive. They urged the point with some pertinacity, and it 
appeared that they conceived carrying this article with Tip- 
poo involved more difficulty than any other. 

Before finishing the conference, Sir John Kennaway 
delivered to Ghoolam Ali Khan a copy of the general pre- 
liminary treaty of five articles, drawn up according to the 
above five answers, and observed that, as Lord Cornwallis 
could not relax in the least from their tenor, he hoped 
Tippoo would approve of them, and sign them, when 
hostilities would immediately cease on delivering of the 
hostages. The definitive treaty could then be entered on. 
But that if Tippoo started any objections, their return 
would be fruitless, and they ought then to order their tents 
away. The envoys replied, that they hoped affairs would 



1.] THE TREATY OP SERINO APATA M. xlii 

not take siicli a turn, andtluit they would in all probability 
return next day. 

Feh. 23rd. — Persons and place of conference the same as 
before. 

The vakeels began by congiRtulating all parties that 
the business was terminated by Tippoo having signed 
the preliminary agreement which they produced, and stated 
that the sultaun’s sons would be delivered up when re- 
quired. Sir John Kennaway directed the paper signed by 
Tippoo to be read and compared with the original draft ; 
when it appeared that Article I. had been altered, leaving 
out the choice of country to be ceded. 

Sir John Kennaway remarked on the impropriety of this 
alteration, after the long discussion which had taken place ; 
and having waited on Lord Cornwallis, returned to the con- 
ference, and told the vakeels that bis lordship would not 
conclude a treaty, unless the omission in Article I, was 
immediately filled up ; that there existed no wish on the 
part of his lordship or the allies to take possession of de- 
tached or inconvenient portions of the sultaun’s territories, 
but that the choice remaining with the allies W’ould ob- 
viate all future litigation. The vakeels said, the sultaun’s 
difficulty in allowing the condition, arose from a remark 
of Mcer Allum that Sera Avould be required of Tippoo. 
Meer Allum replied to this, that his observation merely went 
to express his doubt whether Sera formed one of the ancient 
possessions 'of Hyder. The vakeels now stated that this 
explanation had fully satisfied them, and they were ready to 
insert the condition, without a reference to their principal. 
To this Sir John Kennaway objected, observing, that it was 
extremely necessary that the sultaiin sliould fully understand 
the necessity of the condition; and he demanded from the en- 
voys what were the ancient possessions ? He was answered, 



Xiv CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

Seringapatam, Sera, Gooty, and among others, Coimbetoor. 
Sir John Kennaway observed how impossible it was that he 
could have given them the satisfaction they demanded, as 
Coimbetoor would, probably, be the first country required 
from Tippoo. Meer Allum also reminded them of the 
circumspection with which Sir John Kennaway had ex- 
pressed himself, which they admitted. The vakeels re- 
turned with the treaty signed about twelve o’clock. They 
requested, as peace was now as good as concluded, the im- 
mediate cessation of hostilities, and they promised that the 
young princes should be delivered up the succeeding day. 

Feh, 24M. — In the afternoon Sir John Kennaway for- 
warded to Ghoolam Ali counterparts of the treaty signed 
by Lord Cornwallis and the Nizam’s minister, and also 
intimated his surprise that the tents of the hostages had not 
arrived, although the day was far spent. 

Feh. — Sir John Kennaway, Meer Allum, and the 
otlier deputies, removed their tents from tlie Nizam’s camp 
to the Eedgah, where the liostages were to pitch. About 
one p.m., the vakeels arrived. Sir John Kennaway com- 
menced by saying, that Lord Cornwallis, confiding on the 
speedy arrival of tlie hostages, had suspended operations 
sooner than stipulated in the preliminary treaty, and 
that unless they came out this afternoon, operations would 
re-commence. The envoys replied that the distress of the 
family in parting with the younger princes had rendered 
their previous arrival impossible, and that although this 
was an unlucky day, they should, if it were insisted on, 
come out this evening. But if excused to-day, they would, 
without fail, be ready to-morrow forenoon, when the sul- 
taun trusted that suitable persons, on the part of the allies, 
would be sent to meet the princes, and conduct them to 



THE TREATY OF SERINGAPATAM. 


XV 


I] 


Lord Cornwallis in a manner worthy their birth and rank. 
Sir John Kennaway said, it was not I-<ord Cornwallis’s wish 
to put the princes to the inconvenien(!e of coining out to 
camp at night, but any deviation from the appointment 
now made would be followed by very serious consequences, 
and that he would, in the course of the night, inform 
them of Lord Cornwallis’s pleasure with regard to the 
persons to be deputed to meet the princes. Sir John also 
delivered to them a copy of the preliminary treaty, signed 
by Hurry Punt, SfC. 


Feb, %\th , — It having been determined that the princes 
should only visit Lord Cornwallis to-day, and postpone their 
visit to Secunder Jah and Hurry Punt until to-morrow, 
Sir John Kennaway, attended by Mr. Cherry*, on the 
part of the Governor-general, repaired to a tent pitched by 
Tippoo’s people, about two miles from head-quarters, near 
one of the gates of Seringapatam. They arrived about 
two p.m., entering by one door, while the princes entered 
by the other. After the usual compliments, the party 
proceeded to Lord Cornwallis’s tents, under a salute of 
nineteen guns, and presented m’lns from part of the line. 
From thence they went to their own tents, where Sir John 
Kennaway visited them in the evening, and impressed on 
the vakeels the necessity of fulfilling the remaining articles 
of the treaty. First : Heleasing the prisoners. Secondly : 


* Persian secretary to tlie Governor-j^cncral and coinmander-in* 
chief. Upon Lord Cornwallis’s return to Europe, in 1794, he was 
appointed resident at Lucnoii, and subsequently ag-ent to the Gover- 
nor-geiicrt'il at Benares. On the occasion of announcing to Vizier 
All, the Ex-Nawaub (»f Oiidc, the orders of government for liis re- 
moval to Calcutta, he was barbarously murdered by the adherents of 
that prince. He was much beloved and esteemed as a valuable and 
zealous servant of the East India Company. 



xvi CONFj:nEXCE£? TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

Producing the accounts of the gross amount of the revenues, 
and tlie net receipts, and sending the stipulated money as 
fK)on as possible. The envoys promised the immediate 
fulfilment of these conditions; and requested that Lord 
Cornwallis and the allies would take steps for equally 
fulfilling theirs. They inveighed with great bitterness 
against Pursram Bhow, for violating the terms of the 
capitulation of Darwar. They desired that Assud Ali 
Khan should be ordered to cease hostilities near Gurum- 
conda, and promised Tippoo’s passports for the messengers 
sent to Coimbetoor and the Malabar coast, to put a stop to 
hostilities. 

Feb. — Lord Cornwallis visited the young princes. 

Ali Reza went to the fort, and while there, Sir John Ken- 
naway reminded him, by letter, of fulfilling the articles 
relative to the prisoners, the cash, and the revenue ac- 
counts. 

Feb. ZSlh . — Meer Allum being at the hostages* tents, 
Sir John Kennaway wrote to him, to arrange with the 
vakeels about sending Tippoo’s revenue officers with their 
accounts. Meer Allum* returned only a verbal answer, 
and instead of visiting Sir elohn, accompanied the princes to 
Secundcr Jah’s. Sir John, surprised at this, wrote to him 
again, requesting him to press on the vakeels the necessity 
of proceeding to business, llie answer given to this note 
was, that the vakeels had assured him they would attend 
next day, and that tlie money would be sent out immediately. 
Sir John Kennaway received, on their return, a message 
from the vakeels, and repaired to their tents about four p.m. 

* After the taking of Seringupiitain, in 1799, papers found in the 
palace proved that Alecr Allum had carried on, all this time, secret 
corrcspoiulencc with 'i’ippoo. 



I.] THE TREATY OF SERINOAPATAM. X\ii 

After a preliminary conversation, expressive of their master’s 
friendship for the Governor-general, and the sense they en- 
tertained of Sir John Kennaway’s conduct throughout the 
negotiation, they spoke of the embarrassment which they 
would have to sustain from the cavils of the allies in all 
matters of revenue, and said their master trusted to Lord 
Cornwallis for protection against such. Sir John replied, 
that they might rest confidently on the protection of the 
Governor-general, provided they acted with good faith in 
giving in the revenue accounts. Ali Reza solemnly as- 
sured Sir John Kennaway, that no imposition should be 
attempted, and having earnestly expressed his master’s 
solicitation for the evacuation of the trenches, returned to 
the fort. 

Feb. 29th . — Sir John Kennaway visited the princes by 
desire of the vakeels, and met Ali Reza, who stated that 
the treasure was now loading, and the revenue-officers ready 
to come out with it and the prisoners, when Tippoo ex- 
pected the troops would evacuate the trenches. Sir John 
Kennaway replied, that he would ascertain T.ord Corn- 
wallis’s pleasure regarding their request, but that it would 
have an ungracious appearance to rest the sending of the 
treasure upon such a contingency. 

They listened to this hint, and delivered to Sir John a 
letter from Tippoo, and also two documents ; one containing 
an account of Tippoo’s old possessions, the other an account 
of those which bordered on our frontiers. 

The vakeels shortly afterwards accompanied the princes 
in their visit to Hurry Punt, whence they returned at four 
p.m.; when Sir John Kennaway wrote to them, stating, 
that relative to the evacuation of the trenches. Lord Corn- 
wallis thought, that considering the friendly relations now 
existing between the two states, our occupation of the 

b 



Xviii CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

trenches a little longer was a thing of little moment ; that 
he doubted not of tlie speedy arrival of the prisoners, the 
treasure, and the revenue accountants. The papers they 
had delivered, he observed, were useless, as they did not 
.contain the aniount of revenue ; and what had excited his 
lordships’ astonishment, they assumed deductions to be 
allowed Tippoo which could not be agreed to ; and he 
concluded by requesting other accounts to be sent, without 
restrictions or assumptions. A copy of this letter, and the 
papers referred to in it, was transmitted to the Nizam’s and 
Mahratta deputies. 

March IsL — Sir John Kennaway received a message 
from Tippoo’s vakeels, that a croi'o, nine lacs and a half 
of rupees, had arrived from the fort last night and this 
morning. Sir John expressed, in answer, the pleasure this 
would give the Governor-general; he inquired after the 
prisoners, and requested the vakeels and accountants would 
repair as soon as possible to his tent. 

The vakeels, including Goviud Row Kislien, the Paisli- 
W'ah’s minister, with the Nizam, who was on this occasion 
associated with Bheekajee Pundhit, assembled at Sir John 
Kennaway *s tent. After a conversation on general topics. Sir 
J olm demanded of Ghoolain Ali the accounts of the gross 
and net revenues of TipixK)’s territories. Ghoolam Ali 
evaded an answer, by asking for the papers delivered the 
preceding day, and also a copy of the revenues of his master’s 
country, as extracted from the royal exchequer at Delhi. 
Sir John Kennaway denied the use of the production of 
any paper on his side, until theirs were ready. Ali Reza 
observed, in reply, that in consequence of designing people 
having intrigued and disarranged the train into which he had 
put matters, all the necessary papers were not ready, but he 
would now go to the fort, and after procuring all proper 



I.] THE, ^r^ATY OP SERINGAPATAM. xix 

documents, would return early to-morrow. Before his 
departure, he earnestly requested that no further depreda- 
tions might be committed in tlie l^aul Baugh, and the Ganjam 
suburbs, and that General Abercrombie’s army might be 
forbid to ravage the neighbourhood of the village of 
Pauplye. 

March ^nd . — ^Ali Reza, failing to attend his appointment 
in the forenoon. Sir John Kennaway wrote to him, to 
remind him of it. He came out at four, and sent a mes- 
sage of apology, adding, that he had brought out Subarow, 
chief financial minister to Tippoo, along with all necessary 
papers. Sir John Kennaway wrote, requesting their instant 
attendance : the vakeels excused themselves on the plea of 
their papers requiring previous arrangement, but promised 
faithfully to be ready '^on the morrow. A party of the 
prisoners of the allies were sent in the afternoon. 

March Ord . — Sir John Kennaway attended Lord Corn- 
wallis, on a visit to the princes, and communicated to All 
Keza, that his lordship, on considering his complaint of the 
preceding day, had directed General Abercrombie to change 
ground to Canimbaddy, and ordered Colonel Stewart, who 
commanded in the island, to abstain from cutting any more 
trees in the Laul Baugh, or destroying the houses in Ganjam^ 
Ali Beza, in reply, stated tliat Tippoo had issued orders to 
his troops, not to cut oif General Abercrombie’s supplies* 

At ten, the vakeels of all parties met at Sir John Ken- 
naway’s tent. Tippoo’s deputies then produced a list of 
their master’s subjects, prisoners with the allies. A warm 
altercation took place between the Mahratta and the sul- 
taun’s vakeels, about the infringement of the solemn tenna 
granted to the garrison of Darwar. Sir John Kennaway 
aidted for the papers and accounts : when produced, they 

b 2 



ka CONFERKNCRS TO JNRGOtlATR :A^*^ 

were found little better than the insufBcient papers formerly 
given. After they were recorded, Subarow, ' to shew the 
fairness of the accounts, proposed that if a particular ex- 
amination of the revenue of one of the adjacent villages, or 
districts, should be instituted, he would stake his character 
on their justness. Sir John Kennaway asked to what year 
did the accounts refer ? Soobarow replied they were made 
out for different years, all preceding the war; that the 
revenues of some districts, such as Coorg, were for a period 
seven years back, no revenue having been rec^vcd from 
them since. Sir John Kennaway observed, that this irre- 
gular and improper mode of ^ving the account of revenue 
would render it impossible to compare one year’s revenue 
with .another ; that the greater or less quantity of rain, 
would operate to render the revonvie of each year different, 
and that their mode of giving the accounts would render 
the striking of an average impossible. The vakeels said 
this should be corrected, but their mode of stating the ac- 
counts would make little difference in the grand total, 
which would be found to be about two crores, and ten lacs 
of rupees, (2,040,000/.) 

It was agreed, that comparing the accounts just recorded 
with the originals would occupy the remainder of the day; 
and after mature consideration, all parties would meet to- 
morrow, and discuss them seriatim, and that in the mean- 
time the deputies should also communicate them to their 
respective principals. Before separating, Sir John Eenna- 
way reminded Govind Row Pundhit of the 'guarantee given 
by Hurry Punt, that Tippoo’s territories would produce 
three crores. 

March 4/A.— —Sir John Kennaway wrote to Tippoos 
vakeels ^relative to yesterday’s discussions. Meer Allum 
liaving returned &om the ministers and Hurry Punt, stated 



1.] THE THEATV OP SERIKGAPATART. 

the opinion. of the fonner to be, that Tippoo’s revenue 
counts, as produced, were fallacious, which he could prove 
by a paper from the sultaun's dufter, (exchequer,) relative 
to the revenue of the talook of Velanoor, in the division of 
Gooty, the cession of which Sir John Kennaway had assured 
them would not bo required by the allies. This paper 
stated the revenue at S6,864/., while Tippoo’s valuation 
made it only 8,800/. 

The minister therefore advised that a bond, witli heavy 
penalties, should be required of Subarow, or from Tippoo’s 
vakeels, in case the falsity of the accounts produced could 
be proved. Hurry Punt declined ^ving his opinion until 
he had consulted Furseram Bhow, but he had observed 
thaf'Tippoo had .stated the revenue of the Bidenoor country 
at seven lacs of pagodas ; now be would, he said, be 
content to receive it in part of the Paishwah’s share, for 
twelve lacs. Sir John Kennaway shewed to Meer Allum 
his letter of that morning to the vakeels, which entirely met 
his approval. Meer Allum, and Govind Bow Buswunt, 
waited on Sir John Kennaway with revenue accounts pro- 
cured from one of Tippoo’s revenue officers of rank, a 
prisoner in the Mahratta camp. This paper shewed the 
amount of revenue, as now ^ven by Tippoo, the amount 
conformable to the knowledge of the officer, and the dif- 
ference between both. Govind Row Buswunt further 
declared Hurry Punt’s readiness to take Bidenoor in any of 
three? ways. First : At double the amount of Tippoo’s 
valuation. Secondly : At the same amount, with the pa- 
goda valued at four, instead of three rupees. And thirdly ; 
At the same amount, with the deduction of three or four 
talooks, inserted as belonging to it in Tippoo’s schedule. 
In the evening, Sir John Kennaway wrote to the vakeels in 
answer to their note of yesterday, and reminded them 
verbally, that the time for delivering the accounts would 



xxii CONrsAENGES TO NEGOTIATE [Afp. 

empire to-day. They wrote in rqily, that Ali Reza was 
setting off for the fort, would be back this night, or to- 
morrow, when Tippoo’s answer would be sent. Sir John 
this evening visited the hostages and deputies in company 
with Meer Allum. Ghoolam Ali told him that the Sultaun, 
on seeing his note of yesterday, had sent for Subarow, 
and the other accountants, and expressed his displeasure : 
he allowed the accounts delivered were unsatisfactory, 
and that those demanded by Lord Cornwallis were fair 
and just. Sir John Kennaway remarked, that he had 
at an early period warned them against attempts at imposi- 
tion; that the allies had intrusted, in the pending negotiation, 
their interests to liis lordslup\s charge, and that nothing in 
this Avorld would induce liim to neglect them. Goolam 
Ali said the difference was a mere matter of account, and 
therefore capable of speedy adjustment. 

March Gth . — Ali Reza Khaun having returned from the 
fort, Sir John Kennaway sent him a message, requesting 
written answers to his questions of the 4th instant. Ali 
Reza replied, that he would attend in person next day. 
Sir John Kennaway again requested that he and his 
colleague wovild come to his tent that evening. After some 
difficulty, they consented, and met the deputies of the 
allies at his tent at seven p. m. 

The conversation commenced about prisoners. Ali Reza 
insisted with great warmth that Hurdas, the do wan of 
Darwar, included in the capitulation, granted, though after- 
wards violated, to Budder-ul-Zeman Khaun, the killadar, 
should be given up to Tippoo, as that public officer was 
many lacs in arrear to their master. The Mahratta deputies 
replied with equal warmth, that as he had claimed and 
received their protection, he could not be delivered up. Sir 
John Kennel way at length stopped this altercation by requiring 



1.3 THE TREATY OF SERINOAP ATAM. Xxiii 

that the revenue accounts of three years, specified in his note 
of 4th March, should be produced. He was referred to 
the minister of finance, Siibarow, wlio said that the public 
papers and accounts of the provinces of Bidenoor, Coom- 
betoor, and Calicut, were lost at the taking of the two 
latter by the English ; and the accounts of Darwar, Gujen- 
derghur and Bangalore, when they also fell ; but that the 
accounts of the other divisions would be prepared as soon 
as possible, and would be ready in three or four days. 

Ali lleza remarked that innumerable papers had been lost 
on the night of the 6th viltimo, on the storming of Tippoo’s 
works, when his camp was plundered by his own troops ; 
and that the revenue accounts had been very loosely kept 
since Tippoo haxl come to the throne. To this it was 
answered, that after consulting Lord Cornwallis and the 
representatives of the allied powers, a specific reply would 
be sent. Hussain Ali, a menial sei’vant of Lord Corn- 
wallis, detained in tlie fort after the liberation of the other 
prisoners, was to-day, on compliance with a formal requisi- 
tion, delivered up. 

March 'Ith . — Mcer Allum and Govind Bow Buswunt 
met at Sir John Kcnna way’s tent, when he represented to 
them, that as Tippoo had evaded giving accounts, it would 
be immediately necessary for each separate power to make 
out a schedule of what it conceived itself entitled to, the 
aggregate amount of which could then Ikj included in tlie 
definitive treaty, and that the Company would require a 
proportion amounting to 37,88,295 rupees. They promised 
to submit this to Hurry Punt andAzeem-ul-Omrah. 

The succeeding raoniing Sir John Kennaway wrote twice 
to the Sultaun’s vakeels: the first about workmen being 
again at work on the fort ; and the second, regarding 
prisoners conceived to be still detained. 



xxiv 


CONFEBBNCBS TO NEGOTIATE 


[App. 


Tippoo applied for leave for the religious to officiate as 
usual at the tomb of his father Hyder. Instantly granted. 

March 8th , — Sir John Kennaway waited, by Lord Com- 
wallis'^s desire, on the Sultaun’s deputies, and expressed in 
strong language Lord C.'*s astonishment at the treatment he 
had received from their master, who had delivered in false 
accounts, &c. He stated, that Seringapatam, Tippoo'^s 
family, treasure, in short, his kingdom, being within his 
Lordship’s grasp, he, consulting nothing but his moderation, 
had, against the wishes of his allies, consented to a peace. 
In return, every effort was made to deceive him. The 
necessity of the English retaining Calicut had been candidly 
communicated, and Tippoo had estimated it at five or six lacs 
of rupees beyond its real value. The vakeels replied in gene- 
ral terms, professing their master’s friendship for the Gover- 
nor-gencral, and wishing that he, himself, would deliver in 
his plan of partition, when no opposition would be offered to 
the interests of the Company, but that the Sultaun indulged 
a rooted hatred, which was mutual, to the allies, and could 
ill bear to part with his possessions to them ; and were it not 
for the support of the English, their master, in his present 
reduced state, he would soon expel them from his country. 
Sir John Kennaway replied, that his government was bound 
to the alUcs by treaties which would never be infringed 
to obtain any sinister object ; and that he yet hoped to see 
their master derive benefit by his good faith and strict ad^ 
herence to treaties. After leaving the Sultaun’s deputies, 
Sir John Kennaway requested the attendance of the deputies 
of the allies, who produced lists of their share of the parti- 
tion ; out of these Sir John struck out Soonda, Biswapatam, 
Chitteldroog, Raidroog, and Harponelly. The amount of 
the country remaining was 88,13,787/., and added to the 
Company's share, made a total of 129,59,088/. 



10 


THE TREATY OP SEUINGArATAM. 


XXV 


March 9th . — Sir John Kennaway, having drawn out a 
draft of the definitive treaty, conformable to the preliminary 
treaty, and containing a specification of the countries to be 
ceded, sent it in the evening to Tippoo’s vakeels, with an 
official note. The papers referred to in that note were 
authenticated by an aumil and sirreshtidar (tw^o revenue 
officers), and also an account containing the statement of 
Hurdas, the late dewan of Darwar. 

Sir John Kennaway requested of Lieutenant Macleod, 
charged with the intelligence department, to compare the 
accounts sent in by Tippoo with the best information he 
could collect. About 9 a. m.. Sir John Kennaway received 
a message from the Sultaun’s vakeels, requesting leave to 
wait upon liim. In accordance with his request the Sul- 
taun^'s and the Nizam’s deputies attended, but the Mahratta 
vakeels neglected to attend. The Sultaun’s deputies 
commenced by expressing their surprise at the tone of 
yesterday’s note, and the hard terms of the treaty: they 
would, they said, proceed to lay it before their master, and 
in the mean time proposed to examine some accounts 
brought by Soobarow. Sir John Kennaway replied, that 
the time for examining accounts was passed ; tliat Lord 
Cornwallis had waited patiently nearly twenty days for the 
production of Tippoo’s revenue accounts, &c., to enable 
him to make a fair partition; that their production had 
been evaded, and, as time was precious, the Governor- 
general felt himself obliged to make the division from the 
best data and materials in his power. Lord Cornwallis 
would not, therefore, he thought, examine any more 
accounts, or relax in the least from the terms of the division 
specified in the draft of the treaty before them. His 
Lordship’s character, they knew, had nothing ambitious or 
selfish in it, and the very circumstance of possessing their 
master’s children, as hostages, had made him more delicate 



XXVJ 


CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE 


[App. 


and moderate in tlie terms he had required. The vakeels 
demanded of Sir John Kennaway, if he conceived that the 
Governor-general had consulted their master’s reputation or 
interest, by the terms of the treaty ? Sir John replied, that 
he left the answer of this question to their own sense of 
justice, expediency, and moderation. 

Subarow then proceeded to read over the list of the 
proposed cessions. He began with Coorg, which he termed 
one of the doors to Seringapatam, from wliich it was 
distant only ten or twelve coss. Sir J ohri Kennaway replied, 
that the distance was greater, and that Lord Cornwallis had 
entered into engagements with the Rajah, which would 
prevent the possibility of giving it up. He then instanced 
Deeanicottah as close to llangalore, and distant from our 
frontier. 

He was answered, that when the treaty was carried into 
execution, it would be exactly on the confines. The an- 
swers to the objections urged against Simkagherry and 
Salem, were similar to the above. He then remarked, that 
the river, termed Noil, proposed as our southern boundary, 
had no existence ; that a small rivulet of another name was 
in that position. 

Sir John Kennaway pointed out the river in the map, 
and said the mistake, as to name, would be corrected in the 
fair copy. Subarow next mentioned Bellary and Gooty, 
observing, that the allies had, in the partition, taken all the 
strong forts. Sir John Kennaway replied, that the forts of 
Bangalore and Oosoor, in sti'ength comparable to Calcutta 
and Madras, were by the treaty left to their master ; and 
that retaining the forts was purely defensive, to prevent, by 
obtaining a secure frontier, a recurrence of the calamities 
suffered by the irruptions of Hyder and Tippoo into the 
Carnatic. Sir John concluded by remarking the utter 
uselessness of any further discussion, and recommending to 



1.3 


THE TREATY OP SERINCAPATAM. 


xxvii 


them to go into tlie fort, and after laying the treaty before 
Tippoo, return speedily with his answer ; and tliat he would 
now leave them witli Mr. Cherry, to settle the exchange of 
the money delivered, and come back when that affair was 
finished. As soon as Sir John Kennaway returned, Ali 
lleza endeavoured to lead him to the former discussion, 
and the dewaii (Soobarow) asked on what document he 
relied for the assertion that the “ ancient possessions’^ of 
Tippoo were undervalued? Sir John replied, that one 
proof, among many, was the statement of the talook of 
Velanoor, under the hand and seal of their own aumil, 
being th7'ee times the amount of the revenue assigned to it 
in their paper. This staggered them at first, but after a 
little time they called in (juestion the genuineness of the 
document referred to, and said the balances of former years 
must have been added to make up this amount. Sir John 
Kennaway observed, that the document was genuine, and 
would be produced when necessary : he would in the mean- 
time seriously recommend to them to return all to the fort. 
Soobarow asked, what they were to do fke?'e ? Which Sir 
John answered, by demanding what they were to do here? 
Soobarow explained, that he apprehended his master’s 
resentment would principally fall upon himself, as nothing 
had been settled. They then took leave, promising to 
return next morning, or at farthest on the evening. In an 
interval of the conference just detailed. Sir John Kennaway, 
addressing Ali Keza, said, that the Governor-general, in 
consequence of an authentic report of their master continuing 
to repair the works opposite the trenches, had ordered 
the engineers to resume their work on the fascines and 
gabions. Ali Reza expressed his regret, and said the 
works should be immediately discontinued. Sir John Ken- 
naway also desired that in case a British foraging party 
should have to be sent across the river, means should be 
taken to prevent disturbance. 



XXviii CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

In the afternoon Sir John Kennaway wrote to the Sul- 
taun’s vakeels a note, in answer to one of theirs, complaining 
of Major Cuppage having ascended the Guzzlehutti pass. 

March Wth . — In consequence of the shares of the allies 
being unequal, and the Nizam’s minister having neglected to 
insert the district of Moakah in their share, a new division 
became necessary, by which the East India Company 
received, in addition, the district of Doopain Kanickgeery, 
and part of Doormal, at the back of the Palnaud and 
Ongole districts. Notwithstanding the remonstrances of Sir 
John, and the promises yesterday of the vakeel, the working 
parties continued to-day employed on the fort. 

March — The vakeels failed to come out last night, 

and as the working parties were still busy in the fort. Lord 
Cornwallis directed Sir John Kennaway to write to the 
vakeels at eleven, a. m., to say, that as, contrary to the 
agreement, at the cessation of arms, the working parties 
continued employed in the fort, his lordship would im- 
mediately direct the resumption of operations in the trenches, 
unless their labours instantly ceased. 

The messengers returned at three, p.’m., reporting that he 
had met the vakeels coming out, and that they, on perusal, 
forwarded the letter to Tippoo. Sir John desired the 
attendance of the vakeels as soon as possible. They pro- 
mised to wait upon him at four, but did not arrive until six, 
p. m., accompanied by the deputies of the allies. On com- 
mencing the conference, they intimated generally, that Tippoo 
had agreed to the terms demanded of him, and that nothing 
was now wanting but that the Governor-general and the allies 
should relax on some points. Tippoo, they said, was willing 
to cede half the territories, according to the valuation in his 
own paper, and the other half as valued by the allies, and 
also to deliver up some of the districts, required for our 



I.] TIlK TREATY OF SERINGAPATA JM. xxix 

boundaries; but that he objected to others, particularly 
Coorg, which being close to SeringapaUim, might be viewed 
as one of its entrances : that he considered, by the treaty, we 
were not entitled to require Coorg, which did not lie 
cent ” to our boundary. Sir John replied, that he would 
not enter into a critical examination of the meaning of the 
term adjacent,” that, in matters of business, it signified 
not far removed : that the allies were only debarred by this 
term from taking districts in the centre of Tippoo’s domi- 
nions ; and that Coorg, which they called the door to Sering- 
apatam, was distant forty coss*, and within fifteenf of our 
settlement of Tellicherry, and certainly “ adjacent” to Ca- 
licut, which they had agreed to cede. That, finally, en- 
gagements had been concluded with the Rajah, which could 
not be infringed, otherwise what reliance could Tippoo place 
in those engagements about to be entered upon ? Both the 
vakeels warmly defended their c*/>nstruction of the term 
adjacent,” which Sir John Kennaway denied. After a good 
deal of argument, the matter was, at the earnest request of 
the vakeels, referred to the Govenior-general. Sir John 
having returned from Lord Cornwallis, informed them that 
his lordship having been forced to make the partition treaty 
on the best data in his power, was determined, after mature 
deliberation, not to relax in the least, or yield up any of the 
countries specified ; and that the vakeels ought now to re- 
turn to the fort, and bring Tippoo'^s final answer. They 
replied, that it was not necessary to make any further refer- 
ence to their master, for if Lord Cornwallis did not choose to 
accept their offer, they requested their dismission, and left the 
future to fate. Sir John Kennaway observed, that there 
could be no objection to their departure when they chose ; 
but they insisted that, before going, Lord Cornwallis should 
know what had now passed* 

* Eighty miles. 


t Thirty miles. 



XXX 


CONFEKEJTCES TO NEGOTIATE 


[App. 


March t3//i. — Sir Jolin Kennaway having received the 
Governor-general’s orders, wrote to the vakeels, that no 
reliance could be placed on Tippoo’s accounts, which wore 
formerly declared to be plundered, and now ready to be 
produced : that our calculation made the amount of country 
to be ceded 43,19,69-i of }>agodas, but that his lordship 
would, from an anxiety to avoid extremities, consent to a 
deduction of 4,50,000 pagodas; but that the countries 
objected to, and particularly Coorg, must be ceded. 

The vakeels answered by a note, requesting a more parti- 
cular specification of the countries to be ceded. The vakeels 
themselves shortly followed their letter, and Sir John liaving 
desired the presence of the deputies of the allies, delivered 
to the Sultaim’s envoy the list desired in their last note. 
Ali lleza began warmly to argue that the preliminary treaty 
did not give the right of demanding Coorg. Sir John Ken- 
naway referred him to his former arguments, and said that 
as nothing new was urged, he declined to argue the matter 
further. Ali Reza, with a softened tone, hoped the Go- 
vernor-general, actuated by the same motives which had in- 
duced him not to insist on the cession of Bangalore and Se- 
vendroog, would also refrain from insisting on the cession 
of Coorg, which was so much nearer the capital. Sir John 
replied, that his lordship’s good faith was not involved in 
the cession of the two forts mentioned, and that lie knew 
that nothing would alter the determination of the Go- 
vernor-general with regard to Coorg. Ali Reza then de- 
manded with warmth what, in the event of breaking oflF 
the negotiations, would be our conduct to the princes? 
Sir John replied, they would be detained as hostages for the 
violation of the treaty. They asked how and by whom had 
it bi^jcn violated? Sir John replied, that Tippoo had vio- 
lated the treaty in three instances: first, in declining to 
abide by the selection of countries ; secondly, by the cavils 



1.3 THE TREATY OP SERINGAPATAM. XXxi 

and evasions used in settling the exchange of money ; and, 
thirdly, in despite of our continued remonstrances, and his 
repeated promises, by continuing to this moment, the re- 
pairs and works in the fort opposite our trenches. They re- 
plied, they conceived Sir John to have formerly told them 
that the hostages would not be detained, and that, from the 
English having released a person of consequence, deputed 
to them by Hyder, they had expected a different line of 
conduct. Sir John returned, that Lord Cornwallis would 
not have detained the princes from any other cause than the 
violation of the preliminary treaty by Tippoo : that on the 
faith of the treaty, the works in the trenches, which, in 
all probability, would have ensured the possession of Se- 
ringapatam in ten days, had been relinquished ; and if the 
princes were delivered up, what equivalent had the British 
for the loss of time? That the case quoted of the vakeel was 
not in point ; and that they themselves, similarly situated, 
might depart when they chose. Sir John infoinncd them, 
the princes should change ground to-morrow, and that the 
Sultaun^s guards, now with them, must take their departure. 
The vakeels re(j nested permission to accompany the hos- 
tages, which was olyected to. 

March\4ith.—^\r3iAvL\ ICennaway was awakened by a mes- 
sage from Ali lleza, instantly followed by himself. Sir John 
sent word he was undressed, which the vakeel said was of no 
consequence, and that he would come to the sleeping tent. 
On his arrival, he earnestly entreated Sir John to use his in- 
fluence with Captain Welsh, commanding the guard of ho- 
nour with the hostages, to deky their departure for one day, 
when he would engage to bring back Tippoo'^s answer to 
the list of districts by the evening, otherwise the removal of 
the princes would, in all probability, cost him and his col- 
leagues their lives. Sir John Kennaway replied that Cap- 



XXXii CON^KRKNCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

tain Welsh was acting under superior orders, and was not 
bound to obey him ; but that he would write to Lord Corn- 
wallis, and request the respite so urgently sought. The 
princes had, however, moved, before this note could be de« 
spatched, but, at the desire of the vakeel. Sir John re* 
quested they might not take tlieir final departure until he 
returned, at the appointed time, from the fort. Lord 
Cornwallis, in consequence, directed the princes to be en- 
camped one mile in the rear of head-quarters. In the evrai- 
ing Ali Reza returned, and, with his colleague, waited on 
Sir John Kennaway. After adverting in general terms to 
the success of their interview witli their master, they parti- 
cularised lus acquiescence in all demanded of him, except 
the cession of Coorg, so near to Ins capital, which he hoped 
would be re-considered by the Governor-general, as also the 
cession of some few other places, otherwise an inconvenient 
intermixture of districts would ensue, and the boundary 
wished by his lordship would be destroyed. Sir John 
having requested of him to particularize, Shewaness Row 
instanced Attoor and Permallee, left toTippoo, as intervening 
between the Company’s old boundary of Lallce and Namcul. 
Sir John observ«id that this omission had been provided for 
in the remarks made opposite Namcul, Lallee, 8fc. ; that all 
districts to the east and north of the Caveri should belong to 
the Company. Sir John Kennaway then asked if there 
were any more districts than those he had now instanced ? 
The vakeel could not answer without referring to his papers 
and maps in the fort, which Sir John requested of him to 
produce next morning. Ghoolam Ali observed that it now 
appeared that instead of yielding anything, we were going 
to keep more. Sir John denied this, and said equivalents 
would be given for all those districts taken to make a secure 
boundary. The vakeels then recurred once more to Coorg. 
Sir John Kennaway represented to them the uselessness of 



I.] THE TREATY OF SEEING APATAM. XXxiii 

such discussion, as nothing inserted in the list of the 13th 
would be yielde<l up*; and then categorically demanded whe- 
ther or not Tippoo would agree to the cession of Coorg. 
They answered, that rather than risk the interruption of 
peace he was prepared to yield it up, but he hoped, from 
Lord Cornwallis’s friendship, that the cession of Coorg 
would not be insisted on. Sir John agreed once more to 
consult the Governor-general on this point. Ali lleza then 
presented a paper, containing articles which he wished 
should be corrected in the definitive treaty. The greater part 
of these alterations had been provided for in the additions 
made to the treaty after it had been sent to the vakeels, on 
the 9th. 

March \5th . — Sir John Kennaway sent, early, a mes^ 
sage suggesting the despatch of Shewancss Row to the fort, 
for the maps and papers necessary for the final adjustment 
of the cession of districts and limitation of boundaries, as in 
the event of the definitive treaty not being settled this evening, 
Lord Cornwallis would not delay the march of the princes 
to-morrow. At eight a. m.. Sir John desired the attendance 
of the allied deputies, who having retired, adjusted a par- 
tition of their respective shares. In the mean time, Sir John 
was employed in drawing out the definitive treaty, which 
having completed by mid-day, he desired the attendance 
of the sultaun’s vakeels, although Shewaness Row had not 
yet arrived from Seringapatam. They ai'rivcd about two 
p. m., and commenced by demanding Lord Cornwallis’s 
determination, more especially with regard to Coorg. Sir 
John Kennaway replied, that Lord Cornwallis, with every 
disposition to gratify Tippoo, could not consent to abandon 
the Rajah of Coorg. His lordship, he said, considered the 
preservation of faith to his engagements to be of equal im- 
portance and sanctitj^, and as superior to all other considera- 

VOL. II. c 



XXxiv CONFERENCKS TO NEGOTIATE [Afp. 

lions, as a sincere adherence to the tenets of his religion ; 
he could, therefore, hear nothing further on this subject- 
Sir John tlien delivered to them the treaty, without the list 
of countries to be ceded, which depended on the arrival of 
Shewaness Row. The only articles objected to, were tliose 
preventing any claims for outstanding revenue balances, and 
the omission of the word ryut in the article providing that 
no protection should be given to officers and zemindars 
flying from each other\s districts. Sir John Kennaway, in 
reply to the first, observed that the article was just to the 
inhabitants, and would obviate all disagreeable disputes be- 
tween the different governments — it could not, tlierefore, 
be altered. The same reasoning could with equal justice 
be applied to the demand for the insertion of the word ryut 
—-that enough had been done in inserting officers and 
zemindars.’’ It being now five p. m., and Shewaness Row 
not having arrived, Sir John Kennaway retired to make 
out the list of countries with his own data; but whilst 
thus employed, Shewaness Row arrived, and shewed that 
the districts of Shadiiiiunglum and Valenoor, to tlie cast of 
the Caveri, if left to Tippoo, would occasion an inter- 

mixture of boundaries ; Sir John included them in the 
Company’s share, and having given equivalents, the Com- 
pany’s division stood as follows ; — 

Calicut, 63 Talooks . . - 8,487,65 5] J 

Paulghatcherry .... 88,000 

Dindigul and Palnaveerpackshy . 9,000 

Salem ...... 24,000 

Coorg . . , . . 8,000 

Numkul ..... 16,000 

Sunkagerry .... 40,000 


Carried forward 


8,072,650 5J I 



I.] THE TREATY OF SERINGA FATA M. XXXV 


Brought forward , 

8 , 672,650 61 1 

Baramahal . 

Baramahal .... 

. 64,000 

Caveriputtuii .... 

10,000 

Veerbudidroog 

8,000 

Raicottah ..... 

8,000 

Kangoondy .... 

6,000 

Darampoory .... 

8,000 

Dinageer .... 

. 10,000 

Tingricottah .... 

12,000 

Caveripoor .... 

8,000 

Attoor, Ancutgeery 

18,000 

Peermutty .... 

. 14,000 

Shadiminglum .... 

20,000 

Vamloor .... 

. 16,000 

Kantery Pagodas 

13 , 16,765 5 J i 


All altercation now arose between the sultaun’s and the 
Nizam’s vakeels, regarding the share of tlie latter ; as after 
including the whole of Kudapali, Cummuni, part of the 
Duab, and the talooks about Tangrapilly, twenty thousand 
pagodas only remained to be given to the Nizam, out of 
which was to be settled the cession of Gooty and BeUary, 
which had been insisted on by the allies as absolutely neces- 
sary to form a northern boundary. For these forts, and a 
few dependant talooks, it was proposed to the sultaun’s 
vakeels to take the districts of Budwail and Chitoweil in the 
Kudapah country ; these they positively refused to have, as 
they were cut off from Tippoo’s remaining territories, and 
were bordering on those of the Calistry and Venkatagherry 
liajahs, whose troublesome and litigious disposition might 
involve him in disputes similar to those that had brought 
on the present war : rather than be burdened with districts 

C 2 



XXXVI CONFEflElVCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

SO situated, Tip|XK) would give them, they said, in addition 
to the other cessions. 

After niucli angry discussion between the vakeels, the 
Nizam's always refusing to yield up those districts which 
Tippoo’s were willing to take, Tipjx)o'*s vakeels earnestly 
besought that the cession of Gooty and Bellary should not 
be insisted on. Meer Allum observed, that neither himself 
nor the minister would object to this, provided it met with 
the wishes of Lord Cornwallis. Sir John Kennaway op- 
posed this. It growing late, the conference broke up, with 
an understanding that the Governor-general, and Azeem-ul- 
Omrah should in the meantime be consulted, and that all the 
parties should assemble next morning. 

March — Sir John Kennaway, this morning, in- 

formed Meer Allum that Lord Cornwallis had no objection 
to relinquishing Gooty to Tippoo. Meer Allum having 
waited on the minister, suited it as his intention to be guided 
by the wishes of Lord Cornwallis ; but that though he con- 
sidered keeping Gooty necessary , he would relinquish it, and 
keep Budwail and Chittoweil, provided also Tipjx)o would 
give the fort of Gurrumcondah, and such of its dependant 
talooks as would complete the share of the Nizam. The 
Mahratta vakeels being present, this proposal was fully 
discussed ; when both they and the Nizam’s vakeels agreed 
it would be necessary to yield Gooty to Tippoo. Sir John 
Kennaway, from a conviction that good policy demanded 
that these forts should remain in possession of the allies, 
suggested to the Mahratta vakeels the propriety of giving 
up Huwanoor, and part of Bankapoor, as an equivalent : 
this they directly and positively refused to do. 

It was then agreed to propose the remaining alter- 
native; taking Gurrumcondali, in lieu of Gooty, 

and if this was insuperably objected to, Gooty would 



10 the TniiATY OF SEUING APATAM. XXXVii 

tl)en 1)0 relinquished, provided Lord Cornwallis con- 
sented. 

The Mahratta vakeels then requested the definitive treaty 
might be produced. AVhen read, they stated that Hurry 
runt wished three alterations or additions should be made 
to it. First, The omission of the words heirs and suc- 
cessors, ’’ in the preamble. Secondly, A clause securing 
protection to pilgrims visiting the pagodas in Seringapatam. 
Thirdly, That the treaty should recognise and confirm all 
former treaties, except those modified by the tenor of this. 
In reply to the first. Sir John Kennaway observed, that it 
could not be agreed to ; that such phraseology was usual, 
anti if they wished to observe good faitli, they ought not to 
object to it. They answered it was not their habit to use 
these tenns. In reply to their second request, Sir John 
Kennaway said he had no objections, provided they con- 
tained nothing recognising their claim to Choute. This 
would form an insuperable objection, as that demand ought 
to be abandoned, after the acquisitions obtained by them 
under the present treaty. In regard to the third request, 
about security to pilgrims. Sir John remarked, that it 
would lead to future disputes with Tippoo, if he disliked 
their visiting his capital, and if he did not, it was super- 
fluous. Ill short, if they disliked the present treaty, they 
might make a seperate one with Tippoo themselves. This 
they declined, and to compound with Sir John, they said 
they would, in their copy of the treaty, substitute for 
heirs and successors,” that the treaty should last as long 
as the sun^ moon, and stars ! and with regard to pilgrims. 
Hurry Funt should address a separate letter to Tippoo on 
this subject, but they besought Sir John to bespeak 
Tippoo’s favourable attention towards it. Tippoo’s vakeels 
liaviiig now arrived, it was proposed to them to exchange 
Gooty, ^c.,for Gurrumcondah. To this they immediately 



XXXTiii CONFERENCES TO NEGOTIATE [Arr. 

and decidedly objected, for these reasons ; that Gurrum- 
condah was one of the first acquisitions to the Mysore state^ 
and because the bones of Meer Sahib, Hyder Ali’s brother- 
in-law were deposited in a tomb near the fort. Lord Corn- 
wallis having now signified his hope that the minister 
would relinquish Gooty, it was intimated to the vakeels 
that the point would be conceded. All the vakeels now 
proceeded to arrange the division of the countries that were 
to be exchanged. After much altercation about the ex- 
change of Pergunnahs, the different shares stood, at length, 
as inserted in the definitive treaty. The Sultaun’s vakeels 
then took their leave to go to the fort, promising to return 
with the treaty, next morning, duly executed. Sir John 
warned them against the alteration of a. single word, as from 
the critical situation of affairs, such might be attended with 
the most serious consequences. 

March — Nothing was heard from the vakeels until 

adout four p. m., when Mahomed Ali reported they would 
soon be out with some more treasure. At six, Sir John 
received a note from them, stating that they had laid the de- 
finitive treaty before Tippoo ; and complaining of excesses 
and plunderings by Purseram Bhow^s cavalry. Sir John 
Kennaway returned an answer, that Purseram Show’s ex- 
cesses had been reported to Lord Cornwallis, and would in 
future be prevented. He cautioned the vakeels against any 
delay, or the smallest alteration in the treaty, as either would 
inevitably lead to a rupture. 

March 18^A. — The Sultaun’s vakeels arrived at three, 
and came to Sir John Kennaway’s tents, where they found 
the Nizam’s deputies. The Mahratta vakeels were not in 
the way when summoned. The vakeels commenced by 
making complaints against Purseram Bhow, and whilst they 



I.] THE TIIEATY OF SERINGAPATAM. xxxix 

were yet talking, a letter was brought to them from 
Tippoo, giving details of the plunderings of Purseram 
Bhow on the I'oad to Sera ; that he made collections, beat 
and imprisoned ryuts, and had taken 63 camels, 8000 
bullocks, 4^. Sir John Kennaway replied, that the 
Governor-general would do all in his power to stop these 
enormities, but they were mainly owing to the bad faith of 
their master, who had, in spite of all representations and 
remonstrances, continued to repair and strengthen the works 
in the fort, which had induced Lord Cornwallis to make 
Purseram Bhow cross the river. The vakeels attempted 
to deny this, but Sir John offered to produce a plan of the 
works, shewing the repairs, made up from daily 

authentic reports. 

They then produced the fair and signed copies of the 
treaty, which were collated, corrected, and revised ; in the 
annexed list of countries, two important omissions had been 
made, which could not be rectified without the especial 
permission of Tippoo. They also delivered nine orders of 
surrender for the forts of Salem, Namkui, The next 
day was appointed for the formal delivery of the three 
treaties by the princes to Lord Cornwallis, when the 
Nizam’s and the Maliratta vakeels were requested to 
attend. 

March 19^A. — ^The Mahratta vakeels sent, this morn- 
ing, a copy of the article they wished added to the treaty, 
confirming all former treaties with the Mysore govern- 
ment. Sir John Kennaway answered, that the treaty was 
now signed and executed by Tippoo, that therefore the time 
for alterations was past, and that Lord Cornwallis would 
not return the treaty for such an addition, and he concluded 
by requesting their official attendance at the Governor- 
gencral’s tents, to receive their copy of the treaty delivered 



xl CONFERENCKS TO NEGOTIATE [Ai-p. 

by the princes in Durbar. They answered they would as- 
certain, immediately, the pleasure of Hurry Punt on this 
head ; without his permission they would not attend. All 
Sir John Kcnnaway*s arguments could not induce them to 
alter this resolution, and the treaty had been delivered by 
the princes, and the company breaking up, before Govind 
Row Kishen arrived. When Lord Cornwallis presented 
the treaty to liim, he desired it might be understood that 
Hurry Punt had objections to it which he would state to 
the Governor-general in a personal conference, if granted 
one, which Lord Cornwallis said he would be happy to 
give him. After the Durbar had broken up, Govind Row 
Kishen had a conversation with I^ord Cornwallis, which 
ended in an understanding, that the articles they wished 
should be discussed in the conference requested by Hurry 
Punt. 

March 20M. — Sir John Kennaway received a letter from 
Ali Reza, complaining again of the continued depredations 
of Purseram Bhow. Sir John wrote in reply, that he had 
done his utmost to restrain the Bhow, who had by com- 
mand marched to return to his former position to-day, or 
would certainly do so to-morrow. It was stated that Tip- 
poo’s Bedes and Pindarries were quite as active and de- 
structive as the troops of the Bhow. 

Hurry Punt visited Lord Cornwallis in the evening, and 
agreed to tlie treaty in its present form ; but as the counter- 
part from him could not be prepared by the next morning. 
Lord Cornwallis put off the formal delivery of the counter- 
parts from the different allied powers until the 22d instant. 

March %\st . — Sir John Kennaway wrote to Meer Allum 
and Bheekajee Pundhit, relative to the public delivery of 
the counterpart treaties. 



I.j THE TREATY OF SERINGATATAM. xH 

March SiZncL — In the morning the vakeels of the Ni- 
zam and Mahrattas assembled at Sir John Kennaway’s 
tents, and on the arrival of the Governor- general, accom- 
panied him to the tents of the princes, to whom the ratified 
counterparts of the definitive treaty were delivered, under 
salutes from the different powers. After the interchange of 
compliments, Sir John Kennaw^ay informed Ali Reza, 
that the orders of delivery of the forts to be restored to 
Tippoo were preparing, and demanded the remaining 
orders for those forts to be given to the Company, such as 
Kishnaghurry, Sunkagerry, which the vakeel stated 
to be ready, but that in his hurry he had left them behind. 
Ali Reza then requested of Sir John Keimaway to bespeak 
Lord Cornwallis's influence with the Mahrattas relative 
to the release of prisoners, especially Hiirdas, Dewan of 
Darwar ; also relative to a deduction of ten per cent, on the 
money payable to the Nizam and Mahrattas, usual in all 
money transactions between such states. The concourse of 
people being great, Lord Cornwallis proposed that they 
should retire and diseuss these matters more privately in 
Sir J ohn Kennaway'’s tent . 

Tippoo’s vakeels commenced by requiring the delivery 
of Hurdas. Lord Cornwallis replied, that great as were the 
calamities of the war, they Avould.be much heightened by 
delivering up to enraged masters, people in the position of 
Hurdas ; Avho had voluntarily claimed the protection of the 
Mahrattas, had not been detained by force, and could not 
be looked upon as a prisoner, and did not therefore come 
within the scope of the operation of the treaty relative to 
prisoners. 

The vakeels allowed he had entered the Mahratta ser- 
vice of his own free will, and would not now return to 
Tippoo’s, as lie was between thirty and forty lacs in ar- 
rears, to defraud their master of which was the principal 



xlii COWFEBENCES TO NEGOTIATE [App. 

cause of his desertion ; but that, forniing part of the garri- 
son of Darwar, under Budder-ul-Zemaun Khaun, he bad, 
with the rest, surrendered on terms wlaich Purseram Bhow 
had violated by attacking the garrison, after the evacua- 
tion, plundering and making them prisoners ; that this, 
coupled with the severe treatment they subsequently re- 
ceived, had given to HurtUis both the cause and opportunity 
for deserting. This, they argued, entitled them to class 
him among the prisoners. Lord Cornwallis declined enter- 
ing into the discussion of the surrender of Darwar, or its 
violation ; all he considered necessary was, that he was a 
deserter by his own free will, and therefore his surrender 
was not stipulated for by the treaty. Govind Row Kishen 
observed that Hurry Punt was willing that llurdas be 
brought to Lord Cornwallis’s tent, and allowed to go to 
Tippoo if he chose. In reply to their further discussion on 
this point. Lord Cornwallis adhered to his former answer. 
They then proceeded to demand the deduction of ten per 
cent. Ijord Cornwallis said he knew of no such custom, 
when the sultaun'’s vakeels referred the matter to the Ni- 
zami’s and Mahratta deputies, saying that if they denied 
its existence, they would give it up. Lord Cornwallis replied 
that he was accountable to his superiors for the due fulfil- 
ment of the treaty, wherein no such deduction was provided 
for. They answered, that money transactions being new 
between their government and the English, they could not 
insist on it with regard to them ; but they claimed it as usual 
and well understood between them and the other powers. 
Lord Cornwallis said he would not interfere in such a busi- 
ness; if Hurry Punt and the minister allowed it, he had no 
objections to offer. Meer Allum appeared to think such cus- 
tom usual between the Mysore government and the Mahrat- 
tas, but he denied its existence its it regarded liis own go- 
vernment ; and when it was proposed by the Mahratta 



I.] THE TREATY OF SERIJVGAPATAM. xliu 

vakeels to refer the decision on their part to Iliiny Punt, 
he said there would be little use in making a reference to 
Azeem-ul-Omrah, who would give them a plain deniaL 
The conversation here terminated, and Tippoo’s vakeels 
went away in the belief that no deduction would be agreed 
to by any party. In the evening Sir John Kennaway wrote 
to Tippoo’s vakeels, relative to the release of prisoners still 
unreleased ; among others, there were two officers, named 
Fonblanque and Hoare, confined at Mudgeery. 

Here the conferences ended : shortl}'^ afterwards the allied 
armies commenced their march towards their respective 
frontiers, and, save general expressions of civility, no further 
intercourse passeni between the Governor-general and the 
S iiltaun. 

Tippoo gave an ample supply of d(3olies* and l>earers to 
assist in removing the sick in hospital, which had increased 
in an extraordinary degree during the continuance of the 
siege of Seringapatam. 


♦ A species of litter carried by men called bearers. 



APPENDIX. 


No. II. 

Sm John Shoiie‘*s Minute. 

Dated Calcutta^ Feb. 18, 1795. 

Whilst hostilities between the Mahrattas and the Nizam arc 
yet in suspense, the attention of this government is naturally 
called forth to the consideration of probable events, which 
may fundamentally change the political situation of affairs 
in India. It has been already decided, that we arc not 
bound by any treaty to take part with any of the contending 
powers against the other, and, in this case, the acts of the 
legislature of Great Britain prohibit an interference that 
would necessarily involve iis in hostilities. 

From this decision I have no reason to apprehend that 
we shall be forced to depart, whilst dissensions prevail be- 
tween the Mahrattas and Nizam only ; but if they should 
ultimately end in hostilities, a question may arise on which 
our determination ought previously to be formed, viz.^ 
What part this government is bound to take, if Tippoo 
should attack the territories of the Nizam, during hostilities 
between that prince and the Paishwah, either as a confederate 
of the Mahrattas, or independently. 

The only treaties which have a reference to this question, 
are those concluded at Paungul and Poonah with the Nizam 
and Mahrattas, under the title of Offensive and Defensive 
Alliance, in June and July, 1790. 

The preamble to the treaty with the Nizam specifies three 



SIR JOHN SHORE^S MINUTE. xlv 

parties to it, and that the alliance is against Tippoo SuU 
taiin. The first article confirms the friendship subsisting 
between the three states by former treaties, and the second 
declares that Tippoo having violated his engagements with 
the contracting powers, they have united in a league to 
punish him to the utmost of their ability, and to deprive 
him of the means of disturbing the general tranquillity in 
future. The third and subsequent articles, to the ninth 
inclusive, relate to the prosecution of the war, and to objects 
connected with it, to the distribution of the conqueretl ter- 
ritories, and to the mode of making peace ; and the tenth 
article of the treaty of Paiingul, which is the thirteenth in 
that of Poonah, is in the following terms : — - 

“ If, after the conclusion of peace with Tippoo, he should 
attack or molest either of the contracting parties, the other 
sliall join to punish him, the mode and conditions of effect- 
ing which shall be hereafter settled by the contracting 
parties.^’ 

The treat}'^, therefore, from this summary recital of it, is 
clearly an alliance between three states for a declared spe- 
cific object, with a prospective clause for the future security 
of all the contracting parties against a common enemy. 

To ascertain, with all possible accuracy, the nature of the 
obligations of the treaty, I now advert to the negotiations 
preceding the formation of it, and to tlie discussion of the 
quoted article, which have taken place subsequent to the war. 

Upon receipt of the intelligence that Tippoo had invaded 
the territories of the llajah of Travancore, instructions were 
sent from this government to the residents at Hyderabad 
and Poonah, to notify its determination to support our ally, 
and to propose a co-operation with the Nizam and the Mah- 
rattas against Tippoo. 

The resident at Poonah, previous to the receipt of these 
instructions, had obtained from that court an unrequested 



Xlvi SIH JOHN shore’s MINUTE. [App. 

declaration of its disposition to take part with the Company 
in the war against Tippoo. The first advance to the con- 
federacy was therefore made by the Mohrattas, without 
solicitation or sacrifice on our part. 

To the information communicated to the Nizam, by the 
resident at Hyderabad, of unprovoked aggression of Tippoo 
against the llajah of Travancore, and of the determmation 
of this government to support him, and to the expressed 
expectation of the Nizam’s co-operation, his Highness re- 
plied, without qualificaton, that it was his intention, after 
an interview with the Paishwah, and after concerting with 
him a plan of attack, to commence hostilities against Tippoo^ 
and that the Govemor-gencrars resolution very happily 
coincided with his own plans, — that it had long been his 
intention to attack Tip^xx), and that he had communicated 
it to the Paishwah. 

The Nizam, however, claimed the merit of a ready co- 
operation with the English, of a decision in their favour, 
without waiting to ascertain the disposition of the Paishwah, 
and of an earlier commencement of hostilities than he had 
intended. 

The Nizam'‘s declaration was soon followed by a ques- 
tion from him to the resident, as to the part which the Com- 
pany would take if, during the absence of his army while 
assisting the Company, the Paishwah invited by Tippoo 
should invade the dominions of his Highness; and the reply 
of the resident, which he acknowledges to be unguarded, 
was, Uiat the Company ought to sacrifice their all in his 
Highnesses defence. The minister subsequently requested 
that Lord Cornwallis would introduce in one of his letters 
an expression implying, in general terms, that he should 
consider any attempt to disturb the peace of his Highness’s 
dominions, whilst engaged with us in the war against Tippoo, 
in the same light as an attempt to disturb those of tlie Com- 



II.] 


SIR JOHN shore's MINUTE. 


xlvii 


pany. He had previously signified his wish that the defen- 
sive alliance should be made general, and both the Nizam 
and his minister had evinced a disposition to connect them- 
selves by the closest ties with this government. 

The following extract from the Governor-general’s letter 
of the 12th April, 1790, to the resident at Hyderabad, will 
furnish the most material information on this subject : — 

“ You may likewise take that opportunity to express 
both to himself (the Nizam) and to Azeem-ul-Omrah, how 
highly sensible I am of the liberal manner in which they 
received my propositions to join with the Company in the 
present war, and of the openness and fairness with which 
they have discussed the difterent articles which are to con- 
stitute the terms of our alliance ; and you may give them 
the strongest assurances tliat they shall liavc no reason to 
repent of their having treated me with so much candour; 
but that, in return, I shall have pleasure in embracing 
every opportunity that offers to give them convincing proofs 
of ray sincerity and friendship. 

I trust that the more that his Highness reflects upon 
the nature of his proposition, that I would engage to inter- 
fere ill case the Mahrattas should at any time make unrea- 
sonable demands upon liim, he will more clearly see that, 
as the Malirattas have acceded heartily and cordially to the 
confederacy, it would be highly improper in me to supjx>sc 
that they would be inclined to treat one of their own allies 
with injustice; and, consequently, such an assurance must 
appear to them in a light highly injurious and offensive. 
But, in order to prove to liis Highness how anxious I am to 
go every justifiable length to show my regard to his interests, 
and to gratify him in his wishes, you may inform him that, 
provided the Mahrattas do not positively object to it, I 
will agree to its becoming an additional article in the present 
treaty, that, should differences arise between any two of the 



Xlviii SIR JOHN shore’s MINUTE. j^App. 

oonfeclerates, the third partj*^ shall be bound to interpose his 
good offices, and to take every means in his power to bring 
those differences to a just and amicable settlement ; and you 
may add to his Highness, to Azeem-ubOmrah, and to Meer 
Abal Kassim, that should an article to that effect be as^ 
sented to by the Poonah government^ and any case should 
arise, in which my interference should be called upon in 
consequence of it, tliey will always find me in the best dis- 
position to endeavour to save his Highness from the necessity 
of submitting to injury.” 

This is the substance of what preceded the treaty. It 
now remains to state what passed subsequent to it at the 
period of general pacification at Seringapatam. Hurry 
Punt, on the part of the Malirattas, and Azeem-ul-Omrah, 
on that of the Nizam, proposed to Lord Cornwallis to enter 
into a guarantee treaty, in fuller explanation of the 18th 
and 16th articles of the treaties of Poonah and Paungal, 
with a view to render the terms of tliem more precise, and 
to define the operations to be pursued by the three contract- 
ing parties, in the event of future molestation, or attack, by 
Tippoo, against either of them. 

It is unnecessary to detail the negotiations which followed 
these propositions ; it is sufficient to observe the written de- 
claration which the residents were instructed to deliver to 
their respective courts, if they manifested evasion or back- 
wardness in entering into the proposed explanation, 

Tliat we consider the three parties to be bound to each 
other, to act willi their wliole force against Tippoo, in 
the event of his attacking either of them, without clear and 
just provocation, but in no other case whatever.” That the 
draft of an explanatory treaty was prepared by Lord Corn- 
wallis, and transmitted to the residents at Hyderabad and 
Poonah, by whom it was explained to the ministers of their 
respective courts, that the Mahrattas reejuired time for con- 



II.] . sm joftN SHons’st minute. xlix 

sidering it, but Azeem-ul-Omrah positively declared his re- 
solution not to agree to the guarantee treaty^ until his 
master’s request concerning Kumool had been complied 
with ; that he afterwards retracted this declaration, and ex- 
pressed his consent to accede to the propositions of Lord 
Cornwallis, without waiting for the determination of the 
M ahrattas ; that another draft of an explanatory treaty was 
afterwards prepared by the Mahrattas, and that the discus- 
sion has long since been brought to a close, without any 
specific agreement, under a satisfactory declaration from the 
Mahratta minister, that his state was ready to act agreeably 
to existing treaties, and an expressed acquiescence of the 
Nizam to the proposed draft of Lord Cornwallis. 

I shall now consider the arguments by which the Nizam 
may be presumed to urge his claim to our assistance, in the 
event of the premised suppositions. 

That he is by treaty entitled to the assistance of the Com- 
pany, as well as that of the Mahrattas, if Tippoo should 
attack his dominions, without just cause or provocation, and 
the defection of one party to the treaty cannot exonerate 
the other from the obligations which it has contracted to 
discharge; that, so far from being justified in refusing him 
aid against Tippoo, it is incumbent on us to stand forth and 
compel the third party to perform its stipulations. 

That the article imposing the obligation of assistance is 
clear and positive in its terms, and contains no expression 
or condition to justify a secession on our parts ; that his 
reliance in making the treaty was upon our good faith, as 
he not only well knew the treachery of the Mahrattas, but 
plainly intimated his suspicions of it during the preliminary 
negotiations ; that, at the period of making the treaty, our 
interest dictated the necessity of entering into an alliance 
with him, whether the Mahrattas became parties to it or 
not, — and it cannot be doubted, that if he had insisted upon 
VOL. II. 



1 SIR JOHN SHORE’S MINUTE. [App. 

•an offensive and defensive engagement, in general terms, it 
must have been acceded to ; that if we are at liberty to 
renounce the performance of our stipulations, because the 
Mahrattas have violated their engagements, or for other 
reasons of convenience or policy, that good faith, which is 
the basis and cement of treaties, is subverted, as a pretence 
equally valid can never be wanting to authorize a departure 
from the most solemn obligations. 

That Tippoo’s aggression must be with or without the 
concert of the Mahrattas, and, in either case, we are bound 
to oppose it, but more particularly should he take the field 
against the Nizam as the confederate of the Paishwah, as 
such a confederacy on his part would be a direct and insult- 
ing violation of the treaty, which it would be our indispens- 
able duty to resent. 

To these arguments the following may be opposed :~ 

Nothing can be clearer than that the treaty, by the terms 
of it, is a tripartite engagement, binding and uniting three 
states for their reciprocal security against a declared common 
enemy ; and supposing the guarantee established by it to 
be maintained by the joint efforts and co-operation of the 
three allies. Upon this principle, all explanations and acts 
originating out of the treaty were to take place by mutual 
communication and the concurrence of the three allied 
powers. That as the union of the three allies was the basis 
of the treaty, the continuance of that union, or friendship, is 
essential to the j^erformance of the obligations imposed by 
it, and a war between two of the parties totally changes the 
relative situation of all. 

A junction between Tippoo and one of two parties to the 
treaty, whilst at war with each other, is to be considered 
with reference to the causes of hostilities between the two 
parties engaged in them. The treaty can never be con- 
strued with that rigour, as in ail cases to preclude any of the 



II.] SIR JOHN fiHORB^S MINUTE. It 

parties to it from forming such alliancess as may be neces- 
sary to his safety ; and upon a supposition that the justice 
of the war betvyreen the[Nizam and Paishwah is decidedly on 
one side, and that the other has been compelled into it by 
unprovoketi aggression, self-preservation would justify an 
alliance between the aggrieved party and Tippoo. On the 
other hand, a confederacy between him and one of the par- 
ties to the triple .alliance, against any other party, from 
ambitious motives, may be pronounced a gross infraction of 
that alliance with respect to the state confederating with 
Tippoo. The inference from this reasoning, in point of 
fact, bears rather against the Nizam, as his advance towards 
Bidder, if not an act of aggression against the Mahratta 
state, was indisputably with a view to take part in the dis- 
sensions between Sindia and the minister, and so far an 
indication of hostility. In an early stage of those measures 
which have contributed to involve the Nizam in his present 
embarrassment, the consequences of them were distinctly 
pointed out to Azcem-ul-Onirah ; and whilst the impor- 
tance of a good understanding with Ballajee Pundliit to tlie 
prosperity of the Nizam’s government Avas urged to him, 
he was at the same time apprized of the destructive ten- 
dency to his Highness’s affairs of a rupture with the Mah- 
ratta minister. 

To support the Nizam against Tippoo, if he should seize 
the opportunity of actual hostility between his Highness and 
the Malirattas, to attack the territories of the former without 
provocation, must necessarily involve us in a war with the 
Mahrattas, a predicament Avhich the obligations of the 
treaty never supposed. I state this as a necessary conse- 
quence, for the operations of the field would lead to it : even 
though the invasion were not originally concerted or intended 
between Tippoo and the Paishwah, we cannot conceive it 
possible for us to fight against Tippoo alone, in defence of 

d2 



lii SIR JOHN shore’s minute. [Ap(». 

the Nizam, and with tho co-opcration of his forces, wliilst 
he is engaged with the Mahrattas ; and to prosecute the 
war with effect against Tippoo, we must commence hostili- 
ties at the same time with the Mahrattas. lint if a con- 
trary supposition were admissible, the whole burthen of 
repelling and punishing the aggression of Tippoo would 
exclusively fall upon us, contrary to the spirit, meaning, 
and terms of the triple alliance. 

We are respectively lK)und by different treaties with the 
Nizam and Mahrattas, not to assist tlieir enemies ; and w'e 
are bound in a guaranty with both, for the object of recipro- 
cal security against Tippoo : the first imposes a neutrality 
on our parts with respect to the Nizam and to the Mahrat- 
tas; and the second, the obligation of mutual support 
against Tippoo. The stipulations of tlie last imply and 
express the continuance of amity between the three con- 
tracting parties, as the foundation of that concert which is 
the very essence of the treaty, and by which the security 
derived from it can alone be maintained. Hostilities be- 
tween any two of the parties is in fact, as long as they last, 
a subversion of the principles of the treaty. 

The primary question, as far as regards the obUgations 
of the treaty, is reducible to a very narrow compass, and is 
resolvable into this statement, — whether the treaty of Paun- 
gul is to be deemed a separate independent agreement be- 
tween us and the Ni/am, or connecting in all its obligations 
him and the Mahrattas. The terms of it most clearly prove 
it to be a triple alliance, by which throe parties are bound 
together against a presumed enemy, for their reciprocal 
security, which is to be maintained by their joint efforts, 
and, if necessary, with their whole power. To the argu^ 
ment, that the secession of one party from performing the 
obligations of the treaty does not release tlie other, because 
is not so expressed in it, and because such a clause would 



II ] SIR JOHN SHORE’S MINUTE, IHi 

have been inserted, if this had been the intention of the 
contracting parties, it may be replied, that this construction 
is inadmissible, for it requires more than was intended by 
the treaty itself, as it involves the necessity, or, at all events, 
the risk, of a war with one of the parties to it. This is a 
case which the treaty never supposed, and all the stipula- 
tions in it are formed upon a contrary presumption. 

In reply to other arguments it may be observed, that 
both the Nizam and the Mahrattas were previously disposed 
to war with Tippoo, and that in all probability they would 
have carried this intention into effect, if the Company had 
not been compelled into hostilities with that prince; that 
they embraced with alacrity the favourable opportunity 
afforded them by the determination of this government, and 
can claim no other merit, than that they were induced by it 
to commence their operations at an earlier period than they 
had at first proposed. The clause to which Lord Corn- 
wallis signified his conditional acquiescence was not inserted 
in the treaty, and it is evident that it would liave been 
objected to by the Mahrattas. The Nizam himself has 
afforded a proof of the latitude in which he views the article 
of the guarantee treaty under discussion, by his declaration 
to withhold his acquiescence to the proposed explanatory 
engagement, until our concurrence was obtained to the 
object which he had in view . 

In discussing the nature and force of the obligations of 
the treaty, we are not to be biassed by any considerations 
of the weakness of the Nizam, and the probability of an 
attack upon him only. Such considerations apply to the 
question of expediency ^ and the point of obligation is to 
be argued in the same manner as if the supposition extended 
to an attack upon the Mahrattas by Tippoo. If the terms 
of the treaty, under the stated circumstances, prescribe the 
obligation of assisting the Nizam against Tippoo, they must 



SIR JOHN shore’s MINtfTE. 


[Arp. 


lir 

be construed to require our assistance in favour of the 
Mahrattas under similar circumstances, if attacked by that 
prince, and the probable ruin of the one, with the aggran- 
dizement of the other, would be the necessary consequence 
of such aid. 

Although hostilities between the Mahrattas and Nizam is 
a dissolution of all existing treaties between them, yet they 
are both still bound to us. I am at the same time aware 
that if Tippoo were to attack the possessions of the Company, 
whilst the Mahrattas and Nizam are at war with each other, 
however they might profess an adherence to the stipulations 
of the treaty, they Avould not be in a situation to execute 
them. But with the restoration of peace the power of ful- 
filling their stipulations may again ensue, and the contract- 
ing parties may again stand in the situation which the 
treaty supposed. Upon this principle, if Tippoo were to 
attack either the Nizam or Mahrattas, whilst at war with 
each other, I should deem it necessary, in the first instance, 
to call upon the third party to perform his stipulations. It 
might induce the two parties at war to make peace with 
each other; and, at all events, would cither shew that 
Tippoo’s attack was by concert with one of the allies, or 
prove a direct breach of the treaty against the ally refusing 
his aid in defence of the party attacked, and thus leave us at 
liberty to act as we might think proper. But I do not hold 
this government bound to assist either party against Tippoo, 
unless peace were previously established between the Mah- 
rattas and the Nizam. 

Having discussed the obligations of the treaty, I shall 
now consider the question of assisting the Nizam, on the 
grounds of political expediency. 

In deciding against the Nizam’s claim to our assistance 
against Tippoo, without the co-operation of the Mahrattas, 
I am not to suppose that he will yield his conviction to those 



IL] SIH JOHN SHORE’S MINUTE. * ^ 

arguments which have satisfied my judgment. On the con- 
trary, we are to conclude that he will be inclined to view 
our neutrality as a desertion of his cause, which ill repays 
his co-operation with us, and his anxiety to unite with us 
by the closest ties. W e are therefore, in the occuiTence of 
the supposed event, which I am far from deeming probable, 
to look to the indisposition of the Nizam to the British 
interests in India, and to the consequences of it. In truth, 
the whole tenor of the Nizam's conduct, from the earliest 
period, proves that he has been friendly or inimical to the 
British government, as it suited his immediate views; and 
that his later union with us has proceeded from a motive of 
deriving support from our countenance and power. 

The apprehensions and dangers suggested by this consi- 
deration are remote, and, at present, the question, the deci- 
sion of which presumes them, has not been forced upon our 
determination. But whilst they are possible, it is our duty 
seriously to weigh the probable consequences of neglecting 
the Nizam, or of supporting him against the joint invasion 
of theMahrattas and Tippoo Sultaun. 

The destruction of the Nizam’s power, and the aggran- 
dizement of that of his enemies, must be the consequence of 
leaving him without support, and Tippoo and the Mahrattas 
will of course become proportionably dangerous. 

On the other hand, when wc reflect upon the vices and 
imbecility of the Nizam’s administration, the impossibility of 
directing his politics, without usurjnng his govemment, and 
the dangers of perpetual war, the consequence of such inter- 
ference,— -when we consider the difficulty of making any 
effectual impression in the Mahratta state by our forces, the 
comparative facility with which they might injure us, — the 
magnitude of the resources and exertions, as well as the 
number of troops both native and European, which would 
be required to oppose the united efforts of the Mahrattas 



g SIB JOHN SHOBB’S minute. [Arp. 

and Tippoo— and the inevitable ruin of a long protracted 
war — the inducement to support the Nizam, at the hazard 
of such impending consequences, ought to be much stronger 
than the apprehension of future evils from the subversion of 
his power. 

This event, before it could be effectually opposed by the 
assistance of this government, would be the probable con- 
sequence of an invasion of his dominions by Tippoo and the 
Mahrattas, and it is at least dubious if any efforts on our 
part could procure his re-establishment. 

But, above all, it is indispensably necessary to advert to 
the situation of affairs in Europe, which precludes the ex- 
pectation of receiving any considerable reinforcement of 
troops during the continuance of the war, and impresses the 
necessity of preserving, by every effort, peace with all the 
powers in India. 

Under the supposition of tlie annihilation of the power of 
the Nizam, by the combination of Tippoo and the Mah- 
rattas, the probability is as great that they would attack 
each other, as that they would unite to invade the territo- 
ries of the Company ; and, if it were otherwise, the pro- 
gressive accumulation of our resources would enable us 
better to resist their confederacy against us. Our political 
consequence might lose something of its importance in the 
estimate of the native powers, by leaving the Nizam to his 
fate; but although I am fully sensible of the value of 
opinion in tliis country, it cannot be placed in competition 
with the greater evils attending a war with Tippoo and the 
Mahrattas, which I consider the unavoidable consequence 
of supporting singly the Nizam against Tippdo, if that 
prince should attack him, whilst engaged in hostilities with 
the Paishwah. 

Independently of the reasons for affording protection to 
the Nizam, which are suggested by a consideration of thq 



II.] 


SIR JOHN* SHORK’S MINUTE. 



consequences following the denial of our assistance, other 
motives occur. The conduct of the British government in 
resenting the attack upon their ally, the Ilajali of Travan- 
core, during the war, and in the negotiations for the termi- 
nation of it, not only gained us the confidence of our allies, 
but established the British reputation throughout India for 
good faith, firmness, and moderation ; but in weighing these 
motives, we must attend to self-preservation, including the 
permanency of the British jx)Ssessions in India. 

I have now considered a question which I most sincerely 
hope we shall not be compelled to decide, and I shall take 
this opportunity of recording some reflections which I have 
frequently revolved. 

Whether the dissensions between the Paishw^ah and the 
Nizam are terminated in war or by negotiation, there is too 
much reason to fear that the Nizam will fall under the 
subjection of the Mahrattas, and on this event his power, 
under their controul and direction, w^ill become an accumu- 
lation of their strength, already exorbitant. 

This apprehension cannot have escaped the Nizam, and 
it seems natural to conclude that, having no cxj>ectation of 
our support, he would endeavour to avoid subjection to the 
Mahrattas, by forming an union with Tippoo. Whether 
he has really ever had this in contemplation I am not 
informed, but I have already assigned reasons which I still 
think satisfactory for deeming it impracticable. 

Surmises have been propagated, on the other liand, of a 
meditated confederacy between Tippoo and the Mahrattas ; 
this also I deem improbable, unless the latter should be 
forced into it by our avowed support of the Nizam against 
them. They are, I presume, satisfied on this head; 
Tippoo would, I doubt not, be ready to accept overtures 
from the Paishwah for such a confederacy, but I think they 
will not be made, and I entertain little apprehension that 



SIR JOHN shore’s MINUTE. tAm 

he will at present venture to attack the dominions of the 
Nizam^ without the concert of the Mahrattas. If he should, 
the most probable consequences of such an attempt would, 
in my opinion, be these, that the Mahrattas, in the first 
instance, would make their own terms with the Nizam, and 
then unite with us to defend his territories against Tippoo. 

The sovereignty of India may be now considered to be 
exercised by the Mahrattas, Tippoo, the Nizam, and the 
English. 

The power of the house of Sindia has become subject to 
the control of the Paishwah by means which were foreseen, 
without any immediate prospect that his successor will 
recover that independence which Sindia himself possessed ; 
and the paramount government of Poonah enjoys and exer- 
cises a most extensive influence and authority over all the 
constituent and dependant members of the Mahratta empire. 
If, then, there be assignable limitation, it is with respect to 
the Berar llajah, who, from situation and circumstances, 
has less interest and concern in the general politics of the 
M^ratta state, and carries on his administration indepen- 
dently of it. But his dependence is constitutional, and the 
present Rajah, as I am informed, received the confirmation 
of his succession, with the insignia of his investiture, from 
the Paishwah, and although it should be granted that he is 
not disposed to enter into any measures inimical to the Bri- 
tish interests in India, we may with certainty conclude that 
he would take no active part with this government against 
the Paishwah. 

The power of the Mahratta empire, without the co-ope- 
ration of the Berar Rajah, is sufficiently formidable, and the 
forces under General De Boigne may perhaps be deemed 
equal to that of two English brigades. 

The nature of the Mahratta government is well known 
to be avaricious, grasping, and ambitious, — that it never 



SIR JOHN SHORE'S MINHTE. 


IIJ 


Iftt 


neglects any opportunity of extending its power, or aggran- 
dizing its wealth, with little solicitude as to the rectitude of 
the means employed in obtaining these objects. 

But although the accumulated jx)wer of the Mahrattas 
is great, it is not collected for enterprise without delay and 
difSculty, as we may learn even from recent events. This 
difficulty and delay may be imputed to the nature of the 
Mahratta constitution, to the separate interests and pursuits 
of the dependant members of it, which seldom admit of a 
distant or speedy diversion of their forces, and to the great 
extent of the empire from which the troops are to l>e drawn. 
In this diversity of interests a principle of discord exists, 
which, although it may disappear whenever the safety of the 
Mahratta state is endangered by attack, opens an impedi- 
ment to the union of the efforts of the empire for the pur- 
pose of hostile invasion. 

Friendship or alliance now subsists between the British 
government and the Mahratta state, and its feudatories, the 
Rajah of Berar, Sindia, and Holkar; but though some 
advantage may arise from a friendly connexion with the 
feudatories, and greater perhaps from the apprehension 
which they may entertain of danger to their respective in- 
terests in the event of hostilities between the British arid 
the Mahratta state, it would be unsafe to rely too much 
upon this consideration; on the contrary, if that event 
should occur, whilst we employed the best means which 
policy could suggest to effect a disunion of interests among 
the different chieftains, our exertions must be made on an 
expectation of the united opposition of allr 

With respect to all the powers in India, our actual secu- 
rity is our strength, but with regard to the Mahrattas the 
alarm of danger is lessened, by a consideration that a wider 
and safer career is open to their ambition, in the absolute 
subjection of numerous petty states in Hindustan, some of 



lx SIR JOHKT shore’s MINUTE. [Ajpi». 

which arc independent, whilst others are partially undfer 
their control, than by attacking our possessions, or those of 
our allies. Our security may be deemed to be further con- 
firmed by our avowed principles, in comparison with those 
of Tippoo Sultaun, whose ambition is as notcffious as ofir 
disavowal of extending the British territories by arms. 
after all, we are never to forget that a dominion exercised^ 
by foreigners must ever be viewed in a hostile light, — that 
an union merely political is, in the highest degree, precarious 
— ^and that if the whole power of the Mahratta state weffe 
directed against us, we should find ourselve s very vulnera- 
ble in many parts, and in some perhaps at present misuse 
pected. 

If Tippoo were at the same time to join the confederacy, 
or an European enemy superadd .the weight of his power, the 
successful termination of the contest would require the 
utmost exertions both here and in Europe. | 

The British territories on the Ganges are open to inva- 
sion by Cuttack, by the west, and including the Vizier'^s 
dominions on the north. With respect to tlic Vizier, I shall 
only here say, that, whilst his administration continues on 
its present footing, we should derive no effective assistance 
from his troops, and that we must rather expect to find 
enemies than friends in his dominions, which are inhabited 
and surrounded by numerous hardy and needy adventurers, 
without attachment or allegiance, and ready to take arms 
in any cause that would provide them spoil. 

It is unnecessary to expatiate on the character of Tippoo, 
the leading principle of wliich is ambition, and that has no 
friendships. We know by experience his abilities — he has 
confidants and advisers, but no minister, and inspects, 
superintends, and regulates himself all the details of his 
government — he maintains dignity without ostentation — the 
peasantry of his dominions are protected, and their labours 



n.} SIR JOHN shore's minute. 1X1 

encouraged and rewarded. Before the late war, reports 
Were continually propagated of his cruelty and t3rranny, 
with respect' to his subjects in Malabar, — they were not ill 
that they were greatly exaggerated may be 
estab&hed by one consideration, that, during the contest 
^^ith him, |io person of character, rank, or influence, in his 
her^kai^dominions, deserted his cause. With less bigotry 
thafE^ht to him, we know his zeal for his re- 

ligum to be strong, and his ambition acquires new motives of 
action from this principle. 

Since the termination of hostilities, he has faithfully dis^ 
charged all the obligations of the treaty of peace, and his 
attention appears to have been more immediately directed 
to the improvement of his flnaneCs by economy, to the 
internal administration of his countiy, and to repair and 
strengthen Seringapatam. No part of his conduct has in- 
dicated hostility towards us or our allies, but wc have infor- 
mation that he entertains a particular resentment against the 
Nizam, and a contempt for him. 

His obvious policy is to wait until events produce a dis- 
union amongst the confederates, and to foment it if he can. 

The weakness of the Nizam’s administration would pro- 
bably have an irresistible temptation to his resentment and 
ambition, if he were not protected by the triple alliance, but 
the subversion of the British power, as opposing the firmest 
barrier to his ambition, must natui'ally be the object which 
he has most in view. 

Of the three powers, therefore, which I have mentioned, 
I shall observe, that the aid of the Nizam can never enable 
us to hold the balance of India, — that the ambition of Tip- 
poo has more and stronger motives for action than that of 
the Mahrattas — and that the consolidation of our alliance 
with the latter is an object of the first importance to us. 



Ixii Sia JOHUr shore’s IWIITHTE. [Avr. 

With their aid, which we might expect, we could always 
oppose Tippoo and any European power — ^fiom Tippoo we 
could never hope for assistance, or scf^c^ neutrality. 

In the event of hostilities with the Mahrattas, I think it 
probable that an useful alliance might be formed with the 
northern Rajahs, and perhaps even with some of the Seik 
chiefs. But I should not advise entering into offensive and 
defensive alliances with them, as a precautionary security, 
on this principle, that the danger attending them would 
probably exceed the advantage to be derived from them in 
times of necessity. It is safer, in my opinion, to trust to 
the formation of alliances when that necessity exists ; and 
this may certainly be promoted by the moderation and sin- 
cerity of our language and conduct at all times. The cor- 
respondence between this government and the principal 
northern Rajahs is regular — ►with [any of the Seik chiefs 
occasional only. 

These general reflections may assist the judgment in 
forming a determination on the primary question, which has 
insensibly led to the introduction of them ; and if the Board 
concur in the result of my opinion upon it, they will fur- 
ther , I imagine, agree with me, that there is no immediate 
probability tliat we shall be involved in war in India. But 
with this conclusion, under the uncertain consequences of 
hostilities between the Mahrattas and the Nizam — the 
precarious situation of affairs in Europe, and the desperate 
exertions of the French, we must admit the necessity of 
being prepared to meet any extremity. This, in fact, is an 
obligation of primary necessity at all times, although our 
preparations must be extended or abridged according to the 
impulse of circumstances. With res^^ect to the coast of 
Coromandel, I should ve submitted some propositions 
founded on tliis consideration to the Board, if I had not 



II,] SIR JOHN shore's MINUTE. Ixiit 

been informed by the Bight Honourable President of Fort 
St. George, in a letter of the 18 th December, that, for 
similar reasons, had called for a list of stores and provi- 
sions oii the frontier coast — that he-f^ould take care that they 
were amply supplied, and that the camp equipage should 
be in a state of preparation to admit of our taking the field 
upon a short notice. To these measures I expressed my 
concurrence, and the Board may recollect my verbal com- 
munication of them. 

In Bengal, as far as immediate precaution may be ex- 
pedient, little remains to be done. The Commander-in - 
chief long ago noticed an evil of a very serious tendency, 
the dispersion of the regular troops in detachments upon 
civil services. Exclusively of the impossibility of enforcing 
a proper discipline over troops so divided, it would be diffi- 
cult to collect any considerable body at a short warning, in 
any part of the provinces, Calcutta, perhaps, excepted ; and 
whatever reliance we may place on the submission, timi- 
dity, or attachment of the subjects of this government, 
noUiing can be more obvious than the necessity of being 
prepared at all times to quell insurrection. 

At the verbal or recorded suggestion of the Commander- 
in-chief, some information was called for, as preparatory 
to an arrangement for correcting the evil noticed by him, 
and lately further information has been required. It will 
probably be ready by the period of his return to the Presi- 
dency, which may be very shortly expected, and we may 
then avail ourselves of his advice and assistance in forming 
the necessary arrangements. 

But after the maturest reflection on our situation in this 
country, on the policy, the character, the forces, and am- 
bition of the difierent powers in India, and the dislike 
which they must entertain to the manners, religion, and 



Ixiv sin JOHN shore’s minute. [App. 

dominion of Europeans, it is impossible to suppose that, 
'with all our caution to avoid war, we shall be always at 
peace. Any inability on our parts to, oppose the enmity of 
our neighbours, would immediately make us sensible of its 
effects; and for these reasons our consideration ^ould ex> 
tend beyond a provision for immediate exigency. We 
know from experience that the natives of India improve in 
military tactics, and that every new war with them requires 
augmented exertions and forces on our parts ; and we are 
further to reflect that, exclusively of the protection of these 
provinces, we must have it in our power to send assistance 
to the other possessions of the Company when attacked. 

Our military establishment was formed nine years ago, 
and in the inter\'al we have been engaged in-a war which 
required the united efforts of the three Presidencies, not to 
mention the co-operation of the Nizam and the Mahrattas, 
under the direction of superior military and political abili- 
ties, to bring it to a fortunate conclusion. 

In addition to these observations, we may assume it as 
an undeniable principle, that to im|x)se peace on our neigh- 
bours, by the strength of a military establishment, ready at 
all times for active or extensive exertion, is not only the 
wisest but the most economical system. 

Under the influence of these reflections, I propose there- 
fore tliat the Commander-in-chief should be requested to 
take into his consideration the military establishment of this 
government, and to communicate his sentiments whether he 
deems it sufficient for the security and protection of the 
country which it is to defend ; adverting at the same time 
to the reflections which I have stated ; and to suggest any 
augmentation, either of the whole or the parts of it, which 
he may deem expedient, or any alterations cither in the dis- 
position of the troops or otherwise, which he may tliink proper. 



II.] ■ sm JOHN shore’s minute. Ixv 

I have ever been disposed to adhere as literally as possible 
to the strictest interpretation of the restrictive clause in the 
act of parliament against entering into hostilities; but in 
the course of my present reflections one question has origi- 
nated from 'it, which I think proper here to state. To pur- 
sue schemes of conquest and extension of dominion in 
India arc declared (in the preamble to the clause) to be 
measures repugnant to the wish, the honour, and policy of 
the nation ; and with this preamble the prohibition against 
declaring war or commencing hostilities is connected, except 
where hostilities have actually been commenced, or prepara- 
tions actually made for the commencement of hostilities 
against the British nation in India, or against some of the 
states or princes dependent thereon, or whose territories the 
United Company shall be at such time engaged by any sub- 
sisting treaty to defend or guangitee. 

This clause, in literal construction, if any interpretation 
of the guarantee treaty with the Nizam and the Mahrattas 
agmnst Tippoo be admitted, is decisive agmnst any inter- 
ference on our parts in his favour against Tippoo, without 
the co-operation of the Mahrattas ; and the circumstances 
of the case are such, under all the considerations stated, as 
to confirm the construction in point of expediency. 

But it is possible tliat, without any view to the extension 
of our dominions by conquest, a case might arise in which 
the security of the British possessions in India might be 
best consulted at the risk and even certainty of hostilities, 
by taking part with one state .against another; and the 
question, upon this supposition, is, whether we should be 
justified in such a determination, where we are not bound 
by treaty to defend or guarantee the state which it might 
be expedient to assist ? — ^and it should, I think, be referred 
to the Honourable the Court of Directors. 



Isvi SIR JOHN shore’s MINVTE. [Apf. H. 

To their particular notice, also, the question which is the 
subject of this minute should be pointed out; repeating 
my opinion of the improbability of its being forced upon 
pur decision, that we may obtain their instructions for our 
guidance at any future period;^ in case it should h^i^ter 
occur, 


(Signed) 


J. Shoes. 



No. III. 


Loro Wellesley’s Minute. 

Foo'UWilliam, \2th August^ 1798. 

In communicating to the Board an authentic copy of the 
proclamation issued by the Governor-general of the Isle of 
France during the residence of the ambassadors of Tippoo 
Sultaun in that island, I informed the Board that I would 
prepare the detail of such measures as appeared to me most 
advisable, for the purpose of frustrating the united efforts of 
Tippoo Sultaun and of France. Accordingly, I have laid 
before the Board, for that necessary purpose, a number of 
propositions connected in their principle as well as in their 
object; and I have endeavoured to caiTy the jiroposed 
system of measures into execution with every practicable 
degree of diligence and despatch. When it is remembered 
that I did not take charge of this government until the 18tli 
of May ; that the proclamation did not make its first ap- 
pearance at this presidency until the 8th of June, and was 
not authenticated here until the 18th of J une, I trust it will 
appear that I have proceeded with as much expedition as 
was compatible with the due consideration of the various 
and important questions which demanded my decision. 
Although the leading objects of the several propositions 
which have been adopted by this goveniment may be col- 
lected from my late correspondence with the governments of 
Fort St. George and Bombay, and with the residents at 

e 2 



Ixviii tORD WKLL£StlEY*S iltxtJTft. [A??. 

Poonah and Hyderabad, it may be useful to review with 
more particularity the circumstances which have suggested 
this system of measures to my judgment. My present 
intention, therefore, is to explain and illustrate the principles 
upon which that system is founded, the means by which I 
hope to carry it into effect, and tlie ends which I expect to 
accomplish by its ultimate success and permanent establish- 
ment. In tliis retrospect of my conduct I shall disclose 
without hesitation or reserve the whole train of reflections 
which has passed in my mind during the agitation of this 
intricate and extensive subject ; and I shall avow without 
disguise every successive variation of my opinion, and every 
instance in which I have reluctantly submitted my unaltered 
judgment to the pressure of practical difficulties : nor shall 
I deny that I have ultimately pursued a course far within 
the limits of that to which the course of my own duty and 
character, the clearest principles of justice and of policy, 
the unquestionable rights and interests of the Company, and 
the honour of the British name in India, would have directed 
me, if the obstacles to ray progress had not appeared abso- 
lutely insurmountable. 

The various considerations which have successively en- 
gaged iny attention may be stated in the following order 

First, the nature and character of the recent proceedings 
of Tippoo Sultaun. 

Secondly, the rights and interests of the Company, and 
the principles of my duty arising out of these proceedings. 

Thirdly, the circumstances which might suspend or limit 
the actual exercise of these rights, the immediate and com- 
plete establishment of those interests, and the satisfactory 
discharge of that duty. 

Fourthly, the intermediate precautions which might be 
adopted during the suspension of more effectual measures ; 



III. LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Ixix 

and the securities which might now be provided against the 
return of our actual danger. 

The first consideration required an attentive examination 
of the proclamation issued at the Isle of France, together 
\nth all the collateral circumstances accompanying that 
extraordinary publication. The proclamation made its first 
appearance at Calcutta in a newspaper of the 8th of June. 

Upon the first view of the subject, I was much inclined 
to doubt the authenticity of the proclamation. It seemed 
incredible, that if the French really entertained a design of 
furnishing aid to Tippoo, they would publicly declare that 
design, when no other apparent end could be answered by 
such a declaration excepting that of exposing the project, in 
its infancy, to the observation of our governments both at 
home and in India, and of preparing both for a timely and 
effectual resistance. It did not appear more probable that 
Tippoo, whatever might be his secret design, should have 
risked so public and unguarded an avowal of his hostility. 
However, even under these circumstances, I thought it ad- 
visable to transmit a copy of the proclamation to the 
governor of Fort St. George, in a private letter of the 9th 
of June, apprizing him that if the proclamation should 
prove authentic, it must lead to a serious remonstrance from, 
this government to Tippoo, the result of which remon- 
strance must be uncertain. My letter, therefore, directed 
him to turn his attention to the means of collecting a force 
upon the coast, if necessity should unfortunately require 
such a measure. 

The first regular authentication of the proclamation which 
I received was contained in the letter from Lord Macartney 
of the 28th of March, and in that from Sir Hugh Christian 
of. the same date, received on the 18th of June. It could 
now no longer be doubted that the proclamation actually 
had been issued by the Governor-general of the Isle of 



Ixx LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [Arp. 

France. Still, however, it might have remained a question, 
whether this step might not have been taken without the 
concurrence of Tippoo Sultaun, and for tlie promotion of 
some separate object of the French government, unconnected 
with his interests and unauthorized by his consent. From 
the accounts which I had received of the state of the Isle of 
France, I was led to believe that the object of M. Malartique 
might have been to clear the island of the adherents to the 
present government of France, rather than to afford any 
effectual assistance to Tippoo. 

It appears, however, from a more accurate investigation 
of evidence, that the ship which first conveyed to the Isle 
of France those accounts of the last revolution in France, 
and of the violent measures projected against the Isles of 
France and llourbon, which occasioned the late disturbances 
at Port Nord Quest and the expulsion of the French national 
troops from thence, did not reach the Isle of France until 
Tippoo’s ambassadors liad departed from thence on their 
return to Mangalore. The assistance afforded to Tippoo 
cannot therefore have been connected with the recent com- 
motions in the Isle of France. 

However, I do not apprcliend, unless some new revolu- 
tion shall happen in the Isle of France, that Tippoo Sultaun 
will be able to derive any considerable aid from that quar- 
ter. But whatever may have been the motives of Monsieur 
Malartique in this transaction, the object of Tippoo Sultaun 
was always plain and clear, although, fortunately for our 
interests, his success has not yet been answerable to the 
extent of his design. Of the object of that design I soon 
possessed ample proof, arising from the best evidence which 
the nature of the case could admit. In the first place, it 
appeared, from the general tenor of the letters from the Cape, 
as well as by every public account which had been given of 
the transaction, to be an undisputed fact, that Tippoo 



Iir.] I.OBD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Ixxi 

despatched two ambassadors to the Isle of France, and that 
the proclamation in question was published subsequent to 
their arrival and during their residence in that island. 
These facts would perhaps have been sufficient, without fur- 
ther inquiry, to warrant a strong presumption that this pfo- 
clamation, purporting to declare the objects of the embassy, 
must have been framed with the consent and knowledge of 
the ambassadors of Tippoo, then on the spot, and must 
have corresponded with their instructions from their sove- 
reign, whose orders they would scarcely have ventured to 
exceed, in a matter of such serious consequence as the con- 
clusion of an alliance offensive and defensive with the 
French. In order, however, to obtain the most accurate 
information with respect to the circumstances attending the 
reception of the embassy, the publication of tbe proclama- 
tion, and the conduct of the ambassadors, I examined upon 
oath some respectable persons who were present in the Isle 
of France during tlie residence of the ambassadors at Port 
Nord Ouest. From the concurrent testimony of these 
persons, since corroborated by intelligence from various 
quarters, I obtained a corrected account of the whole trans- 
action. 

Tippoo despatched two ambassadors, who embarked at 
Mangalore for the Isle of France, and arrived there at the 
close of the month of January, 1798. They hoisted Tip- 
poo's colours upon entering the harlwur of Port Nord Quest ; 
were feceived publicly and formally by the French govern- 
ment, with every circumstance of distinction and respect ; 
and were entertained, during their continuance in the island, 
at the public expense. Previously to their arrival, no idea 
or rumour existed in the island of any aid to be furnished 
to Tippoo by the French, or of any prospect of a war be- 
tween him and the Company. 

The second day after the arrival of the ambassadors, an 



Ixxii LORD WELLKSLE^’S MINUTE. [App. 

advertisement was published, of the same purport as the 
proclamation, and immediately afterwards the proclamation 
was fixed up in the most public places and circulated 
through the town. One of the ambassadors was said to be 
conversant with the French language. A person accompa- 
nied the embassy from Mangalore who was habited in the 
Turkish dress, who spoke French and English with uncom- 
mon correctness and fluency, and who appeared to possess 
considerable knowledge and talents, and to be well ac- 
quainted with most of the country languages of India. 
This person had been known at Bussorah by the name of 
Abdulah ; at Surat, by that of Berwick ; and in the Isle 
of France passed under that of Talamas : under which last 
name he had also passed in Bengal, where he resided for 
some years. The ambassadors (far from protesting against 
the matter or style of the proclamation) held, without re- 
serve, in the most open and public manner, the same lan- 
guage which it contains with respect to the ofrensive war to 
be commenced against the British possessions in India. 
They even suffered the proclamation to be publicly distri- 
buted. At their own house, Talamas* conversation, though 
with more caution and mystery, corresponded in substance 
with theirs. In consequence of these circumstances an uni- 
versal belief prevailed in the island that Tippoo would make 
an immediate attack on the British possessions in India ; 
which opinion had gained so much force, that the persons 
who gave this evidence, and all those who arrived at that 
period in India from tlie Isle of France^ expected to find us 
at war with Tippoo; but they all concurred in declaring 
that the temerity of Tippoo’s design had excited general 
ridicule in that island. The ambassadors were present in 
the island when the French government proceeded to act 
under the proclamation in question, and they aided and 
assisted the execution of it by making promises in the name 



III.] LORD WELLESLKY'S MIWtJTE. IwiH 

of Tippoo, for the purpose of enticing recruits to enlist. 
They proposed to levy men to any practicable extent, stating 
their powers to be unlimited with respect to the numbers of 
the force to be raised. 

The ambassadors were aided and assisted in a levy of one 
hundred officers and fifty privates, for the service of Tippoo, 
under the terms and for the purposes stated in the procla- 
mation. Few of the officers are of any experience or skill, 
and the privates are the refuse of the lowest class of the 
democratic rabble of the island : some of them are volun- 
teers ; others were taken from the prisons and compelled to 
embark : several of them are Caffrees and people of half- 
caste. With such of these troops as were volunteers the 
ambassadors entered into several stipulations and engage- 
ments in the name of Tippoo. 

On the 7th of March, 1798, the ambassadors embarked 
on board the French frigate. La Preneuse, together with 
the force thus raised ; and they publicly declared an inten- 
tion of proceeding to the Isle of Bourbon, with the hope of 
obtaining more recruits for the same service. 

The proclamation, therefore, originated in the arrival of 
the ambassadors at the Isle of France, was distributed by 
their agents, was avowed in every part by their own public 
declaration, and, finally, was executed according to its 
tenor by their personal assistance and co-operation. 

The proclamation itself furnishes the most powerful in- 
ternal evidence of the concurrence of the ambassadors in all 
its essential parts. The principal facts stated therein are 
That Tippoo Sultaun, through two ambassadors, de- 
spatched for the purpose to the Isle of France, had addressed 
letters to the colonial assembly of the Isle of France, to all 
the generals employed there, and to the executive directory 
of France; and had made the following propositions 

1st. That he desired to form an alliance offensive and 



Ixxiv LOHD -WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [Apf. 

defensive with France; and offered to maintain, at his ex- 
pense, during the continuance of the war in India, whatever 
troops should be furnished by the French, and to supply 
(with the exception of certain stores) every necessary for 
carrying on the war. 

2nd. That he had given assurances that all his prepa- 
rations were already completed, and that the generals and 
officers would find everything necessary for carrying on a 
species of war to which Europeans have not been accus- 
tomed in their contests with the native powers in India. 

3rd. That he only waited for the succour of France to 
declare war against the English ; and that it was his ardent 
desire to expel the English from India.” 

Upon the ground of these facts the proclamation recom- 
mends a general levy of men for the service of Tippoo ; 
and it concludes by assuring all the citizens who shall en- 
list, that Tippoo will give tlicm an advantageous rate of 
pay and allowances, which will be fixed by his ambassadors, 
who will also engage, in the name of their sovereign, that 
the Frenchmen who shall have enhsted in his army, shall 
never be detained there after they shall have expressed a 
desire of returning to their native country.” 

Tlie avowed purport of this proclamation is to acquaint 
the inhabitants of the island with the propositions made by 
Tippoo Sultann through his ambassadors then on the spot. 

It enumerates those propositions with a particularity of 
detail which could never have been hazarded in the presence 
of the ambassadors, if the facts stated had not been correctly 
true, or if the propositions enumerated had varied in sub- 
stance from those communicated by the ambassadors un- 
der the orders of their sovereign. But the last paragraph 
of the proclamation connected with the conduct of the am- 
bassadors, as already described, establishes in the clearest 
manner their participation in llie whole transaction. That 



III.] LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. Ixxr 

paragraph contains a direct reference to the powers of the 
ambassadors, and engages on their behalf that they shall 
enter into certain stipulations, in the name of their sove- 
reign, with respect to tlie pay and final discharge of such 
French subjects as shall enlist in his army under the condi- 
tions of the proclamation. The accounts which I have 
received from the Isle of France concur in stating that the 
ambassadors openly acted under this part of the proclama- 
tion, and in the name of Tippoo entered into engagements 
and stipulations with the recruits, according to the assur- 
ances specified in the proclamation. 

Monsieur de Bruce, now master attendant at Mangalore, 
stated to one of the witnesses Avhoni I examined the whole 
substance of the engagements which had passed personally 
between him and the ambassadors, all of which engage- 
ments referred immediately to Tippoo’s intention of com- 
mencing war upon the Company, with the aid of the French 
force then about to be levied. And it is certain that, with- 
out some such engagement, not a volunteer could have been 
raised in the Isle of France for the service of Tippex). 

It appears, from the evidence which I have collected, 
that the ambassadors had not brought to the Isle of France 
a supply of treasure sufficient for advancing bounty money 
to the recruits. It was stated that an apprehension of the 
English cruisers had prevented the embarkation of treasure 
for this purpose ; and no doubt was entertained, that if the 
ambassadors had been better provided with money, they 
might have raised a much greater number of men, who 
refused to engage on the mere security of promises in the 
name of Tippoo. 

The ambassadors, together witli the force^ thus col- 
lected, during the time of their mission in the Isle of 
France, landed from the frigate La Preneuse at Mangalore, 



Ixxvi lORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE, [App. 

on the 26th of April. Accounts vary with respect to the 
exact number of the force landed, the most probable are, 
that it did not exceed two hundred jiersotis. Tippoo (far 
from manifesting the least symptom of disapprobation of 
the conduct of his ambassadors in any part of the trans- 
action) formally received them, and the officers, and lead- 
ing persons so landed, with public marks of honour and 
distinction. One of his ambassadors resided for some time 
with the French recruits in a fortress at Mangalore, and the 
Sultaun has admitted the whole levy of officers and men 
into his service, lleferring, therefore, to the conduct of 
the ambassadors in the Isle of France, to their arrival at 
Mangalore, with the force levied in consequence of their 
mission, and, finally, to the reception of the ambassadors 
and of the French rc*criiits by Tippoo Sultaun, the follow- 
ing conclusions appeared to me to be incontrovertibly esta- 
blished : — 

First. — That the ambassadors despatched by Tippoo 
Sultaun to the government of the Isle of France, proposed 
to that government an alliance offensive and defensive 
against the British possessions in India, which alliance was 
accepted by that government, and its acceptance formally 
notified by a public proclamation. 

Secondly. — ''riiat the ambassadors were charged with 
letters from Tippoo Sultaun to the Executive Directory of 
France, which letters were stated to contain the same pro- 
position, and that the ambassadors delivered those letters to 
the Governor of the Isle of France for the purpose of trans- 
mission to France. 

Thirdly. — That the ambassadors, in the name of Tippoo 
Sultaun, gave public assurances, that he had actually com- 
pleted the necessary preparations for commencing immediate 
hostilities, and that he only waited the arrival of succour 



ni.3 toiiD welleslky’s minute, Ixxvit 

from the French to declare war against tlie Company, for 
the express purpose of expelling the British nation from 
India, 

Fourthly. — -That the ambassadors demand unlimited mi- 
litary succour from the French, and levied a military force 
in the Isle of France, with the declared object of com- 
mencing immediate war against the British nation in India. 

Fifthly. — That this force has been actually landed in 
Tippoo's country, and publicly admitted into his service with 
signal marks of approbation; and that the ambassadors 
have been received with similar distinction. 

Sixthly, — That Tippoo Sultaun (by receiving with 
public marks of approbation his ambassadors, who had con- 
cluded in his name an oft'ensive and defensive alliance with 
the French, and by admitting into his service the military 
force raised for effecting the objects of that alliance) has 
personally ratified the engagements contained in the procla- 
mations of the Governor-general of the Isle of France, 
and has proceeded to act under these engagements, con- 
formably to the tenor of that proclamation. 

Seventhly. — That although the succour actually received 
by Tippoo Sultaun under his offensive alliance with the 
French is inconsiderable, yet the tenor of the proclamation, 
the proposition made to the Fi'ench government for unli- 
mited military aid, and the declaration of the ambassadors, 
have proved, that it was the intention of Tippoo Sultaun 
to receive into his service the largest force which he could 
obtain, for the purpose of commencing a war of aggression 
against the Company in India. 

Having thus entered into offensive and defensive engage- 
ments with the enemy, having proceeded to collect, in con- 
junction with the enemy, a force openly destined to act 
against the jx)ssessions of the Company, having avowed 
through his public ambassadors, that he has completed his 



iKxviii 


tORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. 


[Afp. 


preparations of wav for the express purpose of attempting 
the entire subversion of the British empire in India, and 
liaving declared, that he only waits to prosecute offensive 
operations, Tippoo Sultaim has violated the treaties of 
peace and friendship subsisting between him and the Com. 
pany, and has committed an act of direct hostility against 
the British government in India. 

Before I proceeded to apply the principle of the law of 
nations to the conduct of Tij^poo Sultaun, it appeared 
proper to inquire what had been the conduct of the Com-* 
pany towards him for some years past, and whether he had 
received any provocation to justify or to palliate his late 
proceedings. 

Since the conclusion of the treaty of Seringapatam the 
British governments in India have uniformly conducted 
themselves towards Tippoo Sultaun, not only with the most 
exact attention to the principle of moderation, justice, and 
good faith, but have endeavoured, by every practicable 
means, to conciliate his confidence, and to mitigate his vin* 
dictive spirit. Some differences have occasionally arisen 
with respect to the boundaries of his territory bordering 
upon the confines of our jx)ssessions on the Coast of Ma- 
labar ; but the records of all the British governments in 
India will shew that they have always manifested the ut- 
most anxiety to promote the amicable adjustment of every 
doubtful or disputed point; and that Tippoo Sultaun has 
received the most unequivocal proofs of the constant disposi- 
tion of the Company to acknowledge and confirm all his just 
rights, and to remove every cause of jealousy which might 
tend to interrupt the continuance of peace. 

The servants of the Company in India have not, how- 
ever, been ignorant of the implacable sentiments of revenge 
which he has presented without abatement since the hour of 
his last defeat. It has always been well understood, that 



ni.] I*ORD WELI^ESLEY’S MINUTE. Ixxix 

Tippoo Sultaun’s resentment was not to be appeased by any 
conciliatory advances on our part, nor by any other means 
than the recovery of liis lost power, the disgrace of the 
British arms, and the ruin of the British interests in India* 
With such views it was expected that he would eagerly ein^ 
brace the first favourable occasion of striking a blow against 
our possessions ; and his intrigues at the Court of Hyderabad 
and Boonah, together with his embassy to Zemaun Shah, al- 
though managed with such a degree of caution as to avoid 
the appearance of direct acts of aggression, were sufficient in- 
dications of an hostile mind. But none of these circumstances 
have, in any degree, affected the conduct of the Coinpany‘*s 
servants towards Wm ; the correspondence between him and 
the late Governor-general, and the letters from Bombay on 
the subject of the district of Wynaad, furnish ample proofs 
of a sincere desire to bring that question to a fair issue, 
with the consent and knowledge of both parties^^ ac- 
cording to the tenor of the 7th Article of the Treaty of 
Seringapatam ; and I can appeal to tlie letter which I de- 
spatched to him soon after my arrival in Bengal, proposing 
an amicable adjustment of the same question, as well as of 
his recent claims upon certain parts of the district of 
Coorg, for a testimony of the pacific spirit which has 
marked my first communication with him ; although, per- 
haps, a less mild representation might have been justified by 
his unwarrantable precipitation in stationing a military 
force on the frontier of Coorg, before he had made any 
trial of the prescribed and regular channels of negotiation* 
Tippoo Sultuan cannot, therefore, allege even the pretext 
of grievance to palliate the character of his recent acts ; 
he has, indeed, alleged none, but has constantly professed 
the most sincere desire to maintain the relations of amity 
and peace with the Company. In his letters to Sir John 
Shore, written a short time before the return of his am- 



Ixxx 


toRD Wellesley’s minute. 


[App. 


bassadors from the Isle of France, and received at Fort 
William on the 26th of April, 1798, (the day on which 
the French force landed at Mangalore,) Tippoo declares, 
“ That his friendly heart is disposed to pay every regard 
to truth and justice, and to strengthen the foundations of 
harmony and concord established between the two states.’' 
And he signifies his desire, that Sir John Shore would 
impress Lord Mornington with a sense of the friendship 
and unanimity so firmly subsisting between the two states.” 

This is not the language of hostility, nor even of discon- 
tent. From what disposition in the friendly heart of Tip- 
poo these amicable professions have proceeded, how they 
are connected with a regard to truth and justice, or calcu- 
lated to strengthen the foundations of harmony and con- 
cord, and to impress me with a sense of the Sultaun’s 
friendship can now admit of no question, since it is now 
supposed that these letters were written at the very moment 
when Tippoo was in anxious expectations of the hourly 
arrival of that military succour which he had solicited from 
the enemy, for the express purpose of commencing a war 
of aggression against the Company's possessions. 

The motive, therefore, of Tippoo Sultaun was no other 
than that avowed in his correspondence with the enemy, 
and published under the eyes of his own ambassadors , — an 
ardent desire to ejcpel the British nation from India?'' 

It appears highly probable that he was instigated by the 
promises and exhortations of the goveniment of France 
(whose emissaries have reached his councils) to hasten the 
execution of a project in which every consideration of inte- 
rest, and every sentiment of passion would induce the 
French to embark with a degree of zeal, ardour, and ran- 
cour not inferior to his own. The importance of these 
possessions to all the most valuable interests of Great Bri- 
tain has pointed the particular attention of the government 



Ill] LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. IXXXI 

of France to the destruction , of our empire in India. Tlie 
prosperity of our settlements in India has long been the 
primary and undisguised object of the jealousy of France, 
avowed by all her ministers in every negotiation, and. by all 
her rulers in every stage of her innumerable revolutions. 
Tippoo, therefore, might reasonably hope that, if the cessation 
of hostilities on the continent of Europe should at any time 
enable the French Directory to turn their views to the 
disturbance of the peace of India, such an adventure would 
be among the earliest of their operations. 

The conclusion of a peace upon the continent of Europe, 
the weak state of the internal governments of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, the existing disputes apparently precluding 
all co-operation and concert between these two powers, 
added to the growing strength of a French faction, every 
part of India may have appeared, both to Tippoo and to 
the French, to offer a favourable opportunity for the pro- 
secution of their joint design. 

The premature disclosure of this design may, perhaps, be 
imputed rather to the policy of M. Malartique, than to the 
imprudence of Tippoo. Whether the scope of that policy 
was to involve us in a war with Tippoo, or to expose his 
treachery to our view, is yet a matter of doubt ; but what- 
ever circumstances occasioned the premature disclosure of 
the design ; whether the design was wisely or rashly con- 
ceived, whether it has partially succeeded, or entirely failed, 
are questions, tlie solution of which in no degree affects 
the offensive nature of an aggression so unprovoked, and 
of a violation of faith so flagrant and unqualified. The 
history of the world scarcely furnishes an instance in which 
any two powers have united in a confederacy, or alliance, 
previously with the same motives. The party proposing 
an offensive alliance against the Company cannot be ab- 
solved from the consequences of such an act, by any appa- 

VOL. 11. f 



Ixxxii LOHD Wellesley’s mznute. [app. 

rent or real indifFereiice iu the party accepting such a pro- 
posal. The conduct of Tippoo Sultaun, therefore, cannot 
he correctly estimated by reference to the supposed motives 
of Monsieur Malartiquc. 

From the application of the acknowledged principles of 
the law of nations to the facts of this case, I formed my 
judgment of the rights of the Company, and of my own 
duties, with reference to the aggi'ession of Tippoo, The 
course of reasoning which 1 pursued may be stated in the 
following manner : — 

The rights of states, applicable 'to every case of contest 
with foreign powers, are created and limited by the necessity 
of preserving the public safety. This necessity is the found- 
ation of the reciprocal claim of all nations to explanation 
of suspicious or ambiguous conduct, to reparation for inju- 
ries done, and to security against injuries intended. 

In any of these cases, when just satisfaction has been 
denied, or, from the evident nature of circumstances, cannot 
otherwise be obtained, it Ls the undoubted right of the in- 
jured party to resort to arms for the vindication of the 
public safety ; and in such a conjuncture, the right of the 
state becomes the duty of the government, unless some ma- 
terial consideration of tlie public interests should forbid the 
attempt. 

If the conduct of Tippoo Sultaiiii had been of a nature 
which could be termed ambiguous or suspicious ; if he had 
merely increased his force beyond his ordinary establish- 
ment, or had stationed it in some position on our confines, 
or on those of our allies, which might justify jealousy or 
alarm ; if he had renewed his secret intrigues at the courts 
of Hyderabad, Poonah, and Cabul; or even if he had en- 
tered into any negotiation with France, of which the object 
was at all obscure, it might be our duty to resort, in the 
first instance, to its construction of proceedings, which, being 



III.] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Ixxxiu 

of a doubtful character, might admit of a satisfactory expla* 
nation. But where there is no doubt there can be no mat- 
ter for explanation. The act of Tippoo’s ambassadors, 
ratified by himself, and accompanied by the landing of 
a French force in his country, is a public, unqualified, 
and unambiguous declaration of war, aggravated by an 
avowal that the object of the war is neither explanation, 
reparation, nor security, but the total destruction of the 
British government in India. To affect to misunderstand 
an insult and injury of such a complexion, would argue a 
consciousness either of weakness or of fear. No state in 
India can misconstrue the conduct of Tippoo ; the corre- 
spondence of our residents at Hyderabad and Poonah suffi- 
ciently manifested the construction which it bears at both 
those courts, and in so clear and plain a cause our demand 
of explanation would be justly attributed either to a defect 
of spirit or of power. The result of such a demand would 
therefore be the disgrace of our character, and the diminu- 
tion of our influence and consideration in the eyes of our 
allies, and of every power in India. If the moment should 
appear ^^favourable to the execution of Tippoo’s declared 
design, he would answer such a demand by an immediate 
attack ; if, on the other hand, his preparations should not 
be sufficiently advanced, ho would deny the existence of his 
engagements with France — would persist in the denial until 
he had reaped the full benefit of them ; and, finally, after 
having completed the improvement of his own army, and 
received the necessary assistance of an additional French 
force, he would turn the combined strength of both against 
our possessions, with an alacrity and vigour inspired by 
our inaction, and with advantages redoubled by our delay. 
In the present case, the idea, therefore, of demanding 
planatio7i must be rejected as being disgraceful in its prin- 
ciple, and frivolous in its object. The demand of repara- 

f 2 



Ixxxir 


I.OUD WKI.I.ESLEy’S MIXUTr. 


[API*. 


tion, in the strict sense of the term, cannot properly be 
applied to causes of intended injury, excepting in. those 
instances where the nature of the reparation demanded may 
be essentially connected with security against the injurious 
intention. 

Where a state has unjustly seized the property, or invaded 
the territory, or violated the rights of another, reparation 
may be made by restoring what has been unjustly taken, or 
by a subsequent acknowledgment of the right which has 
been infringed. But the cause of our complaint against 
Tipjxx) Sultaun is not that he has seized a j)ortion of our 
property which he might restore, or invaded a part of our 
territory which he might again cede, or violated a right 
wliich he might hereafter acknowledge : we complain that, 
professing tlie most amicable disposition, — bound by sub- 
sisting treaties of peace and friendsliip, and unprovoked by 
any offence on our part, lie has manifested a design to effect 
our total destruction, — he has prepared tlie means and 
instruments of a war of extermination against us, — he has 
solicited and received the aid of our inveterate enemy, for 
the declared 'purjiosc of annihilating our empire, and he 
only waits the arrival of a more effectual succour to strike 
a blow against our existence. 

That he has not yet received the effectual succour which 
he has solicited, may be ascribed either to the weakness of 
the government of Mauritius, or their want of zeal in his 
cause, or to the rashness and imbecility of his own councils ; 
but neither the measure of his hostility, nor of our right to 
restrain it, nor of our danger from it, are to be estimated by 
the amount of the force wliicli he has actually obtained, for 
we know that his demands of military assistance were un- 
limited ; we know that they were addressed, not merely to 
the government of Maui’itius, but to that of France ; and 
we cannot ascertain how soon they may be satisfied to the 



IIL] JLORD WELLESLEY’S MIJfUTE. JXXXV 

full extent of his acknowledged expectations. This, there- 
fore, is not merely the case of air injury to be repaired, but 
of the public safety to be secured against the present and 
future designs of an irreconcileable, desperate, and treacher- 
ous enemy. Against an enemy of this description no effec- 
tual security can be obtained, otherwise than by such a re- 
duction of his power as shall not only defeat his actual pre- 
paration, but establish a permanent restraint upon his future 
means of offence. 

To this species of security our right is unquestionable, 
upon the grounds already stated. But it cannot be sup- 
posed that Tippoo Siiltaun will voluntarily concede to us a 
security of this nature against the effects of his own resent- 
ment, treachery, and ambition, and against the success of 
the most favourite projects of his mind. 

Since, therefore, the principles of justice, and of the law 
of nations, entitle us to such a security, and since we cannot 
possibly obtain it by the voluntary concession of Tippoo 
Sultaun, it is the right of the Comjiany to compel him to 
yield it, and it is equally my duty to use that compulsion 
without delay, provided the interest of the Company com- 
mitted to my charge be not more endangered by the attempt, 
than by the unrestrained progress of his preparations for 
war. In jiroportion to the continual progress of Tippoo’s 
preparations, he will acquire more decisively the advantage 
of holding in his hands the issues of peace and war, together 
with the power of selecting the time and mode of his long- 
meditated attack upon our possessions. He has not yet 
obtained any formidable accession of strength from his 
alliance with France, nor is it probable that any such acces- 
sion will reach his country within a short period, certainly 
not before the close of the monsoon on the coast of Malabar. 
While he shall retain the ready means of intercourse by sea 
with the French government, it cannot be doubted that 



lx\xvi 


LORD Wellesley’s minute. 


[App. 


they will use every endeavour to assist him with military 
aid, and to instigate him to war. The arrival of one of two 
French regiments would probably induce Tippoo to com- 
mence offensive operations, and the assistance of so small a 
body of Frenchmen might become alarming in the actual 
state of the native ai'niies of India. The systematic intro- 
duction of French officers into the service of all the native 
powers, is described by Mr. Wickham as the fixed policy 
of France, adopted witli a view of establishing the most 
certain means of sapping the foundations of our power. 
This system has been pursued in the armies of the Nizam, 
of Sindia, and of many other inferior powers, witli unremit- 
ting assiduity, and extensive success. If Tippoo should be 
allowed to derive from France such succour as would induce 
him to act offensively against us, his earliest movements 
would probably be seconded by the general insurrection of 
the various bodies of French adventurers who are incorpo- 
rated in the service of the several native powers, and who 
maintain a concert and correspondence in every quarter of 
India. Under such circumstances it would be prudent to 
take advantage of the actual crisis, in which the hostile 
designs of Tippoo has been clearly manifested, but the 
means of accomplishing it have happily disappointed the 
ardour of his hojies. In this moment of his comparative 
weakness — of his disappointment, and of his probable 
dejection, no policy could be more wise than to strike such 
an instantaneous blow against his possessions, as should 
effectually frustrate his preparations for war, and should 
render him unable to avail himself of the aid of France 
whenever it may arrive. 

The inconsiderable amount of the force which he has 
already received from France, while it cannot limit our 
right to reduce his power, affords a strong argument of 
policy in favour of an immediate attack. 



III.] LOBD WELLESLEY’flr MIJVtJTE. IxXXYli 

It is, therefore, evident that the rights and interests of 
the Company concur to demand from this government every 
practicable effort to anticipate the execution of his projects 
of vengeance, by attacking him on all sides without delay. 
In this train of reasoning I was confirmed, by adverting to 
the general tenor of the orders of the Court of Directors, 
and of the proceedings of this government with reference to 
the contingency of a French force landing at any time in 
the territories of Tippoo Sultaun. 

The orders of the Court of Directors imifornily enjoin, 
that the landing of a French force in Tippoo’s country 
should be ‘‘ the signal for our attack upon him.’** The 
construction of those orders by the late Governor-general 
in Council, in his instructions to the President in Council 
of Fort St. George, of 12th September, 1796, ap|>ears to 
have been, that the number of the French force should be 
considerable in order to justify our attack. But I am 
persuaded that the real intention of tJic late Governor- 
general in these instructions could not liave been to declare 
that the justice or jx)licy of attacking Tippoo was here- 
after to be measured solely by the magnitude of any French 
force landed in his counlr 3 ^ It is certainly true, that, on 
the one hand, the landing of a considerable French force 
in Tippoo’s country would be an unquestionable indication 
of his hostile intentions against the British poAver ; while, 
on the other hand, the landing of a few French officers and 
privates, and even their admission into the service of Tippoo, 
might, under certain circumstances, be supposed to manifest 
nothing more than a disposition to improve the general 
discipline of his armies, without implying any formed design 
of war against the Company or their allies. This, I am 
persuaded, is the only view in wliieh the late Governor- 
general in Council could consider the magnitude of the 
French force landed in Tippoo’s country, as the foundation 



Ixxxviii 


LOno WEUEStEY’S MINUTE. 


[App. 


of a rule for limiting the discretion of the Company’s 
governments in such a contingency. On the present occa- 
sion, the hostile intentions of the Sultaun are unequivocally 
manifested by the proclamations, by the declarations, and 
conduct of his ambassadors — ^by their demand of French 
troops to an unlimited extent ; and, connected with these 
circumstances, the landing and admission into the Sultaun’s 
armies, even of a less considerable force than that which he 
has received, woukl be deemed, under the just construction 
of the opinions both of the Court of Directors and of this 
government, a signal for our attack upon him,” 

My determination, therefore, was fixed, to attack Tippoo 
with every degree of practicable despatch. The objects 
which appeared to me the most desirable, as well as the most 
easily attainable, were — First, to seize the whole maritime 
territory remaining in his possevssion below the Ghauts, on 
the coast of Malabar, in order to preclude him from all 
future communications by sea with his i’rench allies. 

.Secondly. By marching the army from the coast directly 
upon his capital, to compel him to purchase peace by a for^ 
mal cession of the territory seized on the coast of Malabar. 

Thirdly. To compel him to defray our whole expense in 
the war, and thus to secure the double advantage of indem- 
nifying us for the expense occasioned by his aggression, and 
of reducing his resources with a view to our future security. 

Fourthly. To compel him to admit permanent residents 
at his court from us and from our allies : a measure which 
would enable us at all times to check his operations and his 
treachery. 

Fifthly. That the expulsion of all the natives of France 
nowin his service, and the pexq)etual exclusion of all French-* 
men both from his army and dominions, should l>e made 
conditions of any treaty of peace with liini. 

With this plan in view, I directed that the army upoi\ 



in.] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Ixxxix 

the coasts of Coromandel and Malabar, and at Bombay, 
sliould be immediately assembled ; and I entertained a very 
sanguine hope that active operations might have been com- 
menced so early as, with the co-operation of his Majesty’s 
squadron on the coast of Malabar (which Rear-admiral 
Rainier had promised), might have secured the effectual 
reduction of Tippoo’s power before any assistance could 
have reached him from France. But I never proposed to 
undertake any attack upon him, of which the success could 
be doubtful in the judgment of those whose opinions must 
always govern my discretion in every question of military 
detail. 

The avowed design of Tippoo ; the state of his prepara- 
tions for war, (which, notwithstanding his late disappoint- 
ment, was certainly forward as far as regarded his own 
troops) ; the uncertainty of the motives which might impel 
the violence of his temper to action ; and my knowledge of 
the indiscreet zeal with which he has frequently pursued his 
favourite object of revenge against the British power, — all 
concuri'ed to urge the necessity of placing ourselves in a 
state of preparation for war, at least equal to that of his 
army. These measures appeared to me not matters of 
choice, but of indispensable duty. I could not suffer the 
security of the Carnatic to rest on so precarious a founda- 
tion as the forbearance of Tippoo Sultaun and of his French 
allies. To resume the power of meeting him in the field, 
and to replace in our hands the option which he then pos- 
sessed of accommodating the time of attack to circumstances 
and events, appeared to me to be the most prudent step 
which could be immediately adopted, whatever might here- 
after be the service to which our force might be applied. 
The orders therefore which I gave for assembling the array, 
(although pointed more particularly at the execution of the 
plan of operations which 1 have just now detailed,) wero 



xc 


LORD WELLESLEY’S SIINDTE. 


[App. 


founded upon principles independent of the practicability of 
that plan, and were connected not only with the immediate 
defence of the Carnatic, but with other comprehensive meor- 
sures of permanent precaution and security, to which my 
views have been extended at every period of this crisis. 
When I submitted my ideas of the time and objects of the 
proposed attack upon Tippoo to those military authorities 
which I shall always consider with respect, it seemed to be 
their opinion that the state of our army admitted no doubt 
of the ultimate success of the plan which I had proposed. 
If its speedy accomplishment had appeared to them as cer- 
tain as its ultimate success, I should not have hesitated a 
moment in directing the commencement of offensive opera- 
tions : but I found that, instead of deriving to the interests 
of the Company the inestimable advantages of a sudden and 
rapid reduction of Tippoo’s means of offence, the result of 
such an attempt was likely to lead to a tedious, protracted, 
and expensive, although ultimately successful war. The 
obstacles which arose were of a nature not to be sur^ 
mounted by any degree of present activity or resolution, 
although they originate in causes wliich I trust may be 
removed by future diligence and perseverance. 

The result of my earliest inquiries convinced me that 
radical defects existed in the military establishments on the 
coast of Coromandel, which were afterwards confirmed by 
the concurrent testimony of the Governor of Fort St. 
George, and of the Adjutant-general of that establishment. 
I have entered into a particular consideration of this testi- 
mony in a minute recorded in the secret department, of the 
20th of July, to which I desire to refer on this part of the 
subject. The letter of the government of Fort St. George 
of the 10th of July proceeds far beyond the limits of any 
opinion which I had ever formed or heard with respect to 
the difficulty of restraining the hostility of Tippoo. In that 



111.] LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. XCi 

letter the President in Council even deprecates the ordinary 
precautions of defence, lest they should draw down the 
resentment of the Sultaun upon our unprotected possessions. 

The expense of a protracted war, and the evil effects 
which such a calamity must produce upon the trade of the 
Company, upon their pecuniary affairs at home, upon the 
welfare of their subjects in India, and upon the general state 
of the public revenue and credit of Great Britain, now 
pressed with great weight upon my mind ; and the embar- 
rassment of our iRnances aggravated all the difficulties of 
my situation. The question was now entirely changed; 
the plan which I originally had in contemplation was nothing 
more than a military expedition, of short duration, of no 
heavy expense, and of certain success ; with the additional 
advantage that success would certainly exonerate our 
finances, and throw the whole expense of the undertaking 
upon the enemy who had provoked it. But it now appeared 
that I could not hope to effect any of my proposed objects 
without encountering the expense and inconvenience of a 
long war. 

In this state of the question the condition of our allies 
occurred as an insuperable obstacle to our progress. Al- 
though the assistance of the Paishwali and of the Nizam 
might not have been deemed indispensable, in an expedition 
of the nature which I have described, I have always been 
apprized that an offensive war of any long duration in My- 
sore would be difficult if not impracticable, without the 
effectual aid of the Paishwah and of the Nizam in facili- 
tating the supplies of provision to our army in the field. 

The state of the courts of Hyderabad and of Poonah 
afforded no hope of their early co-operation with us ; and 
although I had determined to take the most expeditious 
measures for restoring both our allies to the power of ful- 
filling their defensive engagements with us, I could not 



xcii LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [App. 

expect to derive any benefit from those measures for a con- 
siderable period of time, and it would have been imprudent 
to have undertaken offensive operations, with the prospect 
of a continued war, until the efficiency of our alliances had 
been'previously secured. Under the accumulated pressure of 
all these difficulties, I felt, with the utmost degree of dis- 
appointment and regret, that the moment was unfavourable 
to the adoption of the only measure which appeared to me 
sufficient to satisfy the rights and interests of the Company 
and the exigencies of my own duty ; and I was, therefore, 
compelled to relinquish the idea of striking an immediate 
blow against the possessions of Tippoo Sultaun ; but the 
circumstances w^hich thus suspended the actual exercise of 
the rights and the Immediate establishment of the interests 
of the Company, could not absolve me from the duty of 
providing, without delay, every degree of intermediate se- 
curity which might now be attainable, by adopting such a 
system of preparation and defence, as might enable us to 
repel any attack which Tippoo may make upon us, or to 
support any demand of satisfaction which we may even- 
tually deem it advisable, in concert with our allies, to make 
to him. 

The sense of this duty induced me to propose to the 
Board the several orders and instructions, which have been 
forwarded to the Government of Fort St. George and Bom- 
bay, and to the Residents at Poonah and Hyderabad, from 
the 8th of July, to the present time. 

The principles upon M^hich these instructions and orders 
are founded, will be best illustrated by referring to the 
nature of our actual danger, as well as to the causes which 
have contributed to produce it. 

No comprehensive or satisfactory view can be taken of 
this subject, without adverting to the whole system of our 
defensive aHianpes with the Native States, and to the various 



an.] LdilD WELLESLiiv’s MiNUtE. xdii 

circumstances which have effected, or which now influence, 
the general balance of power in India. 

The primary objects of the treaties of Poonah and Paun- 
gul, combined with the treaty of Seringapatam, were to 
diminish Tippoo Sultaun’s means of future aggression, by 
reducing his resources and territory, and to provide an effi- 
cient defence against him, by strengthening the Paishwah 
and the Nizam, by uniting their interests with ours, and by 
securing their co-operation in any future war with Mysore. 
On the other hand, a part of the policy of the treaty of 
Seringapatam seems to have been to preserve Tippoo Sul- 
taun that degree of power which might enable him to 
maintain a balance with the Mahrattas and the Nizam, in 
such a manner that the interposition of our force might 
always turn the scale. 

It is evident that the policy of this system has been en- 
tirely frustrated by the course of recent events, and that 
neither the Paishwah, the Nizam, nor Tippoo Sultaun, now 
retain the same relative position which they held at the con- 
clusion of the treaty of Seringapatam, either with respect 
to one another, or to our interests. 

Since the conclusion of the peace of Seringapatam, the 
power and resources of the Court of Hyderabad have been 
constantly declining, the disgrace which fell upon the 
Nizam’s arms, in the unfortunate contest with the Mah- 
rattas at Kurdelah, reduced the military character of the 
Court of Hyderabad to the lowest point of degradation. 
The treaty in which that defeat terminated completed the 
humiliation of the Nizam ; he was compelled to sacrifice a 
portion of territory, to engage to pay a fine of three crorcs 
of rupees, and to submit to the captivity of his minister, 
Azeem ul Omrah, who was carried a prisoner to Poonah. 
Azeem ul Omrah resided at Poonah during the late convul- 
sions in the Mahratta government, and, although a prisoner, 



XCiv I*ORD WEIXEStJSY’S MINUTE. [App. 

bore a very distinguished part in supporting his name 
through the various revolutions which followed the sudden 
death of the Paishwah, Mahda Bow. For these services 
Nanali agreed to relinquish all the benefits acquired by the 
Paishwah against the Nizam, under the treaty of Kur- 
delah. 

But the Paishwah, Badjee Row, having called in the as- 
sistance of Sindia, to check the overgrown power of 
Nanah, Sindia persuaded the Paishwali to violate the en- 
gagements concluded with Azeem ul Omrah ; and the event 
has been, that the Paishwah has insisted upon, and ob- 
tinned from, the Nizam, a cession of one-fourth part of the 
territories, and the payment of one-fourth part of the fine 
stipulated by tlie treaty of Kurdelah. 

In addition to so heavy a loss, both of power and honour, 
the internal resources of the Nizam’s government have not 
yet recovered the derangement occasioned by the rebellions 
of AJi Jah and the son of Dair Jah, by the unfortunate 
contest witli the Mahrattas, and by the detention of Azeem 
iil Omrah at Poonah, 

The effect of these causes has necessarily been to reduce 
the considerations of the Nizam-in the scale of the neigh- 
bouring states ; and in this mean and degraded condition 
he has been for some time past menaced by the army of 
Sindia, stationed in the neighbourhood of Poonaln But 
the most striking feature of change in the state of the 
Nizam’s affairs, since 1793, is the alteration which has 
taken place in his military establishment. Tlie Nizam, 
since the peace of Seringapatam, has greatly reduced his 
cavalry and other troops, and considerably augmented the 
body of infantry, commanded by French officers, and known 
by the name of Raymond’s corps. 

The corps of Raymond had been in the service of the 
Nizam before the last war with Tippoo Sultaun, and in 



HI.] LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. XCV 

1792, when it served with Lord Cornwallis's army, its 
strength was not greater than one thousand five hundred 
men at the highest estimation, and its discipline very de- 
fective. At the battle of Kurdelah, in 1 796, its strength 
amounted to about eleven thousand men ; during the rebel- 
lion of All Jah, and in a variety of service in which the corps 
has since been employed, it has acquired experience and 
skill, and it is now composed of thirteen regiments of two 
battalions each, amounting in the whole to upwards of 
fourteen thousand men. Its discipline, according to every 
recent account, is very considerably improved, insomuch, 
tliat although inferior to our native force, it is said to be su- 
perior in nearly an equal proportion to the ordinary scale of 
the infantry in the service of any of the native powers. Be- 
sides field-pieces to each regiment, a park of forty pieces of 
ordnance, chiefly brass, from twelve to thirty-six pounders, 
with a well-trained body of artillery-men, (including a 
number of Europeans,) is attached to the corps ; a founda- 
tion has also been laid for raising a body of cavalry, to act 
with the corps of infantry. The chief officers of this corps 
are all Frenchmen, of the most violent principles of jaco- 
binism; many of the privates served originally with the 
French native force at Pondicherry ; and the whole corps 
constitutes an armed French party of great power, zeal, 
and activity. Tlic efforts of this party are continually em- 
ployed to magnify the power, resources, and success of 
France ; and to depreciate the character, force, and credit 
of Great Britain, in the eyes of the court of Hyderabad ; 
and it appears by authentic intelligence, that wherever any 
detachment of this corps has been stationed for any con- 
siderable time, a most unfavourable impression has been 
produced against the character of the British nation* 

The death of Monsieur Raymond, which happened a 
few months past, appeared likely to impair the influence of 



XCVi LORD WELLESLEY’S MiNt7TE. [App. 

this corps at the court of Hyderabad; and, accordingly, 
Azeem ul Onirah took that opportunity to resume the large 
jagliire, which had been allotted for the pay and mainte- 
nance of the corps ; but another Frenchman, of the name 
of Peron, has succeeded to the command. His disposition 
is described to be violent and brutal, and his principles do 
not appear to differ essentially from those of Raymond. The 
corps as now constituted, forms the considerable and only 
efficient part of tlie Nizam’s military establishment, and 
retains such a degree of ascendency over the councils of 
the Nizam, as to be an object of serious alarm to Azeem ul 
Omrah. In addition to the command of this corps, M. 
Raymond had the entire conduct of the Nizam’s ordnance, 
with an allowance cf 50,000 rupees monthly. The ord- 
nance has since been placed under the command of Monsieur 
Peron, and he derives great influence from so important a 
charge. Tills coq^s has been recruited in the proportion of 
one-third of its total numbers, from our territories, and 
from those of the Nabob of Arcot, and partly from deserters 
abandoning our service. 

Distinct proof has been given of the assiduity and suc- 
cess of the emissaries employed by Monsieur Baptiste, (the 
second in command to Monsieur Peron, and stated to be 
i)f a very designing and artful character,) for the pur- 
posc of exciting mutiny and sedition, and of inviting de- 
sertion amongst our sepoys stationed on the frontier of the 
Nizam’s dominions. A considerably desertion of our troops 
t(X)k place in that quarter some time ago, and nearly five 
hundred men, with several native officers, who deserted on 
that occasion, are now serving in Monsieur Peron’s corps. 
The repeated applications of our Resident, for the sur- 
render of these deserters, have hitherto been frustrated by 
the prevailing influence of Monsieur Peron and of his army, 
and by the weakness of the Nizam’s government, which 



111.] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. XCvii 

Azeem ul Omrali has declared to be unable to control the 
overbearing spirit and formidable power of the French 
faction. After a protracted negotiation^ Azeem ul Omrah 
has at length, with much difficulty, and by an extraordi- 
nary effort, obtained the surrender of two subadars, who 
were the principal contrivers of the desertion. 

Monsieur Perron and his officers maintain a correspondence 
with a faction at the Nizam’s court, denominated the 
Pagah party, being composed principally of the officers of 
his Highness’s body guard of cavalry. 

The Pagah party has long been connected with Tippoo 
Sultaun, and is entirely adverse to Azeem ul Omrah, and to all 
the friends of the British interests at the court of Hyderabad. 

It must not be forgotten that in the year 1796, during 
the detention of Azeem ul Omrah at Poonah, the French 
faction, with the assistance of the Pagah party, prevailed 
upon the Nizam to dismiss the British detachment, and 
took such measures in concert with Tippoo (a large body of 
whose army marched in this crisis to the frontier of the 
Nizam’s dominions) as would have enabled them to dispose 
of the succession to theMusnud according to their pleasure, 
if the Nizam’s death had happened in that critical con- 
juncture. At this period of time the French contrived to 
obtain the grant of the large jaghire since resumed. This 
grant was considered as the first step towards the establish- 
ment of a territorial revenue ; and there can be no doubt 
that it would have led to that necessary foundation of 
European power in India, if the death of Monsieur Ray- 
mond had not enabled Azeem ul Omrah to frustrate the 
project. The French officers at Hyderabad maintain a 
direct correspondence with their countrymen in the ser\nce 
of Tippoo Sultaun and of Sindia. 

The latest accounts from the resident at Hyderabad, state 
that French officers and adventurers arrive continually at 

VoL. II. g 



xcviii 


lord wellesi-ky's mtnutk. 


[App. 


Hyderabad : the routes by which they gain access to the 
Deccan are as yet unknown. 

This Frencli party, connected as it is with the prevailing 
factions in the court of the Nizam, corresponding with 
Tippoo Sultaun, zealous in the case of France, and actuated 
by a spirit of intrigue, wliich would lead it to mix in every 
distraction of the state, if not to originate internal confusion; 
must be considered as a circumstance of positive weakness 
in the frame of the government of Hyderabad. Azeein ul 
Omrah, is fully aware of the magnitude of this evil, and 
dreads the growth of a party which he can no longer 
restrain within any bounds of moderation, and which 
already threatens to subvert his power, and to disturb the 
regular order of succession, if not to destroy the throne 
itself. With respect to our interests and to the value of our 
defensive alliance, and the treaty of Pauligul, the change in 
the Nizam’s military establishments places him in a con- 
dition worse than that of absolute inefficiency, and renders 
the court of Hyderabad a source of additional strength 
to our enemies, rather than of useful assistance to any branch 
of the triple alliance. The dangers to be apprehended from 
the existence of Perron’s corpsare not to be estimated merely 
by the actual state of its discipline, of its numbers, or of its 
influence over the councils of the Nizam : our views of this 
danger must be extended beyond the present moment. 
The French army at Hyderabad must be considered not 
only as a powerful aid to the cause of France in the present 
crisis, but as the basis of a permanent French faction in 
India ; on wliich, according to the opportunities of fortune, 
and the variation of circumstances and of events, the activity 
of the enemy may establish a strength of the most for- 
midable kind either in peace or war. 

It requires no labour of argument to prove the benefits 
which must be derived to the cause of France even in time of 



III.] XORD WEtI.ESI.E’Sf’S MINUTE. xcix 

peace from an estabKshment of an army of 14,000 men, com- 
manded by natives of France, in the heart of the dominions of 
one of our principal allies, in the vicinity of our. most active 
enemy among the native powei's, and on the borders of a 
vulnerable part of our own dominions. In the event of 
peace, no more convenient channel could be provided for the 
intrigues of France, no more useful point of union for^ the 
numerous adherents to her principles and emissaries of her 
designs ; and it cannot be doubted that the natural effect of 
the unchecked and rapid growth of such an army at the 
court of the Nizam, must be to detach that court from our 
interests, and to fix it absolutely in those of our enemy. 

But, in the event of a war with Tippoo Sultaun, or in the 
still more aggravated case of a war with him, aided by a 
French force, what assistance can we expect from the Nizam, 
the main body of whose array is commanded by the corre- 
spondents of Tippoo, natives of France, distinguished by 
their zeal in the cause of that country, and united with the 
whole body of French adventurers now established in 
India. 

Under such circumstances, the force of the Nizam would 
become useless, and even dangerous to us, precisely in pJ^Or 
portion to the exigency of the case in which we should 
I'equire its services- 

^ If the French troops of the Nizam did not afford Tippoo 
opep assistance, at least they could not be brought into the 
field against him, without the utmost danger to our cause ; 
nor could they be suffered to remain in the Deckan during 
the continuance of the contest, unless checked by the 
presence of an equally powerful force, which must, in that 
case, be diverted from the objects of the war, and must 
operate as a positive diminution of our effective strength in 
the field. It appears however nearly certain, that in the 
present weak state of the Nizam’s government, the French 

g 2 



c LOnD AVKLLKSLKY'S MINUTK. [App. 

corps in his service would openly join Tippoo Sultaiin, and 
by a sudden blow, endeavour to seize the Nizam’s terri- 
tories, and to secure them to the dominion of France, under 
an alliance offensive and defensive with Tippoo Sultaun. 
This danger is aggravated by the present position of Sin- 
dia’s army, and by the disposition and present views of 
that chief : he now entertains a large body of infantry in 
his service, under the command of a French officer, and it 
might be expected that he would readily engage with 
Tippoo Sultaun (with whom he is supposed to have 
lately opened a negotiation) and with the French, upon 
the conditions of a partition of the territories and authority 
of the Paishwah and of the Nizam. The junction which 
might thus be effected by the French officers in the several 
armies of tlie Nizam of Sindia and of Tippoo, might esta- 
blish the power of France in India upon the ruins of the 
states of Poonah and of the Deckan. Under all these^circum- 
stances, therefore, it is evident that the court of Hyderabad, 
in its present condition, (whatever may be its disposition to 
use every effort for our assistance,) is not only disqualified 
from co-operating with us as an ally against Tippoo, but 
furnishes him with powerful means of prosecuting his 
designs against us, and offers every temptation to the am- 
bition of France. 

Such beij}g the condition of the Nizam, it will be found 
that the Paishwah, who forms another branch of tlie triple 
alliance against Tippoo Sultaun, is not more able to fulfil 
his defensive engagements with us. 

The precise situation in which the Maliratta empire stood 
after the peace of Scringapatam, was the most favourable 
to our interests. The several co-estates were then so equally 
balanced, as to prevent any danger of that degree of union 
which might concentre the formidable force of the whole 
in one c<M^lidated mass, either against the British pos- 



Ill ] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Cl 

sessions, or against any other established power in India ; 
nor had any one member of the empire attained such a 
degree of strength as to be able singly to encounter our 
force. On the other hand, the Paishwah, the acknowledged 
and constitutional head of this extensive confederation, aided 
by the abilities of his minister, Nanah Furnavese, {x>ssessed a 
sufficient influence over several of the leading chiefs, to render 
him a respectable ally, and to furnish him with the means 
of bringing a considerable force into the field. 

From the period of the peace of Seringapatam, to that of 
the death of Madha How, the danger appears to have been 
that the address of Nanah might have drawn too great a 
weight into the scale of the Paishwah‘*s power, and have 
enabled the goveriinient of Poonah to wield the united force 
of the whole Mahratta empire. At the battle of Kurdelah, the 
Paishwah was assisted against the Nizam by the contingents 
of most of tlie confederate chieftains of the Mahratta empire, 
and the power of the Nizam was greatly endangered in that 
state of the Paishwali'’s authority and force. But Nanah’s 
ambition or jealousy having induced him, upon the sudden 
death of Madha How, to attempt the disturbance of the 
regular order of succession, by intruding an adopted child 
upon the throne, opened the way to those successive in- 
trigues and revolutions which, for some time past, have 
distracted the Mahratta empire. Without pursuing the 
various changes and convulsions of the government of 
Poonah during the period described, it is sufficient to observe 
that their progress naturally tended to weaken the sovereign 
power, and has terminated in the imprisonment of Nanah, 
in the ruin of his influence, and in the suspension of the 
power and autliority of the reigning Paishwah, under cir- 
cumstances which menace the abolition of his office. 

Sindia, who, in this changeable scene, has alternately 
taken part with the present Faishwali and with Nanah, has 



Cii LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [Arp. 

at length overpowered both, and has been for some time 
past so far master of the government of Poonah, that the 
Paishwah could not, in his present condition, command the 
co-operation of any considerable body of the Mahratta 
chieftains, nor afford us any assistance against Tippoo 
Sultaun. 

During the course of the events which have contributed 
to weaken and degrade the governments of Poonah and 
Hyderabad, their mutual animosities and opposition of 
interests have arisen to such a height, as to render all co- 
operation between them utterly impracticable. The effi- 
ciency of our system of defensive alliance against Tippoo 
Sultaun has, thereft^re, been impaired, not only by the 
respective weakness of each of our allies, but by the difficulty 
of uniting them in any common view, or joint operation. 

In the mean while Tippoo Sultaun has enjoyed a state of 
internal tranquillity nearly uninterrupted. While our allies 
have been distracted and exhausted by faction, rebellion, 
revolution, and war, lie has been employed in improving the 
discipline of his armies, and in repairing the vigour of liis 
resources. He has alternately endeavoured, but without 
success, to gain the Paishwah and the Nizam to his cause ; 
he, however, possesses a considerable influence at the court 
of Hyderabad, in consequence of his connexions with the 
corps of Raymond, and with other factions adverse to the 
British interests at that court. It is also known that he 
despatched an embassy to Zemaim Shah, whose design of 
invading Hindustan has been recently announced in a for- 
mal manner to this government and to the Nabob Vizier. 

That Zemaun Shah really entertains the romantic project 
of invading Hindustan cannot admit of a doubt ; this was 
the opinion of the late Grovernor-general, in which I entirely 
concur. 

It has been suppose that Zeman Shah, in his late march 



Ill] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. ciii 

towards Hindustan, was recalled from Lahore into his own 
dominions, either by some domestic dissension, ot by the 
apprehension of an attack from some of the states in the 
neighbourhood of his kingdom, and it was hoped that the 
same causes might for some time obstruct the execution of 
his declared project ; but the last despatches from the acting 
resident at the court of Sindia state a report, that Zemaun 
Shah is now relieved from all apprehensions cither of internal 
rebellion or of foreign invasion ; and his inclination, as well 
as his ability, to move his army towards the frontier of 
Hindustan, on the close of the rainy season, are now uni- 
versally creditcnl. It must be recollected that, upon a 
recent occasion, Zemaun Shah advanced to Lahore without 
meeting any formidable opposition from the Seikhs, although 
it had formerly been asserted that the country of the Seikhs 
would always prove an insuperable obstacle to his progress. 
Between the country of the Seikhs and the frontier ofOude 
no barrier exists to check the motions of the Shah, except- 
ing the power of Sindia. The dominions of Sindia at pre- 
sent are so weakened by internal dissensions, as to be in a 
state nearly defenceless ; while Sindia continues at Poonah 
with the main body of his army, and while his tributary 
chiefs, remaining in Hindustan, are most seriously disaffected 
to his cause, and arc prepared to seize any favourable op- 
portunity of annihilating his power, 

Zemaun Shah cannot be ignorant of these advantages, 
and if they should tempt him to invade Hindustan, the 
diversion of our force, which would be occasioned by such 
an event, would afford the most favourable opportunity to an 
attack from Tippoo upon the Carnatic ; it is not improbable 
that the object of the intercourse between Tippoo and Ze- 
maun Shah was (on the part of the former at least) some 
such plan of joint operation. 

The present position of Dowlut Row Sindia‘*s army 



civ LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. [Aip. 

operates as a double advantage to the cause of Tippoo. 
The absence of Sindia from his dominions in Hindustan 
invites the invasion of Zeinaun Shah, and favours its suc- 
cess ; while the presence of Sindia’s army at Poonali holds 
both our allies in check. The weight of Tippoo’s power 
in the general balance must, therefore, be considered to 
have received an augmentation, not only by the declared 
projects of Zemaun Shah, and by the possibility of their, 
at least, limited success, by the operations of Sindia, in 
addition to all the other events which have concurred to 
impair the efficiency of our defensive alliance. 

In the mean while, the government of Fort St. George, 
whose peculiar duty it is to watch the operations of Tippoo 
Sultaun, and to communicate to me every circumstance 
relating to the growth of his power, have distinctly stated 
in their letter of the 10th of J uly, that ‘‘ his resources are 
more prompt than our own, and that a great part of Ins 
army is supposed to have long been in a state of field 
equipment.” So sensible, indeed, is the government of 
Fort St. George to the terror of Tippoo Sultaun’s arms, as 
to be apprehensive of making any effort for resisting their 
progress, least Tippoo should anticipate the tardiness of our 
preparations by the rapidity of his own, and should over- 
run the Carnatic before our army could even move for its 
defence. 

It is difficult to describe the pain and regret which that 
letter from the government of Fort St. George occasioned 
in my mind, nor can I conceive that it is calculated to raise 
any other emotions in the mind of any friend to the pro- 
sperity of the British interests, or to the honour of the 
British name in India. If the facts and arguments stated 
in tliat letter be con-ect, it must now be admitted that the 
glorious success of the last war in Mysore, the wisdom 
which balanced the relative interests and forces of the 



Iir.] LOBD WELLESUEV’S MINUTE. CV 

belligerent powers on the conclusion of peace, and, finally, 
the great expense incurred by the Company in the pro- 
gressive increase of their military establishments on the 
coast, have terminated in no better result than to render 
Tippoo’s power absolutely invincible, and to place the dis- 
posal of our fate in his hands. For if the sentiments of the 
government of Fort St. George be founded upon a just 
estimate of the relative conditions of Tippoo Sultaun and 
of the Company in India, he possesses the ready means of 
attack, while we cannot venture to resort even to those of 
defence. But, with a full knowledge of his hostility, of Iiis 
offensive alliance publicly concluded with the enemy, and 
of his continual and advanced preparations for war, 
must submit to remain unarmed, because any attempt to 
counteract his design might possibly [accelerate its execution. 
This argument against the prudence of preparing for our de- 
fence would become stronger every day, in proportion to tlie 
progress of Tippoo’s hostile preparations, until at length wo 
should be reduced to the alternative, eitiier of implicit sub- 
mission, or of incurring a much greater risk than any which 
can now be apprehended from assembling our defensive force . 

Although I am not disposed to adopt the sentiments of 
the government of Fort St. George on this subject, I 
acknowledge, with great concern, those defects in tlic 
military establishments on the coast, which will not admit 
any large proportion of that army to move for several 
months. Those defects certainly constitute so many addi- 
tional advantages in the scale of Tippoo’s power, and in this 
view they become objects of the most serious consideration, 
and form a principal feature of the danger which it is the 
duty of this government to avert, by cguncils of another 
stamp than that of despondency, and by measures of 
another character than that of inaction, or of implicit sub- 
mission to the will of the enemy. 



Cvi LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. [Ary, 

I have now examined the principal causes of that danger, 
as they are to be traced in the variable course of events since 
the peace of Seringapatain. The nature of our actual situa* 
tion, arising from the combined effects of these causes, will best 
appear by a summary review of the facts which I have already 
enumerated in detail. Tippoo Sultaun having manifested the 
most hostile intentions towards us, possesses an army, of 
which a considerable portion is now in readiness to take the 
field for purposes of offence : he has increased the number 
of his French officers, and has solicited, and may possibly 
receive, further assistance from the French ; he may also 
receive assistance fi'om the several corps commanded by 
French officers in the service of the Nizam, of Sindia, and 
of many other native powers. He may be assisted by the 
invasion of Zemaun Shall, and by the co-operation of Sindia. 
On the other hand, our protecting force upon the coast of 
Coromandel cannot be put in motion within a shorter 
period than three, or, according to the Adjutant-general, 
Lieutenant-colonel Close, than six months, even for the 
purpose of defending the Carnatic. Our allies, in the 
mean while, are utterly unable to fufil their defensive 
engagements with us, the Paishwah being depressed and 
kept in check by the intrusion of Sindia and the Nizam, 
by the vicinity of that chieftain’s army, and by the over- 
bearing influence of an army commanded by French officers, 
ami established in the centre of the Dcckan. While we 
remain in this situation, without a soldier prepared to take 
the field in the Carnatic, and without, an ally to assist our 
operations in the event of an attack from Tippoo, we leave 
the fate of the Carnatic to his discretion ; we suffer the 
cause of France to acquire hourly accessions of strength in 
every quarter of India ; we abandon our allies, the Nizam 
and the Paishwah, to the mercy of Tippoo and of Sindia, 
in conjunction with the French ; and we leave to France the 



cvii 


III.} LORD WELLESLEY'S MINDTE. 

ready means of obtaining a large territorial revenue, and a 
permanent establishment in the Deckan, founded upon the 
destruction of our alliance. Under all these circumstances, 
the situation of the British empire in India is, without 
doubt, extremely critical, but, in my opinion, by no means 
alarming. For, in the very difficulties of ovir actual situa- 
tion are to be found the means, not only of averting the 
danger of the present moment, but of procuring permanent 
security against the future return of a similar crisis. A 
common apprehension of the designs of Sindia has fortu- 
nately produced an union of interests between the govern- 
ments of Poonah and Hyderabad ; and, notwithstanding 
some occasional symptoms of that spirit of duplicity and 
intrigue which marks the character of every Asiatic court, 
Azeem ul Omrah and the minister of the Paishwah seem to 
be sincerely convinced that a renewal of amicable engage- 
ments between the Paishwah and the Nizam is equally 
necessary to the safety of both. On the one hand, it ap- 
pears that tlie Paishwah cannot expect to be speedily eman- 
cipated, or effectually defended, from the undue influence 
of Sindia, without the assistance of the Nizam ; and, on 
the other hand, it is evident that the restoration of the just 
power and authority of the Paishwah would operate as a 
constant restraint on the designs of Sindia, of Tippoo, and 
of tlie French, against the independence of the court of 
Hyderabad. Under these circumstances, it appeared to 
me that neither the Paishwah nor the Nizam would be 
likely to view with jealousy any assistance whicli we might 
think it advisable to afford to either, for the purpose of 
reviving the triple alliance against Tippoo on its original 
basis, and of enabling the contracting parties to fulfil their 
respective engagements. This expectation constituted a 
fundamental principle of my instructions to the residents at 
Poonah and Hyderabad, of the 8th of July. Their subse- 



cviii LORD WELLESLKY’S minute. [Apr. 

quent correspondence lias furnished abundant proofs that 
my view of the disposition of the two courts was not erro- 
neous, since it appears that, while I was occupied in framing 
a system of measures for uniting the Nizam and the Paish- 
wah upon the firm ground of their reciprocal interests, a 
treaty was actually concluded between the two powers at 
Poonah, with a view to the same object. The ratification 
of this treaty on the part of the Nizam has been delayed 
by Azeem ul Omrah,but there appears every reason to hope 
that the interposition of our arbitration will accommodate 
every point of difference. Our arbitration has already been 
earnestly solicited by both parties, and I am persuaded that 
it will be both acceptable and efficacious, whenever it shall 
be interposed. The increasing alarm excited at the court 
of Hyderabad, by the intemperate c;onduct of M. Perron, 
and of the French army, would dispose Azeem ul Omrah to 
receive with great gratitude any offer of assistance towards 
the destruction of so powerful and dangerous a faction, and 
the existing jealousies between the French officers would 
facilitate the dismission of the corps. Azeem ul Omrah 
has recently expressed, in the strongest terms, his wish of 
being enabled, by our assistance, to accomplish this most 
desirable measure. The only obstacles which appear 
likely to occur to a general accommodation, are the impetu- 
osity and violence of Dowlut Row Sindia, whose continuance 
in his present position would operate as an effectual assist- 
ance to Tippoo, and would preclude the possibility of 
restoring either the Paishwah or the Nizam to any degree 
of efficiency or consideration. But the absence of Sindia 
from his own dominions, and the ungovernable excesses of 
liis temper, however to be lamented, as having contributed 
to those events which have impaired the power of our allies, 
have, at the same time, weakened the sources of his own 
power, have occasioned a spirit of faction and revolt in his 



in.] louD wELLEStley’s minute. cix 

own dominions, and have disgusted all the ancient friends 
and connexions of his family, together with every respect- 
able adh<3‘ent to his cause. His violence towards the female 
relations of his family has raised a considerable party against 
him among his own followers; and his signal treachery in 
the imprisonment of Nanali, from which he hoped to derive 
free use of Nanah’s treasure, has terminated in rendering 
that resource inaccessible to him, at the very moment when 
it is most indispensable to his necessities. He is therefore 
now surrounded by an army clamorous for pay, is desti- 
tute of pecuniary resources, and is unsupported by any one 
respectable friend. His principal minister, a person of con- 
siderable experience, and liearing the highest character of 
any of his followers, has expressed to the resident at 
I’oonah, in the most distinct terms, an entire disapprobation 
of Sindia’s late conduct, and an earnest wish for an ac- 
commodation between Sindia and the Paishwah, through 
our mediation, and for the peaceable return of Sindia to 
his dominions in Hindustan. Sindia himself has manifested 
no disinclination to receive the advice of the resident at 
Poonah, whose discretion has hitherto limited the extent of 
his interference; but from what has already passed, it is 
reasonable to hope that Sindia, in the present distressed 
state of his affairs, will give a favourable attention to any 
just and moderate proposition, urged with full authority of 
this government. In the mean while the threatened inva- 
sion of Zemaun Shah offers a new motive to recall Sindia 
to the protection of his own dominions ; and he must be 
sensible, not only tliat his security, in the event of such an 
invasion, must depend in a great measure on the co-opera- 
tion of the British troops, but that in the present disturbed 
condition of his possessions and of bis array, we hold his 
fate in our hands. 



CX LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE, [Arp. 

Ill this posture of affairs, any opposition to our interference 
for the re-establishment of our alliances, would be equally 
ineffectual and unjustifiable on the part of Sindia; and 
various considerations of policy and interest will concur to 
render him cautious of taking any step which might afford 
us just cause of offence. The last despatches from Poonah 
afford a hope that Nanah Fumavcse and the Paishwah may 
find it their interest to forget their mutual animosity. Any 
accomunxlation between them would tend gi’eatly to facili- 
tate an arrangement, embracing the respective interests of 
the Paishwah, of Sindia, and of the Nizam. 

Such are the circumstances of the present moment which 
appear to me to favour the execution of that comprehensive 
system of precaution and defence demanded by the exigency 
of our actual situation. The mode in which I haveendeavoured 
to carry this system into effect has been suggested by the fol- 
lowingconsiderations. Thecourt of Hyderabad has repeatedly 
and earnestly solicited an increase of the British detachment 
in the service of the Nizam, under an assurance that the 
French corps of Perron would be dismissed from his High- 
ness’s service immediately upon the arrival of the additional 
British force. This projio.sition has hitherto been embar- 
rassed by conditions of a nature incompatible with our 
engagements at Pixmah ; and the late dissensions between 
the Nizam and the Piushwah have precluded all hope of 
any amicable adjustment of this difficulty. It was there- 
fore thought advisable, by the late Governor-general in 
Council, to resort to the expedient of encoiuragingthc intro- 
duction of British adventurers into the service of the Nizam, 
for the purpose of counterbalancing in some measure the 
influence of the French army at Hyderabad. With this 
view, the corps commanded by Mr. Finglass has received 
the protection and encouragement of the acting resident, 



HI ] LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Cxi 

and has been augmented to the number of 8000 men. The 
policy of this expedient always appeared to me very doubt* 
ful, and I have entertained serious apprehensions that the 
measure might ultimately furnish additional recruits to the 
cause of France, instead of counteracting her influence. In 
the most favourable view, however, this expedient could only 
be considered as a palliative of the evil : it could not be 
expected that such a force as that of Mr. Finglass would 
enable the Nizam to disband the corps of Perron ; it must 
tlierefore have been evident at all times that nothing less 
than a considerable and permanent increase of our regular 
subsidiary force at Hyderabad could empower the Nizam 
to extricate himself from the hands of the French faction 
so solidly established in his dominions. 

I have already stated my reasons for thinking that the 
increase of the British detachment at Hyderabad would no 
longer afford any cause of jealousy to tlie Paishwah ; and 
under all these circumstances I have availed myself of the 
late conduct of Tippoo and of Sindia, to propose that 
measure, subject, in the first instance, to the previous con- 
sent of the court of Poonah. I have accompanied this 
proposition with a condition, that the arbitration of this 
government shall be accepted for the final adjustment of 
the points of difference still remaining between the two 
courts. These points are now so few, and the requisitions 
of the court of Hyderabad of a nature so just and moderate, 
that I entertain a confident expectation of effecting an ac- 
commodation upon principles equally advantageous to both 
parties. 

I have already observed that one of the most dangerous 
ciix;umstances attending the establishment of the French 
party at Hyderabad, is the influence which they are likely 
to possess in directing the succession to the throne, when- 
ever it shall b^ome vacant by the death of the Nizam 



LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. 


[Arp. 


cxi'i 

Secunder Jah, tlie eldest son of the Nizam, would be the 
natural successor, unless the regular order of succession 
should be disturbed by domestic faction, foreign intrigue, or 
force ; for, altliougli priority of birth may not be considered 
to give the same absolute and exclusive right to succession 
in India as it does in Europe, it is invariably deemed the 
strongest title, and is rarely superseded, excepting in cases 
of disaffection or of positive disqualification. So far from 
these or any other objections being applicable to the title 
of Secunder Jah, it is well known that the Nizam has given 
the strongest indications of his favourable intentions towards 
Secunder Jah, by intrusting that prince with the custody of 
the seal, and by empowering him to perform certain acts which 
arc reserved exclusively for the sovereign. This admission 
to the personal exercise of a portion of the sovereign autho* 
rity during the life of the Nizam is deemed equivalent to a 
virtual nomination to the throne ; and there is no reason to 
suppose that the Nizam will nominate any of his younger 
sons to the exclusion of the heir-apparent, unless his Highness 
should be prevailed upon, in the weakness of his last moments, 
to commit an act of such flagrant impolicy and injustice. 

Secunder Jah is connected by marriage with the family 
of Azeem ul Omrah, and his establishment upon the throne 
would give great additional security to the British intei’ests 
at the court of Hyderabad. On the other hand none of the 
younger sons can hope to reach the throne by any other 
assistance than that of the French party and of Tippoo 
Sultaun. Sufficient proof has been stated of the interest 
which Tippoo and the French take in the exclusion of 
Secunder Jali, and of the attempts which they have already 
made to interfere in governing the succession. These 
attempts may be renewed, and their success would neces- 
sarily involve the destruction of Azeem ul Omrah and of 
Secunder Jah, together with the consequent annihilation of 



III.] LORD WEIXESLRY’S MINUTE. CXiii 

the British influence at Hyderabad. All hope of re-esta- 
blishing the balance of power in India, as it existed at the 
peace of Seringapatam, would then be precluded ; the coun- 
tries of the Nizam would, in such an event, become in effect 
a dependency of France, and the partisans of that nation in 
conjunction with Tippoo, and, with the body of their coun- 
trymen lately received into his pay, would have the means 
of endangering the British power in India. 

Under all these circumstances the same principles which 
swgg^sted the necessity of increasing the British detachment 
at Hyderabad, demanded that it should be employed to 
support the succession of Seconder Jah, as being essentially 
exinnected with the permanency of our influence at Hydera- 
bad, and with tlie eflfectual exclusion of the interference of 
Tippoo and of France. 

I have therefore autliorized the resident at Hyderabad to 
employ the British troops in this service, if their assistance 
should hereafter become necessary ; but I am persuaded 
that the mere presence of our force, accompanied by the 
knowledge of my firm determination to support the regular 
order of succession, will preclude every movement cither of 
foreign or domestic oppositions. 

The arrangements proposed for the service of the Nizam 
will be very incomplete, unless connected with the restora- 
tion of the Paishwah to a due degree of authority and 
power, and preceded by the cordial approbation of the 
court of Poonah. But the great danger to be averted is 
the growth of the influence of Tippoo and of France in 
India ; it is therefore evident, that the failure of the pro- 
posed plan at Poonah would increase the necessity of pro- 
viding for the safety of the Nizam, and of destroying the 
French party at his court. If, therefore, the Paishwah 
should either refuse his assent to the propositions to be 

VOL. II. h 



Cxiv lOHD WEIXESLKY’S MINUTE. [Apr. 

made to him, or if, from the success of Sindia’s operations, 
or from any other cau.se, those measures which relate to the 
court of Poonah should be frustrated. I have still deemed 
it advisable to direct the acting resident at Hyderabad to 
carry into effect the increase of the British detachment, and 
such other parts of my instructions as may appear practi- 
cable, reserving always to the Paishwah the power of acced- 
ing hereafter to any treaty which we may conclude with the 
Nizam ; and continuing with that view the restrictive terms 
of our present subsidiary engagements with the latter, as 
far as they relate to the interests of the Paishwah, The 
dismission of the French corps at Hyderabad would not 
fully answer the views with which I have proposed that 
measure, if the officers or European privates were permitted 
to enter into the service of any other native power. Al- 
though I should think them less dangerous in any service 
than in that of the Nizam, I have endeavoured, not only 
to secure the expulsion of the French from Hyderabad, but 
also their immediate return to their native country. I have, 
therefore, required that the French officers and privates 
should be delivered up to the government of Fort St. 
George, in order that they may be immediately conveyed 
to Europe. The Nizam is under no engagements, either 
with the government of France or with the French officers, 
to continue them in his service, and he possesses the full 
right to di.smiss them whenever he shall think fit. The ex- 
orbitant power which M. Perron and his army have acquired 
at Hyderabad, as well as their immoderate abuse of it, will 
justify the Nizam in taking whatever measures may appear 
most effectual, for the purpose of securing himself against 
a faction so formidable, not only to the independence of his 
government, but to the safety of his own person, and the 
existence of his throne. With the same view, I have made 



IH.] I.ORD WELLESLEY'S MIWUTE. CXV 

it a preliminary condition of the whole plan, that the Nizam, 
his heirs, and successors, shall for ever exclude the French 
from their armies and dominions. 

The corps of Mr. Fingiass, after the establishment of a 
considerable British force at Hyderabad, w iU no longer be 
liable to the full force of the objections which I have stated 
against the |K)licy of encouraging such a body of adventurers 
in the service of the Nizam ; this question, however, does 
Hot re([uire our immediate decision : we shall possess ample 
means of deciding it according to our discretion, if our 
propositions to the court of Hyderabad should be attended 
with success : the consent of the Nizam to such parts of the 
proposed arrangements as relate to the establishment of the 
government of Poonah is required as a necessary preli- 
minary to the increase of the British detachment at Hy- 
derabad. 

My intention being to take no ste]> at either court with- 
out the full knowledge and concurrence of the other, a 
principle, the strict observance of which, to every degree of 
practicable extent, appears to me to be the only effectual 
mode of removing all causes of jealousy, of uniting the 
confidence of both parties, and of bringing them to a dis- 
passionate consideration of their mutual interests. 

The parts of the proposed arrangement which relate to 
the re-establishment of the government of Poonah, were 
suggested by Colonel’s Palmer’s letter of the 1st of June, 
in which he states, That the authority of the Paishwah 
would be restored by the appearance of a strong British 
force at Poonah, and that Sindia, under the circumstance 
of Tippoo‘‘s recent aggression, could on no just pretence 
object to such a movement of our troops, nor, in his present 
condition, be able to oppose it.’’ 

The whole tenour of the subsequent advices from Poonah 
tended to confirm this opinion ; for while it appeared evi- 

h 



cxvi 


XORB WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. 


[App. 


dently impossible that the authority of the Paishwah could 
be restored otherwise than by foreign assistance, there 
seemed to be every rational ground of expectation, that the 
mere appearance of our troops would induce all the leading 
chieftains of the Mahratta empire to unite in support of 
the Paishwah, and that such an event would not be unac- 
ceptable, even to the followers of Sindia. “ 

The Paishwah himself has earnestly solicited the aid of a 
body of our troops, and has expressed the fullest sense of 
the necessity, as well as his reliance on the efficacy of sucli 
a measure, for the restoration of his authority, and for the 
protection of his person. 

On the other hand, the danger of the Paishwah increased 
from day to day : the assistance which he had solicited from 
the Nizam was not likely to reach him before his fate had 
been decided ; and the expectation even of any assistance 
from the court of Hyderabad, notwithstanding the conclu- 
sion of the late treaty, appeared to rest on a very precarious 
foundation. In this situation, the direct interposition of 
this government, by moving a detachment of troops to 
Foonah, was the only measure on which we could rely with 
any degree of certainty, for averting the immediate destruc- 
tion of our interest at that court. 

Phe resident at Poonah was, therefore, authorized to 
require a detachment of troops from Bombay ; but pre- 
viously to so decided a step, it was deemed proper that the 
resident should require of the Paishwah his consent to the 
increase of the British detachment at Hyderabad, his ac- 
ceptance of our arbitration between the courts of Poonali 
and Hyderabad, and his exclusion of the French from his 
armies and dominions. 

With a view of securing the lasting benefit of this ar- 
rangement at the court of Poonah, it is intended that a pro- 
posal sliall be made to the Faisliwah, to enter into perma- 



III.] I.ORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. CXVii 

went subsidiary' engagements with us of a similar nature 
and extent with those which shall be concluded at the court 
of Hyderabad. 

With the same vieAv, the resident at Poonah has been 
directed to take such measures as may appear to him most 
likely to interest Nanah Furnavese in the success of this 
general arrangement of the affairs of the two courts. 

The last despatches from Poonah afford every reason to 
hope that the abilities and experience of the minister Nanah 
maybe successfully employed by Colonel Palmer in effecting 
the return of Sindia to his own dominions, and tlie conse- 
quent restoration of the Paishwah. 

The impediments which Sindia opposes to the success of 
this arrangement, will probably disappear, whenever the 
union of the two courts, cemented by our interposition, shall 
become a matter of public notoriety. 

The treasure of Nanah is the only resource in which Sin- 
dia can find the means of appeasing the clamours of his dis- 
contented army ; and Colonel Palmer Avill avail himself of 
any favourable opportunity of connecting the interests of 
Naiiali with those of Sindia and of the Paishwah, in such a 
manner as shall enable Sindia to retire with safety into his 
own dominions, without affording him the power of effect- 
ing any other military movements. Being desirous of conci- 
liating the real interests of all parties, I have instructed 
Colonel Palmer to make the most amicable propositions to 
Sindia, and to urge the policy of his return to his own do- 
minions, by pointing out their actual danger during his ab- 
sence, by offering our co-operation against the menaced in- 
vasion of Zemaun Shah, and our mediation with the courts 
of Poonah and Hyderabad ; and I have made the consent 
of those courts to our mediation of their respective differ- 
ences with Sindia an indispensable preliminary to the ar- 
rangements which regard the restoration of their own inde- 



cxviii LORD WELLESLEY'S MliVUTE. (App. 

pendence. Sindia cannot reject our propositions on any 
ground that would not innnediately place him in the rank 
of a declared enemy to ns, and of an avowed auxiliary to 
Tippoo Sultaun. 

In this case, therefore, we must have recourse to compul- 
sion ; and I have authorized the resident at Poonah to use 
it in the last, and I trust improbable, extremity. 

Such are the measures which I have proposed, with a view 
to restore the efficiency of oUr alliances, and to check the 
growth of the French party in the Deckan. 

I have already stated the reasons which convinced me 
(against the opinion of the government of Fort St. George) 
that the assembling of the army on the coasts of Coromandel 
and Malabar, and at Bombay, was absolutely indispensable 
to the defence of the Carnatic, under the circumstance of 
Tippoo’s declared designs and acknowledged preparations 
for war. 

The fatal policy of neglecting to keep pace with the for- 
wardness of the enemy'^s equipments has been felt more than 
once on the coast of Coromandel ; and I repeat it, I cannot, 
consistently with any sentiment of duty, consent to rest the 
security of the Carnatic, in the present crisis, on any other 
foundation than a state of active and early preparation for 
war. But if I had looked only to the success of those 
measures which are now depending at the courts of Poonah 
and Hyderabad (measures essentially involving our present 
and future means of checking the implacable enmity of 
Tippoo), I should, on that ground alone, have proposed to 
assemble the army upon the coast of Coromandel, at Bom- 
bay, and upon the coast of Malabar. 

It is impossible to suppose that Tippoo would not employ 
every effort to prevent the revival of our defensive alliances ; 
and it would therefore be nearly certain that the advanced 
state of preparations for war, and his renewed connexion 



HI.] LORD WELLESLEY’S MIN13TE. Cxix 

with the French, would tempt him to interfere in the affairs 
of the Nizam and of the Paishwah, and to assist the views 
of Sindia at Poonah, and of Perron’s army at Hyderabad* 
It therefore became necessary to check the motions of Tip- 
poo Sultaun by assembling our ai’my upon his frontier 
during the continuance of our negotiation with our allies. 

I have adverted, in the course of this minute, to those 
defects in the constitution of the army ujx>n the coast which 
have impeded its early movement in the present critical 
conjuncture. The measures which I have proposed for the 
correction of those defects are absolutely necessary, in my 
judgment, to our future security in the Carnatic. The 
detail of those measures will appear in my minute, in the 
secret department, of the 20th of July, and in the letter to 
the government of Fort St. George, of the same date. 

I am fully aware of the expense to be incurred in esta- 
blishing any improved system which shall enable the army 
on the coast to keep pace with the promptitude of Tippoo’s 
resources, and to move >vith an alacrity and expedition 
equal to his. 

If, however, the proposed increase of our subsidiary 
engagements at Hyderabad should take place, it is my 
intention that the whole detachment, consisting of three 
regiments, should be provided from the establishment of 
Fort St. George. The force stationed at Hyderabad will 
afford an effectual security to the northern Sircars against 
Tippoo Sultaun, or against any other foreign enemy. The 
duty of the Sircars with them require no larger a proportion 
of troops than may be sufficient to maintain the internal 
police and good order of the country. It will not therefore 
be requisite, in the event of peace, to rfuse more than one 
new regiment at Fort St. George, to replace those serving 
with the Nizam. This arrangement will operate as a saving 
of the expense of two regiments upon the establishment of 



cxx LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. [Arr. 

Fort St. George, arid will furnish a fund at least adequate 
to the permanent charges of the new establishment of artil- 
lery, draught cattle, and grain, which our recent experience 
has proved to be indispensable for the purpose of enabling 
the army on the coast to take the field expeditiously on any 
sudden emergency. 

In this view, the restoration of our defensive alliances 
against Tippoo, essentially connected with the improvement 
of our system of defence in tlie Carnatic, and the assistance 
afforded to the Nizam, will become (without any increase of 
expense) the source of additional vigour and activity to our 
army upon tlie coast. 

Deeply as I lament the obstacles which have prevented 
us from striking an instantaneous blow against the posses- 
sions of Tippoo, I expect to derive considerable advantage 
from the success of that system of precaution and defence 
which I have been compelled to substitute in place of an 
immediate war. 

The enlargement of our subsidiary engagements at the 
court of Hyderabad, combined with the establishment of 
similar engagements at the court of Poonah, will become a 
great augmentation of our strength, attended by no increase 
of charge, and possibly by a diminution of our military 
expenses. 

The two detachments will form a considerable army, sta- 
tioned on the most vulnerable part of Tippoo Sultaun’s 
frontier, in a position which will at all times facilitate our 
approach to his capital, by securing the protection of our 
convoys of provisions. A force so stationed will operate as 
a perpetual restraint upon any movement which Tippoo 
might be disposed to make towards the frontier, cither of 
the Carnatic, of the Northern Sircars, or of Malabar. 

It will also impede any co-operations between the armies 
of Sindia and of Tippoo, and will induce the former to 



III.] 


LOUD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. 


cxxi 


remain within his own dominions ; where his motions will 
again be checked by the vicinity of our army on the frontier 
of Oude. 

In such circumstances, it must always be the interest of 
Sindia to cultivate our friendship, in preference to that of 
the French, or of any native power. Thus he may become 
a useful ally to us, in the event of Zemauii Shah’s approach 
to the frontier of Hindustan, and the prospect of that event 
must render him anxious to secure our protection. On the 
other hand, the success of his present ambitious and unjus- 
tifiable views against the Paishwah would fix him in the 
interest of Tippoo Sultauii and of France, with the accession 
of whatever strength he might be able to collect from the 
remnants of the empire which he would have overthrown. 

The influence which we shall naturally derive, both at 
Hyderabad and Poonah, from the presence of so large a 
body of our troops, will enable us to jirevent any aggression 
on either side, by the constant interposition of our good 
offices with both parties, to restrain every symptom of a 
revival of their former spirit of jealousy and contention. 

Our endeavours may then be successfully directed to the 
desirable object of preserving unimpaired the strength and 
resources of the two powers on whose co-operation we must 
rely for assistance, in the event of any war with the state of 
Mysore ; and while we prevent our allies from weakening 
themselves by repeated contests, we may expect that such 
an interference in the disputes of the native powers, so far 
from tending to foment divisions, and to occasion war, will 
prove the best security for the general tranquillity of India, 
as well as the most solid pledge of our disposition to 
preserve that blessing from interruption. 

However comprehensive and intricate the proposed sys- 
tem may appear at the first view, it will soon be eyident to 
all the powers of India, that the fundamental principle of 



cxxii 


LORD WELLESLEY’S MIXDTE. 


[App. 

oqr policy Is invariably repugnant to every scheme of con- 
quest, extension of dominion, aggrandizement, or ambition, 
either for ourselves, or for our allies. Consistently with 
this principle, it is our right and duty to restore the vigour 
and deficiency of our defensive alliances, but beyond the 
limits of this principle we entertain no project of altering 
the condition, of reducing or of raising the power of any 
established state in India. On the other liand, the same 
principle justifies and demands our firm resistance to the 
intrusion of any foreign power, which shall attempt to ac- 
quire a preponderant influence in the scale of Indian po- 
litics, to the prejudice of our defensive alliances and of our 
just interests. 

The establishments of our subsidized force at Poonah 
and Hyderabad will aflbrd effectual means of guarding, not 
only against any such intrusion, but against the undue 
growth of any native powers. While we possess so formi- 
dable a force in the centre of India, no such event can hap- 
pen without our knowledge and consent. 

The last question which remains for consideration is what 
shall be the nature and extent of that demand of satisfac- 
tion which we shall make from Tippoo Sultaun, whenever 
we shall have completed the system now depending at the 
courts of our allies, and shall have brought our army in the 
Carnatic to a state of preparation for the field. 

It is evident, from the facts which have come under my 
observation in the course of this discussion, that our safety 
requires a further reduction of the relative power of Tippoo 
Sultaun. 

The policy of the treaty of Seringapatam certainly was not 
to maintain Tippoo’s power upon such a scale as should 
leave him a constant object of alarm and apprehension to 
the Company. That he has been so for some years past 
cannot be denied by any person acquainted with the records 



III.] LOHD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. Cxxiii 

either of this government, or of tliat of Fort St. George. 
The present is the second crisis within the last two years 
in which this government has thought it necessary to as- 
semble the army on the coast, for the sole purpose of check- 
ing the motions of Tippoo Sultaun. 

The vague and inaccurate nature of out* intelligence, with 
respect to the extent of his force, and to the state of his 
preparations, added to the facility which he possesses of 
receiving emissaries and succours from France by sea, have 
contributed to increase the anxiety of the Company'’s go- 
vernments ; and our intercourse with him has beeii of an 
unsettled and ill-defined character, destitute of the advan- 
tages either of peace or of war. 

Under such circumstances, the continuance of Tippoo’ s 
power, in its actual state, must prove to the Company a 
perpetual source of alarm, vexation, and expense. 

The reduction of his means of oflence might be effected 
either by a positive diminution of his territory and resources, 
or by a proportionable increase of power and efficiency on 
our side of the balance, accompanied by such additional 
securities as might enable us to ascertain at all times the 
nature of his intentions, as well as his jx^w’-er of carrying 
them into effect, and to restrain, if not wholly to preclude, 
his intercourse with France. 

The diminution of his territory on the coast of Malabar 
would certainly be the most effectual mode of precluding 
his intercourse with France, as well as of preventing his 
movements towards the Carnatic. But it does not appear 
probable that this most desirable secvirity can ever be 
obtained by the mere terror of our arms. It must be pur- 
chased at the expense and hazard of war. Any considerable 
reduction of his resources must probably be purchased at 
the same price. 

I have already stated the nature and tendency of those 



CXxiv LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [Afp 

steps which have been taken for confining the power ot 
Tippoo within narrower limits, by tlie operation of the 
proposed system of alliance, of subsidiary engagements, and 
of improvement of our defences in the Carnatic. 

The success of this system will unquestionably operate as 
an effectual restraint upon the power of Tippoo, and will 
so strengthen our barriers against him, as to afford a ra- 
tional expectation that we may be enabled to obtain from 
him, without incurring the hazard of war, a very consider- 
able augmentation of security, with respect to all those 
points which now form the most alarming features of his power. 

I have already stated those points to be, the secrecy of his 
operations, his continual intercourse with the French, and 
his constant state of equipment for war. 

Our demand of satisfaction for his late infraction of 
treaty should be so framed as to apply corrections to each 
of these evils ; and such a demand might be founded on 
principles of moderation and justice, so clear and indis- 
putable, as would place the refusal of Tippoo in tlie most 
odious light, and in that event prove to all India the ne- 
cessity of our resorting to arms. 

We might distinctly state to Tippoo, that we entertain 
no view of encroaching upon his territory, or of diminishing 
his resources ; and we might appeal to the late restoration 
of the district of Wynaad for an unequivocal proof of this 
disposition. 

We might declare that after a most unprovoked violation 
of treaty on his part, we did not intend to demand any 
cession of dominion, or payment of money, but will content 
ourselves with obtaining those ordinary pledges of an in- 
tention to abstain from hostilities which all civilized nations 
in a state of peace are in the established habit of requiring 
reciprocally from one another. We might insist upon an 
unequivocal and final explanation of the ix'al nature of our 



in.j 


LORD WELLESLEY'S MINUTE. 


CXXV 


relation with him, declaring that we will no longer submit 
to that ambiguous and anxious state, in which the allies 
have been placed by his conduct for some years past. 

We might signify our determined resolution either to 
establish with him a real and effectual peace, accompanied 
by the customary intercourse, by the mutual exchange of 
good offices, and by all other securities which maintain the 
continuance of that blessing, or to wage war upon him until 
we have removed the causes of our apprehension and danger, 
by the entire destruction of his power. 

This declaration might be made jointly by all the allies, *and 
it might be followed by requiring Tippoo to receive at his 
court an established ambassador from each of the allies, 
according to the practice of all civilized nations in a state of 
peace, offering, at the same time, to admit ambassadors from 
him on equal terms. 

The force levied by him under his offensive alliance with 
France, having been raised for the express purpose of ag- 
gression upon the Company, can be considered in no other 
light than that of a signal of hostility, while it shall remain 
in his service. He must therefore be required to disband it 
without delay, and to remove it from his dominions. 

The anxious desire of the French to destroy the British 
jx)wer in India, the nature of Tippoo’s acknowledged con- 
nexion with them, and the interest which they must always 
feel in instigating him to war, demand the further requisi- 
tion, that he should enter into an engagement for himself, his 
heirs, and successors, to exclude the French from liis terri- 
tories and dominions for ever. 

The advantages resulting from these concessions on the 
part of Tippoo would be very considerable. 

The residence of an ambassador at his court would not 
only restrain the execution of any hostile designs which he 



CXXVi LORD WELLESLEY’S MINUTE. [App. 

might hereafter form, but would provide an authentic 
source of intelligence, from which we might always derive 
timely information of his motions. 

This measure might also ultimately lead to the establish- 
ment of an amicable intercourse Mnth Mysore, for Tippbo 
may perhaps at length be convinced that his wisest policy 
would be to rest satisfied with the undisturbed possession of 
his present dominions, rather tlian to risk the loss of what he 
still retains, by attempting to regain what he has lost. 

The dismission of the French corps raised at Mauritius 
would discourage other adventurers of that nation from 
attempting to engage in the service of the Sultaun, and, 
with a British ambassador on the spot, it would be difficult 
for him to evade the engagements by which he would have 
bound himself to exclude the French from his army and 
dominions. 

The combined effect of these two measures would there- 
fore be, if not wholly to preclude, at least to embarrass to 
a very great degree his intercourse with our enemy. 

He may also at length perceive that he never can hope 
to make any lasting impression upon the British power, 
without the aid of a large French force; and that he never 
can admit such a force into his dominions without the 
utmost danger to his own independence. 

The revival of our alliances, the appearance of our 
armies in the field, and the presence of a part of the British 
sciuadron on the coast of Malabar, will probably incline 
Tippoo to listen to requisitions of this nature ; he will soon 
perceive that we possess ample means of annihilating his 
military force, and of destroying the state of Mysore, from 
among the native powers ; and I trust he will also be con- 
vinced that we have no object in view beyond our own se- 
curity, and that we are really desirous of maintaining .the 



in.] I.ORD 'WELLESLEY’S MINUTE- CXXVli 

relations of amity and peace with him as long as he shall rest 
contented with his present dominions, and shall relinquish 
his vindictive projects against ours. 

If Tippoo should accede to the substance of the requi- 
sitions which I have suggested, I entertain a sanguine hope 
that with the efBciency of the triple alliance, not only re- 
stored, but considerably strengthened with a large army at 
Hyderabad, and another at Poonah, with a resident es- 
tablished at Seringapatam, and with the exclusion of the 
French from the dominions of Tippoo Sultaun, of the Nizam, 
and of the Paishwah, we may be enabled to look confidently 
to a long continuance of tranquillity in India. The growth of 
the French power in India would no longer be a matter of 
apprehension. Sindia, (or whoever shall succeed to his do- 
minions in Hindustan) would become an useful auxiliary 
against the threatened irruption of Zemaun Shah. The 
military charges on the coast of Coromandel might then 
safely admit of reduction ; this government would not then be 
perpetually alarmed with an apprehension of Tippoo'^s equip- 
ments, and of impending invasions of the Carnatic. W e should 
no longer complain of suffering, in time of peace, all the so- 
licitude, hazard, and much of the expense of vrar ; and the 
continuance of tranquillity would be ensured, not more by 
the predominance of our p>wer, than by the moderation 
manifested in using it for the sole purpose of obtaining per- 
manent security and genuine peace. 



Letter from Major-Generai. Sir John Malcolm 

TO THE MaROUESS OF HaSTINOS. 


Madras, July 17/A, 1817. 

My Lord, 

I told your lordship, before I left Calcutta, that I 
should, at the earliest period I was able, communicate my 
sentiments upon the expected operations against the Pin- 
darics, and the likelihood there appeared of these involving 
us with the principal rulers and chiefs in Malwa. In treat- 
ing this subject, I am aware I shall be able to convey no 
new information, and to bring forward no facts with which 
you are not already acquainted ; but my anxiety to shew 
the grounds upon which my opinions are founded will never- 
theless make me incur the hazard of wearying your lord- 
ship'‘s patience. A deliberate examination of this difficult 
question has satisfied my mind of the positive necessity of 
measures which may involve a departure from the principles 
of policy we have liitherto observed towards the states in 
Malwa. By a full statement of the course of reasoning 
which has led me to form this conclusion, I shall afford your 
lordship the best means of appreciating the correctness, or 
of detecting the errors of my judgment. 

Before I left England I gave a memoir to Mr. Canning 
on the subject of the Pindaries, in which I endeavoured to 
trace their origin, to exhibit their character and habits, and 



IV.] Bin JOHN MALCOLM’S L£TT£R. CXxix 

to suggest those means which appeared best calculated for 
their extinction, or rather suppression. Since that paper 
was given in, two invasions of the territories of the Com- 
pany, the disturbed state of the Poonah government, the 
conclusion of a subsidiary treaty with the Rajah of Nag- 
pore, the evasive conduct of Dowlet Row Sindia, and many 
minor events, (among which the rebellions in Ganjam and 
Cuttack, subsequent to the invasion of the former province 
by the Pindarics, are the most important,) have given a 
very different shape to many parts of this question, which 
I shall now proceed to examine under its altered state, and 
with reference to the full and luminous correspondence of 
the residents at the native courts ; which, with other authen- 
tic documents furnished by intelligent officers of the political 
department, throw light on our condition, both with relation 
to these increasing hordes of lawless freebooters, and to the 
predatory powers with whom they are naturally and consti- 
tionally associated and connected. 

The causes of the increase of the Pindarics have been 
before fully described Though they had long existed as 
a separate class of military freebooters, it was no doubt the 
destruction of the power of Tippoo Sultaun, the extinction 
of the political independence of the Nizam and Paishwah, 
and the reduction within narrower limits of the power of 
Sindia and Holkar, that added to their number, and, by 
freeing them in a great degree from that control to which 
they were before subject, gave them not only a wider sphere 
of action, but a character of greater boldness and enterprise. 

Those that condemned the policy adopted by the Mar- 
quess Wellesley, trace this great evil to the principles which 
he introduced of extending either the power or influence of 
the British government over all the states of India ; while 


* Memoir o: the Pindarics, delivered to Mr. Canning, Sept. 18P9. 
VoL. ir. i 



CXXX SIR ^QHN AlALCOLM’s BETTER [Afp- 

the defenders of that system contend that all the dangers 
that have arisen have their root in that selfish and neutral 
policy, which ewe, according to them, like a mildew to 
blight the fruits of our great successes, and to disappoint 
that near prospect of general tranquillity which our actual 
and acknowledged supremacy enabled us to command, 
through the means of our intrinsic power, our allies, and 
the active exercise of our infi^uence solely and unremittingly 
directed to that great and desirable object. 

Before we can propose a remedy for an evil we must 
determine its source ; and with this view it is of importance 
to examine, as far as the experience of twelve years enables 
us, those facts which will assist us to judge the comparative 
merit of these two systems. That of Lord Wellesley was 
first introduced in the southern parts of India. It had a 
full, unchecked, and successful operation in the settlement 
of Mysore, where the liberal arrangements for the support 
of the principal chiefs, of a considerable corps of horse and 
infantry, and a large body of Candachar peons,* gave us 
possession of the military part of the population, to mould 
into what shape we chose, and thereby enabled us to pre- 
vent the occuri’cnce of either discontent or rebellion. 

Our alliance with the Nizam furnished us with the means 
of destroying Tippoo and overcoming a Mahratta confede- 
racy ; and that with the Piushwah was alike essential for the 
latter object. These engagements have no doubt been 
attended with many evils; but we must recollect that a 
government so constituted as that of our eastern empire, 
presents, on all questions, but a choice of difficulties. If 
the introduction of our power and influence into the terri- 
tories of the Nizam and Paishwah has increased the num- 
bers of the Findaries, as it undoubtedly has done, by 


* Vkle Col. Wilke's Report, 1800. 



IV.5 TO THE MARQUESS OT HASTINGS. CXXxi 

destroying in a very considerable degree the energy of 
the internal government of our allies, and consequently 
thrown the latter more upon us for protection, the embar- 
rassments which these causes produce must be balanced 
against the dangers to which we should have been exposed, 
had we refrained from cultivating their friendship upon 
the only terms that could render it useful. We should, 
under any other course of policy, have probably had still to 
contend with the Sultaun of Mysore ; and supposing his 
power to be annihilated, the Nizam and Paishwah would 
either be proceeding in a prosperous career of ambition that 
might render them dangerous neighbours, or become, through 
weakness, a prey to the ambition of some restless military 
chief, who desired their resources to further his plans of 
conquest. Any one the least acquainted with the history of 
the native powers of India, must be sensible that one or 
other of these events must have occurred ; and assuredly 
the embarrassments which now threaten us, taken at their 
worst, bear no proportion to the dangers attendant on such 
a state of affairs. 

If it is admitted that the system of establishing our power 
and influence over our allies, as the best means of securing 
our own and the general tranquillity, has been found to be 
attended with benefit in the south of India, can we deny its 
effects, as far as it has been allowed to operate, in other 
quarters ? May not Bundelcund be adduced as a remark-- 
able instance of this fact ? It was, perhaps, more disturbed, 
more distracted by the disputes of petty rulers, and more 
overrun by bands of freebooters and banditti of every de- 
scription, than any country of equal magnitude in India. 
Yet how completely have our arms and policy subdued and 
reformed this province ; many of the petty rulers of which 
continue to enjoy their possessions, and, acknowledging us 
as their lords paramount, form w th their armed adherents 



txxxii SIR JOHN MAI.COLM*S ARTIER [App. 

one means of maintaining internal peace and security, and 
of repelling foreign invasion. 

The exercise of our control over the states of Bhurretpore 
and Macliery has been attended with one slight embarrass- 
ment, caused by the latter forgetting his relations; but the 
display of our power instantly brought him to reason : and 
the petty chiefs, such as the Nabob of Barraitch, Ahmed 
Buksh, Murteza Khan, and others, who were settled in 
Jagheers to the west of the Jumnah, not only live peaceably 
and prosperously, but have presented an example much 
wanted in that and every other quarter of British India — > 
of natives of rank and respectability in the enjoyment of 
estates (which support themselves and military adherents) 
that were granted as the reward of their attachment and 
faithful services during a period of no common emergency. 
The Sheikh chiefs also, between the Jumnali and the Sut- 
ledge, have been restored to that protection to which their 
services and good faith entitled them, and live after their 
own forms, in their principalities, acknowledging and ren- 
dering service to the British government. 

An attentive consideration of the facts which have been 
stated, dispose us to a conclusion, that if the policy pursued 
by the Marquess Wellesley had not been checked in its 
progress to completion, it would have attained its great 
and professed object, the establishment of the general tran- 
quillity of India, through the supremacy of the British 
government. The measures left unaccomplished had similar 
features, and were of a similar character with those that 
have proved successful. It was proposed to attach and 
employ a portion of the military inhabitants of Hindustan 
in the same manner, and upon the same principle, which 
had been adopted with the irregular horse and Caiidachar 
peons of Mysore. Treaties had been formed with the 
Bajpoot states, and it was meant to cherish to the utmost 



IV.j TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. CXSLXiii 

the energies of that warlike, but tranquil race. Every 
practicable effort was to be made to call forth the native 
resources of the Paishwah and the Nizam. An intimate 
alliance was to be preserved with Sindia, the only object of 
which was to effect a change in the principles of his govern- 
ment, and to render this ruler an instrument for the reform 
or the destruction of that predatory system of which he had 
been the principal support. A subsidiary alliance with the 
Rajah of Nagpore was, as it always had been, an object of 
anxious interest, as his habits wore settled and peaceable, 
and he promised, from these causes, to become, if we could 
conquer his jealousy and fears, an useful ally to the cause 
of order and tranquillity. The personal character of Jes- 
wunt Row Holkar forbade much hope of his accession to 
any confederacy, that had for its object the suppression of 
that predatory warfare of which he was the avowed cham- 
pion, but it was neither intended to bar the door upon him, 
nor any other leader, whom change of sentiments or despair 
of success in predatory warfare, might dispose to settle and 
to enjoy in peace the revenue of their possessions. 

When we consider the means which the British govern- 
ment at this moment possessed, the impression that had 
been made by the unexampled success of its arras and its 
policy ; in other words, the complete and recognised supre* 
macy of its power, it is not too much to affirm that there is 
every reason to conclude it would have been successful in its 
object, of introducing comparative order and tranquiUity 
into countries which it was easy to foresee would, if left to 
themselves, not only fall into anarchy and confusion, but 
become a nursery for predatory bands, who might, at no 
distant day, threaten the peace of all India. It was stated 
with truth by those who condemned this system, that the 
measures necessary to fulfil the object it had in view were 
likely to involve us in all the embarrassments attendant on 



cxxxiv 


SIB JOHN MAI.COi:.M’S LETTEB 


App. 


extended and complicated political relations. But it was 
answered with equal justice that this embarrasspient was the 
natural concomitant of our actual condition; and it was most 
evident that all attempts to escape from it would not only 
be futile, but be attended with superadded embarrassment, 
and with positive danger to the general peace of India, and 
ultimately to the prosperity and security of the British 
possessions. 

To shew how far these apprehensions have been realized, 
a very short detail of events since 1806 (the period of the 
introduction of this system of neutral policy) will suf&ce. 
To the treaties concluded with Siudia and Holkar in 1805 
and 1806, the Governor-general added declaratory articles, 
containing gratuitous cessions, which were meant to eman- 
cipate us from the care and hazard of defending allies, and 
occupying or guaranteeing territory that was supposed to 
be inconveniently situated. The moment peace was con- 
cluded, an indiscriminate reduction was made of all those 
bodies of irregular horse (natives of our newly-conquered 
provinces) who had been entertained during the war, or 
had come over at our invitation from the enemy. These, 
finding themselves without any provision whatever, immedi- 
ately left Hindustan, and swelled the ranks of the freebooters 
who began at this period to collect in Malwa. Some 
of the chiefs who had aided us during the war were 
settled, as has been stated, by giving them grants of land; 
but it was anxiously desired to prevail upon these, as well 
as the Rajahs of Bhurretpore and Macherry, to renounce 
their right to our protection, and increased territory was 
directed to be proffered as the reward of their assent to this 
proposition. The representations of Lord Lake, and the 
determination of the chiefs above mentioned not to forego 
their claim to the protection of the British government, 
prevented the execution of this part of the plan, and the 



IV.] TO THK MARdVESB OF HASTINOS. CXXXT 

result has fully proved that no occurrence could have been 
uMwe fortunate for our interests. 

In pursuance of this neutral policy, the Rajahs o( Jypore 
and Bondee had been cast off, so, in fact, were the Shdkh 
chi^s between the Jumna and the Sutledge, who had acted 
with our army during the war. In our relations subsequent 
to the p«ice, we studiously avoided every interference with 
Dowlut Row Sindia, lest we should involve or embarrass 
ourselves with that ruler. With Holkar we had hardly 
any intercourse, and every effort to negotiate a more inti- 
mate alliance with the Rajah of Nagpore was abandoned. 
In short, it seemed to be determined that the rise and fall 
of all other states and chiefs, except those we were bound 
by treaty to defend, was in future to be an object of no 
interest to the British government, and it was expected that 
the interminable contests in which it was foreseen the native 
powers, with whom it had no connexiem, would become 
invedved, would tend to prennote its peace and security, and 
that of its allies. 

A period of two years had not elapsed, when the ambition 
of Runjeet Singh, Rajdi of Lahore, stimulated by our reced- 
ing policy, claimed and coerced tlie allegiance of the Sheikh 
cluefs south of the Sutledge. The whole conduct of this 
prince, at the time to which I allude, was calculated to 
convey an impression that he cherished hostile designs ; but 
Lord Minto saw at one view the danger and the remedy. 
The march of a corps to Lodiannali, on the l^t bank of the 
Sutledge, — the extension of our jHotection to the chiefs to 
the south of that river, — and a warning to Runjeet Singh 
not tocross it, brought that ruler to a just sense of the rela- 
tion in which he stood. A little more forbearance would 
have encouraged him to a war in wliich he would have been 
destroyed, and his territories conquered. A contrary con- 
duct rendered him a pe^ful ndghbour. This occurrence 



cxxxvi 


SIR JOHN MAI.C0I.H’S rETTER 


[App. 


has importance, as it shews from experience the tendency 
of a neutral system of policy to produce that very conse- 
quence (extension of territory) which it desires to avoid/ 

In 1808, the distracted state of Holkar's government led 
Mahommed Khan Bungush, with a number of followers, to 
rebel against his authority ; and having established himself 
in the territories belonging to that family in Candeish, he 
not only plundered their revenues, but extended his depreda- 
tions into the adjoining provinces of our allies, the Paishwah 
and Nizam. The consequence was, the employment of our 
troops became essential to destroy a rebel of the government 
of Holkar. 

The extraordinary activity and energy of the officer * 
charged with this service, prevented, by the capture of Bun- 
gush and the defeat of his party, a protracted warfare, but 
the event shewed to what we were likely to become subject, 
and how impossible it was to follow the course that had 
been prescribed. This was more fully evinced in the en- 
suing year, when Ameer Khan, a chief who had risen to 
considerable military power in the service of Holkar, asso- 
ciating with his natural allies, the Pindaries, threatened, at 
the head of a predatory host, amounting to about thirty 
thousand men, to overwhelm the country of Nagpore. His 
advance towards the accomplishment of this object was 
deemed by the Governor-general (Lord Minto) to be 
connected with views of ambition, that went to the establish- 
ment of a Mahommedan dynasty in his own person, and 
ultimately to changes unfavourable to our interests in the 
Deckan. These considerations, combined with a desire to 
protect the Rajah of Nagpore, with whom negotiations for 
a subsidiary alliance had been revived, led the Governor- 
general to assemble an army on the Nerbuddah, which 


* Major-gcnersl Sir John Doveiun. 



Iv.j TO THE MABQUESS OP HASTINGS. CXXXvii 

afterwards advanced as far as Seronje, obliging Ameer 
£han to return to ,the northward. Lord Minto would 
appear, at one period, to have contemplated furtlier opera- 
tions for the destruction of Ameer Khan, and seems to have 
been fully sensible of the expediency of an improved fron- 
tier and the actual necessity of some more efficient means 
than we possessed, of keeping in check the hordes of free- 
booters which were annually augmenting in Malwa ; but he 
was deterred, according to his own statement, from a pro- 
secution of these important objects, and disposed to confine 
himself to the protection of Nagpore, by the contemplation 
of the complicated military and political arrangements, to 
which such extensive operations might lead ; the impracti- 
cability of limiting the scene of action, or the scope of mea- 
sures with references to the numerous interests affected by 
them, the heavy burden of expense, and the turn which 
affairs had at that period taken in Europe. These com- 
bined considerations led to his directing the army that had 
entered Malwa to return to the Nizam’s territories. The 
officer commanding was directed to give up Seronje, the 
jagheer of Ameer Khan, to one of the officers of Holkar, 
with a condition that it should not be restored to that chief. 
This condition, however, the Governor-general expected 
might proye abortive, for though he had considered Ameer 
Khan as completely distinct from the Holkar government, 
and the latter had confirmed tliis ground by disavowing the 

• Lord Minto, in a minute, dated the 12th of December, 1809, 
after remarking* on the positions of our subsidiary forces in the coun- 
tries of the Nizam and Paishwah, and the necessity of having one 
within the Nagpore territories, observes — “ It is probable that these 
three forces might be so stationed as not only to enable two to form a 
junction to the eastward, to the westward, or in centre, in a short 
space of time, but also to connect with Bombay and Guzerat on ono 
side, and with Bundelcund on the other/* 



cxxxriii sib johit Malcolm’s letter [App. 

actions of that chiefs he anticipated that he would soon re- 
establish his influence over a weak and distracted court. 
The fact was, the ministers of Holkar, though they had 
promised to do so, did not send an offleer to take posses- 
sion of Seronje, which was delivered up to the head inhabi-* 
tant, or, in other words, to the officer of Ameer Khan. 
Thus terminated a campaign, in which an army*, com- 
manded by one of the ablest officers f India has produced, 
was employed for nearly twelve months. It is probable 
that the territories of the Rajah of Nagpore were saved 
from being plundered by its operations, and possible that 
Ameer Khan might have been frustrated for the moment in 
his scheme of personal aggrandizement ; but though the 
ambitious views of an individual might have been checked, 
the events of succeeding years proved that this display of 
our force (for it amounted to no more) struck no blow at 
that predatory system, in which had originated the ne- 
cessity of its employment, and which, it was now evident, 
constituted our real danger. 

In 1811, 1812, and 1813, the Pindarics greatly increased 
in numbers, not only invaded and plundered the territories 
of our allies, the Nizam and Paishwah, but bad the bold« 
ness to pass through Bundelcund, and to extend their ra- 
vages to the vicinity of Murzapore, threatening with fire 
and sword the rich province of Bahar. The boldness of 
these freebooters caused, at this period, a very considerable 
addition to our military expenses, both at Bengal and Ma- 
dras ; and, in 1814, when the former government had a 
great proportion of its troops employed in Nepaul, the state 

* This army consisted of seventeen thousand regfulars, an excellent 
train of artillery, and contingents of irregular cavalry, from our allies 
the Nizam and Paishwah. This estimate docs no include at large co- 
operating force ill Bundelcund, under Colonel Martindalc. 

t The late Major-general Sir Barry Close, Bart. 



IV.] TO THE MARCttJESS OP HASTINGS. Cxxxix 

of the predatory powers in Malwa, from Sindia down to 
the lowest chieftain, who subsists by plunder, was deemed 
so threatening, that it was not only considered prudent to 
strengthen the subsidiary corps in the Dcckan, but to ad* 
vance the whole disposable force of the army of Fort St^ 
George to the banks of the Tangabuderah. 

This precautionary measure, which the state of affairs 
rendered necessary for our temporary security, was attended 
with as great an expenditure as the most active campaign ; 
but neither our advanced corps, which were now augmented 
to the size of armies, nor the great force we had drawn out 
on our frontier, prevented the Pindarics from plundering 
the countries of our allies; and during the next year ( 1816 ), 
as if in derision of our boasted power and great defensive 
preparations, a body of these freebooters passed our ad- 
vanced coi-ps, and moving rapidly through the territories of 
the Nizam, fell upon the unprotected province of Guntoo; 
I would not willingly exaggerate the effects which this in* 
vasion of our territories has produced. Oiir subjects had 
long relied with implicit faith on our power of protect- 
ing them from attack ; it was a point on which their 
minds were at repose ; and I am convinced, that this ex- 
emption from a scourge, to which they saw the inhabitants 
of ndghbouring countries exposed, was what conciliated 
them to our rule more than every other consideration. The 
distinction of manners, of language, of religion, all were for- 
gotten, or at least ceased to be objects of dislike and abhor- 
rence, in the contemplation of that comparative security they 
enjoyed under our government. Nearly forty years had 
elapsed since any of the Company’s territories in the south 
of India had suffered so dreadful a calamity. The invasion 
of the Carnatic by Hyder Ally was a tale which old men 
told to incredulous hearers ; but the excesses and cruelties 
pf Hyder were far exceeded by the horrid outrages of 



Cxl SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER (App. 

the Pindaries. The scene of these outrages was limited, but 
the impression made extended to far-distant provinces, and 
that has been completed by the irruption of another body of 
these freebooters into Ganjam, in 1816. I speak with full 
knowledge of the state of opinion when I assert, that in the 
south of India such has been the consequence of these 
events, that the best disposed of our subjects have had their 
minds shaken in the opinion they before entertained of the 
superiority and permanence of our power, while the disaf- 
fected and tlie turbulent rejoice in this change of sentiment, 
and look forward with expectation to the further progress 
of a system which revives their subdued hopes of opposing 
the British government, every moment of whose forbearance 
to avenge the deep insult and injury it has received is natu- 
rally construed by this class into inability to meet the danger. 
At such a period, to talk of defensive measures as in any 
way calculated to meet this evil, is to betray a total igno- 
rance of the character of our rule, and the foundation upon 
which the British government in India rests. Besides the 
narrow object of this policy, the saving a temporary expen- 
diture would soon be disappointed. The employment of 
troops occupying posts and lines of defence, and in sup- 
pressing rebellion, the inevitable result of such a policy, 
added to the serious defalcations of the revenue of our plun- 
dered provinces, would amount to more than the expenses 
of war ; and could we afford the loss of character, and with 
it almost all that supports us in our present greatness, and 
reduce this question to a mere money account, even in that 
view we should be losers by any measures that did not strike 
at the root of an evil, which is one that demands for its 
suppression all the energies of the British government. 

Before I offer an opinion on the mode in which these are 
to act, and the legitimate grounds we may assume as the 
basis of our proceeding, it will be useful to say a few words 



IV.J TO THE MAilCtUESS OF HASTINGS. CxU 

on the state of our own power and that of our allies, and on 
the conduct and actual condition of the different rulers and 
chiefs who are likely to be involved either as friends or as 
enemies, from any measures we may adopt. 

The state of the British government in India could not 
be more favourable for a great exertion than it is at this 
moment. The successful termination of the war in Nepaul, 
and the reduction of Hatrass, have added greatly to our 
reputation, and have given recent exercise to the discipline 
and valour of our army in Bengal, which never was in a 
condition more fit for service. The raising of a number of 
local corps has rendered a large proportion of the effective 
force disposable ; and the means of prosecuting such a war 
as that in which we are likely to be soon engaged have been 
considerably increased by the imbodying, under European 
officers, corps to an aggi’egate of upwards of 6000 irregular 
horse. The situation of our troops in Bengal is favourable 
for their assembling, within a very short period, at the points 
where they are likely to be required ; and, independent of 
its political importance, the conclusion of the subsidiary 
alliance with Nagporc has, by giving us a military position 
along the banks of the Nerbuddah, that connects Bundel- 
cund with Berar, added in an incalculable degree to our 
military strength in that quarter. 

The armies of Fort St. George and Bombay arc in the 
most efficient state, and, including the advanced corps in 
the territories of the Nizam, the Paishwah, and Gwickar, 
and that lately assembled near the Tangabuddra, we may 
assume that upwards of thirty thousand troops belonging to 
these presidencies are already in full equipment, and have 
been so for some years past. The advanced position of a 
great part of this force is favourable to the adoption of 
offensive operations at the very opening of the season. The 
^jtate of public credit, of the treasury, and of the revenues, 



Cxlii SIR JOHN MAI.COLU’S lETTER [Avp. 

is every way encouraging, as it promises that no operations 
in which we can contemplate being involved are likely to 
produce any^ financial embarrassment. 

The actual condition of the territories of the Nizam is not 
favourable: the character and conduct of that prince. has 
compelled us to an interference in his internal administration 
(which is managed by a Hindoo minister whom we support) 
that is calculated to increase both his discontent and that 
of his chief nobles and principal officers. It has also the 
effect of impoverishing the country, and of depressing, if not 
destroying the energies of the government. Something like 
this must always be the consequence of an alliance which, 
as it annihilates the political independence of a country, 
may with propriety be deemed a half conquest of it ; but 
peculiar circumstances have aggravated these effects in this 
instance ; and though the force we maintain in the territo- 
ries of the Subah of the Deckan places us beyond the fear of 
immediate danger, a crisis is approaching at which we must 
either usurp further upon this state, or endeavour, by reviving 
its energies, to render it more capable of governing itself. 

The last measure, if it were practicable, would be most 
for our interests ; but of this we may be assured, that we 
can attempt nothing, and affairs will grow hourly worse in 
this country, until we can subdue the predatory hordes in 
its vicinity. These freebooters have, for the last ten years, 
annually plundered the Nizam’s dominions, and our inabi- 
lity to defend them, wliilc it has sunk our character in the 
estimation of the peaceable part of the population, with 
whom our alliance was at first popular, as it promised them 
security from foreign attack, has had the effect of reanimat- 
ing the hopes of all the discontented, among whom I fear 
we may class nearly the whole of the Mahommedan inhabi- 
tants of this kingdom, who are almost all military, and who 
have been gradually thrown out of employment as our 



IV.] TO THE MARCtUlBS9 OF HASTINGS. Oxliii 

power lias advanced. Fortunately for us, tliis class of men 
are an unprincipled and divided race. The nobles can have 
no attachment to a prince who accelerated his own fall by 
an eagerness to destroy them, that he might enjoy the 
revenue of their estates. They have been compelled to 
disband their adherents and embodied troops. The latter 
may unite in a sentiment of hatred to us, but they want all 
principle of union in action, and are almost incapable of 
combination ; but their temper and condition render them 
dangerous to the internal peace of the country, and they 
are admirable materials to swell a band of freebooters. That 
many of them have joined the Pindarics, and aided in their 
expeditions, there can be no doubt, and we may account it 
as certain, that, unless we can destroy or suppress these 
plunderers, the contagion of their example will spread over 
the Deckan, where every unemployed soldier, with a horse 
and a sword, will be against us. Measures of prevention 
have already been taken, several corps of regular infantry, 
and some Rasselahs of irregular horse, have been, at our 
suggestion, raised by the minister. These coips are placed 
under the command of European officers, and hopes are 
entertained tliat they may be efficient. Thus far is certain, 
that in giving employment to men of the military tribes, we 
prevent that total despair which the too sudden introduction 
of our system has invariably the effect of producing. 

At Poonah we had a right to expect the most favourable 
operation of an alliance which placed and supported the 
prince with whom it was made upon the throne ; but we 
had early cause to apprehend embarrassment from the per- 
. verseness of the personal character of the Paishwah, and his 
proneness, like all his tribe, to a crooked course of policy. 
Every step was taken to conciliate him ; his subjects were 
cpmpelled to obedience, his tributaries to render him his 
just dues. The interposition of the British government was 



cxliv SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER 

employed to mediate the adjustment of his claims upon 
other states, and all interference with his internal adminis- 
tration was avoided as much as possible. Affairs went on 
tolerably smoothly till three years ago, when the elevation 
of Trimbuckjee, a menial servant, of a bad and intriguing 
character, to the office of prime minister, excited some sus- 
picion of the Paishwah’s sentiments, and in 1815 the murder 
of Gungodhur Shastree, minister of the Gwickar, who had 
come to Poonah under the express guarantee of the British 
faith, to adjust the accounts between his master and the 
Paishwah, obliged the British residents to demand the sur- 
render of Trimbuckjee, the perpetrator of this atrocious 
deed. The reluctance with which he was given up tended 
to confirm the first suspicion, that he was the instrument of 
the Paishwah’s crime ; and after he escaped from Tannah’*', 
that prince not only made no effort to seize him, but gave 
in secret every support to the rebellion which Trimbuckjee 
raised in his dominions, expecting no doubt, by this con- 
duct, to intimidate the English government into the grant 
of a pardon of his favourite. His views, however, have 
been disappointed by the experience and firmness of the 
resident t- A series of measures of the most spirited and 
decided character have reduced him to complete submission. 
An arrangement has been made which gives us, at a most 
critical period, the greatest advantages, both of impression 
and of resources. Throughout the whole of this transac- 
tion, aid appears to have been expected from the Pindaries ; 
the resident with Sindia J very early reported a correspond- 
ence between these freebooters and Trimbuckjee, and 
subsequently stated that orders had been given by the chiefs 

• Tannah is a small fort in the island of Sallscttc, about tvrenty 
miles from Bombay. 

t The Honourable Mountetuart Elphinstone. 

% Captain Close's letter to Mr. Adam, 2S Nov. 1816. 



IV.] 


TO THE MABC^tJESS OF HASTINGS. Oxlv 

of these freebooters not to plunder the Paishwalfs domi- 
nions. The fact is that it is natural in the present condi- 
tion of India for every prince or chief who cherishes plans 
hostile to the English, to court a body of allies, who glory 
in proclaiming themselves the open enemies of that nation. 
This is in itself a serious and recurring danger, and no 
state can have a right to calculate on its being always averted 
with that wisdom and energy which has been recently 
displayed at Poonah. 

The court of Nagpore is very unwarlike ; the present 
ruler sought our alliance, to fix him on a disputed throne, 
and he will value it, as it gives him security in the power 
he has attained ; but this is a court in which the habits of 
intrigue have taken a deep root, for it is more to the efforts 
of its policy than of its arms, that it has for many years 
past owed its existence. This disposition, and the disputes of 
the different factions among its leading nobles, will no doubt, 
in the course of the alliance, cause us frequent and sei’ious 
embarrassments, but no danger of any consequence is to be 
apprehended ; and let us suppose all that is likely to hap- 
pen at the very worst, and contrast it with what would 
have been our situation had the alliance not been formed, 
and we shall obtain a pretty fair estimate to enable us to 
strike a balance of the benefit of such connexions. Had 
the Bhonsela been hostile, or even neutral, in a contest like 
that with which we are threatened, the successful applica- 
tion of the greater part of our force could not have been 
expected to do more in one campaign than to give us what 
we now possess, the command of the Nagpore country for 
our operations and supplies, and we should have obtained 
that under circumstances of violence and irritation, which 
would probably have left us no option but that of seizing 
upon the government. Every person acquainted with the rela- 
tive local position of the territories of Nagpore to the pos- 
VoL. If. ^ 



cxlvi 


SIR JOHN MAlCOOl’s LETTER 


[App. 


session and liauiits of the Pindarics, and who is aware of the 
actual necessity, in every attack we make upon them, of 
opening and preserving tlie communications between our 
troops in Bundelcund and the Deckan, must be sensible 
tliere is no possibility of escaping this conclusion 

As connected with Nagpore, the petty states of Saugur and 
Bhopaul become of importance. They may be said to cover 
the north-eastern frontier of its territories ; and the nature of 
these countries, and those of the petty rulers intervening along 
the right bank of tlie Nerbudda, renders their friendshij) 
quite essential to the complete protection of eastern Berar,|and 
to guard the common road, through whicli plunderers must 
]5ass to the attack of our provinces in Bundelcund, Bengal, or 
tile northern Circars. The chief of Saugur, who was until 
lately a nominal dependant upon the I’aishwah, is disposed, 
as well as the ruler of Bhopaul, to enter into any arrange- 
ment we can desire, that leaves him the possession of the 
country, and emancipates him from the necessity of pur- 
chasing the forbearance, or resisting the attack of the free- 
booters with whom he is surrounded. The forming of any 
treaty with the Nabob of Bhopaul lias been prohibited by 
the Court of Directors, but the subsequent conclusion of a 
subsidiary alliance with the llajah of Nagpore, and the 
necessity we are now under of attacking the Pindarics, 
leave us altogether without option on this point. To pro- 
tect the countries of the Bhonsela, and to expel the Pin- 
darics from tlieir present haunts, it is alike indisjiensable 
we should either possess by conquest, or through the friend- 
ship of its chief, the advantage of the position and resources 
of Bhopaul. What was befoie a question of speculative 
jiolicy, has become a measure of positive necessity ; and it 
is to be remarked, that the Uvaty with Nagpore has ren-^ 


* This was the ophuon uf Sir B. Cli)se. 



iv.l TO THE MARQ.tJ£SS OF HASTINGS. Cxlvii 

dered the task of protecting this country easy. It is no 
longer an insulated spot in Malvva we shall have to defend, 
but a strong point, connected with the military positions 
we have formed on the Nerbudda. 

Jypore, which, from its local position, is to us the most 
important of the liajpoot states, has, since the peace of 
1806, been more than once on the very brink of ruin, and 
we have had the alarming prospect of seeing a dangerous 
horde of Patan plunderers occupying a country which 
would give them increased means of invading our richest 
provinces in Hindustan, and of maintaining a direct and 
constant intercourse with the most turbulent part of the 
populations of our territories in that quarter, who are of 
the same tribe, and, indeed, generally speaking, their near 
kindred. The apprehension of this danger has led the 
Indian government in England to authorize a defensive 
treaty being concluded with the ruler of Jypore, and though 
some obstacles have interrupted the negotiation, it had the 
effect of averting a recent danger from that state. This 
negotiation will no doubt be revived, for unless this state is 
supported by us, it must fall, and so sensible are its prin- 
cipal nobles of this fact, that they evinced great dissatisfac- 
tion against their ruler allowing any considerations to pre- 
vent the speedy conclusion of the alliance *. Contemplating 
the approaching crisis, the necessity of altering our relations^ 
to Jypore is too imperative to admit of delay. We must 
command the territories of this state both for operations 
and supplies, or they will furnish our enemies with means 
of attacking us in a very vulnerable quarter. 

♦ The present state of Jypore may be imag-Ined, when we are in- 
formed that its troops are at this moment employed in plundering* that 
part of their own country which is in the occupation of Ameer Khan. 

•I* The Rajah of Boondee should be included in our arrangemenU 
with the Rajah of Jypore. 

k 2 



cxlviii 


sin JOHN Malcolm’s letteii 


[Afp. 


The Rajalis of Odipore and Joudpore have been a prey 
to the armies of Sindia and Holkar ever since the peace of 
1806, and Ameer Khan would almost appear to have settled 
himself and army upon Maun Singh Wo must, from 
these circumstances, conclude that the forces of this prince 
have been in a great degree subdued, and his resources 
exhausted ; but should the conduct of the principal preda- 
tory powers ever force us to extend our operations in Me- 
war or Marwar, or even to the vicinity of these provinces, 
I can have no doubt that we should find it easy to rouse 
tlieir indolent but brave inliabitants, and that there are 
embers still left, which, if kindled into a fiame, would aid 
essentially in tlie destruction of those plunderers by whom 
tliese states have been so cruelly oppressed^ 

Zalim Singh, Rajali of Kottah, has attained a power, 
through the influence of his personal character, far exceeding 
either his military means or the limits of his possessions : 
wise, consistent, and politic, he manages his own affairs and 
interferes with those of others with equal prudence : he pays 
tribute f when protection is necessary, but his chaiacter 
causes him to be treated with comparative moderation. His 
territories are an asylum to distressed princes and offending 
subjects ; he is a general arbitrator of disputes, and all con- 
cur in granting him a respect and confidence which they 
refuse to each other. His country, though situated in the 
vortex of anarchy and confusion, is usually exempt from 
the misery of surrounding districts ; but within the last few 
years it has suffered from lawless bodies of Pindarics ; and 

• The llajali »f Joudpore. 

t Besides the tribute Zalim Singh pays Sindia, he rents several 
districts from that prince as well as Ilojkar, wJio is paid tiirough his 
friend and ally. Ameer Khan ; to whose family he gives protection, and 
on whose aid and support he can always rely. 



IV.] TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. CxHx 

he may from this circumstance, as well as his character, be 
supposed to be ready to combine (as far as his jiolitical 
prudence will permit him) in any plan for the extinction of 
this class. The local position of his country will probably 
bring him within the circle of our first operations ; and if 
that is the case, ho must either act as a friend or an enemy. 
If we appear in strength, there can be no doubt winch part 
he will take ; and we may eventually be compelled to ex- 
tremes, in which this popular and able ruler might be used 
with great advantage as an instrument to restore order and 
tranquillity. 

There are many petty Hindu chiefs, besides those that 
have been mentioned, who, since 1806, have been obliged 
to submit to the most powerful freebooters of the momentf 
but who arc only half subdued, and still possess some means 
of asserting and maintaining their independence. If we 
enter the approaching contest on the principle of establishing 
general tranquillity, and I know no other upon which we 
can act with any prospect of success, wo shall find those 
chieftains our best and most natural allies. A connexion 
with them is not exposed to those embarrassments which 
attend that with states of a higher rank. Accustomed to 
own a superior, they are proud of dependence on a great 
government ; and though in the habit of improving their 
possessions by cultivation and commerce, they maintain, to 
the extent of their means, armed adherents, which are taken 
from the ranks of freebooters, and arc, when it becomes 
their interest, the active defenders of order. AVhenever our 
policy may lead us to establish a connexion with the prin- 
cipals of this class, a moderate tribute, or the service of a 
quota of men (if not both) should always be exacted. I 
am quite satisfied, from personal experience, tliat our gene- 
rosity on former occasions, in demanding neither, was quite 
piisundcrstood, and instilled suspicions instead of inspiring 



cl 


SIB JOHN MALCOLM’S LKTTEK 


[App 


confidence. They saw no permanent bond of mutual inte- 
rest, and doubted the continuance of such disinterested 
protection. 

I shall now proceed to take a short view of the condition 
and conduct of the predatory powers, or, in other words, 
those rulers and chiefs whose habits of government and life 
cherish and support that predatory system which constitutes 
our present danger, and against whicli we are at this mo- 
ment compelled to direct all the eflTorts of our policy and of 
our arms. The predatory powers may be divided into three 
classes: the first, Sindia and Holkar; the second, Ameer 
Khan ; and the last, the Pindarics. Though the whole of 
these are alike promoters of that predatory system which it 
Ss our object to subdue, there is a considerable difference 
between the first and the others, and even some shades 
between the two last. It is important, therefore, to examine 
their conduct separately, botli as it relates to their inteimal 
and foreign policy. This will enable us to come to a correct 
conclusion on two very important points : first, the right we 
have to proceed against each or all of tliem ; and secondly, 
the course which appears most likely to obtain success in 
those measures which necessity may lead us to adopt. 

The empire founded by Madhajee Sindia in Malwa and 
Hindustan rested for a long period on no basis but that of 
a foreign conquest of a predatory power, which exacted 
from the natives a large proportion of the annual revenue of 
their country, as a boon for leaving tlie remainder unplun- 
dered. The establishment of -a disciplined army (under 
French officers) of infantry, with Cannon, gave some shape 
and solidity to this power. Strong holds were subdued, 
petty rebellions suppressed, tribute coerced, new conquests 
made, and the mass of the population rendered more obe- 
dient to authority. The plans of Madhajee appear to have 
been full of wisdom ; but the pride of increased strength 



JV.} TO THE MAUQUESS OP HASTINGS. cli 

filled the mind of his successor, DoAvlut Roav, with immea-* 
surable ambition, and ultimately led him, in 1803, to 
provoke a Avar with the British nation, Avhich terminated, in 
a fcAV months, in the destruction of his regular troops, the 
capture of his artillery, and the loss of all the countries he 
possessed in Hindustan. Though the peace concluded in 
1803, the cessions of Gualior in 180(5, and the seizure of 
Ambajee Ingha*‘s territories about the same period, com- 
bined Avitli the destruction, or rather the dissolution of the 
Holkar government, left Dowlut Row Sindia Avlth ample 
possessions, and Avith every means of improving at the same 
time that he enlarged them, he has deliberately pursued 
a contrary course, and from doing so he is justly stated to 
be one of the chief causes of all the danger to which we arc » 
now exposed. Every year of the history of this 'chief since 
1806 presents the same uniform and disgusting picture of 
rebellion in his government, mutinies in his army, and the 
recurring neccssitiides of a petty, plundering warfare ; all 
his hostility has been directed against those Aveak Hindu 
states whom our forbearance left at his mercy, and Avhose 
habits of order and good rule gave their territories a prospe- 
rity Avhich he has destroyed. Though Sindia has increased^ 
by these small conquests, his revenue and his individual 
wealth, his country has become every day more impove- 
rished, his government more embarrassed, and liis nobles 
and his army more disobedient and disorderly. The Pin- 
darics alone, Avhom he has systematically encouraged (in 
spite of his occasional professions to us), have flourished, 
their numbers are increased, they have groAvn bold on the 
assurance of his protection. He has granted them a home 
in his dominions ; and Avheii tliey liave returned laden with 
the plunder of our provinces, and soiled Avith the blood of 
our subjects, he has not only not refused them an asylum, 
but shared in their spoil, and no doubt rejoiced in their 



clii SIR JOHN MALCOLM'S LETTER (Aph. 

success *. I make the last assertion from the positive con- 
viction of its truth. Sindia, who cannot be expected to 
forget or forgive the loss of empire, naturally considers us 
as his greatest enemies, and contemplates with satisfaction 
every attack upon our power. 

It has been, since the conclusion of the war in 1805, a 
favourite opinion Avith the Mahrattas, that Ave can yet be 
opposed by a predatory system of Avarfare, and that our 
poAver may be reduced like that’of the successors of Aurung- 
Zebc, by the incessant attacks of plunderers upon our terri- 
tories and resources ; and the Pindarics have been for some 
years past considered as one of the great means of accom- 
plishing this object. Sindia, Avhen alarmed by our prepa- 
rations, summoned “f* these freebooters round his standard, 
and nothing but the impression of their eventual use in a 
contest with us could have induced him to tolerate their 
insolence, their occasional plunder of his provinces, and, 
above all, the danger of drawing upon his own head, by 
persevering in his connexion with them, the vengeance of 
the British government. 

The conduct of Sindia, on the occasion of a representation 
being recently made to him on this subject, must prove the 
impossibility of placing the slightest reliance on his profes- 
sions. He has lately, it is true, shewn a great desire to 
preserve a good understanding Avith the British government, 
but this is the consequence of alarm at its imposing state. 
His tone was very different tAvo years ago, and even now, 
when goaded by our reproaches to send a force to attack 
the Pindarics, a friendly correspondence is opened between 
one of the principal officers and the leader of these free- 
booters against Avhom he is to act. In any plan we may 

♦ Captain Close's CoiTcspondciicc, 1816 and 1817. 

t I'he minister at the court of Nag^porc did not hesitate to state 
this fact to the resident. 



IV.J TO THE MiiHaUESS OF HASTINGS. dill 

determine upon for the suppression of a predatory system, 
it would, as far as I am able to judge, be as great weakness, 
after what has passed, to place any confidence in the pro- 
fessions, promises, or engagements of Sindia, without very 
adequate security, as it would be waste of time to seek for 
more prcx)f than is already on record, of his interests being 
identified with those freebooters,— of his being their patron, 
and of their considering themselves, however loose the ties, 
as his subjects and soldiers. This is proved by the letters 
of their leader to his minister, and by a thousand facts ; but 
that of their continued residence in his country is of itself 
sufficient to establish our right to treat him (if it suits our 
policy to do so) as an enemy. We must either do this, or 
continue to suffer a neutrality, or rather a system by which 
Sindia carries on a harassing war against us, without 
exposing himself to any of the distresses and dangers of that 
condition. His troops, most of whicli a3*c similar in dress, 
in cast, and in habits to the Pindarics, swell the bands of 
these freebooters, when they ])roceed on their plundering 
excursions ; and the latter, when tlicy desire to elude our 
pursuit, take shelter in his country, and melt into his army. 
Under such circumstances, it appears almost impossible to 
form any plan for the extinction of this evil, which does not 
commence by making Dowlut How Sindia a friend, on 
whom w^e can depend, or an enemy that we have to en- 
counter. It has been urged in palliation of the conduct of 
this prince, that he does not possess the jx)wcr, either to 
suppress or expel the Pindarics ; but this supjjosition, if a 
fact, though it alters his situation, does not alter ours. 
The distinction between want of inclination and want of 
ability, in such a case, is not easily made ; and if our safety 
is endangered by the hostile attacks of a military people 
living in his provinces, it matters little wliether they derive 
their power of waging war upon us from his weakness or 



cliv SIR JOHN MALCOLM'S LETTER [Apr. 

liis support. We are bound to treat him as sovereign of 
the country. And considering him as such, we must make 
him responsible for the conduct of its inhabitants; besides, 
if this really be Sindia’s condition, he will rejoice in the 
opportunity which our pt)licy will afford of co-operating in 
the destruction of hordes that are always above his autho- 
rity, and who must, if not reduced, make rapid strides to 
the subversion of his power. 

The possessions of the Holkar family in Malwa and 
Candeish, are now in a state of singular confusion and 
anarchy. Ever since the insanity of Jeswuntllow Holkar, 
this government has been verging to dissolution. It has 
been, in fact, a prey to contending chiefs ; and their jealousy 
of eacli other, the force of habit, and that devotion to usage 
which is characteristical of the natives of India, has alone 
preserved it from complete destruction. Though Toolsah 
Bhye, the mother of the young prince*, had been acknow- 
ledged Regent, the military power of the state was 
usurped by Ameer Klian, while Balaram Seit, who was 
a favourite of Jeswunt How, and employed by him to 
negotiate with the English government, in 1806 became 
the principal minister. Year after year, the weakness and 
anarchy of this state increased ; Ameer Khan exclusively 
employed the means which his influence gave him to pro- 
mote his plans of personal aggrandizement. Ilis adherents 
(mostly Patans of his own tribe) were distinct from that 
force which was commanded by leaders who had an here- 
ditary attachment to the family of Holkar ; the latter were 
however reduced to a small number, not exceeding eight 
or ten thousand horse, with a few undisciplined corps of 
infantry ; ^and as the government was unable to pay even 

* She is not the real mother of the prince, but having adoptee) 
hilt), was alvviiys called so. 



IV.] TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. olv 

this remnant of his former army, these troops have, for ten 
years past, subsisted by plundering their own country, 
by joining the Pindarics, or by extorting, through the 
means of mutinies, advances from a weak and usual dis- 
tracted court. On a late occasion the llegent Toolsah 
Bhye, with her son and Gunput Row, a rival of Balaram 
Seit, fled from her mutinous army to a fortress, and placed 
herself and the young prince under the safeguard of Zalim 
Singh, chief of Kottali. Slie remained in this voluntary 
exile four months, when, having obtained the means, by 
the seizure and plunder of one of the chief officers of the 
government, of satisfying the troops, she returned to the 
camp, where one of her first acts was to imprison, plunder, 
and put to death BaLiram Seit, whose enemy, Gunput 
Row, was now declared minister. Tim next object of 
plunder was a widow of the late Jeswunt Row Hol- 
kar. Severe torture’*' made this lady produce a sum 
of 60,000 rupees, which only whetted the avarice of her 
enemies. Her further torture and death, and the plunder 
of all her property was the consequence. The nephew of 
Jeswunt Row Holkar, and several otlier chiefs, who were 
attached to the late minister, were seized and murdered. 
These events, which took place in the beginning of this 
year, have excited equal horror and astonishment. 

Ameer Khan is still at Joudpore, and the state of his af- 
fairs in that quarter, combined with the clamours of his 
own troops for pay, have prevented him from repairing to 
Malwa, where his representative, Ghuflbor Khan, has hi- 
therto, in vain, endeavoured to oppose the measures of 
Toolsah Bhye, who, on his placing himself at the head of 
her mutinous infantry, made an application for aid to 

• She was placed on a plate of heated iron.— Vide Captain Close s 
Pespatch. 



clvi SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER [Arr- 

Dowlut Row Sindia, which that ruler has granted ; {ind the 
struggle for supremacy at the durbar of Holkar, which has 
long existed between him and Ameer Khan, would seem 
likely to be soon decided ; but there arc so many interests 
involved, and so many intrigues on foot, as to render it im- 
possible, at any one stage of the action, to anticij)ate the 
conclusion. We can, in fact, be positive of nothing but the 
continuance, which ever way it terminates, of anarchy and 
confusion. 

The events that have been described would be of no con- 
sequence to us, further than as a beacon to warn us from a 
scene of trouble, did they not connect, and that most 
nearly, with the Pindarics. The ranks of these freebooters 
are filled with the soldiers of Holkar, and the state of go- 
vernment and possessions of that family, not only afford 
them continual supplies of men, of money, and of food, 
but of retreat and security. This assertion cannot be con- 
troverted by the circumstances of the occasional disputes 
between this state and the Pindarics, Such disputes arc 
ever the fruit of that aid .and encouragement which weak 
states grant to freebooters of this class. There exists in the 
present government of Holkar no tangible authority from 
which we can expect any redress of the injuries we suffer 
from these causes. The settlement of this state, or ra- 
ther of its ten'itories, therefore, in some shape or other, 
becomes essential in any plan for the extinction of the evil 
which now compcls]us to .arm : whether this is done directly 
by ourselves through Sindia or Ameer Khan matters not, 
so the object is affected. It is a mere question of expe- 
diency. To talk of our faith or our treaties with a govern- 
ment which lias been virtu.ally extinct, or at all events in- 
capable of maintaining any of the relations of friendship 
for ton years, appears to me a mockery of terms. I do 
not, however, mean to say it Avould be just to deprive the 



IV.] 


TO THK MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. 


clvii 

family of Holkar of their possessions, provided they, or 
those that act for them, were disposed to join cordially in 
our plans for the suppression of the predatory system ; and 
under every course I am aware that it would be an outrage 
upon opinion, that nothing but an extreme case could jus- 
tify, to set aside altogether the pretensions of this family* 
The difterent branches of the Mahratta nations [are hasten- 
ing by stages sufficiently rapid to decay ; their rule beyond 
the limits of their native country had never any solid basis. 
They are everywhere else but recent conquerors, and their 
power, in most instances, has preserved its original shape. 
They have, under the denomination of kings, continued to 
be leaders of predatory hordes, and when engaged in fo- 
reign expeditions, their usual habits have found sufficient 
exercise in plundering and chastising those tributaries and 
inferior chiefs, whom their intolerable oppression conti- 
nually drove into rebellion. To subdue the system under 
which this class has flourished is, in part, to subdue them ; 
but satisfied of this, we should avoid, as much as we 
can, any measures which, by exciting their fears, or shocking 
their prejudices, might dispose them (from a sense of com- 
mon danger) to unite. The dissolution of their authority, 
under every course, is certain ; but the more gradual, the 
less likely it is to be attended with any serious con- 
vulsion. 

The state of Ameer Khan’s power in 1809 has been 
already mentioned ; he was then at the head of a predatory 
force, of between thirty and forty thousand men, and com- 
pelled the British government to adopt the expensive mea- 
sure of forming (as has been noticed) an army in the 
Deckan, and a considerable corps in Bundelcund, to keep 
him in check. The Pindarics who had joined this chief, 
from the same feeling they would any other, because he 
promised to lead them to plunder, fell off from their alle- 



clviii SIR JOHN MAtCOLM’S LETTER [App. 

giancc as his views became more limited. This certainly 
was the zenitli of Ameer Khan’s greatness, and had he pos- 
sessed that genius and ambition which numbers believed he 
did, he might have made a great effort for power ; but he 
showed on this occasion, as he has on many others, that he 
is merely a brave partisan chief. The crisis, however, that 
gave him the chance of being greater, evinced in a most 
forcible manner the danger to which we arc hourly exposed, 
from the rise of a leader of higher qualities and more 
daring enterprise. A Sevajee, or Hyder Ally, would, 
with the means which he at that moment possessed, have 
carried fire and sword to the furthest regions of our posses- 
sions in India. The life of Ameer Khan since this period 
has passed between efforts to maintain his authority over 
the distracted councils of the family of Holkar, expedients 
to satisfy the clamours of his army, attaetks on the country 
of Jypore, and the establishment of his influence and 
power over the court of Maun Singh, Rajali of Joud- 
pore. The latter appears to have been throughout his 
leading object ; and as he not only exacts a considerable tri- 
bute from that prince, but has obtained valuable grants of 
territory, which he desires to render hereditary in his fa- 
mily, the greatest proportion of his troops is generally in 
that country ; and it is evident from every account, that no- 
thing but their presence maintain his oppressive autho- 
rity. The utmost jealousy exists between him and the 
Rajah, and it has been conjectured that he means to de- 
pose Maun Singh, and put his son on the throne ; and the 
recent murder of one of the principal ministers at Joud- 
pore, shews he will hesitate at no measure, however violent, 
to maintain his interests in that quarter. 

The preservation of his influence over the family of Holkar 
is left, as has been stated, to an agent, attended by a small 
body of men. The care of the conquests he has made from 



IV.] TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. clix 

the state of Jypore is committed to one of his leaders ; and 
his jaghire of Scronge, and other possessions that he holds 
of the Holkar family, are in a great degree unprotected. 
He reposes great confidence in Zalim Singh, llajah of Kot- 
tah, who pays him*, as has been mentioned, the tribute due 
to Holkar, and who grants his family a place of refuge. 
Ameer Khan, in return for this friendship, is the avowed 
supporter of the Raj all of Kottah, who derives considerable 
strength from the reputation of such an ally. 

The connexion between Ameer Khan and the Pindarics 
was more intimate some years ago than it is at present, but 
they still look up to him, and are associated with his fol- 
lowers by similarity of condition and habits of life ; and in 
any contest we may engage in, it will be very difficult to 
separate one class of freebooters from another, unless the 
followers of Ameer Khan remain engaged, as at this mo- 
ment, in a scene distant from that of our first operations. 
Even in this case, the Pindarics we expel from Malwa 
would find protection in Marwar, and return the moment 
our efforts relaxed. This makes it impossible to exclude 
from our consideration Ameer Khan and his adherents, as 
it is obvious that any settlement will be incomplete that 
dt>es not, in some way or other, embrace them. The whole 
conduct of this chief since 1806 certainly gives us the right 
which Lord Minto assumed, to consider him as distinct from 
the family of Holkar, and in this view he stands the leader 
of a formidable predatory band, without any legitimate 
claims to power, and whom we may in consequence treat as 
expediency shall dictate. It may, however, eventually be 
for our advantage to recognise him in the character he still 
assumes, of a servant of the Holkar family. His actual 
force consists of about 12,000 hoi-se, several indifferent corps 


* Captain Close's Letter to Lord Muira, 23d April, 1810. 



clx SIR JOHN MALCOLM'S LETTER [App. 

of disciplined infantry, and Ijctween two and three hundred 
pieces of cannon. His artillery, if my account is correct, 
is by far more formidable than that of any other native 
power in India, and it has been represented to be in tolerable 
order ; but this, considering the distracted state of his army, 
seems hardly credible. 

Ameer Khan is so far different from a Pindarie chief, 
that his ascendency has taken a more settled shape ; and he 
possesses resources that are, in a certain degree, coippetent 
to meet his expenditure, consequently is not forced, as they 
are, to make incursions upon us or our allies for his sup- 
port. But though there is this shade of distinction, his 
condition is in other respects the same. His army lives by 
plunder, though that is within a defined sphere, but the 
countries on which they now subsist must become exhausted, 
and the bands which he commands aye in training for a 
wider range. We have more than once been compelled to 
make preparations against their threatened ravages, and 
though circumstances may dictate some delay, there is no 
doubt that ultimately the reform or dispersion of this force 
is essential to our iiitcrcsts. There is reason to conclude 
that the age * and disappointed ambition of this leader have 
inclined him to connect himself with the British govern- 
ment. His late overtures to the resident at Delhi “(* upon this 
subject, are in a very different strain from any he lias ever 
before made. He appears anxious for our protection, and 
to gain that, he professes himself ready to be an instrument 
in forwarding our plans, particularly as these may relate to 
the Holkar family. The government have kept this nego- 
tiation open and there is no doubt but Ameer Khan, if 
sincere, may be of great use ; and as boUi he and many of 

♦ Ho is sixty-fivc years of age. 

t Letter from Mr. Metcalf to Mr. Adam. 

J Letter from Mr. Adam to Mr. Metciilf, 



IV.l TO THE MARatJESS OF HASTINGS. dxi 

his principal followers are natives of our own provinces, 
that circumstance may afford us additional means of effect* 
ing such an arrangement. I confess that, in the present 
state of India, I have no alarm at the increase of a Mahom« 
medan power in any regular shape ; and all my experience 
inclines me to consider that race to be much more manage- 
able in intimate connexions with us than the Mahrattas. 
They may be more bold and turbulent, but they are neither 
so artful nor so restless. Their propensity to dissipation 
and to the enjo)rment of every luxury within their grasp 
incline them to an indolence, a very short indulgence in 
which, though it may leave their sentiments the same, 
destroys those habits which render them dangerous. The 
simplicity of the Mahratta soldier preserves him from such 
change ; his clothes, his diet, his manners, arc fixed by the 
rules of the class, or caste, to which he belongs ; he yields 
like the reed to the storm he cannot resist, but it is only to 
resume his shape the moment it is past. On the whole, I 
should conclude that, in our future connexion with these 
two races of men, we shall complain most of our Mahome- 
dan allies ; we shall suffer most from the Mahrattas. 

It remains, in treating this branch of the subject,' to say 
a few words on the actual condition of the Pindarics. The 
numbers of this class of freebooters in Malwa were, three 
years ago, estimated by an intelligent officer * at 30,000 
horse. In a very sensible paper-)-, full of information re- 
garding this people, I find their numbers stated at 41,000* 
Both may be right, for it is evidently impossible, as I have 
elsewhere observed J, to fix any standard for a force that 
is daily changing — ^whose ranks are recruited when there is 
a prospect of plunder from those of Sindia, Holkar, and 

Captain Sydenham. 

t Memoir of the Piudaries, by Captain Tod. 

X Memorandum on the Pindaries, dated London, I81S. 

VOL. II. 



clsdi sin JOHN MALC0T-M"S XETTnn " ixtn 

Ameer Kliau, aud wlio dissolve on the occurrence' of fe> 
verses into tlie armies of these chiefs. There arc, however; 
a certain number of leaders' who have always a body of 
attached adherents, who possess territories’ and forls, and 
even some infantry and cannon. Heerooj Eureem Ehaitt 
•and Cheetoo are tlie principal. Heerbo has long been ' the 
prisoner of Sindia. Kureem Khan at first shared' Ins fete; 
but obtained his release by paying a large ransom; immeA 
diately after which he siinimoried his old followers to his 
standard, and began to revenge himself, by plundering 'the 
possessions of the prince whose avarice had restored him to 
liberty. A junction between Cheetoo and this leader spread 
alarin in every quarter*, as their combined force amounted 
to 85,000 men ; but the policy of the Bliohsela, whose 
country first felt their depredations, divided them j and 
Cheetoo soon afterwards aided one of Sindian’s generals in 
^ attack upon his late ally, Kureem. The latter was 
completely routed, and compelled to throw himself upon the 
mercy of Ameer Khan, who delivered him over to the 
Regent Toolsah Bhye, by whom he is still kept in con«» 
finement. These events have thrown tlie principal corn-* 
mand of the Pindarics into the hands of Cheetoo, whom 
Sindia. rewarded for his aid against Kureem by a grant of 
lands, in addition to those he already possessed, of the 
value of five lacs of rupees per annum. But this diief of 
freebooters lias since abandoned this territory, as inadequate 
to his support, and inconsistent with his views, \vhich led 
him to desire a place of security for his family And wealth, 
aiul to collect liis revenue from fields that others have toiled 
to render fruitful. The character of Cheetoo seems; Well 
qualified for the proiainent part he hOs lately had to act, 
He is described as a man who adds prudence to courage, 
enterprising but cautious, and as possessing not only great 

* Captain To^s Memoir. 



IV'O TO ‘ THE MARCITJESS OF HASTINGS. dkllT 

sirtHice, but political sagacity. This chief is not ^thout 
enemies among his own race : the most prominent are the 
near relations of Kureem ; though, when there is aprospect of 
booty, these quarrels ceases The two great divisions of 
Sin^a Shahee, and Holkat Shahee, which used to separate 
this class, have, we are told, in their late incursions into the 
Deckan and our provinces, been quite forgotten : all parties 
have joined ; but the scene will change when they are at** 
tacked, and as their condition alters from that of prosperity 
to distress, former differences will revive, and each leader 
will find, in the recollection of old grievances and the resent-^ 
liient of past injuries, an excuse for pursuing that cour^ 
wbieh suits best with his interest or safety. 

The indisputable fact of the number of the Pinda^ 
ries having considerably increased within the last seven or 
dght years, completely confutes the idea that they are 
entirely formed of men whom our conquests drove to 
despair. Though many of the irregular horse of India 
might, on the extinction or reduction of the governments 
they had served, have been compelled to join them, it is 
Very evident that if those had found it (as they must have 
done had the rulers in Malwa been inclined to maintain 
tranquillity) a life of hardship and danger, their numbers 
Would have sooii lessened ; they would have resorted to 
another course of life; and as those who had originally 
embraced this line left 14 died, or lost their horses, the ranks 
of these freebooters would have tliinncd, and recruits would 
hot have been found to supply their place. Under such 
circumstances we might conclude that, as the Pindarics are 
not held together by any of tliose ties which unite nations 
of plunderers, but are formed of adventurers and freebootert 
of every class and denomination, early dissolution 'must have 

been certain. Yet how different is their condition from that 

* 

which has been supposed. The encouragement given to 

1 2 



dxiv SIR jroHN Malcolm’s letter capp. 

them by the chiefs of Malwa, the impunity with which they 
have hitherto made invasions into other countries, the plun- 
der tliey have obtained with a very moderate share of 
enterprise, and with comparatively little danger, added to 
their exemption from rigid authority and discipline, and a 
license to indulge to excess in the gratification of their pas- 
sions, must render their life the most attractive that it is 
possible to conceive, for all descriptions of the military 
classes ; but their lawless habits, and their want of those 
bonds which preserve union in adversity, though it is 
cause of their increase, will facilitate their reduction. It is 
against their resuscitation we have to guard, for we must 
never forget that it is worse than profitless to destroy those 
vermin, while the substance that produces them is left in its 
rotten and corrupt state to engender more. 

The Pindarics are not without confidence in the stmng 
holds in which they have lodged their families and wealth,^ 
and to whicli they retire when the season is unfavourable 
for their operations, or when they dread attack. These 
holds are almost all situated upon or near the great range 
of Vindhya mountains, between which and the right bank 
of the Nerbudda there intervenes a strip of fertile country, 
interspersed with ridges of low hills and forests, in some 
places twenty, in others only two miles in breadth, which 
they appear to deem of great importance, as it facilitates 
their incursions into our country and those of our allies, the 
Bhonsela, Nizam, and Paishwah. The near approach of 
our troops stationed in the Nagpore country to this tract, 
has evidently excited the greatest alarm ; and we observe, 
that in all their consultations upon the mode of defence 
against the expected attack, they are no longer at ease with 
regard to the safety of their baggage and families. Cheetoo, 


• Captain Tod's Memoir. 



IV.] TO THE MAnqtTESS OT HASTINGS. clx? 

in a late letter to Hindoo Row Ghatkeali, one of Sindians 
chief officers, laments that that prince should not consider the 
present time as proper to break with the English, and pro* 
mises to do alone (provided he receives secret aid) all that 
is possible. But (the Pindarie chief adds) until a place 
of refuge for the families of your slaves is in our hands, we 
are helpless ; but having this, it will then rest with me to 
carry to the garrison of Calcutta rapine and devastation 
The same leader, in a subsequent letter to Ameer Khan, ex- 
presses a fear that Sindia will be deterred, by apprehension 
of the British government, from complying with this request. 

To the many petitions (he observes) that I sent to the 
Huzoor + of Dowlut Row Sindia, the replies have been to 
the following purport : — At this time my friendship with 
the English is strong and undivided ; to break it now is not 
advisable, but covertly and in time of need my exertions 
shall not be wanting : but to give a place for your families 
would be the cause of immediate rupture with them.’’ — 
‘‘ There is (Cheetoo continues) no help for this ; what is to 
be done? Hindu Row, to the extent of his abilities, is 
using every effort, and on his exertions lies my expectation : 
at present I am looking for a place of strength and difficult 
access, and, being unsuccessful elsewhere, have addressed 
the Rajah, Maun Singh. I am confident that, on this sub- 
ject, you will also address him to this effect, — that the place 
which was formerly assigned for the residence of the Maha- 
rajah Holkar should be appointed for us J ; and that you 
will soon intimate to me its success, that from it my heart 


* Captain Close*s Letter to Mr. Adams, January 23, 1817. 
t Huzoor means presence, and is the common term used in speaking 
or writing of princes. 

J In 1805, when Holkar was pursued into the Punjub by Lord 
Lake, he scut his family to Malwa* 



eMfi BIB . JOBur >iit£Coi.u's letter [Ar^ 

aiay be at eaSe, and that I may fade the English with 
con€deuce. Then, for once, by the' blessing of God and 
the fortune of the exalted, the tumult shall be spre^ to the 
environs of Calcutta, the whole country shall be conagned 
to dshes, and to such distress shall they be reducedi that thu 
accounts will not' fail to reach you ; but at preseUt this must 
be delay^ for want of a place of refuge. To whatever 
fetent you can aid me with a force in horse, do send— 4his 

will be proper and necessary 

In an address to Manii Singh, Hajali of Joudpore, Chee^ 
too observes, “ To Maharajah Dowlut Row Sindia, wHo is 
our master, I have sent several successive letters on this 
subject; to which the replies have been, that the present 
was not a fit season to break the bonds of friendship and 
alliance which existed, but by concealed methods, and in 
overy possible manner, evety assistance and exertion should 
be made for us. But without a place of refuge and safety 
for our families, our minds cannot be at ease. 'The Mahar. 
rajah Sindia cannot give the wished-for place, as his inten> 
tions towards us would then be obvious to the English; for 
this reason, conadering our necessity for a place of refuge, 
I have hopes that from your favour the place you assigned 
for the residence of Jeswunt Row Hoikar'’s family may now 
be bestowed for the families of ypur slaves; then it will 
reach your ear to what straits and difficulties I have reduced 
the English, for the whole of their country, even to Calcutta, 
be consigned to devastation and plunder. X<et the 
Huzoot'**' have reliance on us, ^nd we your slaves shaU 
always be at your command. But if this is not to be your 
pleasure, recollect this tribe (the English^ are wise and full 
of .penetration, and by slow and imperceptible degrees mil 
root out every chief of Hindustan. Do not forget these 

* Presaacfe.: 



ly.}. TOwTIlE JHA.EQ.UESS OF HASITINQS. cUyii 

la^prils of ypur slave ; my„ vakeel *, who resides in the vjcto-. 
vious firmy (SindiaX) will send you by the bircarrah -I*. 

of all that concerns ine^ I remain in expectation 
of a lieply, and trust that it will be favourable/’ 
i I have quoted these genuine documents, as I am confident 
the present condition, feelings, and views of the Pindarics, 
etannpt be better explained than, in the words of tlueir prin^ 
Qipol lender. In a recent letter J from Hindu Row Grhatkeab 
to Chectoo, which the resident at Sindia’s court cpncludes^ 
to have been written with the knowledge of that ruler^ he 
bids him to let lus heart rest satisfied and after inform- 
ijag him that the remonstrances of the British resident 
have compelled Sindia to detach a force against him, adda 
V whatever else is decided on shall be duly and fully com- 
municated to you.” 

Tlmugh the Pindarics have been successful in passing 
^nd repassing our strong corps upon a frontier, to a degree 
Uiat has exposed most fully the folly of attempting to chock 
Uiis evil by a defensive system, the activity and great 
exertions of our troops haye on several occassions reached,^ 
mid severely punished these freebooters, but not one of our 
successes, however, is ever mentioned in any of the native 
Ackbars, or newspapers of Malwa; while the exploits of the 
!pindaries in plundering pur territories, defeating our trpops^ 
and murdering European ofl5cei-s, are blazoned on every 
pccasion* These reports, however exaggerated and false, 
are believed by the parties for whom they are written, and 
prove a sufficient antidote to dispel any impressions that 
might arise from an occasional reverse in a distant ex- 
pedition. 

'We may conclude from what has been stated, that though 
tlie Pindarics consider themselves at war witli tjie English* 

* Agent. t Messenger. 

« Vide Captain Close's letter to Mr. Adaiu, I9th March, il819« 



olxviit 


SIR JOHN MAICOLH’S I.RTr£a 


[Aff* 


and are disposed to make every exertion they can against 
that nation and its allies, they continue to believe that a 
similarity of interest and of habits will secure to them the 
aid of the predatory powers in Malwa, but the latest 
accounts prove that at a moment when unanimity seems so 
essential to the safety of this body, they are distracted by 
internal disputes, which have been lately aggravated by 
their alarm, and the consciousness of how little they can 
depend upon each other on the occurrence of any serious 
emergency. 

From what has been said of the predatory powers in 
Malwa, it will be seen that though distinct in other respects^ 
they are from necessity, from habits, from common motives 
of action, and from a communion, or rather confusion of 
interests, *so connected with each other, and have their pos* 
sessions so intersected, and their policy so interwoven, that it 
is impossible, while they remain in their present condition, 
to separate them from each other ; and when we see, as we 
have done, for several years past, our provinces and those 
of our allies annually plundered, our subjects slaughtered, 
and our revenues exhausted, by defensive measures, and a 
display of our strength; when the only result of our 
forbearance is to make our friends lose confidence in our 
protection, and our enemies exult in our anticipated ruin i 
what consolation can it afford us to discriminate with nicety 
the respective share of the wrongs done us that belongs to 
each of the different parties, whose conduct has produced 
this effect. There can be no doubt that the course pur- 
sued by Dowlut Row Sindia for ten years, has contributed, 
and that most materially, to the state of danger in which 
we stand. That of the government of Holkar has had the 
same effect; Ameer Khan is a declared predatory chief, and 
the whole are so blended with the Pindarics, that we must 
refrain from offensive operations, or be prepay to en-’ 



IV.] "to TOR MARQ,U£Sa OF HASTINGS. clxix 

counter all. Of our right to adopt that proceeding upou 
this occasion 9 which a consideration of our honour, our 
interests and our safety, so imperatively demand, there 
caxmot, I think, be a question. We are fully justified, 
if it suits our policy to do so, to declare to both Sindia and 
Holkar that their conduct has rendered invalid the peace 
of 1806 , and that the situation in which they have placed 
the British , government has absolved it from those ties 
which it then contracted, and that their future relations 
must be determined by their compliance or otherwise with 
the demands which we felt ourselves authorized to make 
upon them. 

With Ameer Khan we can, as far as matter of right is 
concerned, have no difficulty ; the question, as far as relates 
to him, is one of expediency, and with regard to the 
Findaries, our reputation forbids any negotiation. In the 
contests we are engaged in with them, particular chiefs may 
by their actions recommend themselves to clemency, and 
even reward ; but after what has happened, it would, till 
they are subduedg be degrading to enter into any parley or 
contract with the principal leaders of this tribe. 

It is far from satisfactory to be obliged to engage in a 
contest in which the enemy is so intangible, and the interests 
that may be effected so various, that it is alike impossible 
to determine the limits of the scene of action, as the scope 
of measures in which we may become involved ; but unfor- 
tunately we have no option, and to establish the necessity 
we are under of proceeding (whether we are disposed or not) 
to the remedy of this evil, whatever may be the consequences 
that attend the effort, two questions only need be asked-* 
First, is it possible after the events that have occurred, 
for the British government to delay the most active ope- 
rations against the Pindarics ? Secondly, is it possible to 
carry on these operations without being aided by the do* 



ulxx SIB JOHN MALCOl^M’S LETTBB 

cided friendship, or opposed by the open hostiTity ;o£ the 
predatory powers in Malwa, with wliom the P,iiidaries have 
been shewn to^ be so connected and so blended, that nothing 
but their ccnnplete amalgamation or separation oaa afford 
us the means {with all our commanding force) of obtaining 
more than a mere temporary exemption from dangers. 

. There can be only one answer to these questions; there 
indeed appears to me to be no longer any ground to argue 
{as far at least as tliis point is concerned,) regarding. the two 
opposite systems of policy alluded to in the. beginning of 
this letter* For let us suppose that the one adopted tby 
Marquess Wellesley was radically wrong, and that the 
trary course was wise and politic ; still that does not ajter 
the actual state of affairs, which is all that we have.to disr 
cuss. Events have occurred that were not, perhaps^ to be 
anticipated, which have disappointed all the views we had 
indulged of remaining at peace ; while those powers, from 
all connexion with whose affairs we had carefully abstained, 
were waging war against each other, and wasting their 
resources in interminable conquests ” The sphere of dis- 
order has gradually enlarged; the predatory bands that this 
system cherished and encourc^d have taken a wider rarige, 
and our territories, and those of our allies, have been made 
the scene of their cruel rapine and devastation. Compelled 
.to punish this aggression, and to prevent its recurrence, we 
must be guided more by a consideration of our own sUua«- 
tion, and the actual condition of those whose conduct has 
forced us into the field, than by attention to any rules of a 
particular system. It is no doubt the duty of the Indian 
government to attend imt only to the orders but wishes of 
the controlling authorities in England ; but these can only 
at a crisisdike the present prescribe generally the line they 
ewish to be pursued. Their sentiments {as far as relates to 
.this question)- may be anjticif^ted : they will, bq doubly be 



JVO TQi THE M4)iqVES8 OF, BASTISTGS. dxxi 

the aaine as they have bten on similar occasions though 
averse to any ext^ision of our political relations that can be 
avoided^ and deprecating watj they never will shrink from 
the sacred duty oi protecting their subjects^, nor hesitate tft 
^prove of measures, whi(^ have no Object but to. puni^ 
gross and violent aggression, and to prevent its recurrenceii 
Though desirous to discourage all plans of ambition, how-^ 
ever likely to be attended with remote and contingent ad> 
vantages, and justly apprehensive of financial dif^culties 
fiom increasing disbursements, it would be calumny uptm 
the wisdom of these authorities to suppose that they womM 
approve of any policy which sacrificed the safety of their, 
subjects, the peace of their territories, the confidence of 
their allies, and tlie reputation of their gpvennnent, to ph, 
tain a short respite from evils which arc inevitable, and of 
a nature which entail difficulty, and an expenditure propor^^r 
tiqned to the delay incurred in meeting them. 

Having thus given my sentiments in the fullest manner, 
on the condition of the different states of India, of our ac« 
tual relations to each of them, and the right we haveiac,-; 
quired, and the necessity we are under of attacking the Pim 
daries, and of settling, in a mode that will secure the peace 
of our territories , and those of our allies, the predatory 
powers in Malwa, I shall procecdj after a few general oh* 
servations on the character of the measures we should adopt, 
to offer my ojnnion on the extent of our military prepara* 
turns, the positions we should immediately occupy, the de* 
mands we should make from Sindia, Holkar, and Ameer 
Khan> mid eonclude by some general observations on the 
probable conduct of these chiefs. 

In commencing this part of the subject 1 shall only, in 
this place, refer to the opimon I before gave, relative totbe 
course we should pursu^ if compelled to attack the Pinda* 
fte% 4hQii 1 may remark on the qirents^which have mpm 



dxtii 


sin JOHN MAI.C0I.M'S tETTER 


[Afp. 


occurred. Two successive invasions of our territories by 
these freebooters, their open and declared intention to repeat 
these invasions, the support they have indirectly received 
from Dowlut Row Sindia, the evasions and inattention 
with which that prince has treatetl our repeated remon- 
strances ; and, above all, the accession of the Rajah of Nag- 
pore to the general defensive alliance, have substantially al- 
tered this question. I consider that there are now more im- 
perative causes than then existed, for our interfering with a 
strong hand in the reduction or settlement, not only of the 
Pindarics, but of the predatory powers in general, and that 
our prospect of success in effecting this object is much 
greater. We may, I conceive, pursue this end by any one 
of three causes. First, we may instantly declare war upon 
the Pindarics, and those predatory powers whom we con- 
sider as their supporters and protectors; and unless the 
latter instantly submit to the terms we propose, we may 
conquer their country, and add it to our possessions. Se- 
condly, w'e may limit our exertions to the mere expulsion 
of the Pindarics from their present haunts, and trust to the 
check which the advanced position of our troops will im- 
pose on them, to the apprehensions of Sindia, Holkar, and 
Ameer Khan, for our future security ; and, lastly, we 
may, if compelled to war, restore or grant the countries we 
subdue to our allies, contenting ourselves with such arrange- 
ments as are necessary to defray the charges we incur in 
the support of troops, for the establishment of tranquillity. 

The first of these plans cannot be entertained, if it is at 
variance with the principles of policy which are prescribed 
for the government of our Indian empire, and, as far as I 
can judge, in opposition to our true interests. Territorial 
possession will, in spite of all our efforts to the contrary, 
come too fast upon us; and besides the general reasons which 
oppose this policy, the present habits of the population of 



IV.J 


TO THE MARdUKSS OF HASTINGS. 


clxxiii 


Malwa are not favourable to such a change an an immediate 
transition to the rule of the British government, which would 
be compelled to maintain for some years an army in that 
province. It is also no slight objection to this plan, that its 
adoption would, in a considerable degree, deprive us of the 
means of rewarding those who may aid us in the contest in 
which we are about to be engaged. The fact is, should 
Sindia or Holkar venture to provoke hostilities, their pos- 
sessions present us with the best of all materials for destroy - 
ing their power, and raising other native authorities more 
calculated to preserve tranquillity. To seize the territory 
in Malwa for our own use, therefore, wovild be every way 
impolitic ; and though it is probable we should be obliged 
to extend our protection to those who obtained it, there is 
a wide difference between the exercise of a general controul 
through the means of our influence and the direct establish- 
ment of our government. 

Of the second proposition, which goes to the mere expul- 
sion of the Pindarics, and to trust to our advanced positions, 
and the apprehensions of Sindia, Holkar, and Ameer Khan, 
for our future security, I shall only observe, that it would 
be (after what has recently occurred) at once the most 
insecure and expensive of all plans of offensive operations 
we could pursue ; better, indeed, persevere in our useless 
lines of defence, or arm our villages, and bid them to 
resist the Pindarics, than make a parade of encircling the 
weak and divided predatory powers of Malwa with the 
British armies, and conclude on driving a few Pindarics 
for a season from their petty forts and mountain fastnesses. 
This course could have no result but of diminishing our 
reputation, encouraging our enemies, and placing us at the 
end of one year, or at the utmost two, under the necessity 
of renewing pur preparations to revenge fresh aggression, 
and to recover the imprcfifsion of an abortive campaign. 



ckniV '&1R JO&N IRTTBR. [Api^. 

‘ The last coul-se, which proposes to restore or to grant the 
eoantries we ihay subdue to our allies, contenting ourselves 
with such arrangements as are necessary to defray tha 
charges we may incur, in the support of troopa for th^ 
^stablishtnent and maintenance of tranquillity, appears to 
ine on every ground the best we can adopts It places our 
proceeding upon its true ground. Our conduct will shew ^1 
India that, while we indulge in no schemes of ambition,-^ 
cherish no desire to extend our possessions, we are resolved 
not only to resist aggression, but to prevent its recurrence, 
And determined to compel those whose bad faith or bod 
rifle have contributed to produce this state of affairs, to aid 
with their resources, both of men and revenue, in its remedy^ 
or to share in the evils and hazards of that war which this 
systematic policy has brought on us; and in the latter 
event, this course will furnish iis, as I have before stated^ 
with ample materials for their reduction. 

It is quite impossible to propose any plan of operation, 
before the conduct of Sindia, Holkar, and Ameer Khan 
shall have so far developed their intentions, as to enable ua 
to discover the quality and number of our enemies* We 
ean at present only consider ourselves at war with the 
Pindarics, and we may perhaps have none else to contend 
with ; while, on the other hand, it is possible that all the 
predatory chiefs may combine to save their brethren from 
destruction ; and we should be prepared for the worst : 
berides, in exact proportion to the force we exhibit, and 
the imposing attitude it assumes, will be our chance of 
avoiding war with those powers, or if it should occur, of 
bringing it to a speedy and honourable issue. 

From the troops already in the Deckan, and the corps? 
which may be added to them, three forces of nearly equal' 
magnitude might be formed, either of which would be eq^iiah 
to meet any army that the utmost combination could brings 



JV.r TO Waa MABftUESiS or HASTlNtiS. clxx^ 

Against Us. One of these forees should, as soon as possible^ 
occupy a position at or near Hindia, on the Nerbudda *.* 
This would advance it to the verge of the Scene intended 
operdti(k)Sy'-afld place it in oompleto coinmunication witM 
Colonel Adem's cot^s in the Nagpore countt’yV whilO i* 
vJ^Ould be supported by the force at Ellichipore. The latter 
>tould, on the advance corps crossing the NerbUddaty oOt 
Cupy it's position, join, and co-operate with it, in the event 
of .cfreumstaiices rendering such a measure prudent or ad-^ 
visable. The force in the Poonah territory could- not ad-» 
vaih;e to aid in any general plan’ of operations in Malwa, till 
the policy of Sihdia and Holkar was decided, as it would 
be req[u*ired to reduce the territoiies of thasc chiefs in Can-* 
dcish, if they provoked hostilities. It is of consequence 
this point should be decided some months before the Ner» 
budda is fordable, in order (should these chiefs be against 
us) that this corps might be at liberty, after having reduced 
Asseerghur, Chatidore, and Galnaj to occupy an advanced 
position near Chouly Mohyseer, cm the Nerbudda, which 
is'in every view important, as it covers the left of the corps 
at or near Hindia, connects that with the frontier posses* 
sion of Guzzerat, and could move on the centre of Malwa./ 

’Corps would be required at the capitals of Hyderabad and 
Poonali, and some tremps must be left tci aid in the pro* 
tection exf the provinces of our allies, lest parties of free* 
bc)ot^ should pass the advanced line, and ravage theml .But 
^th all the preparations we could make, we should not be 
4ble to guard every danger; and I completely join in the 
opinion, that we ought,' even at the hazard of !petty disJ 

* Hindia is aboutr sixty miles from Hursingabad, one of the prini 
^ipal- positions of Colonel Adam’s forces, about ninety miles from EHi^ 
ebipore, and about one hundred miles from Chouly, Mohyseer, and 
about sixty from BbOpaul. 



clxxvi SIR JOHN MALCOZM’S LETTER - [Arr. 

orders in our own territories or those of our allies^ to direct 
our chief exertion to the inunediate settlement of the con« 
test in which we are engaged ; and I should act in this 
manner, from tlie conviction that oar success in that can 
alone ^ve permanent security to our subjects. 1 do not, 
however, mean by this to recommend any neglect of prepa* 
ration, to guard against an evil which it is likely we may 
have to encounter, but only to class it as secondary to the 
great object, of striking at the root of the power of our 
enemies. 

The government of Bombay, after furnishing such fur- 
ther aid as may be required for the corps in the territories 
of the Ptushwoli, should, I conceive, equip an efficient field- 
force from the remainder of the disposable part of its army, 
to occupy an advanced position on the frontier of Guzzerat, 
which, while it covers that country, approximates, by a 
communication along the banks of the Nerbudda, the corps 
near Chouly Mohyseer, and by the Chumbul, with any 
force that may advance on that river from Hindustan. 
This corps would be also able to grant protection to the 
Rajpoot princes of Oudipore and Joudpore, should events 
dictate such a course of policy. 

I feel some diffidence in extending these general remarks 
on the outline of our preparations to those necessary on the 
frontier of our territory in Hindustan ; but as far as my 
experience, and the opinions I have seen in the several do- 
cuments I have been furnished with, enable me to judge, I 
think that political, as well as military reasons, recommend 
that one corps should be stationed on the frontier of the 
territory of Jypore, while another should occupy a position 
near Saugur : the first corps would have its communication 
with Delhi through Rewari, while it was supported by a 
strong reserve near Agra ; and the latter, in conjunction 



IV.] TO THE MARqtlESS OF HASTIl^GS. . clxXVli 

with the reserve in Bundelcund would completely keep 
Sihdia in check, if he remained (which he probably will 
liMess he is decidedly hostile) in the position which he 
has occupied for the last five years, near Gwalior. 

The strength and com]>osition of the different corps that 
have been proposed, must depend upon circumstances. I 
should conceive a force consisting of a regiment of Euro- 
peans, six battalions of sepoys, and two regiments of cavalry, 
with a proportion of light artillery, and a body of irregular 
horse, as quite efficient to protect itself, or to defeat (if it 
could bring them to action) any body of troops which our 
enemies, supposing them all combined, could bring against 
k. But such a corps would be too deficient in the essential 
branch of cavalry, to expect much success against the hordes 
of predatory horse to which it might be opposed. It could 
reduce forts, occupy posts, and force its way in any direc- 
tion it chose ; but while it toiled after such an enpmy as 
the Pindaries, or their allies, it would always be liable to 
be harassed, and have its supplies cut off. Its sphere of 
action, therefore, if it was actually opposed, must be limited 
to the circle of its depots. We may collect, and it will 
probably be policy so to do, the principal part of our light 
force into one or two corps, and allot to them the more 
active operations. But still every effort must be made to 
remedy the defect of this branch. If no more regiments of 
cavalry are to be raised, the depots should be increased, and 
men should be sent as fast as they are drilled, to supply the 
casualties that must be expected to occur. It has been 
proiiosed (and the suggestion is excellent) to mount a pro- 
portion of our infantry on tattoos, or small horses, the com- 

* Captain Close lias recommended a position on the river Sind, near 
C/liandpore, which is within the territory of our dependent, the Rajah 
of Diitteah, and only thirty miles from Gwalior. 

Voh. ir. 


m 



Clxxviii Sm JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER [Afp. 

mon animal of burden in the Deckan (in Hindustan the 
camel is belter for this puqjbse); and this plan will no 
doubt> in some degree, remedy the defect which has been 
stated, by giving to an additional body of our troops the 
power of rapid movement. Another mode of palliating 
this evil is, an increased proportion of irregular horse. I 
have before stated my sentiments fully on the wisdom of 
adding to their numbers, and I rejoice to see that this 
policy is completely adopted. They may be contemptible 
in comparison with our regular cavalry, but they are equal, 
and, when well managed, sin}erior, to the enemy; besides, 
they are taken from the class with whom we have to war, 
and I continue of opinion that every effort should be made, 
both before, and during the contest, to add to this branch 
of our strength, which is the only one in which we can 
expect aid from our allies. It is, I am satisfied, in a great 
degree through this species of force that we must expect 
complete success, and with the means we possess, and those 
we shall obtain, we shall, 1 trust, be able to compel plun- 
derers to subdue plunderers, and to make those who have 
hitherto promoted anarchy and confusion, the instruments 
of restoring order and peace. But this part of our plan 
requires more delicate management than all the rest. These 
bands, when attached to our army, or co-operating with it, 
must not be judged on mere military principles; we cannot 
expect they will emulate our troops in either their courage 
or their discipline. The constitution and habits are altoge- 
ther opposite, and it is sufficient if we can bring them, by 
kindness and encouragement, to perfonn cheerfully, though 
in a veiy loose and, to us, an unmilitary manner, those duties 
for which alone they are fitted. The services of this class, 
on any terms, may, politically speaking, l>e deemed a be- 
nefit, for it prevents their being against us, which they 
would probably be if unemployed ; but from what I have 



IV.] Ta THE MARQUESS OP HASTINGS. clxxix 

seen of this description of troops, in every part of India, I 
am confident that they maybe rendered of the greatest utility 
to our operations. But, to effect this, their habits must be 
studied and their temper preserved, and every measure 
adopted that can encourage them to activity and exertion. 
Plunder is their legitimate reward : it is not that of our 
soldier; and though he becomes often entitled to it, his 
discipline is never in such hazard as when it occupies his 
attention. 

Before I state my sentiments respecting the policy we 
should pursue towards Sindia, Holkar, and Ameer Khan, 
it will be necessary to remark that their conduct has been 
one of the chief causes which has compelled us to arm ; and 
as our preparations are from necessity on a scale calculated 
to meet their combined hostility, we must consider ourselves 
as past that stage at which it would not be either wise or safe 
to enter upon any negotiations. Experience indeed shews 
that such could have no fruit but procrastination, deception, 
and disappointment. We must therefore determine upon 
our course of proceedings, and, having fixed that, make 
Such demands as we are in reason, in faith, and in justice 
entitled to do ; and if they are rejected, the non-concurring 
party must be considered in a state of war. Our demands 
must be as reasonable as attention to our security and that 
of our allies will permit ; and they must have upon the face 
of them that character of moderation, but firmness, which 
makes it alike impossible to mistake our object and our 
resolution to effect it. 

' After all the consideration I have been able to give this 
subject, I conceive that such a proceeding is the only one 
that can be adopted with the least prospect of avoiding a 
war with Dowlut Row Sindia. It is vain to expect we can 
pursue our plans against the Pindaries without involving 
ourselves with that chief, unless he is pledged too deep to 

m 2 



clxxx sin JOHN MA£cOLM*S letter [App. 

make it easy for him to forsake our alliance. In a contest 
like this, all his habits, his prejudices, his 'wishes are against 
Hs; we have nothing in our favour but his fears. His faith 
and his promises cannot be relied on for a moment. He 
will, if unshackled, be our secret enemy, and probably take 
the first opportunity a casual reverse affords him of acting 
more openly; but we must not suffer a line of action which 
would cramp all our operations, and though it might end 
in the destruction of this ruler, would inevitably lead to 
increased embaiTassinents, hazard, and expenditure. 

The ground of our proceeding with Dowlut Row Sindia 
is already laid ; he has been told, that the Pindarics can 
be no longer tolerated ; all India demands their suppression, 
and all India shall be put in motion to effect it. Were 
(which God avdrt),” this public despatch adds, ‘‘ the Ma- 
harajah to afford the Pindarics refuge, or to give shelter to 
their families, in order to let the aimed body have free 
scope, it would amount to an open declaration of war against 
every power in India which has suffered from the unpro- 
voked and horrible outrages of those wretches.'^' — “ The 
British government,’’ a subsequent paragraph of this letter 
adds, seeks no advantages beyond the security of itself and 
its allies against future outrages. The lands possessed by the 
Pindarics Jaidad from Dowlut How Sindia, as usurped by 
them from his Highness, would revert to him ; any portion 
of territory wrested by them from other states would fall 
again to those states respectively. The British government 
aims not at any aggrandizement, and only desires the sup- 
pression of an evil, which would speedily become as dan- 
gerous for Dowlut Row Sindia as it has been injurious to 
all his neighbours.” 

This communication appears to have excited some alarm 
in his mind ; but the measures which he proffered to take 
against the Pindarics have only furnished further proof of 



IV] TO THE M4RQ,U£SS OF HASTINGS. clxxxi 

his continued evasion, and must tend to confirm^ if any con^ 
firmation were wanting, the right we possess to proceed to 
any extremes against him. Under such circumstances 
Sindia might be called upon, not only to grant us his cordial 
aid in the suppression of the Pindarics, but to give the 
British government fair and reasonable security that he 
would do so. The grounds upon which this demand was 
made should bef fully stated : the tone of it should be de- 
cided, and a very limited period should be given for an 
answer. The security to be demanded is the chief point 
for consideration : it should be of a nature that would make 
it difficult, if not impossible, for this prince to deviate from 
the line he has taken. Nothing but the temporary cession 
of some forts or tracts of country to which he attached 
great value could bind him in a way that would admit of 
our placing implicit confidence in his faith ; and it is ob- 
vious tliat, unless we can place such confidence, we should 
be compelled to incur more hazards in the war with the 
Pindarics, and have less prospect of bringing it to a satis- 
factory conclusion than if Sindia was our declared enemy, 
Beasoning on such grounds, I feel the positive necessity of 
demanding security, but at the same time consider that such 
demand should be as moderate as possible, consistent with 
the object in view ; and I would rather incur some risks, 
than drive him to despair by propositions that were calcu- 
lated to give him alarm for his future safety and inde- 
pendence. 

W e might require Sindia to make over, till the Pindarics 
were subdued, or for a period of three or five years, the 
fortress of Asseerghur and the town and district of Bhurram- 
pore. It could, however, be settled that liis own officers 
should collect the revenue everywhere, except in the Pettah, 
or suburbs of Asseerghur ; but that such Revenue was to bo 



clxxxii SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER [App. 

paid to the English government, which, after deducting a 
fair sum for the payment of the troops necessary to garrison 
the fort and protect the town of Bhurrampore, should dis- 
burse the remainder in paying a body of Sindia's horse, to 
be employed, under the direction of the British officer com- 
manding, in protecting the country and in aiding the general 
operations against the Pindarics. 

The grounds of this demand are obvious. The posses- 
sion of Asseerghur as a depot * is very essential to the com- 
munication with that line of corps which we must form upon 
the Nerbudda; and its being in the hands of Sindia, 
should he be hostile, or pursue a doubtful line, or secretly 
encourage the Killadar of this fortress to act in pretended 
opposition to his orders (which would be quite consonant to 
Mahratta policy), might prove a very serious obstacle to 
our operations, and force iis at a very inconvenient season 
to detach a corps to take it. We may with justice assert 
that this position, though of great importance to us in the 
expected campaign, can be of none to Sindia. We may 
add that we have the power of taking it before he could 
possibly afford it any relief, and that our situation and his 
conduct would fully justify such a measure; but tliat we 
consider its voluntary cession for a short period will convey 
to other powers an impression of his friendship to the British 
government which no professions ever can. We am urge 
that nothing short of his compliance with our demands can 
restore that confidence which his repeated evasions have 
forfeited; and we may add, that as far as these respect 
Asseerghur, we are the more positive, as experience has 
shewn that we cannot trust the officer whom he places in 
command, the Killadar of that fortress having on a former 
occasion openly given protection to the Pindarics. 

♦ The lower fort of Asseerghur is well calculated for a dcp6t. 



IV.] 


TO THE MABQ^UESS OF HASTINGS. clxxxili 


It has been suggested*, the several otlier strongholds 
should be demanded from Sindia as security for his conduct, 
I am not sufficiently acquainted with their local importance 
to offer an opinion on this point, wliich can only be judged 
by two considerations — their value to us, and their value to 
hini^ Asseerghur has consetpience in both views, and it is 
an additional reason for this demand, that should Sindian’s 
Killadar, in the event of its cession, refuse to comply with 
his master’s mandate, which he might do either from a view 
of his own interests or from secret instructions, w'e 2x>ssess 
the means of its immediate reduction. If Sindia consent 
to add to the temporary cession of Asseerghur tliat of onCi 
or at the utmost two more strongholds, we can I'cquire no 
further security of that descriiitioii. It remains to speak of 
the other demands which jx)licy dictates to be made of this 
prince. lie should, I conceive, be required to assent to 
our taking under our jirotection the Rajah of Jyjwre and 
Bhondee, and the Nabob of Bhopal, on the plain ground 
that, under tliat state of affairs which his conduct had 
chiefly produced; attention to the future security of our 
subjects, and those of our allies, coinjielled us to these 
measures. Sindia should be required to employ the most 
efficient and obedient {)art of his irregular horse in co-ope- 
ration with our troops, for the reduction and extinction of 
the Pindaries. He should engage never to shelter any of 
the principal chiefs of those freebooters, and not again to 
admit into his service, or to employ troops of that class, 
that is, bodies of armed men, who receive no pay, and 
avowedly subsist by spoil. 

An Englisli officer should be attached to each separate 
corps employed by Sindia on this service, whose duty it 
should be to communicate with the commander of any Bri- 


* Oapiiuii Clt>sc*b Corrospyndcacc. 



clxxxiv JSIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER [App. 

tish army or detachment whom they might be near, or with 
whom they might co-operate, and should any of Sindia’s 
tributaries, chief officers, commanders of corps, Killadars,or 
heads of districts or villages, give aid to the Pindaries, or 
neglect to supply with provisions, or support, as far as they 
had the power, the conjunct efforts of that prince and the 
British government, or of either separately, they should be 
treated as rebels and enemies. 

The sum of seven lacs and eighty-five thousand rupees, 
which the British government is bound by treaty to pay 
annually to Sindia, should, during the ensuing contest, be 
paid in such portions and such periods as Sindia may desire, 
to the commanders of different corps of his horse co-ope- 
rating with the British troops, provided the conduct of these 
troops shall be such as to merit it. 

As Dowlut Row Sindia has resided in his present encamp- 
ment near Gwalior for five years, he should engage neither 
to leave it without the consent and concurrence of the 
Governor-general, nor to assemble any greater portion of 
his army than he usually has at that point. 

The British government might engage to restore to 
Sindia all possessions formerly belonging to him, which they 
may recover from the Pindarics ; and further, that, if 
forced into war with any other state, they will, in the event 
of success, and supposing the complete fulfilment of his 
engagements, make the most liberal arrangements for the 
consolidation and increase of his territories, having them- 
selves no view beyond that of security. 

In proof of the sincerity of the British government, it 
may be proper to engage, that at any period of the war, or 
after it is over, it will grant Dowlut Row Sindia the aid 
of a corps, for the safety of his person or the settlement of 
his territories, on conditions that shall be made as light as 
possible upon his resources, and his employment of thi^ 



IV.] TO THE MARi^tTESS OF HASTINGS. clxXXV 

corps (which shall act under the usual terms of other sub- 
sidiary forces) shall, if he object to a j>ermanent arrange- 
ment, be limited to a period of three, five, or seven years. 
The sole object of the British government being to aid, by 
any means, however foreign to its usual principles of policy, 
the settlement of his government, on a basis that shall se- 
parate an ally from those predatory hordes with whom he is 
connected, and a continued association with whom must 
tend to the downfal of his family and government. 

The above is a sketch of a treaty which, I think, gives 
us the only chance we can have of the aid of Dowlut Row 
Sindia. If he ixgree to it, he will soon be too far com- 
mitted to retract. Of his agreement it is not easy to form 
a conclusion Some of the terms certainly appear harsh 
and degrading to a proud and independent prince, but as 
they will not be proposed unless we are determined to insist 
upon them, what option has he but that of complying with 
our demands, or complete ruin, supposing him to refuse. 
The fall of his forts and territories in Candeish, Guzerat, 
and all he possesses on the left bank of Nerbuddn, is cer- 
tain, before that river is fordable, and consequently before 
he can give them any relief, and the moment the season 
admits of operations to the northward, a few months would 
see him stript of his strongholds,— of his revenues, sur- 
rounded by rebellious tributaries, and a mutinous array. 
While the conquest of his country would afford us (as has 
been before stated) the ready means of completing his ruin, 
Sindia, thus reduced to the condition of a freebooter, might 
still possess means of harassing us, and of protracting that 
^ttlement which it is our interest to make, but he could 
cherish no hopes of being restored to the height from which 
he had fallen ; and we may rest satisfied he contemplates 
such a reverse of fortune with too great horror to incur 
the hazard, if it can possibly be avoided. On these grounds 



elxxxvi SIB JOHN MALCOLM'S LETTER [App. 

I think we may indulge a reasonable expectation that Sindia^ 
when he sees our troops assembled, and assembling from 
every quarter, — when he discovers from that, and our 
altered tone, that we are determined to be no longer trifled 
with, and when all his attempts at evasion or procrastina- 
tion are foiled, by a prompt and energetic policy, will agree 
to the terms proposed : and I am quite satisfied that our 
coercing him into this agreement, is the only measure that 
can save him from ruin. For it is easy to forsee that, under 
any other course, we shall be easily involved in a war wth 
this prince, which must terminate in his destruction. 

. An offer should be made to the Holkar family to join in 
the league against the Pindaries, but the situation of that 
family renders a negotiation difficult. Powerless them- 
selves, they incline alternately to Ameer Khan, Sindia, and 
the Rajah of Kottah, in the hope of maintaining a conse- 
quence through the jealousy of those who are rivals, for the 
exclusive direction of their councils, or rather for the use of 
the name of a minor prince, whose authority is still in some 
degree recognised over a great part of his possessions. If, at 
the period when the demands of the British government arc 
made on this family, Sindia has estabhshed (as seems at 
present not improbable) his influence with Toolsali Bhye, 
the regent, or has possession of the person of the young 
prince, there can be no objection, provided he agrees to our 
terms, to his being made the medium of negotiation. If, 
on the other hand. Ameer Khan should have been able to 
re-establish his power, we might accept his proffered selr- 
vices as negotiator for tlic Holkar family ; and w'e could 
perhaps find no better means of connecting the attachment 
of this chief to our interest, with the encouragement of his 
ambition, and the support of his military followers. Should 
neither of these plans be practicable, w'e might open a direct 
communication with Toolsah Bliye, through the means of 



1V.3 TO THE MARCIUESS OF. HASTINGS. clxXXvU 

a political agent, who might proceed to Kottah, or to her 
petty court, which probably will remain in the vicinity of 
that city. 

The basis of a treaty with the Holkar family should be 
similar in principles to that with Sindia, the assent to our 
alliance with the llajah of Jypore, Boondee, and the Nabob 
of Bhopaul. The temporary cession of Tonk-Kamporah 
as a depot ; of one or two of the fortresses in Candeish *, 
and the appropriation, under the control of the British 
government, of the revenues of the Holkar family in the 
latter quarter, to the support of such bodies of horse as the 
regent Toolsah Bhyc should direct, to act with our armies 
in the prosecution of operations against the Pindarics, and 
the rc-establishment and maintenance of tranquillity; the 
revenues of Tonk-Bamporah, during their temporary alien- 
ation, might also be appropriated for the same purpose, 
of supporting a body of troops belonging to tliis family : 
but their relative situation to our advanced corps, and Um 
territories of Jypore, would make it dangerous to leave them 
in the possession of a power which might be hostile, and 
which, under any circumstances, is too weak to prevent 
their falling at any stage of the war into the hands of free- 
booters. A reference to the map will shew that the same 
consideration will apply, with still more force, to a great 
part of Holkar’s possessions in Candeish, To expel plun- 
derers from which, when the affairs of this government were 
not so distracted as at present, we have already had to em^ 
ploy our troops. 

Toolsah Bhye might be invited to place herself and the 
young prince under our protection, by proceeding either 

♦ Oalna is tolerably well adapted for a dep6t, and was used as such 
ill ISOlf. It is fiivourably situated to cover and receive supplies for- 
warded to the Deckan from Surat, by Soiiaghur andNuuilcrbar. 



cxxxviii SIR JOHN MALCOL»rS LETTKR [Am 

to Candeisli or Tonk-Ramporah, or she might repair to 
Indore, or Chouly Mohyser, when our troops advanced 
to the Nerbudda, and act in direct communication with the 
commander-in-chief of our army in that quarter. Such a 
step on her part might lead to a more intimate alliance. It 
is sufficiently evident that this family must either be strongly 
supported, or allowed to perish. The settlement of the 
disorders and distractions of the Holkar government, is one 
which no desire of refraining from the concerns of our neigh- 
bours can admit us to evade; for supposing we were con- 
tented that those parts of its territories which are situated 
in Malwa should become, even more than they have been 
for some years past, a source of contention between Ameer 
Khan, the Pindarics and Sindia, wc are prepared to allow the 
the more southern possessions of this family, which are full 
of strongholds, and which command, at very vulnerable 
points, the entrance to our own rich district of Attavery 
and tlie countries round Surat, as well as some of the most 
fertile provinces of the Nizam and Paishwah to share the 
same fate ? We cannot allow such a condition of affairs, and 
I have no hesitation in stating my conviction, that unless 
the family of Holkar agree to the demands we make upon 
it, and afford us a fair security that its resources will not 
be employed against us, we shall be compelled, by military 
as well as political considerations, to occupy, or at least to 
establish a control over the greatest part of the countries 
belonging to it in Candeish. 

It has been before stated that Ameer Khan has made over- 
tures, which there is some reason to think sincere, to place 
himself under the protection of the British government, his 
professed object being to obtain its guarantee for his several 
jagheers in Marwar and Malwa. Any interference with the 
former is impossible, as the English government possesses 
no right to mix in the concerns of the Rajah of Joiidpore j 



iv.] TO THE MABaUESS OF HASTINGS. clxxxix 

but if the guarantee of Seronge, and (in the event of our 
forming a connexion with the government of Holkar 
through his means) the estates he holds from that family 
in Malwa, could procure us the friendship of that chief, it 
might be desirable to endeavour to make an arrangement 
with him upon that basis* 

The negotiation might be opened with Ameer Khan on 
the ground that he must either, in the approaching contest, 
act the part of a friend or an enemy to the British govern- 
ment ; and he might be told, that if he chose the former, 
Seronge, and such of liis actual possessions as lay within the 
limits of our operations, should be protected, provided his 
officers in cliarge of them, granted us such aid in supplies, 
as might be occasionally required by the British troops in 
their vicinity, and refused shelter to the Pindarics, or their 
supporters ; Ameer Khan might also be requested to send a 
body not less than one thousand of his choicest horse, 
(natives of the company's provinces,) to co-operate with our 
army, and he might be promised their pay should be pro- 
vided from the revenue of Tonk-llainporah. With respect 
to any furtlier encouragement, this chief might he informed 
the future conduct of the British government towards him, 
would depend upon the part he acted during the war, and 
that his further recompense would be proportioned to his 
services. 

There could be no objection to make the sou of Ameer 
Khan a party in all these engagements. Indeed, this 
seems the point on v/hich he is most anxious: it would 
however be desirable that the effect^ of this arrangement 
should be to secure us the friendsliip of Ameer Khan, as 
chief of a predatory army, not to detach him from his 
followers, and leave (hem loose to swell the ranks of the 
Pindarics, or to elect a younger and more enterprising 
leader. No plan (as has been observed) would be more likely 



cxc 


SIB. JOHN MALCOXU’S XKTTBR 


[Afp. 

to answer this end than the one which made him the me- 
diator of an agreement with the Holkar family, but this 
must depend upon events regarding the occurrence of which 
it is at this period useless to speculate. 

Whatever proposition it may suit oiir policy to make to 
Ameer Khan, to induce him to join us, we should without 
resei*ve, inform him that we could keep no terms with any 
one, who directly or indirectly aided or favoured the Pin- 
daries, and that his either joining them, or allowing any 
of his troops to do so, or giving them or their families 
shelter, would be deemed a direct act of hostility against us, 
and expose his possessions to be seized, and his adherents 
treated as enemies to the British government. 

Ameer Khan must, if this proceeding is adopted, be 
called upon to evacuate that part of the territories of Jypore, 
which he has seized, and to refrain from any further attacks 
or interference with the possessions of the Rajah of 
Bhoondee or Nal)ob of Bhopaul. We may however if sa- 
tisfied of this chief’s friendly disposition, insist upon the 
Rajah of Jypore, making him some indemnity either in 
money or land for this cession, and our being a guarantee 
to such an arrangement, would be an additional tie upon his 
uncertain fidelity. 

^Vith the Rajahs of Jypore and of Bhi)ondee, should our 
military operations make it advisable to occupy a position 
in their territories, and, consequently, make us in some de- 
gree dependant upon them for supplies and aid, we must 
conclude a decisive arrangement. ^Ve cannot again abandon 
these states, and in the relations in which we shall be placed 
to them, it is not to be anticipated that there will be much 
difficulty in settling the terms of our connexion. They 
will naturally fall into a dependanc^ upon our protection 
which will put it out of their power, as it ought to be, to 
reject any engcigement that is formed on liberal and equitable 



IV,3 TO THE MABCtUESS OF HASTINGS. CXCi 

principles. It may be generally observed, that we cannot 
perhaps leave such states, too much at liberty in their in- 
ternal rule, nor limit them too strictly on all subjects of 
foreign policy ; they must indeed subject their councils on 
such points to our control, or there can be no safety in the 
connexion. 

The death of the Vizier Mahomed*, the actual ruler of 
Bhopaul, may be deemed a misfortune; heaippears to have 
been endowed with singular wisdom and courage, and to 
have saved by unparalleled fortitude, that wreck of the 
fortunes of his family -j*, which he was called to protect. 
His son Nuzzer Maliommed Khan, who has succeeded to 
his power, is said also to be the heir of his good qualities. 
This chief has renewed his application to us for protection, 
and the actual situation of affairs places us under the necessity 
of attending to his solicitations, for it is not to be expected 
this petty ruler will grant us any aid, unless secured from 
the consequences to which such conduct will expose him, and 
our operations at the commencement might be liable to the 
most serious obstructions by his hostility, or even by his 
neutrality. 

The substance of the proposals made by Nuzzer Khan, 
through an accredited agent to the English resident at 
Nagpoor, were, to deliver up the fort of Nuzzer Ghur, or 
Golgoon, to the English as a depot. To aid in obtaining 
supplies of every description for the British troops — -to 
abstain from all intercourses with the Pindaries, or other 
plunderers — to enter into no correspondence with any of the 
principal states of India, and only to communicate with the 
petty chiefs around him, relative to measures affecting the 
internal rule of his iX)Ssessions. 

* Died in March lSl(f. 

t Vizier Mahoinnied, though belonging to tiie fiiniily of Bliopaul, 
never assumed the name of Nabob. 



cxcii SIR JOHX MALCOtM'S 1-ETTER [App. 

Niizzer Mahommed pleads his extreme poverty as alone 
preventing him from making an offer of a pecuniary subsidy, 
but stated that with the fort of Nuzzer Ghur, several vil- 
lages would be ceded, and that future prosperity, through 
the fud of the English government, would, he hoped, enable 
him to do more. 

The character of these propositions shew that the chief 
of Bhopaul is sincere in his desire to obtain our protection. 
His object, no doubt, is the recovery of the former posses- 
sions of his family ; our first operations will put him in 
possession of those districts now occupied by the Pindarics, 
and in the event of Sindia placing himself in the condition 
of an enemy, we may be able to give further scope to his 
ambition. The troops of Bhopaul, though few in number, 
are reported among the bravest in Malwa, and in any agree- 
ment we form with this chief, it may be (as long as the war 
continues) more easy for him to furnish us with a small 
body of good horse, than to contribute a money-payment, 
and it may be of equal if not more benefit for us to receive 
his aid this way than in any other. 

It would perhaps be sufficient to make at first only a 
general engagement with Nuzzer Mahommed, by which he 
should agree to place at our command the resources of his 
country, and to give us as he has offered, a depot, should 
we require it, and to furnish us with a certain quota of 
troops to be increased, or pecuniary payment substituted 
in the course of the war if his resources were enlarged. We 
should on our part grant him protection, and promise that 
our future favour and liberality should be proportioned to his 
exertions. With the chief of Saugur and other petty rulers 
that may hereafter be similarly situated, I W'ould lecom- 
mend similar engagements leaving the settlement of more 
minute points to a final arrangement. We should by sucli 
means, obtain more complete information of their condition, 



IV.] TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. CXciii 

before we were too deeply involved in their concerns, but 
we should keep alive every motive that will stimulate 
them to exertion and promote our views. 

With the Rajah of Odipore, Joudpore, and Kottah, we can 
enter into no negotiation until Sindia and Holkar have taken 
a decided line ; but should that be against us, we must leave 
no effort untried to obtain the active assistance of these 
states. The Rajah of Odipore has recently solicited our 
protecting alliance, and the others must prefer it to the 
intolerable oppression and continued wrongs to which they 
are now subject. The Rajah of Kottah ’s character has been 
described ; a fitter instrument for the establislimeiit of good 
order could perhaps no where be found, and in the event 
of our being compelled to destroy or limit the powers of the 
Mahratta chiefs, we cannot do better than extend that of 
the Rajpoot princes, but particularly of one whose rule 
may comparatively be deemed a blessing in every province 
over which it is established. It need liardly be added, that 
in the event of any such result to the a|)proaching contest, it 
would be but justice to our own interests to make arrange- 
ments that would repay our disbursements, and maintain 
that force which was necessary to ensure our future tran- 
quillity. This could be done as the policy of the moment 
dictated, by the pecuniary payments, or the occupation of 
territory contiguous to our own. 

It has been before stated, that Cheetoo has applied to 
Maun Singh, Rajah of Joudpore, for a place of refuge for 
the families of his tribe; it may be necessary to inform 
that ruler and all others of his condition, that granting pro- 
tection or countenance to these freebooters, in any shape, 
will make them decided enemies of the British government, 
who will consider them as substantively responsible for such 
conduct, and punish them without reference to their con- 
nexions or dependence upon other states. 

VoL. II. 


n 



cxciv sm JOHN MAtCOtin’s IKTTER [App. 

If we are aided by the sincere friendship of Sindia, 
Ilolkar, and Ameer Khan, in the impending contest with 
the Pindaries, there can be no doubt of its speedy termina- 
tion ; but upon this we can hardly calculate. It is there- 
fore of more importance to speculate upon the consequences^ 
if we are attacked by one or all of these predatory powers : 
should Sindia be sincere in his co-operation, we should soon 
terminate the contest, as our own troops, aided by his irre- 
gular horse and those of our allies, would quickly expel the 
Pindai’ics from their present fastnesses, and pursue them 
until they were destroyed or dispersed, when arrangements 
could be made to prevent their again taking shape as a body 
of freebooterpS, which is throughout to be considered as our 
chief object. The aid Ameer Khan might give them would, 
in this case, not protract their fate for any long period, 
while it would be almost certain to involve his own ruin, 
for he could not bring his army to act against us, without 
abandoning many of tlie positions from which he draws 
those resources that keep them •together ; and though, 
under such cij'cumstances, they might swell the I'anks of 
plunderers, tliey would soon lose that strength and compa- 
rative consequence which they at present enjoy from their 
union under one chief. 

If Sindia was to declare against us, and Ameer Khan, 
witli the family of Ilolkar, were to take an opposite point, 
the ruin of Sindia would be certain and sudden. The pos- 
sessions of this prince woidd be easily reduced ; and past 
events, combined with his actual condition, give us a right 
to expect that even his own chiefs would soon become as 
anxious as others to share iu the spoil. 

Wc will now suppose the improbable case of the whole of 
the military liaiids in Mai wa being led, by a common interest, 
to defend that system by which they are supported, and be- 
ijig induced by a jealousy of our increasing power, to unite 



IV] TO THE MARQ,HESS OP HASTINGS. CXCT 

against us, and examine the danger we would have to en* 
counter. The following may be deemed a rough estimate 
of their collected forces : Sindia has perhaps 150,000 horse 
and 15,000 infantry of all descriptions, with an inconsider* 
able artillery. Holkar 10,000 horse and 4000 or 5000 
infantry, with a proportion of cannon. Ameer Khan 10,000 
horse, with some cot^ds of infantry, and a considerable train 
of artillery ; and the Pindarics 30,000 horse, with two or 
three corps of very indifferent infantry, and a few guns. 
There are, besides these, several bodies of infantry, who 
can hardly be said to be dependant upon any ruler, but 
subsist themselves amid this chaos of authority, by levying 
contributions on those parts of the country that arc the most 
unprotected. 

The aggregate of these may be estimated at 80,000 horse, 
of which not above 40,000 at the very utmost can be 
deemed deserving of that name, the rest being more like 
followers mounted on ponies than efficient horsemen. The 
whole of the infantry collected would perhaps be 25,000, 
and when we consider the change that has taken place in 
this class of troops since 1803, and the great deterioration 
of their discipline and equipments, it is not too much to 
assume that, if they were all assembled at the same spot, 
any one of the corps, of the strength which I proposed, would 
be capable of defeating them. It would be iigainst a pre- 
datory war w e would liave to guard ; and suppose (which 
I shall soon shew is quite im})ossible) that the whole of this 
body of 80,000 men were to act in perfect concert, in offensive 
operations against us, what would be the consequence? We 
should have on the Nerbudda, and in the Deckan, and the 
Paishwalfs territories, and on the frontier of the Madras 
territories, w'ell-equipped corps supporting each other, 
amounting, in the aggregate, to upw^ards of 40,000 troops, 
of which 6000 or 7000 are irregular cavalry, besides a body 

n 2 



cxcvi 


SIR JOHN MALCOLM*S LETTER 


[API*. 


of from 15,000 to 20,000 irregular horse belonging to our 
allies, but attached to our armies. On the frontier of Gu- 
zerat there would be assembled a corps of 6000 or 1000 
men, with a proportion of cavalry ; and in Hindustan wc 
should, on such an extreme, be able to bring into the field 
at least 40,000 regulars, including 6000 or 7000 cavalry, 
and a body of iri-egular horse, that cannot be estimated* at 
less than 20,000 men. Can there be a doubt but that these 
great armies are quite competent to subdue any force which 
could be brought against them. If the enemy acted in large 
bodies, the necessity of providing resources for their sup- 
port would soon enable us to come up with them, and if 
they divided we should divide also, and subdue them in 
detail ; but it is time to shew the total impossibility of sucli 
a combination. 

The country near which the authority of these predatory 
powers is spread may be computed to be upwards of six 
hundred miles in length, and in some parts nearly four hun- 
dred in breadth it is intersected everywhere with high ranges 
of mountains and deep rivers, and the character of the ruler 
under which it has been oppressed has had the effect not only 
of multiplying forts, but of making every village a stronghold. 
The natives, from the Rajpoot prince, who resides within his 
fortified capital, and the Grasiah + lord, who still maintains 

* The Mysore horse aritount to 4000, those of the Nizam, under 
European oiheers, to 6000, and the Poonah gfovcrnmerit, under the 
rceent treaty we have concluded with it, will furnish a still more nu- 
merous quota, and these arc independent of the force of irregulars 
which the nobles of these governments are obliged to furnish, and 
which, though not so available, may be calculated as at least double 
in number to the corps stated. This calculation is made on the sup- 
position that, besides 7000 or S(XX) irregular horse, under English 
officers, wc could command the iirmicdiate services of at least 12,000 
belonging to petty rulers and chiefs under our protection. 

t The Crasiahs are, like the Bhecls, original inhabitants, who, 



IV,] TO THE MAUQUESS OF HASTINGS. CXCVli 

an independence amid his inaccessible mountains, down to 
the Poteil, or head man of a village, pay neither tri- 
bute nor revenue to his Mahratta or Mahomedan lord, 
except when the latter sends a force powerful enough to 
extort it. The consequence’ is, that the armies of Sindia, 
of Holkar, and Ameer Khan, and of the Pindarics, when 
not on distant expeditions, are constantly scattered over 
this tract, collecting and enforcing their real or pretended 
rights. There is a petty war in every district, sometimes 
with the chief against his vassal, at others between the 
troops of the two chiefs whose claims upon the same person 
come in collision, and not unusually between the troops of 
the same ruler whose leaders are at variance, and whose 
feuds and quarrels he cherishes as a source of his strength. 
Precarious as resources collected in this manner must be, 
they are all tlie state has to depend upon for its support; 
and the mutinous and disorderly armies which are employed 
on these expeditions, l(X)k to their success as the only hope 
they have of their arrears being liquidated. The conse- 
quence of this state of affairs is, that each of the com- 
manders of these corps is compelled to form a separate 
connexion of his own with every petty ruler or chief ; whom 
he is either directed to support or subdue and this spreads 
through the whole, not only a variety of distinct interests, 
but renders systematic the principles of discordance and 
insubordination among the higher, as well as the lower 
classes of these armies. 

We may conclude from this exposition, of the truth of 
which I imagine there cannot be the slightest doubt, that 

when driven from their lands by Mahomedan and Mahratta invaders, 
subsist by plunder, or by exacting, on the ground of their power to 
plunder it, a portion of the revenue from each village. Their rights 
and sphere of action are usually limited to the coiiutries that once 
belonged to them.— Vide Central India, vol. i. p. 508, 



CXCYiii SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER [Arr, 

the predatory jwwcrs in Malwa, from Sindia down to the 
Pindarie chitrf, are so divided by their constant differences 
with cacli other, not on points of speculative or remote 
interest, but regarding their actual subsistence and that 
of their adherents, from day to day, that they are quite 
incapable of any such combination as has been stated ; 
beside, let us suppose this combination determined upon, 
how will they proceed to carry it into execution, when 
every pait of those territories which they rule, or from 
which they exact plunder, will revolt the moment the pre- 
sence of force is removed • 

Where troops are witlidrawn from countries in such a 
state revenue must cease. Should Sindia recall his corps 
from the vicinity of Jypore, Kottah, Joudpore, and Odi- 
pore, Ameer Khan would, in his own name or Ilolkar’s, 
collect all the tribute. Should he also abandon his position, 
these Rajpoot princes would pay no one. This rule is 
applicable to every other petty state, and indeed to every 
head man of a village ; and who can contemplate the ele- 
ments tliat have been described, and suppose that they can 
ever blend in friendly union, or that chiefs like Sindia, 
Holkar, Ameer Khan, and all the host of lesser freebooters, 
should stifle their feelings of hostility to each other, and, 
sacrificing every personal consideration and interest, incur 
the hazard of immediate destruction, in order that they may 
combine on the general principle of opposing our aggran- 
dizement; or, in other words, that tliey should abandon all 
the substance of their power, for a shadow so unattractive 
os that of a contest with the British government. Of a 
combination like this they arc quite incapable, even if we 
were to drive them to despair by declaring our intention to 
conquer the whole of their possessions ; and, under present 
circumstances, when they see us reluctantly brought into 
the field, by the most daring and repeated oppressions, — 



IVO TO THE MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. cxdx 

when they cannot misunderstand the motives upon which 
we proceed, their union, even in profession, cannot be anti- 
cipated ; in fact it is, I conceive, quite impossible. 

Though, from the reasons above stated, I do not expect 
we shall ever have to encounter the combined force of the 
predatory powers, I by no means intend to state we may 
not, before this contest terminates, be partially involijed 
with each of them. In the last Mahratta war the Rajah of 
Nagpore was not displeased at the defeat of Sindia's army 
at Assye, and the ministers of tlie latter prince, from a 
sense of tliis feeling, rejoiced when the Bhonsela suffered 
a similar misfortune at Argham. Holkar kept liis hordes 
of plunderers aloof till he saw the power of liis rivals re- 
duced, and lie then ventured to provoke a war, in which 
he sustained a similar fate. Under present circumstances, 
should Sindia, in whose territories our operations must 
commence, and who from this circumstance alone we are 
compelled to force to an early declaration of his intentions, 
pursue so desperate a course as to act against us — ^it is not 
improbable that the family of Holkar may endeavour to 
avoid mixing iu the contest, leaving their territories to be 
occupied by the strongest, w^hilst Ameer Khan may remain 
at a distance in Marwar, promising friendship and sup- 
port to both, while he remains neuter, but collects around 
him such a body of plunderers as would oblige us, after 
we had subdued Sindia, and driven the Pindarics from 
Malwa, to attack him. This I deem the very worst shape 
affairs can take, and even this presents no danger, which, 
with the commanding means we possess, we might not con- 
quer in one, or, at the farthest, two years. 

Thougli I have expressed myself in a strain of confi- 
dence, and though I must believe that our success is cer- 
tain, I feel that we should not commence a contest of 
this nature without being prepared for reverses. Uufore- 



cc 


SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER 


App. 


seen difficulties may arise, and the pressure upon our 
finances may be greater than is at present calculated ; but it 
is a scene on which we should not enter without a resolu-. 
tion to persevere till it is brought to an honourable conclu- 
sion. It is probably the last war with any native power of 
consequence in which we shall be engaged; and to be 
foiled, or to have our purpose incompletely executed, 
might produce a re-action of no common nature. 

I think I may assert, after a careful perusal of the volu- 
minous documents written upon this subject, within the 
last four or five years, that there is hardly a plan I have 
proposed, or a suggestion I have offered, that Has riot, 
within that period, been brought forward in some shape or 
other to the notice of the supreme goveimment. The si- 
milarity of sentiment of the political residents, whose situa- 
tions gave them, beyond all others, the means of judging 
this question in a very remarkable fact ; and though these 
public officers were fully aware of the earnest desire of the 
government they served to abstain from all interference 
with the predatory powers in Malwa, they have continued 
to represent the baneful consequences of such a course, and 
to recommend the most active exertion of our policy and our 
arms to avert the dangers with which we were threatened. 
They have differed slightly as to the mode of interfer- 
ence, but they arc completely agreed as to the imperative 
nature of those circumstances which call for this proceed- 
ing ; and though these public officers * are alike distin- 
guished for their intelligence and independence of mind, 
the remote stations at which they reside, the difference of 
scenes in which they are placed, of their personal cha- 
racters, the opposite view^ which men of talent often 

* The Honourable IHr. Elphinstone, Mr. Russell, Mr. Jenkins, 
Mr. Metcalfe, Mr. Straclicy, and Captain Close, are the public officers 
here alluded to. 



IV.] TO THK MARQUESS OF HASTINGS. CGI 

take of die same subject, and, above all, when that is one 
of speculative policy, renders it impossible to account for 
their extraordinary agreement on this point on any ground 
but one, “ its plain and obvious necessity.” I certainly 
think that the communications which these able officers have 
made on this subject, whether we consider the information 
they have collected, or the light thrown upon that by their 
experience and judgment, form a body of the most conclu- 
sive evidence that it is possible any government could re- 
quire, to form its decision upon a political question of mag- 
nitude. 

With respect to myself, I can only say that I brought a 
mind to the consideration of this question that had no bias 
but that which it had recently imbibed from a knowledge of 
the anxious desire of the public authorities in England to 
avoid war, and if that, from the outrages of the Pindarics, 
should become inevitable, to narrow its sphere as much as 
possible, and to bring it to a conclusion as soon as we could, 
consistently with our honour and security. I could not but 
concur in the general principles which dictated this desire, 
as no one was ever more aware than I am of the positive 
evil that must result from any measures that produce even 
a temporary derangement of our finances. Under such 
impressions, nothing could have induced me to recommend 
the vigorovis anirse of proceedings I have done, but the 
persuasion that it affords the only rational hope we can en- 
tertain of avoiding war with those powers' who, from the 
character of their government, are likely to support the 
Pindarics ; or, if that proves inevitable, of bringing it to 
speedy and honourable conclusion. After all, it is not un- 
likely ray opinions may be erroneous — I can only say, that 
every fact and argument upon which they are grounded 
has been freely stated, and that I have comraunicated my 



ccii SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S LETTER. [App. 

sentiments with that sincerity and freedom, which your 
Lordship’s kindness and confidence^ and the nature and im- 
portance of the subject demanded. 

I have the honour to be. 

My Lord, 

Your Lordship’s most obedient 
humble servant, 


Fort St. Goorge, 

Jidy 152, 1817. 


J. Malcolm. 



No. V. 


Naeeative of the Proceedings of Brigadier- 
General Malcolm, 

From the \Qth of January till the 9,0th of Jtme^ 1818, 
including those connected with the submission ami 
abdication of the Paishwau Badjerow. 

To render this narrative more clear, it is necessary to preface 
it with some short remarks on tlic condition of Central 
India, whicli had been recently subdued and occupied by 
the British troops. 

After the peace with Mulhar Row Holkar, which took 
place on the 6th of January, 1818, the Commander-in- 
chief. Sir Thomas Hislop, proceeded soutli, leaving Briga- 
dier-general Malcolm in command of all the troops of the 
Madras aiTiiy north of the Taptce. That officer first em- 
ployed himself in efforts to promote the tranquillity of the 
western frontier of Mar war, Jeswimt Row Bhow, the 
rebellious chief of Jowud, submitted to him, when encamped 
at Nimahera, upon the 14th of February; and Kurreem 
Khan, the celebrated Pindarie leader, gave himself up on 
the following day. Brigadier-general Malcolm, on the 23rd 
of February, sent the principal part of his force to Mahid- 
porc, and proceeded himself with a light detachment to the 
court of Mulhar Row Holkar. After the object of his 
visit to that court was completed, he marched to Mahidpore, 
and joined the division. From that he moved to Oojeen, 



CCiv NARRATIVE OF [Arr. 

where the Bombay troops, under Major-general Sir William 
Kicr, were then encamped. On the 32th of March the 
latter force moved for Guzerat, leaving Brigadier-general 
Malcolm a strong native brigade, and some battering guns. 
The Brigadier-general immediately made arrangements for 
restoring tranquillity to the country, which continued to be 
infested by loose bands of freebooters, and by those here- 
ditary bodies of plunderers who, driven from their lands by 
the Mahrattas, had taken shelter in forests, mountains, and 
strongholds, and for half a century had continually disturbed 
the peace of the country by a petty and harassing warfare 
upon its inhabitants. The most dreaded of these tribes in 
this part of Malwa were the Sondees, or inhabitants of 
Sondwarrah, the name given to the tract which stretches 
from Aggur to the Chumbul, east and west, and from 
near Bampoorah to Oojeen, north and south. The position 
of this tract, and the numbers* and fame of these plun- 
derers, required that a serious effort should be made to 
reduce them. The country they infested belonged to Hol- 
kar, Sindia, Zalim Singh, Rajah of Kottah, and Tukojeo 
Puar Kajali of Dewass. livery arrangement was made to 
secure the benefit of a combined and simultaneous attack on 
these freebooters. The few troops Holkar could give to 
this service were at our disposal. Prom Sindia, who fortu- 
nately had only one province in Sondwarrah, (that of Ag- 
gur,) much was not to be expected : but Brigadier-general 
Malcolm looked for every assistance from Zalim Singh, 
Rajah of Kottali, who possessed several of the finest of those 
districts that were to be rescued from the predatory incur- 
sions of the Sondees, and who had prepared a most efficient 
force, under one of his bravest officers, for co-operation in 

* Tlie Sondees coTild assemble nearly two thousand horse, many of 
wlioiii were remarkably well mounted. 



V.] 


HADJKUOW’S SURRENDEH. 


CCV 


this object. The llajah of Dewass was alike ^lestitute of 
power either to obstruct or forward this measure ; but his 
disposition was quite friendly. 

Brigadier-general Malcolm assigned the reduction of Sond- 
warrah, and of those chiefs in the vicinity by whom its 
plunderers were likely to be assisted, to the Bombay brigade, 
with six hundred irregular horse under Lieutenant-colonel 
Corsellis, who was directed to move down the Chumbul 
from Nolye, and to attack, if they were not given up, the 
strongholds on and near the banks of that river ; while a 
detachment, consisting of a battalion of Madras sepoys, 
commanded by Major Moodic, after being joined by some 
battering guns, moved from Mahidpore on the 11th of 
April, in co-operation with Mehrab Khan, the commander 
of the troops of the Kottah llajah, «against those fortresses 
which were more in the centre of the province. Lieutenant 
Low, first political assistant to Brigadier-general Malcolm, 
with a troop of cavalry, one company of Sepoys, and 1000 
of Holkar’s horse, was sent to aid in these oj)erations, and 
to negotiate amicable settlements with such of the chiefs as 
were disposed to submit. The principle upon which these 
settlements were directed to be made?, is distinctly stated, in 
the letter from Brigadier-general Malcolm, to the Governor- 
general, under date the 10th of May, ‘‘ The engagement,” 
he observes, ‘^entered into through our mediation, byHolkar 
and Zalim Singh with the chief of I.alghur, the principal of 
the freebooters, I deem the most important, not from its 
rcducting that formidable leader from a state of dangerous 
power, but as it exhibits the consideration with which we 
are disposed to treat those, whose habits, however indefen- 
sible in an abstract view, are to be in a great measure attri- 
buted to the general condition of that lawless society of 
M hich they formed a part. Where the niler that claimed his 



CCvi NARRATIVE OF [App. 

obedience drew his resources from acts of violence and ra- 
pine, opposition liecame legitimate, and retaliation could 
hardly be condemned. It was the practice of the superior 
government, whenever it had the power, to plunder and 
destroy all those who had usurped upon its weakness, while 
the latter waited a moment of returaing imbecility or divi- 
sion in its councils to take their revenge. I found, when I 
first contemplated the settlement of Sondwarrah, our allies 
anxious that we should become the instruments of extirpat- 
i!ig a tribe whom they represented to be (and who actually 
were upon the principles they acted towards them) incorri- 
gible ; but I have endeavoured, and not, I trust, without 
success, to instil into their minds the seeds of a better 
system, which, while it punishes hardened offenders with 
unrelenting rigour, throws wide the door to those who are 
disposed to change their habits, and to partake of the be- 
nefits which are offered to all, in the prospect of general and 
permanent tranquillity.” 

The various attacks upon tlic Sondees who refused to 
submit were attended with complete success. In the space 
of six weeks thirteen strongholds were taken, and five of 
them razed to the ground. The freebooters had no safety 
but in flying to a distance, but wherever they went they 
found themselves proscribed as enemies to the English go« 
%'ernment, and to protect them was to provoke its vengeance. 
This produced such misery, that they came in one after 
another, giving up their horses, according to the terms 
prescribed, and obtaining leave to cultivate those fields 
which they had so long left sterile, to follow what they had 
found, in troubled times, the more profitable pursuit of 
plunder. 

This service, on whicli the English displayed their usual 
discipline and courage, was mm’ked by a most gallant 



V] BADJEBOW*S SUHRBNDER. CCvii 

achievement of the troops of Zalim Singh, the Rajah of 
Kottah, in an attack upon the village and fortress of Nar- 
rulla. They had very light artillery and the breach was 
very imperfect, but their brave and veteran commander, 
Mehrab Khan, fearing the garrison might escape during the 
night, ordered a storm. The resistance was desperate, the 
breach proving almost impracticable; but the attack was 
continued for two hours, and all obstacles at length over- 
come by the persevering courage of the assailants, more 
than two hundred of whom, with several officers of rank, 
were killed and wounded. Nearly the whole of the garrison 
were put to the sword. 

Kauder Ruksh, the principal of the Holkar Pindarics, 
with several of the other chiefs of that tribe, had given 
themselves up to Brigadier-general Malcolm, and had been 
sent with Kurreem Khan to Hindustan, to be settled in 
Guruckpoor, far from their former haunts and adhe- 
rents. Accounts had been received that Cheetoo and 
Rajiin, the two only remaining leaders of any consequence, 
had gone to Bhopaul, to deliver themselves up ; but this was 
soon followed uj) by intelligence that, not liking the terms, 
they had fled, and returned to the woods and fastnesses on 
the banks of the Nerbudda. Brigadier-general Malcolm con- 
sidering that their re-assembling any followers would be at- 
tended with the worst consequences, moved south, on the 
1st of April, with three battalions of sepoys, a regiment of 
cavalry, and two thousand irregular horse. He advanced 
himself on Banglee, directing Colonel R. Scott, with a 
strong detachment, on Indore, from w'hence, as well as 
Banglee, detachments were pushed into the forests in all di- 
rections. Rajliii gave himself up, while Cheetoo succeeded 


* The largfcst calibre was a fnir-nnd-half pounder. 



ccviii 


NABHATIVB OT 


[App. 


with great difficulty in escaping across the Nerbudda, with 
ten or twelve adherents. 

The chiefs who rule the tribes, or rather the robbers that 
inhabit the banks of the Nerbudda, from Hindea to Mohy- 
ser, had long aided the Pindaries, and the army of Sir 
Thomas Hislop had been attacked as it passed their hills. 
On its march to the southward every pains were taken at 
this period by Brigadier-general Malcolm, and the officers 
under him, to conciliate their chiefs and these followers ; at 
the same time they were threatened with exemplary punish- 
ment if they continued to protect the Pindaries, or com- 
mitted the slightest outrage, either ujx>n the camp fol- 
lowers or the inhabitants of the country. The success of 
these measures was complete. Many of the Pindaries, 
whom they had concealed, were delivered up with their fa- 
milies and horses ; and though our troops and convoys tra- 
versed this country in every direction, and in the smallest 
parties, not one instance occurred of attack or even rob- 
bery, and every chief came into Brigadier-general Mal- 
colm’s camp, to endeavour to cultivate his friendship, and 
to establish the claim of early submission to the British go- 
vernment. 

The extinction of the Pindaries, the great success of our 
arms, the change mode in the predatory government of 
Holkar, the expulsion or conversion into peaceable subjects 
of the Sondees, and the complete intimidation of the 
plunderers on the Nerbudda, had raised the reputation of 
the British government in this quarter as high as it was 
possible ; and the return of the inhabitants to villages which 
had been deserted for many years, and the commencement 
of cultivation in every quarter, proclaimed the character of 
that confidence which had been established. 

The dispersed plunderers, and the discontented part of 



V.3 BADJKROW’S SURREJVDEIl. <icix 

the military population were at this period (tlie beginning 
of May) gratified by a report, apparently on a good found- 
ation, that the Paishwah, aided by Ram Decn, a rebel 
chief of the Hoi kar government, and many others, meant to 
enter Malwa, Brigadier-general Malcolm immediately re- 
inforced the convoy that was marching to the Deckan from 
Hindia with the guns captured at Mahidpore, and the re- 
maining sick and wounded of the Commander-in-chiefs 
army; and, at the same time, sent a battalion of sepoys, 
under Lieutenant-colonel Smith, to Mundlesir, a small 
fort (l)elonging to the Paishwah) on the Nerbudda, 
within three miles of Chouly Mohyser, directing him 
to take possession of it, and place posts at the fords in 
its vicinity. This service was effected without opposi- 
tion, and gave strength at an essential point. Though 
certain accounts had been received that Badjerow’s army 
was retreating in a north-westerly direction. Brigadier- 
general Malcolm directed the escort with the guns, which 
he had strengthened to twelve companies of native infantry, 
four field pieces, and sixteen hundred irregular horse, to 
proceed by Burrhampore to Jaulnah. He considered 
that in the state the Paishwah\s army must be in 
after theij: defeat and flight, they could not venture to 
attack such a corps. The event proved that the con- 
clusion was correct. Badjerow was within a short dis- 
tance of this force on the 6th of May, but evidently 
too solicitous for his own safety to think of endangering 
that of others ; and the distance which in his rapid flight 
he had gained upon Brigadier-general Doveton’s force, 
placed him for the moment at ease, and he enciimped 

* Badjerow had been routed by Colonel Adams, and oblig^cd t(» fly 
from the territories of Nagfporc, lie was closely pursued by Brig-adier- 
general Doveton. 

VoL. II. 


o 



ccx 


NARRATIVE OF 


[A??. 

near Dholkoto ♦, where he began to refresh and to recruit 
his broken and dispirited troops. Brigadier-general Mal- 
colm received this intelligence on his arrival at Mhow, a 
place twelve miles south-west of Indore, which he had fixed 
upon for his principal cantonments during the remaining 
part of the hot season and the approaching rains. He im- 
mediately ordered Lieutenant-colonel Bussell, with a regi- 
ment of cavalry, to proceed to Hindia, meaning him, af- 
ter being joined by eight companies of the battalion in 
garrison at that fort, and three hundred Mysore horse, to 
form a detachment ready to act as circumstances might di- 
rect. Six companies of sepoys were at the same time 
moved to Onchode, a commanding spot on the top of the 
Ghaut : two sent to reinforce Hindia ; one to guard the 
pass of Peepulda, about thirty miles to tlie west of On- 
chode ; while a detachment of three companies was ordered 
to guard the Ghauts in the Dhar country, and a ford at 
Chikulda, on the Nerbudda, about fifty-five miles west of 
Mohyser. 

These arrangements, and the state of alertness in which 
Brigadier-general Malcolm kept the remainder of his force, 
made it almost impossible that Badjerow could enter Malwa 
in force at any point on this line, without being attacked ; 
and to secure against his making an attempt to cross the 
Nerbudda to the eastward. Brigadier-general Watson was 
requested to send what he could spare of his light troops. 
The general complied with the requisition, and an efficient 
light corps, under Major Cuming, advanced to Eotra, 
a place about forty miles west of Hussingabad, completed 
the defensive arrangements to cover the southern frontier of 

* Dhulkote, a place six or seven miles west of Asscerghiir, and 
twelve or thirteen north of Bhurrainpore. 



V.] BADJEROW^S SURRENDER. CCxi 

Malwa, from the eastern parts of Bhopaul to the west of 
the territories of Dhar. 

The revived hopes of the freebooters who, though sub- 
dued, were still scattered over Malwa — the discontent 
which the late changes had created in numbers— and, 
above all, the uncertainty of the line of policy that Sindia 
might pursue, and the knowledge that the greater part 
of his provincial governors, and almost every Mahratta 
officer either in his or Holkar’s government, cherirfied 
sentiments hostile to our interests, — rendered it of the 
utmost importance that every effort should be mode to 
prevent the Paishwah entering a country in which his 
presence was certain to spread again the flame of discord 
and war. 

Brigadier-general Malcolm received accounts that va- 
keels or envoys from the Paishwah, with overtures for 
peace, were within two marches of his camp. He imme- 
diately directed that he should be permitted to advance, 
and Anund How Jeswunt, and two other vakeels, charged 
with a letter from Badjerow, reached the Brigadier-general’s 
camp at Mhow, late at night on the 16th of May. This 
letter was expressive of the Paishwah’s wish for peace, and 
requesting particularly that General Malcolm (whom he 
styled one of his oldest and best friends) would undertake 
the office of re-establishing a good understanding between 
him and the British goveniment. 

Brigadier-general Malcolm had a long private conference 
with the vakeels, in which they chiefly endeavoured to per- 
suade him that the Paishwah personally had always been 
averse to the war and next to urge as much as possible 
that the Brigadier-general would comply with Badjerow’s 

* They carried this argument to the extreme of adducing ids cow- 
ardice, as a proof of Badjerow’s aversion to fight the English. 



ccxii NAnftATlVE o*‘ [App, 

request, by going to see him in his camp. With this the 
Brigadier-general refused to comply, because, in the first 
place, he thought that his doing so might give an impres- 
sion of a solicitude on our part for peace, which would have 
an injurious tendency ; and, in the second, it would prevent 
his being able to direct those dispositions of his troops that 
were necessary, either to intimidate Badjerow into submis- 
sion, or to pursue his army with success, in the event of 
tile negotiation being broken off. With the view, however, 
of shewing due consideration for this prince’s feelings, and of 
giving him confidence to act upon the overture, as well as to 
gain the best information that could be obtained of the 
actual state of his army, he determined on sending Lieu- 
tenant Low, his first, and Lieutenant Macdonald, his se- 
cond political assistant, to the Paishwah^s camp. He had 
distinctly informed the vakeels that their master must pre- 
pare himself to abandon his throne, and to quit the Deckan, 
as what had occurred, and particularly the proclamation which 
had recently been issued (and under which we had occupied 
his country,) put it out of the power of the English govern- 
ment to recede from a measure quite essential to the peace 
of India. Brigadier-general Malcolm wrote to the Paish- 
wah that he had communicated fully with his vakeels, and 
requested him, if he was sincere in his professed wish for 
peace, to come forward immediately with Lieutenant Low 
towards the Nerbudda, accompanied only by his principal 
chiefs, and promising that, on his doing so, the bi'igadier- 
gencral would meet him unattended, if he required it, and 
discuss all matters respecting tlie terms which the British 
government were willing to grant to him. 

The chief object of Lieutenant Low’s mission was to 
ascertain the actual condition of the Paishwah, and the sin- 
cerity of his professions, and to endeavour to hasten his 
advance to meet Brigadier-general Malcolm; but that 



V.] hadjkuow’s suiiii£Nd£R. ccxiii 

officer was directed to state in the fullest manner to Badjerow 
the principles upon wliich alone the brigadier-general could 
agree to negotiate. These were, first, that Badjerow should 
abandon his condition as a sovereign prince : secondly, that 
he could not be allowed to reside in the Deckan. 

It was also to be stated that he would be expected, as a 
proof of his sincerity, to give up (if he had the power to do 
so) Trimbuckjec Dinglia, and the murderers of Captain 
Vaughan and his brother, two officers who had been inhu- 
manly massacred at Telligaum 

Lieutenant Low proceeded on the 18th of May, accom- 
panied by the vakeels. He took the route of Mundlesir, 
in order to have an opportunity of taking a small escort 
from the battalion of that place, under the command of 
Lieutenant-colonel Smith. 

On the night of the IStli intelligence reached Brigadier- 
general Malcolm of Appah Sahib (the Ex-Rajah of Nag- 
pore) having escaped from confinement ; and conceiving it 
very likely that this event might make some alteration in 
the Paishwah'*s intentions, further instructions were sent on 
the 20th instant to Lieutenant Low, directing him to send 
Badjerow’s vakeels, accompanied by one or two native agents, 
in advance, and only to go on to his camp in the event of 
the vakeels returning within a short period and inviting 
him, on the part of their master, to do so. Lieutenant- 
colonel Smith was also directed to cross the Nerbudda with 
his battalion and some native horse ; and Lieutenant Low 
was ordered to accompany that detachment by easy stages, 
instead of taking only a few men, as was at first intended. 
The object of this change was to enable Lieutenant-colonel 
Smith to co-operate with Brigadier-general Doveton and 
Lieutenant-colonel Russell, in pursuing and destroying 


* Telligaum is a village wiilun fifteen miles of Poonah. 



CCXiv JVARRATIVE OF [Arr. 

Badjen)W, in the event of his resolving again to try his 
fortune in the field. Brigadier-general Malcolm, in the 
mean time, having completed some military arrangements 
for preventing Badjerow’s entering Malwa, moved with a 
small detachment to Mundlesir, where he arrived on the 
^Snd of May. 

Sir John Malcolm, in the event of Badjerow’s advancing, 
proposed to remain near Mundlesir, and keep his other 
corps (except Lieutenant-colonel Smith’s) in the positions 
they then occupied; but he was soon convinced, by the 
delays of the vakeels and the evasions of the Paishwah, 
that this course must be abandoned. He had heard of 
Brigadier-general Doveton’s arrival with a considerable 
force at Bhurrampore, within fourteen miles of Badje- 
row, and of the consequent alarm of that prince ; who, 
however, instead of moving at once, as was expected, in 
the direction of Mimdlesir, had only marched a few miles, 
to induce Subadar Syed Hussein * (Sir John^s native 
aide-de-camp) to forward a letter to Brigadier-general Dove- 
ton, requesting that officer, in the event of the Paishwah’s 
moving towards Brigadier-general Malcolm, to refrain from 
attacking him. These circumstances made the latter officer 
determine to advance ; and he at the same time directed 
Lieutenant-colonel Russell to move from Charwali (the 
position he first occupied) to Borgham, meaning his corps 
to guard against any attempt of Badjerow at escape to the 
north-east. 

lElarly on the morning of the 27th of May Sir John 
.Malcolm reached Bekungong, by a forced march, the day 
after the arrival of Badjerow’s vakeels, who had been 
sent in advance, and bad returned with assurances of 

♦ This gallant and sensible native officer is now Subadar-major of 
the body-guard at Madras. 



V.} BADJEaoW’3 SUBHENSEB. CCXV 

thdr master’s sincerity^ and of his anxiety that Lieutenant 
Low should proceed to his camp. Tlus the Brigadier- 
general directed that ofRccr to do immediately, and after 
repeating what he had before stated to the vakeels, he told 
them they might sec from his proceeding that tliere was no 
time for delay, dnd that, as a sincere friend, he warned Bad- 
jerow to come to a resolution at once, cither to continue the 
war, or to throw himself upon the clemency and generoaty 
of the British government, as, under the circumstances in 
which he was placed, any middle course was destruction. 

Lieutenant Low, in an interview he had with Badjerow 
on the 29th of May, the day of his arrival in that prince’s 
camp, found he continued to expect much better terms than 
it was possible to grant to liim. He was still, to all ap- 
pearance, confident of being permitted to retain the name 
at least of Paishwah, and of being allowed (though with very 
circumscribed power) to reside at Foonah. He appeared in 
a state of great alarm about his own personal safety in the 
proposed meeting with Brigadier-general Malcolm, and 
entreated most earnestly that the troops of the latter might 
all be withdrawn to a considerable distance; but finding 
the Brigadier-general’s resolution to refuse compliance with 
these demands was not to be shaken, he at last consented to 
come to Khmree (about half a mile on tlie plain to the 
north of the mountain-pass of that name) on the 1st of 
June *f on the following conditions 

That he was to bring two thousand men ; that Brigadier- 
general Malcolm was only to bring a small escort, leaving 
his force at Metawul, about ten miles off ; and that he (Bad- 
jerow) should be permitted to retire again in safety to his 
own camp after the meeting, if he idiould wish to do so. 

* This lueetint' was first fixed for the 31st May, but afterwards 
put off by mutual consent. 



ccxvi 


NARRATIVE 


[App. 


Tliese conditions were acceded to, and Badjerow reached 
his tents at the place appointed about five o’clock in the 
evening. Brigadier-general Malcolm arrived soon after- 
wards, accompanied by the officers of his family, and an 
escort of two companies of Sepoys. 

The party were received in open Durbar, where little 
passed beyond the complimentary inquiries usual on such 
occasions. After a few minutes Badjerow requested Briga- 
dier-general Malcolm would retire with him to another tent. 
This conference lasted between two and three hours, during 
which the Paishwah dwelt upon his misfortunes, and 
the situation to which he was reduced, and used all his 
eloquence (which is considerable) to excite pity in the 
mind of Sir John Malcolm, by appealing to their former 
friendship. He alone (he observed) remained of his three 
oldest and best friends : Colonel Close was dead, and Gene- 
ral Wellesley in a distant land. In this hour of difficulty 
and distress, flatterers (he said) fled, and old adherents even 
were quitting him : a real friend waff, therefore, his only 
stay. He believed (he added) he possessed that treasure 
in General Malcolm, and that he had sought a meeting 
with him on the present occasion with an anxiety propor- 
tioned to the importance that it had in his mind !” General 
Malcolm’s reply to his address went, in the first place, to 
explain to him personally (as he had done before through 
others) the only terms which could be granted, using every 
argument to satisfy his judgment that his acceptance of 
these terms was the wisest course he could pursue. He at 
the same time stated that the decision of the Britisli govern- 
ment, as to his abandoning all claims to sovereignty, was 
irrevocable ; and that it would be completely inconsistent 
with the character of a true friend, if he was to flatter Bad- 
jerow’s hopes with prospects which could never be realized. 
Brigadier-general Malcolm, after remarking that this was 



V.] BADJfiROW’S SURRENDBR. CCXVii 

a crisis in his life when Badjerow must shew to what degree 
he possessed the courage and virtues of a man, by resigning 
himself to the situation to which he had reduced himself,” 
concluded by distinctly informing him that no further delay 
whatever could be admitted. 

The limits of this narrative do not admit of a full detail 
of this conference; suffice it to say that every point was 
discussed, and it ended in Badjerow’s entreating that they 
might meet again next day. Tliis was resisted by Brigadier- 
general Malcolm, who perceived from it and other expres- 
sions that the Paishwah’s mind was not yet made up to sub- 
mission; and this circumstance, added to the fact of his 
having the day before sent the whole of his property into 
Asseerghur satisfied the Brigadier-general that not a mo- 
ment was to be lost in bringing matters to a close. 

Brigadier-general Malcolm returned to his tent about ten 
o'^clock p.m., and thePaishwah immediately re-ascended the 
ghaut, where he had some guns placed to protect his retreat. 
So strong were his fears of an attack, notwithstanding all 
the endeavours that had been made to set his mind at rest 
on that point. 

Brigadier-general Malcolm immediately sent to Badjerow 
the following schedule of an i^eement finr his signature : — 
1st. That Badjerow shall resign, for himself'laind suc- 
cessors, all right, title, and claim over the government of 
Poonah, or to any sovereign power whatever. 

‘‘ 2nd. That Badjerow shall immediately come with his 
family, and a small number of his adherents and attendants, 
to the camp of Brigadier-general Malcolm, where he shall 
be received with honour and respect, and escorted safe to the 

* Jeswiint Row Bhow, the governor of Asseerghur, had aided the 
Paishwah throughout, and evinced at this period a very forward 2cal 

his cadse. 



CCXviii NABEATIVE OE [Apr. 

city of Benares, or any other sacred place in Hindustan that 
the Governor-general may, at his request, fix for his residence. 

3rd. On account of the peace of the Deckan, and the 
advanced state of the season, Badjerow must proceed to 
Hindustan without one day’s delay ; but General Malcolm 
engages tliat any part of his family that may be left behind 
shall be sent to him as early as possible, and every facility 
given to render their journey speedy and convenient. 

4th. That Badjerow shall, on his voluntarily agreeing to 
this an*angement, receive a liberal pension from the Com- 
pany’s government, for the support of himself and family. 
The amount of this pension will be fixed by the Governor- 
general ; but Brigadier-general Malcolm takes upon himself 
to engage that it shall not be less than eight lacs of rupees 
per annum. 

5th. If Badjerow, by a ready and complete fulfilment of 
this agreement, shews that he reposes entire confidence in 
die British government, his requests in favour of principal 
jageerdars and old adherents, who have been ruined by 
their attachment to him, will meet with liberal attention. 
His representations, also, in favour of Brahmins of remark- 
able character, and of religious establishments founded or 
supported by liis family, shall be treated with regard. 

6th. The above propositions must not only be accepted 
by Badjerow, but he must personally come into Brigadier- 
general Malcolnfs camp within twenty-four hours of this 
period, or else hostilities will be recommenced, and no fur- 
ther negotiation will be entered into with him.” 

These propositions were forwarded to Badjerow early on 
the morning of the first of June, with a message that no 
alteration could take place, and not the slightest delay could 
be permitted. 

As twenty-four hours only were granted to Badjerow to 
come to a final resolution, every arrangement was made to 



BADJEROW’S SURBENDEB. 


ccxix 


V.3 

attack him at the expiration of that period, in the event of 
his breaking off the negotiation. 

This day (the 2d of June) passed in constant messengers 
from the Paishwah, and from his principal officer. The 
latter, as the crisis approached, became anxious about their 
individual interests, attention to which. Sir John Malcolm 
informed them, could alone be given on tlieir promoting 
the great object, the submission of the Paishwah, and the 
termination of the war. 

The state of affairs at this period is described in Briga* 
dier-general Malcolm’s despatch to Mr. Secretary Adam, 
of the 4th of June, in which he also gives an account of 
Badjerow’s submission. It would fill a volume,” he ob- 
serves, to detail the particulars of all the intrigues which 
occurred. I have never, in the course of my experience, 
witnessed a scene in which every shade of the Indian cha- 
racter was more strongly displayed. It is honourable to 
the Vinchoor Jageerdar, to the Purrender chief, and the ma- 
nager of the interests of the Gokla family, that, though they 
professed themselves hopeless of every success, and were 
convinced by my arguments that Badjerow liad no choice 
but submission, they took care to make me distinctly 
understand (when I informed them that their only claim 
rested on the success of their influence in promoting this 
measure,) that though they would use every means of 
persuasion and remonstrance to effect the end, harshness 
or coercion they would never resort to *. I told them such 
conduct was not required of them ; I respected, I added, 
their spirit of allegiance, but the moment was come when 

* The vakeel of the Vinchoor chief said, that his master's family had 
served that of the Paishwah for five generations, and had always 
spoken boldly to him and his ancestors, hut now, he added, that fate 
(bukht) is upon him, “ we must be silent, unmerited reproaches even 
have remained and must remain unanswered." 



ccxx 


NARRATIVE OF 


[App. 


their interests and those of their prince alike required that 
an end should be put to a ruinous and ineffectual struggle, 
and that if their passiveness allowed the counsels of those 
worthless and wicked men, who had brought Badjerow to 
his present state, to complete his destruction, their delicacy 
would be termed imbecility, and that they could hencefor- 
ward neither expect gratitude from their prince, nor consi- 
deration from us ; and, to conclude, I told them plainly, 
that unless he came to my camp next day, I desired never 
to know more of them or their claims. As individuals they 
were nothing, as attached adherents to a fallen prince, who 
might by their firmness save him and themselves from total 
ruin, they had importance for a moment, but that, if 
lost, would never return. As the vakeels of the Vinchoor 
chief and Abba Purrender were leaving me at eleven 
o’clock, on the night of the 2nd, I told them I knew Badje- 
row had sent some of his most valuable property into 
Asseerghur the day after I arrived at Mctawul, which was 
no proof of confidence. Report said he meant to take refuge 
there. If he did it was his last stake, and if they permitted 
him to adopt such a course, they and their families would 
merit all the ruin that would fall upon their heads. When 
these vakeels left camp, I permitted one of my writers to 
give them, secretly and as from himself, a copy of my letter 
of the day before to Badjerow, and of the propositions I 
had offered for his acceptance- They perused them, he 
told me, with eagerness, and the knowledge of the conside- 
ration meant to be given to them, in the event of a settle- 
ment, appeared to quicken their zeal in no slight degree. 
When I dismissed these vakeels, I sent for an agent of 
Badjerow, whom I had on my first arrival at Metawul 
invited to my camp, and permitted to lay dawks * and send 
hirkarrahs t in every direction, in order to allay the fears and 


♦ Posts, 


t Alessengers. 



VO BADJKROW’S SURREN^DER. CCXXi 

suspicions of Badjel*ow, witli regard to iny intended move- 
ments and attacks, for there was no ground on \vhich I had 
fx-om the first more fear of failure tlianhis excessive timidity. 

I now told this man that he must return to his master^ 
he could no longer remain in my camp, but that he might 
write or say that I did not mean to move till six o’clock 
next morning* I should them march to near Khairee, and 
Badjerow, if he intended to accept the terms, must leave 
the hills, and encamp near my force by twelve o’clock. I 
at the same time told him to inform Badjerow, that Colonel 
Russell had moved to Borgham, to attack any of Trim- 
buckjee’s followers in that quarter, and that Brigadier- 
general Doveton, wliom 1 had informed of Badjerow’s wish 
for that freebooter being destroyed, would no doubt march 
against him to-morrow. 

I had just heard from my assistant, Lieutenant Low, 
whom I had, to facilitate my communication, kept a few 
miles in advance, that the messengers he had sent with the 
letter and propositionshad returned and represented Badjerow 
as full of professions, but in a very vacillating state of mind, 
and anxious beyond all description for another day’s delay, 
as the 3rd of June was, he said, an unlucky day, and he 
had religious ceremonies to perform of the most indis- 
pensible nature, before he coidd come to my camp. I 
affected to be very indignant at this conduct ; I desired 
Lieutenant Low not only to send away, but turn back any 
person desiring to communicate with him from Badjerow’s 
camp. I at the same ordered parties of horse to occupy the 
roads to my camp, to prevent the approach of any messenger 
whatever. Having adopted these steps, about two o’clock 
of the morning of the 3rd, in a manner so public that I 
knew they would reach Badjci'ow through many clianiiels, I 
marched at six o’clock, and reached this ground * about nine. 


* Near Kaircc. 



ccxxii 


NARRATIVE OF 


[App. 

Soon after Anund Row Jeswunt came near me, in a 
state of much trepidation ; I asked him where were his pro- 
mises of sincerity, and bade him return. He said ^ This is an 
unlucky day.’ I replied, it would prove a most unlucky 
one for his master, if he did not come in. * I mean every- 
thing kind,’ I added, ‘ to Badjerow, but he forces me to 
these extremities, and from his character,^ nothing short of 
them will bring him to a resolution that is so obviously for 
the interest of him, and all that are personally dependant 
u}X)n him/ He begged me to send some person to assure his 
mind, ‘ for he is at this moment,’ he added, ‘ in the greatest 
alarm/ * At what is he alarmed,’ I askcil, ‘ at the pro- 
positions ?’ He replied he would consent to them. * Does 
he suspect me of treachery ?’ I demanded, with some degree 
of anger- ^ No!’ he said, ‘ but the orders of the Gover- 
nor-general might compel you to put guards and sentries 
over him, and then he would be disgraced for ever/ ^ You 
may return,’ I replied, ^ to Badjerow, and tell him from 
me, that I have no such orders ; that the settlement I had 
ventured to make, in anticipation of the Governor-general’s 
approbation, was too liberal to make me think it possible 
any human being, in Uadjerow’s situation, would ever at- 
tempt to escape from it, and if he did, he would forfeit all 
future claims whatever, and the English government would 
be freed from a large disbursement which it has agreed to 
increase, more from a feeling of what was due to its own 
dignity, than to any claims which he had to its considera- 
tion.’ Anund Row seemed pleased with this answer, and 
galloped off. I sent a respectable Brahmin to hasten Badje- 
row ; and, at the same time, to desire that the Mahratta 
sirdars alone should accompany him to the ground near my 
camp. Tliis was complied with, and Ram Dun and a 
b<Kly of infantry were directed to encamp in the rear. The 
firing of some guns in the quarter of Asseer (probably 



VI.] BADJEROW^S SURRENDER. CCXxili 

from Brigadier-general Doveton’s attack of Trimbuckjee 
served not a little to quicken the march ; and at eleven 
oVlock Badjerow came near my camp. Lieutenant Low 
went to meet him, and reported him in better spirits than 
he had yet seen him. I meant to pay my respects in the 
evening, but was prevented by a very violent storm.” 

The force that accompanied Badjerow to Brigadier-gene- j 
ral Malcolm'’s camp was between four and five thousand 
horse, and about three thousand infantry ; of these twelve 
hundred were Arabs, whose numbers were increased two 
days afterwards to nearly two thousand, by the junction of 
parties that liad been left to guard the passes in the hills. 
Sir John Malcolm was determined, as he wrote to the Go- 
vernor-general -f-, not to disturb by harsh interference the 
last moments of intercourse between a fallen prince and his 
remaining adherents.” His experience led him to expect 
that this force would gradually dissolve, and he knew in its 
actual state it possessed no means of combined action. 

Badjerow proceeded towaixls the Nerbudda with ^Ge- 
neral Malcolm’s force for several marches, without any- 
thing very particular having occurred, beyond tliat of some 
of his followers leaving him, to return to their homes in the 
Deckan. A large body, however, still remained, in spite 
of the friendly remonstrances of Sir John Malcolm, who 
j)ointed out the imprudence of keeping together such a 
number of armed men ; the great proportion of whom must, 
from their situation, be discontented. He particularly ad- 
verted to the Arabs, from whose violence and desperation 
the worst consequences were to be dreaded. The Paishwah 
and those about him, to whom this advice was addressed at 
different times, always admitted its truth, but little 

* The detachment sent to intervene between Radjerow and Asser 
was fired upon by the fort, but no one hurt. 

t Letter to the Governor-general, June 19, ISII. 



ccxxiv 


NABRATIVE OF 


' fApp. 


attention was paid to it; Badjerow seemed to cling to 
the shadow of that jxjwer he once possessed. He appeared 
as if afraid to own to })imself, or to others, his actual con- 
dition ; and this conduct was still further influenced by 
that suspicion and timidity which marks his character, and 
which Sir John Malcolm knew he could alone overcome by 
an absence of solicitude, and a conduct that shewed that no 
apprehensions were entertained of his acting contrary to his 
engagements. If Badjerow bad real fears of treachery, 
such a course was the only way to remove them. If he 
cherished plans of deceit, his pursuit of them was not likely 
to be encouraged by an indifference which he could alone 
refer to a consciousness of strength. Acting upon these 
considerations Brigadier-general Malcolm indulged Badjerow 
in his hours of marching, and in his desire to encamp at some 
distance from the English force, always giving his opinion, 
as a friend, of the dangers to wliich he exposed himself, by 
continuing to repose in the mercenaries by whom he was 
accompanied. An occasion soon occurred that made the 
Paishwah sensible to all the value of the councils he had 
neglected, and threw him completely upon the protection 
of the Brigadier-general. 

Tlie Arabs, amounting to about two thousand, wlio 
had been hired some months before by Trimbuckjee 
Dinglia, demanded their arrears from Badjerow. That 
prince was willing to pay them for the period during 
which they had been actually with his camp, but the 
Arabs insisted upon pay from the date they were hired 
by Trimbuckjee ; and on his refusing compliance with 
this demand, they surrounded his tent, and would not 
allow him to move. This occurred on the 9th of J une, 
on which day a march had been ordered, and a consider- 
able part of Sir John Malcolnfs force, with the whole 
of the baggage, had gone on to the next stage. The 



V.] BADJEROW’S SURRENDER. CCXXV 

Brigadier-general himself had, as usual, remained behind to 
see Badjerow off the ground ; and he had this day, in the 
apprehension that something might occur, kept with him a 
regiment of cavalry, two gallopers, and six companies of 
infantry. From the first accounts of this mutiny he was 
led to expect Badjerow would be able to settle the matter 
himself. The whole day, however, passed without any 
prospect of affairs being brought to a conclusion. The 
Arabs seemed determined to insist upon their original de- 
mands, nor was it certain they would be satisfied with them; 
and to make affairs worse, their example had excited mu- 
tiny among some Rohillas, and, indeed, all the infantry 
in camp. Badjerow’s alarm for his life was excessive, but 
while he continued to call on Brigadier-general Malcolm for 
relief, he sent message after message to entreat that not a 
man should be moved, as he thought that the least stir in 
the English camp would be the signal for his murder. 

Under these circumstances, Sir John Malcolm directed 
that part of his force which had marched, to return to 
Sconce, He had some communications, in the course of the 
evening, with the chiefs of the mutineers. These appeared 
reasonable, but said they could not control their men. He 
sent to Badjerow to entreat he would compose himself during 
the night, assuring him that he should be relieved early in 
the morning. Brigadier-general Malcolm also sent mes- 
sages to the Arabs and Rohillas, warning them, as they 
dreaded extirpation, from proceeding to violence; and at 
the same time stating that he would guarantee that those 
promises which had been voluntarily made to them by the 
Paishwah should be faithfully performed. These measures 
kept all quiet for the night. 

At daylight Brigadier-general Malcolm had intelligence 
of the troops which had proceeded in advance being on the 

VOL. If. P 



ccxxvi 


NARRATIVE OF 


[Apr. 

retuni, and within a very short distance. He had already 
personally reconnoitred Badjerow’s camp, which was irregu- 
larly pitched along a nullah (or ravine), the banks of which 
were very uneven, and covered with trees and bushes that 
Were favourable for the irregular infantry that he had to 
coerce. The country to the west, however, rose gradually 
from the ravine, and he found on that side a commanding 
ground, upon which he drew up his force, within three hun- 
dred yards of the front of Badjerow’s camp. He had only, 
when all were assembled, four hundred native cavalry, seven 
hundred sepoys, three brigades of six-pounders, and six 
hundred irregular horse; but his confidence in the tried 
courage and discipline of this small body of men was too 
complete to leave a doubt upon his mind as to the result, 
should matters have come to an extremity. He was, how- 
ever, very desirous to avoid such a result. The troops 
were ordered to take the most open distance, and the cavalry 
to form in single rank, that the extended appearance of the 
line might intimidate into submission diose to whom they 
were opposed. 

The moment was one of great anxiety : the object was to 
reduce the mutineers to order, without coming to action ; 
for if that took place, it seemed next to certain that Badje- 
row, whose tent their position encircled, must have lost liis 
life, either by accident or from their violence. The latter, 
from the character of the Arabs, was the most probable : it 
was, besides, obvious that almost all his family, and a great 
number of defenceless persons (including women and chil- 
dren), would have been killed. The mutineers calculated 
on the strength they derived from this circumstance, and 
would not allow a single person to move from thdr camp. 

Though the guns were loaded with grape, and matches 
lighted, the strictest commands were given not to fire till 



V.] BADJEHOW’S SURRENDER. CCXXVii 

ordered. The Arabs, who advanced near to the right of 
the line, opened a fire and wounded ♦ some sepoys. The 
troops, though eager to attack, remained steady and obe- 
dient to their orders, which were repeated by the Brigadier- 
general in person when the casualties were reported. At 
tliis moment Syed Zeyn, the principal Arab chief, who was 
evidently alarmed at the formidable appearance of the line, 
came in advance to request a parley. Sir J ohn Malcolm, 
before he would listen to him, commanded him to stop the 
fire, at the hazard of an instant assault. He despatched one 
of his attendants to do so, and came forward himself with 
an earnest entreaty that matters should be settled. Badje- 
row had, he said, paid the greater part of their demands : 
there were remaining but a few trifling points, which if Bri- 
gadier-general Malcolm would only inquire into, all parties 
would agree to abide by the award of his justice. The 
required promise was given, and Syed Zeyn galloped back 
to his men to remove them from Badjerow’s tent. He 
returned, without effecting this purpose, accompanied by 
all the leaders of the Arabs. These men,'*' he said to the 
General, must have each your hand given to them that 
you will not attack them after they have released the Paish- 
wah.*’ Sir John Malcolm gave his hand to every Jemidar, 
and the assurance they asked. They returned, and the 
Arab flags were immediately seen moving towards their own 
tents. A few minutes afterwards, Badjerow, attended by 
some horse, came in front of the English line ; Brigadier- 

♦ Two or three of the grenadiers of the Htli native infantry were 
wounded. A native officer of the company asked General Malcolm, 
as he was riding past, whether he would allow his sepoys to be 
shot, without returning the fire ? “ If I permit you to fire,’* said the 

General, “ the Company’s good name may sjifi’cr injury,” “ Let 
twenty grenadiers die,” said the fine fellow, in an animated tone ; ‘‘ it is 
for you, General, to tiike care of the Company’s good name,” 

p 2 



CCXXviii XARRATIVE OF [Aip. 

general Malcolm complimented him with a genei*al salute. 
This was done to increase the efFect whicli it was hoped 
what had passed would have upon his mind, and to strike 
deeper the contrast between the disgrace and danger of the 
situation fi-om which he had escaped, and that safety and 
honourable treatment which he secured by relying solely on 
the protection of the British government. 

Never was a result more happy than that which attended 
the events of the day. Badjerow was profuse in his ex^ 
pressions to Brigadier-general Malcolm, who was, he said, 
the friend decreed to save his honour and his life. He had 
erred, he addecl, for the last time, and would now do anything 
the General wished. He was desired to move on immediately 
ten miles on the route to the Nerbudda, with those adherents 
that were to accompany him, while Brigadier-general Mal- 
colm stayed behind to grant passports to the remainder, and 
to see that the Arabs, llohillas, and others, fulfilled their 
engagements of departing towards their respective homes. 
All this was effected with' the most perfect good temper in 
a few hours, and the chiefs of the mutineers were hardly 
less grateful than Badjerow for the manner in which they 
had been treated. Their astonishment was greatly excited 
by the forbearance of the English troops, who, indeed, 
behaved admirably. 

Sir John Malcolm, in the Division Order which he after- 
wards issued, thus expressed the sense he entertained of 
the conduct of the force under his command, on this try- 
ing occasion : Brigadier-general Malcolm congratulates 

tlie force under his command ujx>n their recrossing the 
Nerbudda, and the termination of a campaign rendered 
glorious by great political events and splendid military 
achievements. The corps which compose this force ob- 
tained in the beginning of this war the highest applause for 
their distinguished gallantry, and during the last six montlis 



V.] 


IIADJBROW’S SUnRENDEB. 


ccxxix 


that they have been incessantly employed in restoring order 
and tranquillity to countries long subject to anarchy and 
oppression, they have shewn all the qualities of good soldiers. 
Fortune has given them a part in the last operations of the 
campaign, and they have had the gratification of witnessing 
the submission of the Pmshwah Badjerow, the only enemy 
that remained to the British government. The course of 
this service has afibrded no opportunity for signalizing their 
courage, but in all the measures which Brigadier-general 
Malcolm thought it his duty to adopt, and particularly in 
those of the 10th instant, when he had to quell a dangerous 
mutiny in Badjerow’s camp, he proceeded with a confidence 
that nothing but complete reliance upon those under his 
command could have inspired. The awe with which their 
order and appearance struck a lawless soldiery, was increased 
by that coolness which ever accompanies determined intre- 
pidity. The moment was critical— a body of insubordinate 
men whom they could easily have destroyed, opened a fire, 
which, had it been returned, might have involved conse- 
quences injurious to the British fame, and distressing to 
humanity. The troops saw their comrades wounded and 
remained unmoved — they attended only to orders. The 
result was all that could be wished, and on this occasion 
discipline obtained a triumph far beyond the reach of 
valour !” 

Badjerow, subsequent to this event, complied with every 
wish expressed by Brigadier-general Malcolm, with respect 
to his marching, place of encampment, and indeed on all 
other points. His attendants were reduced to between six 
and seven hundred horse, and two hundred infantry, and 
he himself became daily more reconciled to his condition. 
There Avas indeed every reason why he should be so. The 
provision made for him was most princely; and far beyond 



ccxxx 


NARKATIVE OF 


[App* 


what he had, from his treacherous conduct, any right to 
expect, but the considerations which led to this arrangement 
had little reference to his personal character or merits ; it 
was grounded, first, on the jiolicy of terminating the war, 
which included the necessity of paying an adequate price 
for the submission of a sovereign, who, while he continued 
in opposition, kept all India agitated and unsettled. The 
second consideration referred to what was due to the dignity 
of the British government, whose conduct on all similar 
occasions had lieen marked by the utmost liberality ; and, 
lastly, it appeared an imjxirtant object to make an impres- 
rion, that while it reconciled all ranks to the great change 
that had occurred, left a sentiment of grateful feeling, in the 
minds of the Paishwah’s former adherents, towards a go_ 
vemment which, in the hour of victory, forgot its own 
wrongs, and respected their prejudices in its treatment of 
their fallen prince. 

With respect to the effect this liberality is likely to have 
upon Badjerow himself, though gratitude cannot be looked 
for from a prince towards the power which has dethroned 
him ; yet he must be expected to act even in his reduced 
state from motives that arc influenced by the treatment he 
receives, and the better his condition, the less he wiU be 
incUned to hazard a change. The annual sum granted to 
Badjerow, though princely for the support of an individual, 
is nothing for the purposes of ambition ; but supposing his 
habits of intrigue so inveterate, and his ambition so uncon> 
querable, that he should make another attempt at sovereignty 
—what hopes can he entertain of success ? He has, by 
becoming a voluntary exile, emancipated his subjects from 
their allegiance. His former and oldest adherents, released 
from their duty to him, have been left to form new ties, and 
to pursue the path of their' individual interests. Were he 



V.] BADJEROW'S SURRENDER. CCXXxi 

even of a different character, success in such an eflPort would 
be impossible ; as it is, there can be no hesitation in con- 
cluding with Brigadier-general Malcolm, That Badjerow 
has unstrung a bow which he never can re-bend*.’^ 

* Letter to Mr. Adam, IDtli June, 1818. 



No. VI. 


Speech of Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B., ^c. 8fC. 

Delivered at a General Court of Proprietors of East- 
India Stock, on FHday, Jxdy Qth, 18S4. 

Sir J. Malcolm rose and said — It certainly was not 
my intention to have spoken, unless personally alluded to in 
the course of the debate. What the honourable proprietor 
(Mr. Kinnaird) has said regarding niy sentiments on publi- 
cation in lingland, would not have made me depart from 
the resolution I had taken ; but I cannot sit patiently and 
hear the abuse (I must call it so) that has been lavished 
upon Mr. Adam. The honourable proprietor has given 
high eulogiums to Mr. Buckingham, and he has closed 
them with a profession, that all he thought of that gentle- 
man^s character from his writings and actions, had been con- 
firmed by his personal acquaintance since his arrival in 
[England. I can speak of Mr. Adam on an intimate knowledge 
of thirty years : he is as remarkable for mildness and hu- 
manity as for firmness and judgment ; he is from birth and 
education a lover of the free constitution of his country, 
and all he has done in the case now before us has, I am 
assured, proceeded solely from an imperious sense of public 
duty. It is, however, trifling with the great subject before 
us, to waste our time in discussing the respective merits of 
Mr. Adam and Mr. Buckingham ; but even to understand 
this small part of the question, we must first consider the 
scene in which they acted. Let us commence by looking at 



SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MAECOLH, CCXXXiil 

the character of our Indian government, and then deter- 
mine how far such a free press, as that which is the boast 
of England, can be transplanted to that distant possession. 
This is the real question, and it should be met openly and 
decidedly. The facts appear to me only to require to be 
fairly and boldly brought forward, to convince every rea- 
sonable man of the nature of the measure proposed. To en- 
able us to judge of the probable operation of this measure, 
we must take a near view of the comjionent parts of that 
body called the Public, in England, whose character makes 
the good outweigh the evil of a free press. Will the ho- 
nourable proprietor (Mr. Kinnaird) who has made the mo- 
tion, or him by whom it was seconded, (Mr. Hume,) admit 
that oflicers of his Majesty\s .army and navy, that secreta- 
ries, under secretaries, and clerks in public offices, or men 
immediately dependent on the favour of government, or 
upon that of the paid servants of the state, are essential 
parts of that body? Certainly not : but I will go further; 
I assert that those noblemen who form the House of Peers, 
and the gentry of England who sit in the House of Com- 
mons, though they are a part, are not the most essential 
one, of the public of whom I speak. They must, in some 
degree, be swayed by their connexions, tlieir interests, and 
their political parties. Far less can we number, as men who 
ought to have superior weight in this body, the lowest or- 
ders of this community, who are too uninstructed to judge 
political questions, or the demagogues who lead them, or 
those daily periodical writers who gain popularity and profit 
by flattering the self-love and the passions of the lower or- 
ders, as well as that of the party feelings and pride of the 
higher. All these mix with, and are parts of, what I un- 
derstand by a British public: but the essential component 
part of that body, that which gives gravity and steadiness 
to the whole, lies, as the ballast of the vessel ought, in th$ 



CCXXXiv SPEECH OP SIB JOHN MALCOLM. [App. 

centre. It is that numerous class who occupy the middle 
ranks of life, whose education and knowledge places them 
above being misled like the lower order, and who are, from 
their occupation, free from many of those motives which 
influence the servants of the state, and all who can be be- 
nefited by its favour, or injured by its displeasure ; and who 
are also in a great degree removed from the passions and 
feelings which gives so strong a bias to the lowest and 
highest orders of societ}''. It is the minds, and the charac- 
ter of this middle class, which give them that decided 
weight they have in a British public. Though less forward 
and much less heard than the other classes, they govern 
them : it is their moderation and good sense, combined with 
their habits of thinking and of forming a judgment, on all 
points connected with the constitution and the prosperity of 
their country, that enables it to have a press free, in a de- 
gree unknown to other nations! Without this class, it 
would be a curse instead of a blessing. Now, I wll ask, 
have we one of the class I have described in India ? (I 
speak now of the English in that country :) there is not an 
individual. The English community, I will not call them 
a public (in the sense that term has been used,) are almost 
all in the employ of government, and the few that are not, 
are persons who reside there for a period by license, under 
the covenants and legal restrictions which we have just heard 
read, and the value of which was well explained by an able 
proprietor, (Mr. Iinpey.) If it is wrong, from considera- 
tions of state policy, to deprive these persons of any of the 
privileges which they would have enjoyed had they remained 
in their native land, why, it is assuredly the law that it is 
wrong, not those who act under its authority. Let, there- 
fore, this subject be taken up on its true grounds ; let an 
effort be made to dter the law ; but this is not the place. 
There are present those who have the power to bring it be- 



VI.] SPEECH OP SIR JOHN MALCOLM. CCXXXV 

fore the parliament of the country, wliere it will be fully 
discussed ; and, in my opinion, the more discussion it re- 
ceives the better. The good sense of the people of Eng- 
land will not be slow to decide, whether a free press, such 
as they enjoy, can be established and exist in a country go- 
verned, as British India, by absolute power. But there are 
parts of this subject on which I must not be mistaken ; I 
have stated that the English comnuinity in India neither 
are, nor ever can be, a body resembling the public in Eng- 
land: but it is a happy effect of our constitution, that a 
portion of that spirit of liberty and independence, which 
gives life and vigour to the inollicr-country, is spread to 
her most distant colonies; and all, even to her armies, par- 
take so much of the blessing as is consistent with their con- 
dition, and with the safety of the state. Though such 
communities may be so situated as to render a free press 
dangerous both to themselves and government, they have a 
right to expect from the latter as much of information and 
of free communication as is consistent with tlie public 
safety : the tone and temper of an English society can be 
preserved in .no other mode. I am, and ever have been, 
the advocate of publicity in all affairs of government ; I 
hate concealment and mystification: good and wise mea- 
sures will ever gain strength from daylight. For such rea^ 
sons, though a decided opponent to airce press in India, by 
which I mean one, that, being restrained only by the laws 
made for the press in England, could publish a series of such 
articles as we have heard read from the Calcutta Journal ; 
which, though not punishable by law, must, if permitted, 
prove deeply injurious to the reputation and strength of the 
local government. Though I am, I say, an enemy to such 
a press, I am friendly to any publication that refrains from 
those subjects that have been properly prohibited. We 
have had these prohibitions i*ead, and the honourable mover 



ccxxxvi 


SPEECU Of SIR JOHN l^tALCOLM. 


Apr, 


of the question has depicted tliem as calculated to degrade 
all to whom they apply ; but this is not their operation. 
There have been no complaints but those found in the pages 
of Mr. Buckingham’s paper, which it has suited the case 
of the honourable proprietor to represent as the exclusive 
organ of the public. This gentleman, from the moment 
he landed in India, became, according to him, tlie solitary 
upholder of English liberty in that enslaved country, and 
tliis arduous task he is represented to have undertaken and 
performed from the most pure and disinterested motives ! 
He found the office of censor removed, and the restrictions 
wliich were imposed when it was done away he considered 
as waste paper. These restrictions, liowever, which were 
orders of government, were, in my mind, more severe on 
the press than the censorship. I decidedly prefer the latter ; 
for where it is established, its responsibility rests where it 
ought, with those who have the actual power to restrain 
and to punish ; while, in the other case, it is left to those 
who may have less knowledge and discretion, and who are 
more likely, through indiscretion, inadvertence, or from 
motives of feeling, or of interest, to offend against the go- 
vernment. There is something, no doubt, odious in the 
name of censor ; but it signifies not, if it is necessary ; and 
if the law authorizes such a check upon publication, it can- 
not, for the good of all parties, be too openly and too de- 
cidedly exercised. As for myself, I have, from all the 
knowledge I have of the scene and of tlie society, no fear of 
any harsh or unwise exertion of this power : but to be sa- 
tisfied that we are safe upon this and all other matters af- 
fecting the rights and privileges of our countrymen abroad, 
let us pause to look at the actual condition of those tyrants 
and despots (as they have been termed) under whose au- 
thority they live. The Governor-general of India, and go- 
vernors of the difterent settlements are either noblemen or 



VI.] SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. CCXXXVii 

gentlemen sent from England, or persons who liave raised 
themselves by their services in India, and the latter fill all 
the high offices under government. The race of nabobs 
who are said to have once existed (I never knew any of 
them) are extinct. Those who fill the highest situations 
in India are seldom, if ever, elevated to any forgetfulness 
of their character as English gentlemen. They proceed to 
the execution of their important duties, as men go in this 
country to those of an office ; their minds are neither cor- 
rupted by intrigues, nor disturbed by dreams of irrational 
ambition. They enjoy, it is true, great, and in some cases, 
as I have said, absolute power : the situation of the country 
they govern requires it, and the law of England sanctions 
it : but there never were men who exercised power under 
such checks. Leaving out of the question that natural 
desire to stand well with the community of their country- 
men, over whom they are temporarily placed, and not ad- 
verting to their views of returning as early as they can to 
their native land, and of enjoying that fair esteem and con- 
sideration in England to which any cruel or unnecessary 
exercise of arbitrary powers would be fatal ; leaving, I say, 
these motives (pov/erful as they must be in the breast of 
every Englishman) out of the question, let us examine 
what are the other checks under which they exercise pow er : 
first, their measui'es in detail are submitted to the Court of 
Directors ; we all know the composition of that court ; as- 
suredly it is not probable it will support despotic acts ; but 
suppose it w’^as to do so, its proceedings, whenever called 
for, must be laid before the Court of Proprietors, and, 
judging from the two last meetings of that body, those who 
exercise power in India must expect rough handling in it. 
Their next ordeal is the Board of Control, which, thougJi 
associated with the Court of Directors in the administration 
of our eastern empire, is, by one of those happy anomalies 



ccxxxviii 


SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. 


[App. 


which cliaracterize every part of our constitution, composed 
of persons whose situations and' views must lead them to 
judge questions on very different grounds from the Direc- 
tors ; but their confirmation even of the measures adopted 
by the Indian governments is not final ; the vigilance of 
Parliament, the unbending severity of the law (should they 
have offended against its letter), and the freedom of the 
English press, all hang over them, and form a combination 
of checks that could exist in no other country. I do not 
enumerate these checks to complain of them ; on the con- 
trary, I recognise their utility, even when carried to an 
extreme, — they may pain, and sometimes inflict temporary 
injury on an individual, but tlieir tendency is to benefit the 
public. Power is always intoxicating, and though I will 
not allow that those who exercise it in India are like sultans 
of the east, who require the flappers (which an honourable 
proprietor mentioned) to remind them they are men, I will 
readily admit that the oftener they are reminded they are 
Englishmen the better. But while I admit this, it is with 
a full conviction, that if those appointed to your govern- 
ments abroad sliould ever permit these checks to have an 
undue influence on the performance of their public duties, 
if they act under dread of responsibility, or seek popularity, 
your danger from their measures will be greater than any 
that could result even from tyranny ; the latter can be 
checked and punished, but that weakness which, in con- 
sidering its own safety or gratification, forgets the interests 
of the state, evades all remedy, and the mischievous effect 
is produced before the cause can be removed. It is useful, 
nay, most essential, that the checks I have noticed should 
remain in full vigour ; but they must dwell in England — 
they cannot be co-existent with absolute power in India. 
We have heard much of the press in tliat country being 
first restricted by Lord Wellesley establishing the office of 



VI.] SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. CCXWix 

censor. To understand whether this is the fact or not, it is 
only necessary to take a sliort retrospect of the history of 
its newspapers. These have been known in India little 
more than half a century. About forty-five years ago, 
when his Majesty’s courts of law had an extended jurisdicN 
tion in Bengal (wliich it was soon found indispensable to 
limit), some of the judges came in violent collision with the 
local government, and the free press, as it is termed, which 
in such a society is exactly suited to create and support such 
divisions of authority, became very licentious. A paper 
edited by a Mr. Hickey was put down, as that of Mr. 
Buckingham has now been ; and its editor, like him, declined 
to go to law. Many years afterwards, when Secretary to 
ihc Marquess Wellesley, it became my duty to peruse 
and abstract a petition from this individual, who represented 
himself as a martyr in the cause of liberty, and he com- 
plained, as Mr. Buckingham has done, of Englishmen being 
ruined by oppression and tyranny. Amongst others he 
charged with having denied him justice, was that wise, 
moderate, and great man, the late Lord CornwalJis. I 
applied to the Noble Marquess for redress,” said Mr. Hic- 
key in his petition, but he only advised me, if I thought 
myself aggrieved, to go to Jaw. The Noble Marquess,” he 
added, ‘‘might, in his condescension, have as well advised 
me to fight one of the Company's elephants, as to go to law 
with their government.” The fact probably was in that 
case as in the present, — Mr. Hickey published what com- 
pelled the local government to suppress his paper, and as 
he could prove no malice or illegal exercise of authority, 
he could obtain no redress at law. After this period I never 
heard of their existing anything like a free press. Articles 
were occasionally published, more, I imagine, through in- 
advertence than design, which called for censure on the 
publishers; and it was an imprudence or inadvertence of 



ccxl SPEECH OP SIR JOHN MALCOLM. [Apr. 

this character whicli led to Lord Wellesley’s orders, that 
the proofs of the newspapers should be submitted to the 
secretary of government. But though opinions might 
differ, as to whether that was the best mode of attaining the 
desired end or not, it is only of very late years that it has 
been supposed a free press could exist, to any good or useful 
purpose, in the European community of India. I do not 
say that, so far as that society alone is concerned, its exist- 
ence would immediately endanger the safety of our empire. 
I am satisfied it would excite dissensions, cherish insubor- 
dination, and weaken authority, and produce evils a hun- 
dred times greater than any good it could effect. But its 
effects on the European part of the community is a very 
small part of this question. Amongst that increasing part 
of the population called half-caste, the sons of European 
fathers and native mothers, it would do infinite hara. This 
class must be viewed and treated as an infant society, and 
all the hopes we entertain of their advancement, through 
the adoption of gradual measures for their instruction, will 
be disappointed, if we adopt the free press as the means of 
effecting that object. I have for many years given all the 
consideration I could to the unfavourable and depressed 
condition of this class. I entertain opinions (which this is 
not the moment to state) regarding the policy of their 
introduction to particular branches of the service, but I 
entertain no doubt as to that of every effort being made for 
their improvement, — of every avenue that can be opened, 
being opened, for the encouragement of that industry and 
talent which many of tlieni possess in a very eminent degree. 
There are men in this class of society, whom I hold as dear 
as any friends I possess — amongst those, many in this court 
share the regard I have for Colonel Skinner, who has so 
long commanded a large body of native horse, with honour 
to himself and advantage to government. But with every 



VI.] SPEECH OF SIH JOHX MALCOLM. CCXli 

desire to see this part of the population encouraged and 
advanced) I deem it essential for their good that their pro- 
gress should be gradual, in order that they may be fitted 
for the place they are destined to occupy in oar empire in 
the east. Much has been of late done for them, and par- 
ticularly by those regulations which entitle them to possess 
land in every part of our territories. There are many of 
this class, however, who are prone to impatience and dis- 
content at their condition ; and these, who naturally seek 
to make converts to their opinion, will, be found amongst 
the loudest of the advocates for a free press. But both 
these classes of the European inhabitants of India sink into 
comparative insignificance, when we contemplate the effect 
of such a press upon a native population of eighty millions, 
to whom the blessings or the evils that it may carry in its 
train are to be imparted. Passing over the impossibility of 
establishing, or at least maintaining for a short period, a 
press really free, in an empire governed by foreigners who 
have conquered, and who have not, and cannot, from the 
difference of language, habits, and religion, amalgamate 
with the natives, — let us examine the character and con- 
dition of the latter, that we may discover what would be 
the effect of the boon it is proposed to grant them. They 
are divided into two great classes, Mahomedans and Hin- 
dus ; the higher ranks of the former, who possessed almost 
all India before our rule was introduced, are naturally dis- 
contented with our power. They bear, however, a small pro- 
portion to the Hindus, whose condition and character it is of 
more consequence to examine. From the most remote period 
till the present day, we find the history of this unchanged 
people the same ; and there is one striking feature in it — oil 
the religious and civil classes are educated, and as prompt and 
skilful in intrigue as they are in business. From their intellec- 
tual superiority they have ever influenced and directed the 
VoL. ir. ' q 



ccxlii 


SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. 


[Apr. 


more numerous, ignorant, and superstitious classes of their 
countrymen. These instructed classes (particularly the Brah-* 
. mins) , who have already lost consideration, wealth, and power, 
by the introduction of our power, fear, and justly, that its 
progress will still more degrade them. They must, from sudi 
causes, have a hostile feeling towards us, and this is not likely 
to decrease from the necessity they are under of concealing it. 
They will seize every • opportunity of injuring our power, and 
many must be afforded them. They are, to my knowledge, 
adepts in spreading discontent, and exciting sedition and re- 
bellion. They know well how to awaken the fears, to alarm 
the superstition, or to rouse the pride of those they address. 
My attention has been, during the last twenty-five years, 
particularly directed to this dangerous species of secret war 
against our authority, which is always carrying on, by 
numerous, thoiigli unseen hands. The spirit is kept up by 
letters, by exaggerated repoi-ts, and by pretended prophe- 
cies. When the time appears favourable, from the occur- 
rence of misfortune to our arms, from rebellion in our pro- 
vinces, or from mutiny in our troops, circular letters and 
proclamations arc dispersed over the country with a celerity 
that is incredible. Such documents are read with avidity. 
The contents are in most cases the same. The English are 
depicted as usurpers of low caste, and as tyrants, who have 
sought India with no view but that of degrading the inlia^ 
bitants, and of robbing them of their wealth, while they 
seek to subvert their usages and their religion. The native 
soldiery are always appealed to, and the advice to them is, 
in all instances I have met with, the same — Your Euro- 
pean tyrants are few in number, murder them !’' 

The eflbrts made by the part of the Indian population I 
have mentioned, and their success in keeping up a spirit 
w'hich places us always in danger, are facts that will not be 
denied by any man acquainted with the subject. Now I 



VL] SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. CCxliu 

will ask, if we caii rationally indulge a hope, that a dislike 
and hostility to our rule would not be cherished and inflamed 
by men, whose consideration, wealth, and power, must be 
ruined by our success ? Is it likely to abate ? and if not, 
is it politic, is it wise, to put such means as a free press (such 
as has been described) into their hands ? It could only be 
* used towards one object, that of our destruction ; but that, 
when effected, would be but a prelude to a greater evil — - 
the destruction of themselves. Every fair hope that can be 
formed of rendering this vast population worthy of the 
blessings that may be gradually imparted, would perish, and 
they would be rcplunged into a worse state of anarchy than 
that from which we have relieved them. That this will be 
the result, if we give them, in their present stage of society, 
the baneful present that has been proposed, I conscientiously 
believe. But it is here necessary to ask, for what are we to 
increase such hazards, both to the European and native 
community of India ? The object, we are told, is to pro^ 
mote knowledge. Do we mistrust our local governments ? 
do we mistrust those under whose orders they act, and those 
by whom they are controlled, that we arc to take from their 
hands the accomplishment of that great object, that we 
should place it in the hands of editors of papers and of 
periodical publications ? Are we to confide almost exclu- 
sively to the latter, and to their 'anonymous correspondents, 
the reform of abuses and the improvement of our eastern* 
subjects ? The eloquence of the honourable mover has been 
powerfully exerted to make us do so. The general ten- 
dency of his arguments has gone to express a belief, that 
those who are educated for public duties in India, and who 
have superadded, to the early instruction they received, long" 
and approved service, are not the fittest instruments for this 
great and good* pur(K)se. To bring their knowledge and 
local experience to a level with the compiirative ignorance or 



CCxliv SPEKCH OP SIR JOHN MALCOLM, IApp. 

Others, who have not the same advantages, the make-weight 
of prejudice has been thrown into the scale, and they have 
been represented as having forgotten all the lessons of their 
youth, and having become dead to the feelings of British 
liberty, in order to furnish arguments to prove their incom- 
petence to the higher stations of government. This is a 
convenient doctrine ; it exalts ignorance to a par with know- 
ledge : it has been urged, in the present instance, to suit 
the case. That high and respectable body of men, the civil 
servants of India (with whom, I am proud to say, the prin- 
cipal duties of my life have associated me), have been held 
light and depreciated, that a most distinguished member of 
their service might be proved unfit for the station of Gover- 
nor-general. The prejudices Mr. Adam had imbibed by his 
long residence in India, were alluded to as the cause of his 
maltreatment of Mr, Buckingham. But what comes next ? 
Lord Amherst, a nobleman who is admitted to be as amia- 
ble as he is sensible and just, and whom all acknowledge to 
be deeply imbued with the feelings and sentiments of an 
Englishman, hardly arrives in India before he finds himself 
compelled to adopt the same prindpie upon which his pre- 
decessor had acted, and to send to England Mr. Arnott, 
who had succeeded Mr. Buckingham as editor of the Cal- 
cutta Journal. For this act of authority Lord Amherst is, 
we are told, worse than a tyrant; he has allowed himself to 
become the tool of tyrants, who have taken the advantage of 
his want of experience. Wliat does all this mean ? one Go- 
vernor-general is declared unfitted for his office because h.e 
has local knowledge, and the other because he wants it. 

It appears to me that it is the abstract name of Governor- 
general, or rather the person who exercises, to the best of his 
judgment and conscience, an absolute power which the law 
has vested in him, that is the object of the attack which we 
have heard this day. If so, let this system be arimgaed, 



VI.] SPEECH OF Slit JOHN MALCOLM. CCXlv 

not the individuals. I have shewn the checks under which 
they act; their probable motives, and their means of know* 
ledge : but these are not, we are told, to be relied upon, to 
prevent evil or to promote good purposes. No ; for such 
we must look to men like Mr. Buckingham. They are, on 
their first touch of the soil of India, to start, as if by inspi.- 
ration, into a virtue and knowledge, which is to control, to 
reform, and to improve the society, white and black, of 
India ! 

Jjet us inquire the means of the individual who has 
been brought forward as an example of what has and may 
be done by such characters. When he came first to India, 
and published the prospectus of his Travels in Palestine, 
and at the same time commenced a newspaper on an im- 
proved plan to any then existing, I deemed him, as many 
others did, a man of enterprise and talent : but in a very 
short period, several paragraphs appeared in his paper which 
satisfied me of the course he meant to pursue ; and I early 
gave an opinion on the probable termination of his career, 
which has been verified by the result. I shall not go into 
the detail of the offences he committed, his apologies, 
and his promises of amendment ; nor shall I inquire into 
the exact character of that offence which compelled Mr. 
Adam to withdraw his license. It was the aggregate of his 
offences, and the principle upon which he continued to act, 
that caused the severe but necessary measure of which he 
complains. He knew Mr. Adam’s sentiments, he knew his 
resolution ; but instead of benefiting by such knowledge, to 
avoid that ruin in which we are told he is involved, he per- 
severed in the same bold and contumacious course he had 
so long followed. He chose, no doubt, for the first trial of 
strength with the new Governor-general, a popular subject. 
He judged that Mr. Adam, though pledged to arrest his 
pareer on the first departure from the restrictions, wouH 



CCxlvi SPEECH OF SIB JOHIV MALCOLM.. [Apr. 

hesitate before he acted, in a case where he was or might be 
thought to be personally interested ; but he shewed little 
discernment in his appreciation of the character with whom 
he had to deal, or he would have known that no personal 
consideration would induce him to evade a public duty. 
Mr. Adam, vested witli the highest authority in India, was 
forced, by this course of conduct, to appear in contest with 
Mr. Buckingham, the self-created champion of British 
liberty, while not only the English community, but the 
natives, were lookers on at this trial of strength. Was the 
issue of such a contest to be left doubtful for a moment ? 

It has often been said,, and it has been repeated to-day, 
that your empire in India is one of opinion. It is so, but 
it is not an opinion of your right, but of your power. The 
inhabitants of India see that limited by law and regulations, 
and the spectacle increases their confidence ; but shew them 
the person, who exercises an authority they deem supreme, 
braved and defeated by those under him, and the impression 
which creates the charm will be broken. This, at least, is 
my view of the subject; I am, however, I confess, rendered 
timid by experience. It has made me humble, and I look 
with awe and trembling at questions which the defenders of 
a free press in India treat as mere bugbears, calculated to 
alarm none but the weak and the prejudiced. The honour- 
able mover of the resolution now before Court has asked, 
if the press is restricted in the manner it is at present, how 
we are to obtain information of the merits and character of 
, our servants. I had before thought that might be found 
on the records of the governments — in the opinion of those 
under whom officers acted ; but these are, it would seem, 
imperfect sources, as are ad papers of documents published 
under the restrictions now placed upon the Indian press. 
It is from the pages of the Calcutta Journal, and the com- 
ments of an editor who has been three or four years in India^ 



VI.] SPEECH or SIR JOHN MALCOLM. CCXlvit 

and never beyond the precincts of a presidency — is from 
his able and disinterested view of men and measures, and 
from that of his anonymous correspondents, that we can 
alone derive full and impartial information on this important 
point. But enough on this part of the subject. 

We have heard a petition, said to be written, and I have 
no doubt it is, by that respectable native, Ram Mohun Roy, 
whom I know and regard. I was one of those who earnestly 
wished his mind could have been withdrawn from useless 
schemes of speculative policy, and devoted to giving us his 
useful aid in illustrating the past and present history of his 
countrymen ; for that knowledge (of which we arc yet im- 
perfectly possessed) must form the basis of every rational 
plan of improvement. We have had comments from the 
honourable mover of the question, on those parts of the 
regulations by Mr. Adam that relate to native newspapers, 
which might lead to a belief that he had robbed the natives 
of a freedom they had long enjoyed, of a free press; but 
there never was, until very lately, any native newspaper 
printed in India, and they arc now only subject to the same 
license and regulations as those in the English language. 

I could say much more upon this subject, but feel I have 
already intruded too long upon your indulgence. Allow 
me, however, to repeat my sentiments of Mr. Adam, who 
is an individual not more distinguished by his temper and 
virtue in private life, than by his zeal, integrity, and talent 
as a public servant. lie is incapable of malignity to any 
human being. On the present occasion be has come for- 
ward to expose himself to obloquy, to save the public. The 
best testimonies to the wisdom and necessity of his conduct 
will be found in the corresponding sentiments of those he is 
associated with ; in the measure of the same character which 
Lord Amherst has found himself comjielled to adopt ; in the 
approbation of the Court of Directors ; in that of the Board 



ccxlviii SPEECH OF SIR JOHN MALCOLM. [App. VI, 

of Control. It only remains that he should receive, as I am 
assured he will, the support of this Court, who, I can have 
no doubt, will shew, by their vote on the present occasion, 
that they will never give up to clamour, or abandon, in any 
shape, a public officer, who has performed his duty in an 
able, faithful, and conscientious manner. 



No. VIL 


PeOCLAMATION PEEVtOUS TO THE COMMENCEMENT Off 
Hostilities with the Rajah ok Nepaul, 

The British government having been compelled to take up 
arms against the Nepaulese, his Excellency the Right Ho- 
nourable the Governor-general has judged it proper to make 
known to the powers in alliance and friendship with the 
Honourable Company, the origin and progress of the trans. 
actions which have terminated in this crisis, in the full 
conviction that the exposition will establish beyond dispute 
the extraordinary moderation and forbearance of the British 
government, and the injustice, violence, and aggression of 
the state of Nepaul. 

The course of the Gorkah conquests having approximated 
their frontier to that of the Honourable Company, and of 
its ally the Nawaub Vizier, and the protected Seikh chief- 
tains, throughout an extent of country stretching from the 
eastern border of Morung to the banks of the Sutlege, it 
was scarcely to be expected that differences should not 
occasionally arise between the inhabitants of the contiguous 
districts belonging to the two states, and even among the 
local public officers of each government ; but a just and 
firm line of conduct on the part of the two governments, 
combined with a sincere disposition to maintain uninter- 
rupted the relations of amity, and to respect the rights of 
each other, could not have failed to arrest the progress of 
those unhappy disputes, which have terminated in war. 

WJiile the conduct of the British government has been 



ccl 


PROCLAMATION PREVIOUS TO 


[Ai'P. 


uniformly regulated in its relations with the Nepaulcse by 
the most scrupulous adherence to the principles of justice 
and moderation, there is scarcely a single district within the 
British frontier, throughout the whole of the extensive line 
above described, in which the Gorkhas have not usurped 
and appropriated lands forming the ascertained dominions 
of the Honourable Company. 

Questions originating in the usurpations of the Nepaulese 
have arisen in Purnea, Tirhoot, Sarun, Goruckporc, and 
Bareilly, as well as in the protected territory between the 
Sutlege and the Jumna; and each case might be appealed 
to in proof of the moderation and forbearance of the British 
government, and the aggressive and insolent spirit of the 
Nepaulese. It will be enough, however, to advert in detail 
to two instances only, namely, those which have occurred in 
Sarun and in Goruckpore, which move particularly demon- 
strate the systematic design of the Ncpaidese to encroach 
on the acknowledged possessions of the Honourable Company, 
and have, in fact, been the proximate causes of the war. 

In the former district, they have at different times esta- 
blished their authority over portions of the territory of 
Betteah ; but the British government, abiding by those 
principles of moderation and forbearance so conspicuous in 
all its transactions with the Nepaulese, contented itself for 
a considerable period with remonstrances and representa- 
tions, trusting that the justice of its cause would become 
apparent to the Nepaulese government, and produce it& 
proper effect on the mind of the Bajah and his ministers. 
The repeated complaints of its subjects, and the occurrence 
of a new instance of encroachment in the Tuppah of Nun- 
noar, forming a portion of Betteah, which led to an affray, 
in which Subah Luchingir, an officer of the Nepaulese 
government, was slain, at last induced the British govern-^ 
ment to depute one of its civil officers to the spot, where he 



vn.] THE NEPAULESE WAR, ccli 

was met by deputies from the state of Nepaul, in concert 
with whom proceedings were held and evidence taken, for 
the purpose of ascertaining the claims of the parties. The 
result left no doubt of the right of the British government, 
and of the unjust and violent procedure of the Nepaulesc. 

A more striking proof of the spirit of rapacity and unjust, 
aggression by which the Ncpaulese .were actuated cannot be 
adduced, than the fact that, after having agreed to the 
investigation referred to above, and after the ai^tual deputa-^ 
tion of officers by each government, the Nepaulose suddenly 
seized an additional tract of country belonging to the Com- 
pany, at a very short distance from the scene of their former 
aggressions. 

This violent and unjust procedure would have warranted 
an immediate demand for restitution, or even the actual re- 
occupation of the lands by force ; and it may now be a 
subject of regret to the British government, that this course 
was not pursued. Far, however, from resenting or punish- 
ing this daring outrage as it deserved, tlie British govern- 
ment resolved to persevere in tlie amicable course which it 
had pursued in other cases, and permitted Mr. Young, 
the gentleman deputed to meet the Nepau lose commissioners, 
to extend his inquiries to the lands newly seized, as above 
stated, as well as to those which formed the original object 
of his deputation. 

The pretext by which the Nepaulese attempted to justify 
their occupation of the lands in Nunnore, which consisted of 
no less tlian twenty-two villages, was, that they vrere included 
in the Tuppah of Rotehut, forming a division of Purgunnah 
Sunnown, which Tuppah was restored to the Nepaulese in 
the year 1783, with the rest of the Terraiee of Muckwan- 
pore, which had been conquered by the British arms under 
Major Kinloch. The utter groundlessness of this pretext 
was proved by the evidence taken by Mr. Young, which 



CClii TROCLAMATION PREVIOUS TO Lapp. 

clearly established that the disputed lands were situated in 
the Tuppah of Nunnore, a portion of Purgunnah Simru- 
wun, which had been reserved by the Company at the time 
of the restitution of Rotehut, and the remainder of Muck« 
wanpore. But had it been otherwise, the tacit acquiescence 
by the Nepaulese in our possession of those lands for a 
period of thirty years, would have amounted to a derelic-, 
tion of their claim, however well founded it might originally 
have been. The abrupt and violent manner in which the 
Nepaulese have invariably possessed themselves of those 
portions of the Honourable Company's territory to which 
they have at any time pretended a right, will not aLow the 
supposition that they would have refrained, during so long 
a period, from doing themselves justice in the present case, 
if they had felt conscious of the validity of the claim. It is 
evident, from the whole tenour of their proceedings, that 
they acted on that premeditated system of gradual encroach- 
ment, which, owing to the unexampled forbearance and 
moderation of the British government, they had already 
found to be successful ; and that the assertion of the twenty^* 
two villages having been included in the Tuppah of Rote- 
hut, was merely brought forward to give colour to the 
unwarrantable act which they had committed, when it 
became necessary to assign a reason for their conduct. 

The Nepaulese have attempted to fix on the subjects of 
the Honourable Company the guilt of the murder of Subah 
Luchingir, and have stated as matter of complaint against 
the British government, that the Rajah of Betteah and his 
followers have not been punished for that act ; and they 
have endeavoured to found on this charge a justification of 
their own subsequent proceedings. It has been ascertained, 
however, by incontestable evidence, that Luchingir had, 
previously to the occurrence of the affray in which he died, 
possessed himself of some villages in Betteah, and was prcr 



Vir.] THE .VEPAULESE WAR. Ccliii 

paring to extend liis encroachments. Whatever degree of 
culpability therefore mayattach to the subjects of the Honour- 
able Company, for forcibly opposing his proceedings, their 
offence was towards their own government alone ; and the 
Nepaulese could not, with any colour of justice, demand 
the punishment of those persons, for an act produced solely 
by the misconduct of their own officers, or charge the Bri- 
tish government with a culpable omission of what would 
have been, under different circumstances, due to a state 
professedly on friendly terms with it ; still less can they 
found on this transaction any justification of their own con- 
duct in other instances. 

As the final resolution of the British government, with 
respect to the usurped lands in Betteah, was in part influ- 
enced by the conduct of the Nepaulese, relative to the dis- 
puted territory of Bootwul and Sheoraj in Goruckpore, it 
will be proper to advert to the circumstances of that trans- 
action in this place. 

It is notorious, and has also been proved by reference to 
authentic records, and by the unimpeached testimony of 
living witnesses, that the whole of Bootwul, to the very foot 
of the hills, with the exception of the town of Bootwul 
alone, was held by the Bajahs of Palpah, from the Nawaub 
Vizier, for a considerable period antecedent to the Treaty 
of Cession in 1801 ; and that it was transferred to the Com- 
pany by the terms of that treaty, being specifically included 
in the schedule thereunto annexed. It is no less matter of 
notoriety, that the district of Bootwul actually came into 
the possession of the British government by virtue of the 
cession, and that a settlement was made by the collector of 
Goruckpore with the agent of the late Rajah of Palpali, at 
that time a prisoner at Catmandhoo, for an annual rent of 
thirty-two thousand rupees, without the semblance of an 
objection on the part of the Rajah of Nepaul, So it re- 



Ccliv FROCLAMATIO?f PREVIOUS TO [App. 

mained until the year 1804, when the Nepaiilese com- 
menced that system of gradual encroachment below the 
hills, which terminated in their occupation of nearly the 
whole district of Bootwul. The Tuppah of Sheoraj was 
occupied by the Nepaiilese antecedently to the cession ; but 
it is no less certain that it was a part of the territory of the 
•Vizier, and, together with the rest of the lowlands skirting 
the hills in the district of Goruckpore, included in the 
cession. 

The Nepaulese pretended to found their claim to Boot- 
wul and Sheoraj, and to the other portions of the lands 
below the hills, on the circumstance of their having formed 
the terraiee, or lowlands, of the hill countries of Palpah, 
Goohnee, Pentaneh, Kamchee, &c., wliich the Nepaulese 
have conquered. Admitting that the lowlands were pos- 
sessed by the chiefs of the neighbouring hill-principalities, 
the admission does not affect the question, since it is perfectly 
ascertained that, for a considerable period before the Goor- 
kah conquest, they formed a part of the dominions of Oude ; 
and the conquest therefore of the independent lull-princi- 
palities cannot give to the conquering power any just claim 
to other lands, which, though in the occupation of tlie same 
chiefs, were held on dependent tenures from another state. 

To show the little confidence that the Nepaulese had in 
their claim of sovereignty over these lands, it is sufficient to 
observe, that soon after their usurpation of them, they 
actually made an off*er to hold Bootwul in farm from the 
British government, on the same terms as the Rajah of 
Palpah, a proposition to which this government did not 
think proper to accede. 

The system of gradual, and at times almost imperceptible 
encroachment pursued by the Nepaulese, was calculated to 
deceive the British government with respect to their ultimate 
views, and, combined with the just and moderate course 



VII.] THE NEPAULESE WAE. Oclv 

of proceedings which the British government has pursued 
in all its intercourse with the Nepaulese, prevented it from 
resorting to those means which would at once have repressed 
the outrage of the Nepaulese, and re-established its own 
authority in the usurped lands. The remonstrances and 
discussions which followed the first usurpation of the Ne^ 
paulese in this quarter, continued, with frequent interrup- 
tion, for a period of some years,^during which the Nepaulese 
continued to avail themselves of every favourable (x^casion 
of extending their encroachments. At length a proposition 
was made by the llajah of Nepaul, that commissioners 
should be appointed to meet on the spot, and investigate 
and decide the respective claims of the parties, under the 
express condition that, whatever miglit be the issue of the 
inquiry, both governments would abide by it. Notwith- 
standing its perfect conviction of the justice of its own 
claims, the British government did not hesitate to submit 
to the delay and expense necessarily attending the proposed 
investigation, confiding in the ultimate, though tardy, 
admission of its rights by the Nepaulese, and anxious to 
afford an unequivocal proof of the moderation of its conduct 
and the justice of its cause. The proposition of the Rajah 
of Nepaul was accordingly acceded to, and Major Bradshaw 
was directed to proceed to Bootwul, and enter on the 
investigation, in concert with commissioners to be ap- 
pointed by the Nepaulese government. 

The commissioners of the two governments met, and, 
after much delay and procrastination on the part of the Ne- 
paulese agents, the proceedings were brought to a close, and 
the right of the British government to the whole of the 
lowlands confirmed by the most irrefragable proofs, both 
oral and documentary. 

The Nepaulese commissioners, unable to resist the force 
of this evidence, and clearly restrained by the orders of their 



Cclvi PROCX.AMATION PREVIOUS TO [App. 

court from admitting the right of the British government, 
pretended that they were not authorized to come to a deci- 
sion, and referred the case to the Rajah’s government for 
orders. 

The advanced period of the season when the commis* 
sioners closed their proceedings, rendered it impracticable 
to take any steps founded on them, until the ensuing year. 
The immediate procedure of the British government was 
therefore confined to a communication to the Rajah, stating 
in general terms the conclusions necessarily resulting from 
the proceedings of the commissioners, and requiring the 
Rajah to give up the lands, according to the condition on 
which the investigation was acceded to, on the grounds of 
the conclusive proof of its right, established by those pro- 
ceedings. To this just and fair demand the Rajah of Ne- 
paul replied, by repeating all those arguments in favour of 
his own claim, which had been entirely overthrown by the 
evidence adduced to the commissioners, and refused to 
restore the lands. In tliis state the affair necessarily re- 
mained until the ensuing season, 1813-14. 

In the meanwhile Major Bradshaw proceeded, as soon as 
the state of the country admitted of his marching, to the 
frontier of Betteah, where he was to be met by commissioners 
from Ncpaul, empowered to adjust in concert with him the 
depending claims in that quarter ; no practical measures 
having yet resulted from the inquiry conducted by Mr. 
Young. 

Major Bradshaw, soon after his arrival, renewed a de- 
mand which had been made by the British government, but 
not enforced at the time, for the restoration of the twenty- 
two villages of Nunnore, previously to any examination of 
the question of right. This demand was acceded to by 
the Nepaulese, and the villages were re-occupied by the 
officers of the Honourable Company, subject to the ulti- 



VII.] the NEPAUX.ESE WAR. Cclvii 

mate disposal of them according to the issue of the intended 
inquiry. ^ 

The refusal of the Nepaulese government to abide by 
the result of an inquiry sought by itself in the case of the 
encroachments in Gorruckporc, notwithstanding the full and 
complete establishment of the rights of the British govern- 
ment to the disputed lands in that quarter, now led the Go- 
vernor-general in council to pause before he consented to 
incur the loss, inconvenience, and anxiety, attendant on a 
new investigation of the claims of the respective govern- 
ments to the usurped lands in Sarun. On duly reflecting 
on all that had passed ; on the actual proof of the claim of 
the British government established by Mr. Young’s in- 
quiry, conducted in concert with Nepaulese commissioners, 
an inquiry, which embraced the testimony on oath of all 
those persons who could be supposed to possess the best 
local knowledge, and Avhich had, moreover, this advantage 
over every subsequent investigation, that it was held at 
a period so much nearer to the time of the transaction, and 
on the presumptive proof of our right, arising out of the 
fact acknowledged by the Nepaulese themselves, of our 
uninterrupted possession during tliirty years; the mind 
of the Governor-general in council »was perfectly satisfied 
that a further investigation de novo would be an unprofit- 
able waste of time, and that the utmost that the Nepaulese 
government could in fainiess expect, was, that the commis- 
sioners of both governments should meet for the purpose of 
discussing the question on the basis of the investigation 
actually closed, and of supplying any defects which might 
be discovered in that investigation by further inquiry on the 
spot. 

When this result of the deliberations of the Governor- 
general in council was notified to the Nepaulese commis- 
sioners by Major Bradshaw, with an offer to meet them for 



cclyiii PROCLAMATION PREVIOUS TO [Apf. 

the purpose stated, and to produce documents which he had 
obtained, confirming the correctness of the conclusions 
drawn from the evidence formerly taken, the Commissioners 
declared, that they would not meet him, nor hold any com- 
munication with him ; and, revoking the conditional trans- 
fer of the usurped lands, demanded that Major Bradshaw 
should instantly leave the frontier. They immediately af- 
terwards returned to Nepaiil. 

This insulting and unprovoked declaration could be re- 
ferred to no other cause than a previous determination not 
to fulfil the obligations of justice towards the British go- 
vernment, and left to it no course, but to do itself that 
right which was refused by the government of Nepaub 
Acting on this principle, the Governor-general addressed a 
letter to the Kajah af Nepuul, reviewing the conduct of his 
commissioners, and claiming the full renunciation of the 
disputed lands ; adding, that If it were not made within a 
given time, the portions of these lands still in the hands of 
the Ncpaulese would be reoccupied, and the twenty-two 
villages, which had been conditionally transferred to the 
British government, declared to be finally reannexed to 
the dominions of the honourable Company. This demand 
not having been complied with, the resumption of the lands 
was carried into effect, and the authority of the British go- 
vernment re-established throughout the tract in dispute. 

Wliile these occurrences were passing in Sarun, the 
British government, perceiving from the tenour of the -whole 
conduct of the state of Nepaul, and from the answer to its 
demand for the restitution of Bootwul and Sheoraj, that no 
intention existed on the part of the Rajah to restore those 
lands, was compelled to prepare to take possession of them 
by force, if that necessity should arise. Previously, how- 
ever, to ordering the troops to advance into the disputed 
territory, the Governor-general in council made one more 



vno THE NEPATJtESE WAlli CCHx 

effort to induce the Rajah to restore them, by renewing the 
demand, founded on the result of the investigation, and de- 
clared at the same time, that if the orders of surrender 
were not received within a limited time (which was specie 
tied) the British troops would proceed to occupy the lands. 
The specified period having expired without the adoption 
cff any measure on the part of the Nepaulese government 
towards a compliance with the just requisition of the British 
government, the troops were ordered to march ; and the 
Nepaulese forces, and the public officers of that govern- 
ment, retiring on the advance of the British troops, the civil 
officers of the honourable Company were enabled to establish 
their authority in the disputed lands- 

Tiie coiiiineiicement of the rainy season shortly rendered 
it necessary to withdraw the regular troops, in order that 
they might not be cxix)sed to the periodical fevers which 
reign throughout the tract in that part of the year. The 
defence of the recovered lands was, of course, unavoidably 
intrusted to the police establishments. The apparent ac- 
quiescence, however, of the Nepaulese, in what had taken 
place, left no room for apprehension; especially as no 
real violence had been used in obliging the Nepaulese to 
retire from the district. On the morning of the 29th of 
May last, the principal police station in Bootwul was at- 
tacked by a large body of the Nepaulese troops, headed by 
an officer of that government, named Munraj Foujdar and 
driven out of Bootwul, with the loss of eighteen men killed 
and six wounded. Among the former was the Darogahj 
or principal police-officer, who was murdered in cold blood* 
with circumstances of peculiar barbarity, in the presence of 
Munraj Foujdar, after surrendering himself aj prisoner^ 
Another police tannah f was subsequently attacked by the 

♦ CoiiixDander of the army- 


t Post. 



oeix PROCIAMATXOX PREVtOVS TO [Afp. 

Nepaulese troops, and driven out, with the loss of several 
persons killed and wounded. In consequence of the im- 
practicability of supporting the police tannahs by sending 
troops into the country at that unhealthy season, it became 
necessary to withdraw them ; and the Nepaulese were thus 
enabled to reoccupy the whole of the 'disputed territory, 
which they have since retained. The British government 
linH not ceased to hope that an amicable adjustment of its 
differences with the state of Nepaul might still be accom- 
plished, when the perpetration of this sanguinary and atro- 
cious outrage, by which the state of Nepaul at once placed 
itself in the condition of a public enemy of the British go- 
vernment, put an end to the possihility of any accommoda- 
tion, except on the basis of unqualified submisrion and 
atonement. 

StiU the Governor-general would not proceed to actual 
hostilities, without giving to the Rajah of Nepaul one other 
opening for avoiding so serious an issue. Therefore his ex- 
cellency wrote to the Rajah of Nepaul, to apprize him of 
what must be the consequence of the insolent outrage which 
had taken place, unless the government of Nepaul should 
exonerate itself from the act, by disavowal and punirii- 
ment of the perpetrators. This letter recrived an answer 
wholly evasive, and even implying menace. 

The requisite submission and atonement having thus 
been withheld, the British government had no choice left 
but an appeal to arms, in order to avenge its innocent sub- 
jects, and vindicate its insulted dignity and honour. The 
unfavourable season of the year alone prevented it from 
having instant recourse to the measures necessary for chas- 
tiring the insolence, violence, and barbarity of the Nepau- 
lese, whose whole conduct, not only in the particular cases 
above detailed, but in every part of their proceedings 
towards the British government, for a series of years, 



THE NEPAUUSE WAR, 


TII.3 


cclxi 


been marked by an entire disregard of the principles of ho- 
nour^ justice, and good faith, aggravated by the most fla- 
grant insolence, presumption, and audacity, and has mani- 
fested the existence of a long-determined resolution on the 
part of the court of Catmandhoo to reject all the just de- 
mands of the British government, and to refer the decision 
of the questions depending between the two states to the 
issue of a war. 

Ever since the murder of the police-officers in Bootwul, 
and during the unavoidable interval of inaction which fol- 
lowed, the Nepaulese, with a baseness and barbarity peculiar 
to themselves, have endeavoured to destroy the troops and 
the subjects of the Company on the frontier of Sarun, by 
poisoning the water of the wells and tanks in a tract of con- 
siderable extent. The fortunate discovery of this attempt 
baffled the infamous design, and placed incontrovertible 
proof of it in the hands of the British government. 

The impediment to military operations, arising from the 
season of the year, is now removed, and the British govern- 
ment is prepared, by the active and vigorous employment 
of its resources, to compel the state of Nepaul to make that 
atonement which it is so justly entitled to demand. The 
British government has long borne the conduct of the Ne- 
paulesc with unexampled patience, opposing to their vio- 
lence, insolence, and rapacity, a course of procedure uni- 
formly just and moderate. But forbearance and modera- 
tion must have their limits ; and the British government 
having been compelled to take up arms in defence of its 
rights, its interests, and its honour, will never lay them 
down, until its enemy shall be forced to make ample submis- 
sion and atonement for his outrageous conduct, to indem- 
nify it for the expense of the war, and to afford full security 
for the future maintenance of those relations which he has 
^ shamefully violated. 



cclxii 


PROCLAMATION, 


If the misguided councils of the state of Nepaul shall 
lead it obstinately to persist in rejecting these just demands, 
it will itself be responsible for the consequences. The 
British government has studiously endeavoured, by every 
effort of conciliation, to avert the extremity of war, but it 
can have no apprehension of tlie result ; and it relies with 
confidence on the justness of its cause, and on the skill, 
discipline, and valour of its armies, for a speedy, honour- 
able, and decisive termination of the contest in wliich it is 
engaged. 

By command of his Excellency the Governor- 
General, 

(Signed) J. Adam, 

Secretary to Government. 

LucknoWf 

November 181 4 . 



No. VIII. 


Instructions ♦ by Majoe-genebal Sir John Malcolm, 
G.C.B., £.L.S., TO Officers acting under his Oe- 
DEEs IN Central India, in 1831 . 

These instructions are grounded upon principles which it 
has been my constant effort to inculcate upon all officers 
acting under my orders; and, at a period when I am leav- 
ing Central f India (perhaps not to return), I feel it a duty 
I owe to them, to myself, and to the public service, tp en- 
ter into a more full explanation of my sentiments upon the 
subject of our general and local rule, than could have been 
necessary under any other circumstances. 

Almost all who, from knowledge and experience, have 
been capable of fonning any judgment upon the question, 
are agreed that our power in India rests on tlie general 
opinion of the natives of our comparative superiority in 
good faith, wisdom, and strength, to their own rulers. 
This important impression will be improved by the consi- 
deration we show to their habits, institutions, and religion, 

* These Instructions were published in the Appendix of ‘‘ Central 
India." They are republished from a belief of their utility, in which 
the author is confirmed by the extract of a minute in the Kevenue De- 
partment. under date the 29th of March, 1825, of the Governor of 
Madras, Sir Thomas Munro, directing^ their circulation, and express- 
ing^ a hope that every public officer, for whose use they are intended, 
will be g’uidcd by the spirit which pervades them. 

t Central India, so denominated from its comprising' those provinces 
which, lying in the centre of India, may be said to extend from 
seventy-one to seventy-five degrees norffi latitude, and seventy-three 
to eighty cast longitude. It comprehends all that extent of country 
which was knownyii the time of the emperors of Delhi, under the de- 
nomination of the Subah or government of Malwa.— Vide ** Memoir 
of Central India,*’ vol. I., page 1. 



«clxiv 


SIR JOHN MALCOT.M’S 


App. 


—by the moderation, temper, and kindness, with which we 
conduct ourselves towards them ; and injured by every act 
that offends their belief or superstition, that shows disregard 
or neglect of individuals or conununities, or that evinces 
our having, with the arrogance of conquerors, forgotten 
those maxims by wliich this great empire has been esta- 
blished, and by which alone it can be preserved. 

The want of union of the natives appears one of the 
strongest foundations of our power ; it has certainly con- 
tributed, beyond all others, to its establishment. But, 
when we trace this qause, we find it to have originated in 
the condition in which we found India, and the line we 
adopted towards its inhabitants: that it will continue to 
oi^erate wlmn the condition of that i;ountry is changed, and 
under any alteration in our exmrse of proceedings, is more 
than can be assumed. The similarity of the situation of 
tlic great proportion of the people of this continent now 
subject to our rule, will assuredly make them more accessi- 
ble to common motives of action, which is the foundation of 
all union ; and the absence of that necessity for conciliation, 
which changes have effected, will make us more likely to 
forget its imjxirtance- Our power has hitherto owed much 
to a contrast witli misriile and oppression ; but this strength 
w'e are daily loosing: we have also been indebted to an in- 
definite impression of our resources, originating in igno- 
rance of their real extent ; knowledge will bring this feeling 
to a reduced standard. We are supported by the good 
opinion of the lower and middling classes, to whom our 
government is indulgent ; but it has received the rudest 
shocks from an impression that our system of rule is at 
variance with the permanent continuance of rank, authority, 
and distinction in any native of India. This belief, which 
is not without foundation, is general to every class, and its 
action leaves but an anxious and feverish existence to all 
who enjoy station and high name ; — the feeling which their 



viir.] 


irfSTntJG*rtONs. 


cclxv 


condition excites, exposes those, who have any portion of 
power and independence, to the arts of the discontented, the 
turbulent, and the ambitious: this is a danger to our 
power, which must increase in tlie ratio of its extent, unless 
we can counteract its operation by a commensurate im- 
provement of our administration. 

Our greatest strength, perhaps, and that which gives the 
fairest hopes of the duration of our rule over India, arises 
out of the singular construction of the frame of both the 
controlling and the executive government. Patronage in 
all the branches of the local government of India is ex- 
ercised under much limitation and check: favour effects 
less in this country, and competency more, than in any other 
scene of equal magnitude. There is an interminable field 
for individual exertion ; and, though men high in station 
arc almost absolute, (and the character of our rule requires 
they should be so,) there is, in that jealousy of such power 
which belongs to our native country, a very efficient shield 
against its abuse. This keeps men from being intoxicate 
with their short-lived authority ; and the fundamental prin- 
ciples winch discourage colonisation, prevent public servants 
taking root in the soil, and make them proceed to the duties 
of government, as they would in other countries to the 
routine of an office, which employs their talents, without 
agitating their personal feelings and interests, in any degree 
that can disturb or bias their judgment. This absence of 
baneful passions, and of all the arts of intrigue and ambi- 
tion which destroy empires, produces a calmness of mind 
that can belong alone to the rulers of a country situated ^ 
the English employed in India now are, and gives them an 
advantage which almost balances the bad effects of their 
want of those national ties that usually constitute the 
strength of governments. 

Our successes and moderation, contrasted with the misrule 
and violence to which a great part of the population of India 



cchm SIH JOHN MALCOLM’S [Ajpr. 

have for more tlian a century been exposed^ have at this 
moment raised the reputation of the British nation so high^ 
that men have forgotten, in the contemplation of the security 
and prosperity they enjoy under strangers, their feelings of 
patriotism ; but these are feelings which that very know- 
ledge that it is our duty to impart must gradually revive 
and bring into action. The people of India must, by a re- 
curring sense of benefits, have amends made them for the 
degradation of continuing subject to foreign masters ; and 
this can alone Ije done by the combined efforts of every in- 
dividual employed in a station of trust and responsibility, to 
render popular a government which, though not national, 
lias its foundations laid deep in the principles of ^toleration, 
justice, and wisdom. Every agent of government should 
study and understand the above facts. He should not con- 
tent himself with having acquired a knowledge of the lan- 
guages, and of the customs, of those with whom lie has 
intercourse. All his particular acts (even to the manner of 
them) should be regulated by recurrence to the foundation 
of our rule, and a careful observation of those principles 
by which it has been established, and can alone be main- 
tained. Of the importance of this I cannot better state my 
opinion, than by expressing my full conviction, that, inde- 
pendent of the prescribed duties which every qualified 
officer performs, there is no person in a situation of any 
consequence who does not, both in the substance and man- 
ner of his conduct, do something every day in his life, which, 
as it operates on the general interests of the empire through 
the feelings of the circle he controls or rules, has an unseen 
effect in strengthening or weakening the government by 
which he is employed. My belief that what I have assum- 
ed is correct, will be my excuse for going into some minute- 
ness in my general instructions to those under my orders. 

The first, and one. of the most important points, is the 
manner of European superiors towards the natives. It 



vm.] I^8T^luc^flOIrs. cdurii 

would be quite out of place, in this paper, to speak of the 
necessity of kindness, and of an absence of all violence ; this 
must be a matter of course with those to whom it is sid- 
dressed : there is much more required from them than that 
conciliation which is a duty, but which, when it appears as 
such, loses half its effect. It must, to make an impression, 
be a habit of the mind, grounded on a favourable consi> 
deration of the qualities and merits of those to whom it ex- 
tends; and this impression, I am satisfied, every person will 
have, who, after attaining a thorough knowledge of the 
real character of those with whom he has intercourse, shall 
judge them, without prejudice or self-conceit, by a standard 
which is suited to their belief, their usages, their Irnbits, 
their occupations, their rank in life, the ideas they have im- 
bibed from infancy, and the stage of civilization to whidi 
the community as a whole are advanced. If he does so 
with that knowledge and that temper of mind which are 
essential to render him competent to form an opinion, he 
will find enough of virtue, enough of docility and disposi- 
tion to improvement, enough of i*egm'd mid observance of all 
the best and most sacred ties of society, to create an esteem 
for individuals, and an interest in the community, which, 
when grounded on a sincere conviction of its being deserved, 
will render his kindness natural and conciliating. All hu- 
man beings, down to the lowest links of the chain, inclusive 
of cliildren, are quick in tracing the source of the manners 
of others, and, above all, of their superiors; — when that is 
regulated by the head, not the heart — when it proceeds 
from reason, not from feeling, it cannot please ; for it has 
in it, if at all artificial, a show of design which repels, as it 
generates suspicion. When this manner takes another 
shape, when kindness and consideration appear as acts of 
condescension, it must be felt as offensive. Men may 
dread, but can never love or regard, those who are 



ceixviii 


SIR JOHN SIALCOLAI’S 


[Arp. 


continually humiliating them by the parade of supe- 
riority. 

I have recommended those foundations of manner, to- 
wards the natives of India, upon which I feel my own to be 
grounded. I can recollect (and I do it with shame) the 
period when I thought I was very superior to those with 
whom my ^uty made me associate ; ^ but as my knowledge 
of them and bf myself improved, the distance between us 
gradually lessened. I have seen and heard much of our 
boasted advantages over them, but cannot think that, if all 
the ranks of the different communities of Europe and India 
are comparatively viewed, there is just ground for any very 
arrogant feeling on the part of the inhabitants of the for- 
mer : nor can I join in that common-place opinion, which 
condemns, in ^ sweeping way, the natives of this country as 
men, taking the best of them, not only unworthy of trust 
and devoid of principle, but of too limited intelligence and 
reach of thought, to allow of Europeans, Avith large and 
liberal minds and education, having rational or satisfac- 
tory intercourse with them. Such impressions, if admitted, 
must prove vital as to the manner of treating the natives of 
India : I shall therefore say a few words upon the justice of 
the grounds upon which they rest. The man who considers 
them in this light can grant little or no credit to the high 
characters, and the eulogies which are given to individuals 
and great bodies of men, in their own histories, traditions, 
and records. He must then i judge them by his own obser- 
vations and knowledge, and his opinion will, in all probabi- 
lity, be formed, not comparatively with Europeans of tlieir 
own class of life, but with the public servants of govern- 
ment — a class of men who are, carefully educated, whose am- 
bition is stimulated by the highest prospects of preferment, 
and whose integrity is preserved by adequate salaries 
through every grade of their service. Before this last prin- 



VIII.] 


INSTHUCTIONS. 


ccixSx 


ciplc was iiitrcxluced (whkth is little mor6 tliaH thirty years), 
the European servants of government were in the habit of 
making money in modes not dissimilar to those we now re* 
prodeli the natives in our employ with doing; and it may 
here be asked, “ If the same endeavours have been made to 
alter the habits of the latter as the former I believe the 
exact contrary to be the fact, and that the system since in* 
troduced has not operated more to elevate the European, 
than to sink and depress the native character: but thid is 
not the place for the discussion of this large question. 

Many of the moral defects of the natives of India are to 
be referred to that misrule and oppression from which tfiey 
are now,' in a great degree, emancipated. I do not know the 
example of any great population, in similar circumstances,, 
preserving, through such a period of change and tyrannical 
rule; so much of virtue and so many good qualities as to 
be found in a great proportion of the inhabitants M ibis 
country. This is to be accounted for, in some degree, by 
the Hindu institutions, particularly that of Caste, which 
appear to have raised them to their present rank in human 
society, at a very remote period; but these have certainly 
tended to keep them stationary at that point of civil order 
to which they were thus early advanced. With a just ad» 
miration of the effects of many of their, institutions, particu- 
larly those parts of them which cause in vast classes, net 
merely an absence of the common vices of theft, drunken- 
ness, and violence, but preserve the virtuous ties of famify 
and kindred relations, we must all deplore some of theii' 
usages and weak superstitions; but what individuals, or 
what races of men, are without great and manifold errors 
and imperfections P and what mind, that is not fortified with^ 
ignorance or pride, can, on such grounds, come to a severe 
judgment against a people like that of India? 

I inust here, however, remark, that I have invariably 



cclxx 


SIR JOHSr MAXCOXM’S 


[App. 


jEbiipd, unless In a few cases where knowledge had not over- 
come self-sufficiency and arrogance, that in proportion as 
European officers, civil and military, advanced in their 
acquaintance with the language and customs of the natives 
of India, they became more sincerely kind to them; and, on 
the contrary, ignorance always accompanied that selfish 
pride and want of consideration which held them light, or 
treated them with harshness. 

I am quite satisfied in my own mind, that, if there is one 
cause more than another that will impede our progress to 
the general improvement of India, it is a belief formed by 
its population, from the manner of their English superiors, 
that they are viewed by them as an inferior and degraded 
race : but, on the contrary, if the persons employed in every 
branch of the administration of this great country, while 
dieir conduct marks those rigid principles of virtue and 
justice, under the chec'k of which they act, comport them- 
selves towards the people whom it is their duty to make 
iappy, with that sincere humility of heart which always 
belongs to real knowledge, and which attaches while it ele- 
vates, they will contribute by such mariner, more than any 
measures of boasted wisdom ever can, to the strength and 
duration of their government. 

It is of importance, before I conclude this part of tlie 
subject, to state my opinion, that in our manner to the 
natives, though it is onr duty to understand and to pay 
every proper deference to their customs and usages, and to 
conform with these as far as we can with propriety, particu- 
larly on points where the religious prejudices or the rank of 
those with whom we have intercourse require it, yet we 
should always preserve the European; for, to adopt their 
manners is a departure from the very principle on which 
every impression of our superiority that rests upon good 
foundation is grounded. We should take a lesson on such 



vino 


INSTHUCTIONS. 


cclxxi 


points from what we see occur to native princes and others, 
who ape English habits and modes : they lose ground with 
one class^ that to which they belong, without gaining with 
the other, that to which they wish to approximate. The 
fact is, they ultimately lose with the latter; for even their 
attachment is useless, when they cease to have influence 
with their own tribe. The European officer, who assumes 
native manners and usages, may please a few individuals, 
who are flattered or profited by his departure from the 
habits of his country; but even with these, familiarity will 
not be found to increase respect; and the adoption of such 
a course will be sure to sink him in the estimation of the 
mass of the community, both European and Native, among 
whom he resides. 

The intercourse to be maintained with the Natives within 
your circle is of two kinds, — ^private and official. The first 
should extend as much as possible to all ranks and classes, 
and be as familiar, as kind, and as frequent, as the difference 
of habits and pursuits will admit. 

There is a veil between the Natives of India and their 
European superioi^s, which leaves the latter ignorant, in an 
extraordinary degree, of the real character of the former. 
He can only judge his own domestics by what he secs of 
their conduct in his presence ; of the manner in which they 
perform their other duties in life, he is, if not ignorant, but 
imperfectly informed : so many minute obstacles, grounded 
upon caste, usages, and religion, oppose an approach to 
closer acquaintance, that it can never be generally attained ; 
but in private intercourse much may be learned that will 
facilitate the performance of public duty, and give that 
knowledge of the usages and feelings of the various classes 
of the Natives, which will enable its possessors to touch every 
chord with effect. In joining with them in field-sports, in 
an unceremonious interchange of visits with the most re- 



ccLtxii sin JOHN Malcolm’s [App. 

sp^table^ and in seeking the society of the most learned, 
the European public officer will not only gain much in- 
formation, but impart complete confidence, and lay the 
grounds of that personal attachment which will ever be 
found of the greatest aid to his public labours. He will 
also obtain, by such habits of private intercourse, the means 
of elevating those he esteems by marks of notice and regard ; 
but, in pursuing this course, he must bewai’c lest he lose h\^ 
object, by falling into the weaknesses or indulgences of the 
persons with whom he thus associates. It is in the per- 
formance of this part of his duty, when all the pride of 
station is laid aside, that he must most carefully guard that 
real superiority which he derives from better knowledge and 
truer principles of morality and religion; for it is from the 
impression made by the possession without the ostentation 
of those higher qualities, that he must expect the benefits I 
have described as likely to result from a funiliar and private 
intercourse with the natives under his direction and control. 

In all official intercourse with the natives, one of the first 
points of importance is, tnat these, whatever be their rank, 
class, or business, should have complete and easy access to 
personal communication with their European superior. The 
necessity of this arises out of the character of our rule, and 
of those over whom it is established. It is sufficiently galling 
for the people of India to have foreign masters: the im- 
pression this feeling must continually excite, can only be 
mitigated or removed by a recurring sense of the advantages 
they derive from the wisdom and justice of their European 
superiors; and tliis can alone be effected by direct commu- 
nication with them. Though native servants must be em- 
ployed and trusted, and though it is quite essential to behave 
to all with kindness, and to raise the liigher classes of them 
by a treatment which combines consideration and respect, 
yet they can never without hazard be used as exclusive 



VIII.] INSTIITJCTIONS AND OHDERS. cclxxiil 

mediums of communication: their real or supposed influeiKc 
will, under whatever circumstances they are allowed frequent 
approach to an European officer in the exercise of authority, 
give them opportunities of abusing his confidence, if they 
desire it; and as our servants, who are seldom selected from 
the higher classes, cannot be supposed to have even the 
same motives with native rulers for good conduct, much less 
the same title to regard, men under our power will have, in 
aggravation of the feeling arising out of subjection to foreign 
rule, that of being, to a certain extent, at the mercy of 
persons of their own nation, whom they neither trust nor 
respect. There is no remedy for such an evil, except being 
completely easy of access; but this, however much the 
superior may desire it, is not to be established without 
difilculty and perseverance. It affects the interest and con- 
sequence of every man in his employ, from the highest to 
the lowest ; but, in proportion to their efforts to counteract 
it, so must his be to curry this important point, on which, 
more than all others, the integrity of his personal adminis- 
tration and the good of the country depend. No native 
servant, high or low, must be allowed the privilege of either 
introducing or stopping an applicant or a complainant: all 
such must come with confidence to the European superior, 
or to such assistant as he may specifically direct to receive or 
hear them. It requires much temper and patience, constant 
activity, and no slight sacrifice of personal comfort, to main- 
tain an intercourse with the natives upon this footing; but, 
unless it be done, (I speak here from the fullest experience,) 
the government of control now established* in Central 

* In consequence of the success of the Pindaric war in 1818 
and 1819, our power was established over almost all the country called 
(Central India; but, with the exception of a few districts, its provinces 
rciiiaincd with the native princes and chiefs who before possessed them. 

VoL. If. S 



cclxxiv 


SIR JOHN MALCOZ.Bl'S 


[App. 


India cannot be carried on for any period, and the changes 
which must ensue from relaxation in this particular will be 
brought about in the manner most unfavourable to our 
character and reputation. 

In establishing this direct personal intercourse, it is per- 
haps better, when the habits are so formed as to admit of it, 
that the natives of all classes and ranks should have admis- 
sion and be heard, at whatever hour of the day they come, 
except those of meals; but, where such constant intrusion is 
found to interrupt other business, as it may with many, 
certain portions of every day must be set aside to hear re- 
presentations and complaints, and to see those who desire to 
be seen. The establislniient of direct intercourse is, in my 
opinion, a primary and indispensable duty, — one no more 
dependent upon the inclination or judgment of the indivi- 
duals to whom the charge of managing or controlling these 
countries is intrusted, than it is to an officer whether he 
shall attend his parade, or to a judge whether he shall sit a 
certain number of hours in his court: indeed, I consider 
that late events have so completely altered our condition in 
India, that the duties of almost every officer in the political 
department have become, in a great degree, magisterial, 
and, as such, must be more defined, and subject to more 
exact rules, than they formerly were. 

Our right of interference (as will be shown hereafter) is 
so limited, that it is not in one case in a hundred of those 
that are brought forward, that an officer can do more than 
state calmly and clearly, to the party who seeks redress, the 
reasons and principles which prevent him from attending to 
his representation or complaint. He will have to repeat 

l^hcsc, with hardly wluit can be called an exception, became, umler 
different treaties and eii»-a£feincnts, dependent on the protection and 
subject to the control of the British gfoveniment. 



vrir,] 


INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. 


eel XXV 


tin’s perhaps fifty times in one clay; but he must, in con- 
templating the good that will be ultimately produced, be 
content to take this trouble. The natives of India cannot 
persuade themselves that, possessing as we do the means of 
establishing our direct rule, we shall long refrain from doing 
so. This impression weakens those princes, chiefs, and 
ministers, whom it is our policy to support, in a degree that 
almost unfits them for being instruments of government. 
We can only counteract its bad effects by making ourselves 
understood by all, even to the lowest, upon this jioint: it is 
one on which they will never trust to a communication from 
any native agent or servant, nor indeed will they be con- 
vinced of our sincerity till they observe for years that our 
words and actions are in unison ; and tliey must, to satisfy 
them that there is no prospect of those fluctuations to which 
they have been so habituated, see that everything originates 
with and is known to the superior. This knowledge, added 
to the right of apjiroaching him at all moments, will gradu- 
ally tranquillize their minds, and place tliom, as far as they 
can be placed, beyond the power of being made the dupes 
of artful or interested men. 

It has been before said, that native servants of all classes 
should be treated with that attention and respect to which 
they wore from their station and character entitled. These 
will, of course, have at all times the freest intercourse with 
the superior, but they should never have tlie privilege of 
coming to any conference between Iiini and other natives, 
to which they were not specifically called. But these ser- 
vants (whatever might be their inclination) will have little 
power of doing harm when a direct intercourse (such as has 
been described) is wxll established, and its princij)lcs and 
objects generally understood. Indeed, one of the best effects 
of that intercourse is the check it constitutes on all nefarious 
proceedings of subordinate agents, and persons of every de- 



cclxxvi 


Sin joHiV mAlcolm’s 


TArr. 


scriptioii; as such must act in liourly dread of discovery, 
when every man can tell his own story to the principal at 
any moment he pleases. 

The next important point to be observed in official inter- 
course with the natives, is publicity/’ There can be no 
occasion to expatiate, here, upon the utility of this principle. 
It is the happy privilege of a state so constituted as that of 
the English in India, to gain strength in the ratio that its 
measures, and the grounds on which they are adopted, are 
made public ; and this is above all essential in a quarter 
of India where we are as yet but imperfectly understood. 
There are, and can be, no secrets in our ordinary proceed- 
ings, and every agent will find his means of doing good 
advanced, his toil lessened, and the power of tlie designing 
and corrupt to misrepresent his actions or intentions de- 
creased, in the proportion that lie transacts affiiirs in public. 
He should avoid, as much as he possibly can, private con- 
ferences w’ith those in his employ or others. These will be 
eagerly sought for; they give the individual thus admitted 
the appearance of favour and inlluence; and there is no 
science in which the more artful among the natives are 
greater adepts, than that of turning to account the real or 
supposed confidence of their superiors. I know no mode of 
preventing the mischief whicli this impression, if it becomes 
general, gives men the power of eftectiiig, but habitual pub- 
licity in transacting business. This will, no doubt, be found 
to have inconveniences, which will be purposely increased 
by those who have their game to play, and indeed others ; 
for natives of rank and station, even when they have no 
corrupt views, are from habit and self-importance attached 
to a secret and mysterious way of conducting both great and 
small affairs. 

A public officer, placed in your situation, must always be 
vigilant and watchful of events likely to affect the peace of 



vni. 


li\STUUCTIONS AND 011DER3. 


cHxxvii 


the country under h\s charge; Imt no part of his duty re- 
quires such care and wisdom in its performance. He cannot 
rest in blind confidence, nor refuse attention to obvious and 
well-authenticated facts; but he must be slow in giving his 
car, or in admitting to private and confidential intercourse, 
secret agents and. informers, lest they make an impression 
(which will be their object) upon his mind; for there is 
no failing of human nature to which the worst part of the 
natives of India have learned (from the shape of their own 
government) so well to address themselves, as any disposition 
to suspicion in their superiors. From the condition of Cen- 
tral India, abounding as it must with discontented and 
desperate characters, intrigues, treasonable conversations and 
papers, and immature plots, must, for some time, be matters 
of frequent occurrence and growth; but such will, in general, 
l)e best left to perish of neglect. Established as our power 
now is, men cannot collect any means capable of shaking it, 
without being discovered ; and it is, I am convinced, under 
all ordinary circumstances, wiser and safer to incur petty 
hazard, than to place individuals and communities at the 
niei'cy of artful and avaricious agents and spies, or to goad 
unfortunate men to a state of hostility by continually view- 
ing them with an eye of torturing and degrading suspicion. 

In the intercourse with the natives of your circle, it is 
hardly necessary to advert to the subject of giving and re- 
ceiving jwcserits. The recent orders upon this subject, which 
have been communicated to you, are very defined and strict; 
but there is a necessity, in this government of control, for 
every agent to maintain, on a high ground, not only the 
purity, but the disinterestedness of the English character; and 
you will avoid, as mucli as you possibly can, incurring any 
obligation to local authorities. These will sedulously en- 
deavour to promote your convenience and comfort, and will 



cclxxviii SIB JOHN BJAIXOLM’S [AlP. 

press favours upon you, l)oth from design and good feelings; 
but tliere is a streiigtli in preserving complete independence 
on all such points, tliat must not be abandoned. Our poli- 
tical superiority, to be efficient, must be unmixed with any 
motives or concerns, either connected with our personal 
interest or that of others, that can soil or weaken that im- 
pression on which its successful exercise depends. 

The foi*ms of the official Intercoiu’sc between European 
agents and natives of rank were, before we obtained para- 
mount power, a matter of more moment, and one on wliich 
we could less relax than at present, because our motives 
were at that ])eriod more liable to be mistaken. Thougli it 
is essential, in our inlercoursc with nations who are attached 
to and give value to cerc^monies, to understand such per- 
fectly, and to claim from all what is due to our station, that 
we may not sink the rank of the European superior in the 
estimation of tliosc subject to his control ; it is now the 
duty of the former to l)e much more attentive to tlie respect 
which he gives than what he receives, particularly in his 
intercourse with men of liigh rank. The princes and chiefs 
of India may, in diflerent degrees, be said to be all de- 
pendent on the Uritish governinerit: many have little more 
than the name of that power they before enjoyed; but they 
seem, as they lose the substance, to cling to the forms of 
station. The pride of reason may smile at such a feeling; 
but it exists, and it would be alike opposite to the principles 
of humanity and policy to deny it gratification . 

In official intercourse with tlie lower classes, the latter 
should be treated according to the usages of the country, 
as practised by the most indulgent of their native superiors. 
It will be found that they recpiirc personal notice and con- 
sideration in proportion as their state is removed from that 
knowledge whicli belongs to civilization ; and it is on this 



viir.] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. cclxxix 

ground that the IlJieel * must have more attention paid liim 
than the llyot. It is more difficult to give confidence to his 
miudy and to make him believe in the sincerity and perma- 
nence of the kindness witli which he is treated, because he is 
in a condition more remote from tlie party witli wlioin he 
communicates ; and, before he can be reclaimed, he must be 
approximated. 

The interference of agents employed in tliis country with 
native princes, or courts, or tlieir local officers, cannot 
be exactly defined, for there will be shades of distinction in 
every case, that will require attention ; but all must bo 
subject, and that in the strictest degree, to certain general 
and well-understood principles, founded on the nature of 
our power, our objects, our ]X)litical relations wdth the 
difterent states, the personal conduct of their rulers, their 
necessity for our aid and support, and their disposition 
to require or reject it in the conduct of their internal 
administration. The leading principle, and tlie one which 
must be continually referred to, is grounded on the cha- 
racter of our controlling power and its objects. It is the 
avowed, and I am satisfied it is the true, policy of the 
British state, wliile it maintains the general peace of the 
country, to keep, not only in the enjoyment of their high 
rank, but in the active exercise of their sovereign functions, 
the different princes and chiefs who are virtually or de- 
claredly dependent on its protection. Tlie principal object 
(setting aside the obligations of faith) is to keep at a distance 
that crisis to which, in spite of our efforts, we arc gradually 
approaching — of having the whole of India subject to our 
direct rule. There is no intention of discussing lierc the 

* The Bhecls are mountain-robbers. For a partirular account of 
Ibis remarkable race, vulo Memoir on Central India, vol. i. pp. IIG, 
550, and vol. ii. p. 179. 



cclxxx SIR JOHN MALCOLM'S [.Vpp. 

consequences likely to result from such an event. It is 
sufScicnt for executive and subordinate officers to know, 
that it is the desire of the government they serv^e, to keep 
it at a distance, to render it their duty to contribute their 
whole efforts to promote the accomplishment of that object ; 
and on the manner and substance of their interference the 
local success of this policy will greatly depend. 

On all points where we are pledged by treaty to support 
states, or to mediate or interfere between them and others, 
we must of course act agreeably to the obligations con- 
tracted ; and, in such case, no instructions can be required. 
It may not, however, be iiiiusefiil to remark, that, on all 
occasions wlierc they are referred to, treaties and engage- 
ments sliould be interpreted with consideration to the 
prince or chief with whom they arc made. Tliere is often, 
from opposite education and habits, much difference between 
their construction and ours of such engagements; but no 
loose observation, or even casual departure from the letter 
of them, ought to lead to serious consequences, when it 
appeared tliere was no intention of violating the spirit of 
the deed, or of acting contrary to pledged faith. When 
any article of an engagement is doubtful, I think it should 
be invariably explained with more leaning to the expec- 
tations originally raised in the weaker than to the interests 
of the stronger power. It belongs to superior authority 
to give ultimate judgment upon all points of this nature 
which come under discussion; but that judgment must 
always be much influenced by the colour of the information 
and opinion of the local agent- My desire is to convey 
how important every subject is that connects iu the re- 
motest degree with that reputation for good faith, which 
can only be considered our strength while it exists unim- 
paired in the minds of the natives : in this view the most 
scrupulous attention should be paid to their understanding 



vnr.] iiVSTJiucTioNs and ohders. cclxxxi 

of every article of the agreements we make witli them ; 
for no local advantage, nor the promotion of any pecuniary 
interest, can compensate for the slightest injury to this 
corner-stone of our power in India.” 

With the government of Dowlut Row Sindla * (a groat 
part of wliose possessions are intermixed with those of our 
dependent allies in this quarter) we have only general 
relations of amity ; and, however virtually dependent events 
may have rendered that prince, we can (except insisting 
upon the exact performance of those settlements which we 
have mediated between him or Iiis delegated officers and 
some of his tributaries) claim no right of interference in any 
part of his internal administration ; nor should there, unless 
in cases of unexpected emergency which threatened the 
general peace of the country, be any disposition shown to 
interference, except on specific requisition from the resident 
at Gwalior f. Without interfering, however, we have 
hitherto, and shall continue to exercise a very salutary 
control both over Dowlut Row Sindia and his ](K*al officers, 
by the terms on which wo communicate and act with the 
latter. When these are men of good character, and studj" 
the happiness of the inhabitants and the improvement of 
the country, we can, by the cordiality and consideration 
with which we treat them, and the ready attention we give 
to the settlement of every petty dispute they have with the 
subjects of our allies, as well as other friendly acts, grant 
them a countenance and aid which will promote the success 

♦ This Mahratta prince (for a particular account of whose family 
and possessions, vide Memoir on Central India^ vol. i. p. 116) is the 
only one who maintains a nominal independence of the llritish gfovern- 
nicnt ; but he, in fact, now relies as much on that power as those cliicfs 
who can claim its protection by treaty. 

t Gwalior is the capital of Dowlut Jiow Sindia, with whom a rcprc-» 
sentative of the British g^ovcrniiient resides. 



cclxxxii 


SIH JOHN MALCOLM’S 


[Arp. 


of their local atlininistration. The same principle leatls 
to abstinence from all communication, and to our keeping 
aloof (except wliere the general peace is at hazard) from all 
intercourse with those of Sindia’s managers who arc noted 
for misrule or bad faith. This line of conduct towards the 
latter, grounded, as it publicly should be, on the avowed 
principle of keeping our character free of soil from their 
proceedings, will increase our local reputation, while it has 
the effect of rendering the employment of such men incon- 
venient and unprofitable to the state, and thus constitutes 
one of the chief means we have of working a reform in its 
internal administration : nor is it a slight one ; for the im- 
pression of our powder is so great, that the belief of a local 
officer possessing our good opinion and friendship, is of 
itself sufficient to repress opposition to his aiithoi’ity, while 
his forfeiting our favour is sure to raise him enemies, both 
in his district and at Gwalior. 

With the courts of Ilolkar *, Dhar, Dcw'ass, and almost 
all the petty llajpoot states west of the Chumbul, our re- 
lations arc different. These have been raised from a weak 
and fallen condition, to one of efficiency, through our efforts. 
]Jut, though compelled, at first, to aid them in almost every 
settlement, we have, as they attained the power of acting 
for themselves, gradually withdrawn from minute interfer- 
ence on points connected with their internal administration, 
limiting ourselves to wdiat is necessary for the maintenance 
.of the public tranquillity. 

There is so strong a feeling in the minds of the princes 
and chiefs above alluded to, and in those of all their officers 
(from their prime minister down to the lowest agent), of 

• For an account of the Mahratta families of Holkar, Dhar, and 
Dewass, vide Memoir on Central India, vol. i. pp. 14*3, 97, and 112. 
A detailed account of the Rajpoot chiefs here alluded to is g’iven in 
p. 4G3 of the same volume. 



VIH.] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. cclxxxiii 

their actual dependence ujion tlie British government, that 
it is almost impossible to niakc them understand that they 
are, in the conduct of their internal administration, desired 
and expected to act independently of it. Their difficulty 
of comprehending and trusting the policy which dictates 
our conduct in this particular, arises out of its }>eing opposite 
to all their habits and knowledge. Time alone, and the 
most minute care of every European agent employed, can 
impart to them that conlideiice which is essential to their 
becoming competent functionaries of rule. To effect this 
object, the principles hitherto inculcated and acted upon 
must be steadily pursued, and we must decline all interfer- 
ence, except in cases where Grassiahs*, Bheels, or other 
plunderers are concerned. These, from their situation and 
strength, can only be kept in order by the power of the 
British government; but we must, in such cases even, have 
the limits of oirr interference exactly defined, that no belief 
may exist of our possessing the powder of departing from 
the restrictions we have imposed ujx>n ourselves; for on 
such impressions being general, and being confirmed by 
scrupulous consistency of action, depends our success in 
giving that eifielency to the various native authorities 
subject to our control, which is necessary to enable them 
to perform the different duties allotted to them. 

Ill cases of interference with lesser rulers, such as the 
reformed Rajpoot plunderers and Bheel chiefs, we may bo 
compelled to enter more minutely into their affiiirs; but tJie 
principles observed should be tlio same ; and while wc take 
care to repress every disposition to a return to predatory 

^ The Grassialis are Rajpoot chiefs, who subsist by extorting-, 
through force or intiiuidation, a part of the produce of those districts 
they once jiosscssed, but from which they have been expelled by Mah- 
ratta invaders. For a particular account of tln^sc chiefs, vide Memoir 
on Central India, vol. i. p. 50S, and vol. ii. p. 214. 



cclxxxiv 


SIB JOHN MALCOLM’S 


[Arr. 


and see that men who have long clicrished siicli 
possess themselves of lioiiest means of livelihood, we must 
respect their prejudices, and not hastily break in upon the 
rude frame of their internal rule ; but leave (clown to the 
Turwee, or head of the Bheel Parah or duster of hamlets) 
the full exercise of his authority over those under him, 
according as that is grounded on the ancient prejudices and 
usages of the tribe to which he and his family or followers 
belong. 

The feelings of irritation and hatred w ith wdiicli almost 
all the princes and chiefs of this quarter regard the Gras- 
siahs and Bhcels, and the total want of confidence of the 
latter in their nominal superiors, have and will continue to 
render calls for our interference very frecpicnt : but how’- 
cver high the character and condition of the one party, 
and however bad and low that of the other may be, we 
must never grant our name or siipjx)rt to measures of 
coercion or violence, without fully understanding the merits 
of the case, nor without having had direct communication 
with the party or parties inculpated ; otlierw- ise w^c may be 
involved in embarrassment, and become unconsciously the 
instruments of injustice and o2)pression. 

Many questions will occur, deeply connected with our 
reputation for g<x)d faith, which cannot be decided by any 
exact rules; but whenever that is concerned, the tone of 
our feeling should be very high. It is the point upon 
which the moral part of our government of tliis great 
empire hinges ; and in these countries, wdiere our rule and 
control arc new, and in which the inhabitants cannot yet 
understand any explanations that do not rest upon broad 
and obvious grounds, the subject requires much attention. 
There arc many cases in which our faith, though not 
specifically, is virtually pledged to individuals : ministers, 
for instance, of minor or incoinjx^tcnt princes or cl>iefs, 



VII!.] 


IXSTUt CTTONS AKD ORDERS. 


cclxxxv 


vlio have been bronglit forward or recognised by us in tlic 
exercise of authority, have a claim upon our support and 
consideration, wliicli nothing but bad conduct on tlieir part 
can forfeit. We should, no doubt, be most careful of any 
interference that leads to such obligations. They are only 
to be incurred when a necessity that involves the peace and 
prosperity of the country calls for them : but they must be 
sacredly observed ; for, with a people who look, in all 
questions of government, more to persons than systems, 
the abandonment, excej^t from gross misconduct, of any 
individual wlio bad been raised or openly protected by us, 
W'ould excite stronger feelings than the breach of an article 
of a treaty 1 and locally prove more injurious, as it weakens 
that reliance iij)on our faith which is the very foundation of 
our strcngtl). 

W e may rest satislied, while we pursue the course I have 
stated (and it is tlie one to which our faith is almost in 
every case, either directly or hy implication, pledged), that 
we Iiavc, from our paramount power, a very elRcient clieck 
over states and tribes, whose rulers, officers, and chiefs will 
soon discover that they can only gain our favour and sup- 
port by good conduct, or forfeit it by bad. With such 
knowledge and with means comparatively limited, we can- 
not expect they will be disposed to incur displeasure, when 
the terms on which they can gain approbation are so easy ; 
at least yo men possessed of common sense and discernment 
(({ualitics in which the natives of India are seldom deficient) 
can be expected to act in such a manner ; but we must not 
conceal from ourselves, that their conduct in this, as in 
all otlier particulars, will rest chiefly on the value of that 
condition in wliich they arc placed, or rather left ; and in 
proportion as w e render it one of comfort and dignity, so 
will their care bo to preserve our good opinion and to 
merit our confidence. It is, indeed, upon our success in 



cclxxxvi 


SIR JOHN MALCOLM’S 


[App. 


supporting their rcspectabilityj tlmt the permanence of a 
system of control over great and small native states, such as 
we have established in this quarter of India, will depend. 
We have no choice of means in the performance of this de- 
licate and arduous part of our duty. Though the check 
must be efficient, it should be almost unseen: the effect 
ought to be produced more by the impression than the ex- 
ei'cise of superior power. Our principal object must be to 
elevate the autlioritics to whom we have left the administra- 
tion of their respective territories ; we must, in all cases of 
interference, bring them forward to their own subjects, as 
the prominent objects of respect and obedience ; so far from 
the agent attracting notice to himself, he should purposely 
repel it, that it may be given to the quarter where it is 
wanted, and to which it belongs. 

Wlien we aid any prince or chief against liis own subjects, 
his name should be exclusively used; and we should l)e 
most careful in making our native agents and servants pay 
the full measure of respect to every branch of his adminis- 
tration, and continually be on the M\atch to check that dis- 
position which is inherent in tliem, to slight local authori- 
ties, thfit they may, in the name of tlieir master, draw that 
attention to themselves, which it is quite essential should be- 
long to the officers of the native government. It is evident 
that our control can only be supportable, to any human 
being who has the name and ap2')earancc of power, so long 
as it is exercised in a general manner, and regulated by the 
principles above stated. When it descends to minute checks 
and interference in the collection of revenue, the administra- 
tion of justice listens to the complaints of discontented, or 
even aggrieved individuals, and allows, upon system, its own 
native agents to interfere and act in the name of the para- 
mount state; the continuance of independent *ppwei:> iP any 
shape, to either prince or chief, is not only impolitic but 



Vrii.] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. Cclxxxvii 

dangerous, as his condition must be felt by himself, and by 
all attached to his person or family, as a mockery and de- 
gradation ; and the least effect of such feelings will be the 
extermination of all motive to good or great actions. For 
when control is divested of its large and liberal character, 
and takes a more minute shape, whatever merit belongs to 
the administration becomes the due of the j>erson by whom 
it is exercised, or his agents, and the nominal prince and his 
officers arc degraded into suspected and incompetent instru- 
ments of rule. 

In this general outline of our interference with the rulers, 
great and small, of this part of India, I have dwelt much 
upon the jx>litical considemtions upon which it is grounded ; 
because I am convinced, that there is no part of the subject 
that requires to be so deeply studied and so fully understood, 
as this should be, by every subordinate agent; for there is 
no point of l)is duty whicli is at once so delicate and arduous, 
or in which success or failure so much depends upon indivi- 
dual exertion, lie will be prompted to deviate from the 
course prescribed, by the action of his best feelings, and by 
hopes of increasing his personal reputation; but he will be 
kept steady in that course by a knowledge of tlic importance 
of those general principles on which the present system rests. 
It is in the performance of this part of his duty, that all 
which has been said regarding maimer and intercourse must 
be in his memory ; for men in the situation in whicli those 
are, with whom he must in all cases of interference come in 
contact, arc not to be conciliated to their condition, nor kept 
in that temper with the paramount authority which it is 
necessary for its interests they should be, by more correct- 
ness or strict attention to justice. The native governments 
must be courted .and encouraged to good conduct, and the 
earnest endeavour of the British agent must be, to give their 
rulers a pride in their administration : to effect this object, he 



cclxxxvlii 


Slit joim Malcolm's 


[App. 


must will to his side, not only the rulers themselves, but the 
principal and most respectable men of the country. In his 
efforts to gain the latter, however, he must beware of de- 
priving the local authority of that public opinion which is 
so essential both as a check to misrule and a reward to good 
government, but which would cease to be felt as cither, the 
moment the ties between prince and subject were seriously 
injured or broken. 

Where the public peace, of wliicli we are the avowed pro- 
tectors, has been violated, or where murders or robberies 
have been committed, we have a right to urge the kieal au- 
thorities ('ivhom w’e aid with the means both for the pre- 
vention and punishment of such crimes) to pursue, accord- 
ing to tlieir own usages, the course best calculated to jire- 
serve the safety of persons and of property. In other cases 
connected with the administration of justice, though there 
is no right of interference, it will be for their interest, and 
for our reputation, to lose no opportunity of impressing 
generally the benefit and good name that will result from 
attention to ancient institutions, particularly to that of the 
popular courts of Punchayet, which have never been discon- 
tinued, but in periods marked by anarchy and oppression. 

The practice of Suttee* is not frequent in Malwa, and 
tliat of infanticide is, I believe, less so. The first is a usage, 
which, however shocking to humanity, has defenders among 
every class of tlie Hindu community. The latter is held in 
abhorrence by all but the Ilajpoot families, by whom it is 
practised, and to whom it is confined ; yet many of the most 
respectable chiefs of that tribe speak of this crime with all 
the horror it merits. You cannot interfere in the prevention 
of either of tliesc sacrifices, beyond the exercise of that in- 
fluence which you possess from personal character: indeed, 

* Suttee is a Hindu term for the self-sacrifice of a female at the 
funeral-pile of her husband. 



vin,] 


INSTHtJCTIONS AND ORDERS. 


cclxxxix 


to attempt more, would be at the liazard of making wrong 
impressions, and of defeating the end you desired to attain. 
Praise of those who abstain from such acts, and neglect of 
those who approve or perpetrate them, is the best remedy 
that can be applied. It is the course I have pursued, and 
has certainly been attended with success. 

That the line of interference which has been described is 
difficult will not be denied; but what course can Ave dis- 
cover for the future rule and control of the different native 
states in India, which does not present a choice of difficulties? 
Men are too apt, at the first view of this great subject, to 
be deluded by a desire to render easy, and to simplify, what 
is of necessity difiicult and complicated. Moral considera- 
tions come in aid of the warmest and best sentiments of the 
human mind to entice us to innovation; Ave feel ourselves 
almost the sharers of that crime and misrule Avhich wc think 
our interference could mitigate or amend ; and, in the fer- 
vour of our virtue, Ave are too apt to forget^ that temporary 
or partial benefit often entails lasting and general evil, — 
that every plan, hoAvever theoretically gootl, must be prac- 
tically bad, that is imperfectly executed. We forget, in the 
pride of our superior knowledge, the condition of others ; 
and self-gratification makes almost every man desire to croAvd 
into the few years of his official career the Avork of half a 
century. Thus measures IiaA’^e been, and continue to be, 
brought forward ‘‘in advance of the community” for Avhose 
benefit they are intended. Of Avhat has passed, it is not ne- 
cessary to speak ; the future is in our power, and I cannot 
conclude this part of the subject, which relates to an inter- 
ference that is [calculated, according as it is managed, to 
hasten or retard the introduction of our direct rule, Avithout 
impressing upon every officer employed under my orders 
the importance of a conduct calculated to preserve, Avhile it 
improves, the established governments and native autho- 
voL. n. t 



ccxc 


SIR JOH<V MAICOLM’S 


[App. 


rities of the country. To these it is Ins duty to give such 
impulse as he can, without injuring their frame, towards an 
amendment suited to their situation, to the character of the 
rulers, and to that of the various classes under their rule. 
I consider, and the opinion is the result of both experience 
and reflection, that all dangers to our power in India are 
slight in comparison with those which are likely to ensue 
from our too zealous efforts to change tlie condition of its 
inhabitants, with whom we are yet, in my opinion, but very 
imperfectly acquainted. A person who entertains such senti- 
ments as I do on this question, must appear the advocate of 
very slow reform; but if I am so, it is from a full conviction 
that anything like precipitation in our endeavours at im- 
provement is likely to terminate in casting back those W'e 
desire to advance: on the contrary, if instead of overmaixh- 
ing, we are content to go along with this immense population, 
and to be in good temper with their prejudices, their religion, 
and usages, we must gradually win them to better ways of 
thinking and of acting. The latter process, no doubt, must 
be one of great time; but its success will be retarded by 
every hasty step. 

There are few points on which more care is required than 
the selection and employment of native servants for the 
public service. The higher classes of these, such aa Moon- 
shees*, Mootsuddics+, and Writers, should be men of re- 
gular habits of life, intelligent, and of good characters in 
their own tribes. There is no objection to an officer con- 
tinuing to keep in service a person he has brought from a 
distant province, who has been long with him, and on whose 
fidelity and competence he can repose; but, generally speak- 
ing, it is much better to entertain respectable natives or old 
residents of the country in whieji he is employed; such may 

« Moonshee — ^IVIahomedaii secretary or writer. 

t Mootsuddie--Hindu writer. 



Vin.3 INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS, CCXCi 

have looser habits and be less attaclied, but the foraier bis 
vigilance will clieck and correct, and attachment will soon 
be created by kindness and consideration. Their advantages 
over foreigners are very numerous. The principal are, their 
acquaintance with the petty interests of the country, and 
their knowledge of all the prejudices and the jealousies of 
the different classes of the community to which they belong. 
On all these points the superior sliould be minutely informed, 
and, if he employs men not j>ersonalIy acquainted with 
the disposition and condition of those under his charge or 
control, Jiis information on such subjects must come thiDUgli 
multiplied mediums, which is in itself a serious evil. But, 
independent of this, the employment of the natives of a 
distant province is always unpopular, and they are generally 
viewed with dislike and suspicion by the higher and more 
respectable classes of the country into which they are intro- 
duced. This excites a feeling in tlie minds of the former, 
which either makes tljein keep aloof from all connexion with 
the inhabitants, or seek the society of, and use as instruments, 
men who are discontented or of indifferent character. It is 
difficult to say which of these causes has the worst effect. 
The one gives an impression of pride, if not contempt, and 
the other of design and an inclination to intrigue ; and both 
operate unfavourably to the local reputation of the master. 

I have ob>served, that the natives who are least informed 
of the principles of our rule, arc ready to grant respect and 
confidence to an English officer, which they refuse to persons 
.of their own tribe; but they are apt to form an unfavour- 
able opinion of his disposition and character from any bad 
conduct of his native servants, if foreigners: on the con- 
trary, when the latter are members of their own community, 
the exposure of their errors or crimes, while it brings shame 
and conveys a salutary lesson to the class to which they 
belong, is attended with the effect of raising, instead of de^ 



ccxcii SIR JOHN MAtCOlM*S [Apf, 

pressing, the European in their estimation. To all these 
general reasons might be added many, grounded on the 
particular condition of Central India. The oppression the 
inhabitants of this quarter have recently suffered, both from 
Hindu and Mahomedan Natives of the Deckan * and Hin- 
dustan + makes them naturally alarmed at these classes. 
There is also, in the impoverished state of many of the best 
families of the country, a strong additional reason for our 
giving them, in preference to strangers, what little we can 
of salary as public servants. 

In the above observations there is no desire to exclude 
any member of Deckan or Hindustan families, who have 
settled for life, or for several generations, in Malwa; such 
objection would proscribe from our employ some of the 
most intelligent and respectable inhabitants of that province. 

It has been before mentioned, tliat publicity’’ in our 
transaction of business is most essential, chiefly as it puts at 
repose an alarmed and agitated population, and, beyond all, 
their princes and chiefs. We may greatly promote this 
object by the selection of servants. I early observed a very 
serious uneasiness, if not alarm, in Holkar’s ministers, re- 
garding the course I meant to pursue towards that court ; 
and as one means of removing it, I chose as a principal 
native writer an intelligent Brahmin, whose family was at- 
tached to that of Holkar, in whose employ I found him ; 
and who could, I knew, from his connexions, have no per- 

* The term Deckan means South, and is given to the southern 
parts of India ; but, in a limited sense, is now applied to the territories 
of the Nizam or Prince of Hyderabad, and to those above the mountains 
which formerly belonged to the PaishwaU or head of the Poonah 
government. 

f Hindustan, in its local and limited sense, comprehends the large 
and rich provinces which form the western parts of India, from Luck- 
now to the Punjab, and from the country of Rajpootana to the 
Himalaya mountains. 



VIIL] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. CCXCllI 

manent interests separate from his duty to that state. I was 
conscious of having nothing to conceal, but I knew the im- 
portance of Tantia Jogh* and others being satisfied that 
this was the case. No measure I have adopted has tended 
more to tranquillize their minds; and I state the fact, 
because its application may be suited to cases of daily 
occurrence. 

In the employment of the higher classes of native servants, 
they should, as much as possible, be restricted to their spe- 
cific duties, and no one should be allowed to take a lead, 
or mix (unless when directed) in the occupation of another. 
The keeping of these persons in their eyact places will be 
found difficult, from the habits of the natives being opposite 
to such rules; but it is essential; for errors, if not guilt, 
will be the certain consequence of a confusion of duties, 
which destroys that pride which good men feel from pos- 
sessing confidence, and enables bad to evade that personal 
responsibility which constitutes the chief check upon their 
conduct. 

The employment of the lower classes of public servants 
requires much attention. These should be selected on the 
same principles that have already been stated, with reference 
to the duties they are to perform, which ought always to be 
exactly defined, and their conduct vigilantly w'atched. It 
will indeed be found useful to render as public as possible 
the nature of their employment, and to call upon all local 
authorities to aid us in the prevention of those unauthorized 
and odious acts of injustice and oppression towards the in- 
habitants of the country which this class will, in spite of all 
our efforts, find opportunities of committing. 

I speak from the fullest experience when I state, that, 
though the natives of India may do full justice to the purity 

♦ Tantia Jogli, the minister of the minor prince Malhar Bow 
Holkar. 



ccxciv 


SIR JOHN MAI.COLM’S 


[Apt, 


of our intentions, and the excellence of the principles of our 
rule, they are undisguised in their sentiments regarding 
those parts of our administration in which the very dregs of 
their own community are employed. They cannot, indeed, 
but see with feelings of detestation and resentment a man 
raised from the lowest of their own ranks, and decorated 
Avith the official badge or stick of a civil or political English 
officer, become the very next moment insolent to persons to 
whom he and his family liave been for ages submissive, or 
turn the extortioner of money from those tribes, among 
which he has before lived as an humble individual. 

The power of this class of servants to injure our reputa- 
tation is cveryAvhere great, but more so in proportion as 
the natives of the country arc ignorant of our real clia- 
racter, and where their dread of our power is excessive. Of 
the mischief they have done, or rather tried to do, in Malwa, 
I can speak from a perfect knowledge. I hrlvd endeavoured 
Avith unremitting solicitude to counteract their impositions 
and oppressions, by publishing proclamations, and giving 
high rewards to all Avho informed against or seized any of 
ihy servants, Avhen attempting the slightest interference in 
the country, or affecting to have any business beyond that 
of carrying a letter, or some specified or limited duty; but 
I have, nevertheless, been compelled Avithin three years to 
punish publicly and discharge one Moonshee, two Moot- 
stfddies dr writers, three Jemadars*, and upwards of fifty 
SSfcarmhs f ; and almost an equal number of the same class 
belonging to other public officers have been taken and 
liimished, or banished the country. 

* A JcRkkdair ife the head or principal of the Hircarrahs. 

f Hiroafrah; means literally “a man of all work/’ but is commonly 
applied, as in the text, to messeng-ers who are distinguished by parti- 
cular dresses, by bearing a stick or pike, and by wearing badges which 
denote the names of those by whom they are employed. 



VIIL] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS, CCXCV 

Tliese examples will shew the danger of being tempted, 
by any convenience of service, or a desire to accelerate the 
accomplishment of our objects, to employ such instruments 
with any latitude of action. 

The importance of encouraging the dependent states of 
India to do their own work, and to lean, on points of internal 
administration, as little as possible upon us, lias been before 
noticed ; and as lojig as we manage to keep clear of that 
species of interference Avhicli weakens and unsettles, without 
any proportionate good to balance its evil effects, we sliall 
have credit in general opinion for all the good measures 
which the state under our protection adopts, and our repu- 
tation will be benefited (fi’om the comparisons that are 
drawn) even by its acts of folly and injustice. But the 
latter advantage will lie lost by any half and impolitic mix- 
ture in its concerns, and there is no mode in which this will 
be found so injurious as that of granting it the aid of native 
servants in our employ. Allowing the higher classes of 
these to enter into the affairs of such governments in any 
shape, would be destructive of every principle that has been 
inculcated ; but the giving their rulers, ministers, or local 
officers, the aid of lower servants, would be still more to the 
injury of our reputation ; for among the higher classes we 
might find men of virtue and firmness of character beyond 
what could be expected from the others, when exposed, as 
they would be, to such temptation. They would be used 
for purposes of coercion, if not oppression ; and there would 
be sufficient art in those who thus employed them, to throw, 
when that was their object, the odium of what these instru- 
ments did upon the English government. But, in general, 
their desire would be limited to have the aid of the British 
name to alarm into compliance with their demands, indivir 
duals or communities. They would be aware that the Hir- 
carrah or servant sent to assist their authority was a chik^k 



ccxcvi 


SIB JOHN MArCOlM’S 


[App. 


upon their proceedings, and this would lead to his being 
bribed ; and, if he did not become an instrument of violence, 
it would only be because he received higher wages from the 
party he was sent to oppress. I have seen such manifold 
instances of the bad effects resulting from the employment 
of this class in the manner described, that I have for more 
than three years peremptorily refused any such aid to native 
chiefs, and must require all those under my orders to do the 
same. The best answer to all applications upon this subject 
is, that compliance is at variance with the system ordered 
to be pursued ; and that the usage of granting such aid, 
though it might be found convenient, and in some cases ac- 
celerate the accomplishment of good measures, must in the 
end produce much evil, and be attended with loss of re- 
putation to the British government, whose good name could 
not be intrusted to low agents and menials acting beyond 
tlie strict and vigilant observation of the European officer. 

The right we have to .act, when the public peace is threat- 
ened or disturbed, lias been generally noticed under the 
head of interference ; but it will be useful to say a few words 
on the mode of exercising that right, particularly as it re- 
lates to points which are connected with the internal admi- 
nistration of police and criminal justice. 

Ill countries which have been long in the condition of 
Central India, there is a connexion formed between the most 
powerful and those who are apparently the most insignificant 
of the disturbers of tlie public peace, which will for some 
time require a vigilant attention to every act of the latter to 
prevent the revival of a disorderly or predatory spirit. In 
common cases we shall only have to prompt the local au- 
thority to exertions. But when our aid is required, and 
troops or any persons acting under our orders apprehend 
delinquents, they should invariably be given over to the 
ruler or chief in whose countries the crimes were committed, 



VIIL] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. CCXOvil 

by whom they will be examined, and punished according to 
established custom. I have usually limited my interference 
in this part of the administration of the native states of 
Malwa to two points. The first is, that in cases of robbery, 
but particularly cattle (the common booty of Bheels and other 
plunderers), there should be restitution to the owners the 
moment the property was proved ; leaving those persons 
through whose hands it has passed, by real or pretended 
sales, to have their disputes and recriminations settled, and 
to recover from each other, according to usage. This prac- 
tice is now general, and its enforcement for the last two 
years has done more to put an end to Bheel and other rob- 
beries than all the other measures that have been taken. 
The second point on which I have endeavoured to make a 
change ill the practice of the administration of justice in the 
native states of Malwa, is that of preventing the crime of 
wilful murder being commuted for the payment of a pecu- 
niary fine ; but in all cases of this nature, where circum- 
stances compel us to interfere, it is desirable that no execu- 
tion should take place till guilt has been clearly proved. 
The observance of this rule is more necessary, as in cases 
where the criminals are of a plundering tribe, such as 
Bheels and Baugries *, the native ruler or chief will be dis- 
posed to deem the mere accusation enough to warrant the 
punishment ; whereas, it is exactly with such classes that it 
is of importance to us to be more particular, lest we lose the 
impression we desire to make upon them, by becoming in 
any way accessaries to acts of violence or injury. 

On all occasions when the local power is sufficient, it is 
most desirable to bring it into action, that it may cease to 
be dependent upon us for the maintenance of the internal 
peace. This is particularly advisable where excesses are 

♦ Baugries, a tribe of robbers, — Vide Memoir on Central Jndia^ 
vol. ii. p. 189. 



ccxeviii sin johx Malcolm’s capp. 

committed, that have, either as their real or profess^l 
causes, superstitious or religious feelings. In such cases, 
except where the mixture of political motives is manifest 
and avowed, or the danger imminent, we should call upon 
the native government, by its duty and allegiance to the 
paramount state, to put down all disturbers of the peace, 
particularly when fanatics, like those at Pertaubgurh 
combine with their atrocities the avowal of sentiments hos- 
tile to our rule. The actual condition of Central India 
makes it likely that such efforts as those above alluded to 
may be repeated, and they will always (however contempt- 
ible they may seem) require to be treated witli much deli- 
cacy. It should be deemed a guiding principle not to act, 
if we can avoid it; and when absolutely compelled to do so, 
it is essential that w'e should appear, not as principals, but 
in support of the local government : for the spirit that en- 
genders such excesses, whether they proceed *from intrigue 
or fanaticism, will only attain strength by ojiposition ; and 
any violent measures on our part, however justified by crime 
or outrage, might make the most unfavourable impressions 
upon an ignorant and bigoted population, who, while they 
confess all the benefits of our general rule and control, are 
easily excited to a dread of our success ultimately leading 
to attempts at changing the religion and institutions of their 
forefathers. 

In cases of rebels or plunderers collecting in such force as 
to require British troops to suppress them, you will (if the 
emergency prevents reference to superior authority) make a 

* The name of a town, whicli is the capital of a small principality. 
The fanatics here alluded to, under the direction of a female who de- 
clared herself an incarnation of one of the gods, committed several 
murders ; and while these were perpetrating, she exhibited to her su- 
perstitious followers a mirror, in which was reflected the triumph of the 
itajpouts and the defeat of the English. 



vni] INSTRUCTIONS AND ORDERS. CCXCix 

requisition for aid from the nearest commanding officer that 
can furnish it. 

The rules for such requisitions have been generally noti- 
fied : the political agent will give the fullest information of 
the service to be performed, the nature of the country, the 
character of the enemy and his resources, leaving the mili- 
tary officer, when possessed of such knowledge, the selection 
of the force, both as to number and equipment, that is to be 
placed at his disposal. But it is to be strongly impressed 
upon both, that in a country like Central India, the means 
employed should always.^ be above the object to be accom- 
plished, as failure or defeat in any enterprise or action 
would be attended with very bad consc^qiiences. 

It is almost superfluous to repeat what has been sedu- 
lously inculcated upon you as a primary duty during the 
last three years, tbc adoption of every preventive measure 
to avert the necessity of the employment of force. Its ap- 
pearance has hitherto been almost in all cases sufficient to 
produce the required effect ; and in the few instances where 
it has been employed, the moment of success has been suc- 
ceeded by that of conciliation. To act differently, and to 
pursue those wild tribes wlio are the common disturbers of 
the peace with retaliation of outrages beyond what is neces- 
sary to evince our power, is to confirm them in their habits, 
and to add to their other motives of hostility those of resent- 
ment and despair. When engaged in warfare with such 
classes, we should be cautious how we inflict summary pu- 
nishment on the Individuals who fall into our power. These 
are often the mere instruments of mine, and act in its com- 
mission under as strong an impulse of duty to their supe- 
riors as the soldier in our ranks ; and it is as unreasonable 
to expect their habits can be changed by making examples 
of such men, as it would that we could subdue the spirit of 
a nation by putting to death every soldier belonging to it 



ccc 


SIR JOHN »1AI.C0]:.M’S 


[Arp. 

that we found fighting against us in action. The in- 
creased danger in which this placed individuals would only 
strengthen that powerful feeling by which , they were at- 
tached to their leaders, while it added that of revenge 
against those who treated them with what they deemed 
cruelty and injustice. It is the duty of all agents of the 
British gove nment to direct their efforts to effect a change 
in the frame of these savage communities ; instead of com- 
mencing, in imitation of unprincipled and despotic native 
rulers, an unprofitable and interminable warfare upon indi- 
viduals, who can hardly be termed guilty when they act by 
the express order of chiefs to Avhom and their predecessors 
they and their fathers have given implicit obedience for 
centuries. The nature and strength of the ties which sub- 
sist in these societies were fully discovered in the trial of 
Nadir Singh *, the celebrated Bheelalah chief of tlie Vin- 
dhya range. No one has questioned the justice of his pu- 
nishment ; but that of the persons who committed by his 
order the barbarous crime for which he was exiled, would 
have been deemed an act of oppression. 

. One of the most effectual means that you have to main- 
tain the peace, is that of exerting yourself to render all 
(even the poorest and wildest classes) sensible of the 
benefits they derive from your protection. There is no 
point in which this is more required than against the 
excesses of our troops, camp-followers, merchants who have 
passes, and, in short, all who on any gi'ound use the Bri- 
tish name. The governments of the different presidencies 
have been long sensible of this evil, and have endeavoured, 
by^ the strictest orders and proclamations, to correct it. 
The pressing of begaries* and hackeries t has been posi- 

♦ For a partlcnlar account of this remarkable chief of robbers, vide 
Memoir of Central Jndia^ vol. i. p. 550. 

* Begaries are a class of natives of low tribe, whose occupation is 

labour. t Hackeries are a species of carts. 



Vin.] INSTnUCTIONS AND ORDERS. CCci 

lively forbidden ; but these orders must be enforced with a 
rigorous and uncompromising spirit by the civil and politi- 
cal authorities, otherwise they will prove unavailing. This 
is a point of duty in which I consider those under my 
orders to have no option or latitude. In the present condi- 
tion of Central India, it is one of too much importance, 
both as it relates to the temper of the inhabitants and the 
reviving prosperity of the country, to warrant any devia- 
tion, cither for the accommodation of individuals or the 
public service. Tlie former, when no longer encouraged by 
improper or unwise indulgence to trust in any way to the 
countr}^ will soon learn to be independent of its aid; 
public departments will in like degree Income, from pro- 
viding for their own wants, more efficient ; and when the 
inhabitants are satisfied that it is not in the power of any 
person, whatever he his rank, to press them or their cattle, 
they will be inspired with a confidence that will lead to 
their furnishing more .resources to troops and travellers, 
from a desire of profit, than has ever yet been extorted by 
an oppressive system ; which, according to all natives I 
have heard speak upon the subject, has been carried to as 
great, if not greater lengths, in countries subject to our rule 
and control, than in the worst of their own governments. 

Tliere arc, I fear, many omissions in these notes of 
Instructions ; but an anxiety to render them complete has 
already made them far longer than was at first intended. One 
of my chief objects has been to impress, in the most forcible 
manner, the great benefits which are to be expected from a 
kind and conciliating manner, and a constant friendly inter- 
course with those under your direction and control. It is 
the feelings and knowledge which such habits on your part 
will inspire, that can alone give effect to the principles of 
action that have been prescribed for your observance. You 
are called upon to perform no easy task : to possess power. 



ccccii SIR JOHN MALCOLM'S INSTRUCTIONS. [Aw. VIII, 

but seldom to exercise it ; to witness abuses which you 
thiiik you could correct ; to tl^e errors, if not crimes, of 
superstitious bigotry, knd the miseries of. misrule, and yet 
forbear, lest you injure interests far greater than any 
within the sphere of your limited duties, and impede and 
embarrass, by a rash change and innovation that may bring 
local benefit, the slow but certain march of general improve- 
ment. . Nothing can keep you right On all these points but 
constant efforts to add to your knowledge, and accustoming 
your mind (as I have before urged you) to dwell upon tlie 
character of the British power in India, and that of the 
empire over which it is established. The latter, compre- 
hending numerous tribes and nations, with all their various 
institutions and governments, may truly, though metaphori- 
cally, be viewed as a vast and ancient fabric, neither without 
shape nor beauty, but of which many parts are in a dilapi- 
dated state, and all more or less soiled or decayed; still it 
is a whole, and connected in all its parts ; the foundations 
are deep-laid, and to the very summit arch rests upon arch. 
We are now its possessors; and if we desire to preserve, 
while we improve it, we must make ourselves completely 
masters of the frame of the structure to its minutest orna- 
mepts and defects : nor must we remove the smallest stone 
till another is ready, suited to fill the vacant niche, other- 
wise we may inadvertently bring a ruin on our own heads, 
and those of others, on tlie spot Avherc we too eagerly 
sought to erect a monument of glory. 

John Malcolm. 


Camp DhooUah, 28ih Junct 1821, 


THE END. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES, 
Nortliatnberland con rL 







