o. 


'/A 


m^v&?\J^i/^Y^ 


Q^/^ 


r 


cyo.  .^yfio^r:^^  ^^A^^i^n^^ri^ 


^ 


i^ 


r 


FINAL    FEENCH    STRUGGLES 


IN 


INDIA. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/finalfrenchstrugOOmallrich 


FINAL  FRENCH  STEUGGLES 

IN  INDIA' 

%\\^  on  tlje  Indian  Seas; 

[NCLUDINQ  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CAPTURE  OF  THE  ISLES  OF  FRANCE 

AND  BOURBON,  AND  SKETCHES  OF  THE  MOST  EMINENT  FOREIGN 

ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA  UP  TO  THE  PERIOD   OF  THAT  CAPTURE, 

WITH  AN   APPENDIX 

CONTAINING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  EXPEDITION  FROM 
INDIA  TO  EGYPT  IN  1801. 


BY 


COLONEL   G.  B.  MALLESON,  C.S.L 

AUTHOR  OF  THE   "HISTORY  OF  THE   FRENCH   IN   INDIA," 
"historical     sketch     of     the     native     states     of     INDIA." 


"The  sun,  the  soil,  but  not  the  slave,  the  same 
Unchanged  in  all  except  its  foreign  lord." 

Childe  Harold, 


NEW      EDITION. 


LONDON: 
W.  H.  ALLEN  &   CO.,   13   WATERLOO   PLACE, 

PALL   MALL.     S.W. 

1884. 


M  (9 


HENRY  MORSE  STEriMUi 


DEDICATION. 


Dear  Mrs.  Spencer, 

You  may  perhaps  remember  our  conversa- 
tions on  the  subject  of  my  historical  writings  when 
you  were  staying  with  me  on  the  Nilghiri  Hills  nearly 
twenty  months  ago.  You  then  expressed  your  surprise 
that— considering  the  careers,  full  of  strange  and  varied 
incident,  of  the  sailors  and  adventurers  who  followed 
Dupleix  and  Lally  in  the  struggle  against  the  English — 
I  had  not  continued  and  completed  my  History  of  the 
French  in  India.  I  was  unable  at  the  moment  to  take 
up  your  idea  ;  but  some  months  later  I  made  it  my  own. 
That  idea  has  now  developed  into  a  book,  and  the  book 
is  about  to  appear.  Considering  the  circumstances  of 
its  origin,  you  will  not,  I  feel  assured,  think  me  too 
presuming  if  I  now  ask  you  to  accord  to  the  young 
aspirant  the  privilege  of  introduction  to  the  public  under 
the  auspices  of  your  favour  and  of  your  protection. 

Believe  me, 

Dear  Mrs.  Spencer, 

Very  sincerely  yours, 

G.  B.  MALLESON. 

27,  West  Cbomwell  Road, 
\st  February,  1878. 

To  Mrs.  Almeriq  Spencer. 

512782 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Introduction, v 

Book     I. — French  Mariners  on  the  Indian  Seas,       -  1 

Book   II. — The  Isle  of  France  and  her  Privateers,    -  79 

Book  III. — Foreign  Adventurers  in  India,          -         -  158 

Appendix — Expedition  from  India  to  Egypt,  1801,^  -  253 

Index, 277 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  present  work  supplies  a  suppressed  chapter  of 
Anglo-Indian  history.  It  undertakes,  that  is  to  say,  to 
describe,  in  detail,  the  final  struggle  of  the  French, 
terminating  in  September,  1783,  for  empire  in  Southern 
India ;  the  successful  efforts  of  the  same  nation  during 
the  wars  of  the  Revolution  and  the  Empire  to  destroy 
British  commerce  in  the  Indian  Seas ;  the  suppression 
of  those  efforts  accomplished  by  the  capture  of  the  Isles 
of  France  and  Bourbon.  It  concludes  with  a  sketch  of 
the  most  famous  adventurers  who  strove,  often  success- 
fully, to  train  and  discipline  on  the  European  model 
the  soldiers  of  those  native  princes  who,  towards  the 
close  of  the  last  century,  seemed  the  most  likely  to 
come  into  hostile  contact  with  the  British. 

It  is  strange,  indeed,  that  in  the  standard  English 
histories  of  India  these  later  efforts  of  England's  most 
persistent  rival  should  have  been  dismissed   in  a  few 


VI  INTRODUCTION. 

lines.  It  is  stranger  still  when  we  consider  how 
formidable  those  efforts  appeared  to  contemporary 
writers,  how  nearly  they  approached  success,  how 
injuriously  they  did  affect  Anglo-Indian  interests.. 
The  author  of  a  book  called  Transactions  in  India, 
published  in  1786,  describes  in  clear  and  vivid 
language  events  in  which  he  himself  was  an  actor, 
and  he  paints  the  effect  produced  on  the  minds  of 
the  English  by  the  daring  exploits  of  Suffren.  The 
French  version  of  the  same  story,  differing  only  in 
unimportant  details,  and  styled  Histoire  de  la  derniire 
guerre,  was  published  in  1787.  Colonel  Wilks,  who 
wrote  his  admirable  history  of  Southern  India  in  the 
early  days  of  the  present  century;  who  was  in  India 
when  Suffren  fought  his  five  battles  with  his  English 
rival  and  when  Stuart  was  reduced  to  extremities  at 
Kadaltir,  describes  in  eloquent  and  impartial  language 
the  dangers  incurred  by  the  Presidency  of  Madras  in 
1783,  and  how  it  was  saved  from  those  dangers  only 
by  the  timely  suspension  of  arms  which  preceded  the 
Treaty  of  Versailles. 

These  are,  so  to  speak,  the  contemporary  records 
of  the  period.  The  case  for  the  English  is  stated  in 
the  Transactions,  that  for  the  French  in  the  Histoire, 


INTRODUCTION.  vil 

and  the  events  they  record  are  summarised  by  an 
English  writer,  likewise  an  eye-witness.  Yet  the 
reader  of  the  earlier  editions  of  Mill's  History  of 
India  would  rise  from  the  perusal  of  his  description 
of  the  war  terminated  in  1783,  and  of  its  details, 
without  the  smallest  suspicion  that  the  supremacy 
of  the  English  in  Southern  India  had  been  greatly 
endangered.  The  account  is  more  than  meagre.  It 
induces  a  belief  that  important  events  were  unimpor- 
tant. In  a  word,  it  suppresses  the  point  of  the 
subject  of  which  it  professes  to  treat. 

A  writer  so  honest  and  so  conscientious  as  the  late 
Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  could  not  pass  over  this 
omission  without  notice.  The  foot-note  in  which  he 
gives  to  the  subject  its  true  point,  although  short,  is 
most  suggestive.  "  It  seems  probable,''  he  writes, 
**  that  but  for  the  opportune  occurrence  of  peace  with 
"  France  the  South  of  India  would  have  been  lost 
"  to  the  English.  The  annihilation  of  the  army  at 
"  Cuddalore  would  have  been  followed  by  the  siege 
"  of  Madras,  and  there  was  little  chance  of  defending 
**  it  successfully  against  Tippoo  and  the  French."  The 
conclusion  arrived  at  by  Professor  Wilson  is  so  fully 
borne  out  by  the  facts  of  the  case  that  the  omission 


VIU  INTRODUCTION. 

of  details  referring  to  those  facts  by  the  writers  of  the 
standard  histories  of  India  is  very  difficult  to  account 
for. 

Some  of  my  friends,  indeed,  who  read  a  portion  of 
this  book  in  the  pages  of  the  Calcutta  Review,  have 
not  hesitated  to  tell  me  that  they  regard  as  unpatriotic 
the  attempt  of  an  Englishman  to  search  out  and  record 
events  which  may  contrast  favourably  a  rival  nation 
with  his  own.  But  history  is  either  a  record  of  events 
which  have  happened  or  it  is  romance.  If  it  assume 
to  be  a  record  of  events  which  have  happened  it  must 
record  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good,  misfortune  as 
well  as  gain,  defeat  as  well  as  victory.  No  one  will 
dispute  this  broad  axiom.  But,  to  take  a  narrower 
view,  it  may  with  confidence  be  affirmed  that  the 
truly  patriotic  writer  is  he  who  does  not  attempt  to 
hide  the  shortcomings  of  his  own  countrymen  or  the 
virtues  of  their  enemies.  It  is  the  writer  who  attempts 
to  lessen  the  merits  of  the  enemy  who  is  really  guilty 
of  want  of  patriotism.  For,  if  the  enemy  were  as 
contemptible  as  he  is  often  described  to  have  been 
by  the  purely  insular  writer,  the  merits  of  those  who 
conquered  him  need  not  have  been  very  considerable. 

In  attempting  then  to  restore  a  suppressed  chapter 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

of  Indian  history,  in  which  the  French  navy  appears 
to  very  considerable  advantage,  and  a  French  admiral 
contesting  the  seas  not  unequally  with  an  English 
admiral,  finally  out-manoeuvres  and  beats  him ;  in  which 
events  are  recorded  which  all  but  upset  English 
domination  in  Southern  India ;  whilst  I  narrate  facts 
which  bring  into  strong  light  the  virtues  of  individual 
Frenchmen,  I  relate  the  history  of  a  struggle  which 
ended  in  the  triumph  of  England.  There  must  have 
been  some  English  virtues  counterbalancing  the  French 
virtues,  or  some  French  defects  greater  than  the  French 
virtues,  to  enable  the  English  to  gain  that  triumph. 
For,  by  the  admission  of  contemporary  writers,  our 
countrymen  were  reduced  to  extremities  when,  as 
if  by  the  stroke  of  a  magician's  wand,  they 
recovered  all  that  they  had  lost.  For  the  virtues 
and  the  defects,  so  nearly  balancing  each  other 
on  either  side,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the 
story  itself.  If  success  be  a  criterion  of  merit  it  is 
clear  that  the  balance  must,  on  a  general  consideration^ 
be  in  favour  of  England. 

The  second  Book  is  devoted  to  the  description  of  a 
later  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  French  of  a  very 
different  character  indeed,  but  equally  directed  against 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

English  interests.      I   allude   to   the   efforts  made  by 
their  privateers   to   destroy  British   commerce  in   the 
Indian    seas  ;     the    success    of    those    efforts  ;     and, 
finally,  the  capture  of  the  islands  which  had  nurtured 
the    daring    corsairs,    and    whence    they    made    their 
spring    on    the    merchantmen     of    their    rivals.       It 
happened  that  whilst  engaged  in  writing  this  portion 
of  my  book   (1877)   a  debate  occurred  in  the  House 
of  Commons  on  the  subject  of  privateering.     It  would 
appear  that  there  are  some  who  still  believe  that  by 
continuing  to  adhere  to  those  stipulations  of  the  Treaty 
of    Paris    which    abolished    privateering,    England   is 
placing  herself  at  considerable  disadvantage  with  other 
nations.      I  cannot  but  think  that  the  perusal  of  my 
book   will    have    the    effect    of    changing    the    views 
of    those     who    entertain     this    opinion.       The    note 
I    have    appended    to    page    81   shows    that    during 
the   five   years   from    1793   to    1797   inclusive,   whilst 
the  French  privateers  captured  2266  English  merchant- 
men, the   English   captures  from   her  rival  amounted 
only    to    375 !      And    this    mainly    happened,   be    it 
remembered,  after  Lord  Howe's  victory  had  annihilated 
the  French  navy,  when  England  was  the  undisputed 
mistress  of  the  seas.      Is  it  possible  to  question  the 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

evidence  offered  by  these  figures  that  the  nation 
which  carries  the  largest  amount  of  the  commerce  of 
the  world  must  always  be  the  chief  sufferer  from 
privateers  ? 

If,  indeed,  further  evidence  to  the  same  effect  be 
required  it  will  be  found  in  the  pages  which  follow 
the  note  I  have  quoted.  The  losses  suffered  by 
English  traders  in  the  Indian  seas  during  the  first 
sixteen  years  of  the  war  were  computed  by  millions. 
That  these  losses  were  caused  by  French  privateers 
is  not  only  shown  in  the  text  but  is  borne  out  by 
the  fact  that  when,  by  the  capture  of  the  nest 
whence  the  corsairs  sallied  out  to  burn  and  to  destroy, 
privateering  was  suppressed,  the  English  merchantship 
was  able  to  pursue  her  way  in  safety.  The  damage 
effected  on  the  commerce  of  England  by  the  light 
squadrons  and  single  ships  of  her  enemy  was  small. 
The  privateers  did  all  the  mischief,  and,  as  I  have 
said,  that  mischief  ceased  when  those  daring  cruisers 
were  deprived  of  a  base  of  operations. 

If  the  advice  urged  by  Marquess  Wellesley  in  1800-1 
had  been  followed  the  depredations  upon  British 
commerce  in  the  Indian  seas  would  have  ceased  at 
a    much    earlier    period.       It     was    the   rejection    of 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

that  advice  which  caused  to  the  British  mer- 
cantile community  those  losses  which,  I  have 
already  stated,  were  to  be  counted  by  millions ► 
When,  ten  years  later,  convinced  against  his  will. 
Lord  Minto,  following  in  the  lines  of  the  great 
Marquess,  carried  out  his  views,  the  capture  of  the 
islands  was  found  to  be  an  operation  comparatively 
easy,  effected  with  but  little  bloodshed,  and  with  a 
force  which,  large  in  comparison  with  the  number  of 
the  defenders,  was  yet  considerably  smaller  than  the 
authorities  both  in  England  and  in  India  had  deemed 
necessary.  The  second  Book,  which  professes  to  tell 
the  story  of  the  most  famous  of  the  privateers,  fitly 
concludes  then  with  the  account  of  the  successful 
expedition  against  the  islands  which  were  their  home. 
From  a  national  point  of  view  the  results  are  not 
dissimilar  to  those  arrived  at  in  the  first  Book.  We 
see  evidences  of  the  same  gallantry  on  the  part  of 
individual  Frenchmen,  and  yet  a  conclusion  favourable 
to  England. 

In  the  third  Book  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  some 
detail  of  the  careers  of  those  foreign  adventurers  who 
disciplined  and  trained  the  armies  which  contested 
India  with  England  at  Aligarh,  at  Dehli,  at  Laswari, 


INTEODUCTION.  Xlli 

at  Assaye,  and  at  Argaum.  There  can  be  no  question 
that  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  last  century  there  was 
in  India  scarcely  any  limit  to  the  ambitious  aspirations 
of  an  European  adventurer  who  might  possess  even 
ordinary  ability.  When  we  see  how  men  like  Thomas 
and  Perron,  both  originally  common  sailors,  both  devoid 
of  abilities  of  the  first-class,  rose  to  the  front  rank ; 
how  one  became  the  independent  ruler  of  a  principality, 
and  the  other  governed,  for  Sindia,  a  portion  of  India 
comprehending  roughly  the  country  now  known  as  the 
North-west  Provinces;  we  gather  an  idea  of  the  relative 
practical  character  of  the  European  and  the  Asiatic 
at  that  epoch.  But  the  sketches  of  the  lives  of  these 
adventurers  are  not  less  interesting  from  another 
point  of  view.  They  give  a  remarkable  insight  into 
the  mode  of  administration  peculiar  to  the  natives 
of  Hindostan.  Beading  them,  we  can  form  some 
idea  of  the  condition  to  which  the  whole  of  India 
would  have  been  reduced,  had  Lake  been  beaten  at 
Laswari  and  Wellesley  at  Assaye.  We  can  see  how 
intrigue  ruled  supreme;  how  moral  character  went 
for  nothing ;  how  audacity,  recklessness,  corruption, 
always  triumphed;  how  combined  in  one  man,  they 
were    irresistible.      The     sense     entertained     by    the 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

natives  themselves  of  the  condition  of  hfe  and 
property  at  that  period  is  clearly  shown  in  the 
proverb  which  has  survived  in  some  parts  to  the 
present  day  ;  **  The  buJBfalo  is  to  the  man  who 
*'  wields  the  bludgeon.**  In  my  humble  opinion, 
formed  after  a  service  in  India  of  thirty-five  years, 
during  which  I  have  mixed  freely  and  on  the  most 
intimate  terms  with  the  natives,  the  seventy  odd 
years  which  have  intervened  between  the  battle  of 
Laswari  and  the  present  day  have  wrought  no 
considerable  change  in  the  general  character  of  the 
people.  Not  that  amongst  them  there  have  not 
been,  and  are  not,  men  of  the  highest  moral 
character;  whose  friendship  is  an  honour,  who  know 
what  is  right  and  who  act  up  to  their  knowledge. 
But  these  men  form  an  inconsiderable  minority. 
In  a  time  of  confusion  they  would  be  swept  away. 
The  love  of  intrigue  still  survives,  and  I  write  my 
own  personal  experience  when  I  state  that  in  the 
present  decade,  as  much  as  in  any  that  preceded 
it,  intrigue  uses  falsehood  and  slander  to  move  from 
high  places  men  who  strive  earnestly  and  with  all 
their  power  to  eradicate  those  blots  in  the  native 
character  which   were   the   curse  of    past  generations. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

In  the  last  pages  of  this  third  Book  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show  how  in  consequence  of  these 
vices  it  was  inevitable  that  India  should  fall  under 
the  domination  of  a  foreign  master,  and  how  the 
course  of  events  caused  that  foreign  master  to  be 
British.  No  one  can  deny  that,  however  dimly 
the  ultimate  consequences  may  at  the  time  have  been 
foreseen  by  our  countrymen,  we  fought  for  the 
position  which  we  now  occupy.  It  was  with  design 
that  we  crushed  the  hopes  of  the  French;  with 
design  that  we  conquered  Bengal ;  with  design  that 
we  subdued  Tippu ;  with  design  that  in  1802-3 
we  contested  Hindostan  with  Sindia  and  Holkar. 
Then,  apparently  for  the  first  time,  alarmed  at  the 
empire  at  our  feet,  we  attempted  to  hold  our  hand. 
We  withdrew  from  the  princes  of  Eajputana  the 
protection  which  Marquess  Wellesley  had  promised 
them.  What  was  the  consequence  ?  Thirteen  years 
of  oppression,  of  tyranny,  of  misgovernment  in  its 
worst  form  in  central  and  in  western  India ;  the 
licensed  atrocities  of  Amir  Khan,  the  robberies  of 
the  Pindaris,  dire  spoliation  by  Maratha  chieftains 
and  their  followers.  In  spite  of  ourselves  we  had 
again  to   step   in.     With    the    defeat   and   deposition 


Xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the   Peshwa,   the   overthrow   of   the  Marathas  and 
Pindaris,  the  Marquis  of  Hastings  closed  a  campaign, 
which     restoring    British     protection     to     Eajputana, 
placed  us   formally   on   the  pinnacle  we   now   occupy. 
Thenceforward   we   were   forced   to   go   onwards.     We 
annexed  the   Panjab,    annexed   Bind,    and    sucked   in 
Sattara,   the   dominions  of   the    Bhonsla,    and    Oudh. 
Suddenly  the   overgrown  army  of  mercenaries  we  had 
created,  feeling  its  power,  rose  in  revolt.     Again  did 
England  designedly  assert  her  supremacy.    The  mutiny 
crushed,  we  found  ourselves  face  to  face  with  a  new 
order  of  things.     Thenceforward  there  were  to  be  no 
more  annexations.      But  the  crushing  of  the  mutiny 
had  been  but  a  continuation  of  the  policy  of  Clive,  of 
Hastings,  of  Wellesley,  of  Hardinge,  of  Dalhousie — 
a  continuation  forced  upon  us,  but  still  a  continuation. 
We   thus    possess   India    by   our   own   act;    we   took 
the   responsibility  upon  ourselves,   and  we   are  morally 
bound   by   it.     On  whom   else    could   we    cast    it,    if 
we   would?     We  would   not   make    it    over    to    any 
European   power;    we    could    not,    without    assuming 
the   fearful  responsibility   of  a   terrible   and  inevitable 
future,   resign   it  to  a   native    prince  !     No — we   have 
gained    it    and  we    must     keep    it.      For    my  part 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 

I  regard  India  as  the  brightest  jewel  in  the  diadem 
of  the  Queen  of  England.  I  believe  that  the 
natives  of  India  are  not  solitary  in  deriving  benefit 
from  their  connection  with  England  ;  that  directly 
and  indirectly  England  greatly  gains  by  it.  But 
upon  this  large  question  I  shall  not  here  enter. 
We  are  in  India  and  we  must  stay  there;  and 
that  we  are  there  for  the  benefit  alike  of  the  princes 
and  the  people  is  a  fact  which  the  wise  and 
thoughtful  Indian  will  be  the  first  to  admit.  Many 
of  them  may  perhaps  have  forgotten  the  days  when 
their  country  was  divided  into  armed  camps,  each 
led  by  a  Pindari  marauder  or  a  Maratha  freebooter ; 
when  justice  was  openly  bought,  when  no  man  could 
say  in  the  day  that  his  house  would  belong  to  him 
on  the  morrow,  when  human  life  was  uncared  for,  and 
when  readiness  to  commit  the  vilest  crimes  was  a  sure 
road  to  Court  favour.  But  these  are  matters  which 
it  is  well  not  to  forget.  Eecalling  them  to  the 
memory  the  thinking  reader  will  draw  a  contrast 
between  that  Maratha  period  of  Indian  history, 
peculiarly  favourable  to  reckless  and  unprincipled 
adventurers,  Native  as  well  as  European,  and  that 
which  has  succeeded  it,  when  as  a  rule  the  buffalo  is 

b 


Xviii  INTRODUCTION. 

to  the  honest  and  frugal  peasant,  and  when  the 
higher  appointments  under  Government  fall  to  the 
intelligent,  the  well  instructed,  and  the  conscientious 
citizen. 

One  word  as  to  the  authorities  upon  which  I  have 
drawn.  The  deeds  of  Suffren  have  been  painted 
by  four  eminent  French  writers,  Hennequin,  Canat, 
Trublet,  and  Eoux.  I  have  carefully  compared  the 
statements  made  by  these  biographers  with  Dr. 
Campbell's  naval  history  of  the  period,  with  the 
accounts  given  by  the  authors  of  the  Transactions 
in  India,  and  of  the  Histoire  de  la  derniere  guerre, 
by  Wilks  {History  of  Southern  India),  and  with  the 
information  procured  for  me  from  the  naval  archives 
of  France.  For  the  second  Book,  I  am  indebted 
mainly  to  Canat  {Histoire  de  Surcouf),  to  Gallas 
{Les  Corsair es  Frangais  sous  la  Bepublique),  to  the 
Asiatic  Annual  Register,  and  to  the  files  of  Indian 
papers  of  the  last  century  which  are  stored  up  in 
the  Public  Library  of  Calcutta.  The  contents  of  the 
third  Book  are  based  mainly  on  the  memoirs  of 
de  Boigne,  on  a  very  curious  record  of  the  services 
of  his  brother  officers  under  native  princes  during 
the  last   century  by  Major   Ferdinand   Smith,  on  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

Asiatic  Annual  Register,  and   on   the   newspaper  files 
above  alluded  to. 

To  the  work  as  it  stands  I  have  added  an 
Appendix,  giving  a  plain  didactic  account  of  the 
expedition  from  India  to  Egypt  in  1801.  It  is  true 
that  the  events  recorded  in  this  Appendix  have  only 
an  indirect  connection  with  the  main  subject  of  the 
book.  But  the  French  occupation  of  Egypt  may 
fairly  be  considered  an  integral  part  of  the  efforts 
made  by  France  to  disturb  the  supremacy  of  England 
in  India.  When,  moreover,  it  is  remembered  that 
we  live  in  a  time  when  the  Eastern  question  is  the 
burning  question  of  the  day,  I  shall  be  excused  for 
thinking  that  a  plain  statement  of  an  expedition  from 
India  to  Egypt  organised  by  a  Wellesley,  carried  into 
execution  by  a  Baird,  and  approved  of  by  a 
J,  Wellington,  may  not  be  altogether  out  of  place 
or  out  of  season.  My  authorities  for  the  account  of 
this  expedition  are  the  Life  of  Sir  David  Baird,  the 
memoirs  of  the  Comte  de  Noe,  the  British  despatches, 
and  the   Asiatic   Annual  Register. 

G.   B.   MALLESON. 
27,   West  Cromwell   Road, 
Is*  February,  1878, 


BOOK     I. 


FRENCH  MARINERS  on  the  INDIAN  SEAS. 


I 


I. 

In  the  history  of  the  French  in  India  I  have  brought 
the  story  of  the  struggle  for  empire  in  the  East  of  that 
gallant  and  high-spirited  people  to  the  year  1761.  From 
that  date  the  land  contest  really  ceased.  For  although, 
in  1782,  France  did  despatch  a  considerable  force  to  aid 
Haidar  Ali,  the  decrepitude  of  its  leaders  and  the  death 
of  Haidar  combined  to  render  its  efforts  fruitless.  From 
1761,  indeed,  the  French  ceased  to  be  principals  in  the 
contest.  Thenceforth  the  adventurous  sons  of  her  soil 
were  forced  to  content  themselves  with  the  position  of 
auxiliaries  to  native  princes.  The  foremost  amongst 
them,  levying   contingents   of  their   own   countrymen, 

1 


2  FRENCH   MARINERS 

took  service  in  the  courts  which  showed  the  greatest 
inclination  to  resist  the  progress  of  the  increasing 
power  of  the  English.  Thus  the  younger  Lally,  Law, 
Kaymond,  de  Boigne,  Perron,  Dudrenec,  and  many 
others  became  the  main  supports  upon  which  Haidar 
Ali,  the  Nizam,  Sindia,  and  Holkar  rested  their  hopes 
for  independence,  if  not  for  empire.  But,  after  all, 
although  in  many  cases  these  adventurers  accomplished 
much  in  the  way  of  organising  resistance  to  the  English, 
they  did  not  succeed  in  their  own  secret  views.  They 
failed  entirely  to  resuscitate  the  dream  of  successful 
rivalry  to  England.  One  by  one  they  disappeared  before 
the  steady  advance  of  the  foe  they  had  once  hoped  to 
conquer.  Sometimes,  as  at  Haidarabad,  dismissed  on 
the  requisition  of  an  English  governor;  again,  as  in 
1802,  beaten  by  the  English  general,  they  gradually 
renounced  the  cause  as  hopeless,  and  finally  ceased  to 
pursue  the  struggle.  The  hopes  which  had  glimmered 
but  very  faintly  after  the  death  of  Haidar,  which  had 
again  been  somewhat  rekindled  by  the  prudent  measures 
of  Madhaji  Sindia,  were  dealt  a  fatal  blow  by  Lord  Lake 
at  Aligarh  and  at  Dehli,  and  were  finally  crushed  by 
that  stalwart  soldier  on  the  field  of  Laswari. 

But  there  was  another  element  upon  which  the  fortunes 
of  France  still  flourished  even  after  the  blow  dealt  at 
her  in  1761.  Strange,  indeed,  it  was,  that  during  the 
contest  which  terminated  in  that  vear,  she  had  never 
sent  simultaneously  to  the  field  of  action  a  capable 
general  and   a  capable   admiral.     It  is    true   that   La 


ON    THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  6 

Bourdonnais  combined  both  qualities  in  his  own  person, 
and  the  great  things  he  had  then  been  able  to  effect 
ought  to  have  served  as  an  example  for  the  times  that 
were  to  follow.  But  they  did  not.  La  Bourdonnais' 
stay  in  the  Indian  seas  was  short.  He  was  succeeded 
by  the  feeble  Dordelin.  And  subsequently,  when  the 
Government  of  Louis  XY.  made  the  greatest  effort 
France  had  till  then  made  to  establish  an  empire  in 
India ;  when  it  sent  out  a  general  who  had  won  distinc- 
tion on  the  battle-fields  of  Flanders,  and  soldiers  who 
had  helped  to  gain  Fontenoy  and  Laffeldt,  it  selected  as 
the  colleague  of  the  general  an  admiral  of  whom  it  has 
been  written  that  ''to  an  unproductive  brain  he  added 
infirmity  of  purpose.''  '^^i/^ 

Subsequently  to  the  capture  of  Pondichery  in  17ol, 
the  position  was  reversed.  When,  eighteen  years  later, 
Bussy,  gouty,  infirm,  and  whom  self-indulgence  had 
made  halting  and  undecided,  was  sent  to  command  the 
land  forces,  he  had  as  his  naval  colleague  a  man  whose 
name,  covered  with  an  eternal  ray  of  glory,  still  shines 
as  one  of  the  most  illustrious,  if  not  the  most  illustrious, 
in  the  naval  annals  of  France.  I  allude  to  Pierre 
Andre  de  Suffren. 

-^  The  Treaty  of  Paris,  signed  on  the  10th  February 
1763,  had  restored  Pondichery  to  France,  but  it  was  a 
Pondichery  dismantled,  beggared,  bereft  of  all  her 
influence.  During  the  fifteen  years  which  followed  this 
humiliating  treaty,  Pondichery  had  been  forced  to 
remain  a  powerless  spectator  of  the  aggrandisement  of 

1    A 


4  FRENCH   MARINERS 

her  rival  on  Indian  soil.  Even  when,  in  1778,  the  war  was 
renewed,  the  Government  of  France  was  but  ill  prepared 
to  assert  a  claim  for  independence,  still  less  for  dominion, 
in  Eastern  and  Southern  India. 

The  natural  results  followed.  Chandernagor  fell 
without  a  blow  (10th  July  1778).  Pondichery,  ably 
defended  for  forty  days  against  vastly  superior  forces  by 
its  Governor,  Bellecombe,  surrendered  in  the  month  of 
September  following ;  the  fleet  commanded  by  M.  de 
Tronjoly, — a  feeble  copy  of  Count  d'Ache, — abandoned 
the  Indian  waters  without  even  attempting  to  save  Mahe. 
All  seemed  lost.  The  advantages  gained  by  the  English 
appeared  too  great  to  be  overcome  ;  when  the  marvellous 
energy  of  Haidar  Ali,  the  Mahomedan  ruler  of  Mysore, 
gave  a  turn  to  events  which  upset  the  most  carefully  laid 
calculations,  and  communicated  to  his  French  allies  the 
most  brilliant  hopes. 

On  the  4th  April  1769  Haidar  Ali  had  dictated  peace 
to  the  English  under  the  walls  of  Madras.  By  one  of 
the  articles  of  this  treaty  the  contracting  parties  bound 
themselves  to  assist  each  other  in  defensive  wars.  But 
when,  during  the  following  year,  Haidar  was  attacked 
and  was  hardly  pressed  by  the  Marhatas,  the  English 
refused  their  aid.  Haidar  never  forgave  this  breach  of 
faith. 

When,  therefore,  some  nine  years  later,  he  saw  the 
English  embroiled  alike  with  the  French  and  the 
Marhatas,  Haidar  resolved  to  take  his  revenge.  He  first 
sent  to  the  English  an  intimation  that  he  should  regard 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  5 

an  attack  on  the  French  settlement  of  Mahe,  contiguous 
to  his  own  possessions  on  the  western  coast,  as  equivalent 
to  an  attack  upon  himself.  The  English  notwithstanding 
took  Mahe  and  endeavoured  apparently  to  pacify  the 
ruler  of  Mysore  by  sending  to  him  ambassadors  charged 
with  presents.  These  latter  were  however  little  calculated 
to  produce  such  an  effect.  They  consisted  of  a  pigskin 
saddle  and  a  rifle  which  it  was  found  impossible  to  load. 
Haidar  returned  them  with  contempt,  and  prepared  for 
war. 

His  first  efforts  in  the  autumn  were  eminently 
successful.  Outmanoeuvring  the  English  general, 
Munro,  he  defeated  and  took  prisoners  (9th  and  10th 
September,  1780)  a  detachment  of  3720  men,  of  whom 
upwards  of  500  were  Europeans,  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Baillie,  at  Perambakam.  He  then  captured 
Arcot  and  some  minor  places. 

But  the  ruler  of  Mysore  had  not  been  unmindful  of 
the  French  alliance.  Early  in  the  year  he  had  intimated 
to  the  representatives  of  that  nation  in  India  his 
determination  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  at  their  rivals, — 
a  blow  which  must  be  fatal,  i^  the  French  would  only 
sufficiently  aid  him.  But  the  ministers  of  Louis  XYI. 
were  not  alive  to  the  importance  of  the  stake  to  be 
played  for.  In  that  year,  when  England  was  engaged 
in  a  life  and  death  struggle  with  her  own  children  in 
America,  a  fleet  under  Suffren  and  3000  men  under  a 
skilled  leader  such  as  De  Boigne,  would  have  sufficed  to 
clear   of    her   rivals   the   whole   country   south    of  the 


b 


6 


FRENCH   MARINERS 


Vindhya  range.  But  though  roused  by  the  exhortations 
of  Haidar,  and  catching,  though  dimly,  a  feeble  idea  of 
the  possibilites  before  her,  France,  instead  of  sending  a 
fleet  and  an  army  to  India,  contented  herself  with  the 
despatch  of  a  squadron  and  a  regiment  to  guard  the 
isles  of  France  and  of  Bourbon,  which  the  English  had 
not  even  threatened. 

This  squadron,  commanded  by  M.  Duchemin  de 
Ohenneville,  found  on  its  arrival  at  its  destination  that 
the  French  islands  were  perfectly  well  protected  by  the 
small  detachment  of  vessels  commanded  by  the  French 
admiral  on  the  Indian  station,  the  Chevalier  d'Orves. 
This  officer,  who  had  succeeded  de  Tronjoly,  at  once 
assumed  the  command  of  the  new  arrivals.  He  had 
then  at  his  disposal  six  serviceable  men  of  war,  one 
frigate,  and  two  corvettes.  It  was  not  a  large  fleet,  but 
it  carried  with  it  one  of  the  finest  regiments  in  the 
French  army,  a  regiment  such  as,  if  landed  in  India, 
should  have  sufficed  to  render  the  campaign  of  1781 
decisive. 

A  glimmering  of  the  chances  thus  possibly  awaiting 
him  seems  to  have  decided  d'Orves  to  take  this  small 
fleet  and  this  regiment  to  the  Coromandel  coast.  He 
sailed  then  from  the  islands  on  the  14th  October  and 
sighted  the  coast  near  Kadalur  on  the  25th  January 
following  (1781.)  Before  referring  to  his  subsequent 
conduct,  let  us  take  a  glance  at  the  position  of  afi'airs  on 
the  mainland  on  that  date. 

Haidar,  having  outmanoeuvred  Munro,  beaten  Baillie, 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  7 

and  captured  Arcot,  had  laid  siege  to  Ambur,  Vellor, 
Wandewash,  Permacol,  and  Chinglepat.  The  first 
named  of  these  places  surrendered  on  the  13th  January, 
but  on  the  18th,  Haidar,  having  received  intelligence 
that  the  new  English  general.  Sir  Eyre  Coote,  had  left 
Madras  the  previous  day,  with  the  intention  of  attacking 
him,  raised  the  siege  of  the  other  places,  and  massed 
his  forces.  Haidar  at  first  manoeuvred  to  cut  off  Sir 
Eyre  Coote  from  Madras,  but  Coote,  careless  of  this, 
marched  upon  Pondichery — the  inhabitants  of  which 
had  shaken  off  the  English  yoke,  and  had  begun  to  arm 
the  natives — revictualling  the  fortified  places  on  his 
route.  Haidar  turned,  and,  following,  overtook  him  on 
the  8th  February,  cutting  him  off  from  the  country 
inland.  As  they  approached  Kadalur,  marching  in 
almost  parallel  lines,  Haidar  caught  a  glimpse  of  the 
French  fleet  under  d'Orves,  guarding  the  coast,  and 
preventing  the  possibility  of  any  supplies  reaching  the 
English  by  sea.  At  last,  he  thought,  he  had  them. 
Coote  possessed  only  the  ground  on  which  his  army 
marched.  He  was  between  the  sea  guarded  by  d'Orves, 
and  the  grain-producing  country  shut  out  from  him  by 
Haidar.  Sir  Eyre  Coote  has  recorded  his  opinion  as  to 
the  fatal  nature  of  his  position.  There  seemed  but  one 
chance  open  to  him,  and  that  was  that  Haidar  might  be 
tempted  to  fight  him.  He  tried  then  every  expedient 
to  induce  that  warrior  to  quit  his  lair.  But  the  Asiatic 
was  far  too  wary.  He  knew  that,  barring  accidents,  his 
enemy  must  surrender  without  firing  a  shot. 


8  FBENCH   MARINERS 

Haidar,  meanwhile,  had  communicated  with  d'Orves 
and  had  begged  him  to  land  the  regiment  he  had  on 
board.  He  had  pointed  out  to  him  likewise  all  the 
advantages  of  his  position,  the  fact  that  the  last  army 
of  the  English  was  at  their  joint  mercy,  and  that  Madras 
was  guarded  by  but  500  invalids. 

Never  had  France  such  an  opportunity.  It  was  an 
absolute  certainty.  There  was  neither  risk  nor  chance 
about  it.  The  English  fleet  under  Sir  Edward  Hughes 
was  off  the  western  coast.  D'Orves  had  but  to  remain 
quietly  where  he  was  for  a  few  days  and  the  English  must 
be  starved  into  surrender.  Sir  Eyre  Coote  saw  it;  Haidar 
Ali  saw  it ;  every  man  in  the  army  saw  it;  every  man  in  the 
fleet  saw  it,  excepting  one.  That  man  was  d'Orves  himself. 
Of  all  the  positions  in  the  world  that  one  which  most 
requires  the  possession  of  a  daring  spirit  is  the  com- 
mand of  a  fleet.  That  Government  is  guilty  of  the 
greatest  crime  which  sends  to  such  a  post  a  man  wanting 
in  nerve,  deficient  in  self-reliance.  Once  before  had 
France  committed  the  same  fault  by  entrusting  in  1757, 
to  the  feeble  d'Ache,  the  task  of  supporting  Lally.  But 
at  least  d'Ache  fought.  His  feebler  successor,  d'Orves, 
was  not  required  to  fight.  He  was  required  to  ride  at 
anchor  in  the  finest  season  of  the  year,  a  time  when 
storms  are  unknown  in  the  Indian  seas,  and  see  an 
enemv  starve, — and  he  would  not. 

D'Orves,  described  by  his  own  countrymen  as  a  man 
**  indolent  and  apoplectic,"  saved  Sir  Eyre  Coote.  In 
spite  of  the  protestations  of  Haidar,  he  sailed  for  the 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  y 

islands  on  the  15th  February ,  taking  away  every  man 
he  brought  with  him,  and  having  accomplished  nothing. 
The  English  force  at  once  obtained  supplies  from 
Madras.* 

Haidar,  thus  left  to  himself,  fought  Coote  on  the 
1st  July  at  Chilambram,  and,  after  a  desperate  contest, 
was  beaten.  On  the  27th  August  following  he  again 
engaged  Coote  at  Parambakam,  and  this  time  not 
unequally.  Haidar,  however,  left  the  field  to  the  enemy. 
On  the  18th  February  following  (1782)  Colonel  Braith- 
waite's  detachment,  after  combating  for  three  days, 
succumbed  to  the  superior  numbers  of  Tippu  Sahib.  It 
was  about  the  period  of  this  last  encounter  that  France 
appeared  once  again  upon  the  scene,  better  though  not 
perfectly  represented ;  for  while  she  entrusted  her  fleet 
to  the  greatest  of  all  her  admirals,  she  committed  the 

*  The  Viscomte  de  Souillac,  at  that  time  Governor  of  the  Isle  of 
France,  has  thus  recorded  his  opinion  of  d'Orves,  in  a  memoir  in  the 
Archives  of  the  French  Navy:  "By  this  astonishing  obstinacy  of 
M.  d'Orves,  which  I  reported  to  the  ministry  at  the  time,  we  lost  an 
opportunity  such  as  will  never  recur,  of  becoming  absolute  masters  of 
the  Coromandel  coast.  This  army  of  Kadaltir  (Sir  Eyre  Coote's) 
14,000  strong,  of  which  3000  to  4000  were  English,  comprised  all  the 
troops  the  English  had  in  this  part  of  India.  Madras  could  not  have 
held  out,  and  the  junction  of  our  forces  with  those  of  Haidar  Ali  would 
have  enabled  us  to  conquer  Tanjore  and  Masulipatam  with  all  their 
dependencies." 

An  English  writer,  the  author  of  Memoirs  of  the  late  War  in  Asia, 
published  in  1788,  and  who  himself  took  part  in  the  campaign,  writes  as 
follows  — "  Had  the  French  admiral  left  only  two  frigates  to  block  up 
the  road  of  Cuddalore,  consequences  might  have  happened  as  fatal  to  the 
interests  of  Great  Britain  in  the  East  Indies,  as  flowed  in  North  America 
from  the  convention  of  Saratoga." 


10  FRENCH   MARINERS 

charge  of  her  army  first  to  an  incapable  sailor,  only  to 
replace  him  by  a  gouty  sexagenarian.  But  to  recount 
the  causes  which  led  to  this  powerful  intervention  we 
must  for  a  moment  retrace  our  steps. 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  H 


n. 

Still  unconscious  of  the  fact  that  the  War  of  Indepen- 
dence in  America  offered  them  the  rarest  opportunity  for 
striking  a  decisive  blow  at  the  English  power  in  India, 
the  French  Government  were  nevertheless  alive  to  the 
necessity  of  preserving  from  attack  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  then  belonging  to  their  allies,  the  Dutch,  and  of 
maintaining  a  respectable  force  in  the  Indian  Seas. 
Early,  then,  in  1781,  a  squadron  of  five  men  of  war* 
was  fitted  out,  and  on  the  22nd  March  sailed  from 
Brest,  under  the  command  of  the  Commandant  de 
Suffren. 

This  illustrious  sailor  was  born  at  St.  Cannat  in  Pro- 
vence on  the  13th  July,  1726,  the  third  son  of  the  Marquis 
de  Suifren  de  Saint  Tropez.  Destined  for  the  navy  he 
entered  that  service  in  1743,  and  in  the  Solide,  of  74  guns, 
joined  the  French  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean.  He  took  part 
in  an  engagement  with  the  English  fleet  under  Admiral 

*  They  were : 

Le  HeroSy  ..   74  Guns.  Commandant  de  Suffren. 

UAnnibal,  . .   74      „  Capitaine        de  Tr^migon. 

UArtesieUy  . .   64      „  „  de  Cardailhac. 

Le  VengeuTf  ..64      „  ,,  de  Forbin. 

Le  S])hinxy  ,.  64      ,,  „  du  Chilleau. 


12  FRENCH    MARINERS 

Matthews.    Transferred  to  the  frigate  Pauline,  he  again 
had  several  opportunities  of  displaying  his  courage.  The 
same  year,  serving  on  board  Le  Monarque,  he  was  taken 
prisoner.      After  the  peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  he  was 
released,  and  proceeding  to  Malta  became  one  of  the 
Knights  of  the  order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem.    During 
the  Seven  Years'  War  he  took  part  in  the  siege  and 
capture  of  Port  Mahon  (29th  July,  1756),  and  was  for 
the  second  time  made  prisoner  at  the  combat  of  Lagos 
(1759).     Returning  to  France  after  a  captivity  of  two 
years,  he  was  promoted  to  the  command  of  the  Cameleon 
of  twenty  guns,  and  sent  to  the  Mediterranean  to  protect 
the  French  commerce.     Subsequently,  in  the  Singe,  he 
so  distinguished  himself  as  to  be  promoted  to  the  grade 
of  commander  fcapitaine  de  fregatej.     The  seven  years 
which  followed  offered  little  occupation  to  his  warlike 
nature.     In  1772  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  pos 
captain  fcapitaine  de  vaisseauj,  and  in  1778,  in  com- 
mand of  Le  Fantesque,  he  joined  the  squadron  under 
Count  d'Estaing,  sent  to  aid  the  colonists  of  America. 
In  the  campaign  which  followed   he    so   distinguished 
himself  that  he  was  granted  a  pension  and  marked  for 
future  command.     A  short  cruise  with  two  men  of  war 
in  1780  added  to  his  reputation  alike  as  a  daring  and 
skilful   sailor   and   an    unsurpassed   manager  of  men. 
When,  therefore,  it  was  decided  to  send  a  squadron  to 
the  Indian  seas,  the  choice  of  the  minister  fell  naturally 
upon  one  who  had  shewn  himself  the  most  promising 
captain  in  the  royal  navy  of  France. 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  13 

Such  had  heen  the  services  of  the  man  who  was  now 
starting  with  a  squadron  of  five  line  of  battle  ships  to 
maintain  the  honour  of  his  country  in  the  Eastern  seas. 
Setting  sail  on  the  22nd  March,  in  company  with  the 
fleet  destined  for  the  American  waters  under  the  Count 
de  Grasse,  Suffren  separated  from  that  admiral  at 
Madeira,  and  continued  his  course  towards  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope.  He  had  under  his  charge  seven  transports 
conveying  detachments  of  the  regiment  of  Pondichery, 
and  overlooking  these  was  a  corvette  of  16  guns,  La 
Fortune,  He  had  it  very  much  at  heart  to  reach  the 
Cape  •as  quickly  as  possible,  so  as  to  anticipate  the 
arrival  there  of  Commodore  Johnstone,  who,  he  had 
been  informed,  had  sailed  for  that  place  from  St.  Helena 
with  thirty-seven  ships  of  sorts.* 

Commodore  Johnstone  had  sailed  from  Spithead  on 
the  13th  March,  1781,  with  orders  to  attack  the  Dutch 
possessions  at  the  Cape.  Arriving  at  St.  lago,  one  of 
the  Cape  de  Verde  islands,  he  deemed  it  necessary  to 
stop  there  in  order  to  take  in  wood,  water,  and  livestock 
for  his  voyage.  He  accordingly  put  into  Porto  Praya 
early  in  April. 

It  so  happened  that  one  of  Suflfren's  men  of  war,  the 
Artesien,  had  been  originally  destined  for  the  fleet 
sailing  to  the  American  waters,   and  her  supplies   of 

*  The  squadron  consisted  of  one  ship  of  74  guns,  one  of  64,  three  of 
50,  and  three  frigates.     The  remainder  were  armed  transports. 

The  names  were  the  Hero,  74  ;  the  Monmouth,  64 ;  the  Isis,  Jupiter, 
and  Romney  of  50  each.  The  three  frigates  carried  each  32  guns,  and 
the  transports  had  112  guns  amongst  them. — CamphelVs  Naval  History 


14  FRENCH   MARINERS 

water  had  been  regulated  accordingly.  As  the  French 
squadron  approached  the  island  of  St.  lago,  the  com- 
mander of  that  vessel,  M.  de  Cardailhac,  suggested  to 
his  chief  the  advisability  of  his  putting  into  the  bay  of 
La  Praya,  in  order  to  complete  his  supplies.  Suffren 
assented,  and  ordered  Cardailhac  to  stand  in.  At  the 
same  time,  to  guard  against  any  possible  danger,  he 
followed  in  his  track  with  the  rest  of  the  squadron.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  April,  favoured  by  a 
breeze  from  the  north-east,  the  Artesien  had  just  passed 
between  the  islands  of  Maio  and  St.  lago,  when  her 
captain  discovered  at  anchor  at  the  entrance  of  the 
roadstead  an  English  vessel,  and  almost  immediately 
afterwards  there  burst  upon  his  view  the  thirty-seven 
ships  of  war  and  transports  which  Commodore  John- 
stone had  brought  from  England.  Cardailhac  at  once 
signalled  to  his  commander  that  enemies  were  in 
sight. 

It  was  a  great  opportunity  for  Suffren.  He  doubted 
not  that  the  English  were  quite  unprepared  to  receive 
him ;  that  they  were  dreaming  of  nothing  less  than  of  an 
attack  ;  that  the  crews  would  probably  be  dispersed  in 
search  of  water  and  provisions.  And  this  was  actually 
the  fact.     Of  the  crews  of  the  English  vessels  nearly 


*  Campbell  (Naval  History)  states  that  the  French  had  received  "by 
some  means  or  other  "  information  that  Johnstone  had  put  into  Porto 
Praya ;  but  his  statement  is  quite  unsupported.  The  same  reason  which 
had  prompted  Johnstone  himself  to  put  in,  and  that  reason  alone,  guided 
the  movements  of  Suffren. 


ON    THE    INDIAN   SEAS.  X5 

fifteen  hundred  were  out  foraging;  and  Commodore 
Johnstone  himself  so  little  expected  an  attack  that  he 
was  at  the  moment  engaged  in  giving  directions  for 
altering  the  position  of  some  of  his  ships  which  had 
drifted  too  near  to  each  other.* 

Suffren  did  not  forego  his  chance.  Despatching  La 
Fortune  to  collect  and  guard  the  transports,  he,  at  half- 
past  ten  in  the  morning,  led  the  way  in  the  Heros,  and 
standing  in  close  to  the  shore,  followed  by  the  other 
ships  of  his  squadron,  he  made  for  the  largest  English 
vessel,  also  called  the  Hero^  and  cast  anchor  between 
her  and  the  Monmouth. 

The  concentrated  fire  of  the  English  squadron  was  for 
a  few  moments  directed  on  the  daring  invader ;  but  very 
quickly  the  Annibal  came  to  her  aid,  and  diverted  to 
herself  much  of  the  enemy's  attention. 

The  Artesien,  which  was  following,  was  not  fortunate. 
The  smoke  of  the  combat  caused  her  captain,  Cardailhac, 
to  mistake  one  of  the  armed  transports  for  a  man-of- 
war.  He  was  about  to  board  her,  when  he  was  shot 
dead  through  the  heart.  La  Boixiere  who  replaced  him 
was  incompetent.  He,  too,  mistook  another  transport 
for  a  frigate.  "Whilst  engaged  in  boarding  her,  the 
freshening  breeze  took  both  his  vessel  and  his  prize 
quite  out  of  the  line  of  fire. 

The  Vengeur,  which  had  followed,  went  along  the 
line  of  the  enemy,  exchanging  broadsides,  but  her  cap- 
tain's order  to  anchor  not  having  been  attended  to,  she 

*  Campbell. 


16  FRENCH   MARINERS 

made  the  tour  of  the  roadstead,  and  then  quitting  it, 
found  herself  unable  to  return. 

The  Sphinx,  owing  to  the  mistake  or  disobedience  of 
her  captain,  did  not  anchor.  She  endeavoured  to  main- 
tain her  position  by  manoeuvring,  keeping  up  at  the 
same  time  a  heavy  fire ;  but  she  rendered  little  effectual 
aid. 

Sufiren  found  himself  then  with  two  anchored  vessels, 
and  one  unanchored,  and  therefore  comparatively  use- 
less, engaged  with  the  whole  English  squadron.  The 
odds  were  tremendous,  but  he  still  possessed  the  advan- 
tage always  given  by  a  surprise,  and  he  continued,  for 
an  hour  and  a  half,  to  maintain  the  unequal  combat. 
At  last,  when  the  Annihal  had  lost  her  main  and  mizen 
masts,  and  her  captain  had  been  disabled ;  w^hen  the 
Heros  had  received  considerable  damage  in  her  rigging, 
and  had  lost  eighty-eight  men  killed  and  wounded ;  and 
when  all  hope  of  effectual  aid  from  the  other  three  vessels 
of  his  squadron  had  disappeared,  he  deemed  it  advisable 
to  discontinue  the  contest.  Signalling,  therefore,  to  the 
Annihal  to  follow  him,  he  slowly  sailed  out  of  the  road- 
stead, still  keeping  up  a  tremendous  fire. 

The  Annihal  essayed  to  follow  him ;  but,  as  she  passed 
between  the  Hero  and  the  Monmouth,  her  remaining 
mast  fell  by  the  board.  Fortunately  the  wind  had 
shifted  and  was  now  blowing  strongly  from  the  south- 
west. She  managed  thus  to  rejoin,  though  slowly,  her 
consorts  outside. 

It  was  about  half-past  twelve  o'clock  in  the  day  when 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  17 

* 

Suffren  reunited  his  squadron  outside  the  harbour  and 
began  to  repair  damages.  Three  hours  later  Commodore 
Johnstone  followed  him  and  appeared  inclined  to  attack  in 
his  turn.  SufFren,  however,  placing  the  Annibal  in  the 
centre  of  his  line,  offered  so  bold  a  front,  that  the 
English  commodore,  whose  ships,  especially  the  Isis,  had 
suffered  severely,  drew  off  and  returned  to  La  Praya.* 
Suffren  then  continued  his  voyage  without  molestation, 
and  on  the  21st  June  cast  anchor  in  Table  Bay.  The 
convoy  arrived  nine  days  later. 

Having  landed  his  troops  at  the  Cape ;  having  secured 
the  colony  against  attack ;  having  completely  repaired 
his  damages,  and  having  been  joined  by  two  corvettes, 
the  Consolante  and  the  Fine,  Suffren  sailed  for  the 
islands  of  France  and  Bourbon  on  the  28th  August.  He 
cast  anchor  in  Port  Louis  on  the  25th  October  following. 

*  Dr.  Campbell  states  that  Johnstone  "  pursued  the  French,  but  he 
was  not  able  to  overtake  them."  The  French  authorities,  on  the  other 
hand,  assert  that  their  fleet  put  on  so  bold  a  front  that  Johnstone  stayed 
his  advance,  although  he  was  within  two  cannonshot  of  their  ships.  "  It 
was  only  at  night,"  says  Eoux,  "  that  the  French  continued  their  route, 
lighting  their  fires  to  provoke  the  enemy  to  follow  them.  The  English, 
who  had  the  advantage  of  the  wind,  dared  not  accept  the  challenge,  but 
returned  precipitately  to  La  Praya."  It  is  clear,  considering  the  disabled 
state  of  the  Annibal^  and  that  the  English  commodore  had  the  advantage  of 
the  wind,  that  he  could  have  forced  an  action  had  he  desired  to  do  so. 

On  his  return  to  the  roadstead.  Commodore  Johnstone  recaptured  the 
transport  taken  by  VArtesien. 

Much  has  been  said  by  English  writers  regarding  the  fact  that  the 
Cape  de  Verde  islands  were  neutral  ground.  It  is  perfectly  true,  but  in 
this  respect  the  French  only  did  as  they  had  been  done  by.  The  harbour 
of  Lagos,  in  which  the  vessel  on  board  of  which  Suffren  served  in  1759 
had  taken  refuge,  was  equally  neutral  ground,  and  yet  the  French  had 
been  attacked  in  it  by  the  English. 

2 


18  FRENCH    MARINERS 

He  found  there  six  men  of  war,  three  frigates,  and  some 
corvettes.  But  at  their  head  was  the  indolent  and 
incapable  d'Orves,  the  same  who,  we  have  seen,  had  already 
thrown  away  the  most  splendid  chance  of  establishing  a 
French  India !  It  was  under  this  man  that  Suffren  was 
to  serve  as  second  in  command ! 

Meanwhile  the  French  Government  had  tardily  decided 
to  make  in  1782  an  attempt  which  could  scarcely  have 
failed  if  hazarded  in  1780.  It  had  resolved  to  strike 
another  blow,  this  time  in  concert  with  Haidar  Ali,  for 
domination  in  Southern  India.  With  this  object  in  view 
it  had  roused  from  his  retreat  the  Marquis  de  Bussy,  the 
man  who  in  his  youth  and  middle  age  had  gained  honour 
and  glory  and  wealth  in  that  fairy  land,  but  who  now, 
gouty,  worn  out,  and  querulous,  was  incapable  alike  of 
decision  and  enterprise.* 

The  designs  of  the  Court  of  Versailles  had  been  com- 
municated early  in  the  year  to  M.  de  Souillac,  Governor 
of  the  islands,  and  it  had  been  intimated  that  transports 
containing  troops  would  gradually  arrive  at  his  Governor- 
ship, and  that,  concentrating  there,  they  would  proceed 
to  India,  escorted  by  a  powerful  fleet  under  the  command 
of  Count  d'Orves.  De  Souillac,  who  was  enterprising 
and  patriotic,  had  at  once  set  to  work  to  organise  a  force 
with  the  resources  at  his  command  from  among  the 
colonists  ;  and  at  the  period  of  the  arrival  of  SufFren,  he 
had  drilled  and  armed  a  corps  of  2868  men.     Bussy  had 

*  Bussy  was  then  only  sixty-four  years  old ;  but  twenty  years  of  sloth 
and  luxury  had  quite  impaired  his  faculties. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  19 

not  then  arrived.     De  Souillac  therefore  conferred  the 
command  of  this  force  upon  M.  Duchemin. 

It  was  an  unfortunate  choice.  Duchemin  was  a  sailor 
rather  than  a  soldier.  But  he  was  strong  neither  on  the 
sea  nor  on  the  land.  He  was  as  weak  mentally  as 
physically.  A  terrible  fear  of  responsibility  acted  upon  a 
constitution  unable  to  bear  the  smallest  fatigue.  A  man 
of  moderate  abilities  would  have  sufficed  for  the  occasion. 
The  abilities  of  Duchemin  were  not  even  moderate. 

These  2868  men,  well  commanded,  and  escorted  to  a 
given  point  by  Suffren,  would  have  sufficed  to  give  the 
preponderance  to  Haidar  Ali  in  his  struggle  with  the 
English.  But  moments  were  precious.  The  war  with 
the  American  colonists  still  indeed  continued,  but  many 
things  presaged  that  its  duration  would  not  be  long. 
It  was  necessary,  then,  that  the  French  should  strike 
at  once,  and  should  strike  with  vigour  and  precision. 

Of  this  necessity  no  one  was  more  convinced  than  the 
Governor  of  the  islands,  de  Souillac.  He  hastened  his 
preparations,  so  that  on  the  7th  December,  1781,  the 
French  fleet,  consisting  of  eleven  men  of  war,  three 
frigates,  three  corvettes,  one  fireship,  and  nine  tran- 
sports containing  troops,  was  able  to  set  out  for  its 
destination. 

What  was  its  destination  ?  Suffren,  with  a  precision 
natural  to  him,  had  advised  that  it  should  sail  direct  for 
Madras,  and  attempt  to  take  that  town  by  a  coup  de 
main.  But  the  cautious  and  feeble  d'Orves  had  over- 
ruled him.     He  would    only  proceed  by  degrees.     He 

2  A 


20  FRENCH    MARINERS 

would  feel  his  way.  It  was  too  much  for  him  even  to 
take  a  straight  look  at  India.  He  therefore  directed  the 
fleet  upon  Trincomali. 

But  Providence  had  one  good  turn  in  store  for  the 
French.  Happily  for  the  success  of  the  expedition 
d^Orves  died  on  the  way  (9th  February,  1782).  He  made 
over  the  command  to  Suffren  who  had  just  received  the 
rank  of  commodore  {chef  d'escadre).  Suflfren  at  once 
altered  the  course  to  Madras. 

Before  this  event  had  happened,  Suffren  himself  in 
his  ship,  the  Heros,  had  pursued  and  captured  an 
English  man-of-war  of  50  guns,  called  the  Hannibal, 
She  was  at  once  added  to  the  French  fleet  under  the 
title  of  Le  petit  Annihal.  From  the  officers  of  this  vessel 
Suffren  learned,  for  the  first  time,  that  large  reinforce- 
ments were  on  their  way  to  the  English  squadron  in  the 
East. 

Passing  Pondichery,  Suffren  despatched  to  that  town, 
in  a  corvette,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Canaple,  with  instruc- 
tions to  communicate  at  once  toHaidar  Ali  the  intelligence 
of  his  arrival  and  his  hopes.  On  the  15th  February,  just 
three  days  before  Colonel  Braithwaite's  detachment 
succumbed  to  Tippu  Sahib,  his  fleet  came  in  sight  of 
Madras.*  Anchored  in  front  of  Fort  St.  George,  and 
protected  by  its  guns,  he  descried  eleven  t  ships  of  war, — 

*  The  currents  and  a  southerly  breeze  had  taken  his  squadron  con- 
siderably to  the  north  of  Madras.  Coming  again  under  the  influence  of 
the  N.-E.  Monsoon  he  approached  Madras  from  the  north. 

+  Dr.  Campbell  mentions  only  nine.  The  other  two  were  probably 
frigates. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  21 

the  squadron  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes.  Suffren  formed 
his  ships  in  line  of  battle  till  he  arrived  within  two 
cannonshots  of  the  English  fleet.  He  then  anchored  and 
summoned  all  his  captains  on  board  the  Heros  to  a 
council  of  war. 

It  must  always  be  remembered  that  the  fleet  of  M.  de 
Suffren  was  escorting  transports  conveying  a  corps 
d'armee,  and  that  it  was  a  main  object  with  him  to  land 
his  troops  and  disembarrass  himself  of  his  transports 
before  attempting  an  equal  combat  with  the  enemy.  The 
proposal  then  of  the  captain  of  the  Fine,  M.  Perrier  de 
Salvart,  to  attack  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  lying  as  he  was 
under  the  cover  of  the  guns  of  Madras,  appeared  to  him 
too  hazardous.  He  determined  therefore  to  direct  the 
transports  on  towards  Porto  Novo,  covering  their  course 
with  his  fleet. 

In  pursuance  of  this  decision  the  fleet  commenced 
its  southward  course  that  same  evening.  But  as  the 
breeze  freshened,  Suffren  observed  the  English  vessels 
hoist  their  sails  and  follow  him.  Kightly  conceiving 
that  their  object  was  to  cut  off  his  transports,  Suffren 
gave  the  order  that  these  should  range  themselves 
between  the  shore  and  his  fleet,  covered  by  the  corvette 
the  Pourvoyeuse,  and  make  all  sail  for  Porto  Novo, 
whilst  the  Fine  should  watch  the  enemy's  movements. 

In  spite  of  these  precautions,  however.  Sir  Edward 
Hughes,  favoured  by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  glided 
unperceived  between  the  French  squadron  and  the  tran- 
sports.    These  latter  crowded  sail  to  escape,  and  when 


22  FRENCH   MARINERS 

day  broke  they  and  their  pursuers  had  sailed  almost  out 
of  sight  of  Suffren's  squadron.  Suddenly,  however,  the 
look-out  man  on  board  the  Fine  signalled  the  enemy  to 
the  south.  Immediately  every  sail  was  set,  and  the 
Heros,  followed  by  the  rest  of  the  squadron,  soon 
approached  the  pursuers  and  the  pursued.  Sir  Edward, 
thus  baulked  of  this  prey,*  hove  to,  and  ordered  the 
chase  to  be  discontinued. 

In  the  battle  now  about  to  engage,  the  French  had 
the  advantage  of  two  ships,  having  eleven  against  nine 
of  the  English.  Yet  this  advantage,  great  as  it  was, 
was  balanced,  partly  by  the  superior  organization  of  the 
English,  partly  also  by  the  jealousy  and  dislike  enter- 
tained towards  Suffren  by  the  officers  of  the  ships  which 
had  joined  him  at  the  islands.  The  jealousy,  so  often 
evinced  in  the  time  of  Dupleix,  which  could  not  subor- 
dinate personal  feelings  to  duty,  manifested  itself  in 
the  manner  now  to  be  described  in  the  course  of  the 
action. 

The  French  fleet  was  formed  into  two  divisions ;  the 
first  was  composed  as  follows  : — 

Le  Heros  74  guns,  carrying  the  commodore's  broad  pennant. 

UOrient  74     ,,     one  of  ihe  ships  brought  from  Port  Louis. 

Le  Sphinx  64     ,,     brought  by  Suffren  from  Brest. 

Le  Vengeur  64     ,,  ditto  ditto. 

Le  petit  Annihal  50     „     captured  from  the  English. 

*  Dr.  Campbell  says  vaguely  that  he  captured  *'  several  of  them ; "  but 
the  French  accounts  shew  that  all  the  troops  were  disembarked  sub- 
squently  at  Porto  Novo. 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS. 


23 


The  second  division,  commanded  by  the  captain  of  the 
Annibal,  de  Tromelin,  consisted  of : — 

74  guns,  brought  by  Suffren  from  Brest. 
,,        from  Port  Louis. 
„       by  Suffren  from  Brest. 
,,       from  Port  Louis. 
,,  ditto, 

ditto. 


UAnnibal 

74 

Le  Severe 

64 

UArtesien 

64 

L^Ajax 

64 

Le  Brillant 

64 

Le  Flamand 

54 

)» 


The  armament  amounted  to  710  guns. 
The  English  fleet  was  thus  composed  : — 


The  Superb      74  guns,  Flagship. 
The  Hero         74     „ 
The  Monarch  74     „ 
The  Exeter      64     „ 
The  Eagle       64     „ 


The  Monmouth  64  guns. 

The  Worcester    64      ,, 

The  Barford       64      „ 

The  Isis  54      ,, 

or  a  total  armament  of  596  guns. 


It  was  half-past  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  before 
the  wind,  which  was  light  and  variable,  allowed  Suffren 
to  approach  his  enemy.  Seeing  even  then  that  some  of 
his  captains  had  not  occupied  the  post  assigned  to  them, 
he  signalled  to  them  to  take  the  place  in  the  line  which 
each  could  reach  the  most  quickly. 

Eapidly  advancing  then,  he  exchanged  a  broadside 
with  the  Exeter,  but  noticing  the  flag  of  the  English 
admiral,  he  directed  the  Heros  towards  the  vessel  that 
bore  it,  at  the  same  time  signalling  to  the  second 
division  to  close  within  pistol-shot  of  the  enemy. 

The  combat  lasted  from  half-past  three  to  seven 
o'clock  in  the  evening.  But  it  was  not  till  quite  the 
close  of  the  action  that  all  the  French  ships  came  into 
the  line  of  fire.     The  entire  first  division  consisting  of 


24  FRENCH   MARINERS 

five  ships  was  engaged  throughout ;  but  of  the  second 
the  Flamand  and  the  Brillant  alone  came  to  close 
quarters,  the  remaining  four,  disobeying  the  direct 
orders  of  the  commodore,  keeping  up  only  a  distant  fire. 

On  the  part  of  the  English  the  brunt  of  the  attack 
was  borne  by  the  Exeter  and  the  Superb.  The  former, 
fought  splendidly  by  Captain  King,  was  terribly  riddled. 
Her  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was  very  great.  The 
Superb,  too,  sufi'ered  severely. 

At  seven  o'clock  the  combat  ceased  as  if  by  mutual 
consent.  Darkness  had  come  on,  and  Sufiren  was 
too  ill-satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  five  of  his 
captains  to  risk  a  continuance  of  the  contest.  Sir 
Edward  Hughes  on  his  side  was  well  content  that  it 
should  cease.  He  was  expecting  reinforcements  from 
England  and  by  bearing  down  to  the  south  he  was  likely 
to  meet  them.  An  opportunity  would  then  offer  to 
renew  the  battle  on  more  advantageous  terms.  Taking 
advantage  then  of  the  quiescent  attitude  of  the  enemy 
he  made  all  sail  to  the  south. 

It  is  probable  that  on  this  occasion,  for  the  first  and  only 
time  in  his  life,  Sufiren  missed  a  great  opportunity.  He  had 
on  the  whole  had  the  advantage  in  the  action.  He  had 
reduced  one  of  the  enemy's  ships  to  an  almost  sinking 
condition  *  and  their  losses  had  been  heavier  than  his  own. 

*  "  At  the  close  of  the  action  when  she  (the  Exeter)h8id  been  most  dread- 
fully cut  up,  two  fresh  vessels  of  the  enemy's  squadron  bore  down  upon  her. 
The  Master  asked  Commodore  King  what  he  should  do  withher  under  the 
circumstances.  His  reply  was  "  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  fight  till  she 
sinks."  Just  at  this  moment  the  two  French  ships  were  recalled.  Campbell, 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  25 

He  knew  that  the  Enghsh  were  expecting  reinforcements. 
Why  then  did  he  not  promptly  pursue  them  ?  He  did 
not  do  so  because  he  could  not  trust  all  his  captains. 

The  following  morning  Suffren  summoned  his  captains 
on  board  the  Heros.  Those  inculpated  promised  better 
conduct  for  the  future.  The  squadron  then  quietly 
pursued  its  course  to  Porto  Novo.  Here  Suffren  dis- 
embarked his  troops,  negotiated  the  terms  of  an  alliance 
with  Haidar  Ali,  and  on  the  23rd,  having  re-victualled 
his  ships  and  been  joined  by  one  man-of-war  and  three 
frigates,  sailed  for  the  south,  protecting  some  trans- 
ports he  was  despatching  to  the  islands,  and  hoping  to 
meet  again  his  English  rival. 

On  the  8th  April  his  wishes  in  this  respect  were 
fulfilled.  With  his  twelve  line  of  battle  ships  he  sighted, 
on  the  morning  of  that  day,  the  eleven  ships  composing 
the  squadron  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes*  standing  for 
Trincomali.  For  three  days  they  continued  in  sight, 
Suffren  finding  it  impossible  to  force  an  action.  But  on 
the  morning  of  the  12th,  Hughes,  changing  his  course 
to  gain  Trincomali,  unavoidably  gave  the  Frenchman  the 
advantage  of  the  wind.  Of  this  advantage  Suffren 
made  prompt  use. 

The  action  began  about  half-past  twelve  o'clock. 
Seven  of  the  French  ships  were  immediately  engaged. 
But  two,  the  Vengeur  and  the  ArUsien,  notwithstanding 
the  repeated  signals  of  the  commodore,  kept  at  a 
distance,  and  their  example  was  for  some  time  followed 

*  The  French  ships  carried  972  guns ;    those  of  the  English  737. 


26  FRENCH    MARINERS 

by  the  Severe,  the  Ajax  and  the  Annihal,  At  last  these 
three  came  up,  and  the  action  became  general. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  day  fortune  seemed  to  incline 
to  the  French.  The  Monmouth  was  dismasted  and 
compelled  to  quit  the  line,  having  had  45  men  killed 
and  102  wounded.  The  S'ltperZ?  was  greatly  damaged.  The 
English  admiral  then  gave  orders  to  the  squadron  to 
wear.  By  this  manoeuvre,  the  position  of  the  rival  fleets 
was  reversed.  Still,  however,  the  battle  continued;  when 
suddenly  at  six  o'clock  a  tremendous  storm  burst  upon 
both  fleets,  enveloping  them  in  darkness,  and  forcing 
them,  close  to  a  lee  shore,  to  pay  attention  to  their  own 
safety.     Suffren  at  once  signalled  to  anchor. 

In  this  battle  the  English  lost  137  killed  and  430 
wounded ;  the  French  130  killed  and  364  wounded. 
The  Heros,  the  Orient  and  the  Brillant  had  sufi'ered 
severely.  Nevertheless  the  next  morning  Suffren  offered 
battle  to  Sir  Edward,  but  the  English  admiral,  having  a 
large  convoy  under  his  charge,  declined  it.  Suffren 
then  sailed  southward,  whilst  the  English  squadron 
entered  the  harbour  of  Trincomali.  As  to  the  captains 
of  the  Vengeur  and  the  Artesien,  Captains  de  Forbin 
and  de  Maurville,  Suffren  reported  their  conduct  to  the 
Minister  of  Marine.  Subsequently,  it  will  be  seen,  he 
deprived  them  of  their  commands  and  sent  them  to 
France,  where,  on  arrival,  they  were  imprisoned. 

A  little  more  than  a  fortnight  after  this  battle,  Suffren 
brought  his  squadron  into  the  anchorage  of  Batacola,  a 
Dutch  port  in  the  island  of  Ceylon,  about  twenty  leagues 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  27 

I 

to  the  south  of  Trincomali,  to  which  place  the  English 
squadron  had  repaired.  By  taking  up  this  position 
Suifren  gained  all  the  advantage  of  the  wind  which  was 
just  beginning  to  set  in  from  the  south.  He  had 
previously  despatched  a  brig,  the  Chasseur,  to  the 
islands  to  demand  of  M.  de  Souillac  men  and  munitions 
of  war,  of  which  latter  there  did  not  remain  to  him  a 
sufficient  quantity  for  a  single  action. 

Here,  at  Batacola,  Suffren  received  despatches  from 
France  directing  him  to  proceed  to  the  islands  to  escort 
Bussy  to  the  Indian  coast.*  But  there  were  grave 
reasons  which  urged  Suffren  to  defer  obedience  to  these 
instructions.  In  the  first  place  he  could  not  place 
confidence  in  many  of  his  captains.  The  senior  next  to 
himself.  Captain  de  Tromelin,  was  a  man  whom  he  had 
reason  specially  to  mistrust.  To  leave  to  such  a  man 
the  charge  of  a  squadron  wanting  in  men  and  ammuni- 
tion, at  a  time  when  an  English  squadron  of  almost 
equal  force  was  ready  to  dispute  with  it  the  mastery  of 
the  Indian  Seas,  and  when  nearly  3000  French  troops, 
but  just  landed,  required  the  support  of  French  ships, 
was  a  course  which  prudence  and  patriotism  alike 
spurned.  Suffren  preferred  then  to  take  upon  himself 
the  responsibility  of  not  obeying  the  minister's  order. 
He  justified  this  line  of  action  in  a  letter  to  the 
Grovernor  of  the  Isles  of  France  and  Bourbon. 

i 

*  These  despatches  were  brought  to  Suffren  by  Villaret-Joyeuse, 
subsequently  distinguished  as  the  admiral  who,  with  a  revolutionary  jBieet, 
fought  the  battle  of  the  1st  June  against  Lord  Howe. 


28  FRENCH   MARINERS 

Fortunately  for  France  the  Governor  of  the  islands 
was  a  man  endowed  with  a  cool  judgment,  a  clear 
understanding,  and  large  and  comprehensive  views.  He 
in  his  turn  justified  the  action  of  Suffren  to  the  Minister 
of  Marine.  After  detailing  the  various  reasons  which 
would  render  the  absence  of  Suffren  from  the  scene  of 
action  not  only  inexpedient  but  dangerous  to  French 
interests,  he  thus  concluded  :  **  It  may  truly  beafiirmed 
that  the  course  M.  de  Suffren  has  taken  will  save  India 
and  pave  the  way  for  the  success  of  the  Marquis  de 
Bussy." 

The  French  fleet  remained  in  the  anchorage  of  Batacola 
till  the  1st  June.  It  was  a  trying  time  for  Suffren. 
His  greatest  enemies  were  the  recalcitrant  captains  who 
were  sighing  for  the  luxurious  diet,  the  graceful  forms, 
and  the  smiling  faces  of  the  Isle  of  France.  These 
offered  a  covert  resistance  to  all  the  plans  of  their 
commodore.  But  Suffren  saw  through  their  motives, 
and  being  a  plain  speaker,  he  told  thetn  bluntly  that  he 
would  rather  sink  the  squadron  before  the  forts  of 
Madi'as  than  retire  before  Admiral  Hughes.  **  If  there 
are  any,''  he  added,  /'who  have  formed  the  conception 
of  such  an  infamy  let  them  give  me  their  reasons  and  I 
shall  know  how  to  answer  them."  It  was  in  putting 
down  the  intrigues  formed  by  these  men,  in  repairing 
and  re-victualling  his  ships,  in  tending  on  the  shore  the 
sick  and  wounded,  and  finally  in  welcoming  re-inforce- 
ment  of  men  and  munitions,  that  the  six  weeks  at 
Batacola  were  spent. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  29 

Meanwhile  the  troops  under  the  feeble  Duchemin, 
disembarked  at  Porto  Novo  the  20th  April,  had  begun 
their  operations.  It  had  been  arranged  between  the 
French  commodore  and  Haidar  Ali  that  6000  infantry 
and  4000  cavalry  of  the  Mysore  army  should  join  the 
French  force,  and  that  these  united  should,  under  the 
command  of  the  French  general,  act  in  concert  with 
Haidar  Ali,  the  latter  furnishing  supplies  both  in  money 
and  kind.  These  arrangements  were  quickly  carried 
out.  Haidar  had  wished  that  the  Freneh  corps  d'armee 
should  at  once  attack  Negapatam,  a  most  important 
town  on  the  coast,  and  the  capture  of  which  could  then 
have  been  easily  effected.  Duchemin,  however,  pre- 
ferred the  easier  conquest  of  Kadalur.  This  place 
surrendered  on  the  6th  May.  A  junction  was  then 
effected  with  Haidar  Ali,  and  the  united  armies  besieged 
and  took  Permacol,  and  a  few  days  later  invested 
Wandewash. 

Then  occurred  another  instance  of  the  crime  of  intrust- 
hag  important  military  operations  to  a  man  without  brains 
and  without  nerve.  Probably  in  private  life  Duchemin 
was  amiable  and  inoffensive.  He  was  certainly  not  tor- 
K  mented  by  a  constant  desire  to  dare.  These  somewhat 
^  negative  qualities  ought  to  have  engendered  a  doubt  as 
to  the  possession  of  the  sterner  faculties  which  fit  a  man 
for  command.  It  has  indeed  been  conjectured  that  he 
might  have  owed  his  selection  to  there  not  being  a  better 
man  on  the  spot.  Yet,  judging  by  results,  such  a 
surmise  must  be  a  libel  on  all  and  every  one  of  the 
2868  men  he  led  to  India. 


80  FRENCH   MARINERS 

Just  imagine  his  position.  The  English  had  but  one 
army  in  Southern  India.  That  army  consisted  of  about 
12,000  men,  of  whom  little  more  than  2000  were 
Europeans.  It  was  commanded  by  Sir  Eyre  Coote,  a 
man  who  had  been  very  good  in  his  day,  but  who  was 
then  utterly  broken  down  in  health.  That  army  defeated, 
and  Southern  India  would  become  Mysorean  and  French. 

On  the  the  other  side  was  the  army  of  Haidar  Ali, 
60,000  strong,  flushed  with  victory  over  Braithwaite, 
and  but  just  joined  by  about  2000*  Frenchmen  under 
Duchemin.  For  this  army  a  defeat  was  comparatively 
unimportant ;  for  the  Englisli  had  not  the  men  to  follow 
up  the  victory,  and  Haidar  had  another  army  to  fall  back 
upon.  It  was  just  the  occasion  when  it  was  the  policy 
of  the  English  to  avoid  a  decisive  action,  of  the  allies  to 
force  one  on. 

Yet,  it  is  scarcely  credible  that,  whilst  the  English 
general  so  far  played  into  his  enemy's  hands  as  to  offer 
battle  to  them,  the  French  commander  declined  it.  If 
success  justifies  the  neglect  of  all  rule,  then,  and  then 
alone,  was  Coote  warranted  in  offering  battle.  Defeat 
would  have  ruined  him.  Yet  his  part,  at  least,  was 
a  noble  and  a  daring  part.  But  what  can  justify 
Duchemin  ? 

Look  again  at  the  position.  Haidar  Ali  and  Duchemin 
with  an  army  of  over  60,000  men  were  besieging  Wande- 
wash ;  Sir  Eyre  Coote  thought  that  Wandewash  must  be 
saved  at  any  price.     He  therefore  advanced  with  his 

*  Deducting  the  sick  in  hospital. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  31 

army,  12,000  strong,  and  offered  battle  to  the  allies.  His 
position  was  of  no  great  strength.  He  had  no  advan- 
tages. He  was  over-matched  in  cavalry,  in  infantry,  and 
in  artillery.  Haidar,  old  as  he  was,  was  eager  to  accept 
the  challenge.     Duchemin  refused. 

Why  did  he  refuse  ?  The  fate  of  French  India  was  in 
his  hands.  He  had  but  to  tell  his  countrymen  to  fight, 
as  Frenchmen  will  fight,  and,  in  all  probability,  Wande- 
wash  would  have  been  the  grave  of  the  English.  Why 
then  did  he  refuse  ?  It  was  an  opportunity  at  which 
Suffren  would  have  clutched,  which  the  least  of  the 
generals  of  Napoleon  would  have  made  decisive.  Un- 
happily for  France,  Duchemin  was  less  than  the  least  of 
her  warrior  children. 

In  reply  to  the  urgent  requisition  of  Haidar,  Duchemin 
pleaded  his  health ;  he  pleaded  his  instructions  not  to 
fight  before  the  arrival  of  Bussy;  he  pleaded,  not  in 
words,  but  in  a  manner  not  to  be  misunderstood,  his 
own  innate  incapacity. 

Haidar  AH  saw  it — saw  it  with  disdain .  In  compliance 
with  the  urgent  solicitations  of  the  Frenchman,  he  ab- 
stained from  attacking  Coote,  and,  raising  the  siege  of 
Wandewash,  retreated  towards  Pondichery,  and  occupied 
a  strongly  fortified  position  close  to  Kalinur.  But  the 
loss  of  the  opportunity  chafed  him.  Such  allies  were 
useless  to  him.  He  determined  to  show  them  he  could 
fight  the  English  without  them. 

The  occasion  soon  presented  itself.  Sir  Eyre  Coote, 
foiled  in  his  endeavours  to  force   on    a   battle   before 


32  FRENCH   MARINERS 

Wandewash,  determined  to  make  an  attempt  on  the 
magazines  of  Haidar  at  Arni.  There  were  all  his  stores ; 
there  his  supplies  of  ammunition  and  weapons  of  war. 
To  surprise  that  place  would  in  very  deed  give  a  deadly 
wound  to  his  enemy.  Coote  resolved  to  attempt  it.  His 
chances  seemed  good,  for  he  had  gained  over  the  com- 
mandant of  Arni. 

Coote  set  his  army  in  motion  for  that  purpose  on  the 
night  of  the  30th  May.  But  Haidar  had  had  good  infor- 
mation and  had  penetrated  his  plan.  Whilst  then  he 
sent  by  forced  marches  Tippu  and  his  own  French 
contingent  under  the  younger  Lally  to  protect  Arni,  he 
broke  up  from  his  camping  ground  at  Kalinur,  and 
marched  on  the  track  of  Coote,  hoping  to  take  him  in 
rear.  He  did  not  even  ask  the  opinion  of  Duchemin, 
but  left  him  and  his  corj^s  d'armee  behind.* 

Haidar  Ali  overtook  the  English  force  on  the  2nd  June 
just  as  they  were  in  sight  of  Arni.  The  English  leader 
was  surprised.  He  had  Tippti  and  Lally  in  front  of  him, 
and  Haidar  Ali  in  his  rear.  His  troops  were  tired. 
Haidar  had  never  had  such  a  chance.  But  the  skill  of 
Coote  and  the  valour  of  the  English  baffled  him.  By 
dexterous  manoeuvring  Coote  made  it  a  day  of  skirmish- 
ing, in  the  course  of  which  he  captured  one  of  Lally' s 
guns  stuck  fast  in  the  bed  of  the  river.  In  his  main 
object,  however,  Coote  was  baffled.  Haidar  saved  Arni. 
Four  days  later  Haidar  took  his  revenge  for  the  loss  of 

*  To  mark  his  sense  of  Duchemin's  conduct  Haidar  suspended  the 
supply  of  provisions  to  the  French  army  during  his  own  absence. 


ON    THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  8S 

his  gun  by  tempting  the  English  into  an  ambuscade. 
They  fell  into  the  snare,  and  lost  166  men,  54  horses, 
and  two  guns.  Haidar's  loss  was  about  60  men.  After 
this  action  Sir  Eyre  Coote  returned  to  the  vicinity  of 
Madras.  Haidar,  unable  to  conquer  the  repugnance  to 
action  of  Duchemin,  proceeded  to  push  on  the  siege 
of  Yellor. 


84  FBENCH   MARINERS 


III. 

It  was  whilst  the  events  just  recorded  were  progressing 
on  land  that  intelligence  from  time  to  time  reached 
Haidar  Ali  of  the  gallant  contests  which  Suffren  had 
been  delivering  on  the  sea.  The  enthusiasm  of  the 
tried,  and  gallant  old  warrior  knew  no  bounds.     "At 

*  last,"  he  said  to  his  confidants,  "at  last  the  English 

*  have  found  a  master.     This  is  the  man  who  will  aid 

*  me  to  exterminate  them  :  I  am  determined  that  two 
'  years  hence  not  one  of  them  shall  remain  in  India, 
'  and  that  they  shall  not  possess  a  single  inch  of  Indian 
'  soil.'*     Then  turning  to  the  French  agent  in  his  camp, 

M.  Piveron  de  Morlat,  he  begged  him  to  write  at  once  to 
his  master,  and  to  tell  him  of  his  own  great  desire  to  see 
him,  to  embrace  him,  to  tell  him  how  much  he  esteemed 
him  for  his  heroic  courage. 

Before  this  message  could  reach  the  French  commo- 
modore,  Suffren  had  sailed  with  his  refitted  and 
augmented  squadron  in  the  direction  of  Kadaltir.  It 
had  been  his  original  intention  to  do  the  work  which 
Duchemin  had  declined  to  attempt,  viz,,  to  take  pos- 
session of  Negapatam,  which  would  have  formed  an 
important  depot  for  the  operations  of  the  land  and  sea 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  35 

forces.    But  the  course  of  events  induced  him  to  change 
his  determination. 

The  French  fleet,  consisting  of  twelve  ships  of  the 
line  and  four  large  frigates,  sailed  first  to  Tranquebar, 
and  then,  making  several  captures  en  route,  arrived,  on 
the  20th  June,  at  Kadalur.  Here  for  the  first  time 
Sufiren  became  acquainted  with  the  misconduct  of 
Duchemin.  Eesolved,  by  some  daring  measure,  to  atone 
for  the  shortcomings  of  this  incapable  soldier,  Suffren 
embarked  on  board  his  transports,  besides  siege  materials, 
1200  men  of  the  line,  400  of  the  levies  of  the  islands, 
two  companies  of  artillery,  and  800  sepoys,  intending  to 
make  a  dash  at  Negapatam.  He  was  on  the  point  of 
sailing  when  intelligence  reached  him  that  the  English 
fleet,  emerging  from  Trincomali,  had  passed  Kadalur, 
and  was  bearing  up  northward  in  the  direction  of  the 
place  which  he  had  hoped  to  surprise. 

Disappointed,  but  still  determined,  Suffren  at  once 
set  sail  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  Coming  in  sight,  on 
the  5th  July,  of  Negapatam,  he  beheld  the  English  fleet 
lying  at  anchor  in  the  roadstead.  Determined  at  all 
hazards  to  force  on  an  action,  Suffren  signalled  to  clear 
decks  and  to  be  ready  to  anchor.  His  own  ship,  the 
Heros,  was  leading,  when  at  three  o'clock,  a  sudden 
squall  caused  to  the  Ajax,  which  was  following,  the  loss 
of  her  main  and  mizen  topmasts.  These,  and  other 
damages,  almost  as  serious,  forced  her  to  drop  out  of  the 
line.  The  squall  settling  into  a  steady  breeze  gave  the 
English  admiral  the  advantage  of  the  wind.    He  accord - 

3  A 


86  FRENCH    MARINERS 

ingly  weighed  anchor  and  stood  out  to  sea.  That  night 
the  two  fleets  anchored  within  two  cannonshots  of  each 
other. 

When  the  morning  of  the  6th  July  broke,  the  first 
care  of  the  French  commodore  was  to  ascertain  the  con- 
dition of  the  Ajax,  His  rage  may  be  imagined  when  he 
found  that  the  necessary  repairs  remained  uncompleted. 
The  rage  was  increased  to  fury  when  he  received  from 
her  captain  a  request  that  his  vessel  might  be  allowed  to 
stand  in  for  the  nearest  roadstead,  and  this  in  the  pre- 
sence of  an  enemy  and  when  an  engagement  was 
impending  !     He  refused  absolutely. 

Meanwhile  the  English  admiral,  finding  the  enemy  of 
about  equal  strength  with  himself,*  determined  to  use  his 
advantage  of  the  wind  and  to  force  on  an  engagement.  At 
ten  minutes  past  seven,  then,  he  formed  line  ahead,  and 
signalled  to  his  captains  that  each  ship  should  bear  down 
as  directly  as  possible  upon  her  opponent  and  endeavour 
to  bring  her  to  close  action.  Suffren  on  his  side  tacked, 
putting  the  head  to  the  wind,  in  order  to  form  a  new 
line.  As  he  did  this,  he  had  the  mortification  to  see  the 
captain  of  the  Ajax  stand  right  away  from  him. 

It  was  not  till  about  half-past  nine  o'clock  that  the 
English  ships  came  within  range  of  their  enemy.  Both 
fleets   opened   fire    simultaneously   at    long   distances. 


*  The  French  fleet  consisted,  besides  the  Ajax  which  took  no  part  in 
the  battle,  of  eleven  ships  of  the  line,  carrying  706  guns,  and  of  four 
frigates.  The  English  had  eleven  line  of  battle  ships,  carrying  746  guns, 
•and  one  frigate. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  37 

Soon,  however,  the  fight  closed.  The  Flamand,  50, 
drew  upon  herself  the  fire,  which  she  returned,  of  the 
Hero,  74,  and  the  Exeter,  64 ;  whilst  the  Annihal,  74, 
engaged  in  a  murderous  conflict  with  the  Isis,  56. 
Simultaneously  the  Severe,  64,  and  the  Barford,  74:; 
the  Brillant,  64,  and  the  Sultan,  74 ;  the  French  com- 
modore's ship,  the  Heros,  74,  and  the  English  admiral's 
ship,  the  Superb,  74;  engaged  in  an  almost  hand  to 
hand  encounter. 

Of  the  other  vessels  it  may  be  noted  that  the 
SpJiifix,  64,  fought  the  Monarca,  74 ;  but  the  position 
of  this  latter,  on  the  starboard  quarter  of  the  Superb, 
rendered  it  impossible  for  her  to  deliver  any  but  an 
oblique  fire.  The  Worcester,  the  Monmouth,  the  Eagley 
and  the  Magnamine,  which  followed  in  her  wake,  could 
only  form  a  line  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  with  the  French 
line.  It  followed  that  the  fire  between  these  and  the 
Petit  Annibal,  the  Artesien,  and  the  Vengeur  was  at  a 
long  distance,  whilst  the  Bizarre  and  the  Orient,  not- 
withstanding the  efi'orts  of  their  captains,  remained  in 
forced  inaction.  The  Flamand  was  the  first  French  ship 
to  feel  the  weight  of  her  two  powerful  antagonists.  She 
managed,  however,  to  forge  ahead  and  clear  herself,  and 
they  were  in  too  crippled  a  condition  to  follow  her.  The 
Brillant  at  the  same  time  was  suffering  much  from  the 
well-directed  fire  of  the  Sultan,  when  Sufi*ren,  signalling 
to  the  Sphinx  to  replace  him  alongside  the  Superb,  came 
to  her  rescue.  The  fight  was  then  renewed  with  extra- 
ordinary vigour  ;  when  at  one  o'clock  the  wind  suddenly 


38  FRENCH   MARINERS 

changed,   and  threw  both  the   combating  parties  into 
disorder. 

This  change  of  wind,  according  to  the  English  writers, 
saved  the  French  fleet  from  certain  defeat.  The  French 
on  their  side,  whilst  admitting  the  shameful  conduct  of 
some  of  their  captains,  contend  that  the  battle  was  still 
uncertain,  and  that  they  were  combating  with  equal 
chances  when  the  wind  came  to  part  them.  The 
state  of  affairs  after  the  change  of  wind  had  operated, 
as  stated  by  one  of  the  English  writers  of  the  period,  a 
decided  partisan,  shows,  I  think,  that  there  could  have 
been  little  to  choose  between  the  condition  of  the  rivals. 
*'  After  much  manoeuvring,''  he  writes,  **and  the  con- 
''  tinuation  of  a  partial  engagement  between  such  of  the 
'*  two  fleets  as  came  within  reach  of  each  other,  the 
**  English  admiral  made  the  signal  for  the  line  of  battle 
**  ahead,  and  was  preparing,  at  half-past  one  o'clock,  to 
"  renew  the  attack;  but  seeing,  at  two,  the  enemy 
"  standing  in  shore,  and  collecting  their  ships  in  a  close 
^'  body,  while  his  were  much  dispersed,  and  several  of 
"  them  ungovernable,  he  relinquished  that  design,  and 
*'  thought  only  of  getting  into  such  a  condition  as  should 
"  prove  decisive  to  the  service  next  morning.  Then, 
"  however,  the  French  were  observed  under  sail,  on 
"  their  way  to  Cuddalore,  while  our  fleet  was  utterly 
"  incapable  of  preventing  or  pursuing  them."*  If  this 
does  not  imply  that  the  English  ships  had  been  at  least 

*  Transactions  in  India.     London:  1786.     Campbell   says:    *' The 
action  was  obstinate,  well  fought,  but  indecisive." 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  89 

as  much    damaged   as   their   enemies   in   the  previous 
encounter  there  is  no  meaning  in  language. 

The  French  statement  corroborates  substantially  the 
account  from  which  I  have  just  quoted.  '^  Sir  Edward 
Hughes,"  it  relates,  '*  abandoning  to  us  the  field  of 
**  battle,  endeavoured  to  concentrate  his  ships  between 
'*  Negapatam  and  Naour,  whilst  Suffren,  lying  to,  and 
*'  seeing  the  English  squadron  disappear,  gave  orders  to 
''  anchor  off  Karikal,  two  leagues  to  windward  of  it." 

Suffren  himself  attributed  the  indecisive  nature  of  the 
action  to  the  conduct  of  his  captains.  He  accordingly 
placed  under  arrest  and  sent  to  France  the  following 
three  of  their  number,  viz.,  M.  de  Maurville  of  the 
Artesien,  for  having  on  the  6th  July  aggravated  the 
faults  he  had  committed  on  the  17th  February,  the  12th 
April,  and  the  5th  June ;  M.  de  Forbin,  for  having  on 
this  occasion  rivalled  his  misconduct  on  the  12th  April; 
and  M.  de  Cillart  for  having  unbecomingly  hauled  down 
his  flag.  *  M.  Bouvet,  who  had  not  brought  the  Ajax 
into  action  at  all,  was  deprived  of  his  command,  whilst 
three  other  inferior  officers  were  sternly  reprimanded. 
Having  rid  himself  of  these  worse  than  incapable 
captains,  Sufi'ren  anchored  in  the  roadstead  of  Kadaltir 


*  This  occurrence  is  thus  summarised  from  the  French  authorities :  **  In 
one  of  the  isolated  encounters  le  Severe  was  sustaining  a  fierce  combat 
with  the  Sultan.  All  at  once,  in  spite  of  the  proximity  of  VAnnibalj  le 
SphinXy  and  VHeros,  de  Cillart  ordered  his  men  to  haul  down  his  flag. 
Fortunately  his  cowardice,  which  betrayed  itself  by  unmistakeable  signs, 
remained  without  result.  Two  officers  rushed  to  him,  and  apostrophis- 
ing him  severely,  rehoisted  the  flag  and  continued  the  combat." 


40  FRENCH   MABINEES 

and  devoted  all  his  efforts  to  repair  the   damages  his 
ships  had  sustained  in  the  action. 

Yet,  whilst  actively  engaged  in  this  prosaic  work,  his 
brain,  never  idle,  had  conceived  one  of  the  most  daring 
projects  which  ever  entered  into  the  head  of  a  naval 
commander.  Long  had  he  noticed  with  envy  the 
possession  by  the  English  of  the  only  harbour  on  the 
eastern  coast  of  Ceylon,  capable  of  containing  a  large 
fleet,  at  the  same  time  that  it  was  strong  enough  to  defy 
any  hostile  attack.  He  lay  before  Kadalur  in  an  open 
roadstead,  liable  to  the  storms  of  the  ocean  and  the 
attacks  of  a  superior  force  of  the  enemy.  In  this  open 
roadstead  he  had  to  carry  out  all  his  repairs.  The 
English  admiral,  he  knew  well,  was  about  to  be  joined 
by  the  Sceptre  of  64  guns  and  the  San  Carlos  of  44. 
Were  he  to  be  attacked  by  the  force  thus  increased  to  a 
very  decided  superiority,  how  could  he  effectually  resist? 
Considerations  of  this  nature  pointed  to  the  advisability 
of  securing  a  harbour  at  once  large,  commodious,  and 
safe.  These  advantages  were  possessed  by  Trincomali. 
Suffren  then  resolved  to  capture  Trincomali. 

It  was  a  bold,  almost  an  audacious  venture.  After 
the  combat  of  the  6th  July  the  English  admiral  had 
kept  the  sea  for  nearly  a  fortnight  to  the  windward  of 
Negapatam.*       With    his    ships    much   battered    and 

*  The  only  English  writer  who  attempts  to  justify  the  English 
admiral's  delay  before  Negapatam,  the  author  of  Transactions  in  Indian 
says  that  the  situation  of  the  army  may  have  rendered  this  inaction 
necessary.  But  there  are  no  grounds  for  this  supposition.  The  English 
army  was  then  likewise  in  a  state  of  complete  inaction. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  41 

urgently  needing  repair  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  why 
Sir  Edward  Hughes  wasted  that  precious  fortnight  in 
idle  bravado.  This  at  least  is  certain,  that  it  gave 
Suffren  the  opportunity  he  was  longing  for. 

The  state  of  his  vessels  and  the  necessity  for  procuring 
ammunition  rendered  it  impossible  for  Sir  Edward 
Hughes  to  keep  the  sea  for  more  than  a  fortnight.  He 
steered  then  for  Madras  and  reached  that  place  on  the 
20th  July.  He  at  once  took  the  necessary  measures  for 
the  repairs  of  his  fleet.  Here  also  he  was  joined  by  the 
Sceptre  and  the  San  Carlos.  Sir  Edward  Hughes 
thought,  and  he  seemed  to  have  reason  for  his  opinion, 
that  he  had  sufficient  time  before  him.  He  knew  to  a 
great,  though  not  to  the  fullest  extent,  the  diffi- 
culties his  rival  had  to  encounter  at  Kadalur.  Had 
he  known  the  whole  truth,  he  would  have  felt  still  more 
confident,  for,  on  the  30th  July,  ten  days  subsequently 
to  his  own  arrival  at  Madras,  the  state  of  the  French 
ships  of  war  was  so  miserable,  and  the  resources  at  the 
disposal  of  Suffren  were  so  limited,  that  action  for  the 
remainder  of  the  year  seemed  for  them  impossible. 

On  that  date  Suffren  thus  wrote  to  the  Governor  of 
the  Isle  of  France,  M.  de  Souillac :  **  I  assure  you  it  is 

*  no  easy  matter  to  keep  the  sea  on  a  coast,  without 

*  money,  without  magazines,  with  a  squadron  in  many 
'  respects  badly  furnished,  and  after  having  sustained 
'  three  combats.     *     *     I  am  at  the  end  of  my  re- 

*  sources.    Nevertheless  we  must  fight  to  gain  Ceylon  ; 

*  the  enemy  have  the  wind  of  us  and  we  have  so  many 


42  FRENCH   MARINERS 

'^  slow  sailers  that  there  is  little  hope  we  shall  gain  that 
'*  advantage.  *  '^  The  squadron  has  2000  men  in 
**  hospital  of  whom  600  are  wounded." 

Even  before  thus  writing  Suffren  had  broken  up  his 
prizes  and  transports,  and  had  demolished  houses  and 
other  buildings  in  Kadaliir  to  provide  himself  with  the 
means  of  repairing  his  damaged  ships  ! 

Whilst  thus  engaged  in  these  important  duties, 
intelligence  reached  Suffren  (25th  July)  that  the  great 
sovereign  of  Mysore  had  arrived  within  a  few  miles  of 
Kadalur  in  the  hope  of  seeing  him  and  of  concerting 
plans  for  the  future.  The  French  commodore  at  once 
despatched  an  officer  of  rank  to  congratulate  Haidar  Ali, 
and  the  next  day  he  landed  himself  in  state,  to  pay  him 
a  visit  of  ceremony. 

His  reception  was  magnificent.  Met  on  landing  by 
the  principal  nobles  of  Mysore,  escorted  by  Haidar  Ali^s 
own  bodyguard  of  European  cavalry,  he  was  greeted  on 
the  threshold  of  the  state-tent  by  that  prince  himself. 
The  appearance  of  Haidar  Ali  was  the  signal  for  a  general 
presentation  of  arms  on  the  part  of  the  troops  drawn  up 
in  battle  array.  The  drums  beat,  the  trumpets  sounded, 
the  attendants  sang  hymns  recording  the  prowess  of  the 
French.  Not  a  single  mark  of  respect  or  of  honour  was 
omitted. 

The  interview  lasted  three  hours.  Towards  the  close 
of  it  Suffren  suggested  to  Haidar  that  he  should  come 
down  to  the  sea  shore  to  look  at  the  French  fleet  dressed 
out  in  his  honour.     But  Haidar,  who  was  suffering,  and 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  4B 

who  did  not  care  to  undergo  the  exertion  that  would  be 
necessary,  replied  that  he  **  had  left  his  camp  for  one 
*^  object  only,  that  of  seeing  so  great  a  man,  and  that 
''  now  that  he  had  seen  him  there  was  nothing  remain- 
'^  ing  that  he  cared  to  see/' 

The  two  following  days  were  spent  in  giving  and 
receiving  presents,  and  in  arranging  as  to  the  operations 
which  should  take  place  on  the  arrival  of  Bussy.  They 
were  actually  engaged  in  discussing  this  question,  when 
intelligence  was  received  of  the  arrival  at  Point  de  Galle  of 
the  advanced  guard  of  Bussy's  fleet  under  M.  d'Aymar. 

Bussy,  in  fact,  had  set  out  from  Cadiz  in  December 
1781  with  two  men-of-war,  three  transports,  and  a  large 
convoy.  His  misfortunes  set  in  early.  The  convoy  was 
attacked,  dispersed,  and  in  part  destroyed  by  English 
cruisers,  so  much  so  that  only  two  ships  laden  with 
artillery  joined  him  afc  the  Cape.*  He  still,  however, 
had  the  soldiers  who  had  embarked  on  his  three 
transports.  Terrified,  however,  at  a  report  that  the 
English  were  about  to  attack  the  Cape  with  an  army  of 
6000  men,  he  left  there  650  of  his  small  detachment. 
Sailing  then  to  the  islands,  the  perusal  of  the  despatches 
just  arrived  from  Suffren  seemed  to  give  him  new 
courage.  In  concert,  then,  with  the  Governor,  M.  de 
Souillac,  he  detached  under  M.  d'Aymar,  two  men  of 
war,  the  St.  Michael,  64,  and  the  Illustre,  74,  one 
frigate,  the  Consolante,  and  nine  storeships,  carrying 
800  men  and  laden  with  supplies  and  ammunition,  to 

*  Many  subsequently  made  their  way  to  the  islands. 


44  FRENCH   MARINERS 

proceed  at  once  to  join  Suffren,  and  to  announce  that  he 
himself  would  shortly  follow  with  the  hulk  of  his 
troops. 

It  was  of  the  arrival  of  this  squadron  at  Galle  that 
Suffren  received  information  at  Kadalur  on  the  28th 
July,  whilst  still  discussing  affairs  with  Haidar  AH. 

He  lost  no  time  in  delay.  Some  preparations  were 
still  necessary.  But  these  were  soon  completed,  and  on 
the  morning  of  the  1st  August,  the  French  fleet  leaving 
the  roadstead  in  which  it  had  patched  up  its  repairs, 
fired  a  parting  salute  to  the  great  warrior  her  commodore 
was  never  destined  again  to  behold. 

Suffren  had  two  objects  in  view,  the  one  avowed,  the 
other  concealed :  the  first  to  effect  a  junction  with 
d'Aymar ;  the  second  to  capture  Trincomali :  the  first 
appeared  certain  ;  the  second  could  only  be  accomplished 
by  **  great  daring.*' 

Passing  Karikal,  Naotir,  and  Negapatam,  the  fleet 
arrived  at  Batacola,  twenty  leagues  south  of  Trincomali, 
on  the  9th  August.  Here  it  was  joined  by  the  Bellona, 
a  frigate  of  36  guns,  just  returning  from  an  indecisive 
hand-to-hand  encounter  with  the  Coventry,  32.  Her 
captain,  M.  de  Pierrevert,  a  nephew  of  Suffren,  had  been 
killed  in  the  action. 

Suffren  waited  at  Batacola  till  the  21st  August,  when 
he  was  joined  by  the  St.  Michael  and  the  Illustre, 
escorting  seven  transports  with  troops  and  stores,  and 
accompanied  by  the  corvette  La  Fortune,  Whilst  lying 
at   Batacola  he  received  despatches   from  France  and 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  46 

the  islands.  Amongst  those  from  the  latter  was  one 
from  Bussy  in  which  that  general  pointed  out  how  much 
to  be  regretted  it  was  that  the  French  possessed  no 
harbour  on  the  eastern  coast  equal  to  Trincomali.  It 
cannot  be  said  that  this  letter  decided  Suffren,  for  his 
mind  had  been  previously  made  up ;  but  it  is  probable 
that  this  opinion  of  a  man  who  had  a  great  reputation 
on  matters  connected  with  India  greatly  strengthened 
his  determination  to  strike  for  Trincomali. 

The  reinforcements  brought  by  d'Aymar  did  not 
remain  long  in  Batacola.  One  day  was  spent  in 
distributing  to  the  several  ships  the  munitions  and  stores 
of  which  they  were  in  need.  The  next  day,  22nd  August, 
the  entire  fleet  set  sail,  and  the  same  evening  cast  anchor 
in  front  of  Trincomali.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the 
25th  Suffren,  having  well  examined  the  fortifications, 
moved  his  fleet  to  the  east  of  the  forts  protecting  the 
town,  with  the  intention  to  land  there  his  troops,  to  the 
number  of  2400.  This  was  effected  without  opposition 
the  same  evening.  On  the  26th  batteries  were  con- 
structed to  play  on  the  eastern  face  of  the  fort.  On 
the  27th,  28th,  and  29th,  fire  was  opened  and  continued 
until,  on  the  evening  of  the  last-named  day,  a  breach 
had  been  effected  in  the  fortifications.  Early  on  the 
following  morning  Suffren  summoned  the  com- 
mandant to  surrender.  After  a  long  debate,  the 
commanding  officer.  Captain  Macdowel,  seeing  that 
further  resistance  was  useless,  agreed  to  give  up  the 
place  on  the  condition  that  he  and  his  troops  should  be 


46  FBENCH    MARINERS 

transported  to  Madras  and  be  free  to  serve  in  the  war. 
The  French  then  entered  into  possession. 

Trincomali  capitulated  on  the  31st  August.  It  was 
occupied  by  the  French  on  the  1st  September.  On  the 
2nd  the  fleet  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes  appeared  in  sight  of 
the  place. 


ON   THE   INDIAN   SEAS.  47 


IV. 

We  have  seen  that  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  after  delaying 
for  nearly  a  fortnight  before  Negapatam,  at  last  took  his 
fleet  to  Madras  to  refit.  He  arrived  there  on  the  20th 
July,  and  there  he  was  joined  by  the  Sceptre  and  San 
Carlos. 

The  damages  which  many  of  his  ships  had  sustained 
were  considerable,  and  he  was  forced  to  make  extra- 
ordinary exertions  to  repair  them.  It  had  occurred  to 
him  that  the  French  commander  might  take  advantage 
of  the  state  of  his  vessels,  and  the  gain  of  a  fortnight's 
time,  to  make  an  attempt  upon  Trincomali.  To  guard 
as  much  as  possible  against  such  an  attempt,  he  des- 
patched the  Monmouth  and  the  Sceptre  with  supplies  of 
men  and  ammunition  to  that  place.*  Thinking  this 
sufficient,  his  anxiety  on  the  subject  ceased.  It  was  soon 
roused,  however,  to  a  greater  extent  than  ever. 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  French  frigate  Bellona 
fought  an  indecisive  action  with  the  Coventry  off  Batacola; 
but  I  did  not  then  state  that  the  combating  vessels  had 
approached  sufficiently  near  to  that  place  to  enable  the 

*  These  ships  were  descried  by  the  French  fleet  on  the  3rd  of  August 
off  Negapatam.     It  is  probable  that  they  did  not  go  further. 


48  FRENCH    MARINERS 

captain  of  the  latter  ship  to  see  the  whole  French 
fleet  at  anchor.  He  at  once  crowded  on  sail  to  carry  the 
news  quickly  to  Madras.  He  reached  Madras  in  the  middle 
of  August,  and  gave  the  first  intimation  to  Sir  E.  Hughes 
of  the  dangerous  proximity  to  Trincomali  of  his  enemy. 
Sir  Edward  used  all  the  despatch  possible  to  hasten  his 
departure  for  Ceylon.  At  length  he  set  out,  but,  delayed 
by  contrary  winds,  he  arrived  before  Trincomali  only  to  see 
the  French  flag  flying  on  all  the  forts,  and  the  French 
fleet  at  anchor  in  the  bay. 

Sufi'ren  saw,  not  unmoved,  the  English  fleet  in  the 
offing.  It  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  go  out  and  fight 
it,  for  he  had  succeeded  to  the  fullest  extent  of  his  expec- 
tations. He  had  taken  Trincomali.  There  were  not 
wanting  officers  in  his  fleet  to  urge  upon  him  to  run  no 
further  risk.  The  party  which,  ever  since  his  departure 
from  the  islands,  had  constantly  endeavoured  to  thwart 
his  measures,  had  been  weakened  but  not  annihilated, 
by  the  deportation  to  France  of  de  Cillart,  de  Maurville, 
and  de  Forbin.  The  head  of  this  party  was  his  second 
in  command,  M.  de  Tromelin,  captain  of  the  ship 
Annibal.  Supported  by  de  St.  Felix  of  the  Artesien,  by 
de  la  Landelle  of  the  Bizarre,  and  others,  de  Tromelin 
urged  upon  the  commodore  the  advisability  of  resting 
upon  his  laurels.  **  The  issue  of  a  combat,"  he  said, 
**  was  uncertain,  and  might  deprive  them  of  all  that 
'*  they  had  gained."  Such  was  their  ostensible  reason; 
but  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  was  used  to  cover  alike 
their  jealousy  of  their  chief,  and  their  longing  desire  to 


ON   THE    INDIAN    SEAS. 


49 


return  to  the  soft  beauties  of  the  Isle  of  France.  As  for 
de  Tromelin,  he  had  held  back  in  every  action,  and  it 
was  a  matter  of  surprise  that  he  had  not  been  deported 
with  the  others  after  the  last  engagement. 

It  is  necessary  to  give  this  summary  of  the  debates 
which  preceded  the  action,  because  they  exercised  a 
momentous  influence  on  the  action  itself. 

Before  giving  a  decisive  answer  to  his  peace-pleading 
captains,  Suffren  determined  to  ascertain  the  number  of 
the  enemy's  vessels.  He  accordingly  signalled  to  the 
frigate  Bellona  to  reconnoitre.  The  Bellona  in  a  very 
short  space  of  time  signalled  back  that  there  were  twelve 
English  ships.  This  decided  Suffren.  He  had  fourteen.* 
Turning  to  his  advisers,  he  said,  ''If  the  enemy  had 
''  more  ships  than  I  have,  I  would  abstain;  if  he  had 

an  equal  number,  I  could  scarcely  refrain  ;  but  as  he 

has  fewer,  there  is  no  choice ;  we  must  go  out  and 

fight  him." 

The  fact  is  that  Suffren  saw,  though  his  captains 
would  not  or  could  not  see,  that  a  grand  opportunity, 
possibly  the  last,  now  offered  to  strike  a  decisive  blow 
for  dominion  in  Southern  India.     Could  he  but  destroy, 

*  The  French  fleet  consisted  of  le  Heros,  74 ;  Vlllustre,  74  ;  VOrient  74 ; 
VAnnibal,  74  ;    VArtesien,  64 ;   le  Severe,  64  ;    le  St.  Michel,  64 ;  le 
Brillant,  64  ;  le  Sphinx,  64  ;  VAjax,  64  ;  le  Vengeur,  64  ;  le  Bizarre,  64  ; 
le  Petit  Annibal,  50  ;  and  four  frigates,  carrying  in  all  1038  guns.    The 
English  fleet  comprised  the  Hero,  74  ;   the  Burford,  74  ;  the  Sultan,  74 
the  Superb,  74  ;    the  Monarca,  74  ;    the  Exeter,  64 ;   the  Sceptre,  64 
the  Eagle,  64  ;  the  Magnamine,  64  ;   the  Monmouth,  64  ;    the  Isis,  56 
the  Worcester^  54 ;  and  five  frigates  and  one  corvette,  carrying  in  all 
976  guns. 

4 


a 


(( 


50  FRENCH   MARINERS 

or  eflFectually  disable,  the  fleet  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes, 
everything  was  still  possible.  Bussy  was  on  the  point 
of  arriving;  Haidar  Ali  still  lived,  threatening  the 
English  possessions  all  round  Madras  ;  the  attenuated 
English  army,  deprived  of  its  fleet,  would  be  unable  to 
keep  the  field ;  and  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the 
victorious  French  fleet  from  sailing  with  the  monsoon 
wind  to  Madras,  and  crushing  out  the  domination  of  the 
English  in  the  countries  south  of  the  river  Krishna. 
There  was  the  one  obstacle  ofi'ered  by  the  twelve  ships 
of  Sir  Edward  Hughes  ;  and  Suffren  had  fourteen. 

That  Sufi'ren  entertained  such  hopes  is  beyond  a  doubt. 
Writing  to  a  friend  on  the  14th,  after  the  battle  I  am 
about  to  describe,  and  alluding  to  the  excellent  conduct 
of  the  captain  of  the  Illustre  M.  de  Bruyeres  de 
Chalabre,  he  used  this  expression  :  '*  No  one  could  have 
"  borne  himself  better  than  he  did  ;  if  all  had  done  like 
**  him,  we  should  have  been  masters  of  India  for 
''  ever."* 

But  let  us  now  turn  to  the  events  of  this  memorable 
day.  Decided  by  the  signal  from  the  Bellona  to  fight, 
Suffren,  after  a  short  exhortation  to  his  captains,  weighed 
anchor,  and  stood  out  towards  the  enemy  who  appeared 
inclined  to  entice  him  gently  away  from  the  harbour. 
As  he  approached,  he  signalled  to  form  line  in  the  pre- 
arranged order.  This  signal,  though  repeated  again 
and    again,    was   so    badly  executed    by   some    of  the 

*  This  letter  was  published  in  the  Gazette  de  France  of  31st  March, 
1783. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  51 

malcontent  captains,  that  it  appeared  to  the  English 
as  if  their  enemy  was  about,  after  all,  to  decline  an 
engagement.  At  length,  however,  their  intentions 
became  clear.  Their  line,  though  badly  formed — the 
ships  being  at  unequal  distances  from  each  other,  here 
crowded,  there  separated  by  a  long  interval — approached 
till  within  cannonshot. 

Suffren,  dissatisfied  with  the  unequal  formation  his 
ships  had  taken  up,  signalled  then  to  his  captains  to 
reserve  their  fire  till  they  should  be  at  close  quarters 
with  the  enemy.  He  endeavoured  to  enforce  this  order 
by  firing  a  gun.  The  signal  was  misunderstood  to  signify 
the  immediate  opening  of  fire.  The  fire  accordingly 
opened  simultaneously  along  the  whole  line  of  the  fleet. 
The  compliment  was  quickly  returned,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  the  action  became  general. 

Leaving  for  a  moment  the  van  and  rear  guards  of  both 
fleets,  we  will  turn  our  attention  to  the  centre,  in  which 
the  rival  commanders  were  opposed  to  each  other.  The 
French  centre  was  composed  of  the  Heros,  the  Illustre, 
the  Sphinx,  the  Flamand,  and  the  Petit  Annihal.  Of 
these  five  the  Sphinx  and  the  Petit  Annihal  had,  by  bad 
seamanship  or  ill-will  on  the  part  of  their  captains, 
mixed  themselves  with  the  vanguard,  the  Flamand  had 
tacked  herself  on  the  rearguard,  whilst,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  Ajax,  of  the  rearguard,  had  joined  the  centre. 
It  was  then,  with  only  three  vessels,  the  Ileros,  the 
Illustre,  and  the  Ajax,  that  Sufi'ren  came  to  close 
quarters  with  the  English  admiral. 

'        4  A 


62  FRENCH   MARINERS 

Here  he  found  ready  to  receive  him,  and  arranged 
with  that  care  for  discipline  and  obedience  to  orders 
which  is  one  of  the  glories  of  the  English  services,  the 
Burford,  the  Superb,  the  Sultan,  the  Eagle,  the  Hero, 
and  the  Monarca,  For  one  hour  the  unequal  combat 
lasted,  fought  with  admirable  courage  on  both  sides ;  at 
the  end  of  that  period  Suffren  saw  that  the  odds  were 
too  great,  and  that,  unless  he  received  prompt  assistance, 
he  must  succumb.  He  signalled,  therefore,  to  the  St. 
Michel,  commanded  by  d*Aymar,  and  to  the  Annihal, 
commanded  by  de  Tromelin,  to  come  to  his  aid.  Neither 
obeyed.  De  Kersaison,  however,  brought  up  the  Brillant, 
though  not  in  a  position  to  offer  the  most  effectual 
assistance. 

Whilst  this  murderous  hand-to-hand  conflict  was 
going  on  in  the  centre,  the  two  extremities  continued 
pounding  at  each  other  at  long  distances.  In  this  the 
French  had  somewhat  the  advantage.  The  Exeter  was 
disabled,  and  forced  to  draw  out  of  the  line ;  the  Isis 
suffered  severely,  and  her  captain,  Lumley,  was  killed ; 
the  Worcester,  who  lost  her  captain.  Wood,  and  the 
Monmouth,  were  riddled.  On  the  French  side,  the  Con- 
solante,  a  40-gun  frigate,  which  had  been  brought  into 
action,  lost  her  captain,  Pean ;  the  Vengeur,  having 
fired  away  all  her  ammunition,  withdrew  from  the  line, 
and  caught  fire,  with  difficulty  extinguished ;  the  re- 
mainder of  the  squadron  continued  to  fire  without  order, 
and  at  long  distances,  notwithstanding  that  the  signal 
for  close  action  was  still  flying  on  the  commodore's  ship. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  68 

At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  fight  having 
lasted  then  one  hour  and  a  half,  the  situation  of  the 
French  commodore  had  become  extremely  critical.  The 
Ajax  had  been  so  riddled  as  to  be  able  to  retire  only 
with  the  greatest  difficulty.  The  Heros,  the  Illustre,  and 
the  Brillant  had  to  bear  unsupported  the  weight  of  the 
concentrated  fire  of  the  centre  division  of  the  English 
fleet.  At  four  o'clock  the  Artesien  came  to  the  com- 
modore's rescue  ;  but  even  then  the  odds  were  too  great. 
About  five  o'clock  the  mainmast,  the  fore  topmast,  and 
the  mizen  topmast  of  the  Heros  came  down  with  a 
tremendous  crash.  The  hurrahs  of  the  English  first 
showed  Sufi'ren  that  they  thought  he  had  struck  his 
flag.  Not  for  long  did  they  remain  under  this  delusion. 
Bushing  on  the  poop,  Sufiren  cried  with  a  voice  that 
sounded  above  the  roar  of  the  combat:  *^ Bring  flags; 
**  bring  up  all  the  white  flags  that  are  below  and  cover  my 
^'  ship  with  them."  These  words  inspired  his  men  with 
renewed  energy.  The  contest  continued  with  greater 
fury  than  ever.  The  Burford,  the  Sultan,  and  the 
Superb  had  already  felt,  and  now  felt  again  its  efi'ects. 
Hope  was  beginning  to  rise,  when  at  the  moment  it  was 
whispered  to  Sufi'ren  that  he  had  already  expended 
1800  rounds  of  shot,  and  that  his  ammunition  was 
exhausted ! 

Powder,  however,  remained,  and  with  powder  alone 
he  continued  the  fire,  so  as  to  delude  the  enemy.  But 
he  had  begun  to  despair;  already  he  was  thinking  of 
spiking  the  guns,  and,  enticing  the  enemy's  ships  close 


64  FRENCH    MARINERS 

to  him,  of  blowing  up  his  ship  and  her  neighbours  with 
her,  when  an  event  occurred  which  changed  the  fortunes 
of  the  day. 

Suddenly,  at  half-past  five,  the  wind  shifted  from  the 
south-west  to  the  east-south-east.  This  enabled  the 
vanguard  of  the  French  fleet  to  come  to  the  aid  of,  and  to 
cover,  its  centre.  At  the  same  time  the  English  fleet  wore. 
But  on  resuming  its  position  it  had  no  longer  the  hardly- 
pressed  ships  of  the  French  centre  to  encounter,  but 
those  of  the  vanguard  which  till  then  had  only  engaged 
at  a  distance  and  were  comparatively  fresh. 

The  battle  then  re-engaged.  But  now  it  was  the 
turn  of  the  French.  The  Hero  lost  her  mainmast  at 
twenty  minutes  past  six  and  her  mizenmast  soon  after. 
The  maintopmast  of  the  Worcester  was  shot  away  about 
the  same  time.  The  Superb,  the  Btirford,  the  Eagle, 
and  the  Morimouth  had  previously  been  disabled. 

At  length  night  fell,  and  the  engagement  ceased — 
another  drawn  battle.  Both  fleets  remained  all  night 
near  the  scene  of  action.  The  next  morning  that  of  the 
French  entered  the  harbour  of  Trincomali,  the  English 
set  sail  for  Madras.* 

•  It  is  very  difficult  to  reconcile  the  accounts  given  by  the  rival  actora 
of  the  latter  part  of  the  action.  The  English  writeis  assert  that  the 
French  entered  the  harbour  that  very  night.  Vice-Admiral  Bouet-Wil- 
laumez  and  the  French  authorities  of  the  time  assert  that  Suffren 
signalled  to  chase  the  English,  but  that  they  got  away  ;  and  that  the 
French  entered  Trincomali  the  next  morning.  Truth  would  appear  to 
be  that  both  sides  were  thoroughly  exhausted,  and  were  glad  to  discon- 
tinue the  battle  ;  that  both  anchored  that  night  near  to  where  they  had 
fought,  and  that  the  French  entered  the  harbour  early  in  the  morning. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  65 

Such  was  the  great  sea  fight  off  Trincomali.  That  the 
majority  of  the  French  captains  behaved  disgracefully  was 
broadly  asserted  by  Suffren,  and  was  admitted  by  his 
adversaries.  In  the  English  accounts  published  in  India 
at  that  period  those  captains  were  stigmatised  as  being 
*'  unworthy  to  serve  so  great  a  man,"  whilst  even  in  the 
Calcutta  Gazette  it  was  admitted  that  Suffren  had  been 
very  badly  seconded.  There  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt 
that  he  was  right  in  saying  as  he  did  in  the  letter  I  have 
already  referred  to,  that  if  all  had  fought  like  the  captain 
of  the  Illustre  he  would  have  mastered  Southern  India. 
As  it  was,  the  battle  was  not  without  his  effect  on  the 
campaign. 

The  Madras  Government  was  so  sensible  of  the 
damages  sustained  by  the  English  fleet,  and  so  cognizant 
of  the  enterprising  spirit  of  the  French  commodore, 
that  they  ordered  their  army  to  fall  back  on  Madras. 
Had  there  been  at  the  head  of  the  French  land  forces  a 
man  possessing  but  the  atom  of  a  brain,  the  dream  of 
Dupleix,  of  Lally,  and  of  Suffren,  might  even  then  have 
been  realised  ! 

The  consequences  to  some  of  the  French  captains 
were  serious.  On  the  13th  September  de  Tromelin  of 
the  Annihal,  de  St.  Felix  of  the  Artesien,  and  de  la 
Landelle  of  the  Bizarre,  were  shipped  off  the  Isle  of 
France.  They  were  accompanied  by  de  Galles  of  the 
Petit  Annibal,  whose  health  rendered  necessary  the 
change. 

The   French    fleet   having    repaired    damages,    and 


66  FRENCH   MARINERS 

having  lost  one  of  its  vessels  (V  Orient)  ^  which  struck  on 
a  rock  the  morning  after  the  action,  sailed  from 
Trincomali  on  the  30th  September,  and  arrived  ojQf 
Kadalur  on  the  4th  October.  Here  Suffren  had  the 
misfortune  to  lose  the  Bizarre  which,  taken  too  near  the 
shore,  ran  aground.  On  the  15th,  he  set  out  with  the 
remainder  ©f  his  ships  to  winter  at  Achin.  He  arrived 
there  on  the  7th  November. 

It  is  time  now  to  take  a  glance  at  the  land  operations. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  57 


V. 

We  left  the  French  auxiliary  land  force  under  Duchemin 
in  the  strongly  fortified  position  of  Kalinur, — a  position 
in  which  Haidar  Ali  had  left  them  in  disgust  at  the 
conduct  of  their  commander,  to  go  in  person  with  his 
own  troops  alone  to  baffle  the  designs  of  Coote  on  Arni 
(2nd  June,  1782).  We  have  seen  how  he  accomplished 
that  task.  Shortly  after  the  action  which  took  place 
before  that  fortress,  and  the  more  trifling  skirmishes 
that  followed,  the  English  army  retired  to  the  vicinity  of 
Madras. 

P  On  his  side  Haidar  Ali  cantoned  his  main  army  on 
the  high  ground  near  the  river  Poni,  sixteen  miles  north 
of  Arcot,  conducting  thence  the  siege  of  Vellor.  Thence 
also  he  despatched  his  son  Tippu,  with  a  considerable 
force,  to  counteract  the  manoeuvres  of  the  English  on 
the  western  coast.  The  French  auxiliary  force  under 
Duchemin  remained  intrenched  near  Kadalur  in  a  state 
of  complete  inactivity.  Here  on  the  13th  September 
Duchemin,  who  had  been  long  ailing,  died.  He  was 
succeeded  by  Count  d*Offelize,  the  colonel  of  the  regiment 
of  Austrasia,  a  man  respected  for  his  judgment  and 
good  sense. 


58  FRENCH    MARINERS 

But  it  was  soon  seen  that  active  hostilities  had  by  no 
means  ceased.  Taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of 
Haidar  at  Kadaliir,  whither  he  had  repaired  for  his 
interview  with  the  French  commodore,  Sir  Eyre  Coote 
had  succeeded  by  a  sudden  and  rapid  march,  in  intro- 
ducing a  six  month^s  supply  of  stores  and  ammunition 
into  the  threatened  fortress  of  Vellor.  Haidar,  who  had 
too  late  received  intelligence  of  his  enemy's  movement, 
hastened  to  attempt  to  defeat  it,  but  arrived  only  in 
time  to  witness  its  successful  execution.  Haidar  then 
returned  to  his  camp  on  the  river  Poni.  Coote,  waiting 
until  the  excitement  caused  by  his  recent  raid  should  have 
subsided,  thought  it  might  just  be  possible  to  steal  a 
march  upon  the  ruler  of  Mysore,  and,  pouncing  upon 
Kadaliir,  not  only  to  seize  that  fortified  depot,  but  to 
destroy  at  a  blow  the  French  auxiliary  force.  He  had 
every  hope  that  in  this  attempt  he  would  be  supported 
by  the  frigate  and  transports  containing  stores  and  a 
battering  train,  which  had  been  expedited  from  Madras 
for  that  purpose.     He  therefore  attempted  it. 

Succeeding  in  eluding  the  vigilance  of  Haidar,  Coote 
found  himself,  on  the  6th  September,  on  the  red  hills 
near  Pondichery.  He  commanded  thence  a  complete 
view  of  the  sea.  But  to  his  disappointment  not  a  sail 
was  to  be  seen.  There  was  but  a  march  between  him 
and  the  French  encampment.  Without  a  battering 
train,  however,  the  chances  of  success  were  slight,  and 
repulse  would  be  fatal,  for  Haidar  would  not  long  delay 
to  act  on  his  communications.     As  it  was,  even,  his 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  59 

position  was  full  of  peril.  Still  he  maintained  it  for 
some  days,  straining  his  eyes  towards  the  sea.  Nor  did 
he  cease  to  hope,  until  an  express  from  Madras  informed 
him  that  Trincomali  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  that  the  fleet,  badly  treated  in  an  encounter 
before  that  place,  was  in  full  sail  for  Madras.  He  at 
once  resigned  hope  and  fell  back  on  the  presidency  town. 
Seldom,  it  may  be  safely  affirmed,  have  English 
interests  in  Southern  India  been  exposed  to  greater 
danger  than  they  were  on  this  occasion.  Haidar  was 
encamped  in  an  impregnable  position  within  easy 
distance  of  Madras  ;  two  thousand  of  the  famed 
horsemen  of  Mysore  encircled  the  <japital  endeavouring 
to  cut  off  supplies  ;  a  large  addition  to  the  French  land 
force  was  momentarily  expected ;  the  fleet,  by  the 
capture  of  Trincomali,  had  been  deprived  of  the  only 
possible  place  of  refuge  on  the  Coromandel  coast  during 
the  N.E.  monsoon,  then  about  to  break:  and,  added  to 
all,  a  famine,  such  as  had  not  been  known  for  years,  was 
devastating  the  country.*     It  seemed  that  it  required 

*  A  contemporary,  the  author  of  Transactions  in  India^  writing  tliree 
years  after  the  event,  thus  describes  the  famine  and  its  consequences  : 
"  At  this  moment  a  famine  raged  in  Madras  and  every  part  of  the  Car- 
natic,  and  by  the  tempest  now  described,  all  foreign  resources  that 
depended  on  an  intercourse  by  sea  were  at  an  end.  *  *  *  The  ^ 
roads,  the  outlets  and  even  the  streets  (of  Madras)  were  everywhere 
choked  up  with  heaps  of  dead  and  crowds  of  the  dying.  Two  hundred 
at  least  of  the  natives  perished  every  day  in  the  streets  and  the 
suburbs.  *  *  *  j^n  -y^as  done  which  private  charity  could  do ;  but 
it  was  a  whole  people  in  beggary  ;  a  nation  which  stretched  out  its  hand 
for  food.  *  *  *  For  eighteen  months  did  this  destruction  rage  from 
the  gates  of  Madras  to  the  gates  of  Tanjor." 


60 


FRENCH   MARINERS 


but  one  energetic  push  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to 
make  the  whole  edifice  of  British  supremacy  topple  over. 

The  damages  sustained  by  the  English  ships  in  the 
action  off  Trincomali  rendered  it  dangerous  for  them  to 
wait  the  first  burst  of  the  monsoon  in  the  open  roadstead 
of  Madras.  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  therefore,  immediately 
after  his  arrival,  announced  to  the  Governor,  Lord 
Macartney,  his  intention  to  take  his  fleet  round  to 
Bombay  as  soon  as  he  should  be  able  to  patch  up  the 
injured  ships.  In  vain  did  the  Governor  remonstrate. 
Sir  Edward  Hughes  was  obdurate,  and  rightly  obdurate. 
He  knew  well  the  force  of  the  monsoon  and  his  inability 
to  brave  it.     He  therefore  adhered  to  his  resolution. 

His  efforts  to  put  his  ships  in  order,  to  re-victual  and 
re-equip  them,  were  stimulated  not  less  by  the  close 
proximity  of  the  monsoon,  than  by  a  report  which 
reached  Madras  that  Suffren  was  about  to  make  an 
attempt  on  Negapatam.*  With  all  his  efforts,  however, 
Hughes  could  not  sail  before  the  15th  October  ;  but  on 
the  15th  October  he  sailed. 

The  morning  of  the  15th  had  been  threatening, 
showing  every  indications  of  a  storm.  The  result  did 
not  belie  the  promise.  The  following  morning  the  long 
line  of  coast  off  Madras  was  strewed  with  wrecks ; 
many  vessels  foundered,  some  were  driven  on  shore. 
Of  the  small  craft  containing  the  rice  supplies  which  had 
been  sent  from  the  more  northern  ports  and  roadsteads, 
not  a  single  one  remained. 

*  He  had  been  seen  off  Negapatam  on  the  1st  October. 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  61 

The  ships  of  Sb  Edward  Hughes  though  they  escaped 
absolute  destruction  met  with  little  short  of  it.  For  a 
whole  month  no  two  ships  of  the  fleet  could  speak  with 
each  other.  The  Superb,  which  carried  the  admiral's 
flag,  had  been  at  an  early  date  reduced  to  such  a 
condition  that  Sir  Edward  took  the  first  opportunity  to 
shift  his  flag  to  the  Sultan.  They  were  upwards  of  two 
months  in  making  the  voyage  to  Bombay.  And  when 
the  admiral  arrived  there  on  the  20th  December,  he 
arrived  with  a  shattered  fleet  and  with  sickly  crews.* 

Four  days  after  the  departure  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes 
from  Madras,  Sir  Eobert  Bickerton  arrived  there  with 
five  ships  of  war  and  a  large  number  of  transports 
having  on  board  about  4000  infantry  and  340  cavalry. 
Having  landed  these  he,  too,  sailed  for  Bombay. 

Meanwhile  Sufiren  had  arrived  at  Achin  (7th 
November).  He  stayed  there  till  the  15th  January, 
engaged  in  refitting  his  ships,  in  attending  to  his  crews, 
and  in  sending  cruisers  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  where 
they  made  some  important  captures.!  Early  in  January 
he  heard  of  the  death  of  Haidar  Ali  (7th  December.) 
He   determined   therefore   to    return    at    once   to   the 

*  It  is  a  curious  circumstance  connected  with  the  law  of  storms,  first 
that  Suffren,  who  left  Kadaltir  the  same  day  as  that  on  which  Sir  E. 
Hughes  left  Madras,  experienced  only  fine  weather.  He  noticed  the 
coming  storm  and  avoided  it ;  that  Sir  R.  Bickerton  reached  Madras 
with  five  sail  of  the  line  on  the  19th  October  without  experiencing  bad 
weather ;  that  he  left  it,  the  very  day  he  had  landed  his  troops,  for 
Bombay,  and  arrived  there  some  weeks  before  Sir  E.  Hughes  without 
experiencing  any  bad  weather  in  transit. 

+  Amongst  others  the  Coventry,  a  frigate  carrying  32  guns. 


62  FRENCH   MARINERS 

Coromandel  coast  to  concert  fresh  measures  with  Tippu 
Sultan. 

Suffren,  sailing  on  the  15th  January,  arrived  off 
Kadalur  early  in  February.  He  was  surprised  to  find 
there  neither  tidings  of  Bussy,  nor  any  news  regarding 
two  ships  of  his  fleet,  the  Annihal  and  Bellona,  which 
he  had  sent  to  cruise  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  He  stayed 
there  but  a  few  days  ;  then,  having  detached  two  of  his 
ships,  the  St,  Michel  and  the  Coventry,  towards  Madras 
to  intercept  an  English  convoy,  he  sailed  for  Trincomali, 
and  arrived  there  on  the  23rd  February. 

Here  he  was  joined  not  only  by  his  missing  ships, 
but,  on  the  10th  March,  by  the  squadron  which  was 
escorting  Bussy,  consisting  of  three  line  of  battle  ships, 
one  frigate  and  thirty-two  transports. 

The  troops  under  the  command  of  the  Marquis  do 
Bussy,  consisting  of  about  2300  men,*  were  escorted  to 
the  Coromandel  coast  and  were  landed  safely  at  Porto 
Novo  on  the  19th  March.  I  propose  now  to  show  the 
state  in  which  the  new  commander  found  the  affairs  of 
the  French  and  their  ally. 

The  English  having  concluded  peace  with  the 
Marhatas  had,  early  in  the  year,  made  in  communi- 
cation with  them  so  strong  a  demonstration  on  the 
western  coast,  that  Tippu  had  been  forced  to  start  with 
the  bulk  of  his  army  to  defend  his  own  dominions.    But 

*  They  consisted  of  detachments  from  the  regiment  de  la  Mark, 
from  the  regiment  d'Aquitaine,  from  the  Royal  Roussillon,  and  of  300 
artillery  men. 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  63 

before  this  had  happened  General  Stuart  had  succeeded 
Sir  Eyre  Coote  in  command  of  the  English  forces  at 
Madras.  Keinforced,  as  we  have  seen,  Stuart  moved  in 
February  on  to  Karanguli  and  Wandewash,  the  fortifi- 
cations of  which  places  he  destroyed.  The  Mysorean 
army  under  Tippu  and  the  French  auxiliaries  under 
d'Offelize  were  occupying  a  position  at  the  time  within 
twelve  miles  of  Wandewash,  and  an  action  between  their 
army  and  the  English  seemed  at  one  time  imminent ; 
but  Tippu's  preparations  had  not  been  completed  when 
Stuart  offered  battle,  and  when  Tippu's  plans  had 
matured  Stuart  had  retired.  It  was  immediately  after 
this  that  Tippu  started  with  the  bulk  of  his  army  and 
one  French  regiment  for  Mysore,  leaving  3000  infantry 
and  7000  cavalry  at  the  disposal  of  d'Offelize. 

The  English  authorities  still  clung  to  the  plan  of 
wresting,  by  a  combined  attack  by  sea  and  land,  the 
fortified  depot  of  Kadalur  from  the  French.  Arrange- 
ments having  been  concerted  with  Sir  Edward  Hughes, 
Stuart  set  out  from  the  vicinity  of  Madras  on  the  21st 
April,  at  the  head  of  about  15,000  men.*  As  he 
advanced  to  Wandewash,  d'Ofi'elize,  whose  European 
force  had  been  reduced  to  about  600  men,  fell  back  in 
the  direction  of  Kadalur. 

Bussy,  we  have  seen,  arrived  at  Kadalur  on  the  19th 
March,  in  plenty  of  time,  by  an  active  initiative,  to  pre- 
vent the  investiture  of  that  place.     But  the  Bussy  who 

*  He  set  out  with  about  3000  Europeans  and  11,500  natives,  but  was 
joined  almost  immediately  by  600  Europeans  just  landed. 


64  FKENCH    MARINERS 

returned  to  India  in  1783  was  no  longer  the  hardy 
warrior  who  had  electrified  Southern  India  in  the  years 
between  1754  and  1760 ;  who  had  made  of  the  Subadar 
of  the  Dekhan  a  French  prefect,  and  whose  capacity  to 
dare  had  supplied  the  want  of  soldiers.  If  the  Bussy 
of  1756,  by  his  genius,  his  activity,  his  daring,  his 
success,  foreshadowed  in  some  respects  the  illustrious 
warrior  who,  just  forty  years  later,  displayed  the  same 
qualities  to  conquer  Italy,  the  Bussy  of  1783,  corrupted 
by  wealth,  enervated  by  luxury,  and  careful  only  of  his 
ease,  more  resembled  that  scion  of  the  House  of  Bourbon, 
once  his  sovereign,  who  consecrated  all  his  hours  to  his 
mistresses,  who  left  the  nomination  of  the  generals  of 
the  armies  of  France  to  a  de  Pompadour,  and  who 
banished  a  Choiseul  on  the  requisition  of  a  Du  Barry ! 

Bussy,  then,  instead  of  acting  with  vigour,  did  nothing. 
He  did  not  even  show  himself  to  his  men.  He  kept  him- 
self— to  borrow  the  language  of  one  of  his  countrymen — 
"  invisible  in  his  tent  like  a  rich  Nabob.'*  Instructed 
by  Colonel  d'Offelize  of  the  advance  of  the  English,  and 
informed  by  that  officer  that  he  pledged  himself  to  main- 
tain his  force  at  Permacol,  if  he  were  but  supported, 
Bussy  not  only  refused,  but  abandoned  every  outlying 
fortification  and  fell  back  within  Kadalur. 

The  fort  of  Kadalur  was  a  quadrangle  of  unequal 
sides,  extremely  weak  in  many  respects,  and  possessing 
an  indifferent  flanking  defence.  From  two  to  four  miles 
from  its  western  face  inland  were  the  hills  of  Banda- 
palam.     A  little  estuary  formed  by  the  sea  covered  the 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  65 

eastern  and  southern  faces.  It  was  defended  by  the 
whole  French  force,  reduced  now,  by  sickness  and  de- 
tachments lent  to  Tippti,  to  2300  Europeans,  and  by  a 
Mysorean  force  of  3000  infantry  and  7000  horse. 

The  English  army  arrived  before  Kadaltir  on  the  4th 
June.  On  the  7th,  secure  of  the  support  of  the  fleet, 
which  had  arrived  at  Porto  Novo,  it  made  a  circuit  round 
the  hill  and  took  up  a  position  two  miles  southward 
from  the  fort,  its  left  resting  on  the  hills,  its  right  on 
the  estuary.  In  making  this  circuit,  Stuart  so  exposed 
his  left  to  the  enemy,  that  the  major  of  the  regiment  of 
Austrasia,  de  Boisseaux,  ventured  to  disturb  the  ''French 
*'  Nabob"  in  his  tent,  to  point  out  the  capital  crime  the 
English  were  committing.  But  Bussy,  not  with  diffi- 
culty, restrained  himself.  He  had  arrived  at  a  time  of 
life  when  men  no  longer  attack. 

It  was  only  when  Stuart  had  definitely  taken  up  his 
position  to  the  south  that  Bussy  formed  up  his  force 
outside  Kadalur,  in  a  line  nearly  parallel  to  the  enemy, 
and  began  to  cover  it  with  intrenchments. 

On  the  13th  General  Stuart  ordered  an  attack  on  the 
right  of  the  French  line  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Kelly.  The  attack,  after  gaining  two  positions,  was,, 
thanks  to  the  skill  and  energy  of  Colonel  d'Oifelize, 
repulsed  with  great  loss  at  the  third.  The  success  of 
the  French  seemed  assured,  but  they  pursued  the 
retiring  enemy  too  far,  and  General  Stuart,  noticing  his 
opportunity  came  up  between  them  and  their  intrench- 
ments, and  gained  a  position  which  would  enable  him, 

5 


66  FRENCH   MARINERS 

as  soon  as  his  battering  train,  then  on  board  the  fleet, 
should  be  landed,  to  command  the  entire  French  line  of 
defence.  Upon  this  the  fight  ceased,  and  Bussy,  who 
for  the  day  had  exchanged  his  tent  for  a  palanquin, 
withdrew  his  troops  during  the  night  within  Kadaltir. 

All  this  time  the  sea  had  been  commanded  by  the 
English  fleet.  But  on  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which 
the  French  had  been  driven  within  Kadalur,  a  circum- 
stance occurred  which  brings  again  upon  the  scene  the 
illustrious  French  admiral*  at  the  hour  of  the  direst 
needs  of  his  country. 

We  left  Suff'ren  on  the  19th  March  landing  the  army 
of  Bussy  at  Porto  Novo.  Coasting  then  southwards,  he 
arrived  on  the  11th  April,  after  a  slow  and  difficult 
journey,  within  sight  of  Trincomali.  In  spite  of  the 
presence  of  the  English  off"  the  coast  he  entered  the 
harbour,  and  at  once  set  to  work  to  refit  his  fleet.  Of  his 
fifteen  ships  all  but  five  were  still  under  repair,  when,  on 
the  24th  May,  the  English  fleet  again  passed  Trinco- 
mali in  full  sail  to  the  south.  Imagining  that  this 
demonstration  was  but  a  feint  to  draw  him  towards 
Kadalur  so  that  Trincomali  might  be  captured  in  his 
absence,  Suffren  contented  himself  with  sending  some 
transports  escorted  by  frigates  to  Kadalur,  and  continued 
his  repairs.  Again,  on  the  31st  May,  the  English  fleet 
appeared,  bearing  northwards,  and  this  time  it  even  made 
a  demonstration  to  attack  the  harbour.     But  it  was  only 

*  Suffren  had  been  promoted  in  March,  1783,  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant' 
general^  a  title  corresponding  to  that  of  vice-admiral. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  67 

a  demonstration.  At  the  end  of  two  days  Sir  Edward 
Hughes  went  on  to  take  up  at  Porto  Novo  a  position  which 
was  to  support  the  attack  of  the  land  army  on  Kadalur. 
Two  days  later  the  French  frigates  and  transports  which 
had  been  sent  to  convey  stores  to  Kadalur  returned  to 
Trincomali.  The  senior  captain  of  the  expedition  brought 
with  him  a  letter  from  Bussy,  written  early  in  June, 
painting  his  needs  and  imploring  assistance. 

Suffren  was  not  the  man  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  an 
exhortation  of  that  nature.  It  is  true  that  he  knew  his 
fleet  to  be  inferior  in  number,  in  condition,  and  in  weight 
of  metal  to  that  of  the  enemy;*  but  he  felt  that  the 
interests  of  France  would  be  better  served  by  his  pro- 
voking an  unequal  contest,  the  issue  of  which  might 
however  be  favourable,  than  by  allowing  her  last  army 
to  succumb  without  a  blow.t  He  therefore  did  not 
hesitate  for  a  moment.  He  did  not  even  consult  any 
one ;  but  summoning  on  board  the  flagship  the  captains 
of  his  fleet,  he  informed  them  in  a  few  spirit-stirring 
words  that  the  army  at  Kadalur  was  lost  unless  the  fleet 
went  to  succour  it ;  and  that  the  glory  of  saving  it  was 
reserved  for  them;  and  that,  whatever  might  be  the 
result,  they  would  at  least  attempt  it. 

These  words  were  received  by  the  assembled  captains 
with  the  greatest  enthusiasm.      Instantly  every  hand 

*  The  French  fleet  consisted  of  fifteen  ships  of  war  and  one  frigate 
carrying  1008  guns;  the  English  of  eighteen  ships  of  war,  carrying, 
1202  guns. 

t  The  conduct  of  Suffren  on  this  occasion  may  well  be  contrasted  with 
that  of  d'Ache  in  1761. — Vide  History  of  the  French  in  India, 

5   B 


68  FRENCH    MARINERS 

lent  itself  to  the  work.  The  crews  of  all  but  three  of  the 
frigates  were  transferred  to  the  line  of  battle  ships  to 
bring  up  the  complement  of  these  to  working  capacity. 
On  the  11th  June  the  fleet  left  Trincomali.  On  the 
evening  of  the  13th  it  came  within  sight  of  Kadalur  to 
gladden  by  its  appearance  the  hearts  of  the  soldiers  who 
had  been  forced  that  day  to  retire  within  its  fortifications. 

Sir  Edward  Hughes  was  at  Porto  Novo.  His  light 
ships  having  signalled  the  French  fleet,  he  at  once  stood 
in  for  Kadalur,  and  anchored  in  front  of  it.  The  14th 
and  15th,  the  state  of  the  wind  rendered  it  impossible 
for  Suffren  to  force  on  an  action,  and  the  English 
admiral,  rightly  regarding  the  capture  of  Kadalur  as  the 
main  object  of  the  campaign,  conceived  that  he  best 
contributed  to  the  accomplishment  of  that  object  by 
covering  the  besieged  fort.  On  the  16th,  however,  the 
wind  changed,  and  the  French  fleet  bore  down  on  its 
enemy.  The  English  admiral  at  once  weighed  anchor 
and  stood  to  sea,  hoping  that  by  standing  out  and 
catching  the  light  breezes  which  he  thought  he  detected 
in  the  open,  he  might  bear  down  in  his  turn  and  take 
Suffren  at  disadvantage.  But  this  did  not  happen,  and 
Suffren,  still  bearing  towards  the  coast,  reaped  the  fruit 
of  his  happy  audacity  by  occupying,  without  firing  a  shot, 
the  place  in  front  of  Kadalur  which  had  just  been  vacated 
by  his  English  rival ! 

It  is  impossible  to  speak  in  terms  of  too  high  com- 
mendation of  this  display  of  combined  genius  and  daring. 
To  beat  on  the  open  sea  a  fleet  of  equal  or  of  greater 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  69 

numbers  is  no  doubt  a  splendid  achievement ;  but  it  is  an 
achievement  in  which  the  lower  nature  of  man,  that 
which  is  termed  brute  force,  has  a  considerable  share. 
But  to  gain  all  the  effect  of  a  victory  without  fighting,  to 
dislodge  an  enemy  superior  in  numbers  from  a  position 
of  vital  importance  without  firing  a  shot — that  indeed  is 
an  exercise  of  the  highest  faculties  of  man's  higher 
nature,  a  feat  of  intellectual  power  not  often  bestowed, 
but  generally  combined,  when  given,  with  that  strength 
of  nerve  which  knows  when  and  how  to  dare.* 

The  clocks  of  Kadalur  were  striking  half-past  eight 
when  Suffren  anchored  before  the  town.  With  the 
prescience  of  a  true  commander  he  had  discovered  that 
of  the  two  enemies  before  him  it  was  necessary  to  drive 
off  the  one  before  attacking  the  other.  Were  he  to 
lend  his  sailors  to  join  in  an  attack  on  General  Stuart, 
he  might  at  any  moment  be  assailed  at  a  disadvantage 

*  It  is  curious  to  note  the  manner  in  which  this  achievement  is  alluded 
to  by  English  writers.  Wilks,  with  his  usual  straightforwardness,  writes 
thus  :  "  On  the  16th,  he  (Hughes)  weighed  anchor,  with  the  expectation 
of  bringing  the  enemy  to  close  action,  but  such  was  the  superior  skill  or 
fortune  of  M.  Suffren  that  on  the  same  night,  at  half-past  eight,  he 
anchored  abreast  of  the  fort,  and  the  dawn  of  day  presented  to  the 
English  army  before  Cuddalore  the  mortifying  spectacle  of  the  French 
fleet  in  the  exact  position  abandoned  by  their  own  on  the  previous  day, 
the  English  fleet  being  invisible  and  its  situation  unknown."  The 
author  of  Memoirs  of  the  late  War  in  Asia,  himself  a  combatant,  speaks 
of  the  French  fleet  as  "  a  crazy  fleet,  consisting  of  fifteen  sail  of  ships, 
half  of  them  in  very  bad  condition."  He  merely  mentions  that  "it 
occupied  the  place  vacated  by  Sir  E.  Hughes'  fleet,  consisting  of  eighteen 
coppered  ships  (their  crews  greatly  debilitated  by  sickness)."  Campbell 
and  the  writer  of  the  Transactions  pass  over  the  event  in  silence.  Even 
Mill  ignores  it ;  but  it  is  a  well-attested  fact. 


70  FRENCH   MARINERS 

by  Admiral  Hughes.  Instead  therefore  of  disembarking 
his  own  men  he  embarked  1000  soldiers  to  strengthen 
his  ships. 

This  embarkation  took  place  on  the  17th.  On  the 
18th  Suffren  weighed  anchor  and  stood  out,  but  neither 
on  that  day  nor  on  the  day  following  could  he  succeed 
in  bringing  the  enemy  to  action.  On  the  20th  Sir 
Edward  Hughes,  whose  men  were  suffering  from  scurvy, 
and  whose  supplies  of  water  were  running  short,* 
found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  accept  a  contest  or  to 
bear  up  for  Madras.     He  chose  the  former  alternative. 

In  the  contest  which  was  about  to  commence  Suifren 
was  in  number  of  ships,  in  their  condition,  and  in 
weight  of  metal  considerably  inferior  to  the  English.! 
On  the  other  hand  his  ships  were  better  manned.  But 
that   which  gave  him  the  greatest  confidence  was  the 

*  He  had  lost,  during  little  more  than  a  month,  nearly  3000  men 
from  the  same  cause.  It  is  to  this  that  the  English  writers  attribute  his 
unwillingness  to  accept  an  engagement. 

+  The  English  fleet  consisted  of  the  Gibraltar^  80,  the  Defence^  74, 
the  Hero,  74,  the  Sultan,  74,  the  Superb,  74,  the  Cumberland,  74,  the 
Monarca,  70,  the  Burford,  70,  the  Inflexible,  64,  the  Exeter,  64,  the 
Worcester,  64,  the  Africa,  64,  the  Sceptre,  64,  the  Magnamine,  64,  the 
Eagle,  64,  the  Monmouth,  64,  the  Bristol,  50,  the  Isis,  50. 

The  French  fleet,  of  the  Fendant,  74,  the  Argonaute,  74,  the  HSroSf 
74,  the  Illustre,  74,  the  Annibal,  74,  the  Sphinx,  64,  the  Brillant,  64, 
the  Ajax,  64,  the  Vengeur,  64,  the  Severe,  64,  the  Hardi,  64,  the  Artesien, 
64,  the  St.  Michel,  60,  the  Flamand,  50,  the  Petit  Annibal,  50,  and  the 
Consolante  frigate,  40,  brought  into  the  line.  The  French  had  also 
three  frigates,  the  Fine,  the  Cleopdtre,  and  the  Coventry,  On  board  of 
one  of  these,  in  consequence  of  an  express  order  of  the  king,  provoked 
by  the  capture  of  Count  de  Grasse  in  his  contest  with  Rodney,  Sufiren 
hoisted  his  flag  during  the  action.  The  English  had  also  two  frigates^ 
the  Active  and  the  Medea, 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  ^  71 

quality  of  his  captains.  For  the  first  time  the  ships  of 
his  fleet  were  commanded  by  men  whom  he  could 
trust. 

At  quarter-past  four  in  the  afternoon,  the  two  fleets, 
having  come  within  range,  almost  simultaneously  opened 
fire.  Immediately  afterwards  the  Flamand,  50, 
attempting  to  pierce  the  enemy's  line,  was  attacked  on 
both  sides  by  the  Exeter  and  the  Inflexible,  Her 
captain,  de  Salvart,  was  killed,  but  the  first  lieutenant 
succeeded  in  rescuing  her  from  her  perilous  position. 

Whilst  this  was  being  attempted  the  Heros  and 
Illustre  engaged  at  once  the  Superb,  the  Monarca  and 
the  Burforcl ;  the  Argonaute  the  Sultan;  the  Petit 
Annibal  the  Africa ;  the  Vengeur  the  Magnamine ; 
the  Hardi  at  once  the  Bristol  and  the  Monmouth.  In 
the  rear  division  the  Fendant  encountered  first  the 
Inflexible  and  then  the  Gibraltar,  whilst  the  Sphinx 
tackled  the  Defence.  The  other  ships  of  both  fleets 
were  not  less  actively  engaged. 

At  about  half-past  five  the  mizen  topmast  of  the 
Fendant  caught  fire,  and  her  commander  was  forced  to 
take  her  for  a  moment  out  of  the  line.  The  Gibraltar, 
with  whom  she  had  been  engaged,  seized  this  opportunity 
to  attempt  to  break  the  French  line,  but  the  Flamand 
covered  her  consort  and  kept  the  enemy  at  bay  till  the 
fire  was  extinguished,  and  the  Fendant  returned  to  her 
position. 

The  murderous  contest  was  kept  up  on  both  sides 
until  past  seven  o'clock,  when  darkness  supervened  and 


72  FRENCH   MARINERS 

the  firing  ceased.  Neither  fleet  had  lost  a  ship,  both 
had  been  severely  handled ;  but  the  practical  victory 
would  be  naturally  to  that  which  would  be  able  to 
compel  the  other  to  retire  from  the  vicinity  of  Kadalur. 
That  question  was  soon  decided. 

During  the  night  the  French  fleet  beat  about  endea- 
vouring to  remain  close  to  Kadalur,  but  the  currents 
took  it  down  to  Pondichery.  There,  in  the  course  of 
of  the  following  day,  it  anchored  but  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  22nd,  his  light  ships  signalling  the 
English  fleet  bearing  N.N.E.,  Sufi'ren  immediately 
weighed  anchor  and  stood  out  in  pursuit.  When, 
however,  he  reached  Kadalur  the  enemy  was  no  longer 
in  sight ;'  Sir  E.  Hughes  had  borne  up  for  Madras.* 

Thus  then  had  Sufi'ren  by  combined  skill  and  valour 
attained  one  of  his  objects.  He  had  driven  one  enemy 
from  the  coast ;  he  would  now  aid  in  forcing  the  other  to 
retreat.  That  same  evening,  the  23rd  June,  he  landed 
not  only  the  1000  soldiers  he  had  borrowed  from  the 
fort,  but  added  to  them  2400  men  from  his  sailors. 

More  he  could  not  do.     He  could  command  and  win 

*  The  impartial  historian,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilks,  by  no  means  a 
lover  of  the  French,  states  that  "  The  English  Admiral,  after  receiving 
the  detailed  reports  of  the  state  of  each  ship,  found  the  whole  of  his 
equipments  so  entirely  crippled,  his  crews  so  lamentably  reduced,  and 
the  want  to  water  so  extreme,  that  he  deemed  if  indispensable  to  incur 
the  mortification  of  bearing  away  for  the  roads  of  Madras  whilst  Suffren, 
wresting  from  his  enemies  the  praise  of  superior  address  and  even  the 
claim  of  victory,  if  victory  belong  to  Mm  luho  attains  his  object,  re- 
sumed his  position  in  the  anchorage  of  Cuddalore."  The  italics  are 
my  own.  Campbell  and  the  author  of  the  Transactions  are,  as  usual, 
vague  when  the  matter  refers  to  the  success  of  the  French. 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  78 

battles  on  sea.  He  could  send  his  men  on  shore,  but  on 
land  his  own  men,  he  himself  even,  came  under  the 
orders  of  Bussy.  And  we  have  seen  what  the  Bussy  of 
1783  was.  Yet  this  man,  once  so  distinguished, 
had  now  an  opportunity  at  the  like  of  which  he  would 
have  clutched  in  his  younger  days.  Covered  by  the  fleet, 
he  could  make  an  assault  on  the  enemy — the  landing 
of  whose  battering  train  had  been  prevented  by  the 
success  of  Suffren — with  numbers  superior  to  their  own. 
Suifren  urged  him  to  this  course ;  d'Offelize  urged  him; 
the  officers  of  his  staff  urged  him.  But  he  would  not. 
He  let  the  golden  moments  slip.  Then  Suffren,  dis- 
gusted, returned  on  board  his  ship,  asking  Bussy  as  he 
left  him  *'  if  he  expected  that  he  could  take  his  ships  to 
*'  beat  the  enemy  on  shore." 

At  last,  after  many  hesitations,  when  General  Stuart 
had  recovered  from  the  moral  depression  which  the 
departure  of  the  English  fleet  and,  with  it,  his  battering 
train,  had  caused  him,  Bussy  determined  to  risk  a  sortie. 
But  a  sortie  to  succeed  must  be  composed  of  picked 
men,  and  those  men  must  be  well  commanded.  Bussy 
neglected  both  these  necessary  precautions.  The 
men  he  ordered  for  the  work  were  not  only  not 
specially  selected,  but  their  number  was  insufficient 
for  the  purpose;  their  leader  moreover,  the  Chevalier 
de  Dumas,  was  the  least  trusted  officer  in  the 
French  force.*     The  result  corresponded  to  the  plan. 

*  C'etait  un  vil  intrigant  d'une  incapacity  reconnue. — Roux.  Wilks 
says  he  was  inconsolable  at  not  having  been  wounded. 


74  FRENCH   MARINERS 

The  sortie,  made  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  of 
the  26th  June,  was  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  about  forty 
men  killed,  and  100  taken  prisoners.* 

Notwithstanding  this  repulse,  the  English  general 
was  too  well  aware  of  his  own  comparative  weakness  to 
attempt  an  assault.  He  restricted  himself  therefore  to  a 
blockade,  and  that  of  merely  a  nominal  nature.  The 
French  troops  drew  in  unopposed  all  their  supplies  from 
the  country,  and  Bussy — even  the  Bussy  of  1783 — had 
become  so  emboldened  as  to  talk  of  an  attack  on  the 
besiegers'  camp  with  his  combined  force,  when  suddenly 
the  intelligence  that  the  preliminaries  of  peace  had  been 
signed  in  Europe,  induced  both  contending  parties  to 
agree  to  a  suspension  of  arms. 

This  suspension  assumed  on  the  3rd  September  follow- 
ing a  permanent  character,  by  the  announcement  of  the 
conclusion  of  the  peace  known  in  history  as  the  treaty  of 
Versailles. 

The  suspension  of  arms  was  most  unfortunate  for 
France.  The  army  of  Stuart  before  Kadalur  represented 
the  last  hope  of  the  English  in  Southern  India.  It  was 
reduced  then  by  the  want  of  supplies  to  the  greatest 
extremities.     An  attack  by  the  French  in  force  could 


*  Amongst  the  prisoners  taken  was  Bernadotte,  afterwards  Marshal  of 
France,  Prince  of  Pontecorvo,  and  King  of  Sweden.  He  was  then  a 
sergeant  in  the  regiment  of  Aquitaine.  After  he  had  attained  greatness 
Bernadotte  seized  the  earliest  opportunity  of  expressing  to  Colonel 
Langenheim,  who  commanded  the  German  legion  at  Kadaltir,  and  whom 
he  met  again  in  Hanover,  his  sense  of  the  kindness  with  which  he  had 
been  treated  on  this  occasion. 


ON   THE   INDIAN    SEAS.  75 

have  scarcely  failed  to  annihilate  it.  With  its  destruction 
Madras  and  all  Southern  India  would  have  passed  over 
to  the  French.* 

But  it  was  not  to  be ;  nor,  even  if  it  had  been,  can  it 
be  imagined  that  the  scion  of  the  House  of  Bourbon 
who  then  governed  France,  well-intentioned  though  he 
may  have  been,  would  have  refused  to  restore  it  without 
conditions.  His  predecessor,  after  having  lavished 
French  blood  and  spent  French  treasure  in  a  war  which 
was  costly,  and  in  spite  of  himself  successful,  restored 
at  the  peace  which  followed  t  all  his  conquests,  and 
agreed  even  to  dismiss  his  guest  from  his  hearth,  saying 
he  '^  would  not  treat  as  a  tradesman  but  as  a  king.*' 
This  kingly  method  of  .benefiting  one's  adversaries  at 
the  expense  of  one's  country  would  seem  to  be  an 
heirloom  of  the  House  of  Bourbon.  For,  with  respect 
to  India,  the  treaty  of  Versailles  carried  out  precisely  the 
sam^  principle.  The  war  which  that  treaty  terminated 
had  been  a  most  disastrous  war  for  England.  She 
had  lost,  and  rightly  lost,  her  American  colonies ;  she 
seemed,  for  the  moment,  shorn  of  her  prestige;  the 
French  could  have  insisted  at  least  on  the  restoration  of 
her  possessions  in  India  to  the  status  quo  ante  1761. 
This  was  a  cardinal  point  which  neither  the  Eepublic 

*  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  thus  writes  on  this  subject :  "  It  seems 
probable  that  but  for  the  opportune  occurrence  of  peace  with  France,  the 
South  of  India  would  have  been  lost  to  the  English.  The  annihilation 
of  the  army  at  Cuddalore  would  have  been  followed  by  the  siege  of 
Madras,  and  there  was  little  chance  of  defending  it  successfully  against 
Tippoo  and  the  French." 

+  The  Peace  of  Aix  la  Chapelle. 


76  FRENCH   MARINERS 

nor  the  Empire  would  have  foregone.  But  the  Bourbons 
"  treated  as  kings  and  not  as  traders."  Consequently, 
though  England  had  but  one  army  in  Southern  India, 
and  that  army  was  exposed  to  destruction,  Louis  XVI. 
renounced  every  advantage,  and  allowed  French  India 
to  accept,  after  a  victorious  campaign,  conditions  almost 
ideijtical  with  those  which  had  been  forced  upon  her 
after  the  capture  of  her  capital  in  1761. 

Yet  the  indifference  of  the  ruler  of  France,  noxious  as 
it  was  to  French  interests,  could  not  detract  in  the 
smallest  degree  from  the  merits  of  the  illustrious  man 
who  did,  for  a  time,  restore  French  influence  to  Southern 
India.  That  man  was  the  Bailli*  de  Suffren.  His  five 
contests  with  an  English  fleet,  of  always  nearly  equal, 
once  even  of  greater  force,  stamp  him  as  being  inferior 
to  none  of  the  great  seamen  whom  France  and  England 
had  till  then  produced.  This  has  been  virtually  admitted 
by  the  writers  on  naval  subjects  of  both  nations. 
Mr.  Clerk,  whose  work  on  naval  tactics,  originally 
published  in  1778,  is  said  to  have  inspired  Rodney  with 
the  famous  idea  of  breaking  the  line,  republished,  in 
1790,  an  edition  in  which  he  cites  the  manoeuvres  of 
Suffren  as  constituting  a  lesson  to  all  admirals  to  come, 
and  indicates  him  as  having  been  the  first  commander  to 
introduce  the  principle  of  fighting  at  close  quarters,  sub- 
sequently carried  to  so  great  a  perfection  by  Nelson. 
Vice-Admiral  Bouet  Willaumez,  in   his  work  entitled 

*  In  1782  he  had  been  nominated  Bailli  of  the  order  of  the  Knights 
of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem. 


ON    THE    INDIAN    SEAS.  77 

Batailles  de  terre  et  de  mer,  says  of  Suffren  that  he 
was  ^'  the  first  to  disdain  the  routine  professed  by  the 
"  admirals  of  his  epoch,  consisting  of  ranging  the 
"  squadron  in  one  single  line  of  battle.  He  cared  not 
*'  for  the  traditions  which  required  one  to  fight  at  a 
"  moderate  distance.  He  engaged  within  pistol-shot." 
The  naval  historian,  Dr.  Campbell,  whose  anti-French 
sympathies  are  so  strongly  marked,  is  forced  to  admit 
that  Sufi'ren  was  ''  worthy  of  being  the  rival  and 
'*  opponent  of  Sir  Edward  Hughes."  I  have  already 
cited  the  opinion  of  Colonel  Wilks.  Amongst  all  the 
works  I  have  consulted  on  the  subject  I  have  not  found 
a  divergent  sentiment. 

The  character  of  Suffren  is  thus  justly  summarised  by 
M.  Hennequin,*  *'  To  an  imperturbable  coolness  in 
action,  Suffren  united  an  extreme  ardour  and  activity. 
Courageous  even  to  rashness,  he  showed  an  inflexible 
rigour  towards  officers  whom  he  suspected  of  weakness 
or  cowardice.  In  a  word,  he  united  in  his  person  all 
the  qualities  which  make  a  warrior  illustrious,  a  sailor 
skilful,  and  a  man  esteemed.  Those  who  knew  him, 
and  especially  the  officers  who  sailed  under  his  orders, 
never  pronounce  his  name  even  now  but  with  respect 
and  admiration." 
Suffren  returned  to  France  in  1784,  to  receive  high 
honours  from  his  Sovereign,  but  he  did  not  long  survive 
to  enjoy  them.  He  was  killed  in  a  duel  in  1788  at  the 
age  of  sixty-two. 

*  Essai  historique  sur  la  vie  et  les  campagnes  du  Bailli  de  Suffren. 


78  FRENCH    MARINERS 

Had  he  but  lived,  would  he  have  been  too  old  to  com- 
mand the  fleet  which  fought  Lord  Howe  on  the  1st  June, 
1794  ?  Could  he  have  occupied  with  advantage  the  place  of 
Brueys  and  Yilleneuve  ?  These  are  questions  which  the 
French  at  least,  who  owned  him  and  who  glory  in  him, 
do  ask,  and  which  they  have  a  right  to  ask.  Nor  will 
we — we  English — who  honour  genius,  and  who  recognise 
that  genius  in  the  man  who,  though  a  foreigner,  was 
still  the  precursor  of  our  own  Nelson,  grudge  them  the 
answer  which  their  pride  and  their  patriotism  alike 
dictate. 

Meanwhile  peace  between  the  European  rivals  reigned 
again  in  Southern  India.  By  the  interval  of  nine  years 
which  elapsed  between  the  signature  of  the  treaty  of 
Versailles  and  the  outbreak  of  the  war  of  the  Eevolution 
the  English  profited  to  fix  their  domination  on  a  basis 

4 

SO  substantial  as  to  be  proof  against  further  direct 
hostility  on  the  part  of  their  great  rival.  But  the  indirect 
efforts  which  were  then  attempted  were  coloured  by  a 
tinge  of  romance  almost  entirely  wanting  in  the  history 
I  have  just  recorded. 


BOOK     II. 


THE    ISLE    OF    FRANCE    AND    HER 

PRIVATEERS. 


I. 

Between  the  peace  of  Versailles  and  the  outbreak  of 
the  Eevolutionary  war,  the  French  Marine  was  but 
thinly  represented  on  the  Indian  seas.  But  when  in 
1793,  war  was  declared  between  the  two  nations,  the 
flag  of  the  French  Kepublic,  that  flag  which'  so  soon 
was  *  to  make  the  tour  of  Europe/  appeared  again  to 
animate  those  whom  it  represented  to  fight,  not  on  this 
occasion  for  victory,  but  for  existence. 

For,  indeed,  at  the  outset  of  the  struggle  the  navy  of 
France  was  far  from  being  in  a  condition  to  combat  the 
ships  of  her  ancient  rival  with  any  prospect  of  success. 
The  nobility,  from  which  its  officers  had   been  drawn. 


80  THE    ISLE   OF   FRANCE 

had  emigrated  in  large  numbers,  and  the  democratic 
principle,  which  had  been  introduced  upon  the  ruins  of 
that  which  had  crumbled  away  because  its  foundations 
had  rotted,  had  been  denied  the  opportunity  granted  to 
the  land  forces  of  developing,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
a  perfect  system  of  promotion  and  command.  Never- 
theless, even  under  these  trying  circumstances,  the 
navy  of  France  proved  not  unworthy  of  the  renown  it 
had  inherited  from  Tourville,  from  Duguay-Trouin, 
from  Jean  Bart,  from  de  Forbin,*  and  from  Suffren. 
The  battle  of  the  1st  June,  fought  by  an  untried  admiral, 
with  a  fleet  in  no  way  superior  to  its  enemy  in  numbers 
and  weight  of  metal,  and  newly  officered  from  the 
lowest  to  the  highest  grade,  t  was  indeed  a  defeat,  though 
not  a  very  decisive  defeat ;  yet  who  will  say  that  under 
all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  that  defeat  even  was 
not  glorious  to  the  French  arms  ? 

Another  cause  which   tended  at   this   period  to   the 

*  The  memoirs  of  the  Count  de  Forbin,  Commodore  of  the  French 
Navy  in  the  time  of  Louis  XIV,  were  considered  so  remarkable  that  they 
were  translated  into  English  and  published  in  London  in  the  year  1731. 

+  Rear  Admiral  Kerguelen,  writing  at  the  time,  gives  an  animated 
description  of  the  flagrant  mode  in  which  officers  were  appointed  to  the 
ships  of  war  "  by  charlatans  and  ignorant  empirics."  He  gives  details 
to  prove  his  statements.  Captain  Brenton,  R.N.,  writing  on  the  same 
subject,  says :  "  The  French  fleet  was  no  longer  manned  and  officered  as  in 
the  splendid  times  of  Louis  XIV.  *  *  Most  of  the  seamen  had  been 
marched  to  the  Rhine  and  the  Moselle  to  fill  the  ranks  of  the  army,  and 
their  places  were  supplied  by  wretched  conscripts  and  fishermen.  The 
captains  of  the  line  were  men  totally  unqualified  from  their  habits  for 
such  a  station  ;  they  had  been,  with  few  exceptions,  masters  of  merchant- 
men, and  knew  nothing  of  the  signal  book  or  of  the  mode  of  conducting 
a  ship  of  war." 


AND   HEK   PRIVATEERS. 


81 


demoralisation  and  injury  of  the  French  fleet  was  the 
intense  party-feeHng  which  prevailed  throughout  the 
country.  It  was  this  party-feeling  that  induced  Toulon, 
one  of  the  great  harbours  of  France,  to  revolt  against 
the  established  form  of  government  of  the  country. 
This  revolt  caused  the  loss  to  the  French  of  twenty 
ships  of  the  line  and  twenty-five  frigates.  Of  these, 
three  ships  of  the  line,  one  of  120  guns,  and  twelve 
frigates,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  English  —  not 
conquered  in  fair  fight,  but  betrayed  by  the  partisans  of 
the  used-up  race  which  France  had  expelled. 

France,  then,  thus  heavily  weighted  at  starting,  could 
dream  no  more  of  conquests  on  the  Indian  seas.  She 
could  not  even  defend  her  possessions  on  the  mainland 
of  India.  These  fell  without  a  struggle  to  her  fortunate 
rival.  But  she  could  still  protect  the  islands,  to  the 
chief  of  which  she  had  lent  her  own  fair  name ;  she 
could  still  protect  her  commerce  ;  she  could  still  inflict 
damage  on  the  commerce  of  her  enemy.*  But  to  carry 
out  this  programme  on  the  Indian  waters,  she  had  now 


*  That  she  was  successful  is  shown  by  the  following  tables  taken  from 
the  official  documents  : — 

Merchant  Ships 
taken  by  the 
French  from 
the  English. 

In  1793  ..261 

„  1794  ..627  ..  88 

„  1795  ..502  ..  47 

„  1796  ..414  ..  63 

„  1797  ..562  ..  114 


Merchant  Ships 
taken  by  the 
English  from 
the  PYt^nch. 

63  \ 


2266 


375  J 


Being  &  pro- 
portion    in 
yfive  years  of 
more    than 
six  to  one. 


82  THE    ISLE    OF    FRANCE 

no  fleet  available.  To  light  squadrons,  to  single  ships, 
to  privateers,  she  had  to  leave  these  arduous  duties. 
The  deeds  which  were  under  such  circumstances  ac- 
complished possess  an  interest  all  their  own.  Some  of 
those  performed  by  the  privateers  are  worthy  to  be 
classed  with  the  achievements  of  Duquesne,  of  Duguay- 
Trouin,  and  of  Jean  Bart. 

Conspicuous  amongst  the  commanders  of  these 
privateers  was  Eobert  Surcouf.  His  exploits  were  so 
intimately  connected  with  the  Indian  seas  ;  he  took  so 
leading  a  part  in  the  devastation  of  English  commerce 
from  the  very  outbreak  of  hostilities  ;  that  I  make  no 
apology  for  bringing  him  at  once  before  my  readers,  as 
one  of  the  most  considerable  and  the  most  successful  of 
the  naval  adventurers  with  whom  our  countrymen  had 
to  deal  on  the  Indian  waters. 

The  advantages  ofiered  by  the  Isles  of  France  and 
Bourbon  as  a  refuge  for  French  cruisers,  whence  these 
could  sally  to  commit  depredations  upon  British  com- 
merce, induced  the  British  authorities  to  despatch  in  the 
early  part  of  1794  a  squadron  to  watch  and  blockade 
the  islands.  This  squadron,  originally  intended  to 
consist  of  four  ships,  was  finally  composed  only  of  the 
Centurion  50,  Captain  Osborne,  and  the  Diomede  44, 
Captain  Smith. 

The  islands,  in  the  first  throes  of  the  revolution,  had 
been  virtually  abandoned  to  their  own  resources  by  the 
mother  country,  nor  did  the  latter  fully  resume  her 
protective  control  until  after  the  events  of  18  Brumaire. 


AND    HER   PRIVATEERS.  83 

In  the  meanwhile  the  chief  men  in  the  islands,  military, 
naval,  and  commercial,  had  formed  a  sort  of  provisional 
administration.  The  first  question  to  be  solved  was 
that  of  ''how  to  live?''  This  was  answered  in  the 
manner  I  have  indicated  above.  A  few  stray  frigates 
and  considerable  and  increasing  number  of  privateers 
were  sent  to  prey  on  the  English  commerce.  Their 
gains,  as  may  well  be  imagined,  were  enormous ;  and 
from  a  portion  of  these  gains  the  treasury  of  the 
colonies  was  replenished. 

The  alarm  which  spread  in  the  islands  when  the  news 
reached  them  of  the  arrival  in  their  waters  of  two 
English  ships  of  Avar  to  intercept  their  cruisers  can 
easily  be  imagined.  There  were  not  wanting,  however, 
bold  men,  who  forbade  their  fellow-colonists  to  despair 
and  who  promised  to  sally  forth  and  drive  away  the 
daring  strangers.  Prominent  amongst  these  adventurous 
spirits  was  Jean-Marie  Renaud,  a  captain  in  the  navy 
of  France,  and  commodore  of  the  small  squadron  which 
found  itself  at  the  time  at  the  islands.  This  squadron 
consisted  only  of  the  frigates  Cyhele,  40,  and  Prudente, 
36,  the  brig  Courier,  14,  and  the  privateer  Jean-Bart,^ 
Renaud  called  a  council  of  war  of  their  captains,  and  as 
they  agreed  with  him  that  boldness  was  prudence,  he 
took  out  his  little  squadron  that  same  afternoon  to 
attack  the  strangers.     He  found  them,  and  bore  down 

*  The  English  historian,  James,  speaks  oi  \he  Jean-Bart  as  a  20-gun 
corvette.  She  may  have  carried  20  guns,  though  that  would  seem 
doubtful,  but  she  was  only  a  i^rivateer. 

6  A 


84  THE    ISLE    OF   FKANCE 

upon  them  at  half-past  three  o'clock  on  the  third  day 
(22nd  October.)  The  combat  which  followed  was 
obstinate,  bloody,  and,  as  it  appeared  at  the  moment^ 
indecisive.  The  French  lost  more  men  than  the 
English;  Eenaud  was  wounded;  his  flag  captain^ 
Flouet,  was  killed ;  the  same  fate  befell  the  first 
lieutenant  of  the  Cyhele.  Yet,  in  spite  of  these  losses, 
the  French  succeeded  in  their  main  object.  The  two 
English  ships  renounced  the  blockade  and  disappeared. 

At  this  time  Robert  Surcouf  was  engaged  in  cruising 
between  the  Isle  of  France  and  the  coast  of  Africa.  Born 
at  St.  Malo  on  the  12th  December  1773,  descended 
by  his  mother  from  the  illustrious  Duguay-Trouin^ 
he  had  been  sent  to  sea  at  the  age  of  thirteen. 
In  1790  he  made  a  voyage  to  India  in  the  Aurora^ 
On  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with  England  he  was 
transferred  to  the  French  navy  and  returned  to  France. 
Arriving,  he  left  the  navy  and  set  out  as  captain  of  a 
slaver,  le  Creole,  for  Africa.  Having  landed  on  the  islands 
the  negroes  he  had  obtained,  he  quitted  for  ever  that 
service,  and  accepted,  in  September  1765,  the  command 
of  a  privateer  of  180  tons  burden,  carrying  four  six- 
pounders,  and  a  crew  of  thirty  men.  The  name  of  the 
vessel  was  la  Modeste,  but  Surcouf  changed  it  to  VEmilie. 

For  some  reason  the  Governor  of  the  islands,  M.  de 
Malartic,  declined  on  this  occasion  to  give  Surcouf  a 
letter  of  marque.  He  granted  him  permission  only  to 
defend  himself  in  the  event  of  his  being  attacked. 
Surcouf's   ostensible   mission   was   to   proceed   to    the 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  86 

Seychelles  islands  and  procure  thence  a  supply  of  turtle 
for  the  colonists. 

The  Emilie  was  a  very  fine  sailer,  and  Surcouf,  glowing 
with  the  ardour  and  enterprise  of  his  twenty  years,  was 
a  bold  and  daring  seaman.  He  was  not  quite  the  man 
to  be  content  with  procuring  turtle  for  his  fellow-citizens. 
However,  he  directed  his  course  straight  to  the  Seychelles, 
and  cast  anchor  off  one  of  the  islands  on  the  13th 
September.  Here  he  stayed  several  days  employing 
himself  in  taking  on  board  articles  of  native  produce. 
Already  he  had  nearly  loaded  his  vessel,  when  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  7th  October,  he  discovered  two  large 
English  ships  bearing  down  upon  him  from  the  south- 
«ast-by-south. 

To  cut  his  cable,  to  thread  the  intricacies  of  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Archipelago,  and  to  gain  the  high  seas, 
was  an  object  to  which  he  instantly  bent  his  energies. 
It  was  a  daring  exploit,  for  the  navigation  of  the 
Seychelles  islands  was  but  little  known,  and  many  ships 
had  been  lost  there.  But,  again,  daring  was  prudence. 
With  every  sail  set  he  traversed  the  difficult  passages, 
then,  finding  himself  in  the  open  sea,  he  directed  his 
course  eastward.  Caught  by  the  changing  monsoon, 
when  approaching  Achin,  he  again  altered  his  course, 
determined  to  fly  before  it.  When  the  fury  of  the  storm 
had  moderated,  Surcouf  turned  the  head  of  the  Emilie 
towards  Pegu.  Scarcely,  however,  had  he  doubled  Cape 
Negrais  when  he  found  himself  almost  face  to  face  with 
an  English  vessel. 


86  THE   ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

This  was  a  trading  ship,  the  Penguin,  laden  with 
wood.  Surcouf  captures  her,  places  a  few  of  his  men  on 
board,  and  starts  her  off  for  the  islands.  He  then  turns 
and  follows  as  nearly  as  he  can  the  coast  towards  the 
Bay  of  Bengal.  He  meets,  however,  no  craft  upon  which 
he  can  seize ;  till,  suddenly,  at  daybreak  on  the  19th 
January,  he  finds  himself  close  to  two  English  ships, 
towed  by  a  pilot  brig,  at  one  of  the  mouths  of  the 
Ganges. 

Surcouf  attacked  and  took  the  three  ships.  Then, 
finding  that  the  pilot  brig  was  more  adapted  to  his  pur- 
poses than  the  Emilie,  he  removes  to  her  his  guns  and 
his  crew,  calling  her  the  Cartier,  and  sends  off  the 
Emilie  in  charge  of  his  two  prizes  to  the  islands. 

Still  cruising  off  the  mouths  of  the  river,  Surcouf 
discovered,  on  the  evening  of  the  28th  January,  a  large 
three-masted  vessel  going  out  to  sea.  He  at  once  made 
for  her  and  captured  her.  She  proved  to  be  the  Diana, 
having  on  board  a  large  cargo  of  rice.  He  then  started 
with  his  prize  for  the  islands. 

But  fortune  was  not  always  to  befriend  him.  The 
very  morning  after  the  capture  of  the  Diana  he  sighted 
a  large  English  ship  bearing  up  for  the  coast  of  Orissa. 
This  was  the  Triton,  an  Indiaman  carrying  26  guns  and 
a  crew  of  150  men.  Surcouf  let  the  Diana  approach 
him  so  as  to  increase  his  own  crew,  which,  by  the 
addition  thus  obtained,  reached  the  number  of  nineteen 
men,  himself  and  the  surgeon  included.  He  then  set 
sail  towards  the  Triton,  of  whose  force  he  was  naturally 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  87 

ignorant.  Finding  that  she  sailed  better  than  the 
Cartier,  he  hoisted  the  Union  Jack.  The  Triton^  recog- 
nising the  Cartier  as  a  pilot  brig,  hove  to.  As  Surcouf 
approached  her  he  became  for  the  first  time  aware  of  her 
formidable  armament  and  of  the  number  of  her  crew. 
At  first  he  hoped  these  latter  might  be  lascars,  and  it 
was  not  till  he  arrived  within  cannon-shot  that  he  dis- 
covered them  to  be  all  Europeans. 

He  was  lost.  What  could  his  seventeen  men  and 
four  guns  eff'ect  against  the  150  men  and  twenty-six 
12-pounders  of  the  enemy?  And  he  was  within  cannon- 
shot!  Destruction  seemed  inevitable.  He  could  not  flee, 
for  the  Triton  had  shown  herself  a  better  sailer.  The 
smallest  hesitation  would  betray  him.  What  was  he  to 
do? 

Once  more  boldness  was  prudence.  Not  for  one 
moment  did  Surcouf  relax  his  onward  movement.  He 
summoned  his  crew,  pointed  out  to  them  the  enemy's 
guns,  and  told  them  that  the  Triton  must  be  either  their 
their  tomb  or  the  cradle  of  their  glory.  The  crew 
declared  with  enthusiasm  that  they  would  conquer  or  die. 
Surcouf  at  once  sent  his  men  below ;  then,  keeping  near 
him  only  the  master,  the  officer  of  the  watch,  a  sailor, 
and  two  or  three  lascars  whom  he  had  taken  from  his 
prizes,  he  came  up  rapidly  to  within  half  pistol-shot  on 
the  windward  quarter  of  the  Triton,  Then,  suddenly 
replacing  the  Union  Jack  by  the  Tricolor,  he  fired  a 
broadside  on  the  group  of  sailors  on  the  Indiaman's 
deck.      Terror   and  astonishment  contended  with  each 


88  THE    ISLE   OF    FRANCE 

other  amongst  the  assaulted  English.  Surcouf  at  once 
turned  his  ship's  head  to  the  wind,  clambered  on  board 
the  Trito7i,  and  took  advantage  of  the  confusion  which 
prevailed  there  to  send  up  six  men  into  the  shrouds  of 
the  mizen-mast,  thence,  supported  by  the  fire  of  their 
coDorades,  to  carry  the  poop.  A  desperate  struggle  then 
ejisued.  The  Cartier  is  ranged  alongside  the  Triton; 
every  Frenchman  gains  the  deck ;  the  English,  surprised, 
unarmed,  are  one  by  one  driven  below;  gradually  the 
hatches  are  closed  up  by  their  gi*atings ;  the  port-ropes 
are  cut,  and  Surcouf  does  everything  in  his  power  to 
keep  the  enemy  below. 

Many  of  the  English  had  been  killed  at  the  first 
broadside.  The  remainder,  recovering  from  their  sur- 
prise, made  a  manful  resistance.  Their  indignation  is 
increased  by  the  discovery  made  by  some  of  them  of  the 
small  number  of  their  assailants.  They  attempt  to  blow 
up  the  quarter  deck;  but  Surcouf,  discovering  their  pro- 
ject, opens  so  heavy  a  fire  upon  them  through  the  main 
hatchway  that  they  are  forced  to  desist.  At  last,  finding 
their  eff'orts  useless,  the  crew  surrender. 

Such  was  the  capture  of  the  Triton — a  very  Triton 
caught  by  a  minnow — a  capture  so  marvellous  that  even 
the  Indian  journals  of  the  day  wrote  of  it  as  ''an  extra- 
"  ordinary  capture."*  Undoubtedly  it  was  an  act  of 
piracy,  for  Surcouf  bore  no  commission  to  attack  English 
vessels,  yet  the  captain  of  the  Triton  was  necessarily 
ignorant  of  this  deficiency  in  the  powers  of  his  enemy. 

*  Madras  Courier^  16th  February,  1796. 


AND    HER   PRIVATEERS.  89 

He  knew  that  France  and  England  were  at  war,  and  he 
ought  to  have  known  that  an  enemy  will  always  take 
advantage  of  any  ruse  to  gain  his  ends ;  that  stratagem 
is  fair  in  war. 

Leaving  out  of  consideration  for  a  moment  the  defect 
in  Surcouf 's  commission,  it  must  be  admitted  that  his 
conduct  in  most  dangerous  circumstances  showed  won- 
derful self-possession,  daring,  and  nerve.  He  was  not 
then  twenty-two.  Had  he  known  the  force  of  the  Triton 
neither  he,  nor  any  man  in  his  senses,  would  under  the 
circumstances  have  attempted  to  capture  her.  But 
jfinding  himself  suddenly  in  a  position  from  which  it  was 
impossible  to  escape,  except  by  the  display  of  a  surpass- 
ing audacity  and  the  happiest  presence  of  mind,  he,  on 
the  moment,  did  display  those  qualities — and  conquered. 

After  the  capture  had  been  effected,  Surcouf,  em- 
barrassed by  the  number  of  his  prisoners,  who  greatly 
exceeded  his  own  crew,  ransomed  the  Diana  to  her 
former  captain  for  a  bill  for  30,000  sicca  rupees,  *  and 
after  transferring  to  her  his  prisoners  he  let  her  go. 
Then,  removing  the  bulk  of  his  crew  to  the  Triton,  he 
sailed  in  her  for  the  islands,  instructing  the  Cartier  t  to 
follow  as  rapidly  as  she  could.  Surcouf  reached  the 
Isle  of  France  in  safety ;  but  scarcely  had  he  landed 
when  he  was  informed  that  the  Governor,  M.  de  Malartic, 

*  The  bill  on  presentation  was  not  paid ;  the  drawee  contending  that 
he  had  discovered  that  the  transaction  was  illegal. 

+  The  Cartier  was  re-captured  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  by  an  English 
man-of-war. 


90  THE    ISLE    OF    FKANCE 

had  confiscated  his  prizes  on  the  plea  that  he  was 
unauthorised  to  make  captures.  Against  such  a  ruling 
Surcouf  appealed  in  person  to  the  Directory.  The  case 
came  before  the  Council  of  the  Five  Hundred,  who,  on 
the  4th  September,  1797  (17  Fructidor,  year  V.)  pro- 
nounced a  decision  in  Surcouf's  favour.  His  prizes, 
sold  at  the  islands,  had  realised  the  sum  of  1,700,000 
francs ;  but  certain  difficulties  having  arisen  regarding 
the  question  of  exchange,  Surcouf  agreed  to  accept  for 
himself  and  his  crew  the  diminished  sum  of  660,000 
francs.     This  amount  was  paid  him. 

Surcouf  remained  about  fourteen  months  in  France. 
Tired  then  of  inaction,  he  obtained  at  Nantes  the  com- 
mand of  a  privateer  brig,  called  the  Clarisse,  mounting 
14  guns  and  having  a  crew  of  120  men.  He  set  out  with 
her  in  September  for  the  Indian  seas,  and  reached  the 
line  without  sighting  a  vessel.  Scarcely,  however,  had 
he  entered  the  southern  hemisphere  when  a  sail  was 
signalled.  She  proved  to  be  an  English  three-masted 
vessel  carrying  26  guns.  The  wind  was  in  her  favour, 
and  she  bore  down  with  all  sail  on  the  Clarisse. 

Here  again  destruction  seemed  inevitable.  The 
prospect  did  not,  however,  appal  Surcouf.  He  first  ex- 
changed broadsides  with  his  enemy,  then  wearing,  came 
down  on  the  starboard  tack  and  took  up  an  advantageous 
position  on  his  quarter.  For  half  an  hour  the  victory 
was  obstinately  contested,  but  at  the  end  of  that  time, 
the  stranger,  having  been  considerably  maltreated  and 
having  lost  her  captain,  clapped  on  all  sail  and  bore 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  91 

away.     The    Clarisse   was   in   no   condition   to   follow 
her. 

The  damages  sustained  on  that  occasion  were  quickly 
repaired,  and  Surcouf  pursued  his  journey  without  inter- 
ruption to  the  Indian  seas.  Still  sailing  eastward  he 
captured,  after  a  severe  combat,  two  English  merchant 
ships  with  rich  cargoes.  He  returned  with  these  to  the 
island  of  Bourbon,  the  Isle  of  France  being  blockaded 
by  British  cruisers.  Having  there  repaired  and  refitted 
the  Clarisse,  he  sailed  again  (August,  1799)  for  the 
Straits.  In  this  voyage  he  touched  at  Java,  and  landed 
there  to  replenish  his  water-tanks.  Whilst  on  shore 
here  with  only  a  few  of  his  crew,  he  was  suddenly 
attacked  by  a  chieftain  of  the  country  who  came  upon 
him  with  a  large  following.  Unprepared  and  his  crew 
unarmed,  Surcouf  owed  his  escape  to  the  presence  of 
mind  which  never  failed  him.  Leaving  his  musket  still 
slung  across  his  shoulders  he  advanced  towards  the 
Javanese  chieftain  and  placed  in  his  hand  a  red  hand- 
kerchief he  had  untied  from  his  neck.  The  chieftain, 
whose  actions  up  to  that  moment  had  denoted  the 
greatest  hostility,  seemed  so  fascinated  by  the  colour  of 
the  present  he  had  received  that  he  contented  himself 
with  making  signs  to  Surcouf  and  his  men  to  re-embark 
immediately.  It  need  scarcely  be  added  that  the  hint 
was  promptly  taken. 

In  the  cruise  which  followed,  the  Clarisse  captured  a 
Danish  ship  carrying  an  English  cargo,  a  Portuguese 
ship,  and  an  English   merchantman,   the   Auspicious, 


92  THE    ISLE    OF    FKANCE 

A  few  days  later  Surcouf  was  in  pursuit  of  another 
merchantman  and  was  fast  approaching  her,  when  he 
perceived  bearing  down  upon  him  from  an  opposite 
direction  a  vessel  which  was  unmistakeably  a  ship  of  war. 

This  was  no  other  than  the  English  frigate  La  Syhille 
of  48  guns,  which  had  but  recently  captured  off  the 
Sandheads  the  French  frigate  La  Forte  of  52  guns. 
Surcouf  was  apparently  lost,  as  the  English  frigate  soon 
showed  herself  a  better  sailer  than  the  Clai^isse.  But 
he  did  not  despair.  He  cast  overboard  his  spare  masts 
and  spars ;  then  eight  of  his  heavy  guns  ;  and  that  not 
being  sufficient  he  half-emptied  his  water  casks.  Thus 
lightened  the  Clarisse  gained  rapidly  on  the  frigate  and 
at  daybreak  the  following  morning  the  latter  was 
completely  out  of  sight.  Two  days  later  Surcouf 
captured  an  English  merchantman,  the  James,  laden 
with  rice,  and  on  the  fourth  day  after  that  the  American 
ship  Louisa.  With  these  captures  Surcouf  closed  his 
career  in  the  Clarisse.  Returning  with  his  prizes  to  the 
islands,  he  was  offered  the  command  of  a  new  privateer, 
just  arrived  from  Bordeaux,  and  reputed  to  be  the  fastest 
sailer  afloat.     Surcouf  accepted  the  offer. 

The  new  privateer  was  named  La  Confiance.  She 
was  of  between  400  and  500  tons  burden,  and  carried 
16  guns.  Her  crew  consisted  of  159  Frenchmen,  twenty- 
five  volunteers  from  the  island  of  Bourbon,  and  about 
twenty  natives.  She  left  the  islands  for  her  cruise  in 
the  Indian  waters  the  middle  of  April  1800. 

Surcouf  went  first  to  the  Malabar  coast  on  account  of 


AND    HEE    PRIVATEERS.  9^ 

the  monsoon.  But  in  July  he  directed  thence  his  course 
towards  Trincomali.  Chased,  though  in  vain,  off  that 
harbour  by  an  English  man-of-war,  he  pushed  his  way 
towards  the  mouths  of  the  Ganges,  having  captured  up 
to  this  time  one  American  and  two  English  merchant- 
men. He  was  off  the  Sandheads  on  7th  October  when 
a  sail  was  signalled  to  the  eastward.  Soon  she  was 
discerned  to  be  a  large  and  heavily  armed  ship.  She 
was,  in  fact,  the  Kent,  an  Indiaman  of  820  tons,  carrying 
26  guns,  and  having  on  board  437  Europeans,  including 
troops.* 

The  Kent  carelessly  approached  La  Confiance,  taking 
her  to  be  a  friend.  Nor  was  it  till  she  was  within 
cannon-shot  that  her  captain  perceived  his  mistake. 
Still  he  made  light  of  his  enemy,  and  opening  fire,  in  a 
very  short  space  of  time  he  inflicted  severe  damage  on 
the  hull,  the  rigging,  and  the  masts  of  the  Frenchman. 
Still  Surcouf  did  not  reply.  It  was  his  object  to  board, 
and  he  endeavoured  to  manoeuvre  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  gain  the  port  side  of  the  Kent.  When  at  length  he 
had  succeeded  in  this,  he  opened  a  tremendous  broadside 
and  musketry  fire,  then  fastening  the  grappling-irons  he 
attached  himself  closely  to  his  enemy.     Thenceforward, 

*  The  French  accounts  state  that  besides  twenty-six  broadside  guns, 
the  Kent  carried  twelve  on  her  quarter-deck  and  forecastle.  James 
implies  that  this  was  not  so.  On  the  other  hand,  James  reduces  the 
number  of  the  crew,  including  passengers,  to  about  140.  But  this  is 
manifestly  incorrect,  for  besides  her  own  crew  of  more  than  120,  she 
had  taken  on  board  the  entire  crew  of  the  Queerif  an  Indiaman  burnt  at 
St.  Salvador,  and  she  had  besides,  the  troops  and  passengers  of  both 
vessels. 


94  THE   ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

from  her  superior  height   out  of  the  water,  the  fire  of 
the  Keyit  could  only  pass  over  the  deck  of  La  Confiance. 

To  climb  on  the  enemy's  deck  followed  by  the  crew, 
was  a  work  of  an  instant.  After  a  desperate  conflict  the 
English  were  driven  below,  their  flag  was  hauled  down, 
but  still  they  did  not  give  in.  The  fight  continued 
below  in  the  batteries,  nor  was  it  until  resistance  had 
become  useless  that  it  ceased,  and  the  Kent  surrendered. 

In  this  battle  the  French  had  sixteen  men  wounded, 
of  whom  three  died  of  their  wounds.  The  English  lost 
seventy  men  killed  and  wounded.*  Surcouf  at  once 
transported  the  greater  part  of  his  prisoners,  amongst 
whom  was  the  daughter  of  the  Margrave  of  Anspach 
married  to  an  English  general,  on  board  a  three-masted 
coasting  vessel  which  opportunely  came  near  enough  to 
be  captured ;  then  placing  sixty  of  his  men  under  an 
officer  on  board  the  Kent,  he  sailed  in  company  with  her 
to  the  Islands.  He  arrived  there  in  November.  There, 
too,  he  received  instructions  to  re-conduct  the  Confiance 
to  France  with  a  view  to  her  receiving  a  more  powerful 
armament.  He  sailed  with  this  object  on  the  29th 
January  1801,  and  arrived  at  La  Kochelle  on  the  13th 
April  following,  having  captured  a  Portuguese  vessel, 
the  Ehro,  carrying  18  twelve -pounders,  on  the  way. 

That  same  year  the  brief  treaty  of  Amiens  put  a  stop 
to  hostilities.  Surcouf  then  married.  But  the  war 
being  resumed  in  1803,  the  First  Consul  ofl'ered  him  the 
commission  of  post  captain  {capitaine  de  vaisseau)  in 

*  James  says  about  fifty-eight. 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  95 

the  French  Navy,  with  the  command  of  two  frigates  in  the 
Indian  seas.  In  the  interview  which  followed  with  the 
First  Consul,  Surcouf  would  only  accord  a  provisional 
acceptance  of  the  offer.  **  I  am  willing,"  he  is  reported 
to  have  said,  *'to  undertake  the  duty,  provided  I  am 
**  made  independent  of  all  superior  command,  whether  of 
''  the  admiral  in  the  Indian  seas,  or  of  any  senior  officer 
*'  I  may  encounter."  The  First  Consul  declined  to  grant 
him  a  power  so  excessive ;  but  struck  by  his  manner 
and  perfectly  cognisant  of  his  reputation  he  asked  his 
opinion  as  to  the  policy  by  which  the  French  Navy  could 
be  placed  on  such  a  footing  as  to  cause  the  greatest  injury 
to  the  English.  The  reply  of  Surcouf  was  eminently 
characteristic  of  the  man  :  "  If  I  were  in  your  place," 
he  replied,  '*  I  would  burn  all  my  line  of  battle  ships  ;  I 
^  would  never  deliver  battle  to  the  English  fleets  and 
'  squadrons.    But  I  would  construct  and  send  into  every 

*  sea  frigates  and  light   ships   in  such  extraordinary 

*  numbers  that  the  commerce  of  the  enemy  must  be 
'  speedily  annihilated."     Napoleon  was  then  too  much 

engaged  with  the  project  of  the  invasion  of  England, 
rendered  abortive  by  the  misconduct  of  Villeneuve,  to 
depart  so  markedly  from  the  established  traditions  of 
naval  warfare  ;  but  he  did  not  the  less  appreciate  the 
intelligent  ideas  of  the  bold  sailor.  He  conferred  upon 
him  the  Cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour. 

Until  the  year  1806  Surcouf  remained  in  France, 
living  on  his  savings,  and  sending  out  privateers  com- 
manded by  his  friends  and  relations.     But  in  1806  he 


96  THE    ISLE    OF   FKANCE 

became  tired  of  inaction.  He  panted  again  for  life  on 
the  Indian  seas.  He  accordingly  in  that  year  had  built 
under  his  own  superintendence  a  vessel  to  carry  18 
guns  and  a  crew  of  192  men.  In  this  ship,  which  he 
called  the  Revenant,  he  sailed  from  St.  Malo  for  the 
Indian  waters  on  the  2nd  March  1807. 

The  islands  were  reached,  without  any  adventure 
worthy  of  note,  on  the  10th  June.  So  great  was  the 
consternation  in  Calcutta  on  the  news  that  this  famous 
cruiser  was  on  his  way  once  again  to  the  mouths  of  the 
Ganges,  that  the  reward  of  a  lakh  of  rupees  was  offered 
by  the  English  Government  for  his  capture.*  But 
undeterred  by  this,  Surcouf,  on  the  3rd  September, 
sailed  for  his  destination.  On  the  26th  of  the  same 
month  he  arrived  of  Vizagapatam.  The  same  day  he 
captured  the  Trafalgar,  a  merchant  ship  laden  with 
rice  and  carrying  12  guns,  and  the  Mangles  with  a 
similar  cargo  and   carrying   14  guns.t      In   the   next 

*  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  the  actual  order ;  but  the  Indian 
journals  for  1807  and  1808  abound  with  complaints  of  the  injuries 
caused  by  Surcouf  to  the  British  trade.  The  Asiatic  Annual  Register 
records  in  October  1807  that  the  losses  in  the  value  of  captured  ships  in 
the  preceding  six  weeks,  amounted  to  thirty  lakhs  of  rupees. 

+  The  Asiatic  Annual  Register  (1808)  states  that  these  vessels  were 
insured  for  150,000  rupees  each  ;  that  Surcouf  sent  their  crews  on 
shore  detaining  only  the  captains,  and  Mr.  Nichol,  who  would  appear  to 
have  been  a  person  of  some  consideration.  Subsequently  Mr.  Nichol 
managed  to  effect  his  escape  in  a  manner,  says  the  Annual  Register, 
fair  and  honourable,  yet  such  as  was  likely  to  cause  great  irritation  to 
Surcouf.  Yet  the  French  captain  would  not  allow  his  feelings  to 
interfere  with  what  he  considered  to  be  due  to  propriety.  He  took  the 
first  opportunity  of  forwarding  to  the  British  Government  the  whole  of 
the  personal  property  left  by  Mr.  Nichol  on  board  the  ship. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  97 

few  days  the  Admiral  Apliuj  the  Susanna,  the  Hunter, 
the  Fortune  (previously  captured  from  the  French),  and 
the  Success  struck  their  flags  to  him.  Such  was  the 
terror  he  inspired  that  the  Govenor-General  in  Council 
placed  on  all  the  vessels  anchored  in  the  Hughli  an 
embargo  to  be  binding  as  long  as  Surcouf  might  remain 
in  the  Bay  of  Bengal. 

Hearing  of  this  order  Surcouf  took  an  eastern  course. 
On  the  16th  November  he  sighted  three  Indiamen 
conveying  troops.  These  he  avoided.  But  the  next  day 
he  captured  the  Neiv  Endeavour,*  laden  with  salt ;  and 
two  days  later  the  Colonel  MacaubyA  On  the  12tli 
December,  returning  from  the  Burmese  waters,  to  which 
he  had  repaired  without  making  a  capture,  he  was 
chased,  ineffectually,  by  a  man-of-war  and  a  corvette. 
Two  days  later  he  captured  two  brigs,!  from  whose 
masters  he  learned  that  the  embargo  had  been  taken  off" 
the  English  vessels  in  the  Hughli.  On  the  17th  he 
captured  the  Sir  William  Burroughs  of  700  tons,  laden 
with  teak,  and  bound  from  Rangoon  to  Calcutta.  He 
sent  her  to  the  islands.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the 
third  subsequent  day  he  found  himself  within  cannon- 
shot  of  an  English  man-of-war.    The  smallest  indication 

*  Surcouf  ascertained  that  this  vessel  belonged  to  the  captain  who  was 
navigating  her,  and  that  she  was  not  insured.  With  a  rare  generosity 
he  restored  her  to  her  owner  unconditionally. 

+  From  the  Colonel  Macauhy  Surcouf  took  1440  bottles  of  claret, 
some  specie  and  some  gunpowder.  He  then  restored  her  to  her  owner 
for  the  same  reason  which  had  prompted  his  restoration  of  the 
Neiv  Endeavour. 

I   These  brigs  were  restored  to  their  owners. 


98  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

of  fear  would  have  lost  him.  But  Surcouf  was  quite 
equal  to  the  occasion.  He  steadily  pursued  his  course^ 
unquestioned  and  unmolested,  his  true  character  un- 
suspected, and  he  soon  sailed  out  of  sight.  A  few  days 
later  he  captured  a  Portuguese  vessel,  the  Oriente,  and 
a  fine  ship  under  Arab  colours,  but  whose  papers  attested 
her  to  be  English  property.  Both  these  vessels  were 
likewise  despatched  to  the  islands.*  His  crew  being 
reduced  to  seventy  men,  and  he  having  received  intelligence 
that  a  new  English  frigate  had  arrived  with  the  express 
mission  to  capture  him,  Surcouf  resolved  to  follow  his 
prizes  thither.  Chased,  though  ineffectually,  by  an 
English  man-of-war,  he  arrived  at  Port  St.  Louis  on 
the  31st  January  1808,  and  found  that  all  his  prizes  had 
safely  preceded  him. 

Surcouf  shortly  afterward  set  out  for  France  in  a 
vessel  called  the  Charles  t  with  a  cargo  valued  at  five 
millions  of  francs.  His  vessel,  the  Revenant,  \  after  a 
short  cruise  under  her  first  lieutenant.  Potior,  had  been 

*  Thither  also  had  been  despatched  all  the  captures  not  specially 
referred  to  in  the  text,  except  the  Admiral  Aplin,  shipwrecked  on  the 
Coromandel  coast,  the  Hunter^  which  he  abandoned,  and  the  Success^ 
which  he  burned. 

4  The  Charles  was  an  old  frigate  called  La  Semillante^  worn  out  in 
service,  and  sold  for  the  purposes  of  commerce. 

J  The  fate  of  the  Revenant  was  curious.  After  a  short  cruise  under 
the  command  of  Potier,  in  which  she  captured  a  Portuguese  frigate,  the 
Concegdo  de  San  Antonio ^  pierced  for  64,  and  carrying  54  guns,  she 
was  taken  up  by  the  Governor,  added  to  the  French  Navy  as  a  corvette 
of  22  guns,  and  re-named  the  Jena.  In  this  new  form  she  sailed  with 
an  envoy  and  despatches  for  the  Persian  Gulf,  captured  the  schooner 
Swallow  with  2500  dollars  on  board  her,  and  the  Janets  a  small  country 


AND    HER   PRIVATEERS.  99 

taken  up  by  the  Governor,  General  Decaen,  for  the 
defence  of  the  islands,  and  there  appeared  to  be  no 
chance  of  a  further  cruise  in  the  Indian  waters.*  He 
reached  St.  Malo  on  the  5th  February  1809.  In  a  few 
days  he  went  to  Paris  where  he  recived  a  flattering 
reception  from  the  Minister  of  Marine. 

His  active  life  on  the  sea  was  now  terminated.  The 
capture  shortly  afterwards  by  the  British  of  the  Isles  of 
France  and  Bourbon  tended  very  much  to  shut  out  the 
French  cruisers  from  the  Indian  seas.  Surcouf  con- 
tinued, nevertheless,  during  the  war  to  arm  and  fit  out 
privateers,  t  When  peace  came  he  devoted  himself  to 
maritime  commerce,  to  agriculture,  and  to  shooting. 

Surcouf  died  in  1827.  '*  France,"  writes  M.  Cunat, 
in  his  admirable  biography,  "lost  in  him  a  distinguished 
*'  warrior;  the  naval  service  one  of  her  bravest  captains; 
"  and  St.  Malo,  his  native  town,  an  illustrious  offspring. 
*'  Whilst  the  tears  of  the  unfortunate  proclaimed  his 
''  charity,  his  fellow  citizens  felt  deeply  the  loss  they 

craft,  but  had  herself  to  succumb  to  the  Modeste,  a  frigate  of  greatly- 
superior  force,  which  she  had  approached  in  the  belief  that  she  was  a 
merchant  ship.  The  Je?ia  was  added  to  the  English  Navy,  under  the 
name  of  the  Victor. — Asiatic  Annual  Regisier. 

James  states  that  the  Modeste  carried  36  guns ;  and  the  Jena  18. 
Seven  of  these,  together  with  her  boats,  hencoops,  and  spars,  she  threw 
overboard  in  her  attempt  to  escape. 

*  As  I  am  not  writing  a  life  of  Surcouf,  I  do  not  propose  to  enter 
upon  the  subject  of  his  disputes  with  the  Governor,  especially  as  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  gave  a  decision  in  his  favour. 

+  Amongst  the  most  successful  of  his  privateering  ventures  were  the 
Auguste^  the  Borade,  the  Biscayenne,  the  Edoard,  the  Espadony  the 
Ville  de  Caen,  the  Adolphe,  and  the  Eenard, 

7  A 


100  THE    ISLE    OF  FKANCE 

"  had  sustained.  Their  regrets  were  a  last  homage  to 
*'  the  man  whose  enterprise,  as  a  sailor,  had  astonished 
**  the  world,  and  who,  as  a  trader,  had  benefited  all  the 
*'  industries  of  the  country  which  he  idolised/'  It  would 
be  difficult  to  add  a  word  to  this  eloquent  eulogy. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  101 


n. 

A  CONTEMPORARY,  a  fellow-townsmaii,  and  almost  to  the 
same  extent  a  destroyer  of  English  commerce  on  the 
Indian  waters,  was  Francois  Thomas  Lememe,  whose 
adventures  I  am  now  about  to  record. 

Born  in  1763  at  St.  Malo,  Lememe  enrolled  himself 
as  a  volunteer  on   board  the  privateer  the  Prince  de 
Momhaiiy,    commanded   by   one    Boynard.       This  was 
during  the  war   for  the   independence   of  the    United 
States,    when    opportunities    offered    to    the    sons    of 
Brittany  and  of  Normandy  to  prey  upon  the  commerce 
of  the  great  rival  of  France.     The  cruise  of  the  Prince 
de  Momhany  was  not  altogether  fortunate.     She  took, 
indeed,  some  merchantmen,  but  she  was  forced  herself 
to  succumb  to  an  English  frigate ;   '^  and  it  was  in  the 
'^  prisons  of  Great  Britain,"   says  M.  Gallois,   'Hhat 
**  Lememe  learned,  in  his  early  youth,  to  hate  with  a 
*'  hatred  altogether  national  the  islanders  whom  he  was 
''  destined  later  often  to  encounter  and  to  overcome." 

Keleased  from  his  British  prison  by  the  treaty  of 
Versailles,  Lememe  continued  his  seafaring  life.  He 
happened  to  be  at  the  Isle  of  France  in  1793  in  com- 
mand of  a  small  transport  brig,  the  Hirondelle,  when 


102  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

the  intelligence  arrived  that  war  had  been  declared 
between  France  and  England.  Instantly  Lememe  trans- 
formed the  Hirondelle  into  a  privateer.  He  armed  her 
with  twelve  4-pounder  carronades,  and  manned  her  with 
eighty  men.  In  addition  to  these,  volunteers  pressed 
forward  to  serve  under  him  ;  of  them,  however,  he  could 
take  only  thirty. 

Thus  armed  and  manned,  Lememe  sailed  from  the 
islands  in  July,  1793,  taking  the  direction  of  the  Indian 
Ocean.  On  the  16th  August  he  encountered  and 
carried  by  boarding  a  Dutch  corvette  carrying  eighteen 
9-pounders,  called  The  Good  Werivagting.  It  is  related 
that  before  Lememe  had  been  able  to  lay  the  Hirondelle 
alongside  her  powerful  opponent  the  fire  from  the  latter 
had  so  damaged  the  French  privateer,  that  one  of  her 
officers  remarked  to  the  captain  that  the  enemy's  fire 
would  sink  her.  *'  That's  just  what  I  want,"  remarked 
Lememe,  **we  shall  be  obliged  then  to  put  our  feet  on 
**  the  decks  of  that  one."  Immediately  afterwards  he 
brought  the  Hirondelle  alongside  and  boarded. 

Nine  days  later,  in  company  with  and  aided  by  his 
prize,  Lememe  attacked,  and,  after  a  contest  of  forty 
minutes,  captured  the  William  Thesied,  a  large 
Dutch  Indiaman,  pierced  for  60  but  carrying  only  40 
guns.  With  these  two  prizes  Lemene  returned  to  the 
islands. 

He  did  not  stay  there  long.  Transferred  from  the 
Hirondelle  to  the  Ville  de  Bordeaiix,  carrying  32  guns, 
and  having  on  board  a  crew  of  200  men,  Lememe  started 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  103 

again  in  the  month  of  October  for  his  old  cruising 
ground.  Proceeding  direct  to  Sumatra,  he  stormed  the 
fortifications  of  Padang,  one  of  the  Mantawi  islands 
close  to  the  mainland,  and  seized  all  the  shipping  lying 
off  it.  Obtaining  most  advantageous  terms  from  the 
Dutch  Governor,  he  quitted  Padang,  his  ship  well  laden 
with  the  products  of  the  expedition,  and  returned  to  the 
Isle  of  France,  capturing  on  his  way  a  Portuguese  mer- 
chantman, the  Santo  Sacramento ,  The  share  of  the 
plunder  accruing  to  Lemene  from  this  expedition 
amounted  to  1,100,000  francs,  equal  to  £44,000 
sterling. 

In  the  Amphitrite,  of  which  he  next  took  command, 
Lememe  made  several  rich  captures ;  but  of  the 
particulars  I  have  been  unable  to  obtain  a  record. 
Transferred  again  to  UUni,  carrying  21  guns  and  a 
crew  of  200  men,  he  became  the  terror  of  the  Indian 
seas.  She  is  reported  to  have  captured  in  her  short 
cruise  six  merchantmen,  two  of  which  carried  very 
valuable  cargoes,  and  four  native  grabs*  all  laden  with 
specie.  Lememe,  however,  having  placed  insufficient 
prize  crews  on  board  these,  the  Moplahs,  who  had 
originally  manned  them,  rose  upon  and  killed  their 
captors.  Amongst  the  letters  found  on  the  body  of  the 
chief  officer  was  one  from  Lememe  to  the  owners  of 
UUni,  in  which  he  announced  his  intention  **  to  sweep 
^^  the  Malabar  and  Coromandel  coasts  and  to  call  at 

*  A  grab  is  a  three-masted  vessel  peculiar  in  those  days  to  the 
Malabar  coast. 


104  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

**  Tranquebar  for  refreshments/'*  He  would  appear 
to  have  kept  his  word. 

After  the  return  of  UUni  to  the  islands,  Lememe 
made  two  more  cruises  in  the  Indian  seas,  the  first  in 
the  Clarisse;  the  second  in  the  Grande  Hirondelle. 
The  cruise  in  the  Clarisse  was  at  least  as  successful  as 
the  cruises  which  had  preceded  hers.  Hostile  ships  of 
war  were  successfully  avoided  and  merchantmen  were 
successfully  encountered.  But  the  same  fortune  did  not 
attend  the  Grande  Hirondelle,  After  making  three 
captures,  she  herself  w^as  forced  to  succumb,  on  the 
31st  December,  1801,  to  the  British  frigate  La  Sybille, 
48  guns,  commanded  by  Captain  Charles  Adam.t 

Keleased  from  confinement  by  the  treaty  of  Amiens, 
Lememe,  who  had  realised  an  enormous  fortune  by  his 
cruises,  renounced  the  sea,  and  started  as  a  merchant. 
But  he  managed  his  afiairs  so  unsuccessfully,  that  when 
the  war  broke  out  again  in  1803,  he  had  lost  all  he  had 
possessed.  Again  he  resumed  his  earlier  profession,  and 
hoisting  his  flag  on  board  a  three-masted  vessel,  the 
Fortune,  carrying  12  guns  and  a  crew  of  160  men,  he 

*  Asiatic  Annual  Register, 

t  The  fact  of  the  capture  of  the  Grande  Hirondelle  when  under  the 
command  of  Lememe  has  been  ignored  by  all  the  French  authorities  I 
haye  been  able  to  consult.  In  his  biographical  sketch  of  Lememe 
M.  Gallois  merely  mentions  that  before  the  peace  of  Amiens  he  had 
cruised  in  the  Clarisse  and  Grande  Hirondelle.  Yet  I  have  before  me 
not  only  Captain  Adam's  official  report  of  the  capture,  dated  2nd 
January,  1802,  but  also  a  letter  from  Lem§me  himself,  dated  the  7th 
idem,  written  when  a  prisoner,  and  addressed  to  Captain  Adam  himself. 
— Asiatic  Annual  Register ,  1802,  pages  42,  45,  46. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  105 

made  his  way,  towards  the  end  of  1803,  to  the  Bay  of 
Bengal. 

This  time  his  success  was  unexampled.  In  a  very 
brief  period  he  captured  at  least  fifteen  vessels.*  The 
sums  realised  by  the  sale  of  these  was  enormous,  the 
official  returns  showing  that  the  first  six  on  the  list  sold 
for  nearly  1,200,000  francs.  Yet,  unfortunately  for 
Lememe,  he  did  not  live  to  enjoy  his  gains.  On  the 
7th  November  1804,  in  the  waters  of  the  Arabian  sea, 
he  found  himself  early  in  the  morning  in  close 
proximity  to  the  Concorde,  a  British  frigate  carrying  48 
guns,  which  had  been  sent  from  Bombay  in  search  of 
him.  In  vain  he  attempted  to  escape.  The  Concorde 
was  a  better  sailer,  and  at  half-past  three  o'clock  she 
came  within  range.  Lememe  did  all  that  man  could  do 
to  cripple  his  adversary.  But  it  was  useless.  At  half- 
past  ten  o'clock,  his  ship  reduced  to  a  wreck,  he  had  to 
strike  his  flag. 

With  this  action  ended  his  career.  Shipped,  the  15th 
February  1805,  on  board  the  Walthamstozv  as  a  prisoner 


*  The  official  report  of  Admiral  Linois,  published  in  the  Moniteur, 
gives  a  list  of  ten,  viz.,  the  Barlow^  the  Eleonora,ih.e  Active,  the  Pomona^ 
the  Vulcan,  the  Mahomed  Bux,  the  Nancy,  the  Creole,  the  Fly,  and  the 
Shrewsbury,  M.  Gallois  adds  to  this  list  the  Industry,  a  packet  boat, 
restored  to  its  owner ;  the  Bembow,  the  Daos,  and  the  Lionne.  In  the 
Asiatic  Annual  Register  for  March,  1804,  I  find  the  following :  "  On  the 
1st  ultimo  the  Taxbux,  under  Arab  colours,  was  fired  at,  and  at  nine  p.m. 
taken  possession  of  by  the  French  privateer  La  Fortune,  commanded  by 
Citizen  Lememe.  *  *  *  Captain  Mercer  was  informed  on  board  the 
privateer  that  she  had  taken  three  vessels,  the  Sarah,  the  Eliza,  and 
the  ActiveX     The  Taxbux  was  restored  to  Captain  Mercer. 


106  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

bound  for  England,  he  died  on  the  way  (30th  March). 
In  him  Franch  lost  one  of  the  most  daring  of  her  sailor 
adventurers,  and  the  Anglo-Indian  community  were 
relieved  of  the  obligation  to  give  to  the  question,  as  to 
the  name  of  the  privateersman  by  whom  their  last 
merchant  vessel  had  been  captui^ed,  the  stereotyped  reply 
of  ^'toujours  leinemey 

But  little  inferior  to  Lememe  as  a  destroyer  of  British 
commerce  in  the  Indian  seas  was  Jean  Dutertre.  In  the 
chronicle  of  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register  for  November 
1799,  there  appeared  the  following  notice : — *^  On  Monday 
morning,  the  28th  October  last,  an  express  arrived  at 
the  General  Post  Office,  Bombay,  from  Masulipatam, 
conveying  accounts  of  the  capture  of  the  under- 
mentioned ships  by  a  French  privateer,  a  little,  to  the 
northward  of  the  Madras  Eoads,  viz.,  the  Nawab  of 
Arcot's  ship.  Surprise  galley,  the  Princess  Royal, 
formerly  a  Company's  ship,  the  Thomas,  ditto,  an 
extra  ship,  the  Joyce,  belonging  to  Masulipatam, 
the  Lord  Hobart,  belonging  to  Madras.  *  *  * 
The  privateer  by  which  these  ships  were  captured  is 
supposed  to  be  the  Malartic,  mounting  12  guns, 
and  commanded  by  the  same  person  who  took  the 
Danish  ship  Ha  aha  t  on  the  coast  four  months  ago." 
The  supposition  was  correct.  The  privateer  was  the 
Malartic,  carrying  12  guns,  having  a  crew  of  110  men, 
and  commanded  by  Jean  Dutertre.  Dutertre  was  born 
at  Lorient  and  early  took  to  the  sea.  He  happened  to 
be  at  the  Isle  of  France  when  the  Emilie  arrived  there 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  107 

in  charge  of  the  prizes  which  Surcouf  had  taken  in  her. 
Surcouf,  it  may  be  recollected,  had  abandoned  her  for 
his  prize,  the  Cartier,  Dutertre  was  then  appointed  to 
her  command,  and  in  her  he  made  one  or  two  cruises, 
the  details  regarding  which  are  altogether  wanting.  He 
was  next  heard  of  as  commanding  the  Malartic,  in 
which  he  made  the  prizes  to  which  I  have  alluded,  and 
subsequently,  in  addition,  he  captured  the  Governor 
North  and  the  Marquess  Wellesley.  Shortly  afterwards, 
however,  the  Malartic  was  forced  to  strike  her  colours 
to  an  English  vessel  of  superior  force,  the  Phoenix,  and 
Dutertre  was  taken  prisoner  to  England. 

Keleased  by  the  peace  of  Amiens  Dutertre  recom- 
men  his  career  in  the  Indian  seas.  He  again  became 
the  terror  of  those  waters.  In  concert  with  another 
adventurer  named  Courson,  he,  in  one  season,  captured 
the  Rebecca,  the  Active,  the  Clarendon,  the  William, 
the  Betsey  Jane,  the  Henry  Addington,  the  Admiral 
Rainier,  the  Lady  William  Bentinck,  the  Nancy,  the 
Actceon,  the  Brothers,  the  Hebe,  the  Mongamah,  and  the 
Warren  Hastings.  So  great  was  the  consternation 
caused  that  we  find  the  English  journals  of  the  period 
complaining  that  'Hhere  is  no  part  of  the  world,  not- 
*'  withstanding  the  superiority  of  the  English  marine, 
**  in  which  the  enemy  does  not  succeed  in  molesting 
'*  our  navigation,  and  in  causing  us  infinite  losses." 

It  was,  after  all,  but  the  natural  consequence  of  the 
system  of  privateering  thus  affecting  the  power  which 
carried  the  commerce  of  the  world. 


108  THll    ISLE    OF    FRANCE 

After  this  cruise,  which  began  in  1804  and  closed  the 
following  year,  Dutertre  entered  the  French  Navy  and 
became  lost  to  the  public  view.     He  died  in  1811. 

Amongst  the  other  adventurers  who  caused  great 
damage  to  English  commerce,  I  find  the  Courson, 
above  referred  to,  and  who,  previous  to  the  peace  of 
Amiens,  had  made  several  captures  and  had  been  taken 
prisoner  and  sent  to  England ;  Potier  of  St.  Malo,  who 
succeeded  Surcouf  in  the  Eevenant,  and  who,  in 
command  of  that  privateer  carrying  18  guns,  captured 
the  Portuguese  man-of-war,  the  Coiicegdo,  pierced  for 
64,  but  carrying  54  guns  ;  and  Mallerouse  of  St.  Malo, 
who  commanding  the  Iphigenie  of  18  guns,  and  having 
captured  the  Pearl,  Indiaman,  carrying  10  guns  and 
having  on  board  treasure  amounting  to  more  than  three 
lakhs  of  rupees,  found  himself  suddenly  face  to  face 
with  H.  M.'s  ship  Trincomali,  carrying  18  24-pounder 
carronades.  The  combat  which  ensued  was  so  remarkable 
that  I  make  no  apology  for  recording  it  at  length.  I 
am  fortunately  able  to  quote  an  authority  which  every 
Englishman  will  recognise  as  impartial,  for  the  extract 
which  follows  is  taken  from  a  private  letter  written  to 
his  brother  in  England  by  Mr.  Cramlington,  who 
was  chief  officer  of  the  Pearl  when  she  was  captured, 
and  at  the  time  a  prisoner  on  board  the  Iphigenie. 

After  recounting  the  story  of  the  capture  of  the  Pearl 
Mr.  Cramlington  thus  continues  :  *'  The  treasure  was 
'^  shifted  on  board  the  privateer  the  next  day;  and  they 
**  were  so  elated  with  their  success  that  they  determined 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  109 

to  return  from  their  cruise  immediately.  But  on  the 
10th,  at  night,  we  fell  in  with  H.  M.'s  ship  Trincomali, 
Captain  Kowe,  mounting  18  24:-pounder  carronades, 
but  badly  manned.*  She  had  been  fitted  out  at 
Bombay,  and  had  been  cruising  in  the  Gulf  nine  or 
ten  months ;  her  crew  very  sickly,  had  lost  a  number 
of  them  by  death,  and  had  no  fresh  supply.  I  have 
been  told  she  had  only  seventy  active  men  on  board. 
^*  A  partial  action  took  place  the  next  day  as  they 
passed  each  other,  and  on  the  12th,  at  three  p.m., 
they  came  within  gunshot  again,  and  kept  firing  at 
each  other  till  after  sunset,  but  at  too  great  a  distance 
for  much  damage  to  be  .done.  Owing  to  calm  and 
light  airs  they  could  not  get  near  each  other.  A 
schooner,  named  the  Comet,  was  in  company  with  the 
Trincomali,  mounting  8  small  guns.  The  captain  of 
the  privateer  wanted  very  much  to  cut  her  ofi",  but 
through  the  bravery  and  good  conduct  of  her  captain 
all  his  schemes  failed,  and  she  served  to  engage  the 
Pearl  for  whom  she  was  more  than  a  match. 
''  xit  half-past  six  o'clock  the  same  evening,  a  fine 
breeze  springing  up,  the  privateer  bore  down  towards 
her  prize.  The  Trincomali  followed,  and  at  ten  p.m. 
(being   moonlight)  brought  her  to  action,  which  con- 

*  James,  in  his  Naval  Historyy  writes  quite  at  random  regarding 
the  armament  of  the  combatants.  He  speaks  of  the  Trincomali  as 
carrying  16  guns,  probably  6-pounders  (the  italics  are  mine)  ;  and  of 
the  Iphigenie  as  carrying  22  guns.  The  French  captain  he  calls 
"  Malroux."  Compare  his  account  with  that  given  by  the  English 
eye  witness  in  the  text. 


110  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

tinued  for  two  hours  with  great  fury  within  musket- 
shot  ;  when  with  one  ship  luffing  up,  and  the  other 
edging  down,  they  fell  alongside  each  other  and 
grappled  muzzle  and  muzzle.  In  this  situation  they 
remained  about  half  an  hour,  the  slaughter  very  great 
on  both  sides.  The  French,  being  more  numerous, 
were  preparing  to  board,  when  by  some  fatal  accident, 
the  TrincomaU  blew  up,  and  every  soul  on  board 
perished,  except  one  English  seaman,  named  Thomas 
Dawson,  and  a  lascar.  The  explosion  was  so  great, 
and  the  ships  so  close,  that  the  privateer's  broadside 
was  stove  in. 

"  I  leave  you  to  judge  the  dreadful  situation  I  was  in 
at  this  crisis ;  being  below  two  decks,  in  the  square 
of  the  main -hatchway,  in  the  place  appointed  for  the 
wounded,  which  was  full  of  poor  souls  of  that 
description  in  circumstances  too  shocking  to  be 
described.  All  at  once  the  hatchway  was  filled  in  with 
wood,  the  lights  were  driven  out,  the  water  rushing  in, 
and  no  visible  passage  to  the  deck.  The  ship  appeared 
to  be  shaken  to  pieces,  as  the  hold  beams  had  shrunk  so 
considerably,  that  where  there  was  room  before  to 
stand  nearly  upright,  you  could  now  only  crawl  on  hands 
and  knees,  which  I  did  towards  the  hole  on  the  side 
where  the  water  was  coming  in.  Close  to  this,  by  the 
light  of  the  moon,  I  found  a  hole  through  both  decks, 
which  had  been  newly  made,  I  suppose,  by  the  falling 
of  some  of  the  TrincomalVs  guns,  or  other  wreck. 
Through  this  I  got  with  difficulty  upon  deck,  when  I 


AND    HEB    PRIVATEERS.  Ill 

'*  found  the  ship  just  disappearing  forward,  and  hastened 
**  aft  as  fast  as  I  could  over  the  bodies  of  the  killed,  with 
**  which  the  deck  was  covered,  to  the  tafferel,  and  jumped 
*^  overboard. 

''  I  swam  a  little  way  from  her,  dreading  the  suction, 
**  and  looked  round  for  her,  but  she  had  totally  dis- 
*'  appeared.  I  afterwards  caught  hold  of  a  piece  of 
*'  wood  to  which  I  clung  for  about  an  hour  and  a  half, 
*'  and  at  which  time  the  boats  of  the  Pearl  came  to 
pick  us  up,  there  being  about  thirty  Frenchmen  in  the 
same  predicament.  They,  however,  were  all  taken  up 
first ;  and  when  I  solicited  to  be  taken  in,  I  had  a 
blow  made  at  my  head  with  an  oar,  which  luckily 
**  missed  me.  This  treatment  I  met  with  from  two 
*'  different  boats,  and  I  began  to  think  they  were  going 
"  to  leave  me  to  my  fate.  But  the  French  ofi&cer  in 
*'  command  of  the  Pearl,  hearing  there  were  some 
*'  Englishmen  on  the  wreck,  ordered  the  boats  im- 
**  mediately  to  return  and  take  us  up,  viz,,  myself  and 
*'  Thomas  Dawson,  then  the  only  survivor  of  the 
"   Trincomali, 

"  There  were  killed  and  drowned  on  board  the 
**  Iphigenie  115  or  120  men.  Among  whom  were  the 
**  captain,  seven  ofiQcers,  the  surgeon,  two  young  men, 
volunteers  from  the  Isle  of  France,  the  first  boatswain, 
gunner,  and  carpenter.  All  the  treasure  went  down 
in  the  privateer.  Captain  Rowe  of  the  Trincomali 
**  was  killed  before  his  ship  blew  up,  as  was  also  the 
"  first  lieutenant   whose   name  was   Williams.      The 


a 


112  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

**  Comet,  immediately  on  the  accident  happening,  made 
**  sail  from  the  Pearl,*  I  suppose  she  was  afraid  there 
"  might  be  too  many  French  for  her  to  manage.  On 
'*  the  15th  we  arrived  here  "  (Muscat)  ''  for  water,  &c., 
*'  and  the  French  officer  was  so  good  as  to  give  me  my 
''  liberty." 

The  Peaii  subsequently  reached  the  Isle  of  France  in 
safety,  but  the  career  of  Mallerouse  was  over. 

In  addition  to  the  preceding  I  may  mention  Pinaud 
of  Nantes.  One  incident  in  the  career  of  this  brave 
adventurer  deserves  to  be  recorded. 

In  my  notice  of  Surcouf  I  have  mentioned  the  feats  he 
was  able  to  accomplish  in  the  Clarisse,  a  brig  carrying 
14  guns.  When  Surcouf  left  the  Clarisse  for  the  Con- 
fiance,  the  command  of  the  former  was  entrusted  to 
Pinaud.  Pinaud  took  her  in  1800  to  the  Indian  seas, 
made  many  captures,  but  was  forced  himself  to  succumb 
to  an  English  man-of-war.  Taken  to  Madras,  he  was 
thrown  into  prison,  and  finally  placed,  with  about  600 
other  prisoners,  on  board  the  Prince,  Indiaman,  to  be 
taken  to  England  under  the  convoy  of  a  squadron  of  six 
ships  of  war  returning  thither.     The  convoy  sailed  the 

♦  James  says  that  the  Pearl  escaped  from  the  Comet.  It  would 
appear  from  the  impartial  statement  of  the  Englishman  in  the  text, 
the  Comet  fled  from  the  Pearl.  But  let  the  facts  speak.  The  Pearl 
remaining  on  the  scene  of  action  picked  up  by  successive  trips  of 
her  boats  about  thirty  Frenchmen  and  two  Englishmen.  The  captain 
of  the  Comet,  in  his  official  report,  dated  18th  February  1800,  admits 
that  he  only  picked  four  sepoys  and  a  lascar,  and  those  immediately 
after  the  accident !  It  is  clear  from  this  that  it  was  not  the  Pearl 
which  sailed  first  from  the  scene  of  the  encounter. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  113 

middle  of  1801,  and  reached  in  safety  the  latitude  of 
the  Isle  of  France.  The  locality  Pinaud  considered 
favourable,  if  other  circumstances  should  combine,  to 
strike  a  blow  for  freedom.  He  communicated  his  plan 
to  his  companions.  They  approved.  It  so  happened 
that  on  the  29th  October  the  squadron  was  surprised, 
when  near  the  Isle  of  France,  by  a  heavy  squall  which 
dispersed  the  vessels  composing  it.  Pinaud  considered 
the  moment  opportune.  The  chief  officer  was  in  the 
fore-topmast  crosstrees ;  the  second  officer  in  charge  of 
the  deck;  the  captain,  the  military  officers,  and  two 
French  officers  (prisoners)  were  in  the  cuddy  taking  tea, 
when  suddenly  there  rushed  upon  them  Pinaud  at  the 
head  of  a  strong  party  of  prisoners.  Another  division 
at  the  same  time  took  possession  of  the  deck.  The 
surprise  had  been  so  well  managed  and  the  secret  so 
well  kept  that  there  was  not  even  the  semblance  of  a 
struggle.  Pinaud  took  command  of  the  ship,  followed 
the  course  laid  down  for  some  time  so  as  not  to  excite 
suspicion,  then,  when  night  fell,  he  put  out  all  the 
lights,  changed  the  ship's  course,  and  reached  the  Isle 
of  France  a  few  weeks  later  (20th  November).  Pinaud 
next  made  a  most  successful  cruise  in  the  Subtile.  He 
subsequently  transferred  his  cruising  ground  to  the  West 
Indies. 

It  would  be  a  tale  of  repetition  to  recount  the  deeds  of 
several  other  adventurers,  such  as  Cautance  of  the 
Eugene;  Peron  of  the  Bellone ;  and  Henri  of  the 
Henriette.      It  will    suffice    to   state  that  the  injury 

8 


114  THE   ISLE    OF  FRANCE 

inflicted  on  the  British  trade  with  the  East  was 
enormous,  and  the  gain,  to  the  French  so  immediate 
that  the  privateers  continued  to  increase  and  prosper 
in  spite  of  our  overwhelming  naval  superiority. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  115 


III. 

The  secret  of  their  impunity  lay  in  the  fact  that  in  the 
Isles  of  France  and  Bourbon  the  enemy's  cruisers 
possessed  a  strong  base  of  operations.  It  was  the 
charmed  refuge  to  which  they  could  retire ;  from  which 
they  could  issue  with  renewed  strength.  It  may  be 
asked  why  the  British,  boasting  as  they  did  of  the  com- 
mand of  the  seas,  allowed  those  islands  to  remain 
so  long  in  the  possession  of  their  deadliest  enemy.  The 
question  is  difficult,  even  at  this  distant  period,  to 
answer.  The  sagacious  intellect  of  Marquess  Wellesley 
had  early  detected  the  weak  point  in  the  British  armour, 
and  with  characteristic  vigour  he  had  at  once  applied 
himself  to  repair  it.  Very  soon  after  the  fall  of 
Seringapatam  he  had  organised  from  the  armies  of 
the  three  presidencies  a  force  which,  massed  at  Trin- 
comali,  should  proceed  thence  to  the  conquest  of  Java 
and  of  the  French  islands.  This  expedition  had  been 
on  the  very  point  of  setting  out  when  urgent  orders 
from  England,  despatched  overland,  diverted  it  to 
Egypt  to  aid  the  expeditionary  corps  of  Sir  Kalph 
Abercromby.  Partly,  probably,  owing  to  the  ''  timid 
"  counsels ''  which  supervened  on  the  departure  of  the 

8  A 


116  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

great  Marquess  from  India ;  partly,  likewise,  on  account 
of  the  exaggerated  opinion  entertained  in  England  of  the 
strength  of  the  islands  and  of  the  great  difficulties 
which  would  attend  an  expedition,  the  idea  was  allowed 
for  some  years  to  drop.  The  British  Government  con- 
tented itself  with  spasmodic  directions  to  blockade  the 
islands — a  measure,  the  effective  carrying  out  of  which 
was  impossible,  and  which,  even  when  attempted,  did 
not  affect  the  successful  egress  and  ingress  of  the 
adventurous  cruisers. 

At  length  the  damage  done  by  those  cruisers  aroused 
a  cry  of  indignation  and  despair  to  which  it  was 
impossible  that  the  Government  should  remain  longer 
deaf.  Under  the  pressure  thus  excited  the  Governor- 
General,  Lord  Minto,  urged  upon  the  Home  Government 
the  necessity  of  adopting  measures  more  effectual  than 
that  of  a  blockade  by  ships  depending  for  their  supplies 
on  the  Cape  or  on  Bombay.  Lord  Minto  was  in  conse- 
quence authorised  to  occupy  Eodriguez,  a  small  island 
about  300  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  Isle  of  France. 
Still  neither  the  English  Government  nor  the  Governor- 
General  entertained  any  idea  beyond  gaining  a  base 
from  which  to  supply  blockading  squadrons.  In 
accordance  with  these  views  a  small  force,  consisting 
of  200  Europeans  and  200  natives,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Keating,  was  despatched  in 
May,  1809,  from  Bombay,  in  H.M.'s  ship  Belliqueux^ 
to  occupy  Eodriguez. 

Eodriguez,  used  by  the  French  as  a  garden  to  supply 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  117 

the  larger  islands  with  vegetables,  was  garrisoned  by 
three  Frenchmen,  gardeners,  and  these  were  insufficient, 
even  if  they  had  been  inclined,  to  offer  any  serious 
resistance.  The  English  detachment,  therefore,  occupied 
the  island,  without  opposition,  the  4th  August.  They 
kept  the  French  gardeners  to  grow  vegetables  on  its 
soil,  whilst  using  the  island  also  as  a  depot  for  ships' 
stores.     These  were  landed  in  great  numbers. 

It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  the  French  priva- 
teers still  sailed  and  returned  with  their  prizes  as  they 
had  been  accustomed  to  sail  and  to  return.  They 
continued  to  elude,  as  successfully  as  they  had  before 
eluded,  the  vigilance  of  the  British  cruisers.  In  a  word, 
it  was  found  that  even  with  a  base  so  near  to  the  scene 
of  operations  as  was  Kodriguez  effectual  blockade  of  the 
islands  was  impossible. 

Under  these  circumstances  the  garrison  of  Rodriguez 
was  strengthened,  and  Colonel  Keating  was  authorised 
to  make  an  attempt  on  the  Isle  of  Bourbon.*  That  officer 
accordingly  embarked  on  the  16th  September  (1809)  368 
officers  and  men,  of  whom  one-half  belonged  to  the 
2nd  Bombay  Native  Infantry,  on  board  H.M.'s  ships 
Nereide  and  Otter  and  the  Honourable  Company's 
cruiser  Wasp,  On  the  18th  these  three  vessels  arrived 
off  Port  Louis,  and  the  following  morning  they  joined 


*  This  island  was  then  called  "  Bonaparte,"  and  was  subsequently 
named  and  has  since  been  known  as  "  Reunion ; "  but  for  the  sake  of 
uniformity  I  adhere  to  the  nomenclature  it  bore  from  the  time  of  its 
first  occupation  by  the  French. 


118  THE    ISLE    OF   FKANCE 

H.M.'s  ships  Raisonnable  £LiiA  Sirius ;  the  naval  force 
being  commanded  by  Commodore  Eowley  of  the  former. 
That  same  day  the  seamen  and  troops  destined  for  the 
attack,  amounting  to  604  men,  were  massed  on  board 
the  Nereide,  and  towards  evening  the  squadron  stood 
for  the  Isle  of  Bourbon,  off  the  eastern  coast  of  which  it 
arrived  on  the  morning  of  the  20th.  Colonel  Keating, 
however,  had  resolved  to  attempt  to  carry  St.  Paul,  the 
chief  town  on  the  western  side,  to  secure  the  batteries 
there,  and  to  force  the  surrender  of  the  enemy's  shipping 
in  the  port. 

At  five  o'clock  on  the'^morning  of  the  21st  the  troops 
were  disembarked  to  the  south  of  Point  de  Calotte, 
seven  miles  from  St.  Paul.  They  were  formed  into 
three  columns :  the  reserve,  composed  of  eighty  men  of 
the  Pompadours  and  eighty  of  the  Royal  Marines,  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Forbes ;  the  second  column, 
consisting  of  the  detail  of  the  2nd  Battalion  2nd  Bom- 
bay Native  Infantry,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Imlack ;  the  centre  column  formed  of  100  sailors  under 
Captain  Willoughby,  and  of  the  remainder  of  the  Pom- 
padours and  Marines,  about  140  in  number,  under 
Captain  Hanna. 

Colonel  Keating  landed  first  with  the  reserve  to  cover 
the  disembarkation  of  the  other  two  columns.  This 
having  been  efiected,  the  reserve  column  was  directed  to 
proceed  under  Captain  Forbes  by  the  road  leading  to 
St.  Paul,  until  it  should  pass  the  bridge  over  the  lake, 
when   it  was  to    make   a   turn   to  the  left,  and   take 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  119 

possession  first  of  the  barracks,  then  of  the  second 
battery,  La  Pierre,  and  then  to  proceed  on  to  the  first 
battery,  La  Centiere,  where  it  would  receive  fresh  orders 
from  the  commanding  officer ;  the  second  column,  under 
Captain  Imlack,  was  directed  to  pass  the  river  Galotte 
and  to  proceed  along  the  seashore  until  it  should  reach 
the  rivulet  running  from  the  lake  into  the  bay.  It  was 
to  advance  thence  up  the  bed  of  the  rivulet,  past  the  right 
flank  of  the  battery,  Lamboucere,  then  move  out  and 
form  towards  the  sea,  thus  bringing  it  within  pistol-shot 
of  the  rear  of  the  battery,  of  which  Captain  Imlack  was 
to  take  possession,  spike  the  guns,  and  move  on  to  La 
Centiere. 

The  centre  column  under  Colonel  Keating  was  to 
march  straight  on  the  battery  La  Centiere,  and  to 
occupy  it,  detaching  thence  a  force  to  take  possession 
of  the  battery  La  Neuve.  La  Centiere  was  to  constitute 
the  post  on  which  all  attacks  were  to  concentrate. 

Whilst  the  British  troops  are  marching  in  the  order 
above  indicated,  I  propose  to  take  a  glance  at  the  means 
possessed  by  the  French  commandant  of  the  island  to 
resist  so  formidable  an  invasion. 

The  commander  of  the  French  force  in  the  island  of 
Bourbon  was  General  des  Bruslys.  That  force  was  very 
small.  There  were  concentrated  at  the  capital,  St.  Denis, 
under  the  personal  command  of  General  des  Bruslys, 
about  100  troops  of  the  line  and  300  Creoles.  At  St.  Paul 
there  were  on  board  the  frigate  Caroline,  anchored  in  the 
harbour,  110  troops  of  the  line  and  from  200  to  300 


120  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

Creoles.  The  remainder  of  the  force,  entirely  Creole, 
was  scattered  over  nine  districts,*  from  which  they 
could  not  without  diflSculty  be  suddenly  withdrawn  and 
concentrated  on  a  given  point.  Des  Bruslys  was  expect 
ing  an  attack  not  at  St.  Paul  but  at  St.  Denis.  His 
lieutenant  at  the  former  place,  the  Commandant 
St.  Michiel,  had  received  no  intimation  that  the 
English  were  about  to  land.  When  they  did  land  he 
had  not  then  even  withdrawn  from  the  Caroline  the 
European  troops  on  board  of  her. 

It  can  easily  be  conceived  then  that  Colonel  Keating's 
first  attack  was  successful.  The  second  column  took 
possession  of  the  battery  Lamboucere,  and  the  centre 
column  of  the  battery  La  Centiere  without  any  strong 
opposition,  except  that  ofi*ered  by  the  fire  from  the 
enemy's  ships  in  the  river.  The  reserve  column  had 
likewise  moved  on  La  Centiere  and  had  turned  its  guns 
on  the  enemy's  shipping.  The  second  column,  under 
Captain  Imlack,  consisting  only  of  142  men  of  the 
2nd  Bombay  Native  Infantry  and  of  twelve  Europeans, 
was  then  sent  to  take  possession  of  the  battery  La 
Neuve,  deserted  by  the  enemy. 

But  before  Captain  Imlack  could  reach  La  Neuve  the 
French  appeared  on  the  field.  Very  early  that  morning 
the  Commandant  St.  Michiel  had  ordered  the  dis- 
embarkation of  the  110  Europeans  from  the  Caroline, 
and  had  directed  them  to  join  him  as  soon  as  possible 

*  These  were  St.  Leu,  St.  Louis,  St.  Pierre,  St.  Joseph,  St.  Rose, 
St.  Benoit,  St.  Andr§,  St.  Suzanne,  and  St.  Marie. 


AND    HER   PRIVATEERS.  121 

in  a  very  strong  position  he  had  taken  up  in  front  of  the 
battery  La  Neuve.  This  position  was  covered  by  a  stone 
wall  carefully  loop-holed,  and  flanked  on  both  sides  by  a 
strong  natural  defence.  Each  of  these  flanks  was  again 
covered  by  three  6 -pounders. 

This  position  had  been  occupied  by  St.  Michiel  whilst 
the  English  were  marching  on  the  batteries  Lamboucere 
and  La  Centiere.  He  occupied  it  still  with  about  150 
Creoles  when  the  swarthy  sons  of  India  under  their 
English  officers  marched  upon  it.  The  attack  was 
conducted  with  great  gallantry,  but  the  defences  were 
too  strong  and  the  artillery  fire  too  concentrated,  and 
the  sepoys  fell  back.  A  second  attack  was  not  more 
successful.  The  British  centre  column,  consisting 
entirely  of  Europeans,  was  then  ordered  up  to  reinforce 
the  native  troops.  Again  the  attacking  party  charged. 
This  time  they  succeeded,  after  a  desperate  conflict,  in 
taking  two  of  the  enemy's  guns,  but  they  made  no 
impression  on  his  position.  It  was  now  the  turn  of 
the  French  to  be  reinforced.  They  were  joined  by  110 
Europeans  from  the  Caroline,  and  by  many  Creoles 
from  the  hills.  The  contest  was  now  resumed  with 
greater  fury  than  ever,  and  it  became  necessary  for  the 
English  commander  to  bring  up  the  reserve  under 
Captain  Forbes.  This  officer,  advancing  by  a  circuitous 
route,  occupied  the  battery  La  Neuve  and  thus  took  up 
a  position  very  nearly  in  rear  of  the  enemy. 

St.  Michiel  felt  his  post  no  longer  tenable.  He 
evacuated  it  therefore,  and  fell  back    upon    St.  Paul; 


122  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

losing,  after  a  most  gallant  resistance,  his  four  remaining 
guns.  After  that  the  course  of  the  English  was  easy. 
The  fourth  and  fifth  batteries,  La  Pierre  and  La  Caserne, 
fell  into  their  hands.  By  half-past  eight  they  had  taken 
possession  of  the  town  evacuated  by  St.  Michiel,  the 
magazines,  eight  brass  field  pieces,  117  new  and  heavy 
iron  guns  of  different  calibres,  and  all  the  stores.  The 
commodore,  seeing  the  success  of  the  troops,  immediately 
stood  in,  anchored  close  to  the  enemy's  shipping,  and 
compelled  it  to  surrender.  The  same  evening  Colonel 
Keating  destroyed  all  the  public  property  in  the  town 
not  fit  for  transport,  and  re-embarked  his  troops. 

General  des  Bruslys  learned  with  sui-prise  the  same 
night  the  landing  of  the  British  troops  on  the  west 
coast  of  the  island.  He  immediately  collected  all  his 
available  men  and  marched  towards  St.  Paul.  He 
arrived  on  the  hills  covering  the  town  on  the  evening  of 
the  22nd  and  encamped  there.  Colonel  Keating  de- 
termined to  dislodge  him  the  following  morning.  He 
accordingly  embarked  his  entire  force  in  boats  early  on 
the  23rd.  But  whether  it  was  that  des  Bruslys  thought 
that  further  resistance  would  only  lead  to  greater  disaster, 
or  whether  the  moral  tension  was  too  strong  for  him, 
this  at  least  is  certain,  that  he  did  not  wait  for  a  contest, 
but  retreated  to  St.  Denis  and  shot  himself.* 


*  He  left  a  paper  saying  that  he  had  destroyed  himself  to  avoid 
death  on  the  scaffold, — a  commentary  on  the  dread  caused  in  a  weak 
mind  by  the  terrible  knowledge  that  his  master  required,  before  all 
things,  success. 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  123 

The  Commandaiit  St.  Michiel  succeeded  to  the  post 
thus  vacated  by  des  Bruslys.  There  was  nothing  left 
for  him  but  to  negotiate  with  the  conqueror.  The 
conditions  insisted  upon  by  the  latter  were  not  heavy. 
It  was  arranged  that  he  should  retain  possession  of  St. 
Paul  until  he  should  be  able  to  place  on  board  his  ships 
the  stores  he  had  taken  there,  and  to  fit  out  the  captured 
vessels*  for  sea.  This  was  soon  accomplished,  and  on 
the  2nd  October  Colonel  Keating  evacuated  the  island 
and  set  sail  for  Eodriguez. 

*  These  were  the  Caroline  frigate,  44  guns ;  the  Grappler  brig,  11 
guns  ;  the  Streatham  a  merchantman,  850  tons  and  pierced  for  30 
guns;  VEuropej  820  tons,  pierced  for  26  guns  ;  the  Fanny,  150  tons; 
the  Tres  Amis  and  La  Creole  of  60  tons  each. 


124  THE   ISLE    OF   FRANCE 


IV. 

The  success  of  this  expedition  showed  the  Government 
how  far  from  formidable  were  the  resources  possessed  by 
the  islands,  and  how  easy  it  would  be  to  strike  a  decisive 
blow  at  these  harbours  of  safety  for  the  French 
privateers.  Impressed  with  this  idea  Lord  Minto, 
without  waiting  for  orders  from  England,  dispatched  in 
the  spring  of  1810,  considerable  reinforcements  from 
the  three  presidences  to  the  island  of  Rodriguez.  These 
reinforcements  raised  the  troops  under  Colonel  Keating's 
orders  to  3650  men,  of  whom  not  quite  one-half  were 
Europeans.  So  confident  was  Lord  Minto  of  the 
success  of  his  plans  that  he  nominated,  in  anticipation, 
Mr.  Farquhar  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service  to  be  Governor 
of  the  island. 

The  transports  conveying  the  reinforcements  to  Colonel 
Keating  arrived  off  Rodriguez  on  the  25th  June,  but  it 
was  not  till  the  3rd  July  that  the  expedition  was  able  to 
start  for  its  destination.  This  time  Colonel  Keating 
had  determined  to  strike  at  once  at  the  heart  of  Bourbon, 
at  its  capital,  St.  Denis.  With  this  view  it  was  arranged 
that  the  transports  should  meet  at  a  given  point  about 
fifty  miles   to   the   windward   of  the   island ;  that   the 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  125 

troops  should  then  concentrate  by  brigades  on  board 
H.  M/s  ships  of  war*  and  that  these  should  proceed 
at  once  to  the  points  marked  out  for  each  beforehand. 

About  four  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  July, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Campbell  and  150  troops  of  the 
4th  brigade,  accompanied  by  Captain  Willoughby,  K.N., 
commanding  a  party  of  sailors,  the  whole  constituting 
the  advanced  guard  of  the  force,  were  successfully 
landed  at  a  point  between  the  battery  St.  Marie  and  the 
batteries  of  the  town.  A  few  moments  later,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Macleod,  commanding  the  3rd  brigade,  effected 
a  landing  with  150  men,  somewhat  to  the  right  of 
Colonel  Campbell's  party,  expecting  to  be  joined  by  the 
remainder  of  his  brigade.  But  just  at  this  moment  the 
weather,  which  till  then  had  been  calm  and  moderate, 
suddenly  became  stormy.  So  violent  was  the  surf  that 
further  disembarkation  was  impossible.  Under  these 
circumstances  Colonel  Keating  could  not  fail  to  be  very 
anxious  for  the  safety  of  the  handful  of  troops  which  had 
but  just  landed.  Impressed,  however,  with  the  truth  of 
the  motto  that  in  all  doubtful  circumstances  boldness  is 
prudence,  the  colonel  was  desirous  that  his  troops  should 
try  to  daunt  the  enemy  by  themselves  taking  the 
initiative.  But  the  violence  of  the  surf  had  increased 
and  was  increasing.  No  boat  could  take  an  order  to 
them.  Yet  the  fate  of  the  300  or  400  men  just  landed 
seemed  to   depend   upon  their  receiving  one.      Every 

*  These  were  the  Boadicea^  38;    the  Sirius;  the  Iphigenia ;    the 
Magicienne ;  and  the  Nereide. 


126  THE   ISLE    OF   FKANCE 

device  was  tried.  A  small  vessel  was  beached,  stern 
foremost,  in  the  hope  that  one  at  least  of  her  crew 
might  make  his  way  to  the  shore.  But  the  fury  of  the 
elements  frustrated  even  this  attempt.  Further  effort 
appeared  impossible.  Colonel  Keating  was  in  despair. 
At  this  crisis  Lieutenant  Foulstone  of  H.M.'s  69th 
Regiment  came  forward  unsolicited,  and  volunteered  to 
swim  through  the  surf  and  carry  orders  to  Colonel 
Macleod.  His  offer  was  promptly  accepted.  Carried  in 
a  boat  to  the  edge  of  the  surf  Foulstone  jumped  in,  and, 
though  a  good  deal  knocked  about,  reached  the  shore. 
He  conveyed  to  Colonel  Macleod  the  order  to  unite  the 
two  parties  which  had  landed  and  at  once  to  attack  and 
storm  St.  Marie.  Macleod  carried  out  these  instructions 
with  spirit  and  energy,  occupied  the  post,  and  remained 
there  unmolested  all  night. 

As  the  weather  next  day  showed  no  signs  of 
moderating.  Colonel  Keating  proceeded  with  the  3rd 
and  4th  brigades  to  the  leeward,  to  Grand  Chaloupe ; 
where,  on  the  8th,  about  eleven  a.m.,  he  succeeded  in 
effecting  a  landing.  Colonel  Keating  at  this  point  was 
separated  from  the  town  by  heights.  He  lost  no  time 
in  crossing  these,  and  before  two  p.m.  he  occupied  a 
position  from  which  he  could  command  the  enemy's 
intrenchments. 

But  affairs  had  gone  somewhat  too  fast  for  him.  The 
1st  brigade,  commanded  by  Colonel  Fraser,  had  suc- 
ceeded at  two  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  in 
effecting  a  landing  in  a  position  to  the  south  of  the 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  127 

capital  within  sight  of  the  enemy.  This  daring  achieve- 
ment had  the  effect  of  concentrating  upon  Colonel 
Fraser  the  entire  attention  of  the  French  commandant, 
and  diverting  it  from  Colonel  Macleod's  isolated  party. 
Colonel  Fraser  resolved  to  keep  his  attention  fixed.  He 
at  once  pushed  forward,  dislodged  the  enemy  from  the 
heights,  and  then  took  up  a  commanding  position  just 
above  the  town. 

He  had  with  him  only  350  bayonets,  all  Europeans, 
but  with  these  he  kept  the  enemy  anxious  and  occupied 
until  darkness  fell.  He  then  retreated  to  a  secure 
position  a  little  in  the  rear  which  cut  the  communications 
between  St.  Denis  and  St.  Paul. 

Eeinforced  during  the  night  by  from  300  to  400 
sepoys,  and  by  his  guns  and  pioneers,  Colonel  Fraser, 
posting  the  sepoys  so  as  to  protect  his  rear,  advanced  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning  towards  the  town,  re- 
occupied  the  position  of  the  previous  evening,  and 
forming  his  troops  there,  waited  for  the  day. 

When  day  broke  Fraser  saw  in  the  plain  below  him 
the  whole  available  French  force.  This  force,  consisting 
of  190  Europeans  and  350  Creoles,  was  drawn  up  in 
two  columns,  each  with  a  field  piece  at  its  head,  covered 
by  the  concentrated  fire  of  the  batteries,  and  commanded 
by  the  successor  of  the  unfortunate  des  Bruslys,  Colonel 
de  Suzanne.  Fraser  did  not  hesitate.  Under  a  mixed 
shower  of  balls  issuing  all  at  once  from  the  many  and 
deep-toned  mouths  of  the  ordnance  and  musketry*  the 

*  Asiatic  Annual  Register, 


128  THE    ISLE    OF   FBANCE 

British  soldiers  descended  the  heights  in  steady  and 
unbroken  alignment.  When  they  reached  the  plain 
Colonel  Fraser  gave  the  order  to  charge.  They  at  once 
charged  home. 

The  French  stood  firm,  covered  by  their  guns,  till  the 
rush  of  the  British  grenadiers  warned  them  of  the 
earnestness  of  the  play.  They  then  retired  in  good 
order,  without  waiting  for  actual  contact,  behind  the 
guns.  But  even  there  they  were  not  safe  from  their 
infuriated  enemy.  Where  they  could  retire  he  could 
follow.  And  he  did  follow.  The  dash  of  the  onset 
could  not  be  withstood.  The  French  commandant 
escaped  with  difficulty ;  the  second  in  command  was 
taken  prisoner ;  the  men  were  driven  headlong  from 
position  to  position  until  all  their  redoubts  were  occupied 
by  their  victorious  rivals,  and  though  rallying,  they  did 
make  an  effort  to  recover  these,  the  attempt  was  not  only 
unsuccessful,  but  it  cost  them  the  life  of  their  leader. 
Shortly  afterwards  the  French  commandant  sent  a  cartel 
asking  for  terms.  A  little  later  Colonel  Fraser  was 
joined  by  the  second  brigade  under  Colonel  Drummond. 

Such  was  the  position  when  Colonel  Keating,  with  the 
3rd  and  4th  brigades,  came  within  sight  of  St.  Denis  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  8th  September.  He  was  about  to 
march  on  the  town  when  a  messenger  from  Colonel 
Fraser  brought  him  the  intelligence  of  its  surrender. 

The  formal  capitulation  was  not  indeed  signed  till  the 
evening  of  the  following  day.  By  the  terms  of  it  the 
entire  island  of  Bourbon,  containing  a   population   of 


¥ 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  129 

upwards  of  100,000  souls,  became  British  territory. 
This  conquest  had  been  effected  with  a  loss  of  only 
eighteen  men  killed  and  seventy-nine  wounded.  There 
was  no  further  resistance.  The  French  troops  were 
transported  as  prisoners  of  war  to  the  Cape. 


130  THE    ISLE    OF    FRANCE 


V. 

The  news  of  the  capture  of  Bourbon  reached  Calcutta 
on  the  '24th  August.  It  had  the  effect  of  stimulating 
the  determination  to  conquer  the  larger  island.  It  was 
known  that  the  French  squadron  charged  with  the 
protection  of  the  two  islands,  and  consisting  of  the 
Bellone  and  Minerve  frigates,  and  the  sloop  Victory  was 
absent  on  a  cruise  in  the  Indian  seas.  Mr.  Farquhar,  the 
new  Governor  of  Bourbon,  considered  then  the  moment 
opportune,  even  before  he  should  receive  official  authority, 
to  feel  his  way  towards  the  accomplishment  of  this 
greater  work.  Accordingly  on  the  13th  August  he 
embarked  250  men  on  board  the  boats  of  the  frigates 
at  his  disposal,  and  sent  them  that  night  to  attempt  the 
surprise  of  the  Isle  de  la  Passe.  This  small  island, 
distant  only  three  miles  from  the  mainland,  lies  at  the 
entrance  of  the  harbour  of  Grand  Port,  then  called 
Port  Imperial,  on  the  south-eastern  coast  of  the  Isle  of 
France.  The  expedition  was  successful,  and  a  garrison 
of  130  men  was  left  to  guard  de  la  Passe.  From  this 
advanced  post  the  English  were  able  to  communicate 
with  the  mainland,  and  Mr.  Farquhar  thought  he  could 
make  an  advantageous  use  of  this  communication  by 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  131 

distributing  to  the  people  of  the  island  copies  of  a 
proclamation  in  which  the  ambition  of  the  French  was 
contrasted  disadvantageously  with  the  good  government 
of  the  English.  This  somewhat  childish  demonstration 
met  with  the  fate  that  might  have  been  anticipated.  It 
failed  to  seduce  a  single  islander. 

Before  adverting  to  the  measures  next  taken  by  the 
English,  I  propose  to  remark  for  a  few  moments  on  the 
state  of  affairs  at  this  moment  in  the  Isle  of  France. 
The  Governor  of  that  island  was  General  Count  Decaen. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  officers  of  the 
French  Army.  He  had  made  his  earlier  campaigns 
under  Kleber,  Hoche,  and  Moreau.  At  Hohenlinden 
he  had  contributed  more  than  any  other  general,  except- 
ing perhaps  General  Kichepanse,  to  the  decisive  victory. 
Named  in  1802  by  the  First  Consul  Captain- General  of 
the  French  possessions  to  the  east  of  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  he  had  accompanied  Admiral  Linois  to  the  Indian 
waters,  had  with  him  visited  Pondichery,  and  recognising 
the  impossibility  of  keeping  that  place  in  the  event  of 
the  breaking  out  of  a  war,  then  imminent,  with  England, 
had  sailed  to  the  Isle  of  France,  thence  to  concert  the 
measures  which  it  might  still  be  possible  to  direct  against 
the  resolute  enemy  of  his  country.  But  he  did  not  stop 
there.  He  devoted  himself  with  all  the  ardour  of  his 
generous  and  enlightened  nature  to  the  amelioration  of 
the  condition  of  the  islanders.  He  modified  and  im- 
proved the  old  commercial  laws ;  he  established  a  number 
of  useful  institutions ;  codified   the   general,  the  civil, 

9  A 


132  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

and  the  criminal  laws  of  the  island,  embodying  them  in 
a  code  which,  I  believe,  is  still  known  as  the  CodeDecaen.* 
So  salutary  were  his  reforms,  so  beneficient  was  his  admin- 
istration, that  many  years  later  an  illustrious  t  French- 
man referring  in  a  speech  in  the  Chamber  of  Peers  to 
his  achievements  in  the  islands,  used  this  remarkable 
expression :  ^*  General  Decaen  made  the  people  over 
**  whom  he  ruled  almost  forget  even  the  names  of  La 
*'  Bourdonnais  and  of  Dupleix." 

Such  was  the  man.  Let  us  now  glance  at  the  means 
at  his  disposal  in  1810.  He  had  with  him  only  800 
French  troops  of  the  line,  |  and  scattered  over  the 
island,  from  2000  to  5000  Creole  militia.  In  Port  Louis 
were  three  frigates,  the  Astree,  the  Venus,  and  La 
Manche :  the  others,  constituting  the  squadron  under 
Commodore  Duperre,  had  not  then  returned  from  their 
cruise.  With  these  small  means  to  meet  a  powerful  and 
well-organised  attack  he  must  have  felt  that  all  the 
resources,  even  of  his  own  brave  heart,  would  be 
abundantly  drawn  upon. 

Before,  however,  the  English  had  been  able  to  take 
advantage  of  the  possession  of  de  la  Passe  Commodore 

•  So  highly  appreciated  were  the  merits  of  this  code  that  when  the  Isle 
of  France  was  surrendered  to  the  English,  it  was  made  an  article  of  the 
capitulation  that  it  should  be  continued  to  be  ruled  by  the  Code  Decaen. 
The  article  ran  :  "  Shall  preserve  their  religion,  laws,  and  customs." 

f  Gerard  Lacuee  Comte  de  Cessac,  one  of  the  ablest  of  Napoleon's 
ministers.  He  died  m  1841,  leaving  behind  him,  says  M.  Chanut, '*  one 
**  of  the  purest  and  most  honourable  reputations  of  our  epoch." 

}  He  had  also  enlisted  500  foreign  prisoners,  mostly  Irish ;  but  these 
could  not  be  depended  upon  to  fight  against  their  own  countrymen. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  133 

Duperre  returned,  bringing  with  him,  besides  his  own 
three  vessels  previously  named,  two  Indiamen,  the 
Windham  smd.  the  Ceylon,  captured  in  the  Indian  waters. 
As  he  approached  the  island  on  the  20th  July,  Duperre 
noticed  the  Tricolor  still  flying  on  the  staff  of  the  small 
fort  in  the  isle  de  la  Passe.  With  it  likewise  was  a 
signal  advising  him  that  *'  the  enemy  was  cruising  at 
*'  the  Coin  de  Mire."  A  three-masted  vessel,  also 
flying  the  Tricolor,  was  likewise  discerned  lying 
at  anchor  under  the  walls  of  the  fort.  Deceived 
by  these  appearances,  Duperre  signalled  to  his  squadron 
to  make  the  best  of  their  way  to  Grand  Port,  directing 
the  sloop  Victor  to  take  the  lead  closely  followed  by  the 
Minerve,  each  in  passing  to  communicate  with  the 
three-masted  vessel  lying  off  de  la  Passe.  The  Victor 
sailed  on  without  the  smallest  suspicion,  till,  as  she  was 
doubling  the  fort,  she  received  at  once  broadsides  from 
the  strange  ship  and  from  the  battery  on  shore  ;  these 
simultaneously  hoisting  English  colours.  The  surprise 
of  every  one  on  board  the  French  ships  may  be  conceived. 
But  Duperre  was  equal  to  the  occasion.  Signalling  to 
his  ships  to  keep  close  to  windward,  he  made  his  way 
into  the  harbour  and  anchored  in  a  very  advantageous 
position,  admitting  of  constant  communication  with  the 
shore.  In  this  operation  he  had,  however,  the  bad 
fortune  to  lose  one  of  his  prizes,  the  Windham ,  owing  to 
the  indecision  displayed  by  the  officer  in  charge  of  her. 
Notwithstanding  the  advantageous  position  taken  up 
by  the  French  commodore.  Captain  Pym  of  the  Sirius, 


I 


134  THE   ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

in  communication  with  Captain  Willoughby  of  the 
Nereide,  determined  to  attack  him.  On  the  22ndy 
accordingly,  both  these  frigates  stood  in ;  but  they  had 
scarcely  arrived  within  a  mile  of  the  enemy's  line  when 
the  Sirius  grounded.  The  Nereide  did  not  care  to  go 
on  alone.    The  attempt  therefore  failed  for  the  moment. 

Meanwhile  intelligence  of  the  events  occurring  in  the 
vicinity  of  Grand  Port  reached  General  Decaen.  That 
able  officer  immediately  despatched  on  board  Duperre*s 
squadron  all  the  available  seamen  in  the  island.  He 
ordered  also  the  three  frigates  in  Port  Louis,  the  Astree, 
La  ManchCy  and  the  Venus  to  proceed  under  the  senior 
captain,  Hamelin,*  to  the  aid  of  their  sisters  threatened 
in  Grand  Port. 

But  before  Captain  Hamelin  could  reach  the  scene  of 
action  the  two  English  frigates  had  been  reinforced  by 
the  Iphigenia  and  the  Magicienne.  As  these  approached 
the  shoal  on  which  the  Sirius  had  struck  the  previous 
afternoon,  but  from  which  she  had  just  then  extricated 
herself,  that  vessel  and  her  consort  prepared  to  weigh 
anchor.  But  before  deciding  to  renew  his  attack  Captain 
Pym  assembled  on  board  the  Sirius  the  captains  of  the 
three  other  ships  and  all  the  available  pilots.  The 
conference  resulted  in  a  resolution  to  proceed  at  once  to 
the  attack,  the  certain  effect  of  which  no  one  questioned 
for  a  moment. 

Duperre  had  expected  this  attack ;  and  he  had  pre- 

*  Uncle  of  Admiral  Hamelin  who  commanded  the  French  Black  Sea 
fleet  during  the  Crimean  War. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  135 

pared  to  meet  it  with  the  skill  which  marked  his  long  and 
glorious  career.  I  have  said  that  his  ships  had  easy 
communication  with  the  shore.  All  along  that  shore, 
below  his  vessels,  he  had  erected  formidable  batteries, 
had  armed  them  with  heavy  guns,  and  manned  them 
with  those  of  his  sailors  who  were  most  skilled  in  the 
art  of  gunnery.  His  own  ships,  covered  by  shoals  and 
by  sunken  rocks,  the  navigation  amongst  which  was 
diflBcult,  had  been  so  placed  as  to  be  able  to  meet  with  a 
concentrated  fire  an  advancing  enemy.  The  Indiaman 
he  had  taken,  the  Ceylon^  had  likewise  been  heavily 
armed,  and  the  command  of  her  entrusted  to  one  of  the 
best  officers  at  his  disposal.  Duperre  had  himself  seen 
to  every  detail ;  he  had  that  morning  inspected  every 
battery,  said  a  cheery  word  to  every  officer,  spoken  to 
his  captains  of  his  plans  and  his  hopes.  Having  done 
this,  he  waited,  with  a  serene  countenance  and  a  bold 
heart,  the  advance  of  the  English. 

They  came  on — they  too,  dauntlessly,  even  jubilantly. 
But  no  sooner  had  they,  sailing  close  together,  arrived 
within  range  than  the  shore  batteries  opened  upon 
them.  The  fire  was  tremendous  and  effective,  but  it 
did  not  check  the  onward  progress  of  the  British  ships. 
The  Iphigenia,  in  accordance  with  a  previously -concerted 
plan,  directed  her  course  towards  the  Minerve,  and 
opened  on  her  so  terrible  a  fire  within  half  pistol-shot 
that  she  drove  her  out  of  the  line.  The  Magicienne,  a 
little  ahead  of  the  Iphigenia,  was  about  to  engage  the 
Ceylon  when   she   struck  on   a   hidden  rock   and  lay 


136  THE    ISLE    OF  FRANCE 

motionless  in  the  water  in  such  a  position  that  but  few 
of  her  guns  could  bear  on  the  enemy.  The  Nereide, 
close  astern  of  the  Bellone,  commanded  by  Duperre, 
engaged  that  vessel  on  one  side  whilst  Captain  Pym  in 
the  Sirius  attacked  her  on  the  other.  The  French 
sloop,  the  Victor,  was  meanwhile  doing  all  in  her  power 
to  aid  the  Minerve  by  firing  at,  and  engaging  the 
attention  of,  the  Iphigenia. 

The  number  of  guns,  the  weight  of  metal,  the  inspira- 
tion of  attack,  all  were  in  favour  of  the  English,  and 
Duperre  saw  that  unless  he  used  his  brain  to  aid  the 
physical  power  of  his  men  his  squadron  must  be 
destroyed.  He  put  in  force  then  a  manoeuvre  which  he 
had  arranged  beforehand  in  concert  with  his  captains. 
He  signalled  to  them  to  cut  their  cables  and  let  their 
vessels  glide  towards  the  shore.  The  result  fully  answered 
his  anticipations.  As  his  own  vessel,  the  Bellone j  glided 
slowly  towards  the  shore,  Captain  Pym,  with  all  the 
impetuosity  of  his  nature,  turned  the  Sirius  in  pursuit. 
Not  following,  however,  the  exact  line  the  French 
commodore  had  taken,  he  dashed  his  vessel  on  to  a 
shoal ;  and  there  she  remained  fixed,  immoveable,  and 
powerless. 

Having  thus  rid  himself  of  one  enemy,  Duperre, 
ordering  his  vessels  to  cast  anchor,  concentrated  all 
the  fire  of  the  Bellone  on  the  other,  the  Nereide, 
which,  following  the  example  of  the  Sirius,  had  likewise 
drifted  on  a  shoal.  Exposed  to  a  most  galling  fire,  the 
Nereide  fought  until  most  of  her  guns  were  disabled 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  137 

and  the  greater  part  of  her  crew  had  been  killed  and 
wounded.  Incapable  of  protracting  the  defence  she 
then  struck.  But  in  the  excitement  of  the  fire  and  in 
the  blindness  of  the  smoke  the  hauling  down  of  the 
Union  Jack  was  not  perceived  by  the  enemy,  and  the 
French  continued  their  fire  for  some  time  longer.* 

In  the  other  part  of  the  line,  likewise,  fortune  had 
inclined  to  the  French.  The  Iphigenia,  warned  by  the 
fate  of  her  consorts,  had  warped  out  of  close  range.  The 
Magicienne,  on  her  rock,  had  been  so  pounded  by  the 
Ceylon  and  the  shore  batteries  that,  when  morning 
broke,  she  could  scarcely  keep  afloat. 

The  firing  continued  all  night.  At  eleven  p.m.  the 
crew  of  the  Magicienne  abandoned  her.  She  blew  up 
immediately  afterwards.  At  the  early  dawn  Duperre 
sent  oflf  a  boat's  crew  to  take  possession  of  the  Nereide, 
The  Iphigenia  then  endeavoured  for  a  short  time  to 
extricate  the  Sirius  from  her  position,  but  failing,  that 
vessel  too  was  abandoned  and  blown  up.  Of  all  the 
squadron  that  had  sailed  so  proudly  and  so  confidently 
to  the  attack  on  the  previous  day  the  Iphigenia  alone 
remained ! 

But  she  was  not  destined  to  escape.  Duperre  indeed 
was  unable  to  get  oflf  his  stranded  ships  in  sufl&cient 
time  to  follow  her  to  the  Isle  de  la  Passe.  But  just  at 
the  opportune  moment,  just  as  she  had  been  warped  to 
her  station  oflf  that  islet,  there  arrived  oflf  Grand  Port 

*  Every  man  on  board  the  Nereide  was  killed  or  wounded. — Asiatic 
Annual  Register. 


138  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

the  squadron  of  three  frigates  which  General  Decaen 
had  despatched  from  Port  Louis.  In  the  presence  of 
a  force  so  overwhelming  Captain  Lambert  of  the 
Iphigeiiia  had  no  alternative  but  to  yield  his  vessel  and 
the  islet.  He  tried  hard  to  save  the  former ;  but 
General  Decaen  had  arrived  at  Grand  Port,  and  he 
dictated  terms  of  absolute  surrender.  They  were  with 
a  pang  accepted.  The  Iphigenia  and  her  crew  were 
made  over  to  the  French,  and  the  Tricolor  once  more 
floated  over  the  little  fort  of  the  Isle  de  la  Passe. 

Thus  ended  the  first  attempt  of  the  English  on  the 
Isle  of  France.  If  we  are  bound  to  admire  the  pluck,  the 
daring,  the  determination  displayed  by  our  countrymen, 
we  cannot,  in  candour,  refuse  an  equally  apprecia- 
tive acknowledgement  of  the  combined  skill  and  courage 
by  which  Duperre  converted  an  apparently  certain  defeat 
into  a  most  decisive  victory.  Later  in  his  career  Duperre 
accomplished  great  things.  In  1814  he  defended  the 
lagunes  of  Venice  against  an  Austrian  army ;  in  1823, 
at  the  head  of  a  French  squadron,  he  compelled  the 
surrender  of  Cadiz  ;  in  1830,  commanding  a  French 
fleet,  he  besieged  and  took  Algiers.  But  it  is  probable 
that  whenever,  during  the  time  intervening  between  that 
last  great  feat  of  arms  and  his  death  in  1846,  he  might 
have  been  disposed  to  pass  in  review  the  events  of  his 
distinguished  life,  he  referred  with  the  greatest  satisfac- 
tion to  the  repulse  and  destruction  of  an  English 
squadron  of  superior  force  at  Grand  Port  on  the  24th 
and  25th  August,  1810 ! 


w 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  139 


Flushed  with  his  success,  Decaen  resolved  to  resume 
the  offensive.  Collecting  all  the  ships  at  his  disposal, 
now  constituting  a  formidable  squadron,  he  blockaded 
the  island  of  Bourbon,  intercepting  with  great  success 
the  merchantmen  which  were  bringing  supplies  to  it 
from  India.  He  hoped  to  starve  the  English  garrison 
into  submission  before  it  could  be  strengthened  by  the 
large  reinforcements  which,  he  well  knew,  were  on  their 
way  from  India.  The  only  English  ship  remaining  in 
those  waters,  the  Boadicea,  38,  had,  after  the  re-capture 
of  the  Isle  de  la  Passe,  taken  refuge  in  the  harbour  of 
St.  Paul. 

Whilst  the  blockade  of  Bourbon  was  still  being 
maintained  the  British  38  gun  frigate  L'Africaine 
appeared  off  St.  Denis  (12th  September).  Captain 
Rowley  instantly  brought  round  the  Boadicea  with  the 
Otter,  sloop  of  war,  and  the  Staunch,  gun-brig,  to  join 
the  new  arrival.  The  junction  having  been  effected  it 
was  resolved  to  attempt  to  drive  away  the  blockading^ 
force,  consisting  of  the  Iphigenie  *  recently  captured  at 
G-rand  Port — and  the  Astree. 

The  French  frigates  stood  at  once  off  to  sea  enticing 
the  enemy  to  follow  them.  It  was  soon  found  that  the 
Africaine  was  a  far  better  sailer  than  the  French  frigates 
and  than  her  own  consort,  the  Boadicea,  and  that  in 
the  chase  she  was  rapidly  leaving  the  latter  behind. 
She  therefore  shortened  sail.  Before  night  fell,  however, 
the  Africaine  had  come  up  close  to  the  enemy,  and  she 

*  The  French,  at  once  changed  the  final  a  into  e. 


140  THE    ISLE   OF  FRANCE 

then  endeavoured  to  maintain  this  position  until  day 
should  break,  keeping  up  communication  with  the 
Boadicea  by  means  of  night  signals.  At  three  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  however, — the  Boadicea  being  then 
from  four  to  five  miles  astern  of  her  consort, — a  sudden 
breeze  caught  the  sails  of  the  Africaine,  and  carried 
her,  not  without  her  commander's  consent,  within  less 
than  musket-shot  distance  on  the  weather  quarter  of  the 
Astree.  Captain  Corbet,  who  commanded  the  English 
frigate,  could  not  resist  the  temptation,  but  at  once  fired 
into  the  enemy.  The  Astree  immediately  replied.  The 
second  broadside  from  the  Astree  severely  wounded 
Captain  Corbet,  but  his  place  was  taken  by  the  first 
lieutenant,  and  the  action  was  continued  for  ten  minutes 
with  great  spirit.  By  that  time  the  Iphigenie  had  time 
to  come  to  the  aid  of  her  consort.  Whilst  the  Astree 
continued  within  pistol-shot  on  the  larboard  beam  of 
the  English  frigate,  the  Iphigenie  came  close  up  on  her 
starboard  bow  and  raked  her  several  times. 

A  contest  so  unequal  could  not  long  continue.  Yet 
one  hour  elapsed  before  the  gallant  crew  of  the  Africaine 
would  confess  themselves  conquered ;  and  even  then  it 
was  not  till  163  of  their  number  had  been  killed  and 
wounded. 

But  the  interlude  was  not  yet  over.  Commodore 
Rowley  of  the  Boadicea  noticed  at  break  of  day  that 
the  Africaine  had  been  captured.  He  did  not  at  once 
attempt  to  disturb  her  conquerors,  but  made  way  towards 
the  Otter  and  Staunch.     Having  joined  these  he  set  out 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  141 

with  them  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  The  French 
frigates  were  not  inclined  to  risk  another  engagement 
with  three  fresh  vessels.  The  rigging  of  the  Iphigenie 
had  been  so  cut  up  as  to  render  her  difficult  of 
management.  She  had  also  fired  away  nearly  all  her 
ammunition.  Captain  Bonnet  of  the  Astree  preferred 
then  the  abandonment  of  his  prize  to  an  encounter 
which  could  scarcely  be  successful.  Taking  then,  the 
Iphigenie  in  tow,  he  abandoned  the  Africaine, — which 
was  helpless, — to  her  former  masters,  and  returned  to 
Port  Louis,  capturing  on  his  way  a  16-gun  cruiser 
belonging  to  the  East  India  Company. 

Commodore  Rowley  and  his  prize  then  reached  the 
anchorage  at  St.  Paul.  The  blockade  of  Bourbon  was 
at  the  same  time  resumed  by  the  French  frigate  Venus 
44,  and  the  sloop  Victor.  Whilst  engaged  in  this 
blockade,  these  vessels  sighted  the  British  32-gun  frigate 
Ceylon,  having  on  board  General  Abercromby,  on  his 
way  from  Madras  to  Bourbon,  to  assume  the  command 
of  the  troops  destined  to  act  against  the  Isle  of  France. 
They  at  once  set  out  in  pursuit.  The  Venus,  being  a 
better  sailer,  soon  caught  up  and  engaged  the  British 
frigate.  After  a  close  contest  of  three-quarters  of  an 
hour,  in  which  the  Venus  lost  her  mizen-mast,  and  the 
Ceylon  was  rendered  almost  unmanageable,  the  Venus 
assumed  a  position  to  leeward,  and  continued  firing  only 
at  intervals  until  the  Victor^  should  come  up.     This 

*  The  Victor  was  no  other  than  our  old  friend,  the  Revenantj  so 
famous  under  Surcouf.     Taken  into  the  French  Navy  as  the  Jenuy  she 


142  THE    ISLE    OF  FKANCE 

occurred  about  two  hours  after  the  action  had  begun. 
The  Victor  then  took  a  raking  position  athwart  the  bows 
of  the  Ceylon,  and  the  latter,  then  quite  helpless,  struck 
her  flag. 

But  there  was  speedy  vengeance  in  store  for  the  British. 
The  Boadicea,  accompanied  by  the  Otter  and  Staunch, 
having  descried  the  French  frigate  with  her  prize  abreast 
of  St.  Denis,  started  off  at  once  in  pursuit.  The  Victor 
vainly  endeavoured  to  take  in  tow  the  damaged  Ceylon,  and 
the  latter,  cast  off,  was  re-captured.  Then  came  the  turn 
of  the  V^nus,  But  she  had  been  too  much  crippled  in  her 
fight  of  the  previous  night  to  be  able  to  oiBfer  effectual 
resistance  to  a  fresh  and  more  powerful  frigate,  and  too 
much  damaged  in  her  rigging  to  escape.  Captain 
Hamelin,  who  commanded  her,  made,  however,  a  hot 
fight  of  it,  and  only  struck  when  further  resistance  had 
become  impossible.* 

had  been  captured  by  the  English  and  re-named  the  Victor.  She  was 
subsequently  re-captured  by  the  French. 

*  It  is  gratifying  to  notice  the  manner  in  which  Hamelin's  gallant 
service,  notwithstanding  the  loss  of  his  ship,  was  acknowledged  by 
Napoleon.  In  a  despatch  from  the  Minister  of  Marine,  dated  27th 
December  1810,  I  find  the  following  : — *'  His  Majesty  has  remarked  with 
pleasure  that  you  rendered  decisive  the  success  which  Captain  Duperre 
had  obtained  between  the  23rd  and  25th  August,  and  that  you  subse- 
quently captured  the  frigate  Ceylon  in  a  hand-to-hand  encounter. 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  events  which  followed,  H.M.  has  not 
the  less  appreciated  the  splendid  defence  which  you  made,  notwith- 
standing that,  when  disabled  by  a  preceding  combat,  you  were 
attacked  by  superior  forces.  He  has  deigned  in  appreciation  of  these 
different  actions,  which  testify  to  your  courage  and  to  your  skill,  to 
promote  you  to  the  grade  of  Commander  of  the  Legion  of  Honour." 
The  following  year  Hamelin  was  created  a  Baron  and  promoted  to 
the  rank  of  Rear- Admiral. 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  143 

The  capture  of  the  Venus  was  the  turning  point  in 
the  scale.  Thenceforward  the  favours  of  fortune  were 
showered  exclusively  on  the  British.  Shortly  after  that 
event  there  arrived  at  St.  Denis  the  frigate  Nisus,  bearing 
the  flag  of  Vice- Admiral  Bertie,  the  precursor  of  a  fleet 
and  army  on  their  way  from  England  via  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  ordered  to  co-operate  with  the  troops  taken 
from  the  three  presidencies,  and  which  had  started  from 
India  about  the  same  time,  to  effect  the  reduction  of  the 
Isle  of  France. 


I 


144  THE    ISLE    OF    FRANCE 


VI. 

It  was  not,  however,  until  the  14th  October  that  Admiral 
Bertie  had  been  able  to  refit  the  ships  which  he  found 
at  St.  Paul  and  St.  Denis.  But  on  that  date  he  sailed 
from  the  former  port  at  the  head  of  the  Boadicea,  the 
Africaine,  the  Ceylon,  the  Nisus,  and  the  Nereide,* 
to  blockade  Port  Louis.  Leaving  three  of  these  vessels 
on  that  duty,  he  proceeded  on  the  19th  in  company  with 
General  Abercromby  to  Rodriguez,  there  to  meet  the 
troops  and  ships  which,  coming  respectively  from 
England  and  India,  had  appointed  that  Uttle  island  to  be 
their  rendezvous. 

On  the  24th  Admiral  Bertie  fell  in  with  the  British 
squadron  on  its  way  to  the  Indian  seas,  commanded  by 
Rear-Admiral  Drury  and  consisting  of  seven  ships. 
Two  of  these,  the  Cornelia,  32,  and  the  Hesper  sloop, 
were  at  once  sent  to  increase  the  blockading  force  off 
Port  Louis ;  two  others,  the  Clorinde,  88,  and  the  Doris, 
36,  were  detained  at  Rodriguez ;  the  remainder  were 
sent  on  to  their  destination.  The  admiral  arrived  at 
Rodriguez  on  the  3rd  November,  and  found  there  the 

*  Formerly  the  Venus.     It  will  be  noticed  that  three  ships  of  the 
squadron  had  been  in  the  possession  of  the  French. 


AND    HER   PRIVATEERS.  145 

troops  which  had  been  sent  from  Bombay.  The  division 
from  Madras  convoyed  by  the  Psyche  and  Cornwallis 
arrived  on  the  6th,  and  that  from  Bourbon  on  the  12th 
November. 

The  troops  from  Bengal  and  those  from  the  Cape 
were  so  long  in  coming,  that  the  admiral,  in  concert 
with  the  general,  determined  not  to  wait  for  them 
beyond  the  21st.  All  preparations  accordingly  were 
made  for  the  expedition  to  leave  Rodriguez  on  the 
morning  of  the  22nd,  when,  on  the  evening  of  the 
previous  day,  the  happy  intelligence  was  received  that 
the  Bengal  division  was  in  the  offing.  The  transports 
conveying  it  were  at  once  ordered  not  to  drop  anchor, 
but  to  join  the  main  fleet  and  accompany  it  to  the 
selected  point  of  debarkation,  Grande  Baye,  about 
fifteen  miles  to  the  windward  of  Port  Louis. 

The  armament,  independently  of  the  division  from 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  did  not  arrive  in  time 
to  take  any  part  in  the  operations,  consisted  of  forty-six 
transports  and  a  fleet  of  twenty-one  sail.*     They  carried 

(11,300  fighting  men,  composed  as  follows : — Of  regi- 
ments of  the  line  there  were  the  12th,  14th,  22nd, 
83rd,  56th,  59th,  65th,  69th,  84th,  and  89th  regiments; 
the  artillery  consisted  of  four  batteries  from  Bengal  and 
Madras ;    the   European   cavalry  of  one   troop   of  the 

*  These  were  the  Illustrious^  47  ;  the  Cornwallis^  44 ;  the  Africaine, 
the  Boadiceaj  the  Nisus^  the  Clorinde^  the  Menelaus^  the  Nereide^  each 
of  38  ;  the  Phcebe  and  Doris^  of  36  ;  the  Cornelia,  Psyche,  and  Ceylon, 
of  32  ;  the  sloops  Hesper,  Eclipse,  Hecate,  and  Actceon ;  the  gun-brig 
Staunch,  and  four  smaller  yessels. 

10 


146  THE   ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

26th  Dragoons.  The  native  troops  from  Bengal  and 
Madras  consisted  of  four  volunteer  battalions  and  the 
Madras  pioneers ;  2000  sailors  and  marines  were  like- 
wise  contributed  by  the  fleet.  The  Europeans  were  to 
the  natives  of  the  force  in  the  proportion  of  two  to  one. 

General  Decaen  had  not  been  unconscious  of  the 
coming  storm.  Aware  of  his  own  inability  to  oppose 
with  success  any  large  hostile  force  led  with  ordinary 
prudence,  he  had  nevertheless  exerted  himself  to  the 
utmost  to  rouse  the  energies  of  the  colonists.  We  have 
seen  that  he  had  at  his  disposal  only  800  French  troops 
of  the  line,  in  addition  to  500  enlisted  prisoners,  mostly 
Irish,  upon  whom  he  could  not  depend.  The  Creole 
element  has  been  variously  estimated.  Extravagant 
English  writers  have  rated  it  as  high  as  10,000 ;  but  it 
probably  never  exceeded  4000;  and  of  these  it  is 
recorded  by  the  English  annalist  of  the  time,*  that 
**  they  refused  on  the  approach  of  the  British  armament 
"  to  co-operate  in  the  defence  of  the  island.''  A  few  of 
the  slaves  were  armed,  but  in  a  most  cursory  and 
inefficient  manner. 

General  Decaen  might,  indeed,  well  have  despaired. 
But  he  allowed  no  symptoms  of  any  such  feeling,  even 
if  he  entertained  it,  to  appear.  No  sooner  had  he 
received  information  that  the  hostile  armament  had  left 
Rodriguez   than   he  issued   a    spirited    proclamation  t 

*  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  1101-11. 

f  The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  text  of  the  proclamation : — 

*'  Inhabitants  of  the  Isle  of  France, — Thirty-four  of  the  enemy's  ships 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  147 

calling  upon  the  colonists  to  aid  the  army  and  navy 
in  the  defence  of  the  island,  promising  them  victory, 
should  they  respond  to  his  call.  He  could  do  no  more 
in  that  way.  Then,  massing  his  troops,  he  took  up  a 
position  near  Port  Louis,  whence  he  would  he  able  to 
move  at  once  upon  any  threatened  point. 

Meanwhile  the  transports  carrying  the  expeditionary 
force  arrived,  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  November, 
before  a  narrow  passage  dividing  from  the  mainland  a 
small  island  called  Gunner's  Quoin.  It  had  previously 
been  ascertained  by  careful  survey  that  this  passage 
offered  openings  through  the  reefs  by  which  several 
boats  could  enter  abreast.  Here,  then,  at  ten  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  the  fleet  came  to  anchor.  The  debarkation 
on  the  mainland  commenced  at  one  p.m.,  and  was  con- 
ducted to  a  successful  result,  without  the  loss  of  a  single 
man,  in  three  hours — the  small  French  party  which 
had  held  Fort  Malartic,  situated  at  the  head  of  the  bay, 
retiring  on  the  appearance  of  the  British  fleet. 

The  English  army  had,  previously  to  its  debarkation, 

are  before  the  island !  This  number,  which  may  be  increased  at  any 
moment,  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  English  have  not  relinquished  their 
intention  to  attack  this  colony — an  intention  in  which  they  have  been 
already  once  baffled  by  the  glorious  success  of  the  brave  men  of  the 
division  of  Duperre.  I  do  not  forget  the  proofs  of  zeal  and  intrepidity 
displayed  by  you  both  before  and  after  that  glorious  feat  of  arms. 

*'  Inhabitants  of  the  Isle  of  France !  In  the  present  conjuncture  I 
would  remind  you  of  the  enthusiasm  with  which,  on  the  last  anniversary 
of  the  fete  of  the  great  Napoleon,  you  renewed  your  vows  of  fidelity  to 
your  country.  You  are  Frenchmen!  Join,  then,  your  valour  to  the 
valour  of  the  brave  soldiers  and  marines  whom  I  am  about  to  lead 
against  the  enemy,  and  we  shall  not  fail  to  be  victorious." 

10  A 


148  THE    ISLE    OF   FRANCE 

been  divided  into  six  brigades.  The  first,  under  Colonel 
Picton,  was  composed  of  the  12th  and  22nd  regiments, 
and  the  right  wing  of  the  Madras  volunteer  battalion  ; 
the  second,  under  Colonel  Gibbs,  comprised  the  59th 
regiment,  300  men  of  the  89th  and  100  of  the  87th 
formed  together  as  one  battalion,  and  the  left  wing  of 
the  Madras  volunteer  battalion ;  the  third,  under  Colonel 
Kelso,  consisted  of  the  14th  regiment  and  the  2nd 
Bengal  volunteers ;  the  fourth,  under  Colonel  Macleod, 
was  formed  of  the  69th  regiment,  300  marines,  and  the 
Madras  native  flank  battalion  ;  the  fifth,  commanded  by 
Colonel  Smith,  comprised  the  65th  regiment,  a  troop  of 
the  25th  Dragoons,  and  the  1st  battalion  of  the  Bengal 
volunteers ;  whilst  the  sixth  or  reserve  brigade,  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant- Colonel  Keating,  consisted  of  a 
battalion  formed  of  the  four  fiank  companies  of  the 
12th  and  33rd  regiments,  of  two  companies  of  the 
56th,  of  one  of  the  14th,  one  of  the  89th,  of  the 
84th  regiment,  and  of  Captain  Imlack's  detachment  of 
Bombay  troops  which  had  done  such  good  service  in  the 
capture  of  Bourbon. 

The  debarkation  had  no  sooner  been  effected  than, 
leaving  the  fifth  brigade  to  cover  the  landing  place. 
General  Abercromby,  at  four  o'clock,  pushed  on  with 
the  rest  of  the  force  through  a  very  thick  wood,  lying 
between  the  coast  and  the  high  road  leading  to  Port 
Louis.  The  troops  forced  their  way  for  fully  four  miles 
through  an  all  but  impenetrable  jungle,  entangling  their 
feet  at  every  step,  and  dragging  the  guns  only  by  the 


AND    HER    PRIVATEERS.  149 

most  untiring  exertion.  They  had,  however,  the  good 
fortune  to  debouch  into  the  more  open  country  without 
any  opposition.  Just,  however,  as  they  reached  that 
more  open  plain  they  came  upon  the  advanced  picquet 
of  the  enemy.  The  men  of  the  picquet  had  not  evidently 
anticipated  an  attack  from  that  quarter,  for  they  were 
surprised,  and,  after  a  faint  and  irregular  fire,  they 
retreated  from  their  position. 

Their  fire,  however,  faint  and  irregular  as  it  was, 
effected  some  damage.  Two  grenadiers  were  killed,  and 
two  officers  and  several  men  wounded.  Some  officers  and 
men  likewise  succumbed  to  the  intense  heat  and  to  the 
fatigue  of  the  march.  The  French  picquet  having  retired, 
General  Abercromby  encamped  his  force  in  the  open 
ground  in'front  of  the  wood.  He  resumed  his  march  in  the 
morning  with  the  intention  of  pushing  on  to  Port  Louis. 
But  the  heat  of  the  day  and  the  extreme  scarcity  of 
water  rendered  this  impossible,  and  the  little  army,  after 
marching  only  five  miles,  was  forced  to  take  up  a  position 
for  the  rest  of  the  day  and  for  the  night  at  Moulin  a 
poudre  on  the  banks  of  a  small  river  called  Pample- 
mousses,  which  thus  covered  the  camp. 

To  return  to  General  Decaen.  This  officer  had 
anticipated  that  the  English  army  would  disembark 
at  a  point  nearer  to  Port  Louis — whence  the  road  to 
the  capital  was  shorter  and  easier — and  he  had  taken 
his  measures  accordingly.  He  had  never  imagined 
that  an  invader  would  land  his  troops  on  a  point 
where  the   inland   country  was  covered  by  an    almost 


150  THE    ISLE    OF    FRANCE 

impenetrable  jungle,  defensible  by  a  few  determined 
men  against  an  army.  But  the  moment  he  received  the 
news  brought  by  the  retiring  picquet  he  prepared  to 
meet  the  new  danger — a  danger  the  greater,  as  the 
natural  defence  had  been  forced  and  there  were  but  ten 
miles  between  the  enemy's  camp  and  the  capital.  It 
was  not,  however,  until  mid-day  of  the  30th  that  he  was 
able  to  collect  a  force  at  all  respectable  to  make  head 
against  the  enemy.  This  force,  consisting — including 
the  Irish  prisoners  forced  into  the  service — of  1300 
Europeans  and  a  few  slaves  and  Creoles,  he  posted  in  a 
rather  strong  position,  iibout  two  miles  in  front  of  the 
capital.  He  drew  up  his  men  on  a  level  ground  over 
which  the  high  road  passed,  the  guns  in  the  centre  on 
either  side  of  the  road,  concealed  by  brushwood,  and 
both  flanks  covered  by  a  thick  wood,  impenetrable  on 
the  right  and  capable  of  a  strong  defence  on  the  left. 
Having  so  disposed  his  small  force,  he  galloped  forward, 
followed  by  his  stafl",  by  a  few  Creole  cavalry,  and  some 
riflemen,  to  reconnoitre  the  English  position. 

The  English  had  been  about  two  hours  in  their 
encampment  at  Moulin  a  poudre  when  General  Decaen 
rode  up.  Approaching  rather  too  closely,  a  smart 
skirmish  ensued,  in  the  course  of  which  the  French 
general  received  a  contusion  on  his  leg.  What  he  saw, 
there,  however,  was  worse  than  any  contusion.  He 
counted  a  force  exceeding  his  own  in  the  proportion  of 
ten  to  one,  and  ready  the  next  morning  to  cover  the  five 
miles  which  still  intervened  between  it  and  the  capital. 


»  AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  161 

Decaen  must  have  felt  as  he  rode  back  to  his  men 
that,  according  to  the  probabilities,  further  resistance 
would  but  cause  a  useless  expenditure  of  blood.  He 
determined  nevertheless  to  make  one  effort  for  victory. 
On  his  return  to  camp  he  despatched  300  men  with  two 
guns  to  occupy  a  position  commanding  the  bridge  over 
the  Tambeau,  about  half  a  mile  in  front  of  his  camp. 
Could  he  but  keep  the  invaders  there  for  a  short  time 
he  might  yet  raise  a  force  te  operate  on  their  communi- 
cations. 

But  it  was  not  to  be.  Early  the  following  morning, 
before  daylight,  General  Abercromby  detached  the  fourth 
brigade  to  seize  the  batteries  at  the  Tambeau  and  Tortue 
bays,  whence  it  had  been  arranged  that  the  army  was  to 
receive  its  supplies.  The  main  body  of  the  force,  under 
the  personal  command  of  the  general,  commenced  its 
movement  on  Port  Louis  shortly  afterwards.  After 
marching  about  two  miles  it  came  within  sight  of  the 
bridge  over  the  Tambeau.  As  it  was  seen  to  be  defended, 
the  advance  column  was  halted,  whilst  the  guns  opened 
with  shrapnel  on  the  enemy.  The  fire  was  so  well 
directed  that  the  French  retired  precipitously,  leaving 
uncompleted  the  destruction — begun  and  partly  executed 
— of  the  bridge.     They  fell  back  on  their  main  body. 

The  injury  done  to  the  bridge  had  been  so  far  effectual 
that  the  guns  of  the  British  were  unable  to  cross  it. 
They  had  to  seek  a  passage  lower  down,  at  a  ford 
commanded  by  the  French  artillery.  The  passage  was 
attended  with  difficulty  and  some  loss,  but  was  neverthe- 


152  THE    ISLE    OF   FKANCE 

less  accomplished.  The  British  force  then  moved  on  the 
position  occupied  by  the  French  and  flanked  by  thick 
woods  already  described. 

General  Decaen  had  witnessed,  not  unmoved,  the 
passage  of  the  Tambeau.  He  knew  that  he  was  now 
left  with  but  one  card  in  his  hand.  He  played  it  boldly. 
Carefully  reserving  his  fire  till  the  heads  of  the  hostile 
columns  should  advance  within  range,  he  then  opened 
upon  them  a  concentrated  and  continuous  discharge. 
This  fire,  coming  from  guns  which  had  been  masked, 
checked  the  advance  for  a  few  moments.  But  it  was 
only  that  the  British  troops  might  deploy.  For  them 
there  was  nothing  for  it  but  the  bayonet.  The  advance 
guard,  led  by  Colonel  Campbell  of  the  33rd,  under  the 
general  direction  of  General  Ward,  having  quickly  formed, 
dashed  straight  on.  Nothing  could  stop  their  splendid 
charge.  The  enemy's  troops,  after  a  gallant  struggle, 
in  which  many  of  them  were  killed,  were  forced  back 
from  their  position,  leaving  their  guns  in  the  hands  of 
the  conquerors.  These,  however,  did  not  gain  a 
bloodless  triumph.  Besides  several  privates,  Colonel 
Campbell,  33rd,  and  Major  O'Keefe,  12th,  were  killed. 
Whilst  this  was  going  on  in  the  centre  an  attempt 
which  had  been  made  on  the  left  flank  of  the  French 
had  proved  not  less  successful.  After  a  gallant  resist- 
ance the  enemy's  position  was  forced,  and  all  his  guns 
were  taken.* 

*  In  this  action  the  French  lost  about  100  men,  killed  and  wounded. 
The  return  of  the  English  for  this   engagement,  and  for  the  slight 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  153 

The  French  force  retired  across  the  river  Lataniers 
within  the  outworks  of  Port  Louis.  The  EngHsh  took 
up  a  position  for  the  night  just  beyond  cannon-shot  of 
the  enemy's  lines. 

But  it  was  all  over.  The  English  fleet  commanded 
the  harbour,  and  the  fortifications  could  not  be  defended 
by  the  small  force  at  the  disposal  of  the  Captain-GeneraL 
Reconnoitring  the  following  morning,  General  Decaen 
observed  preparations  in  the  enemy's  camp,  betokening 
an  intention  to  make  a  general  attack  upon  the  town. 
Such  an  attack  would,  he  knew,  not  only  be  irresistible, 
but  it  would  entail  upon  the  inhabitants  great  calamities. 
In  their  interests,  then,  and  in  the  interests  of  humanity, 
having  done  all  that  was  possible  for  France,  and 
exhausted  every  available  resource,  General  Decaen 
resolved  to  capitulate.  He  sent  an  officer,  bearing  a  flag 
of  truce,  with  a  proposal  to  this  effect  to  the  British 
camp. 

He  was  just  in  time.  General  Abercromby  was  on  the 
point  of  despatching  a  force  to  the  southern  side  of  the 
town,  so  that  the  assault  might  be  combined  and 
general.  The  proposal  for  a  capitulation  alone  stopped 
the  movement.  The  General  agreed  to  it,  though 
demurring  to  the  terms  proposed  But  these  were  soon 
arranged.  The  Isle  of  France,  with  all  the  ships  in  her 
harbours,  all  the  arms  in  her  arsenals,  all  the  stores  in 

encounter  in  front  of  the  wood  on  the  29th  November,  is  as  follows : — 
Killed,  28 ;  wounded,  89 ;  missing,  45.  Total  162.  Besides  these  one 
sailor  was  killed  and  five  were  wounded. 


154  THE    ISLE   OF    FRANCE 

her  magazines,  was  transferred  bodily  to  England.  One 
point  was  insisted  on  by  General  Decaen,  and,  from 
motives  of  policy,  accorded  by  the  English  commander. 
This  was  that  the  French  troops  should  not  be  considered 
as  prisoners  of  war,  but  should  be  permitted  to  return  to 
France  at  the  cost  of  the  British  Government  with  their 
arms  and  baggage.* 

Thus  did  the  French  lose,  after  an  occupation  of  nearly 
a  hundred  years,  the  beautiful  island  upon  which  had 
been  bestowed  the  name  of  their  own  bright  land,  and 
which  in  climate,  in  refinement  of  luxury,  in  the  love  of 
adventure  of  its  children,  had  been,  in  very  deed,  the 
France  of  the  East.  In  the  long  struggle  with  England 
which  had  followed  the  Eevolution,  the  Isle  of  France 
had  inflicted  upon  the  English  trade  a  '*  damage  which 
"  might  be  computated  by  millions,"  whilst  she  herself 
had  remained  uninjured, — for  eighteen  years  indeed — 
unthreatened.     She  had  proved  herself  to  be  that  which 

*  I  think  it  right  and  fair  to  give  General  Abercromby's  own  reasons 
for  agreeing  to  the  demand  of  General  Decaen  in  this  particular.  In 
his  report  to  Lord  Minto  he  says  : — "  I  was  prevailed  upon  to  acquiesce 
in  this  indulgence  being  granted  to  the  enemy,  from  the  desire  of 
sparing  the  lives  of  many  brave  officers  and  soldiers,  and  out  of  regard 
to  the  interests  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  island,  who  have  long 
laboured  under  the  most  degrading  misery  and  oppression,  added  to  the 
late  period  of  the  season  when  every  hour  became  valuable.  I  considered 
these  to  be  motives  of  much  more  national  importance  than  any  injury 
which  would  arise  from  a  small  body  of  troops,  at  so  remote  a  distance 
from  Europe,  being  permitted  to  return  to  their  own  country  free  from 
any  engagement."  It  will  be  seen  that  General  Abercromby  avows  that 
he  was  influenced  solely  by  considerations  of  general  policy.  His 
statement  regarding  the  misery  and  oppression  of  the  islanders,  of 
which  he  had  no  personal  knowledge,  may  be  dismissed  as  gratuitous. 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  155 

the  Emperor  had  declared  that  Cherbourg  should 
become, — '*  an  eye  to  see  and  an  arm  to  strike." 
Protected  for  long,  partly  by  the  storms  of  the  ocean, 
partly  by  the  daring  spirit  of  her  children,  partly  by  the 
timid  counsels  of  the  British  Government,  she  had  been, 
for  the  privateers  who  preyed  upon  the  commercial  marine 
of  the  East  India  Company,  at  once  a  harbour  of  refuge 
and  a  secure  base  of  operation.  She  had  been  the  terror 
of  British  merchants,  the  spectre  which  haunted  the 
counting  house,  the  one  black  spot  in  the  clear  blue  of 
the  Indian  Ocean.  The  relief  which  was  felt  by  the 
merchants  of  Calcutta  was  expressed  in  an  address 
presented  by  them  to  Lord  Minto,  in  which  they  offered 
their  **  sincere  congratulations  on  the  capture  of  the 
''  only  remaining  French  colony  in  the  East,  which  has 
^'  for  so  many  years  past  been  the  source  of  devastation 
*'  to  the  commerce  of  India,  to  a  magnitude  almost 
*'  exceeding  belief."* 

The  ease  with  which  the  Isle  of  France  was  captured 
in  1810  suggests  the  question  why  she  was  so  long 
allowed  to  pursue  her  aggressive  career  ?  An  investiga- 
tion of  the  cause  of  this  apathy  on  the  part  of  the 
British,  when  so  many  interests  were  at  stake,  can  only 

*  It  may  interest  many  of  those  now  residing  in  Calcutta  to  read  the 
names  of  the  merchants  who  signed  this  address.  They  were — 
Alexander  Colvin,  John  Palmer,  J.  D.  Alexander,  J.  H.  Fergusson, 
Robert  Downie,  James  Mactaggart,  Joseph  Barretto,  John  Robertson, 
James  Scott,  Johannes  Sarkies  and  William  HoUings.  The  object  of 
the  address  was  to  ask  Lord  Minto  to  sit  for  his  portrait  in  commemora- 
tion of  the  capture  of  the  isle. 


i 


156  THE    ISLE    OF   PRANCE 

tend  to  confirm  the  conviction  of  the  prescience  and 
wisdom  of  Marquess  Wellesley,  to  show  very  clearly 
the  unsoundness  of  the  timid  policy  by  which  he  was  so 
often  overruled.  The  great  Marquess  not  only  urged 
an  exepdition  in  1800  ;  he  fitted  one  out  in  1801.  This 
was  diverted  to  Egypt.  Shortly  afterwards  the  Court  of 
Directors,  dreading  the  genius  which  would,  if  unfettered, 
have  advanced  the  civilisation  of  India  by  twenty  years, 
replaced  him  by  a  Governor- General  who  began  by 
undoing  the  large  work  of  unification  which  his 
predecessor  had  initiated.  When  Lord  Cornwallis  died, 
the  Court  of  Directors,  after  vainly  endeavouring  to 
confer  the  Governor- Generalship  on  a  narrow-minded 
reactionist — who,  in  the  short  term  of  his  acting 
incumbency,  confirmed  and  extended  a  system  which 
left  the  states  of  Eajputana  a  prey  to  Maratha  free- 
booters,— imposed  a  policy  upon  Lord  Minto  which 
restricted  his  power  for  that  kind  of  aggressive  warfare 
which  is  so  often  the  best  and  surest  defence.  It  is  a 
high  testimony  to  Lord  Minto's  intellect  that  in  the  end 
he  burst  those  trammels,  and  forced  one  portion,  at 
least,  of  the  policy  of  Marquess  Wellesley  on  a  peace- 
loving  Court  of  Directors  and  a  distrusting  ministry. 

It  was  Lord  Minto  then  who,  taking  up  the  dropped 
thread  of  the  policy  of  Marquess  Wellesley,  wrested  the 
Isle  of  France  from  her  parent  country.  For  France 
indeed,  even  her  name,  the  name  she  had  borne  for 
about  a  hundred  years,  perished  on  the  3rd  December 
1810.     Called  by  her  discoverers,  the  Portuguese,  Cerne; 


AND   HER   PRIVATEERS.  157 

re-named  in  1598  by  the  Dutch  after  their  Maurice  of 
Nassau,  Mauritius ;  falling,  after  her  abandonment  by 
the  Dutch  between  1703  and  1710,  into  the  possession 
of  the  French,  the  island  had  been  subsequently  known 
to  the  world  by  the  name  she  bore  when  the  English 
captured  her.  But  the  name  did  not  suit  the  new 
conqueror.  It  was  erased,  and  that  bestowed  in  honour 
of  the  great  Stadtholder  was  substituted.  The  Isle  of 
France  vanished  from  history  with  the  last  month  of  the 
year  1810  ! 

With  her  conquest,  too,  ended  the  careers  of  the 
privateers  on  the  Indian  seas.  They,  too,  vanished  with 
the  island  which  had  nurtured  them.  Thenceforward 
the  huge  Indiamen  of  the  Company  could  sail  in 
comparative  safety.  In  the  course  of  a  few  years  not 
only  did  the  dread  of  the  French  cruisers  vanish,  but 
their  exploits  came  to  be  listened  to  with  a  smile.  Not 
the  less,  however,  are  the  deeds  which  they  did  accomplish 
worthy  of  being  recorded.  They  show  that  if,  in  a 
future  war,  privateering  should  again  be  legitimatized, 
it  may  be  possible  for  a  nation  whose  navy  shall  have 
been  annihilated  and  whose  ports  shall  be  blockaded,  to 
inflict,  by  means  of  it,  on  a  nation  which  may  even  bear 
the  title  of  the  mistress  of  the  seas,  losses  the  full 
extent  of  which  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to 
estimate. 


BOOK     III. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 


After  the  failures  of  the  direct  attempts  made  by 
Dupleix,  by  Lally,  and  by  Suflfren  to  establish  French 
domination  in  Southern  India,  there  remained  to  the 
Latin  race  but  one  mode  of  counteracting  the  progress  of 
the  English.  That  mode  may  be  described  in  a  few  words. 
To  enable  the  princes  of  India  to  meet  the  English  success- 
fully in  the  field  it  was  necessary  above  all  things  to 
impart  to  their  troops  a  thorough  knowledge  of  European 
discipline  and  a  complete  acquaintance  with  the  system  of 
European  strategy.  To  this  somewhat  venturesome  task 
the  sons  of  France  bent  themselves  with  untiring  energy. 
They  gave  to  it  often  their  lives,  almost  always  their  every 
faculty.  They  had  much  to  aid  them.  The  native 
princes  who  employed  them  knew  at  least  that  their 


FOBEiaN   ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA.  15& 

hatred  of  England  was  not  feigned;  that  they  had 
nothing  so  much  at  heart  as  the  humiliation  of  the  rival 
of  their  own  country.  They  therefore  gave  them,  almost 
always,  a  confidence  without  stint.  Their  behests  were 
but  rarely  refused.  They  worked  under  the  avowed 
sanction  and  with  the  authority  of  the  prince  whom 
they  served.  And  if  they  did  not  succeed,  their  want  of 
success  is  to  be  attributed  rather  to  the  jealousies  which 
prevented  combination  amongst  the  native  princes,  than 
to  any  shortcomings  on  the  part  of  the  ablest  and  most 
influential  amongst  them. 

Of  all  these  adventurers  de  Boigne  was,  with  one 
exception,  the  ablest  and  the  most  successful.  Born  at 
Chambery,  the  8th  March,  1751,  the  son  of  a  furrier, 
Benoit  de  Boigne  was  at  an  early  age  sent  to  study  law 
at  the  College  of  his  native  town.  But  he  had  scarcely 
attained  the  age  of  seventeen  when  his  adventurous 
nature  impelled  him  to  renounce  his  studies,  and  to 
seek  excitement  in  a  career  of  arms.  In  1768,  then,  he 
entered  the  regiment  of  Clare,  a  regiment  in  the  Irish 
Brigade  in  the  service  of  France,  and  then  commanded, 
in  the  absence  of  Lord  Clare,  by  Colonel  Leigh.  De 
Boigne  joined  the  regiment  with  the  rank  of  ensign  at 
Landrecies,  and  applied  all  the  ardour  of  his  youth  to 
master  the  science  of  his  profession.  In  this  task  he 
received  great  encouragement  and  assistance  from 
Colonel  Leigh,  and,  under  his  tuition,  de  Boigne 
attained  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  art  of  war  as 
it  was  understood  in  those  days. 


160  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA. 

After  serving  in  garrison  for  three  years  and  a  half 
at  Landrecies,  the  regiment  of  Clare  was  ordered  to 
Dnnkerque  to  embark  for  the  Isle  of  France.  The 
regiment,  having  taken  its  tour  of  duty  in  the  island  for 
eighteen  months,  retui-ned  to  France,  and,  disembarking 
at  L' Orient,  was  ordered  to  B6thune. 

This  happened  in  1773.  France  was  then  at  peace 
with  all  the  world,  and  no  prospect  of  war  seemed  to 
loom  in  the  future.  The  promotion  of  de  Boigne  had 
been  slow,  and,  beginning  to  feel  disgusted  with  a  life 
so  monotonous  and  so  devoid  of  enterprise,  he  asked 
himself  if  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  seek  another 
scene  for  the  occupation  of  the  abilities  he  felt  that  he 
possessed.  It  chanced  that  Russia  was  then  at  war  with 
Turkey.  The  Russian  Government  was  in  the  habit  in 
those  days  of  welcoming  eagerly  instructed  officers  into 
the  ranks  of  its  army.  De  Boigne  resolved,  then,  to 
resign  his  commission  in  the  French  service  and  to  offer 
himself  to  her  northern  ally. 

His  resignation  was  accepted,  and  de  Boigne  went  to 
Turin.  Obtaining  there  letters  of  introduction  to  Count 
Orloff,  who  commanded  the  Russian  land  and  sea  forces 
in  the  Grecian  Archipelago,  he  returned  to  Marseilles 
and  embarked  on  board  the  first  ship  sailing  thence  for 
Greece.  Almost  immediately  on  his  arrival  there  he 
was  appointed  captain  in  a  Greek  regiment  in  the 
service  of  the  Empress  Catherine.  This  regiment 
formed  a  part  of  the  army  employed  in  besieging 
the  island  of  Tenedos.     A  detachment  of  it,  to  which 


I 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  161 

de  Boigne  belonged,  having  been  sent  to  efifeet  a  descent 
on  that  island,  the  Turks  made  a  sortie,  attacked  the 
invaders  in  great  force,  and  cut  them  off  nearly  to  a 
man.  De  Boigne  escaped  with  his  life,  but  was  taken 
prisoner  and  sent  first  to  Ohio  and  thence  to  Constanti- 
nople. 

Seven  months  later  the  war  came  to  an  end,  and 
de  Boigne,  with  the  other  prisoners  of  war,  was  released. 
He  had  then  attained  the  rank  of  major  in  the  Russian 
army.  Peace,  however,  had  closed  for  him  the  avenues 
of  further  advancement.  De  Boigne  then  quitted  the 
Russian  service  and  embarked  for  Smyrna.  Meeting  in 
that  town  some  Englishmen  who  had  returned  from 
India,  he  was  so  struck  by  their  description  of  the 
adventurous  life  of  that  country,  that  he  resolved  to 
seek  his  fortune  there.  Returning  to  Constantinople, 
he  made  his  way  to  Aleppo,  and  joined  there  a  caravan 
just  setting  out  for  Basra.  The  caravan  reached  Bagdad 
in  safety,  but,  as  a  furious  war  was  then  raging  between 
the  Turks  and  the  Persians,  the  road  thence  to  Basra 
was  deemed  too  dangerous  to  be  traversed,  and  the 
caravan  returned  to  Aleppo. 

From  that  place  de  Boigne  made  his  way  as  quickly 
as  he  could  back  to  Smyrna  and  sailed  thence  to 
Alexandria.  In  his  journey  from  Alexandria  to  Rosetta 
he  was  shipwrecked  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Arabs, 
These,  with  characteristic  hospitality  towards  a  stranger, 
befriended  him,  and  by  their  aid  he  was  able  to 
reach  Cairo.     Here  innumerable  delays  occurred,  and  it 

11 


162  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

was  owing  to  the  kindness  of  the  English  consul, 
Mr.  Baldwin,  that  means  were  at  last  provided  for  him 
to  reach  India.  He  embarked  at  Suez  and  sailed  thence 
at  the  end  of  the  year  1777  for  Madras. 

Amongst  those  whom  de  Boigne  had  met  in  his 
European  wanderings  was  an  English  nobleman,  Earl 
Percy.  With  him  he  had  formed  a  friendship,  and 
Lord  Percy  had  in  consequence  furnished  him  with 
letters  to  Lord  Macartney  and  to  Warren  Hastings.  On 
his  arrival  at  Madras,  de  Boigne  wished  at  first  to  act 
independently  of  the  British  Government.  But  the 
circumstances  of  the  time  were  against  him.  The 
British  were  on  the  eve  of  their  last  war  with  Haidar 
All,  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  they  should  be 
unwilling  to  afibrd  opportunities  for  foreign  adventurers 
to  find  their  way  to  the  camp  of  that  formidable  leader. 
Having  no  other  resource,  then,  de  Boigne,  who  had 
been  a  major  in  the  Russian  service,  accepted  the  rank 
of  ensign  in  the  6th  regiment  Madras  Native  Infantry. 

The  war  broke  out  immediately  afterwards.  It  hap- 
pened that  the  6th  regiment  N.  I.  was  one  of  those 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Baillie  when  that  officer 
was  attacked  by  the  combined  forces  of  Haidar  and 
Tippu  at  Perambakam  in  September,  1780.  A  few  days 
before  that  fatal  conflict,  however,  two  companies  of  the 
6th  regiment  had  been  sent  to  escort  supplies  of  grain 
to  the  main  army.  With  these  two  companies  was  de 
Boigne,  and  in  this  manner  he  escaped  the  almost  entire 
destruction  which  befell  the  main  body  of  his  regiment. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  163 

Shortly  after  this  de  Boigne  quitted  the  English 
service.  Various  reasons  have  been  assigned  for  this 
step.*  But  he  himself  undoubtedly  stated  the  truth 
when  he  affirmed  that  in  a  service  of  progressive  pro- 
motion there  was,  at  his  age,  no  chance  of  his  ever 
attaining  to  high  command.  He  resolved,  therefore,  to 
return  to  Europe  by  way  of  Kashmir,  Afghanistan,  and 
Persia. 

With  this  object  in  view  he  came  round  to  Calcutta 
and  presented  to  Warren  Hastings  Lord  Percy's  letter 
and  one  with  which  he  had  been  provided  by  Lord 
Macartney.  That  illustrious  statesman  gave  him  a 
warm  and  cordial  reception;  entirely  approved  of  his 
design  to  return  to  Europe  by  the  route  he  had 
indicated ;  and  furnished  him  with  letters  to  the  British 
residents  at  the  various  native  courts  he  would  be  likely 
to  visit  en  route ,  as  well  as  to  the  independent  native 
princes  in  alliance  with  the  British  Government. 

At  Lakhnao,  the  first  city  which  he  visited  on  his 
travels,  de  Boigne  was  extremely  well  received  by  the 
Nawab,  to  whom  he  had  been  presented  by  the  resident. 
Not  only  was  a  khilat  of  the  value  of  4000  rupees 
bestowed  upon  him,  but  the  Nawab  presented  him 
likewise  with  a  bill  on  the  bankers  of  Kabal  for 
6000  rupees,  and  another  for  an  equal  amount  on 
those  of  Kandahar.     At  Lakhnao  de  Boigne  remained 

*  Vide  Ferdinand  Smith's  Sketch,  pages  67-68  ;  the  Article  de  Boigne 
in  the  Nouvelle  Biographic  Generate ;  and  the  Memoire  sur  la  carriere 
du  General  Comte  de  Boigne. 

11    A 


164        FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA. 

five  months,  making  many  friends  amongst  the  English 
officers  and  studying  their  system.  He  then  went  on 
to  Delhi  where  he  arrived  at  the  end  of  the  month 
of  August. 

The  Emperor  of  Delhi  at  that  time  was  Shah  Alam ; 
his  minister,  Mirza  Shaffi.  Without  the  aid  of  the 
latter  it  was  impossible  for  de  Boigne  to  obtain  an 
interview  with  the  Emperor,  and  Mirza  Shaffi  was  in 
the  camp  before  Agra.  Thither,  accordingly,  de  Boigne 
repaired. 

It  was  during  his  sojourn  in  this  camp  that  de 
Boigne's  ideas  took  a  direction  which  influenced  his 
whole  life.  Kebuffed  by  the  minister,  who  refused  to 
allow  him  to  be  presented  to  Shah  Alam,  he  turned  his 
attention  to  the  political  events  passing  before  his  eyes. 
Noting  the  rivalry  of  the  various  native  princes,  the 
indiscipline  of  their  armies,  the  ignorance  and  want 
of  knowledge  of  their  generals,  it  occurred  to  him  that 
a  great  career  was  open  to  an  instructed  European 
soldier.  The  unleavened  masses  were  fermenting  all 
about  him.  Let  the  instructed  European  soldier  but 
procure  for  himself  the  authority  to  leaven  but  one  of 
those  masses,  and  his  master  would  become  the  chief  of 
all  his  rivals,  if  not  indeed  the  ruler  of  India.  The  idea 
grew  daily ;  it  ripened  quickly  into  feasibility ;  thence- 
forth the  career  of  de  Boigne  was  determined. 

At  that  time  the  Kana  of  Gohad  was  closely  besieged 
in  his  fort  by  Madhaji  Sindia.  To  offer  himself  to  the 
latter,  immensely  superior  in  power  to  the  Rana,  would 


FOEEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  165 

have  been  a  folly.  In  such  a  case,  even  had  Madhaji 
accepted  his  services,  no  credit  to  himself  could  possibly 
have  resulted.  But  to  enter  the  service  of  the  besieged 
Eana,  and  by  skill  and  dexterity  to  paralyse  the  move- 
ments of  his  enemy,  would  be  to  gain  a  reputation  and 
to  acquire  a  moral  power  such  as  would  open  out  the 
brightest  prospects  for  the  future.  Thus  reasoning, 
de  Boigne  made  secretly  the  following  proposition  to 
the  Kana.  He  offered,  in  consideration  of  a  certain 
stipulated  sum  of  money,  to  raise  2000  men  at  Agra, 
1000  at  Jaipur,  4000  at  Delhi,  and  1000  near  Gohad ; 
to  concentrate  these  troops  with  all  imaginable  secrecy 
at  a  point  on  the  frontier  of  the  Eana's  territory ;  and 
with  them  to  attack  the  besieging  force  in  the  rear,  and 
drive  it  from  his  dominions. 

The  Rana  of  Gohad,  without  declining  this  offer,  did 
not  at  once  accept  it.  He  hoped  rather  to  be  rescued 
from  his  perilous  condition  by  the  intervention  of  the 
English.  Meanwhile,  however,  he  was  not  sufficiently 
careful  to  keep  the  secret.  With  the  publicity  he  allowed 
to  be  imparted  to  the  offer,  the  possibility  of  carrying  it 
into  execution  vanished.  De  Boigne  then  broke  off  the 
negotiation,  and  offered  his  services  to  the  Eaja  of 
Jaipur. 

But  before  an  answer  could  come  from  Jaipur,  de 
Boigne  had  accepted  an  invitation  from  Mr.  Anderson, 
the  British  resident  at  the  court  of  Madhaji,  to  visit  him 
in  the  camp.  Madhaji  Sindia  was  then  besieging 
Gwaliar.     Thither  accordingly  de  Boigne  repaired,  and 


166  FOEEIGN    ADVENTUREKS    IN    INDIA. 

there  he  agreed  to  remain,  the  guest  of  Mr.  Anderson, 
until  he  should  receive  the  reply  of  the  Raja. 

De  Boigne  received  that  reply  at  the  end  of  October 
(1783).  His  offer  was  accepted.  Before  taking  up  the 
appointment,  however,  he  thought  it  becoming  to  inform 
Warren  Hastings  ofi&cially  of  his  intention  to  renounce 
his  journey  to  Europe  and  to  take  service  with  the  Eaja 
of  Jaipur.  Warren  Hastings,  in  reply,  requested  de 
Boigne  to  return  in  the  first  instance  to  Calcutta  that  he 
might  inform  him  personally  of  the  sentiments 
entertained  by  the  government  of  India  regarding  the 
course  he  proposed  to  pursue.  De  Boigne,  though 
sensible  of  the  arbitrary  nature  of  this  request,  felt  that 
his  gratitude  and  his  interest  alike  counselled  him  to 
comply  with  it.  He  returned  accordingly  to  Calcutta, — 
no  easy  journey  in  those  days.  On  his  arrival  there 
Warren  Hastings  informed  him  that  his  requisition  had 
been  necessary  because  he,  de  Boigne,  had  given  an 
official  form  to  his  letter,  and  that  as  such  it  had  been  laid 
before  the  council ;  that  as  Governor- General  in  Council 
he  could  not  give  him  authority  to  enter  the  service  of  a 
native  prince,  although,  in  his  private  capacity,  he  had 
no  objection  to  his  following  such  a  course,  and  that 
if  he  chose  to  follow  it,  he  would  shut  his  eyes  to 
his  proceedings.  The  Governor- General  added  that  he 
was  about  to  set  out  for  Lakhnao,  and  that  he  hoped  de 
Boigne  would  accompany  him  so  far. 

Armed  with  this  power  to  act  as  he  might  think 
best,  de  Boigne  accompanied  the  Governor- General  to 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  l67 

Lakhnao,  hastened  thence  to  Agra,  and  obtaining  there 
a  small  escort,  pushed  on  towards  Jaipur.  The  dif- 
ficulties, and  they  were  not  slight,  which  he  encountered 
in  his  journey  were  surmounted,  and  in  the  spring  of 
1784  he  reached  Jaipur. 

But  here  disappointment  awaited  him.  In  the  long 
interval  which  had  elapsed  between  the  acceptance  of 
his  offer  and  his  arrival,  the  Jaipur  policy  had  changed. 
Peaceful  councils  now  prevailed,  and  the  Eaja  had  no 
need  of  a  general.  To  compensate  de  Boigne,  however, 
for  the  trouble  and  expense  which  had  been  caused  him 
the  Raja  presented  him  with  10,000  rupees. 

Disappointed  though  not  daunted,  de  Boigne  repaired 
to  Dehli.  At  this  time  the  murder  of  Mirza  Shaffi  and 
the  anarchy  which  had  followed^  had  reawakened  in  the 
mind  of  Madhaji  Sindia  the  hope  of  becoming  master  of 
the  capital  of  the  Moghols.  He  was  fully  sensible  of  the 
new  difficulties  which  the  power  he  might  thus  acquire 
would  cause  him :  but,  being  able,  farsighted,  and 
ambitious,  he  was  nursing  his  resources  and  seeking  for 
means  to  meet  the  crisis  which  might  arrive  at  any 
moment.  At  the  time  of  de  Boigne's  arrival  Sindia  was 
in  the  vicinity  of  Agra,  organising  an  expedition  against 
Bandalkhand. 

For  this  expedition  de  Boigne  offered  his  services. 

He  proposed  to  raise  two  regiments,  each  850  strong ; 

and  to  equip  and  organise  them  in  the  European  fashion. 

Madhaji   knew   de    Boigne    by  reputation,    and    by 

something  more.     The  offer  he  had  made  to  the  Rana 


168  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

of  Gohad  had  struck  him  at  the  time  as  betokening  a 
daring  and  resolute  nature ;  and,  subsequently,  when  de 
Boigne  had  passed  a  night  in  his  camp  on  his  way 
to  join  Mr.  Anderson,  Madhaji  caused  his  tent  to  be 
pillaged.  The  property  then  taken  was  restored  but 
the  papers  were  retained.  It  is  probable  that  a  perusal 
of  these  confirmed  the  impression  which  the  Gohad 
scheme  had  given  bii-th  to.  Such  a  man,  he  thought, 
could  scarcely  fail  to  be  an  acquisition.  He  accepted, 
then,  after  a  short  delay,  de  Boigne*s  offer 

The  terms  agreed  to  by  de  Boigne  were  that  he 
should  receive  1000  rupees  a  month  for  himself,  and 
eight  rupees  a  month  for  each  man,  officers  and 
privates  indiscriminately.  To  enable  himself  to  give  a 
proper  salary  to  the  officers,  de  Boigne  fixed  the  pay 
of  the  privates  at  rupees  5-8-0  each.  This  arrange- 
ment provided  him  with  4250  rupees  monthly  for  the 
officers. 

The  men  were  speedily  raised ;  but  the  drilling  was  a 
matter  of  more  difficulty.  De  Boigne  had  resolved  to 
teach  them  European  drill,  to  arm  them  with  European 
weapons,  and  to  impart  to  them  European  discipline. 
"  The  labour  which  this  imposed  on  an  individual," 
writes  Mr.  Grant  Duff,  "  can  easily  be  conceived  by  any 
"  person  acquainted  with  military  affairs.''  It  was, 
indeed,  at  the  outset  a  task  which  required  no  ordinary 
patience,  perseverance,  and  self-control.  But  at  length 
he  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  end  attained.  Five 
months  after  he   had   enlisted  his    men,  he   marched 


FOEEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  169 

with  two  perfectly  disciplined  regiments  to  join  in 
Bandalkhand  the  army  commanded  by  Appa  Khande 
Rao. 

In  the  short  campaign  which  followed,  the  two 
battalions  under  de  Boigne  constituted  the  entire 
infantry  of  the  Maratha  army,  the  remainder  being 
mainly  cavalry  and  a  few  guns.  As  it  was  a  campaign 
of  sieges  the  brunt  of  the  work  fell,  naturally,  on  his 
newly  raised  troops ;  and  this  work  they  performed  with 
valour  and  with  success.  In  the  midst  of  his  triumphs, 
however,  de  Boigne  was  called  away  to  join  the  main 
army  of  Madhaji  at  Dehli. 

On  the  22nd  October  1784  the  prime  minister  of  the 
Emperor  Shah  Alam,  Afrasiab  Khan,  was  murdered  by 
the  brother  of  the  minister  whose  assassination  he  had 
instigated.  In  the  terror  that  followed  this  murder  all 
parties  turned  to  Madhaji.  The  Emperor  invested  him 
with  a  power  virtually  supreme.  By  his  advice  the 
Peshwa  was  nominated  Wakil-ul-Mutluk  or  Supreme 
Deputy  of  the  Empire,  Madhaji  was  appointed  Deputy 
of  the  Peshwa,  Commander-in-chief  of  the  Moghol 
armies,  and  the  provinces  of  Agra  and  Dehli  were 
confided  to  his  management. 

But  Madhaji  was  not  too  elated  by  his  success.  He 
was  well  aware  that  the  power  which  had  been  conferred 
by  acclamation  in  a  time  of  terror,  of  difficulty,  and  of 
danger,  would  be  disputed  as  soon  as  men's  minds  should 
begin  to  calm.  He  therefore  took  instant  measures  to 
strengthen  his  position,  and  amongst  other  precautions 


170  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

he    summoned   de    Boigne    and    his    battalions    from 
Bandalkhand. 

To  describe  fully  the  events  which  followed  could  only 
be  effected  by  trenching  upon  ground  already  occupied.* 
I  must  be  satisfied  with  referring,  as  briefly  as  may  be, 
to  the  deeds  of  de  Boigne  himself.  Thus,  in  May  1787, 
he  fought  at  Lalsot  for  three  days  under  the  eyes  of 
Madhaji  against  the  Patans  and  Eajpiits,  and  when,  on 
the  third,  the  other  infantry  of  Sindia's  army,  14,000  in 
number,  deserted  to  the  enemy,  de  Boigne  kept  his  men 
true  to  their  colours.  For  eight  consecutive  days  they 
continued,  as  they  retreated,  to  repulse  the  enemy's 
attacks.  At  the  battle  of  Chaksana,  fought  on  the  24th 
April  1788  against  the  same  enemies,  Sindia  confided 
the  command  of  his  right  wing  to  a  Frenchman,  M. 
Lesteneau,  and  of  his  left  to  de  Boigne,  whilst  the 
centre  was  commanded  by  a  native,  Sindia  being  in 
reserve  with  the  cavalry.  On  this  occasion  de  Boigne 
and  Lesteneau  not  only  repulsed  the  attacks  made  on 
their  wings,  but  were  prepared  to  render  the  victory 
decisive  had  they  been  supported  by  the  centre  and  the 
cavalry.  But  no  prayers  could  induce  either  to  advance, 
and  the  action,  undecided,  terminated  by  a  retreat  from 
the  field.  A  few  weeks  later,  however,  an  ample  revenge 
was  taken  for  these  checks.  On  the  18th  June,  in  the 
battle  fought  before  Agra,  the  battalions  of  de  Boigne 

*  Keene's  Fall  of  the  Moghol  Empire,  a  vivid  and  accurate  account  of 
the  event  in  Hindostan  from  the  death  of  Aurangzib  to  the  beginning 
of  the  present  century. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  171 

and  their  leader  contributed  greatly  to  the  victory 
obtained  over  the  Patan  chief.  Less  than  four  montha 
later,  de  Boigne's  battalions  and  the  bulk  of  the 
Maratha  army  re-occupied  Dehli.  Madhaji  himself 
followed  shortly  after. 

The  splendid  service  rendered  by  the  two  battalions 
of  de  Boigne  at  Lalsot,  at  Agra,  and  at  Chaksana,  their 
fidelity  when  their  irregular  comrades  had  deserted,  and 
their  unvarying  steadiness  under  fire,  had  particularly 
attracted  the  notice  of  Madhaji  Sindia.  But  the 
prejudices  of  the  Maratha  were  still  strong  within  him. 
When,  therefore,  de  Boigne  pointed  out  to  him  that 
these  two  battalions,  though  perfectly  efficient,  and 
capable  even  of  retarding  a  defeat,  were  yet  insufficient 
to  decide  the  fortunes  of  a  campaign  ;  that  it  would  be 
advisable  to  increase  them  to  the  strength  of  a  corps 
d'armee,  with  artillery  attached,  Madhaji  hesitated. 
Influenced  partly,  probably,  by  a  dread  to  place  in  the 
hands  of  a  European  a  small  army  obedient  only  to  the 
orders  of  its  immediate  general ;  partly  by  the  Maratha 
leaning  towards  cavalry,  partly  also  by  the  annihilation 
of  his  enemies  and  by  the  expense  which  the  proposed 
scheme  would  entail,  Madhaji  resolved  to  defer  his 
sanction.  As,  however,  he  indicated  no  fixed  time  for 
the  announcement  of  a  final  decision,  de  Boigne  regarded 
his  reply  as  a  veiled  refusal.  He  therefore  offered  hi& 
resignation.     Madhaji  accepted  it. 

De  Boigne  left  Dehli  a  comparatively  rich  man.     It  is 
stated  that  he  owed  the  greater  part  of  his  wealth  to  the 


172  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA. 

munificence  of  Madhaji,  who  thus  showed  his  gratitude 
for  the  unequalled  services  rendered  to  him  during  the  late 
campaigns.  Certain  it  is  that,  renouncing  his  military 
career,  he  proceeded  to  Lakhnao,  and  there  on  the  advice 
of  his  old  friend,  Claude  Martin,  engaged  in  mercantile 
speculations  which  speedily  augmented  his  capital.  He 
was  still  engaged  in  these  when  he  received  from 
Madhaji  pressing  solicitations  to  re-enter  his  service, 
accompanied  by  an  assurance  that  he  would  be  at  liberty 
to  carry  out  the  measures  he  had  formerly  proposed. 

The  fact  was  that  Madhaji  Sindia  had  not  found  his 
position  by  any  means  so  assured  as,  in  the  first  moment 
of  his  triumph,  it  had  appeared  to  him.  The  Patan 
army  had  been  beaten  and  dispersed,  but  its  soldiers  still 
existed.  He  was  menaced  from  the  north  by  the 
Afghans,  from  the  west  by  the  Eajputs,  whilst  he  had 
perhaps  even  more  to  dread  from  the  jealousy  of  Nana 
Farnawis,  the  minister  of  the  Peshwa,  and  from  the 
scarcely  veiled  hostility  of  the  other  chiefs  of  the 
Marathas. 

He  felt  the  want,  then,  of  just  such  a  body  of  troops 
as  de  Boigne  had  proposed  to  raise, — troops  who  would 
surpass  all  his  other  troops  in  skill  and  discipline ;  who 
would  obey  one  man,  and  that  man  impervious  to 
intrigue,  devoted  to  himself  alone.  In  this  extremity 
he  bethought  him  of  de  Boigne :  and  upon  that  thought 
there  speedily  followed  the  missive  of  which  I  have 
spoken. 

De  Boigne  was  not  deaf  to  the  demand.     Arranging, 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  173 

as  speedily  as  was  possible,  his  commercial  affairs, 
which,  however,  he  left  in  full  action  in  the  hands  of 
agents,  he  hastened  to  Mathura,  where  Madhaji  then 
had  his  head  quarters.  His  proposals  were  at  once 
agreed  to.  He  was  authorised  to  raise  a  corps  d*armee 
consisting  of  thirteen  battalions  of  infantry,  of  500 
cavalry,  and  of  sixty  guns. 

De  Boigne  went  to  his  task  with  his  accustomed 
energy.  He  reclaimed  the  two  battalions  he  had  drilled 
and  commanded  before.  A  third  battalion  was  formed 
of  the  soldiers  who  had  been  raised  and  drilled  by  the 
Frenchman,  Lesteneau,  but  who,  mutinying  for  arrears 
of  pay,  had,  on  the  advice  of  de  Boigne,  been  disbanded. 
He  had  to  enlist  men  from  Kohilkhand  and  Oudh  for 
seven  more  battalions.  All  these  were  dressed  and  drilled 
on  the  European  principle.  But,  in  addition  to  these 
ten  battalions,  de  Boigne  raised  three  more  of  Afghans, 
dressed  in  their  national  costume,  and  armed  with 
matchlocks  and  bayonets.  For  the  service  of  the  camp 
he  raised  500  Mewatis,  dressed  and  armed  as  irregular 
troops. 

The  corps  d'armee  thus  consisted  of  8500  regular 
infantry,  2400  Afghans,  500  Mewatis,  500  cavalry,  and 
100  artillerymen.  Each  regiment  was  commanded  by  a 
European  officer.  These  officers  were  men  of  all  nations, 
many  of  them  British,  and  in  many  instances  respectable 
by  birth,  education,  and  character.*     There  were  always 

*  Grant  Duff,  vol.  iii.,  chapter  ii.  Subsequently  the  number  of  men 
in  each  regiment  was  fixed  at  700. 


174  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

two  European  officers  to  each  regiment,  sometimes  more. 
The  non-commissioned  officers  were  in  the  first  instance 
taken  from  the  three  disciplined  battalions.  The  colours 
of  the  corps  were  the  national  flag,  the  white  cross,  of 
Savoy. 

For  its  command  de  Boigne  was  granted  a  salary  of 
4000  rupees  a  month.  To  provide  for  this,  as  well  as 
for  the  regular  payment  of  the  troops,  Madhaji  made 
over  assignments  of  land  to  the  charge  and  management 
of  de  Boigne,  allowing  him  two  per  cent,  upon  the  net 
revenue,  in  addition  to  his  regular  pay.* 

By  dint  of  great  exertions  the  new  corps  d*armee  was 
brought  into  a  condition  fitting  it  for  active  service 
early  in  the  year  1790.  An  opportunity  soon  offered 
for  the  display  of  its  efficiency.  On  the  20th  June  the 
Maratha  army  engaged,  near  Patau,  the  Patans  under 
Ishmael  Beg,  aided  by  the  Kajptit  troops  of  Jaipur  and 
Jodhpur.  The  battle  was  obstinate  and  bloody.  Holkar, 
who  had  promised  to  aid  Madhaji,  held  aloof.  The 
Patans  three  times  charged  through  the  infantry  of 
de  Boigne,  cutting  down  the  artillerymen  at  their  guns. 
But  the  coolness  of  de  Boigne  and  the  discipline  of  his 
troops  soon  repaired  this  disaster.  With  re-serried 
ranks  they  attacked  the  too  daring  enemy  and  drove 
him  back.  Then  there  opened  on  both  sides  a  heavy 
artillery  fire.  This  ceasing  on  the  part  of  the  Marathas 
at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  de  Boigne  placed  himself 
at  the  head  of  his  infantry  and  led  them  to  the  charge. 
*  Grant  Duff,  toI.  iii.,  chapter  ii. 


FOKEIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA.        175 

The  attack  was  irresistible.  One  by  one  the  hostile 
positions  were  carried.  At  nine  o'clock  the  enemy  were 
in  complete  flight,  utterly  disorganised,  having  lost  all 
their  guns — ten  battalions  of  their  infantry  having 
previously  surrendered. 

De  Boigne  then  received  orders  to  invade  Jodhpur. 
He  proceeded  at  once  to  the  siege  of  Ajmir,  but  learning 
that  the  Rajputs  had  assembled  a  considerable  army  at 
Mirta,  he  left  about  2700  men  to  blockade  Ajmir  and 
started  to  attack  the  enemy. 

At  daybreak  on  the  12th  September,  de  Boigne 
assailed  the  enemy's  position.  By  nine  o'clock  he  had 
obtained  a  complete  victory.  He  gained  this  victory 
notwithstanding  a  false  movement  made  by  one  of  his 
lieutenants,  and  which  for  a  time  left  his  right  wing 
exposed  to  the  incessant  charges  of  the  Rahtor  cavalry. 
The  Savoyard,  however,  showed  himself  quite  equal  to 
the  occasion.  At  nine  o'clock,  as  I  have  said,  the 
Rajputs  were  beaten ;  at  ten  o'clock  their  camp  and  all 
their  guns  and  baggage  were  captured;  at  three  p.m.,  the 
town  of  Mirta  was  taken  by  assault.  Peace  followed  this 
decisive  victory. 

Sindia  had  now  satisfied  himself  as  to  the  immense 
advantage  he  had  derived  from  possessing  a  corps 
d^annee  armed  and  disciplined  on  the  European  prin- 
ciple— and  commanded  by  a  de  Boigne.  The  troops 
thus  disciplined  and  thus  organised  had  disposed  of  his 
Mahomedan  and  Rajput  enemies,  but  he  still  looked  for 
more  at  their  hands.     It  must  never  be  lost  sight  of 


176  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

that  the  great  dream  of  Madhaji  Sindia's  life  was  to 
unite  all  the  native  powers  of  India  in  one  great  con- 
federacy against  the  English.  In  this  respect  he  was 
the  most  farsighted  statesman  that  India  has  ever 
produced.  But  to  bring  about  this  great  end  it  was 
necessary  that,  in  addition  to  the  power  which  he  wielded 
at  Dehli  and  in  a  part  of  central  India,  he  should  be 
master  of  all  the  resources  of  the  Maratha  empire. 
This  he  felt  would  be  impossible  until  he  could  rid  the 
Peshwa  of  the  minister,  Nana  Farnawis,  who  was 
jealous  of  his  reputation.  Nor,  he  felt,  could  this  end 
be  obtained  unless  he  could  dispose  of  Holkar,  the 
•  agent  and  last  hope  of  the  Nana.  His  plan,  then,  was 
to  crush  Holkar,  to  proceed  to  Puna,  and,  obtaining 
then  from  the  Peshwa  the  requisite  authority,  to  unite 
all  India  in  a  crusade  against  the  English.  It  was  a 
grand  idea,  one  capable  of  realisation  by  Madhaji,  but 
by  him  alone,  and  which,  but  for  his  death,  would  have 
been  realised. 

Full  of  these  views,  and  preparing  carefully  for  the 
conflict  he  saw  looming  in  the  future,  Madhaji  deter- 
mined at  this  time  to  increase  still  further  the  force 
which  had  been  so  useful  to  him.  De  Boigne  was 
authorised  to  increase  it  to  18,000  regular  infantry, 
6000  irregulars,  2000  irregular  horse,  600  Afghan 
cavalry,  and  2000  guns.  The  force  thus  raised  was  to 
be  divided  into  three  brigades,  or,  as  it  would  be  more 
proper  to  call  them,  divisions.  For  their  payment  a 
tract  of  country  between  Mathura  and  Dehli  and  some 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  177 

lands  east  of  the  Jamna,  comprising  in  all  fifty-two 
districts,  yielding  ultimately  twenty -two  lakhs  of  rupees, 
were  assigned  to  de  Boigne.  That  general  was  authorised 
to  reserve  to  himself  two  per  cent,  of  that  revenue,  in 
addition  to  his  pay,  now  increased  to  6000  rupees  a 
month,— -a  sum  which  was  doubled  by  other  duly 
authorised  emoluments.  The  fortress  at  Agra  was 
assigned  to  him  as  a  depot  of  small  arms  and  cannon. 
Over  these  fifty-two  districts  de  Boigne  was  assigned, 
by  Sindia,  a  power  in  civil  and  military  matters  entirely 
absolute.     He  fixed  his  headquarters  at  Aligarh. 

It  was  while  de  Boigne  was  raising  and  drilling  his 
brigades,  casting  guns,  and  bringing  the  districts  under 
his  sway  into  order ;  whilst  Madhaji  Sindia  was 
endeavouring  to  arrange  the  scheme  which  was  the 
dream  of  his  later  years,  that  war  broke  out  between 
the  British  and  Tippu  Sultan.  This  war  was  a  blow  to 
Madhaji.  He  disapproved  this  isolated  attack  upon  a 
power  to  which  united  India  might  only  possibly  be 
a  match.  Still  more  was  he  annoyed  and  enraged  at 
finding  that  the  Peshwa,  guided  by  Nana  Farnawis,  had 
entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  common  enemy. 
Nothing,  Madhaji  had  always  felt,  could  be  more 
noxious  to  the  general  cause  of  the  native  princes  of 
India,  than  the  union  of  one  chief  with  their  most 
formidable  rival  to  put  down  another  chief.  Still,  for 
the  moment,  he  was  powerless  to  prevent  this  fatal 
action.  He  was  forced  to  content  himself  with  husband- 
ing his  resources,  with  guarding  against  an  attack  from 

12 


178  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

the  north,  and  with  preparing  his  army  for  the  great 
event  to  which  he  looked  forward.  Having  done  all  that 
was  possible  in  this  respect,  he  set  out  for  Puna,  deter- 
mined, after  repressing  Holkar,  and  unseating  Nana 
Farnawis,  to  obtain  the  chief  power  himself,  and, 
wielding  it,  to  make  one  supreme  effort  to  drive  the 
British  from  Hindostan. 

Madhaji  left  de  Boigne  and  the  greater  part  of  his 
corps  d'arm^e  behind.  He  took  with  him  as  escort 
only  two  battalions,  commanded  by  Hessing  and  Filoze. 
He  arrived  at  Puna  the  11th  June,  1793. 

Scarcely,  however,  had  Madhaji  crossed  the  borders  of 
his  own  territories  than  his  enemies  began  to  raise  their 
heads.  First,  the  widow  of  Najif  Khan,  a  former  prime 
minister  at  the  Imperial  Court  of  Dehli,  refused  to 
surrender  the  fort  of  Kanund  to  Sindia's  officers.  De 
Boigne  sent  one  of  his  brigades,  under  the  orders  of 
M.  Perron,  to  compel  her.  The  often-defeated  Ishmail 
Beg  raised  troops  to  support  her.  He  encountered  Perron 
under  the  walls  of  Kanund,  and  though  beaten,  yet 
succeeded  in  penetrating  into  the  fort  with  a  consider- 
able body  of  men.  The  defence  was  prolonged  in 
consequence,  but,  the  widow  having  been  killed,  Ishmail 
Beg,  distrusting  the  garrison,  surrendered  himself  and 
the  fort  to  the  French  leader. 

But  this  was  not  all.  Taking  advantage  of  the 
absence  of  Madhaji,  Tukaji  Holkar,  the  minister  of 
the  famous  Ahalya  Bae,  suddenly  crossed  the  river 
Chambal  in  great  force,  and  marched  towards  Rajput  an  a, 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  179 

pretending  that  the  aggressions  of  Madhaji's  agent, 
Gopal  Eao  Bhao,  forced  him  to  this  act  of  open 
hostility. 

Gopal  Eao  Bhao  had  hut  a  small  force  under  him  in 
Rajputana.  Aware  that  Ttikaji  was  supported  by  a  body 
of  native  troops,  armed  and  drilled  in  the  European 
fashion,  and  commanded  by  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec, 
Gopal  Eao  sent  pressing  messages  to  de  Boigne,  and  to 
Lakhwa  Dada,  commanding  the  main  body  of  Sindia's 
cavalry,  to  join  him  without  delay.  De  Boigne  set  out 
at  once  from  Aligarh  at  the  head  of  9000  infantry,  and 
joined  Gopal  Eao  before  the  latter  had  been  molested  by 
Holkar.  Lakhwa  Dada  brought  in  his  cavalry  at  the 
same  time.  De  Boigne  immediately  assumed  command 
of  the  combined  force,  consisting  of  9000  infantry, 
20,000  cavalry,  and  about  forty  guns,  and  forthwith 
marched  upon  the  enemy.  Tukaji  became  now  aware  of 
the  double  mistake  he  had  committed;  in  the  first  place, 
in  becoming  the  aggressor ;  in  the  second,  in  not  at  once 
crushing  the  small  force  opposed  to  him.  He  did  his 
utmost,  then,  to  avoid  a  general  engagement.  But 
de  Boigne  was  not  to  be  denied.  He  followed  him  up 
vigorously,  and  at  last,  on  the  20th  September,  had  the 
satisfaction  of  finding  himself  in  front  of  his  enemy 
posted  at  the  pass  of  Lakhairi  on  the  road  leading 
from  Kanund  to  Ajmir. 

Tukaji  and  Dudrenec  had  under  them  four  battalions 
of  sepoys,  trained  by  Dudrenec,  about  30,000  irregulars, 
mostly  cavalry,  and  thirty-eight  guns.      The  position 

12 


180  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

they  occupied  was  very  formidable.  The  pass  of  Lakhairi 
was  extremely  narrow ;  covered  in  front  by  wet  ground, 
and  impossible  to  be  turned,  both  flanks  being  guarded 
by  thick  woods  and  rising  ground. 

De  Boigne  felt  as  he  reconnoitred  this  strong  position 
that  he  would  have  to  deploy  all  his  resources.  Yet  his 
own  position  was  not  without  some  considerable  counter- 
vailing advantages.  His  men  were  covered  by  tangled 
forests,  impervious  to  cavalry.  His  attack  might  fail, 
yet  his  position  could  not  be  forced.  All  other  things 
being  equal,  victory  must  incline,  he  saw,  to  the  side 
which  possessed  the  greatest  number  of  steady  infantry. 
That  side  was  his  own. 

There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  move  straight  on.  He 
placed  himself  accordingly  at  the  head  of  his  tried 
battalions  and  batteries,  and  ordered  them  to  advance. 
No  sooner,  however,  did  they  emerge  from  the  forest 
than  the  enemy's  artillery  opened  a  tremendous  and 
effective  fire  upon  them.  De  Boigne  continued,  however, 
to  advance,  and  his  own  guns  were  soon  sufficiently  clear 
of  the  jungle  to  take  up  a  position  and  reply.  But  they 
had  scarcely  fired  half  a  dozen  rounds  before  an  event 
happened  which  might  have  been  fatal  in  its  conse- 
quences. The  fire  from  the  enemy's  guns  caused  the 
explosion  first  of  one  tumbril  and  then  immediately 
afterwards  of  twelve  others  continguous  to  it.  The 
effect  might  have  been  made  decisive.  Tukaji  at  once 
launched  forth  his  cavalry  to  make  it  so.  But  De 
Boigne  was  equal  to  the  occasion.     He  caused  his  men 


FOBEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA.  181 

to  fall  back  rapidly  into  the  jungle.  They  reached  it, 
before  Tukaji's  cavalry,  feebly  handled,  could  attack 
them.  A  concentrated  fire  of  musketry  sent  back  the 
horsemen  more  rapidly  than  they  had  advanced.  A 
charge  from  Sindia's  cavalry  completed  their  overthrow- 
Thenceforward  they  took  no  part  in  the  contest. 

The  cavalry  having  disappeared,  de  Boigne  once  more 
advanced  his  infantry  and  his  guns.  This  time  there 
was  no  mistake.  The  pass  was  so  narrow  that  not  more 
than  three  columns  could  act  abreast.  Covering  these 
with  500  Eohilla  skirimishers  he  crossed  the  wet  ground 
and  charged.  But  the  battalions  of  Dudrenec  did  not 
give  ground.  They  stood,  and  fought,  and  died  at  their 
post.  But  they  were  as  one  to  three.  The  greatest 
number  must  inevitably  prevail.  And  it  happened  so. 
After  the  most  desperate  conflict  he  had  ever  been 
engaged  in,  the  troops  of  de  Boigne  stood  the  victors  on 
the  summit  of  that  fatal  pass  !  There  was  not  a  man 
to  be  pursued.  The  enemy^s  cavalry  had  disappeared, 
his  infantry  had  died  fighting ;  the  guns  had  been 
captured ! 

This  victory  broke  for  a  time  the  powder  of  Holkar 
and  left  Madhaji  undisputed  master  of  the  situation. 
De  Boigne  followed  it  up  by  marching  against  the  Kajti 
of  Jaipur  who  had  shown  a  disposition  to  take  advantage 
of  Holkar's  outburst.  De  Boigne's  movements  were  so 
rapid  and  his  plans  so  well  laid  that  the  Eaja  was  glad 
to  compromise  by  submission,  based  on  the  payment  of 
his  arrears  of  tribute,  and  an  immediate  sum  of  seventy 


182  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

lakhs  of  rupees.  De  Boigne  then  returned  to  Aligarh, 
inarching  by  Alwar,  the  Eaja  of  which  place  had  some 
years  before  displayed  great  loyalty  to  Sindia  in  very 
critical  circumstances.  Here  he  had  an  audience  of  the 
Eaja.  An  incident  which  occurred  at  this  audience  is 
thus  related  in  de  Boigne's  memoirs.  *'  One  day  when 
**  the  Eaja  gave  audience  to  the  general,  whom  he  had 
*'  made  to  sit  near  him,  M.  de  Boigne  observed  the 
**  minister  of  the  Eaja,  who  was  standing  behind  his 
master,  bend  down  and  whisper  into  his  ear  some 
words  in  the  Persian  language — a  language  which  the 
general  did  not  understand.  The  Prince  replied  only 
by  a  sign  of  disapproval  and  by  a  look  in  which  anger 
and  indignation  were  painted.  The  general's  vakil 
turned  pale.  The  conversation  nevertheless  continued 
as  before,  and  the  audience  terminated  without  the 
general  having  conceived  the  least  suspicion.  But  in 
going  out  of  the  palace  he  was  informed  by  his  vakil — 
**  who  knew  Persian,  and  who  had  overheard  the  words 
*'  whispered  by  the  minister — that  the  latter  had  proposed 
**  to  the  Eaja  to  assassinate  de  Boigne  in  the  hall  of 
**  audience.'*  De  Boigne  took  no  notice  of  the  incident. 
The  power  of  Madhaji  Sindia  was  now  consolidated 
in  Hindostan.  While  his  armies  had  been  triumphing 
in  Eajputana  his  policy  had  been  gaining  ground  at 
Puna,  whither,  on  his  request,  de  Boigne  had  expedited 
10,000  of  his  trained  infantry  under  the  command  of 
Perron.  Madhaji,  in  fact,  was  on  the  point  of  crossing 
the  threshold  to  attain  which  had  been  the  dream  of  his 


<( 
(( 
(( 
(( 
(( 
ft 
<( 
t( 


FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA.        183 

later  years.  His  plans  had  been  successful  everywhere  ; 
and  he  was  on  the  eve  of  gaining  the  pinnacle  which 
would  have  enabled  him  to  form  one  vast  combination 
against  the  English,  when  he  was  attacked  by  fever  and 
died  (12th  February,  1794). 

With  him  the  fabric  raised  with  so  much  patience,  so 
much  skill,  and  so  much  foresight,  fell  to  the  ground. 
His  successor,  Daolat  Eao,  was  a  boy  of  fifteen,  with  a 
chiiracter  which,  if  unformed,  still  showed  the  germs  of 
waywardness  and  of  a  want  of  self-control. 

At  the  time  of  Madhaji's  death  de  Boigne  was  virtually 
governor  of  Hindostan.  Daolat  Kao  confirmed  him  in 
this  appointment,  and  he  held  it,  resisting  the  advances 
made  him  by  the  partisans  of  the  blind  Emperor,  Shah 
Alim,  till  the  end  of  1795.  In  the  interval,  feeling  his 
health  weakened,  he  had  more  than  once  asked  permission 
to  resign ;  but  Daolat  Kao  had  as  often  begged  him  to 
remain.  At  last,  at  the  end  of  1794,  he  yielded  to  his 
urgent  solicitations,  and  granted  him  permission  to 
leave  for  Europe,  still  retaining  him  in  his  service. 

De  Boigne  bade  farewell  to  the  officers  of  his  army  in 
February  1796,  and  set  out  for  Calcutta.  He  took  with 
him  the  regiment  of  cavalry  which  was  his  own  peculiar 
property.  He  had  ofi*ered  this  regiment  to  Sindia,  but 
Daolat  Rao  proposed  to  pay  for  it  only  on  the  return  of 
de  Boigne  to  India.  On  his  way  through  Lakhnao  he 
offered  it  to  the  Nawab,  but  they  could  not  agree  as  to 
the  terms.  Finally  he  offered  it  to  the  English  govern- 
ment ;    Lord  Cornwallis  took  it  on  the  general's  own 


184  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

conditions.  These  were  500  rupees  for  each  horse,  or 
for  the  entire  corps,  consisting  of  600  horses,  100 
camels,  four  pieces  of  light  artillery,  and  some  draught 
cattle,  360,000  rupees.  The  men  at  the  same  time 
entered  the  British  service. 

De  Boigne  embarked  for  Europe  in  September  1796, 
and  arrived  in  London  in  January,  1797.  There  he 
married  Mademoiselle  d'Osmond,  daughter  of  the  Marquis 
d'Osmond.  The  marriage,  however,  was  not  happy. 
He  remained  principally  in  England  during  the  Empire, 
but  shortly  after  its  fall  he  settled  at  the  Villa  Buisson 
near  Chambery.  He  spent  the  last  years  of  his  life  in 
making  a  philanthropic  use  of  the  enormous  fortune  he 
had  acquired.  In  Chambery  itself  he  built  a  theatre, 
and  a  college  for  the  Jesuits,  and  embellished  the  town 
by  new  and  handsome  streets.  When  he  died  on  the 
21st  June  1830,  he  left  1,200,000  francs  to  build  a 
hospital  for  old  men  ;  500,000  for  a  hospital  for  the 
insane  ;  300,000  for  the  permanent  relief  of  beggars ; 
200,000  francs  for  new  beds  in  other  hospitals,  and 
100,000  francs  for  the  education  of  young  girls.  To 
his  wife  he  left  a  life  income  of  600,000  francs. 

It  is  impossible  to  part  with  de  Boigne  without  adding 
some  details  regarding  his  person,  his  character,  and  his 
mode  of  administration.  The  following  somewhat  prolix 
description  was  written  by  a  contemporary,  one  who 
knew  him  personally,  in  the  year  1797  :*  *'  De  Boigne 

•  Letter  of  LONGINUS,  to  the  Telegraph  newspaper,  dated  2nd 
January,  1797. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  185 

is  formed  by  nature  and  education  to  guide  and 
command:  his  school  acquirements  are  much  above 
mediocrity  :  he  is  a  tolerable  Latin  scholar,  and  reads, 
writes,  and  speaks  French,  Italian,  and  English, 
with  ease  and  fluency.  He  is  not  deficient  in  a 
general  acquaintance  with  books,  and  possesses  great 
knowledge  of  the  world.  He  is  extremely  polite, 
affable,  pleasant,  humorous,  and  vivacious  ;  elegant  in 
his  manners,  resolute  in  his  determinations,  and  firm 
in  his  measures ;  remarkably  well  versed  in  the 
mechanism  of  the  human  mind,  and  has  perfect 
command  over  himself.  To  the  political  subtlety  of 
the  Italian  school  he  has  added  consummate  Oriental 
intrigue  ;  made  his  approaches  to  power  in  disguise, 
and  only  showed  himself  when  too  strong  to  be 
resisted.  On  the  grand  stage  where  he  has  acted  a 
brilliant  and  important  part  for  these  ten  years,  he  is 
dreaded  and  idolised,  feared  and  admired,  respected 
and  beloved.  Latterly  the  very  name  of  de  Boigne 
conveyed  more  terror  than  the  thunder  of  his 
cannons.  A  singular  instance  of  which  I  shall  relate 
en  passant,  Najaf  Ktili  Khan  in  his  last  moments 
advised  his  Begam  to  resist  in  the  fort  of  Kanund 
the  efforts  of  his  enemies,  who  would  assuredly  grasp, 
on  his  demise,  at  the  small  remnants  of  his  patrimony; 
*  resist,'  said  he,  'but  if  de  Boigne  appears,  yield." 
He  will  be  long  regretted,  long  recollected  in  India. 
His  justice  was  uncommon,  and  singularly  well- 
proportioned  between  severity   and   relaxation.     He 


186  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 


4( 
it 
(( 
i( 
(t 
(( 
(( 
i( 
H 


possessed  the  happy  art  of  gaining  the  coniBdence 
of  surrounding  princes  and  subjects.  He  was  active 
and  persevering  to  a  degree  which  can  only  be 
conceived  or  believed  by  those  who  were  spectators  of 
his  indefatigable  labours  from  the  time  he  raised  eight 
battalions  till  his  departure  from  his  station.  I  have 
seen  him  daily  rise  with  the  sun,  survey  his  Karkhana 
(arsenal),  inspect  his  troops,  enlist  recruits,  direct  the 
vast  movements  of  three  brigades,  raise  resources  and 
'*  encourage  manufacturers  for  their  arms,  ammunitions, 
and  stores,  harangue  in  his  durbar,  give  audience  to 
ambassadors,  administer  justice,  regulate  the  civil  and 
revenual  affairs  of  a  Jaidad  (province)  of  twenty 
lakhs  of  rupees,  listen  to  a  multitude  of  letters  from 
various  parts  on  various  important  matters,  dictate 
replies,  carry  on  an  intricate  system  of  intrigue  in 
different  courts,  superintend  a  private  trade  of  a 
lakh  of  rupees,  keep  his  accounts,  his  private  and 
public  correspondence,  and  direct  and  move  forward  a 
most  complex  political  machine.  All  this  he  did 
without  any  European  assistance.  He  used  to  say 
that  any  ambitious  person  who  reposes  confidence  in 
**  another  risks  the  destruction  of  his  views.  *  *  *  * 
**  In  person  he  is  above  six  feet  high,  giant-boned,  large 
'^  limbs,  strong  featured,  and  with  piercing  eyes.  There 
**  is  something  in  his  countenance  which  depicts  the 
**  hero,  and  compels  us  to  yield  implicit  obedience. 
<«  ^  *  *  #  *  i^  lias  often  been  a  subject  of  sur- 
**  prise  to  many  how  de  Boigne  could  so  long  and  so 


<t 

it 
f( 

4( 
4( 
(( 

it 
it 
tt 
tt 
tt 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  187 


invariably  aggrandise  his  power  whilst  many  ad- 
venturers in  the  same  line  have  repeatedly  failed. 
Setting  his  talents,  perseverance,  and  policy  aside, 
there  is  another  cause  which  is  not  generally  known 
or  considered.  Other  Europeans  who  have  attempted 
the  project  which  de  Boigne  realised  failed  from  the 
want  of  a  fixed  and  sufficient  fund  to  pay  their  troops. 
De  Boigne's  penetrating  genius  foresaw  and  obviated 
this  fatal  error.  Soon  after  the  establishment  of  his 
two  brigades,  he  persuaded  Madhaji  Sindia  to  consign 
some  certain  pergunnahs  for  their  payments.  This 
was  done  in  1793.  A  Jaidad  producing  sixteen  lakhs 
per  annum  was  granted  for  the  expense  of  his 
army,  which  still  continues  appropriated  to  that 
*'  purpose.  ■*  *  *  This  Jaid!ad^  has  been  augmented 
**  by  the  attention  and  equity  of  de  Boigne  to  twenty 
*'  lakhs  a  year,  and  is  in  as  high  a  state  of  cultivation 
'*  as  the  most  fertile  parts  of  Banaras ;  and  the  ryots 
'*  are  as  happy  as  sensual  beings  can  be,  abstracted  from 
"  intellectual  enjoyments.'* 

This  contemporary  account  is  in  many  points  confirmed 
by  the  remarks  given  in  the  memoir  of  his  life  published 
at  Chambery  in  1829.  **  M.  de  Boigne,''  it  is  there 
stated,  *'  did  not  limit  his  cares  to  the  concerns  of  his 
"  army;  he  directed  at  the  same  time  his  attention  to 
"  the  provinces  which  Sindia  had  confided  to  him.  He 
"  introduced  into  them  the  greatest  order.  The 
**  collection  of  the  public  revenue  was  indeed  made  by 
**  the  military  authorities  according  to  the  custom  of 


188  FOREIGN   ADVENTUEERS   IN   INDIA. 

the  country.  But  the  amounts  to  be  received  had 
been  settled  with  justice,  and  they  were  fixed.  It  was 
this  that  caused  the  collections  to  be  realised  with 
greater  regularity  and  with  less  difficulty  than  is  the 
case  generally  in  India.  He  had  two  offices  of 
account,  the  one  serving  to  control  the  other.  In 
one,  the  accounts  were  kept  in  French  ;  in  the  other 
all  the  entries  were  written  in  Persian.  At  the  end 
of  each  month  the  statement  of  receipts  and  expendi- 
tures was  transmitted  to  the  Government. 
**  It  was  inevitable  that  so  many  details,  so  multiplied 
and  so  varied,  should  occupy  all  the  time  of  the 
general ;  but  the  importance  of  his  mission,  and  the 
desire  by  which  he  was  actuated  to  carry  it  to  a 
successful  end,  inspired  him  with  an  activity  which 
sufficed  for  everything.  He  used  personally  to  inspect 
the  works  going  on  in  the  arsenal ;  ^o  visit  the  parade 
ground  daily,  for  some  hours,  there  to  make  the 
troops  manoeuvre  and  to  pass  them  in  review.  From 
the  parade  ground  he  used  to  return  to  his  office, 
there  to  attend  to  administrative  matters. 
"  As  the  army  never  ceased  to  be  the  particular  object 
of  his  attention,  his  troops  became  formidable  alike 
for  their  numbers  and  for  their  perfect  discipline.  On 
this  subject  we  quote  the  honourable  testimony  of  an 
English  writer.  *  It  was  not  the  least  of  the  advan- 
*  tages  arising  from  General  de  Boigne's  merit,'  writes 
the  Bengal  Journal  of  the  18th  September,  1790, 
'  that,   in    his    military   capacity,    he    should    have 


((    c 

<(  ( 
a  < 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  189 

*'  '  softened,  by  means  of  an  admirable  perseverance, 
'*  '  the  ferocious  and  almost  savage  character  of  the 
*'  *  Marathas.  He  submitted  to  the  discipline  and  to 
*^  '  the  civilisation  of  European  armies,  soldiers  who 
till  then  had  been  regarded  as  barbarians  ;  and  to 
such  an  extent  did  he  succeed,  that  the  rapacious 
licence  which  had  formerly  been  common  amongst 
them  came  at  last  to  be  looked  upon  as  infamous 
even  by  the  meanest  soldier.''* 
Such  was  the  opinion  formed  of  de  Boigne  by  those 
who  lived  in  his  times  and  who  knew  him  personally. 
To  us,  who  can  look  back  on  all  that  he  accomplished, 
and  who  can  form  a  tolerably  accurate  idea  of  the  diffi- 
culties he  must  have  had  to  encounter,  he  stands  out  as 
pre-eminently  the  foremost  European  figure  between 
the  departure  of  Warren  Hastings  and  the  arrival  of 
Marquess  Wellesley.  It  was  de  Boigne  who  made  it 
possible  for  Sindia  to  rule  in  Hindostan,  at  the  same 
time  that  he  controlled  the  councils  of  Puna. 
It  was  through  de  Boigne  alone  that  Madhaji's  great 
dream,  dissolved  by  his  death,  became  possible  of  reali- 
sation. But  for  de  Boigne  the  power  of  the  Marathas 
would  never  have  become  so  formidable,  would  never 
have  been  able  to  offer  a  resistance  to  the  British  so 
determined  and  so  prolonged.  It  was  de  Boigne  who 
introduced  into  the  North-West  Provinces  the  germs 
of  that  civil  administration  which  the  English  have 
since  successfully  developed.  I  cannot  do  better,  in 
concluding  this  sketch  of  his  career,   than   quote   the 


190  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

apposite  language  of  the  historian  of  the  fall  of  the 
Moghol  Empire.  '*  Though  moving  in  an  obscure 
'  scene/'  writes  Mr.  Keene,*  '*  de  Boigne  was  one  of 
*  the  great  personages  of  the  World's  Drama ;  and 
'  much  of  the  small  amount  of  civil  and  military 
'  organisation  upon  which  the  British  Empire  of 
'  Hindostan  was  ultimately  founded  is  due  to  his 
'  industry,  skill,  and  valour.'* 

*  The  Fall  of  the  Moghul  Empire^  by  Henry  George  Keene. 


FOREIGN  ADVENTUREBS   IN   INDIA.  191 


II. 

The  commandants  of  the  several  brigades  raised  by 
de  Boigne  and  his  successors  will  now  come  under 
review.  The  first  brigade,  raised  in  1792-3,  was 
originally  commanded  by  Colonel  Fremont.  He  was 
succeeded  in  1794  by  Colonel  Perron;  the  latter,  in 
1797,  by  Colonel  Drugeon ;  he,  the  following  year,  by 
Colonel  Duprat;  Colonel  Duprat,  in  1799,  by  Colonel 
Sutherland ;  and  Colonel  Sutherland,  in  1802,  by 
Colonel  Pohlmann. 

The  second  brigade  was  originally  commanded  by 
Colonel  Perron.  On  his  transfer  to  the  first  brigade,  in 
1794,  Major  Gardner  succeeded  him.  Major  Sutherland 
replaced  Gardner  in  1795,  and  Major  Pohlmann  Suther- 
land in  1799.  In  1802  Sutherland  and  Pohlmann 
changed  places,  and  the  following  year  Sutherland  was 
replaced  by  Colonel  Hessing. 

The  third  brigade  was  raised  in  1795.  Its  first 
commandant  was  Captain  Pedrons.  He  was  replaced  in 
1801  by  Major  Bourquin. 

A  fourth  brigade  was  raised  in  1803,  Of  this  Colonel 
Dudrenec  was  the  commandant.  A  fifth,  raised  the 
same  year,  was  allotted  to  Major  Browning. 


1^ 

192  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

Besides  these  there  were,  in  1803,  attached  to  Sindia's 
army  the  following  additional  brigades :  that  of  Filoze, 
consisting  of  eight  battalions  of  infantry,  500  cavalry, 
and  forty-five  guns ;  that  of  Sombre,  composed  of  six 
battalions  of  infantry,  500  cavalry,  and  thirty-five 
guns ;  that  of  Shephei'd,  attached  to  Ambaji  Inglia, 
numbering  five  battalions,  500  cavalry,  and  twenty-five 
guns. 

Before  proceeding  to  deal  with  the  men  whose  names 
I  have  mentioned,  and  some  of  whom  filled  a  great  part 
in  the  history  of  the  period,  I  propose  to  give  a  detailed 
account  of  the  internal  economy  of  the  brigades  as  finally 
settled  by  de  Boigne. 

A  brigade  was  composed  of  eight  battalions.  Each 
battalion  comprised  within  itself  infantry  and  artillery. 
Each  was  commanded  by  a  captain,  having  under  him  a 
lieutenant,  either  European  or  European  by  descent.  A 
battalion  had  eight  companies  of  infantry,  each  com- 
manded by  a  subadar,  aided  by  two  jemadars,  one  kot 
havildar,  three  havildars,  four  naicks,  and  fifty-two 
sepoys.  The  artillery  of  the  same  battalion  consisted 
of  one  sergeant-major  (European),  and  five  European 
gunners,  one  jemadar,  one  havildar,  five  naicks,  thirty- 
five  golandaz,  five  tindals,  thirty-five  klassis,  twenty 
bildars,  thirty  gariwans,  four  ironsmiths,  and  four 
carpenters.  A  battalion  had  also  a  native  surgeon,  and 
a  complement  of  matsadis,  water  carriers,  and  the  like. 
Every  battalion  had  408  stand  of  arms,  four  field-pieces, 
one  howitzer,  five  trumbrils,  120  bullocks,  and  two  native 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  193 

carts.  Every  gun  had  constantly  ready  with  it  300 
rounds  of  shot  and  100  rounds  of  grape.  A  howitzer 
had  fifty  stone  shells  and  fifty  rounds  of  grape.  The 
monthly  pay  of  the  native  officers  and  men  of  a  battalion 
was  about  4500  rupees.  The  pay  of  the  ofiicers  was  as 
follows  : — ^A  colonel  received  3000  rupees ;  a  lieutenant- 
colonel  2000;  a  major  1200;  a  captain  400;  a 
captain-lieutenant  300 ;  a  lieutenant  200  ;  an  ensign 
150.  These  rates  were  increased  fifty  per  cent,  when 
the  officers  concerned  were  serving  in  the  Dekhan. 
The  men  received,  under  the  same  circumstances,  a 
proportional  increase.  Besides  their  pay,  officers  com- 
manding brigades,  whether  colonels  lieutenant-colonels 
or  majors,  received  100  rupees  a  month  as  table 
allowance. 

A  brigade  of  eight  battalions  consisted  of  6000  men. 
Besides  the  battalion  complement  of  guns  above  detailed 
the  brigade  had  attached  to  it  three  battering  guns  and 
two  mortars  with  men  to  serve  them.  Each  had  like- 
wise 200  irregular  cavaby  and  500  irregular  infantry 
(Rohillas). 

The  battalions  were  named  after  famous  cities  or 
forts,  such  as  Dehli,  Agra,  Burhanpur.  The  men  were 
disciplined  according  to  the  English  regulations  of  1780, 
then  in  force  in  the  British  army.  The  regular  infantry 
were  armed  with  muskets  and  bayonets  manufactured  at 
Agra.  The  irregulars  with  match-locks  and  bayonets. 
The  cavalry  were  well  mounted.  Seven  hundred  of  them 
were  armed  with  match-locks   and  swords;    500  with 

13 


194  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

carbines,  pistols,  and  swords ;  they  were  drilled  in  the 
European  fashion.* 

I  propose  now  to  consider  the  personnel  of  these 
battalions  and  brigades.  Of  the  first  on  the  list,  Colonel 
Fremont,  I  have  been  unable  to  collect  any  interesting 
details.  He  would  seem  to  have  been  amongst  the  first 
Frenchmen  who  joined  de  Boigne,  for  I  find  him  com- 
manding a  brigade  of  six  battalions  in  1792,  and 
storming  at  their  head  the  hill  fort  of  Balahara,  sixty 
miles  to  the  east  of  Jaipur.  Again,  in  1794,  he 
commanded  a  brigade  of  eight  battalions  at  an  action 
which  took  place  at  Datia  in  Bandalkhand.  It  is 
probable  that  he  died  shortly  after  that  action,  for  in  the 
year  following  it,  the  command  of  his  brigade  devolved 
on  Perron,  and  his  name  ceases  to  be  mentioned. 

Perron  was  a  very  remarkable  adventurer.  He  came 
out  to  India  in  the  year  1774  as  a  common  sailor  on 
board  the  French  frigate  the  Sardaigne.  Being  a  man 
of  energy,  ambition,  and  strength  of  will,  he  quitted  the 
naval  service  and  strove  by  various  means  to  make  a 
fortune  in  the  country.  It  was  not,  however,  till  he 
made  the  acquaintance  of  de  Boigne,  in  1789,  that  he 
very  decidedly  ameliorated  his  condition.  De  Boigne 
had  just  then   acceded  to  the  urgent   solicitations  of 

I  have  taken  all  these  details  from  a  curious  old  book,  entitled  A 
Sketch  of  the  rise^  progress j  and  termination  of  the  regular  corps  formed 
and  commanded  by  Europeans  in  the  Service  of  the  Native  Princes  of 
India,  by  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  late  Major  in  Daolat  Rao  Sindia's 
service.  The  book  was  published  at  the  beginning  of  the  century 
and  is  very  scarce. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  195 

Madhaji  Sindia  by  agreeing  to  re-enter  his  service.  He 
was  in  want  of  officers.  Struck  by  the  energetic  temper 
displayed  by  Perron,  he  offered  him  the  post  of  captain- 
lieutenant  in  his  second  brigade.  Perron  jumped  at  the 
offer,  and  at  once  distinguished  himself  and  won  the 
heart  of  his  chief  by  his  attention  to  duty,  his  courage, 
and  his  activity.  The  camp  became  his  world,  and  he 
devoted  himself  with  all  the  ardour  of  his  nature  to  take 
a  leading  part  in  it.  He  distinguished  himself  so  much 
nt  the  battles  of  Mirta  and  Patau  that  de  Boigne  soon 
after  entrusted  him  with  an  independent  command.  He 
was  sent  in  1792  with  his  brigade  to  reduce  the  fort  of 
Kantind.  How  he  succeeded  on  this  occasion  I  have 
related  in  the  preceding  section.  For  this  service  he 
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  major.  He  then  rejoined 
de  Boigne,  and  was  present  at  the  well-contested  battle 
of  Lakhairi.  The  following  year  he  was  detached  by 
his  chief  at  the  head  of  his  brigade  to  Puna,  to  take 
there  also  the  command  of  the  troops  which  had  accom- 
panied Madhaji  Sindia  to  that  court  under  the  command 
of  Hessing  and  Filoze.  His  whole  regular  force  amounted 
then  to  18,000  men.  He  was  at  Puna  when  Madhaji 
died  (12th  February,  1794). 

Into  the  intrigues  which  immediately  followed  the 
succession  of  Daolat  Eao  Sindia  it  is  not  necessary  here 
to  enter.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  state  that  the  unsettled 
condition  of  affairs  at  the  court  of  the  Peshwa  roused 
the  ambition  of  the  Nizam  Ali  Khan,  the  Nizam  of 
Haidarabad.     This   intriguing   prince   was   induced   to 

13  A 


196  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA. 

believe  that  the  power  of  the  Mahommedan  rule  might  bo 
revived  in  the  ruins  of  Puna.  He  accordingly  assembled 
an  army  at  Bidr,  and  advanced  thence  towards  the 
Maratha  frontier. 

Nizam  Ali  had  some  reason  for  his  confidence* 
Besides  some  70,000  irregular  infantry  he  had  serving  in 
his  army  15,000  regulars,  commanded  by  a  very  famous 
Frenchman,  M.  Eaymond,  a  man  who  had  served  under 
Bussy,  and  whose  name  still  lives  revered  in  the  Dekhan. 
To  support  these  Nizam  Ali  led  into  the  field  20,000 
horsemen  and  a  due  proportion  of  artillery. 

To  meet  this  formidable  invasion  the  Peshwa 
summoned  all  his  vassal  chieftains.  Daolat  Kao  Sindia 
brought  25,000  men  ;  Raghuji  Bhonsla  15,000 ;  Holkar 
10,000 ;  Pareshram  Bhao  7000.  Other  contingents 
increased  the  total  number  to  130,000;  and  besides  these 
there  were  10,000  Pindaris. 

But  the  great  strength  of  the  Peshwa*s  army  consisted 
in  the  brigades  commanded  by  the  quondam  French 
sailor.  Perron  had  ten  of  de  Boigne's  trained  battalions, 
amounting  with  cavalry  and  artillery  to  about  10,000 
men.  There  were  also  serving  under  his  orders  six 
battalions  commanded  by  Filoze,  amounting  with  guns 
and  cavalry,  to  about  5000  men  ;  and  four  by  Hessing, 
amounting  to  3000. 

Holkar,  too,  brought  similarly  trained  troops  unto  the 
field,  viz,,  four  battalions  of  about  3000  men,  commanded 
by  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec ;  and  two  of  1500  led  by 
Major  Boyd. 


FOBEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  197 

The  two  armies  met  midway  between  the  forts  of 
Kardla  and  Parinda.  The  battle  which  ensued  was  the 
first  great  departure  since  the  death  of  Madhaji  Sindia 
from  the  policy  of  that  great  statesman ;  the  first  marked 
deviation  from  his  principle  of  one  general  alliance 
against  an  enemy  who  would  otherwise  destroy  them 
piecemeal.  It  was  fought  the  12th  March,  1795.  The 
Marathas  occupied  a  defensive  position,  of  which  Perron's 
troops  formed  the  left.  On  the  high  ground  near  him 
Perron  had  placed  his  artillery,  and  he  supported  this 
arm  by  the  infantry  and  cavalry  in  the  plain  below.  The 
troops  of  Dudrenec  and  Boyd  were  with  Holkar  in  the 
centre. 

The  battle  began  by  an. advance  of  the  Mahommedans 
on  the  right  wing  and  centre  of  the  Marathas.  The 
attack  completely  succeeded.  The  Maratha  right  wing 
was  driven  on  to  its  centre,  at  the  same  time  that  the 
centre  itself  was  completely  broken  by  the  steady  advance 
of  Kaymond's  drilled  troops.  These  divisions  fled  in 
confusion,  carrying  Dudrenec's  and  Boyd's  men  with 
them,  and  endeavouring  to  seek  a  refuge  behind  the 
still  unbroken  left.  Towards  this  left  covered  and 
supported  by  a  cavalry  flushed  with  victory  Raymond 
now  advanced.  Perron  allowed  him  to  approach  almost 
within  musket-shot,  and  then  suddenly  opened  a  con- 
centrated and  continuous  fire  from  the  thirty-five  guns 
loaded  with  grape  which  he  had  placed  on  the  eminence. 
At  the  same  moment  Raghuji  Bhonsla  assailed  the 
Mahommedan   cavalry  with   a  shower    of    rockets,  the 


198  FOKEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

materials  for  firing  which  he  had  maintained  on  the 
ground  during  the  general'fight  of  the  right  wing.  This 
simultaneous  discharge  sent  the  Moghol  cavalry  to  the 
right-about.  Kaymond's  infantry,  however,  not  only 
stood  firm,  but  succeeded  for  a  time  in  making  a 
successful  opposition  to  all  the  efibrts  of  Perron.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  how  the  battle  would  have  ended  had 
Nizam  Ali  been  endowed  with  the  most  ordinary  qualities 
of  a  leader.  But  like  most  Asiatic  commanders  he 
trusted  only  to  his  horsemen.  When,  then,  these  fled,  he 
fled  with  them,  sending  order  after  order  to  Eaymond  to 
follow  him.  Meanwhile  the  Maratha  horse,  rallying, 
were  hastening  to  support  Perron.  Kaymond,  then, 
most  unwillingly  was  forced  to  follow  his  master.  He 
did  so,  however,  in  the  most  perfect  order,  prepared  to 
renew  the  fight  the  next  day.  An  accident,  however, 
converted  the  retreat  during  the  night  into  a  complete 
rout.*  Three  days  later  a  humiliating  accommodation 
was  forced  upon  the  pusillanimous  Nizam. 

The  battle  of  Kardla,  if  it  crushed  the  Nizam,  gave 
by  its  results,  fuller  impetus  to  the  intrigues  going  on 

•  This  accident  is  thus  related  by  Grant  Duff  (Vol.  III.  chapter  VI.). 
*'  In  the  stillness  of  night  a  small  patrol  of  Marhatas,  in  search  of 
water  for  their  horses,  come  by  chance  to  a  rivulet  where  lay  a  party  of 
Moghols,  who,  discovering  what  they  were,  instantly  fired  upon  them. 
Raymond's  sentries  who  were  in  the  neighbourhood,  also  fired,  when 
their  whole  line,  who  lay  on  their  arms,  with  their  muskets  loaded  as 
they  had  retreated,  started  from  their  sleep  and  instantly  fired  a  sort  of 
irregular  volley.  The  alarm  which  such  a  discharge  of  musketry 
occasioned,  in  the  state  of  the  Moghol  army  at  that  moment,  may  be 
conceived.  *  *  *  Nizam  Ali  in  perfect  consternation  sought  refuge 
within  the  walls  of  Kurdld. 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  199 

at  Puna,  and  these  received  a  further  accession  of 
force  by  the  untimely  death  of  the  youthful  Peshwa, 
Madhu  Kao  (October  25th,  1795).  An  account  of  these 
intrigues  would  be  foreign  to  my  present  subject!  A  few 
months  after  the  Peshwa's  death  de  Boigne  resigned 
to  Perron  the  command  of  the  armies  of  Sindia  in 
Hindostan. 

The  fortunate  man  who  had  left  France  as  a  common 
sailor  now  ruled  and  administered  in  the  name  of  Sindia 
the  country  from  Lahore  to  Kota  and  between  Aligarh 
and  Jodhpur.  He  possessed  greater  power  than  any 
European  had  till  that  time  possessed  in  Hindostan. 
This  power  he  used,  according  to  contemporary  authority, 
in  such  a  manner  '*  as  to  aggrandise  his  authority  and 
'*  his  riches."*  In  his  admirable  work  on  the  Fall  of 
Moghol  Empire,  Mr.  Keene  has  extracted  from  a  record 
published  by  order  of  the  local  Government,  a  passage 
bearing  upon  the  mode  in  which  Perron's  administration 
was  conducted.  "  Perron,"  says  this  record, t  which  I 
extract  from  Mr.  Keene's  book,  /*  succeeded  in  erecting'* 
(a  principality)  *'  for  the  maintenance  of  the  army,  and 
*'  reigned  over  it  in  the  plenitude  of  sovereignty.  He 
*'  maintained  all  the  state  and  dignity  of  an  oriental 
"  despot,  contracting  alliances  with  the  more  potent 
*'  Eajas,  and  overawing  by  his  military  superiority  the 
''  petty  chiefs.  At  Dehli,  and  within  the  circle  of  the 
'^  imperial  dominions,  his  authority  was  paramount  to 

*  Major  Ferdinand  Smith,  before  referred  to. 

+  Aleegurh  Statistics.     By  J.  R.  Hutchinson  and  J.  W.  Sherer. 


200  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

that  of  the  emperor.  His  attention  was  chiefly  directed 
to  the  prompt  realization  of  revenue.  Pargannahs 
were  generally  formed ;  a  few  were  allotted  as  jaidad 
to  chiefs  on  condition  of  military  service  ;  the  revenue 
(of  the  lands  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aligarh)  was 
collected  by  large  bodies  of  troops  always  concentrated  at 
head-quarters.  A  brigade  was  stationed  at  Sikandrabad 
for  the  express  purpose  of  realizing  collections.  In  the 
event  of  any  resistance  on  the  part  of  a  landholder,  who 
might  be  in  balance,  a  severe  and  immediate  example 
was  made  by  the  plunder  and  destruction  of  his 
village ;  and  blood  was  not  unfrequently  shed  in  the 
harsh  and  hasty  measures  which  were  resorted  to. 
The  arrangements  for  the  administration  of  justice 
were  very  defective;  there  was  no  fixed  form  of 
procedure,  and  neither  Hindu  nor  Mahommedan  law 
was  regularly  administered.  The  suppression  of  crime 
was  regarded  as  a  matter  of  secondary  importance. 
There  was  an  officer  styled  the  Bakhshi  Adalat  whose 
business  was  to  receive  reports  from  the  Amils  (officials) 
in  the  interior,  and  communicate  General  Perron's 
orders  respecting  the  disposal  of  any  offenders 
apprehended  by  them.  No  trial  was  held ;  the  proof 
rested  on  the  AmiFs  report,  and  the  punishment  was 
left  to  General  Perron's  judgment." 
The  vacillating  character  of  Daolat  Eao  Sindia 
imposed  upon  Perron  difficulties  of  a  character  dij0ferent 
from  those  over  which  de  B eigne  had  triumphed. 
Daolat  Eao  possessed  none  of  the  foresight,  none  of  the 


FOBEIGN   ADVENTUEERS    IN   INDIA.  201 

power  of  comprehensive  view,  for  which  his  adoptive 
father  was  so  famous.  The  influence  wielded  by  the 
latter,  and  inherited  for  the  moment  by  Daolat  Kao, 
was  frittered  away  in  contests  for  secondary  objects  at 
Puna.  Gradually  the  tried  adherents  of  Madhaji  fell 
away  from  his  successor,  and  Perron  was  then  called 
upon  to  meet  as  enemies  in  the  field  the  men  who  had 
been  the  allies  and  followers  of  de  Boigne. 

Eoremost  amongst  these  men  was  Lakhwa  Dada* 
Lakhwa  Dada  was  a  Maratha  Brahman.  He  had 
distinguished  himself  in  the  service  of  Madhaji  in  1788 
by  his  brilliant  and  successful  defence  of  Agra  against 
the  Patau  leaders.  He  had  fought  side  by  side  with  de 
Boigne  on  many  a  well-contested  field,  and  especially  in 
the  bloody  battle  of  Lakhairi.  To  none  of  his  adherents 
had  Madhaji  shown  greater  confidence.  Such  was  the 
man,  clever  influential,  and  far-sighted,  whom  Daolat 
Eao,  actuated  by  the  suspicion  that  he  had  connived  in 
the  escape  of  the  widows  of  his  predecessor  from  the 
prison  to  which  he  had  consigned  them,  deprived  of  his 
power  and  dismissed  from  all  his  employments. 

In  those  days  arbitrary  power  could  not  always  be 
exercised  with  impunity  towards  a  clever  and  influential 
servant  of  the  State.  Lakhwa  Dada  knew  that  a  great 
many  powerful  vassals  were  impatient  of  the  yoke  of 
Doalat  Kao  ;  that  they  wanted  only  a  leader.  He  threw 
himself  into  their  ranks,  was  recognised  as  their  chief, 
raised  a  powerful  army,  repeatedly  defeated  the  troops 
sent   against   him,  and   reduced   all  the   country  from 


202  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

Ujain  to  Sironj.*  Agra,  too,  the  place  in  which  in  his 
younger  days  he  had  won  his  spurs,  fell  into  the  hands 
of  his  adherents. 

Perron  had  not  been  blind  to  the  events  occurring  in 
his  government.  In  Agra  were  his  arsenals,  his 
magazines,  his  manufactories.  To  Agra,  then,  he 
marched,  at  the  head  of  his  whole  available  force.  He 
was  joined  before  the  place  by  Ambaji  Inglia,  one  of 
Daolat  Kao's  principal  ofi&cers,  at  the  head  of  a  large 
body  of  cavalry. 

Agra  resisted  long,  but  Lakhwa  Dada  was  not  there 
to  defend  it  in  person,  and  in  the  end  it  surrendered. 
Perron  then  marched  against  Lakhwa  Dada,  who  had  by 
this  time  mastered  nearly  two-thirds  of  Rajputana. 
The  hostile  forces  met  at  Sondia,  in  the  Datia  territory, 
on  the  3rd  May  1800.  The  disciplined  battalions 
prevailed.  Lakhwa  Dada  was  beaten  and  so  severely 
wounded  that  he  died  shortly  after. 

Rid  of  this  formidable  adversary  Perron  had  time  to 
turn  his  attention  to  George  Thomas,  an  adventurer 
who  had  almost  succeeded,  single  handed,  in  firmly 
establishing  an  independent  principality  in  northern 
India.  Thomas  was  a  very  remarkable  man.  An 
Irishman  by  birth,  Thomas  had  come  out  to  India  as  a 
common  sailor  on  board  of  an  English  man-of-war  about 
the  year  1782.  Deserting  from  his  ship  as  she  lay 
anchored  in  the  Madras  roads,  he  had  wandered  about 
the  Carnatic,  and  had  finally  taken  service  under  the 

*  Grant  Duff. 


FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA.        20B 

Bigam  Sombre.  A  bold,  indefatigable,  active  man, 
endowed  with  great  natural  abilities  and  a  large  share  of 
common-sense,  possessing,  too,  a  handsome  person  and 
a  winning  manner,  Thomas  was  just  the  man  to  rise  ta 
distinction  under  such  a  mistress.  Opportunities  did 
not  fail  him.  In  April,  1788,  when  the  contingent  of 
the  Bigam  was  serving  under  the  orders  of  the  Emperor 
Shah  Alim  at  the  siege  of  Gokalgarh,  Thomas  was 
fortunate  enough  to  save  the  Emperor  from  death  or  a 
worse  captivity.  For  five  years  Thomas  continued  in  the 
service  of  the  Bigam,  and  it  is  probable  that,  as  time 
went  on,  he  began  to  aspire  to  a  position  of  a  more 
intimate  character.  But,  if  he  did  entertain  such  a 
hope,  he  was  disappointed.  A  Frenchman  named  Le 
Yaisseau  supplanted  him.  Thomas  upon  this  left  the 
Bigam's  service  and  set  up  for  himself.  He  went  first 
to  the  village  of  Anupshahr  where  was  stationed  the 
frontier  brigade  of  the  English  force.  From  this  place 
he  corresponded  with  Appu  Khandi  Eao,  an  influential 
officer  in  the  service  of  Sindia.  The  correspondence 
ended  by  Thomas  obtaining  from  his  friend  the  investi- 
ture of  a  few^  villages  at  Maratha  territory.  Subsequently 
Thomas  obtained  permission  to  conquer  and  administer 
the  district  of  Hariana,  a  part  of  the  country  so  neglected 
and  desolate  that  up  to  that  time  no  one  had  considered 
it  worth  taking.  He  first  succeeded  in  taking  a  large 
village  in  Hariana.  His  subsequent  proceedings  are 
thus  described  by  a  personal  friend  and  contemporary :  ^ 

*  Major  Ferdinand  Smith. 


204  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

^*  Thomas  commenced  his  ambitious  career  in  1794, 
**  after  he  left  the  Bigam  Sombre's  service,  by  collecting 
"  a  few  men  near  Dehli,  with  whom  he  stormed  a  large 
**  village.  The  little  money  he  acquired  from  this 
**  village  laid  the  foundation  for  his  future  hopes  and 
^'  prospects ;  he  made  a  few  guns,  enlisted  more  men, 
'*  raised  two  battalions,  and  besieged  parts  of  the 
'*  desolated  country  of  Hariana.  *  *  *  He  increased 
**  his  forces  by  plunder;  the  brass  and  copper  vessels 
"  he  found  in  the  towns  and  villages  were  melted  into 
*\  cannon,  and  cannon  procured  him  money.  Thus  he 
*'  proceeded  some  time,  gradually  raising  his  forces  as 
**  he  augmented  his  means  to  pay  them,  until  1797, 
**  when  they  amounted  to  four  battalions.  He  then 
**  cleared  away  the  jungle  from  the  abandoned  fort  of 
"  Hansi,  and  put  it  in  a  state  of  defence.  His  range 
"  of  depredations  now  became  more  extensive  and  his 
"  resources  greater.  At  last,  in  1801,  he  raised  his 
^*  party  to  ten  battalions  with  sixty  pieces  of  cannon, 
"  and  secured  a  country  to  himself  of  three  lakhs  a 
^'  year." 

Such,  in  brief,  is  the  outline  of  the  history  of  the 
rise  of  George  Thomas.  But  there  are  other  details, 
not  uninteresting,  which  served  to  help  him  on.  Such 
was  his  adoption  by  Appti  Khandi  Eao  immediately 
subsequent  to  their  joint  visit  to  Dehli  in  1794  to 
receive  investiture  of  their  fiefs  from  the  local  repre- 
sentative of  Daolat  Eao  Sindia.  It  was  on  this  occasion 
that  Appti  Khandi  conferred  upon  Thomas  the  right  to 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  205 

occupy  Hariana,  and  extended  the  powers  he  had 
previously  granted  to  him.  Another  characteristic 
incident  of  this  part  of  his  career  was  the  restoration 
by  his  means  of  his  old  mistress,  the  Bigam  Sombre, 
now  once  more  a  widow,  to  the  principality  of  which  she 
had  been  deprived  by  the  intrigues  of  her  officers.  A 
third,  the  invariable  fidelity  and  forbearance  he  displayed 
towards  his  adoptive  father,  notwithstanding  the 
repeated  intrigues,  amounting  often  to  treachery, 
indulged  in  by  the  latter.  Latterly  he  recognised 
Ambaji  Inglia,  the  favourite  general  of  Sindia,  as  his 
most  trusted  ally. 

Before  proceeding  to  the  event  which  brought  Thomas 
into  collision  with  Perron,  I  propose  to  devote  a  few 
lines  to  the  manner  of  his  administration  of  Hansi  and 
its  surrounding  district.  The  story  is  best  told  in  his 
own  words.*  " Here,'' writes  he  in  his  memoirs,  "I 
'*  established  my  capital,  re -built  the  walls  of  the  city, 
"  which  had  long  since  fallen  to  decay,  and  repaired  the 
"  fortifications.  As  it  had  been  long  deserted,  at  first 
'*  I  found  difficulty  in  procuring  inhabitants,  but  by 
**  degrees,  and  gentle  treatment,  I  selected  between 
*'  5000  and  6000  persons,  to  whom  I  allowed  every 
*'  lawful  indulgence.  I  established  a  mint,  and  coined 
'*  my  own  rupees,  which  I  made  current  in  my  army 
**  and  country ;  cast  my  own  artillery,  commenced 
**  making  muskets,  match-locks,  and  powder;     *     *     * 

till  at  length,'*  he  goes  on  to  say,  ''  having  gained 
*  Francklin*B  Life  of  George  Thomas. 


it 


206  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 


a  capital  and  country  bordering  on  the  Sikh  territories, 
I  wished  to  put  myself  in  a  capacity,  when  a 
favourable  opportauity  should  offer,  of  attempting 
the  conquest  of  the  Panjab,  and  aspired  to  the  honour 
of  placing  the  British  standard  on  the  banks  of  the 
Attock,''  No  ignoble  aspiration,  indeed,  for  a  deserter 
from  a  British  man-of-war  ! 

It  was  no  idle  dream  however.  Thomas  had,  in  fact, 
already  left  his  own  territory  to  make  the  attempt,  and 
he  was  actually  within  four  marches  of  Labor,  when  he 
received  an  express  to  the  effect  that  his  principality  of 
Hariana  was  menaced  by  Perron. 

The  fact  is  that  Perron,  wielding  the  power  of  Sindia 
in  Hindostan,  having  crushed  Lakhwa  Dada,  was  not 
disposed  to  brook  the  establishment  so  near  to  Dehli  of 
an  independent  power,  and  that  power  wielded  by  a 
native  of  Great  Britain.  He  accordingly  sent  to  Thomas 
a  summons  to  repair  to  Dehli,  there  to  do  homage  as  a 
vassal  of  Sindia.  Anticipating  his  refusal  he  massed 
ten  battalions  and  2000  horses  at  Dehli.  Thomas, 
foreseeing  what  was  in  store  for  him,  sent  an 
indignant  reply,  at  the  same  time  that  he  made  every 
effort  to  return  and  cover  his  capital.  Marching  thirty 
or  forty  miles  a  day  he  succeeded  in  reaching  Hansi 
before  Perron  had  moved  out  of  Dehli. 

But  Perron  had  committed  himself  too  far  to  retreat. 
He  had  allied  himself  with  the  Sikhs  and  obtained  from 
them  assistance  alike  in  men  and  money.  Thomas 
likewise  had  formed  alliances  with  his  old  friend  the 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  207 

Bigam   Sombre,  with  the  Kajas  of  Jaipur   and  Alwar, 

and  with  Lafontaine,   who  commanded   six  battalions 

of  Filoze's  brigade  in  the  service  of  Sindia.     Eeinforced 

by   the   troops   received   from   these    quarters   he   met 

Perron's  army  at  Bahadurgarh,  eighteen  miles  to   the 

west  of  Dehli.      Neither  party  was   very   confident   of 

success.     Perron  thought,  moreover,  that  it  might  be 

possible  to  arrange  matters  satisfactorily  without  having 

recourse  to  the  doubtful  arbitrament  of  a  battle.     He 

therefore  commissioned  one  of  his  officers,  Major  Lewis 
I  

Ferdinand  Smith,*  to  repair  to  the  camp  of  Thomas, 
and  to  offer  him  60,000  rupees  a  month  for  his  troops, 
the  rank  of  colonel  for  himself,  and  the  fort  of 
Hansi  in  perpetuity,  provided  he  would  take  service 
under  Sindia,  and  acknowledge  Perron  as  his  chief. 
Thomas,  though  unwillingly,  consented  to  discuss  these 
terms  at  a  personal  interview. 

There  were  many  reasons  which  combined  to  dissuade 
Thomas  from  the  offered  accommodation.  Intelligence 
had  but  just  reached  him  of  the  defeat  of  Daolat  Kao's 
troops  at  Ujjen,  and  of  his  precipitate  retreat  on 
Burhanpur.  Letters  too  had  come  in  from  Jeswant  Eao 
Holkar  urging  him  to  attack  Perron,  and  promising  him 
aid  in  men  and '  money.  Kecruits,  too,  were  on  their 
way  to  join  him,  whilst  he  knew  that  Sindia  was 
demanding  reinforcements  from  Perron.  His  policy 
was   plainly   to   temporise   until   he   should   possess  a 

*  It  is  from  the  memoirs  of  this  oflScer,  an  actor  on  the  scene,  that 
I  have  gleaned  the  details  which  follow. 


208  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

manifest  superiority.  This  indeed,  was  the  course  that 
recommended  itself  to  his  clearer  vision.  But  the 
demand  made  by  Perron  at  the  interview,  that  he  should 
divide  his  force  and  send  one-half  to  the  assistance  of 
Sindia  maddened  him  to  such  an  extent  that  he  broke 
oflf  the  conference  and  hastily  retreated  to  Hansi. 

On  the  breaking  up  of  the  conference  Perron  returned 
immediately  to  Aligarh,  called  thither  by  the  necessity 
of  attending  to  the  urgent  requisitions  of  Sindia,  leaving 
his  force  before  Bahadurgarh  under  the  command  of 
Major  Bourquin,  then  acting  as  commandant  of  the 
third  brigade.  This  officer  at  once  despatched  Major 
Smith  to  besiege  Georgegarh,  a  fort  which  had  been 
built  by  Thomas,  about  seventy  miles  from  Hansi, 
whilst  he  himself  should  cover  the  siege.  Thomas, 
however,  noticing  the  distance  of  the  covering  from  the 
besieging  force,  broke  up  suddenly  from  Hansi,  fell  upon 
Smith  and  completely  defeated  him.  What  he  might 
have  accomplished  may  be  gathered  from  Major  Smith's 
own  words :  *'  I  was  attacked,"  he  writes,*  ^*  by  Thomas 
'  with  eight  battalions,  compelled  to  raise  the  siege  and 

*  retreat  to  Jajar,  four  coss  (eight  miles)  to  the  east  of  j 

*  Georgegarh  ;  favoured  by  the  obscurity  of  the  night, 

*  I  was  not  completely  cut  off,   and  made  good    my 
^  retreat,  with  the  loss  of  one  gun  and  one-third  of  my 

*  force   killed    and   wounded.      How   I   escaped   total 
'  destruction  I  do  not  yet  know.    Why  Thomas  did  not 

*  Sketch  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  regular  corps  under  Sindia,  by 
Major  L.  F.  Smith. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  209 

*'  follow  my  retreat  I  cannot  say,  for  if  he  had  continued 
'*  the  pursuit  I  must  have  lost  all  my  guns,  and  my 
**  party  would  have  been  completely  destroyed.'* 

After  raising  the  siege  Thomas  threw  himself  into 
Georgegarh,  the  defences  of  which  he  strengthened. 
Here  he  was  attacked  on  the  20th  September  by 
Bourquin's  troops,  who  had  marched  seventy  miles  in 
the  thirty-six  hours  almost  immediately  preceding  the 
assault.  '^Bourquin,'' writes  Major  Smith,  '*did  not 
lead  the  attack  himself,  but  prudently  remained  with 
the  cavalry,  2000  yards  in  rear  of  George  Thomas's 
line.  The  seven  battalions  of  de  Boigne,  with  calm 
intrepidity  advanced  with  their  guns  through  heavy 
sand,  exposed  to  a  dreadful  and  well-directed  fire  of 
fifty-four  pieces  of  cannon,  and  attacked  Thomas's 
ten  battalions  in  their  intrenchments  ;  but  they  were 
repulsed  with  the  severe  loss  of  1100  men  killed  and 
wounded,  which  was  nearly  one-third  of  their  number. 
*  *  Thomas's  loss  was  not  so  great,  as  the  guns 
of  de  Boigne's  battalions  were  mostly  dismounted  by 
their  recoil  on  the  sand,  when  fired,  which  snapt  their 
axle-trees." 

'*  Had  Thomas,"  adds  Major  Smith,  "  taken  advantage 
of  Bourquin's  ignorance  and  folly,  and  sallied  out  on 
the  beaten  troops  of  Perron,  he  would  have  overturned 
his  power,  but  Thomas  at  this  critical  moment  was 
confused  and  confounded."  Thomas  indeed,  took  no 
advantage  of  their  repulse.  He  remained  shut  up 
in  Georgegarh  waiting  for  the  reinforcements  promised 

14 


210  FOKEIGN   ADVENTUREKS   IN   INDIA. 

by  Holkar,  and  which  never  came  ;  for  before  the  period 
then  passing,  the  power  of  Holkar,  though  he  knew  it 
not,  had  been  temporarily  annihilated  at  Indur. 

Meanwhile  reinforcements  poured  into  the  besieger's 
camp.  The  incapable  Bourquin  was  superseded  by 
Colonel  Pedrons,  and  he  turned  the  siege  into  a 
blockade.  This  lasted  for  seven  weeks.  Reduced  then 
by  famine  and  desertion,  having  spent  his  ammunition 
and  finding  his  remaining  troops  utterly  disorganised, 
Thomas  saw  that  the  end  was  at  hand.  Rather,  however, 
than  surrender  he  mounted — the  night  of  the  10th 
November  1801 — his  Persian  horse,  and  accompanied 
by  his  only  two  European  officers,  Captain  Hearsey  and 
Lieutenant  Birch,  and  some  troops,  rode  away,  hoping 
to  reach  Hansi  by  a  circuitous  route.  The  party,  though 
attacked  and  pursued,  arrived  safely  at  Hansi  on  the 
third  day. 

Colonel  Pedrons  consigned  to  Bourquin  the  task  of 
finishing  the  war.  The  latter  followed  up  Thomas  to 
Hansi,  laid  siege  to  the  place,  and  though  Thomas 
defended  himself  stoutly,  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the 
ultimate  issue.  An  ofier  made  by  a  portion  of  the 
garrison  to  betray  their  leader  brought  matters  to  a 
crisis.  Major  Smith  was  again  detached  to  communicate 
mth  Thomas,  to  inform  him  of  the  treachery  of  his 
troops,  and  to  offer  him  honourable  terms.  These  terms 
assured  him  freedom  of  action  for  himself  within  British 
territory  with  the  safe  conduct  of  the  property  still 
remaining  to  him.      Thomas  accepted   the   conditions 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  211 

(1st  January  1802),  and  proceeded  towards  Calcutta 
with  the  intention  of  returning  to  his  native  land  with 
the  wreck  of  his  fortune  amounting  then,  according  to 
Major  Smith,  to  a  lakh  of  rupees.  He  died,  however, 
on  his  way  down,  near  Barhampur,  in  the  burying- 
ground  of  which  place  he  was  interred.  His  career, 
records  the  friend  already  quoted  ''  was  more  worthy  of 
^'  astonishment  than  imitation." 

Perron  was  now  complete  master  of  the  situation.  He 
had  beaten  all  his  master's  enemies  in  Hindostan ;  his 
master's  troops  had  triumphed  in  Ujjen.  But  his 
double  triumph  had  similarly  affected  both  master  and 
servant.  They  showed,  in  this  crisis  of  their  fortunes, 
that  prosperity  was  fatal  to  them.  It  exhalted  their 
pride  and  weakened  their  judgment. 

Perron  had  had  no  education,  no  mental  training  ;  he 
was  not  gifted  with  a  large  mind.  A  self-made  man, 
he  had  raised  himself  from  the  position  of  a  common 
sailor  to  a  post  which  was,  in  fact,  second  only  to  one 
other  in  India,  and,  so  long  as  he  had  enemies  to  fight, 
the  animal  vigour  of  his  nature  had  a  fit  field  for  its 
display.  But  with  the  dispersion  of  his  enemies  the 
scene  of  action  for  that  animal  vigour  disappeared,  and 
his  mental  power  was  more  largely  called  upon.  In  this 
respect  Perron  was  weak.  He  began  to  show  undue 
contempt  for  the  native  chieftains ;  an  unjust  partiality  for 
his  own  countrymen ;  to  further  his  own  private  interest 
only ;  to  look  upon  the  interests  of  Sindia  as  secondary, 
not  to  be  placed  in  the  balance  against  his  own. 

14  A 


212  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  action  based  upon  such 
views  raised  a  storm  against  him.  One  after  another  the 
native  chiefs  and  leaders  complained  to  Sindia  of  the 
arrogance  and  grasping  character  of  his  French  lieutenant. 
To  meet  the  storm  raised  by  these  denunciations,  Perron 
proceeded  at  the  end  of  1802  to  the  court  of  Daolat  Eao 
then  held  at  Ujjen.  He  proposed  to  himself  three 
objects  in  this  visit.  The  first,  to  ascertain  the  views  of 
Colonel  Collins,  the  British  resident,  then  at  Sindia's 
court ;  the  second,  to  ascertain  by  personal  examination 
how  far  Colonel  Sutherland,  who  commanded  the  second 
brigade,  and  whose  character  he  dreaded,  was  likely  to 
supplant  him;  the  third,  to  destroy  the  effect  of  the 
intrigues  of  Sakharam  Ghatgay,  Sindia's  father-in-law, 
and  of  the  other  chiefs  who  were  hostile  to  him.  Should 
he  find  the  position  too  strong  for  him  he  had  resolved 
to  resign  his  office. 

Perron  did  not  resign.  He  presented  to  Daolat  Eao 
a  nazzar  of  five  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  seemed  to  triumph. 
After  a  stay  of  a  few  weeks  only  at  Ujjen  he  returned  to 
Aligarh  with  his  former  power  confirmed.  An  incident 
occurred  shortly  afterwards,  however,  which  roused  all 
his  fears  and  suspicions. 

The  student  of  Indian  history  of  that^  period  will 
recollect  that  the  defeat  of  Sindia's  army  by  Jeswant 
Eao  Holkar  near  Puna  on  the  25th  October,  1802,  had 
caused  the  Peshwa  to  fly  in  trepidation  from  his  capital. 
From  Severndrug,  where  he  had  taken  refuge,  the 
Peshwa  addressed  pressing  solicitations  to  Sindia,  still 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  213 

in  camp  at  Ujjen,  to  come  to  his  aid.  It  may  freely  be 
asserted  that  the  fate  of  India  was  in  the  hands  of 
Daolat  Eao.  Had  he  marched  to  the  aid  of  his  suzerain, 
not  only  would  no  treaty  of  Bassein  have  been  signed, 
but  he  would  have  attained,  with  one  bound,  the  influence 
and  power  of  his  predecessor. 

Daolat  Eao  cast  away  the  opportunity — never  to  recur. 
Why  did  he  do  so  ?  Was  it,  as  he  gave  out,  that  he 
was  not  strong  enough,  or  did  he  doubt  the  intention  of 
the  Peshwa  to  throw  himself,  unless  relieved,  in  the 
hands  of  the  British  ? 

A  glance  at  the  relations  between  Daolat  Kao  and 
M.  Perron  at  this  period  will  tend  to  elucidate  the 
question.  Perron  had  hardly  returned  to  Aligarh  before 
he  received  from  Daolat  Eao  a  pressing  requisition  to 
send  him  another  brigade,  as  with  his  then  force  he  was 
not  strong  enough  to  march  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Peshwa.  Daolat  Eao  had  then  three  brigades  with 
him;  one,  belonging  to  Perron's  force,  commanded  by 
Sutherland ;  one,  an  independent  brigade,  commanded 
by  Filoze;  and  a  third  belonging  to  the  Bigam  Sombre. 
Perron  had  with  himself  three  brigades.  When,  there- 
fore, he  received  the  requisition  to  send  one  of  these  to 
Ujjen,  he  thought  he  read  in  the  order  a  resolution  to 
despoil  him  of  his  power.  Although,  then,  he  saw  that 
the  moment  was  critical,  that  by  delaying  to  comply  he 
risked  the  independence  and  even  the  existence  of  the 
Maratha  empire,  yet  regard  for  his  own  interests  and  the 
dread  of  throwing  too  much  power  into  the  hands  of 


214  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

Daolat  Eao,  caused  him  to  hesitate  for  three  months. 
When  at  last  he  did  compl}^,  the  favourable  moment  had 
passed,  and  the  P6shwa  had  thrown  himself  into  the 
arms  of  the  British  Government  for  protection.  In 
February,  1803,  Perron  despatched  to  Ujjen  the  fourth 
brigade  under  Dudrenec,  and  half  of  the  newly-raised 
fifth  brigade  under  Brownrigg.  But  it  was  too  late. 
The  treaty  of  Bassein  had  been  signed. 

The  treaty  of  Bassein  precipitated  the  conflict  between 
Sindia  and  the  British.  It  roused  Daolat  Rao  to  a  sense 
of  his  errors.  In  that  treaty  he  saw  not  only  the  sub- 
version of  the  vast  plans  of  his  predecessor  but  a  threat 
against  himself.  Though  invited  to  become  a  party  to 
the  defensive  portion  of  the  treaty  he  distinctly  refused. 
Then  probably  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  he  understood 
the  conception  of  Madhaji,  finding  himself  as  he  did 
face  to  face  with  the  dangers  which  Madhaji's  scheme 
would  have  rendered  impossible.  Then  he  bestirred 
himself;  then,  at  last,  he  sought  to  unite  the 
Marathas  against  the  common  foe.  But  he  was 
too  late.  Holkar  refused  to  join  him.  His  prepara- 
tions, though  he  sought  to  conceal  and  did  deny 
them,    were    too    patent.      The     Governor-General    of 

India,  Marquess  Wellesley,  resolved  then  to  anticipate 
him,  and  to  bring  the  matter  to  the  arbitrament  of  the 
sword.  War  was  declared,  and  on  the  8th  August, 
1803,  an  English  force  under  General  Lake  crossed  the 
frontier  of  Sindia's  territory  and  marched  straight  on 
Aligarh. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA.  215 

Perron  was  at  Aligarh,  but  he  was  as  a  general 
without  an  army.  The  main  body  of  the  troops  were 
with  Daolat  Eao ;  others  were  not  at  the  moment 
amenable  to  his  orders.  He  had  with  him  at  the  time 
but  2000  infantry  and  8000  cavalry. 

But  there  were  other  evils  threatening  him  which 
Perron  dreaded  far  more  than  a  deficiency  of  troops. 
His  conduct  in  the  early  part  of  the  year,  which  I 
have  detailed  at  length,  had  roused  all  the  suspicions 
of  Daolat  Eao.  His  disgrace,  again  imminent,  was 
hastened  by  the  present  of  fifteen  lakhs  of  rupees  made 
by  Ambaji  Inglia  to  Daolat  Eao  as  the  price  of  the 
Subadarship  of  Hindostan.  Ambaji  was  one  of  the 
great  chiefs  whom  Perron  had  insulted,  and  from  whom 
he  could  expect  no  mercy.  His  rival  would  have  drained 
his  purse  if  not  his  life's  blood. 

Perron  could  not  even  trust  the  commanders  of  his 
brigades.  Dudrenec,  on  his  way  back  from  Ujjen  to 
Aligarh,  was  far  more  attached  to  Ambaji  than  to  him ; 
Bourquin,  who  at  the  moment  had  the  second  and  third 
brigades  under  his  orders,  threw  off  his  allegiance.  But 
one  chance  remained,  and  that  was  to  make  the  best 
possible  terms  with  the  British. 

To  this  course  Perron  resigned  himself.  When,  on 
the  29th  August,  1803,  General  Lake  marched  on  the 
the  village  of  Aligarh,  a  splendid  opportunity  ofi'ered  to 
Perron  to  charge  it  with  the  8000  horse  he  had  under 
his  command.  He  did  not  seize  it.  He  gave  no  orders. 
His  men  were  paralysed  by  his  indecision,  and  a  few 


216  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

rounds  from  the  galloper  guns  sent  them  flying  in  all 
directions.  Perron  fled  with  them,  directing  his  course 
first  to  Hatras,  thence  to  Mathura.  From  this  latter 
place  he  sent,  on  the  5th  September,  a  proposal  to  the 
English  general  to  surrender  on  receiving  an  assurance 
of  protection  for  his  person  and  his  property. 

Lord  Lake  acceded  to  the  proposal.  Whereupon, 
Perron,  having  first  sent  his  family  to  Agra,  slipped 
quietly  across  the  river,  and,  making  his  way  to  Sasni, 
threw  himself  under  the  protection  of  the  British 
detachment  stationed  there.  Thence  he  was  allowed 
to  proceed  with  his  family  and  his  property  to  Chandar- 
nagar.  From  that  time  he  and  his  afi*airs  ceased  to 
interest  the  Indian  world. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  217 


III. 

Amongst  the  French  oiSicers  mentioned  in  the  section  is 
Colonel  Pedrons.  He  must  have  joined  de  Boigne 
early,  as  he  raised  and  commanded  the  third  brigade 
in  1795.  The  next  mention  I  find  of  him  is  of  so  late 
a  date  as  1800.  In  that  year,  when  Perron  was  engaged 
in  besieging  the  fort  of  Agra,  Pedrons,  then  a  major, 
was  despatched  with  eight  battalions  to  attack  and 
annihilate  Lakhwa  Dada  in  Bandalkhand.  In  this 
enterprise  he  was  assisted  by  Ambaji  Inglia  with  some 
irregular  infantry  and  5000  horse.  He  found,  however, 
Lakhwa  Dada  so  strongly  posted,  that  though  the  latter 
had  only  6000  horse,  3000  Eohillas,  and  200  drilled 
sepoys*  under  his  command,  Pedrons  was  afraid  to 
attack  him.  He  spent  two  months  in  fruitless  recon- 
noitering.  At  the  end  of  that  time  Perron  himself  came 
down  and  crushed  Lakhwa  Dada  with  one  blow  (3rd 
May,   1800).    ,We  next  hear  of  Pedrons  as   relieving 

*  The  200  sepoys  were  drilled  and  commanded  by  Major  Tone,  "  an 
unfortunate  gentleman,"  says  Major  Smith,  "whose  abilities  and 
integrity  were  as  great  as  his  misfortunes  were  severe."  Major  Tone 
was  subsequently  shot  through  the  head,  whilst  serving  under  Holkar, 
at  an  action  near  Choli  Mahastir,  in  1802.  He  wrote  a  valuable  work 
called  "  Letters  on  the  Marathd  People."     (Ferdinand  Smith.) 


218  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

Bourquin  in  the  campaign  against  Thomas.  The  part 
he  then  took  has  been  aheady  related.  His  final  act 
was  the  defence  of  the  fort  of  Aligarh  against  an  English 
army  under  Lord  Lake. 

I  have  already  stated  that  when  the  English  army 
marched  on  Aligarh  Perron  had  with  him  only  2000 
infantry  and  8000  cavalry.  The  infantry  he  threw  into 
the  fort,  the  command  of  which  was  confided  to 
Pedrons. 

Lord  Lake*s  first  act  was  to  summon  Pedrons  to 
surrender.  Pedrons  in  becoming  terms  refused.  Lord 
Lake,  then,  finding  that  to  attack  it  in  the  regular  form 
would  give  the  enemy  time  to  concentrate  their  forces  to 
oppose  him,  resolved  to  attempt  a  coup  de  main. 

It  was  a  daring  experiment,  for  Aligarh  was  strong, 
well  garrisoned,  and  the  country  round  it  had  been 
levelled.  It  had  but  one  weak  point,  and  that  was  a 
narrow  passage  across  the  ditch  into  the  fort.  This 
passage  was,  however,  guarded  by  a  strong  gateway,  and 
three  other  gateways  had  to  be  forced  before  the  body  of 
the  place  could  be  entered.  To  resolve  to  attempt  such 
a  place  by  a  coup  de  main  required  no  ordinary  nerve. 
The  whole  future  of  the  campaign  depended  on  the 
success  of  the  storm.  Should  it  fail,  all  India  would 
rise  up  against  the  English ;  should  it  succeed,  the 
Maratha  Empire  would  receive  its  death-blow. 

But  throughout  his  career  Lord  Lake  always  acted  on 
the  principle,  so  often  referred  to  in  this  work,  that 
'*  boldness   is   prudence."       He  stormed   and   carried 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  219 

Aligarh.  By  that  success  he  paralysed  the  Maratha 
confederacy.  To  use  the  words  of  a  contemporary 
writer  then  in  the  service  of  Sindia,  **  it  was  a  mortal 
**  blow  to  the  Maratha  war :  it  struck  a  panic  into  the 
**  minds  of  the  natives  and  astonished  all  the  princes  of 
**  Hindostan  :  it  gave  them  dreadful  ideas  of  European 
*'  soldiers  and  European  courage." 

Pedrons  was  taken  prisoner  at  Aligarh.  From  that 
time  he  disappeared  from  the  scene.. 

The  next  in  order  is  the  Bourquin  referred  to  in  the 
preceding  section.  This  man's  real  name  was  Louis 
Bernard.  His  previous  history  and  his  reason  for 
changing  his  name  are  alike  unknown  to  me.  It  is 
only  known  that  Perron  had  raised  him  from  obscurity 
to  the  command  of  a  brigade.  His  campaign  against 
Thomas  has  been  already  related.  He  is  next  heard  of 
as  evincing  his  gratitude  to  Perron  by  revolting  against 
him  on  the  eve  of  the  war  with  the  English.  By 
Perron's  flight  to  British  territory  and  by  Pedrons's 
captivity,  Bourquin  became  the  senior  officer  in  com- 
mand of  the  old  brigades  of  de  Boigne. 

Bourquin  was  close  to  Dehli,  at  the  head  of  the 
second  and  third  brigades,  when  the  English  were 
marching  on  Aligarh.  Another  French  officer,  Colonel 
Drugeon,  was  commanding  the  fort  of  Dehli.  Bourquin, 
strongly  sensible  of  the  political  advantage  which  might 
arise  from  having  in  his  camp  the  blind  old  Emperor, 
called  upon  Drugeon  to  send  him  out  under  an  escort*^ 
Drugeon   refused.      Upon   this   Bourquin  prepared  to 


220  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

besiege  Dehli,  and  he  only  desisted  when  the  fatal 
intelligence  of  the  storming  of  Aligarh  recalled  him  to  a 
sense  of  his  position. 

On  receiving  this  news  Bourquin  began  to  cross  the 
Jamna  with  his  two  brigades.  He  had  already  (11th 
September)  passed  over  twelve  battalions,  with  seventy 
pieces  of  cannon,  and  5000  cavalry,  when,  at  eleven 
o'clock,  the  English  army  appeared  in  sight.  Bourquin 
drew  up  his  troops  in  a  remarkably  strong  position,  his 
front  covered  by  a  line  of  intrenchments  prepared  on  the 
two  preceding  days ;  each  flank  covered  by  a  swamp, 
and  his  guns  hidden  by  long  grass.  Wishing  to  entice 
the  English  to  attack  this  formidable  position,  he 
directed  the  outposts  to  fire  on  the  English  camp.  At 
the  time  that  this  firing  commenced  the  British  troops 
had  grounded  their  arms,  many  were  undressed,  others 
had  gone  in  search  of  fuel.  Lord  Lake,  however,  hastily 
collected  his  men  and  led  them  to  the  attack.  The  fire 
from  the  long  grass  was,  however,  so  heavy,  and  the 
intrenchments  were  so  formidable,  that  Lord  Lake,  after 
losing  many  men  and  being  wounded  himself,  stopped 
the  advance  to  attempt  a  ruse  de  guerre.  He  then 
ordered  his  cavalry,  which  was  leading,  to  retire  slowly 
behind  the  infantry.  The  movement  of  the  cavalry  to 
the  rear  induced,  in  the  mind  of  the  French  leader,  the 
supposition  that  the  British  force  was  beaten.  He 
ordered  the  men  to  leave  the  intrenchments  and  com- 
plete the  victory.  This  they  did  with  loud  shouts. 
Their  error  continued  till  the  sudden  disappearance  of 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  221 

the  cavalry  showed  them  the  British  infantry  advancing 
to  meet  them.  The  disciplined  battalions  fought  well, 
but  they  were  overmatched.  Bourquin  was  the  first  to 
leave  the  field.  The  rout  was  then  complete.  Bourquin 
surrendered,  with  five  officers,  three  days  later,  to  the 
English,  and  disappeared  not  only  from  the  field  of 
battle,  but  from  the  field  of  history. 

A  character  superior  in  every  way  to  Bourquin  was 
the  Chevalier  Dudrenec.  A  native  of  Brest,  the  son  of 
a  commodore  in  the  French  navy,  Dudrenec  had  come 
out  to  India  as  a  midshipman  in  a  French  man-of-war 
about  the  year  1774.  Why  he  left  the  French  navy,  or 
the  occupation  to  which  he  betook  himself  after  leaving 
it,  I  have  never  been  able  to  ascertain.  He  first  appears 
upon  the  Indian  scene  in  command  of  Bigam  Sombre's 
brigade.  He  left  this  command  in  1791  to  join  Tukaji 
Holkar,  by  whom  he  was  commissioned  to  raise,  drill, 
and  equip  four  battalions  on  the  principle  previously 
employed  for  Sindia  by  de  Boigne.  Dudrenec  acquitted 
himself  of  this  commission  with  great  success.  The 
following  year,  however,  his  battalions  were  destroyed — 
the  men  dying  at  their  posts — at  the  fatal  battle  of 
Lakhairi,  an  account  of  which  I  have  given  in  the 
sketch  of  de  Boigne's  career.  Not  disheartened,  Holkar 
commissioned  Dudrenec  to  raise  four  more  battalions. 
This  task  he  successfully  accomplished,  and  with  them, 
on  the  12th  March,  1795,  he  contributed  to  the  victory 
of  Kardla,  gained  by  the  combined  Maratha  forces 
against  the  Nizam. 


^22  FOREIGN   ADTENTURERS   IN    INDIA. 

For  some  time  after  this  engagement  Dudrenec 
remained  in  comparative  inaction  at  Indur.  In  1797  he 
added  two  battalions  to  his  force.  In  the  struggle  for 
power  which  followed  the  death  of  Tukaji  the  same  year 
(1797),  Dudrenec  sided  at  first  with  the  legitimate,  but 
imbecile,  heir,  Khasi  Kao.  Acting  in  his  name,  he 
alternately  defeated,  and  was  defeated  by,  the  pretender, 
Jeswant  Rao.  When  at  length  the  triumph  of  the  latter 
seemed  assured,  Dudrenec  went  over  with  all  his  troops 
and  guns  to  his  side.  But  Jeswant  Rao  did  not  trust 
him,  and  Dudrenec  soon  saw  that  his  disgrace  was 
determined  upon.  Under  these  circumstances  he  thought 
he  would  try  and  steal  a  march  upon  his  master.  Taking 
advantage  of  the  hostilities  then  engaged  between  Sindia 
and  Jeswant  Rao  (1801)  he  endeavoured  to  take  his  six 
battalions  bodily  over  to  the  former.  But  the  men 
were  more  faithful  than  their  commander.  They  drove 
Dudrenec  from  the  camp  and  marched  to  Jeswant  Rao, 
who  at  once  placed  at  their  head  an  Englishman  named 
Vickers. 

Dudrenec  was,  however,  well  received  by  Sindia,  and 
entrusted  with  the  command  of  a  brigade — the  fourth — 
and  placed  under  the  orders  of  Perron,  at  Aligarh.  In 
February,  1803,  he  was  detached  with  this  brigade  to 
join  Sindia  at  Ujjen  ;  again,  towards  the  autumn  of  the 
same  year,  when  hostilities  with  the  English  were 
imminent,  he  was  sent  back  to  rejoin  Perron.  This 
force  reached  the  vicinity  of  Agra  in  October,  having 
been  joined   in    its   way  by  the    three    battalions   of 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  223 

Bourquin's  force  which  had  not  crossed  the  Jamna,  nor 
been  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Dehli  against  the  English, 
and  by  some  other  fugitives.  The  whole  force  amounted 
to  about  12,000  men,  well  supplied  with  excellent 
artillery. 

It  was  this  army,  indeed,  which  fought  the  famous 
battle  of  Laswari.  But  when  it  fought  that  battle 
Dudrenec  was  not  with  it.  Influenced,  it  seems  probable, 
by  the  example  of  his  fellow  adventurers,  and  by  the 
favourable  conditions  offered,*  he  had  surrendered 
(30th  October)  to  the  English.  His  Indian  career  then 
closed. 

One  of  the  oldest  officers  in  the  service  of  de  Boigne 
was  John  Hessing,  a  man  who,  if  not  a  Dutchman,  t  was 
at  least  of  Dutch  extraction.  He  joined  de  Boigne 
shortly  after  the  latter  entered  the  service  of  Sindia,  and 
was  present  at  the  hardly-contested  battles  of  Lalsot,  of 
Agra,  and  of  Chaksana.  At  Patau  too,  he  fought 
bravely  and  well.  After  that  battle,  however,  he 
quarrelled  with  de  Boigne  and  tendered  his  resignation. 
This  was  accepted.  Sindia  then  advanced  him  money 
to  raise  a  battalion  which  should  be  peculiarly  his  own, 
and  should  act  as  his    special  body-guard.     As  com- 


*  These  conditions  generally  were  security  of  life  and  property,  and 
permission  to  return  to  Europe. 

+  Grant  Duff  says  he  was  an  Englishman ;  but  his  acquaintance  and 
contemporary,  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  invariably  speaks  of  him  as  a 
foreigner.  His  name  does  not  appear  in  the  list  of  British  subjects 
serving  Maratha  States,  who  were  pensioned  by  the  British  Government, 
and  the  inscription  on  his  tomb  at  Agra  declares  him  a  Dutchman. 


224  FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA. 

mandant  of  this  body-guard  Hessing  accompanied 
Madhaji  to  Puna  in  1792,  augmenting  it  gradually,  as 
he  proceeded,  to  four  battalions.  It  was  at  this  strength 
when  failing  health  forced  Hessing  to  leave  Puna.  He 
was  sent  thence  to  command  at  Agra  where  he  died  in 
1803. 

His  son,  George  Hessing,  succeeded  him  at  Puna. 
Shortly  after  that  Madhaji  Sindia  died.  Daolat  Eao, 
however,  not  only  continued  his  favour  to  Hessing,  but 
authorised  him  to  increase  the  number  of  his  battalions 
to  eight.  They  were  at  this  strength  when  hostilities 
broke  out  between  Holkar  and  Sindia  in  1801,  although 
half  the  number  only  were  then  with  Daolat  Kao  in  his 
camp  at  Burhanpur,  George  Hessing  having  sent  four  to 
reinforce  his  father  at  Agra. 

Holkar  having  shown  a  disposition  at  this  period  to 
attack  and  plunder  Ujjen,  Sindia  detached  George 
Hessing,  with  three  of  his  battalions  and  one  belonging 
to  Filoze,  to  defend  that  place.  Shortly  after  he  had 
left,  Sindia,  not  thinking  his  force  strong  enough,  sent 
his  fourth  battalion,  and  another  of  Filoze's,  under 
Captain  Mclntyre,  to  reinforce  him.  These  were 
followed  by  Sindia's  grand  park  of  fifty-two  guns,  the 
advanced  guard  of  which  was  formed  by  two  of  Perron's 
battalions  under  Captain  Gautier,  and  the  rear  guard  by 
two  more  under  Captain  Brownrigg. 

Never,  in  his  brilliant  career,  did  Jeswant  Kao  Holkar 
display  to  a  greater  extent  the  qualities  of  a  general  than 
on  this  occasion.     Noticing  the  distance  that  separated 


FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  225 

these  parties  the  one  from  the  other ;  that  the  state  of 
the  soil,  knee-deep  with  the  mud  created  by  the  heavy 
rainfall,  precluded  the  possibility  of  quick  communication 
between  them,  at  the  same  time  that  it  rendered  the 
progress  of  the  guns  extremely  slow,  he  passed  the 
leading  column  (George  Hessing's)  close  to  Ujjen,  and 
dashed  down  upon  Mclntyre's  two  battalions  at  Nun, 
thirty-five  miles  from  that  place.  His  force  was  so 
overwhelming  that,  notwithstanding  their  obstinate 
resistance,  he,  in  the  end,  forced  them  to  surrender. 
Having  thus  placed  an  impassable  distance  between 
Hessing's  detachment  and  the  troops  under  Gautier  and 
Brownrigg,  he  turned  back  and  fell  upon  the  former. 
The  battle  was  long,  obstinate,  and  bloody.  The 
immensely  superior  fire  of  Holkar's  artillery  alone 
decided  the  day,  nor  was  it  until  seven*  out  of  his 
enemy's  eleven  European  oflScers  had  been  killed,  and 
three  taken  prisoners;  until  three-fifths  likewise  of  their 
men  had  been  killed  and  one-fifth  wounded,  that  victory 
decided  in  favour  of  Holkar. 

George  Hessing  is  next  heard  of  at  Agra,  commanding 
at  that  place  when  it  was  threatened  by  Lord  Lake  in 

*  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  writes  :—"  Of  the  eleven  European  officers 
who  were  in  this  severe  action  eight  were  British  subjects,  seven  of  whom 
were  killed  at  their  posts,  and  only  one  survived,  but  survived  wi^h 
wounds.  Colonel  Hessing,  the  commander,  escaped."  The  names  of 
the  eight  British  subjects  were  Graham,  Urquhart,  Montague,  Macpher- 
son,  Lang,  Doolun,  Haden,  and  Humpherstone.  The  seven  first-named 
were  killed,  the  last-named  was  severely  wounded  and  taken  prisoner. 
The  names  of  the  foreign  officers  were  Hessing,  Dupont,  and  Derridon. 
The  first  escaped,  the  two  last  were  taken  prisoners. 

15 


226  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

October,  1803.  The  troops,  however,  noticing  the 
facility  with  which  their  foreign  ofi&cers  had  surrendered 
to  the  English,  placed  Hessing  and  the  six  officers  with 
him  under  restraint.  This  action  on  their  part  did  not 
prevent  Lord  Lake  from  taking  Agra.  All  the  European 
officers,  foreign  and  English,  then  within  its  walls 
renounced  the  service  of  Sindia,  and  accepted  the  liberal 
conditions  offered  by  Marquess  Wellesley.  Among  these 
was  George  Hessing. 

Michel  Filoze,  a  Neapolitan  of  low  birth  and  of  no 
education,  had  at  first  served  under  de  Boigne.  By 
means  of  intrigue,  however,  he  contrived  to  obtain 
authority  to  raise  a  battalion  under  his  own  sole 
command,  and  at  the  head  of  this  he  accompanied 
Madhaji  to  Puna  in  1792. 

This  battalion  became  the  nucleus  of  the  brigade  of 
fourteen  battalions  raised  by  Michel  Filoze  and  his  son 
and  successor,  Fidele,  between  that  year  and  1800.  At 
the  head  of  six  of  these  he  rendered  good  service  at  the 
battle  of  Kardla,  1795.  Michel  Filoze  was  an  adventurer 
of  the  lowest  type.  To  other  bad  qualities  he  added 
the  practise  of  treachery  and  dishonour.  During  the 
intrigues  at  Puna  which  followed  the  death  of  Madhaji 
Filoze  ingratiated  himself  with  Nana  Farnawis,  the 
minister  of  the  Peshwa.  When  the  latter  was  pressed 
by  Sindia  to  visit  him,  and  only  hesitated  because  he 
mistrusted  the  intentions  of  Daolat  Kao,  Michel  Filoze 
assured  him  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  and  on  his 
word  of  honour,  that  he  would  guarantee  his  safe  and 


POBEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  227 

immediate  return  to  his  house.  Yet,  notwithstanding 
his  oaths,  and  the  pledge  of  his  honour,  Filoze  himself 
arrested  the  Nana  on  his  return  from  the  interview  (Slst 
December,  1797)  and  made  him  over  to  his  master. 
This  act  of  his  was  resented  in  the  most  marked  manner 
by  the  other  adventurers  at  the  court  and  in  the  camp 
of  Daolat  Kao.  They  considered  this  baseness  on  the 
part  of  one  of  their  number  as  a  stain  upon  themselves 
as  a  body.  When  shortly  afterwards,  the  N^na  was 
released  and  restored  to  power,  Michel  Filoze,  dreading 
his  vengeance,  fled  to  Bombay. 

He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Fidele.  Fidele  Filoze 
accompanied  Daolat  Eao  in  his  campaign  against  Holkar 
in  1801  at  the  head  of  six  battalions.  One  of  these,  under 
Captain  Mclntyre,  was  cut  off  by  Jeswant  Kao  Holkar 
at  Nuri ;  a  second  under  George  Hesfing  was  destroyed 
at  Ujjen  (June  1801) ;  the  remaining  four  took  part  in 
the  battle  of  Indur  (14th  October,  1801).  On  this 
occasion  Sindia's  army,  really  commanded  by  an 
Englishman,  Major  Sutherland,  gained  a  decisive 
victory.  Strange  to  say,  after  that  battle,  to  the  gain  of 
which  he  and  his  troops  contributed,  Fidele  Filoze  cut 
his  throat.  "The  reasons  for  this  suicide,'*  writes  Major 
L.  F.  Smith,  so  often  referred  to,  "  are  various.  Some 
say  that  he  had  carried  on  a  traitorous  correspondence 
with  Jeswant  Kao  Holkar  previous  to  the  battle  of 
Indur,  and  that  he  cut  his  throat  to  prevent  the 
disgrace  of  condign  punishment ;  others  that  he 
**  committed   the  act   in   a   delirium."     Major   Smith 

15  A 


it 

€( 
i( 


228  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

describes  FideleFiloze  as  having  been  "a  good,  ignorant 
**  man,  a  much  better  character  than  his  faithless  and 
**  treacherous  father,  who  had  all  the  bad  qualities  of  a 
"  low  Italian,  and  none  of  the  good  points  which 
**  Italians  possess."  The  Filoze  family  ultimately 
settled  at  Gwaliar. 

A  great  deal  might  be  written  regarding  the  careers 
of  adventurers  who  were  not  foreigners  but  Englishmen, 
and  some  of  whom  displayed  the  highest  qualities. 
Prominent  amongst  these  stand  the  names  of  Sutherland, 
Smith,  Shepherd,  Gardner,  Skinner,  Bellasis,  Dodd,. 
Brownrigg,  Vickers  and  Kyan.  The  first  five  of  these 
accepted  the  terms  offered  by  Marquess  Wellesley  in 
1803,  and  with  upwards  of  thirty  other  officers  renounced 
the  service  of  native  chiefs  ;  the  last  five  were  murdered 
or  killed  in  action. 

Of  other  Frenchmen  who  did  good  service  to  Sindia 
and  Holkar,  may  be  mentioned  Captain  Plumet,  of 
whom  Major  Smith  records  that  he  was  a  '*  Frenchman 
"  and  a  gentleman,  two  qualities  which  were  seldom 
*'  united  in  the  Maratha  army.  He  was  a  man  of 
"  respectable  character  and  sound  principles."  Plumet 
commanded  four  battalions  for  Holkar  in  the  attack  on 
George  Hessing  at  Ujjen  (June  1801),  and  he  shared  in 
the  defeat  inflicted  upon  Holkar  by  Major  Brownrigg  at 
Barkesar  in  the  July  following.  Finding  Jeswant  Eao 
Holkar  a  master  difficult  to  serve,  cunning,  capricious, 
and  ungrateful,  Plumet  left  him,  and  returned  to  the 
Isle  of  France. 


FOBEIGN  ADVBNTUBERS   IN   INDIA.  229 

With  these  names  I  have  exhausted  the  list  of  the 
principal  foreign  adventurers  who  built  up  the  armies 
of  Holkar  and  Sindia  between  1787  and  1803.  It  is 
true  that  many  more  names  remain  on  the  list,  but  not 
one  that  calls  for  sympathy  or  interest.  This  is  my  own 
conviction  formed  upon  a  minute  examination  of  every 
paper  of  that  period  upon  which  I  have  been  able  to  lay 
my  hand.  How  far  that  conviction  is  borne  out  by 
contemporary  opinion  may  be  gathered  from  the 
following  sentence  culled  from  Major  Smith's  work 
already  quoted.  **  Perron's  army,"  wrote  that  gentleman 
in  1805,  "  was  a  minute  miniature  of  the  French 
*'  revolution.  Wretches  were  raised  from  cooks,  bakers, 
*'  and  barbers,  to  majors  and  colonels,  absurdly  en- 
*'  trusted  with  the  command  of  brigades,  and  shoved 
**  into  paths  to  acquire  lakhs.  This  was  the  quintessence 
"  of  egalite,  and  the  acme  of  the  French  revolution." 
Even  if  Major  Smith's  description  be  exaggerated,  this 
at  least  is  certain,  that  of  all  the  men  to  whom  I  have 
referred,  but  one  only,  de  Boigne,  was  worthy  of 
representing  France.  He  was  worthy ;  and  there  was 
another,  Raymond,  whose  deeds  have  yet  to  be  recorded, 
who  at  least  rivals  him  in  the  esteem  which  living,  he 
earned ;  which,  dead,  is  still  not  denied  him. 


230  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 


IV. 

Before  proceeding  to  Raymond  it  seems  fit  that  I 
should  briefly  notice  the  career  of  two  adventurers,  very 
famous  in  their  day,  who  flourished  at  a  period 
immediately  antecedent  to  that  of  de  Boigne.  I  allude 
to  Madoc  and  Sombre. 

The  real  name  of  Sombre,  as  he  was  styled  on  account 
of  his  dark  complexion,  was  Walter  Reinhard.  By  birth 
he  was  a  German,  by  trade  a  butcher.  He  originally 
came  out  to  India  in  the  Swiss  company  of  infantry 
under  the  command  of  Captain  Zeigler,  attached  to  the 
Bombay  European  regiment.  With  that  company  he 
most  probably  came  round  to  the  coast,  where  he 
deserted  and  made  his  way  round  to  Bengal,  apparently 
in  the  French  service.* 

After  the  capture  of  Chandarnagar  in  1757  Sombre 
wandered  from  the  court  of  one  petty  chieftain  to  that 
of  another  in  quest  of  service.  After  several  unim- 
portant adventures  he  was  in  1762  appointed  to  the 
command  of  a  brigade  of  troops  in  the  service  of  Mir 
Kasim,  Nawab  Nazim  of  Bengal. 

Shortly  after  that  event  the  greed  and  avidity  of  the 

*  Broome's  Histoi-y  of  the  Bengal  Army, 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  231 

English  rulers  of  Bengal*  forced  Mir  Kasim  to  war. 
The  contest  was  on  the  one  side  for  dominion,  on  the 
other  for  independence.  On  the  1st  July,  1763,  Mr, 
Ellis  and  the  English  garrison  of  Patna,  who  had  taken 
and  then  abandoned  that  city,  surrendered  to  Mir 
Kasim *s  generals,  Markar  and  Sombre,  and  were  sent 
back  thither  as  prisoners.  On  the  17th  July  following, 
Mu'  Kasim's  main  army  was  repulsed  on  the  banks  of 
the  riyer  Adji  by  a  strong  artillery  force  under  Lieutenant 
Glenn ;  and  two  days  later  it  was  defeated  by  Major 
Adams  in  the  most  obstinately  contested  battle  of 
Katwa. 

The  brigade  of  Sombre  was  not  engaged  on  these 
occasions,  but  it  joined  the  main  army  in  time  to  take 
party  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Gheria  (2nd  August). 
In  this  battle  Sombre  occupied  a  very  prominent  position, 
and  had  he  displayed  the  smallest  pluck,  the  British 
power  might  have  been  temporarily  extinguished  on 
that  well-contested  field.  The  left  wing  of  the  English 
had  been  broken  ;  their  centre  had  been  attacked  in  the 
rear.  The  brigades  of  Sombre  and  Markar  t  had  only 
to  advance  and  the  day  was  gained.  But  it  was  against 
Sombre's  principle  to  advance.  His  plan  of  action  was 
invariably  to  draw  his  men  in  a  line,  fire  a  few  shots, 
form  a  square,  and  retreat.  He  followed  out  this  plan 
to  the  letter  at  Gheria.  He  allowed  the  victory  to  slip 
from  his  grasp,  but  he  covered  the  retreat  of  the  army. 

*  Broome's  History  of  the  Bengal  Army, 
f  Markar  was  an  Armenian  in  Mir  Edslm's  service. 


232  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA. 

The  victory  of  Gheria  was  followed  up  by  another 
(5th  September)  on  the  U*dwa  nullah ;  and  on  the  1st 
October  by  the  capture  of  Manghir.  In  the  first  defeat 
Sombre  and  his  brigade  were  sharers. 

The  fall  of  Manghir  irritated  Mir  Kasim  to  such  a 
degree  that  he  determined  to  take  the  terrible  revenge 
of  slaughtering  the  English  prisoners  held  by  him  at 
Patna.  The  story  is  thus  told  in  his  admirable  history 
by  the  late  Colonel  Broome.*  '*  Mir  Kasim  now  issued 
'*  the  fatal  order  for  the  massacre  of  his  unfortunate 
"  prisoners,  but  so  strong  was  the  feeling  on  the  subject, 
"  that  none  amongst  his  officers  could  be  found  to 
**  undertake  the  office,  until  Sombre  offered  his  services 
**  to  execute  it. 

The  majority  of  the  prisoners  were  confined  in  a 
house  belonging  to  one  Hadji  Ahmad,  on  the  site  of 
the  present  English  cemetery  in  that  city.  Hither 
Sombre  repaired  on  the  5th  October,  with  two 
''  companies  of  his  sipahis,  having  on  the  previous  day, 
under  pretence  of  giving  the  party  an  entertainment 
procured  all  their  knives  and  forks,  so  that  they  were 
deprived  of  every  means  of  resistance.  Having 
surrounded  the  house,  he  sent  for  Messrs.  Ellis,  Hay, 
and  Lushington,  who  went  out  with  six  other 
gentlemen,  and  were  immediately  cut  to  pieces  in  the 
**  most  barbarous  manner  and  their  remains  thrown 
*'  into  a  well.     The  sipahis  now  mounted  the  roof  of 

*  Broome's  History  of  the  Bengal  Army^   a   standard  work  based 
entirely  on  authentic  records. 


<( 
<( 
<i 
it 
it 
it 
it 
it 
it 
it 


FOBEIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  233 

"  the  house,  which  was  built  in  the  form  of  a  square, 
and  fired  down  upon  the  remainder  of  the  party,  who 
were  congregated  in  the  centre  court.  Those  who 
escaped  this  volley  sought  shelter  in  the  building,  but 
were  quickly  followed  by  Sombre's  sipahis,  and  a 
fearful  scene  of  slaughter  ensued.  The  English, 
"  driven  to  desperation,  defended  themselves  with 
"  bottles,  bricks,  and  articles  of  furniture  ;  and  their 
^*  very  executioners  struck  with  their  gallantry, 
"  requested  that  arms  might  be  furnished  to  them, 
''  when  they  would  set  upon  them  and  fight  them  till 
"  destroyed,  but  that  this  butchery  of  unarmed  men 
"  was  not  the  work  for  sipahis  but  the  hullalkhores 
*'  (executioners).  Sombre,  enraged,  struck  down  those 
"  that  objected,  and  compelled  his  men  to  proceed  in 
"  their  diabolical  work  until  the  whole  were  slain. 
"  The  following  morning  their  remains  were  thrown 
"  into  a  well  in  the  courtyard.  The  men  employed  in 
'*  this  office  found  one  person,  Mr.  Gulston  of  the  civil. 
**  service,  yet  alive,  and  they  seemed  inclined  to  save 
*'  him;  but  this  gentleman,  who  was  an  admirable 
**  linguist,  smarting  with  his  wounds,  and  ignorant  of 
*'  their  kindly  intentions  towards  him,  gave  them  abuse 
**  and  threatened  them  with  the  vengeance  of  his 
"  countrymen,  upon  which  they  threw  him  still 
"  breathing  into  the  well  with  his  more  fortunate 
"  comrades.  A  few  of  the  party,  probably  the  sick 
"  and  wounded,  were  in  the  Chehel  Situn,  and  were 
"  butchered  in  a  similar  manner  on  the  11th.     Neither 


234  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

"  age  nor  sex  was  spared,  and  Sombre  consummated 
**  his  diabolical  villainy  by  the  murder  of  Mr.  Ellis's 
"  infant  child,  from  which  it  may  be  inferred  that  Mrs. 
*'  Ellis  was  amongst  the  female  sufferers  in  this  dreadful 
*'  catastrophe.**  Upwards  of  fifty  civil  and  military 
officers  and  a  hundred  European  soldiers,  perished  on 
this  occasion.  One  officer,  Dr.  FuUarton,  whose  medical 
abilities  had  gained  even  the  regard  of  Mir  Kasim,  had 
been  allowed  to  reside  on  the  Dutch  factory,  and  escaped 
some  days  later.  Four  Serjeants  also  who  had  been 
sent  for  from  Purnia  by  Mir  Kasim  overpowered  the  crew 
of  the  boat  in  which  they  were  being  conveyed,  and 
escaped. 

From  this  date  the  fate  of  Sombre  was  allied  to  that 
of  the  deadliest  enemies  of  the  English.  Thenceforward 
his  life  was  a  purgatory.  He  could  expect  but  one  fate 
should  he  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  countrymen  of  his 
murdered  victims.  He  therefore  always  carried  about 
with  him  poison  to  avoid  a  catastrophe  which  he  never 
ceased  to  dread.  Sombre  took  part  in  the  battle  of 
Patna  (May  2nd,  1764),  fought  by  Mir  Kasim ;  and  in 
that  of  Baksar,  fought  by  the  Vizier  of  Oudh  against  the 
English  (23rd  October,  1764).  In  both  these  he  dis- 
played his  usual  shiftiness,  retreating  on  the  very 
suspicion  of  danger.  After  the  ruin  of  Mir  Kasim  (1764) 
he  had  transferred  himself  and  his  brigade  to  the  Vizier 
of  Oudh,  but  he  left  him  for  the  Jats  in  August,  1765. 

Whilst  serving  with  the  Jats  Sombre  purchased  at 
Dehli  a  dancing  girl,  named  Zeb-til-Nissa,  afterwards 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS   IN    INDIA.  235 

SO  notorious  as  the  Bigam  Sombre.  She  has  been 
described  as  small  and  plump,  with  a  fair  complexion, 
and  large  animated  eyes.  She  possessed  great  talents, 
the  power  of  influencing  others,  and  was  utterly 
unscrupulous. 

After  his  marriage  with  Zeb-ul-Nissa  Sombre  acted 
on  the  principle  of  offering  his  brigade  to  the  highest 
bidder.  Somehow  he  always  commanded  a  good  price. 
In  1776  he  accepted  service  under  Mirza  Najaf  Khan, 
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Moghol  army,  after 
having  shared  in  the  defeat  inflicted  by  that  leader  upon 
his  patrons,  the  Jats,  at  Barsana  the  previous  year. 
The  following  year  the  Court  of  Dehli  conferred  upon 
him  the  principality  known  as  Sirdhana,  yielding  an 
annual  rental  of  six  lakhs  of  rupees.  This  territory  was 
nominally  granted  to  Sombre  for  the  payment  of  the 
troops  under  his  command,  but  upon  his  death,  4th 
May,  1778,  it  passed  to  Zeb-ul-Nissa,  thenceforth  known 
in  history  as  the  Bigam  Sombre  or  Samru. 

After  Sombre's  death  the  brigade  was  commanded 
under  the  Bigam  first  by  one  Pauly,  a  German  who  was 
taken  prisoner  by  Mahomed  Beg  Hamdani,  and  executed, 
in  breach  of  a  solemn  promise,  in  1783.  After  the  murder 
of  Pauly,  "  three  Frenchmen,"  writes  Major  L.  F.  Smith, 
*'  Messieurs  Baours,  Evens,  and  Dudrenec,  successively 
**  commanded  and  gladly  retired."  In  1793,  the  Bigam 
married  her  then  chief  officer,  M.  Le  Vaisseau,  '*  a  man 
**  of  birth,  talents  and  pride  of  character,***  who  shot 

•  Major  L.  F.  Smith. 


236  rOREIGN   ADVBNTURBBS   IN   INDIA. 

himself  two  years  later.  An  old  and  respectable  French- 
man, Colonel  Saleur,  then  obtained  the  command. 
Under  him  the  brigade  increased  to  six  battalions  and 
fought  at  Assaye,  losing  there  its  four  guns  and  many 
men.     The  Bigam  herself  lived  till  1836. 

Madoc  had  been  a  common  soldier  in  the  French 
army.  The  capture  of  Chandarnagar  in  1757  threw 
him  loose  on  the  country.  After  some  adventures 
totally  unworthy  of  being  recorded,  he  joined  Sombre's 
brigade,  and  served  under  his  orders  at  the  several 
battles  in  which  he  was  engaged  under  Mir  Kasim. 
With  him  he  transferred  his  services  in  1764  to  the 
Vizier  of  Oudh,  and  obtained  at  once  the  command  of  a 
separate  brigade.  At  the  battle  of  Baksar  he  rendered 
good  service.  His  character  was  the  very  opposite  of 
that  of  Sombre.  He  was  rash,  enterprising,  and  even 
imprudent.  In  1765  he  transferred  his  brigade,  which 
consisted  of  five  battalions,  twenty  guns,  and  500  horse, 
to  the  Jats.  Subsequently,  and  as  it  suited  his  purpose, 
he  took  service  alternately  with  them,  with  Mirza  Najaf 
Khan,  and  with  the  Kana  of  Gohad.  In  1776,  whilst 
in  alUance  with  the  first-named,  he  was  attacked  and 
his  party  almost  destroyed  at  Biana  by  1500  Rohillas, 
who  surprised  him  during  a  storm  of  rain.  On  this 
occasion  he  lost  twelve  European  officers  killed  and 
wounded,  all  his  guns  and  baggage,  and  fled,  but  scantily 
attended,  to  Futtehpur.  Thence,  however,  he  made  his 
way  to  Agra,  and  succeeded  in  raising,  in  an  incredibly 
short  space  of  time,  a  force  as  strong  in  numbers,  and 


FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS   IN   INDU.  237 

as  well  appointed  in  men  and  material  as  the  party  lie 
had  lost.  Receiving  shortly  afterwards  (1782)  an  offer 
of  a  large  sum  from  the  Rana  of  Gohad  for  the  brigade 
as  it  stood,  he'  sold  it  to  him  and  returned  to  France. 
He  did  not  long  survive,  being  killed  in  a  duel.  The 
subsequent  life  of  his  brigade  was  even  shorter,  Madhaji 
Sindia,  who  was  then  warring  with  the  Eana,  cutting  it 
off  to  a  man  in  an  ambuscade  (1784). 


238  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 


V. 

It  is  now  time  to  turn  to  Raymond. 

Michel  Joachim  Marie  Raymond  was  born  at  Serignac, 
the  20th  September,  1755.  His  father  was  a  merchant, 
and  the  son  followed  the  same  profession.  Pushed  on 
by  his  enterprising  nature,  however,  young  Raymond 
determined  to  found  a  corresponding  house  in  India, 
and  with  that  object  he  set  out  in  January,  1775,  from 
Lorient  for  Pondichery,  taking  with  him  a  large  quantity 
of  manufactured  goods.  He  disposed  of  these  to  great 
advantage  at  Pondichery;  then,  still  drawn  on  by  his 
ardent  nature  and  his  love  of  adventure,  he  entered  as 
sub-lieutenant  in  a  corps  commanded  by  the  Chevalier 
de  Lasse  in  the  service  of  Tippu  Sahib.  With  this  corps 
he  fought  throughout  the  campaigns  of  the  war  which 
began  in  1780  against  the  English  for  the  possession  of 
Southern  India. 

When,  in  March,  1783,  the  Marquis  de  Bussy  landed 
in  India  at  the  head  of  2300  men,  one  of  his  first  acts 
was  to  offer  to  Raymond,  as  one  who  knew  the  country, 
the  people,  and  the  language,  the  post  of  aide-de-camp. 
Raymond  accepted  it,  and  took  a  share  in  all  the  actions 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  239 

under  Bussy  related  in  the  first  book  in  this  volume. 
Subsequently  to  the  treaty  of  Versailles,  and  till  the 
death  of  Bussy  at  Pondichery  in  January,  1785, 
Kaymond  occupied  the  same  post  with  the  rank  of 
captain.  But  on  Bussy's  death,  he,  with  the  consent 
of  the  governor,  took  service  with  Nizam  Ali  Khan,  the 
Subadar  of  the  Dekhan. 

The  Subadars  of  the  Dekhan  had  always  been  partial 
to  the  French.  It  had  been  under  the  brother  of  the 
Nizam  Ali  that  Bussy  with  his  corps  of  Frenchmen  had 
gained  so  great  a  renown.  In  July,  1758,  Bussy  had 
been  compelled,  by  the  policy  of  Lally,  to  leave 
Haidarabad.  He  then  made  over  charge  to  M.  de 
Conflans.  The  following  year,  however,  Conflans  sur- 
rendered to  the  English,  and  the  ruler  of  the  Dekhan 
had  been  forced  not  only  to  renounce  the  French 
alliance,  but  to  agree  never  to  permit  a  French  con- 
tingent to  be  quartered  within  his  territories. 

This  treaty  was  regarded  as  binding  by  Nizam  Ali 
Khan  when,  in  1761,  he  imprisoned  and  succeeded  his 
brother.  But  there  was  another  brother,  Basalat  Jang, 
who  held  in  jaghir  from  Nizam  Ali  the  district  of 
Gantur.  Basalat  considering  himself  as  bound  by  no 
treaty,  and  anxious  to  have  in  his  service  a  body  of 
foreigners  upon  whom  he  could  depend,  took  into  his 
pay  a  body  of  French  troops.  These  were  commanded 
by  the  younger  Lally,*  a  nephew  of  the  more  famous 
general.     Nizam  Ali,  moved  by  the  English,  required 

*  Transactions  in  India,     London,  1786. 


240  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

his  brother  to  disband  this  contingent.  For  five  years 
he  refused,  and  only  at  last  complied  when,  quarrelling 
with  Haidar  Ali,  he  found  it  necessary  to  conciliate  the 
English.  Nizam  Ali  at  once  took  the  corps  into  his 
own  service. 

The  fate  of  the  younger  Lally  I  have  never  been  able 
to  ascertain,  but  it  is  certain  that  he  and  the  men  he 
commanded  were  lent  in  1779  by  the  Nizam  to  Haidar 
Ali  to  aid  in  the  prosecution  of  his  war  against  the 
English ;  that  they  served  throughout  that  war,  and  on 
the  conclusion  of  peace  returned  to  Haidarabad.*  It 
seems  probable  that  Lally  died  or  resigned  in  1785  ; 
certain  it  is  that  in  that  year  Raymond  succeeded  him. 

Up  to  the  time  of  Eaymond^s  arrival  at  Haidarabad 
the  foreign  adventurers  who  had  served  his  predecessor 
had  constituted  one  single  corps  of  European  cavalry. 
Simultaneously  almost  with  de  Boigne  Raymond  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  improving  this  system  by  raising  and 
drilling  in  the  European  fashion  a  considerable  body  of 
native  troops,  who  should  be  commanded,  and  in  part 
officered,  by  the  adventurers  who  had  survived  the  then 
recent  campaign. 

To  this  task  Raymond  bent  all  his  energies.  The 
work  was  gradual  in  its  accomplishment.  It  may  be 
asked,  perhaps,  how  the  Nizam  was  able  to  evade  his 
obligation  to  the  British  Government?  But  this  was 
not  difficult.  His  predecessor  had  been  forbidden  to 
entertain  a  corps  of  Frenchmen.  This,  the  Nizam 
*  Transactions  in  India,    London,  1786. 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  241 

agreed,  was  not  intended  to  apply,  and  could  not  apply, 
to  native  battalions  officered  by  foreigners.  Notwith- 
standing, then,  the  displeasure  frequently  expressed  by 
the  Madras  Government,  Raymond,  under  the  Nizam's 
orders,  continued  to  augment  the  disciplined  native 
troops. 

His  plan  of  procedure  was  different  to  de  Boigne's, 
and  had  some  advantages  over  it.  These,  however,  were 
owing  to  the  larger  European  material  available  in  his 
hands.  Thus  he  was  able  to  fix  the  complement  of  the 
European  officers  to  each  regiment  at  eight,  of  the  men 
at  750. 

By  the  beginning  of  the  year  1795  Raymond  had 
under  his  command  15,000  disciplined  troops,  formed 
into  twenty  battalions,  and  officered,  including  the 
staff,  by  124  Europeans.  It  was  the  most  formidable 
body  of  native  troops  in  the  service  of  a  native  prince  in 
India.  For  their  support  the  Nizam  assigned  to  Raymond 
several  districts. 

Nevertheless,  the  first  essay  of  these  troops  on  the 
the  field  of  battle  was  destined  to  be  unfortunate.  In 
the  beginning  of  1795  the  Nizam,  incited  by  the  anarchy 
prevailing  at  the  Court  of  Puna,  declared  war  against  the 
Peshwa,  and  marched  to  overthrow  the  Maratha  Empire. 
The  Peshwa  summoned  his  vassals  and  raised  an  army 
to  meet  him.  The  two  armies  met  between  Kardla  and 
Parinda,  the  12th  March,  1795.  Raymond  had  all  his 
men  in  the  field ;  whilst  the  Marathas  were  aided  by 
twenty-six  battalions    composed    of   the   men   of    the 

16 


242  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

brigades  of  Perron,  Filoze,  Hessing,  Dudrenec,  and 
Boyd.  In  the  sketch  of  Perron's  career  I  have  given 
an  account  of  the  action.  It  will  be  seen  that  not  only 
did  Raymond  obtain  at  first  an  advantage  over  the 
Marathas,  but  that  when  the  tide  turned  he  covered  the 
retreat,  prepared  at  any  moment  to  convert  it  into  a 
victory.  But  for  the  pusillanimity  of  the  Nizam  he 
might  have  done  so.  But  with  such  a  leader  even 
a  Raymond  could  not  force  victory. 

During  this  war  with  the  Marathas,  the  Governor 
General,  Lord  Teignmouth,  had  lent  the  Nizam  two 
battalions  of  British  sepoys  to  maintain  the  internal 
peace  of  his  dominions,  while  he  should  concentrate  all 
his  forces  against  the  enemy.  In  doing  this  Lord 
Teignmouth  had  displayed  a  consideration  for  the  Nizam 
which  might  easily  have  been  construed  as  exceeding^ 
the  bounds  of  permissible  courtesy,  the  British  bein^ 
still  in  alliance  with  the  Peshwa.  But  even  this  did 
not  satisfy  the  Nizam.  He  wanted  active  aid ;  and 
because  he  had  been  refused,  he,  on  the  termination  of  the 
war,  resolved  to  dispense  altogether  with  British  support, 
and  to  supply  its  place  by  additions  to  the  corps  of 
Raymond.  In  pursuance  of  this  resolution  he,  in  June,. 
1795,  dismissed  the  two  British  battalions.  Coincidently 
with  this  dismissal  he  ordered  a  large  increase  to 
Raymond's  troops  and  assigned  fresh  districts  for  their 
maintenance. 

But  the  British  troops  had  scarcely  quitted  Haidarabad 
when  an  event  occurred,  the  effects  of  which  rendered 


FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  243 

the  timorous  Nizam  more  dependent  than  ever  on  the 
allies  he  was  insulting.  His  eldest  son,  Ali  Jah, 
following  the  family  traditions,  broke  out  into  rebellion. 
Quitting  the  capital  under  a  false  pretext  the  young 
prince  made  his  way  to  Bidr,  obtained  possession  of 
that  fortress  and  of  others  of  less  importance,  summoned 
disaffected  chiefs  and  disbanded  sepoys  to  his  standard, 
and  was  soon  able  to  present  a  very  formidable  front  to 
his  outraged  father. 

The  first  act  of  Nizam  Ali  on  learning  of  this  revolt 
was  to  recall  the  two  British  battalions/;  his  second  to 
despatch  Raymond  against  the  rebels.  Raymond 
experienced  no  difficulty.  The  slightest  skirmish 
sufficed  to  dissipate  the  followers  of  Ali  Jah.  The 
prince  fled  to  Aurangabad,  but  was  pursued  and 
captured.  Raymond  made  over  his  prisoner  to  the 
minister  sent  by  his  father  to  take  charge  of  him.  The 
minister  when  setting  out  on  his  return  journey  to 
Haidarabad,  directed  that  the  hotvdah  in  which  the 
prince  was  seated  should  be  covered  with  a  veil.  But 
Ali  Jah,  ashamed  of  this  indignity  and  afraid  to  meet 
his  father,  took  poison  and  died. 

Notwithstanding  the  suppression  of  the  rebellion,  the 
Nizam  still  retained  the  two  British  regiments  at 
Haidarabad,  and  he  himself  fell  gradually  into  a  state 
of  dependence  on  the  British  Government.  This  was 
further  evidenced  by  the  difficulties  thrown  in  the  way 
of  carrying  out  the  order  for  the  increase  of  Raymond's 
corps.     The  prudent  conduct  of  Raymond  at  this  crisis 

16  A 


244  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA. 

was  not,  however,  without  influence  on  the  mind  of  his 
capricious  master,  and  it  seems  not  improbable  that,  had 
he  lived,  all  opposition  to  his  schemes  would  have 
vanished.  He  died,  however,  very  suddenly  on  the 
25th  March,  1798,  just  six  months  prior  to  the  arrival 
of  the  crisis  which  would  have  tried  to  the  utmost  his 
ability  and  his  influence. 

Raymond  was  a  great  loss  to  the  enemies  of  England. 
No  adventurer  in  India  ever  stood  higher  than  he  did. 
He  was  brave,  magnificent,  generous,  afi'able,  and 
vigilant.  To  great  abilities  he  united  the  most  con- 
summate prudence.  The  one  dream  of  his  life  was  to 
carry  out,  by  the  means  still  open  to  him,  the  schemes 
of  Dupleix,  of  Lally,  and  of  Suffren.  He  deserves  to 
be  ranked  with  those  illustrious  warriors  in  the 
hierarchy  of  patriotic  Frenchmen.  With  far  fewer 
means  he  laid  the  foundation  of  a  system  which 
excited  the  greatest  apprehension  in  the  minds  of  the 
enemies  of  his  country.  His  death  at  the  early  age  of 
forty-four,  just  as  the  crisis  to  which  he  might  have 
been  equal  was  approaching,  was  the  last  drop  in  the 
cup  of  ill -fortune  which  attended  French  enterprises  in 
India.  It  is  indeed  just  possible  that  his  reputation 
has  not  suffered  from  his  early  demise.  Even  Raymond 
might  have  proved  unequal  to  cope  with  the  great 
Marquess  Wellesley,  wielding  all  the  power  of  British 
India.  But  there  is  this  yet  to  be  said  of  him.  No 
European  of  mark  who  preceded  him,  no  European  of 
mark  who  followed   him,  in  India,   ever  succeeded  in 


FOKEIGN    ADVENTURPmS    IN    INDIA.  245 

gaining  to  such  an  extent,  the  love,  the  esteem,  the 
admiration  of  the  natives  of  the  country.  The  grandsons 
of  the  men  who  loved  him  then  love  and  revere  him  now. 
The  hero  of  the  grandfathers  is  the  model  warrior  of  the 
grandchildren.  Eound  his  tomb  in  the  present  day 
there  flock  still  young  men  and  maidens  listening  to  the 
tales  told  by  the  wild  dervishes  of  the  great  deeds  and 
lofty  aspirations  of  the  paladin  to  whom  their  sires 
devoted  their  fortunes  and  their  lives. 

Kaymond  was  succeeded  in  the  command  of  the 
French  division  by  M.  Piron,  a  Fleming.  Piron  was 
honest,  but  sadly  deficient  in  prudence.  He  could  not 
conceal  the  hatred  which  he  felt  towards  the  English. 
It  happened  that  Marquess  Wellesley  had  just  landed  as 
Governor-General  strongly  impressed  with  the  designs 
of  General  Bonaparte  on  India,  and  almost  his  first  act 
was  to  require  the  Nizam  to  dismiss  his  French  con- 
tingent. It  is  possible  that  the  prudent  Kaymond  might 
have  conjured  away  or  have  met  the  storm.  Piron  did 
not  possess  sufficient  character  to  do  either.  The  Nizam 
was  very  unwilling  to  comply.  But  he  yielded  to  the 
pressure  put  upon  him  by  the  great  Marquess,  and  on 
the  1st  September,  1798,  he  signed  a  treaty  by  which 
he  agreed  to  take  no  Frenchman  in  his  service,  to 
disband  the  whole  of  the  infantry  lately  commanded  by 
Raymond,  and  to  receive  in  their  stead  a  contingent  of 
British  sepoys. 

No  sooner  had  the  treaty  been  concluded  than  four 
battalions  of  British  sepoys  with  their  guns  marched  to 


246  FOREIGN   ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

Haidarabad,  and  joined  the  two  battalions  formerly 
stationed  there.  Some  hesitation  was  even  then  dis- 
played by  the  Nizam  to  break  up  Piron's  corps ;  but  the 
threatening  attitude  assumed  by  the  British  forced  him 
to  issue  a  proclamation  to  his  disciplined  sepoys  inform- 
ing them  that  their  French  officers  were  dismissed.  The 
scene  that  followed  was  remarkable.  These  sepoys  had 
adored  Eaymond ;  they  had  looked  to  their  European 
officers  with  affection  and  pride ;  they  would  have 
followed  them  to  the  end  of  the  earth ;  they  knew  that 
their  dismissal  was  due,  not  to  the  wish  of  the  Nizam,  but 
to  British  influence.  On  hearing,  then,  the  proclamation 
of  the  Nizam,  they  first  murmured,  then  broke  out  into 
rebellion.  But  their  European  officers  had  been  secured  ; 
their  cantonments  had  been  surrounded  ;  from  every 
point  they  saw  their  position  commanded  by  cannon. 
Resistance  being  then  hopeless,  they  surrendered,  askin<2f 
each  other  with  a  sigh :  **  Would  this  have  been,  had 
'*  Eaymond  only  lived?"  The  French  officers  were 
sent  to  France. 

I  have  now  brought  to  a  close  this  sketch  of  the 
careers  of  the  principal  foreign  adventurers  who 
flourished  in  India  between  the  signature  of  the  treaty 
of  Versailles  and  the  fatal  blow  dealt  to  the  Maratha 
Empire  by  Marquess  Wellesley  in  1803-4.  From  that 
moment  the  British  Empire  in  India  was  secure. 
Thenceforth  neither  native  prince  nor  foreign  adventurer 
could  stay  its  onward  progress.  Any  war  which  might 
break  out,  from  the  Satlaj  down  to  the  sea,  could  cause 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN   INDIA.  247 

no  serious  disquiet  to  the  Governor -General  of  British 
India.  Even  the  acute  sovereign  of  the  warlike  clan 
which  had  established  a  powerful  monarchy  beyond  the 
Satlaj — even  Kanjit  Singh  foresaw  the  doom  which 
awaited  even  the  kingdom  he  had  created.  '*  It  will  all/' 
he  said,  as  he  noted  on  the  map  the  red  border  which 
encircled  the  various  provinces  already  under  British 
sway,  *'it  will  all  become  red."  His  words  were  a 
prophecy.  The  impetus  given  to  the  vast  machine 
€Ould  not  be  stopped  until  the  final  goal  had  been 
attained.  The  various,  so  to  speak,  indigenous  races 
which  had  tried  to  found  an  empire  in  India  had  failed. 
The  Hindus,  brave  as  they  were,  became  to  a  great 
extent  demoralised  by  an  over-refinement  of  civilisation ; 
an  over-refinement  which,  amongst  other  strange  forms, 
made  of  food  a  religion.  This  one  law,  this  article  of 
faith,  which  prevents  combination,  restricts  men  to  a 
€ertain  diet,  to  be  partaken  of  only  under  certain  fixed 
conditions,  is  sufficient  in  the  present  day  to  prevent  the 
race  which  practises  it  from  holding  the  chief  sway  over 
such  a  country  as  Hindostan.  The  northern  warriors 
who  ruled  on  their  ruin  had  defects  of  an  opposite 
character  not  less  fatal  to  permanent  predominance. 
With  some  brilliant  exceptions  they  were  intolerant,  and 
the  security — the  very  existence  even — of  their  rulo 
always  depended  on  the  character  of  the  ruler.  The 
Marathas,  who  succeeded  them,  were  in  every  sense  of 
the  word  adventurers — fortune  hunters  who  rose  from 
nothing,  men  of  neither  birth,  position,  nor  descent — 


248  FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA. 

the  marauders  which  a  country  in  the  last  throes  of 
its  agony  sends  out  from  its  lurking  places  to  plunder 
and  destroy.  Such  was  Sivaji ;  such  were  the  earlier 
representatives  of  the  Gaikwar,  of  Sindia,  of  Holkar, 
and  of  the  Bhonsla.  Yet  these  men  founded  an  empire. 
The  Marathas  succeeded  the  Moghols.  When  Lord 
Lake  entered  Dehli,  in  1803,  the  men  he  had  beaten 
beneath  its  walls  were  the  soldiers  of  the  greatest  of 
the  Maratha  chieftains.  Virtually  he  restored  the 
Moghol. 

Could  the  Maratha  Empire  have  lasted  if  there  had 
been  no  foreign  power  on  the  spot  to  supplant  it  ?  To 
those  who  would  pause  for  a  reply  I  would  point  to 
the  condition  of  the  Court  of  Puna  after  the  death  of 
the  Peshwa,  Madhu  Eao  Narain,  in  1795.  It  was  the 
Court  of  Dehli  after  the  demise  of  a  sovereign  in  its 
worst  days.  It  was  the  Court  of  Dehli  as  it  always  was 
after  the  death  of  Aurangzib.  The  Maratha  system  of 
rule  was  cursed  with  the  same  inherent  vice  which  was 
the  bane  of  the  Moghol  sway.  The  succession  was 
never  secure  to  any  one  member  of  the  family.  The 
people  were  never  safe  against  the  exactions  of  their 
rulers.  The  rulers  were  never  safe  against  treachery 
and  insurrection.  The  inevitable  consequences  were 
intrigue,  rapine,  slaughter,  constant  wars,  incessant 
oppression  of  the  people.  Had  there  been  no  foreigners 
on  the  spot  to  supplant  the  Maratha  rule,  it  is  probable 
that  the  various  members  of  its  clan  would  have  fought 
to  a  standstill,  only  in  the  end  to  make  way  for  some 


FOREIGN    ADVENTURERS    IN    INDIA.  249 

new  invMder  from  the  north — possibly,  for  the  moment, 
for  Eanjit  Singh — to  relapse,  on  his  death,  into  renewed 
anarchy. 

It  would  seem,  then,  to  have  been  necessary  for  the 
safety  of  India  that  the  successor  to  the  Maratha  should 
be  a  foreigner.     Who  was  that  foreigner  to  be  ?    It  was 
inevitable  that  he  should  come  from  Europe,  for  the 
children  of  northern  Asia  had  been   tried  and  found 
wanting.     Portugal  made  the  first  venture,  ignorant  of 
the  possible  stake   she   might   be   called  to   play   for. 
Holland,  with  a  keener,  though  still  very  dim  appre- 
ciation of  the  future,  followed  and,  in  part,  supplanted 
Portugal.       Then    came  England  with   a  vision  more 
clouded   than   that   of     Holland,    caring   nothing    for 
dominion,  looking  only  for  gain.     Last  of  all  stepped 
in  France.     To  the  brilliant  intellect  of  her  gifted  sons 
the  nature  of  the  mission  which  lay  before  one  European 
power  was  not  for  long  a  sealed  book.     The  greatest  of 
the  children  whom  she  sent  to  India,  recognising  the 
priceless  value  of  the  stake,  risked   his  all  to  win  it. 
Had  the  Bourbon  who  ruled  France  properly  supported 
him  he  would  have  won  it.     As  it  was  the  intensity  of 
the  passion  he  displayed  in    playing    the    great  game 
communicated  some  vague  idea  of  its  importance  to  his 
English  rivals.     The  genius  of  Clive  clutched  it;   the 
statesmanlike   brain  of  Warren  Hastings  nurtured  it  ; 
the     commanding     intellect     of    Marquess    Wellesley 
established  it  as  an  ineradicable  fact.     Yet,  throughout 
this  period,  France,  which  had  been  the  first  to  conceive 


250        FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS  IN  INDIA. 

the  idea  never  resigned  it.  She  had  much  to  contend 
against.  The  narrow  visions  of  her  monarch  and  her 
statesmen  could  not  grasp  the  vital  importance  of  the 
mighty  stake.  It  was  these  men  who  prevented  India 
from  becoming  French.  I  have  but  to  point  to  a  few 
instances  of  their  incapacity.  The  restoration  of 
Madras  by  the  peace  of  Aix  la  Chapelle  ;  the  recall  of 
Dupleix,  when  if  they  had  sent  him  but  one  regiment 
more,  he  would  have  gained  southern  India ;  the 
diminution  of  the  forces  ordered  to  be  sent  with  Lally  ; 
the  appointment  as  his  colleague  of  such  a  man  as 
d'Ach6 ;  the  acknowledgment  by  the  treaty  of  Versailles 
of  the  status  quo  ante  helium,  when  the  English  were 
reduced  to  their  last  grasp  in  southern  India ;  all  these 
were  fatal  errors  due  to  that  want  of  comprehensive 
grasp  which  marked  the  statesmen  of  the  later  Bourbons. 
Frenchmen  on  the  spot,  indeed,  atoned  nobly  for  the 
errors  of  their  rulers.  They  fought  for  the  idea,  as 
long  as  it  could  be  fought  for ;  and  when  they  beheld 
it  slipping  from  their  grasp  they  yet  struggled  with  skill, 
with  courage,  and  with  pertinacity  to  prevent  its 
appropriation  by  their  rivals.  In  my  history  of  the 
French  in  India,  not  less  than  in  this  volume, 
I  have  endeavoured  to  draw  a  vivid  and  a  true 
picture  of  their  aims  and  of  their  struggles.  Those 
aims  were  worthy  of  being  recorded,  for  they  were 
lofty ;  those  struggles  deserved  a  historian,  for  they  were 
gallant.  The  record  reveals  to  us,  moreover,  this  great 
people  displaying  qualities  for  which  the  world  has  not 


FOREIGN  ADVENTURERS   IN   INDIA.  251 

given  them  credit.  We  all  knew  that  the  French  were 
clever,  brave,  and  venturesome.  Not  every  one,  however, 
is  prepared  to  find  in  a  Frenchman  the  long  pertinacity 
displayed  by  Dupleix ;  the  quality  of  not  knowing  when 
he  was  beaten  evinced  by  Sufi'ren ;  the  daring  hardihood 
of  her  privateersmen  ;  or  lastly,  the  patience,  the 
energy,  the  perseverance  shown  under  trying  circum- 
stances by  some  of  the  adventurers  whose  deeds  have 
been  recorded  in  this  book.  England,  who,  grasping 
gradually  the  idea  of  France,  now  occupies  the  position 
to  which  a  Frenchman  first  aspired,  only  does  honour  to 
herself  when  she  recognises  the  splendid  qualities 
displayed  by  her  most  formidable  rival ;  allows  that  on 
the  sea  as  well  as  on  land  she  met  a  worthy  antagonist ; 
and  admits,  that  if  for  the  favourable  result  of  the 
contest  she  owes  much  to  the  genius  and  the  compre- 
hensive views  of  the  great  statesmen  who  guided  the 
councils  of  her  country  during  a  large  portion  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  she  is  indebted  even  to  a  greater 
extent  to  the  errors  committed  by  the  statesmen  of  the 
enemy  she  was  combating. 


APPENDIX. 


THE  BRITISH  EXPEDITION  FROM 
INDIA  TO  EGYPT  IN  1801. 


On  the  5th  February,  1801,  Major-General  David  Baird, 
at  the  time  commanding  the  Dinapore  division,  received 
orders  to  repair  at  once  to  Trincomali,  there  to  assume 
the  command  of  a  force  assembled  with  the  object  of 
capturing  the  island  of  Java,  and,  on  the  completion  of 
that  task,  of  attempting  the  reduction  of  the  isles  of 
France  and  Bourbon. 

The  force  to  be  employed  on  this  service  consisted 
of  the  10th,  19th,  and  80th  regiments  of  the  line,  of 
detachments  from  the  86th  and  88th,  of  a  Corps  of 
Bengal  Native  Volunteers,  and  of  two  companies  of 
European  and  Native  Artillery  with  lascars  attached. 

The  most  minute  instructions  regarding  the  move- 
ments of  the  force  had  been  detailed  by  Marquess 
Wellesley.      After    Java   should  have    been   captured 


254  EXPEDITION   FROM   INDIA 

General  Baird,  was  to  remain  there  as  Lieutenant- 
Governor,  whilst  his  second  in  command,  Colonel  the 
Honourable  Arthur  Wellesley,  should  proceed  towards 
the  islands. 

The  same  day,  the  5th  February,  General  Baird 
embarked  on  board  the  Honourable  Company^s  ship 
Phoenix,  but  before  that  vessel  had  left  the  Saugor  roads, 
Marquess  Wellesley  received  a  despatch  from  the 
President  of  the  Board  of  Control,  the  effect  of  which 
was  to  entirely  alter  the  destination  of  the  expedition. 

In  that  despatch  Mr.  Dundas  informed  the  Governor- 
General,  that  Sir  Balph  Abercromby  had  received  orders 
to  proceed  up  the  Mediterranean  and,  by  an  attack  on 
Alexandria  and  the  coast,  to  co-operate  with  the  Turkish 
army  assembling  in  Syria,  in  whatever  plan  might  be 
concerted  with  them  for  expelling  the  French  army  from 
Egypt ;  and  that  it  had  been  thought  expedient  *'  that  a 
'*  force  should  be  sent  also  fi'om  India  to  act  in  such  a 
*'  manner  as  might  appear  conducive  to  that  essential 
**  object,"  from  the  side  of  the  Red  Sea. 

Mr.  Dundas  added  that,  with  that  object  in  view 
Sir  Home  Popham,  with  a  proper  squadron,  would  be 
immediately  sent  into  that  sea,  taking  with  him  a 
regiment  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ;  that  his  first 
rendezvous  would  be  the  Port  of  Mocha ;  and  he  directed 
that  a  force  of  about  1000  Europeans  and  2000  Native 
Infantry  should  be  sent  at  once  from  India  to  the 
proposed  place  of  rendezvous,  with  as  little  delay  as 
possible,  to  co-operate  with  Sir  Home  Popham. 

Copies  of  this  despatch  were  sent,  to  the  presidencies 
of  Madras  and  Bombay,  the  Governors  of  which  were 
instructed  to  make  the  necessary  preparations  without 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  255 

delay,  and  even  to  carry  the  orders  into  execution 
without  waiting  for  the  Governor- General's  directions, 
if  they  were  ready  in  other  respects. 

The  despatch  concluded  by  expressing  a  belief  that 
unless  anything  unforeseen  should  occur  the  armament 
under  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby  would  reach  the  coast  of 
Egypt  in  December,  and  that  of  Sir  H.  Popham  would 
arrive  at  its  destination  in  the  February  following.  The 
Governor- General  was  therefore  earnestly  recommended 
to  despatch  the  Indian  Contingent  as  quickly  as  possible; 
not  even  to  wait  till  the  troops  should  all  be  collected  if 
it  would  save  time  to  forward  them  in  two  or  three 
distinct  detachments. 

Lord  Wellesley  received  this  despatch, — dated  the  6th 
October,  1800,  and  forwarded  overland — on  the  ()th 
February.  The  same  day  he  intimated  to  General 
Baird  that  a  despatch  from  England  would  probably 
render  it  necessary  for  him  to  make  some  essential 
variations  in  the  object  of  the  armament  he  had 
equipped;  that  meanwhile  General  Baird  had  better 
remain  on  board  the  Pluienix,  urging  the  captain,  however, 
to  make  every  necessary  preparation  for  sailing,  as  he 
hoped  to  send  the  further  instructions  within  forty-eight 
hours. 

But  it  was  not  till  the  10th  that  the  Military  Secretary 
to  the  Governor- General  intimated  to  General  Baird,  in 
a  short  note,  that  the  despatch  from  England  had 
rendered  it  necessary  that  he  should  *'  assist  Sir  Ralph 

Abercromby  in  driving  the  French  from  Egypt  instead 

of  seizing  on  Batavia/'  The  same  evening  Marquess 
Wellesley  forwarded  his  instructions,  accompanied  by 
a  very  friendly  letter,  to  General  Baird. 


it 


256  EXPEDITION    FROM    INDIA 

These  instructions  and  letters  were  received  by  General 
Baird  on  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  The  Phoenix  sailed 
the  same  day  for  Trincomali ;  but  before  she  reached 
her  destination  events  had  occurred  to  which  it  is  now 
necessary  to  refer. 

Colonel  Wellesley,  appointed  second  in  command  of 
the  expedition  against  Java  and  the  islands,  was  already 
at  Trincomali  when  a  copy  of  Mr.  Dundas's  despatch  of 
the  6th  October  reached  the  Madras  Government.  This 
copy  was  at  once  forwarded  to  Colonel  Wellesley  who 
determined,  in  consequence,  to  proceed  at  once  with  the 
troops  under  his  command  (excepting  the  19th  regiment 
for  which  he  could  not  procure  tonnage)  to  Bombay, 
and  thence  to  the  place  of  rendezvous  pointed  out  in  the 
despatches  from  Mr.  Dundas.  He  accordingly  embarked 
with  the  troops  from  Ceylon  on  the  14th  February. 

Colonel  Wellesley  reached  Bombay  about  the  middle 
of  March.  He  at  once  communicated  with  the  Governor, 
and  sent  off  to  Mocha  a  detachment  of  Bombay  troops 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Eamsay  of  the  80th 
Kegiment.  He  then  set  to  work  to  prepare  transports 
for  a  second  detachment,  and  the  progress  in  this 
respect  had  been  considerable  when  General  Baird,  who, 
on  missing  him  at  Trincomali,  had  pushed  on  in  the 
Wasp  gun-vessel,  joined  him  on  the  31st  March. 

So  indefatigable,  indeed,  had  been  the  exertions  of 
Colonel  Wellesley  that  on  the  3rd  April  the  second 
detachment  of  the  force,  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Beresford  of  the  88th  Kegiment,  was  able  to  sail  in  six 
transports  from  Bombay.  On  that  very  day  Colonel 
Wellesley  was  attacked  by  intermittent  fever,  and  on 
the  5th  the  medical  officers  declared  that  it  would  be 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  257 

utterly  impossible  for  him  to  sail  then  with  the 
expedition,  though  he  might  possibly  be  able  to  follow 
in  time  to  catch  up  the  second  division. 

This  second  division  consisted  of  the  troops  which 
General  Baird  had  found  at  Trincomali  and  which  had 
started  from  that  port  for  Mocha. 

General  Baird  himself  left  Bombay  on  the  6th  April 
and  reached  Mocha  on  the  24th.  On  his  arrival  there 
he  found  that  Colonel  Murray,  who  had  been  despatched 
to  that  place  several  months  before,  had  sailed  for  Jedda 
on  the  17th,  having  on  the  12th  sent  on  Colonel 
Ramsay's  detachment.  He  found  likewise  that  Colonel 
Beresford's  detachment  had  arrived  on  the  21st  and 
sailed  again  on  the  24th. 

General  Baird,  fearing  lest  these  two  detachments 
uniting  at  Jedda  might  make  a  premature  attempt 
upon  Kosseir,  which  place,  in  default  of  Suez, 
unapproachable  at  that  season  by  sailing  ships,  he 
had  designed  as  his  base  of  operations,  sent^  off 
directions  to  Colonels  Murray  and  Beresford  to  remain 
at  Jedda  until  he  should  join  them  with  another  de- 
tachment under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Montresor  of  the 
80th  Eegiment.  That  detachment  reached  Mocha  on 
the  28th  April.  Leaving  at  that  place  despatches 
detailing  the  arrangement  he  had  decided  upon  for 
Colonel  Champagne,  commanding  the  detachment  still 
due,  for  Colonel  Wellesley,  and  for  Sir  Home  Popham 
(expected  from  England),  General  Baird  set  out  for 
Jedda  with  Colonel  Montresor's  division  on  the 
30th. 

He  reached  Jedda  on  the  18th  May.  There  he  found 
that  his  despatches  had  arrived  too  late  to  be  communi- 

17 


258  EXPEDITION    FROM   INDIA 

cated  to  Colonel  Murray ;  that  that  officer,  taking  with 
him  the  Bombay  detachment  under  Colonel  Ramsay  and 
the  division  under  Colonel  Beresford,  had  sailed  up  the 
Gulf  towards  Suez.  Baird's  first  impulse  was  to  follow 
them ;  but  he  was  restrained  by  the  necessity  which 
existed  to  take  in  a  supply  of  fresh  water — the  tanks 
having  run  very  low.  He  availed  himself  of  the  delay 
thus  caused  to  endeavour  to  secure  by  every  means  in 
his  power  the  friendship  and  co-operation  of  the  chief 
authorities  at  Mecca. 

On  the  evening  of  his  arrival,  Baird  received  intelli- 
gence of  the  victory  gained  on  the  21st  March  by  Sir 
Ealph  Abercromby  over  the  French  troops  under 
Oeneral  Menou. 

On  the  24th  General  Baird  was  on  the  point  of 
sailing  from  Jedda  when  Sir  Home  Popham  arrived 
in  H.M.S.  Romney,  50  guns,  with  the  sloop  Victor 
in  company,  closely  followed  by  the  division  he  was 
•escorting  from  the  Cape.  This  consisted  of  H.M.'s  61st 
Regiment,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Car- 
ruthers;  several  troops  of  the  8th  Light  Dragoons, 
Captain  Hawkers ;  and  a  detachment.  Royal  Artillery, 
Captain  Beaver.  Sir  Home  Popham  brought,  however, 
no  intelligence  regarding  Colonels  Wellesley  and 
Champagne.  Nothing  had  been  heard  at  Mocha 
either  of  them  or  of  the  provision  ships  that  were  to 
precede  or  accompany  them  when  Sir  Home  Popham 
touched  at  that  place. 

On  the  26th  May  Baird  sailed  from  Jedda  with  Sir 
Home  Popham  in  the  Romney,  and  reached  Kosseir  on 
the  6th  June.  He  found  there  Colonel  Murray,  and 
the  troops  that  had  accompanied  them. 


TO    EGYPT,    1801. 


259 


The  force  then   under  his  orders  was  composed  as 
follows : — 


Eoyal  Artillery 

Bengal  Horse  Do. 
Bengal  Foot  Do. 
Madras  Do.  Do. 
Bombay  Do.  Do. 
Eoyal  Engineers. 
Bengal  Do. 

Madras         Do. 
Bombay        Do. 
Madras  Pioneers. 
H.M.'s  8th  Light  Dragoons 

10th  Foot 

61st  Foot 

80th  Foot 

86th  Foot 

88th  Foot 
Bengal  Volunteer  N.  I. 
1st  Bombay  Eegt.  N.  I. 
7th     Do.  Do. 


Captain  Beaver. 
Captain  Browne. 
Captain  Fleming. 
Major  Bell. 
Captain  Powell. 


Captain  Hawkers. 
Lt.-Col.  Quarril. 
Lt.-Col.  Carruthers, 
Colonel  Eamsay. 
Lt.-Col.  Llovd. 
Colonel  Beresford. 
Captain  Michie. 
Major  Holmes. 
Major  Laureston. 


The  respective  quota  furnished  by  the  different 
establishments  to  which  these  corps  belonged  is  thus 
to  be  divided : — 

Men. 

East  India  Company's  Artillery  ...     448 

Do.  Do.        Native  Troops ...  1940 

H.M's.  Troops  ...  2438 


Total 


...  4826 
17  A 


260 


EXPEDITION    FKOM   INDIA 


To  these  must  be  added — 

European  officers 

•  •  •          •  •  •          • 

218 

Native       ditto 

'  •  •          •  •  •          • 

53 

Drummers 

•  •  •          •  •  •          • 

125 

Lascars 

•  •  •          •  •  •          • 

440 

Servants  not  soldiers 

276 

Public  followers 

•  • «          •  •  •          • 

572 

Private    ditto 

•  •  •          •  •  •          • 

Grand  Total 

305 

..       6815 

This  force  was  commanded  in  chief  by  Major-General 
David  Baird,  54th  Foot,  who  had  as  his  Adjutant- 
General,  Colonel  Achmuty,  10th  Foot,  and  as  Quarter- 
Master-General,  Colonel  Murray,  84th  Foot.  It  was 
divided  into  two  brigades  the  Eight  and  the  Left,  the 
former  commanded  by  Colonel  Beresford,  the  latter  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Montresor. 

General  Baird's  first  act,  after  arriving  at  Kosseir, 
was  to  place  himself  in  the  communication  with  General 
Hely  Hutchinson,  commanding  the  British  Army  of 
Egypt  after  the  death  of  Sir  Ealph  Abercromby.  But 
his  letter  had  been  sent  off  only  five  days,  w^hen  he 
received  a  despatch  from  General  Hutchinson  himself 
dated  the  13th  May,  from  Rahamenie  on  the  Nile. 

In  this  letter  General  Hutchinson  stated  that  it  was 
his  intention  to  push  on  towards  Cairo  so  as  to  prevent 
the  French  from  attacking  the  Indian  force  before  it 
should  have  effected  its  junction  with  the  Grand  Vizier  ; 
that  he  had  written  to  that  high  officer  to  give  General 
Baird  all  the  assistance  he  might  require  for  the  passage 
of  the  desert. 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  261 

After  alluding  generally  to  the  difficulties  to  be 
encountered  from  the  climate  and  the  people  General 
Hutchinson  added  that  he  intended  to  continue  in  his 
position  near  Cairo  until  he  should  hear  that  the  Indian 
force  was  in  a  state  of  security ;  that  he  would  then 
descend  the  Nile  and  besiege  Alexandria ;  that  he  rather 
opined  that  General  Baird  should  join  the  army  of  the 
Grand  Vizier  and  besiege  Cairo  with  him,  for  which 
purpose  he  would  endeavour  to  procure  for  him  some 
heavy  artillery  as  none  could  be  brought  across  the 
desert. 

To  this  letter  General  Baird  replied  that  the  Admiral 
on  the  station  (Admiral  Blankett)  had  pronounced  the 
journey  by  sea  to  Suez  at  that  season  of  the  year  to  be 
impossible ;  and  that  he  was  about  to  send  off  his 
Quarter-Master-General,  Colonel  Murray,  to  Keneh, 
where  he  would  either  remain,  or  proceed  down  the  Nile 
to  open  a  communication  with  General  Hutchinson. 

General  Baird,  in  anticipation  of  a  forward  movement 
had  already  established  military  posts  for  nearly  half  the 
distance  between  Kosseir  and  Keneh,  and  had  directed 
the  men  forming  them  to  dig  for  water.  At  all  these 
posts  water  had  been  found.  The  General  determined 
therefore  to  push  on  a  corps  at  once  in  advance,  to  be 
followed  by  others.  The  first  of  these  corps  commanded 
by  Colonel  Beresford  left  Kosseir,  therefore,  on  the 
19th  June. 

The  route  they  had  to  take  may  thus  be  concisely 
shewn  :  *  • 

*  This  itinerary  is  taken  from  the  official  orders  signed  by  Colonel 
Montresor  and  compiled  after  General  Baird  had  himself  made  the 
journey  between  the  two  places.     The  list  given  in  the  Memoirs  of  Sir 


...  11 

Water. 

...  17 

No  water. 

...  17 

Water  &  provisions. 

...     9 

Water. 

...  19 

No  water. 

...  19 

Water  &  provisions . 

...  18 

Water. 

...  10 

The  Nile. 

262  EXPEDITION    FROM    INDIA 

Miles. 
Kosseir  to  the  New  Wells 
Half  way  to  Moilah 
To  Moilah 
Advanced  Wells . . 
Half  way  to  Legeta 
To  Legeta 
To  Baromba 
To  Keneh,  on  the  Nile 

Total  120 

The  march  was  encumbered  with  difficulties.  The 
very  first  day  many  of  the  water  bags  leaked  so  much 
that  all  the  water  had  escaped  before  the  troops  reached 
their  destination ;  the  wells  which  had  been  dug  there 
yielded  indeed  water,  but  it  was  procurable  only  in  very 
small  quantities.  The  dreariness  of  the  country ;  the 
depressing  nature  of  the  climate ;  the  burning  sand  and 
the  burning  sun  ;  all  these  added  to  the  difficulties  of 
the  General,  and  called  for  the  exercise  of  all  his 
firmness,  his  presence  of  mind,  and  his  fortitude. 

General  Baird  had  accompanied  the  two  first  detach- 
ments a  part  of  the  way.  He  then  returned  to  Kosseir 
to  arrange  measures  for  providing  a  water  supply  for  the 
troops  forming  them.  He  had  previously  succeeded  in 
obtaining  about  5000  camels,  and  these  he  loaded  with 
leathern  bags  or  mashaks.  In  an  order  which  he  issued 
on  the  occasion  will  be  found  the  means  he  had  asser- 
tained  to  be  most  efficacious  for  supplying  the  troops  on 
the  line  of  march  with  this  necessary  article. 

David  Baird  was  written  before  the  journey  had  been  attempted,  and  is 
incomplete  and  imperfect.     Vide  Asiatic  Annual  Register  for  1802. 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  26S 

After  examining  the  various  modes  which  had  been 
suggested  for  ensuring  a  regular  water-supply  he  an- 
nounced the  conclusion  at  which  he  had  arrived  that  the 
army  ''  must  either  trust  to  the  puckailies,  or  find  water 
in  the  desert,  or  re-embark." 

The  order  then  proceeded  as  follows :  **  To-day's 
march  of  the  88th  will  decide  the  first  point,  and  if 
it  is  possible  to  carry  water  it  should  be  done  in  this 
way. 

The  88th  should  take  their  bags  on  to  Legeta,  and 
after  the  next  day's  march  thence,  send  them  back  to 
Legeta  for  the  next  corps. 

**  The  10th  should  take  their  bags  to  Moilah,  and 
after  the  next  day's  march  send  their  bags  back  to 
Moilah  for  the  next  division.  The  artillery,  increased 
to  100  puckallie  camels,  should  take  their  bags  one 
day's  march  to  the  wells,  and  send  them  back.  By 
these  three  divisions  of  bags  the  whole  army  could,  in 
succession,  be  supplied.  Careful,  steady  men  should 
be  appointed  to  each  division,  and  the  principle  should 
be  well  explained  to  everybody.  A  European  officer 
should  also  go  with  each  division  of  puckailies. 
*'  If  the  puckailies  will  not  answer  and  the  88th  get 
on  to  Moilah,  a  company  should  be  sent  to  clear  the 
wells,  seven  miles  from  Moilah,  and  two  companies 
should  be  sent  halfway  from  that  towards  Legeta  to 
dig  wells,  and,  as  fast  as  they  find  water,  more  com- 
panies should  follow. 
'*  In  the  same  manner  the  10th  should  send  two 
**  companies  halfway  to  Moilah  and  endeavour  to  dig 
*'  wells. 

**  If  water  is  found  at  these  stations,  the  88th  must 


a 
(( 
(( 

ti 
(I 
a 

a 
(( 

iC 

a 
(( 
a 
(t 
it 
ti 

ti 

ti 
ti 

ti 

a 


264  EXPEDITION   FROM    INDIA 

"  halt  at  Legeta,  and  send  on  two  companies  to  dig 
'*  wells  between  that  and  Keneh. 

**  The  Sepoys  at  the  stations  may  go  and  assist,  and 
*'  the  two  companies  at  Legeta  should  immediately 
"  begin  between  that  and  Keneh/* 

General  Baird  had  decided  to  leave  Kosseir  for  Keneh 
on  the  27th  June.  On  that  day,  however,  he  received 
despatches  from  Bombay  informing  him  that  Colonel 
Champagne's  detachment  would  sail  in  six  transports 
*'  in  a  few  days,''  and  that  Colonel  Wellesley  was  pre- 
vented by  ill  health  from  joining  him. 

A  feeling  of  soreness  had  existed  between  General 
Baird  and  Colonel  Wellesley  since  the  date  (5th  May, 
1799)  on  which  the  former  had  considered  himself 
superseded  by  the  latter  in  the  command  of  Seringa- 
patam.  It  is  interesting,  therefore,  to  read  the  manner 
in  which  an  ill-feeling  on  the  part  of  Colonel  Wellesley 
had  been  effaced  by  personal  contact  with  General  Baird 
in  Bombay. 

**  As  I  am  writing  on  the  subject,"  wrote  Colonel 
Wellesley  in  a  private  letter  dated  Bombay,  9th  April, 
I  will  freely  acknowledge  that  my  regret  at  being 
prevented  from  accompanying  you  has  been  greatly 
increased  by  the  kind,  candid,  and  handsome  manner 
in  which  you  have  behaved  towards  me ;  and  I  will 
**  confess  as  freely,  not  only  that  I  did  not  expect  such 
**  treatment,  but  that  my  wishes,  before  you  arrived, 
'^  regarding  going  upon  such  an  expedition,  were 
*'  directly  the  reverse  of  what  they  are  at  this  moment. 
"  I  need  not  enter  farther  into  this  subject  than  to 
"  entreat  that  you  will  not  attribute  my  stay  to  any 
"  other    motive    than   that   to   which    I    have    above 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  265 


assigned  it" — (the  state  of  his  health) — '*and  to 
inform  you  that,  as  I  know  what  has  been  said  and 
expected  by  the  world  in  general,  I  propose,  as 
well  as  for  my  own  credit  as  for  yours,  to  make 
**  known  to  my  friends  and  to  yours,  not  only  the 
distinguished  manner  in  which  you  have  behaved 
towards  me,  but  the  causes  which  have  prevented  my 
demonstrating  my  gratitude  by  giving  you  every 
assistance  in  the  arduous  service  which  you  have  to 
"  conduct." 

Colonel  Wellesley  accompanied  his  letter  by  a 
memorandum  in  which  he  detailed  the  course  he  would 
recommend  the  general  in  command  of  the  force 
invading  Egypt  from  India  to  adopt. 

Dismissing  as  impracticable  any  attempt  to  gain  Suez 
in  sailing  ships  at  that  season  of  the  year,  Colonel 
Wellesley  indicated  Kosseir  as  the  place  of  which  the 
army  should  first  gain  possession. 

After  referring  to  the  probable  movements  of  the 
French  troops,  and  the  disposition  of  the  Mamelukes 
and  the  Beys,  the  memorandum  thus  proceeded : — 

*'  The  first  question  which  I  shall  consider,  and  which 
*'  will  lay  the  grounds  for  a  consideration  of,  and 
'*  decision  upon  others,  is  whether  it  would  be  prac- 
**  ticable  or  even  desirable  to  cross  the  desert  from 
Kosseir  at  all,  if  that  operation  is  not  performed  in 
concert  and  co-operation  with  a  body  of  natives  posted 
upon  the  Nile. 
**  It  is  needless  to  enter  into  a  statement  of  the 
**  difficulties  to  be  apprehended  in  crossing  the  desert ; 
**  they  are  certainly  great,  but  I  imagine  not  insur- 
"  mountable.     But,  if  it  is  not  certain  that  the  army  or 


266  EXPEDITION    FROM    INDIA 

detachment  which  will  cross  the  desert,  will  partake 
of  the  plenty  of  the  banks  of  the  Nile  when  they 
reach  them ;  if  they  should  be  certain  of  having  water 
only,  and  such  forage  as  their  cattle  should  be  able  to 
pick  up,  I  apprehend  that  the  difficulty  will  become 
so  great  that  the  operation  ought  not  to  be  attempted. 
It  is  impossible  that  the  Mamelukes  in  Upper  Egypt 
can  be  neutral  in  the  contest  in  contemplation — they 
must  take  part  with  the  French  or  with  us.  If  they 
take  part  with  the  French,  the  army  will  be  in  the 
situation  in  which  I  have  above  described  it,  enjoying 
no  advantage  from  having  reached  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  excepting  water,  and  probably  some  forage ; 
and  it  is  needless  to  point  out  that  if  the  desert  is  to 
be  crossed  under  those  circumstances  care  must  be 
taken  not  only  to  send,  with  the  body  of  troops  which 
will  cross,  a  very  large  proportion  of  provisions,  but 
means  must  be  adopted  to  add  to  them  until  the 
operations  of  this  body  shall  have  given  them  such  a 
hold  of  the  country  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  their 
steady  supply  of  provisions.  It  is  obvious  that  this 
will  require  a  great  number  of  cattle,  a  number  much 
larger  than  the  Government  of  India,  with  all  the 
zealous  exercise  of  their  power  and  means,  can  supply ; 
but  there  is  another  consideration  connected  with  this 
subject  besides  the  supply  of  cattle,  and  that  is 
the  means  of  feeding  them  when  landed  from  the 
ships. 

'*  Upon  this  point  I  need  only  call  to  the  General's 
*'  recollection  the  difficulties  to  which  he  has  been  a 
"  witness  in  moving  large  supplies  of  stores  and  pro- 
**  visions   even    in    fertile,    cultivated,    and    inhabited 


TO  EGYPT,   1801.  267 


countries,  well  supplied  with  water,  and  under  every 
disadvantage  of  arrangement  in  the  supply,  in  the 
distribution,  and  the  food  of  the  cattle,  and  draw  a 
comparison  between  such  difficulties  and  those  to  be 
expected  in  a  march  through  a  desert.  But  that  is 
not  the  worst  that  is  to  be  apprehended ;  the  cattle 
will  of  course  land  in  a  weak  condition,  in  a  desert, 
and  it  must  be  expected  that  even  those  which  survive 
the  voyage  will  starve  or  at  least  be  in  such  a  state 
before  they  commence  their  march  as  to  render  it 
**  very  probable  that  they  will  not  carry  their  loads  to 
the  end  of  it.  Upon  the  whole,  then,  I  am  decidedly 
of  opinion  that  if  the  Mamelukes  are  not  on  our  side, 
no  attempt  ought  to  be  made  to  cross  the  desert. 

This  opinion,  the  General  will  observe,  is  by  no 
means  founded  on  the  impracticability  of  crossing 
with  troops,  because  I  am  convinced  that  it  can  be 
done ;  but  it  is  founded  upon  the  danger  that  the 
troops  will  starve  if  they  do  not  return  immediately, 
*'  and  upon  the  inutility  of  the  measure  if  they  do. 

It  may  be  imagined  that  (supposing  the  Mamelukes 
to  be  wavering)  if  an  attempt  is  not  made  to  cross  the 
desert,  the  advantage  of  their  co-operation  will  be 
lost.  Upon  this  point  I  observe,  that  a  knowledge 
of  our  strength  (not  of  our  weakness)  will  induce  them 
^'  to  come  forward,  and  it  might  be  expected  that  the 
**  sight  of  our  weakness,  occasioned  by  our  march  over 
''  the  desert  without  concert  with  them,  might  induce 
them  to  take  advantage  of  it  and  to  join  the  French. 
**  But  those  who  will  urge  this  consideration  must 
suppose  it  possible  that  the  Mamelukes  can  be 
*'  neutral  for  a  moment ;   and  this,  their  history  from 


a 
a 
a 

C( 

it 
tc 

<i 

(( 
it 
a 
i( 


a 


a 


268  EXPEDITION   FROM   INDIA 


the  beginning  of  time,  particularly  since  the  French 
invasion,  will  show  to  be  impossible. 

I  come  now  to  consider  the  propriety  and  mode  of 
crossing  the  desert,  supposing  that  the  Mamelukes 
*'  should  be  inclined  to  shake  off  the  French  yoke  and  to 
'*  co-operate  with  us.  The  first  point  for  the  General 
'*  to  ascertain  is  their  sincerity  in  the  cause,  of  which, 
^'  as  I  have  above  stated,  there  is  every  probability.  As 
"  soon  as  he  will  have  ascertained  this,  it  will  be 
*'  necessary  that  he  should  make  arrangements  with 
them  for  posting  a  supply  of  water  on  that  part  of 
the  desert  where  it  is  most  wanted,  and  for  having  a 
supply  of  provisions  ready  on  the  Nile ;  and  he  might 
cross  over  a  part  of  his  army  immediately.  The  first 
object  on  his  arrival  on  the  Nile  should  be  to  estab- 
lish a  post  at  Keneh,  and,  if  possible,  another  in  the 
desert  between  that  place  and  Kosseir,  in  order  to 


(( 

(( 
tt 
tt 
(( 

et 
(( 

"  insure  his  communications  between  the  sea  and  the 
**  Nile.  At  Keneh  he  should  make  the  depot  of  his 
''  stores,  &c.,  which  might  be  brought  across  the  desert 
"  by  degrees,  and  then  he  might  commence  his 
*'  operations  against  the  enemy. 

"  In  the  consideration  of  the  question  regarding  the 
"  crossing  of  the  desert  I  have  omitted  to  mention  the 
*'  interruption  which  may  be  given  to  that  operation  by 
"  the  enemy,  because  it  is  entirely  distinct  from  the 
"  difficulties  which  are  peculiar  to  the  operation  itself. 
"  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  if  the  Mamelukes  are  not 
*'  on  our  side,  and  if  they  should  not  have  driven  out 
of  Upper  Egypt  the  small  French  force  supposed  to 
be  in  that  country  before  the  operation  is  attempted, 
that  force,  however  small,  will  greatly  increase  the 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  269 

*^  distress  of  the  British  troops  who  will  cross  the  desert. 
^'  I  have  not  adverted  to  the  supply  of  arms  and 
'*  ammunition  to  be  given  to  the  natives.  As  long 
'^  as  their  co-operation  is  doubtful  these  supplies  ought 
''  to  be  withheld  but  promised;  when  they  will  have 
'*  shown  their  sincerity  in  our  cause,  the  arms  may  be 
"  given  to  almost  any  extent.'* 

On  the  third  day  after  the  receipt  of  this  memorandum, 
viz.,  the  30th  June,  General  Baird  quitted  Kosseir.  He 
had  calculated  that  it  would  take  him  ten  days  to 
concentrate  all  his  force  at  Keneh.  Thence,  should 
he  be  able  to  collect  a  sufficient  number  of  boats,  it 
might  be  possible  for  him  to  reach  Cairo  in  twenty  days. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  land  march  from  Keneh  to  Cairo 
would  take,  he  believed,  thirty-five  days. 

The  difficulties  of  the  march,  owing  to  the  want  of 
water,  the  heat,  and  the  trying  character  of  the  soil,  and 
the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  communication,  were  so  great 
that  General  Baird,  lion-hearted  as  he  was,  despaired, 
whilst  waiting  at  Keneh  for  orders,  of  being  able  to 
effect  anything  useful  to  the  public  service.  For  many 
days  he  was  without  intelligence  of,  and  received  no 
orders  from.  General  Hutchinson.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, and  dreading  lest  the  breaking  out  of  the 
monsoon  might  interfere  with  his  return  to  India,  he, 
on  the  9th  July,  addressed  from  Keneh  to  H.R.H.  the 
Duke  of  York,  a  letter  expressive  of  his  anxiety  to  know 
whether  his  continuance  in  Egypt  was  likely  to  be 
productive  of  any  beneficial  results  to  the  service. 

Just  at  this  moment  intelligence  reached  General 
Baird,  by  a  circuitous  route,  that  General  Belliard,  the 
French  Governor  of   Cairo,  had   entered  into  a  treaty 


270  EXPEDITION   FROM   INDIA 

with  General  Hutchinson.  This  information  convinced 
General  Baird  that  there  could  be  no  longer  any 
necessity  for  his  further  advance,  still  less  for  bringing 
up  more  troops.  Penetrated  by  this  idea,  he  directed 
preparations  to  be  made  for  the  return  of  the  force  then 
at  Keneh  to  Kosseir,  and  for  its  embarkation  at  the 
latter  place. 

But  a  few  days  latter  these  views  were  destined  to  be 
altered.  About  the  22nd  July  General  Baird  received 
from  General  Hutchinson  a  letter,  dated  the  10th  idem, 
in  which  that  officer,  after  alluding  to  the  want  of 
information  under  which  he  had  been  labouring  as  to 
the  strength  and  destination  of  the  Indian  force,  stated 
that  the  French  Commander-in-Chief,  General  Menou, 
had  refused  to  receive  the  officer  sent  by  General 
Belliard  to  lay  before  him  the  capitulation  of  Cairo,  and 
that  it  was  probable  that  he  would  defend  himself  with 
great  obstinacy  and  give  a  great  deal  of  trouble ;  that  he 
should  be  extremely  glad,  therefore,  to  have  General 
Baird's  assistance  and  co-operation. 
■  As  to  the  mode  of  his  advance  and  the  means  he 
should  employ  to  effect  it,  Genera^^  Hutchinson  thus 
expressed  himself:  "1  am  thoroughly  aware  that  from 
the  season,  and  from  the  inundation,  the  march  by  land 
will  be  impracticable.  You  must  do  all  you  can  to 
collect  boats,  but  whether  you  should  use  force  or  not 
is  entirely  out  of  the  question,  beeause,  for  the  last 
thousand  years  force  has  been  the  only  law  in  this 
country,  and  the  inhabitants  are  so  little  used  to  think 
for  themselves  that  they  are  at  a  great  loss  how  to  act 
when  it  is  not  adopted  against  them.'* 
He  added,  **  I  wish  you  to  advance  as  soon  as  you 


TO   EGYPT,    1801.  271 

*'  conveniently  can  without  pressing  or  fatiguing  your 
^^  troops;  you  may  march  by  detachments,  and  let 
''  them  be  ever  so  small  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in 
*'  making  your  rendezvous  at  Gizeh  which  I  have 
**  occupied  entirely  for  your  convenience.  You  have 
'*  only  to  intimate  your  wishes  to  Colonel  Stewart  '* 
(Commandant  of  Gizeh)  *'  and  everything  will  be 
**  procured  for  you  that  the  country  affords." 

With  respect  to  his  own  movements  General 
Hutchinson  stated  that  his  army  had  marched  on  the 
9th  and  would  arrive  at  Rosetta  about  the  29th.  Thence 
he  intended  to  proceed  without  loss  of  time  to  besiege 
Alexandria. 

On  receiving  this  letter  General  Baird  lost  no  time 
in  ordering  all  the  troops  up  from  Kosseir.  Amongst 
those  who  responded  to  his  call  were  four  companies  of 
the  61st  Regiment,  two  of  the  80th,  the  Horse  Artillery 
from  Bengal,  and  the  Artillery  and  Pioneers  from 
Madras, — recently  arrived  at  Kosseir.  I  may  mention 
that  Colonel  Champagne  and  the  provision  ships  had 
not  even  then  arrived ;  and  that  the  Susannah,  the  ship 
in  which  Colonel  Arthur  Wellesley  was  to  have  sailed, 
was  lost  on  her  passage  !  Never  certainly  was  an 
attack  of  fever  more  opportune  than  that  which  pre- 
vented the  future  conqueror  of  Napoleon  from  taking 
part  in  this  expedition. 

On  the  24th  July  General  Baird  despatched  Colonel 
Quarrill  with  the  10th  Regiment  to  Girgeh  with  instruc- 
tions to  enquire,  on  his  arrival  there,  into  the  state  of 
the  roads  and  of  the  inundations ;  he  was  further 
directed,  that  if  he  should  find  he  could  with  safety 
proceed  to  Siout  or  to  any  town  capable  of  furnishing 


272  EXPEDITION    FBOM   INDIA 

adequate  supplies  for  his  troops,  to  inarch  thither,  and 
thence  proceed  in  a  similar  manner  as  rapidly  as  he 
could  towards  Cairo,  taking  care  never  to  expose  himself 
to  the  chance  of  being  overtaken  by  the  flooding  of  the 
Nile  at  any  considerable  distance  from  a  large  town. 

Colonel  Quarrill  was  farther  instructed,  if  he  should 
find  the  roads  impassable,  to  select  some  high  ground, 
and  wait  the  arrival  of  the  river  fleet  with  the  General. 

Having  sent  oflf  Colonel  Quarrill,  General  Baird 
proceeded  to  impress  or  otherwise  procure  boats.  This 
was  an  easy  task,  and  it  was  soon  ascertained  that  the 
supply  would  exceed  the  demand.  These  boats  were  of 
three  sizes.  One  of  the  largest  size  was  capable  of 
carrying  150  men,  three  field  officers,  a  proportion  of 
officers  junior  to  that  rank,  and  their  servants ;  a 
medium-sized  boat  would  contain  120  men ;  and  a 
small  boat  thirty-five.  It  is  stated  that  the  88th 
Regiment,  consisting  of  590  men  and  officers,  with 
eight  horses,  took  up  seven  boats  of  the  difierent  sizes 
above  enumerated. 

Having  made  all  his  preparations  General  Baird, 
appointing  Colonel  Murray  to  the  command  of  the 
troops  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  instructing  him  to  remain 
at  Keneh  until  the  rear  of  the  army  should  have  come 
up  and  been  sent  on  to  Gizeh,  embarked  for  that  place 
on  the  31st  July. 

Gizeh  was  reached  on  the  8th  August.  After  having 
arranged  for  the  comfort  of  his  troops  the  General,  on 
the  16th,  shifted  his  quarters  to  Rhoda,  a  little  island, 
a  mile  and  three-quarters  long  and  one  third  of  a  mile 
broad  situated  between  Gizeh  and  Cairo,  and  two  miles 
from  the  latter.     On  the  27th  having  left  a  force  under 


TO  EGYPT,   1801.  27.3 

Colonel  Eamsay  to  garrison  Gizeh,  he  concentrated  all 
his  troops  in  the  island. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  notice  the  effect 
which  the  sight  of  the  Anglo  Indian  army  produced 
upon  the  Egyptians  and  Turks.  The  following  passage 
extracted  from  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register  for  1802 
may  be  accepted  as  giving  an  impartial  view  on  the 
subject.  ''  Whilst  at  Ehoda/'  writes  the  chronicler 
the  Indian  Army  had  attracted  much  surprise  and 
admiration.  The  Turks  were  astonished  at  the  novel 
spectacle  of  men  of  colour  being  so  well  disciplined 
and  trained.  Indeed  the  general  magnificence  of  the 
establishment  of  the  Indian  army  was  so  different 
from  what  they  had  been  accustomed  to  see  in 
General  Hutchinson's  that  the  contrast  could  not 
fail  of  being  striking.  But  General  Baird  proved 
to  them  also  that  his  troops  were  not  enfeebled  or 
himself  rendered  inactive,  by  these  superior  comforts. 
Every  morning  at  day-light  he  manoeuvred  his  army 
for  several  hours,  and  in  the  evening  again  formed 
his  parade.  Never  were  finer  men  seen  than  those 
which  composed  this  force,  and  no  soldiers  could 
possibly  be  in  higher  order.'' 
On  the  night  of  the  27th  August  the  right  wing  of 
the  army  began  to  move  in  the  direction  of  Alexandria 
and,  with  General  Baird  at  its  head,  reached  Eosetta  on 
the  30th.  A  detachment  under  Colonel  Lloyd  was 
about  the  same  time  sent  to  garrison  Damietta,  but  in 
consequence  of  a  difference  of  opinion  with  the  Grand 
Vizier,  commanding  the  Turkish  army,  it  was  with- 
drawn, the  European  portion  of  it  being  sent  to  Eosetta, 
and  the  native  (four  companies  Bombay  N.  I.)  to  Gizeh. 

18 


274  EXPEDITION   FROM   INDIA 

On  arriving  at  Kosetta  General  Baird  and  his 
force  hoped  to  be  able  to  take  part  in  the  siege  of 
Alexandria,  but  their  ardour  was  damped  by  the  receipt 
of  a  letter  from  General  Hutchinson,  announcing  that 
the  French  had  sent  a  flag  of  truce  to  him  to  treat  for 
a  surrender.  General  Baird  was  ordered  to  halt  where 
he  was. 

On  the  1st  September  General  Baird  called  upon 
General  Hutchinson  in  his  tent.  -He  learned  from  him 
that  the  capitulation  had  been  actually  signed  and  that 
the  British  troops  were  to  take  possession  of  the 
outworks  of  Alexandria  the  following  morning. 

The  Anglo-Indian  army  then  disembarked  and  en- 
camped at  Aboumandur,  not  far  from  Rosetta. 

For  some  months  the  Indian  army  remained 
encamped  near  Eosetta  without  orders  either  from 
England  or  from  India.  Meanwhile  a  difficulty 
arose.  General  Hutchinson  had  resolved  to  proceed 
to  England,  and  the  British  Government  had  replaced 
him  by  Lord  Cavan.  This  officer  declined  to  look  upon 
General  Baird  as  commanding  a  separate  force  distinct 
from  the  British  army,  but  desired  to  place  him  and  his 
troops  in  the  same  alignment,  as  it  were,  as  the  troops 
who  had  come  direct  from  England.  To  this  General 
Baird  objected,  assigning  as  one  great  obstacle  to  the 
success  of  such  an  arrangement  the  fact  that  the  troops 
under  his  orders  received  Indian  rates  of  pay,  and  that 
the  money  he  had  to  dispose  of  as  commanding  the 
Indian  expedition  was  the  property,  not  of  the  Crown, 
but  of  the  East  India  Company.  General  Hutchinson 
appeared  to  see  great  force  in  these  objections  ;  but  he 
did  not  the  less,  on  his  departure,  the  6th  November, 


TO  EGYPT,   1801.  275 

make  over  command  of  the  whole  army,  including  the 
Anglo-Indian  force,  to  Lord  Cavan. 

Shortly  after  this  intelligence  arrived  of  the  signing 
of  the  preliminaries  of  peace  between  France  and 
England,  and,  at  nearly  the  same  time.  General  Baird 
received  from  Marquess  Wellesley  a  despatch,  in 
which,  whilst  expressing  full  approval  of  his  conduct, 
he  intimated  a  wish  that  when  the  services  of  the 
army  should  be  no  longer  required  in  Egypt,  General 
Baird  should  return  with  his  troops,  or  at  least  with 
such  portion  of  them  as  it  might  not  be  necessary  to 
leave  in  Egypt,  to  the  nearest  port  in  India. 

On  the  30th  April,  1802,  despatches  were  received 
from  England  directing  that  the  native  troops,  and  a 
portion  of  the  European  troops  on  the  Indian  estab- 
lishment serving  in  Egypt,  should  return  at  once  to 
India  by  sea  from  Suez. 

General  Baird  at  once  made  the  necessary  preparations 
for  evacuating  the  country.  He  ordered  parties  to  be  sent 
from  Gizeh,  to  be  stationed  along  the  desert,  in  order  to 
dig  for  water.  He  himself  left  Alexandria  for  Gizeh  on 
the  7th  May,  and  arrived  at  that  place  on  the  11th.  He 
set  out  thence,  after  an  interview  with  the  Pasha,  at  the 
head  of  his  troops,  for  Suez,  which  place  he  reached  on 
the  25th.  The  troops  crossed  the  desert  in  successive 
divisions,  in  five  easy  marches  each,  without  experiencing 
much  inconvenience,  and  with  the  loss  of  only  three 
Europeans. 

On  the  5th  June,  General  Baird  and  his  army  left 
Suez.  The  ship  on  which  he  himself  was  on  board, 
H.M.S.  Victor  J  reached  Madras  the  6th  July,  and 
Calcutta  the  31st  idem.     On  that  day  the  Governor- 

18  A 


276         EXPEDITION    FROM    INDIA    TO    EGYPT,    1801. 

General  published  a  congratulatory  General  Order,  in 
which  he  made  special  allusion  to  the  terms  in  which 
Lord  Cavan  had  written  regarding  the  Anglo-Indian 
force.  As  the  language  used  was  the  result  of  personal 
experience  during  a  considerable  time,  of  a  force  serving 
under  his  own  orders,  I  propose  here  to  reproduce  it. 

Lord  Cavan,  alluding  to  the  Anglo-Indian  force, 
wrote  : — '^  Their  excellent  discipline  and  obedience  and 
their  patience  under  great  fatigue  and  hardship,  have 
been  equalled  by  their  exemplary  conduct  in  the 
correct  and  regular  discharge  of  every  duty  of  soldiers ; 
and,  though  they  may  lament  that  circumstances 
rendered  it  impossible  for  them  to  have  taken  part  in 
the  brilliant  actions  of  this  country  during  the  last 
campaign,  it  must  be  a  satisfaction  for  them  to  know 
that  their  services  in  Egypt  have  been  as  important, 
and  as  essential  to  their  country,  as  those  of  their 
brother  soldiers  that  gained  such  distinguished  vic- 
tories in  it." 

I  do  not  think  I  can  better  conclude  than  by  this 
testimony  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of 
Egypt  to  the  character  and  conduct  of  his  two  Indian 
Brigades  this  short  narrative  of  the  Anglo-Indian 
expedition  to  Egypt  of  1801. 


INDEX. 


ABE 

ABERCROMBY,  General,  is 
made  prisoner  in  the  Ceylon, 
141 ;  which  is  recaptured,  142  ; 
proceeds  to  Rodriguez,  144 ; 
sails  to  attack  the  Isle  of  France, 
145 ;  disembarks  his  troops, 
147  ;  easy  success  of,  149  ; 
manoeuvres  to  dislodge  Decaen, 
151 ;  succeeds,  152  ;  receives 
offers  to  treat,  153 ;  captures 
the  island,  154 ;  reasons  of,  for 
letting  free  the  French  soldiers, 
154,  note 

Africaine,  The,  is  captured  by  the 
French,  140  ;  recaptured,  141 

Ali  Jah,  rebels  against  his  father, 
243  ;  commits  suicide,  243 

Alwar,  Raja  of,  interview  of,  with 
de  Boigne,  182 

Amiens,  treaty  of,  puts  an  end  to 
hostilities  in  the  Indian  seas,  94 

Aymar,  Monsieur  d',  arrives  at 
Point  de  G  alle  with  the  advanced 
squadron  of  the  fleet  escorting 
de  Bussy,  43 


BAIRD,  Major- General  David,  is 
ordered  to  assume  command 
of  a  force  to  capture  Batavia, 
253  ;  receives  fresh  instructions 


BEN 

diverting  the  force  to  Egypt, 
255  ;  reaches  Jedda,  257  ;  sails 
for  Kosseir,  258  ;  opens  commu- 
nications with  General  Hutch- 
inson, 260 ;  prepares  for  a  for- 
ward movement,  261 ;  careful 
preparations  made  by,  262-4 ; 
correspondence  of,  with  Colonel 
Wellesley,  264, 265 ;  moves  up  his 
entire  force,  271 ;  occupies  the 
island  of  Rhoda  on  the  Nile,  272 ; 
advances  to  Rosetta,  273  ;  learns 
that  peace  is  concluded,  274  ; 
marches  across  the  desert  and 
embarks  at  Suez,  275 

Basalat  Jung,  disagreement  of, 
with  his  brother  the  Nizam, 
239,  240 

Battalions  of  Sindia,  organization 
of  the,  193 ;  personnel  of  the, 
194 

Bellecombe,  Monsieur,  surrenders 
Pondichery,  4 

Benoit  de  Boigne,  early  history  of, 
159 ;  enters  the  service  of  Russia, 
160  ;  is  taken  prisoner,  released, 
and  proceeds  to  Egypt,  161 ; 
enters  the  military  service  of 
the  East  India  Company,  162  ; 
quits  it  and  proceeds  to  Laldi- 
nao,  163 ;  resolves  to  enter  the 
service  of  a  native  prince,  164 ; 


278 


INDEX. 


BEB 

DGgotiates  with  various  princes, 
165 ;  applies  to  Warren  Hastings 
to  sanction  his  proceedings,  166 ; 
offers  his  services  to  Sindia,  167 ; 
they  are  accepted,  168 ;  early 
successes  of,  169  ;  splendid  ser- 
vice rendered  by,  170 ;  resigns 
Sindia's  service,  171  ;  re-enters 
it,  172  ;  reorganizes  the  force, 
173 ;  gains  a  great  victory  at 
Patau,  174 ;  another  at  Mlrta, 
176  ;  is  authorised  largely  to 
increase  his  force,  176 ;  emolu- 
ments  of,  177  ;  marches  against 
Tfikajl  Holkar,  179  ;  gains  the 
battle  of  Lakhairi,  180,  181; 
adventures  of,  at  Alwar,  182 ; 
resigns  Sindia's  service,  183 ; 
summary  of  life  of,  in  Europe, 
184 ;  remarks  on  the  character 
of,  184-190 

Bcrnadotte,  is  taken  prisoner  at 
Kadahjr,  74  note 

Bertie,  Admiral,  commands  a 
squadron  in  the  Indian  seas, 
143,  144 

Bickerton,  Sir  Robert,  lands  troops 
at  Madras  and  sails  for  Bombay, 
61 

Boadicea,  The,  captures  the  Afri- 
caine,  141,  the  Ceylon  and  the 
Venus,  142 

Boisseaux,  Major  de,  urges  Bussy 
to  attack  the  English,  65 

"  Boldness  is  Prudence,"  83,  85, 
87,  125,  218 

Bourbon,  House  of,  remarks  on 
the  policy  of  the,  75,  76 

Bourbon,  Isle  of,  state  of,  after  the 
revolution,  81,  82 ;  result  of 
attack  on,  by  the  English,  118- 
123 ;  is  again  attacked,  125 ; 
surrenders,  129 

Bourquin,  Major,  commands  one 
of  Sindia's  brigades,  191 ;  is  sent 
against  George  Thomas,  208 ; 
is  repulsed,  209  ;  is  superseded 
but  re-employed,  210 ;  sketch  of 
previous  career  of,  219  ;   fights 


CAV 

against    Lord    Lake   at   Delhi, 
220,  221 

Bouvet,  Monsieur,  is  deprived  of 
his  command  by  Suffren,  39 

Braithwaite,  Colonel,  is  beaten  by 
Tippfi  Sahib,  9 

Brigades  of  Sindia,  organization 
of,  191-193 ;  personnel  of,  194 

Bruslys,  General  des,  commands  at 
Bourbon,  119;  faulty  manoeuvre 
of,  122;  commits  suicide,  122 
and  note 

Bussy,  Marquis  de,  is  ordered  to 
India,  18;  his  failing  energies, 
18  and  note ;  disastrous  voyage 
of,  from  Cadiz,  43  ;  his  opinion 
regarding  occupation  of  Trinco- 
mali,  45  ;  arrives  with  his  army 
at  Porto  Novo,  62 ;  deterioration 
of  the  character  of,  64 ;  falls  back 
within  Kadalfir,  64 ;  neglects  his 
favourable  chances,  65 ;  is  drive 
into   Kadalfir,    66  ;     applies    to 
Suffren  for  aid,  67 ;  loses  golde 
moments,   73  ;    orders   a  sortie 
but  is  repulsed,  73,  74  ;  agrees 
to  a  suspension  of  arms,  74 


CAMPBELL,  Dr.  gives  h 
reasons  for  the  conduct  of 
the  French  at  Porto  Praya,  14, 
note  ;  refutation  of  opinion  of, 
on  Commodore  Johnstone's 
action,  17,  note ;  vagueness  of 
assertions  of,  22,  note 

Campbell,  Lieut.-Colonel,  com- 
mands the  advance  in  the  attack 
Bourbon,  125 

Cardaillac,  Monsieur  de,  com- 
mands the  Artesien,  11 ;  sug- 
gests to  Suffren  to  put  into 
Porto  Praya,  13 ;  signals 
'*  enemies  in  sight,"  13  ;  is  shot 
dead,  14 

Captains,  French,  bad  conduct  of 
certain,  24,  26,  38,  55 

Cavan,  General  Lord,  assumes 
command  of  the  British  troops 


INDEX. 


279 


CHA 

in  Egypt,  274;  difficulties  of, 
with  respect  to  the  union  of  the 
British  and  Indian  brigades, 
274 ;  testimony  of,  to  the  merits 
of  the  Indian  army,  276 

Chandernagor,  taken  by  the  Eng- 
lish, 4 

Cillart,  Monsieur  de,  is  placed 
under  arrest  by  Suffren,  39 

Commerce,  British,  enormous 
damage  caused  to,  by  priva- 
teering, 81,  note ;  96,  notes ;  107 

Consul,  First,  proposition  made 
to  the,  to  effect  the  destruction 
of  British  commerce,  95 

Coote,  Sii  Eyre,  brings  his  army 
into  a  fital  position,  7  ;  is  saved 
by  the  weakness  of  the  French 
Admira.,  8 ;  beats  Haidar  Ali, 
9 ;  offers  battle  to  Haidar  at 
Wandewash,  30,  31  ;  attempts 
Arni,  32 ;  is  foiled  but  yet 
baffles  Baidar,  32  ;  relieves  Vel- 
lor  and  attempts  Kadalur,  58  ; 
is  baffled  and  falls  back  on 
Madras,  59 

Coursou,  commands  a  privateer, 
107,  10^ 

Cramlington,  Mr.  account  of  cap- 
ture of,  by  the  French,  and 
subsequent  adventures  of,  108- 
112 


DAOLAT  RAO  SINDIA,  suc- 
ceeds Madhaji  Sindia,  183  ; 
joins  i\\i  Maratha  league  against 
the  Nizam,  196 ;  vacillating 
conduct  of,  200 ;  insults  the 
tried  adherents  of  his  prede- 
cessor, 201 ;  casts  away  the 
chance  of  realismg  the  dream  of 
Madhaji,  213  ;  his  eyes  opened 
too  late,  214 
Decaen,  General  Comte,  previous 
career  of,  131 ;  merits  of,  as 
governor  of  French  India,  132  ; 
sends  reinforcements  to  Duperre, 


EXP 

134  ;  blockades  Bourbon,  139 » 
forces  at  disposal  of,  to  meet 
English  attack,  146 ;  issues  a 
proclamation,  146,  147,  note ; 
measures  of,  to  check  the  Eng- 
lish, 149  ;  is  wounded,  160  ; 
continues  to  resist,  151 ;  posi- 
tion of,  forced,  152  ;  offers  to 
treat,  1 53  ;  surrenders  the  Isle 
of  France,  154 ;  stipulations  of 
surrender,  154 

Drugeon,  Colonel,  refuses  to  obey 
Bourquin,  219 

Duchemin  de  Chenneville,  ap- 
pointed to  command  a  French 
squadron,  6  ;  nominated  to  the 
command  of  the  land  forces,  19 ; 
character  of,  19  ;  takes  Kadaltir, 
29  ;  refuses  to  support  Haidar 
Ali,  30  ;  remarks  upon  the  con- 
duct of,  30,  31  ;  is  treated  with 
contempt  by  Haidar,  32,  33 ; 
dies,  57 

Dudrenec,  Chevalier,  commands  a 
portion  of  Holkar's  forces,  179  ; 
fights  at  Kardla,  197  ;  sketch  of 
the  career  of,  221-223 

Duperre,  Commodore,  returns  from 
a  cruise  in  the  Indian  waters, 
132,  133 ;  is  enticed  into  an 
ambush  but  succeeds  in  taking 
up  a  strong  position,  133  ;  skil- 
ful disposition  of,  to  meet  the 
English  attack,  135  ;  successful 
manoeuvre  of,  136  ;  completely 
defeats  the  English,  139;  the 
proudest  achievement  in  the  life 
of,  138 

Dutertre,  notice  of  the  prowess  of, 
106  :  his  success,  reverses,  and 
renewed  success,  107 


EXPEDITION,  against  the  Isle 
of  France,  how  composed, 
145 ;  reaches  its  destination, 
147;  succeeds,  148-154;  against 
Egypt,  how  composed,  258-260 


280 


INDEX. 


FAR 

FARQUHAR,  Mr.  appointed 
governor  of  Bourbon,  124 ; 
distributes  a  proclamation  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  Isle  of 
France,  131 

Filoze,  Michel,  career  of,  226 ; 
baseness  of,  227 

Filoze,  Fidele,  career  of,  227; 
suicide  of,  227,  228 

Five  Hundred,  Council  of  the, 
pronounces  a  decision  in  favor 
of  Surcouf,  90 

Fleet,  The  French,  detail  of  the, 
entrusted  to  Sufifren,  11  ;  com- 
position of,  in  the  Indian  seas, 
22,  23 ;  engages  the  English 
fleet,  23-26,  36-38,51-54;  detail 
of,  as  it  fought  the  English 
fleet,  70,  note ;  engages  English 
fleet,  71,  72 ;  causes  of  its 
demoralization,  81,  82 

Fleet,The  English,  composition  of, 
under  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  23  ; 
engages  the  French  fleet,  23-26, 
36-38,  51-54;  detail  of,  as  it 
•  fought  the  French  fleet,  70, 
notes ;  engages  French  fleet, 
71,72 

Forbin,  Monsieur  de,  is  placed 
under  arrest  by  Suffren,  39 

Forbin,  Comte  de,  remarkable 
memoirs  of,  80,  note 

Foulstone,  Lieutenant,  gallantry 
of,  126 

France,  throws  away  the  certainty 
of  gaining  Sauthern  India,  74-76 

France,  Isle  of.  State  of  the,  after 
the  revolution,  82,  83  ;  impor- 
tance of  the  situation  of,  to  the 
French,  115  ;  is  attacked  by  the 
English,  148 ;  is  surrendered, 
164 ;  remarks  on  the  services 
rendered  by,  to  the  mother 
country,  154-156 

Fraser,  Colonel,  effects  a  landing 
in  Bourbon,  126 ;  bold  and 
masterly  advance  of,  127 ;  beats 
the  enemy  and  forces  surrender 
of  the  capital,  128 


HES 


Fremont,  Colonel,  career  of,  ander 
Sindia,  194 

French  Contingent  of  Haidarabad, 
is  dismissed  on  the  req^uisition 
of  Marquess  Wellesley,  245-246 


GOHAD,  Rrya  of,  negotiates  with 
de  Boigne,  165 
Gopul  Rao  Bhao,  is  attacked  by 
Trikaji  Holkar,  179 


HAIDAR  ALI,  reasons  of  hatred 
of,  to  the  English,  4-8  ; 
defeats  Munro,  5 ;  seeks  an 
alliance  with  the  French,  5 ; 
outmanoeuvres  Sir  Eyre  Coote, 
7  ;  is  thwarted  by  th3  French 
Admiral,  8  ;  fights  t\vo  battles 
with  Coote,  9  ;  incites  3uchemin 
to  join  him  in  attacking,  29  ; 
disgust  of,  at  Duchemin's  be- 
haviour, 31 ;  saves  Ami,  32  ; 
marks  his  sense  of  Euchemin's 
conduct,  32,  note;  entices  the 
English  into  an  ambuscade,  33 ; 
enthusiasm  of,  regardii:)g  Suffren, 
34  ;  receives  a  state  risit  from 
Suffren,  42  ;  remark  of,  on  that 
occasion,  43 ;  threatens  Madras, 
59  ;  dies,  61 

Hamelin,  Captain,  takes  three 
frigates  to  reinforce  Duperre, 
134 ;  lineage  of,  154,  note ; 
arrives  opportunely  off  Grand 
Port  and  completes  Duperre's 
victory,  138  ;  succumbs  to  the 
English,  142 ;  treatment  of,  by 
Napoleon,  142,  note 

Hastings,  Warren,  receives  de 
Boigne  kindly,  163  ;  reply  of,  to 
de  Boigne's  application  to  enter 
the  service  of  a  native  prince, 
166 

Hessing,  John,  sketch  of  the  career 
of,  223 

Hessing,  George,  sketch  of  the 
career   of,   224 ;    is   beaten  by 


INDEX. 


281 


HUT 

Holkar,  225  ;  accepts  Marquess 
Wellesley's  conditions,  226 

Hutchinson,  General  Hely,  opens 
a  communication  with  General 
Baird,  260-261;  orders  up 
Baird's  forces,  270 ;  receives 
the  surrender  of  the  French 
force,  271 

Hughes,  Sir  Edward,  commands 
tlie  English  fleet  in  the  Madras 
Roads,  21 ;  makes  for  the 
French  transports,  21  ;  hoves 
too  and  prepares  for  battle,  22  ; 
engages  Sufifren,  23,  24 ;  but 
without  results,  2-4 ;  again 
engages  Suffren,  25  ;  with  a 
similar  result,  26 ;  engages  the 
French  fleet  off  Negapatam,  36  ; 
again  without  results,  36  ; 
keeps  the  sea  off  Negapatam, 
40 ;  bears  up  for  Madras,  41 ; 
consequences  of  prolonged 
stay  off  Negapatam,  ^  47 ; 
awakens  from  his  dream  and 
finds  Trincomali  lost,  48;  en- 
gages the  French  fleet,  51-54 ; 
with  indecisive  result,  54,  55  ; 
takes  his  fleet  round  to  Bombay, 
60  ;  perils  of  the  voyage,  61  : 
takes  up  a  strong  positon  off 
Porto  Novo,  67 ;  is  out 
manoeuvred  by  Suffren,  68 ; 
determines  to  accept  the  battle 
offered  by  Suffren,  70 ;  fights 
and  bears  up  for  Madras,  71, 
72 


INDIA,      Argument      why,     fell 
necessarily  under  British  Rule, 
246-251 
Iphigenia,   The,   captured  by  the 

French,  137 
Iphigeniej   L'    Extraordinary    en- 
counter of,  with  the  Trincomali, 
108 


LAN 

TESWANT  RAO  HOLKAR,  de- 
J  feats  Sindia's  Army,  212 ;  dis- 
misses Dudrenec,  222 ;  great 
military  talents  of,  224 ;  brilliant 
manoeuvres  of,  225 
Johnstone,  Commodore,  takes  an 
English  squadron  to  the  Cape, 
13 ;  puts  into  Porto  Pray  a,  13 ; 
is  surprised  by  Suffren,  14 ; 
offers  a  gallant  and  successful 
resistance,  15,  16 ;  declines  to 
follow  up  the  repulse  of  the 
enemy,  17  and  note 


KADALt^R,  taken  by  the  French, 
29;  description  of  the  defences 
of,  64 ;  engagements  before, 
64-74 

Kanund,  Battle  of,  178. 

Keating,  Colonel,  is  sent  with  an 
expedition  against  Rodriguez, 
116 ;  again  against  Bourbon, 
117 ;  disembarks  and  defeats 
the  French,  118-122;  sails 
away  with  his  prizes,  123 ; 
receives  reinforcements,  and 
proceeds  again  against  Bourbon, 
12  4  j  ^'nxiety  caused  to,  by  the 
^yiH»  off  the  island,  125  ; 
manoeuvres  of,  126  ;  receives  the 
surrender  of  the  island,  129 


LAKE,  Lord,  attacks  and  cap- 
tures Aligarh,  218 ;  beats 
Bourquin  at  Delhi,  220,  221 

Lakhairi,  Battle  of,  180,  181  ^ 

Lakhwa  Dada,  reinforces  Gopal 
Rao  Bhao  with  Sindia's  cavalry, 
179 ;  revolts  against  Doalat  Rao, 
201 ;  is  beaten  by  Perron,  and 
dies,  202 

Lally,  the  younger,  loses  a  gun  at 
Arni,  32 ;  serves  under  the 
Nizam,  240 

Lambert,  Captain,  is  forced  to  sur- 
render to  the  French,  138 

Landelle,  Monsieur  de  la,  is  shipped 


282 


INDEX. 


LEM 

to  the  islands  for  misconduct, 
55 

Lem^me,  Monsieur,  early  career 
of,  101 ;  successful  cruise  of,  in 
the  Indian  seas,  102-104 ;  is  taken 
prisoner,  104;  is  released  and 
becomes  a  merchant,  104 ;  again 
commands  a  ship  and  is  taken 
prisoner,  105  ;  dies,  106  ;  relief 
of  British  merchants  at  his 
death,  106 

Lesteneau,  Monsieur,  achievements 
of,  170-3 

Louis  XVI.,  blindness  of  the 
Ministers  of,  5 


MACLEOD,  Lieutenant-Colonel, 
commands  one  of  the  attack- 
ing parties  on  Bourbon,  125 

Madhaji  Sindia  attacks  the  Rand 
of  Gohad,  164;  besieges  Gwaliar 
165 ;  enlists  de  Boigne,  168 ; 
is  nominated  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  Moghol  armies,  169  ; 
battles  of,  with  the  Patans  and 
Rajputs,  170;  probable  reasons 
of,  for  accepting  the  resignation 
of  de  Boigne,  171 ;  reasons  of, 
for  re-engaging  him,  172 ; 
arrangements  made  by,  for  the 
payment  of  de  Boigne's  troops, 
174 ;  "  the  dream  of  his  life," 
176;  Tippu's  war  with  the 
English,  a  blow  to  the  hopes  of, 
177 ,  arrives  at  Puna,  178 , 
power  of,  consolidated  in 
Hindostan,  182  ;  death  of,  183. 

Madras,  is  in  great  danger  from 
various  causes,  59 

Madoc,  Sketch  of  the  career  of, 
186,  187 

Magicienne,  The,  destroyed  by 
the  French,  137 

Malartic,  Monsieur  de,  declines  to 
give  Surcouf  a  letter  of  marque, 
84 ;  confiscates  prizes  taken  by 
Surcouf,  90 


OFF 

Mallerouse,  career  of,  in  command 
of  a  privateer,  108 

Maurville,  Monsieur  de,  is  placed 
under  arrest  by  Sufifren,  39 

Memoirs  of  the  late  war  in  India, 
the  author  of  the,  records  his 
opinion  of  the  action  of 
Chevalier  d'Orves,  9  and  note 

Minto,  Lord,  reasons  which  im- 
pelled, gradually  to  adopt  Lord 
Wellesley's  policy,  116  ;  further 
steps  of,  in  the  same  direction, 
124-156 

Mir  Kiisim,  employs  Sombre,  230 ; 
ill  treatment  of,  by  the  English, 
231  ;  subsequent  career,  and 
ruin  of,  231-234 


VTAPOLfeON,  treatment  accorded 

IN  by,  to  Captain  Hamelin,  after 
the  loss  of  a  French  ship  by 
the  latter,  142,  note 

Navy,  remarks  on  the  state  of  the 
French,  after  the  revolution,  79, 
80,  and  note 

Nereide,  The,  is  captured  by  the 
French,  137 

Nizam  Ali  Khan,  The  Nizam,  deter- 
mines to  drive  the  Maratha's 
fi-om  Puna,  195;  marches 
against  them,  196 ;  fights  the 
battle  of  Kardla,  197 ;  dastardly 
conduct  of,  198;  concludes 
peace,  198;  engagements  of, 
regarding  the  enlistment  of 
foreigners,  239  ;  takes  a  French 
corps  into  his  service,  240  ;  dis- 
content of,  with  the  English, 
242 ;  action  of,  on  his  son's 
rebellion,  245  ;  is  forced  by 
Marquess  Wellesley  to  dismiss 
the  French  contingent,  244-246 


OFFELIZE,  Colonel  d',  succeeds 
Duchemin  in  command  of  the 
French  force,  acting  with  Haidar, 
57 ;  falls  back  towards  Kadalur, 


INDEX. 


283 


OBV 

63  ;  is  prevented  by  Bussy  from 
riefending  Permacol,  64 ;  dis- 
plays skill  and  energy,  but  is 
rash,  65;  urges  Bussy  to  at- 
tack, 73 
Orves,  The  Chevalier  d',  commands 
the  French  fleet  off  the  islands, 
6  ;  sails  for  India,  6 ;  gains  a 
decisive  position  off  the  Cora- 
mandel  coast  7 ;  renounces  it 
and  sails  for  the  islands,  8 ; 
overrules  Suffren,  19 ;  dies,  20 


PASSE,  ISLE  DE  LA,  is  cap- 
tured by  the  English,  130; 
re-captured  by  the  French,  138. 

Pedrons,  Colonel,  beats  George 
Thomas,  210 ;  sketch  of  the 
career  of,  217  ;  defends  Aligarh 
against  Lord  Lake,  218  ;  fails 
and  is  taken  prisoner,  219 

Percy,  Earl,  meets  and  befriends  de 
Boigne,  162 

Perron,  Monsieur,  is  sent  to  attack 
Kaniind,  178 ;  early  career  of, 
J  96  ;  enters  Sindia's  service, 
195;  receives  an  independent 
command,  195 ;  joins  the 
Peshwa  with  ten  battalions,  196 ; 
gains  the  battle  of  Kardla,  1 97, 
198,  governs  North  West 
Hindostan  for  Sindia,  199 ; 
account  of  the  mode  of  admin- 
istration of,  200;  crushes  the 
revolt  of  Lakhwa  Dada, 
202 ;  turns  his  attention  to 
George  Thomas,  202 ;  sends 
him  a  summons,  206 ;  negotiates 
with  him,  209  ;  detaches  a  force 
against  him,  208 ;  head  of, 
turned  by  prosperity,  211; 
makes  his  peace  with  Daolat 
Rao,  212;  is  deterred  by  self- 
interest  from  aiding  Daolat  Rao 
at  a  critical  period  of  Maratha 
fortunes,  213;  acts  too  late,  214; 
fall  in  the  fortunes  of,  215  ; 
leaves  Sindia's  service,  216 


•       ROD 

Peshwa,  The,  is  appointed  Su- 
preme Deputy  of  the  Moghol 
Emperor,  169 ;  summons  his 
vassal  chieftains  to  repel  the 
attack  of  the  Nizam,  196 ; 
presses  Sindia  to  come  to  his 
aid,  212 

Pinaud,  Monsieur,  succeeds  Sur- 
couf  in  command  of  the  Clarisse, 
112;  captures  the  English  India- 
man  on  board  of  which  he  was 
at  the  time  a  prisoner,  113 

Piron,Monsieur,  succeeds  Raymond 
at  Haidarabad.  245 

Plumet,  Captain,  short  account  of, 
228 

Potier,  Monsieur,  sketch  of  the 
career  of,  108 

Privateering,  practical  results  of, 
81,  note  ;  107-157 

Pym,  Captain,  commands  H.M.S. 
Siriusj  133  ;  runs  her  aground, 
134 ;  gets  her  off,  and  being 
reinforced  attacks  Duperre,  134 ; 
total  defeat  of,  135-137 


RAYMOND,Monsieur,  commands 
a  portion  of  the  Nizam's 
army,  196  ;  gallant  conduct  of, 
at  Kardla,  197 ;  is  not  supported 
by  the  Nizam,  198  ;  early  career 
of,  238 ;  engages  under  the 
Nizam,  240;  mode  adopted  by, 
to  officer  native  corps,  241  ; 
suppresses  the  rebellion  of  Ali 
Jah,  243 ;  dies  at  a  critical 
period,  244;  veneration  in  which 
the  memory  of,  is  still  held,  245 

Renaud,  Jean  Marie,  commands  a 
small  French  squadron  off  the 
islands,  83  ;  fights  the  English 
squadron,  84 

Revenant,  The,  history  of,  98, 
note;  continued  career  of,  as 
Victor,  142,  and  notes 

Rodriguez,  Island  of,  situation  of, 
116  ;  captured  by  the  English, 
117 


284 


INDEX. 


ROW 


Rowley,  Captain,  re-captures 
VAfricaine,  141 ;  and  the  Ceylon^ 
142  ;  captures  the  VenuSj  142 


ST.  MICHAEL,  commandant, 
commands  at  St.  Paul,  in 
Bourbon,  ItiO ;  makes  a  gallant 
defence  against  the  English,  121 ; 
is  forced  to  succumb,  123 

St  Felix,  Monsieur  de,  is  shipped 
to  the  islands  by  Suflfren,  55 

Salvart,  Monsieur  Perrier  de, 
advises  Suffren  to  attack  the 
English  fleet,  21 

Seychelles,  The,  difficulties  of  the 
navigation  of,  85 

Sirius,  The,  destroyed  by  the 
French,  137 

Smith,  Lewis  Ferdinand,  note 
regarding,  194 ;  is  sent  to 
negotiate  with  George  Thomas, 
207 ;  is  ordered  to  besiege 
Georgegarh,  208  ;  his  own  ac- 
count of  the  expedition,  208, 
209 ;  again  negotiates  with 
Thomas,  i?10  ;  list  given  by,  of 
gallant  English  officers,  225 ; 
note ;  reasons  given  by,  for  the 
suicide  of  Filoze,  227,  228; 
description  given  by,  of  Perron's 
army,  229 

Sombre,  sketch  of,  230 ;  principle 
of  military  action  of,  231 ; 
massacre  at  Patna  by,  232-234  ; 
subsequent  career  of,  and  death, 
234,  235 

Souillac,  Viscomte  de,  opinion  of, 
of  D'Orves,  9  note ;  organises  a 
force  to  go  to  India,  18  ;  appoints 
Duchemin  to  command  it  19  ; 
supports  Suffren  in  his  refusal 
to  return  to  the  islands,  28 

Storms,  curious  circumstance  con- 
nected with  the  law  of,  61,  note 

Stuart,  General,  succeeds  Sir  Eyre 
Coote,  63 ;  follows  up  the  French 
towards  Kadalur,  63 ;  attacks 
Kadalur,    65 ;     gains .    an    ad- 


SUF 

vantageous  position,  66 ;  is 
hampered  by  the  want  of  a  bat 
tering  train,  73 ;  repulses  a 
sortie,  74  ;  is  saved  from  almost 
certain  desctruction  by  a  sus- 
pension of  arms,  74,  75 ;  and 
75,  note 

Squadron,  English,  off  the  Islands, 
82 ;  fights  a  French  squadron 
and  retires,  84 

Suffren,  Bailli  de,  is  appointed  to 
command  a  French  squadron  11 ; 
earlier  career  of,  11,  12  ;  sails 
for  the  islands,  13  ;  attacks  the 
English  fleet  in  Porto  Pray  a,  15  ; 
changes  of  the  position  of,  16  ; 
draws  off  and  pursues  his 
voyage,  17  ;  is  second  in  com- 
mand to  D'Orves,  18  ;  is  over- 
ruled by  D'Orves,  19  ;  succeeds 
to  the  command,  20  ;  takes  his 
fleet  to  the  Madras  coast,  20 ; 
descries  the  English  fleet,  20  ; 
reasons  of,  for  declining  to  attack 
it,  21;  sails  for  Porto  Novo,  21; 
flies  to  the  rescue  of  his  trans- 
ports, 22  ;  engages  the  English 
fleet,  23,  24 ;  indecisively,  24 
possibly  misses  a  chance,  24 
again  engages  the  English  fleet 
25  ;  and  again  indecisively,  26 
takes  his  fleet  to  Batacola,  26 
refuses  to  return  to  the  islands, 
27  ;  represses  the  desires  of  his 
captains,  28 ;  sails  for  the  Ne- 
gapatam,  34  ;  finds  the  English 
fleet  at  anchor  there,  35 ;  engages 
it,  36  ;  again  indecisively,  38  ; 
places  three  of  his  captains 
under  arrest,  39  ;  conceives  de  ■ 
signs  against  Trincomali,  40 ; 
describes  his  difficulties,  41  ; 
pays  a  state  visit  to  Haidar  Ali, 
42  ;  learns  the  arrival  at  Galle 
of  d'Aymar's  squadron,  44 ; 
sails  for  Batacola,  44  ;  receives 
reinforcements,  and  sails  for 
Trincomali,  45  ;  captures  Trin- 
comali,     46 ;        descries       the 


INDEX. 


285 


SUB 

English  fleet   off    the   harbour, 

48  ;  is  urged  to  rest  upon  his 
laurels,  48  ;    decides  to  attack, 

49  ;  reasons  and  hopes  of,  50 ; 
attacks,  51 ;  danger  of,  51 ; 
ship  of,  is  dismasted,  52 ;  expends 
all  his  ammunition,  53  ;  resolves 
to  blow  up  his  ship,  54  ;  is  saved 
by  a  change  of  wind,  54  ;  sends 
to  the  islands  his  recalcitrant 
captains,  55  ;  loses  two  of  his 
vessels,  56 ;  goes  to  winter  at 
Achin,  56  ;  sends  cruisers  into 
the  Bay  of  Bengal,  61  ;  returns 
to  Trincomali,  and  is  joined  by 
the  squadron  escorting  Bussy, 
62 ;  escorts  Bussy  to  the  coast 
and  returns  to  refit,  66 ;  deter- 
mines to  attempt  the  relief  of 
Kadalur,  67  ;  outmanoeuvres  Sir 
Edward  Hughes,  68;  goes  to 
attack  the  English,  70 ;  fights 
them  and  gains  the  victory,  70, 
71  and  7wte ;  advice  of,  to,  and 
sarcastic  remarks  of,  on  Bussy, 
73  ;  merits  of,  as  a  naval  com- 
mander, 76,  77 ;  is  killed  in  a 
duel,  77 ;  conjectures  regarding, 
78 

Surcouf,  Robert,  introduction  of, 
to  reader,  82  ;  birth,  parentage, 
and  previous  career  of,  84 ;  sails 
to  the  Seychelles,  and  flees  be- 
fore two  English  ships,  84,  85  ; 
captures  the  Penguin,  the 
Cartier,  and  the  Diana,  86 ; 
daring  adventure  of,  with  the 
Triton,  87,  88  ;  differences  of, 
with  the  Governor  of  the 
islands,  90 ;  commands  the 
Clarisse  in  the  Indian  seas,  90, 
91 ;  cruises  and  adventures  of, 
91,  92  ;  changes  to  La  Confiance 
92 ;  encounters  the  Kent,  93  ; 
captures  her,  94 ;  marries,  94 ; 
extraordinary  interview  of,  with 
the  First  Consul,  95  ;  plan  of, 
for  destroying  British  commerce, 
95 ;     takes    command    of     the 


viSn 

Revenant,  96 ;  successful  cruise 
of,  97-98  ;  subsequent  career  of, 
and  death,  99 


TEIGNMOUTH,  Lord,  action  of, 
regarding  the  Nizam,  242. 

Thomas,  George,  early  career  of, 
202  205  ;  mode  of  administration 
of,  205,  206 ;  refuses  the  con- 
ditions offered  by  Perron,  206  ; 
negotiates  with  him,  207  ;  but 
breaks  off,  208  ;  is  attacked  by, 
and  repulses  Bourquin,  208, 209 ; 
fails  to  follow  up  the  blow,  209  ; 
is  forced  to  evacuate  Georgegarh, 
210 ;  renounces  his  government, 
retires  and  dies,  211 

Tippu  Sahib,  beats  Colonel  Braith- 
waite,  9 ;  foils  Coote  at  Ami,  32 ; 
proceeds  to  the  Western  coast, 
63 

Tone,  Major,  account  of,  217,  note. 

Trincomali,  taken  by  the  French, 
46 

Trincomali,  The,  extraordinary 
contest  of,  with  the  Iphigenie, 
108 

Triton,  The,  extraordinary  capture 
of,  87,  88 

Tromelin,  Caijtain  de,  is  mistrusted 
by  Suffren,  27 ;  urges  Suffren 
not  to  fight  off  Trincomali,  48 ; 
probable  reasons  of,  48-49 ;  is 
packed  off  to  the  Isle  of  France, 
55 

Tukaji  Holkar,  attacks  Sindia,  178 ; 
tries  to  avoid  an  engagement 
with  de  Boigne.  179  ;  fights  a 
desperate  battle,  180 ;  is  badly 
beaten,  181 


J/^ENUS,    The,    captures    the 
'  Ceylon,  141  ;    is   captured 

by  Captain  Rowley,  142 ;  the 
capture  of,  the  turning  point  in 
the  scale,  143  ;  name  of  changed 
to  La  Nereide,  144,  note 


286 


INDEX. 


VIC 


Victor,    The,    former    career    of, 
142,  note 


\T  T  E  L  L  E  S  L  E  Y,        Marquess, 

\\  sagacious  views  of,  115; 
policy  of,  at  last  carried  out,  156; 
resolves  to  bring  matters  to  an 

-  issue  with  Sindia,  214  ;  forces 
the  Niz^m  to  dismiss  his 
French  contingent,  245,  246 ; 
receives  instructions  to  send  a 
force  from  India  to  Egypt,  253 
255  ;  orders  the  despatch  of  the 
expedition,  255  ;  and  its  return, 
276 

Welleslej,  Colonel,  appointed 
second  in  command  of  the  force 
ordered  first  against  Java,  after- 


ZEB 

wards  against  Egypt,  256  ;  in- 
defatigable exertions  of,  256 ; 
sickness  of,  256-264;  letter  of, 
to  General  Baird,  264 ;  memo- 
randum of,  regarding  an  invasion 
of  Egypt  from  India,  265-269  ; 
loss  of  the  vessel  in  which  he 
was  to  have  sailed,  271 

Wilks,  Colonel,  testimony  of,  re- 
garding Suffren,  69,  note;  72, 
note 

Willoughby,  Captain,  commands 
the  Nereide,  134 


ZEB-fjL-NISSA,  Bigam,  marries 
Sombre,  234 ;  description  of, 
235  ;  marries  Le  Vaisseau,  235 


.(/) 


LONDON : 
PRINTED   BY   T.   BRETTELL   AND    CO.    51,    RUPERT    STREET,  HAYMARKET,  W. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

BERKELEY 


Return  to  desk  from  which  borrowed. 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


FEB  1  9 1981 
tmty.  OF  mxf^  Bim 

LD  21-100m-9,'48(B399sl6)476 


VB  26558 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


