®A  PARTICULAR  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 
EUROPEAN  MILITARY  ADVENTURERS 
OF  HINDUSTAN,  FROM  1784-1803®® 


Hfl/lfe 


A  PARTICULAR  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  EUROPEAN 
MILITARY  ADVENTURERS  OF  HINDUSTAN 
FROM  1784  to  1803. 


EDITED    BY    HKKBKRT    COMPTOS. 


A   MASTER   MARINER: 

•mO  THB  LITX  AHD  ADVEHTTJRZ8  OF 

CAPTAIN    ROBERT   WILLIAM    EASTWICK. 

NinUi  Volant*  of  M  The  Adventure  tefa*.") 
j.  Clol*.  C.. 


TUB  Tuna  :—  "In  MMM  NBBMtoi  the  be*  of  the  «rri««,  Bad 
«TUiniy  paw  •  nnfa|M  InUmrt  in  UM  RUajM  M  afford* 
into  UM  *•;  in  which  IriUBMi  mm  »*d«  Mi  kX  by  «|M» 
MratM  tM|M«H«»»*  'a  U»  p^my  d*y»  of  UM  di  E*rt  IndU 
CoapMty  and  th.  FrMoh  wwm.  .  .  .  IU«  •tnigntlorwtrdDMft, 
itn  ill  in.  !••  I  In  Milli  •laiilM  aHlli  liililii  In  i 
nli  In  In  Hi  1  1  mill  iflB^Mnmlilii  - 


SATT»n»T  K«nr  w  :—  "  Mr.  Oonptoa  hM  don*  w*ll  to  print 
it  .  .  .  Ttan  «r».  ••  Mdckt  to  •gJMtat,  HMnJ  Mb  toachr* 
whfeh  h*««  •  |M 


WBITB  :-••  Wh«i  UM  old  Milor  OOIBM  to  toU  of 
•MM  MOftaf  uto  trf  lock  or  dwin«.  he  telU  hi«  rtory  *•  >inply 
Md  MtanU>  H  U  b*  «««  mlb«  cC  •  WlwMi  ymro.- 


Uuws  :—  M  Tb«  narrative  fe  writtoo  with  •  rimplieity  and  a 
dtrwUMM  whieh  •mntm  UM  H*d»f  l>  b«  required  a*»uraiin  - 
ullu  mud  Uithaodaecvncy,  audit  will  b%(uundfullufinurart, 


T     K1M1KK    U.NW1X. 


A  PARTICULAR  ACCOUNT 


OF  THE 


EUROPEAN  MILITARY 
ADVENTURERS  OF  HINDUSTAN 

From    1784   to    1803 


COMPILED     BY 

HERBERT     COMPTON 

EDITOR    OF    "  A    MASTER    MARINER,"    &C. 


T.    FISHER    UN  WIN 

PATERNOSTER   SQUARE 


MDCCCXCII 


DS 


LESTOCK     EEID,     ESQUIEE 
(Of  the  Bombay  Civil  Service) 

THIS    ATTEMPT    TO    PERPETUATE 
THE    MEMOEY   OP 

MANY  BEAVE   MEN 

IS   INSCRIBED 

WITH 
REGARD    AND    GRATITUDE 


INTRODUCTION. 


HE  European  Military  Adventurers  of  Hindustan 
belong  to  an  heroic  age  which  seems  further  removed 
from  our's  than  the  mere  lapse  of  a  century  suggests. 
It  is  probable  that,  saving  to  the  student  of  Indian 
history,  their  names  are  but  as  indistinct  items  on  a 
forgotten  scroll,  whose  record  is  nearly  obliterated  by 
the  dust  of  oblivion.  They  and  their  deeds  are  blended  into  a  bar- 
baric past,  when  history  was  written  in  blood  not  in  books,  and  of 
which  scarce  a  vestige  remains  in  the  civilised  Indian  Empire  of  the 
Victorian  Zenith.  And  yet  only  a  hundred  years  ago  these  dead  and 
gone  Adventurers  created  armies,  conquered  kingdoms,  overturned 
princes  and  ruled  provinces,  winning  such  distinctions  and  wielding 
such  personal  power  as  are  not  within  the  reach  of  modern  endeavour. 
Forming  a  link  between  the  eras  of  Oriental  despotism  and  European 
government,  they  bedizened  the  introduction  of  Western  enlighten- 
ment with  the  gaudy  paraphernalia  of  the  East.  But  Fate  planted 
them  in  one  oi  those  periods  of  transition  which  by  their  very  nature 
are  temporary,  and  they  share  with  it  a  short-lived  fame.  Their 
individual  places  in  History  are  limited  to  a  paragraph  or,  at  most,  a 
page.  They  are  but  units  in  the  sum  of  India's  story — stray  drafts  on 
its  capital  of  achievement  which  have  been  retired,  filed  away  and 
forgotten.  None  heed  these  faded  personalities  now.  The  whisper  of 
De  Boigne's  name  is  as  powerless  to  compel  attention  as  the  thunder 
of  his  cannon  to  create  terror  ;  the  mention  of  George  Thomas  awakens 
no  responsive  recognition  even  in  hearts  alert  to  the  influence  of 
Romance  and  Adventure ;  the  political  opinions  of  Perron  have  long 
ceased  to  affect  the  price  of  India  stock,  or  set  heads  wagging  in 
Leadenhall  Street.  As  for  the  lesser  Soldiers  of  Fortune — the  cen- 
turions and  the  lieutenants  of  the  Mercenary  Armies  of  Native  India 
—they  are  dust  of  the  common  dust,  whose  memory  the  greedy  march 
of  Engh'sh  enterprise  in  the  East  has  shuffled  out  of  sight,  reducing 
their  achievements  to  the  common  level  which  displays  not  a  head- 
stone to  view.  Yet  each  in  his  different  way,  designedly  or  uncon- 
sciously, directly  or  indirectly,  worked  towards  one  common  end  by 


8  INTBODUCTION. 

assisting  in  bringing  about  the  conditions  that  paved  the  way  for  the 
establishment  of  English  supremacy  in  India ;  and  each,  when  his 
personal  share  in  the  drama  was  finished,  and  the  last  great  act 
opened,  passed  off  the  stage  unnoticed  and  unknown,  and  left  the 
completion  of  the  task,  and  the  applause  it  evoked,  to  other  actors. 

A  word  of  explanation  is  necessary  concerning  the  title  chosen  for 
this  book.  The  "Hindustan  "  therein  referred  to  is  the  circumscribed 
territory  defined  by  that  fine  old  geographer,  Major  James  Eennell,  in 
his  "  Memoir  of  a  Map  of  Hindostan,"  published  in  1785.  It  was  a 
territory  bounded  by  the  Indus  on  the  west,  by  the  "  Burrampootra 
or  thereabouts "  on  the  east,  by  the  Himalayan  mountains  on  the 
north,  and  "by  the  countries  of  the  Deccan  on  the  south,  so  that  the 
whole  peninsula  to  the  south  of  a  line  drawn  nearly  from  Balasore  to 
Broach  is  not  reckoned  Hindostan."  It  is  necessary  to  thus  localise 
the  Adventurers  whose  lives  are  sketched  in  the  following  pages  in 
order  that  they  may  not  be  confounded  with  the  innumerable  European 
Free  Lances,  who  served  the  courts  of  Haidarabad  and  Mysore  and 
other  Native  Princes  in  Southern  India. 

The  period  in  which  the  European  Military  Adventurers  of  Hindu- 
stan flourished  began  in  1784,  during  the  Government  of  Warren 
Hastings,  and  ended  in  1803  during  that  of  the  Marquis  Wellesley. 
Those  twenty  years  saw  the  rise,  the  reign,  and  the  ruin  of  Independent 
Military  Adventure  in  India.  To  De  Boigne  belongs  the  honour  of 
having  initiated  the  wonderful  system  that  took  root  and  grew  with 
the  fatal  rapidity  of  an  exotic.  He  created  for  Madhoji  Sindhia — "A 
Ruler  of  India" — the  first  complete  army  of  regular  troops  employed 
by  the  Native  Princes  of  the  country.  The  example  was  soon  followed 
by  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad,  and,  in  a  different  degree,  by  Tipu  Sultan. 
In  1798  there  were  three  great  disciplined  military  establishments  in 
the  service  of  the  leading  Indian  Courts,  commanded  by  Frenchmen  in 
the  French  interest,  and  employing  European  arts  and  tactics  of  war. 
Their  destruction  and  extermination  was  forced  upon  the  Marquis 
Wellesley  by  the  political  exigences  of  the  times,  and  was  the  most 
important  work  of  his  administration.  De  Boigne's  army,  which  had 
passed  under  the  command  of  Perron,  was  the  first  of  these  three 
organisations  to  be  called  into  existence  and  the  last  of  them  to  be 
broken  up. 

The  political  and,  indeed,  international  importance  of  the  European 
Military  Adventurers  of  India  can  be  guaged  from  the  following 
extract  from  a  despatch  written  by  the  Marquis  Wellesley  in  1798  : — 

"  In  the  present  weak  state  of  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad's  Govern- 
ment, the  French  corps  in  his  service  would  (in  the  event  of  a  war 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

between  the  English  and  Mysore,  which  was  anticipated)  openly  join 
Tipii  Sultan,  and  by  a  sudden  blow  endeavour  to  seize  the  Nizam's 
territories,  and  to  secure  them  to  the  Dominion  of  France  under  an 
alliance  offensive  and  defensive  with  Tipu  Sultan.  .  .  .  The  interest 
and  the  inclination  of  Sindhia,  who  entertains  a  large  army  in  his 
service  under  the  command  of  a  French  officer  (Perron),  would  lead 
him  to  engage  with  Tipu  Sultan  and  the  French.  .  .  .  The  junction 
which  might  thus  be  effected  between  the  French  officers,  with  their 
several  corps  in  the  respective  services  of  the  Nizam,  of  Sindhia,  and 
of  Tipu,  might  establish  the  power  of  France  upon  the  ruins  of  the 
states  of  Poonah  and  of  the  Deccan." 

Although  this  book  does  not  deal  with  the  French  Factions  01 
Haidarabad  and  Mysore,  their  existence  and  importance  must  be 
noted,  because  they  are  intimately  connected  with  the  subject  treated. 
In  Haidarabad,  in  addition  to  the  Nizam's  irregular  soldiery,  there 
was  a  trained  army  of  14,000  men  and  30  guns  under  the  command  of 
Piron,  who  had  succeeded  the  famous  Raymond.  The  native  army  of 
Mysore  numbered  75,000  troops  of  all  arms,  and  included  Tipii's 
"  European  or  French  Force "  of  550  officers,  non-commissioned 
officers  and  men.  Finally  Sindhia  could  muster  40,000  disciplined 
infantry  with  380  guns,  the  whole  commanded  by  Perron,  who  was 
assisted  by  an  efficient  staff  of  300  Europeans.  Sindhia's  Brigades 
were  one  factor,  and,  as  events  proved,  the  most  formidable  factor  in 
that  possible  combination  which  a  hundred  years  ago  threatened  the 
existence  of  the  English  power  in  India.  The  story  of  those  Brigades 
is  the  story  of  the  European  Military  Adventurers  of  Hindustan. 

I  am  desirous  of  taking  this  opportunity  of  recording  my  obligations 
to  two  gentlemen  for  help  received.  Mr.  Edmund  Neel,  C.I.E.,  the 
assistant  secretary  in  the  political  department  of  the  India  office, 
facilitated  a  search  through  many  volumes  of  Government  records, 
and  kindly  assisted  in  regard  to  those  of  a  secret  nature  which  were 
not  open  to  my  inspection ;  and  Count  de  Boigne  placed  at  my  disposal 
a  memoir  of  his  illustrious  grandsire's  life,  and  cleared  up  one  doubtful 
point  of  great  interest. 

In  compiling  the  following  pages  a  great  many  authorities  have 
been  consulted,  but  it  would  be  tedious  to  give  in  detail  the  names  of 
all  the  works  from  which  fragments  of  information  have  been  gleaned. 
The  principal  ones  are  indicated  in  the  list  printed  below,  to  the  first 
four  books  in  which  I  am  particularly  indebted.  The  sketch  of  De 
Boigne's  life  was  written  before  the  two  French  biographies  indicated 
came  under  my  observation,  and  they  have  only  been  used  to  correct 
a  few  minor  statements  of  fact,  chiefly  of  a  personal  nature.  In  the 


10  INTBODUCTION. 

life  of  George  Thomas,  his  memoirs  have  been  very  closely  followed, 
but  a  great  quantity  of  extraneous  and  uninteresting  matter  has  been 
eliminated,  and  a  good  deal  of  additional  information  incorporated. 
With  regard  to  Perron,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  no  detailed 
biography  of  this  adventurer  in  existence,  and  the  one  here  presented 
is  compiled  from  original  sources.  The  lives  of  the  lesser  adventurers 
have  been  culled  from  a  great  variety  of  works,  by  far  the  most 
important  of  which  is  the  one  written  by  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith. 

An  earnest  endeavour  has  been  made  to  secure  correctness  of  narra- 
tive, but  in  some  cases  it  has  been  rendered  very  difficult,  and  success 
rendered  doubtful,  by  divergent  statements  and  contradictory  dates 
bearing  on  the  same  incident. 

H.  C. 

LIST  OF  AUTHORITIES  CONSULTED. 

A  Sketch  of  the  Rise,  Progress,  and  Termination  of  the  Regular  Corps  formed 

and  commanded  by  Europeans  in  the  service  of  the  Native  Princes  of  India. 

By  LEWIS  FEBDINAND  SMITH.    Calcutta,  1806. 
Military  Memoirs  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  James  Skinner,  C.B.    By  J.  BAILLIE 

FBASBE.    London,  1851. 
The  Military  Memoirs  of  George  Thomas.    By  COLONEL  WILLIAM  FBANCKLIN. 

Calcutta,  1803. 

A  History  of  the  Mahrattas.    By  JAMES  GEANT  DUFF.     London,  1826 
The  Despatches,  Minutes,  and  Correspondence  of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G., 

during  his  administration  in  India.     London,  1837. 

Memoire  sur  la  carriere  de  M.  Le  General  Comte  de  Boigne.     Chambery,  1830. 
Une  page  inedite  de  1'histoire  des  Indes.    Le  General  de  Boigne  (1751-1830). 

Par  VICTOE  DE  SAINT-GENIS.    Poitiers,  1873. 
Memoirs  of  the  Puthan  Soldier  of  Fortune.  .  .  .  Ameer  Khan.    Compiled  in 

Persian  by  BUSAWAN  LAL.    Translated  by  H.  T.  PBINSEP.     Calcutta,  1832. 
Illustrations  of  some  Institutions  of  the  Mahratta  People.    By  W.  H.  TONE. 

Calcutta,  1818. 
The  History  of  the  Reign  of  Shah  Aulum.    By  COLONEL  WILLIAM  FBANCKLIN. 

London,  1798. 
The  Calcutta  Monthly  Register,  1790 ;  The  Calcutta  Monthly  Journal,  1798- 

1800;  The  Hindostanee  Intelligencer  and  Oriental  Anthology,  1801-1802; 

The  Asiatic  Annual  Register,   1801-1811;  The  Asiatic  Journal,  1831,  etc. 

Selections  from  the  Calcutta  Gazette.    By  W.  S.  SETON  KARB.     Calcutta, 

1864. 
Government  Records  at  the  India  Office. 

Etc.,  Etc.,  Etc. 


CONTENTS. 


PAOF, 

INTRODUCTION           7 

DE  BOIGNE               15 

GEORGE  THOMAS      109 

PERRON          221 

APPENDIX       337 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


MAP  OP  INDIA       Frontispiece 

DE  BOIGNE  ...         To  face  p.     15 

MADHOJI  SINDHIA ,,  79 

GEOKGE  THOMAS ,         109 

EUPEE  STRUCK  BY  GEORGE  THOMAS    p.     143 

CEMETERY  AT  BERHAMPUR,  IN   WHICH  GEORGE 

THOMAS  is  BURIED To  face  p.     213 

THE  EMPEROR  SHAH  'ALAM       ,,         271 

LIEUT. -COLONEL  JAMES  SKINNER,  C.B.  ...         ,,         337 

THE  BEGUM  SOMBRE  403 


DE  BOIGNE. 


DE    BOIGNE. 


CHAPTER    I. 

HIS   EARLY  LIFE   AND   SERVICES.      ARRIVAL   IN   INDIA. 
1751-1784. 

F  the  daring  and  errant  military  adventurers  who, 
during  the  last  two  decades  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  helped  to  wreck  dynasties  and  establish 
kingdoms  in  Hindustan,  there  is  one  who  towers 
high  and  great  above  the  rest.  The  pride  and  pomp 
of  Perron,  and  the  delirious  ambition  of  George 
Thomas,  must  yield  place  to  the  genius  and  achievement  of  General 
Count  de  Boigne,  who,  if  he  never  quite  touched  the  political  im- 
portance attained  by  the  former,  or  aspired  to  the  actual  independence 
usurped  by  the  latter,  must  yet  take  precedence  of  both  as  the  creator 
of  the  military  system  they  inherited  or  adopted.  For  De  Boigne  was 
the  first  to  raise  up  disciplined  armies  from  the  fierce  races  of  Upper 
India,  and  teach  them  how  to  fight  and  how  to  conquer;  he  was  the  first 
to  carry  the  science  of  European  warfare  into  the  heart  of  Hindustan  ; 
and  his  famous  battalions  formed  the  connecting  link  between  the 
eras  of  Mughal  Empire  and  British  Dominion  in  the  East.  If  the 
extraordinary  power  De  Boigne's  brigades  exercised,  and  the  brilliant 
record  they  left  behind  them,  during  a  momentous  quarter  of  a  century, 
fill  but  a  single  chapter  in  the  turbulent  history  of  India,  it  is  at 
least  one  glowing  with  enterprise  and  achievement,  and  worthy  of  the 
place  it  fills  between  the  pages  that  record  the  conquests  of  Clive  and 
Coote  and  the  victories  of  Lake  and  Wellesley. 

Benoit  La  Borgne — better  known  to  history  as  Benoit  de  Boigne — • 
was  born  at  Chambery,  in  Savoy,  on  the  8th  of  March,  1751.     He 


16  DE  BOIGNE. 

was  the  second  son  of  a  large  family,  and  his  father  followed  the  calling 
of  a  hide  merchant.  Despite  his  narrow  means,  Pere  La  Borgne 
contrived  to  afford  Benoit  a  sufficient  education  at  the  college  of  his 
native  town,  where,  under  the  tutelage  of  pious  and  learned  monks, 
the  youth  acquired  a  general  knowledge  of  books  and  a  tolerable  pro- 
ficiency in  Latin  ;  whilst,  from  the  circumstances  of  his  birthplace 
being  situated  near  the  French  frontier,  he  spoke  French  and  Italian 
with  equal  fluency. 

As  a  lad,  Benoit  found  his  chief  pleasure  in  music  and  fencing,  and 
his  brain  was  filled  with  the  fanciful  ideas  of  glory  in  which  boys 
indulge.  It  was  his  father's  intention  to  make  him  a  lawyer,  but  he 
himself  determined  at  an  early  age  to  follow  the  profession  of  arms, 
for  which  his  fine  physique  and  bold  spirit  eminently  fitted  him.  His 
desire  was  to  enter  the  army  of  his  native  country,  then  under  the 
rule  of  King  Charles  Emanuel,  but  in  this  he  was  disappointed  owing 
to  all  its  commissioned  appointments  being  monopolised  by  the 
nobility  of  Savoy  and  Sardinia,  and  admitting  no  cadets  of  less  dis- 
tinguished birth.  Perhaps  De  Boigne  lost  nothing  by  this,  for  the 
life  of  an  officer  in  the  Sardinian  service  was  often  one  of  inflated 
poverty  wherein  a  glittering  coat  covered  a  hungry  stomach  during  a 
long  and  depressing  period  of  uniformed  irnpecuniosity. 

But  he  had  not  far  to  look  for  a  more  hopeful  sphere  of  action. 
France  was  contiguous,  and  its  capital  the  head-quarters  of  a  body  of 
adventurers  famous  in  history — the  Irish  Brigade.  This  corps 
enjoyed  the  highest  reputation  throughout  Europe  for  gallantry  in 
the  field  and  discipline  in  the  camp.  Its  ranks  were  open  to  the 
merit  and  talent  of  all  nations,  and  to  belong  to  it  was  at  once  an 
establishment  and  a  distinction  in  life.  It  was,  in  short,  just  such  a 
service  as  appealed  to  the  inherent  instincts  of  young  De  Boigne,  and 
he  determined  to  enter  its  ranks  if  possible. 

Tradition  says  that  he  left  his  native  country  under  circumstances 
which  did  more  credit  to  his  spirit  than  to  his  respect  for  those  laws 
which  his  father  had  intended  he  should  expound.  A  duel  with  a 
Sardinian  officer,  which  threatened  retribution  at  the  hands  of  a  local 
magistrate,  led  De  Boigne  to  accelerate  his  departure  from  the 
paternal  roof.  Nurturing  high  aspirations,  and  without  any  definite 
ambition  in  view,  he  crossed  the  frontier  and  entered  France  in  1768, 
and  presented  himself  for  employment  in  the  Irish  Brigade. 

There  was  a  recommendation  in  his  tall  martial  figure  and  frank 
soldierly  bearing.  His  large-boned  limbs  and  massive  frame  gave 
evidence  of  unusual  physical  powers,  and  he  confronted  the  world 
with  an  air  of  conscious  superiority.  His  features  were  stern  and 


HIS  EARLY  LIFE  AND  SERVICES.  17 

resolute,  lit  up  with  piercing  eyes,  and  surmounted  by  a  lofty  brow, 
not  common  in  the  Latin  race,  and  indicating  the  possession  of  those 
qualities  from  which  soldiers  are  shaped  and  heroes  hewn.  His 
application  was  successful,  and  he  obtained  an  ensign's  commission 
in  the  Clare  Eegiment,  temporarily  commanded  by  Major  Leigh,  an 
officer  noted  for  his  discipline.  Joining  his  corps  at  Landrecies, 
De  Boigne  passed  the  next  three  years  chiefly  in  Flanders,  until  his 
regiment  embarked  for  the  Isle  of  France,  where  it  remained  for 
eighteen  months  before  being  ordered  back  to  Europe. 

During  his  stay  in  the  Irish  Brigade  De  Boigne  was  noted  for  his 
professional  zeal  and  general  good  conduct,  and  in  this  famous  corps 
acquired  the  intimate  knowledge  of  military  affairs  which  proved  of 
such  essential  use  to  him  in  later  life.  But  after  some  years'  service 
his  active  and  ambitious  temperament  grew  disheartened  from  want 
of  encouragement ;  promotion  stagnated,  and  he  found  advancement 
to  the  higher  grades  too  slow  for  his  restless  spirit.  He  never  spared 
himself,  but  he  expected  a  suitable  reward  for  his  exertions.  Despite 
his  zeal  and  love  for  his  profession,  De  Boigne  was  so  far  a  mer- 
cenary at  heart  that  he  recognised  his  sword  was  his  sole  capital,  and 
desired  to  invest  it  to  the  best  advantage.  Love  of  money  was 
strongly  engrained  in  his  character,  and  a  subaltern's  pay  in  a 
foreign  legion  satisfied  him  as  little  as  a  subaltern's  position.  When, 
therefore,  he  chanced  to  hear  of  an  opening  for  volunteer  officers  in 
the  service  of  Eussia  (then  at  war  with  the  Turks),  De  Boigne 
determined  to  quit  the  Irish  Brigade,  and  endeavour  to  advance  his 
fortunes  under  a  new  flag  where  the  chances  of  active  service 
were  assured,  and  the  flow  of  promotion  promised  to  be  more 
rapid. 

Eesigning  his  commission  in  the  French  service  in  1774,  De  Boigne 
proceeded  to  Turin,  and  obtained  from  the  Marquis  D'Aigueblanche, 
the  Sardinian  minister,  a  letter  of  recommendation  to  Admiral 
Orloff,  who  commanded  the  Eussian  forces  in  the  Grecian  Archi- 
pelago. Equipped  with  this,  he  started  for  the  seat  of  war,  and  made 
his  way  to  Paros,  where  he  presented  himself  before  the  Admiral,  who, 
with  the  quick  perception  of  a  commander  accustomed  to  read  character, 
was  favourably  impressed  with  De  Boigne's  appearance,  and  appointed 
him  to  a  captaincy  in  a  Greek  regiment  in  the  service  of  the  Empress 
Catherine. 

But  Fate  ordained  that  De  Boigne's  career  of  active  service  should 
be  of  short  duration.  After  a  few  weeks  his  regiment  was  employed 
in  an  attack  on  the  island  of  Tenedos,  at  the  rnouth  of  the  Darda- 
nelles. The  expedition  was  ill-conceived  and  ill-executed,  and  met 

2 


18  DE  BOIGNE. 

with  a  disastrous  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the  Turkish  garrison,  by 
whom  De  Boigne,  one  of  the  few  survivors  of  the  fight,  was  made 
prisoner. 

As  an  infidel  and  a  captive  of  war  in  the  hands  of  the  Moslem  he 
received  but  scant  consideration.  One  account  says  he  was  sent  to 
Scio,  where  he  languished  six  months  in  prison  till  the  war  terminated. 
But  another  authority  gives  the  following  somewhat  apocryphal 
but  picturesque  version  of  his  adventures  during  the  next  three  years. 
After  being  taken  prisoner  he  was  sent  to  Constantinople,  and  there 
sold  as  a  slave  for  fifty  dollars,  and  for  a  time  employed  in  a  menial 
capacity,  being  actually  set  to  hew  wood  and  draw  water  for  his 
master's  household.  During  this  period  he  managed  to  communicate 
with  his  parents,  who  arranged  for  his  ransom.  On  regaining  his 
freedom  he  made  his  way  to  St.  Petersburg  to  press  his  claims  for 
consideration  after  the  hardships  he  had  suffered  in  the  Russian 
service.  After  some  little  waiting  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  pre- 
sentation to  the  Empress  Catherine,  who  listened  graciously  and  with 
interest  to  the  story  of  his  slavery  at  Constantinople,  and  is  said  to 
have  predicted  a  career  for  him.  To  compensate  for  his  misfor- 
tune she  bestowed  on  him  a  commission  as  major  in  her  army,  and 
the  war  with  the  Turks  being  at  an  end,  he  was  posted  to  a 
regiment  doing  duty  on  the  south-western  frontier  of  Russia,  where 
he  was  not  long  afterwards  selected  for  the  command  of  an  escort 
detached  to  attend  Lord  Percy,  a  son  of  the  Duke  of  Northumber- 
land, on  a  tour  through  the  islands  of  the  Grecian  Archipelago. 
De  Boigne  quickly  ingratiated  himself  with  this  nobleman.  In 
the  course  of  their  travels  they  touched  at  Smyrna,  where  De 
Boigne  chanced  to  meet  some  European  merchants  lately  returned 
from  the  East,  whose  dazzling  descriptions  of  India,  and  the  prospects 
it  held  out  to  military  adventurers  so  fascinated  him  that  he  deter- 
mined to  visit  the  country.  This  intention  he  communicated  to  Lord 
Percy,  who  furnished  him  with  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Warren 
Hastings,  the  Governor  of  Bengal. 

While  considering  the  best  way  to  carry  his  design  into  execution, 
the  idea  occurred  to  De  Boigne  of  making  the  journey  to  India  over- 
land, by  way  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  Tartary,  and  Kashmir.  It  was  a 
boldly  conceived  enterprise,  and  worthy  of  his  adventurous  spirit. 
Returning  to  St.  Petersburg  he  solicited  an  audience  with  the 
Empress,  and  laid  his  proposition  before  her.  The  project  was  one 
that  appealed  to  a  sovereign  who  was  always  ready  to  encourage 
travel  and  exploration,  more  especially  in  those  countries  which 
Peter  the  Great  had  indicated  in  his  will  as  indispensable  objects  of 


HIS  EARLY  LIFE  AND  SERVICES.  19 

future  acquisition  by  Eussia.  The  Empress  accorded  her  countenance 
to  the  scheme,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  twelve  years 
later,  when  the  relations  between  Russia  and  England  threatened  a 
rupture,  she  ordered  her  ministers  to  obtain  all  available  information 
concerning  the  actual  route  suggested  by  De  Boigne,  with  a  view  to 
invading  India  by  an  advance  in  that  direction. 

Such  is  one  version  of  De  Boigne's  adventures  during  this  period, 
but  another  account  merely  states  that  after  his  capture  by  the  Turks 
he  was  confined  for  seven  months  at  Scio,  until  the  end  of  the  war, 
which  event  liberated  him,  but  stopped  his  promotion  ;  that  he  then 
resigned  the  service  of  Russia  and  embarked  for  Smyrna,  where  he 
met  certain  English  traders  lately  returned  from  the  East,  who 
described  India  as  a  veritable  political  chaos,  but  withal  so  marvellous 
a  country  that,  listening  to  them,  De  Boigne  felt  all  the  fantastic 
dreams  of  his  youth  revive,  and  was  inspired  to  go  there  and  search 
for  fortune. 

There  is  nothing  incompatible  in  the  two  versions,  and  they  both 
bring  the  narrative  to  the  same  point  at  Aleppo,  where  De  Boigne 
found  himself  about  the  year  1777,  and  joined  a  caravan  starting  for 
Baghdad.  Unfortunately  Turkey  was  at  war  with  Persia,  and  the 
arms  of  the  former  having  recently  suffered  some  serious  reverses, 
the  districts  through  which  the  caravan  would  have  to  travel  were 
rendered  unsafe  by  the  presence  of  marauding  bodies  of  Persian 
cavalry,  and  the  leader  of  the  expedition,  fearing  capture,  decided 
shortly  after  starting,  to  abandon  the  proposed  journey  and  return  to 
Aleppo. 

Undeterred  by  this  inauspicious  beginning,  De  Boigne  determined 
to  reach  India  by  some  other  route,  and  set  sail  for  Alexandria.  But 
misfortune  still  dogged  his  path,  for  the  vessel  that  carried  him  was 
wrecked  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile,  and  he  found  himself  a  castaway 
on  the  inhospitable  shores  of  Egypt.  He  was  rescued  by  a  band  of 
Arabs,  from  whom  he  expected  the  inhumanity  of  treatment  they 
were  generally  credited  with  exercising ;  but  it  appeared  that,  how- 
ever pitiless  they  might  be  in  plundering  the  rich,  they  were  pre- 
cluded by  their  notions  of  honour  from  oppressing  the  needy,  and,  so 
far  from  ill-treating  De  Boigne,  they  succoured  him  most  charitably, 
and  assisted  him  to  reach  Grand  Cairo. 

Here  he  met  his  old  acquaintance  Lord  Percy,  who  introduced 
him  to  Mr.  George  Baldwin,  the  British  Consul,  through  whose 
kindness  De  Boigne  obtained  a  passage  in  a  country  ship  to  Madras, 
by  way  of  the  Red  Sea.  He  was  also  furnished  with  letters  of  intro- 
duction to  Major  Sydenham,  the  Town-major  of  Fort  St.  George, 


20  DE  BOIGNE. 

where  he  landed  in  January,  1778,  just  after  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold 
had  assumed  the  government  of  the  Presidency. 

De  Boigne  was  at  this  time  a  young  man  of  twenty-seven  years  of 
age,  ten  of  which  had  been  spent  in  military  service  and  foreign 
travel.  And  yet  he  was  not  so  worldly  wise  but  that  he  expected  to 
find  the  famous  pagoda  tree  flourishing,  whose  branches  required 
only  to  be  shaken  to  ensure  the  dropping  of  their  golden  fruit.  He 
had  come  to  acquire  wealth,  but  he  soon  learnt  that  poverty  and  want 
existed  in  the  East  as  well  as  riches  and  luxury.  War  had  recently 
been  declared  between  England  and  France,  and  Sir  Hector  Munro 
was  engaged  in  laying  siege  to  Pondicherry.  It  was  an  inauspicious 
moment  for  an  ex-officer  of  the  French  service  to  seek  his  fortune  in 
an  English  dependency.  Month  after  month  passed  by,  and  De  Boigne 
waited  for  the  preferment  that  did  not  come.  His  slender  stock  of 
money  gradually  melted  away,  and  at  last,  in  order  to  procure  the 
necessaries  of  life,  he  was  compelled  to  give  lessons  in  fencing — an 
art  in  which  he  was  highly  proficient. 

That  he  was  very  poor,  that  he  was  very  distressed,  and  that  ho  was 
greatly  disheartened,  is  confirmed  by  his  acceptance  shortly  afterwards 
of  an  ensign's  commission  in  the  Gth  Regiment  of  Madras  Native 
Infantry.  This  he  obtained  through  the  good  offices  of  Major  Syden- 
ham,  who  found  means  to  overcome  the  scruples  of  the  Governor.  It 
has  been  suggested  that  by  entering  the  British  service  De  Boigne 
desired  to  disarm  suspicion  as  to  his  political  relations  with  the  Russian 
Government,  and  that  this  step  offered  the  most  efficacious  method  of 
doing  so.  But  this  theory  may  be  dismissed,  for  there  is  little  doubt 
but  that  it  was  poverty  alone  which  compelled  this  ex-captain  of  the 
Irish  Brigade  and  ex- major  of  the  Russian  army  to  don  the  uniform 
of  a  subaltern  in  a  regiment  of  Madras  Native  Infantry,  and  swear 
allegiance  to  a  Company  of  merchant  adventurers. 

For  nearly  two  years  De  Boigne  continued  in  this  station,  and,  but 
for  a  fortunate  accident,  might  have  ended  as  well  as  begun  his  Indian 
career  as  a  Company's  ensign.  His  regiment  was  attached  to  Colonel 
Baillie's  force  at  Gantur  in  September,  1780,  when  De  Boigne 
happened  to  be  detached  on  escort  duty  to  convoy  up  a  supply  of  grain 
from  Madras.  During  his  absence  Colonel  Baillie  was  surrounded  by 
the  Mysore  army,  under  Tipii  Sahib,  the  son  of  HaidarAli,  and  after  a 
brave,  but  hopeless,  resistance,  during  which  the  greater  portion  of 
his  force  was  cut  to  pieces,  obliged  to  surrender. 

Just  about  this  time  Lord  Macartney  succeeded  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold 
as  Governor  of  Madras,  and,  after  the  disaster  of  Gantur,  offered 
De  Boigne  an  appointment  in  his  body-guard  It  is  not  improbable 


HIS  EABLY  LIFE  AND  SERVICES.  21 

that  during  the  next  three  years  De  Boigne  learnt  many  particulars 
concerning  the  French  military  adventurers  in  the  service  of  Mysore, 
for  the  deeds  of  these  Free  Lances  of  Carnatic  must  have  been  topics 
of  common  conversation.  Amongst  them  were  many  able  officers 
not  unworthy  successors  to  Dupleix,  Bussy,  La  Bourdonnais,  Lally, 
and  Law.  Lally,  it  may  be  noted,  had  served  in  Dillon's  Regiment 
in  the  Irish  Brigade.  Aided  by  the  condition  of  the  tknoe,  and  the 
circumstances  of  the  country,  these  military  adventurers  attained  sub- 
stantial, and,  in  many  cases,  lucrative,  commands  in  the  service  of 
Haidar  Ali,  and  were  struggling  to  keep  in  existence  the  French 
influence  in  Southern  India. 

Before  many  months  had  passed  De  Boigne  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Madras  Native  Army  dangled  no  charms  for  a  soldier  of 
fortune.  On  the  contrary,  it  confirmed  his  repugnance  for  a  progressive 
service.  Those  were  the  days  of  grey-headed  ensigns  and  veteran  lieu- 
tenants, to  whom  promotion  could  never  come.  Money,  not  merit,  com- 
manded steps,  and  De  Boigue's  prospects  were  the  more  hopeless  because 
he  laboured  under  the  disadvantage  of  alien  birth,  which  was  a  bar  to 
his  advancement.  Yet  all  this  time  he  was  constantly  reminded  of 
the  possibilities  the  country  offered  to  men  of  ability  and  enterprise, 
for  but  a  few  leagues  distant  there  were  Frenchmen — who,  in  Europe, 
must  have  saluted  him  respectfully — enjoying  immense  powers,  dignity 
and  wealth  in  a  service  that  was  greedy  to  receive  all  European  appli- 
cants who  would  fight  against  the  English. 

The  resignation  De  Boigne  decided  on  was  accelerated  by  two 
incidents,  the  one  arising  out  of  the  other.  A  charge  was  preferred 
against  him  of  taking  undue  liberties  with  the  wife  of  a  brother  officer, 
and  although  the  accusation  was  unfounded,  and  he  was  honourably 
acquitted  by  a  court-martial,  the  circumstance  led  Lord  Macartney  to 
refuse  De  Boigne's  application  for  an  adjutancy,  and  confer  the 
appointment  on  an  officer  of  junior  standing.  Whereupon  De  Boigne 
threw  up  his  commission.  This  induced  the  Governor  to  inquire 
more  clearly  into  the  matter,  and  he  was  soon  convinced  that  De 
Boigne  had  been  harshly  treated.  Anxious  now  to  repair  the  un- 
witting injustice,  he  professed  himself  ready  to  sanction  the  appoint- 
ment, but  De  Boigne  had  made  up  his  mind  to  leave  the  Company's 
service,  and  declined  to  withdraw  his  papers.  Lord  Macartney  was 
therefore  obliged  to  accept  his  resignation,  but  to  testify  his  kindly 
feeling,  he  provided  him  with  a  letter  of  recommendation  to  Warren 
Hastings  at  Calcutta. 

Captain  Edward  Moor,  in  his  "  Narrative  of  Little's  Expedition," 
gives  another  version  of  the  reason  that  led  to  De  Boigne's  departure 


22  DE  BOIGNE. 

from  Madras.  According  to  this  writer  he  was  dismissed  from  the 
service  for  a  trivial  offence  "by  the  overgrown  authority  of  the  Civil 
power ; "  but  it  matters  little  whether  he  resigned  voluntarily  or  of 
necessity.  In  1782  he  arrived  at  Calcutta,  where  a  kind-hearted  resi- 
dent of  Fort  William — an  intimate  friend  of  Captain  Moor — took  him 
by  the  hand,  and  furnished  him  with  credit  to  a  very  considerable 
amount,  which  enabled  him  early  in  the  following  year  to  set  out  on 
his  journey  to  Upper  India. 

Meanwhile  De  Boigne  presented  his  letters  of  introduction  from 
Lord  Percy  and  Lord  Macartney  to  Warren  Hastings.  These  secured 
him  a  courteous  reception,  and  he  confided  to  the  Governor-General 
his  intention  of  endeavouring  to  make  his  way  to  Europe  overland. 
The  boldness  of  the  design  interested  Hastings,  who  could  appreciate 
enterprise  in  all  its  forms,  and  he  provided  De  Boigne  with  letters  to 
the  British  agents  in  India,  and  also  to  the  Nawab  Wazier  of  Oudh, 
which  assured  the  recipient  great  pecuniary  advantages,  since  it  was 
the  custom  of  the  Native  Courts  of  India  to  bestow  valuable  Khiluts, 
or  presents  of  honour,  on  all  persons  recommended  by  friendly  powers. 
This  to  a  traveller  of  De  Boigne's  narrow  circumstances  was  a  matter 
of  immense  importance. 

Early  in  1783,  after  a  short  stay  in  Calcutta,  De  Boigne  proceeded 
to  Lucknow,  and  waited  upon  Mr.  Middleton,  the  English  Resident 
at  the  Court  of  Oudh,  and  in  the  course  of  time  was  received  in 
audience  by  the  Nawab  Wazir,  and  honoured  with  a  valuable  Khilut 
and  letters  of  credit  on  Kabul  and  Kandahar  for  Us.  12,000.  The 
Khilut  De  Boigne  immediately  sold  for  Ks.4,000,  and  being  thus 
provided  with  the  necessary  means,  settled  down  at  Lucknow  to  study 
the  languages  for  five  mouths,  and  to  prepare  a  suitable  equipment 
for  his  journey  through  Central  Asia.  During  this  time  he  made  the 
acquaintance  of  General  Claude  Martine,  a  remarkable  adventurer, 
who  held  a  post  of  the  highest  confidence  in  the  Nawab's  Court,  and 
with  whom  he  formed  a  friendship  that  lasted  until  Marline's  death, 
sixteen  years  later. 

In  August  Major  James  Brown,  an  officer  deputed  by  Warren 
Hastings  on  a  mission  to  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam,  was  starting  for 
Delhi,  his  object  being  to  discover  the  designs  that  the  Mahratta  Prince 
Madhoji  Siudhia  had  formed  in  regard  to  the  Mughal  Empire.  De 
Boigne  decided  to  accompany  Major  Brown, but  a  few  days  after  leaving 
Lucknow,  the  march  of  the  mission  was  arrested  by  the  intrigues  of 
the  turbulent  nobles  of  the  Court  of  Delhi,  who,  having  long  since 
reduced  their  sovereign  to  a  state  of  impotence,  were  very  averse  to 
oreign  interference,  and  especially  dreaded  the  arrival  of  the  British 


EI8  EABLY  LIFE  AND  8EEVICES.  23 

Ambassador.  In  consequence  of  which  they  took  measures  to  impede 
Major  Brown's  progress ;  but  De  Boigne  pressed  on,  and  made  his 
way  to  Delhi,  where  he  arrived  towards  the  end  of  the  month. 

The  Emperor's  Wazir,  or  prime  minister,  Mirza  Shafi,  being  absent 
from  the  capital  on  an  expedition  against  the  Jats  at  Agra,  De  Boigne 
found  it  impossible  to  obtain  an  audience  with  Shah  'Alam,  and 
decided  to  proceed  towards  Agra,  where  Mirza  Shafi  was  encamped. 
But  when  the  latter  heard  that  the  traveller  had  been  in  Major  Brown's 
mission,  his  fears  were  aroused  and  he  suspected  De  Boigne  of  sinister 
designs.  He  therefore  accorded  him  the  coldest  reception  (for  Mirza 
was  at  this  time  intriguing  with  Madhoji  Sindhia),  and  refused  to 
comply  with  his  application  for  assistance  on  his  journey  towards  the 
west. 

Not  far  from  the  Wazir's  camp  lay  the  army  of  Madhoji  Sindhia, 
who  was  engaged  in  an  invasion  of  the  territory  of  the  Kana  of  Gohad, 
and  the  siege  of  the  fortress  of  Gwalior.  Madhoji  was  one  of  the 
most  powerful  chiefs  of  the  great  Maratha  Confederation,  and  attached 
to  his  Court,  in  the  quality  of  British  Eesident,  was  Mr.  James  Ander- 
son. As  soon  as  this  gentleman  heard  of  De  Boigne's  arrival  in  the 
neighbourhood  he  asked  him  to  visit  his  camp,  and,  hopeless  of  obtain- 
ing any  assistance  from  Mirza  Shafi,  De  Boigne  gladly  accepted  the 
invitation.  But  now,  in  turn,  Madhoji's  suspicions  were  aroused  by  the 
advent  of  this  stranger,  who  had  been  first  in  the  entourage  of  Major 
Brown,  next  at  Delhi,  then  in  the  camp  of  the  Wazir,  and  was  finally 
coming  to  Mr.  Anderson.  It  seemed  impossible  that  such  a  sequence 
of  visits  could  be  altogether  innocent  in  their  nature.  The  re-occupa- 
tion of  Delhi,  which  the  Marathas  had  been  forced  to  evacuate  after  the 
battle  of  Panipat,  was  the  object  of  Sindhia's  present  ambition,  whilst 
the  encroachment  of  the  British  power  excited  his  keenest  jealousy. 
Under  these  circumstances  Madhoji  was  particularly  anxious  to  dis- 
cover the  real  character  of  the  suspicious  wanderer,  who  was  moving 
from  camp  to  camp  in  a  way  that  suggested  intrigue.  To  obtain 
this  information  he  had  recourse  to  the  usual  Maratha  expedient  of 
craft,  and  employed  one  of  the  gangs  of  robbers,  with  which  the 
country  was  infested,  and  whose  dexterity  in  theft  was  beyond  descrip- 
tion, to  steal  De  Boigne's  baggage  during  his  march  to  Mr.  Anderson's 
camp,  hoping  to  discover  in  it  letters  or  credentials  that  would  explain 
the  recent  movements  or  ultimate  designs  of  their  owner.  His  plot 
was  successful,  and  when  De  Boigne  reached  his  destination  he  reported 
that  all  his  property  had  been  plundered  on  the  march. 

Mr.  Anderson's  resentment  was  aroused  at  this  indignity  offered  to 
his  guest,  and  he'demanded  the  restoration  of  the  stolen  baggage.  A 


'24  DE  BOIGNE. 

few  days  afterwards  it  was  all  brought  in,  with  the  exception  of  the 
letters  of  recommendation  and  credit.  These  were  never  given  up, 
although  every  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  to  secure  their  recovery. 

The  loss  of  his  money  and  papers  was  a  fatal  blow  to  De  Boigne's 
schemes  of  travel  and  exploration.  Without  means  or  credentials  he 
oould  not  hope  to  pierce  the  unsettled  and  disturbed  districts  that  lay 
between  Hindustan  and  Russia,  and  he  had  no  other  resources  on 
which  to  fall  back.  Without  friends,  without  employment,  a  stranger 
in  a  strange  land,  and  penniless  to  boot,  all  that  was  left  to  him  was 
his  sword,  his  talent,  and  his  determination. 

It  was  of  course  open  to  him  to  return  to  Calcutta,  and  Mr.  Ander- 
son would  have  considered  it  a  duty  to  arrange  for  his  journey  thither. 
But  this  was  a  poor  and  ignominious  retreat  out  of  his  difficulties, 
and  one  that  could  not  commend  itself  to  a  man  of  De  Boigne's 
character  and  ambition.  The  spirit  of  adventure  was  quick  within 
him,  and  he  scorned  surrender.  He  felt  he  was  on  the  threshold  of 
an  arena  where  great  achievements  were  possible.  Vivid  in  his 
memory  was  the  recollection  of  the  French  soldiers  of  fortune  in 
Southern  India,  whose  successes  afforded  an  example  of  the  attain- 
ment possible  to  men  fitted  for  military  command,  if  they  once  obtained 
the  confidence  of  the  native  princes.  Instances  of  similar  success  were 
around  him :  Sombre  *  and  Medoc,  Martine  and  Sangster,  Pauly  and 
Baours  were  adventurers  who  had  commanded,  or  were  at  the  present 
moment  commanding,  small  disciplined  corps  in  the  service  of 
neighbouring  rulers.  Here  he  was,  in  the  centre  of  Hindustan, 
amidst  contending  interests  and  wai'like  peoples,  each  eager  to  over- 
come the  other.  To  the  north  lay  Delhi,  with  its  Mughal  population 
nurtured  in  conquest  for  centuries  past ;  to  the  west  dwelt  the  Rajputs, 
a  warrior  nation,  the  bravest  and  most  chivalrous  in  all  India ;  close 
at  hand  were  the  Jats,  staunch  and  sturdy  soldiers,  who  had  recently 
won  their  independence  ;  whilst  to  the  southward  stretched  the  great 
Maratba  Dominion,  with  its  Confederated  princes,  whose  spears  had 
glistened  at  the  gates  of  Lahore,  until  the  Abdali,  carrying  the  crescent 
from  the  north,  hurled  them  back  to  within  their  own  boundaries  from 
the  field  of  Panipat. 

War  was  in  the  hearts  of  all  these  antagonistic  races,  whom  rapine 
ruled,  and  whose  profession  was  plunder  and  pillage.  Yet  they  were 
utterly  wanting  in  the  science  of  war.  They  relied  on  the  strength  of 
countless  numbers,  or,  at  best,  on  the  advantage  of  surprise  by  swift 
advance  or  safety  by  rapid  retreat.  They  fought  with  the  ponderous 
club,  whose  very  unwieldiness  carried  its  blows  astray,  not  with  the 

*  For  this,  and  all  subsequent  lesser  adventurers  mentioned,  see  Appendix. 


HIS  EARLY  LIFE  AND  SERVICES.  25 

trained  rapier,  which  pierced  the  heart  almost  before  its  thrust  was 
seen.  Their  armies  were  vast  multitudes,  impossible  to  manoeuvre, 
siibject  to  panic,  ill-armed,  and  absolutely  without  discipline.  The 
brute  power  was  there,  but  it  was  wasted  by  reason  of  the  ignorance 
that  could  not  direct  or  control  it.  Its  proper  organisation  opened 
out  to  De  Boigne  a  splendid  field  for  his  talents.  In  the  strife  and 
scramble  for  the  wreck  of  Taiinur's  Empire,  a  soldier's  sword,  supported 
by  European  intelligence,  was  a  sufficient  capital. 

De  Boigne  had  already  served  three  masters,  and  was  no  novice  in 
the  art  of  swearing  allegiance.  His  fortunes  had  never  been  at  so  low 
an  ebb  as  they  were  at  this  moment,  when  he  found  himself  derelict 
in  the  centre  of  Hindustan.  He  was,  in  truth,  a  castaway,  whose 
condition  might  have  awakened  commiseration  in  the  coldest  breast. 
But  herein  lay  his  opportunity.  From  the  lowliness  of  his  beginning 
must  be  measured  the  height  of  his  attainment.  He  was  to  prove  the 
resultant  of  his  own  works,  and  before  accompanying  him  on  his  career 
to  his  ultimate  success,  it  is  well  to  note  this  point  from  which  he 
started.  It  was  one  hedged  about  with  novel  and  singular  difficulties 
and  dangers ;  but  they  could  not  veil  from  his  eyes  the  possibilities 
beyond.  To  a  man  of  his  splendid  spirit  and  tireless  perseverance 
obstacles  were  but  the  stepping  stones  to  an  end.  That  voyager 
succeeds  in  life  whose  eyes  are  fixed,  not  on  the  troubled  waters  that 
intervene,  but  on  the  harbour  he  desires  to  reach.  It  was  so  with 
De  Boigne.  He  felt  that,  at  last,  his  career  was  in  his  own  hands, 
and  with  squared  shoulders  and  resolute  mien  he  faced  the  future  that 
lay  before  him.  Long  ago,  as  a  boy,  he  had  dreamed  of  glory  and 
greatness ;  but  now  the  reality  of  his  life  was  dawning,  and  it  was 
destined  to  carry  him  far  beyond  "  the  utmost  further  rim"  of  youth's 
imagination. 


CHAPTER  II. 

DE   BOIGNE   ENTERS    SINDHIA'S   SERVICE.       THE   BATTLES    OF   LALSOT 
AND    CHAKSANA. 

1784-1788. 

THE  value  of  European  direction  and  discipline  in  native  warfare 
began  to  be  acknowledged  by  the  Princes  of  Upper  India  about 
the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  Nawabs  of  Bengal  and 
Oudh,  the  Eajahs  of  Kajputana,  the  Jat  chiefs  of  Agra  and  Bhartpur, 
and  the  Imperial  Court  of  Delhi  itself,  all  employed  from  time  to  time 
the  services  of  several  French,  and  a  few  English,  military  adven- 
turers, who  found  their  way  westward  or  northward  from  Calcutta  or 
the  Carnatic,  and  sold  their  swords  to  the  highest  bidder.  General 
Claude  Martine,  of  Lucknow,  could  have  told  De  Boigne  many  stirring 
and  romantic  histories,  that  can  never  be  known  now,  of  European 
soldiers  of  fortune  who  drilled  the  troops  and  led  to  battle  the  armies 
of  alien  races,  inspiring  them  with  confidence  and  courage,  and  teaching 
them  how  to  fight  fields  and  win  victories.  Amongst  these  daring 
men  were  persons  of  birth,  education,  and  approved  character,  who, 
from  various  causes,  expatriated  themselves,  and  entered  the  services 
of  the  Native  Courts.  Some  from  dissatisfaction  with  their  prospects, 
others — men  of  less  respectability — from  caprice  or  more  unworthy 
motives;  a  few  were  driven  to  this  form  of  banishment  by  reason 
of  their  necessities  or  pecuniary  embarrassments,  whilst  many  were 
actuated  by  a  spirit  of  pure  adventure,  without  any  aim  except  a 
desire  to  win  distinction  in  fresh  fields,  and  rise  to  a  pre-eminence 
denied  them  in  their  own  country. 

Of  this  cosmopolitan  company  two  or  three  achieved  high  rank  and 
position  at  the  Courts  they  served,  either  through  their  own  abilities 
or  under  favour  of  fortune.  But  the  majority  were  men  of  inferior 
moral  calibre,  who  proved  unable  to  resist  the  temptations  around 
them,  and  succumbed  to  the  notorious  vices  of  the  East.  Having  once 


DE  BOIGNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.  27 

given  way  to  debauchery  and  immorality,  they  soon  fell  into  the  lowest 
state  of  degradation,  despised  by  the  very  people  they  had  purposed  to 
teach. 

History  has  recorded  the  good  and  bad  deeds  of  only  a  few  of  these 
early  European  pioneers  in  Hindustan.  From  time  to  time  their 
names  flit  across  its  pages  in  desultory  transit,  to  be  too  often  dis- 
missed with  perfunctory  comment  or  contemptuous  unconcern.  Even 
the  current  literature  of  their  day  ignores  them,  and  one  may  search 
page  after  page  of  contemporaneous  history  without  gleaning  more 
than  the  baldest  facts  concerning  men  whose  enterprises  deserved  a 
fuller  recognition,  and  who  in  this  more  civilized  and  calmer  age  would 
have  been  acclaimed  heroes  of  no  common  clay. 

None  of  these  early  soldiers  of  fortune,  who  served  in  the  armies  of 
Delhi,  Lucknow,  Agra,  and  Bengal,  left  any  permanent  mark  upon  the 
history  of  their  times.  Some  of  them  were  locally  successful,  and  won 
battles  for  their  several  masters,  but  their  victories  were  isolated  in- 
cidents leading  to  no  substantial  assertion  of  power.  The  doctrine  of 
the  highest  bidder  governed  their  actions  whenever  they  attained  to 
any  temporary  importance,  and  counteracted  sustained  effort  in  one 
direction.  It  was  left  to  De  Boigne,  not  only  to  inaugurate  more 
perfect  systems  of  discipline  and  superior  methods  of  warfare,  but  to 
show  how  loyalty  to  a  single  cause  could  raise  it  up  to  supremacy. 
His  genius  and  his  constancy  created  a  dominion  such  as  those  who 
preceded  him  never  dreamt  of,  and  his  career  presents  a  contrast  to, 
rather  than  a  comparison  with,  the  careers  of  the  Military  Adventurers 
who  established  themselves  in  Upper  India  previous  to  the  period  in 
which  he  flourished. 

When  De  Boigne  joined  Mr.  Anderson's  camp,  Madhoji  Sindhia  was 
engaged  in  the  reduction  of  Gwalior.  This  stronghold  had  been  in 
the  possession  of  the  Marathas,  but  was  captured  from  them  by  the 
English  during  the  late  war,  and  made  over  to  Chattra  Sing,  the  Kana 
of  Gohad,  a  Jut  chieftain  who  had  created  an  independent  principality 
for  himself  on  the  ruins  of  Mughal  decadence.  The  Eana  had  been 
assisted  by  a  Frenchman  named  Medoc,  from  whom,  by  a  species  of 
transaction  peculiar  to  those  days,  he  purchased  a  battalion  of  dis- 
ciplined infantry.  In  1784  the  command  of  this  battalion  was  in  the 
hands  of  a  Scotchman  named  Sangster.  It  consisted  of  one  thousand 
disciplined  men,  and  a  respectable  train  of  artillery,  and  was  partially 
officered  by  Europeans,  one  of  them  being  an  Irishman  named  Thomas 
Legge,  the  hero  of  a  marvellously  adventurous  life.  But  this  single 
battalion  was  not  strong  enough  to  cope  with  Madhoji  Sindhia's 


28  DE  BOIGNE. 

immense  Maratha  hordes  investing  Gwalior,  the  siege  of  which  place 
it  had  been  unable  to  raise. 

De  Boigne,  smarting  under  a  sense  of  resentment  at  the  robbery  he 
had  sustained,  determined  to  offer  his  sword  to  Sindhia's  enemy,  the 
Rana  of  Gohad.  But  instead  of  endeavouring  to  enter  the  service  as 
an  officer  under  Sangster,  he  spurned  such  humble  means  to  an  end, 
and  boldly  proposed  to  raise  an  independent  and  much  larger  force  of 
his  own.  A  single  battalion  would  not  suit  the  ambition  of  this 
vagrant  adventurer,  whose  pride  was  not  broken  by  his  poverty.  He 
aspired  to  the  immediate  command  of  a  brigade  of  five  regiments.  It 
is  impossible  not  to  admire  the  cool  audacity  which  from  the  depths 
of  recent  disaster  could  deliberately  ask  for  an  advance  of  a  lakh  of 
rupees  (.£12,500)  to  create  an  army.  This  was  the  actual  proposition 
De  Boigne  made  to  Chattra  Sing,  undertaking  in  return  to  recruit  £  ve 
thousand  men  at  Delhi,  Jaipur,  Gohad,  and  elsewhere,  and  withal 
so  secretly  and  expeditiously  as  not  to  arouse  suspicion  until  he  was 
in  a  position  to  act  in  conjunction  with  Sangster,  and  relieve  the 
beleaguered  fort  of  Gwalior. 

The  proposal  was  an  imperial  one.  But  De  Boigne  had  unbounded 
belief  in  himself,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  formulate  it,  even  though  it 
should  bring  him  into  direct  conflict  with  the  might  of  the  Maratha 
Empire,  which  at  this  time  was  the  dominant  power  in  India.  A 
lakh  of  rupees  was  all  he  required.  But,  alas !  for  the  littleness  of 
human  nature  and  the  economy  of  regal  minds,  it  was  over  this 
miserable  bauble  the  scheme  was  wrecked.  Chattra  Sing  was  a 
prudent  and  thrifty  potentate.  He  mistrusted  the  enthusiastic  but 
unknown  stranger,  and  declined  to  confide  so  large  a  sum  to  his  care. 
But  this  did  not  prevent  the  practical  prince  from  turning  the  incident 
to  his  advantage,  by  causing  circumstantial  details  of  it  to  be  circu- 
lated, so  that  they  might  reach  Sindhia's  ears,  and  intimidate  him. 
The  information  was  soon  current  in  the  Maratha  camp,  and  not 
unnaturally  excited  Madhoji's  enmity  against  De  Boigne.  But  at  the 
same  time  it  discovered  the  daring  and  enterprise  of  a  man  who  could 
conceive  such  an  audacious  scheme,  and  marked  him  as  one  of  more 
than  average  ability. 

This  repulse  instead  of  discouraging  De  Boigne  stirred  him  to  fresh 
endeavour,  for  his  perseverance  was  as  dogged  as  his  ambition  was 
aspiring.  There  were  other  enemies  of  Sindhia  to  be  appealed  to, 
and  first  and  foremost  Partab  Sing,  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur,  who  was 
jealously  watching  the  movements  of  the  Maratha  armies,  ready,  in 
his  desire  to  restrain  them  within  their  own  boundaries,  to  take  the 
field  at  any  moment.  To  this  prince  De  Boigne  now  addressed 


DE  BOIQNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.          29 

himself,  and  his  proposals  were  favourably  received.  Negotiations 
followed,  and  he  was  engaged  at  a  salary  Rs.2,000  a  month  to  raise 
and  discipline  a  couple  of  battalions  of  regular  infantry. 

De  Boigne  at  once  wrote  to  Warren  Hastings,  acquainting  him  of 
his  good  fortune.  Whether  he  did  so  from  mere  exuberance  of  satis- 
faction, or  from  a  sense  of  duty,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Possibly  he  was 
influenced  by  the  circumstance  of  his  having  held  a  commission  in 
the  Company's  army,  or  he  may  have  considered  that  as  he  had 
started  from  Bengal  in  pursuit  of  a  fixed  purpose,  for  the  furtherance  of 
which  he  had  received  credentials  from  the  Governor-General,  it  was 
right,  now  that  his  original  plan  was  abandoned,  to  communicate  the 
fact.  Unfortunately  his  letter  was  official  in  form,  and  was  read  at 
the  meeting  of  the  Bengal  Council,  whose  factious  members  never 
neglected  an  opportunity  of  opposing  the  Governor-General ;  and  they 
immediately  expressed  disapproval  of  a  European,  a  protege  of  Warren 
Hastings,  entering  the  service  of  native  princes.  This  opinion  was 
quite  in  keeping  with  the  petty  prejudices  of  the  period,  when  "  inter- 
lopers "  were  regarded  with  only  one  degree  less  suspicion  than 
loafers  create  at  the  present  day.  It  resulted  in  an  order  for  De 
Boigne  to  return  to  Calcutta  immediately. 

De  Boigne  received  this  just  as  he  was  entering  on  his  new  task, 
and  it  is  to  his  credit  that  he  at  once  obeyed,  and  started  for  Bengal. 
His  prompt  compliance  so  pleased  Warren  Hastings,  that  after  expla- 
nations had  been  tendered,  he  permitted  De  Boigne  to  accompany 
him  to  Lucknow,  whither  he  was  going,  and  from  thence  to  return 
to  Jaipur  to  resume  his  engagement  But  meanwhile  the  treaty  ot 
Salbye  had  been  ratified,  and  this  changed  Partab  Sing's  policy,  and 
he  dispensed  with  De  Boigne's  services,  salving  the  disappointment 
with  a  solatium  of  Ks.  10,000,  with  which  the  Utter  returned  to  Delhi, 
where  he  found  his  friend,  Major  Brown. 

Little  did  the  Jaipur  ruler  suspect  what  a  disastrous  effect  upon  his 
future  fortunes  was  to  follow  this  decision,  or  he  would  never  have 
permitted  the  departure  from  his  service  of  a  man  who  was  to  become 
his  scourge  and  dictator  in  the  future.  It  is  idle  to  speculate  upon 
the  what-might-have-beens  of  history,  yet  it  is  indisputable  that,  but 
for  the  failure  of  De  Boigne's  negotiations  with  Chattra  Sing  and 
Fartab  Sing,  he  would  have  been  arrayed  in  the  field  of  battle  against 
Madhoji  Sindhia,  instead  of  on  his  side,  and  this  circumstance  must, 
in  all  human  probability,  have  changed  the  course  of  Central  and 
Upper  Indian  history  for  the  next  twenty  years. 

During  these  transactions  Madhoji  Sindhia  had  been  obser- 
vant of  the  man  whose  papers  he  had  stolen,  and  of  whose 


30  DE  BOIGNE. 

enterprise  he  received  such  constant  proofs,  and  so  high  was  the 
opinion  he  conceived  of  his  capacity  that  he  came  to  the  con- 
clusion it  would  be  better  to  secure  his  services  for  himself.  In  the 
recent  war  with  the  English  Sindhia  had  learnt  the  value  of  dis- 
ciplined infantry.  Twice  within  a  fortnight  his  army  of  20,000 
cavalry  had  been  attacked  and  dispersed  by  Colonel  Goddard  at  the 
head  of  a  force  of  4,000  British  troops,  whilst  Captain  Popham,  by  his 
brilliant  capture  of  Gwalior,  had  proved  how  much  could  be  achieved 
by  Sepoys  well  trained  and  heroically  led.  The  Maratha  armies  of 
this  period  mustered  no  infantry  at  all,  and  Sindhia  determined  to 
raise  a  force  of  this  arm.  He  therefore  made  advances  to  De 
Boigne  through  Mr.  Anderson,  and  invited  the  man,  who  had  so 
deliberately  sought  to  beard  him,  to  enter  his  service. 

With  such  splendid  prospects  as  were  now  opened  out  to  him,  De 
Boigne  could  afford  to  forget  all  injuries  and  bury  all  animosities, 
and  he  accepted  the  offer  without  any  hesitation.  And  here  a  short 
digression  is  necessary  to  explain  the  political  situation  in  Upper 
India  at  the  time  when  De  Boigne  entered  the  service  of  Madhoji 
Sindhia. 

In  this  year,  1784,  the  Empire  of  the  Mughal  was  tottering  to  its 
fall.  It  had,  indeed,  virtually  ceased  to  exist  twenty-two  years  pre- 
viously, when  'Alamgir  II.  was  murdered,  for  Shah  'Alam,  who  suc- 
ceeded him,  was  never  anything  but  a  mere  symbol  of  sovereignty, 
now  paraded  by  one  minister  in  power,  now  by  another,  as  his  patent  of 
authority.  Meanwhile  the  Maratha  power  was  fast  recovering  from 
the  shock  its  prestige  had  sustained  at  Panipat,  and  under  the  genius 
of  Madhoji  Sindhia  reasserting  its  influence  at  Delhi.  Madhoji  had 
good  cause  to  remember  Panipat,  for  a  wound  received  in  that  battle 
left  him  a  cripple  for  life.  Since  that  memorable  day  he  had  been 
associated  with  Takuji  Holkar  in  consolidating  the  Maratha  power 
in  the  great  province  of  Malwa,  whose  government  they  shared 
equally,  and  preparing  to  recover  the  supremacj^  of  Hindustan.  Ten 
years  after  Panipat  the  two  chiefs  placed  Shah  'Alam  on  the  throne 
of  Delhi,  from  which  he  had  been  driven  by  the  Abdali.  Eight  years 
later  war  broke  out  with  the  English,  and  they  were  obliged  to 
withdraw  their  forces  southward  to  protect  their  own  territories. 
During  this  campaign,  which  lasted  from  1779  to  1782,  Madhoji's 
fortunes  rose  and  fell,  and  rose  again,  until  they  were  finally  estab- 
lished by  the  treaty  of  Salbye,  which  recognised  his  independence, 
raised  him  to  the  head  of  the  confederated  Maratha  princes,  who 
acknowledged  the  Peshwa  of  Poonah  as  their  suzerain,  and  left  him 
a  free  hand  to  deal  with  the  wreck  of  the  Mughal  Empire  as  he  willed. 


DE  BOIGNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.  31 

The  road  was  now  clear  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  ambitious 
designs  against  Delhi,  which  had  been  interrupted  by  late  events. 
Since  the  withdrawal  of  the  Maratha  protection  from  Shah  'Alain, 
the  capital  had  become  a  prey  to  internal  quarrels  and  jealousies, 
which  reduced  it  to  a  state  of  absolute  anarchy.  It  was  a  period 
when  great  political  and  territorial  changes  were  on  the  tapis,  and  the 
Emperor's  dominions,  torn  by  dissensions,  seemed  to  court  invasion. 
Madhoji  only  waited  a  favourable  opportunity  to  advance,  whilst 
behind  him  crouched  the  enormous  power  of  the  Maratha  nation. 
To  be  associated  with  such  a  prince  at  such  a  time  was  to  woo  fortune 
by  her  most  certain  path. 

De  Boigne  was  so  associated,  and  how  well  he  used  his  oppor- 
tunities these  pages  will  attempt  to  show.  The  commission  he 
received  from  Madhoji  was  to  raise  two  battalions  of  disciplined 
infantry,  with  a  suitable  complement  of  artillery.  He  was  to  receive 
eight  rupees  a  month  for  each  soldier  in  the  force,  and  his  own  pay 
was  fixed  at  Es.  1,000  per  mensem.  The  battalions  were  to  consist 
of  850  men  each,  and  to  be  formed  as  nearly  as  possible  upon  the 
lines  of  those  in  the  Company's  service,  with  similar  accoutrements, 
arms,  and  discipline.  In  short,  the  corps  was  one  calculated  to 
give  fair  scope  to  De  Boigne's  powers  of  organisation  and  his  military 
ability. 

In  1784  De  Boigne  began  this  task  with  characteristic  energy. 
Recruits  soon  flocked  to  his  enlisting  centres,  for  in  such  warlike 
times,  and  amongst  such  warlike  races,  soldiers  were  an  abundant 
ready-money  commodity.  He  fixed  the  pay  of  a  Sepoy  at  five  and  a 
half  rupees  per  mensem,  thus  leaving  a  sufficient  surplusage  from 
which  to  offer  attractive  inducements  to  European  officers  to  join  his 
standard.  Sangster  was  one  of  the  first  to  do  so,  having  recently  left 
the  Eana  of  Gohad's  service  on  that  chief  submission  to  Sindhia. 
The  Scotchman  was  a  man  of  considerable  ingenuity,  and  skilful 
in  the  art  of  casting  cannon,  and  De  Boigne  appointed  him  super- 
intendent of  his  arsenal,  where  he  was  soon  busy  turning  out 
excellent  artillery  and  small  arms.  Another  officer  was  John  Hes- 
sing,  a  Dutchman  by  nationality,  and  a  gallant  man  by  nature.  He 
commanded  one  of  the  battalions,  and  a  Frenchman  named  Fremont 
the  other. 

During  the  time  he  was  engaged  in  raising  his  corps  De  Boigne's 
energy  was  inexhaustible,  and  in  vivid  contrast  to  the  sensual  indo- 
lence which  too  frequently  characterised  the  military  adventurers  of 
the  period.  From  morning  to  midnight  he  was  continuously  at  work, 
superintending  every  detail  of  the  new  force.  He  examined  and 


32  DE  BOIGNE. 

passed  recruits,  drilled  the  raw  levies,  organised  the  companies  and 
divisions,  and  selected  and  appointed  the  native  officers.  Amongst 
others  who  offered  their  services  about  this  time  was  a  certain 
Rohilla,  named  Amir  Khan,  whom  De  Boigne  rejected  because  of 
his  youth.  It  was  not  often  that  he  was  at  fault  in  selecting  his 
native  subordinates,  but  in  this  instance  he  failed  to  detect  the  merits 
of  the  applicant ;  for  Amir  Khan  rose  to  an  eminence  which,  in 
comparison,  was  as  great  as  that  attained  by  the  European  who 
declined  his  services.  As  soon  as  his  muster  roll  was  full  De  Boigne 
turned  his  attention  to  succeeding  details,  choosing  the  uniforms, 
deciding  on  the  accoutrements  and  armament,  and  providing  a 
suitable  equipment  for  field  service.  He  never  spared  himself,  but 
grappled  with  the  work  he  had  undertaken  strenuously  and  enthu- 
siastically. The  result  was  that  in  less  than  five  months  he  had 
brought  into  readiness  for  active  service  two  excellent  battalions  of 
regular  infantry.  Those  only  who  have  had  experience  of  the  interior 
economy  of  a  native  state,  which  nowadays  is  but  a  reflection  of  the 
chaos  existing  in  India  a  hundred  years  ago,  can  form  an  idea  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  work  accomplished  by  De  Boigne  within  this  short 
space  of  time. 

As  soon  as  his  new-fledged  battalions  were  ready  to  take  the  field, 
Madhoji  Sindhia  ordered  them  to  join  the  army  of  Appa  Khandi  Rao, 
one  of  his  leading  generals,  who  was  engaged  in  the  subjugation  of 
Bundelkhand.  Appa's  force  consisted  solely  of  cavalry,  that  being 
the  only  arm  of  service  engaged  in  the  predatory  system  of  warfare 
which  the  Marathas  affected.  There  was  at  first  a  prejudice,  amount- 
ing to  a  contempt,  displayed  towards  De  Boigne's  new  battalions,  but 
this  did  not  prevent  him  from  making  their  value  felt ;  and  when  the 
siege  of  Kalinjar,  a  strong  fortress  a  few  miles  south  of  Allahabad, 
was-  undertaken,  the  whole  brunt  of  the  attack  devolved  upon  his 
infantry  and  artillery,  who  distinguished  themselves  so  signally  that 
they  evoked  the  highest  tribute  of  praise  from  Appa  Khandi  Rao. 

But  the  Bundelkhand  campaign  was  brought  to  a  premature  close 
by  events  at  Delhi.  Madhoji  Sindhia  had  long  been  watching  the 
dissensions  in  progress  at  the  Court  of  Shah  'Alam,  which  culminated 
in  the  assassination  of  two  successive  Wazirs.  Paralysed  by  the 
difficulties  around  him,  and  after  vainly  seeking  help  from  the 
English,  the  luckless  Emperor  appealed  in  his  extremity  to  the 
Marathii  prince  to  subdue  his  mutinous  nobles  and  seat  him  in 
security  on  the  throne  of  his  forefathers. 

This  was  the  opportunity  Madhoji  had  so  long  desired.  He  at  once 
crossed  the  Chambal  River,  which  formed  the  northern  boundary  of 


DE  SOIGNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.          33 

the  Marathd  dominions,  and  joined  the  Emperor  at  Agra  in  October, 
1784,  and  early  in  the  following  year  escorted  him  back  to  Delhi, 
from  which  he  had  been  forced  to  fly.  Some  of  the  rebellious  nobles 
evacuated  the  city  on  his  approach,  and  others  submitted,  and  in 
January,  1785,  the  unhappy  monarch  was  once  more  elevated  to  the 
regal  state,  if  not  the  sovereign  power,  of  Emperor  of  Hindustan. 

The  power  remained  in  Sindhia's  hands,  for  he  was  the  master  of  the 
situation.  In  his  gratitude  Shah  'Alam  desired  to  invest  his  deliverer 
•with  the  title  and  dignity  of  Amir-ul-Umrah,  or  Chief  of  the  Nobles, 
but  this  honour  was  declined.  The  titular  distinction  was  not  accom- 
panied by  corresponding  practical  advantages,  and  the  empty  leader- 
ship of  such  a  factious  aristocracy  was  to  be  avoided  rather  than 
accepted.  The  crafty  Hindu  prince — a  great  soldier,  but  a  greater 
statesman — had  other  objects  in  view  than  the  impossible  post  of 
keeper  of  a  Muhammadan  emperor's  unruly  kin.  With  a  sycophantic 
assumption  of  humility,  which  he  always  carried  to  excess  throughout 
life,  Madhoji  declined  all  honours  for  himself,  but  for  his  suzerain, 
the  Peshwa,  who  was  nominally  the  vassal  of  Delhi,  he  requested  the 
dignity  of  Vakil-i-Mutluq,  or  supreme  deputy  of  the  Emperor,  a  post 
which  carried  with  it  paramount  authority.  This  was  accorded  by 
Shah  'Alam,  who  thus  signed  away  his  regal  power.  As  a  natural 
consequence  Madhoji,  the  Peshwa's  local  representative,  assumed  the 
office,  and  with  it  the  control,  of  the  Imperial  army,  the  sole 
machine  of  government  in  Oriental  politics.  Soon  afterwards  the 
chief  command  of  it  was  conferred  on  him  as  a  personal  distinction. 

Hindustan  was  now  in'Sindhia's  hands.  His  arms  and  his  diplomacy 
had  made  him  its  master.  The  rich  Mughal  districts  in  the  Doab,  a 
fertile  tract  of  country  between  the  Ganges  and  Jumna,  soon  sur- 
rendered with  the  fortresses  of  Aligarh  and  Agra.  On  the  fall  of 
the  latter,  regarded  as  the  key  of  Hindustan,  the  Deccan  Hindu  was 
paramount  lord  of  the  Mughal  Empire. 

But  Fortune  had  been  too  lavish  with  her  favours.  In  his  career  of 
conquest  Madhoji  Sindhia  was  aided  by  circumstances  too  fortuitous 
to  be  permanently  relied  upon.  The  ancient  aristocracy  of  Delhi, 
awed  into  submission  at  first  by  his  masterly  advance,  and  the  weak- 
ness of  their  own  internal  chaos,  began  to  foregather  and  recover 
spirit.  Sindhia's  necessity,  possibly  his  cupidity,  could  not  resist  the 
temptation  of  sequestrating  the  estates  of  the  leading  nobles,  and  thus, 
to  the  intolerable  insult  of  a  despised  infidel  being  placed  in  command 
over  them,  was  added  the  positive  injury  of  the  loss  of  their  property. 
Misfortune  made  them  kin,  and  they  determined  to  sink  for  a  time  all 
their  private  enmities,  and  concert  measures  to  expel  the  invader.  To 

3 


34  DE  BOIGNE. 

which  end  they  entered  into  communications  with  the  Rajahs  of  Jaipur 
and  Jodhpur,  in  Rajputana,  to  whom  they  proposed  an  alliance,  and 
these  princes,  mindful  of  the  heavy  exactions  they  continually  suf- 
fered as  tributaries  of  the  Marathas,  turned  a  favourable  ear  to  their 
overtures. 

Directly  Madhoji  Sindhia  heard  of  this  combination  he  determined 
to  anticipate  its  action.  The  Rajputs  had  long  been  nominal  vassals 
of  the  Empire,  and  seizing  on  this  as  a  pretext,  he  called  upon  them,  in 
his  capacity  of  Vakil-i-Mutluq,  for  payment  of  tribute.  The  demand 
was  only  partially  obeyed,  and  in  order  to  enforce  it,  Madhoji  prepared 
to  lead  the  Imperial  army  against  the  rebels. 

But  Sindhia's  power  now  showed  the  unstable  basis  on  which  it 
was  builded.  His  weakness  lay,  not  in  his  will,  but  in  his  weapon. 
The  Imperial  army  was  necessarily  the  instrument  of  his  purpose,  but 
it  was  officered  by  those  very  nobles  who  had  entered  into  intrigues 
with  the  enemy,  and  its  ranks  filled  with  their  own  personal  follow- 
ing. It  was  obviously  unsafe  for  Madhoji  to  place  himself  in  the 
power  of  such  a  force.  In  order,  therefore,  to  strengthen  his  hands, 
he  recalled  the  army  of  Bundelkhand,  and,  on  being  joined  by  Appa 
Khandi  Rao  and  De  Boigne,  set  out  for  Rajputana  early  in  the  year 
1787. 

Near  the  village  of  Lalsot,  some  miles  to  the  south-east  of  Jaipur, 
the  allied  forces  of  the  Rajput  princes  were  found  drawn  up  for  battle. 
The  untrustworthiness  of  the  Imperial  army  soon  discovered  itself, 
for  two  of  the  leading  generals  at  once  went  over  to  Partab  Sing, 
taking  with  them  all  their  troops.  Their  names  were  Muhammad 
Beg  Hamadani,  and  his  nephew,  Ismail  Beg,  who  was  destined  to 
become  one  of  Madhoji's  most  redoubtable  foes  for  the  next  seven 
years. 

This  early  example  of  treachery  created  a  spirit  of  mutiny  amongst 
the  Mughal  soldiery,  whose  sympathies  were  naturally  with  the  de- 
serters, and  the  aspect  of  affairs  soon  became  threatening.  In  this 
dilemma  Madhoji  was  compelled  to  avail  himself  of  that  desperate 
panacea  for  internal  trouble — action.  He  determined  to  give  battle 
before  there  was  time  for  any  further  desertions  to  take  place,  trusting 
to  fortune  for  victory,  and  knowing  that  halting  indecision  always 
sides  with  the  stronger  party. 

Accordingly  he  disposed  his  army  for  attack,  and  gave  the  order  to 
advance.  On  the  left  De  Boigne's  battalions  were  stationed,  and  the 
right  was  entrusted  to  the  Maratha  Cavalry,  both  supporting,  or  more 
probably  coercing,  the  Imperial  army  in  the  centre.  The  Rajput 
princes  at  once  accepted  battle,  and  the  action  began.  At  the  very 


DE  BOIGNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.          35 

outset  Muhammed  Beg  Hamadani  was  killed  by  a  cannon-shot,  which 
BO  disheartened  his  troops  that  they  began  to  retreat,  and  it  seemed 
as  though  the  day  was  lost.  But  at  this  juncture  Ismail  Beg  came  to 
the  rescue.  Rallying  his  uncle's  wavering  soldiery  he  placed  himself 
at  their  head  and  charged  the  Mahratta  Cavalry  with  such  impetuous 
gallantry  that  he  drove  them  back  in  disorder. 

Observing  this,  the  Chief  of  Eiah,  one  of  the  Raja  of  Jodhpur's 
generals,  was  encouraged  to  advance,  and  collecting  his  10,000  Rathor 
Cavalry,  led  them  against  Sindhia's  left  wing,  where  only  De  Boigne, 
with  his  little  body  of  infantry,  stood  to  oppose  him. 

The  Rathors  of  Jodhpur  were  the  very  flower  of  Rajput  bravery, 
and  celebrated  throughout  Hindustan  for  their  splendid  courage  and 
their  handsome  mien.  They  were  a  warrior  clan  whose  past  achieve- 
ment had  marked  them  out  as  the  first  and  finest  of  all  the  fighting 
races  of  the  East,  and  won  for  them  the  proud  distinction  of  being 
without  fear. 

As  they  came  within  sight  of  De  Boigne's  two  battalions,  drawn  up 
ready  to  receive  them,  they  converged  upon  the  little  band,  rending 
the  air  with  fierce  and  exulting  shouts  of  anticipated  victory.  Their 
flags  flaunted  in  the  breeze,  the  sunshine  glistened  on  their  plumed 
helmets  and  chain  armour,  and  their  swords  and  spears  flashed  aloft 
as  they  thundered  over  the  sun-baked  plain.  Never  yet  in  the  history 
of  battle  had  footmen  dared  to  oppose  the  might  of  Marwar  mounted 
for  the  fray,  and  when  the  Chief  of  Riah  saw  the  compact  formation, 
steady  as  the  stones  around,  awaiting  his  onslaught,  he  determined 
to  punish  this  insolence  of  courage. 

It  was  a  terrible  baptism  of  battle  for  De  Boigne's  young  battah'ons. 
Armies  had  melted  and  dispersed  before  these  on  charging  warriors, 
who  seemed  as  if  they  had  but  to  ride  over  to  annihilate  the  little 
square  that  held  its  place  and  awaited  the  shock  with  splendid  courage. 
In  the  midst  of  his  men  rode  De  Boigne,  calm  and  fearless.  He  had 
formed  them  into  a  hollow  square  (a  formation  Wellington  and  Quatre 
Bas  were  to  make  famous  in  after  years),  with  his  guns  hidden  from 
view  in  the  centre.  Not  for  a  moment  was  his  presence  of  mind  dis- 
turbed, and  as  he  issued  his  orders  and  completed  his  dispositions,  his 
confident  bearing  gave  his  men  that  sense  of  security  which  Asiatics 
have  ever  derived  from  the  presence  and  co-operation  of  European 
leaders. 

Nearer  and  nearer  came  the  advancing  squadrons,  until  the  supreme 
moment  arrived  and  only  a  few  paces  intervened.  Then  the  word  of 
command  rang  out,  and  with  the  precision  of  the  parade  ground,  De 
Boigne's  front  line  fell  back  behind  the  guns,  which,  before  the 


36  DE  BOIGNE. 

amazed  Eathors  could  realize  what  the  movement  signified,  belcbed 
out  a  murderous  discharge  of  grape  into  their  ranks. 

The  huge  moving  mass  staggered  at  the  shock,  but,  carried  forward 
by  its  own  impetus,  completed  its  charge.  Eeckless  of  everything 
except  the  honour  of  the  day,  the  sons  of  Marwar  rode  to  the  cannons' 
muzzles,  cutting  down  the  gunners  as  they  served  their  pieces,  and 
attempting  to  break  into  the  centre  of  the  stubborn  square.  For 
a  few  seconds  all  was  inextricable  confusion;  then,  as  the  smoke 
cleared  away,  high  above  the  roar  of  battle,  the  word  of  command 
rang  out  again,  and  from  nearly  two  thousand  muskets,  at  closest 
quarters,  a  death-dealing  volley  was  directed  against  the  Eathor  ranks. 

Their  horses  refused  to  face  the  awful  sheet  of  flame  that  flashed 
out  and  strewed  the  field  with  corpses  of  men  and  beasts  ;  and  rider- 
less steeds,  stampeding  back  in  terror  through  the  main  body,  added 
to  its  confusion.  De  Boigne's  military  instinct  seized  the  decisive 
moment,  and  the  advance  was  sounded.  It  was  the  turning-point  of 
the  fight.  The  enemy  were  rallying  for  a  second  charge,  infuriated  at 
the  insult  of  a  repulse  from  infantry.  But  before  they  could  reform 
De  Boigne  and  his  battalions  were  on  them.  Again  the  flames  flashed 
forth  in  the  very  faces  of  the  horses,  and  like  lightning  from  the 
heavens  above  dealt  death  and  dismay.  The  despised  infantry  could 
not  only  resist,  it  could  attack !  A  revelation  burst  upon  these 
warriors  of  the  West,  and  before  that  small  disciplined  force  the 
chivalry  of  Eajputana  wavered  and  broke,  till  finally,  like  driven 
cattle,  they  streamed  out  in  flight,  conquered  by  the  genius,  the  reso- 
lution, and  intrepidity  of  a  single  man. 

It  needed  but  a  general  advance  of  the  Imperial  army  to  complete 
the  victory  assured  by  the  valour  of  De  Boigne's  corps.  The  Mughal 
centre  was  ordered  to  follow  in  pursuit,  but  intrigue  and  treachery 
had  been  at  work,  and  they  refused  to  stir.  And  so  the  enemy  made 
good  their  retreat,  and  De  Boigne  found  that  the  heroism  of  his  men 
had  been  expended  in  vain,  and  that  the  blood  so  freely  shed  on 
Lalsot's  plain  had  been  sacrificed  to  the  accomplishment  of  an  empty 
victory. 

Two  days  later  Sindhia  prepared  to  renew  the  battle,  but  even 
as  he  was  forming  his  line,  the  whole  of  the  Imperial  army,  by  a 
volte  face  indigenous  to  Asiatic  soil,  passed  over  to  the  enemy,  taking 
with  them  eighty  'pieces  of  cannon.  De  Boigne's  indignation  was 
aroused  beyond  endurance  as  he  saw  the  Mughal  deserters  marching 
away  with  drums  beating  and  flags  flying.  Galloping  up  to  Sindhia 
he  asked  permission  to  charge  them  with  the  Maratha  Cavalry,  but 
Madhoji  with  a  more  prudent  appreciation  of  the  danger  their  defec- 


DE  BOIGNE  ENTEES  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.          87 

tion  involved,  preferred  the  doctrine  of  discretion  and  decided  to  leave 
them  alone. 

There  was  nothing  left  but  to  retire,  for  the  Maratha  troops  could 
not  hope  to  resist  the  overswollen  ranks  of  the  enemy.  The  danger 
was  critical,  but  it  served  to  bring  into  operation  all  Madhoji's  finest 
qualities  of  fortitude  and  resource.  A  line  of  retreat  to  Ulwar  was 
quickly  decided  upon  and  the  march  commenced,  the  defence  of  the 
rear  being  entrusted  to  De  Boigne.  Ismail  Beg  at  once  prepared  to 
follow,  but  his  Kajput  allies,  having  satisfactorily  asserted  their  exemp- 
tion from  tribute,  and  recovered  their  lost  province  of  Ajmir  (which 
the  Marathas  were  obliged  to  abandon),  declined  to  take  up  another's 
quarrel  and  withdrew  into  their  own  territories.  The  Mughal  noble, 
collecting  all  the  cavalry  he  could  muster,  followed  in  pursuit  of  the 
retreating  enemy  with  the  intention  of  destroying  them,  but  in  this  he 
was  foiled  by  De  Boigne,  who  proved  himself  as  skilful  a  general  in 
retreat  as  he  had  been  in  action,  and  with  his  two  battalions  success- 
fully defended  the  rear  of  Sindhia's  army  for  eight  days,  meeting  and 
repulsing  every  attack  made  by  Ismail  Beg,  until  Ulwar  was  reached 
and  refuge  found  within  its  walls. 

The  Mughal  noble  now  relinquished  the  pursuit,  and  made  his  way 
to  Agra,  and  shortly  afterwards  Madhqji  Sindhia,  convinced  that  he 
could  no  longer  hold  Hindustan,  collected  his  vanquished  forces,  and 
crossing  the  Chambal,  fell  back  upon  the  fortress  of  Gwalior,  whence 
he  wrote  urgent  letters  to  the  Peshwa  at  Poonah  to  send  reinforce- 
ments to  aid  in  retrieving  this  tremendous  disaster  to  Maratha 
prestige. 

Meanwhile  Ismail  Beg,  in  his  design  to  recover  Delhi,  found 
himself  forestalled  by  a  Eohilla  chief  named  Ghulam  Kadir,  who  had 
seized  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  distracted  state  of  affairs  in 
Upper  India,  and  the  defenceless  condition  of  the  capital,  to  drive 
out  the  Maratha  garrison  and  take  possession  of  it.  The  only  in- 
dividual who  attempted  to  oppose  him  was  the  Begum  Somru,  who 
had  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  regular  troops  her  late  husband 
raised ;  but  although  she  displayed  great  courage  and  spirit  she  was 
obliged  to  retire.  Ghulam  Kadir  next  captured  Aligarh,  whereupon 
Ismail  Beg,  finding  the  Afghan  master  of  the  situation,  and  not 
feeling  strong  enough  to  oppose  him,  made  overtures  for  an  alliance, 
offering  to  share  with  him  all  the  conquests  their  joint  forces  might 
effect ;  and  these  terms  being  accepted,  a  plan  was  formed  for  the 
immediate  recovery  of  the  Mughal  Doab  provinces  from  the  Marathas. 

The  capture  of  Aligarh  was  soon  followed  by  that  of  the  surrounding 
districts.  This  accomplished,  the  two  chiefs  were  able  lo  concentrate 


38  DE  BOIGNE. 

their  forces  on  the  siege  of  Agra,  Sindhia's  sole  remaining  stronghold 
in  Hindustan,  but  here  a  stubborn  resistance  was  opposed  to  them 
by  a  Brahmin  named  Lakwa  Dada,  one  of  the  bravest  and  best  of  the 
Maratha  generals,  and  a  prominent  figure  in  the  history  of  the  country 
for  the  next  fifteen  years. 

With  the  Imperial  city  wrested  from  him,  the  Doab  Provinces  lost, 
Aligarh  captured,  and  Agra  closely  invested,  the  fortunes  of  Madhoji 
Sindhia  were  indeed  dark.  After  his  brief  blaze  of  triumph,  he  had 
in  one  short  campaign  lost  nearly  everything  his  arms  had  previously 
won,  and  now  found  himself  apparently  further  off  than  ever  from  the 
attainment  of  his  ambition.  His  army  was  beaten  and  dispirited,  and 
he  had  proved  as  weak  in  holding  Hindustan  as  he  had  been  bold  in 
seizing  it.  For  some  months  he  remained  at  Gwalior,  anxiously 
awaiting  help  from  the  Deccan ;  but  it  was  a  far  cry  from  the 
Chambal  to  Poonah.  Not  only  many  leagues,  but  many  jealousies 
intervened.  Poonah  politics  were  directed  by  a  crafty  Brahmin 
named  Nana  Farnavis,  who  has  been  denominated  the  Machiavelli 
of  the  Maratha  Empire.  He  had  long  been  hostile  to  Sindhia,  whose 
enormous  and  growing  power  aroused  mistrust,  and  had  no  difficulty 
in  persuading  the  Peshwa  that  his  vassal  of  Ujjain  was  aiming  at  the 
establishment  of  an  independent  kingdom  for  himself.  Beneath  the 
cloak  of  servility,  under  which  Sindhia  always  disguised  his  intentions, 
there  existed  designs  of  the  most  imperial  nature.  In  his  excess  of 
humility  he  called  himself  a  Patel,  or  village  mayor,  and  vowed  that 
to  carry  his  master,  the  Peshwa's,  slippers  was  his  hereditary  duty ; 
hut  under  this  artificial  assumption  of  modesty  there  lurked  far- 
reaching  aims  and  ambitions.  Nana  Farnavis  was  aware  of  this,  and 
in  the  hour  of  Sindhia's  need,  deemed  it  the  wisest  policy  to  withhold 
assistance.  To  the  urgent  appeals  for  reinforcements  replies  of 
a  temporising  nature  were  sent,  and  it  soon  became  apparent  to 
Sindhia  that  no  help  could  be  expected  from  Poonah  at  present,  and 
that  he  must  depend  upon  his  own  exertions  to  re-establish  his  shaken 
fortunes. 

The  relief  of  Agra  was  of  the  first  importance,  in  order  to  secure 
a  base  of  operations  for  the  reconquest  of  the  lost  territory.  In 
proximity  to  this  fortress  lay  the  country  of  the  Jats,  a  low  caste 
Hindu  tribe,  originally  from  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  who  possessed 
a  tolerable  army,  which  included  a  battalion  of  regular  infantry, 
commanded  by  a  Frenchman  named  Lestineau.  After  his  defeat  at 
Lalsot,  Madhoji,  with  diplomatic  generosity,  had  made  a  virtue  of 
necessity,  and  restored  to  the  Jats  a  considerable  iract  of  territory 
and  the  fortress  of  Dig,  which  had  originally  been  conquered  from 


DE  BOIGNE  ENTERS  SINDHIA'S  SERVICE.          39 

them.  This  paved  the  way  for  an  alliance  which  he  now  entered  into 
with  their  ruler,  Ranjit  Sing.  Calling  in  all  his  scattered  detach- 
ments, Sindhia  concentrated  his  army  at  Bhartpur,  where  a  junction 
was  formed  with  his  new  allies,  and  in  the  spring  of  1788  he  prepared 
to  take  the  field  again. 

Whereupon  Ismail  Beg  and  Ghulam  Kadir  raised  the  siege  of 
Agra,  and  marched  to  oppose  him,  and  on  the  24th  of  April  the  two 
armies  met  at  Chaksana,  or  Chaksu,  about  eight  miles  from  Bhartpur. 
Sindhia's  troops  were  commanded  by  Appa  Khandi  Rao  and  Rana 
Khan.  The  latter  was  a  favourite  officer,  who  had  saved  Madhoji's  life 
at  Panipat  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  before,  in  gratitude  for 
which  he  had  been  raised  to  high  military  command.  Although  of 
humble  birth  Rana  Kkan  proved  himself  worthy  of  the  confidence 
reposed  in  him,  and  was  moreover  a  very  capable  general.  Appa 
Khandi  Rao,  as  a  reward  for  gallantry  and  enterprise,  had  recently 
obtained  the  estates  sequestrated  from  Ismail  Beg,  but  only  to  lose 
them  by  his  master's  present  reverse  of  fortune.  He  had  every 
reason  to  desire  the  re-establishment  of  the  Maratha  rule,  and  was 
entrusted  with  the  chief  command  in  this  battle.  In  the  disposition 
of  his  forces  he  placed  the  Maratha  troops  in  the  centre,  supported  on 
the  right  by  De  Boigne's  battalions,  and  on  the  left  by  the  Jat  army 
and  Lestineau's  regular  infantry. 

The  action  began  with  a  heavy  cannonade  opened  by  Ismail  Beg, 
and  chiefly  directed  against  De  Boigne's  corps,  in  the  hopes  of  shaking 
the  solidity  of  the  phalanx  which  had  so  successfully  resisted  all  attacks 
in  the  battle  of  Lalsot,  and  during  the  retreat  to  Ulwar.  On  the 
other  wing  Ghulam  Kadir,  spurning  such  incidental  aid,  charged  the 
Jats,  and  soon  put  all  to  flight,  except  Lestineau's  infantry,  who  main- 
tained their  ground.  Seeing  the  enemy's  left  wing  in  retreat,  and 
anticipating  that  their  example  might  be  contagious,  Ismail  Beg  now 
suspended  his  artillery  fire,  and  collecting  his  cavalry  bore  down  upon 
De  Boigne. 

But  the  same  discipline  and  resolution  which  had  saved  the  two 
battalions  when  they  stemmed  the  torrent  of  the  Rathor  charge 
animated  them  now.  Ismail  Beg's  onslaught  was  met  with  firmness 
and  fortitude,  and  all  his  efforts  failed  to  shake  the  square  of  trained 
men,  who,  standing  shoulder  to  shoulder,  proved  themselves  im- 
pervious to  panic,  and  withheld  their  fire  until  their  leader  gave  the 
word  of  command.  Then  was  repeated  the  lesson  of  Lalsot :  a  hail 
of  bullets  tore  into  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  and  strewed  the  ground 
with  dead  and  wounded.  Calm  discipline  again  proved  its  superiority 
over  mad  valour,  and  the  science  of  war  triumphed  over  the  advantage 


40  DE  BOIGNE. 

of  numbers.  Before  De  Boigne's  musketry  fire  the  Mughal  squadrons 
fell  back  dazed  and  decimated,  and  it  needed  but  the  assistance  of  the 
Maratha  Cavalry  to  secure  the  day.  But  again  Fate  snatched  the 
laurels  from  the  adventurer's  grasp,  for  when  the  critical  moment 
arrived  the  Deccan  warriors  were  not  at  hand  to  charge.  De  Boigne's 
and  Lestineau's  infantry  alone  kept  the  field,  until  unsupported  in  the 
unequal  fight,  they  were  obliged,  after  sustaining  heavy  losses,  to  fall 
back  and  seek  shelter  within  the  walls  of  Bhartpur,  whither  their 
cowardly  allies  had  preceded  them. 

The  defeat  of  Chaksana  completes  a  chapter  in  De  Boigne's  career, 
for  with  it  closes  the  record  of  his  military  misfortunes.  The  signal 
personal  distinction  with  which  he  emerged  from  the  two  disastrous 
battles  recorded  served  to  establish  his  reputation  in  a  more  sensible 
degree  than  if  he  had  merely  shared  in  a  general  victory.  His  gallantry 
in  action,  his  presence  of  mind  in  crisis,  and  his  resource  in  retreat, 
marked  him  as  a  great  and  gallant  leader,  and  impressed  his  high 
merits  on  the  mind  of  Madhoji  Sindhia,  whilst  the  ordeal  through 
which  his  young  battalions  had  triumphantly  passed,  completed  the 
confidence  of  his  men  in  their  commander,  and  in  themselves. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE   BATTLE   OF   AGRA.      FORMATION   OF   THE   FIRST   BRIGADE. 

1788-1790. 

T  MMEDIATELY  after  their  victory  at  Chaksana,  dissensions  broke 
-*•  out  between  Ismail  Beg  and  Ghulam  Kadir.  There  was  little  in 
common  between  them  except  their  creed.  The  former  represented 
Mughal  respectability,  whilst  the  latter  was  an  Afghan  adventurer, 
emasculated  in  his  youth,  and  vindictive  and  truculent  by  nature,  who 
represented  a  purely  foreign  element  in  Hindustan.  News  of  the 
quarrel  was  conveyed  to  Sindhia,  who  learnt  at  the  same  time  that 
the  Sikhs  had  made  an  incursion  into  Ghulam  Kadir's  own  territory 
of  Saharanpur.  So  he  sent  a  force  to  assist  them,  and  this  obliged 
the  Rohilla  to  proceed  at  once  to  the  protection  of  his  property,  whilst 
Ismail  Beg  returned  to  the  siege  of  Agra,  which  still  held  out  under 
Lakwa  Dada.  Taking  advantage  of  this  division  of  the  enemy's 
forces,  Rana  Khan  and  Appa  Khandi  Rao  were  encouraged  to  resume 
the  offensive,  and  marched  to  the  relief  of  Agra,  which  place  they 
reached  on  the  18th  of  June,  1788. 

It  was  the  height  of  the  hot  season,  just  before  the  breaking  of  the 
monsoon  rains,  when  the  heated  air  was  like  a  furnace  breath,  and 
the  sun  scorched  with  the  fierceness  of  a  flame.  The  opposing 
armies  were  drawn  up  on  a  large  plain  outside  the  city.  Behind 
Ismail  Beg's  camp  flowed  the  river  Jumna,  its  waters  swollen  by  the 
melting  of  the  Himalayan  snows.  To  the  far  right  the  dazzling  dome 
and  slender  minarets  of  the  Taj  rose  in  exquisite  symmetry  over  the 
grave  of  Murataz-i-Mahal,  a  monument  to  the  past  glory  of  that 
empire  which  could  raise  such  a  monument  to  one  of  its  queens. 
Behind  the  red  stone  battlements  of  the  beleaguered  fortress  the 
gallant  Lakwa  Dada  still  held  his  own,  and  watched  with  anxious 
eyes  the  result  of  the  coming  contest  that  was  to  decide  the  fate  of 
Hindustan,  It  was  an  historical  day,  on  which,  for  the  last  time  in 

41 


42  DE  BOIGNE. 

the  annals  of  the  bouse  of  Taimur,  its  army  was  to  stand  in  battle 
array,  fighting  for  the  faith  against  the  great  encroaching  power  from 
the  south,  begotten  of  its  own  overgrown  empire. 

A  long  and  desperate  battle  ensued.  Around  De  Boigne's  battalions 
the  strife  raged  fiercest.  But  his  men  were  veterans  in  warfare  now, 
trained  in  the  hard  school  of  defeat,  and  met  and  repulsed  each 
succeeding  charge,  till  the  Mughal  Cavalry  reeled  backwards  beaten. 
Then  De  Boigne  advanced,  with  serried  ranks  and  compact  forma- 
tion, and  before  the  sun  had  set  Ismail  Beg's  army  was  dispersed  in 
full  flight,  its  guns  abandoned,  and  its  camp  given  over  to  flame  and 
pillage.  "When  he  saw  the  day  was  lost,  the  Mughal  noble,  who  had 
been  twice  wounded,  mounted  a  swift  horse,  and  spurred  to  the  Jumna. 
Plunging  into  its  swollen  waters,  he  swam  to  the  other  side,  and  so 
made  good  his  escape,  whilst  the  remnants  of  his  routed  army  flocked 
in  straggling  bodies  to  Delhi. 

The  battle  of  Agra  was  the  most  important  and  decisive  that  had 
taken  place  between  the  two  parties  engaged  for  many  years.  It 
extinguished  for  ever  the  last  flickering  hope  of  independence  that 
remained  to  the  Mughal,  and  completely  established  the  ascendency 
of  the  Marathas.  It  assured  the  easy  reconquest  of  the  Doab 
Provinces,  and  made  Madhoji  Sindhia  the  undisputed  master  of 
Hindustan.  That  the  success  of  the  day  was  due  in  the  first  degree 
to  De  Boigne,  every  historian  has  admitted,  and  from  this  time  forward 
the  force  which  his  genius  had  created,  became  a  recognised  power  in 
the  political  history  of  the  country,  and  the  chief  factor  in  framing  its 
course  during  the  next  fifteen  years. 

Ismail  Beg  fled  at  once  to  Ghulam  Kadir's  camp,  where  an  apparent 
reconciliation  was  effected  between  them.  As  soon  as  Shah  'Alam 
heard  of  the  Maratha  victory  he  wrote  to  Madhoji  Sindhia,  throwing 
himself  on  his  protection  ;  but  this  letter  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Ghulam  Kadir,  who  immediately  proceeded  to  the  capital,  where  he 
found  the  gates  closed  against  him.  Corruption  and  treachery  soon 
opened  them,  and  seizing  the  person  of  the  Emperor,  the  Bohilla 
chief  deposed  him  from  power,  and  placed  a  youth  named  Bedar 
Shah  on  the  throne.  He  then  sacked  the  palace,  not  even  sparing  the 
Zenana,  or  women's  apartments  ;  but  being  disappointed  by  finding 
less  than  was  expected,  he  sent  for  Shah  'Alam  and  commanded  him 
to  disclose  the  place  where  the  concealed  treasure  was  deposited.  The 
monarch  pleaded  in  vain  that  he  knew  of  none.  Inflamed  by  a  con- 
tinued debauch,  which  had  thrown  him  into  a  paroxysm  of  rage,  the 
brutal  Eohilla  seized  Shah  'Alam,  who  was  an  old  man  of  nearly 
seventy  years"  of  age,  and  throwing  him  to  the  ground,  gouged  out 


FOEMATION  OF  THE  FIRST  BRIGADE.  43 

his  eyes  with  a  dagger,  heedless  of  the  holy  but  impotent  protest  that 
appealed  against  the  sacrilege  of  destroying  "  eyes  which  for  a  period 
of  sixty  years  have  been  assiduously  employed  in  perusing  the  sacred 
Koran."  For  two  months  this  bloodthirsty  ruffian  continued  to  hold 
sway  in  the  capital,  during  which  it  became  the  scene  of  the  most 
barbarous  atrocities  and  foulest  excesses  consequent  on  his  inhuman 
efforts  to  extort  money  from  the  inmates  of  the  palace. 

During  this  time  Madhoji  Sindhia,  with  a  supineness  that  has  been 
reprobated,  halted  at  Gwalior  awaiting  the  reinforcements  from  the 
Deccan,  which  were  at  length  being  sent  to  him.  It  was  not  until 
three  months  had  elapsed  that  he  ordered  Bana  Khan  to  march  to 
Delhi.  On  the  approach  of  this  chief,  Ghulam  Kadir  at  once  eva- 
cuated the  capital,  whilst  Ismail  Beg,  who  had  quarrelled  with  him  over 
the  spoils  of  the  palace,  and  was  further  disgusted  by  his  brutal 
conduct,  tendered  his  submission,  and  came  over  to  the  Marathas,  who 
took  possession  of  the  fort  and  city  without  firing  a  shot.  De  Boigne's 
battalions  were  entrusted  with  the  charge  of  the  citadel,  and  the  blind 
emperor  was  released  from  confinement,  and  soon  afterwards,  on 
Sindhia's  arrival,  elevated  for  the  third  time  to  his  unstable  thrqne. 
The  office  of  Vakil-i-Mutluq  was  now  confirmed  on  the  Peshwa,  and 
the  deputyship  to  Madhoji,  whilst  Ismail  Beg  was  rewarded  with  the 
territory  of  Hariana  and  Bewari,  which  he  was  sent  to  administer. 

Ghulam  Kadir  fled  to  Meerut,  whither  he  was  pursued  by  Bana  Khan 
and  Lestineau.  The  city  being  surrounded  and  all  supplies  cut  off, 
the  chief's  followers  became  mutinous,  and  as  a  last  resource,  he 
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  500  faithful  cavalry,  and  one  night  made 
a  sortie  from  the  fort  and  cut  his  way  through  the  investing  lines.  He 
would  doubtless  have  made  good  his  escape,  but  for  his  horse  falling 
into  a  well,  by  which  the  chief  was  disabled,  and  his  followers,  un- 
aware of  the  accident,  left  him  behind.  This  led  to  his  capture, 
and  he  was  shortly  afterwards  shockingly  mutilated,  his  body  being 
dismembered,  and  his  trunk,  whilst  he  was  yet  alive,  placed  in  a  cage 
for  the  purpose  of  being  conveyed  to  Delhi.  But  death  mercifully 
released  from  his  sufferings  one  who  had  never  shown  mercy  to 
others.  His  saddle-bags,  stuffed  with  valuable  jewels  looted  from  the 
emperor's  palace  and  harem,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Lestineau,  who 
conceived  the  opportunity  of  retirement  from  active  service  too 
auspicious  to  be  neglectedy'and  on  his  return  to  the  capital,  drew 
a  large  sum  of  money  for  the  pay  of  his  troops,  and  then  decamped 
to  British  territory,  whilst  his  bilked  battalion  relieved  its  feelings  by 
breaking  into  mutiny. 

The  victorious  termination  of  a  long  campaign  that -had  opened  so 


44  DE  BOIGNE. 

disastrously,  proved  beyond  doubt  the  value  of  De  Boigne's  disciplined 
infantry,  which  had  done  so  much  towards  retrieving  the  earlier  re- 
verses of  the  war.  Their  commander  now  began  to  press  his  claims 
for  suitable  recognition.  In  an  army  like  Sindhia's,  a  corps  of  2,000 
men  counted  as  nothing,  numerically  speaking.  They  were  lost  in 
the  enormous  multitudes  of  Maratha  soldiery,  and  their  leader  preju- 
diced by  the  insignificance  of  their  numbers.  Moreover,  De  Boigne 
was  subject  to  the  control  and  authority  of  the  native  generals,  and 
although  he  saved  them  in  defeat,  and  won  their  victories  for  them, 
he  still  remained  subordinate  to  men  for  whom  he  could  not  but  feel 
a  professional  contempt  and  a  racial  superiority.  His  amour  propre 
rebelled  against  a  continuance  of  these  conditions,  and  the  false  posi- 
tion they  placed  him  in.  It  was  customary  to  measure  the  merits  of 
a  military  adventurer  by  his  success,  and  to  reward  him  in  like  ratio. 
It  has  been  observed  that  De  Boigne  was  impatient  of  the  slow  pro- 
motion of  a  progressive  service  ;  but  his  present  service  was  not  even 
progressive,  for  his  command  remained  precisely  the  same  now  as 
when  he  was  first  appointed  to  it,  although  in  the  interval  his  battalions 
had  been  instrumental  in  saving  Sindhia  from  annihilation,  and  had 
mainly  helped  to  restore  to  him  a  lost  kingdom.  One  cannot  wonder 
that  De  Boigne  began  to  expect  a  reward  commensurate  with  the 
results  he  had  achieved,  and  proposed  to  Madhoji  to  augment  the  two 
battalions  into  a  full  brigade  of  10,000  men-at-arms.  In  urging  this 
he  could  point  to  the  justification  of  past  achievement,  for  Lalsot, 
Chaksana,  and  Agra  were  credentials  upon  which  almost  any  claim 
might  have  been  based  by  one  whose  share  in  them  was  as  glorious  as 
De  Boigne's. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  Sindhia  declined  to  accede  to  this 
proposal.  He  was  fully  aware  of  the  value  of  De  Boigne  and  his  two 
battalions,  and  that  the  honours  of  the  victory  of  Agra  belonged  to 
them ;  for  not  even  the  jealousy  that  surrounded  the  European  com- 
mander could  hide  his  merits  or  depreciate  his  success.  Possibly  it 
was  the  circumstance  of  this  jealousy  that  influenced  Madhoji,  who 
could  not  afford  to  quarrel  with  his  countryman  at  this  crisis.  An 
acquiescence  in  De  Boigne's  proposals  would  certainly  have  raised  up 
a  host  of  dangerous  malcontents.  The  time  was  not  appropriate  for 
the  introduction  of  such  radical  measures,  for  it  was  imperative  for 
Sindhia  to  conciliate  all  hostile  influences  and  consolidate  his  power. 
Another  substantial  argument  against  the  suggested  increase  of  the 
force  was  its  expense,  for  the  chief  was  gravely  embarrassed  by  pecu- 
niary difficulties,  and  the  disturbed  and  devastated  condition  of  the 
districts  he  had  just  reconquered  made  it  impossible  to  collect  any 


FORMATION  OF  THE  FIRST  BRIGADE.  45 

revenue  from  them.  Lastly,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  there  lingered  in 
his  heart  some  deeply  rooted  Maratha  prejudice  in  favour  of  cavalry  ; 
for  although  his  experience  and  observation  had  taught  him  the  value 
of  infantry,  he  was  at  this  time  a  man  convinced  against  his  will.  All 
these  causes  operated  against  an  immediate  consent  to  De  Boigne's 
suggestion,  and  Madhoji  declared  himself  in  favour  of  the  existing 
establishment  and  opposed  to  any  augmentation. 

Whereupon  De  Boigne,  with  the  independence  of  character  he  had 
often  displayed  before,  tendered  his  resignation,  and  Sindhia,  not 
altogether  displeased  at  the  opportunity  of  gratifying  his  own  country- 
men, accepted  it.  But  there  was  no  personal  ill-feeling  displayed  or 
aroused.  Madhoji  was  conscious  that  he  owed  much  to  De  Boigne, 
who  on  his  part  had  innumerable  pecuniary  favours  to  remember. 
And  so  the  prince  and  his  general  parted  with  friendly  compliments 
and  regrets,  that  augured  an  early  rapprochement ;  and  whilst  the 
former  settled  himself  down  to  the  consolidation  of  his  power  in  Hin- 
dustan, the  latter  determined  to  forsake  the  hazardous  paths  of  war,  and 
devote  himself  to  the  cultivation  of  the  quiet  fields  of  commerce. 

Leaving  Delhi  in  1789  De  Boigne  proceeded  to  Lucknow,  where  he 
was  welcomed  by  his  old  friend  Claude  Martine,  by  whose  advice  he 
entered  into  trade  as  a  cloth  and  indigo  merchant,  embarking  in  these 
ventures  the  very  considerable  sum  of  money  he  had  saved  in 
Sindhia's  service.  He  soon  laid  the  foundation  of  a  successful  and 
lucrative  business,  which  he  continued  to  conduct  after  he  resumed 
his  military  career,  utilising  it  as  a  means  of  transmitting  to  Europe 
the  large  fortune  he  made  in  the  East. 

But  he  was  not  long  permitted  to  pursue  a  peaceful  life  at  Lucknow. 
Madhoji  Sindhia,  having  established  himself  at  Delhi,  and  completed 
the  subjugation  of  the  Doab,  turned  his  attention  to  army  reform,  and 
early  in  the  year  1790,  began  to  introduce  several  innovations  with  the 
view  of  making  his  forces  better  adapted  for  the  requirements  of  the 
service  on  which  they  were  now  employed.  Amongst  the  first  of 
these  was  the  enlistment  of  Rajput  and  Muhamtnadan  soldiers  for 
garrison  work,  his  own  countrymen  being  too  independent  by  nature 
and  too  lawless  by  habit  to  perform  the  duties  of  a  standing  army. 
Before  long  Sindhia's  judgment  convinced  him  that,  however  suitable 
his  hordes  of  cavalry  might  be  for  predatory  warfare,  for  the  invasion 
of  countries  and  the  sack  of  cities,  those  objects  once  attained  an 
infantry  force  was  indispensable  for  the  maintenance  of  a  permanent 
occupation,  where  fortresses  had  to  be  garrisoned,  and  large  centres  of 
population  controlled.  For  such  duties  his  wild  Deccan  horsemen, 
with  their  impatience  of  restraint,  and  their  irresistible  craving  for 


46  DE  BOIGNE. 

plunder,  were  altogether  unsuited,  and  to  detach  them  for  service  of 
this  description  was  almost  tantamount  to  billetting  a  pack  of  wolves 
on  a  fold  of  sheep. 

Moreover,  there  was  another  danger  which  began  to  make  itself 
apparent.  Madhoji  was  illegitimate  by  birth,  and  this  tended  to 
diminish  his  influence  with  his  countrymen,  and  afforded  a  handle  for 
his  enemies,  of  whom  he  had  many,  to  intrigue  against  him.  Mughals 
Rohillas,  Eajputs,  and  Jats,  all  resented  his  dominion  at  Delhi,  and 
were  prepared  to  oppose  him  at  every  opportunity.  But  there  were 
more  dangerous  foes  than  these,  for  amongst  his  own  countrymen 
were  many  whose  hostility  was  scarcely  veiled,  and  chief  amongst 
them  his  great  rival  Takuji  Holkar,  who  was  consumed  with  jealousy 
at  Sindhia's  success.  In  order  therefore  to  strengthen  himself 
Madhoji  determined  to  create  a  special  force,  bound  to  him  by  the 
strongest  ties  possible,  and  more  completely  under  his  control  than 
his  unruly  Marathas. 

Early  in  1790  he  sent  an  agent  to  Lucknow,  to  invite  De  Boigne  to 
return  to  his  service,  and  promising  that  the  proposals  originally  made 
should  be  accepted  in  every  detail.  De  Boigne  was  discovered  deeply 
immersed  in  his  new  business ;  but  he  was  a  soldier  before  everything 
else,  and  the  call  to  arms  fell  upon  willing  ears.  A  few  days  sufficed 
to  regulate  his  affairs  at  the  Oudh  capital,  after  which  he  accompanied 
the  Vakil  back  to  Madhoji's  camp  at  Mattra.  In  a  single  interview 
an  understanding  was  arrived  at,  for  the  prince  was  liberal,  the  soldier 
not  exacting,  and  both  imbued  with  feelings  of  mutual  confidence  and 
esteem  that  had  not  been  disturbed  by  anything  in  the  past. 

The  commission  with  which  De  Boigne  was  entrusted  was  the 
creation  of  a  Campoo  or  Brigade  of  ten  battalions  of  infantry,  with  a 
suitable  train  of  cavalry  and  artillery,  the  whole  to  be  disciplined  in 
the  English  style,  and  officered  by  Europeans.  In  the  execution  of 
this  task  he  was  left  a  perfectly  free  hand. 

Thus,  after  ten  years  of  endeavour  and  perseverance,  De  Boigne 
found  himself  with  the  means  of  accomplishing  the  object  he  had  long 
desired,  and  empowered  to  create  a  force  worthy  of  his  ambition. 
The  future  was  now  his  own  to  make  :  the  materials  required  but  the 
moulding.  With  characteristic  energy  he  set  to  work  carrying  into 
execution  the  scheme  whose  details  he  had  so  long  considered  and 
matured  in  his  mind.  His  two  battalions  were  still  in  Sindhia's  service, 
and  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  new  brigade.  Lestineau's  regiment 
had  been  disbanded  as  a  punishment  for  its  mutiny,  but,  at  De  Boigne's 
request,  the  men  were  permitted  to  re-enlist.  Thus  there  were  at  his 
disposal  trained  soldiers  sufficient  for  three  battalions.  The  remain- 


FORMATION  OF  THE  FIEST  BRIGADE.  47 

ing  seven  were  raised  in  Rohilkhand,  Oudh,  and  the  Doab  with  but 
little  difficulty.  It  was  a  time  of  war  and  battle,  when  the  arts  of 
peace  had  fallen  into  desuetude.  Every  peasant  was  perforce  a  soldier, 
and  every  artisan  could  wield  a  sword.  The  inducements  of  regular 
pay  and  the  anticipations  of  plunder  were  irresistible  attractions  to 
men  whose  lives  had  been  spent  in  defending  their  property  or 
fighting  for  existence  against  the  exactions  of  tyrants  and  the  incur- 
sions of  invaders. 

The  engagement  of  a  staff  of  European  officers  presented  greater 
difficulties  than  the  enlistment  of  the  men.  Sangster  was  still  in  the 
service,  and  able  to  continue  his  work  of  casting  cannon  and  manufac- 
turing small  arms,  in  both  of  which  branches  he  was  an  expert. 
During  the  next  few  years  he  supplied  most  of  the  best  artillery  in 
Sindhia's  army,  whilst  his  muskets,  turned  out  at  a  cost  of  ten  rupees 
each,  were  far  superior  to  anything  then  in  the  hands  of  the  native 
powers,  and  almost  equal  in  finish  and  durabilty  to  weapons  made  in 
Europe.  His  arsenal  was  established  at  Agra,  which  fortress  Sindhia 
assigned  to  De  Boigne  as  a  depot  for  his  arms  and  munitions  of  war. 

Fremont  the  Frenchman  and  Hessing  the  Hollander  still  remained 
in  their  original  posts,  and  the  former  was  now  promoted  to  second  in 
command  of  the  Brigade.  Of  the  other  European  officers  engaged  at 
this  time  the  names  of  at  least  six  survive — Perron,  Baours,  Pedron, 
and  Eohan,  all  Frenchmen ;  and  Sutherland  and  Roberts,  who  were 
British  subjects.  They  were  posted  to  the  command  of  the  different 
battalions  which  were  named  after  forts  and  cities,  such  as  the  Ujjain, 
Burhanpur,  Delhi,  and  Agra  regiments. 

With  the  assistance  of  these  officers,  De  Boigne  rapidly  organised 
his  Brigade.  It  consisted  of  ten  battalions  of  infantry  of  750  men 
each.  Of  these,  seven,  known  as  Telingas,  were  uniformed  and 
accoutred  in  the  same  way  as  the  Company's  Sepoy  regiments  and 
armed  with  muskets  and  bayonets.  The  other  three,  designated 
Najibs,  were  recruited  from  Pathans,  and  at  first  armed  with  match- 
locks, shields,  and  swords,  but  later  on  their  efficiency  was  much 
increased  by  the  substitution  of  bayonets  for  the  latter.  These  Najibs 
wore  Persian  uniforms,  and  their  matchlocks  were  of  a  new  invention. 
All  the  infantry  were  exercised  in  the  drill  and  manual  according  to 
the  old  English  system  of  1780,  and  although  one  ultra-patriotic  his- 
torian avers  that  the  word  of  command  was  given  in  Irish,  it  is  agreed 
by  the  majority  of  commentators  that  English  was  the  language  in 
use. 

To  increase  the  mobility  of  the  Brigade  500  Mewatis,  or  irregular 
soldiers,  were  incorporated,  who  performed  the  ordinary  routine  duties 


48  DE  SOIGNE. 

of  camp,  thus  leaving  the  regular  troops  available  for  combatant 
work.  The  cavalry  consisted  of  500  regular  horsemen,  called 
Trokesmvars,  and  the  artillery  of  sixty  pieces  of  cannon,  three,  six, 
and  twelve-pounders,  with  a  proportion  of  howitzers,  all  excellently 
appointed  and  drawn  by  capital  cattle.  When  brought  to  its  full 
strength  the  entire  brigade  numbered  very  nearly  10,000  men-at-arms, 
and  formed  a  compact,  well-organised  fighting  machine,  immeasurably 
superior  to  any  hitherto  existing  in  the  native  states  of  India. 

De  Boigne  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  General,  and  his  pay,  at 
first  fixed  at  Bs.4,000  per  mensem,  was  subsequently  raised  to  Rs.10,000, 
and  he  enjoyed  in  addition  many  other  services  of  emolument.  In 
his  agreement  with  Madhoji  Sindhia  he  made  but  two  stipulations  ; 
one  that  he  should  never  be  called  on  to  carry  arms  against  the 
English,  the  other  that  his  troops  should  be  regularly  paid.  Herein 
he  showed  his  wisdom.  The  history  of  all  previous  military  adven- 
turers employed  by  native  princes  pointed  one  moral,  and  that  was 
the  failure  that  invariably  attended  unpunctuality  in  paying  the  men. 
Eastern  potentates  were  as  poor  in  their  pecuniary  performances,  as 
they  were  prodigal  in  their  preliminary  promises,  and  Madhoji  Sindhia 
was  no  exception  to  the  rule.  He  had  a  reluctance  to,  amounting  to 
a  positive  horror  of,  parting  with  hard  cash  from  his  treasury.  De 
Boigne  was  a  prudent  man,  especially  in  money  matters,  and  recog- 
nised that  silver  was  the  sole  power  that  could  control  a  mercenary 
army,  and  that  without  a  fixed  and  certain  revenue  it  was  idle  to 
attempt  the  estabh'shment  of  a  serviceable  force.  He  therefore  insisted 
upon  a  sound  financial  arrangement  for  the  upkeep  of  his  Brigade, 
and  Sindhia  whose  prejudices  did  not  include  indirect  disbursements, 
made  over  to  De  Boigne  a  Jaidad  or  military  assignment  of  territory, 
the  revenues  of  which  were  to  be  devoted  to  the  expenses  of  the  corps. 
This  system  of  assigning  land  for  the  payment  of  troops  was  almost 
universal  in  India,  where  districts  were  always  apportioned  to  the 
native  chiefs  and  generals  for  the  upkeep  of  their  troops. 

The  Jaidad  which  De  Boigne  received  comprised  a  large  and  rich 
tract  of  country  in  the  Doab,  and  within  its  boundaries,  he  was  para- 
mount, exercising  and  enjoying  sovereign  rights  and  privileges.  When 
he  first  assumed  the  administration  of  this  province  its  revenues 
amounted  to  sixteen  lakhs  of  rupees  a  year  (,£200,000) ;  but  by  subse- 
quent additions  and  good  management  the  area  was  increased  to  fifty- 
two  pergannaJis  or  districts,  and  the  income  to  thirty  lakhs.  De  Boigne's 
civil  administration  was  as  successful,  and,  in  its  way,  as  remarkable 
as  his  military  one.  He  introduced  a  system  of  order  and  regularity, 
adopted  a  fixed  and  equitable  scale  of  taxation,  and  created  special 


FORMATION  OF  THE  FIRST  BRIGADE.  49 

departments  for  collecting  and  checking  the  same,  by  the  simple  but 
efficacious  expedient  of  two  revenue  offices,  the  accounts  in  one  being 
kept  in  French,  and  in  the  other  in  Persian.  By  a  firm,  but  just 
government  he  created  confidence  amongst  the  peasantry,  and  without 
harassing  or  squeezing  them,  drew  from  the  land  larger  and  more 
punctually  paid  revenues  than  had  ever  been  obtained  before.  He 
was  allowed  a  commission  of  2  per  cent,  on  all  coUections,  and  so 
xcellent  was  his  administration  that  not  only  were  his  troops  regu- 
larly and  liberally  paid,  but  his  own  private  fortune  was  materially 
increased. 

Early  in  the  summer  of  1790  the  Brigade  was  brought  to  its  full 
strength  and  reported  ready  for  service.  This  prompt  accomplish- 
ment of  a  really  great  undertaking  was  due  to  De  Boigne's  indefatig- 
able exertions.  His  enthusiasm  and  energy  were  marvellous,  and  he 
neither  stopped  nor  rested  until  he  had  completed  his  work.  When 
at  length  everything  was  ready,  and  he  paraded  his  new-formed  army 
in  review  for  the  first  time,  prompted  by  a  sentiment,  that  must  touch 
all  patriotic  hearts,  he  unfurled  above  it,  in  that  wild  and  heathen 
spot,  so  far  removed  from  his  native  land,  the  flag  of  his  own  country 
— the  White  Cross  of  Savoy. 

When  Madhoji  Sindhia  inspected  his  new  Brigade  for  the  first  time, 
he  must  have  been  struck  with  the  contrast  between  it  and  his  own 
undisciplined  Maratha  army.  The  Deccan  soldiery  of  the  last  century 
were  perhaps  the  most  irregular  ruffians  in  aU  India.  Every  indi- 
vidual trooper  asserted  his  independence  and  freedom  from  control ; 
he  was  the  proprietor  of  his  horse  and  arms,  and  whilst  agreeing  to 
give  his  services  in  return  for  a  certain  payment,  he  did  not  consider 
it  any  part  of  the  contract  to  imperil  his  property.  Warfare,  he 
regarded,  as  a  legitimate  means  of  plundering,  but  as  his  steed  and 
spear  represented  his  entire  capital,  and  constituted  his  sole  claim  to 
employment,  he  sedulously  avoided  all  conflict  (which  somewhat 
detracted  from  his  merits  as  a  combatant),  and  preferred  flight  to 
fight  on  every  occasion  of  danger. 

The  camps  of  these  immense  armies  of  discreet,  and  yet,  at  times, 
dashing  warriors,  were  vast  halting  peaces,  formed  without  any  idea 
of  order  or  regularity,  and  covering  extended  tracts  of  ground.  Every 
trooper  slept  with  his  horse  picketed  beside  him,  and  there  were 
generally  three  camp  followers  to  each  fighting  man.  A  teeming 
bazaar  accompanied  the  armies  in  their  line  of  march,  wherein  all 
trades  and  professions  of  city  life  were  represented,  and  which  in- 
cluded every  accessory  of  Asiatic  civilisation  from  bevies  of  dancing 
girls  to  bands  of  professional  thieves,  who  plied  their  licensed  callings 

4 


50  DE  BOIGNE. 

under  privilege  of  a  trade  tax.  The  multitudes  which  a  Maratha 
prince  led  to  war  consisted  of  a  vast  medley  of  conglomerate  elements, 
as  far  removed  in  appearance  from  a  military  expedition  as  it  is 
possible  to  conceive,  and  powerful  only  in  their  overwhelming 
numbers,  their  wonderful  endurance,  and  the  almost  incredible 
rapidity,  with  which  they  could  move  from  place  to  place,  either  for 
attack  or  in  retreat. 

De  Boigne's  Brigade  was  the  very  antithesis  of  a  Maratha  army. 
It  was  a  small,  solid,  compact,  slow-moving  body,  in  which  obedience 
and  discipline  were  the  guiding  principles.  Every  military  operation 
was  carried  out  with  precision  and  routine  ;  the  men  marched  and 
manoeuvred  in  the  methods  that  obtained  in  European  armies,  and  in 
camp  afforded  a  spectacle  of  order  and  system  that  would  have  done 
credit  to  a  Company's  Sepoy  regiment. 

This  result  had  not  been  accomplished  without  labour.  De 
Boigne's  life  was  far  from  one  of  Oriental  ease  and  luxury.  He  rose 
each  morning  with  the  sun,  and  until  midnight  devoted  himself  to 
the  multifarious  duties  of  his  position.  Every  day  he  inspected  his 
Kharkhdna,  or  arsenal,  drilled  his  troops  on  parade,  and  issued  the 
orders  of  the  day.  To  the  enlistment  of  recruits  he  paid  especial 
attention.  The  equipment  and  armament  of  his  force  were  designed 
and  provided  by  him,  and  he  was  his  own  quartermaster  and 
adjutant  general.  The  medical  department  and  ambulance  service 
had  his  care,  and  both  were  arranged  for.  He  never  delegated 
administrative  duties  to  subordinates,  for  he  was  a  somewhat  morbidly, 
independently  man,  who  insisted  on  doing  everything  himself,  and 
distrusted  the  deputation  of  authority.  Active  and  laborious  to  an 
astonishing  degree,  he  seemed  capable  of  performing  the  work  of  half 
a  dozen  men,  and  his  example  infected  those  under  him,  with  much 
of  his  own  energy  and  diligence.  Before  his  zeal  and  determination 
to  succeed,  difficulties  faded  away,  and  apparent  impossibilities 
became  accomplished  facts.  The  highly  organised  and  disciplined 
army,  of  which  this  first  Brigade  was  the  earnest,  was  a  monument  no 
less  to  his  military  genius  as  a  great  soldier,  than  to  his  personal 
industry  as  an  able  administrator. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

THE   BATTLES   OF   PATAN  AND   MERTA. 
1790. 

'""THERE  was  soon  work  for  the  new  Brigade.  Madhoji's  old  and 
-*•  redoubtable  enemy,  Ismail  Beg,  renounced  his  allegiance,  and 
having  induced  the  Rajahs  of  Jaipur  and  Jodhpur  to  assist  him, 
appeared  in  arms  in  the  Ajmir  district.  Sindhia,  with  his  accustomed 
preference  for  intrigue,  tried  at  first  to  corrupt  the  following  of  the 
Mughal  noble,  but  failing  in  the  attempt,  detached  an  army  from  his 
camp  at  Mattra,  under  the  command  of  Lakwa  Dada  and  De  Boigne, 
to  punish  the  rebel  and  crush  the  Rajput  princes. 

They  came  upon  the  enemy  near  Patan  Tanwar,  in  the  Shaikhawati 
country,  on  the  20th  of  June,  1790.  It  has  been  stated  that  a 
secret  understanding  existed  between  Lakwa  and  Partab  Sing,  by 
which  the  latter  agreed  to  stand  aloof  during  the  fight  on  the  condi- 
tion that  his  territory  of  Jaipur,  adjoining  the  Maratha  boundaries, 
should  not  be  devastated.  To  this  cause  is  attributed  the  defeat  of  the 
famous  Rathor  Cavalry  in  a  bloody  and  obstinate  conflict,  in  which 
Ismail  Beg  and  his  Pathan  horse  behaved  with  signal  gallantry, 
thrice  charging  through  De  Boigne's  line  and  cutting  down  his 
artillery  men  at  their  guns.  It  was  only  the  personal  courage  of  the 
general,  and  the  staunchness  of  his.troops,  that  secured  victory.  There 
exists  an  authentic  description  of  the  battle,  written  by  De  Boigne 
himself  four  days  after  it  was  fought,  and  which  appeared  in  the  Cal- 
cutta Gazette  of  the  22nd  of  July,  1790.  It  reads  as  follows : — 

"  Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Major  De  Boigne. 

"  CAMP  PATAN,  June  24,  1790. 

"  Our  various  little  skirmishes  since  the  severe  cannonade  of  8th 
and  9th  Ramzan,*  are  not,  I  hope,  unknown  to  you.  I  have  often 

*  Ramsjan  ;  the  ninth  Mohammedan  lunar  month.    The  mouth  of  the  Fast. 

51 


52  DE  BOIGNE. 

tried  to  harass  and  surprise  the  enemy,  but  their  naturally  strong  and 
almost  impregnable  situation,  added  to  their  very  great  superiority  in 
numbers,  both  in  troops  and  artillery,  rendered  all  my  exertions 
fruitless.  At  last,  tired  out  with  vexation,  I  determined  to  march 
from  our  ground  in  three  columns,  so  as  to  form  the  line  from  the 
centre  of  each  with  ease  and  celerity.  In  that  way  I  advanced  to  a 
little  more  than  cannon-shot  distance  from  the  enemy,  where  I 
formed  rny  little  army,  consisting  of  two  lines  and  a  reserve,  the 
Maratha  horse  in  the  rear  and  on  our  flanks.  After  waiting  the  best 
part  of  the  day  with  impatient  hopes  to  see  them  marching  against 
us,  as  they  had  threatened  ;  at  last,  about  three  o'clock,  a  few 
Maratha  horses  began  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy's  right  wing, 
consisting  of  horse,  which  shortly  increased  from  five  to  six  thousand, 
but  they  were  soon  beaten  off.  I  was  now  encouraged  to  try  if  some- 
thing better  could  not  be  done  by  our  side,  and  in  order  to  induce 
them  to  come  out  from  their  stronghold,  I  ordered  the  line  to  advance 
after  a  warm  cannonade  of  about  an  hour  from  both  sides.  The  enemy 
not  appearing  to  come  out,  I  still  advanced  till  we  came  within  reach 
of  grape-shot ;  then,  halting,  we  gave  and  received  from  each  gun 
nearly  forty  rounds  of  grape,  which  made  it  a  warm  business,  we 
being  in  the  plain  and  they  in  the  trenches.  The  evening  was  now 
far  advanced,  and  seeing  at  the  same  time  such  numerous  bodies  of 
the  enemy's  cavalry  in  motion,  and  ready  to  fall  on  us  if  they  could 
find  an  opening,  I  thought  it  prudent  to  move  on  rather  quicker, 
which  we  did  till  the  firing  of  platoons  began.  But  we  had  already 
lost  such  numbers  of  people,  principally  clashies,*  that  those  remaining 
were  unable  to  drag  the  guns  any  further.  I,  therefore,  gave  imme- 
diate orders  to  storm  the  lines,  sword  in  hand,  which  was  as  soon 
executed.  Upon  which  the  enemy,  not  relishing  at  all  the  close 
fighting,  gave  way  on  all  sides,  infantry  as  well  as  cavalry,  leaving 
us  in  possession  of  all  their  guns,  baggage,  bazaar,  elephants,  and 
everything  else.  The  day  being  now  closed  put  an  end  to  the 
slaughter  of  the  enemy,  which  must  have  been  very  considerable  if 
we  had  had  an  hour's  more  daylight.  However,  it  was  a  complete 
victory.  Their  cavalry,  after  losing  about  2,000  men  and  horses, 
saved  themselves  by  flight ;  the  infantry,  who  could  not  run  so  fast, 
took  refuge  in  the  town  of  Patun,  strongly  fortified.  But  in  the 
morning  they  thought  proper  to  give  themselves  up,  and  surrendered 
to  me  all  their  arms,  colours,  etc.  Nine  battalions  and  irregular  troops, 
making  above  12,000  men,  are  now  prisoners  of  war ;  I  have  promised 

*  Clashies  :  native  artillerymen. 


THE  BATTLES  OF  PAT  AN  AND  MEET  A,      53 

to  allow  them  a  safeguard  to  conduct  them  to  the  other  side  of  the 
Jumna. 

"  The  enemy's  force  consisted  of  12,000  Bhattore  Cavalry,  6,000 
from  Jeypore,  5,000  Moguls  under  Ismail  Beg,  and  2,000  under 
Allyhar  Beg  Khan  ;  of  foot  they  had  12,000  men,  and  100  pieces  of 
artillery,  and  with  Ismail  Beg  5,000  Tellengas,*  and  matchlock  men, 
with  twenty-one  pieces  of  artillery,  4,000  Rohillas,  5,000  Fakirs,} 
called  Attyles  and  Brakys,  and  Rajpoot  Sybundees,  J  with  eight 
pieces  of  cannon,  and  4,000  Hinahs,  §  who  were  of  great  service  to  the 
enemy,  as  the  battle  was  given  at  the  foot  of  the  hills. 

"  My  Brigade  was  10,000  strong.  The  Mahratta  Cavalry  stood  on 
our  flanks  as  spectators ;  they  began  the  skirmish,  in  which  they  had 
only  six  men  killed  and  forty  wounded.  Had  it  not  been  for  two 
battalions  of  mine,  who  changed  front  when  the  enemy's  cavalry  were 
charging  ours,  the  Mahrattas  would  have  seen  fine  play. 

"Our  victory  is  astonishing  !  A  complete  victory  gained  by  a 
handful  of  men,  over  such  a  number  in  such  a  position  !  It  may 
surprise  you  when  I  say  that  in  less  than  three  hours'  time  12,000 
round  and  1,500  grape  shot  were  fired  by  us,  and  by  the  enemy  much 
more,  as  they  had  two  guns  to  our  one. 

"  During  all  the  engagement  I  was  on  horseback  encouraging  my 
men.  Thank  God  I  have  realised  aU  the  sanguine  expectations  of 
Sindhia.  My  officers,  in  general,  have  behaved  well ;  to  them  I  am 
a  great  deal  indebted  for  the  fortunes  of  the  day. 

"  We  have  had  129  men  killed  and  472  wounded.  The  enemy  not 
more,  perhaps  not  so  much,  as  they  were  entrenched ;  but  they  have 
lost  a  vast  number  of  cavalry. 

"  I  have  taken  107  pieces  of  artillery,  6,000  stand  of  arms,  252 
colours,  fifteen  elephants  (amongst  them  are  Ismael  Beg's  five 
elephants)  200  camels,  513  horses,  and  above  3,000  oxen.  I  intend 
to  send  the  whole  to  Sindhia  as  soon  as  it  may  be  practicable.  All 
their  camp  was  burnt  or  destroyed  ;  they  have  absolutely  saved 
nothing  but  their  lives. 

"  The  terror  of  our  arms  alone  put  us  in  possession  of  the  town  of 
Patun,  in  which  the  troops  found  a  great  deal  of  plunder,  and  near 
2,000  horses.  It  would  have  required  at  any  other  time  a  month  to 
take  it,  its  fortifications  being  very  strong,  and  defended  by  three  hills 
close  to  each  other.  The  place  was  never  taken  before." 

*  Tellengas :  regular  soldiery. 

t  Fakirs :  religious  fighting  mendicants. 

+  Sybundees :  irregular  infantry, 

$  Minahs  :  hill  men  from  the  districts  near  Ajmir. 


54  DE  BOIGNE. 

It  is  difficult  which  to  admire  most  in  this  letter,*  the  lucidity  of 
the  narrative,  or  the  modesty  of  the  gallant  soldier  in  his  description 
of  an  achievement  in  which  he  played  the  principal  part.  Another 
account  of  the  battle,  also  published  in  the  Calcutta  Gazette,  enables 
one  or  two  interesting  details  to  be  added.  It  appears  that  the  attack 
on  Ismail  Beg  and  the  Kajputs  was  commenced  on  the  23rd  of  May  ; 
but  owing  to  their  strong  position  and  numerous  artillery,  no  impres- 
sion could  be  made  on  their  lines,  "it  being  full  nine  Jcos  round  the 
mountains  to  come  even  at  their  foraging  parties."  At  last  De  Boigne 
received  information  that  the  enemy's  council  of  war  had  fixed  on  the 
20th  of  June  as  an  auspicious  day,  and,  taking  them  in  the  humour, 
he  sent  word  to  Ismail  Beg  that  he  would  meet  him  half  way.  For 
this  purpose  the  general  inarched  out  of  camp  an  hour  before  day- 
break, but  the  battle  was  delayed  until  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon, 
owing  to  the  reluctance  of  the  enemy  to  join  issue.  The  fight  then 
followed,  as  described  by  De  Boigne,  until  "  about  six  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  our  intrepid  General,  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  one  of 
the  battalions,  and  giving  orders  to  the  rest  to  follow,  rushed  forward, 
sword  in  hand,  to  the  mouth  of  the  enemy's  cannon.  This  vigorous 
proceeding  animating  all  our  troops,  had  the  desired  effect,  as  we 
almost  instantaneously  got  possession  of  their  first  line.  Their  second 
was  forced  about  eight  o'clock,  and  by  nine  the  enemy  were  entirely 
routed.  The  General's  courage  and  judgment  on  this  occasion  were 
equally  conspicuous.  ...  In  the  course  of  three  days  we  took  the 
strong  town  of  Patun  by  storm,  which  was  afterwards  razed  to  the 
ground,  and  so  intimidated  the  Bajah,  who  commanded  Patun  Fort  (a 
place  resembling  Gibraltar  from  its  almost  impregnable  position),  that 
he  submitted  to  become  a  vassal  of  Sindhia,  and  is  now  (1st  July)  with 
us  on  the  march  to  Jaipur.  Our  signal  victory  was  gained  with  only 
the  loss  of  700  men  killed  and  wounded ;  but  the  number  of  the  enemy 
who  have  fallen  must  be  immense,  for  it  is  said  that,  beside  those  left 
on  the  field,  the  road  from  here  to  Jaipur,  about  thirty-two  kos,  is 
covered  with  the  dead  carcases  of  men,  horses,  camels,  and  bullocks. 
Their  camp,  which  was  three  miles  in  length  and  one  in  breadth,  we 
burned  and  left  not  a  stick  standing.  Our  success  affords  a  strong 
proof  of  the  amazing  power  of  discipline  under  a  brave  and  skilful 
commander." 

Directly  the  result  of  the  battle  was  placed  beyond  doubt,  Ismail 
Beg  accepted  the  inevitable,  and  attended  by  a  small  retinue,  galloped 
from  the  field.  When  news  of  this  great  success  reached  Sindhia  at 

*  It  is  probable  the  original  was  written  in  French  and  translated  into 
English  for  the  Calcutta  Gazette. 


THE  BATTLES  OF  PAT  AN  AND  MEET  A.  55 

Mattra,  he  determined  to  press  home  the  advantage,  and  complete  the 
subjugation  of  the  Rajput  states,  which  had  asserted,  and  main- 
tained, their  independence  since  the  battle  of  Lalsot,  and  he  now 
ordered  De  Boigne  to  invade  Jodhpur,  and  reduce  the  Rajah  to  sub- 
mission. On  receiving  these  commands.  De  Boigne  decided  to  first 
attempt  the  capture  of  Ajmir,  which,  lying  as  it  did,  half  way  between 
Jaipur  and  Jodhpur,  was  the  key  of  the  country.  On  the  15th  of 
August  he  reached  it,  and  at  once  completed  the  investment,  but,  owing 
to  the  impregnable  nature  of  the  fort,  was  unable  to  take  it  by  a  coup 
de  main.  So  he  left  2,000  cavalry,  and  a  sufficient  force  of  infantry 
to  cover  it,  and  marched  with  the  rest  of  his  army  towards  Jodhpur. 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  from  an  officer  in  De  Boigne's 
Brigade,  published  in  1790,  refers  to  this  incident : — 

"AGIMERE  CAMP, 

"  September  1,  1790. 

"  Although  we  have  invested  this  fort  for  fifteen  days  very  closely, 
yet  we  can  make  no  impression  upon  it ;  our  guns,  from  the  very  great 
elevation  they  are  placed  at,  and  the  distance,  make  no  visible  im- 
pression, and  the  narrow  paths  which  lead  to  the  fort  are  so  defended 
by  nature,  that  a  few  large  stones  thrown  down  must  carry  everything 
before  them.  The  noise  they  make  in  rolling  I  can  compare  to  nothing 
but  thunder.  Indeed,  I  am  afraid  we  must  turn  the  blockade  into  a 
siege,  as  they  have  six  months'  water  and  a  year's  provisions  in  the 
fort.  I  fancy  we  shall  divide  our  forces,  leaving  some  here,  and  the 
rest  proceeding  to  Mairtha,  where  the  enemy  have  taken  the  field. 
Bijai  Sing  offered  the  fort  of  Agimere  and  country  for  fifty  Kos* 
round  to  General  de  Boigne,  if  he  would  desert  Sindhia ;  but  De 
Boigne's  reply  was  that  Sindhia  had  already  given  him  Jodhpur  and 
Jaipur,  and  that  the  Rajah  would  not  be  so  unreasonable  as  to 
expect  he  would  exchange  them  for  Agimere." 

The  latter  paragraph  is  interesting  as  confirming  the  assertion  often 
made  that  De  Boigne  was  on  several  occasions  solicited  to  enter  the 
service  of  Sindhia's  enemies. 

To  turn  for  a  moment  to  the  course  of  events  in  the  Rajput  states, 
it  must  be  noted  that  Bijai  Sing,  the  Rajah  of  Jodhpur,  had  sustained 
a  terrible  disgrace  by  the  defeat  of  his  Rathor  Cavalry  at  Patan.  The 
flight  of  those  redoubtable  warriors,  even  though  it  was  due  to  the 
treachery  of  their  Jaipur  allies,  had  given  rise  to  a  ribald  rhyme, 
which  accused  them  of  abandoning  on  the  field  of  battle  the  five 
*  Kos  :  an  elastic  measure ;  probably  a  mile  and  a  half  in  this  instance. 


56  DE  BOIONK 

attributes  of  manhood,  namely,  horse,  shoes,  turban,  moustachios, 
and  the  "  Sword  of  Marwar."  This  was  tantamount  to  taunting 
them  with  having  degenerated  into  women.  None  but  those  who 
can  enter  into  the  exaggerated  sense  of  pride  which  is  the  ruling 
passion  of  a  high  caste  Rajput,  and  understand  his  precise  views 
concerning  womankind,  can  appreciate  the  keenness  of  this  taunt. 
To  wipe  out  the  shame  of  Piitan,  Bijai  Sing  summoned  to  his 
standard  every  Rathor  between  fourteen  and  sixty  years  of  age  capable 
of  wielding  a  sword.  From  hamlets  and  villages  they  came,  from 
towns  and  cities,  eager  to  blot  out  with  their  blood  this  evil  stain  on 
their  national  honour.  In  response  to  this  call  to  arms,  30,000  warriors, 
burning  to  repel  the  invader  and  efface  the  memory  of  the  past,  col- 
lected at  Merta,  a  large  walled  city,  standing  on  high  ground  in  the 
centre  of  a  vast  grassy  plain,  thirty  miles  to  the  east  of  Ajmir.  It 
was  an  historical  place,  and  had  been  the  scene  of  many  desperate 
battles,  in  the  annals  of  Marwar,  in  which  the  crown  of  Jodhpur  had 
oftentimes  been  lost  and  won.  The  plain  around  was  fat  with  blood, 
poured  out,  sometimes  in  internecine  strife,  but  more  often  in  opposing 
foreign  invasion,  and  was  covered  with  altars  and  memorials,  erected 
to  the  manes  of  the  doughty  dead  who  lay  there.  Here,  in  September, 
1790,  the  Rathor  army  assembled  to  meet  their  Maratha  enemies,  who, 
forty  years  before,  had  defeated  them  on  the  very  spot,  with  a  loss  of 
40,000  men. 

Owing  to  the  failure  of  the  annual  rains,  all  the  ordinary  sources  of 
water  supply,  never  plentiful  in  the  best  of  seasons,  were  exhausted, 
and  De  Boigne  was  obliged  to  make  a  considerable  detour  to  approach 
Merta.  On  September  8th  he  reached  a  village  called  Eiah,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Li'ini,  and  began  the  passage  of  the  river.  But  soon  his 
cannon  became  embarrassed  in  its  muddy  bed,  and  this  occasioned 
considerable  delay.  Whereupon  he  sent  the  Maratha  Cavalry  forward 
to  reconnoitre,  who,  after  proceeding  a  few  miles,  suddenly  came  upon 
Bijai  Sing's  army. 

The  Rathors  were  drawn  up  on  the  plain  of  Merta,  their  right  flank 
resting  upon  the  village  of  Dangiwas.  Bijai  Sing  was  not  present, 
for  he  had  remained  at  his  capital,  and  entrusted  the  direction  of  the 
war  to  his  commander-in-chief,  Gangaram  Bhandari.  But,  unfortu- 
nately, he  had  associated  with  this  general  one  of  his  ministers,  and 
the  introduction  of  a  civil  element  into  an  essentially  military  matter 
proved  fatal.  Directly  Gangaram  Bhandari  saw  the  Maratha  Cavalry, 
unsupported  by  those  terrible  battalions  that  had  done  all  the  fighting 
at  Patan,  he  desired  to  engage  them.  But  the  Rajah's  minister  in- 
sisted upon  waiting  until  they  were  reinforced  by  Ismail  Beg,  who  was 


THE  BATTLES  OF  PAT  AN  AND  MEET  A.      57 

hurrying  to  form  a  junction  with  them.  Owing  to  this  unhappy 
divergence  of  opinion,  the  golden  opportunity  was  lost.  For  it  cannot 
he  doubted  but  that  the  Rathors  dying  to  redeem  their  honour,  would 
have  made  short  work  of  the  Maratha  Cavalry,  whose  cowardice  was 
notorious,  and  after  defeating  them,  might  have  fallen  upon  De 
Boigne's  Brigade  during  its  passage  of  the  Liini  river,  with  every 
prospect  of  destroying  the  force,  or,  at  least,  obliging  it  to  retreat. 

As  it  was,  the  Maratha  Cavalry  were  permitted  to  retire  unmolested, 
and  so  to  remain  for  the  next  thirty-six  hours.  It  was  not  until  mid- 
night of  the  10th  that  De  Boigne  completed  the  crossing  of  his  guns. 
The  next  morning  he  advanced  slowly  in  the  direction  of  Merta,  his 
march  across  the  sandy  plain  being  much  impeded  by  the  heaviness  of 
the  ground.  Towards  midday  he  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  drawn  up 
in  line  of  battle,  and  a  heavy  cannonade  was  at  once  opened  upon  him. 
Lakwa  Dada,  the  Maratha  General,  was  anxious  to  engage  forthwith, 
but  De  Boigne,  profiting  by  the  experience  of  Patan,  where  nightfall 
robbed  him  of  the  full  meed  of  victory,  determined  to  defer  the  battle 
till  the  next  morning,  in  order  that  he  might  have  a  long  day  for  the 
work  in  hand.  He  accordingly  decided  to  fall  back,  and  the  Rathors, 
who  still  awaited  Ismail  Beg's  arrival,  made  no  effort  to  force  on  an 
action. 

During  the  afternoon,  De  Boigne  carefully  reconnoitred  the  ground, 
and  after  deciding  on  his  plan  of  battle,  gave  orders  for  the  Brigade 
to  be  under  arms  before  dawn,  hoping  to  take  the  enemy  by  surprise. 
Whilst  it  was  yet  dark  the  troops  began  to  assemble,  and  in  the  silence 
of  the  sweltering  autumn  night  fell  into  their  places  and  prepared  for 
action.  As  day  broke,  the  sleeping  hosts  encamped  in  front  of  them 
were  awakened  from  their  slumbers  .by  showers  of  grape,  followed  by 
the  advance  of  the  regular  infantry,  who  rapidly  stormed  and  occupied 
their  outer  lines.  All  in  confusion  and  haste,  the  Rathors  formed 
and  opened  a  cannonade.  But  the  advantage  was  already  with  the 
attacking  army,  and  the  Jodbpur  infantry  was  beginning  to  waver  and 
break,  when  a  misadventure  overtook  De  Boigne,  which  nearly  proved 
fatal  in  its  results. 

Captain  Echan,  a  French  officer  in  command  of  the  left  wing  of  the 
Brigade,  took  upon  himself,  without  orders  from  the  General,  to  ad- 
vance, and  the  battalions  on  either  side  of  him  following  his  example, 
the  line  was  broken,  and  a  weak  point  afforded  for  attack. 

In  order  to  show  how  the  Rathors  took  advantage  of  this  error,  it  is 
necessary  to  revert  for  a  moment  to  the  events  occurring  in  their 
camp.  When  its  occupants  had  been  surprised  in  the  early  morning 
by  De  Boigne's  attack,  their  principal  chiefs  were  wrapped  in  the 


58  DE  BOIGNE. 

lethargic  slumber  of  opium — a  narcotic  universally  consumed  by  the 
governing  classes  of  Eajputana.  Slowly  they  were  awakened  from 
their  drowsy  sleep,  one  of  them — the  Chief  of  Ahwa — being  aroused 
with  the  utmost  difficulty.  When  they  regained  possession  of  their 
senses,  they  found,  to  their  shame  and  humiliation,  the  camp  in  con- 
fusion, and  the  infantry  a  disorganized  rabble  on  the  point  of  being 
routed. 

Then  did  these  chiefs,  twenty-two  in  number,  decide  on  a  great 
atonement.  Girding  on  their  swords,  they  called  four  thousand  * 
chosen  followers  to  arms,  and,  as  the  clan  was  collecting,  prepared 
and  drank  opium  together  for  the  last  time.  It  was  not  the  final 
carouse  of  weak  debauchees,  but  a  stern  and  solemn  sacrament.  For 
they  drank  it  as  the  draught  of  death.  They  wrapped  themselves 
around  with  shawls  of  yellow  silk,  the  certain  token  that  they  rods  to 
victory  or  death,  and  so  gave  the  order  to  mount. 

It  was  at  this  moment  that  Captain  Rohan  advanced  out  of  De 
Boigne's  line.  The  Chief  of  Ahwa  saw  the  opportunity  presented  for 
attack,  and  in  the  act  of  imprudence  recognised  a  propitious  omen. 
Standing  up  in  his  stirrups,  he  encouraged  his  clansmen  with  a  few 
spirited  words,  calling  on  them  to  follow  him,  and  concluding  with  the 
pregnant  exhortation  :  "  Bemember  Pdtan  !" 

Then  he  led  the  way,  the  squadrons  following  after,  at  full  gallop. 
The  scene  of  conflict  was  soon  reached,  and  charging  straight  against 
De  Boigne's  three  detached  battalions,  he  took  them  at  disadvantage, 
and  drove  them  back  in  disorder.  The  moral  effect  of  this  temporary 
triumph  inspired  the  Bathors  with  hope  and  excitement.  Their  Chief 
now  turned  his  attack  upon  the  main  body  of  the  Brigade,  and  when 
he  neared  it  his  body  of  horse  divided  and  trailed  out,  and,  as  if  acting 
on  a  preconcerted  plan,  wheeled  round  until  De  Boigne  was  completely 
surrounded  ;  awhile  they  rent  the  air  with  the  war  cry  they  had  ac- 
cepted, and  which  was  at  once  a  confession  and  an  inspiration. 

Peradventure  the  God  of  Battle,  as  he  looked  down  upon  that  heathen 
host,  smiled  grimly  in  anticipation  of  the  rich  sacrifice  about  to  be 
offered  up  before  his  altars.  The  parched  plain  gaped  for  the  coming 
red  flood  that  would  drench  it  so  darkly,  and  force  forth  richer  pasture 
growths  than  any  springing  from  the  rain  which  fell  from  above.  The 
steel-blue  sky  interposed  no  clouds  between  that  awful  arena  and  the 
high  heavens.  The  rugged  Aravallis,  towering  on  the  horizon,  caught 
the  first  rays  of  the  morning  sun,  and  hung  out  crimson  banners  on 
their  mountain-tops.  Oft  had  they  looked  down  on  Merta's  fields,  and 
seen  human  strife  and  human  carnage  ;  oft  from  their  grey  steeps  and 
*  Some  authorities  quote  this  number  as  only  four  hundred. 


THE  BATTLES  OF  PAT  AN  AND  MERTA.  59 

stony  fastnesses  the  roar  of  battle  had  re-eclioed  back  in  angry  thunder 
tones  ;  oft  had  their  shadows  fallen,  as  a  pall,  on  ghastly  heaps  of 
mangled  men.  And  now  the  cycle  of  war  had  come  round  again,  and 
the  wind  that  blew  from  Merta's  plain  was  soon  to  be  hot  with  the 
breath  of  battle. 

"  Remember  Pdtan  !  " — Onward  swept  the  squadrons  of  Marwar ; 
out  rang  the  battle  cry,  as  with  uplifted  swords  and  lances  poised  to 
thrust,  they  hurled  themselves  upon  De  Boigne's  battalions. 

But  the  genius  of  the  great  general  had  anticipated  the  danger,  and 
prepared  to  meet  it.  With  "  incomparable  presence  of  mind  "  De 
Boigne  rapidly  formed  his  men  into  a  hollow  square,  and  as  the 
Rathors  dashed  on  to  them  they  found  a  magio  change  had  ranged 
serried  rows  of  bristling  bayonets  and  long  lines  of  gaping  guns  ready 
to  receive  them  at  every  point.  Up  to  the  very  muzzles  of  the  cannon, 
they  charged  and  recharged,  those  valiant  sons  ofMarowar,  "The  Land 
of  Death."  Dwellers  in  the  Land  of  Death  were  they,  and  death  they 
despised.  Theirs  to  retrieve  a  lost  honour  !  Theirs  to  give  the  lie  to 
that  stinging  jest  of  false  Jaipur !  Theirs  to  "  Remember  Pdtan  !  " 

Again  and  again  they  charged,  each  time  with  ebbing  effort  and 
weaker  effect.  Again  and  again  they  flung  themselves  against  that 
hedge  of  bayonets  with  merciless  madness.  There  is  a  limit  to 
human  endurance,  but  to-day  that  limit  was  Death.  To  the  bravest 
man  there  comes  a  time  when  conscience  confesses,  "  Enough,"  and 
justifies  it ;  but  to-day  the  command  of  conscience  was  Death.  Great 
gaps  yawned  in  the  ranks,  where  grape  and  shot  ploughed  their 
furrows,  only  to  be  at  once  closed  up  by  the  valour  of  a  frantic 
fanaticism,  as  the  Rathors  reformed  under  the  destroying  fire,  and 
rode  back  to  the  charge  with  the  abandon  of  despair.  But  the 
disciplined  Brigade  confronted  them,  unmoved  as  the  rocks  against 
which  the  succeeding  storm  waves  are  shattered,  and  they  reeled 
back  broken,  but  unbeaten.  And  so  the  ghastly  sacrifice  was  con- 
summated until  only  fifteen  remained  alive,  and  these,  steadfast  to 
the  end,  returned  for  the  last  time  to  the  shambles  of  self-immolation, 
and  found  the  death  they  sought. 

The  God  of  Battle  smiled  grimly  down,  and  the  incense  of  war  rose 
to  his  nostrils.  A  holocaust  of  self-doomed  devotees  lay  prone  before 
his  feet.  The  plain  reeked  with  blood,  but  it  flowed  not  from  alien 
veins,  but  from  hearts  that  claimed  Merta  as  their  mother  earth.  The 
echoes  of  the  cannon,  booming  sullenly  back  from  the  grey  Aravallis, 
thundered  out  no  salute  of  national  victory,  but  sounded  the  minute 
guns  that  proclaimed  the  end  of  Marwar's  chivalry.  Thus  was  the 
atonement  of  the  Chief  of  Ahwa  accomplished. 


60  DE  BOIGNE. 

Before  midday  the  Jodlipur  army  was  in  full  flight,  and  an  hour 
later  De  Boigne's  battalions  in  possession  of  their  camp.  After 
allowing  his  troops  a  short  rest  upon  their  arms,  he  ordered  the  storm 
of  the  town  of  Merta,  and  before  sunset  the  colours  of  the  Brigade 
were  flying  over  that  formidable  place. 

There  is  an  account  of  the  battle  of  Merta,  written  by  an  officer  in 
De  Boigne's  army,  and  printed  in  a  Calcutta  paper,  which  must  be 
quoted  here,  for  the  description  already  given  is  mainly  based  on 
Colonel  James  Tod's  record  in  his  "  Annals  of  Rajas'than."  This 
letter  is  dated  from  Camp  Merta  on  the  13th  of  September,  1790,  and 
reads  as  follows : — 

"  We  had  laid  close  siege  to  Agimere  for  seventeen  days,  when  the 
General,  finding  that  the  spirits  of  the  army  were  upheld  by  the 
enemy  taking  the  field  at  Mirtah,  left  2,000  horse  to  blockade 
Agimere,  and  marched  against  the  enemy.  Owing  to  a  scarcity  of 
water,  following  on  a  famine  and  dry  season,  we  had  to  make  a 
circuitous  route,  and  did  not  reach  Rie  till  the  8th.  About  midnight 
we  recommenced  our  march,  and  having  marched  very  near  to  the 
enemy,  a  heavy  cannonade  commenced  about  nine  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  The  Mahratta  chief  was  eager  to  advance  upon  the  enemy, 
but  De  Boigne  objected,  not  only  on  account  of  the  fatigue  of  the 
troops,  after  a  march  of  ten  kos,  but  because  of  the  intense  heat  and 
lateness  of  the  hour,  which  would  have  prevented  him  reaping  the 
fruits  of  success.  The  enemy's  force  consisted  of  30,000  cavalry, 
100,000  infantry,  and  25  pieces  of  cannon.  On  our  side  the  same 
number  of  horse,  6,000  to  7,000  rank  and  file,  and  80  pieces  of 
artillery.  On  the  10th  at  break  of  dawn  we  were  ordered  to  advance 
on  the  enemy,  the  disposition  of  our  troops  being  the  same  as  at  the 
memorable  battle  of  Patan.  A  heavy  cannonade  soon  commenced, 
supported  on  both  sides  with  great  vigour.  Our  first  line  of  50  pieces 
of  cannon  shortly  after  began  to  fire  with  grape,  and,  by  means  of  our 
superiority  of  guns,  drove  the  enemy  from  their  lines.  But  a  French 
officer  of  Sindhia's,  elated  with  success,  advanced  without  orders  of 
the  line  of  battle  at  the  head  of  three  battalions.  The  enemy  soon 
took  advantage  of  his  imprudence,  and  charged  him  so  vigorously 
that  it  was  not  without  great  difficulty  he  effected  his  retreat.  They 
then  charged  our  main  body  in  front,  flanks,  and  rear,  but  General 
De  Boigne's  foresight  and  incomparable  presence  of  mind  were  the 
means  of  saving  us,  for  upon  perceiving  the  error  which  his  officer 
had  committed,  and  no  doubt  aware  of  the  consequences,  he  formed 
us  into  a  hollow  square,  so  that  upon  being  surrounded  shortly  after- 
wards, we  on  all  sides  presented  a  front  to  the  enemy. 


THE  BATTLES  OF  PAT  AN  AND  MEET  A.      61 

"  About  nine  o'clock  they  were  obliged  to  quit  the  field ;  about  ten 
we  got  possession  of  their  camp  ;  and  about  three  p.m.  took  the  great 
and  formidable  town  of  Mirtah  by  storm.  The  pillage  lasted  three 
days,  and  to  mention  all  the  particulars  attending  it  would  make  your 
teeth  water.  The  ladies  at  first  seemed  displeased  with  oar  coming 
abruptly  into  the  town,  but  at  length  grew  more  kind,  acknowledging 
with  good  grace  that  none  but  the  brave  deserve  the  fair. 

"  The  town  of  Mirtah  is  much  larger  than  Benares,  surrounded 
by  a  thick  mud  rampart  and  parapet  thirty  feet  high.  It  has  two 
minarets,  and  the  houses  are  all  pucca.*  In  this  engagement  the 
attacking  army  lost  six  to  seven  hundred  men,  killed  and  wounded, 
mostly  by  the  sabre.  Gangarani  Bhandaree,  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  Rhattores,  was  taken  on  the  llth  at  night,  endeavouring 
to  make  his  escape  in  the  disguise  of  a  servant.  It  is  impossible  for 
me  to  describe  the  feats  of  bravery  performed  by  the  Jerd  Kopperah 
Wallahs,^  or  Forlorn  Hope,  of  the  enemy.  I  have  seen,  after  the 
line  was  broken,  fifteen  or  twenty  men  return  to  charge  a  thousand 
infantry,  and  advance  to  within  ten  or  fifteen  paces  before  all  were 
shot.  Captain  Bahore  (?  Baours),  who  commanded  the  right  wing, 
was  wounded  in  the  thigh,  and  died ;  Lieutenant  Roberts  was  also 
severely  wounded  by  a  missile,  or  weapon  called  an  Organ,l  which  is 
composed  of  about  thirty-six  gun  barrels  so  joined  as  to  fire  at  once. 
The  Rhattores  lost  five  chiefs,  including  a  nephew  of  the  Rajah,  and 
the  Buxee  §  of  the  army.  These  five,  finding  they  could  not  escape, 
quitted  their  horses,  and  fought  with  eleven  other  followers  on  foot 
till  they  were  all  cut  to  pieces.  This  great  victory  is  solely  to  be 
attributed  to  the  coolness  and  intrepidity  of  our  general  in  making  so 
complete  a  disposition  of  his  forces  in  time  to  repel  the  rapid  charge 
of  the  most  courageous  cavalry  in  the  world.  Ismail  Beg  arrived  the 
day  after  the  engagement  at  Nagora,  about  two  kos  distant." 

Merta  was  a  decisive  victory,  and  was  won  by  the  bravery  of  De 
Boigne.  "  But  for  his  skill  and  presence  of  mind,"  writes  Colonel 
James  Tod,  who  describes  the  battle  from  the  Jodhpur  point  of  view, 
"  his  Brigade  would  infallibly  have  been  annihilated."  His  trained 
intelligence  recognised  the  impending  danger  before  it  was  apparent 

*  Pucca  :  substantial,  built  of  stone  or  burnt  brick,  in  contrast  to  the  usual 
buildings,  which  are  kutcha,  e.g.,  built  of  mud. 

t  Jerd  Kopperah  Wallahs  :  men  in  yellow  raiment,  the  garb  of  doom. 

J  Organ  =  query,  a  mitrailleuse  ? 

§  Buxee  =  the  paymaster  of  the  army,  a  most  important  personage  in 
Oriental  armies. 


62  DE  BOIGNE. 

to  any  one  else,  and  his  military  genius  made  the  dispositions  that 
met  and  overcame  it.  The  battle  was  recognised  at  the  tune  as  a 
remarkable  one.  "  De  Boigne's  battalions,"  writes  the  Calcutta 
Chronicle  of  the  14th  of  October,  1790,  "  have  certainly  all  the  merit  of 
the  victory  of  Mairtha.  De  Boigne  has  shown  such  ability  and  courage, 
that  the  corps  seem  to  act  as  if  they  thought  themselves  invulnerable." 
Another  writer,  with  a  juster  appreciation  of  the  man  he  was  describ- 
ing, thus  refers  to  him  in  another  journal,  "  M.  de  Boigne's  history 
will  make  an  important  figure  in  future  times  in  the  annals  of  India 
that  will  immortalise  his  name,  and  add  celebrity  to  the  European 
character."  Six  months  later,  in  March,  1791,  the  deeds  of  this 
adventurer  were  recognised  in  a  debate  in  the  British  House  of 
Commons. 

Merta  won  for  De  Boigne's  Brigade  the  name  of  the  Cherri  Foug, 
or  Flying  Army,  for  it  showed  that  infantry  could  not  only  protect 
fortified  places  and  act  in  pitched  battle,  but  were  able  to  undertake 
extended  campaigns,  and  invade  distant  territories.  It  converted 
Madhoji  Sindhia  to  a  complete  belief  in  his  regular  troops,  and  led 
to  the  creation  of  the  huge  standing  army  which,  before  a  decade  had 
passed,  became  a  menace  to  the  British  power  in  India. 

The  day  after  the  battle  Ismail  Beg  joined  Bijai  Sing,  bringing 
with  him  a  hurriedly-collected  force.  He  endeavoured  to  persuade 
the  Jodhpur  prince  to  renew  the  contest,  and  an  attempt  was  made 
to  reassemble  the  scattered  soldiery,  and  form  a  new  army.  Bat  in 
December  discreeter  counsels  prevailed,  and  Bijai  Sing  sent  a  Vakil 
to  Koapur,  where  De  Boigne  was  encamped,  to  sue  for  peace.  The 
terms  imposed  were  severe,  and  included,  in  addition  to  an  indemnity 
of  three  quarters  of  a  million  sterling,  the  cession  of  the  province  of 
Ajmir,  which  was  granted  as  Jaidad  to  Lakwa  Dada,  the  Maratha 
Commander-in-Chief. 

As  soon  as  the  treaty  was  concluded,  De  Boigne  marched  his  brigade 
back  to  Mattra,  which  he  reached  on  the  1st  of  January  1791.  Here 
he  was  welcomed  with  an  unique  salute  of  the  entire  park  of  artillery, 
and  a  feu  de  joie  of  all  the  small  arms  in  the  Maratha  camp,  whilst 
in  the  jubilation  of  his  heart  Madhoji  loaded  his  victorious  general 
with  honours  and  rewards  commensurate  with  his  great  services. 


CHAPTER   V. 

THE    SECOND   AND   THIRD   BRIGADES.      MADHOJI   SINDHIA   PROCEEDS    TO 

POONAH. 

1791-1793. 

THE  immediate  result  of  the  victories  of  Patan  and  Merta  was  the 
formation  of  a  second  brigade  in  1791  and  a  third  in  1793,  the 
enlistment  and  organisation  of  which  occupied  much  of  De  Boigne's 
time  and  attention  till  the  summer  of  the  latter  year.  Establishing 
his  headquarters  at  Koil,  he  threw  himself  with  heart-whole  energy 
into  the  new  work  Madhoji  Sindhia  had  entrusted  to  him,  determined 
to  fulfil  the  expectations  of  his  master  and  deserve  the  unlimited  con- 
fidence reposed  in  him.  Koil  was  situated  close  to  Aligarh,  the  forti- 
fications of  which  were  considerably  strengthened,  and  beneath  its 
ramparts  arose  an  extensive  cantonment  capable  of  holding  a  large 
body  of  troops,  whilst  under  De  Boigne's  fostering  administration  the 
town  itself  became  an  emporium  of  commerce.  The  spot  was  well 
chosen  for  the  headquarters  of  an  army,  for  its  position  in  the  centre 
of  De  Boigne's  districts  secured  to  him  supplies  of  all  descriptions 
necessary  for  his  troops,  whilst  the  equi-distance  from  Delhi  and 
Agra  enabled  him  to  dominate  both  cities  by  the  rapidity  with  which 
he  could  concentrate  a  force  at  either  point. 

When  increasing  his  army,  circumstances  induced  De  Boigne  to 
somewhat  remodel  the  constitution  of  the  brigades,  each  now  con- 
sisting of  6,000  Telingas,  or  regular  infantry,  1,000  Najibs,  or  irregu- 
lars, and  1,000  Eohillas,  called  "  Allygools,"  who  were  men  of  proved 
bravery,  and  recruited  for  the  special  work  of  leading  storming  parties. 
Attached  to  each  brigade  were  800  regular  cavalry,  3  battering  guns,  10 
howitzers,  2  mortars,  and  36  field-pieces.  There  was  also  a  small 
body  of  Persian  Horse,  mounted  and  armed  at  De  Boigne's  expense, 
and  regarded  as  his  personal  bodyguard.  The  regular  cavalry  were 
well  mounted ;  some  were  armed  with  matchlocks  and  swords,  others 

63 


64 


DE  BOIGNE. 


with  carbines,  pistols,  and  swords,  and  all  were  well  disciplined  to 
perform  the  European  evolutions. 

To  military  readers  the  composition  of  a  complete  battalion  in  De 
Boigne's  army  may  be  interesting.     It  was  as  follows  : — 


Infantry. 


1  Captain  (European) 
1  Lieutenant  (European) 


Bs. 

1  Adjutant,  or  Subahdar      ...  paid  35.  per  mensem. 

8  Jemadars „     20.  ,, 

1  Havildar  Major     ,,     12.8  ,, 

32  Havildars  (sergeants)        „     10.8  „ 

32  Naiks  (corporals) ...  ,,       8.8  ,, 

2  Colour  Bearers       ,,     12.  ,, 

2  Cymballs „     12.  „ 

10  Drummers ...  ,,     12.  „ 

lOFifers           „     12. 

416  Sepoys,  Grenadier  Companies,  6.  ;  others  ,,       5.8.  „ 

Artillery. 

1  Sergeant  Major  (European)         paid  60.  per  mensem. 

5  Gunners  (European)         ...         ...         ...  ,,40.  ,, 

1  Jemadar      „     30.  ,, 

1  Havildar      ,,      15.  ,, 

5  Naiks           ...  „       9.  „ 

5  Sarangs  (bullock  sergeants)         ...         ...  ,,       9.  „ 

5  Tindals  (park  sergeants) ...  „       6.8  ,, 

4  Blacksmiths            ...  ,,       6.  ,, 

4  Carpenters „       6.  ,, 

35  Golundars  (native  gunners)              paid  6.,  7.,  and  8.  „ 

35  Clashies  (native  artillerymen)               paid  4.8  and  5.  „ 

20  Be*ldar8  (sappers) paid     4.  „ 

24  Garewans  (bullock  drivers)         ,       4.  „ 

Native  Staff. 

1  Pandit  (accountant)           paid  60.    per  mensem. 

2  Matsaddis  (writers)            ,,      20.  „ 

11  Beesties  (water  carriers) „        4.  ,, 

7  Armourers „        7.  ,, 

2  Hirkarrus  (messengers) „        5.  „ 

4  Gurreealas  (time -keepers)            ,        5.  ,, 

1  Surgeon  (native) „      10.  „ 

1  Masalchi  (torch-bearer) „        5.  „ 


THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD  BRIGADES.  65 

Each  battalion  was  provided  with — 

408  stand  of  arms. 

4  field-pieces  (four-  and  six-pounders). 

1  howitz. 

5  tumbrils. 
120  bullocks. 

18  camels. 

2  bullock  carts. 

300  round  of  shot  for  each  gun. 
100  round  of  grape  for  each  gun. 

50  stone  shells  for  each  howitz. 

50  rounds  of  grape  for  each  howitz. 

Each  tumbril  was  drawn  by  twelve  bullocks,  under  charge  of  three 
drivers  ;  and  each  gun  by  eight  bullocks,  with  two  drivers. 

The  irregular  infantry  were  similarly  equipped,  but  while  the 
Telingas  were  clothed  in  scarlet  uniforms,  obtained  from  Calcutta, 
with  black  leather  accoutrements  and  cockscombs  in  their  blue  tur- 
bans, the  Najibs  wore  garments  of  blue  quilted  country-cloth. 

The  companies  fired  by  platoons  independently,  but  as  the  fire  of 
the  matchlock  battalions  was  much  heavier  than  that  of  the  musket 
battalions,  De  Boigne  gave  an  extra  "  caronacle  "  or  "  howitz  "  to 
each  of  the  latter.  The  Rohillas,  recruited  for  fighting  in  hill  country 
and  attacks  on  fortified  villages,  were  paid  E.s.5.8  per  mensem. 
There  were  also  400  Mvwattis  attached  to  each  brigade,  whose  duties 
were  to  forage,  furnish  guards,  escorts,  wood-cutters,  &c,  and  two 
hundred  and  forty  recruits,  who  drew  two  annas  a  day  each  until 
incorporated  in  the  rank  and  file. 

The  details  concerning  the  Cavalry  are  not  quite  so  explicit.  The 
number  attached  to  a  brigade  appears  to  have  been  800,  and  their 
uniform  was  a  green  one,  with  red  turbans  and  kammarbands  or  belts. 
De  Boigne's  bodyguard,  the  pick  of  the  mounted  troops,  was  made  up 
of  four  Eisalas  or  troops,  each  consisting  of — 

Es. 

1  Bisaldar          ...         ...  paid  40.  per  mensem. 

1  Naib  Risaldar ,,     30.  ,, 

4  Jemadars        ,,     18.  ,,            each. 

4  Daffadars         ...         ...  ,,     12.  „                 ,, 

64  Troopers         ,,       8.  ,,                „ 

1  Kettledrum     ,,        7.  ,, 

35  Gunners          ,,       8.  ,,                ,, 

4  Galloper  guns 


66  DE  BOIGNE. 

It  included  also  a  special  body  of  75  skirmishing  horse,  mounted 
on  the  fleetest  and  hardiest  animals,  and  recruited  from  the  bravest 
and  most  active  men,  who  were  not  disciplined  like  the  troopers  of  the 
other  squadrons,  but  employed  as  irregulars. 

Two  Bisalas  of  similar  cavalry,  composed  of  the  bravest  and  best 
mounted  men,  were  attached  to  each  brigade  for  skirmishing  purposes. 
The  ordinary  cavalry,  who  had  to  provide  and  feed  their  own  horses, 

were  paid  as  follows — 

Es. 

Eisaldars  paid  80.  per  mensem,  each. 

Jemadars  ...         ...        ,,     40.  ,, 

Daffadars  ,,30.  „ 

Kettledrums „     24.  „ 

Troopers  ,,     24.  „ 

The  number  of  men  in  each  brigade  was  about  9,000,  so  that  when 
his  army  was  brought  to  its  full  strength  De  Boigne  had  under  his 
command,  including  garrison  troops,  about  30,000  men.  The  monthly 
cost  of  a  brigade  was  Es. 50,000  in  Hindustan,  increased  by  a  special 
batta  or  allowance  of  50  per  centum  to  Es.84,000,  when  serving  south 
of  the  Chambal  river. 

The  difficulty  of  obtaining  competent  officers  was  in  a  measure  over- 
come by  the  pay  and  allowances  offered.  But  it  is  probable  that  these 
were  not  so  liberal  at  first  as  the  scale  ultimately  sanctioned,  which 
bore  favourable  comparison  with  that  obtaining  in  the  Company'a 
army  at  the  same  period,  and  was  certainly  good  enough  to  tempt 
Europeans  of  recognised  ability  and  character  to  enter  the  service. 
This  could  hardly  have  been  the  case  in  1792,  as  the  following  pay-list 
of  De  Boigne's  officers,  supplied  to  the  Government  of  India,  will 
show — 

OFFICERS  IN  COLONEL  DE  BOIGNE'S  BRIGADE  IN  1792. 


PAY 


Commander  of  First  Brigade.         PER  MENSEM. 

Es. 
Major  Fremont  (Frenchman)  1,400 

Commander  of  Second  Brigade. 
Major  Perron  (Frenchman)      1,200 

Brigade  Major  of  First  Brigade. 
Captain  James  Gardner  (Scotchman) 450 

Brigade  Major  of  Second  Brigade. 
Captain  Drugeon  (Savoyard) 400 


THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD  BRIGADES  67 

Officers  in  the  First  Brigade. 

Captain  Lyenite  (France)         700 

Felose  (Italy) 300 

„         Allamunde  (England)  200 

„         Baleman  (Pohlman  ?),  (Hanover)  ...  200 

Butterfield  (England)  200 

,,         Le  Marcbant  (France)  ...         ...  300 

Captain  Lieutenant  Eobert  Bell  (England)  . . .  250 

Lieutenant  Sutherland  (Scotland)      200 

,,  Jumeon  (Holland)  150 

„  Eennick  (Ireland)  ...         ...         ...  200 

„  Abbott  (England) 200 

,,  Lewis  (Bourguien?),  (France)    ...  200 

Ensign     Harvey    (Ireland),    (deserter    from 

Company's  Artillery  at  Cawnpore) 120 

A  footnote  mentions  tbat  promotion  and  pay  entirely  depended  on 
Colonel  De  Boigne's  favour. 

In  this  list  the  loaves  and  fishes  are  Tew  and  far  between,  but  a  con- 
siderable improvement  was  made  in  the  pay  and  allowances  of  the 
officers  when  the  third  brigade  was  raised,  as  the  following  amended 
scale  of  salaries  then  introduced  indicates — 

RANK  PAY  PER   MENSEM  PAY   PER   MENSEM 

OF   OFFICER.  IN   HINDUSTAN.  IN   THE   DECCAN. 

Es.  Es. 

Colonel         3,000  4,500 

Lieutenant- Colonel            ...  2,000  3,000 

Major           1,200  1,800 

Captain        400  600 

Captain-Lieutenant           ...  300  450 

Lieutenant 200  300 

Ensign          150  225 

Besides  their  pay,  all  colonels,  lieutenant-colonels,  and  majors 
commanding  brigades  drew  Es.100  a  month  from  the  Bazaar  as 
table  allowance.  It  is  also  easy  to  understand  that  there  were  many 
other  sources  of  emolument  open  to  the  officers  besides  their  pay, 
especially  when  they  rose  to  positions  of  command  and  responsibility, 
and  as  time  passed  certain  privileges  accrued  which  increased  their 
position  and  respectability.  For  instance,  no  ordinary  person  pre- 
sumed to  set  up  a  palanquin  in  the  Maratha  dominions,  and  in  the 
Mughal  provinces  the  right  of  riding  in  a  yellow  elephant  howdah  was 
confined  exclusively  to  the  aristocracy ;  yet  De  Boigne's  Europeans 


68  DE  BOIGNE. 

were  permitted  to  use  both  unquestioned.  In  travelling  through  the 
country  their  baggage  was  carried  from  place  to  place  free  of  charge, 
and  all  goods  imported  for  their  personal  use  were  exempted  from  the 
payment  of  customs  dues.  As  for  the  duties  of  these  officers,  except 
in  the  case  of  a  commander  of  a  battalion,  they  were  far  from  onerous. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  service  was  admittedly  a  precarious  one, 
depending  solely  upon  success  in  the  field.  So  long  as  fortune  smiled 
upon  their  arms,  pay  and  position  were  assured ;  but  in  the  event  of 
a  defeat,  it  was  tacitly  understood  that  there  was  no  compensation 
for,  or  appeal  against,  loss  of  employment.  The  expense  of  living  was 
considerable,  requiring  the  upkeep  of  a  large  establishment  of  servants, 
camp  equipage,  and  transport  animals. 

That  fortunes  could  be,  and  were,  made  by  the  officers  in  De 
Boigne's  Brigades  is  a  matter  of  fact,  for  they  had  opportunities  of 
acquiring  large  sums  of  money  apart  from  that  which  the  ordinary 
exercise  of  their  profession  brought  them.  The  Pagoda  tree  still 
flourished  in  the  native  states  of  India.  De  Boigne  himself,  in  his  old 
age,  was  wont  to  remark  of  many  of  his  old  subalterns,  "  Such  a  one, 
if  he  had  not  drunk,  or  such  a  one,  if  he  had  not  gambled,  could  have 
done  as  I  have  done.  It  was  his  own  fault  that  he  did  not  save 
i'100,000.  It  depended  on  himself  to  make  a  fortune  equal  to  mine." 

When  the  Second  Brigade  was  completed  Major  Perron  was 
appointed  to^its  command,  whilst  Major  Fremont  received  that  of  the 
first.  On  the  formation  of  the  third  Major  Sutherland  obtained  the 
command.  As  showing  the  value  attaching  to  commissions  in  the 
service,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  an  officer  named  Pedron,  who 
joined  as  a  captain-lieutenant,  soon  after  purchased  his  majority.  By 
the  time  the  three  brigades  were  brought  to  their  full  strength  there 
were  about  three  hundred  Europeans  of  different  nationalities — 
English,  French,  German,  Swiss,  Italian,  Hanoverian,  Portuguese, 
and  half-castes— in  the  force,  of  whom  10  per  cent,  held  commissions. 
The  rest  were  drill-sergeants  and  artillery-men,  chiefly  recruited  from 
runaway  soldiers  and  sailors  of  the  Company's  service,  or  half-castes. 
Their  pay  was  very  small,  ranging  from  80  to  CO  rupees  a  month. 
They  were  generally  dissolute  and  degraded  in  their  mode  of  life, 
forming  connections  with  native  women,  and  in  times  of  peace 
reflecting  but  little  credit  on  their  European  birth.  But  during  active 
service  they  constantly  exhibited  extraordinary  courage,  and  sustained 
their  reputation  for  brave  fighting. 

De  Boigne's  pay  was  raised,  first  from  Es.4,000  to  Rs. 0,000  a  month, 
and  subsequently  to  Bs.  10,000.  Moreover,  this  was  nearly  doubled 
by  various  perquisites,  including  a  commission  of  2  per  cent,  on  the 


THE  SECOND  AND  TRIED  BEIGADES.  69 

revenue  collections  of  his  Jaidad,  which  could  not  have  brought  him 
in  less  than  Rs.GO,000  a  year.  He  enjoyed  the  income  of  a  modern 
British  Viceroy. 

Soon  after  its  establishment  De  Boigne's  force  received  the  title  of 
The  Imperial  Army,  for  although  it  was  absolutely  of  Madhojt 
Sindhia's  own  creation,  and  subservient  to  his  orders  alone,  he  pre- 
ferred, perhaps  from  a  sense  of  exaggerated  humility,  or  more  prob- 
ably from  motives  of  policy,  to  invest  it  with  a  titular  designation 
which  accorded  the  shadow  of  authority  to  the  blind  emperor,  and  left 
the  substance  in  his  own  hands. 

Of  course  these  radical  changes  and  innovations,  creating  as  they 
did  for  Sindhia  a  formidable  standing  army  of  30,000  men,  were  not 
introduced  without  causing  enmity  and  dissatisfaction  in  many 
quarters.  In  the  first  instance,  the  assignment  to  De  Boigne  of  a 
vast  and  fertile  district  in  the  heart  of  the  Doab  as  Jaidad,  made  him 
an  object  of  universal  jealousy.  Soon,  in  addition  to  this,  a  large 
Jaghir,  or  personal  estate,  was  conferred  on  him  by  his  grateful 
master,  to  the  intense  chagrin  of  the  Maratha  chiefs,  who  realised, 
with  impotent  anger,  that  the  European  interloper  had  obtained  their 
prince's  ear  and  favour,  and,  having  discredited  their  own  military 
pretensions,  was  completely  superseding  them.  The  power  and 
authority  De  Boigne  enjoyed  were  equal  to  those  of  a  sovereign  ruler, 
and  his  orders  carried  the  same  force  as  if  they  had  been  issued  by 
an  independent  Mughal  Emperor. 

Thus  in  nine  short  years,  by  perseverance  and  determination,  by 
ability  and  industry,  by  the  valour  of  his  sword  and  the  wisdom  of  his 
conduct,  De  Boigne  raised  himself  from  the  inconsequence  of  an 
ensign  in  a  regiment  of  Madras  native  infantry  to  the  position  of 
Commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  Hindustan.  Assisted  by  none, 
dependent  solely  on  his  own  exertions  and  talents,  he  attained  this 
pre-eminence  through  sheer  force  of  character  and  merit.  In  the 
great  city,  which  had  for  centuries  been  the  capital  of  the  most  potent 
and  gorgeous  empire  in  India,  this  wandering  Savoyard  was  para- 
mount. It  was  an  elevation  that  exceeded  his  wildest  aspirations — 
one  which  in  his  old  age  he  could  never  look  back  upon  without  ex- 
claiming, "  It  all  appears  as  if  it  were  a  dream  !  " 

After  the  formation  of  the  Second  Brigade  De  Boigne  was  for  some 
time  employed  in  consolidating  Sindhia's  power  in  the  Shaikbawati 
district,  but  the  service  was  of  a  comparatively  unimportant  character, 
and  chiefly  confined  to  extirpating  robber  bands  and  reducing  petty 
chiefs  to  submission.  No  detailed  chronicle  of  this  period  appears  to 
exist,  but  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  printed  in  The  World 


70  DE  BOIGNE. 

newspaper,  published  at  Calcutta,  in  September,  1792,  is  so  far  in- 
teresting that  it  localises  his  actions  about  this  time,  and  conveys  in- 
formation regarding  the  state  of  his  health.  The  letter  was  written  by 
an  officer  in  the  First  Brigade,  under  Major  Fremont,  who  was  engaged 
in  punishing  the  Eajah  Devi  Sing,  a  tributary  chief  of  Jaipur,  and 
compelling  him  to  pay  the  amount  of  tribute  due  from  him.  The 
first  portion  will  be  found  in  the  appendix  in  the  sketch  of  Fremont's 
life  :  the  concluding  part  reads  as  follows  : — 

"  This  country  is  called  the  Sheikawutty  District,  and  if  properly, 
or  even  moderately,  cultivated,  would  yield  seven  lakhs'  revenue, 
whereas  it  is  not  estimated  at  more  than  three.  It  is  still  populous, 
and  the  ruins  of  vast  cities  and  towns  dispersed  through  all  our  route, 
convey  a  strong  impression  of  former  and  vast  opulence.  But  want 
stares  through  every  village,  and  while  the  little  that  the  wretched 
inhabitant  of  a  hut  possesses  is  subject  to  be  wrested  from  him  by 
numerous  bands  of  banditti  on  the  one  side,  or  by  the  oppressions  of 
his  chief  or  his  servants,  or  both,  on  the  other,  heaven  has  afflicted 
this  unfortunate  land  with  a  drought  of  two  years'  continuance.  The 
country  is  very  mountainous,  but  the  valleys,  notwithstanding  the 
niggardness  of  the  elements,  give  still  a  display  of  verdure  not  to  be 
expected,  and  almost  incredible. 

"  We  left  the  First  Brigade  with  De  Boigne  at  Eohtak  on  the  22nd 
of  June  (1792).  De  Boigne  was  then  just  recovering  from  a  dreadful 
dysentery,  which  has  deprived  us  of  some  of  our  officers.  Colonel 
Martine's  brother  died  at  Jedger  (Jhojjar?),  and  Lieutenant  Stewart 
at  Eohtak,  the  day  prior  to  our  march,  and  we  came  at  the  rate  of 
eight  and  nine  cos  each  day.  Grain  was  nine  seers  a  rupee,  and 
coarse  flour  six  pice  the  seer  yesterday.  It  is  now  more  moderate. 

"  Liqua  Adda  (Lakwa  Dada)  commands  the  division  of  Mahratta 
Cavalry  attached  to  this  Brigade.  He  is  a  man  of  great  respectability, 
and  a  favourite  of  Scindia's.  The  second  in  command  is  Jaggo  Cappoo 
(?  Bappoo)  Dada,  a  man  of  ability  and  trust. 

"  De  Boigne  with  his  First  Brigade  is  now  at  Ulwar,  in  the  Mewatte 
country,  about  fifty  cos  from  Delhi.  The  position  of  our  camp  is  in  a 
more  westerly  direction,  but  only  fifty  cos  from  Delhi.  The  country 
is  in  such  a  state  that  subjection  seems  almost  chronic ;  for  plunder 
is  the  universal  system,  and  become  so  habitual  as  to  be  spoken  of 
with  as  much  indifference  as  we  talk  of  a  purchase  in  a  mercantile 
way.  As  soon  as  a  party  has  plundered  a  district,  the  plundered 
directly  make  an  incursion  on  their  neighbours,  and  so  it  continues 
with  as  great  regularity  as  trade,  only  that  it  operates  in  the  contrary 
course,  ruining  instead  of  supporting  nature. 


THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD  BRIGADES.  71 

"  The  superior  politics,  as  you  call  it,  has  been  some  time  out  of 
my  way,  or  rather  I  have  been  out  of  its  way,  on  this  active  tour. 
Scindia  continues  at  Poonah,  and  a  letter  of  yesterday  from  De 
Boigne  (August  9th)  mentions  that  he  is  not  to  be  expected  speedily. 
At  Oojeen  Major  Palmer  (the  English  Resident)  has  taken  up  a  partial 
abode.  He  win  make  it  such  so  long  as  the  subtle  Mahratta  continues 
with  the  Peishwa.  The  situation  is  particularly  favourable  for  keeping 
the  communication  of  correspondence  complete  between  your  presi- 
dency and  our  friends  in  this  quarter.  It  keeps  the  circle  perfect.  It 
is  certain  that  there  had  been  some  secret  stroke  in  meditation  be- 
tween the  British  and  the  lately  hostile  Sultan.:;:  Almost  Dutchlike 
slowness  and  Oriental  indecision  delayed  the  stroke  till,  to  use  an  old 
adage,  the  iron  cooled.  The  opportunity  is  passed,  and  to  prevent  its 
return  will  be  the  true  British  policy.  Various  ideas  are  entertained 
by  the  delay  of  Scindia.  It  has  been  asserted  in  our  camp  that  he 
aimed  at  measures  tending  to  fix  a  claim  to  the  Mogul  tribute  of  two 
and  a  half  lakhs  of  rupees,  agreed  to  be  paid  by  the  Company  to  the 
Dewanni.  But  I  can  scarcely  credit  it,  although  I  know  that 
Scindia's  power  at  Delhi  is  all,  and  that  of  the  Mogul  is  nothing. 
Beside,  by  the  king's  determination  in  1771  to  reside  at  Delhi  instead 
of  Allahabad,  that  claim  was  forfeited. 

"  The  Sikhs  hold  the  northern  balance  of  India.  Intrigue  cannot 
act  on  them  from  the  unsettled  nature  of  their  living.  But  if  Scindia 
had  youth  to  reduce  them,  as  he  has  spirit  and  resolution,  their  weight 
would  soon  again  restore  the  throne  to  the  worshippers  of  the  Hindoo 
Theogony." 

During  the  period  that  De  Boigne  was  raising  the  Second  and  Third 
Brigades,  and  establishing  his  master's  authority,  the  enormous  growth 
of  Sindhia's  power  was  being  watched  with  rancorous  jealousy  by 
Takuji  Holkar,  his  partner  in  the  province  of  Malwa,  and  his  great 
compeer  in  the  Maratha  Confederation.  Holkar  had  been  associated 
with  Madhoji  in  the  extension  of  the  Maratha  power  over  Hindustan. 
Politically  the  two  were  equal,  and  the  former  clung  to  his  prescriptive 
share  in  the  conquest  with  great  tenacity.  But  Patan  and  Merta,  and 
the  completion  of  De  Boigne's  army,  disturbed  the  balance  of  power, 
and  the  shrewd  and  enterprising  policy  of  Sindhia  outran  the  slower 
and  more  conservative  course  that  Holkar  steered,  and  carried  him  to 
the  front.  Takuji  realised  this,  and,  in  order  to  combat  it,  raised  a 
disciplined  corps  of  his  own.  Its  organisation  was  begun  in  1791,  and 
the  Chevalier  Dudrenec,  a  gallant  French  gentleman,  but  a  singularly 
unfortunate  soldier,  was  chosen  for  its  command. 
*  Tipu  Sultan  of  Mysore. 


72  -,    .        DE  BOIGNE. 

Had  Holkar  merely  confined  himself  to  the  establishment  of  an 
infantry  brigade,  modelled  on  the  lines  of  De  Boigne's,  Sindhia  might 
have  regarded  his  endeavours  with  tolerable  indifference.  But  simul- 
taneously cabals  and  intrigues  were  set  on  foot  at  the  Peshwa's  Court 
at  Poonah,  and  every  craft  brought  to  bear  to  undermine  Madhoji's 
influence.  So  successful  were  the  conspirators  that  Sindhia  soon 
found  it  necessary  to  proceed  to  the  capital  to  protect  his  own  inte- 
rests, and  counteract  the  schemes  of  his  enemies.  The  step  was  a 
serious  one,  but  the  necessity  was  great ;  for  Sindhia's  ambition  com- 
prehended an  assertion  of  power,  not  merely  in  Hindustan,  but  over 
the  whole  of  the  Maratha  dominions,  and  Holkar's  hostility  neutra- 
lised in  the  south  all  that  De  Boigne's  successes  had  wrought  in  the 
north. 

Hindustan  was  secure  while  De  Boigne's  brigades  held  it  in  an  iron 
grasp,  and  of  this  Madhoji  felt  satisfied.  So  he  appointed  Gopal  Bao 
Bhao  his  Viceroy,  and  prepared  to  start  for  Poonah.  But  in  order  to 
allay  suspicion  he  announced  that  the  object  of  his  journey  was  to 
invest  the  Peshwa  with  the  insignia  of  the  office  of  Vakil-i-Mutluq, 
or  supreme  deputy  of  the  empire,  which  had  been  confirmed  on  him 
three  years  previously  by  the  Emperor.  Moreover,  with  diplomatic 
moderation,  he  confined  his  escort  to  a  single  battalion  (the  one  chosen 
to  accompany  him  being  that  commanded  by  Michael  Filoze),  and  a 
bodyguard  raised  for  the  occasion  by  Colonel  John  Hessing,  who  had 
quarrelled  with  De  Boigne  after  the  battle  of  Patan,  and  resigned  his 
command.  In  the  spring  of  1793  Madhoji  Sindhia  commenced  his 
journey,  and  marching  by  slow  stages  arrived  at  Poonah  on  the  llth 
of  June  following. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE   BATTLE   OF  LAKHAIRI.      DEATH   OF   MADHOJI   SINDHIA. 

1793-1794. 

THE  departure  of  Madboji  Sindhia  from  Hindustan  was  tbe  signal 
for  Takiiji  Holkar  to  commence  operations  in  that  quarter.  He 
had  long  considered  himself  unjustly  used  by  tbe  small  share  awarded 
him  of  the  territory  conquered  from  the  Mughal,  and  his  indignation 
was  greatly  increased  when  be  learnt  that  one  of  the  principal  objects 
of  Sindhia's  visit  to  Poonah  was  to  procure  the  recall  of  his  rival  from 
the  conquered  provinces.  This  was  not  an  unnatural  step  for  Madhoji 
to  take.  In  tbe  battles  that  bad  led  to  the  annexation  of  Hindustan, 
and  the  subjugation  of  the  Rajput  States  of  Jaipur  and  Jodbpur, 
Holkar  bad  studiously,  and  on  one  notable  occasion,  treacherously, 
kept  aloof;  but,  as  not  unfrequently  occurs,  when  the  fighting  was 
over,  he  desired  to  share  the  plunder.  In  Hindustan  he  bad  been  less 
insistent,  or  less  successful,  but  be  bad  made  up  for  this  in  Rajputana, 
where  he  had  carefully  avoided  conflict  until  Patan  and  Merta  had 
been  fought  and  won,  when  he  sent  his  troops  across  the  Chambal, 
pretended  that  in  tbe  division  of  the  spoils  the  tribute  of  Jaipur  had 
passed  to  him,  and  Jodbpur  to  Sindhia,  and  asserted  bis  equal  right 
to  occupy,  with  Madhoji's  forces,  tbe  newly-annexed  territory  of  Ajmir. 
This,  of  course,  led  to  disagreements  and  difficulties ;  but,  before  draw- 
ing bis  own  sword,  Holkar  sought  for  some  other  instrument  to  use 
against  Sindhia,  and  in  the  restless  and  rebellious  spirit  of  Ismail  Beg 
found  the  very  weapon  be  desired. 

He  at  once  determined  to  make  a  cat's-paw  of  the  Mughal  noble, 
and  push  him  forward  to  disturb  tbe  tranquillity  of  the  new  conquests, 
trusting  in  any  disturbance  that  ensued  to  find  an  opportunity  to 
further  bis  own  interests.  A  plausible  chance  soon  presented  itself. 
Before  tbe  Maratha  occupation  of  Delhi,  one  of  tbe  Emperor's  most 
trusted  ministers  had  been  a  nobleman  named  Najaf  Kuli  Khan. 

73 


74  DE  BOIGNE. 

This  person  had  recently  died,  leaving  a  widow,  who  still  maintained 
her  independence  in  the  fortress  of  Kanaund.  Being  a  woman  of 
brave  and  masculine  spirit,  she  refused  to  surrender  her  stronghold  to 
Sindhia,  and  as  such  rebellious  conduct  could  not  be  overlooked,  it 
was  deemed  necessary  to  take  forcible  measures  to  reduce  her  to 
submission,  and  De  Boigne  ordered  Major  Perron  to  proceed  against 
Kanaund  with  a  email  force  and  capture  it.  Najaf  Kuli  Khan  during 
his  lifetime  had  formed  so  high  an  estimate  of  the  power  of  De  Boigne's 
battalions,  that  previous  to  his  death,  although  exhorting  his  Begum 
to  hold  out  resolutely  against  the  Marathas,  he  advised  her  to  surrender 
at  once  if  De  Boigne's  troops  were  sent  against  her.  With  this  warn- 
ing fresh  in  her  memory  the  widow  was  prepared  to  sue  for  peace, 
but  before  she  actually  did  so,  Ismail  Beg,  who  had  remained  inactive 
after  his  defeat  at  Patan,  instigated  by  Takuji  Holkar,  collected  a 
force,  and,  marching  to  Kanaund,  persuaded  the  Begum  to  oppose 
resistance. 

A  description  of  the  battle  which  ensued  between  Ismail  Beg  and 
Perron's  forces  will  be  found  in  the  sketch  of  the  latter's  life,  to  which 
it  rightly  belongs.  Here  it  is  sufficient  to  record  that  the  fort  of 
Kanaund  was  captured  and  the  Begum  killed,  whilst  Ismail  Beg,  in 
order  to  save  himself  from  a  shameful  treachery  premeditated  against 
him  by  the  garrison,  surrendered  to  Perron,  under  promise  of  his  life 
being  spared.  Directly  Madhoji  Sindhia  heard  that  his  old  enemy 
was  at  last  in  his  power,  he  sent  orders  for  his  immediate  execution, 
but  De  Boigne  chivalrously  resisted  the  mandate,  and  saved  the  life  of 
the  gallant  but  unfortunate  noble,  whose  energy  in  the  field  and 
heroic  resistance  to  the  invaders  of  his  country  was  the  one  bright 
spot  in  the  miserable  history  of  incapacity  and  defeat  that  brought 
about  the  downfall  of  the  Mughal  Empire.  Ismail  Beg  was  sent  as  a 
state  prisoner  to  Agra,  where  he  was  treated  with  the  respect  due  to 
his  rank  and  courage,  and  awarded  a  subsistence  of  Bs.GOO  a  month. 
But  his  spirit  was  broken  by  his  misfortunes,  and  he  never  lifted  his 
head  again.  He  died  in  1799,  and  with  him  passed  away  the  last 
worthy  warrior  that  sought  to  sustain  the  dynasty  of  Taimur  in 
independence  on  the  throne. 

The  failure  of  Ismail  Beg's  final  effort  left  Holkar  with  only  himself 
to  depend  upon  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  hostile  designs  against 
Madhoji,  and  it  was  not  until  the  latter  had  proceeded  to  the  Deccan, 
in  1793,  that  he  dared  to  bring  matters  to  a  crisis.  In  July  of  that 
year  a  rupture  took  place  between  his  troops  and  those  of  Sindhia, 
when  the  two  factions  were  engaged  in  levying  tribute  in  Bajputana. 
A  quarrel  over  the  spoils  of  a  certain  district  led  to  an  appeal  to  arms, 


DEATH  OF  MADHOJI  SINDHIA.  75 

and  this  was  at  once  followed  by  active  preparations  for  war  between 
the  two  great  rival  chiefs. 

Gopal  Kao  Bhao,  Madhoji's  Viceroy  in  Hiudustan,  having  summoned 
Lakwa  Dada  and  De  Boigne  to  join  him,  advanced  against  Holkar's 
army,  which  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Ajrnir.  The  latter  endeavoured  to 
avoid  a  pitched  battle,  and  some  time  was  lost  in  marches  and  counter- 
marches, but  he  was  at  length  brought  to  bay  in  the  pass  of  Lakhairi 
in  September,  1793. 

Gopal  Eao's  army  consisted  of  20,000  horse,  and  De  Boigne's  First 
Brigade  of  9,000  infantry,  with  80  guns,  whilst  Holkar  brought  into 
the  field  30,000  cavalry,  and  his  four  newly-raised  regular  battalions 
lander  the  command  of  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec.  De  Boigne,  on  whom 
the  command  devolved,  found  the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  a  defile  in 
the  hills,  where  the  nature  of  the  ground  was  such  that  only  a  very 
small  force  could  be  utilised  in  attack.  The  battle  that  ensued  has 
been  described  by  the  General  as  the  most  obstinate  and  bloody  one 
he  was  ever  engaged  in.  He  began  the  action  by  sending  forward 
three  battalions  of  infantry  and  500  Bohillas  to  storm  the  narrow, 
wooded  pass  which  led  to  the  enemy's  position.  But  scarcely  had 
these  advanced  than  a  terrible  disaster  overtook  his  main  body.  A 
chance  shot  struck  an  open  tumbril  of  ammunition  and  exploded  it, 
and  this  was  immediately  followed  by  the  explosion  of  twelve  others 
standing  near.  The  catastrophe  threw  the  Brigade  into  the  greatest 
alarm  and  confusion,  but  fortunately,  owing  to  the  wooded  and  hilly 
nature  of  the  country,  Holkar's  Cavalry  were  unable  to  take  full  advan- 
tage of  it.  With  the  wondei-ful  presence  of  mind  and  resource  in 
moments  of  crisis  that  never  failed  him,  De  Boigne  retrieved  the 
disaster.  Beturning  to  his  main  body  he  collected  and  reformed  the 
broken  soldiery  in  time  to  meet  the  onslaught  of  the  enemy's  cavalry, 
who,  as  soon  as  they  came  under  his  fire  began  to  waver.  De  Boigne 
then  ordered  his  regular  horse  forward,  and  leading  them  in  person, 
attacked  the  hesitating  foe,  and  turned  a  doubtful  day  into  a  complete 
victory. 

The  punishment  of  the  battle  fell  on  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  corps. 
These  were  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  cavalry  in  their  rapid  flight, 
and  in  self-defence  faced  round  and  attempted  to  stem  the  pursuit. 
With  the  utmost  determination  and  gallantry  they  contested  the 
ground  until  they  were  practically  annihilated.  Dudrenec  alone 
escaped  unhurt,  every  European  officer  in  his  force  being  killed 
or  wounded,,  whilst  thirty-eight  of  his  guns  were  captured.  The 
shattered  wreck  of  Holkar's  army  made  a  precipitate  flight  across  the 
Chambal  into  Malwa,  where  their  prince,  in  impotent  rage,  swooped 
down  upon  Sindhia's  undefended  capital  of  Ujjain  and  sacked  it. 


76  DE  BOIGNE. 

The  battle  of  Lakhairi  decided  for  seven  years  the  doubtful  contest 
that  had  hitherto  smouldered  between  the  houses  of  Ujjain  and  Indore. 
It  made  Sindhia  the  sole  master  of  the  Maratha  acquisitions  in  Hin- 
dustan, and  humbled  the  pride  if  it  did  not  actually  break  the  heart  of 
Takuji  Holkar,  who  never  showed  fight  again,  and  died  four  years 
later.  The  one  redeeming  feature  of  the  defeat  was  the  valour  dis- 
played by  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  disciplined  brigade.  Short-lived 
and  ill-fated  though  it  had  been,  it  had  still  proved  its  worth,  and 
shortly  afterwards  Holkar  was  induced  by  this  officer  to  raise  another 
corps  on  similar  lines. 

The  quarrel  between  Sindhia  and  Holkar,  and  the  absence  of  the 
former  from  Hindustan,  now  prompted  Partab  Sing  of  Jaipur  to 
throw  off  the  yoke  of  a  tributary  and  declare  his  independence.  He 
was  a  ruler  not  wanting  in  spirit,  nor  deficient  in  judgment,  but  on 
this  occasion  his  conduct  was  both  impolitic  and  pusillanimous,  for  he 
lacked  the  courage  and  the  energy  to  carry  into  effect  a  determination 
he  had  arrived  at  too  hastily.  No  sooner  was  De  Boigne  informed 
of  Partab  Sing's  refusal  to  pay  his  tribute,  than,  with  his  usual 
vigour  and  promptitude,  he  marched  from  Lakhairi  to  Jaipur.  The 
Rajah  fell  back  before  him,  and  shut  himself  up  in  his  capital,  and  at 
the  last  moment,  rather  than  sustain  a  siege,  tendered  his  submission 
and  paid  the  fine  demanded  of  nearly  a  million  sterling. 

Matters  being  thus  settled  Partab  Singh  invited  De  Boigne  to  his 
capital,  and  entertained  him  in  a  style  of  unparalleled  magnificence. 
From  Jaipur  the  General  marched  his  Brigade  back  to  the  Doab, 
stopping  on  the  way  to  visit  the  Rajah  of  Ulwar  at  Macheri.  Here 
he  narrowly  escaped  assassination  whilst  attending  the  chief's  durbar. 
During  the  ceremony  one  of  the  Rajah's  attendants,  approaching  his 
master,  asked,  in  a  whisper,  if  he  would  authorise  the  assassination  of 
De  Boigne,  which  could  be  accomplished  when  he  was  leaving  the 
palace.  To  his  credit,  be  it  recorded,  the  Prince  of  Ulwar  recoiled  in 
horror  from  the  foul  suggestion,  and  in  consequence  no  attempt  was 
made  to  carry  it  out.  De  Boigne's  Vakil  overheard  the  proposal, 
which  was  whispered  in  a  vernacular  the  General  did  not  understand, 
and  communicated  it  to  him,  but  De  Boigne  not  only  made  no  com- 
ment, but  never  alluded  to  the  incident  in  any  way  afterwards. 

De  Boigne  had  now  reached  the  zenith  of  his  greatness,  and  when 
he  returned  to  Delhi  at  the  head  of  his  victorious  army,  he  was  the 
autocrat  of  Hindustan.  He  had  vanquished  all  Sindhia's  enemies, 
and  there  was  not  one  left  that  dared  to  so  much  as  raise  a  hand. 
The  power  of  Holkar  was  broken,  and  the  rebellious  spirit  of  Rajputana 
reduced,  whilst  Delhi  was  humbled  to  the  position  of  a  city  occupied 


DEATH  OF  MADHOJI  SINDHIA.  77 

by  an  enemy.  Shah  'Alam,  the  blind  Emperor,  was  suffered  to  exist — 
a  mere  symbol  of  authority — in  order  that  the  fiction  of  governing  in 
his  name  might  be  preserved.  All  the  power  lay  in  De  Boigne's  hands, 
for  Goptil  Rao  had  recently  been  suspected  by  Sindhia  of  participation 
in  the  hostile  intrigues  of  Nana  Farnavis,  and  deposed  from  his  office 
of  Viceroy  of  Hindustan,  which  was  conferred  upon  De  Boigne,  with 
whom  the  Bhao,  in  his  misfortunes,  had  taken  refuge,  and  by  whom 
he  was  protected,  even  as  Ismail  Beg  had  been,  from  the  malice  of  a 
wanton  and  cruel  revenge. 

With  Sindhia  De  Boigne  was  paramount,  for  the  Maratha  Chief 
although  treacherous  by  nature  and  suspicious  by  disposition,  trusted 
his  European  General  implicitly,  and  treated  him  as  honourably  as  he 
trusted  him.  Never  did  any  European  gain  from  a  native  prince  such 
confidence  and  esteem  as  De  Boigne  won  from  Madhoji,  who  frequently 
remarked  that  though  he  owed  his  being  and  his  heritage  to  his  father, 
it  was  De  Boigne  who  taught  him  how  to  enjoy  the  one,  and  make 
use  of  the  other.  Assuredly  this  was  the  case,  for  it  was  De  Boigne's 
battalions  "before  whose  bayonets  terror  recoiled,  and  whose  grape 
scattered  armies  in  flight"  that  raised  up  Sindhia  to  his  supreme 
position,  and  kept  him  there. 

That  De  Boigne  was  worthy  of  the  great  responsibilities  to  which 
he  was  called,  history  bears  witness.  Although  surrounded  by  temp- 
tations which  appealed  to  his  ambition,  his  vanity,  and  his  cupidity, 
he  never  abused  his  opportunities,  but,  on  the  contrary,  made  the  noble 
use  of  them,  that  stamps  him  as  a  good  as  well  as  a  great  man.  In 
the  exalted  rank  he  had  attained,  the  power  for  evil  was  as  potent  as 
the  power  for  good,  and  he  chose  to  exert  the  latter.  Foremost  in 
war,  he  was  also  foremost  in  peace,  and  the  welfare  and  social  improve- 
ment of  those  he  ruled,  were  his  sincere  aim.  In  battle  his  fearless 
courage  and  military  genius  inspired  with  confidence  the  ignorant  and 
barbarous  peoples  he  trained  to  arms,  but  when  the  fight  was  finished 
he  tempered  the  brutality  of  the  times  by  an  exercise  of  humanity 
that  made  its  mark  on  the  decade.  The  ferocity  of  war,  and  the 
savage  reprisals  of  victory  were  curbed  by  the  enforcement  of  a  rigid 
discipline ;  and  slaughter,  devastation,  and  rapine  were  sternly  re- 
pressed. He  never  suffered  the  disgrace  of  defeat,  and  he  never 
permitted  the  greater  moral  disgrace  that  too  often  attached  to  the 
unlicensed  excesses  of  conquest  in  the  East.  Loyal  as  he  was  to 
Sindhia,  he  was  equally  loyal  to  his  own  sense  of  rectitude,  and  feared 
not  to  champion  the  claims  of  humanity  when  the  occasion  arose. 
Often  did  he  stand  between  Madhoji  and  <the  hasty  wrath  that  would 
have  been  guilty  of  a  mean  or  wicked  action,  shielding  those  whom 


78  DE  BOIGNE. 

the  despotism  of  an  Oriental  revenge  threatened,  until  the  fierce  storm 
of  passion  had  passed  and  justice  was  allowed  to  resume  its  sway. 
That  De  Boigne  could  so  act,  and  did  so  act,  and  yet  to  the  last 
retained  his  master's  esteem  and  confidence,  proved  that  his  moral 
victories  were  even  greater  than  those  which  he  won  with  his  sword. 

From  June,  1793,  to  February,  17U4,  Madhoji  remained  at  Poonah, 
endeavouring  to  gain  over  the  young  Peshwa,  and  circumvent  the 
crafty  machinations  of  his  many  enemies  at  Court.  The  signal  defeat 
of  Holkar  at  Lakhairi  made  the  task  even  more  difficult  than  before, 
for  the  universal  jealousy  it  aroused  increased  Sindhia's  unpopularity 
in  the  Deccan  capital,  whilst  his  schemes  were  too  ambitious  to  find 
immediate  adherents.  The  time  passed  in  intrigue  and  counter 
intrigue,  plot  and  counter  plot,  until  at  last  his  efforts  began  to  be 
rewarded,  and  the  young  Peshwa,  chafing  under  the  austere  direction 
of  Nana  Farnavis,  evinced  a  decided  inclination  to  throw  off  the  yoke 
and  submit  himself  to  the  more  attractive  guidance  of  his  great 
vassal.  Madhoji  was  rough,  but  he  was  genial,  and  he  cloaked  his 
shrewdness  under  an  apparently  open  and  hearty  nature.  There  was 
a  certain  freedom  in  his  manner  which  was  attractive,  and  he 
assiduously  laboured  to  please.  It  almost  seemed  as  if  the  same 
good  fortune  that  had  crowned  his  arms  in  the  north  was  going  to 
crown  his  diplomacy  in  the  south,  when,  in  this  moment  of  success, 
there  came  a  sudden  summons  to  him — a  summons  that  kings  and 
subjects  alike  must  obey,  and  which  shatters  all  hopes  and  ambitions, 
even  as  it  terminates  all  fears  and  sufferings.  Early  in  February 
1794,  the  old  Patel,  whilst  residing  at  Wanaoli,  near  Poonah,  was 
seized  with  a  violent  fever,  and  on  the  twelfth  of  the  month,  in  the 
sixty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  Madhoji  Sindhia,  the  greatest  prince, 
with  the  exception  of  Sivaji,  that  the  Maratha  nation  ever  produced, 
breathed  his  last. 

Gifted  with  great  political  sagacity,  skilled  in  artifice,  and  a  master 
of  intrigue,  Madhoji's  schemes  were  ambitious,  but  practicable.  Had 
he  lived  there  is  little  doubt  but  that  he  would  have  fulfilled  a  portion, 
at  least,  of  the  task  he  set  himself,  and  founded  an  independent 
dynasty  which  might  have  claimed  a  place  by  the  side  of  the  greatest 
in  India.  His  military  talents  were  of  the  first  rank,  and  he  was  not 
less  a  great  statesman  than  a  great  soldier.  It  was  the  combination 
of  the  highest  qualities  of  each  that  enabled  him  to  recognise  the 
merits  of  De  Boigne  and  adapt  them  to  his  purpose.  Boldly  breaking 
free  from  the  trammels  of  long-established  custom,  he  superseded  an 
untrained  multitude  with  a  comparatively  small,  but  compact  and 
highly  disciplined  army,  which  formed  a  powerful  weapon  in  his 


MADHOJI    SIXDHIA. 
(From  a  plate  in  Fraiickliris  "  History  of  the  Reign  of Shah-Aulum."\ 


DEATH  OF  MADHOJ1  SINDHIA.  79 

bands.  His  enterprise  met  with  its  due  reward,  for  it  raised  him  up 
to  a  position  which  knew  no  compeer,  and  feared  no  rival.  The 
fighting  machine  he  called  into  existence  made  him  invincible. 
Before  his  death,  in  addition  to  bis  vast  possessions  in  Central  India 
and  Malwa,  across  the  Chambal  Eajputana  was  his  vassal,  and 
Hindustan  his  own.  From  the  Deccan  in  the  south  to  the  Siwaliks 
in  the  north,  from  the  valley  of  the  Ganges  in  the  east  to  the  deserts 
of  Bikanir  in  the  west,  the  sway  of  the  old  Patel  was  undisputed. 
The  kingdom  be  left  behind  him  was  the  most  powerful  in  all  India, 
and  it  owed  its  circumstance  not  less  to  the  statesmanship  of  Madboji 
Sindhia  than  to  the  battalions  of  Benoit  De  Boigne. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ACCESSION  OF    DAULAT   RAO   SINDHIA.       DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND. 

1794-5. 

TV  l(  ADHOJI  SINDHIA  left  no  children,  and  was  succeeded  by  his 
-••'•*•  grand  nephew,  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia,  a  youth  of  fifteen,  who  was 
entirely  under  the  influence  of  a  crafty  Brahmin  named  Baloba 
Tantia,  whom  he  appointed  his  minister.  Tantia,  in  common  with 
most  of  the  leading  Maratha  chieftains,  was  inimical  to  De  Boigne, 
and  jeakms  of  his  enormous  power.  But  it  was  impossible  to  attempt 
any  change  in  the  complicated  military  and  political  machine  that 
controlled  Hindustan,  and  the  General  was  confirmed  in  the  command 
of  the  army,  the  guardianship  of  the  Emperor's  kingdom,  and  the 
government  of  all  the  Maratha  possessions  north  of  the  Chambal. 

On  his  accession  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  decided  to  remain  at  Poonah 
and  continue  his  uncle's  policy,  which  had  been  directed  towards  the 
attainment  of  a  preponderating  influence  at  the  Court  of  the  Peshwa. 
His  position  was  soon  considerably  strengthened  by  the  arrival  of 
De  Boigne's  First  Brigade,  under  the  command  of  Major  Perron, 
which  had  been  ordered  down  to  the  Deccan  by  Madhoji  shortly 
before  his  death.  This  secured  the  young  chief  a  force  sufficient  to 
awe  the  Peshwa,  and  assure  the  ascenuancy  of  his  own  views.  More- 
over, about  the  same  time  Hessings's  and  Filoze's  corps  were  con- 
siderably augmented. 

On  the  death  of  his  old  master  De  Boigne's  conduct  was  governed 
by  those  principles  of  honour  and  rectitude  which  distinguished  his 
whole  career.  So  great  was  his  power  that  it  is  no  exaggeration  to 
say  he  might  have  made  Hindustan  his  own  ;  but  the  temptation  was 
rejected,  and  the  soldier  of  fortune  who  had  so" loyally  served  Madhoji 
Sindhia  wavered  not  for  an  instant  in  his  allegiance  to  the  boy  prince 
who  succeeded  him. 

Often  throughout  his  career  had  De  Boigne  been  the  recipient  of 
tempting  overtures  from  neighbouring  powers,  who  sought  to  detach 


DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  81 

him  from  the  Maratha  interest,  and  secure  his  services  for  them- 
selves, and  many  of  these  offers  were  now  repeated.  Shah  'Alam, 
who  in  his  impotent  blindness  and  degrading  confinement,  still 
hugged  the  delusion  of  majesty,  proposed  to  confer  on  De  Boigne 
the  high  office  of  "Wazir,  if  he  would  employ  his  Brigades  in  restoring 
an  independent  Mughal  Empire.  Zeman  Shah,  the  king  of  Cabul, 
sent  his  ambassadors  to  the  General,  with  offers  so  dazzling,  that  they 
amounted  to  an  equal  share  in  his  throne  if  De  Boigne  would  set  up 
the  dominion  of  the  Abdali  in  India.  But  these  and  many  other 
overtures  were  all  declined,  and  De  Boigne  remained  true  to  the 
young  master  of  the  house  he  had  so  long  served,  and  whose  fortunes 
he  had  raised  to  such  a  commanding  eminence  in  the  community  of 
Indian  nations. 

It  was  a  noble  decision  that  recognised  the  path  of  duty  so  clearly 
and  followed  it  so  unhaltingty.  For  it  was  the  decision  of  a  proud, 
ambitious  man  in  the  flood  tide  of  his  successful  career,  on  whose 
actions  no  restraint  was  placed  save  that  of  conscience.  De  Boigne 
was  at  this  time  but  forty-three  years  old,  and  in  the  very  prime  of 
life,  and  there  was  afforded  to  him  a  possibility  of  obtaining  indepen- 
dent sovereign  power.  But  he  rejected  the  temptation  ;  and  in  the 
renunciation  there  was  a  finer  credit  than  any  which  the  grandeur  of 
an  usurped  crown  could  have  conferred. 

Upon  the  accession  of  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  De  Boigne's  over- 
whelming strength  enabled  him  to  keep  the  peace  in  Hindustan,  and 
overawe  those  projected  rebellions  against  existing  authority  which 
always  follow  the  succession  of  Oriental  rulers.  Three  small  out- 
breaks occurred  at  Datia,  Narwar,  and  Sohawalgarh,  but  were 
speedily  suppressed  by  Majors  Fremont,  Sutherland,  and  Gardner, 
who  were  severally  detached  to  reduce  the  refractory  chiefs  implicated. 
With  these  exceptions  no  record  exists  of  any  extensive  military 
operations  undertaken  north  of  the  Chambal,  during  the  period  that 
intervened  between  Madhoji  Sindhia's  death,  and  the  General's  de- 
parture for  Europe. 

But  although  his  sword  was  allowed  to  rest  in  its  sheath  there  were 
many  civil  and  political  duties  which  claimed  De  Boigne's  attention 
at  this  time,  and  two  of  them  are  especially  interesting.  One  was 
the  condition  of  the  Taj  at  Agra,  the  other  the  circumstances  of  the 
Emperor  Shah  'Alam.  An  interest  in  both  matters  was  evinced  by 
Colonel  John  Murray,  an  officer  of  the  Company  holding  a  high 
post  under  Government  at  Calcutta,  who,  on  the  22nd  of  February, 
1794,  wrote  to  De  Boigne,  inquiring  if  any  steps  were  being  taken  to 
preserve  the  unique  mausoleum  raised  to  Mumtaz-i- Mahal  at  Agra, 

6 


82  DE  BOIGNE. 

and  stating  that  "  he  had  repeatedly  heard  that  this  monument  of 
Eastern  magnificence  and  refinement  was  likely  to  fall  soon  into 
irrevocable  decay,  unless  means  were  taken  without  loss  of  time  to 
prevent  it." 

De  Boigne,  in  reply  to  this  inquiry,  wrote  : — "  I  have  been  honoui'ed 
with  your  kind  favour  of  the  22nd  ultimo,  which  has  given  me  much 
pleasure  in  finding  myself  noted  by  you,  and  thought  capable  of 
effecting  the  liberal  views  and  honourable  wishes  you  have  in  the 
preservation  of  the  Tage."  He  then  went  on  to  state  that  he  had 
already  once  or  twice  spoken  to  Madhoji  Sindhia  on  the  subject  of 
preserving  the  mausoleum  "  but  he  did  not  appear  to  value  more  than 
the  richness  of  the  material."  A  small  allowance  had  been  sanctioned 
for  the  expenses  of  keeping  it  in  good  repair,  "  but  the  avarice  and 
parsimony  of  the  Hindoo  caste  in  general,  and  the  Mahrattos  in 
particular,  as  also  their  abhorrence  of  all  that  is  Mahomedan  will  for 
ever  impede  the  application  of  the  allowance  to  its  real  purpose  .  .  . 
I  shall  certainly  use  my  best  endeavours,  and  take  advantage  of  the 
little  influence  I  have  with  the  Prince,  to  have  the  allowance  already 
made,  applied  to  the  repairs  of  it,  and  if  possible  to  have  something 
more  added  to  it,  if  the  former  is  thought  insufficient.  .  .  .  Was  ever 
Scindia  endowed  with  those  noble  principles  you  possess,  and  which 
guide  your  actions  in  this  desire  of  yours,  yet  the  Pundits,  who  have 
the  management  of  all  business  at  Court,  will  never  put  aside  the  old 
way  of  embezzling  the  half  of  what  is  to  pass  by  their  hands,  which  is 
so  familiar  in  every  transaction,  that  it  is  not  thought  so  much  as  to 
take  any  notice  of  it.  ...  If  I  am  so  happy  as  to  meet  with  success 
in  my  exertions  to  execute  your  commands,  that  honour  shall  be 
yours,  and  positively  to  you  alone  shall  be  indebted  for  the  pleasure 
they  shall  enjoy  in  the  admiration  of  that  superb  monument.  If 
otherwise,  and  that  the  decay  of  it  cannot  be  much  retarded,  you  shall 
have  the  self-satisfaction  of  having  wished  and  done  your  utmost  for 
its  preservation,  and  I,  at  your  request,  to  have  followed  your  steps  in 
that  noble  career.  Eequesting  the  favour  to  be  at  all  times  honoured 
with  your  commands,  and  with  a  place  in  your  acquaintance,  permit 
me  to  be,  with  unfeigned  regard,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  very 
humble  servant,  BT.  DE  BOIGNE." 

The  "  Dream  in  Marble  "  still  stands  to  witch  all  pilgrims  to  Agra 
with  its  exquisite  beauty.  It's  costly  splendour  may  be  estimated 
from  the  fact  that  upon  this  single  edifice  over  three  million  pounds 
sterling  were  expended,  and  this,  too,  in  a  country  where  labour  was 
the  cheapest  item  in  building  work.  It  is  formed  of  the  finest  white 
marble  inlaid  with  precious  stones,  and  although  bearing  many  marks 


DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  83 

of  Vandal  Maratha  hands,  still  the  Taj  exists  in  all  its  original  exquisite 
symmetry  of  form.  For  their  share  in  its  preservation  posterity  owes 
a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Colonel  John  Murray  and  Benoit  De  Boigne. 

Colonel  Murray  was  evidently  encouraged  by  the  tone  of  De 
Boigne's  letter  to  address  him  on  another  subject  which  he  had  at 
heart.  This  was  the  ill-treatment  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam  was 
experiencing  at  the  hands  of  his  Maratha  appointed  custodian 
Nizam-ul-Din.  This  man  was  by  profession  a  Dervish,  and  often 
alluded  to  as  the  "  Cowrie  Father,"  from  the  circumstance  that  alms 
in  the  shape  of  Cowries,  or  shells  (the  lowest  form  of  currency  in 
India),  were  often  thrown  to  fakirs  of  his  persuasion.  Writing  on 
the  10th  of  October,  1794,  Colonel  Murray  thanks  De  Boigne  for  the 
attention  paid  to  his  letter  regarding  the  preservation  of  the  Taj,  and 
now  begs  to  enlist  his  sympathies  on  behalf  of  the  blind  Emperor, 
asking  him  "  to  use  his  pious  endeavours  to  mitigate  the  sufferings  of 
this  fallen  and  ill-used  family,"  and  enclosing  the  following  extract 
from  a  letter,  written  by  a  friend  of  De  Boigne  at  Delhi,  to  a  corre- 
spondent in  the  Company's  service  : — 

"  Scindia  sets  Shah  Nizam-ool-Deen  over  the  Badshaw  as  the 
greatest  scoundrel  they  could  find.  He  does  not  give  a  farthing  ot 
money  to  the  Badshaw,  or  any  of  his  people,  affecting  to  console  the 
poor  old  king  that  it  is  all  the  better  for  him,  as  no  temptation  can 
remain  for  another  Gholam  Cadir  to  seize  upon  him  for  the  sake  of 
plunder.  Regularly  every  day  he  furnishes  the  old  King  with  two 
seers  (4  Ibs.)  of  pillaw  and  eight  seers  of  meat  for  himself  to  get  cooked 
as  he  likes.  This,  with  two  loaves  of  bread,  about  the  length  each  of 
a  cubit,  to  suffice  for  breakfast,  dinner,  and  supper,  and  he  may  get 
masdla  (spices  and  condiments)  where  he  can.  This,  however, 
though  it  is  to  serve  for  five  persons,  and  the  poor  servants  who  can 
pick  at  it  a  bit  afterwards,  is  living  in  clover  in  comparison  with  the 
rest  of  the  Eoyal  Household.  They,  poor  creatures,  without  dis- 
tinction, Princes  and  Princesses,  nay  Queens  and  all  eunuchs  and 
female  slaves,  have  exactly  delivered  out  to  them  to  bake  into  cakes 
two  seers  a  day  of  barley  flour  for  every  three  of  them,  which  they  are 
to  bake  for  themselves,  and  are  thus  afforded  two-thirds  of  a  seer  of 
food  a  day.  For  liquors,  from  the  King  to  the  turnspit,  they  have 
nothing  but  water.  The  King's  quincuncial  party  at  dinner  every  day 
is  made  out  of  himself  and  his  doctor,  his  son  and  heir,  and  a  little 
favourite  daughter,  and  the  mighty  boon  of  being  one  at  this  fine 
extra  fare  is  fairly  allotted  to  his  200  Begums,  one  after  another  in 
turn ;  so  that  of  the  poor  Queens  each  has  a  prospect,  of  what  to  them, 


84  DE  BOIGNE. 

after  their  miserable  fare,  must  be  a  high  treat  indeed,  a  dinner  and 
a  half  a  year  !  I  asked  if  the  old  gentleman  would  not  wish  to  regale 
himself  with  beef  now  and  then  ?  Yes,  he  longs  for  it,  but  where  is 
he  to  get  it  ?  The  servants  often  apply  in  great  misery  to  the 
unfeeling  father  (Nizam-ool-Deen)  for  a  little  wages,  when,  after 
having  been  three  or  four  months  without  a  farthing,  he  will  perhaps 
only  bestow  on  them  three  or  four  annas,  on  another  perhaps  as  much 
as  eight  annas.  The  old  Nizam  (of  Hydrabad)  sent  the  King  six  years 
ago  6,000  gold  mohurs.  They  every  farthing  got  into  the  Cowrie 
Father's  hands,  and  remain  there  !  " 

Such  was  the  pitiful  condition  to  which  the  Emperor  of  Hindustan 
was  reduced  when  Colonel  John  Murray,  impelled  by  a  feeling  of 
humanity,  wrote  to  De  Boigne.  It  was  not  until  the  month  of  M.irch 
in  the  following  year  that  the  latter  replied  to  the  letter,  for  it  reached 
him  during  a  time  when  he  was  prostrated  with  illness,  and  incapa- 
citated from  work.  But  as  soon  as  he  had  recovered,  and  insti- 
tuted the  necessary  inquiries,  he  sent  the  following  answer  to  Colonel 
Murray,  dated  from  Koil,  the  l'2th  of  March,  1795  : — 

"  DEAR  SIR, — I  can't  but  with  propriety  begin  by  making  you 
strong  and  warm  apologies  for  my  having  been  so  long  in  acknow- 
ledging your  kind  favour  last  received  in  its  due  time,  and  delivered 
to  me  by  Lieutenant  Robert  Murray.  Be  pleased  to  believe,  my  dear 
sir,  that  the  cause  don't  come  from,  any  neglect  or  forgetfulness.  Too 
proud  in  the  honour  of  your  remembrance  and  correspondence,  I 
have  had  so  bad  a  state  of  health  for  these  six  months,  that  with  the 
greatest  difficulties  have  I  been  able  to  attend  in  part  to  the  duties  of 
my  station,  which,  indeed,  are  too  great  to  leave  me  a  moment's 
quietness  of  mind  or  body.  On  that  account,  and  confiding  in  your 
kindness  and  liberality,  I  have  some  hope  that  you'll  be  pleased  to 
forgive  me. 

"  In  regard  to  your  observations  of  the  King  Shah  Allum  and 
family's  situation,  they  are  but  too  right.  However,  not  quite  so  bad 
as  by  the  paper  you  have  been  pleased  to  send  me,  the  author  having 
somewhat  exaggerated  or  been  misinformed.  Could  the  old  man 
know  the  interest  you  take  in  his  misfortunes,  which  are  great  indeed, 
he  could  not  but  admire  the  goodness  and  sensibility  of  your  heart, 
which  is  above  all  praise ;  and  myself,  as  if  informed  with  your 
liberal  intentions,  feel  as  you  do  for  the  unfortunate.  I  have  been  for 
near  these  two  years  past  endeavouring  to  alleviate  the  miseries  of 
that  family,  and  have  been  perhaps  rather  troublesome  to  the  late 


DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  85 

Maclkajee  Scindia  in  that  respect.  I  will  not  disguise  that  the  prin- 
cipal motives  of  my  exertions  were  not  so  pure  as  yours,  they  being 
rather  intended  to  the  reputation  of  the  prince,  my  master,  and 
perhaps  my  own,  knowing  that  the  king's  miseries  could  not  but 
tarnish  it  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  He  always  promised  me  that  at 
his  return  in  Indostan  he  would  certainly  attend  to  my  application  in 
ameliorating  his  situation,  and  had  he  lived  no  doubt  something 
would  have  been  done.  After  his  death  I  have  continued  my  impor- 
tunities to  the  young  prince,  which  has  occasioned,  as  you  may  have 
heard,  some  advances  to  ihe  Soubahdar  of  Delhy,  Shawjee,  that  Fakir 
having  been  obliged  to  pay  lately  150,000  rupees,  which  the  Mahratta 
chiefs  have  taken  from  him  without  the  king's  benefitting  by  it, 
except  about  25,000  in  nuzzars  and  goods  presented  to  him.  At  the 
same  time  it  has  been  settled  that  the  former,  or  present  allowance 
of  the  king,  should  be  increased  by  5,000  rupees  a  month.  A  few 
villages  have  been  ceded  in  Jaghir  to  some  of  the  Begums  and  Prin- 
cesses, and  I  have  put  myself  Mirza  Akber  Shah's  eldest  son  in 
possession  of  a  province  called  Kotte  Kassim,  producing  about  30,000 
rupees  per  annum,  which  he  held  also  in  Jaghir  before  the  late 
troubles  in  Indostan.  All  this,  which  is  not  much,  has  been  done 
now,  and  not,  I  assure  you,  without  my  encountering  the  greatest 
difficulties,  the  present  government  and  the  Mahratta  chiefs  having 
not  the  smallest  intention  or  wish  to  ameliorate  the  situation  of  that 
poor  old  man ;  and  it  may  be  said  the  little  already  done  to  have 
been  done  entirely  by  deference  to  him  than  to  the  King — which 
brings  us  to  say,  0!  Temporal  0  !  Mores  !  The  province  in  Shawjee's 
possession  intended  for  the  support  of  the  royal  family  may  produce 
about  seven  lakhs  per  annum.  Should  that  sum  be  employed  to  that 
purpose,  it  would  be  quite,  if  not  above,  sufficient.  But  Shawjee,  as 
a  Fakir,  takes  the  greatest  part  of  it  for  himself,  and  a  great  deal 
must  be  given  to  the  Mahratta  chiefs,  to  be  supported  and  continued 
in  his  office.  Who  is  not  acquainted  perfectly  with  the  Mahratta 
character — particularly  the  Pundits — can  have  no  idea  of  their 
avarice  and  insensibility  and  bad  faith.  It  may  be  said  they  have 
all  the  vices  known,  without  any  of  the  virtues,  which  gives  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  Empire  is  soon  to  fall.  Being  forced,  against  my 
wish,  to  enter  into  all  the  details  of  government  since  the  death  of 
Madhajee  Shah,  I  have  the  opportunity  to  know  them  better  than  I 
have  been  able  to  learn  in  ten  years  before. 

"  Being  so  far  advanced  in  your  wishes  and  good  intentions  in  regard 
of  that  miserable  family,  I  shall  continue  to  employ  my  best  exertions, 
and  the  little  influence  I  have  in  the  Government,  to  do  what  may  put 


86  DE  BOIGNE. 

them  out  of  physical  want,  and  which  50,000  rupees  a  month  will 
entirely  do.  Where  so  fortunate,  I  shall  with  a  heartfelt  satisfaction 
give  you  due  intimation  of  it,  persuaded  that  it  will  be  an  enjoyment 
to  you. 

"  Do  me  the  honour  of  your  remembrance  and  of  your  commands. 
My  punctuality  in  the  execution  of  them  will  prove  to  you  my  being 
with  regard  and  esteem, 

"  Your  most  humble  and  very  obedient  servant, 

"  BT.  DE  BOIGNE." 

In  this  letter  it  is  important  to  note  De  Boigne's  opening  statement 
regarding  his  ill  health,  for  the  time  was  now  approaching  when 
its  continuance  obliged  him  to  resign  his  post,  although  other  reasons 
were  advanced  for  his  retirement.  The  letter  is  pervaded  witb  a 
spirit  of  modesty,  almost  approaching  humility,  which  to  English 
ears  sounds  strangely,  when  coming  from  one  who  wielded  such 
immense  power  as  the  writer.  A  great  deal  of  this  is,  no  doubt,  to 
be  traced  to  what  has  been  conventionally  termed  "  French  polite- 
ness," and  it  certainly  would  not  have  been  so  noticeable  if  the  letter 
had  been  expressed  in  French.  Its  whole  tone  conveys  indisputable 
evidence  of  the  cordial  feeling  existing  between  De  Boigne  and  the 
East  India  Company,  and  the  establishment  of  a  friendly  correspon- 
dence between  him  and  one  of  the  leading  Government  officials  at 
Calcutta. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  it  was  this  established  and  friendly  com- 
munication which  gave  rise  to  an  incident  that  occurred  about  this 
time,  and  requires  special  mention  ;  for  it  illustrates  the  remarkable 
consolidation  of  De  Boigne's  power,  and  adds  a  crowning  prestige  to 
his  career.  In  1795  a  mutiny  broke  out  amongst  the  officers  of  the 
Company's  army  in  Bengal,  due  to  circumstances  into  which  it  is  not 
necessary  to  enter  here,  and  in  this  emergency  either  the  Governor- 
General  Sir  John  Shore  applied  to  De  Boigne  for  assistance,  or  it  was 
offered  spontaneously.  Colonel  Meadows  Tayler,  in  his  admirable 
history,  states  that  the  Company  was  the  applicant,  but  from  Lord 
Cornwallis's  correspondence  it  would  appear  that  in  the  first  instance 
the  offer  came  from  De  Boigne.  It  matters  little  which,  for  the  fact 
remains  that  a  cavalry  regiment,  officered  by  Europeans,  was  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  the  Governor-General.  No  incident  in  De  Boigne's 
life  is  so  significant  as  this,  and  yet,  with  customary  indifference  to 
all  matters  relating  to  independent  military  adventure  in  the  East, 
it  is  left  unmentioned  by  many  of  the  historians  of  India,  and  slurred 
over  by  nearly  all  the  rest.  But  it  was  assuredly  no  slight  circuru- 


DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  87 

stance  that,  in  a  serious  crisis  of  its  affairs,  the  Great  Company 
Bahadur  accepted  from  this  Soldier  of  Fortune  assistance  with 
which  to  quell  a  mutiny  in  its  own  army,  and  found  it  accorded  with 
a  promptitude  which  testified  both  to  De  Boigne's  power  and  his 
friendly  disposition  towards  the  English. 

Although  Hindustan  was  peaceful,  trouble  soon  broke  out  in  the 
Deccan,  where  a  demand  for  Chout,  or  tribute,  by  the  Marathas  led 
to  a  war  between  them  and  Nizam  Ali  Khan,  of  Haidarabad.  De 
Boigne's  First  Brigade,  under  Major  Perron,  was  ordered  by  Sindhia 
to  co-operate  with  the  Peshwa's  forces,  and  mainly  through  its  instru- 
mentality a  great  victory  was  gained  by  the  Marathas  on  the  llth  of 
March,  1795.  A  detailed  account  of  the  contest  will  be  found  recorded 
in  the  life  of  Perron.  Although  the  actual  loss  on  the  field  was  slight, 
Kardla  (or  Parinda,  as  it  is  sometimes  called)  was  one  of  the  most 
noteworthy  battles  of  the  period,  not  only  from  its  results,  but  because 
of  the  number  of  disciplined  and  European-led  troops  engaged  in  it. 
These  amounted  to  nearly  40,000  men,  and  included  on  the  side  of  the 
Marathas  De  Boigne's  First  Brigade,  the  independent  corps  of  John 
Hessing  and  Michael  Filoze,  the  former  by  this  time  increased  to  four 
and  the  latter  to  six  battalions,  and  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  brigade, 
which  was  contributed  by  Holkar.  On  the  side  of  the  Nizam  there 
were  eleven  battalions  of  Colonel  Raymond's  army,  and  the  indepen- 
dent corps  of  Majors  Boyd  and  Finglass.  With  the  exception  of 
Lakhairi,  which  bore  very  much  the  aspect  of  civil  war,  Kardla  was 
the  only  occasion  on  which  the  native  powers  of  India  employed 
large  bodies  of  trained  infantry  and  European  tactics  in  their  contests 
with  one  another,  and  the  victory,  gained  chiefly  by  De  Boigne's 
battalions,  over  an  enemy  similarly  armed,  drilled,  and  commanded, 
and  admirably  handled,  added  very  considerably  to  the  reputation  of 
the  famous  Brigades  of  Hindustan. 

But  Kardla  did  more  than  this.  It  confirmed  a  disposition  which 
many  of  the  Maratha  chiefs  had  long  evinced  for  entertaining  discip- 
lined bodies  of  regular  infantry,  and  hereafter  most  of  them  are  found 
employing  corps  trained  and  commanded  by  Europeans.  Holkar 
increased  his  establishment  by  the  addition  of  two  brigades,  under 
Majors  Plumet  and  William  Gardner.  Major  W.  H.  Tone  was  ordered 
to  raise  a  force  for  the  Peshwa,  into  whose  service  Major  Boyd  also 
entered.  Lakwa  Dada  engaged  Captain  Butterfield  and  the  younger 
Sangster  for  a  similar  purpose,  and  Ainbaji  Inglia  commissioned 
James  Shepherd  and  Joseph  Bellasis,  both  excellent  officers,  and 
worthy  of  a  better  master,  to  drill  battalions  for  him.  Appa  Khandi 
Rao  was  singularly  fortunate  in  securing  such  a  commander  as 


88  DE  BOIGNE. 

George  Thomas,  Ali  Bahadur,  of  Bundelkhand,  and  Eaghoji 
Bhonsla,  of  Berar,  each  had  their  trained  battalions,  and  Daulat  Eao 
Sindhia,  in  addition  to  the  formidable  army  created  by  De  Boigne, 
entertained  no  less  than  four  other  independent  corps  under  the 
commands  of  Colonels  John  Hessing,  and  Michael  Filoze,  Captain 
Brownrigg,  and  Colonel  Saleur,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  Begum 
Somru's  contingent.  Within  five  years  a  complete  change  took  place 
in  the  various  armies  of  the  Maratha  Confederation,  and  the  Western 
system  of  military  organisation  superseded  the  old  native  method. 
No  chief  of  importance  considered  his  army  complete  unless  it  con- 
tained disciplined  infantry  and  European  officers. 

In  the  face  of  this  almost  universal  adoption  of  the  European 
system  it  is  strange  to  find  that  the  innovation  proved  of  doubtful 
advantage.  Eegular  corps  were  delicate  machines,  requiring  special 
knowledge  and  expert  handling  to  keep  them  in  order.  They  were 
apt  to  become  dangerous  to  those  who  employed  them  when  not 
punctually  paid  and  properly  controlled.  The  radical  changes  their 
introduction  brought  about  in  Maratha  warfare  were  not  suited  to 
the  national  character  of  the  people.  The  Marathas  were  essentially 
cavaliers,  fitted  only  for  predatory  campaigns.  Eapid  retreats  formed 
as  important  an  element  in  the  economy  of  their  operations,  as  daring 
incursions,  and  a  horse  was  a  sine  qua  non  for  any  display  of  confi- 
dence and  courage,  of  which  they  possessed  but  a  very  moderate 
share.  The  introduction  of  infantry  and  artillery  involved  pitched 
battles,  and  afforded  no  scope  for  those  marvellously  quick,  and  hence 
demoralising  advances,  and  those  equally  swift  strategic  movements 
to  the  rear,  which  distinguished  the  wild  Deccan  horseman  of  the 
past.  The  result  was  that  before  long  the  Marathas,  as  a  nation, 
began  to  lose  that  which  they  could  least  spare — their  courage,  and 
also  much  of  their  former  mobility,  and  confidence  in  distant  enter- 
prises. And  there  were  those  who  prophecied  that  the  very  innova- 
tions which  had  created  Madhoji  Sindhia's  power,  would  in  the  end 
prove  the  ruin  of  his  race.  Colonel  James  Skinner  describes  an 
incident  which  admirably  illustrates  this  distrust  of  the  new  military 
policy.  When  Daulat  Kao  Sindhia  gave  orders  for  the  erection  of  a 
permanent  Cantonment  at  Ujjain,  Gopal  Eao,  who  had  been  restored 
to  favour  after  Madhoji's  death,  and  was  now  Commander-in-chief  of 
the  Maratha  army  (a  term  used  in  these  pages  to  distinguish  the 
national  cavalry  from  the  mercenary  trained  infantry),  made  a  strik- 
ing remark  in  open  Durbar.  "  Our  fathers,"  he  said,  "  the  first 
founders  of  the  Maratha  power,  made  their  houses  on  the  backs  of 
horses ;  gradually  the  house  came  to  be  made  of  cloth,  and  now  you 


DE  BOIGNE  RESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  89 

are  making  it  of  mud.  Take  care  that  in  a  short  time  it  does  not 
turn  to  mud,  and  is  never  built  again."  Daulat  Kao  Sindhia  laughed, 
and  replied,  "  Who  is  there  dare  oppose  me  so  long  as  I  have  my 
infantry  and  guns  ?  "  "  Beware,"  answered  the  old  Maratha  general, 
"  it  is  those  very  infantry  and  guns  which  will  be  your  ruin." 

A  similar  prediction  came  from  a  source  even  more  illustrious.  In 
a  speech  in  the  House  of  Commons  Sir  Philip  Frances  quoted  an 
opinion  on  this  point  passed  by  Warren  Hastings.  "  Sir,"  said  the 
great  Pro-Consul  to  him,  "  the  danger  you  allude  to  in  the  progress 
the  Marathas  are  making  in  the  art  of  casting  cannon,  in  the  use  and 
practice  of  artillery,  and  in  the  discipline  of  their  armies  is  imaginary. 
The  Marathas  can  never  be  formidable  to  us  in  the  field  on  the  prin- 
ciples of  an  European  army.  They  are  pursuing  a  scheme  in  which 
they  can  never  succeed,  and  by  doing  so  they  detach  themselves  from 
then-  own  plan  of  warfare,  on  which  alone,  if  they  acted  wisely,  they 
would  place  dependence."  A  similar  opinion  was  expressed  by  the 
Duke  of  Wellington. 

But  history  proves  that  the  Marathas,  or  at  least  the  mercenaries 
they  employed,  could  be,  and  were,  formed  into  excellent  armies, 
drilled  and  disciplined  to  a  high  state  of  efficiency.  Nevertheless, 
Warren  Hastings'  condemnation  of  their  unwisdom  in  deserting  their 
own  military  system  found  ample  illustration  in  the  Pindari  Wars, 
and  in  Laswari  and  Assaye.  The  genius  of  De  Boigne,  whilst  it 
transformed  savage  irregulars  into  staunch  and  disciplined  soldiery, 
created  an  enormous  standing  army,  that  raised  the  fear  and  jealousy 
of  the  English,  and  proved  a  vulnerable  body,  capable  of  being 
attacked  and  brought  to  bay.  It  was  unable  to  elude  flight  as  the 
mounted  Maratha  hordes  of  the  past  had  done,  and  as  Jaswant  Rao's 
Pindaris  were  yet  again  to  do,  and  when  it  passed  under  the  com- 
mand of  a  leader  who  lacked  the  political  prudence  of  De  Boigne,  it 
became  a  menace,  and  by  courting  the  veiy  danger  he  warned  it 
against,  met  the  doom  the  greybeards  of  the  nation  predicted. 

Kardla  was  the  last  battle  in  which  De  Boigne's  Brigades  were 
engaged  during  the  period  of  his  command.  Towards  the  end  of 
1795  his  health  began  to  fail  and  his  constitution  to  show  signs  of 
yielding  to  the  enormous  strain  imposed  upon  it.  Best  and  change 
of  climate  were  imperative.  For  eighteen  unbroken  years  he  had 
laboured  under  an  Indian  sun.  There  existed  for  him  no  snow- 
fanned  Simla,  no  breezy  Utakarnand,  where  he  might  snatch  annual 
reprieves  from  the  furnace  blasts  of  the  plains.  Imagine  a  modern 
Indian  Viceroy  spending  eighteen  years  in  the  plains  !  Conceive  a 
contemporary  commander-in-chief  completing  eighteen  annu  tours 


90  DE  BOIGNE. 

of  inspection  without  a  holiday  to  the  Hills.  Yet  this  was  what  De 
Boigne  had  done.  Little  wonder  that  the  time  had  arrived  when  he 
felt  he  must  relinquish  the  reins  of  power,  or  risk  their  dropping  from 
stiffened  fingers,  never  to  be  picked  up  again.  It  has  heen  asserted 
that  he  resigned  his  post  because  some  fancied  storm  was  brewing, 
and  that  his  departure  was  the  result  of  a  prudent  discretion.  But 
what  storm  could  have  shaken  the  foundations  of  the  power  that 
absolutely  ruled  Hindustan  ?  Perron  —  base,  braggart  Perron — 
boasted  in  after  years  that  by  his  intrigues  he  had  compelled  his 
general  to  resign.  But  to  this  vainglorious  assertion  the  lie  is  given 
in  a  letter  written  to  De  Boigne  by  Daulat  Eao  Sindhia  within  a  few 
months  of  their  parting.  "  You  are  the  pillar  of  my  State,  the  right 
arm  of  my  victory,"  runs  a  passage  in  it ;  "  your  presence  is  required 
in  my  councils  and  my  Brigades.  Come,  with  all  speed.  Without 
fail  It  is  my  order  and  my  petition  to  you." 

All  suggested  reasons  for  De  Boigne's  resignation  may  be  dismissed 
save  the  one  that  reaUy  occasioned  it— his  broken  health.  It  was  not 
without  a  deep  regret  that  he  bowed  to  the  inevitable  necessity,  and 
asked  to  be  relieved  of  his  command.  At  first  Daulat  Eao  Sindhia 
refused  his  consent,  or  to  allow  his  general  to  depart.  But  De  Boigne 
persisted,  and  sanction  was  unwillingly  accorded  on  the  understanding 
that  if  his  health  was  re-established  by  a  change  to  Europe  he  would 
return  and  resume  his  post.  His  parting  admonition  to  the  Prince 
was  to  avoid  all  contest  with  the  English,  and  disband  his  battah'ons 
rather  than  excite  their  jealousy,  or  risk  a  war  with  them. 

And  thus  it  came  to  pass  that  in  December,  1795,  the  curtain  drew 
up  on  the  last  scene  of  the  romantic  drama  of  Indian  military 
adventure  which  these  pages  have  attempted  to  depict,  and  on  the 
plain  of  Agra,  where  seven  years  before  he  had  fought  that  stubborn 
battle  which  won  an  empire  for  Madhoji  Sindhia,  De  Boigne  paraded 
his  battalions  in  review  for  the  last  time. 

It  was  no  ordinary  occasion  that  witnessed  the  solemn  parting 
between  the  chief  and  the  army  of  his  creation.  The  scene  is  one  ima- 
gination can  help  to  depict.  The  General,  tall,  gaunt,  and  martial,  his 
rugged  features  showing  signs  of  failing  health,  is  seated  on  his  charger. 
He  watches  with  sadness  in  his  piercing  eyes  his  veterans  passing 
before  him  for  the  last  time.  The  sword,  that  has  so  often  led  the  way 
to  victory,  now,  and  for  the  first  time,  trembles  in  his  hand  as  he  brings 
it  to  the  salute.  Bank  after  rank,  regiment  after  regiment,  file  past, 
of  dusky  Asiatics  who  deem  this  man  their  God,  and  cannot  com- 
prehend why  he  should  leave  them  now.  Before  him  they  would 
swot  them  %  Ives  down,  and  pressing  their  foreheads  to  his  feet,  call 


DE  BOIONE  BESIGNS  HIS  COMMAND.  91 

him  "Father"  and  appeal  to  him  to  stay,  but  for  that  stern  dis- 
cipline which  he  has  taught  them,  and  which  bids  them  to  face 
neither  to  right  nor  to  left,  but  march  obediently  on. 

And  he  who  watches  them  ?  What  stirring  memories  the  sight  of 
those  serried  ranks  must  have  aroused  !  "What  ghosts  of  dead  soldiers, 
perchance,  stalked  after  them,  summoned  by  that  last  reveille  from 
their  forgotten  sepulchres  in  the  wind-swept  deserts  of  Rajputana, 
the  sultry  plains  of  Central  India,  or  the  fertile  valleys  of  the  Green 
Doab  !  And,  ah  !  what  spectre  hosts  of  slaughtered  foemen — gallant 
Mughals  and  chivalrous  Bajputs,  fierce  Rohillas  and  stubborn  Jats — 
could  have  crept  into  the  presence  of  that  great  white  chief,  had  he 
possessed  the  power  to  call  the  dead  from  their  graves.  In  the 
accomplishment  of  his  high  career  there  was  much  to  rejoice  over, 
much  to  be  proud  of ;  but  the  course  of  conquest  is  marked  by  many 
monuments,  and  there  are  those  which  are  crowded  with  the  records 
of  the  dead,  as  well  as  those  which  commemorate  the  achievements 
of  the  living. 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 

DE    BOIGNE    RETURNS   TO    EUROPE. — HIS  MARRIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH. 

1790-1830. 

ON  Christmas  Day,  1795,  De  Boigne  left  Koll  under  escort  of  his 
bodyguard,  and  set  out  for  the  Company's  territory.  "  He  was 
attended,"  writes  a  correspondent  of  one  of  the  journals  of  the  day, 
"  by  610  cavalry,  4  elephants,  150  camels,  and  many  bullock- 
waggons  laden  with  his  effects.  His  cavalry  cut  a  good  appearance, 
being  dressed  in  a  uniform  of  green  jackets  with  red  turbans,  the 
folds  of  which  were  intermixed  with  silver  wire.  They  seemed  to  be 
very  well  disciplined,  and  each  horseman  was  armed  with  a  pair  of 
pistols,  a  gun,  and  a  sword." 

Making  his  way  to  Lucknow,  De  Boigne  halted  some  time  at  that 
place  arranging  his  affairs,  which  he  left  in  charge  of  General  Claude 
Martine.  From  thence  he  proceeded  to  Calcutta,  where  he  was 
honourably  received  by  the  Governor-General.  The  horses  and 
equipment  of  his  bodyguard  were  purchased  by  the  British  Govern- 
ment, and  the  troopers  enlisted  in  the  Company's  service,  in  which 
they  remained  for  two  years,  until  Lord  Wellesley,  in  an  hour  of 
retrenchment,  transferred  the  corps  to  the  Nawab  Wazir  of  Oudh. 

It  was  not  until  September,  1796,  that  De  Boigne  finally  quitted 
India.  He  sailed  in  the  ship  Cromberg,  and  reached  England  early 
in  the  year  1797,  carrying  with  him  a  fortune  of  =6400,000,  the  result 
of  nineteen  years  of  adventure  in  the  East. 

On  his  arrival  he  took  up  his  residence  near  London,  for  the  war 
on  the  Continent  offered  little  prospect  of  repose  in  his  native  Savoy. 
His  health,  much  improved  by  the  long  voyage,  was  soon  completely 
re-established,  and  it  seemed  probable  that  he  would  return  to 
India,  for  he  had  actually  commenced  preparations  for  so  doing, 
when  a  pretty  face  and  a  musical  voice — "  A  voice  which  must  be 

92 


HIS  MARBIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH.  93 

mine,"  as  he  remarked  even  before  be  saw  the  face — changed  his 
destiny. 

It  happened  one  day  that  he  was  at  a  concert  where  a  young 
girl — Mdlle.  Eleonora  Adcle  D'Osmond,  daughter  of  the  Marquis 
D'Osmond,  afterwards  French  Ambassador  to  England — was  one  of 
the  performers.  Her  beauty  and  her  sweet  singing  conquered  the 
heart  of  the  war-worn  old  soldier ;  and,  although  she  was  only  seven- 
teen years  old,  he  proposed  for  her  hand  and  was  accepted.  They 
were  married  on  the  llth  of  June,  1798.  There  was  a  fitting  touch  of 
romance  in  the  union  not  out  of  keeping  with  De  Boigne's  past ;  but 
unfortunately  the  marriage  did  not  turn  out  happily.  They  lived 
together  in  London  and  Paris  for  some  years,  but  the  disparity  in  age 
was  too  great,  and  in  1804  they  separated,  no  children  having  been 
born.  De  Boigne  provided  handsomely  for  the  Countess,  and  she 
returned  to  her  father's  home,  and  accompanied  him  to  London 
when  he  was  appointed  French  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  St.  James. 
In  1819  she  settled  at  Paris,  and  became  the  centre  of  a  select  coterie 
in  high  life,  her  salons  being  thronged  with  the  most  distinguished 
people  of  the  period.  Once  every  year  she  visited  her  husband  at 
Chambery  for  a  few  weeks,  assuming  her  position  as  mistress  of  his 
house  and  entertaining  his  numerous  friends.  She  always  expressed 
the  highest  respect  for  his  character,  and  it  is  said  that  the  honours 
which  were  subsequently  conferred  upon  him  by  Louis  XVIII.  were 
due  to  her  solicitations  as  much  as  to  De  Boigne's  well-known 
royalistic  principles.  The  Countess  De  Boigne  survived  her  husband 
many  years,  and  died  as  recently  as  18GG. 

De  Boigne's  history  for  the  six  years  succeeding  his  marriage,  has 
been  the  subject  of  remarkable  and  persistent  misrepresentation  at  the 
hands  of  English  writers.  It  has  been  stated,  and  repeated  with  cir- 
cumstantial detail,  that  in  1802  the  General,  at  the  invitation  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  removed  to  Paris,  and  became  the  First  Consul's 
Privy  Counsellor  and  Adviser  in  those  designs  against  the  English 
power  in  India,  which  led  to  the  second  Maratha  war,  and  the  exter- 
mination of  Sindhia's  regular  army.  After  a  long  and  laborious  in- 
vestigation of  the  matter,  it  seemed  to  the  compiler  that  this  statement 
was  fairly  well  attested,  even  though  he  failed  to  find  it  corroborated 
by  any  of  the  records  in  the  India  Office,  opened  to  his  inspection, 
and  which  he  carefully  searched  for  its  confirmation.  It  was  not  until 
the  view  was  accepted  that  De  Boigne  did  actually  assist  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  with  his  counsel,  and  this  chapter  was  in  print,  that  a 
refutation  was  received.  It  came  from  the  best  living  authority,  the 
present  Count  de  Boigne,  whose  letter  is  printed  in  extenso  later  on. 


94  DE  BOIGNE. 

As  the  excision  of  the  discredited  passages  would  greatly  interfere  with 
the  construction  of  the  story,  and  render  unintelligible  several  refer- 
ences in  the  sketch  of  Perron's  life,  it  has  been  thought  best  to  leave 
them  as  they  originally  stood — for  they  contain  much  historical  narra- 
tive that  is  correct — and  to  refute  the  personal  misrepresentation  they 
contain  by  the  publication,  side  by  side  with  it,  of  Count  de  Boigne's 
denial  of  his  grandfather's  alleged  transactions  with  Bonaparte. 

In  the  year  1802,  the  peace  of  Amiens — if,  indeed,  that  term  can 
be  applied  to  a  cessation  of  hostilities  that  was  little  more  than  an 
armistice — had  just  been  concluded,  and  the  opportunity  was  favour- 
able for  the  perfection  of  those  designs  against  India  which  the  First 
Consul  had  long  premeditated.  The  conquest  of  the  British  posses- 
sions in  the  East  was  one  of  his  most  cherished  ambitions,  and  towards 
the  furtherance  of  this  object  he  had  undertaken  the  Egyptian  cam- 
paign, and  entered  into  intrigues  with  the  ruler  of  Mysore ;  but  the 
battle  of  the  Nile  and  the  capture  of  Seringapatam  put  a  period  to 
both  these  attempts.  By  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  through  an  incon- 
ceivable oversight  on  the  part  of  English  diplomacy,  Pondicherry  and 
the  other  possessions  in  India  which  had  been  wrested  from  her 
during  the  late  war  were  restored  to  France.  This  gave  Bonaparte  a 
foothold  in  the  country  sufficient  for  his  purpose.  Hitherto  the 
French  had  been  foiled  in  every  endeavour  to  re-establish  their  power 
in  India.  In  direct  conflict  with  the  English  they  had  been  defeated 
and  driven  out  of  the  land.  After  Raymond's  death  his  army,  which 
practically  dominated  Haidarabad  in  the  French  interest,  was  dis- 
armed and  disbanded  by  Lord  Wellesley  in  1798.  In  Mysore,  Tipu 
Sultan  was  dead,  and  the  French  auxiliaries  prisoners  of  war  in  the 
hands  of  the  English.  Southern  India  was  swept  clean  of  French- 
men. But  Bonaparte,  undiscouraged  and  indefatigable,  projected 
fresh  schemes  of  conquest  in  1802,  and  began  to  build  sanguine  hopes 
of  success  in  a  quarter  hitherto  untried.  Generel  Perron,  who  suc- 
ceeded De  Boigne,  was  paramount  at  Delhi,  and  had  recently 
opened  communications  with  the  French  Government,  and  made 
certain  proposals  which  commended  themselves  to  the  First  Consul. 
De  Boigne  was  now  in  Paris,  and  in  touch  with  Hindustan,  being 
in  correspondence  with  Perron  and  other  of  his  old  officers,  whilst  his 
local  knowledge  and  experience  were  unique.  Of  his  ability  and 
advice  Bonaparte  is  reported  to  have  availed  himself,  for  it  appeared 
to  him  that  the  Maratha  nation,  from  its  constitution,  its  habits,  and 
its  territorial  importance,  held  out  the  most  hopeful  prospects  that 
had  yet  offered  for  the  furtherance  of  French  ambition  and  the 
destruction  of  the  English  power  in  India. 


HIS  MABRIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH.  95 

The  great  want  that  existed  in  Perron's  army  was  that  of  trained 
officers.  To  supply  this  deficiency  Bonaparte,  under  the  colourable 
pretext  of  colonial  defence,  despatched  to  Pondicherry  a  fleet  of 
six  men-of-war,  which  sailed  from  France  under  Monsieur  Lenois, 
a  distinguished  naval  officer.  It  transported  1,400  picked  troops 
commanded  by  General  Decaen.  Amongst  these  were  200  young 
Frenchmen,  who,  although  they  shipped  in  the  guise  of  private 
soldiers,  were  gentlemen  by  birth,  thoroughly  trained  in  the  duties 
of  officers,  and  provided  with  a  proper  equipment.  They  were,  in 
addition,  one  and  all  fired  with  a  determination  to  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  De  Boigne,  and  carve  out  for  themselves  kingdoms  and 
principalities.  It  was  intended  that  after  landing  at  Pondicherry 
these  young  adventurers  should  make  their  way  to  Delhi  in  small 
bodies,  through  the  territories  of  the  Rajah  of  Berar,  whose  seaboard 
of  Cuttack  could  be  reached  by  country  boats  in  forty-eight  hours 
during  the  south-west  monsoon.  At  Delhi  they  were  to  take  service 
under  Perron,  so  that,  when  the  time  was  ripe,  the  army  of  Hin- 
dustan, efficiently  officered  and  led,  might  co-operate  with  Bonaparte 
in  his  intended  invasion  of  India,  and  crush  by  one  concerted  blow 
the  English  power  in  the  East.  War  was  to  be  declared  and  carried 
on  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam,  whose  rescue  from 
British  tyranny  was  assigned  as  the  ostensible  object  of  this  dis- 
interested scheme. 

Unfortunately  for  these  aspiring  young  cadets,  their  hopes  were 
blighted  by  the  sagacity  and  acumen  of  the  Marquis  Wellesley, 
who  mistrusted  their  coming,  and  whose  suspicions  were  subsequently 
confirmed  by  the  copy  of  a  secret  document  obtained  from  one  of 
General  Decaen's  officers.  This  was  entitled  "A  Memorial  on  the 
present  importance  of  India,  and  the  most  efficacious  means  of  Re- 
establishing the  French  Nation  in  its  ancient  splendour  in  that 
Country."  It  detailed  the  French  scheme  in  fall,  and  after 
denouncing  "  the  treatment  received  from  a  company  of  merchant 
adventurers  by  the  Emperor  of  Hindustan,  the  sole  branch  of  the 
illustrious  house  of  Taimur,"  went  on  to  assert  that  "the  English 
Company,  by  its  ignominious  treatment  of  the  great  Mughal,  has 
forfeited  its  rights  and  privileges  in  Bengal,"  and  that  "  the  Emperor 
of  Delhi  has  a  real  and  indisputable  right  to  transmit  to  whomsoever 
he  may  please  to  select  the  sovereignty  of  his  dominions,  as  well  as 
the  arrears  (of  tribute)  due  from  the  English."  ..."  These  arrears," 
concluded  the  ingenuous  document,  "  with  the  interest  of  the  country 
added,  amount  to  four  hundred  and  fifty-two  livres  Tournois,  a  sum 
which  greatly  exceeds  the  value  of  the  Company's  moveable  capital." 


96  DE  BOIGNE. 

"  A  pretty  comfortable  prospect,"  comments  a  contemporary  his- 
torian, "for  the  new  legacy  hunter,  Bonaparte,  of  a  bequest,  at  the 
demise  of  an  old  man  past  eighty  years,  of  All  Hindustan  and  nineteen 
millions  seventeen  hundred  and  seventy-five  pounds  sterling  !  " 

Lord  Wellesley  thus  deals  with  this  document  in  one  of  his  dispatches, 
or  rather  with  the  scheme  by  which  Bonaparte  hoped  to  constitute 
himself  legatee  of  the  Mughal's  millions  :  — 

"  The  system  of  introducing  French  adventurers  into  the  armies  of 
the  Native  States,  for  the  improvement  of  their  discipline  and  efficiency, 
has  been  found  the  readiest  and  most  effectual  means  of  establishing 
the  influence  and  authority  of  the  French  in  the  government  of  those 
States,  and  of  erecting  an  independent  territorial  and  military  power, 
within  the  limits  of  a  foreign  dominion.  .  .  .  Under  the  continuance 
of  peace  between  England  and  France,  and  between  the  British 
Government  and  the  Mahratta  States,  the  progress  of  French  intrigue 
and  aggrandisement  of  the  French  power  in  India  would  be  most 
rapid  and  dangerous  to  our  security.  In  the  prosecution  of  these  views 
the  French  would  manifestly  derive  essential  aid  from  the  possession 
of  the  person  and  family  of  the  Emperor  Shah  Allum,  and  under  the 
plea  of  restoring  that  monarch  to  his  hereditary  dominion,  the  power 
of  France  in  India  might  be  directed  to  the  subversion  of  every  state, 
and  the  appropriation  of  every  territory  unprotected  by  alliance  with 
the  British  Nation.  .  .  .  By  successful  intrigue  M.  Perron  has  obtained 
the  office  of  Commandant  of  the  Fortress  of  Delhi,  which  is  the  resi- 
dence of  the  royal  family,  and  thus  secured  the  person  and  nominal 
authority  of  the  Emperor.  The  Mogul  has  never  been  an  important 
or  dangerous  instrument  in  the  hands  of  the  Mahrattas,  but  the 
augmentation  of  M.  Perron's  influence  and  power,  and  the  growth  of 
the  French  interest  in  Hindustan,  have  given  a  new  aspect  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  Mogul,  and  that  unfortunate  prince  may  become  a 
powerful  aid  to  the  cause  of  France  in  India,  under  the  direction  of 
French  agents." 

The  practical  application  of  these  views  was  found  in  the  precautions 
Lord  Wellesley  took  to  prevent  any  member  of  General  Decaen's 
Expedition  from  finding  his  way  to  Delhi.  On  their  arrival  at  Pondi- 
cherry  the  two  hundred  French  officers  found,  to  their  intense  disgust 
and  mortification,  that  they  were  virtually  "  en  cage  "  within  its 
narrow  boundaries.  They  never  left  the  desolate  strip  of  territory, 
and,  when  a  little  later  hostilities  broke  out  again  between  Eng- 
land and  France,  these  miserable  men  were  all  made  prisoners  of 
war. 

Meanwhile  it  has  been  stated  that  De  Boigne,  seduced  from  his 


HIS  MABBIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH.  97 

former  sympathies  with  the  English,  became  a  highly  distinguished 
personage  at  the  Tuilleries,  and  was  elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a 
Privy  Counsellor.  Doubts  have,  however,  been  thrown  upon  this 
episode  in  his  history.  His  biographer,  M.  St.  Genis,  omits  mention 
of  it,  although  he  makes  allusion  to  "an  unfounded  remark  of  Bona- 
parte ''  which  had  obtained  currency  and  conveyed  the  impression  that 
the  First  Consul  had  been  angered  at  a  refusal  on  De  Boigne's  part 
to  proceed  to  India  at  the  head  of  an  invading  expedition.  St.  Genis 
adds  that  although  De  Boigne  had  taken  up  his  abode  within  the 
limits  of  the  Empire,  he  had  no  sympathy  with  Napoleon,  and  pro- 
bably distrusted  the  solidity  of  his  power  ;  and  that  notwithstanding 
the  advantageous  opening  his  military  talents  might  have  found 
in  the  Imperial  service,  he  was  averse  to  such  employment  on  several 
grounds,  and  the  Emperor  knew  him  too  well  to  spare  him  the 
necessity  of  a  refusal.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  asserted  that  De 
Boigne  did  actually  advise  and  assist  Bonaparte  in  his  designs 
against  the  English  Empire  in  the  East.  In  a  pamphlet  printed  in 
1804  and  entitled  "  Brief  Remarks  on  the  Mahratta  War,  and  the 
Rise  and  Progress  of  the  French  Establishment  in  Hindustan  under 
Generals  De  Boigne  and  Perron,"  which,  though  published  anony- 
mously, bears  evidence  of  particular  knowledge,  there  is  a  circum- 
stantial account  of  the  matter  as  herein  narrated,  and  one  of  the 
principal  points  put  forward  seems  to  be  corroborated  by  a  passage 
in  a  letter  from  Perron  to  De  Boigne,  dated  the  28th  of  February, 
1802,  and  published  in  M.  St.  Genis'  work.  Perron  writes  as  follows 
(the  letter  will  be  found  quoted  in  his  life) : — "  Yes ;  I  will  receive 
with  great  satisfaction  all  the  persons  you  recommend  for  appoint- 
ments in  the  Brigades." 

Again,  iu  "  A  Letter  on  the  Present  Crisis  of  Affairs  in  India,"  written 
in  1807  by  Major  Ambrose,  who  had  been  an  officer  in  Holkar's  ser- 
vice, and  who  refers  to  De  Boigne's  residence  at  Paris  as  a  matter  of 
common  notoriety,  one  of  the  arguments  put  forward  is,  that  "  Napo- 
leon possesses  the  advantages  of  De  Boigne's  abilities  to  guide  him." 
In  a  third  "  India  Tract," — to  use  the  generic  name  by  which  these 
publi cations  were  known — written  in  1812  by  "  A  Field  Officer  on  the 
Bengal  Establishment  of  thirty  years'  service,"  and  entitled  "A  Dis- 
sertation on  the  Defence  of  the  British  Territorial  Possessions  in 
Hindustan,"  the  following  passage  occurs  : — 

"  When  a  single  adventurer  like  De  Boigne,  with  but  slender 
talents  (stc),and  without  the  countenance  or  support  of  any  European 
prince,  was  able  to  raise  and  discipline,  in  the  North  of  India,  such  an 
army  as  we  had  to  contend  against  in  1803-4,  we  cannot  surely  be 

7 


98  DE  BOIGNE. 

surprised  if  men  of  genius  and  talents,  selected  by  Bonaparte,  and 
supported  with  all  the  influence  of  his  great  name  and  extensive 
resources,  should  succeed  in  forming  a  powerful  army  in  that  country. 
That  De  Boigne  was  received  with  distinguished  attention,  and 
consulted  on  this  very  point  is  well  known  ;  and  that  he  recom- 
mended the  measure  as  easy  and  practicable,  and  the  first  and  most 
certain  step  towards  the  conquest  of  Hindustan,  there  can  he  very 
little  doubt." 

But  perhaps  the  most  important  reference  is  contained  in  a  chance, 
but  significant,  remark  in  a  letter  of  Lord  Wellesley  to  General 
Lake,  under  date  of  the  8th  of  July,  1803,  which  concludes  with  the 
sentence : — 

"  M.  Du  (sic)  Boigne  (Sindhia's  late  General)  is  now  the  chief  confi- 
dante of  Bonaparte.  He  is  constantly  at  St.  Cloud.  I  leave  you 
to  judge  why  and  wherefore." 

Eecent  information  has  denounced  these  assertions  and  suggestions 
as  incorrect.  In  June,  1892,  the  following  communication  was  re- 
ceived from  the  present  Count  de  Boigne,  and  is  inserted  with 
peculiar  satisfaction,  for  it  is  pleasant  to  be  assured  that  his  grand- 
father was  innocent  of  the  hostility  towards  the  English  with  which 
he  has  been  charged  : — 

"  In  1802  the  General  was  in  Savoy,  and  signed  authentic  deeds, 
which  I  have  in  my  possession,  together  with  letters  which  General 
Perron  wrote  to  him  from  Hindustan. 

"  He  was  never  a  Privy  Counsellor  to  Bonaparte,  and  in  all  his 
family  papers  I  do  not  find  a  single  word  which  might  lead  one  to 
suppose  that  he  ever  saw  him,  or  had  anything  to  do  with  him. 

"  During  the  whole  of  the  reign  of  Bonaparte  the  General  led  a 
perfectly  secluded  life.  It  was  only  at  the  Eestoration  that  he  was 
appointed  Marshal,  Knight  of  St.  Louis,  and  of  the  Legion  of  Honour, 
by  King  Louis  XVIII.  He  had  married  Mdlle.  D'Osmond,  and  his 
father-in-law  was  the  first  French  Ambassador  in  London  after  the 
return  of  the  Bourbons. 

"  In  1815,  after  Savoy  was  united  to  the  kingdom  of  Sardinia,  he 
was  appointed  Lieutenant-General,  and  received  the  Grand  Cross  of 
St.  Maurice  et  Lazarre. 

"  All  this  proves  he  never  had  any  transactions  with  Bonaparte. 

"  As  to  his  connection  with  the  English  and  the  advice  he  gave  to 
Sindhia,  the  General  felt  that,  in  spite  of  the  splendid  army  he  had 
created  for  him,  the  Prince  would  be  beaten  if  he  waged  war  against 


HIS  MARRIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH.  99 

the  English.  When  he  left  him,  he  told  him  that,  notwithstanding 
the  pride  he  felt  in  the  Brigades,  he  advised  the  Prince  to  disband 
them  rather  than  go  to  war  with  the  English. 

"  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  information  you  have  received 
is  not  correct.  It  is  in  contradiction  to  the  facts,  and  I  can  under- 
stand why  you  failed  to  find  any  confirmation  of  it  in  the  Records  of 
Government. 

"  CTE.  DE  BOIGNE." 

This  disposes  of  an  accusation,  which,  with  the  marvellous  fertility 
of  falsehood,  has  blossomed  from  the  dust  of  nearly  ninety  years  ago. 

Early  in  1803  De  Boigne  purchased  a  fine  estate  on  the  outskirts  of 
his  native  town  of  Chambery,  in  Savoy,  where  he  built  himself  a 
magnificent  mansion  named  "  Buisson,"  wherein  he  spent  the  last 
twenty-seven  years  of  his  life,  enjoying  the  princely  fortune  he  had 
acquired.  During  this  period  his  bounties  to  the  poor,  the  sick,  the 
aged,  and  to  religious  institutions  were  immense,  and  conceived  in  a 
spirit  of  the  broadest  philanthropy.  The  principles  which  governed 
him  cannot  be  better  illustrated  than  by  a  quotation  from  an  address 
he  delivered  in  1822,  on  the  occasion  of  opening  a  hospital  with  which 
he  had  endowed  his  native  town.  "  If  Divine  Providence,"  he  said, 
"  deigned  to  crown  with  a  special  grace  the  career  of  arms  I  followed, 
He  also  loaded  me  with  favours  far  greater  than  my  poor  talents  could 
have  expected,  and,  I  may  add,  greater  than  I  deserve.  My  wants 
were  never  great,  and  I  experienced  no  particular  ambition  for  riches. 
F'rom  my  forefathers  I  inherited  nothing,  and  all  that  I  have,  I 
received  from  heaven.  For  this  reason  I  consider  I  should  use  these 
gifts  in  a  way  acceptable  to  Him  who  gave  them.  Gratitude  and  our 
Holy  Eeligion  enjoin  this  as  a  duty,  and  suggest  that  the  proper  use 
to  make  of  my  wealth  is  to  succour  the  unfortunate.  Therefore,  on 
my  return  to  my  native  land,  to  which  nay  heart  has  ever  clung  with 
affection,  my  first  work,  my  first  thought,  was  to  invite  my  fellow 
citizens  .to  share  the  benefits  so  liberally  entrusted  to  my  keeping 
by  Providence." 

These  are  noble  words,  and  how  nobly  De  Boigne  acted  up  to  them, 
a  list  of  his  charities  can  testify.  During  the  latter  years  of  his 
life  the  sums  he  expended  on  philauthropical  objects  reached  the 
enormous  total  of  3,078,000  francs.  He  built  and  endowed  two 
hospitals,  a  lunatic  asylum,  an  institute  for  teaching  trades  to  young 
girls,  an  almshouse,  a  college,  and  a  public  library.  Nor  did  his  bene- 
factions cease  with  his  life,  for  in  his  will  he  supplemented  them  with 
further  princely  bequests. 


100  I)E  BOIGNE. 

Honours  were  heaped  upon  De  Boigne  in  bis  old  age.  King  Victor 
Emanuel  of  Sardinia  created  him  a  count  and  a  lieutenant-general  in 
his  army,  and  decorated  him  with  the  Grand  Cross  of  the  Order  of  St. 
Maurice  and  St.  Lazarus.  Louis  XVIII.  appointed  him  a  Marechal 
de  Camp,  and  a  knight  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  and  conferred  on 
him  the  Order  of  St.  Louis.  His  native  town  of  Charnbery  delighted 
to  honour  him.  During  his  life  time  his  bust  in  marble  was  unveiled 
by  the  King  in  the  public  library,  and  one  of  the  finest  streets  in  the 
city  perpetuates  the  name  of  her  greatest  son,  and  contains  a  beautiful 
monumental  fountain  erected  to  his  memory. 

It  has  been  mentioned  that  De  Boigne  had  no  children  by  his 
marriage  with  Mdlle  D'Osmond.  But  there  were  two  born  to  him  by 
a  marriage  contracted  "  according  to  the  usages  of  the  country,  with 
the  daughter  of  a  Persian  colonel  in  India."  These  were  a  son  named 
Ali  Bux,  bom  at  Delhi  in  1792,  and  a  daughter  named  Bunco.  They 
accompanied  their  father  to  Europe,  and  were  subsequently  baptized, 
receiving  the  names  of  Charles  Alexander  and  Anna.  The  latter  died 
at  Paris  in  1810,  but  Charles  grew  up  and  married  the  daughter  of  a 
French  nobleman,  by  whom  he  had  a  family.  He  succeeded  his 
father  in  the  title,  and  lived  a  life  of  unostentatious  benevolence, 
dying  in  1853,  when  the  estate  passed  to  his  son,  the  present  Count 
de  Boigne. 

In  his  old  age  De  Boigne  dispensed  a  lordly  hospitality,  and  especially 
welcome  to  his  house  were  any  English  officers  who  had  been  in  India. 
Both  Colonel  Tod  and  Grant  Duff,  in  the  works  with  which  their 
names  are  associated,  make  special  mention  of  this,  and  each  pays  a 
tribute  to  the  courtesy  and  hospitality  experienced  at  Buisson.  As 
illustrating  the  simplicity  of  De  Boigne's  menage,  it  may  be  men- 
tioned that  to  the  end  of  his  days  his  sole  Major  Domo  was  an  old 
native  servant  whom  he  had  brought  from  India,  and  who  directed  all 
his  household  arrangements. 

One  who  knew  De  Boigne  well  has  thus  described  his  appearance 
two  years  before  his  death ; — "  His  frame  and  stature  were  Herculean, 
and  he  was  full  six  feet  two  inches  in  height.  His  aspect  was  mild  and 
unassuming,  and  he  was  unostentatious  in  his  habit  and  demeanour, 
preserving  at  his  advanced  age  all  the  gallantly  and  politeness  of  the 
vielle  cour.  He  disliked,  from  modesty,  to  advert  to  his  past  deeds, 
and  so  seemed  to  strangers  to  have  lost  his  memory.  But  in  the 
society  of  those  who  could  partake  of  the  emotions  it  awakened,  the 
name  of  Merta  always  stirred  in  him  associations  whose  call  he  could 
not  resist.  The  blood  would  mount  to  his  temples,  and  the  old  fire 
came  into  his  eyes,  as  he  recalled,  with  inconceivable  rapidity  and 


HIS  MAEEIAGE,  OLD  AGE,  AND  DEATH.  101 

eloquence,  the  story  of  that  glorious  day.  But  lie  spoke  of  himself  as 
if  it  were  of  another,  and  always  concluded  with  the  words,  '  My  past 
appears  a  dream  /  '" 

But  it  was  no  dream — that  glorious  past  of  his — which  he  looked 
back  upon.  The  vista  of  many  years  stretched  between  him  and  the 
epoch  his  deeds  made  memorable,  but  through  its  gathering  shadows 
vivid,  distinct  and  brilliant,  glittered  the  star  of  victory — the  splendour 
of  actual  accomplishment. 

Almost  on  the  fortieth  anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Patan,  Death 
came  and  gently  summoned  away  the  brave  old  Adventurer  whom  he 
had  so  often  spared  on  Indian  battlefields.  On  the  21st  June,  1830, 
amidst  the  prayers  of  the  aged  and  the  helpless,  and  the  blessings  of 
the  sick  and  the  needy,  full  of  years,  full  of  honours,  peacefully,  in 
his  bed,  died  Benoit  La  Borgne,  Count  De  Boigne/ 


CHAPTEE  IX, 

THE   CHARACTER  AND   ACHIEVEMENT   OF   DE   BOIONE. 

DE  BOIGNE'S  Indian  career  lias  been  described  as  a  series  o 
ambitious  plans  ;  yet  however  exalted  their  aim  they  all  found  a 
justification  in  results.  To  a  high  intent  he  added  a  sustained  dili- 
gence and  a  determination  that  never  faltered  until  each  design  he 
undertook  was  completed.  He  scorned  delights  and  lived  laborious 
days.  Work — sheer  hard  work — was  the  secret  of  his  success.  -With- 
out it  even  his  genius  must  have  failed  in  achieving  the  ends  he 
attained.  Moreover,  he  weighed  those  ends  well.  A  certain  practical 
caution  governed  all  his  enterprises,  and  his  prudence  never  permitted 
him  to  be  carried  away  by  his  enthusiasm.  This  characteristic  he 
exhibited  in  his  financial  arrangements,  in  his  business  aptitude,  and 
in  his  attention  to  detail.  No  mutiny  occurred  in  the  army  he 
created,  yet  the  histories  of  prior  and  contemporaneous  corps  teem 
with  instances  of  insubordination,  desertion,  and  revolt,  consequent 
upon  irregularity  of  payment.  De  Boigne's  penetrating  perception 
marked  this  weak  spot,  and  discounted  its  danger  by  obtaining  from 
Madhoji  Sindhia  the  territorial  assignment  that  supplied  him  with  a 
fixed  income,  secured  him  from  dependence  on  an  untrustworthy 
treasury,  and  placed  his  Brigades  from  the  very  first  on  the  only  sound 
footing  possible  to  a  mercenary  army. 

The  amount,  as  well  as  the  variety,  of  work  accomplished  by  De 
Boigne  was  astonishing.  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  thus  desciibes  his 
routine  of  daily  duty  : — 

"  De  Boigne  was  active  and  persevering  to  a  degree  which  can  only 
be  conceived  or  believed  by  those  who  were  spectators  of  his  inde- 
fatigable labours.  I  have  seen  him  daily  and  monthly  rise  with  the 
sun,  survey  his  arsenal,  view  his  troops,  enlist  recruits,  direct  the  vast 
movements  of  three  brigades,  raise  resources,  and  encourage  manu- 
factures for  their  arms,  ammunition,  and  stores  ;  harangue  in  his 
durbar,  give  audience  to  ambassadors,  administer  justice,  regulate  the 


CHARACTER  AND  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  DE  BOIGNE.  103 

civil  and  revenue  affairs  of  a  Jaidad  of  twenty  lakhs  of  rupees,  listen 
to  a  multitude  of  letters  from  various  parts,  on  various  important 
matters,  dictate  replies,  carry  on  an  intricate  system  of  intrigue  in 
different  courts,  superintend  a  private  trade  of  lakbs  of  rupees,  keep 
bis  accounts,  his  private  and  public  correspondence,  and  direct  and 
move  forward  a  most  complex  political  machine.  Such  was  his 
laborious  occupation  from  sunrise  till  past  midnight,  and  this  was  not 
the  fortuitous  avocations  of  a  day,  but  the  unremitting  employment  of 
nine  or  ten  years.  To  this  exhausting  and  unceasing  toil  he  sacrificed 
one  of  the  firmest  and  most  robust  constitutions  ever  formed  by 
nature." 

Living  in  sovereign  magnificence,  and  wielding  quasi-sovereign 
power,  De  Boigne  was  called  upon  to  exercise  the  most  important 
duties  of  State.  For  this  he  was  fitted,  for  he  was  a  consummate 
diplomatist,  skilled  in  directing  the  most  complicated  affairs,  and  he 
added  to  a  complete  mastery  of  Oriental  intrigue  the  political  subtlety 
of  the  Italian  school.  His  knowledge  of  the  world  was  profound,  and 
he  understood  the  art  of  moulding  to  his  purpose  the  minds  of  those 
he  had  to  deal  with.  He  was  an  acute  observer  of  the  dispositions  of 
men,  a  rapid  judge  of  character,  and  gifted  in  a  remarkable  degree 
with  the  power  of  gaining  the  confidence  of  others.  But  he  never 
divulged  his  own  affairs,  and,  as  one  of  his  commentators  has  observed, 
"  there  is  this  remarkable  thing  about  him,  that  during  the  whole  of 
his  Indian  career  his  only  secretary  was  bis  writing-desk,  which  knew 
neither  his  business  nor  his  fortune,  for  both  of  those  he  kept  com- 
pletely to  himself." 

To  the  end  of  his  stay  in  India  De  Boigne  carried  on  the  mercantile 
business  he  established  at  Lucknow  in  1789,  the  books  and  correspon- 
dence of  which  he  wrote  up  with  his  own  hand.  All  these  multi- 
farious occupations,  military,  political,  administrative,  and  commercial 
were  conducted  without  assistance  from  others,  for  it  was  a  frequent 
assertion  of  his  that  any  ambitious  person  who  reposed  confidence  in 
another  risked  the  destruction  of  his  own  views.  He  never  deputed 
authority,  preferring  to  labour  eighteen  hours  a  day,  and  day  after 
day,  rather  than  delegate  to  a  subordinate  the  control  of  any  matter 
of  importance. 

It  has  been  stated  that  this  tenacity  of  power  degenerated  at  times 
into  a  positive  greed  of  authority,  and  led  him  to  view  in  an  unworthy 
light  the  successes  and  efforts  of  others,  and  he  has  been  taxed  with  a 
jealousy  that  on  occasions  administered  ungenerous  rebuke  where 
commendation  was  justly  due.  How  far  this  was  true  it  is  impossible 
to  estimate  now,  but  it  is  certainly  not  corroborated  by  the  singular 


104  DE  BOIGNE. 

esteem  evinced  towards  him  by  his  subordinates.  In  considering 
these  charges  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  men  who  filled  the 
higher  appointments  in  De  Boigne's  Brigades  were  in  many  cases 
illiterate  persons  of  humble  birth,  whose  mental  calibre  unfitted  them 
for  positions  of  responsibility,  although  doubtless  in  the  artificial 
exaltation  of  their  lives  they  considered  themselves  equal  to  any  duty, 
and  entertained  opinions  of  their  own  qualifications  not  shared  by 
their  chief. 

De  Boigne  has  also  been  accused  of  greed  and  avarice,  and  de- 
scribed as  mean  and  grasping  in  pecuniary  matters,  and  this  by  one 
who  knew  him  well  and  respected  him  highly.  How  far  this  failing 
was  a  part  of  his  nature,  and  how  far  it  was  due  to  the  spirit  of  the 
times  and  his  surroundings  is  a  moot  point.  India  of  the  last  century 
was  above  everything  else  the  Land  of  the  Pagoda  Tree,  and  the 
raison  d'etre  of  the  Pagoda  Tree  was  to  be  shaken  violently.  Men 
went  to  the  East  to  make  fortunes  as  quickly  as  they  could,  and  then 
return  to  Europe.  The  intention  was  never  disguised.  The  question, 
therefore,  of  De  Boigne's  avarice,  may  be  fairly  judged  by  the  degree 
of  his  fortune.  Let  us  compare  the  harvest  of  his  life  with  that  of 
others.  In  eleven  years  he  saved  from  his  pay,  from  his  administra- 
tion of  a  vast  territory,  and  from  his  commercial  speculations,  a  sum 
of  .£400,000.  But  Perron,  who  succeeded  him,  accumulated  in  nine 
years  a  capital  which  has  been  variously  assessed  at  from  three-quar- 
ters of  a  million  to  two  millions  sterling,  and  this  without  any  assist- 
ance from  the  profits  of  business.  Bourguien,  who  merely  commanded 
a  brigade  under  Perron,  was  credited  with  taking  "  an  equal  sum  " 
out  of  the  country,  but  this  refers  to  the  actual  amount  Perron  suc- 
ceeded in  conveying  to  Europe,  which  was  not  more  than  i'500,000. 
But  these  examples  of  money-minting  pale  before  the  financial 
achievements  of  a  certain  Colonel  Hannay,  who  entered  the  service 
of  the  Nawab  Wazir  of  Oudh  in  1778.  Hannay  was  a  Company's 
officer,  and  for  very  cogent  reasons  obtained  permission  to  serve  on 
the  further  side  of  a  boundary  which  creditors  could  not  cross  and 
where  writs  did  not  run.  He  received  the  command  of  a  considerable 
force,  and  was  assigned  the  districts  of  Baraitch  and  Gorakhpur  for 
its  support.  These  he  depopulated  in  three  years  by  his  exactions. 
"  He  entered  the  Nawab's  service,"  remarks  a  contemporary  writer, 
"  a  man  in  debt,  and  left  it  three  years  afterwards  with  a  fortune  of 
i'300,000."  With  such  instances  before  us  the  savings  that  De  Boigne 
amassed  appear  reasonable  when  his  length  of  service,  his  enormous 
income,  the  gifts  he  received  from  Sindhia,  his  mercantile  business  at 
Lucknow,  and  all  his  incidental  sources  of  emolument  are  considered. 


CHARACTER  AND  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  DE  BOIGNE.  105 

Finally,  the  accusation  of  "avarice  that  verged  on  the  contemptible" 
may  fairly  be  met  by  a  reference  to  the  princely  philanthropy  of  his 
declining  years,  and  in  this  connection  it  is  proper  to  quote  the 
remarks  of  the  Marquis  de  Faverges,  who,  in  discussing  his  character, 
says:  "  He  gave  coldly,  but  always  decidedly.  He  counted  the  money 
which  came  and  went,  more  from  business  habit  than  from  actual 
avarice,  but  he  never  withheld  a  halfpenny.  He  gave  much  and  un- 
ostentatiously, but  without  any  desire  to  hide  it,  although  his  secret 
charities  were  considerable." 

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this  conflicting  testimony,  but  whilst  the 
accusation  rests  on  individual  statements,  the  refutation  exists  in 
the  charitable  gifts  and  bequests  enjoyed  to  this  day  by  the  inhabitants 
of  Chambery.  And  it  must  be  noted  that  in  the  speech  De  Boigne 
made  on  the  occasion  of  opening  a  hospital  in  that  town,  he  cate- 
gorically disclaimed  "  any  particular  ambition  for  riches." 

On  the  other  hand,  against  these  possible  detractions  must  be  set 
many  good  and  noble  qualities.  Above  all  stands  De  Boigne's 
staunch  and  unswerving  loyalty,  which,  in  the  face  of  the  many 
enticing  offers  that  appealed  especially  to  the  avarice  he  has  been 
charged  with,  never  faltered  for  a  moment.  His  sense  of  justice  was 
singularly  well  balanced  between  severity  and  mildness,  and  his 
orders  commanded  respect,  no  less  from  the  firmness  with  which  he 
enforced  them,  than  for  the  impartiality  he  displayed  in  arriving  at  a 
decision.  His  manners  were  polite  and  elegant,  his  disposition  affable 
and  vivacious,  and  he  was  not  wanting  in  a  sense  of  humour.  He  was 
modest,  and  good-natured  in  his  behaviour  towards  his  subordinates, 
although  he  could  show  himself  stern  and  implacable  if  opposed  or 
thwarted,  but  he  possessed  an  entire  command  over  his  passions,  and 
was  an  adept  in  the  art  of  dissimulation — gifts  of  inestimable  advan- 
tage in  dealing  with  the  natives. 

De  Boigne's  achievements  are  the  best  testimony  to  the  high  order 
of  his  military  talent.  As  a  general  he  may  take  his  stand  amongst 
the  greatest  India  has  ever  produced.  In  times  of  crisis  and  sudden 
danger  his  presence  of  mind  was  incomparable,  and  his  judgment  in 
guaging  difficulties  and  deciding  on  the  course  to  follow  was  as  quick 
as  it  was  correct.  His  retreats  were  the  result  of  cowardice,  treachery, 
or  incompetence  011  the  part  of  those  with  whom  he  was  associated, 
lor  he  never  lost  a  battle,  nor  was  himself  worsted  in  fight,  while  his 
victories  were  all  of  his  own  winning.  P  titan,  Merta,  and  Lakhairi, 
although  hidden  from  view  in  the  turbid  flood  of  Indian  strife,  were 
achievements  that  can  be  compared  with  the  most  brilliant  the 
Company's  Sepoy  regiments  ever  performed,  and  if  their  particular 


106  DE  BOIGNE. 

record  is  lost  in  the  tumult  of  Eastern  warfare,  they  deprive  its  annals 
of  a  glorious  chapter,  that  might  fitly  preface  the  victories  of  Laswari 
and  Assay e. 

As  a  general  De  Boigne  was  not  only  successful  in  carrying  out 
extended  campaigns  of  conquest,  and  directing  battles  splendid  with 
vigour,  but  could  inspire  mercenary  armies  witk  courage  and  con- 
fidence, and,  above  all,  with  patience.  No  troops  in  Asia  suffered 
greater  proportionate  losses  in  war,  or  underwent  more  trying  fatigues 
than  his  famous  brigades,  which,  during  twelve  years  of  incessant 
activity,  were  constantly  marching  and  fighting.  And  yet  they  were 
sustained  by  no  patriotic  spirit,  inspired  by  no  national  sentiment, 
bound  together  by  no  common  cause.  They  were  merely  a  hireling 
soldiery,  risking  their  lives  for  stipulated  payment,  and  as  often 
opposed  to  men  of  their  own  creed  or  caste  as  allied  with  them.  Not- 
withstanding which  they  conducted  themselves  with  a  loyalty  and 
heroism  that  could  not  be  excelled  by  any  national  army.  The  con- 
quests between  the  Chambal  and  the  Siwaliks  were  of  countries 
inhabited  by  savage  and  warlike  peoples,  from  whose  very  midst  De 
Boigne  raised  the  battalions  that  held  the  territory  in  an  iron  grip, 
and  drew  from  it  revenues  richer  and  more  regular  than  had  been 
extorted  by  any  previous  conqueror. 

A  noble  trait  in  De  Boigne's  character  was  his  earnest  endeavour 
to  mitigate  the  horrors  of  war  and  minimise  its  evils.  His  humanity 
evoked  blessings  from  the  battlefield,  where  only  despair  had  moaned 
before.  Officers  and  soldiers  who  were  wounded  in  his  service 
received  pecuniary  compensations  commensurate  with  the  severity  of 
their  sufferings,  and  men  permanently  disabled  were  awarded  grants 
of  land,  which  passed  to  their  heirs,  whilst  special  provision  was  made 
for  the  relatives  of  those  who  were  killed  in  action.  The  tortures  of 
the  battlefield  were  ameliorated  by  the  establishment  of  a  medical 
department,  to  which  an  ambulance  corps  was  attached.  These  re- 
forms were  hah0  a  century  in  advance  of  the  times,  and  were  benign 
innovations  such  as  no  native  powers  had  ever  dreamt  of  before. 

What  wonder  that  his  soldiers  loved  this  chief,  whose  heart  was 
so  full  of  solicitude  for  their  welfare  !  What  wonder  that  one  of  his 
old  officers,  in  writing  to  him,  expressed  himself  in  the  following 
terms :  "  You  must  return  to  us.  We  await  your  coming  as  that  of 
the  Messiah.  You  will  be  like  a  saint,  so  highly  are  you  venerated 
and  adored.  Above  all  by  the  troops,  who,  in  their  songs,  invoke 
your  name  only."  Do  not  the  echoes  of  these  songs,  chanted  by  a 
rude  soldiery  around  their  Indian  camp  fires,  come  floating  over  many 
years  to  tell  us  what  manner  of  man  their  leader  was  ?  Does  not 


CHARACTER  AND  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  DE  BOIGNE.  107 

that  message,  with  its  unlaboured  eloquence,  touch  our  hearts  to-day, 
even  as  it  must  have  touched  the  heart  of  him  to  whom  it  was 
addressed  nearly  a  century  ago  ?  It  is  very  plain  to  see  that,  above 
and  beyond  the  respect  his  military  talents  commanded,  there  existed 
an  affection  for  De  Boigne  that  made  every  individual  soldier  in  his 
army  an  adherent,  and  inspired  his  battalions  with  the  magic  strength 
of  a  personal  devotion.  When  he  left  India  he  carried  with  him,  not 
only  the  esteem  of  his  master  and  the  admiration  of  his  officers,  but 
the  love  of  the  humblest  soldier  who  served  under  him. 

By  his  enemies  De  Boigne  was  respected,  for  in  the  hour  of  their 
defeat  he  treated  them  with  mercy  and  consideration.  "  It  is  not  the 
least  merit  of  General  De  Boigne  as  a  military  man,"  writes  the 
Bengal  Journal  in  1790,  "  to  have  tempered,  by  an  admirable  perse- 
verance, the  ferocious  and  almost  savage  character  of  the  Mahrattas. 
He  subjects  to  the  discipline  and  civilisation  of  European  armies 
troops  hitherto  deemed  barbarians ;  and  licentiousness  and  rapine, 
heretofore  so  common  among  them,  have  now  become  infamous  even 
in  the  estimation  of  the  meanest  soldier."  Despite  this  humane 
departure  from  the  repressive  customs  of  the  times,  when  slaughter 
followed  victory,  and  pitiless  oppression  stalked  in  the  path  of  con- 
quest, De  Boigne's  personal  prestige  suffered  no  diminution,  and 
"  latterly  the  very  name  of  De  Boigne  conveyed  more  terror  than  the 
thunder  of  his  cannons." 

De  Boigne's  genius  in  war  and  his  abilities  in  diplomacy  more  than 
quadrupled  the  extent  of  Madhoji  Sindhia's  dominions  and  influence. 
The  unbroken  successes  of  his  ''  Invincible  Army  " — as  it  came  to  be 
called — inspired  that  prince  with  a  belief  in  the  European  methods  of 
warfare,  and  weaned  him  from  his  racial  prejudices  in  favour  of 
cavalry  to  an  appreciation  of  infantry  for  heroic  defence  and  irresis- 
tible attack.  His  conversion  was  not  without  fruit,  for  "  the  military 
talent  of  De  Boigne  and  the  valour  of  his  battalions  were  the  grand 
instruments  which  made  Madhoji  Sindhia  the  most  powerful  prince 
in  India." 

De  Boigne  was  a  born  leader  of  men.  "  There  was  something  in 
his  face  and  bearing,"  writes  the  authority  so  often  quoted,  "  that 
depicted  the  hero,  and  compelled  implicit  obedience.  In  deportment 
he  was  commanding,  and  walked  with  the  majestic  tread  of  conscious 
greatness.  The  strong  cast  of  his  countenance  and  the  piercing  ex- 
pression of  his  eyes,  indicated  the  force  and  power  of  his  mind.  On 
the  grand  stage,  where  he  acted  so  brilliant  and  important  a  part  for 
ten  years,  he  was  at  once  dreaded  and  idolised,  feared  and  admired, 
respected  and  beloved," 


108  DE  BOIGNE. 

Certes  in  the  history  of  the  decade  in  which  he  flourished  De 
Boigne  stands  out,  a  splendid  solitary  figure,  distinct  and  distin 
guished  above  all  others.  We  recognise  in  him  an  adventurer  of  a 
rare  and  nohle  type.  Nor  is  that  glamour  of  romance  wanting  which 
can  invest  with  a  certain  heroic  charm  the  personalities  brought  under 
its  influence.  The  circumstances  of  his  career  always  remind  us 
that  he  was  a  free  lance  in  a  far  land.  We  see  him  organising  armies, 
winning  battles,  conquering  countries,  and  ruling  territories  in  a 
picturesque  scene,  rich  with  Oriental  colouring,  martial  with  pagan 
hosts,  peopled  with  dusky  races,  and  instinct  with  barbaric  splendour. 
He  carries  us  away  out  of  our  cold,  conventional  European  climate, 
into  the  warm  glow  of  an  Asiatic  land,  where  the  conditions  of  life 
are  strange  and  startling,  and  its  possibilities  illimitable.  We  follow 
him,  step  by  step,  across  arid  deserts,  through  tropical  jungles,  over 
desolate  hills,  past  districts  prodigal  in  their  fertility,  to  that  stately 
marble  palace  on  Jumna's  bank,  where  a  blind  Emperor,  the  colophon 
of  one  of  the  greatest  empires  Asia  has  ever  seen,  finds  in  this  self- 
made  soldier  of  fortune  a  protector,  a  patron,  and  the  regent  of  his 
throne.  More  wondrous  than  a  fairy  tale,  more  dazzling  than  a 
dream,  stranger  than  the  strangest  fiction,  it  is  difficult  to  realise 
the  magnitude  of  De  Boigne's  achievement.  In  this  prosaic  age, 
when  the  daily  occurrences  of  a  generally  humdrum  East  are  read  at 
our  breakfast  tables  the  next  morning,  and  we  are  reconciled  to  a 
Government  that  prosecutes  sedition  in  a  police  court,  and  exercises 
self-restraint  as  an  election  sop,  it  is  hard  to  realise  that  less  than  a 
hundred  years  ago  India  was  a  dark  continent  to  our  forefathers.  Yet 
such  it  indubitably  was  when  De  Boigne  carried  the  military  systems 
of  Europe  into  the  heart  of  Hindustan,  and  without  favour  of  political 
opponents  or  license  of  a  criminal  procedure  code,  established  his  sway 
in  the  Empire  of  Akbar  and  Aurangzebe. 


GEORGE    THOMA?. 

\h~rom  a  medallion  in  Francklin's  "  Military  Memoirs  of 
Mr.  George  Thomas."} 


GEORGE    THOMAS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

GEORGE    THOMAS   LANDS   IN    INDIA.      EARLY   VICISSITUDES.       ENTERS    THE 
BEGUM    SOMRU'S    SERVICE. 

1756-1793. 

[Although  in  the  chronological  order  of  events  the  Life  of  General  Perron 
should  follow  that  of  De  Boigne,  there  is  a  career — that  of  George  Thomas — so 
overlapped  by  both,  that  it  is  most  conveniently  inserted  between  the  sketches  of 
the  two  greater  Adventurers.  ] 

EOEGE  THOMAS  was  born- in  Tipperary  in  the  year 
1756.  His  parents  were  people  of  humble  position, 
unable  to  afford  him  any  education,  and  at  an  early 
age  he  adopted  the  seafaring  profession,  and  came  out 
to  India  whilst  he  was  quite  a  boy.  The  circumstances 
under  which  he  left  this  calling  are  variously  related. 
He  has  been  described  as  "  a  quartermaster  in  the  Navy,  or,  as  some 
affirm,  only  a  common  sailor,  who  landed  at  Madras  in  1781  or  1782" ; 
whilst  another  account  states  that  he  was  a  cabin  boy  on  board  a 
trading  ship  on  the  Coromandel  coast,  from  which  he  ran  away. 
Whatever  his  exact  condition  when  he  arrived  in  India,  it  is  certain 
he  began  life  in  a  very  humble  capacity  as  a  sailor.  On  leaving  his 
ship  he  made  his  way  "  up-country  " — an  expression  synonymous  with 
"inland"  in  India — and  spent  some  years  in  the  Karnatic  with  the 
Poligars,  a  semi-independent  and  exceedingly  lawless  class  of  chiefs 
inhabiting  mountainous  and  jungle  districts,  and  of  whom  there  were 
a  considerable  number  in  the  hill  tracts  of  Southern  India. 

After  a  residence  of  about  five  years  amongst  these  people,  Thomas 
appears  to  have  found  his  way  to  Haidarabad,  in  the  Deccan,  where 

309 


110  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

he  took  service  as  a  private  soldier  in  the  army  of  Nizam  Ali  Khan. 
But  he  did  not  stay  here  long,  for  in  1787  he  left  the  Deccan  and 
made  his  way  to  Delhi.  It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  record  of  this  journey, 
for  it  must  have  been  full  of  adventure  and  incident.  Even  in  these 
modei'n  days  the  march  of  a  solitary  European  from  one  capital  to 
the  other  would  not  be  altogether  free  from  danger.  A  hundred  years 
ago  the  undertaking  must  have  been  perilous  in  the  extreme,  and 
nothing  but  a  stout  heart  and  a  strong  frame  could  have  successfully 
traversed  the  thousand  miles  between  the  two  cities,  through  countries 
which  were  in  a  constant  state  of  disturbance  and  commotion,  and 
infested  with  numerous  bands  of  robbers  and  predatory  chieftains, 
who  levied  blackmail  on  every  traveller,  and  acknowledged  allegiance 
to  no  authority. 

Despite  all  dangers  and  difficulties,  Thomas  completed  his  journey, 
and  arrived  at  the  Mughal  capital  in  safety.  This  was  before  the  final 
occupation  of  Delhi  by  the  Marathas,  and  when  the  influence  of 
Ghulain  Kadir  and  Ismail  Beg  was  paramount  there.  The  only  body 
of  regular  troops  in  Hindustan  was  that  belonging  to  the  Begum 
Somru,  to  whom  Thomas  offered  his  services.  She  held  the  fief  of 
Sardhana,  a  district  lying  about  forty-five  miles  north  of  Delhi,  where 
her  troops  were  cantoned.  Thomas's  application  was  entertained,  and 
he  was  appointed  to  a  subordinate  command  in  the  Begum's  army. 
Before  long  the  handsome  Irishman  attracted  his  mistress's  attention. 
He  was  a  tall,  soldierly  fellow,  endowed  with  a  pleasing  address  for 
one  of  his  station,  and  gifted  with  the  honied  speech  of  his  country- 
men, and,  except  when  his  temper  was  aroused,  gentle  in  his  manners, 
though  not  without  that  dash  and  spirit  which  always  commends  itself 
to  womankind. 

Before  long  he  obtained  the  Begum's  confidence  and  favour,  and 
she  gave  him  in  marriage  a  slave  girl  whom  she  had  adopted,  and 
promoted  him  to  the  command  of  a  battalion  in  her  force.  He  soon 
found  an  opportunity  of  distinguishing  himself.  In  1789  the  Begum, 
in  her  capacity  of  feudal  vassal  to  Shah  'Alain,  was  engaged  in  assisting 
the  Emperor  to  reduce  certain  revolted  districts  which  had  been 
restored  to  him  when  he  regained  his  nominal  independence  aiter  the 
defeat  of  the  Marathas  at  Lalsot.  These  were  in  the  possession  of  a 
discontented  noble  named  Najaf  Kuli  Khan,  who  refused  to  render 
allegiance,  and  took  up  a  position  of  defiance  in  a  strong  fortress 
named  Gokalgarh,  a  little  to  the  north-west  of  Agra,  which  latter 
place  Ismail  Beg  was  engaged  in  besieging.  Shah  'Alam  had  invested 
the  rebel's  stronghold,  and  erected  trenches  around  it.  But  the  Imperial 
army  was  in  a  shamefully  demoralised  condition,  and  one  night  the 


ENTERS  THE  BEGUM  SOMRU'S  SERVICE.          Ill 

officers  and  soldiery  having  recklessly  abandoned  themselves  to  a 
debauch,  Najaf  Khan,  determined  to  profit  by  the  enemy's  folly, 
and,  marching  silently  out  of  his  entrenchments,  attacked  the  royal 
troops  as  they  lay  buried  in  a  drunken  slumber.  The  investing 
lines  were  quickly  carried,  and  a  dreadful  slaughter  commenced.  The 
terror  excited  by  the  sudden  and  vigorous  attack  was  so  great  that  a 
panic  seized  the  royal  army,  which  was  soon  in  confusion  and  on 
the  point  of  flight.  The  Emperor  himself  was  exposed  to  the  greatest 
danger,  many  persons  around  him  being  killed,  and  he  was  preparing 
to  withdraw  from  the  field,  when  the  Begum  Somru,  whose  camp 
was  pitched  a  short  distance  off,  perceived  his  peril,  and,  unaffected 
by  the  panic,  determined  to  support  her  sovereign.  A  hundred  men 
and  a  six-pounder  gun,  under  the  command  of  Thomas,  were  hastily 
ordered  to  advance,  whilst  the  Begum,  seated  in  her  palanquin, 
accompanied  them  to  the  scene  of  conflict,  and  gave  the  order  to 
open  fire.  Thomas's  native  sense  of  chivalry  was  aroused  by  the 
spectacle  of  a  woman  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  he  supported  her  with 
such  determination  that  after  a  short  but  desperate  struggle,  Najaf 
Khan  was  beaten  back  and  the  Emperor  rescued  from  his  critical 
position.  In  grateful  recognition  of  assistance  so  timely  rendered, 
Shah  'Alam  summoned  the  Begum  to  his  Durbar,  and,  after  praising 
her  for  her  gallantry,  and  thanking  her  for  her  service,  loaded  her  with 
honours,  and  bestowed  on  her  the  title  of  "His  most  beloved  daughter." 
Nor  was  Thomas  unrewarded,  for  not  only  was  his  reputation  estab- 
lished by  the  incident,  but  he  received  a  very  valuable  khilut,  or 
present,  from  His  Majestj7. 

Not  long  after  this  the  Begum  was  entrusted  with  the  defence  of 
the  northern  Mughal  districts  against  the  incursions  of  the  Sikhs,  and 
a  valuable  Jaiddd  assigned  to  her  as  payment  for  this  special  service, 
to  the  management  of  which  she  appointed  Thomas,  who  took  up  his 
quarters  at  a  fort  called  Tappal,  the  principal  place  in  it.  It  was  a 
wonderful  piece  of  promotion,  for  it  elevated  him  to  the  position  of 
Military  Governor  and  Civil  Administrator  of  an  extensive  territory. 
Despite  his  inability  to  read  and  write,  he  seems  to  have  handled  the 
reins  of  management  with  considerable  ability,  for  he  doubled  the 
revenues  of  the  Jaiddd,  before  long,  and  established  the  Begum's 
authority  in  a  district  which  had  never  previously  acknowledged  any 
master  but  the  drawn  "word.  In  the  intervals  of  collecting  rents  and 
dispensing  justice  Thomas  was  frequently  called  away  northwards  to 
repel  the  periodical  incursions  of  the  Sikhs,  a  task  in  which  he  distin- 
guished himself  no  less  by  his  personal  prowess  than  by  his  uniform 
success.  Unfortunately  no  chronicles  exist  of  these  border  frays  of  a 


112  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

past  century.  Advanced  or  retired  boundary  pillars  formed  the  only 
records  of  frontier  warfare  in  India.  But  in  various  and  successive 
actions  against  the  Sikhs  Thomas,  by  his  courage  and  energy,  made 
his  rule  respected,  and  for  long  years  after  tradition  handed  down  the 
legendary  deeds  of  the  mighty  Jchazi-Sahib,  or  sailor,  who  first  taught 
the  sons  of  Nanak  to  respect  the  marches  of  the  Great  Mughal. 

By  these  successes  Thomas  gained  considerable  influence  over  the 
mind  of  the  Begum,  but  there  were  many  Europeans  in  her  force, 
chiefly  Frenchmen,  between  whom  and  him  a  violent  hatred  soon 
developed.  They  monopolised  the  chief  posts,  and  drew  large  emolu- 
ments, although,  as  he  quickly  observed,  they  were  of  little  use  except 
to  keep  their  mistress  in  a  chronic  state  of  pecuniary  difficulty.  Their 
jealousy  of  and  hostility  to  the  English  interloper  were  undisguised  ; 
but  in  spite  of  their  machinations  he  retained  for  a  considerable  time 
the  place  he  had  gained  in  the  Begum's  favour,  for  he  was  always 
ready  to  fight,  which  her  other  officers  were  not,  and  when  he  fought 
he  won.  This  in  itself  made  him  a  valuable  acquisition  to  a  force 
whose  records  in  the  tented  field  were  none  too  glorious ;  but  as,  in 
addition  to  his  military  abilities,  Thomas  possessed  the  charm  of 
personal  attraction,  he  soon  became  chief  adviser  and  counsellor  to 
the  "Witch  of  Sardhana,"  as  the  Begum  was  called.  But  this  success, 
obtained  at  the  expense  of  others,  increased  the  circle  of  his  enemies 
and  made  them  desperate.  Envy  and  jealousy  entered  into  a  plot, 
and  under  the  leadership  of  an  officer  named  Le  Vassoult  a  cabal  was 
formed  to  bring  about  Thomas's  ruin.  The  season  chosen  was  during 
one  of  his  periodical  expeditions  against  the  Sikhs.  Taking  advantage 
of  his  absence,  the  conspirators  presented  themselves  in  a  body  before 
the  Begum,  and  by  artful  arguments  persuaded  her  that  Thomas  har- 
boured treacherous  designs  against  her  independence,  and  that  his 
reason  for  desiring  to  procure  the  dismissal  of  her  French  officers  was 
that  he  might  make  himself  sole  and  undisputed  master  of  her  posses- 
sions. 

This  plot,  which  was  brought  to  a  head  in  1792,  was  entirely 
successful.  It  was  cunningly  contrived,  being  calculated  to  raise  the 
Begum's  fears  by  suggesting  a  danger  that  bore  an  air  of  probability, 
for  the  subversion  of  authority  was  at  the  root  of  every  conspiracy  in 
those  times.  The  Begum  at  once  became  alarmed,  but,  on  being 
assured  of  their  protection  and  fidelity  by  her  French  officers,  anxiety 
gave  way  to  anger,  and  she  visited  her  wrath  upon  Thomas's  wife, 
who  communicated  with  her  husband.  Back  he  came  at  once  from 
the  frontier,  rescued  his  family,  and  carried  them  to  Tappal,  where 
he  erected  the  standard  of  rebellion. 


ENTERS  THE  BEGUM  SOMRU'S  SERVICE.          113 

No  doubt  he  was  driven  to  this  by  the  force  of  circumstances, 
for  George  Thomas's  worst  enemy  could  never  have  accused  him  of 
treachery.  But  still  his  conduct  seemed  to  confirm  the  accusations 
made  against  him,  and  the  Begum  Somru  forthwith  marched  with  an 
overpowering  force  to  regain  her  district.  Tappal  was  invested,  and 
Thomas  compelled  to  surrender.  And  then  the  Begum,  with  a  mag- 
nanimity which  could  hardly  have  been  expected  of  her,  and  had  in  it 
a  touch  of  both  inconsistency  and  tenderness,  spared  his  life,  and 
permitted  him  to  depart  unmolested. 

When  Thomas  evacuated  Tappal  his  worldly  wealth  did  not  exceed 
fifty  pounds.  It  was  not  much  to  show  for  five  years'  meritorious 
service,  but  it  may  fairly  be  adduced  as  evidence  of  his  integrity ; 
for  during  his  administration  of  a  district  producing  a  revenue  of 
nearly  .£10,000  a  year,  many  opportunities  must  have  occurred  of 
enriching  himself  by  methods  which,  however  deprecated  in  the  West, 
were  regarded  in  India  as  not  only  fortuitous,  but  legitimate. 

His  prospects,  as  he  summed  them  up,  were  far  from  encouraging. 
After  eleven  years  of  active  adventure  he  found  himself  little  richer 
than  when  he  began.  Heroic  measures  were  necessary,  and  he  adopted 
them  forthwith.  Having  expended  his  small  capital  in  arming  a 
band  of  desperate  followers,  he  stormed  and  captured  a  large  village 
near  Delhi,  from  which  he  plundered  a  considerable  sum  of  money. 
With  the  sinews  of  war  thus  obtained  he  increased  his  force  to  250 
mounted  men,  and  marched  them  to  Anupshahr,  the  frontier  British 
station,  there  to  await  events.  After  putting  his  followers  through  a 
course  of  training  until  they  presented  a  semblance  of  discipline,  he 
offered  the  services  of  his  party  to  Ali  Bahadur,  one  of  the  leading 
Maratha  princes,  who  had  established  an  independent  rule  in  Bundel- 
khand.  But  a  difficulty  arising  about  terms,  the  negotiations  were 
broken  off,  and  shortly  after  this  Thomas  received  proposals  from  a 
chief  named  Appa  Khandi  Kcao,  with  promise  of  a  suitable  provision, 
and  these  being  acceptable,  he  entered  his  service  early  in  1793. 


CHAPTER  II. 

UNDER  APPA   KHANDI  RAO. 

1793-1797. 

A  PPA  KHANDI  BAG  was  ODO  of  Madhoji  Sindhia's  principal 
•**•  chieftains,  and  bad  played  an  important  part  in  the  conquest 
of  Hindustan.  More  recently  he  had  been  engaged  in  the  invasion  of 
Bundelkhand,  but  his  arms  had  not  met  with  success,  and  owing  to 
this  his  troops  were  several  months  in  arrears  of  pay,  and  when  their 
leader's  continued  ill-fortune  seemed  to  destroy  all  hopes  of  recovering 
what  was  due  to  them,  they  broke  out  into  mutiny.  This  so  angered 
Sindhia  that  he  summarily  dismissed  the  chief  from  his  service,  and 
Appa's  proud  and  haughty  spirit  was  brooding  over  this  disgrace  when 
he  sought  the  assistance  of  George  Thomas. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  it  was  under  Appa  Khandi  Rao  that  De 
Boigne — now  in  his  zenith — entered  Sindhia's  service  with  the  two 
battalions  which  comprised  bis  first  command.  His  extraordinary 
success,  and  the  power  he  had  attained,  inspired  Appa  with  confi- 
dence in  the  merits  of  European  courage  and  intelligence.  Although 
Thomas's  small  band  of  ragamuffins  must  have  presented  a  ludicrous 
contrast  to  De  Boigne's  trained  and  equipped  battalions,  the  chief  re- 
membered how  modestly  the  latter  began  his  career,  and  Thomas's 
impoverished  condition  and  needy  appearance  did  not  necessarily 
prejudice  him.  Vicissitudes  of  fortune  were  the  rule,  not  the  exception, 
in  Hindustan — only  a  few  weeks  previously  Thomas  himself  had  been 
thrashing  the  Sikhs  in  the  northern  provinces  of  Delhi,  and  enjoying 
a  position  of  importance  and  confidence  in  the  service  of  the  Begum 
Somru.  It  mattered  little  his  being  temporarily  under  a  cloud.  What 
he  had  done  in  the  past,  that  he  could  do  in  the  future,  and  Appa  was 
in  urgent  need  of  some  one  to  collect  his  revenues,  since  his  own 
mutinous  troops  could  no  longer  be  depended  upon  for  that  very 
essential  service.  The  man  who  had  enforced  taxes  from  the  Tappal 

114 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  115 

districts,  could  extort  them  from  Appa's,  which  adjoined  them  in  the 
Mewatti  country. 

So  Thomas  was  engaged,  and  ordered  to  raise  a  battalion  of  1,000 
regular  infantry  and  100  horse.  But  this  required  money,  a  commo- 
dity Appa  could  not  command,  and,  therefore,  in  lieu  of  a  monthly 
payment,  he  assigned  to  his  new  commander  the  districts  of  Tijara, 
Tapukra,  and  Firozpur,  the  revenues  of  which  were  to  be  applied  to  the 
expenses  of  the  corps.  They  formed  a  portion  of  Appa's  own  territory 
of  Bewari,  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  Ismail  Beg,  and  lay  about 
forty  miles  south  of  Delhi.  Their  assignment  answered  a  double  pur- 
pose :  it  secured  the  payment  of  a  battalion  by  which  Appa  hoped  to 
re-establish  his  fortunes,  and  it  brought  the  districts  themselves  under 
his  authority,  which  was  comforting  to  his  feelings  and  agreeable  to 
his  dignity,  for,  as  a  matter  of  practical  finance,  he  had  never  been 
able  to  collect  any  revenue  from  them  himself,  owing  to  their  chronic 
state  of  rebellion.  They  had,  indeed,  been  to  him  a  bane  rather  than 
a  blessing,  for  whenever  he  sent  a  force  against  them,  the  peasantry 
fled  for  refuge  to  the  hilly  tracts  around,  and  directly  his  troops  re- 
tired, sallied  forth  and  committed  fresh  depredations  on  the  surrounding 
country.  This  unsatisfactory  state  of  affairs  made  it  both  cheap  and 
profitable  to  sublet  the  district  to  any  one  who  would  undertake  to  pay 
himself  out  of  the  proceeds,  and  keep  the  unruly  inhabitants  in  peace 
and  subjection, 

Thomas  had  no  misgivings  as  to  his  ability  to  collect  revenue,  for 
his  methods  were  as  sure  as  they  were  summary,  and  he  accepted  the 
proposal,  with  the  single  stipulation  that  accounts  should  be  balanced 
every  six  months,  and  the  difference  adjusted.  This  being  agreed  to, 
he  received  two  cannons  and  a  supply  of  ammunition,  and  began  the 
enlistment  of  men.  Service  under  European  commanders  was  popular 
with  the  natives,  and  there  would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  filling  his 
ranks  had  he  enjoyed  the  command  of  a  little  ready  cash.  As  it  was, 
the  problematical  revenues  of  Tijara,  Tapukra,  and  Firozpur  did  not 
pass  current,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  he  recruited  400  men. 
With  these  he  decided  to  take  possession  of  his  Jaidad,  hoping  to 
extract  a  reality  out  of  its  shadowy  resources ;  but  scarcely  had  he 
marched  half  way  toward  it  than  he  was  recalled  in  hot  haste  by  Appa, 
and  ordered  to  accompany  that  chief  to  Delhi,  to  guard  against  any 
possible  commotion  that  might  arise  owing  to  the  death  of  Modhoji 
Sindhia,  news  of  which  had  just  reached  Hindustan. 

There  were  several  chiefs  collected  at  the  capital,  who  joined  in 
maintaining  the  Maratha  authority  under  General  De  Boigne.  They 
were  honourably  received  by  the  Emperor,  to  whom  Thomas,  in  due 


116  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

turn,  presented  bis  nazzar,  or  offering,  and  from  whom  he  received  a 
valuable  Jchilut.  He  remained  at  the  capital  for  sonic  time,  during 
which  he  was  successful  in  recruiting  his  force  up  to  700,  and  then  ob- 
tained leave  to  depart  in  order  to  take  possession  of  his  assigned 
districts,  and  raise  from  them  the  funds,  which  were  now  more 
urgently  needed  than  ever.  But  scarcely  had  ho  marched  his  party 
out  of  the  capital  than  they  mutinied  for  their  pay,  and  began  to  dis- 
perse and  plunder  the  surrounding  country,  after  the  manner  fashion- 
able at  that  period. 

It  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  Thomas  whipped  in  his  riotous 
pack,  and  returned  with  them  to  Delhi,  where  he  represented  to  Appa 
the  impossibility  of  doing  anything  without  means.  The  chief  found 
a  truly  Oriental  escape  out  of  this  difficulty  by  getting  very  angry ; 
but  Thomas,  who  seldom  avoided  a  fight  if  he  could  help  it,  gave  his 
master  back  word  for  word,  and  a  rupture  seemed  imminent,  until 
Appa  compromised  the  matter  by  advancing  Rs.14,000,  and  executing 
a  bond  for  the  rest  of  the  claims,  which,  it  is  perhaps  superfluous  to 
add,  was  never  honoured.  The  payment  on  account,  however,  enabled 
Thomas  to  satisfy  his  mutineers,  and  in  July,  1794,  he  set  out  for  the 
third  time  to  take  possession  of  his  Jaidad. 

His  route  lay  through  the  Jumna  Jaghir  of  the  Begum  Sornru, 
which  Thomas  had  administered  for  such  a  long  time.  The  opportu- 
nity was  irresistible,  and  he  plundered  it,  exacting  a  heavy  fine  from 
a  village  called  Garath.  It  was  a  very  sorry  return  for  the  generous 
treatment  he  had  received  from  the  Begum ;  but  it  is  probable  his 
vindictiveness  was  directed,  not  against  her,  but  against  the  French 
faction,  which  directed  affairs  at  Sardluina,  and  had  brought  about 
Thomas's  downfall. 

Continuing  his  march  after  this  little  interlude,  Thomas  duly  reached 
his  domains.  It  was  a  dark  and  rainy  monsoon  night  when  he  arrived 
at  Tijara,  the  place  of  chief  importance.  He  pitched  his  camp  a  short 
distance  from  its  walls,  and  his  men,  fatigued  after  a  long  and  harass- 
ing march,  lay  down  to  rest.  That  night  his  new  subjects  gave  him 
a  taste  of  their  quality  by  creeping  into  his  encampment  and  steal- 
ing a  valuable  horse,  which  had  been  picketted  in  its  very  centre. 

The  impudence  of  this  proceeding  aroused  Thomas's  wrath,  and  he 
instantly  determined  to  inflict  condign  punishment  on  the  vagabond 
thieves  who  were  so  wanting  in  veneration  for  constituted  authority. 
So  he  detached  a  party  to  discover  the  village  to  which  the  horse  had 
been  taken ;  but  they  had  not  gone  far  before  they  were  attacked,  and 
obliged  to  retire.  Seeing  this,  Thomas  ordered  his  cavalry  to  ad- 
vance and  cover  the  retreat  of  the  detachment,  whilst  he  himself  led 


UNDEE  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  117 

out  the  main  body  of  bis  infantry  ;  but  by  this  time  the  enemy  had 
been  considerably  reinforced,  and  showed  a  formidable  front.  Thomas, 
taking  the  lead  of  his  centre  column,  boldly  advanced  and  set  fire  to 
the  village,  which  was  the  point  of  attack,  but  as  he  was  doing  so,  his 
right  and  left  wings  were  seized  with  a  sudden  panic,  and  fled  in  pre- 
cipitation. Their  example  affected  the  centre,  who  immediately 
followed,  abandoning  their  wounded,  and  leaving  Thomas  with  only 
a  dozen  faithful  men  and  a  few  cavalry  to  support  him. 

It  was  a  moment  of  extreme  peril.  But  it  was  in  such  crises  that 
Thomas  displayed  those  splendid  qualities  of  audacity  and  defiance 
which  distinguished  his  whole  career.  Falling  slowly  back  on  one  of  his 
guns  which  had  become  embarrassed  in  the  bed  of  a  stream,  he  en- 
couraged his  small  party  to  exert  themselves  in  extricating  it,  and  had 
just  succeeded,  when  the  enemy,  confident  of  victory  now,  renewed 
the  attack  with  furious  energy. 

The  native  commander  of  Thomas's  cavalry,  a  man  of  distinguished 
bravery,  stood  nobly  by  his  master,  and,  with  a  few  others,  threw 
themselves,between  the  enemy  and  the  gun  which  was  the  object  of 
their  charge.  Their  intrepidity  cost  them  their  lives  ;  but  their  gallant 
effort  allowed  time  for  the  piece  to  be  loaded,  and  the  next  minute 
a  well-directed  fire  of  grape  was  poured  into  the  advancing  foe.  The 
timely  discharge  saved  Thomas  and  the  few  brave  fellows  that  sur- 
vived, and  after  half  a  dozen  more  rounds  the  enemy  drew  off  and 
retired  into  the  surrounding  ravines. 

Thomas  now  collected  his  fugitives,  but  when  he  had  mustered 
them,  found  his  force  reduced  to  300  men.  With  these  he  again  ad- 
vanced to  give  battle  ;  but  the  enemy,  satisfied  of  his  prowess,  declined 
to  renew  the  contest. 

Although  his  first  experience  had  been  so  disastrous,  the  gallantry 
and  ability  with  which  he  retrieved  the  reverse  created  a  great  effect, 
and  spread  a  dread  amongst  the  people  who  had  opposed  him.  Serious 
as  was  Thomas's  loss  in  action,  the  Mewattis  had  suffered  more,  and 
the  immediate  consequence  was  that  their  headmen  made  overtures 
for  peace,  which  led  to  an  amicable  adjustment  of  terms.  It  was 
agreed  that  a  year's  revenue  should  be  paid,  and  the  stolen  property 
restored,  hostages  being  given  for  the  performance  of  these  conditions. 

Tijara  was  the  strongest  place  in  the  district,  and  inhabited  by  the 
most  refractory  people.  Only  a  few  weeks  before  the  date  of  Thomas's 
victory  the  Begum  Somru's  whole  force  had  failed  in  an  attack  upon 
the  town,  and  been  compelled  to  retire.  Its  occupation  by  Thomas 
led  to  the  immediate  submission  of  the  rest  of  the  district ;  but  he 
was  so  pleased  with  the  spirit  and  fighting  qualities  of  the  people 


118  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

that  he  offered  to  enlist  any  of  them  who  chose  to  serve  him,  and  this 
being  well  responded  to,  he  had  no  difficulty  in  bringing  up  his 
battalion  to  the  sanctioned  strength. 

Orders  now  reached  Thomas  from  Appa  to  assist  the  collector  of  the 
district  of  Kishnagar  in  getting  in  the  revenue  due.  Having  no  belief 
in  conciliatory  measures,  but  holding  the  opinion  that  the  turbulent 
people  of  the  province  could  only  be  coerced  into  obedience,  Thomas 
at  once  entered  into  a  vigorous  punitive  campaign,  carrying  fire  and 
sword  into  their  midst.  His  expedition  concluded  with  the  subjuga- 
tion of  the  town  of  Jhajjar,  a  place  of  considerable  importance,  after 
which  he  returned  to  Tijiira. 

Upon  the  surrender  of  Jhajjar,  Appa  gave  Thomas  an  order  on  the 
collector  of  that  town  for  a  sum  sufficient  to  pay  the  arrears  due  to 
the  battalion  ;  but  just  at  this  time  the  chiefs  own  troops  mutinied 
for  their  long- withheld  pay,  and  the  money  was  diverted  to  satisfy 
their  claims.  Whereupon  Thomas  marched  to  the  Bahadurgarh 
district,  to  raise  a  contribution  to  meet  his  needs.  In  his  route  he 
found  the  smaller  villages  all  deserted,  and  considerable  numbers  of 
armed  persons  collected  in  a  threatening  manner  in  the  larger  ones. 
His  force,  thinned  by  frequent  desertions,  had  dwindled  down  to  300 
men,  whose  discipline  was  extremely  unsatisfactory.  Notwithstanding 
which,  having  arrived  at  a  place  called  Mandaka,  and  found  the  in- 
habitants ready  to  resist  him  by  arms,  he  attacked  them  without  a 
moment's  hesitation,  and  after  giving  them  a  severe  beating,  sacked 
their  village  of  Es.  4,000. 

The  extraordinary  vigour  and  success  of  Thomas's  short  campaign 
began  to  arouse  the  apprehensions  of  the  Maratha  authorities  at 
Delhi,  who  felt  obliged  to  take  note  of  the  influence  he  was  acquiring 
within  such  a  short  distance  of  the  capital.  At  the  instigation  of  the 
Begum  Somru,  whose  resentment  had  been  aroused  by  the  recent 
attack  upon  her  Jumna  Jaghir,  a  combined  force  was  sent  to  watch 
Thomas,  who  thereupon  deemed  it  prudent  to  remove  to  a  distance, 
and,  in  consequence,  retired  to  headquarters. 

Scarcely  had  he  reached  Tijara  than  he  received  an  urgent  message 
from  Appa,  calling  on  him  to  advance  with  ah1  speed  to  K6t  Putli,  a 
fort  about  forty  miles  distant,  where  the  chief  was  detained  by  his 
mutinous  troops,  who  had  been  tampered  with  by  Gopal  Rao  Bhao, 
Daulat  Rao  Sindhia's  viceroy  in  Hindustan.  Appa  was  fearful  of 
being  delivered  up  to  his  enemies,  and  implored  Thomas  to  rescue 
him  without  fail,  for  he  could  no  longer  rely  on  his  officers,  who  had 
all  been  bought  over  by  Gopal  Rao. 

Although  it  was  raining  heavily,  and  the  afternoon  far  advanced 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  EAO.  119 

when  Thomas  received  the  summons,  he  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment 
in  obeying  it.  The  fall  of  his  master  meant  his  own  ruin,  for  if  Sindhia 
resumed  Appa's  territory,  as  he  seemed  inclined  to  do,  Tijara,  Tapiikra 
and  Firozpur  would  naturally  go  with  it.  Instantly  collecting  his 
men,  Thomas  marched  all  night  and  the  greater  portion  of  the  follow- 
ing day  and  night,  through  constant  rain  and  over  heavy  roads,  and  at 
two  o'clock  on  the  second  morning  arrived  before  Kot  Piitli.  His 
sudden  appearance,  and  the  inclement  state  of  the  weather,  prevented 
any  opposition  from  the  mutineers,  who  had  surrounded  Appa  and  his 
few  faithful  followers,  and  Thomas  was  able  to  march  up  to  the  fort, 
encamp  under  its  walls,  and  send  in  a  supply  of  provisions,  of  which 
the  chief  stood  in  great  need. 

As  nearly  all  Appa's  troops  were  in  mutiny,  it  was  impossible  to  re- 
establish his  authority  with  the  small  force  remaining  loyal,  and  under 
these  circumstances  Thomas  recommended  that  an  effort  should  be 
made  to  come  to  terms  with  Sindhia.  Of  this  advice  Appa  approved ; 
but  he,  nevertheless,  sought  an  early  opportunity  of  placing  himself  and 
his  family  in  safety,  and  the  next  day  made  his  way  to  Thomas's  camp, 
a  proceeding  not  unattended  with  danger.  It  was  now  determined  to 
fall  back  upon  Kanaund,  Appa's  principal  stronghold,  and  the  order 
was  given  to  strike  camp  and  march.  But  no  sooner  had  a  start  been 
made,  than  the  mutineers  began  to  follow  in  pursuit,  and  in  a  short 
time  overtook  and  surrounded  Thomas's  force.  The  position  now 
became  very  critical,  and  as  a  last  resource  Thomas  urged  Appa  to 
mount  his  elephant,  and  lead  an  attack,  believing  such  behaviour 
would  have  an  inspiriting  effect  upon  the  men  who  defended  him,  and 
who  were  disheartened  at  the  position  in  which  they  found  themselves. 
Appa,  who  was  a  courageous  chief,  at  once  adopted  the  suggestion, 
which  met  with  complete  success.  No  sooner  was  a  bold  front  shown 
than  the  mutineers  first  came  to  a  halt,  and  then  retreated,  leaving 
the  way  clear  for  Thomas  to  conduct  his  master  in  safety  to  Kanaund. 

The  danger  had  been  great,  and  the  deliverance  dashing,  and 
in  gratitude  for  his  exertions,  Appa  presented  Thomas  with  a  khilut 
of  Rs.3,000,  with  which  to  purchase  an  elephant  and  palanquin 
suitable  to  his  dignity.  Furthermore,  to  mark  his  appreciation  of  the 
gallant  and  faithful  conduct  of  the  regular  troops,  he  ordered  a  con- 
siderable increase  in  their  numbers,  and  assigned  to  Thomas  in 
perpetuity  the  districts  of  Jhajjar,  Bairi,  Mandoti,  and  Pathoda,  which 
were  situated  to  the  westward  of  Delhi,  and  yielded  an  annual  revenue 
of  a  lakh  and  a  half  of  rupees. 

This  marked  a  distinct  step  in  Thomas's  fortunes,  for  in  all  the 
changes  and  vicissitudes  he  subsequently  experienced,  he  clung  to 


120  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

Jhajjar  to  the  end,  and  only  surrendered  it  at  the  termination  of  bis 
career. 

Appa  being  safely  established  at  Kanaund,  where  he  was  in  a 
position  to  hold  his  own,  Thomas  was  permitted  to  depart  in  order 
to  take  possession  of  his  new  territory,  but  before  he  had  completed 
doing  BO,  a  serious  disturbance  broke  out  in  one  of  his  master's 
frontier  districts,  which  was  under  the  charge  of  a  Brahmin  official 
named  Ganga  Bishen,  who  possessed  great  influence,  and  was  able  to 
bring  14,000  fighting  men  into  the  field.  Discontented  with  the  exacting 
rule  of  Appa,  and  encouraged  by  recent  events,  Ganga  Bishen  entered 
into  negotiations  to  transfer  his  allegiance  to  Gopdl  Rao  Bhao,  and 
surrender  to  Sindhia  the  district  he  held  from  Appa.  This  intelligence 
being  communicated  to  the  latter,  he  sent  orders  to  Thomas  to  seize 
the  rebel,  who  at  once  retreated  to  a  mountainous  part  of  the 
Mewatti  country,  and  shut  himself  up  in  a  strong  hill  fort. 

In  order  to  lull  suspicion,  Thomas  allowed  a  short  time  to  elapse 
before  making  any  movement.  He  then,  after  a  sudden  and  swift 
night  inarch,  presented  himself  before  the  rebel's  stronghold,  and  by 
a  clever  stratagem,  secured  his  person,  and  sent  him  to  Appa.  But 
the  fort  still  hold  out,  being  occupied  by  a  garrison  of  1,000  men, 
under  the  command  of  Ganga  Bishen's  nephew  ;  and  it  was  necessary 
to  reduce  it.  As  it  was  known  to  be  well  supplied  with  provisions 
and  ammunition,  nothing  but  a  long  and  tedious  blockade  seemed 
possible,  and  the  better  to  ensure  success,  Thomas  began  the  construc- 
tion of  a  chain  of  posts  or  redoubts  around  the  place. 

Whilst  employed  in  erecting  these,  he  experienced  a  desperate 
adventure,  in  which  he  narrowly  escaped  losing  his  life.  Shortly 
after  the  completion  of  one  of  his  principal  redoubts,  he  had  retired 
to  rest  one  night,  when  he  was  awakened  by  a  great  shouting  and 
commotion.  Hurrying  to  an  eminence  near  at  hand,  he  saw  that  the 
garrison  had  made  a  sortie,  and  possessed  themselves  of  this  redoubt, 
in  which  was  stored  all  his  reserve  arms  and  ammunition.  Whilst 
he  was  reconnoitring  the  position,  a  small  band  of  the  enemy  caught 
sight  of  him,  and  immediately  bore  down  towards  where  he  was 
standing.  In  his  haste  Thomas  had  not  armed  himself,  but  at  this 
moment  a  faithful  servant  rushed  up  with  his  sword,  which  he  had 
just  time  to  grasp  when  the  attackers  reached  him,  and  he  found  him- 
self confronted  by  half  a  dozen  dangerous  men. 

These  discharged  their  matchlocks,  and  threw  several  spears  at  him, 
but  fortunately  with  an  unsuccessful  aim.  Perceiving  a  stand  of 
colours,  which  his  own  men  had  abandoned,  Thomas  stooped  down 
to  pick  them  up,  and  the  enemy,  concluding  from  the  motion  of  his 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  121 

body  that  be  was  wounded,  dasbed  forward,  hoping  to  overpower  him 
by  force  of  numbers  and  a  simultaneous  onslaught.  But  they  had 
under-estimated  the  prowess  of  the  Jeliazi  SaJtib.  Nothing  daunted 
by  overwhelming  odds,  he  gallantly  met  them,  and  although  he  was 
obliged  to  loose  his  hold  of  the  colours,  he  succeeded  in  beating  his 
assailants  off,  and  on  being  reinforced  by  his  men,  drove  them  back 
into  the  fort.  Faint  from  loss  of  blood,  he  could  not  follow  up  the 
advantage,  but  was  compelled  to  retire  to  his  trenches,  where  his 
wounds  were  dressed,  and  his  pusillanimous  followers  recalled  to  a 
sense  of  their  duty. 

The  principal  points  in  the  lines  of  investment  were  now 
strengthened,  and  the  siege  vigorously  enforced  ;  but  Ganga  Bishen's 
nephew  held  out  as  resolutely,  and  Thomas's  troops  soon  began  to 
suffer  hardships.  Supplies  ran  short,  and  sickness  broke  out.  The 
camp  equipment  was  of  a  miserable  description,  Thomas's  tent  being 
the  only  one  in  the  field,  and  this,  with  characteristic  generosity,  he 
gave  up  for  use  as  a  hospital.  The  weather  was  inclement,  with 
incessant  rain,  and  was  made  the  harder  to  bear  from  the  great 
scarcity  of  blankets  and  warm  clothing.  As  usual  Thomas's  funds  were 
exhatisted,  and  in  order  to  raise  sufficient  money  to  purchase  the 
more  urgent  necessaries  his  men  required,  he  sold  his  horses.  It  was 
by  such  generous  sacrifices  as  these  that  Thomas  endeared  himself  to 
his  soldiers,  and  won  from  them  that  personal  devotion  which  he 
always  enjoyed.  In  the  piping  times  of  peace  his  liberality  was 
prodigal,  and  in  seasons  of  adversity,  when  there  was  no  pay  in  the 
treasure  chest,  and  no  grain  in  the  camp  bazaar,  he  never  failed  to 
identify  himself  with  his  followers,  sharing  with  them  their  trials, 
their  discomforts,  and  their  dangers. 

The  siege  of  Ganga  Bishen's  fort  lasted  for  some  time,  but  after 
two  mines  had  been  sprung  with  considerable  effect,  the  garrison 
capitulated,  and  Appa's  authority  was  asserted.  Thomas  then  re- 
turned to  Jhajj'ar,  where  he  collected  the  revenue  due,  paid  his  troops 
their  arrears,  and  allowed  them  the  rest  needful  after  their  late  severe 
exertions. 

Towards  the  end  of  1794,  Gopal  Rao  Bhao,  Sindhia's  viceroy  in 
Hindustan,  was  disgraced,  and  superseded  by  General  De  Boigne,  who 
delegated  much  of  his  authority  to  Lakwa  Dada,  a  distinguished  and 
favourite  chief  of  the  late  Madhoji  Sindhia.  Lakwa  now  appeared  in 
the  vicinity  of  Appa's  territory  at  the  head  of  a  large  Maratha  army, 
and  the  latter,  considering  it  politic  to  pay  his  respects  in  person, 
visited  his  camp. 

But  although  Appa  was  well  received,  the  occasion  was  taken  to 


122  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

demand  from  him  arrears  of  tribute  which  were  stated  to  be  due  ;  and 
when  he  desired  to  depart  permission  was  withheld,  and  he  was 
practically  detained  a  prisoner  pending  the  settlement  of  what  was 
claimed  from  him.  Although  the  whole  amount  was  only  two  lakhs 
of  rupees,  and  many  persons  in  Appa's  family  could  easily  have 
afforded  him  assistance  in  his  distress,  not  a  man  was  found  who 
would  advance  anything.  Being  unable  to  raise  the  required  sum, 
Appa,  to  secure  his  freedom,  was  obliged  to  make  over  his  districts  in 
mortgage  to  a  Maratha  chief,  named  Bapu  Farnavis,  and  furthermore 
to  enter  into  an  agreement  to  pay  the  troops  Bapu  proposed  to  keep 
up  to  collect  the  revenue.  "  In  short,"  observes  Thomas  in  his 
memoirs,  "it  was  plain  to  see  that  whoever  might  hereafter,  by 
chance  of  war,  obtain  possession  of  the  districts  in  question,  it  was 
evident  that  by  these  concessions  Appa  had  for  ever  done  away  with 
his  own  right."  Amongst  the  pargannaJis  thus  surrendered  were 
these  of  Tijara,  Tapukra  and  Firozpur,  which  belonged  to  Thomas, 
to  whom  the  loss  was  a  severe  one,  but  with  a  magnanimity  highly 
to  his  credit  he  observed  that  "  since  his  principle  was  ruined  he  had 
no  cause  for  complaint,"  and  made  no  claim  for  compensation  from 
that  part  of  his  master's  territory  still  remaining  to  him. 

Appa  Khandi  Rao's  prestige  and  authority  were  much  shaken  by 
this  sequestration  of  his  property,  and  his  detention  in  Lakwa  Dada's 
camp,  and  the  inhabitants  of  his  remaining  districts  deemed  the 
opportunity  a  good  one  for  refusing  the  payment  of  their  taxes,  and 
breaking  into  rebellion.  But  they  had  reckoned  without  their  master's 
tax-gatherer.  Thomas  at  once  marched  against  them  at  the  head  of 
800  men,  and  in  a  short  time  captured  several  of  their  principal  places, 
some  by  day  and  others  by  night  assaults,  and  soon  reduced  them  to 
submission.  His  promptitude  in  planning,  and  vigour  in  executing, 
punitive  expeditions  of  this  description  were  remarkable.  Having 
exacted  heavy  fines  from  a  large  portion  of  the  malcontents,  he  came 
at  length  to  a  place  called  Bairi,  where  he  met  with  a  desperate 
resistance,  the  description  of  which  is  best  told  in  his  own  words. 

"  In  the  fort  of  Byree,  exclusive  of  the  garrison,  were  300  Rajpoots 
and  Jhats,  who  had  been  hired  for  the  express  purpose  of  defending 
the  place,  and  it  was  here  that  I  was  in  the  most  imminent  danger  of 
losing  the  whole  of  my  party.  We  had  stormed  the  fort  and  were 
beat  back  with  loss.  One  of  my  sirdars  (officers)  was  wounded,  and 
from  the  confusion  that  occurred  was  left  behind  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  The  danger  was  every  moment  increasing,  the  town  being 
set  on  fire  in  several  places,  and  our  retreat  nearly  cut  off  by  the 
flames  that  surrounded  us. 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  EAO.  123 

"  In  this  situation  we  had  the  additional  mortification  to  perceive 
the  merciless  enemy  seize  on  the  wounded  officer,  and  with  savage 
barbarity  precipitate  him  into  the  fire.  Equally  animated  and 
enraged  by  the  spectacle,  my  troops  now  rushed  forward  to  the 
attack,  with  an  ardour  that  was  irresistible.  Having  gained  entire 
possession  of  the  fort,  the  soldiers,  with  clamorous  expressions  of 
revenge,  insisted  on  the  death  of  every  one  of  the  garrison  that 
remained,  and  I  was  not  inclined  to  refuse.  But  it  cost  us  dear,  the 
enemy  to  a  man  making  a  brave  resistance.  This  contest  was  con- 
tinued so  long  as  to  afford  time  to  those  who  had  retreated  to  return  ; 
by  these  means  we  were  engaged  again,  and  at  one  time  almost  over- 
powered, but  receiving  a  reinforcement  of  our  own  party,  the  enemy  by 
slow  degrees  began  again  to  retreat.  I  pursued  with  the  cavalry  : 
the  enemy  once  more  made  a  stand  in  the  jungles  adjoining  the 
town,  when,  after  a  second  desperate  conflict,  they  gave  way  on  all 
sides,  and  most  of  them  were  cut  to  pieces." 

The  expedition  which  was  concluded  by  this  vigorous  exploit  had 
been  a  short  but  severe  one.  Now  that  it  was  finished,  the  recogni- 
tion awaiting  Thomas  was  not  such  as  he  expected,  for  scarcely  had 
he  completed  the  objects  of  his  march  than  he  received  a  communi- 
cation from  Appa,  informing  him  that,  owing  to  his  straitened  means, 
he  found  it  impossible  to  retain  the  services  of  the  battalion,  and  he 
therefore  desired  it  to  be  dismissed,  and  Thomas  to  repair  to  his 
camp  in  the  country  of  the  Rao  Kajah. 

It  was  certainly  a  brief  and  summary  way  of  terminating  the  con- 
tract that  existed  between  the  soldier  and  his  master,  and  had  the 
merit  of  simplicity ;  but  it  quite  ignored  the  fact  that  Thomas's  troops 
were  in  considerable  arrears  of  pay,  and  that  without  a  settlement  of 
their  claims  it  was  impossible  to  disband  them.  Their  commander, 
therefore,  marched  to  Appa's  camp,  which  was  pitched  near  Ulwar, 
and  in  the  interview  which  followed,  was  informed  by  the  chief,  who 
spoke  with  visible  uneasiness,  that  the  Maratha  commanders  noticing 
Thomas's  influence  and  his  energetic  conduct,  considered  him  a 
dangerous  personage,  and  one  who  might,  if  occasion  arose,  act  against 
Sindhia  himself,  and  they  had  therefore  requested  Appa  to  discharge 
him. 

Thomas,  on  hearing  this,  at  once  repaired  to  Lakwa  Dada,  whom 
he  taxed  with  endeavouring  to  procure  his  ruin;  but  the  Maratha 
general  not  only  denied  that  he  had  ever  disapproved  of  Thomas's 
conduct,  but  offered  him  the  command  of  2,000  men  in  Sindhia's 
service,  if  he  felt  inclined  to  leave  Appa. 

This  was  putting  a  new  complexion  on  affairs,  for  the  proposal  em- 


124  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

braced  a  promotion  which  few  men  would  have  hesitated  to  accept. 
But  it  failed  to  tempt  Thomas,  whose  idea  of  duty  stretched  hefore 
him  straight  as  a  die.  Mercenary  soldier  and  adventurer  though  he 
was,  no  truer  or  more  faithful  servant  than  this  wandering  Irishman 
ever  pledged  his  word.  Appa's  districts  had  now  broken  out  again 
into  a  state  of  open  rebellion,  and  Thomas  "  considered  himself  under 
obligations  which  could  not  be  passed  over  ;  for  if  he  now  quitted  his 
master  it  would  in  all  probability  prove  his  utter  ruin,  and  he  there- 
fore resolved  to  adhere  to  Appa  Khandi  Rao,  and  endeavour  to  retrieve 
his  affairs." 

On  Thomas's  return  from  Lakwa's  camp,  he  went  to  interview 
Appa,  who  excused  himself  for  his  late  conduct,  the  reasons  for  which 
are  hard  to  understand.  But  he  managed  to  satisfy  Thomas  (who 
on  more  than  one  occasion  in  his  career  gave  evidence  of  a  confiding 
and  complacent  disposition),  and  induced  him  to  undertake  the  sub- 
jugation of  the  revolted  districts.  Before  he  could  start,  however,  there 
came  a  request  from  Lakwa  Dada,  for  Appa's  battalion  to  assist  in  the 
reduction  of  the  fort  of  Sobawalgarh,  which  had  refused  to  pay  its 
stipulated  tribute  to  the  Marathas,  and,  with  his  master's  consent, 
Thomas  marched  his  men  to  join  the  forces  already  engaged  in 
besieging  the  place. 

On  his  arrival  Thomas's  post  was  assigned  to  him,  but  his  men, 
being  now  several  months  in  arrears  of  pay,"-;:  refused  to  fight,  and  in 
order  to  satisfy  their  demands  he  was  again  compelled  to  sell  his 
property,  and  distribute  the  proceeds  before  his  soldiers  would  return 
to  their  duty. 

Sohawalgarh  had  been  for  some  time  invested  by  four  of  General 
De  Boigne's  battalions,  under  command  of  Major  Gardner.  The 
enemy,  in  the  hopes  of  compelling  the  Marathas  to  raise  the  siege, 
had  taken  possession  of  the  ravines  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  led 
to  several  skirmishes,  occasioning  losses  on  both  sides.  Soon  after 
Thomas's  arrival  a  council  of  war  was  summoned  to  consider  the  best 
means  of  reducing  the  place,  and  Major  Gardner  proposed  the  advance 
of  a  second  parallel,  but  this  could  not  be  effected  without  first 
capturing  a  very  strongly  fortified  outpost,  which  no  one  appeared 
inclined  to  attack. 

Thomas,  who  was  present  at  the  council,  volunteered  no  advice,  but 
his  mind  was  already  made  up  to  take  the  redoubt.  That  same 
evening  he  carefully  reconnoitred  its  approaches,  and  decided  how  to 

*  The  chronic  state  of  arrears  in  which  Thomas's  troops  seemed  to  exist  is 
difficult  to  understand.  It  is  probable  that  his  frequent  assertions  of  having 
"  paid  them  up  "  meant  only  small  payments  on  account. 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  125 

assault  it,  and  early  the  next  morning,  without  acquainting  any  one  of 
his  design,  mustered  his  troops,  formed  them  into  columns,  and, 
advancing  whilst  the  enemy  were  off  guard,  completely  surprised 
them.  Having  stormed  the  outworks  he  effected  an  entry  into  the 
redoubt  itself,  and  maintained  his  position  until  he  was  reinforced 
from  the  Maratha  camp,  whereupon  the  enemy  evacuated  the  place, 
and  he  established  himself  in  the  position  he  had  won. 

The  second  parallel  was  now  advanced,  and  the  fort  so  closely 
invested,  that  the  commandant,  despairing  of  succour  from  without, 
negotiated  for  terms,  and  a  ransom  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees  was 
demanded,  which  he  agreed  to  pay.  Thomas  received  a  share  suffi- 
cient to  reimburse  him  for  all  the  expenses  he  had  incurred,  and 
then  returned  to  his  own  country.  This  he  found  in  the  usual 
rebellious  state,  and  the  better  to  keep  it  in  order,  he  divided  his 
force  into  two  battalions,  one  of  which  he  employed  in  the  collection 
of  revenue,  and  kept  the  other  stationed  at  Jhajjar. 

And  now  another  danger  threatened  him.  For  some  months  past  the 
Begum  Somru  had  been  trying  by  every  means  in  her  power  to  effect 
Thomas's  ruin,  and  had  even  gone  so  far  as  to  bribe  the  Maratha 
officials  to  advise  his  dismissal.  To  this  hostile  course  of  action  she 
was  incited  by  her  French  officers,  and  especially  by  Thomas's  old 
enemy,  Le  Vassoult,  to  whom,  about  this  time,  the  Begum  was  secretly 
married.  His  influence  being  now  paramount,  he  persuaded  her  to 
attack  Thomas's  districts,  and  she  accordingly  ordered  her  army  to 
Tharu,  a  place  about  twenty-five  miles  south-east  of  Jhajjar.  The 
force  consisted  of  4  battalions  of  infantry,  400  cavalry,  and  20  guns, 
and  it  was  publicly  given  out  that  the  object  of  the  expedition  was  a 
war  of  revenge  against  her  former  officer. 

Thomas  immediately  called  in  his  detachments  to  headquarters, 
where  he  concentrated  all  his  troops,  which  now  amounted  to  2,000 
regular  infantry,  200  cavalry,  and  10  pieces  of  artillery.  With  these 
he  prepared  to  meet  the  threatened  invasion;  but  before  the  Begum 
could  put  her  intention  into  execution,  a  mutiny  broke  out  in  her 
army,  and  she  was  obliged  to  return  to  Sardhana,  whilst  Thomas, 
freed  from  the  impending  danger,  once  more  turned  his  attention  to 
the  ever-constant  necessity  of  keeping  his  own  districts  in  order. 

Since  Appa's  reverse  of  fortune  his  country  had  been  placed  under 
a  joint  management,  as  Lakwa  Dada  insisted  on  his  officials  being 
associated  in  the  collection  of  the  revenue.  This  surveillance  was 
strongly  resented  by  Appa,  whom  it  greatly  humiliated,  and  he  there- 
fore intrigued  to  sow  dissensions  between  Lakwa  and  his  local  deputy 
Bapu  Farnavis,  and  having  succeeded  in  setting  the  two  quarrelling, 


126  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

determined,  whilst  they  were  occupied  with  one  another,  to  reassert 
his  own  independence. 

Withdrawing  into  his  stronghold  of  Kanaund,  which  he  fortified 
very  strongly,  he  sent  orders  to  Thomas  to  summarily  dismiss  the 
Maratha  collectors  and  officials  employed  by  Lakwa  Dada.  These  in- 
structions were  promptly  carried  into  effect,  although  their  execution 
gave  rise  to  much  severe  fighting  and  loss  of  life.  Appa  next  marched 
out  and  laid  seige  to  Narnal,  a  large  and  populous  town  sixteen  miles 
south  of  Kanaund,  where  Thomas  joined  him,  and  the  chief  was  so 
delighted  with  the  thorough  way  in  which  his  work  had  been  per- 
formed, that  he  presented  him  with  several  valuable  presents,  in- 
cluding an  elephant  and  a  palanquin. 

Namal  was  under  the  command  of  one  of  Lakwa  Dada's  Brahmin 
officials,  who,  on  hearing  of  Thomas's  arrival,  came  to  him  secretly 
at  night,  and  offered  to  surrender  the  town  and  fort  if  the  safety  of 
his  own  person  and  property  were  guaranteed.  To  this  Thomas 
agreed,  and  the  gates  were  opened  the  next  morning  to  the  besiegers. 
But  now  a  difficulty  arose,  for  Appa,  being  in  desperate  want  of 
money,  desired  to  extort  a  heavy  fine  from  the  Brahmin,  who  was 
known  to  be  a  rich  man,  and  demanded  his  surrender  from  Thomas. 
The  request  was  at  once  refused,  with  an  explanation  of  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  man  had  given  himself  up.  Upon  this  Appa 
became  very  angry,  and  declared  that  the  slight  lowered  him  in  the 
estimation  of  his  followers,  and  that  it  was  not  within  Thomas's 
power  to  grant  terms  and  protection  to  the  chief's  enemies.  But 
Thomas,  whose  loyalty  to  his  word  of  honour  was  his  finest  trait, 
refused  to  yield,  and  the  result  was  a  serious  rupture  between  him 
and  Appa. 

A  few  days  later  Thomas  was  requested  to  attend  his  master,  and 
at  once  complied.  Having  arrived  at  the  house  where  Appa  had 
taken  up  his  quarters,  he  was  informed  that  the  chief  was  ill  and 
confined  to  his  bed  in  an  upper  chamber,  to  which  Thomas  was 
desired  to  ascend.  Suspecting  no  treachery,  and  anxious  to  avoid 
giving  any  cause  for  offence,  he  left  his  escort  below  and  went  upstairs 
unattended,  when,  to  his  surprise,  he  found  Appa  apparently  perfectly 
well,  and  waiting  to  receive  him. 

A  conversa' ion  ensued,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  sur- 
render of  the  B<  ahmin  was  the  main  object  of  the  interview.  Thomas 
listened  to  all  his  master  had  to  say,  and  then  replied  that  his  pledged 
word  involved  his  personal  honour  and  could  not  be  broken,  and  that 
no  consideratian  would  induce  him  to  yield  to  Appa's  request.  On 
hearing  this  the  chief,  making  some  excuse,  rose  and  left  the  room, 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  127 

from  which  he  had  no  sooner  departed,  than  it  was  filled  with  armed 
men. 

The  trap  he  had  fallen  into  was  now  apparent  to  Thomas,  but  so 
far  from  showing  any  alarm  or  timidity,  he  calmly  retained  his  seat 
with  an  air  of  imperturbability — a  course  of  conduct  that  was  not 
without  its  effect  upon  the  intruders.  Presently  a  letter  was  handed 
him  from  Appa,  which  proved  to  be  a  sort  of  ultimatum,  demanding 
the  immediate  surrender  of  the  Brahmin. 

This  brought  matters  to  a  crisis.  Many  a  man  in  suck  a  dilemma 
would  have  salved  his  conscience  with  the  reflection  that  he  had  done 
everything  in  his  power  to  keep  his  promise,  and  that  to  resist  any 
longer  was  only  to  wantonly  imperil  the  one  life  that  stood  between 
the  proposed  victim  and  his  destruction.  But  this  was  not  the  view 
Thomas  took  of  the  matter,  for  he  spurned  such  a  surrender  of 
principle  as  it  involved,  and  instantly  refused  compliance.  Then, 
rising  to  his  feet,  he  demanded,  in  an  imperious  tone,  to  be  conducted 
to  Appa's  presence.  His  audacity  saved  him,  and  before  any  one 
could  interpose  he  strode  out  of  the  room  and  into  the  adjoining 
chamber,  where  the  chief  had  retired. 

At  the  sudden  apparition  of  the  tall  resolute  Irishman,  whom  he 
had  imagined  a  prisoner,  Appa  was  completely  taken  aback.  There 
was  danger  in  Thomas's  flashing  eye,  and  an  actual  threat  in  the 
action  of  his  hand,  as  it  sought  the  hilt  of  his  sword.  Before  this 
exhibition  of  daring  the  Maratha  chief  quailed,  and  seeing  his  hesita- 
tion, Thomas,  with  the  exquisite  guile  and  gallantry  of  his  country- 
men, relieved  himself  of  a  conventional  compliment,  and  accomplished 
his  departure  unmolested. 

On  his  return  to  camp  he  despatched  his  diwdn,  or  head  native 
official,  to  Appa  to  inform  him  that,  "compelled  by  a  just  indignation 
against  the  treachery  of  his  proceeding,  he  would  no  longer  serve 
him."  In  this  determination  Thomas  was  supported  by  his  troops, 
who,  fired  at  the  insult  offered  their  leader,  declared  they  would  no 
longer  remain  in  Appa's  service. 

The  incident  illustrates  very  vividly  the  dangers  that  surrounded  a 
soldier  of  fortune  in  India  in  those  days.  Craft  and  treachery  were 
component  parts  of  the  Maratha  nature,  and  the  European,  with  his 
code  of  honour,  was  at  a  disadvantage  in  dealing  with  men  who  had 
none.  Appa's  original  request  was  one  that  would  have  been  com- 
plied with  by  any  native  without  demur  or  hesitation,  and  the  means 
he  took  to  try  and  enforce  it  was  consistent  with  established  custom, 
and  would  probably  have  been  considered  rather  clever.  The  fact 
that  Thomas  had  for  a  long  time  devoted  himself  with  uncommon 


128  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

energy  and  fidelity  to  the  chiefs  cause,  weighed  as  nothing  against 
the  gratification  of  avarice  or  malice,  and  Appa  would  have  sacrificed 
his  officer  without  a  sigh  rather  than  forego  the  accomplishment  of 
his  personal  desire. 

And  now  that  he  had  failed  to  coerce  or  intimidate  him  his  conduct 
was  equally  despicable.  He  feared  losing  not  only  his  European,  but 
the  regular  infantry  as  well.  So  he  began  to  invent  excuses  for  his 
treachery,  trying  to  explain  it  away,  and  in  order  to  re-establish  confi- 
dence came  the  next  day  in  person  to  Thomas's  camp,  and  succeeded 
hi  persuading  him  to  withdraw  his  resignation  and  return  to  his 
allegiance.  It  is  difficult  to  comprehend  how  Thomas  could  have 
consented  to  overlook  what  had  occurred,  but  it  is  possible  that  he 
hesitated  before  relinquishing  an  established  position  with  a  chief  of 
standing,  and  one  that  was  not  without  certain  substantial  advan- 
tages. At  any  rate  matters  were  amicably  adjusted,  and  before  Appa 
left  he  and  Thomas  were  on  their  old  footing. 

The  collection  of  the  revenue  in  the  Mewatti  district  was  the  next 
task  that  engaged  Thomas's  attention.  Here  he  found  the  Maratha 
officials  again  interfering  and  quarrelling  with  Appa's,  but  by  punish- 
ing some,  and  conciliating  others,  he  brought  matters  into  a  favour- 
able train  for  settlement.  In  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  however, 
he  was  under  the  necessity  of  storming  a  fort,  in  which  he  captured 
a  valuable  booty  of  cannon,  bullocks,  and  other  transport  animals. 
On  hearing  of  this  success  Appa  claimed  as  his  right  the  artillery 
taken,  but  Thomas  as  strenuously  insisted  that  the  guns  belonged  to 
the  troops  who  had  fought  for  them.  This  divergence  of  opinion  led  to 
another  rupture,  and  Appa,  highly  incensed  at  his  officer's  insubordi- 
nation and  growing  ideas  of  independence,  determined,  if  possible, 
to  finally  effect  his  downfall. 

To  this  end  he  entered  into  communication  with  a  body  of 
Ghussains,  who  were  proceeding  on  their  annual  pilgrimage  to 
Hardwar,  and  happened  to  be  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood.  These 
people  belonged  to  a  formidable  sect  of  Hindu  mendicants,  accustomed 
to  engage  in  military  service  when  any  offered,  and  large  bodies  of 
them  were  frequently  to  be  met  with  ti-avelling  from  place  to  place, 
and  levying  contributions  wherever  they"  went.  They  often  attached 
themselves  to  the  service  of  a  particular  chief,  and  for  sudden  attacks 
or  reprisals  no  men  could  be  found  better  fitted,  for  they  were 
inured  to  pain  and  privation  by  the  nature  of  their  calling,  and  were 
absolutely  indifferent  to  death. 

In  consideration  of  a  reward  of  Rs.10,000  the  leader  of  this  band  of 
Ghussains  agreed  to  make  an  attack  on  Thomas ;  but,  luckily,  particulars 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  129 

of  this  atrocious  arrangement  were  communicated  to  him  by  the  agents 
he  employed  in  Appa  Khandi  Kao's  camp.  Deeply  incensed  at  the 
premeditated  treachery  Thomas  determined  to  defeat  it,  and  making 
a  night  march  against  the  Ghussains,  fell  upon  them  iinawares,  and 
completely  turned  the  tables  on  the  would-be  assassins,  for  he  routed 
them  with  immense  slaughter,  and  sent  the  few  survivors  in  headlong 
flight  to  Delhi,  as  though  the  devil  himself  were  after  them.  Having 
thus  asserted  himself,  Thomas  wrote  to  Appa,  denouncing  his  base 
conduct,  and  declining  to  remain  any  longer  in  the  service  of  one  who 
could  be  guilty  of  such  a  shameful  act. 

A  Maratha  is  seldom  at  a  loss  for  an  excuse,  and  Appa  absolved 
himself  from  all  responsibility  for  the  deed,  by  laying  the  blame  on 
his  servants  ;  vowing  that  they  alone  were  guilty,  he  himself  having 
been  ill,  and  unable  to  attend  to  any  business.  He  then  went  on  to 
expatiate  upon  the  gravity  of  his  disorder,  which  had  taken  a  dangerous 
turn  and  was  growing  worse  every  day,  and  capped  all  by  expressing 
a  wish  for  a  personal  interview  with  Thomas,  before  it  was  too  late,  in 
order  that  he  might  place  under  his  charge  the  heir  and  successor  he 
had  chosen,  and  for  whose  youth  and  inexperience  he  desired  to  enlist 
his  officer's  favour. 

This  invitation  was  both  surprising  and  awkward,  for  though  it  was 
true  that  Appa's  health  was  failing,  Thomas  was  not  prepared  to  place 
any  further  reliance  on  his  word.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  difficult  to 
refuse  such  a  request  from  so  powerful  a  chief.  Happily  the  necessity 
of  coming  to  a  decision  in  this  difficult  dilemma  was  obviated  by  in- 
telligence of  a  raid  made  by  a  numerous  body  of  Sikhs  into  the  Doab 
districts  north  of  Delhi,  where,  after  defeating  and  almost  extermin- 
ating the  Maratha  troops  stationed  for  the  defence  of  the  frontier,  they 
were  committing  great  depredations  in  the  vicinity  of  Saharanpur. 

Although  Appa  Khandi  Eao  had  no  particular  connection  with 
Saharanpur,  he  thought  that,  in  common  with  the  other  Maratha  chiefs, 
he  ought  to  exert  himself  to  prevent  further  incursions,  the  more 
especially  as  his  own  districts  would  in  all  probability  be  the  next  to 
suffer  from  these  desperate  marauders.  He  therefore  ordered  Thomas 
to  march  his  whole  force  northward,  and  attack  the  Sikhs  wherever 
he  encountered  them  in  Maratha  territory: 

The  commission  was  one  to  Thomas's  taste.  He  had  the  Irishman's 
irresistible  love  of  a  row,  and  never  lagged  when  fighting  was  in  pros- 
pect. Moreover,  the  expedition  relieved 'him  from  his  quandary  with 
regard  to  Appa's  invitation.  Crossing  the  Jumna,  a  little  to  the  north 
of  Delhi,  he  advanced  rapidly  towards  the  enemy.  But  the  Sikhs 
knew  the  Jiliazi  Sahib  of  old,  having  often  felt  the  weight  of  his 

9 


130  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

sword  when  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  Begum  Somru,  and  entrusted 
with  the  defence  of  these  very  districts.  To  quote  Thomas's  own 
words,  "  he  had  on  more  than  one  occasion  given  them  samples  of  his 
method  of  fighting,"  and  the  information  thus  conveyed  sufficed.  They 
had  no  stomach  now  to  meet  the  fiery  Irishman,  whose  prowess  was 
already  a  password  along  the  frontier,  and  on  hearing  of  his  approacli 
effected  a  rapid  retreat  into  their  own  territory. 

When  Lakwa  Dada  heard  how  promptly  and  efficiently  Thomas  had 
retrieved  the  disgraceful  defeat  of  the  Marathii  troops  and  cleared  the 
country  of  the  Sikhs,  he  requested  Appa  to  allow  his  officer  to  raise  a 
hody  of  2,000  men  for  the  protection  of  the  province  of  Saharanpur  and 
other  parts  of  the  Maratha  possessions.  To  this  Appa,  unable  to  dis- 
oblige so  powerful  a  chief,  reluctantly  consented,  and  the  districts  of 
Panipat,  Sonpat,  and  Karnal,  were  assigned  to  Thomas  in  Jaidad,  for 
the  upkeep  of  a  special  frontier  force  of  2,000  infantry,  200  cavalry, 
and  1G  guns.  These  districts  were  contiguous  to  Thomas's  ownjagliir 
of  Jhajjar,  and  their  acquisition  made  him  paramount  lord  over  an 
extensive  domain.  Panipat  itself  was  an  historical  city  of  great  an- 
tiquity. It  stood  in  the  centre  of  a  large  plain,  which  had  been  the 
scene  of  two  decisive  battles  in  the  history  of  Hindustan,  and  although 
it  had  ceased  to  be  an  emporium  of  commerce,  as  it  had  once  been  for 
the  caravans  of  Kabul,  Lahore,  and  Persia,  it  still  remained  a  place  of 
considerable  importance. 

No  sooner  had  Thomas  established  himself  in  this  new  territory 
than  a  pathetic  appeal  for  help  reached  him  from  his  old  mistress 
the  Begum  Somru.  Her  marriage  with  Le  Vassoult  had  led  to  a 
mutiny  in  her  force,  and  in  a  vain  endeavour  to  escape  from  Sardhana, 
her  husband  met  his  death,  and  she  herself  was  deposed  from  authority, 
and  confined  a  prisoner  at  her  capital,  her  step-son,  Zaffar  Yah  Khan, 
otherwise  known  as  Balthazar  Sombre,  being  elevated  to  the  govern- 
ment. The  Begum  now  wrote  to  Thomas  in  most  abject  and  des- 
ponding terms,  throwing  herself  on  his  clemency,  and  begging  him  to 
come  to  her  aid,  as  she  had  no  one  else  to  look  to.  She  declared  that 
she  was  living  in  imminent  dread  of  being  poisoned,  and  offered  to  pay 
any  sum  of  money  he  might  demand  if  he  would  only  reinstate  her 
in  power. 

Thomas  possessed  in  a  very  marked  degree  the  virtues  of  chivalry 
and  generosity,  and  could  never  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  pleadings  of 
lovely  woman  in  distress.  According  to  his  recorded  description  the 
Begum  was  at  this  time  forty-five  years  of  age,  small  in  stature  and 
inclined  to  be  plump.  Her  complexion  was  very  fair,  and  her  eyes 
black,  large,  and  animated.  Her  dress  "  perfect  Hindostany  "  and  of 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  181 

the  most  costly  material.  She  spoke  the  Persian  and  Hindustani 
languages  with  fluency,  and  in  conversation  was  "  engaging,  sensible 
and  spirited."  He  resolved  to  help  her,  and  on  receipt  of  her  letter 
induced  Bapu  Sindhia,  the  Maratha  governor  of  Saharanpur,  by  an 
offer  of  Rs.120,000  (.£15,000),  to  move  some  troops  towards  Sardhana. 
From  his  former  experience  Thomas  felt  convinced  that  unless  he 
could  gain  over  a  portion  of  the  Begum's  rebellious  soldiery,  who  had 
now  sworn  allegiance  to  Balthazar  Sombre,  not  only  would  his  exer- 
tions be  fruitless,  but  the  Princess  herself  would  be  exposed  to  the 
greatest  personal  danger.  So  he  set  on  foot  an  intrigue  for  this  purpose 
in  which  he  was  successful.  He  then  marched  with  his  force,  and 
encamped  at  the  village  of  Kataoli,  twelve  miles  to  the  north  of 
Sardhana,  where  he  publicly  announced  that  unless  the  Begum  was 
reinstated  in  authority,  he  would  accord  no  mercy  to  those  who  re- 
sisted ;  and  to  give  additional  weight  to  his  proclamation  he  stated  that 
he  was  acting  under  the  authority  of  Sindhia. 

This  intimation  was  at  first  attended  with  the  desired  effect,  for  a  por- 
tion of  the  troops  belonging  to  the  Sardhana  State  immediately  re- 
sponded by  confining  Balthazar  Sombre  and  declaring  for  the  Begum. 
But  Thomas  knew  well  that  no  reliance  could  be  placed  on  their  capri- 
cious temper,  for  mutiny  came  to  them  as  a  periodical  relaxation  in 
the  monotony  of  life :  so  he  lost  no  time  in  pinning  them  to  their 
declaration  by  advancing  towards  Sardhana.  But  before  he  reached 
the  place  a  cotinter  revolution  had  already  proclaimed  the  restoration 
of  Balthazar  Sombre. 

i  Thomas  now  determined  on  a  coup  de  main.  Ordering  four  hundred 
of  his  infantry  to  follow  with  all  expedition,  he  galloped  forward,  escorted 
by  only  fifty  cavalry,  on  whom  he  could  thoroughly  depend.  Balthazar 
Sombre  on  seeing  the  weakness  of  this  escort  at  once  jumped  at  the 
conclusion  that  he  had  got  Thomas  into  his  power,  and  gave  orders 
for  an  attack,  but  at  this  moment  the  infantry  were  perceived  in  the 
distance,  and  the  mutineers  believing  the  whole  Maratha  army  was 
at  hand,  sought  safety  in  a  third  revolution,  deposed  Balthazar  nemine 
contradicente,  and  tendered  their  humble  submission  to  Thomas. 
Before  sunset  the  Begum  Somru  was  restored  to  power,  and  an  oath 
of  fidelity — such  as  it  was  worth — extracted  from  her  troops,  whilst 
Balthazar  Sombre,  who  was  a  poor  debauched  semi-imbecile  half-caste, 
was  plundered  of  all  his  property,  and  conducted  a  prisoner  to  Delhi, 
where  he  was  incarcerated. 

After  reinstating  the  Begum  Thomas  marched  his  force  to  a  large 
town  named  Samli,  situated  on  the  Sikh  frontier,  the  commandant 
of  which  place  bad  encouraged  the  Sikhs  in  then-  late  incursion,  by 


132  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

communicating  to  them  the  defenceless  condition  of  the  Upper  Provinces. 
Sainli  was  situated  forty-five  miles  from  Sardhana,  and  Thomas  covered 
the  distance  in  twenty-four  hours.  An  action  took  place  in  the  open,  in 
which  the  commandant,  after  a  stubborn  resistance,  was  defeated  and 
compelled  to  retreat  into  the  town,  and  Thomas,  anxious  to  bring  the 
affair  to  a  speedy  conclusion,  gave  orders  for  an  assault  the  same 
evening,  when  the  fort  was  carried  by  storm,  and  nearly  all  the  garrison 
put  to  the  sword. 

It  was  by  these  long  and  rapid  marches,  and  by  these  sudden  and 
vigorous  attacks,  that  Thomas  won  most  of  his  victories.  There  never 
existed  a  man  who  more  conscientiously  observed  the  maxim  "  Never 
put  off  till  to-morrow  what  you  can  do  to-day."  Fearless,  impatient, 
impetuous,  the  Jehazi  Sahib  could  brook  no  delay  when  his  fighting 
blood  was  aroused,  and  his  very  audacity  imposed  on  his  enemies,  so 
that  they  came  to  regard  him  as  irresistible  and  invincible. 

Having  arranged  affairs  at  Samli,  and  appointed  a  new  governor, 
Thomas  next  repaired  to  Bapu  Sindhia's  camp,  to  whom,  under  orders 
from  Appa,  he  was  now  attached.  Bapu  was  engaged  hi  the  reduction 
of  Laknoti,  a  place  of  considerable  strength,  situated  on  the  east  bank 
of  the  Jumna  a  little  to  the  north  of  Samli,  and  occupied  by  the  Sikhs. 
A  practicable  breach  having  been  effected,  preparations  were  made  for 
an  assault,  but  the  commandant,  seeing  he  was  likely  to  be  unsuccessful 
in  defending  the  fort,  in  order  to  save  effusion  of  blood,  came  privately 
to  Thomas's  tent,  and  made  terms  for  the  surrender  of  the  place,  which 
were  faithfully  and  punctually  carried  out  on  the  following  morning. 

The  next  matter  of  importance  in  Thomas's  career  was  the  receipt  of 
a  letter  from  Appa,  in  which  that  chief  informed  him  that  from  con- 
tinued illness  his  pains  were  augmented  to  a  degree  which  had  become 
intolerable,  and  no  hope  remaining  of  recovery  from  his  cruel  distemper, 
he  had  determined  to  put  a  period  to  his  misery  by  voluntary  death. 
For  this  purpose  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  Ganges,  but  he  requested 
Thomas  to  come  to  see  him  once  more  before  the  scene  closed  for  ever. 
On  receipt  of  this  intelligence  Thomas  set  out  immediately  to  afford, 
such  consolation  as  he  could  to  his  desponding  chief ;  but  he  had  not 
marched  far  when  intelligence  reached  him  that  Appa  had  committed 
suicide  by  drowning  himself  in  the  river  Jumna. 

Thus  perished,  in  1797,  one  of  Madhoji  Sindhia's  most  intrepid  and 
enterprising  chieftains,  and  a  man  who  had  played  no  inconsiderable 
a  part  in  the  Maratha  conquest  of  Hindustan.  Appa  had  been  engaged 
in  the  battles  of  Lalsot,  Chaksana,  and  Agra,  and  the  occupation  of 
Delhi.  He  was  a  typical  Maratha,  whose  mind  was  never  free  from 
intrigue  and  treachery,  and  his  conduct  towards  Thomas  had  at  times 


UNDER  APPA  KHANDI  RAO.  133 

been  as  base  as  it  was  unintelligible,  for  he  had  no  abler  or  more  loyal 
soldier  in  his  service  than  the  European  whose  life  he  twice  attempted 
to  take.  On  the  other  hand  Appa  was  a  brave  and  skilful  general, 
whose  later  misfortunes  were  due  to  political  causes,  and  who,  during 
a  troublous  time  in  the  history  of  Hindustan,  held  his  own  against 
many  and  powerful  enemies,  and  retained  his  distinguished  position 
until  his  death. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE    CONQUEST   OF   HAIUANA. 

1797-1798. 

rT"'HE  death  of  Appa  Ehancli  Bao  was  a  severe  blow  to  Thomas. 
A  Although  the  chief  had  often  been  capricious  and  treacherous  in 
his  conduct,  he  had  at  times  shown  he  could  appreciate  the  higli 
qualities  of  his  European  officer,  and  as  he  represented  an  established 
power  in  Maratha  politics  there  was  a  substantial  advantage  in  being 
connected  with  him.  A  great  deal  could  be  done  in  India  under  the 
name  of  authority,  even  though  the  power  invoked  was  a  shadowy 
unreality.  For  twenty  years  Hindustan  had  been  ruled  in  the  name 
of  Shah  'Alam,  and  notwithstanding  that  he  was  blind,  helpless,  and 
a  prisoner,  edicts  continued  to  be  issued  in  his  name,  and  rewards, 
titles,  and  privileges  conferred  by  his  favour. 

Appa  Khandi  Eao  was  succeeded  in  his  possessions  by  his  nephew 
Vaman  Rao,  or  Bawan  Eao  as  the  name  is  sometimes  written. 
"Vaman  Eao  was  a  vain,  inexperienced  youth,  better  fitted  for 
the  calling  of  an  accountant  than  the  career  of  a  soldier.  He  was 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  intriguing  Brahmins  and  crafty  courtiers,  who 
crowded  his  capital  at  Eewari,  and  were  jealous  of  the  authority  and 
influence  of  Thomas,  to  whom  Appa,  in  his  last  moments,  had  en- 
trusted the  protection  of  his  heir.  They  soon  persuaded  the  young 
chief  to  renounce  his  guardian,  and  demand  from  him  the  restitution 
of  the  district,  which  had  been  granted  as  a  reward  for  honourable 
services.  Thomas  was  naturally  indignant  at  this  treatment,  and 
peremptorily  refused  to  surrender  his  Jaidad,  but  conscious  that  a 
quarrel  between  Vsiman  Rao  and  himself  could  only  involve  both  in 
very  serious  difficulties,  he  endeavoured  to  compromise  matters  by 
offering  to  pay  a  sum  of  money  to  be  confirmed  in  his  possessions, 
this  species  of  succession  duty  being  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of 
the  country. 

131 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HARIANA.  135 

But  Vaman  Rao,  instigated  by  his  advisers,  would  not  agree  to  this, 
and  was  foolhardy  enough  to  resort  to  force.  Without  notice  or 
warning  he  occupied  with  his  undisciplined  rabble  a  large  village 
called  Kosli,  which  formed  part  of  Thomas's  possessions.  The  latter, 
with  a  forbearance  not  iisual  with  him,  curbed  his  inclination  to  fight, 
and  endeavoured  to  avoid  a  breach  of  the  peace.  This  encouraged 
Vaman  Rao,  who  on  being  joined  by  large  bodies  of  local  peasantry, 
became  too  formidable  to  be  ignored,  and  Thomas  felt  obliged  to  bring 
the  business  to  an  issue.  He  accordingly  attacked  the  chiefs  troops, 
and  the  affair  was  quickly  decided.  Vaman  Rao's  soldiery  broke  at 
the  first  onslaught  and  fled  in  all  directions,  and  the  greater  part  of 
them  having  taken  refuge  in  the  fort  of  Kosli  were  besieged  therein. 
After  erecting  batteries,  Thomas  ordered  grates  for  heating  shot  to 
be  made  ready,  and  this  being  done,  fired  so  successfully  with  red  hot 
balls  as  to  quickly  set  the  place  on  fire,  and  compel  a  surrender  at 
discretion. 

It  was  now  agreed  that  an  interview  should  take  place  between 
Thomas  and  Vaman  Rao  at  Kanaund,  for  at  the  first  sign  of  defeat  the 
chief  had  shut  himself  up  in  that  stronghold.  But  when  Thomas 
arrived,  Vaman  Rao  pretended  to  be  fearful  of  treachery,  and  refused 
to  come  out  of  the  fort,  whilst  Thomas,  for  similar  reasons,  was  un- 
willing to  enter  it.  The  negotiations  were  in  consequence  broken  off, 
and  leaving  matters  in  statuo  quo  the  latter  marched  his  troops  north, 
where  his  presence  was  required  to  repel  an  incursion  of  the  Sikhs. 
He  took  the  precaution,  however,  of  leaving  a  force  to  defend  Jhajjar 
against  any  attack  that  might  be  made  on  it  in  his  absence,  and  then 
directed  his  way  to  Karnal,  where  he  soon  had  his  hands  full  of 
fighting.  Four  successive  actions  took  place,  which  resulted  in  a  loss 
of  500  men  on  Thomas's  side,  and  1,000  on  that  of  the  enemy.  A 
mutual  desire  for  peace  was  the  result  of  this  blood-letting,  and  a 
treaty  was  concluded  by  which  the  Sikhs  agreed  to  evacuate  the 
villages  they  had  taken  possession  of. 

Vaman  Rao  did  not  neglect  the  opportunity  of  attacking  Jhajjar 
during  its  master's  absence,  but  the  garrison  left  in  it  resisted  him 
successfully,  and  on  Thomas's  return  the  chief  thought  fit  to  retire. 

The  differences  between  Thomas  and  his  old  master's  heir  had  been 
fomented  in  a  great  measure  by  a  specious  and  wily  native  named 
Kashmiri  Bholi,  who  was  the  zemindar,  or  headman,  of  a  large  and 
populous  district  called  Dadri,  which  lay  to  the  west  of  Jhajjar. 
Thomas  now  determined  to  punish  this  individual,  and  falling  upon 
him  suddenly  extorted  a  heavy  fine.  No  sooner  had  he  effected  this 
than  he  was  summoned  by  Bapu  Sindhia,  the  governor  of  Saharanpur, 


136  GEOEGE  THOMAS. 

to  assist  in  repelling  an  invasion  of  Bohillas  on  the  eastern  frontier  of 
the  province,  to  which  they  had  been  incited  by  a  Sikh  chief  named 
Nihal  Sing,  who  had  himself  assembled  a  large  body  of  his  country- 
men to  assist  by  a  diversion  on  the  western  boundary.  On  Thomas's  ap- 
proach the  latter  at  once  withdrew,  and  meanwhile  Bapu  having  driven 
back  the  Bohillas,  Thomas's  assistance  was  not  required,  so  he  turned 
aside  to  Sonpat,  one  of  the  districts  recently  assigned  to  him,  and  en- 
camped there  a  short  tune,  making  himself  acquainted  with  its  re- 
source. Soon  rumours  of  the  arrival  at  Lahore  of  Zeman  Shah,  the 
King  of  Kabul,  created  general  consternation  in  Hindustan,  and 
caused  Bapu  Sindhia  to  summon  a  council  of  war,  to  which  Thomas 
was  invited,  the  districts  he  was  deputed  to  guard  being  in  the  very 
path  of  the  projected  invasion,  and  the  place  where  the  Afghan  army 
should  most  properly  be  met. 

Unfortunately  at  this  critical  juncture  Thomas's  troops,  being  in 
arrears  of  pay,  became  clamorous  for  their  dues.  This,  at  a  time 
when  their  services  might  at  any  moment  be  urgently  required,  gave 
the  greatest  offence  and  dissatisfaction  to  Bapu,  and  caused  a  serious 
misunderstanding  between  him  and  Thomas.  The  result  was  that  the 
latter  marched  away  in  disgust,  and  was  at  once  followed  and  at- 
tacked by  a  force  sent  after  him  by  the  Maratha  chief,  but  in  the 
action  that  took  place  Bapu's  general  was  wounded,  and  drew  off  his 
troops.  An  amicable  arrangement  might  now  have  been  effected  had 
not  the  Sikhs,  delighted  at  the  breach  between  the  governor  of 
Saharanpur  and  his  Warden  of  the  Marches,  intrigued  successfully 
to  widen  it  and  bring  about  a  renewal  of  hostilities. 

This  was  a  serious  matter,  for  with  Bapu  Sindhia  against  him  on 
one  side,  and  Vaman  Bao  on  the  other,  each  threatening  to  sequestrate 
his  assigned  districts,  Thomas  was  placed  in  a  dangerous  predica- 
ment. After  considering  his  situation,  he  determined  to  fall  back  on 
Karnal ;  but  in  order  to  accomplish  this  he  had  to  cross  the  Jumna, 
and  Bapu,  who  was  determined  to  dispute  his  passage,  having  strongly 
reinforced  his  defeated  troops,  took  the  command  in  person,  and 
getting  between  Thomas  and  the  river  opposed  his  progress.  A  des- 
perate engagement  ensued,  but  the  latter,  although  greatly  outnum- 
bered, was  successful  in  holding  his  own  and  eventually  effected  his 
object. 

Bapu  Siudhia  was  now  joined  by  many  of  the  country  people, 
and  further  reinforced  by  troops  sent  out  by  Bagoji,  the  Maratha 
general  at  Delhi,  as  well  as  by  some  of  the  Begum  Sornru's  battalions 
— a  poor  reward  to  Thomas  for  the  aid  he  had  recently  afforded  that 
princess.  As  Sardbana  was  a  tributary  state  to  the  Marathas,  she  was 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HABIANA.  137 

probably  acting  from  necessity  not  choice.  With  this  combined  force 
Bapu  crossed  the  Jumna,  and  by  a  rapid  march  took  up  a  position 
between  Thomas  and  Jhajjar  with  the  intention  of  cutting  off  his 
retreat  to  his  Jaidad. 

Thomas's  position  was  now  very  critical,  for  he  was  short  of  provisions 
and  completely  isolated,  and  there  was  only  one  resource  left  to  him, 
namely,  to  fight  his  way  through  the  enemies'  forces.  This  he  at  once 
determined  to  do,  and  forming  his  men  into  line,  gave  battle.  Bapu 
now  looked  upon  success  as  assured,  and  engaging  Thomas's  front 
with  his  infantry,  sent  his  cavalry  to  charge  him  in  flank.  These 
attacked  him  again  and  again,  but  were  on  each  occasion  driven  back 
by  steady  and  well-directed  volleys,  poured  into  them  by  Thomas's 
right  and  left  wings,  who  changed  front  to  repulse  them.  After  each 
charge  Thomas  moved  his  force  forward,  and  as  the  attacks  became 
weaker  and  weaker  gradually  made  good  his  advance,  until  at  length 
he  found  the  road  to  Jhajjar  clear  and  effected  his  escape.  Bapu, 
disheartened  by  his  heavy  loss,  made  no  attempt  to  pursue,  but  con- 
tented himself  with  re-occupying  the  districts  of  Panipat,  Sonpat  and 
Karnal,  which  Thomas,  of  necessity,  had  to  abandon. 

Dispossessed  of  his  principal  source  of  revenue,  Thomas  was  now  com- 
pletely crippled,  and  left  with  no  adequate  means  to  pay  his  troops,  who 
numbered  3,000  men.  He  had  hitherto  occupied  a  position  analagous 
to  that  of  other  European  adventurers  in  the  Maratha  service,  to 
whom  territory  was  assigned  for  the  upkeep  of  their  corps.  But  his 
summary  dismissal  from  his  appointment  of  Frontier  Warden,  and  the 
resumption  of  his  districts  by  Bapu,  left  him  not  only  without  a  master, 
and  without  a  territory,  but  encumbered  with  an  army  heavily  in 
arrears  of  pay,  which  had  recently  mutinied  and  might  at  any  time 
mutiny  again,  and  with  only  the  revenues  of  the  comparitively  small 
district  of  Jhajjar  to  draw  upon.  These  were  altogether  insufficient 
for  the  support  of  such  a  large  force  as  he  had  enlisted. 

This  reverse  marks  a  distinct  departure  in  Thomas's  career. 
Hitherto  he  had  been  a  mercenary,  fighting  other  peoples  battles  for 
stipulated  payment,  and  acting  under  such  authority  or  license  as 
passed  current  in  those  wild  times  and  places.  But  the  fountain  of  re- 
muneration was  now  dried  up,  and  he  was  thrown  solely  on  his  own 
resources.  Needs  must  when  necessity  drives,  and  from  this  hour 
Thomas  threw  off  all  disguise,  and  became  a  freebooter  pure  and 
simple.  There  was  no  attempt  at  concealment.  He  began  forthwith  to 
support  himself  by  filh'bustering  raids  on  the  towns  and  villages  of 
his  neighbours,  without  any  regard  whatever  to  the  elementary  laws 
of  meum  and  tuum.  He  sold  his  troops  for  specific  reward,  or  let 


138  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

them  out  "  by  the  job,"  with  license  to  pillage  and  plunder  like  any 
Pindari.  His  attacks  were  indiscriminate,  the  occasion  of  his  im- 
pecuniosity  being  the  certain  signal  for  a  foray  in  the  nearest  territory 
where  he  could  hope  to  levy  fines. 

This  course  of  life  which  he  now  entered  upon  cannot  be  defended 
or  excused.  The  most  that  can  be  said  for  it  is  that  it  was  in  keeping 
with  the  ideas  of  the  times,  and  in  harmony  with  the  Maratha  system 
which  dominated  Hindustan.  Thomas,  in  his  isolated  and  adven- 
turous career,  surrounded  by  enemies  and  befriended  by  no  one,  was 
fighting  for  very  existence.  Both  his  livelihood  and  personal  safety 
depended  upon  the  men  who  followed  his  standard  ;  had  they  rebelled 
against  him  his  life  would  not  have  been  worth  an  hour's  purchase. 
Money  was  the  sole  power  able  to  control  them,  and  when  his  assign- 
ment was  forfeited  his  only  means  of  raising  money  went  with  it. 
There  were  but  two  courses  open  to  him  :  flight  into  British  territory, 
or  a  bold  bid  for  independence.  His  daring  and  ambitious  nature 
rebelled  against  the  ignominious  escape  offered  by  the  former :  to 
achieve  the  latter  it  was  necessary  to  throw  all  conventional  restraint 
to  the  winds,  and  boldly  usurp  a  position,  which,  whilst  raising  every 
man's  hand  against  his,  would  make  him  his  own  master.  This  was 
the  course  George  Thomas  chose. 

Upon  his  arrival  at  Jhajjar  the  troops  at  once  demanded  their  pay, 
and  in  order  to  satisfy  their  claims  he  marched  them  against  Harichu, 
a  large  and  populous  town  belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur,  and 
"  levied  a  contribution  "  from  it.  Without  reason  or  right  other  than 
his  own  necessity,  he  called  on  the  governor  of  the  town  to  pay  him  a 
"ransom"  of  a  lakh  of  rupees,  which  being  denied,  he  stormed  and 
took  possession  of  the  place.  The  fort,  which  defended  the  town,  and 
stood  separate  from  it,  still  held  out ;  but  when  Thomas  prepared  for 
a  second  assault,  the  commandant  offered  Rs.52,000,  and  this  was 
accepted.  But  during  the  negotiations  the  town  had  "  unfortunately 
been  set  on  fire,  and  burnt  so  fiercely  that  goods  to  the  amount  of 
several  lakhs  of  rupees  were  totally  consumed." 

This  episode  is  related  by  Thomas  with  a  candour  which,  in  a  less 
reprehensible  matter,  would  be  a  naive.  There  is  a  directness  of 
description  and  a  precision  of  narrative  in  his  treatment  of  the  subject 
which  has  a  copybook  simplicity.  He  volunteers  no  explanation, 
advances  no  theory  of  justification,  attempts  no  excuses,  but  merely 
mentions  that  he  wanted  money  to  pay  his  men,  and  so  he  went  to 
Harichu  and  took  it. 

Perhaps  this  bold  and  lawless  action  had  an  effect  on  Vaman  Rao, 
whose  adjacent  territories  might  be  the  next  to  tempt  "  contribution." 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HAfilANA.  139 

At  any  rate  lie  chose  the  moment  to  re-open  negotiations,  and  con- 
ducted them  in  such  a  conciliatory  spirit,  that  the  differences  between 
the  two  were  adjusted  and  Thomas  was  confirmed  in  his  possession  of 
Jhajjar.  In  return  for  this  he  employed  himself  in  reducing  several 
of  the  chiefs  refractory  zemindars  to  obedience,  and  in  forcing  from 
them  the  payment  of  their  arrears  of  revenue.  This  incidental  ex- 
pedition carried  him  again  towards  the  borders  of  the  Jaipur  territory, 
the  proximity  of  which  suggested  another  raid.  And  so  he  repeated 
his  former  experiment,  this  time  under  a  pretence  of  punishing,  what 
he  was  pleased  to  call,  "  a  nest  of  banditti,"  who  had  at  some  remote 
date  invaded  Vaman  Bao's  country,  the  memory  of  which  iniquity 
aroused  a  virtuous  indignation  in  Thomas's  bosom,  and  compelled 
him  to  attack  them  in  force,  and  annihilate  "  the  thievish  tribe"  before 
returning  to  his  headquarters  at  Jhajjar. 

He  now  determined  to  allow  his  men  a  short  rest  and  recreation 
after  their  sixteen  months  incessant  campaign,  the  more  especially  as 
it  was  the  month  of  May,  and  the  intense  heat  of  the  season  militated 
against  operations  in  the  field.  It  was  during  this  short  period  of 
inaction  that  there  came  to  Thomas's  imagination  the  ambitious 
design  of  erecting  for  himself  an  independent  principality,  over  which 
he  might  rule  with  sovereign  power. 

To  the  north-west  of  Jhajjar  lay  a  tract  of  territory  known  as 
Hariana,  or  the  Green  Land.  Perchance  the  name  reminded  him 
of  the  Green  Isle  far  away,  from  which  he  had  come,  and  for  which 
he  felt  the  passionate  devotion  of  an  Irishman.  Although  at  the 
present  day  a  populous  and  settled  district,  replete  with  railways,  roads, 
jails,  court-houses,  and  missionaries,  and  hallowed  with  the  privileges 
of  local  self-government,  Hariana  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  was  a 
veritable  No  Man's  Land,  acknowledging  no  master,  and  tempting 
none.  In  turn  the  prey  of  many  succeeding  invaders,  it  had  for 
many  years  been  a  recognised  battle-field  for  contending  powers.  It 
covered  an  area  of  nearly  three  thousand  square  miles  of  country  so 
wild  and  barren  that  it  had  been  a  favourite  hunting  ground  for  Firoz 
Tughlak,  a  renowned  king  of  Delhi,  the  ruins  of  whose  buildings  were 
still  to  be  seen,  and  also  the  remains  of  a  canal,  excavated  in  the  year 
1356,  to  supply  the  place  with  water  from  the  Jumna.  This  was 
rendered  necessary  by  the  natural  dryness  of  the  region — the  name 
Hariana  being  appropriate  to  only  a  small  portion  of  it — for  there 
was  little  or  no  surface  water  to  be  found,  the  only  supply,  not 
brackish,  being  obtained  from  wells,  most  of  which  had  to  be  sunk 
to  a  depth  of  over  a  hundred  feet. 

So  far  back  as  1036,  Ilausi.  the  capital  town  of  Hariana,  had  been 


140  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

in  existence,  and  was,  indeed,  a  place  of  considerable  importance. 
When  Massoud,  the  son  of  the  famous  Mahmud  of  Gazni,  invaded 
India,  he  found  it  fortified  and  strongly  garrisoned  by  Hindus,  who 
believed  it  could  never  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Muhammadau.  It 
was,  however,  taken  by  storm  after  a  short  siege  of  six  days,  and 
plundered  of  the  immense  treasures  it  contained.  Lying  as  it  did  in 
the  direct  road  of  the  Western  approach  to  India,  it  became  thereafter 
the  victim  of  many  invading  armies,  and  owing  to  this  cause  was 
almost  a  depopulated  wilderness  when  Thomas  determined  to  make 
himself  master  of  it. 

Having  matured  his  plans  and  waited  until  the  approach  of  the 
rainy  season,  Thomas  reinforced  his  army,  provided  it  with  everything 
necessary  to  ensure  success,  and  commenced  his  march.  His  first 
attack  was  directed  against  the  town  and  fort  of  Kanhori,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  which  were  notorious  for  "thievish  depredations,"  which 
shocked  Thomas.  Advancing  with  his  usual  celerity,  he  attempted, 
according  to  his  custom,  to  take  the  place  by  storm,  but  was  prevented 
by  the  spirited  resistance  of  the  enemy,  who  compelled  him  to  retreat 
with  a  loss  of  300  men. 

This  was  an  unfortunate  prelude  to  his  scheme  of  conquest,  and 
would  have  induced  most  aspirants  to  forego  such  ambitious  designs. 
But  Thomas  was  a  man  whose  persistence  equalled  his  courage. 
Like  an  illustrious  fellow-countryman  of  his,  who,  half  a  century  later, 
distinguished  himself  not  many  miles  from  this  very  spot,  he  "  never 
was  bate  and  never  would  be  bate  !  "  A  repulse  only  raised  his  fury 
and  stirred  him  to  fresh  endeavour,  and  when  his  troops  fell  back, 
baffled  and  defeated  from  the  walls  of  Kauhori,  he  issued  orders  for 
the  fortification  of  the  camp,  with  the  stern  determination  of  retrieving 
the  disaster. 

A  regular  siege  of  the  fort  was  now  commenced,  but  constant  and 
heavy  rain  prevented  the  erection  of  batteries,  and  so  a  fortified  chain 
of  posts  was  erected  round  the  town,  by  which  it  was  cut  off  from  all 
external  aid.  Before  long  the  garrison  were  in  straits  for  provisions, 
and  began  to  suffer  great  distress,  and  they  made  several  fierce  sallies, 
attempting  to  fight  their  way  through  in  investing  lines. 

During  one  of  these  encounters  Thomas  experienced  another  of 
those  desperate  adventures  and  escapes  with  which  the  history  of  his 
life  abounds.  A  sortie  was  directed  against  the  redoubt  which  he 
himself  occupied,  and  hi  the  confusion  of  the  attack  a  sudden  panic 
seized  his  troops,  and  the  greater  portion  ran  away,  leaving  him  in  a 
most  critical  position,  for  only  five  of  his  infantry  remained  with  him, 
these  being  selected  soldiers  to  whom  had  been  allotted  the  particular 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HABIANA.  141 

charge  of  bis  firearms,  consisting  of  pistols  and  blunderbusses  of  a 
large  size.  With  these,  and  the  assistance  of  a  few  cavalry  who  came 
to  his  aid,  he  maintained  the  post  for  a  considerable  time  against  every 
effort  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  him,  and  at  length  by  repeated  and 
well-directed  discharges  compelled  them  to  retire. 

A  few  days  after  this  occurrence,  the  weather  becoming  finer, 
Thomas  was  able  to  erect  a  battery,  from  which  he  fired  with  such 
good  effect  as  to  bring  down  a  portion  of  the  wall  of  the  fort.  This 
emboldened  him  to  attempt  another  assault,  but  night  coming  on, 
he  was  obliged  to  defer  it  till  the  following  morning,  when  he  found 
the  enemy  had  evacuated  the  place. 

The  best  and  bravest  inhabitants  of  the  Hariana  district  resided  in 
the  fort  of  Kanhori,  men  of  desperate  courage,  nurtured  in  battle,  and 
inured  to  invasion,  and  who  lived  by  the  sword  and  recognised  no 
other  form  of  government.  The  defeat  of  so  formidable  a  faction  had 
a  salutary  effect  on  the  rest  of  the  district,  which  offered  but  a  slight 
resistance.  In  a  short  time  Thomas  gained  complete  possession  of 
the  whole  of  the  southern  portion  of  the  territory ;  but  it  cost  him 
much  trouble  to  extend  his  rule  over  the  north-western  parts,  which 
were  occupied  by  the  Sikhs  and  a  predatory  tribe  called  Bhattis. 
These  he  successfully  engaged  and  defeated,  driving  the  former  back 
across  the  river  Ghaggar,  which  he  made  his  boundary  in  that  direc- 
tion. 

The  conquest  of  Hariana  was  now  complete,  and  Thomas  pro- 
claimed his  rule  over  an  extent  of  territory  which  had  formerly 
contained  nearly  a  thousand  towns  and  villages,  and  produced  an 
annual  revenue  of  Rs.1,430,000  (£178,750).  But  the  number  of  the 
former  was  now  reduced  to  little  more  than  a  quarter,  and  only  yielded 
Rs.286,000  a  year.  The  products  of  the  country  consisted  chiefly  of 
grain,  and  were  dependent  upon  the  rainfall.  In  favourable  seasons 
the  Ghaggar — of  evil  reputation  to  Simla-bound  travellers  of  the  pre- 
sent day — overflowed  its  banks  and  inundated  the  northern pargannahs. 
On  the  subsiding  of  the  waters  a  rich  greasy  deposit  remained  on 
the  land,  which  produced  amazing  crops  of  wheat  and  grass.  So 
stimulating  were  the  effects  of  this  pasturage  that  the  cattle  grazed 
on  it  were  celebrated  for  their  excellence,  and  this  character  they 
retain  to  the  present  day.  In  the  southern  and  western  parts  of  the 
country  the  soil  was  sandy  and  the  rainfall  small,  the  consequence 
being  that  cultivation  was  very  sparse.  During  the  summer  months 
the  heat  was  intense,  but  upon  the  whole  the  climate  was  sufficiently 
salubrious,  and  in  the  winter  very  cold  and  bracing. 

For  the  capital  of  his  new  domains  Thomas  selected  the  town  of 


142  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

Hansi.  Tbe  state  of  desolation  into  which  this  place  had  fallen  may 
be  estimated  from  a  legend  which  long  ran  current  in  the  Panjab  that, 
when  Thomas  occupied  the  city,  its  sole  inhabitants  were  a  fakir,  or 
holy  mendicant,  and  two  lions — emblems  of  its  poverty  and  its  deserted 
state.  It  had,  however,  the  advantage  of  being  centrally  situated  on 
an  elevated  spot  of  ground,  the  highest  for  many  miles  round.  The 
ruins  of  the  former  city  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  fortress,  which  was 
built  on  one  of  those  huge  mounds  of  earth  common  to  this  part  of 
the  Panjab  and  the  mud  walls  of  the  citadel  were  of  such  enormous 
thickness  as  to  prove  impervious  to  shot.  A  large  reservoir  in  the 
centre  caught  and  retained  the  rain-water,  and  there  were  several  wells 
in  the  immediate  vicinity,  although  the  surrounding  country  was  an 
arid  waste  of  desert,  through  which  approach  for  any  large  body  of 
men  was  rendered  almost  impossible  by  the  absence  of  water.  The 
district  harboured  many  tigers,  and  a  few  lions,  it  being  the  only  place 
in  India,  except  Guzerat,  where  the  latter  species  of  ferae  existed. 
Even  as  late  as  1830  they  were  to  be  found  there. 

The  plain  around  Hansi  might  almost  be  termed  a  cemetery,  for 
it  was  computed  that  not  less  than  40,000  of  the  followers  of  the 
Prophet  had  found  a  resting-place  within  a  short  circuit  of  its  walls 
during  the  centuries  of  warfare  it  had  witnessed  between  Hindu  and 
Muhammadan.  The  inhabitants  of  the  district  were  endowed  with 
great  personal  bravery,  and  were  expert  in  the  use  of  arms,  particularly 
in  the  exercise  of  the  lance,  sabre,  and  matchlock.  Many  instances 
of  their  resolution  and  courage  were  recorded,  and  in  recent  years 
they  had  successfully  resisted  the  attacks  of  Mughals  and  Marathas, 
and  forced  their  armies  to  retreat.  But,  although  fearless  in  fight, 
they  were  cruel,  treacherous,  and  vindictive,  and  singularly  calloTia  of 
shedding  blood  or  taking  life  in  their  domestic  quarrels.  The  greater 
part  of  the  population  at  the  time  of  Thomas's  annexation  were  Hindus, 
and  their  occupation  agricultural. 

Thomas's  first  care  was  to  rebuild  the  walls  of  the  fort,  which  had 
long  fallen  into  ruin,  and  repair  the  defences  of  the  town  that  lay 
under  its  ramparts.  The  decay  of  ages  had  eaten  into  the  red-brick 
masonry,  so  that  it  crumbled  to  the  touch,  the  streets  were  empty 
and  the  houses  roofless  and  tenantless.  But  by  degrees  and  by  gentle 
treatment  Thomas  attracted  nearly  0,000  people  to  take  up  their 
residence  in  the  place,  and  to  these  he  allowed  every  lawful  indulgence, 
and  guaranteed  the  protection  of  their  lives,  liberty,  and  property. 

What  more  he  did  is  best  told  in  his  own  words,  by  quoting  the 
following  famous  passage  in  his  memoirs,  which  has  been  reproduced 
by  nearly  every  writer  who  has  had  occasion  to  mention  him : — 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HAEIANA.  143 

"  At  Hansi  I  established  a  mint  and  coined  my  own  rupees,*  which 
I  made  current  in  my  army  and  country.  As  from  the  commencement 
of  my  career  at  Jhujhur  I  had  resolved  to  establish  an  independency, 
I  employed  workmen  and  artificers  of  all  kinds,  and  I  now  judged  that 
nothing  but  force  of  arms  could  maintain  me  in  my  authority.  I 
therefore  increased  their  numbers,  cast  my  own  artillery,  commenced 
making  muskets,  matchlocks,  and  powder — and,  in  short,  made  the 
best  preparations  for  carrying  on  an  offensive  and  defensive  war,  till, 
at  length,  having  gained  a  capital  and  a  country  bordering  on  the 
Sikh  territories,  I  wished  to  put  myself  in  a  capacity,  when  a  favour- 
able opportunity  should  offer,  of  attempting  the  conquest  of  the  Pnnjaub, 
and  aspired  to  the  honour  of  planting  the  British  standard  on  the  banks 
of  the  Attock  !  " 

One  other  act  of  Thomas's  must  be  mentioned.  Very  early  in  his 
rule  he  instituted  a  system  of  pensions  and  compensations  for  his 
soldiers,  and  those  who  were  wounded  in  his  service  received  sufficient 
for  their  wants,  whilst  half  of  the  pay  of  their  rank  was  granted  to  the 

*  Through  the  kindness  of  General  Sir  A.  Cunningham  the  following  engraving 
of  a  George  Thomas  rupee  has  been  obtained  : — 

Reverse.  Obverse. 


JALUS  (REIGN),  SIKAH  SAHEB, 

42  OF  SHAH  'ALAM.  A.H.  1214 

(A.D.  1799-1800).  (A.D.  1799-1800). 

General  Cunningham  writes  :  — 

"  I  believe  this  rupee  to  have  been  struck  by  George  Thomas. 

"  The  middle  line  of  the  obverse  reads  Sikah  Sdheb,  which  is  never  used  for 
the  money  of  a  king.  Saheb  Kirdn  Sanl  is  used  as  a  title  of  kings,  but  always 
in  combination  with  the  name  of  the  king. 

"  The  Hegira  date  on  the  obverse  is  1214=A.D.  1799-1800. 

"  The  Reign  (Jalus)  date  on  reverse  is  42  of  Shah  'Alam=A.D.  1799-1800. 

"  I  hope  this  coin  may  be  proved  to  belong  to  George  Thomas.  The  date  is 
correct.  The  beginning  of  the  name  of  Hansi  is  at  the  left  hand  of  the  top  line 
of  the  Reverse.  The  mint  city  of  the  kings  was  Hisdr  ;  but  Hansi  was  a  veiy 
famous  fortress  which  resisted  the  arms  of  the  early  Ghazni  kings,  and  was 
accordingly  known  as  the  '  Maiden  Fortress.'  " 

An  additional  iaterest  is  attached  to  this  engraving,  from  the  fact  that  the 
coin  it  is  copied  from  is  probably  unique. 


144  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

widows  and  children  of  men  killed  in  action.  These  liberal  provisions 
absorbed  a  sum  of  Rs.50,000  a  year,  which  was  more  than  a  tenth  of 
Thomas's  entire  revenue — a  proportion  far  in  excess  of  that  allotted  to 
such  philanthropicnl  purposes,  even  in  the  most  civilised  countries. 

It  is  a  pleasant  page  in  his  chequered  career  to  dwell  upon.  And 
so  let  the  chapter  close  on  George  Thomas,  emancipated  from  his  lust 
of  battle,  and  settling  down  for  a  brief  space  in  his  erratic  life  to 
cultivate  the  paths  of  peace  and  improvement,  and  patronise  the  rude 
arts  of  those  rnde  days. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE   JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN. 
1799. 

BY  the  time  Thomas  had  established  himself  at  Hariaua,  and 
outlined  a  system  of  administration,  his  exchequer  was  ex- 
hausted, and  he  was  called  upon  to  solve  the  problem  of  finance. 
When  he  had  money  at  his  command  he  was  a  lavish  paymaster, 
and  in  cantonments  spoilt  his  men  with  kindness,  often  in  his  im- 
providence expending  his  last  rupee  on  them  with  cheerful  reckless- 
ness. At  this  particular  time  he  had  extremely  heavy  calls  on  his 
resources,  for  he  was  preparing  for  the  great  project  which  had  become 
the  central  idea  of  his  mind  and  his  ambition.  This  was  the  conquest 
of  the  Panjab,  or,  as  he  expressed  it,  the  planting  of  the  British 
standard  on  the  banks  of  the  Attock  river.  With  this  object  in  view, 
he  commenced  casting  cannon,  manufacturing  small  arms,  and  pur- 
chasing warlike  stores  and  material,  and  these  expenses  soon  brought 
him  to  the  end  of  his  means.  Whereupon  he  took  stock  of  his 
position  to  see  if  he  was  properly  prepared  for  the  great  under- 
taking he  aspired  to  carry  through;  but  on  a  review  of  his  troops 
his  force  appeared  insufficient.  He  therefore  decided  on  what  he 
pleasantly  terms  an  "  excursion  "  into  Jaipur  territory,  which  place, 
he  gratefully  adds,  "  had  hitherto  afforded  a  never-failing  supply  to 
his  necessities,  and  whose  ruler  was,  in  consequence,  become  his 
bitter  enemy." 

It  happened  just  about  this  time  that  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur  was  in 
arrears  with  the  payment  of  his  tribute  to  the  Marathas,  and  Vaman 
Rao  was  ordered  to  invade  his  country  and  collect  what  sums  he 
could.  Of  the  amount  so  realised  he  was  authorised  to  retain  ten- 
sixteenths  to  pay  himself  for  his  trouble  and  exertion,  and  the  balance 
was  to  be  remitted  to  the  Maratha  treasury. 

For  the  delicate  detail  of  accounts,  and  especially  for  crediting 

10  146 


146  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

himself  with  a  bigger  ten-sixteenths  than  so  exact  a  science  as 
mathematics  legitimately  allows,  Vaman  Rao  was  most  admirably 
qualified.  But  the  coarse  and  brutal  preliminary  of  invading  Jaipur 
territory  and  by  force  of  arms  coercing  a  nation  of  warriors  into 
paying  tribute  was  quite  out  of  his  line.  Partiib  Sing's  army  con- 
sisted of  30,000  cavalry  and  18,000  infantry,  with  a  numerous  and 
well-appointed  artillery.  The  order  to  compel  the  lord  of  so  many 
legions  to  pay  up  tribute  quite  staggered  the  little  quill-driving, 
copper-counting  chief,  and  he  immediately  wrote  pressing  letters  to 
Thomas  urging  him  to  assist  in  the  proposed  expedition.  Thomas, 
however,  possessed  with  the  delirium  of  Panjab  conquest,  was  un- 
willing to  enter  into  a  campaign  which  he  knew  must  prove  an 
extended  one,  preferring  the  small  but  quick  profits  of  rapid  raids,  and 
partly  from  this  reason,  partly  from  prudential  motives,  declined  the 
invitation.  He  foresaw  that  to  put  into  the  field  a  body  of  troops 
sufficient  for  an  invasion  like  the  one  proposed  could  only  be  accom- 
plished with  a  fall  treasury,  whereas  his  was  as  dry  as  the  sands  of 
his  own  deserts.  This  he  explained  to  Viiman  Ruo,  but  the  chief  had 
become  fascinated  with  the  commission  and  was  not  to  be  denied. 
It  seemed  to  him  that  if  Thomas  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  do  the 
fighting,  he  himself  could  cope  with  the  accounts,  and  as  this  pro- 
mised substantial  pecuniary  results  (Jaipur  being  rich  in  resources  of 
every  kind)  he  pressed  his  proposals  home,  and  finally  sent  a  Vakil 
to  Thomas  with  the  offer  of  a  sum  of  money  down.  This  argument 
was  irresistible,  and  Thomas  consented  to  accompany  the  chief  on  his 
expedition. 

The  Hariana  force  at  this  tune  consisted  of  three  battalions  of 
400  men  each,  300  Bohilla  irregulars,  200  Harii'ma  irregulars,  90 
cavalry,  and  14  pieces  of  artillery — in  all  nearly  2,000  men.  Vaman 
Rao's  troops  numbered  one  battalion  of  infantry,  600  irregulars,  900 
cavalry,  and  four  guns  ;  so  that  the  combined  forces  amounted  to 
about  4,000  strong.  Having  effected  a  junction,  the  march  for  Jaipur 
territory  was  commenced  early  in  1799. 

On  entering  the  country  a  detachment  of  the  Rajah's  troops, 
stationed  on  the  frontier  to  collect  revenue,  retreated,  and  the  head- 
man of  the  district  sent  a  Vakil  into  Thomas's  camp  and  agreed  to 
pay  two  lakhs  of  rupees  as  tribute.  This  offer  was  accepted,  and  the 
march  being  resumed  several  other  chiefs  were  compelled  to  submit, 
and  for  a  month  the  invaders  continued  their  progress  without 
opposition,  their  mere  presence  sufficing  to  enforce  their  demands. 

But  meanwhile  Partiib  Sing  had  not  been  idle.  Having  collected 
his  troops,  he  now  marched  to  the  relief  of  his  northern  districts, 


THE  JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN.  147 

wherein  Thomas  and  Vaman  Rao  were  disporting  themselves,  with  a 
resolution  to  punish  them  and  give  battle  whenever  he  met  them. 
Nearly  the  whole  of  the  Jaipur  mercenary  and  feudal  troops  were 
assembled  in  this  army,  which  amounted  to  not  less  than  40,000 
fighting  men. 

Buoyed  up  by  a  false  sense  of  security  begotten  of  their  unopposed 
progress,  Thomas  and  Vaman  Rao  had  pushed  on  too  far,  and  sud- 
denly discovered  they  were  cut  off  in  the  middle  of  a  hostile  country 
without  any  source  of  supply  or  base  of  operations  to  fall  back 
upon — a  disregard  of  military  caution  which  involved  their  small  flying 
column  in  a  very  hazardous  position.  In  this  dilemma  Vaman  Rao 
counselled  retreat,  deeming  it  impossible  to  encounter  so  large  a  force 
as  that  threatening  them,  and  which  was,  moreover,  composed  chiefly 
of  Rajputs,  whose  bravery  was  traditional.  In  combatting  these 
arguments  and  frustrating  so  pusillanimous  a  design,  Thomas  remon- 
strated strongly  against  a  retrograde  movement,  and  reminded  Vaman 
Rao  that  he  had  in  the  first  instance  insisted  on  undertaking  the 
expedition,  and  that  there  existed  no  cause  to  prevent  at  least  one 
trial  of  strength  with  the  enemy,  the  troops  being  faithful  and  eager 
to  engage.  As  for  a  retreat,  without  an  exertion  on  their  part, 
"  This,"  Thomas  declared,  "  would  be  a  dishonour  to  myself  and  my 
progenitors,  who  never  turned  their  backs  on  an  enemy."  But  the 
argument  which  finally  prevailed  with  the  chief  was  the  warning  that 
he  could  never  again  expect  to  be  employed  by  Sindhia,  or  any  other 
chief  under  his  authority,  if  he  retreated  now  without  striking  a  blow. 
In  the  end,  Vaman  Rao  agreed  to  risk  an  engagement,  and  with  this 
determination  marched  to  Fatehpur,  a  prosperous  and  important 
town  in  the  Shekhawati  district,  where  there  was  a  prospect  of 
finding  a  supply  of  grain  sufficient  for  the  troops,  and  securing  a 
strong  defensive  position. 

Early  information  of  Thomas's  approach  was  conveyed  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  place,  who,  as  a  preliminary  measure  of  re- 
sistance, filled  up  all  the  wells  in  the  surrounding  country,  and  thus 
rendered  it  waterless  in  the  direction  from  which  the  invaders  were 
advancing.  Unaware  of  this,  Thomas  pushed  on,  only  to  discover, 
when  it  was  too  late  to  rectify  his  mistake,  the  serious  danger  to 
which  his  force  was  exposed.  For  on  the  last  day  he  was  obliged  to 
make  a  forced  march  of  twenty-five  miles  over  deep  sand,  through 
which,  as  the  long,  hot  afternoon  wore  on,  his  jaded  troops  could 
scarcely  plough  their  way,  then:  feet  sinking  ankle-deep  into  the 
yielding  surface.  When  at  length  the  walls  of  Fatehpur  loomed  in 
sight,  the  town  was  found  fully  prepared  to  resist,  and  the  last  well 


148  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

outside  its  gates  was  just  being  filled  up  by  a  body  of  400  men,  who 
had  been  detached  for  the  task. 

The  capture  of  this  solitary  water  supply  now  became  an  object  of 
supreme  importance,  as  Thomas  at  once  realised.  It  was  no  time  for 
hesitation,  and  without  further  ado  he  collected  his  little  baud  of 
regular  cavalry,  who  needed  no  stimulus  beyond  the  cravings  of  their 
own  unendurable  thirst,  and  charged  the  force  defending  the  well. 
The  skirmish  was  at  first  obstinate,  but  two  of  the  enemy's  officers 
being  killed,  their  men  full  back,  and  the  well  was  happily  preserved. 
It  was  a  narrow  escape  from  a  great  disaster,  for  if  the  comparatively 
unfatigucd  cavalry  had  failed  in  their  attack,  the  exhausted  infantr}', 
who  had  toiled  on  foot  during  the  whole  of  a  day,  "  the  service  of 
which  was  uncommonly  severe,"  could  not  have  retrieved  defeat,  and 
Thomas's  army  must  either  have  been  annihilated  in  an  unequal 
fight,  or  in  an  almost  impossible  retreat  have  perished  from  thirst 
and  fatigue. 

The  camp  was  now  pitched,  and  the  troops  obtained  the  rest  and 
refreshment  needed,  and  by  morning  were  ready  for  work  again. 
But  the  city  being  full  of  people,  Thomas  desired  to  treat  for  its 
surrender,  in  order  to  save  the  effusion  of  blood  which  must  neces- 
sarily ensue  from  an  assault.  He  therefore  suggested  the  payment  of 
a  ransom,  but  no  sooner  was  the  word  "  negotiation  "  whispered  than 
Vaman  Rao  came  to  the  front,  and  demanded  ten  lakhs  of  rupees. 
The  townspeople,  being  encouraged  to  hold  out  by  the  hope  of 
receiving  assistance  from  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur,  who  was  rapidly 
advancing  to  their  relief,  responded  by  offering  to  pay  one  lakh,  and 
nothing  definite  was  arrived  at  when  night  put  a  stop  to  the  negotia- 
tions. "Whereupon  Thomas,  who  disbelieved  in  the  policy  of  pro- 
crastination, formed  his  troops,  and  stormed  and  captured  the  place 
the  next  morning. 

This  was  scarcely  effected  than  intelligence  of  Partab  Singh's 
approach  was  announced.  Thomas,  in  consequence,  decided  to  fortify 
his  camp,  which  he  did  in  the  following  ingenious  way.  There  grew 
in  the  neighbourhood  an  abundance  of  a  species  of  wild  thorn-tree 
common  to  that  part  of  India,  and  he  caused  a  large  number  of 
these  to  be  cut  down  and  piled  one  upon  another  in  the  front  and 
flanks  of  the  camp,  with  their  branches  closely  interwoven.  Being 
strengthened  and  secured  with  ropes,  they  formed  an  almost 
impenetrable  chevaux  de  frise,  the  weight  and  solidity  of  which 
were  increased  by  a  large  quantity  of  sand  thrown  between  the 
branches  and  piled  up  over  their  butts.  It  was  not  practicable  to  dig 
trenches,  as  the  soil  was  too  loose,  but  the  abattis,  or  breastwork, 


THE  JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN.  149 

described  was  found  ample  both  to  ward  off  the  charge  of  the  enemy's 
horse,  and  to  protect  the  camp  generally.  Some  of  the  wells  in  the 
vicinity  having  by  this  time  been  cleared  out  and  opened  afresh  for 
use,  batteries  were  erected  for  their  defence.  In  the  immediate 
rear  of  the  camp  stood  the  town  of  Fatehpur,  which  was  fortified  in  the 
best  manner  the  shortness  of  the  time  admitted.  Nor  did  Thomas 
neglect  the  precaution  of  collecting  a  large  supply  of  provisions  and 
grain,  and  by  the  tune  he  had  completed  these  preparations  the 
vanguard  of  the  Jaipur  army  appeared  in  sight. 

Partab  Singh  encamped  at  a  distance  of  six  miles,  and  then  pushed 
forward  a  strong  detachment  of  cavalry  and  infantry  to  clear  the 
wells  in  his  front.  He  was  allowed  to  do  so  for  two  days  without 
interruption,  whilst  Thomas  further  secured  his  position ;  but  on  the 
second  night  the  latter  marched  out  to  attack  the  enemy's  main  park 
of  artillery  with  two  battalions  of  infantry  each  400  strong,  8  guns, 
and  his  90  regular  cavalry,  whilst  he  detached  his  third  battalion  to 
disperse  the  advance  party  engaged  in  clearing  out  the  wells.  He 
had  kept  his  intentions  hidden  from  Vaman  Eao,  whose  troops  were, 
in  point  of  fact,  asleep  when  Thomas  left  camp.  The  reason  for  this 
secrecy  was  the  knowledge  that  if  he  acquainted  the  Marathas  with 
his  scheme  the  enemy  would  certainly  hear  of  it ;  for  Vaman  Eao's 
countrymen  were  quite  unable  to  hold  their  own  counsel,  and  the 
gossip  of  their  camps  always  reached  the  ears  of  the  enemy.  So 
Thomas  contented  himself  with  leaving  a  letter  for  the  chief, 
explaining  his  plan  of  action,  and  requesting  him  to  follow  with  his 
cavalry  in  the  morning,  and  leave  his  infantry  to  guard  the  camp. 

Unfortunately,  soon  after  Thomas  started  an  accident  happened 
to  one  of  his  tumbrels,  and  occasioned  such  delay,  that  dawn 
began  to  break  before  the  mishap  was  repaired.  This  rendered  it 
impossible  to  carry  out  his  original  design  of  a  surprise,  for,  to 
Thomas's  mortification  on  arriving  within  sight  of  the  Jaipur  main 
camp,  he  perceived  the  enemy  assembled  under  arms  and  ready  to 
meet  him.  He  therefore  diverted  his  attack  and  advanced  against 
the  party  at  the  wells,  which  numbered  about  7,000  men.  These 
received  him  with  a  show  of  resistance,  but  the  spirit  and  vigour 
with  which  he  made  his  attack  soon  obliged  them  to  fall  back  upon 
their  main  body,  after  sustaining  considerable  loss.  Having  obtained 
possession  of  the  wells,  which  they  had  cleared  out,  Thomas  filled 
them  up  again,  and  after  capturing  several  horses  and  many  head  of 
cattle,  returned  to  camp.  On  his  way  back  he  met  the  Maratha 
cavalry,  who  seemed  much  out  of  humour  at  not  having  been  con- 
sulted on  so  important  an  occasion,  but  Vaman  Eao  rebuked  them, 


150  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

telling  them  plainly  that  their  delay  in  preparing  for  action  and  fol- 
lowing Thomas  was  the  real  cause  of  their  having  missed  sharing  in 
the  victory.  Thomas  and  his  officers  received  khiluts  from  the  chief, 
and  to  prevent  animosities  and  jealousies  similar  marks  of  honour 
were  bestowed,  though  with  reluctance,  on  the  commanders  of  the 
Maratha  cavalry. 

Thomas  now  determined  to  force  on  a  general  engagement,  but 
found  his  intention  anticipated  by  the  enemy,  who,  at  daybreak  the 
next  morning  salh'ed  out  in  order  of  battle.  In  returning  to  his 
encampment  on  the  previous  day  he  had  prudently  reconnoitred  the 
ground,  and  determined  in  his  own  mind  the  spot  on  which  he  would 
engage.  Towards  this  he  now  made  his  way ;  but  aware  that  no 
reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the  Marathas,  he  left  a  battalion  of  his 
infantry  and  four  six-pounder  guns  to  defend  the  camp  and  protect 
his  rear,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  open  to  attack  by  the 
enemy.  The  force  with  him  consisted  of  800  regular  infantry,  200 
llohillas,  90  cavalry,  and  10  pieces  of  artillery.  Vaman  Rao's  Maratha 
cavalry  accompanied  him  at  the  start,  but  no  sooner  did  they  see  the 
immense  host  with  which  they  had  to  contend  than  they  gave  them- 
selves up  for  lost,  and  left  Thomas  to  fight  the  battle  alone,  nor  once 
during  the  whole  day  did  they  afford  him  any  assistance. 

After  some  manoeuvring  on  either  side  Thomas  was  glad  to  find  the 
Rajput  forces  voluntarily  distributing  themselves  in  a  manner  con- 
formable with  his  plan  of  battle.  Their  right  wing,  consisting  of  the 
feudal  cavalry,  was  directed  against  his  camp,  and  so  certain  were 
they  of  victory  that  on  catching  sight  of  the  defences  which  had  been 
built  up,  they  laughed  at  the  idea  of  "a  few  bushes,"  as  they  con- 
temptuously termed  them,  retarding  their  progress,  or  resisting  the 
impetuosity  of  their  attack.  The  left  wing,  consisting  of  4,000 
Rohillas,  3,000  Ghussains,  and  6,000  irregular  infantry,  commanded 
by  the  chiefs  of  their  respective  districts,  advanced  at  the  same  time 
with  hasty  strides  and  loud  shouts  to  take  possession  of  the  city,  the 
loss  of  which  would  have  been  attended  with  the  most  serious  conse- 
quences. The  main  body,  or  centre  of  the  enemy,  was  composed  of 
10  battalions  of  infantry,  22  pieces  of  artillery,  and  the  body-guard  of 
the  Rajah,  the  latter  numbering  1,600  chosen  men,  armed  with 
matchlocks  and  sabres.  This  division  was  commanded  in  person  by 
Rajah  Roraji  Khavis,  the  generalissimo  of  the  Jaipur  forces. 

It  was  fortunate  for  Thomas  that  he  had  chosen  such  a  strong 
position,  for  this  alone  enabled  him  to  sustain  the  unequal  combat. 
No  sooner  did  the  Marathas,  who  were  posted  in  the  rear,  observe 
the  Rajput  cavalry  advancing  against  them  in  close  and  compact 


THE  JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN.  151 

order,  than  they  sent  urgent  entreaties  to  Thomas  for  reinforcements. 
Although  it  was  imprudent  to  spare  them,  he  ordered  four  companies 
from  the  battalion  which  had  been  left  for  the  protection  of  the  camp 
to  march  out  and  strengthen  the  troops  in  the  field,  whilst  with  five 
companies  and  three  guns  he  advanced  to  repel  the  attack  of  the 
Rajah's  body-guard,  leaving  his  main  body  under  the  command  of 
an  Englishman  named  John  Morris,  who,  though  a  brave  man,  was 
better  adapted  to  conduct  a  forlorn  hope  than  direct  the  movement 
of  troops  on  the  field  of  battle.  Thomas,  by  a  skilful  manceuvre, 
obtained  possession  of  a  high  sand  bank,  whereby  the  enemy  were 
placed  between  two  fires,  and  could  neither  charge  him  nor  attack 
the  camp  without  exposing  their  rear  to  danger.  Whereupon  they 
began  to  draw  off,  sullenly  and  slowly,  but  presently,  perceiving  the 
weakness  of  his  smaU  squadron  of  regular  cavalry,  made  a  sudden 
and  furious  charge  upon  the  little  body  of  ninety  mounted  men,  killing 
the  commander  and  several  of  the  troopers.  Thomas  instantly  ad- 
vanced two  companies  of  grenadiers  to  their  assistance,  and  these 
brave  fellows,  after  giving  a  single  volley,  charged  the  great  body  of 
cavalry  with  their  bayonets,  and  compelled  them  to  retreat,  thereby 
affording  the  extraordinary  illustration  of  infantry  attacking  and 
routing  a  mounted  force. 

During  this  time  the  enemy's  left  wing  had  advanced  and  made  an 
assault  upon  the  city,  from  which  they  were  driven  back  by  the  troops 
Thomas  had  posted  for  its  defence.  These  consisted  of  his  Hariana 
infantry  and  100  Rohillas,  who,  having  occupied  the  highest  and 
strongest  of  the  houses,  were  able  to  maintain  themselves  against  all 
attacks  except  those  of  artillery.  Of  this  circumstance  the  enemy 
now  became  aware,  and  summoning  reinforcements  of  six  pieces  of 
cannon  to  their  aid,  returned  to  the  assault.  Whereupon  Thomas, 
having  beaten  off  the  cavalry,  proceeded  to  the  relief  of  the  garrison 
defending  the  town,  and  attacked  the  enemy's  left  flank  so  vigorously 
that  he  compelled  them  to  limber  up  their  artillery  and  retire  again. 
By  this  time  their  main  body  had  become  a  confused  mass,  without 
regularity  or  method,  having  been  in  turn  disordered  by  the  retreat 
of  the  right  and  left  wings,  which  Thomas  had  defeated  one  after 
another.  But  notwithstanding  this  Roraji  determined  to  risk  the 
final  issue  of  the  day  in  a  general  charge.  The  ardour  of  his  troops, 
however,  proved  unequal  to  the  call,  and  Thomas,  perceiving  them 
wavering,  opened  a  heavy  artillery  fire  of  grape  shot  upon  them, 
before  which  they  precipitately  retreated.  He  now  desired  to  pursue 
them  with  those  of  his  companies  which  had  suffered  least  during  the 
fight,  but  unfortunately  the  bullocks  attached  to  his  artillery  had  been 


152  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

stationed  for  protection  behind  a  sandbank  some  distance  in  the  rear, 
and  could  not  be  brought  up  quickly  enough.  On  perceiving  this,  the 
Maratha  cavalry,  who  all  through  the  action  had  stood  aloof,  galloped 
up  and  offered  their  services,  and  Thomas,  having  procured  a  suffi- 
cient number  of  bullocks  for  one  gun,  advanced  with  that  and  a 
battalion  of  infantry,  whilst  the  Maratha  horse  made  a  great  show  of 
accompanying  him. 

The  enemy  were  now  retiring  in  all  directions,  and  Thomas  first 
turned  his  attention  to  a  pair  of  24-pounder  guns  which  they  had 
abandoned,  and  directed  them  to  be  taken  to  the  rear.  But  at  this 
moment  a  large  body  of  Rajput  cavalry,  under  the  chief  of  Chumu , 
rallied,  and  fired  with  a  determination  to  redeem  their  honour  and 
recapture  the  lost  guns,  formed  a  gul,  or  dense  band  of  feudal  chivalry, 
and  charged  down  on  Thomas.  Whereupon  his  cowardly  Maratha 
allies,  without  waiting  to  sustain  a  single  impact,  turned  and  fled. 
Thomas  immediately  drew  up  his  infantry  as  well  as  the  shortness 
of  the  time  admitted,  but  before  the  line  was  completely  formed  the 
panic-stricken  cavalry,  reckless  of  where  they  were  riding,  dashed 
through  his  left  wing,  closely  followed  by  the  Rajputs,  who  began  to 
cut  down  a  great  number  of  his  men.  These  gallant  fellows  made  a 
heroic  resistance,  many  of  them,  even  in  the  agonies  of  death,  seizing 
hold  of  the  bridles  of  the  enemies'  horses,  in  their  attempts  to  impede 
their  progress.  The  moment  was  critical,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the 
battalion  must  be  exterminated.  But  Thomas,  ever  resourceful  and 
undaunted,  loaded  his  single  gun  up  the  very  muzzle,  and  with  about 
150  of  his  men,  who  bravely  resolved  to  conquer  or  die  with  him,  awaited 
the  event  with  fortitude.  After  permitting  the  enemy  to  approach  to 
within  forty  yards,  the  order  was  given  to  fire,  and  simultaneously 
with  the  discharge  of  the  G-pounder,  the  men  delivered  a  volley  of 
musketry  with  such  cool  precision  and  effect,  that  great  numbers  of 
the  enemy  were  killed  or  wounded.  Twice,  before  they  could 
recover  themselves,  did  Thomas's  little  force  reload  and  fire,  and 
after  their  third  discharge  the  Rajputs  turned  and  fled,  bearing  away 
with  them  the  chief  of  Cln'imu,  sorely  wounded,  from  the  field. 

Meanwhile  the  Maratha  cavalry,  who  had  been  the  chief  cause  of 
this  disaster,  were  flying  helter-skelter  towards  the  camp.  But  here, 
by  Thomas's  orders,  previously  conveyed,  they  were  refused  admit- 
tance, and  in  consequence  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  small  party  of 
the  Rajputs,  who  had  followed  in  their  rear,  and  put  many  of  them  to 
death  without  mercy. 

The  enemy's  infantry,  when  they  saw  the  success  which  had  at 
first  attended  the  charge  of  the  chief  of  Chumu,  seemed  disposed  to 


THE  JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN.  153 

return  to  the  contest,  and  Thomas,  collecting  the  remains  of  his 
gallant  battalion,  prepared  to  receive  them.  But  by  this  time  the 
day  was  drawing  to  a  close,  and  the  exhibition  of  his  dogged  resolu- 
tion convinced  Koraji  that  it  was  best  to  retire  ;  and  so  he  drew  off, 
leaving  Thomas  to  return  to  his  fortified  camp  with  the  remnants  of 
his  force.  The  casualties  during  the  day  on  Thomas's  side  amounted 
to  '600  men,  or  25  per  cent,  of  his  troops  actually  engaged  in  the  open. 
Amongst  the  wounded  was  the  gallant  John  Morris.  The  enemy  lost 
'2,000  men,  and  were  compelled  to  abandon  a  vast  number  of  horses 
and  other  valuable  effects. 

Thus  ended  the  battle  of  Fatehpur,  in  which  Thomas,  with  less 
than  2,000  men,  successfully  defended  a  large  city,  and  an  extensive 
fortified  camp,  and  defeated  in  the  open  field  an  army  of  40,000  men 
well  supplied  with  artillery.  In  reviewing  this  achievement  there 
are  many  points  to  admire :  the  engineering  skill  with  which  he 
protected  his  encampment ;  the  ability  with  which  he  defended  a 
hostile  town  with  a  mere  handful  of  irregular  soldiery ;  his  strategy 
in  occupying  the  advantageous  position  from  which  he  gave  battle ; 
his  generalship  in  dividing  the  enemy  and  defeating  them  in  detail ; 
the  marvellous  resolution  with  which  he  retrieved  disaster;  and  the 
courage  and  vigour  he  displayed  at  all  times  throughout  the  day. 
When  the  overwhelming  numerical  superiority  opposed  to  him  is 
considered,  and  the  ever-present  consciousness  of  danger  which  he 
laboured  under  from  the  cowardly  and  untrustworthy  conduct  of  his 
allies,  we  must  accord  to  him  the  merit  of  having  won  a  very  remark- 
able victory  by  the  display  of  the  highest  qualities  of  a  soldier  and  a 
general. 

On  the  following  morning  Thomas  notified  to  Koraji  that  he  might 
send  proper  persons  to  bury  the  dead,  and  carry  away  the  wounded 
without  interruption  on  his  part.  This  civility  was  received  with 
attention,  and  presently  a  request  came  to  treat  for  peace.  At  the 
prospect  of  renewed  negotiation,  Vaman  Rao,  whose  name,  it  will  be 
noted,  does  not  appear  once  in  the  description  of  the  battle,  came 
forward  again,  and  took  the  conduct  of  it  into  his  own  hands.  As  a 
preliminary  stipulation  he  insisted  on  a  heavy  payment  to  indemnify 
him  for  the  loss  he  had  sustained,  but  Eoraji  objected,  saying  he 
was  not  aiithorised  by  Partab  Sing  to  disburse  so  large  a  sum 
without  express  orders.  On  receiving  this  answer  Thomas  suspected 
that  the  enemy  only  desired  time  to  procure  reinforcements,  and 
urged  Vaman  Bao  to  renew  the  attack.  Although  the  Maratha  chief 
was  averse  to  this  proposal,  fearing  the  risk  of  another  engagement, 
and  overruled  Thomas's  advice,  in  the  end  the  negotiations  were 


154  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

broken  off,  and  the  enemy,  having  collected  the  scattered  remains  of 
their  forces,  took  post  on  their  former  ground.  A  resumption  of 
hostilities  was  now  imminent,  but  at  this  juncture  orders  came  from 
Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  for  Vaman  Rao  to  discontinue  the  war,  and  others 
of  similar  import  from  General  Perron,  who  had  recently  been  in- 
vested with  the  government  of  Hindustan. 

And  now  the  enemy  of  their  own  accord  offered  to  pay  the  sum  of 
Re. 50,000,  but  this  was  most  unaccountably  rejected  by  Vaman  Rao, 
who  soon  had  cause  to  repent  his  folly,  for  during  the  recent  negotia- 
tions considerable  reinforcements  had  arrived  in  the  Jaipur  camp, 
and,  despite  Sindhia's  instructions,  hostilities  were  recommenced 
with  redoubled  vigour  on  both  sides. 

Soon  Thomas's  troops  began  to  suffer  great  inconvenience  from 
the  scarcity  of  forage,  which  they  were  obliged  to  collect  from  a 
distance  of  twenty  miles,  and  were  sorely  harassed  by  detached  parties 
of  the  enemy  when  bringing  it  into  camp.  To  add  to  their  diffi- 
culties the  Rajah  of  Bikanir  arrived  with  reinforcements  of  5,000 
men  for  the  Jaipur  army.  The  Marathas  in  Thomas's  camp  were 
useless,  except  to  plunder  and  destroy  the  unresisting  peasantry,  and 
he  had  only  his  own  decimated  troops  on  which  to  rely .  In  this  situa- 
tion, and  forage  continuing  to  decrease,  a  council  of  war  was  called, 
and  it  was  unanimously  agreed  to  attempt  a  retreat  to  their  own 
country. 

In  accordance  with  which  resolution  camp  was  struck,  and  before 
daybreak  the  next  morning  the  troops  began  to  file  off.  But  scarcely 
were  they  in  motion  than  the  enemy  advanced  to  the  attack  in  great 
force.  While  it  continued  dark  confusion  prevailed  everywhere,  none 
being  able  to  distinguish  foes  from  friends,  but  on  the  appearance  of 
daylight  Thomas  collected  his  men,  and  forming  them  into  proper 
line  of  battle,  compelled  the  enemy  to  sheer  off.  The  march  was 
then  resumed,  but  the  Rajputs  continued  to  hang  on  his  rear,  annoy- 
ing it  with  the  fire  of  artillery  and  an  immense  quantity  of  rockets. 
He  pushed  on,  however,  at  a  rapid  rate,  and  soon  left  their  heavy 
guns  behind,  the  rocket  and  matchlock  men  alone  continuing  the 
pursuit. 

The  day  was  intensely  hot,  and  the  disheartened  troops  suffered 
severely  from  want  of  water.  The  fiery  desert  wind  blew  over  the 
sandy  plain  in  furnace  breaths,  whilst  on  the  horizon  a  delusive 
mirage  dazzled  and  glittered,  presenting  alluring  pictures  of  green 
islands  floating  amidst  lakes  of  cool  water,  which  faded  away  or 
receded,  even  as  they  appeared  to  be  within  reach.  The  tramp  of 
shuffling  feet  over  the  loose  sand  churned  up  clouds  of  impalpable 


THE  JAIPTJE  CAMPAIGN.  155 

dust,  which  aggravated  the  thirst  and  discomfort  the  column  suffered. 
Fortunately  these  trials  operated  as  much  against  the  pursuers  as  the 
pursued.  For  fifteen  weary  hours  Thomas's  little  army  fought  its 
desperate  way,  with  certain  death  behind  it,  and  in  front  an  uncer- 
tainty of  relief  almost  as  terrible.  "  The  service  was  severe," 
writes  Thomas,  in  his  brief,  soldierly  language,  "  and  in  the  highest 
degree  fatiguing.  At  length,  after  a  toilsome  march,  we  arrived  in 
the  evening  at  a  village  where  we  fortunately  met  with  two  wells  con- 
taining plenty  of  excellent  water." 

So  great  was  the  rush  to  these  that  two  men  were  precipitated  into 
them,  one  of  whom  was  drowned,  and  the  other  rescued  with  the 
greatest  difficulty.  After  this  an  armed  force  was  stationed  to  protect 
the  approaches  till,  by  degrees,  most  of  the  troops  received  a  small 
supply,  the  confusion  ceased,  and  order  was  restored. 

The  enemy  had  meanwhile  encamped  three  miles  in  the  rear,  and 
Thomas  made  up  his  mind  to  attack  them  on  the  following  day.  But 
when  morning  broke  he  plainly  realised  that  his  men  had  lost  their 
accustomed  bearing,  and  were  too  dispirited  for  fighting.  All  he 
could  do  was  to  continue  the  retreat.  Before  long  many  began  to 
succumb  to  exhaustion,  for  the  march  was  accompanied  by  circum- 
stances fully  as  distressing  as  those  of  the  previous  day.  The  enemy, 
encouraged  by  their  advantage,  frequently  appeared  inclined  to 
charge,  and  Thomas  was  forced  to  keep  up  a  constant  fire  from  his 
artillery  in  the  rear.  So  disheartened  were  his  men  that,  in  order  to 
encourage  them,  he  dismounted  from  his  horse  and  marched  on  foot 
at  their  head  during  the  whole  of  the  day. 

This  is  a  characteristic  incident,  and  displays  at  their  best  those 
personal  qualities  which  made  Thomas  so  greatly  beloved  by  those 
who  followed  his  fortunes.  A  native  general  in  retreat  either 
spurred  away  on  a  fleet  horse,  or  was  carried  along  on  the  fastest 
elephant,  regardless  of  everything  except  his  own  safety  or  comfort. 
Not  so  with  this  fighting  Irishman,  who  in  his  career  never  proved 
false  to  a  friend,  or  deserted  a  dependent  in  distress  or  danger.  He 
shared  with  his  soldiers  their  perils  and  their  privations,  as  well  as 
their  victories,  and  never  asked  them  to  undertake  a  task  he  was  not 
ready  to  join  in,  or  a  risk  he  was  not  prepared  to  undergo. 

There  is  the  material  for  a  fine  picture  in  this  retreat  from  Fateh- 
pur.  At  the  head  of  his  dispirited  army  marches  Thomas  with  lifted 
head  and  determined  stride.  Behind  him  plods  the  long  straggling 
column  of  soldiery,  the  men  turning  their  eyes  first  to  the  illimitable 
waste  of  desert  around,  and  then  to  their  indomitable  leader,  who 
holds  his  steadfast  compass  course,  and  in  whom  all  their  hopes  are 


156  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

centred.  The  jaded  cattle  drag  the  guns  slowly  and  toilfully  through 
the  deep  sand.  Anon  a  halt  is  called,  a  gun  unlinibered,  and  a  few 
defiant  shots  fired  at  the  enemy.  Like  minute  guns  the  dull  reports 
die  away  after  each  discharge,  and  the  heavy  smoke  hangs  sullenly 
in  the  still  air.  Then  the  order  is  given  to  limber  up  again,  and 
once  more  assuming  his  position  at  the  head  of  the  column,  the  tall, 
fierce  Irishman  leads  the  way  into  the  desolate  expanse  ahead. 

Towards  sunset  a  large  town  was  reached,  where  the  distressed 
troops  were  gratified  by  the  sight  of  five  wells  of  water,  and  were 
able  to  assuage  then*  thirst,  while  the  enemy,  who  had  by  this  tune 
outmarched  their  enthusiasm,  gave  up  the  pursuit,  and  returned  to 
Fatehpur. 

Thomas  was  now  able  to  direct  his  attention  to  the  condition  of  his 
men.  The  locality  was  a  favourable  one  for  a  halt,  and  he  deter- 
mined to  camp  here  till  they  were  recovered  from  their  recent 
fatigues.  The  sick  and  wounded  were  conducted  to  a  place  of  safety, 
and  properly  cared  for.  Supplies  and  water  being  in  abundance,  all 
fared  well,  and  a  few  days'  rest  made  a  wonderful  change.  Before  a 
week  had  passed,  with  bodies  fortified  and  spirits  revived,  and,  above 
all,  with  an  increased  faith  in  the  ikbdl,  or  good  fortune,  of  their 
commander,  Thomas's  battalions  were  ready  for  a  renewal  of  active 
operations. 

He  desired  nothing  better,  for  fighting  was  his  second  nature. 
Hostilities  were  recommenced  in  the  enemy's  country,  and  by  a 
succession  of  exactions  and  fines,  sufficient  money  obtained  to  defray 
the  expenses  of  the  expedition,  and  satisfy  the  arrears  of  pay  due  to 
the  troops.  Before  long  the  Bujah  of  Jaipur,  sensible  of  the  injury 
his  territory  would  sustain  by  a  prolongation  of  these  depredations, 
sent  persons  to  sue  for  peace,  and  the  evacuation  of  his  territory,  and 
Vaman  Kao,  having  been  reduced  to  a  more  moderate  frame  of  mind, 
accepted  the  terms  now  offered,  and  peace  was  declared. 

Thomas  was  now  free  to  return  to  Hariana,  but  instead  of  doing 
this  he  determined  to  retaliate  on  the  Rajah  of  Bikauir,  and  punish 
him  for  the  assistance  he  had  recently  afforded  to  the  Jaipur  prince. 
Surut  Singh,  the  ruler  of  Bikanir,  kept  up  a  very  respectable  army 
of  mercenaries  and  feudal  levies,  the  whole  amounting  to  8,000  men, 
two-fifths  of  whom  were  cavalry,  and  the  remainder  infantry  and 
artillery.  There  were  several  European  officers  in  his  service,  who 
retided  in  the  fort  of  Bikanir,  and  disciplined  his  troops.  The  country 
was  a  dry  and  waterless  one,  the  approach  to  which  must  be  attended 
with  privations  similar  to  those  Thomas  had  recently  experienced. 
Profiting  by  the  past,  he  took  measures  to  protect  himself  against  a 


THE  JAIPUR  CAMPAIGN.  157 

recurrence  of  misfortunes  by  preparing  a  number  of  water  bags,  made 
of  skins,  for  the  use  of  his  army,  whereby  he  overcame  the  difficulty 
of  traversing  waterless  deserts. 

Surut  Singh,  on  receiving  intimation  of  the  intended  invasion, 
prepared  to  repel  it,  but  being  weak  in  artillery,  and  knowing  he 
could  not  stand  against  Thomas  in  the  plain,  confined  his  defence 
to  strongly  garrisoning  his  frontier  towns,  hoping  to  tire  the  invaders 
out  with  repeated  attacks  on  entrenched  positions  and  fortified  strong- 
holds. But  assaults  of  this  description  never  came  amiss  to  Thomas. 
The  first  he  made  was  upon  the  village  of  Jeitpur,  which  was  about 
seven  marches  north-east  of  the  Rajah's  capital,  and  defended  by 
3,000  men.  Resolving  on  an  immediate  storm,  Thomas  carried  it 
with  a  loss  of  200  men,  and  exacted  a  heavy  ransom  before  consenting 
to  spare  the  lives  and  property  of  the  inhabitants.  This  example  of 
his  methods  of  warfare  was  sufficient  to  intimidate  the  country  round. 
Hereafter  he  met  with  but  little  serious  opposition,  for  the  Rajah's 
troops  deserted  in  great  numbers,  and  only  a  few  Rajputs  remained 
faithful  to  his  cause. 

Under  circumstances  so  unfavourable  Surut  Singh  despatched  a 
Vakil  to  Thomas's  camp  to  sue  for  peace,  agreeing  to  pay  an  indemnity 
of  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  half  of  which  was  to  be  delivered  on  the  spot, 
and  for  the  remainder  bills  given  upon  certain  wealthy  bankers  of 
Jaipur.  These  terms  Thomas  accepted,  and  commenced  his  return 
to  Hansi ;  but  when,  a  short  time  afterwards,  he  presented  the  drafts 
for  encashment,  they  were  dishonoured.  He  contented  himself  with 
a  protest  at  the  time,  but  in  his  soul  he  determined  that  when  occa- 
sion offered  he  would  severely  punish  these  reprehensible  frauds  upon 
his  confiding  nature. 


CHAPTER  V. 

TROUBLES   WITH   THE   SIKHS. — THE   EXPEDITION    TO   UDAIPUR. 

1799-1800. 

IT  was  early  in  the  summer  of  1799  that  Thomas  returned  to  Hansi 
from  the  Jaipur  and  Bikanir  campaigns,  and  about  this  time  Lak- 
wa  Dada,  the  Maratha  commander-in-chief,  being  suspected  of  sym- 
pathy with  the  rebellion  of  the  Bhais,  fell  into  disgrace  with  Daulat 
Rao  Sindhia,  and  was  superseded  by  another  chief  named  Ambaji 
Inglia.  Lakwa's  downfall  suggested  to  Thomas  the  feasibility  of  re- 
gaining possession  of  the  districts  which  had  been  sequestrated  from 
Appa  Khandi  Rao,  and  these  he  now  occupied,  intending  to  present 
them  to  Varnan  Rao.  But  Ambaji  and  General  Perron,  hearing  of  this 
action,  requested  Thomas  to  withdraw ;  and  he,  after  consulting  with 
Vaman  Rao,  who  advised  compliance,  consented  to  do  so.  In  recom- 
pense for  this  the  Maratha  government  gave  Thomas  the  district  of 
Badhli,  which  he  added  to  his  other  possessions. 

By  this  time  Thomas  had  become  a  confirmed  filibuster,  whose 
restless  spirit  could  not  endure  peace,  or  brook  inaction.  Rather  than 
remain  idle,  he  now  turned  his  attention  to  the  Sikh  states  on  his 
northern  frontier,  and  marched  against  Jhiud,  a  town  belonging  to  a 
chief  named  Bagh  Singh,  who  had  evinced  hostility  to  Thomas  from 
the  first  moment  of  his  establishing  himself  at  Hariana. 

Following  his  usual  tactics,  Thomas  made  a  sudden  march,  and  at- 
tempted to  storm  Jhind  by  surprise.  But  he  had  underrated  its 
strength,  and,  after  a  stubborn  conflict,  found  himself  driven  back 
with  a  loss  of  400  men.  The  defeat  was  as  serious  as  it  was  unex- 
pected ;  but  Thomas  was  undismayed,  and  instead  of  retreating,  ho 
fortified  his  camp  and  settled  down  to  blockade  the  place,  in  the  hopes 
of  compelling  the  garrison  of  3,000  men  to  surrender. 

Adjacent  to  Jhind  lay  the  territories  of  Sahib  Singh,  the  Sikh  chief 
of  Patiala,  JJe  w^S  himself  an  indolent,  weak-minded  man,  but 

158 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  159 

possessed  a  sister  named  Kunur,  a  woman  of  masculine  and  intrepid 
spirit,  and  she  now  marched  at  the  head  of  a  large  force  to  the  relief 
of  the  besieged  town.  On  the  way  she  was  joined  by  an  individual, 
who,  according  to  Thomas's  etymology,  rejoiced  in  the  name  of  Bug- 
heel  Sing,  and  several  other  Sikh  chiefs.  Directly  these  arrived  with- 
in striking  distance  Thomas  attacked  them,  and  compelled  them  to 
retire,  driving  them  in  panic  through  their  own  camp,  which  being 
built  of  straw  huts  was  easily  set  on  fire,  and  consumed. 

After  a  few  days  Kunur  rallied  the  enemy,  and  returned  to  the 
contest  with  increased  numbers,  and,  by  the  shameful  supineness  of 
two  of  Thomas's  officers,  surprised  and  obtained  possession  of  two  of 
his  redoubts,  in  which  many  of  his  best  men  were  cut  to  pieces.  This 
reverse  encouraged  the  country  people,  who  had  hitherto  been  held  in 
awe,  to  declare  openly  against  Thomas,  and  cut  off  his  supplies  of 
provisions,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  raise  the  seige  of  Jhind  and 
commence  his  return  to  Hansi.  By  this  time  the  enemy  had  in- 
creased to  10,000  strong,  and  directly  he  began  his  retreat  they  followed 
in  his  rear,  and  simultaneously  the  Chief  of  Patiala  took  the  field 
against  him,  with  a  large  additional  force  and  several  pieces  of  heavy 
artillery. 

A  retrogade  movement  in  these  countries  was  always  deemed 
equivalent  to  a  defeat,  and  the  peasantry  now  rose  in  a  mass  to 
oppose  Thomas's  progress.  In  order  to  allay  their  increasing  hostility 
he  publicly  gave  out  that  he  was  going  to  Jaipur,  hoping  thereby  to 
induce  them  to  relinquish  the  pursuit.  But  they  were  not  to  be  im- 
posed upon  by  this  ruse,  and  hovered  on  his  rear  and  flanks,  repeatedly 
attacking  him,  and  as  often  being  repulsed.  By  a  forced  march  the 
Sikhs  managed  to  get  between  him  and  Hansi,  and  encamped  at  a 
place  called  Narnaund,  with  the  intention  of  stopping  his  way.  In 
this  crisis,  Thomas,  with  his  usual  defiance,  resolved  on  assuming  the 
offensive  again,  and  suddenly  ordering  a  night  march,  arrived  by  day- 
break before  the  enemy's  camp.  Instantly  attacking  them,  he  in- 
flicted a  severe  defeat.  Their  tents,  baggage,  the  howdahs  of  their 
elephants,  their  bazaar,  1,000  saddles  and  200  horses  fell  into  his 
hands,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  troops  getting  out  of  control  and 
dispersing  for  plunder,  he  would  have  captured  their  artillery  and 
elephants  as  well. 

The  Sikhs  fled  to  Jhind,  but  on  then*  arrival  there  were  refused  ad- 
mittance by  Sahib  Singh's  sister,  who  taunted  them  for  their  cowardice, 
and  offered  to  take  the  field  in  person  herself,  to  show  them  how  to 
fight.  Ashamed  in  being  exceeded  in  spirit  by  a  woman,  they  returned 
to  attack  Thomas,  whom  they  found  encamped  near  a  large  town,  where 


160  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

he  had  left  his  heavy  baggage.  Their  resolution  now  was  to  conquer 
or  perish  ;  but  whilst  deliberating  overnight  on  the  tactics  they  should 
employ,  their  camp  was  unexpectedly  attacked  by  a  numerous  and 
daring  banditti,  who  sounded  their  trumpets  with  such  loud  alarms, 
that  the  Sikhs  thought  it  was  Thomas  himself,  and  abandoned  the 
place  with  great  precipitation. 

Their  panic  was  so  ludicrous  and  humiliating  that  it  lost  for  them 
the  reputation  for  prowess  they  had  previously  enjoyed.  They  were 
now  as  desirous  of  peace  as  they  had  before  been  impatient  for 
war,  and  made  overtures  which  resulted  in  an  accommodation  being 
arrived  at,  by  which  each  side  remained  in  possession  of  the  districts 
they  held  before  the  siege  of  Jhind.  This  treaty  satisfied  everybody 
except  the  Rajah  of  Patiala,  who  refused  to  ratify  it,  although  his 
spirited  sister  did  so,  in  spite  of  his  remonstrances.  Whereupon  he 
displayed  his  resentment  by  seizing  her  person  and  placing  her  in 
confinement ;  but  Thomas,  on  hearing  of  this,  deemed  it  his  duty  to 
interfere,  and  by  threats  compelled  the  release  of  the  brave  lady. 

Thus  ended  Thomas's  first  offensive  campaign  against  the  Sikhs. 
Begun  impetuously,  at  one  time  it  nearly  found  a  premature  end  in 
defeat ;  but  his  own  right  hand  retrieved  reverse,  and  turned  disaster 
into  victory.  Although  the  war  led  to  no  substantial  results,  it  illus- 
trated Thomas's  qualities  in  danger,  and  the  amazing  vigour  witli 
which  he  could  turn  upon  an  exultant  and  victorious  foe,  and  scatter 
them  in  flight  at  the  very  moment  when  they  believed  they  had  him 
in  their  power. 

Shortly  after  his  return  to  Hansi  Thomas  received  a  proposal  of 
temporary  employment  from  Ambaji  Inglia,  who  offered  him  a  subsidy 
of  Ks.50,000  a  month,  to  assist  in  driving  Lakwa  Diida  out  of  the 
province  of  Me*war.  Having  no  particular  war  on  hand,  Thomas 
accepted  Ambaji's  offer,  and  prepared  to  lead  his  army  against  the 
revolted  chief,  who  had  assembled  a  great  force  and  taken  the  field 
in  the  vicinity  of  Udiiipur. 

This  expedition  was  a  more  extended  one  than  any  Thomas  had 
hitherto  undertaken,  and  during  his  march  southwards  a  mutiny  broke 
out  amongst  his  troops,  occasioned  by  a  delay  in  the  payment  of  their 
arrears.  To  excuse  their  unmilitary  conduct  they  explained,  that  as 
they  were  proceeding  to  the  Deccan,  their  families  would  suffer  great 
hardships  by  their  long  absence,  and  they  therefore  expected  extra 
pay.  Although  there  appeared  some  reason  in  their  demand,  Thomas 
considered  that  to  yield  compliance  would  form  a  dangerous  precedent, 
and  resolved  to  resist.  Whereupon  the  mutineers  grew  outrageous, 
and  plotted  to  seize  and  confine  him  ;  but  this  he  evaded  by  encamping 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  161 

apart  from  them  with  the  soldiers  who  were  still  faithful.  He  then 
called  in  a  body  of  cavalry  to  his  assistance,  upon  which  the  mutineers 
advanced  to  attack  him.  Determined  to  repress  their  insolence  at  all 
hazards,  he  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  out  to  meet  them ;  several 
shots  were  fired,  but  none  struck  him,  and  seizing  the  leaders  he 
instantly  caused  one  to  be  blown  from  the  mouth  of  a  cannon. 
Whereupon  the  remainder,  perceiving  the  fate  of  their  comrades,  re- 
turned to  their  duty. 

When  nearing  Udaipur,  information  was  received  that  Sindhia  had 
pardoned  Lakwa  Dada,  so  that  there  no  longer  existed  any  necessity 
for  a  campaign.  But  Thomas,  who  only  consulted  the  interest  of 
Anibaji  Inglia,  in  whose  personal  service  he  was  now  engaged,  and 
from  whom  he  had  received  positive  orders  to  fight  Lakwa  wherever  he 
came  up  with  him,  did  not  think  himself  at  liberty  to  desist,  and  con- 
tinued his  march,  and  being  presently  joined  by  General  Perron's 
Second  Brigade  under  Colonel  Sutherland,  the  united  forces  advanced 
against  the  rebel.  The  latter  was  encamped  near  a  pass  leading 
to  Udaipur,  which  was  so  narrow  that  it  only  admitted  of  the  passage 
of  a  single  gun  at  a  time,  and  here,  safe  in  the  knowledge  that  the 
Rana  of  Udaipur  was  favourably  inclined  towards  him,  he  had  taken 
up  an  exceedingly  strong  position. 

A  plan  of  attack  was  now  concerted  between  the  two  commanders, 
and  the  following  morning  fixed  for  carrying  it  into  execution.  But 
during  that  night  Colonel  Sutherland,  without  assigning  any  cause, 
and  to  Thomas's  utter  astonishment,  struck  camp  and  marched  away, 
leaving  to  the  latter  the  sole  conduct  of  the  operations  ag&inst  Lakwa 
Dada. 

Colonel  Sutherland's  withdrawal  inspired  the  rebel  chief  with  confi- 
dence, and  he  became  haughty  and  unreasonable  in  proportion  to  the 
improvement  in  the  aspect  of  his  affairs,  sending  letters  to  various 
chiefs  in  the  district,  summoning  them  to  join  him.  But  Thomas  had 
no  intention  of  waiting  for  them  to  do  so,  and  three  days  later,  leaving 
Ambaji  with  his  troops  to  protect  the  baggage,  advanced  against 
Lakwa  in  order  of  battle.  The  action  was  however,  prevented  by  the 
bursting  of  a  tremendous  storm  of  rain,  thunder,  and  lightning,  which 
compelled  a  halt.  It  happened  that  Thomas  had  arrived  at  a  position 
favourable  for  cavalry  to  attack,  and  the  enemy  being  exceedingly 
strong  in  that  arm,  he  thought  it  prudent  to  change  ground,  and 
mano3uvred  so  as  to  gain  possession  of  an  eminence  where  he  would 
have  no  such  fear.  When  the  storm  abated,  Lakwa,  who  had  been 
within  sight  all  this  time,  advanced  with  his  army,  but,  losing  a  number 
of  men  during  his  approach  from  Thomas's  artillery  fire,  and  per- 
il 


162  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

ceiving  the  full  strength  of  the  position  to  be  attacked,  he  thought  it 
best  to  retire  ;  anil  Thomas,  after  a  severe  and  fatiguing  service,  which 
lasted  during  the  whole  of  the  day,  returned  to  his  camp  in  the 
evening. 

At  midnight  Lakwa  sent  Vakils  to  Thomas  with  some  letters  from 
Sindbia,  in  which  the  Prince  repeated  his  commands  for  the  cessation 
of  hostilities  on  both  sides,  and  nominated  Lakwa  to  the  government 
of  all  the  Mardtha  possessions  north  of  the  Narbada.  In  consequence 
of  this,  a  council  of  war  was  called,  at  which  Thomas  announced  that 
as  he  was  employed  by  Ambaji  for  the  express  purpose  of  reducing  the 
province  of  Mewar  to  his  authority,  he  could  consent  to  no  terms  in 
which  the  evacuation  of  that  country  was  not  a  leading  article. 

After  much  discussion,  a  proposal  was  made  that  both  armies 
should  march  to  the  northern  frontier  of  the  district,  and  there  await 
fresh  orders  from  Sindbia.  Thomas's  assent  was  reluctantly  given,  as 
he  doubted  the  sincerity  of  Lakwa,  believing  that  the  chief  only  de- 
sired to  gain  time  in  order  that  he  might  be  reinforced  by  a  body  of 
troops  who  were  marching  to  join  him  from  Ajmir,  which  city,  with 
the  surrounding  territory,  belonged  to  him.  The  two  armies  now 
commenced  their  journey  northwards,  but  owing  to  heavy  rain,  it 
took  them  fifteen  days  to  cover  the  distance  to  Shahpiira,  although  it 
was  only  seventy-five  miles.  On  arriving  there  Lakwa  Dada  was 
joined  by  his  Ajmir  troops,  whom  he  had  been  expecting,  and  now 
peremptorily  refused  to  evacuate  the  territory  in  dispute. 

Hostilities  were  at  once  resumed  by  Lakwa  taking  the  offensive. 
Thomas  had  prudently  pitched  his  camp  on  ground  surrounded 
by  ravines  on  all  sides,  which  secured  him  from  the  danger  of  cavalry 
attacks.  A  council  of  war  being  called,  it  was  decided  that  Ambaji's 
army,  which  was  in  an  exposed  position,  should  shift  quarters,  and 
encamp  in  Thomas's  rear  so  as  to  be  under  his  protection ;  but  before 
this  could  be  accomplished,  Lakwa,  sensible  of  his  error  in  not  having 
at  first  occupied  the  ground  secured  by  Thomas,  advanced  to  take  a 
redoubt  that  defended  it,  near  to  which  one  of  Ambaji's  battalions 
happened  to  be  cooking  their  morning  meal,  the  preparation  of  which 
had  delayed  them  in  falling  back  into  a  place  of  safety.  This  battalion 
was  charged  by  Lakwa's  cavalry  and  cut  to  pieces.  Thomas  no  sooner 
heard  of  this  than  he  formed  his  men  and  hastened  to  retrieve  the 
disaster;  but  heavy  rain  again  coming  on,  the  ravines  were  soon 
swollen  with  water,  which  put  an  end  to  all  hostilities  for  that 
day. 

The  rain  continued  without  intermission  for  a  week,  during  which 
no  opportunity  occurred  for  a  general  action,  though  frequent  skir- 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  163 

misbes  took  place.  In  order  to  bring  tbese  about  Tbomas  constantly 
changed  tbe  colours  and  uniforms  of  his  men,  and  by  tbis  ruse  often 
succeeded  in  getting  to  close  quarters  with  tbe  enemy,  and  opening  a 
smart  cannonade,  which  caused  them  considerable  loss  in  men  and 
horses.  On  one  occasion  he  nearly  killed  Lakwa  himself,  but  the 
chief  managed  to  get  out  of  range  by  the  fleetness  of  his  steed. 

Intelligence  now  reached  Thomas  that  General  Perron,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  undefended  state  of  Jhajjar,  had  invaded  it.  This  in- 
formation he  was  most  anxious  to  keep  secret,  fearing  that  a  knowledge 
of  it  might  prejudice  his  position ;  but  Lakwa  had  been  similarly  in- 
formed, and,  as  he  was  strongly  hostile  to  General  Perron,  he  made 
Thomas  very  handsome  proposals  to  join  his  standard.  As  Thomas 
was  in  the  service  of  Ambaji,  who  was  General  Perron's  native  colleague 
in  both  the  government  of  Hindustan  and  the  command  of  Sindhia's 
army,  this  invasion  of  Jhajjar  was  a  distinctly  treacherous  act,  which 
might  have  reasonably  served  as  an  excuse  for  Thomas  to  desert  his 
allegiance,  and  accept  Lakwa's  offer  of  service.  But,  with  all  his 
lawlessness  and  aggression,  there  never  breathed  a  more  faithful 
soldier  of  fortune  than  George  Thomas,  and  he  rejected  the  proposals, 
saying,  that  although  at  the  termination  of  the  present  campaign  he 
might  leave  Ambaji's  service,  he  could  never  become  an  enemy  to  that 
chief,  nor  connect  himself  with  those  who  were.  This  answer  greatly 
displeased  Lakwa,  whose  Maratha  morality  was  unable  to  comprehend 
the  European  code  of  honour,  and  in  open  durbar  he  complained  of 
Thomas,  declaring  him  to  be  a  man  of  the  most  unaccountable  charac- 
ter :  for,  although  he  had  received  repeated  orders  from  Sindhia  to 
cease  hostilities,  he  disobeyed  them,  and  Lakwa  could  only  suppose 
he  was  bent  upon  extirpating  the  Prince's  authority,  and  establishing 
his  own. 

Lakwa  now  began  to  try  other  expedients  to  rid  himself  of  this 
pertinacious  antagonist,  and  sent  emissaries  into  Thomas's  camp  to 
stir  up  a  mutiny  amongst  his  troops  ;  but  these  men  being  discovered, 
were  seized  and  put  into  confinement,  and  there  detained  during  the 
rest  of  the  campaign,  whilst  Thomas  conciliated  his  soldiers  by  an 
assurance  of  speedily  conducting  them  back  to  their  own  country. 

Lakwa's  force  at  the  time  amounted  to  9,000  cavalry,  6,000  regular 
infantry,  2,000  Rohillas,  and  6,000  mercenaries,  with  90  pieces  of 
artillery.  To  oppose  this  formidable  army  Thomas  could  only  muster 
six  battalions  of  infantry,  much  reduced  by  desertion  and  casualties  in 
the  field,  300  Rohillas,  150  cavalry,  and  22  guns,  the  whole  not 
numbering  more  than  2,400  men.  The  disparity  in  numbers  was 
enormous  ;  but,  in  addition  to^fighting,  Thomas  was  called  upon  to 


1G4  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

provide  for  the  safety  of  Ambaji,  guard  the  camp,  procure  buppliea  of 
forage  and  provisions,  and  convoy  them  into  the  place. 

As  soon  as  the  rain  ahated  hostilities  were  actively  resumed,  and 
several  actions  took  place,  in  most  of  which  Thomas  was  successful, 
frequently  driving  the  enemy  hack  to  their  camp.  On  one  occasion 
Lakwa  escaped  total  defeat  by  a  very  narrow  chance.  Having 
formed  his  whole  army  into  order  of  battle,  he  advanced  suddenly 
against  Thomas,  who  at  the  time  had  only  two  battalions  with  him 
in  the  front,  and  was  obliged  to  fall  back,  the  enemy  following  close 
on  his  rear  till  he  reached  the  outskirts  of  his  encampment.  Here  he 
was  reinforced  by  three  other  battalions  and  a  supply  of  ammunition, 
of  which  he  had  nearly  run  out.  Whereupon  he  faced  round,  and 
resolutely  meeting  his  pursuers  compelled  them  to  retire  quicker  than 
they  had  advanced.  So  great  was  their  consternation  and  confusion 
that  Thomas  inflicted  the  greatest  slaughter,  and  it  was  only  the 
darkness  of  night,  which  had  overtaken  the  combatants,  that  saved 
Lakwa  from  a  crushing  defeat. 

But  not  long  after  this  there  occurred  a  disaster  which  led  to  the 
termination  of  the  campaign.  Between  the  rival  armies  flowed  a 
nullah,  or  stream,  the  north  side  of  which  was  occupied  by  Lakwa, 
and  the  south  by  Thomas  and  Ambaji.  Shortly  after  the  action 
above  described,  Ambaji  obtained  possession  of  one  of  the  enemy's 
redoubts  on  the  north  side  of  this  nullah,  and  garrisoned  it  with  three 
battalions  of  infantry,  1,000  Ghussains,  and  six  guns.  No  sooner 
was  this  accomplished  than  heavy  rain  came  on,  and  continued 
without  intermission  for  twenty-four  hours.  This  caused  two  large 
tanks  to  overflow,  and,  breaking  their  banks,  they  discharged  their 
contents  into  the  nullah,  which  soon  became  so  full  of  water  as  to  be 
impassable,  whereby  all  communications  were  cut  off  with  the  newly- 
captured  redoubt.  Perceiving  this  Lakwa  attacked  the  post  with 
great  vigour,  his  men  advancing  to  the  assault  through  rushing  water, 
which  in  places  rose  up  to  their  necks.  Such  intrepid  conduct  struck 
terror  into  the  garrison,  who  became  panic-stricken,  and,  except  the 
Ghussains,  surrendered  without  firing  a  shot.  The  latter  refused  to 
yield,  and  after  a  brave,  but  fruitless  resistance,  were  cut  to  pieces. 
This  disaster  seemed  to  crush  all  the  spirit  out  of  Ambaji's  army,  for 
directly  after  it  his  men  refused  to  fight,  and  began  to  desert  in  great 
numbers.  Lakwa,  being  informed  of  this,  induced  the  Shahpiira 
chief,  near  to  whose  capital  the  armies  were  encamped,  and  who  had 
hitherto  remained  neutral,  to  declare  against  Thomas,  and  withhold 
supplies  of  gram.  Although  the  latter  had  provisions  sufficient  for 
twenty  days'  consumption  of  his  own  men,  Ambaji  had  not  more  than 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  165 

enough  for  three,  whilst  Thomas  himself  was  short  of  ammunition, 
his  reserve  having  been  left  at  Singanah,  thirty  miles  distant.  It 
was  imperative  to  obtain  a  fresh  supply,  but  he  did  not  think  it 
prudent  to  risk  sending  a  small  detachment  for  it,  and  therefore 
determined  to  fall  back  on  this  base.  But  he  could  not  bring  himself 
to  abandon  Ambaji's  sick  and  wounded,  of  whom  there  were  a  large 
number  in  camp,  and  generously  advanced  money  for  their  transport 
to  a  place  of  safety.  During  this  retreat,  although  pursued  and  har- 
rassed  by  cavalry  sent  out  by  Lakwa,  he  defended  himself  so  success- 
fully that  after  several  futile  attempts  the  enemy  drew  off,  and  he 
completed  the  remainder  of  his  march  unmolested,  and  brought  his 
whole  force  safely  to  Singanah. 

His  conduct  on  this  occasion  appears  to  have  touched  a  tender 
chord  in  Ambaji's  breast.  The  chief  had  tacitly  acquiesced  in 
Perron's  recent  attack  on  Thomas's  districts,  both  he  and  the  general 
supposing  at  the  time  that  Lakwa  had  finally  evacuated  Mewar, 
and  there  would  be  no  further  occasion  for  Thomas's  services,  while 
the  distressed  condition  of  the  latter,  far  away  from  home,  and 
weakened  by  a  long  and  arduous  campaign,  made  the  opportunity 
for  seizing  his  country  a  favourable  one.  But  now  that  a  reverse  had 
been  sustained,  and  Ambaji  saved  from  annihilation  by  Thomas's 
faithful  adherence  to  his  interests,  the  chief  grew  ashamed  of  his 
treachery,  and  began  to  excuse  the  recent  attacks  on  Jhajjar,  ascribing 
them  to  the  enmity  of  General  Perron.  Thomas,  from  prudential 
motives,  accepted  tbis  disclaimer,  and  pretended  to  be  satisfied,  and 
shortly  afterwards  information  reached  him  that  the  villages  occupied 
had  been  restored,  and  so  Tie  allowed  the  matter  to  drop. 

Having  supplied  his  troops  with  ammunition  at  Singanah,  Thomas 
returned  to  the  attack  on  Lakwa,  who  had  meanwhile  invested  a  fort 
forty-five  miles  to  the  north-east  of  that  place.  Advancing  by  slow 
and  easy  marches  through  the  districts  of  a  chief  named  Agaji  Merta, 
Thomas  took  occasion  to  punish  this  individual  for  his  hostility  on  a  late 
occasion,  when  he  incited  the  country  people  to  rise  against  Ambaji. 
A  few  days  after  this  he  arrived  within  twelve  miles  of  Lakwa's  army, 
and  made  dispositions  to  attack  him  the  next  morning,  but  the  chief, 
deeming  himself  unequal  to  the  contest,  struck  camp,  abandoned 
the  fort  he  was  endeavouring  to  reduce,  and  quitted  the  boundary  in 
dispute,  and  by  a  couple  of  forced  marches  reached  his  own  district  of 
Aj  mir. 

Thomas's  commission  was  now  fulfilled  :  he  had  driven  Lakwa  out 
of  Mewar,  and  this  being  accomplished  he  turned  his  attention 
towards  reimbursing  Ambaji  for  the  expenses  he  had  been  put  to, 


166  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

and  entered  on  the  congenial  task  of  levying  contributions.  Deogarh 
and  Amet,  two  strong  towns,  were  in  turn  attacked  and  forced  to 
purchase  their  safety,  aud  then  Kosital  and  Lusain  were  stormed,  and 
heavy  ransoms  exacted.  So  successful  was  the  raid  that  the  fines 
collected  amounted  to  four  lakhs  of  rupees,  a  sum  considerably  in 
excess  of  the  expense  incurred  by  Ambaji,  and  this  handsome  har- 
vest would  have  been  increased  but  for  a  new  development  of 
affairs. 

Ambaji,  at  the  commencement  of  this  campaign,  had  entered  into 
an  understanding  with  General  Perron,  by  which  it  was  mutually 
agreed  that  should  Sindhia  at  any  time  reinstate  Lakwa  Dada,  who 
was  avowedly  hostile  to  the  General,  the  two  should  act  in  concert, 
and  by  their  combined  efforts  preserve  their  respective  possessions. 
A  separate  stipulation  of  this  treaty  was  that  Ambaji  was  to  retain 
Mewar.  But  Perron  now  began  to  entertain  a  jealousy  against 
Ambaji,  and  entered  into  a  secret  understanding  with  Lakwa,  whom 
he  gained  over  to  his  own  interests.  Such,  at  least,  is  Thomas's 
version  of  current  politics  ;  but  it  seems  more  probable  that  Perron, 
having  learnt  of  Lakwa's  restoration  to  favour,  shaped  his  course 
accordingly,  for  not  long  afterwards  the  chief  was  appointed  to  his 
former  post  of  commander-in-chief  of  the  Maratha  army  in  Upper 
India. 

The  upshot  of  this  intrigue  was  that  letters  from  Sindhia  were  now 
produced,  desiring  Ambaji  to  retire  from  Me"war,  and  Perron  wrote 
recommending  compliance,  and  threatening  in  case  of  refusal  to  assist 
Lakwa  Dada  by  force  of  arms.  Under  these  circumstances  Ambaji 
ordered  Thomas  to  deliver  over  the  country  in  dispute  and  withdraw 
his  troops. 

Thomas  had  no  option  but  to  comply,  though  it  touched  him  to  the 
quick  to  tamely  yield  up  that  which  he  had  won  with  so  much  hard 
fighting.  No  sooner  had  he  done  so  than  he  heard  General  Perron 
was  marching  to  Jaipur,  and  simultaneously  Ambaji  desired  him  to 
proceed  to  Datia  in  Bundelkhand,  a  place  200  miles  to  the  eastward. 
Thomas  was  preparing  to  obey,  for  he  still  considered  himself  bound 
to  Ambaji,  when  a  contrary  order  arrived,  directing  him  to  join  the 
united  forces  of  that  chief  and  Lakwa  Dada,  who  had  exchanged  visits 
of  amity.  From  such  contradictory  instructions  Thomas  suspected 
treachery,  and  knowing  Lakwa  was  highly  incensed  against  him, 
declined  to  place  himself  in  his  power,  but  determined  instead  to 
return  to  Hansi. 

Whereupon  Lakwa  threw  off  his  mask,  and  would  have  sent  a  force 
after  Thomas,  but  for  his  inability  to  raise  funds  sufficient  for  the 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  167 

purpose.  Thomas  retaliated  by  levying  contributions  on  the  pro- 
vince of  Ajmir,  through  which  he  directed  his  return  journey,  con- 
sidering himself  now  in  a  state  of  actual  hostility  with  the  chief. 

His  position  had  by  this  time  become  exceedingly  precarious. 
Lakwa's  army  was  only  thirty  miles  to  the  eastward,  and  at  Jaipur, 
which  lay  between  him  and  his  destination,  General  Perron  was 
endeavouring  to  induce  Partab  Singh  to  cut  off  his  retreat.  To 
add  to  his  cares  a  grievous  disease  attacked  his  troops,  who  were 
suffering  from  the  effects  of  drinking  the  unwholesome  water  of  the 
mountainous  country  of  Mewar,  and  a  third  of  them  were  stricken 
with  sickness.  Fortunately  Lakwa's  soldiery  were  in  a  state  of  open 
mutiny,  whilst  Perron  and  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur  were  overawed  by  the 
presence  of  Colonel  Collins,  the  British  resident.  This  officer,  towards 
the  end  of  1799,  arrived  at  Jaipur  to  demand  the  surrender  of  "Wazir 
Ali,  the  spurious  Nawab  of  Oudh,  who  after  occasioning  much  trouble 
by  his  opposition  to  the  English  in  that  country,  sought  refuge  from 
their  anger  in  Bajputana. 

In  this  state  of  affairs  Thomas,  after  eluding  every  attempt  to 
oppose  his  progress,  and  successfully  levying  contributions  to  the 
extent  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  made  good  his  retreat  past  Jaipur. 
Almost  his  last  exploit  was  the  capture  of  a  strong  fort  named  Siiraj- 
garh,  belonging  to  Patab  Singh,  from  which  he  exacted  a  fine  of 
Rs.50,000.  After  this  he  prudently  accelerated  hia  homeward  journey, 
and  arrived  at  Hansi  towards  the  end  of  1799. 

Apart  from  the  question  of  its  morality,  this  flying  campaign  was 
certainly  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  dashing  that  Thomas  ever 
executed.  In  less  than  five  months  he  had  led  his  little  force  a  dis- 
tance of  nearly  1,000  miles,  had  fought  a  succession  of  battles,  had 
obliged  Lakwa  Dada  to  evacuate  Mewar,  and  had  finally  marched  his 
victorious  troops  safely  home  through  a  hostile  country,  from  which, 
even  as  he  retreated,  he  extorted  several  heavy  fines.  The  districts 
he  had  traversed  were  either  dry  and  waterless  deserts,  or  difficult 
and  pathless  ranges  of  hills,  and  the  elements  had  been  against  him 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  campaign.  Yet  such  was  the  vitality 
and  mobility  of  his  force  that  he  successfully  overcame  all  these 
obstacles,  and  carried  his  men  triumphantly  back  to  the  point  from 
whence  they  started. 

Thomas  was  now  inclined  to  allow  his  troops  some  repose  after 
their  late  exertions,  but  an  excuse  for  fighting  presenting  itself,  he 
could  not  resist  the  temptation  of  taking  the  field  again.  It  occurred 
to  him  to  make  an  incursion  into  the  Sutlej  states,  and  punish  Sahib 
Singh  of  Patiala,  who  had  maltreated  his  sister  for  entering  into 


168  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

negotiations  with  Thomas  in  the  previous  year.  Moreover,  during 
Thomas's  absence  in  Mewar,  the  chief  had  committed  depredations  in 
Hariana,  and  this  was  a  crime  that  could  not  be  overlooked.  So 
preparations  were  made  to  chastise  him,  when,  at  the  last  moment, 
he  agreed  to  surrender  certain  villages,  and  pay  an  indemnity  for  the 
damage  he  had  done,  and  thus  avoid  hostilities. 

But  raid  and  foray  had  become  essential  to  Thomas,  who  found  it 
impossible  to  remain  inactive  and  at  peace.  He  and  his  men  were 
prepared  to  fight,  and  were  not  to  be  baulked  of  their  design  by  the 
pusillanimity  of  Sahib  Singh.  A  pretext  for  another  expedition  was 
afforded  by  the  remembrance  of  the  dishonoured  bills  which 
Thomas  had  received  from  the  Rajah  of  Bikanir,  and  he  forthwith 
determined  on  an  invasion  of  Surut  Singh's  country. 

This  prince  had  recently  obtained  an  advantage  over  his  neighbours, 
the  Bhattis,  an  extraordinary  race  of  people  inhabiting  a  jungle  tract 
of  country  to  the  north-west  of  Hansi.  "When  Thomas  reached  the 
frontiers  of  Bikanir  the  Bhattis,  hearing  of  his  intended  expedition, 
offered  him  Rs.40,000  to  capture  and  deliver  over  to  them  a  strong 
fort  which  Siirut  Singh  had  erected  nine  miles  south-west  of  their 
capital  of  Batinda,  whereby  they  were  much  incommoded  and 
menaced.  Thomas  cheerfully  accepted  the  commission,  and,  altering 
his  route,  soon  reached  the  city  of  Batne*r,  which  in  the  geographical 
light  of  these  times  was  regarded  as  the  most  western  habitation  in 
that  part  of  India. 

The  fort  which  the  Rajah  of  Bikanir  had  erected  was  garrisoned  by 
a  large  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  and,  from  its  natural  position, 
was  almost  inaccessible  to  an  enemy,  there  being  no  water  obtainable 
within  a  circuit  of  twelve  miles.  But  Thomas  had  prepared  himself 
for  a  desert  campaign,  and,  bringing  up  his  artillery  with  him, 
battered  a  breach  in  the  walls  almost  before  the  garrison  realised  he 
was  attacking  them.  He  soon  made  the  necessary  preparations  for 
storming  the  place,  when  the  enemy  capitulated  on  being  permitted 
to  march  out  with  the  honours  of  war,  and  Thomas  put  the  Bhattis 
in  possession  of  the  fort,  and  received  from  them  the  stipulated  reward 
of  Rs.40,000. 

He  now  continued  his  march  towards  Bikanir,  storming  and  cap- 
turing several  places,  and  fighting  various  skirmishes.  In  these  his 
losses  were  heavy,  which,  added  to  sickness  consequent  upon  the 
unhealthiness  of  the  climate,  reduced  his  fighting  strength  to  one- 
third  of  its  original  number,  and  compelled  him  to  suspend  his 
advance  and  fortify  his  camp  for  defence.  Many  attempts  were 
made  by  the  enemy  to  carry  his  entrenchments,  but  his  vigilance  and 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  STKHS.  169 

energy  foiled  all,  and  the  health  of  his  force  improving,  he  presently 
struck  camp  and  returned  towards  his  own  country.  On  his  way  he 
came  across  a  town  called  Futehbad,  which  he  burnt,  and  would  in 
all  probability  have  taken  possession  of  the  adjacent  country,  and  added 
it  on  to  Hariana,  which  it  adjoined,  had  not  the  enemy  received  assist- 
ance from  the  Eajah  of  Patiala,  who,  deeming  the  present  moment  a 
favourable  one  to  work  his  revenge  for  past  injuries,  sent  a  contingent 
of  1000  cavalry  to  act  against  Thomas.  The  latter,  not  feeling  strong 
enough  to  prosecute  hostilities,  returned  to  Jhajjar,  where  he  allowed 
his  people  to  recuperate  after  the  distempers  they  had  contracted 
during  the  campaign,  and  recruited  his  battalions  to  their  full 
strength. 

This  was  in  March  1800,  about  which  time  Lakwa  Dada,  through 
the  intrigues  of  Perron  at  Sindhia's  durbar,  had  been  again  super- 
seded in  his  command.  To  hasten  the  chiefs  downfall,  and,  if  possible, 
to  take  him  prisoner,  the  General  marched  against  him  at  Sounda, 
in  the  Datia  district,  where  he  stormed  his  camp,  and  forced  him 
to  fly  for  his  life  to  Jodhpur.  Perron,  whose  designs  against  Hariana 
Thomas  had  reason  to  distrust,  being  thus  occupied,  the  latter  did 
not  choose  to  remain  idle  long.  Large  arrears  of  revenue  were  due  to 
him  from  his  northern  districts,  and  he  resolved  to  march  thither  and 
enforce  payment.  On  his  route  he  incidentally  punished  a  numerous 
and  daring  banditti  who  had  frequently  annoyed  him  by  their  pre- 
datory attacks,  and  who,  having  been  joined  by  a  number  of  the 
peasantry,  were  assembled  in  considerable  force  at  the  village  of 
Safidun,  just  outside  Thomas's  north-eastern  boundary.  Confiding 
in  their  superior  numbers,  the  robbers  issued  boldly  forth,  on  his 
approach,  to  give  him  battle  on  the  plain  in  front  of  the  town.  But 
their  temerity  proved  their  destruction,  for  Thomas  not  only  routed 
them,  but  followed  so  close  on  their  heels,  that  his  troops  entered  the 
fort  with  the  fugitives,  and  put  to  death  no  less  than  700  within  its 
walls.  Thomas's  own  loss  on  this  occasion  was  considerable  ;  but  the 
victory  struck  such  a  terror  throughout  the  country  that  the 
remaining  districts  submitted  without  a  struggle. 

Emboldened  by  this  success,  Thomas  now  determined  to  cross  the 
boundary  and  levy  contributions  in  the  district  of  Saharanpur,  which 
was  being  administered  by  Sambunath,  one  of  Lakwa  Dada's 
collectors,  who  had  remained  true  to  the  chiefs  cause  in  the  hour  of 
his  fall.  Sambunath  was  in  the  Doab  at  the  head  of  a  numerous, 
but  disorderly  rabble,  and  had  lately  sustained  some  smart  skirmishes 
with  the  troops  sent  against  him  by  Perron.  Taking  advantage  of 
the  anarchy  in  which  the  district  was  thrown,  Thomas  made  a 


170  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

rapid  dash  through  its  upper  portion,  and  extorted  several  heavy 
fines  before  his  presence  there  was  suspected. 

Soon  after  this  Perron  advanced  in  person  against  Sambunath,  and 
at  the  same  time  caused  letters  to  be  delivered  to  Thomas,  which  he 
pretended  emanated  from  the  Peshwa,  and  directed  the  recipient  to 
assist  Lakwa  Dada.  These  letters  Thomas  at  once  recognised  as 
forgeries,  intended  to  tempt  him  into  an  attitude  of  declared  hostility 
against  Sindhia,  which  would  have  given  Perron  an  excuse  for 
declaring  war  against  him.  This  crafty  plot  made  Thomas  regret 
that  he  had  not  in  the  first  instance  taken  Sambunath's  part,  who 
might  then  not  only  have  saved  himself  from  defeat,  but  crushed,  or  at 
least  shaken  the  power  of  Perron  himself.  It  was,  however,  too  late 
to  do  anything  now,  so  he  contented  himself  with  offering  Sambunath 
an  asylum  at  Hansi,  and  advising  him  not  to  think  of  opposing  his 
wretched  troops  to  Perron's.  But  the  former,  confiding  in  the  pro- 
testations of  his  followers,  rashly  determined  to  fight.  He  was  soon 
convinced  of  his  error,  for  on  the  approach  of  Perron,  his  troops 
deserted  him,  and  some  endeavoured  by  treacherous  means  to  seize 
his  person  and  deliver  him  up  a  prisoner.  He  effected  his  escape, 
however,  and  found  refuge  in  the  Sikh  country. 

Thomas  now  received  intelligence  that  several  of  his  own  districts 
in  the  vicinity  of  Hansi  were  in  a  state  of  actual  rebellion,  and  had 
plundered  the  merchants  resorting  to  them  of  a  very  considerable 
sum  of  money.  Amongst  others  guilty  of  this  reprehensible  conduct 
were  Balhali,  Sorani,  Jamalpur,  and  Bihal.  The  latter  place  con- 
tained 10,000  inhabitants,  who  enjoyed  a  character  for  remarkable 
bravery,  having  defeated  several  armies  which,  at  various  times, 
attempted  their  reduction,  and  on  one  occasion  successfully  resisted 
the  Mughal  noble  Ismail  Beg,  who  fruitlessly  endeavoured  to  sub- 
due them  with  a  force  of  16,000  men  and  100  guns.  The  population 
of  Bihal  consisted  chiefly  of  Rathor  Bajputs,  who  possessed  the 
finest  qualities  of  courage  and  resolution . 

This  rebellion  broke  out  in  June  1800,  just  as  the  rainy  season 
was  commencing,  and  Thomas  was  sensible  that  if  it  was  not  quickly 
crushed,  the  most  serious  consequences  would  ensue  to  the  cultiva- 
tion, on  which  the  revenues  depended.  He  therefore  marched 
against  the  place  without  delay  and  found  it  garrisoned  by  3,000 
men,  who,  although  well  armed,  were  badly  supplied  with  provisions. 
With  a  discretion  he  did  not  ordinarily  display,  Thomas  decided 
not  to  storm  it,  thinking  from  the  numbers  and  bravery  of  the 
defenders  that  the  event  might  prove  doubtful,  and  certainly  lead  to 
an  immense  loss  of  life.  So  he  fell  back  on  the  slower,  but  surer 


TROUBLES  WITH  THE  SIKHS.  171 

method  of  a  blockade,  and  erected  a  chain  of  forts  around  the  town, 
and  also  completely  encircled  it  with  a  ditch  twelve  feet  deep,  which 
prevented  any  provisions  reaching  the  garrison,  and  soon  reduced 
them  to  a  condition  of  severe  distress.  This  was  further  augmented 
when  means  were  found  to  diminish  their  water  supply,  and  force 
them  to  the  necessity  of  drinking  from  the  wells  within  the  fort, 
which,  being  bitter  in  quality  and  unwholesome,  soon  caused  sickness 
to  break  out.  At  last  the  garrison  was  reduced  to  one-third  of  its 
original  number,  and  Thomas,  desirous  of  putting  an  end  to  the  siege, 
drew  out  his  troops  with  intent  to  storm  the  place.  Seeing  this,  and 
satisfied  of  his  resolution,  the  enemy  capitulated  at  the  last  moment, 
and  paid  a  fine  of  Rs.30,000  to  be  forgiven  and  allowed  to  return  to 
their  allegiance. 

In  August  Thomas  returned  to  his  quarters  at  Hansi,  and  was  soon 
after  this  visited  by  a  man  named  Usuf  Ali  Khan,  a  native  agent  sent 
by  Colonel  Collins,  the  British  resident  at  Sindhia's  court,  on  a 
political  mission  to  the  Sikhs.  Usuf  Ali,  in  his  report  to  Colonel 
Collins,  mentions  that  he  was  received  with  the  greatest  courtesy 
by  Thomas  "  on  account  of  the  Colonel's  letter,"  and  provided  by 
him  with  an  escort  to  Eohtak. 

For  the  next  four  months  Thomas  was  busy  completing  his 
ammunition  and  stores  for  his  next  campaign,  on  which  he  entered  in 
December  1800.  This  was  the  last  aggressive  one  he  undertook,  and 
also  the  most  important,  being  directed  against  the  Sikh  states  of  the 
Sutlej  district 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE   INVASION   OF   THE   SUTLEJ   STATES. 
1801. 

T  N  an  earlier  chapter  it  has  been  shown  how  the  range  of  Thomas's 
*•  ambition  was  not  confined  to  the  establishment  of  an  independent 
rule  over  the  principality  of  Hariana,  but  nurtured  far  more  extended 
schemes  of  conquest  in  the  Land  of  the  Five  Kivers.  The  Panjab 
dangled  a  rich  prize  to  an  invader.  Its  fertile  plains  yielded  harvests 
twice  a  year :  it  was  well  watered  and  well  wooded :  its  annual 
revenues  were  two  million  sterling  :  it  contained  populous  cities,  the 
resorts  of  merchants  and  caravans  from  the  far  countries  of  Central 
Asia  ;  and,  finally,  the  Sikh  nation,  who  inhabited  it,  was  divided  and 
subdivided  into  countless  clans  and  confederacies,  whose  internal 
dissensions  and  jealousies  nullified  the  effect  of  their  numbers,  and 
made  their  country  an  easier  prey  to  an  invading  army  than  if  they 
had  been  a  united  people. 

Thomas  knew  the  Sikhs  and  their  ways  well.  During  fifteen  years 
he  had  exchanged  many  hard  knocks  with  them,  and  beaten 
them  times  without  count.  Along  their  frontier  his  name  was  one  to 
conjure  with,  for  it  was  feared  and  dreaded  by  the  sons  of  Nanak.  In 
addition  to  his  old  designation  of  Jcliazi  Sahib,  he  received  about 
this  time  the  more  honourable  one  of  Jowruj  Jung,  which,  being 
interpreted,  means  "  George  the  Conqueror."  A  conqueror  Thomas 
was,  and  he  now  proved  his  further  claim  to  the  title  by  aspiring  to 
the  conquest  and  consolidation  under  his  own  government  of  all  the 
petty  states  into  which  the  Panjab  was  divided,  and  the  proclamation 
of  his  rule  over  the  broad  territory  that  stretched  between  the  Jnmna 
and  the  Indus. 

His  design  is  thus  summarised  in  his  memoirs  by  his  biographer, 
Captain  Francklin : — 

"  When  Thomas  first  fixed  his  residence  at  Hansi,  he  conceived, 

172 


THE  INVASION  OF  THE  SUTLEJ  STATES.          173 

and  would,  if  unforeseen  circumstances  had  not  occurred,  have 
executed  the  bold  design  of  extending  his  conquests  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Indus.  This  was  to  have  been  effected  by  a  fleet  of  boats,  con- 
structed from  timber  procured  in  the  forests  near  the  city  of  Ferozpur, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Sutlej  river.  He  then  intended  proceeding  down 
the  river  with  his  army,  and  settling  the  countries  he  might  subdue 
on  his  route — a  daring  enterprise  and  conceived  in  the  true  spirit  of 
an  ancient  Roman.  On  the  conclusion  of  this  design  it  was  his 
intention  to  turn  his  arms  against  the  Punjaub,  which  he  expected  to 
reduce  in  the  course  of  a  couple  of  years,  and  which,  considering  the 
wealth  he  would  then  have  acquired,  and  the  amazing  resources  he 
would  have  possessed,  must  have  established  his  authority  on  a  firm 
and  solid  basis." 

With  the  advantage  of  our  modern  geographical  knowledge  we  are 
able  to  properly  estimate  the  full  scope  of  this  enterprise.  The 
territory  this  audacious  Irishman  proposed  to  invade,  includes  the  two 
vast  provinces  which  now  constitute  the  entire  western  frontier  of 
the  British  Empire  in  India.  Their  annexation  cost  the  English  three 
great  wars.  Well  might  Captain  Francklin  write  that  the  scheme 
"  was  conceived  in  the  true  spirit  of  an  ancient  Roman."  A  conquest 
whose  limits  were  determined  by  Karachi,  Lahore,  and  Delhi,  was  a 
task  worthy  of  a  heroic  age. 

Although  it  was  ambition  which  first  led  Thomas  to  the  considera- 
tion of  this  delirious  scheme,  there  were  other  causes  that  operated  in 
commending  it  to  his  mind.  He  was  conscious  of  the  increasing 
jealousy  and  hostility  of  General  Perron,  whose  encroaching  arms  and 
despotic  power  threatened  to  swallow  up  the  little  principality  of 
Hariana.  From  such  an  inconsiderable  base  of  operations  as  Hansi, 
Thomas  could  not  hope  to  successfully  resist  the  wealth  of  men  and 
material  possessed  by  Perron.  But  with  the  Panjab  at  his  back 
there  was  no  hostile  combination  he  would  have  feared,  and  with  that 
magnificent  recruiting  ground  to  draw  upon,  he  could  have  created 
an  army  that  might  reasonably  hope  to  cope  with  the  Brigades  of 
Hindustan. 

To  the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  the  project  Thomas  was  not  blind  : 
but  he  feared  those  which  lurked  in  his  rear,  not  those  which  existed 
in  front.  And  it  was  with  a  view  of  securing  himself  against  an 
attack  from  Sindhia  that  about  this  time  he  made  definite  overtures 
to  the  British  Government.  In  these  he  announced  his  intention  of 
declaring  war  against  the  Sikhs,  who  were,  he  observed,  equally  the 
enemies  of  the  Marathas  and  the  English.  To  enable  him  to  attaek 
them  with  confidence  he  desired  an  assurance  of  neutrality  from 


174  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

General  Perron,  under  guarantee  from  the  Governor-General.  In 
return  for  tins  Thomas  offered  "  to  advance  and  take  possession  of 
the  Punjaub,  and  give  up  his  army  to  the  direction  and  control  of  the 
English ;  to  take  the  country,  and,  in  short,  to  become  an  active 
partisan  in  their  cause.  By  this  plan,:'he  explained,  "I  have  nothing 
in  view  but  the  welfare  of  my  King  and  country ;  it  is  not  to  better 
myself  that  I  have  thought  of  it ;  but  I  should  be  sorry  to  see  my 
conquests  fall  to  the  Mahrattas,  for  I  wish  to  give  them  to  my  King, 
and  to  serve  him  the  remainder  of  my  days.  This  I  can  only  do  as 
a  soldier  in  this  part  of  the  world  ?  " 

Political  considerations  made  it  quite  impossible  for  the  Marquis 
Wellesley  to  entertain  these  proposals.  They  were  advanced  at 
a  time  when  he  had  his  hands  fully  occupied  with  the  expedition  to 
Egypt,  and  the  unsettled  state  of  affairs  in  the  Deccan,  where  signs  of 
trouble  were  looming  which  would  require  all  the  resources  of  the 
English  power  to  successfully  oppose.  In  consequence  of  this 
Thomas's  design  of  an  invasion  of  the  Panjab  was  never  carried 
out  in  its  entirety,  but  was  confined  to  the  short  but  brilliant 
campaign  which  he  undertook  in  the  year  1801. 

A  plausible  excuse  for  the  formality  of  a  declaration  of  war  against 
the  Sikhs  was  afforded  by  the  conduct  of  the  Rajah  of  Patiala,  who, 
in  the  preceding  year,  had  broken  his  treaty  of  peace  with  Thomas, 
and  assisted  his  enemies  to  harass  him  during  his  return  from  the 
Bikanir  expedition.  Sahib  Singh  of  Patiala,  whose  forces  consisted  of 
1,500  cavalry  and  1,000  infantry,  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  laying 
siege  to  a  fort  in  which  his  Amazonian  sister  Kunur  had  taken  refuge 
from  his  resentment.  Thomas,  with  his  native  chivalry,  determined 
to  march  to  this  lady's  relief,  but  on  his  approach  Sahib  Singh 
hurriedly  raised  the  seige  and  retired  within  the  fortifications  of 
Sunatn,  a  large  town  thirty  miles  to  the  west  of  Patiala.  Thomas 
followed  on  his  track  with  the  intention  of  storming  the  place,  but  was 
deterred  from  doing  so  by  the  unexpected  arrival  of  Tara  Singh,  an 
aUy  and  son-in-law  of  Sahib  Singh,  who  brought  with  him  a  large 
force.  The  appearance  of  these  reinforcements  gave  confidence  to  the 
surrounding  peasantry,  and  they  rose  en  masse  to  join  the  Patiala 
chief.  Thomas  accordingly  determined  on  more  prudential  tactics, 
and  striking  camp  marched  twenty-four  miles  to  a  town  called  Belad. 
But  he  was  followed  by  a  large  body  of  the  enemy's  cavalry,  who 
concealed  themselves  in  a  neighbouring  jungle,  intending  to  make 
a  sudden  attack  on  his  rear  when  he  advanced  to  the  storm. 

Belad  was  a  strongly  fortified  place,  as  indeed  were  all  the  towns 
and  villages  in  the  district,  owing  to  its  constant  state  of  warfare. 


THE  INVASION  OF  THE  SUTLEJ  STATES.          175 

The  walls  were  nine  feet  in  thickness,  and  it  was  surrounded  by 
a  ditch  twenty  feet  deep,  and  defended  by  a  numerous  garrison. 
Nevertheless  Thomas,  who  was  apprised  of  the  proximity  of  the 
Patiala  troops,  determined  to  storm  it  without  any  loss  of  time,  and 
before  the  latter  could  form  a  junction  with  the  garrison,  or  afford 
external  aid. 

Fortune  favoured  him,  and  he  carried  the  place  by  a  vigorous 
assault,  with  a  loss  of  only  eighty  of  his  own  people.  A  rancorous 
enmity  had  long  existed  between  his  troops,  who  were  chiefly 
Muhamraadans,  and  the  Sikhs,  and  in  the  heat  of  racial  conflict,  despite 
all  his  attempts  to  stay  the  slaughter,  no  less  than  500  of  the  garrison 
were  put  to  the  sword.  Upon  which  the  townspeople  who  survived, 
ransomed  their  lives  by  the  payment  of  a  large  sum  of  money. 

Having  thus  established  himself  in  a  situation  of  strength  and  safetj', 
Thomas  directed  his  attention  to  dividing  the  force  that  had  followed 
him,  and  gradually  increased  to  not  less  than  10,000  men,  intending  if 
possible  to  attack  and  defeat  them  in  detail.  He  also  experienced  an 
inclination  "  to  explore  the  neighbouring  country  and  raise  contribu- 
tions." To  effect  these  objects  he  presently  marched  to  a  central 
position  between  the  towns  of  Patiala  and  Sunam,  but  soon  changed 
his  intention  on  a  chance  presenting  itself  of  punishing  Tara  Singh, 
whose  assistance  to  Sahib  Singh  had  obliged  Thomas  to  raise  the 
siege  of  Sunam.  Tara  Singh's  capital  was  at  a  place  called  Maler 
Kotla,  which  lay  a  short  distance  to  the  north-west  of  Thomas's 
position,  and  he  now  perceived  an  opportunity  of  attacking  it  by 
surprise  in  the  absence  of  its  chief,  which  he  at  once  proceeded  to 
put  into  execution.  The  road  lay  through  a  thick  jungle,  well 
adapted  for  ambuscade,  and  as  his  men  were  making  their  way  along, 
a  smart  firing  was  suddenly  heard  in  the  front.  Hurrying  forward 
Thomas  found  his  advance  guard  had  been  attacked  by  a  superior 
force  of  the  enemy,  just  as  they  were  emerging  into  an  extensive  open 
plain,  and  presently  discovered  that  this  was  a  ruse  to  draw  his 
observation  away  from  a  large  and  populous  town  named  Bhat, 
situated  close  at  hand,  and  belonging  to  Tara  Singh. 

Having  received  information  of  the  proximity  of  this  place,  Thomas 
marched  against  it.  The  walls  of  the  fort  were  twelve  feet  thick  and 
thirty  feet  high,  with  four  strong  bastions,  well  fortified  with  cannon, 
commanding  the  town  below,  as  well  as  the  plain  adjoining.  It  was 
defended  by  3,000  troops,  and  in  all  respects  a  place  difficult  to  take  ; 
but  Thomas  was  determined  to  capture  it,  and  resolved  on  an  im- 
mediate assault.  Dividing  his  force  into  two  columns,  he  led  one 
himself  against  the  centre  of  the  town,  whilst  one  of  his  officers 


176  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

named  Hopkins  led  the  other  against  the  eastern  angle.  The  affair 
was  desperate,  for  though  the  town  was  soon  set  on  fire,  the  enemy 
made  a  brave  and  stubborn  resistance.  Hopkins,  advancing  with  the 
utmost  gallantry,  stormed  the  quarter  assigned  to  him,  but,  in  the 
moment  of  victory,  fell  wounded,  and  several  other  officers  were 
killed  or  disabled  by  the  tremendous  fire  kept  up  from  the  bastions. 
The  affair  now  began  to  present  a  doubtful  aspect,  especially  when 
a  large  body  of  the  Patiala  cavalry  made  their  appearance  in  the  rear, 
just  as  Thomas's  troops,  although  in  actual  possession  of  the  town, 
were  beginning  to  waver  and  show  signs  of  retreating,  either  because 
of  the  excessive  heat  thrown  out  from  the  burning  buildings,  or  from 
the  uncommonly  severe  fire  poured  down  upon  them  from  above. 
The  danger  was,  however,  averted  by  Thomas's  presence  of  mind. 
Bringing  up  a  6-pounder  gun  close  to  the  gates  of  the  citadel,  he 
demolished  them  by  repeated  discharges.  Whereupon  the  enemy 
gave  up  the  contest,  and  by  timely  submission  saved  a  further  effusion 
of  blood  on  both  sides,  and  paid  a  ransom  of  Es.50,000. 

Although  Tara  Singh  was  a  Sikh,  a  great  portion  of  the  population 
of  Maler  Kotla  were  Muhammadans,  who,  when  they  heard  of  the 
capture  of  Bhat,  showed  a  disposition  to  join  Thomas,  and  eventually 
paid  him  a  contribution,  and  united  their  troops  with  his. 

Meanwhile  the  Kajah  of  Patiala  had  not  been  idle.  To  the  east- 
ward of  his  capital  was  the  district  of  Shahabud,  belonging  to  a  Sikh 
chief  of  the  name  of  Karram  Singh,  to  whose  son  Sahib  Singh  offered 
his  daughter  in  marriage  if  he  would  assist  against  Thomas.  The 
proposal  being  accepted,  5,000  of  the  Shahabad  troops  joined  the 
Patiala  army,  and  on  their  arrival  a  grand  council  of  war  was  held, 
whereat  it  was  resolved  that  a  general  combination  of  the  Sikh  states 
should  be  formed  to  expel  Thomas  from  the  country. 

For  by  this  tune  Thomas  had  fully  justified  his  claim  to  the  title  of 
Jowruj  Jang.  He  had  become  a  veritable  scourge  to  the  Sutlej 
states,  and  made  his  shadow  dreaded  wherever  it  fell.  Victory 
followed  his  arms,  and  none  seemed  capable  of  resisting  him.  The 
confederation  of  such  discordant  elements  as  the  Sikh  clans  was  the 
best  testimony  to  his  power  and  prestige.  Information  of  this  alliance 
soon  reached  him  through  his  spies,  but  it  raised  no  serious  appre- 
hensions in  his  breast,  for  he  considered  that  the  diversity  of  interests 
and  counsels  that  prevailed  in  the  enemy's  camp,  and  the  well-known 
jealousies  of  their  chiefs,  would  render  it  difficult  for  them  to  act  in 
harmony,  or  carry  out  any  preconcerted  plan  with  loyalty  to  one 
another. 

But  at  this  juncture  an  event  occurred  which   tempted   Thomas 


THE  INVASION  OF  THE  SUTLEJ  STATES.          177 

from  the  path  of  prudence,  and  turned  the  scale  of  circumstances 
against  him.  Adjoining  the  Maler  Kotla  country  was  the  territory 
of  Eai  Elias,  a  youth  who  had  recently  succeeded  his  father,  Eai 
Kalian,  in  his  inheritance.  Kai  Elias's  district  ran  contiguous  with 
the  Sutlej  river,  and  included  the  important  cities  of  Ludhiana  and 
Firozpur.  In  consequence  of  his  tender  age  his  mother  had  assumed 
the  reins  of  government,  but  from  inexperience,  and  the  disadvantages 
of  her  sex,  proved  wholly  unable  to  rule  a  country  producing  a  revenue 
of  five  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  surrounded  by  enemies  eager  to  prey  on 
it.  Taking  advantage  of  her  weakness  the  Sikhs  had  attacked  her 
son's  districts  in  the  previous  year,  and  taken  possession  of  a  great 
portion  of  them,  only  a  few  strong  forts  remaining  to  the  Rani.  Soon 
after  this  Zaman  Shah,  the  King  of  Kabul,  arrived  at  Lahore,  which 
was  only  seventy  miles  distant  from  Eai  Elias's  capital,  and  to  him 
the  Eani  appealed  for  assistance  to  reinstate  her  son  in  his  authority. 
Hearing  of  this  the  Sikhs  evacuated  the  villages  they  had  occupied, 
and  the  peasantry  returned  to  their  allegiance,  and  matters  were 
beginning  to  assume  a  brighter  aspect  when  a  fresh  danger  arose, 
which  reduced  the  Eani  to  even  deeper  misfortunes  than  those  from 
which  she  had  just  emerged. 

A  certain  Sikh  named  Sahib  Singh  (not  to  be  confounded  with  the 
ruler  of  Patiala)  who  was  a  Behdi  of  the  race  of  Nanak,  the  founder 
and  prophet  of  the  Sikh  nation,  counterfeited  religious  inspiration,  and 
having  by  fraud  and  artifice  imposed  on  his  countrymen,  collected 
a  large  force  and  proceeded  to  possess  himself  of  the  country  of  Eai 
Elias.  As  Zaman  Shah  had  by  this  time  returned  to  Kabul,  no  help 
could  be  expected  from  that  sovereign,  and  the  Eani  was  soon 
reduced  to  a  truly  deplorable  situation,  and  obliged  in  her  extremity 
to  sue  for  terms  from  her  enemies.  A  treaty  was  drawn  up  by  which 
she  agreed  to  pay  a  sum  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees  to  the  Sikhs  as 
ransom,  but  Sahib  Singh,  the  imposter,  refused  to  approve  it,  and 
demanded  the  surrender  of  the  whole  of  her  country.  As  a  last 
resource  the  Eani  sent  her  young  son  to  make  an  appeal  in  person, 
and  try  to  obtain  an  abatement  of  these  harsh  terms  ;  whereupon  the 
youth  was  treacherously  seized  and  retained  a  prisoner  by  Sahib 
Singh,  but  was  shortly  released  by  a  Sikh  chief  named  Karram  Singh, 
whose  credulity  could  no  longer  be  imposed  upon  by  the  pretended 
prophet,  and  who  detached  himself  from  his  cause  and  carried  Eai 
Elias  to  a  place  of  safety.  Sahib  Singh  immediately  returned  to  the 
attack  of  the  Eani's  country,  and  was  occupied  in  the  siege  of 
Ludhiana,  one  of  the  chief  towns  in  it,  when  Thomas  appeared  upon 
the  scene  and  captured  Bhat. 

12 


178  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

In  this  situation  of  her  affairs  the  Rani  determined  to  apply  to 
Jowruj  Jung  for  assistance  in  expelling  Sahib  Singh,  and  despatched 
a  confidential  agent  to  his  camp,  offering  him  a  lakh  of  rupees  to 
reinstate  her  son  in  power,  and  promising  him  an  annual  tribute  of 
Rs.50,000  a  year  to  guarantee  the  youth  in  undisturbed  possession. 
Although  this  proposal  seemed  likely  to  drag  Thomas  into  a  pro- 
longed war  he  was  so  touched  by  "  the  fallen  condition  of  an  ancient 
and  honourable  family  "  that  he  acceded  to  it.  Lovely  woman  in 
distress  never  appealed  in  vain  to  this  susceptible  Irishman,  and 
whether  it  was  the  Witch  of  Sardhana,  the  Amazon  of  Patiala,  or  the 
widow  of  Ludhiana,  it  needed  but  a  woman's  cry  to  bring  him  to  the 
rescue. 

Hearing  of  these  negotiations  Sahib  Singh,  the  impostor,  wrote  to 
Thomas,  threatening  him  with  punishment,  and  warning  him  "  if  he 
wished  for  quarter  "  to  send  a  Vakil  at  once  to  "  the  successor  of 
Nanak  and  the  Sovereign  of  the  Sikh  nation  " — such  being  the  dignity 
to  which  the  Behdi  laid  claim  :  and  he  concluded  his  letter  by 
recommending  "implicit  obedience  to  his  commands." 

The  idea  of  Thomas  "  wishing  for  quarter  "  at  the  hand  of  a  Sikh 
was  distinctly  precious :  and  there  was  a  splendid  audacity  of  ex- 
pression in  the  recommendation  of  "implicit  obedience"  from  Jowruj 
Jung.  Equally  indignant  at  the  impertinence  of  the  language  and 
the  menace,  Thomas  replied  that  he  was  accustomed  to  receive,  not 
to  send  Vakils,  and  that  Sahib  Singh  had  better  pay  down  his  con- 
tribution before  he  was  compelled,  and  immediately  evacuate  the 
country  of  Eai  Elias.  This  answer  brought  matters  to  a  point,  and 
the  imposter  prepared  to  make  good  his  threats. 

Meanwhile  Rai  Elias  left  the  Kajah  of  Patiala,  with  whom  he  had 
taken  refuge  after  leaving  Karram  Singh,  and  came  of  his  own  accord 
to  Thomas's  camp.  "  The  comely  appearance  of  the  youth,"  observes 
the  Irishman,  "  his  fallen  condition,  and  above  all  the  confidence  he 
showed  in  placing  his  whole  reliance  on  one  against  whom  he  was  so 
lately  leagued  in  enmity,  altogether  influenced  me  in  his  favour,  and 
determined  me  to  use  every  exertion  to  support  his  cause." 

The  Rajah  of  Patiala  now  joined  the  imposter  to  make  common 
cause  against  their  common  enemy.  Thomas  at  once  advanced 
against  them,  upon  which  "the  Sovereign  of  the  Sikhs"  inconti- 
nently fled,  his  followers  evacuating  the  country  faster  than  Thomas 
could  occupy  it.  So  rapid  was  the  Behdi's  retreat  that  in  one  place 
his  bed,  palanquin,  tent  and  baggage  were  all  found  abandoned.  His 
discomfiture  was  complete,  and  he  never  afterwards  occasioned  any 
disturbance. 


THE  INVASION  OF  THE  SUTLEJ  STATES.          179 

The  Rani  and  her  son  were  now  put  in  possession  of  their  territory, 
and  after  the  most  active  of  the  rebels  had  been  seized  and  punished, 
the  authority  of  the  young  chief  was  re-established.  But  although  the 
imposter  was  no  more,  the  Rajah  of  Patiala  still  kept  the  field,  and  was 
joined  by  several  other  chiefs.  He  now  advanced  at  the  head  of  15,000 
men  against  Thomas,  with  the  intention  of  driving  him  out  of  the 
country.  Several  skirmishes  took  place,  but  without  any  substantial 
results,  neither  party  being  desirous  of  risking  a  general  engagement. 
And  so  hostilities  continued  to  be  carried  on  in  a  desultory  manner,  the 
Sikhs  contenting  themselves  with  cutting  off  supplies  from  Thomas's 
camp,  and  preventing  him  from  collecting  forage.  But  as  all  this 
occurred  within  Rai  Elias's  territory,  and  occasioned  great  loss  by 
stopping  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  Thomas  desired  to  carry  the 
war  into  the  enemy's  country.  To  this,  however,  the  Rani  would 
not  consent,  pressing  him  to  stay  by  her  while  the  Sikhs  remained 
in  the  neighbourhood. 

So  long  as  prudence  allowed,  he  listened  to  these  solicitations,  but  at 
last  a  time  came  when  his  ammunition  began  to  fall  short,  and  he  was 
reluctantly  compelled  to  make  preparations  for  his  return  to  Hansi  to 
obtain  a  supply.  And  so,  much  against  her  will,  he  left  the  Rani  to 
sustain  her  authority  by  herself,  and  began  his  march  home- 
wards. 

The  Sikhs  at  once  closed  in  upon  his  rear  and  began  to  harass  him. 
This  behaviour  incited  him  to  retaliate  by  devastating  their  country 
through  which  he  passed.  And  there  was  a  further  satisfaction  in 
knowing  that  his  pursuit  by  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  was  operat- 
ing favourably  for  Rai  Elias,  since  it  drew  the  Sikhs  away  from  his 
districts,  which,  for  a  time  at  least,  would  be  freed  from  their 
depredations. 

Previous  to  his  setting  out  on  this  campaign  Thomas  had  effected  a 
treaty  with  two  powerful  Sikh  neighbours,  Bagh  Singh  of  Jhind,  and 
Lai  Singh  of  Kaithal,  by  which  they  solemnly  agreed  to  live  in  amity, 
and  particularly  to  abstain  from  invading  Hariana  during  Thomas's 
absence.  But  now  these  treacherous  chiefs,  perceiving  the  strong 
combination  that  had  been  formed  against  him,  broke  their  faith,  and 
joined  his  enemies.  They  had  not,  however,  rightly  reckoned  the 
character  of  the  man  whose  feelings  they  thus  outraged.  Thomas, 
by  forced  marches,  forged  ahead  of  his  pursuers,  and  led  his  troops 
against  the  fort  of  Kanhori,  which  belonged  to  Lai  Singh,  and  taking 
it  by  storm,  put  the  garrison  to  the  sword.  The  capture  of  this  place, 
which  was  only  forty-five  miles  distant  from  Patiala,  was  of  the 
greatest  importance  to  him,  for  its  situation  near  the  Ghaggar 


180  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

river,  and  on  the  borders  of  bis  own  districts,  afforded  Thomas  an 
excellent  advance  depot  for  stores  and  ammunition,  and  be  accordingly 
repaired  the  fortifications  and  garrisoned  it  with  a  large  force. 

This  done  he  collected  hostages  from  the  surrounding  country  as 
security  for  its  peaceful  behaviour,  and  marched  to  Retara,  another 
strong  fort,  belonging  to  the  Eaithal  chief,  and  was  on  the  point  of 
storming  this  when  the  garrison  of  500  men,  dreading  a  similar  fate 
to  that  experienced  by  the  inhabitants  of  Kanhori,  appealed  for  quarter, 
and  were  granted  it  on  payment  of  a  substantial  contribution,  and  the 
surrender  of  the  fort  with  its  contents  to  Thomas. 

From  Retara  Thomas  returned  to  Hansi,  where  he  learnt  that 
diiring  his  absence  Bapu  Sindhia,  the  Maratha  general,  had  invaded 
Hariana  under  orders  from  General  Perron,  but  had  fallen  back  on 
Delhi,  where  the  main  army  was  encamped,  directly  information 
reached  him  that  Thomas  was  returning  to  his  capital. 

The  main  Sikh  army,  which  had  not  relinquished  the  pursuit,  now 
began  to  suffer  seriously  from  want  of  water  and  supplies,  and  were 
eventually  compelled  to  abandon  active  operations  for  the  present, 
and  drawing  off  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kaithal,  there  to 
await  the  bursting  of  the  monsoon  rains  before  recommencing  hostili- 
ties. But  no  consideration  of  this  sort  hindered  Thomas  when  he  was 
on  the  war-path.  He  had  still  to  punish  the  Rajah  of  Jhind,  and 
marching  to  that  chiefs  district,  he  exacted  a  fine,  and  took  hostages. 
Thence  he  passed  on  to  lay  siege  to  Safidiin,  a  town  dependent  on  the 
same  ruler.  This  place  was  built  of  brick  and  surrounded  by  walls  of 
uncommon  height  and  strength,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  take  it  by 
a  sudden  assault.  Thomas  therefore  erected  three  redoubts  around  it, 
which  he  fortified  with  eighteen  12-  and  6-pounder  guns,  and  opened  a 
bombardment,  keeping  up  an  incessant  fire  from  early  dawn  till  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  at  which  hour,  fearing  the  place  might  be 
reinforced  during  the  night,  he  determined  on  a  storm.  The  garrison 
consisted  of  700  men,  300  of  whom  remained  in  the  fort,  whilst  the 
rest  sallied  bravely  out  and  attacked  Thomas's  advanced  posts  on  the 
first  signs  of  his  intention  to  assault,  but  most  of  them,  including  some 
chiefs  of  distinction,  were  put  to  the  sword  as  they  clambered  their 
way  out  of  the  deep  ditch  surrounding  the  place.  And  now  Thomas 
in  his  turn  delivered  his  attack,  and  attempted  to  mount  the  breach 
which  his  guns  had  made.  But  his  scaling  ladders  proved  too  short, 
and  his  men  were  involved  in  the  greatest  difficulty,  being  entirely 
exposed  to  the  enemy's  fire  without  any  possibility  of  returning  it. 
After  a  desperate  conflict  of  two  hours  he  was  compelled  to  draw  off 
with  a  loss  of  450  of  his  best  troops.  The  gallant  Hopkins,  who  had 


THE  INVASION  OF  THE  SUTLEJ  STATES.          181 

been,  as  usual,  conspicuous  by  his  ardour  during  the  assault,  was  again 
severely  wounded. 

But  the  enemy  had  also  suffered  greatly  in  the  earlier  part  of  the 
day,  and  now  attempted  to  escape  by  cutting  their  way  through 
Thomas's  line.  In  this  they  were  successful,  and  reached  the  shelter 
of  a  thick  forest  in  the  neighbourhood,  whilst  the  victors  marched  in 
and  occupied  the  abandoned  fort. 

It  does  not  speak  much  for  the  national  spirit  of  the  Sikhs  that 
during  this  time  their  main  army  lay  within  twenty-seven  miles  of 
Safidun,  and  yet  never  attempted  to  relieve  their  brethren  in  distress. 
It  was  also  a  fortunate  occurrence  for  Thomas  that  Bapu  Sindhia, 
who  was  encamped  fourteen  miles  to  the  south,  made  no  hostile 
movement.  Encouraged  by  this  immunity  from  attack  Thomas  now 
marched  against  the  main  Sikh  army  at  Kaithal,  to  renew  the  war 
which  had  been  suspended ;  but  his  late  feats  had  struck  a  chill  into 
the  hearts  of  his  enemies,  who  recognised  that  Jowruj  Jung  was  a 
masterful  man,  to  whom  it  was  better  to  submit  than  offer  resis- 
tance. So  soon  as  his  intentions  became  evident  to  the  Chief  of 
Patiala  and  his  allies  they  sent  four  Vakils  to  negotiate  for  peace, 
thus  admitting  his  advantage. 

Thomas,  despite  his  exhibition  of  energy  and  vigour,  was  sincerely 
desirous  of  terminating  the  war ;  for  he  was  informed  that  General 
Perron  was  preparing  to  march  from  Delhi  for  the  avowed  purpose  of 
assisting  the  Sikhs.  Although  this  was  not  exactly  the  case,  it  was 
certain  that  Perron  was  bent  on  measuring  swords  with  Thomas. 
Added  to  these  considerations  was  the  occurrence  of  disturbances 
which  had  broken  out  near  Hansi,  and  required  care  to  avert  danger. 
Thomas,  therefore,  wisely  decided  to  profit  by  the  enormous  prestige 
he  now  enjoyed,  and  agreed  to  terms.  It  was  settled  that  the  Sikhs 
should  pay  him  an  indemnity  of  Bs.135,000,  and  renounce  all  preten- 
sions to  the  country  of  Eai  Elias  ;  that  the  Chief  of  Patiala  should  be 
reconciled  to  his  sister,  Kunur,  who  was  to  be  reinstated  in  the  property 
confiscated  from  her ;  that  certain  districts  on  the  frontier  should  be 
ceded  to  Thomas;  and  finally  that  the  Chief  of  Patiala  should  sub- 
sidise two  battalions  of  infantry,  who  were  to  be  stationed  to  keep  order 
on  the  boundary,  as  a  safeguard  to  either  party. 

It  was  a  treaty  which  did  honour  to  Thomas,  not  only  because  it 
asserted  his  complete  mastery  over  his  enemies  and  secured  him  solid 
advantages,  but  because  two  of  its  principal  stipulations  showed  how 
the  protection  of  the  weak,  and  the  rehabilitation  of  an  injured  woman 
had  a  first  place  in  his  warm  Irish  heart,  and  evoked  the  support  of 
his  chivalrous  nature. 


182  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

"  Thus,"  he  observes  in  his  memoirs,  "  ended  a  campaign  of  seven 
months,  in  which  I  had  been  more  successful  than  I  could  possibly 
have  expected  when  I  first  took  the  field  with  a  force  consisting  of 
5,000  men  and  36  pieces  of  cannon.  I  lost  in  killed,  wounded 
and  disabled,  nearly  one-third  of  my  force  ;  but  the  enemy  lost  5,000 
persons  of  all  descriptions.  I  realised  near  Rs.200,000,  exclusive  of 
the  pay  of  my  army,  and  was  to  receive  an  additional  Es.100,000  for 
the  hostages  which  were  delivered  up.  I  explored  the  country,  formed 
alliances,  and,  in  short,  was  DICTATOR  in  all  the  countries  belonging  to 
the  Sikhs  south  of  Sutlej." 

Directly  this  treaty  was  concluded  Thomas  made  an  astonishingly 
rapid  march  back  to  Hansi,  to  the  consternation  and  amazement  of 
General  Perron,  who  was  actively  preparing  for  an  attack  on  that 
town,  in  the  belief  that  its  master  was  many  miles  away.  This  extra- 
ordinary display  of  vitality  confounded  Perron,  who,  in  the  changed 
aspect  of  affairs,  began  to  consider  the  advisability  of  substituting 
negotiations  for  action. 

But  the  star  of  Jowruj  Jung  had  passed  its  meridian  height  and  was 
now  on  the  decline.  Once  or  twice  it  was  destined  to  blaze  brightly 
out  through  the  dark  clouds  that  shrouded  its  setting  ;  but  the  cam- 
paign that  carried  him  conquering  to  the  Sutlej  and  safely  back  was 
his  last  victorious  effort.  Conceived  in  a  spirit  of  the  boldest  enter- 
prise ;  conducted  with  an  audacity  as  successful  as  it  was  splendid, 
and  concluded  with  a  vigour  that  astounded  his  enemies,  it  fitly  crowns 
the  dashing  and  defiant  career  of  this  gallant  Irish  adventurer.  And 
more  than  this,  it  compels  the  belief  that  under  a  happier  destiny  he 
might  have  carried  into  effect  the  ambitious  scheme  of  conquest  which 
he  marked  out  for  achievement,  but  never  lived  to  realise. 

The  end  was  drawing  near :  his  work  was  nearly  done.  But  its 
memory  was  to  remain.  For  in  many  a  Panjab  village,  for  many  a 
long  year  after  he  had  passed  from  the  scene  of  his  exploits,  the 
whisper  of  the  name  of  Jowruj  Jung  could  hush  children  into  silence, 
and  bring  a  keen  alert  look  into  the  grave  dusky  faces  of  grey-bearded 
warriors,  who  remembered  how,  in  the  days  of  their  youth,  the  sword 
blows  of  the  sailor  Sahib  were  wont  to  fall  fast  and  thick  amongst 
flying  Sikh  armies,  scourging  and  scattering  them  like  the  flail  of  the 
thresher  descending  upon  the  trampled  sheaves  of  com. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

WAR  WITH  PERRON.   THE  BATTLE  OF  GEORGEGARH. 
1801. 

r"PHE  extraordinary  success  of  Thomas's  career,  the  alarmirig  growth 
•1  of  his  power,  and  his  singularly  ambitious  nature,  had  for  some 
time  marked  him  out  as  an  object  of  suspicion  to  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia 
and  of  jealousy  to  General  Perron.  More  than  once  the  Maratha 
prince  had  in  the  past  offered  service  to  Thomas,  and  these  offers 
had  recently  been  revived,  but  Thomas  refused  them,  owing  to  his 
disinch'nation  to  serve  in  conjunction  with  Perron,  whom  he  cordially 
hated.  And  so  no  arrangement  was  concluded,  and  meanwhile  Thomas 
gradually  increased  his  force  to  eight  battalions  of  regular  infantry  of 
750  men  each,  1,500  Rohillas,  2,000  garrison  troops,  1,000  cavalry, 
and  50  guns.  This  little  army,  from  a  numerical  point  of  view, 
was  sufficiently  powerful  to  create  distrust,  but  it  was  rendered  doubly 
formidable  from  the  prowess  and  prestige  of  its  commander,  "  who 
had  a  spirit  and  elevation  of  mind  not  to  be  subdued  by  accident,  or 
depressed  by  ill-fortune,"  and  from  the  valour  and  confidence  which 
animated  all  ranks  after  an  almost  unbroken  career  of  victory. 

The  recent  invasion  of  the  Sutlej  states  had  raised  Thomas  to  a 
distinct  place  in  the  community  of  Indian  powers,  whilst  the  lawless 
and  predatory  instinct  that  swayed  him  made  his  army  a  source  of 
constant  terror  to  the  neighbouring  countries  he  so  frequently 
devastated  and  laid  under  contribution.  Even  to  the  Maratha 
power  itself  Jowruj  Jung  had  become  a  standing  menace,  for  his 
proximity  to  Delhi,  and  the  dash  and  daring  of  his  system  of 
warfare,  made  a  coup  de  main  against  the  capital  and  the  person 
of  the  Emperor  not  outside  the  bounds  of  possibility. 

This  in  itself  was  a  sufficient  reason  for  Perron's  determination  to 
measure  swords  with  the  conqueror  of  Hariana.  But  there  was 
another  consideration  which  influenced  him,  and  that  was  Thomas's 

183 


184  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

notorious  hatred  of  Frenchmen.  Jowruj  Jung  suffered  from  the 
acutest  form  of  Francophobia  prevalent  at  a  time  when  the  disease 
was  very  virulent.  It  was  on  this  ground  that  he  refused  Sindhia's 
proposals,  explaining  that  "  M.  Perron  and  himself  being  subjects  of 
different  nations  then  in  a  state  of  actual  hostility  against  each  other, 
it  was  impossible  they  could  ever  act  in  concert  or  with  cordiality. 
He  was  moreover  convinced  that  as  a  Frenchman  and  possessed  of  a 
national  enmity  against  him,  M.  Perron  would  always  be  induced  to 
represent  his  actions  in  a  light  most  unfavourable  to  his  interests." 
This  inference  was  certainly  sufficiently  justified  by  Perron's 
behaviour  towards  the  British  officers  in  his  army.  He  was  at  this 
time  bent  on  the  establishment  of  a  French  dominion  in  Hindustan, 
to  which  end  he  had  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  French 
Government.  These  schemes  and  ambitions  undoubtedly  influenced 
his  policy  towards  Thomas,  for  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  view  with 
equanimity  the  existence  on  his  weakest  flank  of  a  growing  power, 
whose  sympathies  were  intensely  British.  He  therefore  urged  upon 
Sindhia  the  necessity  of  crushing  the  army  of  the  audacious  adventurer 
of  Hansi,  whose  increasing  fame  threatened  to  eclipse  that  of  Perron 
himself. 

Whatever  Perron  suggested,  Sindhia  of  necessity  approved  and 
sanctioned,  for  he  was  too  harassed  and  tormented  by  difficulties  in  the 
Deccan  to  exert  any  real  authority  in  Hindustan.  But  true  to  the 
traditions  of  craft  and  intrigue  that  governed  the  Maratha  mind, 
Daulat  Riio  first  attempted  a  diplomatic  solution,  and  once  more 
repeated  his  invitation  to  Thomas  to  join  his  standard.  Thomas  met 
the  proposal  with  his  former  reply.  "  Principles  of  honour,"  he 
wrote,  "forbid  me  from  acting  under  the  command  of  a  Frenchman. 
But  should  you  think  proper  to  appoint  me  to  the  management  of 
operations,  either  offensive  or  defensive,  in  any  part  of  the  Deccan, 
Hindostan,  or  the  Punjaub,  I  am  ready  and  willing  to  undertake  the 
charge  so  soon  as  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  payment  of  my 
troops  can  be  completed." 

To  this  Sindhia,  under  Perron's  direction,  replied  "  That  it  was  im- 
possible to  consent  to  such  a  proposal,  as  it  would  create  an  unfavour- 
able precedent;  and  he  recommended  Thomas  to  curb  his  national 
enmity,  and  consider  the  matter  in  a  light  more  favourable  for  the 
interests  of  the  service." 

Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  at  the  end  of  the  Sutlej  campaign, 
when  it  became  evident  that  a  conflict  between  Thomas  and  Perron 
could  be  no  longer  deferred.  The  Sikhs,  smarting  under  the  defeat 
they  had  suffered,  helped  to  bring  matters  to  a  head  by  opening  nego- 


WAR  WITH  PERRON.  185 

tiations  with  Perron,  to  whom  they  offered  a  subsidy  of  five  lakhs  of 
rupees  and  a  contingent  of  10,000  cavalry,  if  he  would  undertake 
the  destruction  of  their  dreaded  enemy. 

This  offer  came  at  an  opportune  moment, .for  Perron  was  fully 
determined  in  his  mind  to  bring  matters  to  a  summary  conclusion, 
either  by  force  of  arms,  or  by  absorbing  Thomas's  army  in  his  own. 
So  he  wrote  a  sort  of  ultimatum  to  Thomas,  requesting  him  to  send  a 
Vakil  to  confer  upon  the  proposals  recently  made  by  Sindhia.  But 
no  sooner  was  this  communication  despatched  than  news  reached 
Delhi  of  the  disastrous  defeat  of  Sindhia's  forces  at  Ujjain  by  Holkar, 
which  in  a  moment  changed  the  aspect  of  affairs.  Orders  followed  for 
Perron  to  temporise  with  Thomas,  and  proceed  immediately  to  the 
Deccan  with  all  his  troops,  to  assist  in  re-establishing  his  master's 
power,  which  had  received  a  serious  shock. 

This  was  an  ominous  blow  to  Perron.  His  personal  interests  were 
centred  in  Hindustan,-  a  withdrawal  from  which  would  be  fatal.  The 
negotiations  which  he  had  recently  opened  with  the  French  Govern- 
ment required  both  the  consolidation  of  his  power  at  Delhi,  and  that 
it  should  be  supreme  there.  To  detach  all,  or  even  a  portion  of  his 
troops  to  Ujjain  would  be  political  suicide.  It  was  far  more  important 
to  him  to  destroy  Thomas  than  to  defeat  Holkar.  The  temporary 
success  of  the  latter  might  even  be  advantageous  to  his  personal 
schemes  if  it  weakened  Sindhia :  for  Daulat  Rao's  weakness  was 
Perron's  strength  so  long  as  the  latter  could  keep  his  Brigades  around 
him.  Eumours  reached  him  of  several  alliances  which  Thomas  was 
negotiating  with  the  Begum  Somru,  the  Rajahs  of  Jaipur  and  Ulwar, 
with  sundry  Sikh  chiefs,  with  Lakwa  Dada,  and  with  Jaswant  Rao 
Holkar  himself.  As  a  fact,  Holkar  had  repeatedly  urged  Thomas  to 
commence  hostilities,  and  promised  to  assist  him  with  men  and 
money.  Thomas  was  also  in  communication  with  Jean  Baptiste  la 
Fontaine,  who  commanded  six  battalions  of  Filoze's  party  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Sindhia.  This  pairing  of  opposite  cards  comes  on  the  authority 
of  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  who  writes  :  "  Such  are  the  singularity  and 
treachery  of  Eastern  politics,  that  two  of  Scindia's  Brigades,  Sombre's 
and  Filoze's,  had  agreed  to  assist  Thomas  against  Daulat  Rao's  com- 
uiander-in-chief  Perron  !  "  For  the  moment  it  almost  appeared  as 
though  Thomas  would  be  successful  in  forming  an  overwhelming  com- 
bination against  his  enemies,  whilst  he  was  considerably  augmenting  his 
own  force,  having  made  preparations  to  raise  six  more  battalions,  the 
recruits  for  which  were  on  their  way  to  join  him,  and  the  arms  ready 
for  them.  A  careful  review  of  the  comparative  strength  of  Thomas  and 
Perron  at  this  time  seems  to  favour  the  former. 


186  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

Perhaps  Perron  realised  this ;  but  he  had  gone  too  far  to  draw  back. 
The  very  existence  of  his  power  depended  upon  the  destruction  of 
Thomas's.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  obey  Sindhia's  orders  and 
march  with  his  battalions  to  the  Deccan,  leaving  Hindustan  shorn  of 
troops.  So  under  various  pretexts  he  avoided  starting  for  Ujjain,  and 
meanwhile  cogitated  on  an  extremely  clever  scheme  which,  if  success- 
ful, would  at  one  and  the  same  tune  undermine  Thomas's  power,  and 
pacify  Sindhia's  importunity.  This  was  nothing  more  or  less  than 
sending  Thomas  to  do  the  work  in  the  Deccan,  and  retaining  his 
own  Brigades  intact  in  Hindustan.  With  this  design  in  his  mind 
Perron  received  the  Vakil  Thomas  sent  him  with  marked  favour,  and 
presently  requested  a  personal  interview  with  his  master. 

Thomas  consented,  and  the  fort  of  Bahadurgarh  was  fixed  for  the 
meeting.  Thither  Perron  sent  his  Third  Brigade  of  10  battalions 
of  infantry  under  Bourguien  and  2,000  regular  horse,  following  them 
from  his  headquarters  at  Koil,  about  the  middle  of  August.  At 
the  same  time  Thomas  marched  out  of  Hansi  to  attend  the  interview. 
On  approaching  Bahadurgarh,  which  was  situated  a  few  miles  to  the 
north-west  of  Delhi,  he  was  met  by  Captain  L.  F.  Smith,  who  was 
deputed  to  conduct  him  to  the  place  of  meeting.  Thomas  was  not 
altogether  without  suspicion  of  Perron's  good  faith,  and  this  distrust 
was  increased  by  information  which  reached  him  that  the  General  had 
recently  put  to  death  a  Sikh  chief,  who  had  revolted  from  Sindhia,  and 
of  whose  person  he  had  obtained  possession  by  treacherous  means. 
Thomas,  therefore,  took  with  him  as  a  personal  escort,  two  of  his  most 
approved  battalions  and  300  cavalry,  and  on  the  19th  of  August, 
1801,  arrived  and  encamped  two  miles'  distant  from  Perron's  lines  at 
Bahadurgarh. 

The  next  day  an  interview  took  place.  Thomas  was  determined  to 
observe  the  greatest  circumspection,  but  both  he  and  Perron  were  too 
cunning  to  deceive  each  other  long.  One  can  imagine  the  meeting  of 
the  vain-glorious  Frenchman  and  the  hot-headed  Irishman,  each  in 
his  own  way  typical  of  the  European  nations  they  represented.  Both 
were  self-made  men,  sprung  from  the  same  low  strata  of  seafaring  life ; 
both  had  fought  their  way  to  distinction  and  power  by  similar 
methods,  and  reached  an  extraordinary  elevation.  Both,  doubtless, 
laboured  under  exaggerated  ideas  of  the  etiquette  and  conduct  required 
in  diplomatic  dealing.  The  mind  pictures  the  forced  Gallic  politeness 
of  the  one,  and  the  Tipperary  punctilio  of  the  other,  as  they  attempted 
to  disguise  the  racial  hatred  that  filled  their  hearts.  Perron  with  his 
solitary  hand — he  had  lost  one  at  the  siege  of  Kanaund  in  1793 — 
waving  the  great,  tall  Irishman  into  the  place  of  honour,  must  have 


WAR  WITH  PERRON.  187 

adjured  the  scelerat  under  his  breath ;  and  Thomas  cursed  the  d d 

Frenchman  as  he  glared  down  on  him  and  passed  to  his  seat.  But  the 
pantomime  of  politeness  passed  off  well  enough,  and  although  no  busi- 
ness was  transacted,  the  way  was  paved  for  future  negotiations. 

Several  conferences  took  place  after  this,  and  when  the  first  sense  of 
distrust  and  awkwardness  wore  off,  friendly  relations  were  established, 
if  not  between  Perron  and  Thomas,  at  least  between  the  latter  and  the 
European  officers  of  Bourguien's  Third  Brigade,  with  whom  he  dined 
repeatedly.  Amongst  these  was  Colonel  (then  Captain)  James  Skin- 
ner (to  whose  excellent  memoirs  much  of  the  following  matter  is 
indebted),  who  states  that  "  all  seemed  to  be  going  on  well,"  and 
describes  Thomas's  troops  as  "  looking  well,  but  not  over-disciplined ; 
but  his  artillery  was  very  fine  and  the  bullocks  particularly  good  and 
strong."  Captains  Hearsey,  Hopkins,  and  Birch,  three  of  Thomas's 
officers,  were  in  his  camp,  as  well  as  some  Europeans  acting  as  ser- 
geants in  his  artillery,  so  that  he  must  have  made  a  very  creditable 
show. 

Thomas  had  already  received  information  about  Sindhia's  defeat  at 
Ujjain  and  the  unfavourable  aspect  of  the  Prince's  affairs,  and  this 
naturally  strengthened  his  hand,  and  led  him  to  hope  that  the  negotia- 
tions would  be  productive  of  an  amicable  adjustment  of  all  former  diffi- 
culties, and  lead  to  future  tranquillity  and  a  good  understanding 
between  him  and  Perron.  But  when  the  latter  indicated  the  con- 
ditions on  which  it  was  proposed  to  entertain  Thomas's  services,  the 
demand  was  equally  sudden  and  unexpected,  and  quite  took  Thomas 
aback.  He  was  to  surrender  his  district  of  Jhajjar,  but  to  be  permitted 
to  retain  the  fort  of  Hansi ;  he  was  to  rank  as  a  colonel  in  Sindhia's 
service,  with  a  pay  of  Bs.60,000  a  month  for  his  corps,  but  to  serve 
under  Perron's  orders.  These  terms  were  unfavourable  and  unaccept- 
able in  themselves,  but  they  were  made  impossible  by  the  additional 
condition  that  Thomas,  directly  he  agreed  to  them,  would  be  required 
to  detach  four  of  his  battalions  for  service  against  Holkar  in  the 
Deccan. 

In  Thomas's  acutely  suspicious  Irish  nature  this  last  proviso  aroused 
the  strongest  distrust.  It  seemed  to  him  that  Perron  wished  to  follow 
the  political  maxim  Divide  et  Impera,  and  he  believed  the  stipulation 
was  a  distinct  attempt  to  undermine  his  power,  and  that  as  soon  as 
Holkar  was  defeated,  his  own  turn  would  come  to  be  dealt  with,  when 
he  would  be  compelled  to  accept  any  terms  Perron  might  choose  to 
impose.  He  therefore  peremptorily  refused  compliance,  and  abruptly 
breaking  off  the  conference,  inarched  back  to  Hansi  and  prepared  for 


188  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

That  be  was  mistaken  in  this  step  is  proved  by  results,  for  service 
under  Sindhia  could  never  have  led  to  such  absolute  ruin  as  overtook 
Thomas  before  four  months  had  passed  away.  He  has  been  blamed 
for  want  of  judgment  in  neglecting  "  the  only  rational  chance  left 
him  of  realising  with  greater  certainty  a  higher  station  as  a  soldier 
than  he  could  ever  hope  to  do  by  his  own  unaided  resources  against 
the  jealous  enmity  of  the  most  potent  prince  in  Hindustan."  Although 
by  the  light  of  subsequent  events  the  wisdom  of  this  criticism  is  made 
apparent,  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  grounds  which  influenced 
Thomas  in  his  choice.  In  the  first  place  he  could  not  foresee  that  all 
his  projected  alliances  were  to  fail  him,  and  he  had  in  theory  an 
exceedingly  strong  combination  at  his  back.  Then  he  was  a  victorious 
and  independent  leader  treating  for  terms,  not  a  defeated  general  suing 
for  them,  who  had  no  choice  but  to  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  sur- 
rendering territory  he  had  held  and  governed  for  nine  years.  He  was 
at  the  head  of  a  marvellously  spirited  force,  fresh  from  a  brilliant 
campaign,  in  which  it  had  proved  its  superiority  over  enormous  nume- 
rical odds.  Perron  might  certainly  bring  bigger  battalions  into  the 
field,  but  the  recent  defeat  at  Ujjain  had  gravely  shaken  the  prestige  of 
Sindhia's  regular  infantry.  Lastly,  there  was  Thomas's  own  nature, 
his  unconquerable  pugnacity,  his  firm  faith  in  his  own  fortune,  and  his 
cherished  ambitions  for  supreme  power  which  prevented  his  giving 
way.  Visions  of  glory  blinded  him  ;  his  eyes  still  turned  towards  the 
far  Panjab  ;  his  mind  was  filled  with  schemes  of  conquest  and  acqui- 
sition. It  was  intolerable  to  him  to  serve  under  another  in  an  inglori- 
ous role  of  subordination ;  but  altogether  repugnant  when  that  other 
was  a  Frenchman.  And  it  was  this  sentiment,  more  than  any  other, 
that  urged  him  to  enter  into  a  struggle  with  the  master  of  forty 
thousand  fighting  men,  rather  than  yield  up  an  independence  which 
he  had  won  with  his  own  right  hand,  and  lower  his  sword  in  salute  to 
a  chief  whom  he  despised. 

War  was  formally  declared,  and  both  sides  began  to  make  ready. 
But  Perron  set  off  for  Koil  with  such  impolitic  precipitation  that  Lewis 
Ferdinand  Smith  refers  to  his  departure  as  "  the  flight  of  Perron  from 
his  army."  He  left  Major  Louis  Bourguien,  who  was  in  command  of 
the  Third  Brigade,  to  conduct  the  operations,  and  this  officer,  after 
being  strengthened  with  GO  guns  and  reinforced  by  6,000  Sikh 
cavalry,  entered  Thomas's  territory  early  in  September,  and  march- 
ing to  Jhajjar,  which  was  unfortified,  occupied  it  without  oppo- 
sition. He  then  attempted  to  capture  Georgegarh,  a  strong  fort 
five  miles  to  the  south,  garrisoned  by  800  of  Thomas's  troops, 
but  the  officer  entrusted  with  the  attack  being  repulsed,  Bourguien 


WAR  WITH  PEBRON.  189 

left  Captain  L.  F.  Smith  with  three  battalions  of  infantry  and  a 
battering  train  to  lay  siege  to  it,  and  himself  marched  to  Jhind, 
whither  he  heard  Thomas  had  gone.  On  arriving  here  he  was  told 
his  quarry  had  moved  off  to  Patiala,  and  at  once  started  in  pursuit ; 
but  this  had  merely  been  a  feint  on  Thomas's  part  to  draw  off  Bour- 
guien's  main  army,  and  he  now  retraced  his  steps  to  Hansi  with 
incredible  rapidity,  completed  his  ammunition  and  other  stores,  left  a 
body  of  Eohillas  to  defend  the  place,  and  then  swooped  down  on 
Smith  at  Georgegarh,  covering  the  last  seventy-six  miles  in  two  days, 
whilst  the  blundering  Bourguien,  discovering  too  late  the  trap  into 
which  he  had  fallen,  came  following  after. 

Thomas's  sudden  approach  was  the  signal  for  Smith  to  raise  the  siege 
of  Georgegarh,  and  fall  back  on  Jhajjar.  But  Thomas  was  not  to 
be  foiled,  and  without  resting  his  men,  dashed  forward  to  cut  Smith 
off.  His  troops,  however,  from  some  unaccountable  reason,  lost  their 
road  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  when  in  the  early  morning 
Thomas  came  up  with  the  retreating  enemy  he  found  he  had  only  one 
battalion  supporting  him. 

Smith's  rear-guard  was  under  the  command  of  a  gallant  old  native 
officer,  named  Piiran  Singh,  who  immediately  drew  up  his  battalion 
in  line  in  order  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the  artillery  and  baggage, 
whilst  Smith  opened  a  slight  cannonade,  and  then  continued  his  flight. 
This  gave  time  for  some  of  Thomas's  laggards  to  come  up,  but  being 
in  a  state  of  extreme  fatigue,  and  only  commanded  by  a  native  officer 
named  Martaza  Khan,  they  incautiously  advanced  through  a  field  of 
high  standing  corn,  without  reconnoitring  their  front,  and  suddenly 
found  themselves  attacked  by  Piiran  Singh,  who  charged  them  with 
great  spirit  and  beat  them  back  with  a  loss  of  four  of  their  guns. 

Hearing  of  this  disaster  Thomas  immediately  advanced  to  the  relief, 
and  leading  his  men,  sword  in  hand,  fell  upon  the  enemy,  and  after  a 
severe  conflict  completely  defeated  them,  and  recaptured  the  four  guns. 
Piiran  Singh  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner,  and  a  great  number 
of  his  men  killed  or  disabled,  only  a  mere  remnant  escaping ;  for 
although  Smith  was  but  a  short  distance  ahead,  he  did  not  return  to 
their  assistance,  but  busied  himself  with  securing  the  safety  of  his 
guns  and  baggage. 

Thomas,  whose  loss  was  under  100  men,  now  fell  back  on  George- 
garh, his  troops  being  so  exhausted  with  fatigue  as  to  be  unable 
to  continue  the  pursuit ;  and  only  a  few  cavalry  were  sent  after  the 
fugitives,  and  these  picked  up  several  stands  of  colours  and  small 
arms.  Skinner,  in  his  memoirs,  blames  Smith  for  his  supine  conduct 
on  this  occasion ;  but  Thomas  observes,  "  Had  it  not  been  for  the 


190  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

soldier-like  precautions  taken  by  Captain  Smith  in  sending  forward 
his  artillery  and  baggage,  while  he  made  head  with  his  infantry,  the 
whole  would  have  infallibly  have  been  captured ;  as  it  was  he  lost  the 
greater  part  of  his  ammunition  and  baggage." 

This  action  occurred  on  the  27th  of  September,  and  on  the  following 
morning  Thomas  was  preparing  to  renew  the  attack  when  his  scouts 
bronght  information  of  Bourguien's  approach.  His  troops  being 
fatigued  and  many  of  them  dispersed  in  search  of  plunder,  Thomas 
did  not  deem  it  advisable  to  hazard  an  immediate  engagement,  and 
the  relieving  force,  which  turned  out  to  be  Bourguien's  2,000  regular 
cavalry,  under  the  command  of  Captain  F.  E.  Smith,  a  brother  of 
Captain  L.  F.  Smith,  made  good  their  way  to  Jhajjar,  and  saved  the 
two  battalions  and  the  battering  train  there  from  a  very  serious 
danger. 

Bourguien  himself,  with  his  infantry,  arrived  on  the  29th,  the  men 
harassed,  fatigued,  and  famished  after  a  march  of  sixty  miles  in  thirty- 
six  hours ;  yet,  with  incredible  imbecility,  their  leader  determined 
on  an  immediate  attack.  On  reconnoitring  Thomas's  position  he 
found  him  drawn  up  in  one  line,  with  Georgegarh  and  a  large  fortified 
village  on  his  right  flank,  a  strong  redoubt,  in  which  were  stationed 
600  Bohillas  and  4  pieces  of  artillery,  on  his  left ;  and  another 
large  walled  village  in  his  rear.  Even  under  favourable  circum- 
stances the  position  would  have  been  a  strong  one  to  attack,  but 
under  existing  conditions  an  assault  by  Bourguien's  exhausted  and 
worn-out  troops  was  madness. 

Notwithstanding  which  the  Frenchman  ordered  the  advance  at 
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  but,  with  a  prudent  regard  for  his  own 
safety,  directed  operations  from  a  point  far  away  in  the  rear,  where  he 
faithfully  kept  his  post  during  the  rest  of  the  fight,  full  of  importance, 
but  out  of  danger.  Obedient  to  orders,  and  with  a  calm  intrepidity 
worthy  of  its  reputation,  the  Brigade  advanced  in  open  columns  of 
companies  against  Thomas's  entrenchments.  The  route  lay  through 
heavy  sand,  and  they  were  exposed  to  a  dreadful  and  well-directed 
fire  from  50  guns.  Two  battalions,  with  a  couple  of  cannon,  were 
detached  to  make  a  diversion  on  Thomas's  rear,  whilst  the  main  body 
proceeded  straight  against  his  position. 

Thomas  had  chosen  his  ground  with  his  usual  ability,  and  so 
divided  his  forces  as  to  oppose  a  front  to  the  enemy  at  each  point 
threatened.  The  position  gave  him  a  considerable  advantage,  for 
knowing  that  his  men  were  unaccustomed  to  artillery  fire,  he  selected 
a  place  whore  the  soil  was  so  loose  and  sandy  that  it  deadened  the 
shot,  and  prevented  them  from  ricochetting.  The  total  number  of 


WAR  WITH  PERRON.  191 

troops  under  his  command  consisted  of  10  battalions  of  infantry,  GOO 
Rohillas,  500  cavalry,  and  54  guns. 

About  four  o'clock  the  two  armies  were  within  musket  shot,  and 
Bourguien's  men  began  to  push  briskly  on,  with  their  guns  at  the 
drag  ropes.  But  Thomas,  with  rapid  discharges  of  round  and  grape 
shot,  mowed  them  down  by  scores,  whilst  his  own  troops  were  in  a 
great  measure  sheltered  by  a  breastwork  of  sand  which  they  had 
hastily  thrown  up.  A  few  minutes  of  this  hot  work  threw  Bour- 
guien's main  body  into  confusion,  which  must  have  resulted  in 
irretrievable  disaster,  had  not  his  cavalry  made  a  spirited  charge  on 
Thomas's  centre,  and  pressed  it  so  hard  that  it  began  to  give  way, 
and  the  rest  of  his  line  to  waver. 

This  rendered  an  immediate  movement  necessary,  and  Captain 
Hopkins  with  the  right  wing,  and  Captain  Birch  with  the  left,  were 
ordered  to  advance  and  charge  with  bayonets.  Each  moved  out  with 
two  battalions  in  columns  of  companies,  and  then  formed  in  front  of 
the  enemy  "  with  as  great  calmness  and  precision  as  if  they  had  been 
at  review,"  and  after  delivering  their  fire  dashed  forward  with  fixed 
bayonets,  and  drove  Bourguien's  line  back.  But  Bourguien's  gunners 
would  not  abandon  their  pieces,  and,  serving  them  with  great  resolu- 
tion, kept  up  a  heavy  fire,  which  created  immense  havoc,  and  so 
encouraged  the  cavalry,  who  had  temporarily  drawn  off,  that  they 
charged  again.  But  being  bravely  met  and  repulsed  with  loss,  they 
retreated  a  second  time,  and  were  pursued  for  a  considerable  distance 
by  Thomas's  horse. 

And  now  there  came  one  of  war's  mischances  to  operate  against 
the  victory  which  seemed  almost  assured  to  Thomas.  Captain 
Hopkins,  his  second  in  command  and  in  gallantry,  his  alter  ego, 
was  struck  by  a  cannon  ball,  which  carried  away  one  of  his  legs.  On 
seeing  their  leader  fall  his  men  immediately  lost  heart,  and  retired  in 
disorder,  carrying  him  with  them.  Whereupon  Bourguien's  left  wing 
rallied,  and  reoccupied  the  position  they  had  abandoned,  and  after  a 
little  time  attempted  to  advance  to  the  storm  again;  but  the  fire 
along  the  line  from  Thomas's  guns  was  so  murderous,  that  at  last  the 
whole  Brigade  was  ordered  to  lie  down  and  avail  themselves  of  such 
shelter  as  the  undulating  surface  of  the  ground  afforded.  In  the 
same  way  Thomas's  troops  crouched  behind  the  sand  hillocks  that 
protected  them,  and  in  this  position  the  two  armies  remained  until 
sunset,  neither  daring  to  expose  itself  by  an  advance  or  a  retreat,  but 
continuing  to  keep  up  a  constant  fire.  When  at  last  night  drew  its 
curtain  over  the  bloody  plain,  the  worn-out  soldiers,  utterly  ex- 
hausted, bivouaced  on  the  open  field  they  had  so  desperately  contested. 


192  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

At  sunrise  tho  next  morning  Bourguien  hung  out  a  flag  of  truce, 
and  an  armistice  was  granted  for  six  hours,  during  which  the  wounded 
were  conveyed  to  the  rear  and  the  dead  buried.  At  noon  the  flag  was 
hauled  down,  but  neither  party  displayed  any  inclination  to  renew  the 
engagement,  and  after  a  few  rounds  of  cannon  shot  Bourguien  drew 
off  unmolested,  leaving  Thomas  master  of  the  field. 

Thus  ended  the  severest  battle  that  was  ever  fought  between  the 
disciplined  armies  of  Hindustan  up  to  that  date.  The  troops  opposed 
had  been  nearly  equally  matched,  for  though  Bourguien  commanded 
8,000  men,  and  Thomas  only  5,000,  the  tatter's  deficiency  in  numbers 
was  made  up  by  the  greater  strength  of  his  position,  the  comparative 
freshness  of  his  men,  and  his  own  immeasurably  superior  military 
skill. 

The  loss  on  both  sides  was  enormous,  but  from  the  conflicting 
nature  of  the  returns  it  is  difficult  to  state  the  exact  numbers. 
Captain  Skinner,  who  was  present  at  the  battle,  puts  down  Bour- 
guien's  casualties  at  between  3,000  and  4,000,  but  Thomas  assesses 
them  at  2,000,  whilst  Captain  L.  F.  Smith  states  "  that  above 
1,100  men  were  killed  and  wounded,  which  was  nearly  one-third 
of  the  number  engaged."  But  Bourguien  had  7,500  infantry  at 
the  very  least,  so  that  Thomas's  estimate  is  probably  the  most 
correct.  Skinner's  must  certainly  be  accepted  cautiously,  for  his 
memory  for  dates  and  figures  is  peculiarly  incorrect  as  a  rule.  Out 
of  seven  European  officers  engaged  in  the  attack,  Lieutenant 
M'Culloch  was  killed,  Lieutenant  Emilius  Felix  Smith  mortally 
wounded,  and  Captains  Oliver  and  Babells  wounded. 

Thomas  lost  700  men  by  his  own  account,  though  Skinner  puts  it 
down  at  2,000.  The  destruction  of  artillery  on  both  sides  was  very 
great.  Twenty-five  of  Bourguien's  tumbrels  were  blown  up,  and 
fifteen  of  his  guns  dismounted,  owing  to  the  sandy  soil  from  which 
they  were  fired  preventing  a  proper  recoil,  and  so  causing  the  axle- 
trees  to  snap.  In  the  same  way  Thomas  lost  twenty  pieces  of 
cannon,  only  a  few  of  which  were  dismounted  by  the  enemy's  shot 
striking  them. 

But  a  far  greater  loss  to  him  was  the  death  of  Captain  Hopkins, 
who  succumbed  to  his  wound  a  few  hours  after  the  action.  "  He  was 
worth  more  than  a  couple  of  battalions  to  Thomas,"  writes  one  who 
knew  him,  "  and  had  the  latter  possessed  another  such  officer  the 
undecided  day  of  Georgegarh  would  have  been  turned  into  victory." 
As  these  words  are  being  penned,  ninety  years  have  passed  to  the  very 
day  since  Hopkins  fell  in  battle.  The  coincidence  of  date  comes 
suddenly  and  with  something  of  a  shock,  even  as  the  ink  that  records 


WAR  WITH  PERRON.  193 

his  death  is  wet.  God  knows  under  what  insignificant  dot  of  land  in 
that  distant  country  lie  mouldering  the  bones  of  this  gallant  ad- 
venturer. But  laying  down  the  pen,  and  musing  for  an  idle  moment, 
a  forlorn  pity  steals  over  the  mind  as  one  thinks  of  how  he  was  cut  off 
in  the  bright  spring-tide  of  his  youth,  squandering  all  that  human 
nature  holds  most  dear  in  the  insignificant  service  he  belonged  to. 
Expatriated,  remote,  unknown,  he  died  a  soldier's  death,  acquitting 
himself  as  nobly  as  if  he  had  been  fighting  under  the  flag  of  his  own 
country,  instead  of  in  a  cause  that  yielded  little  credit,  and  less 
renown.  Thrice  in  these  pages,  within  the  compass  of  a  year,  the 
brief  chronicle  of  Hopkins'  bravery  finds  mention  :  twice  wounded, 
the  third  time  dead,  and  so  forgotten — poor  dropped  atom  in  the 
world's  dust ! 

Indecisive  as  was  the  battle  of  Georgegarh,  the  advantage  remained 
with  Thomas.  Had  he  availed  himself  of  his  opportunity  he  would 
have  added  a  crowning  success  to  his  career.  Colonel  Skinner 
admits  this  when  he  writes :  "  We  had  always  heard  that  Thomas 
was  a  brave,  active,  and  clever  soldier,  and  an  able  general.  But  we 
were  surprised  that  he  now  permitted  us  to  remain  for  fifteen  days 
without  attempting  to  attack  us,  or  make  good  his  retreat  to  Hansi : 
for  there  was  no  doubt  in  our  minds  that  had  he  tried  either  plan  he 
would  have  succeeded.  The  state  of  our  guns  and  the  spirits  of  our 
soldiery  was  such  that,  had  Thomas  shown  any  inclination  to  move 
towards  us,  we  should  have  got  out  of  his  reach,  for  our  commander, 
Major  Louis  Bourguien,  was  not  only  a  coward,  but  a  fool.  He  was 
one  of  those  who  got  on  by  flattery,  and  had  it  not  been  for  Major 
Bernier,  a  Frenchman,  we  should  certainly  have  lost  the  day;  for  the 
Major  was  not  seen  at  all  during  the  battle,  and  our  being  saved 
from  total  destruction  was  entirely  owing  to  the  exertions  of  Major 
Bernier,  who  was  a  brave  and  able  soldier." 

There  is  a  humiliating  confession  in  this  passage,  and  one  cannot 
but  hope  that  De  Boigne  never  learnt  to  what  a  low  ebb  "  the  spirits 
of  his  soldiery  "  had  been  reduced.  Perron,  when  he  wrote  to  his 
old  chief  in  the  following  February,  and  boasted  that  "  he  had  been 
obliged  to  entirely  destroy  that  scoundrel  Thomas,"  omitted  to  touch 
on  this  incident,  or  to  mention  how  Captain  Drugeon,  the  general's 
deputy  at  Delhi,  collected  all  the  doctors  in  the  city  and  bundled 
them  off  to  the  front  to  tend  the  wounded,  whilst  Perron  himself 
raised  new  troops,  and  hurried  forward  reinforcements  with  feverish 
haste. 

Captain  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  takes  even  a  stronger  view  than 
Skinner  of  the  possibilities  opened  to  Thomas  by  the  battle  of 

13 


194  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

Georgegarb,  as  the  following  passage  will  show : — "  Had  Thomas 
taken  advantage  of  Bourguien's  ignorance  and  folly,  and  sallied  out 
on  the  beaten  troops  of  Perron,  be  would  have  overturned  bis  power. 
But  Thomas  was,  in  this  critical  moment,  confused  and  confounded, 
though  he  had  shown  feats  of  valour  during  the  action  .  .  .  Had  be 
acted  with  bis  usual  boldness,  caution  and  activity,  the  forces  under 
Bourguien  must  have  been  destroyed ;  the  allies  of  Thomas  would 
have  thrown  off  the  mask,  and  openly  taken  bis  part ;  and  before 
Perron  could  have  collected  another  efficient  force,  Thomas  would 
have  been  master  of  Delhi  and  the  king's  person,  and  probably  have 
extinguished  Perron's  power  and  authority.  Scindia  would  have 
quietly  transferred  that  power  to  Thomas,  for  he  would  have  been 
equally  indifferent  who  governed  Hindostan,  Perron  or  Thomas,  as 
he  must,  from  impotency  to  resist,  have  bowed  to  the  will  and  power 
of  every  aspiring  mind  who  commanded  large  bodies  of  regular 
infantry." 

It  was  in  this  supreme  moment  of  his  career  that  Thomas  fell. 
Fell  from  an  estate  so  high,  that  its  possibilities  are  scarcely  credible 
when  we  consider  the  character  of  the  man  who  might  have  grasped 
them,  and  learn  the  reason  why  he  failed  to  do  so.  That  reason  has 
not  hitherto  been  hinted  at,  but  it  had  long  existed.  When  Thomas 
required  his  faculties  to  be  clearest,  his  understanding  unclouded,  and 
bis  energies  strung  to  their  highest  pitch,  he  gave  way  to  drink! 
Alas!  for  the  unheroing  of  this  hero,  that  he  should  have  sold 
himself  so  cheaply,  so  vulgarly,  so  wantonly.  Who  shall  diagnose 
a  drunkard's  reasons  ?  Perchance  Thomas  was  over-affected  by  the 
death  of  gallant  Hopkins,  and  his  impressionable  Irish  nature  sought 
the  solace  which  countrymen  of  his  class  not  unfrequently  fly  to  on 
such  occasions  :  perchance  it  was  the  very  devilry  of  drink  that  drove 
him  to  the  bottle  ;  or  a  more  charitable  explanation  may  lie  in  the 
stimulant  required  by  the  unendurable  fatigue  of  over-taxed  physical 
effort,  or  the  terrible  strain  of  mental  anxiety.  It  matters  little 
which.  The  pitiable  truth  remains  that  in  the  momentous  crisis  of 
bis  life  Thomas  surrendered  himself  to  the  demon  that  enslaved 
him,  and  in  one  wild,  reckless  debauch,  sacrificed  everything. 

Those  who  have  followed  him  thus  far  in  the  erratic  course  of  his 
adventurous  career,  and  who,  in  noting  each  step  in  it,  have  sighed 
over  his  lawlessness  and  condemned  his  abandonment,  but  have  yet 
been  cajoled  into  admiration  for  the  man  militant,  may  surely,  in  this 
moment  of  his  weakness  and  his  folly,  as  they  see  him  distraught  and 
undone,  blindly  seeking  his  own  destruction,  spare  one  regret  for  the 
lost  man.  Remembering  only,  out  of  their  charity,  those  things  which 


WAR  WITH  PERRON.  195 

lie  to  his  credit :  the  loyalty  that  never  deserted  a  friend,  the  chivalry 
that  so  oftentimes  succoured  the  weak,  the  enterprise  which  raised 
him  to  the  height  from  which  he  fell,  and  ihe  invincible  spirit  that 
sustained  him  through  twenty  years  of  war  and  battle  in  the  East. 


CHAPTEK  VIII. 

GATHERING   TOILS.      A   DASH   FOtt   HANSI. 
1801. 

R  a  fortnight  after  the  battle  of  Georgegarli  Thomas  resigned  the 
entire  conduct  of  his  affairs  to  Captain  Hearsey,  who,  instead  of 
pressing  forward  to  attack,  or  retiring  on  Hansi,  began  to  fortify  the 
camp — a  proceeding  that  halted  half  way  between  an  advance  to 
victory  and  a  retreat  to  safety.  The  reason  he  gave  for  his  action 
was  that  he  expected  assistance  from  Lakwa  Dada,  but  this  chief  was 
fully  employed  in  defending  himself  against  Ainbaji  Inglia's  English 
officer,  James  Shepherd,  and  was,  moreover,  in  a  state  of  pecuniary 
embarrassment,  for  it  had  recently  been  publicly  reported  he  had  been 
obliged  to  Bell  his  jewels  to  raise  money  to  pay  his  troops. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  considerations  which  induced 
Hearsey  to  repose  confidence  in  the  faith  of  a  Maratha,  and  on  the 
strength  of  it  take  up  a  position  in  an  open  camp  instead  of  falling 
back  on  Hansi,  which  was  not  only  Thomas's  capital  and  arsenal  and 
the  base  of  his  supplies,  but  a  fortress  of  great  strength,  and  capable 
of  opposing  an  indefinite  resistance  to  Perron.  Ignoring  this,  Hearsey 
elected  to  fortify  what  was  little  better  than  an  open  cantonment, 
completely  cut  off  from  all  resources,  and  without  any  corresponding 
advantage  in  return. 

"While  Thomas  drank  the  golden  moments  away,  and  Hearsey 
thought  only  of  holding  an  untenable  position,  reinforcements  kept 
reaching  the  enemy  daily.  Drugeon,  Perron's  deputy  commandant 
at  Delhi,  hurried  forward  all  the  available  troops  he  could  spare. 
Perron  detached  five  battalions  of  the  Second  Brigade  from  Koil, 
and  five  more  from  Hessing's  corps  at  Agra :  13apu  Sindhia,  the 
Maratha  Subahdar  of  Saharanpur,  contributed  a  large  force  of  cavalry, 
and  the  chiefs  of  Bhartpur  and  Hathras  supplied  their  quota  of  troops. 
Last  of  all,  a  great  many  of  the  Sikh  chiefs  joined  Thomas's  enemies, 

ISO 


GATHERING  TOILS.  197 

amongst  them  being  Sahib  Singh  of  Patiala,  whose  Amazonian  sister, 
Kunur,  died  on  the  15th  of  September,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty- 
eight. 

Perron,  when  he  heard  of  Bourguien's  defeat,  was  furious,  and 
despite  that  officer's  solemn  asseveration  that  "  God  knew  he  had 
done  his  best,"  superseded  him  by  Major  Pedron,  who  commanded 
the  Second  Brigade.  This  officer  immediately  started  for  the  front, 
and  shortly  after  he  had  assumed  command  at  Georgegarh,  a  cordon 
of  80,000  men  and  110  pieces  of  artillery  was  drawn  round  Thomas. 
This  army  was  made  up  of  twenty-two  battalions  of  regular  infantry, 
including  ten  of  the  Third  Brigade,  five  of  the  Second  Brigade,  five  of 
Htssing's,  and  two  of  the  Begum  Somru's  (the  authority  quoted  is 
that  of  Colonel  Skinner),  with  2,000  regular  Hindustani  horse,  and 
about  12,000  Sikh  and  Maratha  cavalry.  One  of  Pedron's  first  acts 
was  to  advance  his  line  and  secure  possession  of  a  large  tank  or  reser- 
voir of  water,  a  short  distance  outside  Georgegarh,  which  left  Thomas 
with  only  three  wells  to  depend  on.  Very  soon  the  enormous  display 
of  force  brought  against  him  overawed  the  surrounding  peasantry,  who 
submitted  to  Pedron,  and  discontinued  their  usual  supplies  of  provi- 
sions to  the  beleaguered  camp,  by  which  the  difficulties  within  it  were 
very  considerably  augmented. 

And  now,  when  it  was  too  late,  Thomas  pulled  himself  together  and 
resumed  the  command  of  his  troops.  He  soon  realised  that  he  was 
too  weak  to  draw  out  his  army  in  open  field  and  give  battle,  and  that 
all  he  could  do  was  to  remain  within  his  lines  and  act  on  the  defensive. 
Something  of  his  old  energy  and  resource  began  to  return  to  him,  and 
he  set  to  work  to  fortify  the  camp  in  the  best  manner  possible,  build- 
ing around  it  a  hedge  of  the  same  kind  of  thorn  trees  he  had  utilised 
in  his  defence  of  Fatehpur,  and  found  so  efficacious.  He  then  took  a 
careful  stock  of  his  provisions,  and  found  they  were  sufficient  for  a 
month's  consumption.  Having  thus  arranged  everything  for  the 
security  of  the  camp,  he  braced  himself  to  hold  out  until  assistance 
arrived  from  Lakwa  Dada,  who,  at  the  commencement  of  hostilities, 
had  given  him  frequent  assurances  of  support. 

It  was  now  nearly  the  middle  of  October.  Soon  skirmishes  began 
to  take  place  daily,  and  Thomas  made  frequent  sorties  and  attacked 
Pedron's  entrenchments,  but  was  never  able  to  capture  any  of  them. 
Isolated  duels  were  often  fought  in  the  open  plain  between  the  two 
camps  by  detached  parties  from  either  army,  but  although  Thomas's 
troops  behaved  with  signal  gallantry,  they  were  always  overpowered 
by  superior  numbers  and  driven  back  within  their  own  lines  again. 
On  the  18th  of  October  a  grand  concerted  attack  was  made  in  conjunc- 


198  GEOEQE  THOMAS. 

tion  with  some  troops  Vaman  Rao  had  sent  to  Thomas's  assistance, 
but  it  failed,  and  the  latter  lost  400  men  without  effecting  anything 
decisive.  The  following  day,  Rahman  Khan,  one  of  his  Afghan  mer- 
cenaries, made  a  gallant  sortie  with  2,000  men,  hut  only  to  be  driven 
back  by  a  heavy  cannonade  from  Pedron's  well-posted  guns.  And  so 
a  fortnight  passed,  marked  by  frequent  conflicts,  in  which  nothing 
was  gained,  and  by  the  end  of  it  Thomas's  provisions  had  shrunk  alarm- 
ingly, for  his  foraging  parties  found  it  impossible  to  avoid  the  Sikh 
and  Maratha  cavalry  that  swarmed  round  the  camp,  and  prevented 
them  from  replenishing  his  fast  diminishing  stock.  Day  followed 
day,  and  one  week  another,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  Lakwa  Dada's 
coming.  The  investing  lines  were  drawn  closer  and  closer,  and  the 
weak  points  in  them  strengthened,  until  at  last  a  complete  blockade 
was  established,  whilst,  to  complete  his  troubles,  the  water  in  Thomas's 
three  wells  began  to  show  signs  of  failing. 

The  Asiatic  soldier,  no  matter  how  heroically  led  and  commanded, 
is  a  fatalist  at  heart,  and  this  prejudices  him  for  defensive  operations, 
for,  curiously  enough,  his  fatalism  always  anticipates  the  worst,  and 
when  he  touches  his  forehead  and  says  "  Kismet,"  he  is  prepared  to 
accept  defeat.  When  food  ran  short,  and  water  began  to  be  stinted, 
a  portion  of  Thomas's  troops  commenced  crying  "Kismet.1'  Previous 
to  the  declaration  of  war  he  had  enlisted  several  bands  of  Afghans  to 
swell  his  ranks  for  the  coming  contest,  and  to  the  untrustworthiness 
of  these  treacherous  mercenaries  his  ruin  can  in  a  great  measure  be 
traced.  Pedron  was  not  slow  to  avail  himself  of  these  facts,  and 
began  to  intrigue  with  the  malcontents  in  the  besieged  camp,  and 
bring  corrupt  influences  to  bear  upon  them.  The  families  of  several 
of  Thomas's  native  officers  resided  in  Perron's  territory,  and  their 
dependent  situation  was  taken  advantage  of  to  effect  their  master's 
downfall.  Perron,  being  acquainted  with  their  circumstances,  had,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  war,  placed  guards  over  the  houses  of  many 
of  these  individuals,  notably  over  those  of  Shitab  Khan,  who  was 
commandant  of  the  fort  of  Georgegarh,  and  Khairat  Khan,  who  com- 
manded Thomas's  first  matchlock  regiment,  both  of  whose  families 
resided  in  villages  belonging  to  Perron.  These  native  officers  were 
now  pressed  to  desert  their  colours  under  pain  of  their  property  being 
confiscated,  and  their  women  folk  maltreated — a  threat  more  potent 
in  the  East  than  fire  or  sword.  Bribes,  threats,  and  promises  were 
all  freely  used  to  induce  them  and  others  similarly  situated  to  forsake 
their  allegiance.  To  this  unfair  and  ignoble  pressure  many  succumbed, 
not  a  few  being  selected  men,  who  had  been  the  recipients  of  the 
greatest  kindness  from  Thomas,  and  whom  he  had  raised  from  low 


GATHERING  TOILS.  199 

stations  in  his  army  to  appointments  of  authority  and  command.  Yet, 
in  the  hour  of  his  sore  distress,  they  scrupled  not  to  prove  traitors  to 
their  salt,  and  joined  his  enemies. 

But  there  was  even  fouler  treachery  than  this  at  work  in  the  camp, 
for  incendiary  fires  began  to  break  out.  In  the  fort  of  Georgegarh, 
where  Shitab  Khan  commanded,  several  stacks  of  hay,  which  formed 
the  chief  forage  supply  were  destroyed,  whilst  the  small  remaining 
store  of  grain  was  made  away  with  by  means  equally  nefarious.  Not 
content  with  this,  these  perfidious  men  were  constantly  instilling 
into  the  minds  of  the  troops  the  peril  of  their  situation,  and  the  im- 
possibility of  saving  themselves  except  by  submitting  to  the  enemy 
and  joining  them,  as  they  were  daily  invited  to  do.  Of  these  traitorous 
designs  Thomas  was  not  informed  until  it  was  too  late,  when  their 
truth  was  brought  home  to  him  by  the  sudden  increase  in  desertions. 

Meanwhile  Lakwa  Dada  did  not  arrive,  and,  disheartened  by 
Thomas's  misfortunes,  several  other  chiefs,  who  had  promised  him 
their  assistance,  not  only  withheld  it,  but  actually  joined  his  enemies. 
Constant  and  authentic  information  of  all  that  was  passing  in  his 
camp  reached  Pedron,  who,  on  the  23rd  of  October,  hoisted  a  flag, 
and  publicly  announced  that  all  deserters  from  Georgegarh  taking 
refuge  under  it  should  receive  quarter.  That  night  two  of  Thomas's 
newly-raised  battalions  marched  out,  and  availed  themselves  of  this 
proclamation,  and  three  days  later,  Sharif  Khan  and  Hamza  Khan, 
two  Afghan  mercenaries,  whom  he  had  recently  entertained,  followed 
their  base  example,  and  passed  over  to  Pedron  with  all  their  men. 

Amidst  all  these  dangers  and  difficulties  Thomas  was  the  only 
person  who  never  lost  heart,  but  unceasingly  endeavoured  to  buoy 
up  the  spirits  of  his  people  with  the  assurance  that  help  was  coming. 
To  Lakwa  Dada  he  sent  frequent  and  urgent  messages,  and  as  con- 
stantly heard  from  him,  one  letter,  full  of  the  usual  specious  promises, 
reaching  him  as  late  as  the  3rd  of  November.  Vaman  Rao  also  wrote 
encouraging  Thomas  to  persevere,  and  stating  he  was  sending  rein- 
forcements. But  they  were  all  words,  idle  words,  and  neither  Lakwa 
Dada's  nor  Vaman  Rao's  standards  ever  appeared. 

On  the  6th  of  November  Thomas  determined  to  make  a  last  effort, 
and  with  a  body  of  cavalry  endeavoured  to  surprise  Pedron's  camp  by 
a  night  attack.  But  traitors  had  given  information  of  the  intended 
attempt,  and  the  sortie  was  met  with  a  discharge  of  musketry,  artillery 
and  rockets  from  an  enemy  fully  prepared  and  admirably  posted,  and 
the  attempt  resulted  in  failure  and  defeat.  By  this  time  Thomas  was 
reduced  to  the  direst  straits.  The  grain  in  the  camp  was  finished,  and 
the  scanty  supply  that  his  foraging  parties  collected  at  a  great  expense 


200  OEOEOE  THOMAS. 

of  life,  was  sold  at  tho  price  of  blood.  His  cattle  bad  nearly  all  been 
killed,  bis  water  supply  was  almost  exhausted,  and  bis  troops  were 
kept  alive  on  meat  rations,  a  form  of  food  not  only  unsuitable  but 
positively  injurious  to  men  accustomed  to  grain  diet.  Finally,  bis 
ammunition  began  to  run  sbort,  and  tbreatened  to  leave  bim  witbout 
tbe  means,  as  well  as  witbout  tbe  men,  to  figbt.  In  tins  extremity 
tbere  remained  to  birn  but  one  single  cbance.  A  large  convoy  of 
grain  bad  been  despatcbed  by  Vaman  Rao,  and  bis  bopes  were  all 
centred  on  its  reacbing  bim  safely.  It  was  due  on  tbe  10th  of 
November,  but  on  tbe  previous  night  a  detachment  of  Pedron's  horse 
discovered  and  captured  it.  In  a  spirit  of  Oriental  brutality  tbe  noses 
of  the  camel  drivers  conveying  it  were  cut  off  and  sent  with  taunts 
into  Thomas's  starving  camp,  early  on  tbe  following  morning.  At 
the  same  hour  he  learnt  of  the  desertion  on  the  previous  night  of  his 
most  trusted  Afghan  chief,  a  man  named  AH  Ghol,  in  whom  ho  bad 
hitherto  reposed  the  greatest  confidence,  and  whose  loyalty  had  never 
been  doubted. 

In  such  a  pass  the  bravest  man  might  without  dishonour  have  given  up 
an  unequal  fight ;  but  submission  never  entered  Thomas's  rnind.  "  In 
this  distress,"  he  writes,  "I  had  "no  resource  but  either  to  attack  the 
enemy  by  night,  to  sally  forth  and  try  the  event  of  a  contest  by 
day,  or  to  attempt  a  retreat,  leaving  tbe  infantry  to  make  the  best 
terms  they  could  with  the  enemy."  No  idea  of  surrender  is  apparent 
here,  though  it  must  have  been  the  uppermost  thought  in  the  mind 
of  every  other  man  in  the  camp.  But  Joivruj  Jung  never  belied  his 
reputation  for  a  moment.  The  word  defeat  was  not  in  his  dictionary : 
and  when  circumstances  obtruded  it,  the  letters  shaped  themselves 
into  defiance.  Figbt  by  day,  or  figbt  by  night,  or,  at  worst,  a  dash 
through  those  investing  lines,  sword  in  hand,  and  his  horse's  head 
pointed  for  Hansi,  were  still  "  resources  "  left  him.  After  a  short 
consideration  he  determined  to  hazard  the  first,  and  attempt  to  fight 
his  way  past  tbe  enemy,  and  reach  his  capital. 

He  accordingly  gave  the  necessary  directions  for  carrying  this 
resolution  into  effect ;  but  his  soldiers,  suspecting  his  intention,  began 
to  pack  up  their  baggage  and  openly  desert  tbe  camp.  Upon  this, 
Thomas  assembled  bis  officers  and  inquired  of  them  tbe  cause  of  tbe 
commotion  stirring  in  the  lines.  They  replied  that  no  further  reliance 
could  be  placed  on  the  troops,  who,  confounded  by  their  difficulties, 
would  no  longer  remain  true  to  their  colours.  On  bearing  this,  Thomas 
proceeded  in  person  to  the  lines,  and  endeavoured  to  reanimate  bis 
men,  but  hunger  and  thirst  and  want  and  privation  had  laid  their 
bands  upon  his  followers,  and  with  the  fatalism  of  their  race  they 


GATHEEING  TOILS.  201 

had  accepted  the  decree  of  Fate,  convinced  that  the  star  of  Jowruj 
Jung  had  set. 

But  Thomas  relaxed  not  his  efforts.  "  To  encourage  the  drooping 
spirits  of  his  people  "  (!)  he  gave  orders  for  an  attack  to  be  made  on 
one  of  the  enemy's  advanced  posts  which,  from  its  situation,  appeared 
easy  to  be  taken.  But  a  difficulty  arose  regarding  bullock  drivers, 
who  had  all  deserted  the  camp.  Some  sepoys,  however,  encouraged 
by  the  promise  of  a  liberal  reward,  undertook  the  office,  and  a  select 
detachment  quitted  the  camp.  But  whether  from  being  infected 
with  the  depression  of  spirits  that  prevailed,  or  because  they  were 
really  unfit  for  the  work  assigned  them,  the  sepoys  conducted  them- 
selves in  so  awkward  a  manner,  and  made  so  little  exertion  in  getting 
on  the  guns,  that  it  was  necessary  to  recall  them  to  camp. 

Shortly  after  this  his  spies  brought  Thomas  information  that  the 
enemy,  having  been  apprised  of  his  intention  to  force  his  way  to 
Hansi,  had  formed  line  ready  to  oppose  his  progress.  And  it  now 
seemed  to  him  that,  in  the  present  discontented  state  of  his  troops,  if 
he  attempted  to  carry  out  his  design,  the  termination  must  be  defeat 
and  disgrace. 

The  end  was  drawing  near.  At  sunset  Thomas  summoned  a 
council  of  war,  and  (submitted  to  his  officers  the  circumstances  of 
their  situation.  They  gave  it  as  their  unanimous  opinion  that 
nothing  remained  but  an  unconditional  surrender  to  the  enemy. 
Long  and  earnestly  did  their  leader  try  to  persuade  them  that  a 
retreat  to  Hansi  was  still  practicable ;  but  his  exertions  were  ineffec- 
tual, and  he  was  forced  to  confess  that  "  a  dismal  aspect  presented 
itself  on  all  sides."  The  spirit  of  resistance  was  crushed  out  of  the 
camp,  saving  only  the  inextinguishable  spark  glowing  by  comparison 
more  brilliantly  than  ever  in  the  bosom  of  its  chief. 

Scarcely  was  the  council  of  war  dismissed  than  Thomas  learnt 
that  a  body  of  Eohillas  stationed  over  the  wells  had  gone  over  to  the 
enemy.  Other  troops  were  at  once  appointed  to  guard  the  posts  thus 
abandoned,  but  to  his  sorrow  Thomas  found  that  the  spirit  of 
desertion  had  seized  on  the  Muhammadan  soldiery  in  general,  the 
cavalry  alone  excepted.  At  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  whole  of 
the  troops  stationed  on  out-post  duty  followed  the  example  of  the 
Bohillas,  and  it  became  apparent  that  Pedron  was  making  pre- 
parations for  a  general  assault.  Simultaneously  an  incendiary  fire 
broke  out  in  the  last  stack  of  hay,  which,  as  Thomas  afterwards 
learnt,  was  a  preconcerted  signal  between  the  traitors  in  his  camp 
and  the  enemy.  Even  as  the  flames  leapt  forth  into  the  dark  night, 
word  was  brought  him  that  Shitab  Khan,  who  commanded  at 


205S  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

Georgegarh,  and  although  secretly  in  league  with  Pedron,  had  up  to 
now  preserved  an  appearance  of  loyalty,  was  mounting  his  horse 
preparatory  to  leaving  the  fort,  attended  by  all  his  people  and  their 
effects,  and  that  a  party  of  the  Mariitha  troops  had  approached  the 
walls  in  order  to  escort  these  deserters  to  safety,  and  occupy  the 
abandoned  post. 

Thomas's  soldiery  were  now  openly  deserting  the  camp  in  all 
directions,  and  the  only  battalion  that  remained  faithful  was  the  one 
formerly  commanded  by  Hopkins.  It  had  entered  on  the  campaign 
700  strong,  but  the  severe  service  of  the  last  two  months  had  reduced 
it  to  little  more  than  200.  "  These,"  writes  Thomas  in  his  memoirs, 
with  pathetic  brevity,  "were  the  only  men  that  stood  true  to  my 
interests." 

Even  the  splendid  spirit  of  Jowruj  Jung  was  dismayed  now.  New 
dangers  and  calamities  sprung  up  on  every  side.  Within  and  without 
the  camp  all  were  against  him.  The  enemy  were  preparing  to 
advance  in  overwhelming  numbers,  and  it  was  evident  that  in 
another  hour  all  would  be  over.  And  so,  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  night 
of  the  10th  of  November,  1801,  George  Thomas  mustered  his  Europeans 
and  300  of  his  chosen  cavalry,  and  putting  himself  at  their  head,  led 
the  way  out  of  the  doomed  camp. 

Prosper  him,  kind  Fate !  Prosper  a  brave  man's  ride  to-night ! 
No  worthier  object  of  thy  kind  decree  ever  appealed  for  thy  aid.  No 
stouter  heart  ever  faced  thee  than  this  gallant  Irishman,  who 
gallops  now  for  life  and  liberty ! 

The  direction  Thomas  took  was  that  in  which  Major  George 
Hessing's  Brigade  was  encamped,  and  against  its  five  battalions  he 
made  his  last  daring  charge.  He  succeeded  in  breaking  through 
them,  but  the  alarm  was  at  once  given,  and  the  whole  of  Pedron's 
cavalry  turned  out  in  pursuit.  Overtaking  the  little  band  of  fugitives 
before  they  had  gone  far,  they  attacked  them  with  vigour,  and  the 
escort,  disheartened  by  late  events,  lost  their  accustomed  courage 
and  scattered  and  melted  away,  leaving  Thomas  with  four 
Europeans — Captains  Hearsey  and  Birch  and  two  sergeants — to  fly 
for  their  lives.  And  so,  alone  and  unattended,  "  into  the  midnight 
they  galloped  abreast." 

The  horse  Thomas  rode  was  a  favourite  animal,  of  a  very  superior 
Persian  breed,  and  of  the  highest  spirit.  He  proved  himself  "  a  horse 
without  peer"  that  night.  The  enemy  continuing  the  pursuit, 
Thomas  was  compelled  to  make  a  circuituous  route  to  avoid  falling  in 
with  their  straggling  parties,  and  traversed  double  the  actual  distance 
between  Georgegarh  and  Hunsi  in  reaching  his  destination.  His 


GATHEBING  TOILS.  203 

generous  steed  covered  the  journey  of  120  miles  without  halt  or  stay, 
and  by  nightfall  of  the  llth  of  November  carried  his  master  safely  into 
his  capital. 

Fifty  guns  and  all  Thomas's  camp  'and  baggage  fell  into  Pedron's 
hands.  The  few  faithful  troops  left  behind  laid  down  their  arms, 
rejecting  with  contempt  the  offers  of  service  made  them  by  the 
victors.  Their  personar%ttachment  to  Thomas  survived  his  downfall, 
and  several  of  his  old  native  officers,  who  had  been  in  his  service  for 
a  long  time,  "  rent  their  clothes  and  turned  beggars,  swearing  they 
would  never  serve  as  soldiers  again." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ONE  IRISH  SWORD! 

1801. 

UPON  reaching  Hansi,  Thomas's  first  care  was  directed  towards 
its  defences,  and  warned  by  bitter  experience  of  the  treacherous 
disposition  of  his  Mnhammadan  soldiery,  he  committed  the  charge  of 
the  fort  to  his  faithful  Rajputs,  whom  on  all  occasions,  and  in  most 
trying  situations  he  found  worthy  of  confidence.  Two  pieces  of 
artillery  were  all  that  remained  in  the  fort  fit  for  service,  but 
the  dilatory  advance  of  the  enemy  allowed  time  for  eight  new 
cannon  to  be  cast  and  mounted.  All  the  wells  within  a  radius 
of  several  miles  of  the  city  were  filled  up,  and  the  tanks  defiled 
with  beef  and  pork,  so  as  to  render  their  water  undrinkable  to 
either  Hindu  or  Musalman.  Just  outside  Hansi  Thomas  threw 
up  three  strongly-fortified  outworks — one  commanding  the  south- 
eastern gate,  a  second  the  southern,  and  a  third  the  western  gate,  and 
these  were  manned  with  Rohilla  troops.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate 
the  exact  strength  of  the  force  that  remained  to  him :  Skinner 
puts  it  down  at  5,000  men,  but  Thomas  states  there  were  only  1,200 
adhering  to  his  interests,  of  whom  300  were  Rajputs.  The  latter 
estimate  is  probably  the  correct  one  :  but  whatever  the  number  of  his 
men,  he  had  lost  confidence  in  all  except  his  Rajputs,  and  so  critical 
did  he  consider  his  situation  that  he  took  up  his  residence  within 
the  fort  and  was  careful  to  keep  a  strict  guard  during  the  night  to 
avert  treachery. 

After  his  success  at  Georgegarh,  Major  Pedron  brought  the  Third 
Brigade  up  to  its  full  strength  by  drafting  into  it  a  sufficient  number 
of  men  from  the  Second  to  fill  the  vacancies  created  by  death  and 
casualties,  and  conceiving  the  campaign  practically  finished,  returned 
to  Aligarh,  leaving  Major  Louis  Bourguien  with  ten  full  battalions  of 
infantry,  500  Hindustani  horse,  and  5,000  Sikh  cavalry  to  follow 
Thomas  and  effect  the  coup  dc  gnice. 

204 


ONE  IRISH  SWORD  .'  205 

Bourguien  set  forward  in  a  leisurely  way,  marching  by  easy  stages 
and  possessing  himself  of  the  wells  in  the  vicinity  of  Hansi,  which  he 
stopped  to  clear  out.  It  was  not  until  towards  the  end  of  November 
that  he  reached  the  town,  and  after  reconnoitring  its  environs  several 
times,  formed  his  plan  of  atta1!k.  It  was  first  necessary  to  capture 
the  outworks  which  defended  the  gates,  and  an  assault  upon  them  was 
ordered.  Three  columns,  of  two  battalions  each,  advanced  at  day- 
break, led  by  Captain  Skinner,  Major  Bernier,  and  Lieutenant 
Mackenzie.  They  succeeded  so  easily,  that  Thomas  ascribed  their 
victory  to  treachery.  It  is  certain  that  Skinner  and  Mackenzie  met 
with  but  a  nominal  resistance,  the  garrisons  scrambling  out  and 
running  away  as  the  stormers  advanced  ;  but,  according  to  Skinner's 
account,  Major  Bernier  was  obstinately  opposed,  for,  by  getting 
between  the  town  and  the  outwork  he  was  attacking,  he  cut  off  the 
retreat  of  the  troops  defending  it,  who  fought  well  and  drove  the 
stormers  back.  Bernier  rallied  them,  but  was  killed  in  the  act  of 
doing  so,  upon  which  his  men  rushed  forward  and  carried  the  place, 
putting  every  soul  in  it  to  death.  Considerable  doubt  is,  however, 
thrown  on  this  account  by  the  recent  discovery  of  a  marble  tomb 
stone,  which  was  erected  over  Bernier's  grave,  and  the  inscription  on 
which  states  that  he  was  killed  on  the  10th  of  December  at  the 
storming  of  Hansi.  The  outpost  affair  above  described  occurred  in 
November,  and  it  is  probable  that  Skinner's  memory  was  at  fault  in 
making  it  the  occasion  of  Bernier's  death.  The  total  loss  on 
Bourguien's  side  was  very  small,  and  the  three  captured  works 
were  now  fixed  upon  as  points  for  his  trenches.  Batteries  being 
erected,  a  heavy  fire  was  opened  upon  the  waUs  of  the  town,  and, 
although  the  defenders  kept  up  a  smart  return,  a  breach  was  effected, 
and  three  columns,  numbering  1,500  men  each,  were  told  off  for  the 
storm. 

At  dawn  of  day  on  the  10th  of  December  the  signal  for  attack  was 
given.  Captain  Skinner  and  Lieutenants  Skinner  and  Mackenzie  were 
the  officers  in  command  of  the  columns.  The  elder  Skinner  found 
himself  opposed  by  Lieutenant  Birch,  whilst  his  brother  and  Mackenzie 
stormed  the  points  defended  by  Captain  Hearsey  and  a  native  officer 
named  Elias  Beg.  The  two  lieutenants  made  good  their  way  after 
some  resistance,  but  Captain  Skinner  was  twice  beaten  back  by 
Birch,  who  defended  his  post  well.  Burning  thatch,  powder  pots,  and 
every  missile  that  came  to  hand  were  showered  down  upon  the 
stormers,  greatly  distressing  and  disheartening  them.  At  a  third 
attempt,  however,  they  made  good  their  footing,  and  just  as  Skinner 
clambered  up  the  breach,  he  saw  Birch  about  twenty  yards  off 


206  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

taking  aim  at  him  with  a  double  barrelled  gun,  both  of  which  barrels 
he  discharged.  Fortunately  he  missed  his  mark  and  Skinner  immedi- 
ately "  levelled  his  javelin,"  and  darting  it  at  Birch,  took  off  his  hat, 
whereupon  the  latter  set  off  running  and  joined  his  party  who  had 
already  left  the  walls. 

Bourguien's  three  columns  now  converged  towards  the  centre  of  the 
town,  driving  the  enemy  before  them,  until  Thomas  came  up  with  his 
reserves  to  the  relief.  Attacking  the  younger  Skinner  he  beat  him 
back  to  the  walls  of  the  town  ;  but  the  latter,  being  joined  by  his 
brother,  advanced  again,  and  obliged  Thomas  to  retire.  The  three 
columns  now  effected  a  junction  in  the  central  bazaar,  which  became 
the  scene  of  a  desperate  conflict.  Thomas  having  ordered  up  a 
6-pounder,  brought  it  to  bear  on  the  stormers,  and  by  several  discharges 
of  grape  expelled  them  from  the  bazaar,  but  they,  being  reinforced  by 
a  reserve  battalion  and  two  9-pounders,  were  able  to  retake  the 
position.  The  contest  was  now  carried  on  at  closest  quarters,  the 
fighting  being  hand  to  hand.  Young  Skinner  approached  so  near  to 
Thomas  that  he  made  a  sabre  cut  at  him  and  would  have  disabled  him 
but  for  the  protection  afforded  by  his  armour.  Thrice  the  tide  of 
battle  ebbed  to  and  fro,  now  one  party,  now  the  other,  gaining  ground. 
The  narrow  side  streets  were  choked  with  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and 
wounded  who  had  crawled  out  of  the  way,  and  the  central  bazaar  ran 
red  with  blood.  Desperate  defence  was  opposed  to  obstinate  attack 
from  morning  until  noon,  when  the  superiority  of  Bourguien's  numbers 
began  to  tell,  and  after  disputing  every  inch  of  ground  with  the  most 
determined  valour  and  resolution,  Thomas  was  compelled  to  withdraw 
into  the  fort  and  abandon  his  capital  to  his  enemies. 

The  loss  of  life,  in  comparison  to  the  numbers  engaged,  was  enor- 
mous. Skinner  puts  down  the  killed  and  wounded  on  Bourguien's 
side  at  1,600,  but  due  allowances  must  be  made  for  his  habitual 
exaggeration.  Amongst  the  wounded  was  Lieutenant  Mackenzie, 
and  several  native  officers  were  killed.  Thomas  records  that  after 
the  fight  only  700  men  remained  to  him,  and  this  would  make  his 
loss  about  500.  Directly  victory  was  assured,  Bourguien,  who  had 
watched  the  conflict  from  a  strategic,  but  safe,  position  in  the  rear, 
marched  into  the  town  with  two  battalions  and  8,000  dismounted 
troopers,  and  relieved  the  combatants  who  were  allowed  to  retire  to 
the  rear. 

The  following  morning  Bourguien's  battering  guns  were  dragged 
into  Hansi,  and  trenches  dug  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  fort. 
Eight  18-pouuders  being  run  into  position  in  the  central  bazaar, 
their  fire  was  brought  to  bear  upon  the  walls  of  the  citadel.  Thomas 


ONE  IRISH  SWORD  f  207 

made  every  disposition  to  defend  himself,  but  liis  troops  had  lost  heart 
and  were  no  longer  the  same  men  whom  he  had  so  often  led  to  victory 
in  the  past.  From  time  to  time  they  followed  him  out  to  the  attack, 
but  they  fought  with  the  conviction  of  coming  defeat,  and  although  he 
sometimes  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  out  of  the  trenches,  he 
was  unable  to  maintain  any  temporary  advantage. 

The  bombardment  itself  produced  but  little  effect,  for  the  balls  of 
the  cannon  merely  buried  themselves  in  the  mud  walls  of  the  fort 
without  in  the  least  degree  shaking  their  solidity.  On  this  becoming 
apparent  it  was  decided  to  commence  mining,  and  Bourguien's  sappers 
advanced  to  within  ten  yards  of  the  crown-work.  But  meanwhile 
the  condition  of  affairs  within  the  fort  fell  from  bad  to  worse.  Pro- 
visions were  scarce,  and  the  danger  from  shot  and  shell  so  constant 
as  not  to  leave  a  moment's  rest.  The  spirit  of  mutiny  appeared 
amongst  the  Muhammadan  troops,  and  numerous  desertions  occurred, 
so  that  it  was  soon  apparent  that  only  time  was  wanting  to  complete 
the  tale  of  Thomas's  ruin. 

Bourguien  now  began  to  intrigue  with  the  garrison  in  the  fort. 
Letters  offering  them  six  months'  pay  and  permanent  service  under 
the  Maratha  flag  were  rolled  round  arrows  and  shot  over  the  ramparts, 
and  replied  to  by  the  same  method.  Before  long  these  insidious 
proposals  began  to  bear  fruit.  There  were  still  a  faithful  few  around 
Thomas,  but  they  were  in  the  minority,  and  Bourguien  was  assured 
by  those  he  tampered  with  that  in  a  short  time  they  would  be 
able  to  arrange  an  accommodation  for  the  fort  to  be  surrendered  and 
its  master  delivered  up. 

But  in  this  the  darkest  hour  of  that  dark  time  Jowruj  Jung  found 
in  his  enemy's  camp  hearts  touched  by  his  splendid  spirit,  and  who 
would  not  suffer  this  gallant  soldier  to  become  the  victim  of  such  foul 
treachery  as  that  premeditated.  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  the  two 
Skinners  and  Mackenzie  were  respectable  and  honourable  men,  and 
unable  to  acquiesce  in  deeds  of  shame.  Bourguien  had  boasted  how 
he  would  ill-use  "  that  blackguard  Irishman  "  when  he  once  got  hold 
of  him,  vowing  he  should  be  confined  in  prison,  a  threat  he  was  quite 
capable  of  carrying  into  execution.  "  But  this,"  writes  Skinner,  "was 
language  we  did  not  admire,  and  we  felt  indignant  at  this  underhand 
treachery,  and  agreed  that  it  would  be  disgraceful  if  Thomas  fell 
through  such  intrigue."  And  so  these  officers,  some  English,  some 
countryborn,  waited  upon  Bourguien  and  remonstrated  against  what 
was  going  on,  and,  partly  by  protest,  partly  by  persuasion,  prevailed 
upon  him  to  allow  Thomas  the  barren  honours  of  a  capitulation, 
pointing  out  that  much  more  credit  would  result  from  such  a  course 


208  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

than  if  the  end  was  secured  by  unfair  means.  For  a  long  time 
Bourguien  resisted,  but  "  one  day,  after  tiffin,  when  the  wine  he  had 
drunk  had  put  him  in  high  spirits  and  good  humour,"  they  pressed 
their  point,  and  at  last  he  consented,  calling  out  in  his  broken  English, 
"  Well,  gentlemen,  you  do  as  you  like.  I  give  power.  Only  he  be 
one  dam  Englishman." 

Thomas  was  aware  of  the  conspiracy  ripening  against  him,  but 
powerless  to  prevent  it.  The  Rajputs  still  remained  faithful,  and  it 
was  his  intention  to  hold  out  as  long  as  it  was  possible ;  but  it  was 
plain  to  see  that  the  end  was  near,  and  that  nothing  could  save  him. 
When,  therefore,  Captain  Smith  was  deputed  to  visit  him,  under  a 
flag  of  truce,  with  the  offer  of  honourable  terms,  Thomas  received  him 
with  gratitude,  and  on  learning  he  had  been  sent  by  the  whole  of  the 
English  officers  to  save  him  from  dishonour,  thanked  him  and  begged 
he  would  return  and  say  any  terms  the  officers  recommended  would 
be  accepted.  After  some  trouble,  Bourguien  was  prevailed  upon  to 
sanction  the  following :  that  Thomas  should  be  permitted  to  depart 
with  all  his  money  and  private  property  to  British  territory,  and  his 
troops  allowed  to  march  out  with  all  their  private  arms,  and  the 
honours  of  war ;  but  that  everything  else  in  the  fort  was  to  be  made 
over  to  the  victors. 

Thomas's  acceptation  of  these  terms  may  be  best  recorded  in  his 
own  words  : — 

"  Considering,  therefore,  that  I  had  entirely  lost  my  party,  and  with 
it  the  hopes  of  at  present  subduing  my  enemies,  the  Sikhs,  and  the 
powers  in  the  French  interest ;  that  I  had  no  expectation  of  succour 
from  any  quarter,  Luckwa  having  gone  to  Joudpore  ;  that  if  hostilities 
continued  my  resources  in  money  would  have  failed  ;  in  this  situation 
I  agreed  to  evacuate  the  fort." 

And  so  the  curtain  fell  011  the  rule  of  Jowruj  Juny,  and  the  princi- 
pality he  founded.  Won  by  the  sword,  and  held  by  the  sword,  it  was 
surrendered  at  the  sword's  point.  Crowded  are  its  brief  but  brilliant 
annals  with  tales  of  lawless,  yet  dauntless  daring  and  audacious  energy, 
and  fitly  closed  by  the  heroism  of  the  last  grand  struggle,  when 
against  dangers  that  appalled,  and  overwhelming  numbers  that 
crushed,  the  unconquerable  spirit  of  George  Thomas  resisted  for  long 
weeks  of  unequal  strife  and  constant  battle  the  might  of  Perron's 
power. 

On  the  20th  of  December,  1801,  the  terms  of  surrender  were  drawn 
out  and  signed,  and  a  cessation  of  hostilities  declared.  It  was  agreed 
that  possession  of  the  fort  should  be  given  up  in  two  days.  An  inter- 
view followed  between  Bourguieii  and  Thomas,  at  the  bungalow  of 


ONE  IRISH  SWORD  !  209 

the  latter,  which  was  situated  upon  the  banks  of  the  Umtee  tank  in 
the  town  of  Hansi.  All  Bourguien's  officers  were  assembled  to  receive 
the  defeated  soldier.  His  behavioiir  was  dignified  and  courteous,  and 
he  was  particularly  gracious  to  the  younger  Skinner,  "  whom  he  em- 
braced," and  showed  him  the  cut  he  had  received  from  him  on  his 
belt  during  the  fight  of  the  10th  of  December.  His  demeanour  had  a 
marked  effect  on  Bourguien,  who  treated  him  with  great  politeness  and 
invited  him  and  his  two  officers,  Birch  and  Hearsey,  to  dinner  on  the 
next  day. 

Thomas  accepted  the  invitation,  and  about  seven  o'clock  on  the 
following  evening  rode  into  camp,  attended  by  50  of  his  cavalry. 
His  bearing  was  now  greatly  changed  from  that  of  yesterday,  and  he 
showed  signs  of  deep  dejection,  as  though  bowed  down  by  the  weight 
of  his  misfortunes.  At  eight  o'clock  dinner  was  served  in  a  large  tent 
and  all  sat  down.  With  the  chivalrous  sympathy  all  brave  soldiers 
feel  for  a  fallen  foe,  Bourguien's  officers  tried  their  utmost  to  cheer 
their  guest,  carefully  framing  their  conversation  so  as  to  avoid  all 
reference  to  recent  events,  and  endeavouring  to  enlist  his  interest  in 
other  topics.  Presently  the  wine  began  to  flow,  and  Thomas  sought 
comfort  in  its  fickle  cheer.  By  eleven  o'clock  at  night  the  whole 
company  was  "  pretty  merry,"  and  drinking  the  health  of  "  General 
Perron  "  and  "  George  Thomas,"  and  Thomas  himself  seemed  quite 
happy. 

Suddenly,  stirred  by  some  evil  and  ungenerous  impulse,  Louis 
Bourguien  raised  his  glass  aloft,  and  from  his  seat  at  the  head  of  the 
table,  called  loudly  out :  "  Let  us  drink  to  the  success  of  Perron's 
arms !  " 

In  a  moment  the  sounds  of  laughter  and  carouse  died  away,  and  an 
ominous  hush  succeeded,  as  those  present  rebelled  against  the  toast 
and  in  testimony  turned  their  glasses  up. 

As  Thomas  realised  the  import  of  that  action,  and  the  generous 
sympathy  it  conveyed,  his  impulsive  Irish  nature  yielded  to  the  insult, 
and  to  the  condemnation  it  had  evoked,  and  he  burst  into  tears. 

But  only  for  a  moment.  The  next  he  was  Jowruj  Jung  once  more, 
fierce  and  furious.  Springing  to  his  feet  he  confronted  the  man  who 
could  thus  taunt  him  in  the  hour  of  his  misfortune,  and  laying  his 
hand  on  his  sword  hilt,  called  out  to  Bourguien  that  it  was  to  his  own 
ill-fate  his  fall  was  due,  and  not  to  the  prowess  of  the  low  braggart 
who  insulted  him.  Then,  drawing  his  sword  and  waving  it  over  his 
head,  he  cried  aloud  : 

"  One  Irish  Sword  is  still  sufficient  for  a  hundred  Frenchmen." 

One  IrisJi  Sword  I    And  what  a  sword  it  was.     Sikh  and  Rohilla 

14 


210  GEOBGE  THOMAS. 

Rajput  and  Path  an  had  fled  before  it.  It  had  shielded  the  Mugha 
provinces  of  Saharanpur  from  invasion,  and  reinstated  the  Witch  of 
Sardhaua  on  her  throne ;  it  had  scourged  the  lawless  Mewatti 
districts  into  submission,  and  established  a  ruler  in  rebellious 
Rewari ;  Jaipur  and  Bikanir  had  paid  it  tribute,  Batinda  had 
bought  its  clemency,  Hariana  knew  its  weight,  and  Udaipur  its 
reach;  it  had  carried  conquest  to  the  banks  of  the  gleaming  Sutlej, 
and,  but  three  months  since,  had  defeated  the  battalions  that  were 
still  known  as  "  De  Boigne's."  One  Irish  (Sword— sufficient  for  a 
hundred  Frenchman,  truly,  as  it  flashed  out  now  in  the  dimly-lighted 
tent.  More  than  sufficient  for  Louis  Bourguien,  who  felt  the  magic 
of  its  latent  power,  and  in  a  palsy  of  terror  jumped  from  his  chair, 
and  rushing  out  of  the  tent,  called  for  his  guard  to  protect  him. 

Thomas's  troopers,  who  were  outside,  crowded  in  at  the  first  sound 
of  high  words.  For  a  moment  it  seemed  as  though  a  fight  was 
imminent,  but  the  European  officers  present  assured  them  that  it  was 
"only  the  Sahib  drunk,"  and  bade  the  men  keep  off,  whilst  Thomas  in 
the  midst  kept  wildly  waving  his  sword  an!  calling  out  in 

Hindustani  to  "  See  !  see  !  how  he  had  made  the  d d  Frenchman 

run  like  a  jackal." 

A  dramatic  scene.  Picture  the  great  Irishman,  swaying  to  and  fro, 
as  he  lunges  and  thrusts  with  his  sword  into  the  empty  air,  in  the 
intensity  of  his  excitement.  In  his  face  the  flush  of  wine,  in  his  eyes 
the  glitter  of  passion,  in  his  attitude  the  ferocity  of  insulted  honour. 
The  swarthy  troopers,  thronging  in,  press  forward  with  clank  of  steel 
and  angry  cries  ;  the  turbaned  servants  huddle  in  the  doorways ;  with- 
out the  hurried  cry  to  arms,  and  shouting  and  confusion  swelling  the 
clamour ;  within  the  tent  all  have  risen  from  the  littered  table,  and 
are  crowding  round  Thomas,  striving  to  pacify  him,  whilst  he 
wrestles  and  towers  above  them,  waving  his  sword  and  glaring  at  the 
empty  chair  from  whence  the  master  of  the  feast  has  fled. 

It  required  the  greatest  persuasion  to  prevail  upon  him  to  sheath 
his  weapon.  The  natives  were  hustled  out,  and  after  Thomas  had 
been  induced  to  resume  his  seat,  it  was  explained  to  him  that  the 
wine  Bourguien  had  taken  was  the  cause  of  his  forgetting  himself, 
and  that  no  insult  had  been  intended.  With  the  inconsistency  of 
intoxication,  Thomas  agreed  to  make  it  up,  whereupon  the  Frenchman 
ventured  to  return,  and  shaking  hands  begged  Thomas's  pardon. 

Peace  being  thus  restored,  the  wiae  flowed  again,  and  it  was  soon 
evident  that  the  banquet  was  degenerating  into  an  orgies.  The  elder 
Skinner  was  orderly  officer  of  the  day,  and  seeing  how  matters  were 
shaping,  withdrew  and  rode  off  to  the  town,  which  was  occupied  by 


ONE  IRISH  SWORD  /  .       211 

Bourguien's  troops,  to  caution  the  men  not  to  challenge  Thomas  on 
his  return  to  the  fort.  Unfortunately  he  omitted  to  warn  the  guard 
posted  at  the  south-eastern  gate,  which  was  the  one  Thomas  entered 
by,  and  in  consequence  on  the  arrival  of  the  latter  about  midnight, 
he  was  saluted  with  the  usual  challenge  "  Who-Kum-Dar  ?  " 

"  Sahib  Bahadur ! "  (the  great  master),  was  the  reply  from 
Thomas's  troopers,  that  being  the  name  by  which  he  was  always 
known. 

The  sentry  replied  that  he  knew  of  no  Sahib  Bahadur,  and  could 
let  no  one  pass  without  permission  from  his  officer.  Thomas  heard 
this,  and  turning  round  to  his  men  asked  them, 

"  Could  any  one  have  stopped  Sahib  Bahadur  at  this  gate  but  one 
month  ago  ?  " 

"  No,  no  !  "  they  answered,  with  the  effusive  concurrence  typical  of 
the  native  character.  Whereupon  Thomas  dismounted,  and  drawing 
his  sword,  made  a  slash  at  the  poor  sentry  and  cut  off  his  right  hand. 
The  guard  immediately  fell  in  and  Thomas's  life  was  in  danger,  but 
just  at  this  moment  Skinner  came  up  and  further  mischief  was 
avoided. 

He  found  Thomas  staggering  up  and  down,  his  naked  sword  in  his 
hand,  and  Hearsey  and  several  of  his  troopers  trying  to  lay  hold  of 
him.  At  length  one  of  the  latter  caught  him  from  behind,  and  he 
was  disarmed.  He  then  submitted  to  be  placed  in  a  palanquin,  and 
in  this  conveyance  the  Lord  of  Hansi  was  carried  into  his  fort  for  the 
last  time. 

The  next  morning,  on  recovering  his  senses,  Thomas  learnt  from 
Hearsey  what  had  happened.  "Whereupon  he  sent  for  the  trooper  he 
had  maimed  and  gave  him  Es.500,  and  wrote  to  Bourguien  apologising 
for  his  conduct. 

Alas,  for  that  Irish  sword  1  The  pity  that  it  should  be  sullied  by 
the  stain  of  this  cowardly  act.  In  all  his  excesses  Thomas  never 
plumbed  a  deeper  degradation  of  drink  than  this  pitiable  incident 
displays.  "Would  that,  if  happen  it  must,  it  had  happened  on  any 
other  night  than  that  on  which,  in  a  flash  of  defiance  that  lifted 
him  high  above  his  misfortunes,  he  bearded  Bourguien  at  his  own 
table,  and  claimed  for  his  Irish  sword  that  it  was  still  sufficient  for  a 
hundred  Frenchmen ! 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  GEORGE  THOMAS. 
1802. 

ON  the  29th  of  December,  1801,  George  Thomas  evacuated  Hansi, 
and  three  days  later,  under  escort  of  a  battalion  of  Bourguien's 
infantry  commanded  by  Captain  Smith,  started  for  Anupshahr — the 
very  place  from  which  he  had  commenced  his  adventurous  career  exactly 
eight  years  before.  He  carried  with  him  the  wreck  of  his  fortune,  to 
the  value  of  about  one  lakh  of  rupees,  in  money,  jewelry,  shawls  and 
other  property,  and  was  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  family. 

From  Anupshahr  Thomas  proceeded  by  river  to  Benares,  which  he 
reached  in  March.  Here  he  met  the  Governor-general's  fleet  of 
boats  on  its  way  to  Lucknow,  and  was  invited  by  Lord  Wellesley  to 
an  interview,  in  the  course  of  which  Thomas  afforded  the  Governor- 
general  a  great  deal  of  valuable  information  about  the  countries 
beyond  Delhi,  and  the  strength  of  the  armies  of  the  native  princes  in 
the  western  parts  of  India.  In  connection  with  this  meeting  there  is 
a  characteristic  anecdote  recorded,  which  must  not  be  omitted.  In 
order  to  illustrate  Thomas's  remarks  a  map  of  India  was  laid  on  the 
table,  in  which,  as  was  and  is  still  customary,  the  British  possessions 
were  coloured  red.  On  this  being  explained  to  Thomas,  he  swept  his 
great  hand  across  the  chart  from  end  to  end  with  the  emphatic 
comment,  "  All  this  ought  to  be  red  1 " 

Therein  breathed  the  true  spirit  of  Jowruj  Jung.  Bed  that  map 
was  destined  to  be,  and  the  great  statesman  he  addressed  little 
suspected  how  soon.  And  in  this  connection  it  is  curious  to  observe 
that  nearly  forty  years  later,  Eanjit  Singh,  the  old  Lion  of  Lahore, 
made  an  almost  identical  observation  under  similar  circumstances, 
for  when  a  map  of  India  happened  to  be  placed  before  him  and  the 
theory  of  its  colouring  explained,  he  fixed  on  it  that  one  penetrating 
eye  of  his,  "  which  was  equal  to  any  other  man's  two  eyes,"  and 
almost  in  Thomas's  words  remarked,  "  It  will  all  be  red  soon." 

212 


§  i 

*•  I 

g  I 

I  -I- 

8  .«N 

a:  i; 

u  >i 


ii 


<     -2 


DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  GEORGE  THOMAS.     213 

Thornas  remained  some  time  at  Benares  arranging  his  affairs,  and 
it  was  here  that  he  dictated  his  memoirs  to  Captain  Francklin.  "  He 
proposed,"  writes  his  biographer,  "  to  deliver  his  information  in  the 
Persian  language,  adding,  that  from  constant  use,  it  had  become 
more  familiar  to  him  than  his  native  tongue.  This  offer,  for  obvious 
reasons,  was  declined ;  but  it  proves  Mr.  Thomas's  capacity  under 
every  disadvantage  arising  from  a  want  of  regular  education,  and  I 
have  no  hesitation  in  declaring  my  opinion  that  if  Mr.  Thomas  had 
found  leisure  to  cultivate  his  mind,  his  progress  in  the  most  useful 
branches  of  literature  would  have  been  surprisingly  rapid.  He  spoke, 
wrote,  and  read  the  Hindustani  and  Persian  languages  with  un- 
common fluency  and  precision." 

It  was  Thomas's  wish  to  return  to  Ireland  with  his  family  and 
fortune,  and  pass  his  days  in  retirement  in  his  native  land.  With 
this  aim  in  view  he  left  Benares,  and  commenced  his  journey  to 
Calcutta  by  river.  But  misfortunes  had  broken  his  daring  mind  and 
impaired  his  robust  constitution,  and  he  succumbed,  a  victim  to  his 
own  fatal  weakness,  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1802,  in  the  forty-sixth  year 
of  his  age.  He  died  near  the  military  cantonment  of  Bahrampur,  in 
the  burying  ground  of  which  place  his  remains  were  interred. 

Captain  Francklin  states  that  a  monument  was  being  erected  to 
Thomas's  memory  at  the  time  when  he  was  finishing  his  memoirp. 
Anxious  to  include  in  these  pages  the  epitaph  which  his  contemporaries 
placed  over  George  Thomas,  particular  endeavours  have  been  made 
to  secure  the  same,  but  without  success.  "  I  have  searched  every 
cemetery  in  Berhampur,  English  and  Dutch,"  writes  an  esteemed  and 
courteous  correspondent,  "  but  no  trace  of  George  Thomas's  tomb  can 
be  found.  In  the  cemetery  now  in  use  there  are  many  old  tombs 
without  any  name  plates  left  on  them  :  the  plates  have  fallen  out,  and 
where  they  have  been  picked  up  whole,  they  have  been  inserted  in 
the  wall.  I  have  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Thomas's  plate  has  fallen  out 
and  been  broken — if  it  ever  existed."  The  illustration  shows  the  pro- 
bable site  of  his  grave. 

In  appearance  Thomas  was  a  singularly  fine  and  tall  man,  standing 
upwards  of  six  feet  in  height,  and  his  limbs  and  body  were  massive 
and  well  proportioned.  His  constitution  was  an  iron  one,  and  his 
physical  strength  enormous,  whilst  his  dexterity  with  the  sword  was 
such  that  he  could  decapitate  a  bullock  with  a  single  stroke.  His 
countenance  was  bold  and  open,  arid  his  bearing  manly  and  erect. 
"  From  the  constant  and  active  use  of  his  limbs,  during  his  long  and 
arduous  warfare"  writes  Francklin,  "he  had  contracted  a  certain 


214  OEOliGE  THOMAS. 

elevation  of  the  bead,  which  gave  him  an  air  of  stiffness,  but,  at  the 
same  time,  added  to  his  martial  appearance,  and  seemed  to  indicate 
something  of  the  intrepidity  of  spirit  which  wholly  possessed  his 
conduct  to  the  last  hour  of  his  life." 

The  life  which  was  brought  to  a  premature  close  at  Bahrampur 
presents  a  strange  admixture  of  strength  and  weakness,  and  the 
contrast  enables  us  to  see  the  actual  clay  of  which  the  man  was 
moulded.  Although  this  circumstance  may  dispel  much  of  the 
glamour  that  surrounds  Thomas's  romantic  career,  the  knowledge 
of  his  frailty  heightens  our  astonishment  at  his  achievement. 
For  it  reveals  the  fact  that  this  fearless  Irishman,  who,  cutting  him- 
self adrift  from  all  communication  with  his  fellow-countrymen, 
plunged  into  an  unknown  land,  raised  himself  from  the  position  of  a 
private  soldier  in  a  native  army  to  that  of  an  independent  prince, 
waged  indiscriminate  war,  invaded  foreign  territories,  fought  battles, 
stormed  fortresses,  and  pillaged  towns,  premeditated  the  conquest  of 
the  Panjab,  and  pitted  his  strength  against  Perron  when  the  latter 
was  in  the  zenith  of  his  power — this  Irishman,  we  find,  was  a  very 
human  hero  after  all.  From  the  summit  of  his  success  as  independent 
ruler  of  Hansi  and  self-elected  scourge  of  the  Sikh  states,  it  is  a  deep 
drop  into  the  abyss  of  that  fatal  fortnight  at  Georgegarh,  and  an 
acquaintance  with  these  facts  creates  a  wonder,  not  how  he  rose  but 
how  he  fell.  We  find  it,  indeed,  more  difficult  to  understand  his 
exhibition  of  weakness  than  his  display  of  strength. 

There  is,  of  course,  very  much  that  is  unrecorded  in  Thomas's  life. 
Francklin's  memoir  is,  at  best,  a  mere  summary  of  facts,  without  a 
comment  or  an  explanation  conceded.  What  Thomas  did — he  did. 
No  analysis  of  motive  elucidates  his  actions,  even  when  they  are 
most  lawless.  Perhaps  it  is  better  so.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the 
philosophy  of  Jowruj  Jung  savoured  too  much  of  "  the  good  old  plan  " 
to  permit  of  his  history  being  too  closely  scrutinised. 

But  passing  from  his  motives  to  his  deeds  there  comes  to  us  much 
that  compels  our  admiration.  The  romanceful  pages  of  Indian 
adventure  contain  no  epic  more  stirring  than  that  of  George  Thomas. 
Whether  he  is  striding  forward  to  conquest,  or  standing  defiant  in 
resistance  he  amazes  us  with  his  prodigious  daring  and  his  un- 
conquerable resolution.  Without  a  single  advantage  of  birth  or 
education,  without  means  and  without  friends,  he  fought  his  way  to 
success.  Suffering  in  its  acutest  form  from  an  Irishman's  irresistible 
propensity  for  fighting,  Thomas's  Indian  career  was  one  prolonged 
battle.  Never  resting  for  one  moment  on  his  arms,  he  faced  about 
from  one  victory  or  repulse,  only  to  attack  another  foe.  Nothing 


DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  GEORGE  THOMAS.     215 

dismayed  him,  nothing  stopped  him.  He  led  his  flying  columns 
thirty,  forty,  and  fifty  miles  a  day  into  the  heart  of  an  enemy's 
country ;  he  sacked  villages  of  their  cooking-pots  and  household 
utensils  for  metal  to  cast  him  cannon ;  he  seldom  saw  a  fortress  but 
he  stormed  it  there  and  then  ;  never  met  a  foe  but  he  forthwith 
offered  fight.  He  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  be  defeated,  and  was 
most  dangerous  when  other  men  would  have  been  most  despairing. 
And  yet,  with  all  his  lust  of  battle  and  his  lawless  extravagance, 
there  comes,  ever  and  anon,  some  strangely  touching  incident  to 
reveal  the  finer  nature  of  the  man,  as  when  we  find  him  forgiving  a 
treacherous  master,  championing  a  deposed  prince,  or  assisting  some 
weak  and  oppressed  woman  in  her  distress,  with  a  nobility  of 
character,  a  disinterestedness  of  design,  and  a  chivalry  of  feeling  that 
would  have  become  many  a  better  man. 

Let  contemporary  opinion  speak  for  Thomas's  character. 

"  Thomas  was  formed  by  nature,"  writes  Captain  Francklin,  "  to 
execute  the  boldest  designs,  and  though  uncultivated  by  education  he 
possessed  a  native  and  inherent  vigour  of  .  mind,  which  qualified 
him  for  the  performance  of  great  actions,  and  placed  him  on  a  level 
with  distinguished  officers  of  his  day.  His  knowledge  of  the  different 
tribes  and  nations  that  composed  the  interior  of  the  vast  peninsula 
of  India  was  various,  extensive  and  correct,  and  no  man,  perhaps, 
ever  more  thoroughly  studied,  or  properly  appreciated  the  Indian 
character  at  large.  In  his  manners  he  was  gentle  and  inoffensive, 
and  possessed  a  natural  politeness,  and  evinced  a  disposition  to 
please,  superior  to  most  men.  He  was  a  loyal  subject  to  his  king, 
and  a  real  and  sincere  well-wisher  to  the  prosperity  and  permanence 
of  the  British  Empire  in  the  East.  He  was  open,  generous,  charit- 
able and  humane,  and  his  behaviour  towards  the  families  of  those 
persons  who  fell  in  his  service  evinces  a  benevolence  of  heart, 
and  a  philanthropy  of  spirit  highly  honourable  to  his  character. 
But  with  these  good  qualities  the  impartiality  of  history  demands 
that  we  should  state  his  errors,  and  endeavour  to  discover  some 
shades  in  a  character  otherwise  splendid.  A  quickness  of  temper, 
liable  to  frequent  agitation  and  the  ebullitions  of  hasty  wrath,  not 
unfrequently  rendered  his  appearance  ferocious ;  yet  this  only  occurred 
in  instances  when  the  conviviality  of  his  temper  obscured  his  reason, 
and  for  this,  on  conviction,  no  man  was  ever  readier  to  make  every 
acknowledgment  and  reparation  in  his  power.  Perfect  correctness  of 
conduct  cannot  be  expected  from  a  character  like  the  one  under  con- 
sideration, as  a  seclusion  from  civilised  life  and  long  absence  from  the 
exercise  of  those  duties  which  constitute  the  chief  enjoyment  of  social 


216  GEORGE  THOMAS 

happiness,  must  necessarily  have  tinctured  the  manners  of  the  man 
with  some  portion  of  the  spirit  of  the  barbarians  with  whom  he  was 
so  long  intimate.  Upon  the  whole,  however,  we  may  be  justified  in 
remarking  that  on  a  review  of  the  life  and  actions  of  this  very  extra- 
ordinary man,  it  is  difficult  which  most  to  admire — the  intrepidity  of 
spirit  by  which  he  was  incited  to  the  performance  of  actions  which,  by 
their  effect,  raised  him  from  the  condition  of  a  private  subject  to  rank 
and  distinction  among  princes,  or  the  wonderful  and  uncommon  at- 
tachment generally  exhibited  towards  his  person  and  interest  by  tho 
natives  of  every  description  who  fought  and  conquered  with  him  in 
his  long  and  arduous  career,  and  whose  assistance  exalted  him  for  a 
time  to  a  height  of  respectability  and  consequence  that  seldom  falls  to 
the  lot  of  an  individual." 

In  these  lines  Captain  Franckhn  has  laboured  much  to  disguise 
Thomas's  failings ;  but  reading  carefully  between  them  it  is  easy  to 
recognise  the  particular  vices  and  shortcomings  they  indicate.  No 
one  could  believe  the  debauch  of  Georgegarh  was  a  new  and  sudden 
folly ;  it  was,  alas,  the  climax  of  a  long  course  of  dissipation.  And 
for  the  rest  it  is  enough  to  mention  that  Thomas  so  far  conformed  to 
the  customs  of  the  country  as  to  keep  a  harem.  After  his  death  an 
exceedingly  numerous  progeny  found  an  asylum  at  Sardhana,  through 
the  indulgence  and  charity  of  the  Begum  Somru,  only  in  process  of 
tune  to  become  merged  in  the  native  population  of  the  country  ; 
although  one,  who  bore  his  father's  name,  rose  to  the  position  of  an 
officer  in  her  army. 

The  following  testimony  of  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  is,  perhaps, 
more  valuable  than  that  of  Captain  Francklin,  for  he  was  brought 
into  earlier  and  more  intimate  relations  with  Thomas. 

"  Thomas  was  a  bold,  enterprising  adventurer,  who  stepped  over 
difficulties  which  would  have  disheartened  many  daring  minds.  He 
was  coarse  and  illiterate,  but  his  courage  was  undaunted,  his  perse- 
verance invincible,  and  his  activity  indefatigable.  He  had  a  strong 
judgment,  cautious  prudence,  and  great  natural  powers,  was  generous 
and  hospitable,  and  often  insinuating  from  inclination  :  and  his  ambi- 
tion required  the  operation  of  all  these  three  qualities.  All  ambitious 
characters  must  be  generous :  it  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  instru- 
ments to  forward  their  views.  Thomas's  conduct  had  been  sur- 
prisingly admirable  until  the  moment  when  he  required  the  exertion 
of  all  his  uncommon  powers.  At  this  critical  moment  he  failed,  and 
failed  astonishingly.  I  can  only  ascribe  it  to  his  being  confounded  at 
the  difficulties  which  opposed  him,  to  his  want  of  European  officers, 
and  to  the  treachery  of  his  native  commanders. 


DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  GEORGE  THOMAS.  217 

"I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  and  had  a  sincere  respect  for 
his  character.  With  some  oddities,  and  many  singularities,  he  was 
an  uncommon  character,  and  his  exertions  towards  station,  power, 
riches  and  glory,  were  still  more  uncommon.  He  was  extraordinarily 
amhitious,  which  was  the  principal  cause  that  led  to  his  ruin.  He 
would  be  all  or  nothing.  To  serve  under  the  orders  of  another  was 
an  inglorious  dependence  in  his  estimation  of  things.  Courage  he 
possessed  to  an  eminent  degree,  and  he  certainly  had  abilities,  if  a 
clear  head,  a  solid  judgment,  and  an  acute  discernment  can  be  called 
by  that  name." 

To  Thomas's  military  talents  several  competent  critics  have  borne 
testimony.  Writes  a  contributor  in  the  Calcutta,  Review: — "We  find 
tin's  uneducated  and  dissipated  adventurer  casting  guns  at  Hansi, 
strengthening  his  flanks  in  action  against  large  bodies  of  cavalry  with 
abbaiis,  and  altogether  demeaning  himself  as  a  soldier  in  a  manner 
that  would  have  done  credit  to  the  school  of  Wellington  and  Napo- 
leon." And  another  in  the  same  journal :  "  This  remarkable  man, 
by  dint  of  perseverance,  military  skill,  and  great  personal  valour, 
carved  out  for  himself  a  small  principality,  and  had  there  been  only 
natives  to  contend  against  would  have  held  it.  In  him  was  pre- 
eminently displayed  the  energy  of  character  which  distinguishes  the 
European  from  the  Asiatic.  We  find  him  refusing  to  desert  the  cause 
of  friends,  bringing  into  subjection  a  district  previously  uncontrollable, 
building  forts,  casting  cannon,  and  training  levies.  To  support  the 
widow  of  a  Mahomedan  prince,  who  had  appealed  to  him  for  help,  he 
marched  through  a  hostile  country,  in  open  warfare  with  the  chiefs  of 
it,  whom  he  defeated  in  more  than  one  battle,  and  he  was  the  first 
Englishman  to  plant  his  foot  on  the  banks  of  the  Sutlez,  although 
that  honour  is  usually  ascribed  to  Lord  Lake." 

Colonel  James  Tod,  the  author  of  "  The  Annals  of  Eajas'than,"  thus 
summarises  Thomas's  character  in  the  pages  of  the  Asiatic  Journal  : 

"  In  Thomas  was  seen  the  union  of  wild  energy,  considerable  fore- 
sight, and  daring  intrepidity,  with  gigantic  form  and  strength,  which 
placed  him  among  the  most  conspicuous  of  all  who  carved  their  way 
to  fortune  in  that  wild  field.  Nor  is  there  any  reasonable  doubt  that, 
but  for  the  brilliant  close  of  his  career  in  the  unequal  but  unavoidable 
contest  with  Perron,  he  would  have  made  Lahore  his  capital.  For 
the  Sikhs  quailed  before  the  name  of  Thomas,  who  spoke  of  them  as 
soldiers  with  contempt,  and  treated  them  to  hard  knocks.  With  500 
of  his  Kohilla  cavalry  he  would  at  any  time  have  disposed  of  thrice 
that  number  of  Sikh  horse." 

This  long  list  of  quotations  may  be  concluded  by  an  extract  from 


218  GEORGE  THOMAS. 

the  Edinburgh  Review.  "  If  we  can  forgive  Thomas  what,  at  that 
tune  and  under  his  circumstances,  was  rarely  accounted  a  crime,  that 
he  shed  blood,  and  that  very  largely,  in  the  quarrels  of  others  with 
which  he  had  no  concern,  and  that  he  manifested  very  violent  out- 
hursts  of  temper,  we  shall  still,  to  do  him  justice,  he  obliged  to  admit 
that  he  displayed  many  and  very  striking  traits  of  generosity  and 
benevolence  ;  that  he  was  scrupulously  true  to  his  engagements  ;  that 
he  never  deserted  or  betrayed  a  friend  or  an  ally ;  and  that  he  pos- 
sessed in  an  uncommon  measure  those  noble  qualities  which  secured 
to  him  the  devoted  attachment  of  all,  of  whatsoever  race,  who  served 
under  him." 

In  estimating  the  character  and  career  of  George  Thomas,  after  a 
lapse  of  nearly  a  hundred  years,  we  must  divest  ourselves  of  many 
modern  ideas,  and  judge  him  by  the  standard  of  the  times  in  which 
he  lived,  and  the  scenes  in  which  he  laboured.  They  were  barbarous 
times  and  savage  scenes.  In  the  world  which  he  penetrated,  only  the 
strongest  arm  and  sharpest  sword,  the  shrewdest  brain  and  least 
scrupulous  conscience,  met  with  success.  Moral  obligations  were 
unknown  in  the  Maratha  Empire.  The  ethics  of  the  sons  of  Sivaji 
were  simple .  Might  was  right,  and  the  end  justified  the  means. 

The  starting  point  from  which  Thomas  began  his  career  did  not 
qualify  him  for  the  exhibition  of  any  extraordinary  virtue  or  forbear- 
ance. A  common  sailor  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  was  familiarised 
to  despotism  and  tyranny.  His  personal  liberty  extended  no  further 
than  the  hail  of  the  press  gang :  his  professional  duties  were  inculcated 
and  exacted  with  a  Spartan  severity  ;  and  he  was  rendered  callous  of 
life  by  the  cheerful  way  in  which  he  was  called  on  to  kill  or  be  killed. 
At  a  time  when  the  high  seas  pwarmed  with  privateers  and  pirates, 
the  lawlessness  of  maritime  warfare  was  notorious,  and  battle  and 
chase  were  the  conditions,  not  the  exceptions,  of  naval  life.  This  was 
the  school  in  which  George  Thomas  was  educated,  and  in  scrutinising 
his  conduct  and  his  humanity,  we  must  remember  that  he  sprang 
from  the  lowest  strata  of  society  in  a  civilised  country,  where  men 
were  transported  for  pilfering  trifles,  and  hung  for  stealing  sheep. 
The  brutality  of  the  repressive  laws  of  the  eighteenth  century  exceeded 
the  brutality  of  those  who  broke  them,  and  if  Thomas  held  life  cheap 
in  war,  the  country  he  belonged  to  held  it  cheaper  in  peace. 

To  pass  from  Thomas's  merits  as  a  man  to  his  claims  as  a  soldier  is 
a  pleasant  transition.  He  was  a  born  leader,  a  general  by  intuition. 
He  enjoyed  the  precious  gift  of  endearing  men  to  his  person,  making 
them  not  merely  soldiers  but  zealots  in  his  cause.  He  inspired  con- 
fidence, courage,  and  enthusiasm.  He  could  rally  panic-stricken 


DEATH  AND  CHARACTER  OF  GEORGE  THOMAS.     219 

battalions  by  the  magic  of  his  presence,  and  lead  them  to  victory 
where  they  had  but  just  fallen  back  in  defeat.  His  troops  followed 
him,  without  question  or  concern,  on  distant  and  hazardous  enter- 
prises into  regions  terrible  with  vague  dangers  and  unknown  risks. 
In  the  record  of  his  military  achievements  it  is  difficult  to  particularise 
any  as  more  brilliant  than  the  rest,  but  taking  them  at  haphazard, 
and  as  they  occur  to  the  running  pen,  what  more  dashing  episode 
could  be  adduced  than  his  isolated  fight  at  Fatehpur  ?  what  more 
masterly  retreat  than  his  withdrawal  from  Udaipur  ?  what  more 
vigorous  advance  than  his  invasion  of  the  Sutlej  states  ?  and,  above  and 
beyond  all,  what  more  defiant  and  heroic  resistance  than  that  which 
his  invincible  resolution  rendered  possible  at  Georgegarh  and  Hansi  ? 

To  complete  the  estimate  of  his  military  abilities  contrast  the  con- 
ditions under  which  he  fought  and  conquered  with  those  existing  in 
modern  warfare.  In  the  Sikhs,  Eajputs  and  Hindustanis,  whom 
Thomas  engaged,  he  found  enemies  as  brave  and  daring  as  any  exist- 
ing in  the  present  day.  He  met  them  on  a  common  ground  with 
common  arms.  His  superiority  lay  in  his  genius  and  his  gallantry, 
not  in  machine  guns  and  breach-loaders.  The  troops  he  led  were 
composed  of  the  game  elements  as  the  troops  he  conquered  ;  they 
possessed  no  leaven  of  British  bayonets.  The  muskets  he  manu- 
factured and  the  cannon  he  cast  were  not  a  whit  better  than  those 
whose  muzzles  were  pointed  towards  him.  The  forts  he  stormed  and 
captured  were  stronger  by  nature  than  the  redoubts  he  erected  to 
reduce  them,  or  the  armed  camps  ho  defended.  The  leagues  he 
marched  were  trudged  on  foot,  ofttimes  through  unexplored  countries 
and  trackless  deserts,  where  the  sun  by  day  and  the  north  star  by 
night  guided  his  daring  course  ;  no  troopships  or  transport  trains 
deh'vered  him  on  the  confines  of  an  enemy's  country,  surveyed  and 
mapped  for  campaign.  A  commissariat  system  and  a  medical  staff 
entered  not  into  the  philosophy  of  his  warfare.  It  was  not  the  for- 
tuitous advantages  of  money,  a  superior  equipment  and  an  advanced 
civilisation  that  enabled  him  to  overcome  numerical  superiority,  but 
his  own  single  intelligence  and  valour.  No  hope  of  public  appreciation 
or  reward  spurred  him  on  to  effort :  he  was  sustained  only  by  his  own 
dauntless  resolve.  Far  beyond  the  farthest  ken  of  his  fellow-country- 
men George  Thomas  at  Hansi  was  the  splendid  solitary  advance 
picket  of  English  Empire  in  the  Panjab. 

Surely  when  we  reflect  on  what  he  did,  we  may  acquit  him  of  his 
lawlessness  and  forgive  his  frailty.  Who  can  help  but  admire  this 
reckless,  resolute  Irishman,  as  he  emerges  breathless  out  of  the  great 
tumult  of  his  times,  and  plants  his  foot  upon  the  walls  of  Hansi  ? 


220  GEOEGE  THOMAS. 

Whose  heart  can  remain  unthrilled  when,  with  a  touch  that  con- 
quers it,  George  Thomas,  begirt  with  enemies,  fallen  and  defeated, 
draws  his  Irish  sword  and  hurls  defiance  at  his  French  conqueror  ? 
And  who  can  help  but  love  this  vagabond  adventurer  when  he  sweeps 
his  great  hand  athwart  the  map  of  India,  and  vows  it  should  all  be 
red? 

To-day  that  map  is  all  red.  It  is  dyed  deep  with  the  blood  of 
conquered  Maratha,  Afghan,  Sikh,  Rajput,  Mughal,  Sindian,  Baluchi, 
Kohilla,  Gurkha,  and  Burmese.  With  ceaseless  spread  the  emblem- 
atic colour  has  increased  and  covered  all.  What  then  if  Jowruj  Jung 
swept  his  neighbour's  borders  in  foray,  or  seized  a  district  and  pro- 
claimed his  rule  ?  Shall  we  condemn  him  with  that  map  before  us  ? 
Let  us  not  seek  our  own  justification,  nor  question  his.  Let  it 
suffice  that  in  our  Panjab  Province,  where  peaceful  tillage  has  followed 
perpetual  warfare,  and  battle-fields  have  been  turned  into  quiet 
pasture  lands,  the  spirit  of  British  adventure  was  typified  by  George 
Thomas,  the  van  of  British  Conquest  was  led  by  Jowruj  Jung. 


PEEEON. 

CHAPTER  I. 

HIS   BIRTH   AND   EARLY   CAREER. 

1755-1796. 

THE  events  recorded  in  the  preceding  pages  will  have  made  the 
name  of  Perron  familiar  to  the  reader,  and  the  time  has  now 
come  to  deal  with  the  career  of  this  adventurer.  But  in  order  to  do  so 
satisfactorily,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  a  little  and  bring  his  history 
up  to  the  point  when  De  Boigne  resigned  the  command  of  the  army 
of  Hindustan,  and  thereafter  continue  the  narrative  which  was 
interrupted  by  the  interpolation  of  the  life  of  George  Thomas. 

Pierre  Cuillier,  better  known  to  history  as  General  Perron,  was 
born  in  1755  at  Chateau  du  Loire,  Sarthe,  France.  His  father  was  a 
cloth  merchant,  who  failed  in  business  whilst  Perron  was  yet  in  his 
teens,  and  the  boy  was  early  thrown  upon  his  own  resources.  After 
making  a  fruitless  appeal  for  assistance  to  a  rich  relative,  Perron 
determined  to  trust  to  his  own  endeavours,  and  early  in  1774  laid  out 
his  modest  capital  in  a  speculative  investment  of  handkerchiefs,  and 
set  out  for  Nantes  with  the  object  of  disposing  of  them.  Not  meeting 
with  success  in  this  venture,  he  deserted  commerce,  and  obtained  a 
situation  in  the  cannon  foundry  at  Nantes,  where  he  mastered  the 
technicalities  of  casting  guns.  He  then  enlisted  in  a  regiment  of 
volunteers  under  orders  for  the  Isle  of  France,  where  he  arrived  in 
the  same  year.  Later  on  he  appears  to  have  transferred  his  services 
to  the  navy,  for  in  1780  he  came  out  to  India,  according  to  one  report 
as  a  common  sailor,  to  another  as  a  petty  officer  on  board  the  French 
frigate  Sardine,  under  the  famous  Admiral  Suffrein.  The  period  was 
one  when  French  military  adventurers  were  welcomed  in  the  native 

221 


222  PERRON. 

states  of  Southern  India,  and  it  was  doubtless  a  knowledge  of  this  fact 
that  induced  Perron  to  desert  his  ship,  in  company  with  three  of  his 
messmates,  and  land  on  the  Malabar  coast.  Making  his  way  into 
the  interior,  he  journeyed  up  country  tmtil  he  reached  Upper  India, 
where,  about  the  year  1781,  he  entered  the  Rana  of  Gohad's  corps, 
commanded  by  the  Scotchman  Sangster,  under  whom  there  were 
two  other  Europeans  serving,  Tom  Legge,  and  Michael  Filose. 

Pierre  Cuillier  now  discarded  his  patronymic  and  assumed  the 
nom  de  guerre  of  Perron,  which  was  the  diminutive  form  of  his 
Christian  name.  This  fashion  of  adopting  a  Christian  name  or  alias 
on  entering  the  employ  of  the  country  princes  was  a  common  one  at 
the  period.  Thus  Walter  Reinhard  became  Summers,  which  was 
corrupted  into  Sombre,  and  so,  in  native  speech,  to  Somru.  George 
Hessing  was  known  as  Jorus  Sahib,  Louis  Bourguien,  as  Looee 
Sahib,  George  Thomas  as  the  Jehazi  Sahib,  and  James  Shepherd  as 
James  Sahib.  People  who  retained  their  surnames  suffered  dreadful 
atrocities  at  the  lips  of  the  natives.  Eobert  Sutherland,  for  instance, 
was  known  as  Sutluj  Sahib,  and  Captain  Symes  as  Sunk  Sahib, 
while  Captain  Brownrigg  was  even  more  unfortunate,  for  his 
patronymic  was  twisted  into  Burrandee  Sahib.  The  designation  that 
Perron  assumed  was  itself  corrupted  by  native  pronunciation  into 
Peeroo  Sahib — a  not  altogether  happy  one  for  its  possessor,  since 
Peeroo  is  the  Hindustani  for  a  turkey. 

Perron  began  his  new  career  in  a  very  humble  capacity,  and  it  was 
not  until  two  years  had  passed  that  he  rose  to  non-commissioned 
rank.  It  is  probable  his  first  introduction  into  the  native  service  was 
as  an  artilleryman,  or  at  best  an  overseer  in  Sangster's  Foundry. 
But  his  circumstances  enabled  him  to  marry,  and  he  was  united 
to  a  Mdlle.  Deridon,  whose  family  resided  at  Pondichery  and  whose 
brother  "  a  half-caste  Frenchman "  was  a  military  adventurer  in 
Upper  India. 

Upon  the  defeat  of  the  Rana  of  Gohad  and  the  disbandment  of  his 
battalion,  Perron  entered  a  corps,  commanded  by  an  officer  named 
Lestineau,  in  the  service  of  the  Jat  Rajah  of  Bhartpur,  obtaining  an 
appointment  as  quartermaster-sergeant  on  a  pay  of  Rs.GO  a  month. 
This  was  probably  about  the  year  1784.  He  remained  in  the  service 
some  tune,  and  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Chaksana  and  Agra,  and 
assisted  in  the  occupation  of  Delhi  by  the  Marathas  in  1789,  when  his 
chief  was  in  alliance  with  Madhoji  Sindhia.  It  was  on  this  occasion 
that  Lestineau,  having  been  detached  to  assist  in  the  pursuit  of 
Ghulam  Kudir  at  Meerut,  possessed  himself  of  that  person's  saddle- 
bags, which  were  fijled  with  jewels  looted  from  the  palace  at  Delhi, 


HIS  BIRTH  AND  EARLY  CAREER.  223 

and  with  this  plunder  and  the  regimental  pay  due  to  his  battalion 
absconded,  leaving  his  corps  under  the  charge  of  his  second  in 
command,  Mons.  J.  Fillet,  who  proved  unequal  to  the  task  of  keeping 
the  exasperated  soldiery  in  order,  for  they  mutinied  directly  they 
became  aware  of  Lestineau's  flight,  and  were  in  consequence  dis- 
banded by  Madhoji  Sindhia's  orders. 

Perron  being  thus1  thrown  out  of  employment  applied  for  service  to 
Rana  Khan,  a  general  of  high  standing  in  Sindhia's  army.  From  this 
chief  he  received  the  command  of  a  battalion,  which  was,  however, 
soon  broken  up,  and  Perron  found  himself  once  again  adrift  on  the 
world.  A  friend  named  Montigny  now  interested  himself  on  his 
behalf,  and  recommended  him  to  the  Begum  Somru  for  employment, 
but  as  that  lady's  military  force  was  fifteen  months  in  arrears  of  pay 
at  this  time,  she  did  not  feel  justified  in  increasing  her  establishment, 
and  Perron  found  his  application  unsuccessful,  despite  the  very 
strong  recommendations  he  had  received.  This  was  in  1790,  by 
which  time  he  had  been  more  than  nine  years  in  India,  and  was 
apparently  little  further  advanced  in  life  than  when  he  first  sought  his 
fortune  in  the  East. 

But  now  came  the  turning  point  of  his  career.  General  De  Boigne, 
who  had  recently  been  commissioned  by  Modhoji  Sindhia  to  raise  his 
First  Brigade,  was  looking  out  for  officers.  Perron  was  personally 
known  to  him,  and  he  had  formed  a  favourable  opinion  of  his 
capacity  as  a  brave  soldier,  and  an  artisan  skilled  in  the  work  of  a 
cannon  foundry.  So  he  appointed  him  captain-lieutenant  in  the 
new  Brigade,  and  gave  him  the  command  of  the  Burhanpur 
battalion. 

Perron  soon  ingratiated  himself  with  his  chief  by  his  courage, 
activity  and  great  punctuality  in  his  duties.  He  was  a  subordinate 
after  De  Boigne's  heart,  being  diligent,  energetic  and  indefatigable, 
finding  a  pleasure  in  his  work,  and  taking  a  pride  in  bringing  his 
battalion  to  the  highest  pitch  of  efficiency  and  discipline. 

Towards  the  end  of  1790  there  occurred  the  campaign  against  the 
princes  of  Jaipur  and  Jodhpur,  which  witnessed  the  battles  of  Patan 
and  Merta.  Perron  was  present  at  both,  and  at  the  former 
particularly  distinguished  himself.  When  De  Boigne  returned  to 
headquarters,  Perron  was  left  behind  to  settle  the  newly  annexed 
district  of  Ajmir,  and  this  task  he  carried  out  with  considerable 
ability.  In  1792  he  marched  back  to  the  Doab,  but  was  soon  selected 
for  further  special  employment.  De  Boigne  had  determined  to 
reduce  the  fort  of  Kanaund,  which  still  held  out  against  the  Maratha 
rule,  and  sent  Perron  with  four  battalions  to  capture  it. 


224  PERRON. 

Kanaund  was  an  exceedingly  strong  fortress  in  the  Bewari  territory, 
and  had  formerly  been  held  by  Najaf  Kuli  Khan,  one  of  the  leading 
nobles  at  the  court  of  the  emperor  Shah  'Alam.  On  Najaf  Khan's 
decease  the  possession  of  the  fort  passed  to  his  widow,  who,  when  De 
Boigne  summoned  her  to  surrender,  seemed  inclined  to  obey,  for, 
before  his  death,  her  husband  had  specially  warned  her  not  to  attempt 
to  resist  the  general.  But  whilst  negotiations  were  going  on  a  new 
ally  suddenly  came  to  her  assistance.  This  was  none  other  than 
Ismail  Beg,  who  after  the  battle  of  Merta,  had  submitted  to  the 
Marathd  rule,  and,  it  is  said,  accepted  service  under  Sindhia.  But  his 
sympathies  were  always  with  the  old  regime,  and  Holkar,  aware  of 
this,  instigated  him  to  revolt,  pointing  out  the  excellent  opportunity 
that  offered  of  joining  forces  with  Najaf  Khan's  Begum.  This 
artifice,  by  which  Takuji  Holkar  hoped  to  weaken  his  rival  Sindhia, 
and  so  improve  his  own  prospects  in  Hindustan,  was  a  very  trans- 
parent one;  but  the  shallowest  excuse  was  sufficient  to  tempt  the 
gallant  Mughal  noble  to  strike  another  blow  for  the  Faith,  and  he 
accepted  the  suggestion  with  avidity.  Eenouncing  his  allegiance  to 
Sindhia,  he  wrote  to  the  Begum  to  hold  out  against  the  conqueror 
of  their  common  country,  and  hurried  to  her  assistance  with  an 
army  of  20,000  men  and  30  guns. 

Upon  hearing  of  this  De  Boigne  ordered  Perron  to  advance  with 
all  speed,  give  battle  to  Ismail  Beg,  and  bring  him  in  dead  or  alive. 
Marching  to  Kanaund,  Perron  found  the  allies  encamped  under  the 
walls  of  the  fort,  and  at  once  engaged  them.  It  was  the  first 
important  battle  in  which  ho  held  chief  command,  and  he  acquitted 
himself  very  creditably.  In  less  than  two  hours  he  inflicted  a  severe 
defeat  on  the  enemy,  killing  2,000  of  them,  capturing  all  their  guns 
and  driving  Ismail  Beg  and  his  beaten  troops  into  the  fort  for 
shelter. 

The  siege  of  the  place  was  now  undertaken,  but  Ismail  Beg, 
although  vanquished  in  open  fight,  maintained  a  brave  defence  for 
four  months.  The  thickness  of  the  mud  walls  of  Kanaund  proved 
impervious  to  Perron's  battering  train,  and  he  was  unable  to  effect  a 
practicable  breach,  whilst  his  strength  in  men  was  insufficient  to  take 
the  stronghold  by  assault.  It  seemed  as  though  the  blockade  would  be 
a  very  slow  business,  when  an  accident  occurred  which  accelerated  it. 
One  day  the  Begum,  whilst  playing  a  game  of  chess  with  an  eunuch, 
was  killed  by  a  chance  stone  shot,  whereupon  the  garrison  became 
disheartened  and  broke  into  mutiny  against  Ismail  Beg,  who  had 
been  instrumental  in  persuading  their  late  mistress  to  resist.  Hoping 
to  gain  more  favourable  terms  for  themselves  they  conspired  to 


HIS  BIRTH  AND  EARLY  CAREER.  225 

deliver  him  up  to  the  besiegers,  but  this  plot  coming  to  his  ears, 
Ismail  Beg  anticipated  their  action  by  surrendering  to  Perron,  who 
promised  ou  his  own  faith  and  that  of  De  Boigne's  to  spare  his  life, 
and  honourably  redeemed  his  word  despite  Madhoji  Sindhia's  wrath 
and  opposition. 

During  the  siege  of  Kariaund  an  accident  happened  to  Perron  which 
maimed  him  for  life.  Whilst  experimenting  with  some  hand  grenades 
one  of  them  burst  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  throwing  it,  and  so 
shattered  his  hand  that  he  was  obliged  to  submit  to  amputation,  and 
thereafter  he  was  often  known  among  the  natives  as  EJcdust,  or  The 
One-handed.  But  his  success  at  Kanaund  was  rewarded  by  his 
promotion  to  the  rank  of  major,  and  on  the  creation  of  De  Boigne's 
Second  Brigade,  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  it,  Major 
Fremont,  as  senior  officer,  obtaining  that  of  the  First.  Thus  in  less 
than  three  years  from  the  date  of  his  entering  Sindhia's  service, 
Perron  found  himself  in  a  post  almost  analogous  to  that  of  a  general 
of  division,  and  with  a  force  of  8,000  infantry,  800  cavalry,  and  40 
guns  under  his  command,  whilst  his  pay  and  emoluments  were 
probably  not  less  than  Rs.2,000  a  month.  This  was  a  rapid  and 
wonderful  rise  for  a  man  who  had  but  recently  been  fruitlessly 
seeking  service,  and  lamenting  the  loss  of  an  employment  that 
brought  him  in  Es.720  a  year. 

During  the  rest  of  this  year  and  in  the  early  part  of  1793  Perron 
was  associated  with  Ambaji  Inglia  and  Rana  Khan  in  the  subjuga- 
tion of  Mewar,  and  assisted  in  establishing  the  former  as  Subahdar  or 
lord  lieutenant  of  that  district.  Madhoji  Sindhia  himself  accom- 
panied the  army  engaged  in  this  work,  and  when  the  objects  of  the 
expedition  were  completed,  marched  to  Poonah,  whilst  Perron  and  his 
Brigade  returned  to  headquarters  in  Hindustan.  But  he  was  not 
allowed  to  remain  here  long,  for  early  in  1794  he  was  transferred 
to  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade  and  ordered  to  the  Deccan 
to  strengthen  Sindhia's  position  there.  Before  he  arrived,  however, 
that  prince  was  dead  and  succeeded  by  his  nephew,  Daulat  Rao 
Sindhia,  whose  peaceful  succession  was  in  a  great  measure  due  to  the 
opportune  arrival  in  the  month  of  March  of  Perron  and  his  ten  fine 
battalions. 

In  the  following  year  there  came  to  Perron  one  of  those  oppor- 
tunities which,  if  rightly  used,  often  lay  the  foundations  of  future 
greatness.  A  disagreement  had  long  existed  between  the  Marathas 
and  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad,  relative  to  a  claim  for  chout  or  tribute, 
demanded  by  the  former  and  long  resisted  by  the  latter.  The  sum 
had  now  increased  to  nearly  three  millions  sterling,  and  Nana 

15 


22G  PERRON. 

Farnavis,  the  Peshwa's  prime  minister,  determined  to  exact  it,  and 
called  upon  the  Nizam  for  an  immediate  settlement.  An  angry  and 
insulting  answer  was  returned,  which  was  immediately  followed  by  a 
declaration  of  war,  and  in  January,  1795,  both  powers  took  the  field. 

The  Peshwa  was  assisted  by  his  tributary  chiefs.  Daulat  Eao 
Sindhia  supplied  the  strongest  contingent,  which  included  De  Boigne's 
First  Brigade  under  Perron,  Michael  Filose's  independent  corps  of  six 
battalions,  and  Colonel  John  Hessing's  of  four,  and  a  large  force  of 
irregular  cavalry.  Takuji  Holkar  sent  a  brigade  of  four  battalions  of 
regular  infantry  under  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec,  who  had  been  com- 
missioned to  raise  and  discipline  another  corps  after  his  disastrous 
defeat  at  Lakhairi.  Eaghoji  Bhonsla,  the  Elijah  of  Berar,  and  other 
lesser  chiefs  of  the  Deccan  sent  in  contingents,  and  the  allied  army 
numbered  140,000  men,  of  whom  24,000  were  disciplined  infantry. 
Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  took  command  of  his  own  troops  in  person,  but 
the  actual  direction  in  the  field  was  left  to  Perron. 

To  oppose  this  formidable  host  the  Nizam  Ali  Khan  collected  an 
army  of  110,000  men,  including  17,000  disciplined  infantry,  of  which 
11,000  were  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Eaymond,  a  French  officer 
of  high  character  and  repute,  and  the  remaining  6,000  belonged  to  two 
independent  corps  commanded  by  an  American  named  Boyd,  and  an 
Englishman  named  Finglass. 

Upon  the  llth  of  March,  1795,  the  two  armies  met  near  a  place 
called  Puriuda,  whither  the  Nizam  was  marching  from  Kardla,  by 
which  name  the  battle  that  ensued  is  generally  known.  The  Marathas 
appeared  in  great  force  upon  the  Nizam's  right,  on  some  rising  ground, 
from  whence  they  were  able  to  open  a  distant  cannonade  on  the  rear 
of  the  Haidarabad  army.  The  Nizam's  troops  were  at  once  drawn 
out  in  line  of  battle,  and  Eaymond  advancing  with  his  infantry  and 
24  guns  took  up  a  position  on  an  elevated  piece  of  ground  in  front, 
supported  by  a  large  body  of  cavalry.  Upon  this  Pareshram  Bhao, 
the  Peshwa's  commander-in -chief,  formed  his  army  to  receive  the 
attack,  taking  the  centre  station  himself,  with  the  Peshwa's  cavalry 
and  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  brigade,  whilst  he  placed  the  Rajah  of 
Berar's  contingent  on  the  right,  and  Daulat  Eao  Sindhia's  infantry  on 
the  left  wing.  The  action  commenced  with  an  attack  on  the  Maratha 
centre  by  the  Nizam's  cavalry,  who  were  much  elated  at  a  slight 
advantage  they  had  gained  on  the  previous  day  over  an  advance 
guard  of  the  Peshwa's  household  troops.  They  now  charged  with  great 
gallantry,  wounding  Pareshram  Bhao,  and  driving  the  Maratha  centre 
back  in  confusion.  But  whilst  they  were  thus  carrying  everything 
before  them  in  the  centre,  the  regular  infantry  on  both  sides  had 


HIS  BIRTH  AND  EARLY  CAREER.  227 

advanced  to  within  musket  shot  of  one  another.  Perron,  by  skilful 
manoeuvring,  obtained  a  decided  advantage  of  position,  and,  having 
posted  35  guns  on  an  eminence,  opened  a  destructive  fire.  Raymond 
was  immediately  deserted  by  the  Nizam's  cavalry,  but  his  infantry 
stood  their  ground  well,  and  had  they  been  permitted  to  fight  out  the 
duel,  it  is  possible  they  might  have  won  the  day.  The  fate  of  the 
battle  was,  however,  destined  to  be  decided  by  one  of  those  domestic 
considerations  which  often  have  a  preponderating  influence  in  Asiatic 
contests.  The  Nizam,  with  the  imbecile  infatuation  of  an  Oriental 
potentate,  had  carried  his  womenfolk  with  him  on  the  campaign,  and 
early  in  the  battle,  his  favourite  wife,  terrified  by  the  roar  of  the 
cannon,  implored  him  to  retire.  To  pacify  her  fears  he  ordered 
Raymond's  brigade  to  fall  back  for  her  protection.  Its  commander 
resisted  to  the  utmost  this  fatal  and  supine  act  of  pusillanimity,  until 
frequent  and  repeated  commands  left  him  no  choice  but  to  obey,  and 
about  sunset  he  began  to  retire.  Darkness  soon  closed  over  the  scene 
of  battle,  but  Perron,  whose  long  experience  of  Indian  warfare  had 
taught  him  the  importance  of  pressing  home  an  advantage,  made 
every  effort  to  follow,  persisting  in  the  pursuit  as  long  as  it  waa 
possible,  and  keeping  up  a  desultory  fire  in  the  dark. 

Meanwhile  the  orders  and  counter-orders  that  reached  Raymond 
were  so  confusing  that  in  attempting  to  carry  them  out  his  men  were 
perfectly  bewildered,  and  at  last,  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  vocifera- 
tion, they  sank  to  rest  in  bivouac  upon  the  field.  But  about  eleven 
o'clock  an  accidental  encounter  between  the  advance  pickets  of  the  two 
armies  started  the  battle  afresh.  Perron,  from  his  advanced  position, 
immediately  opened  a  heavy  fire  with  artillery  and  rockets,  where- 
upon a  panic  seized  the  Nizam's  soldiery,  and  abandoning  their  guna 
and  camp  they  fled  towards  Kardla,  a  small  fort  so  surrounded  by 
hills  that  it  formed  a  veritable  cul-de-sac. 

Within  the  walls  of  this  fort  the  Nizam  took  refuge,  and  for  some 
time  Raymond  gallantly  defended  his  master.  But  when  Perron 
dragged  up  his  heavy  artillery  and  brought  it  to  bear  on  the  place, 
sin-render  became  inevitable,  and  the  Nizam  sued  for  terms.  An 
indemnity  of  three  millions  sterling  was  extorted  from  him,  besides 
territory  yielding  a  revenue  of  nearly  three  and  a  half  lakhs  of  rupees 
annually,  and  for  the  due  fulfilment  of  these  stringent  terms  he  was 
compelled  to  send  his  prune  minister  as  a  hostage  to  Poonah. 

Kardla  was  a  decisive  battle,  but  never  was  such  a  substantial 
victory  won  with  less  bloodshed.  Although  there  were  nearly  a 
quarter  of  a  million  men  contending  in  the  field,  the  losses  on  either 
side  were  infinitesimal,  and  the  Nizam  owed  his  defeat  to  his  own 


228  PEHRON. 

cowardice  and  folly.  But  Perron's  reputation  as  an  able  general  was 
at  once  established,  and  thereafter  he  found  signal  favour  in  the  sight 
of  his  master,  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia. 

In  1795  Siiidhia  left  1'oonah,  and  proceeded  as  far  as  the  Godaveri 
river  on  his  return  to  Hindustan,  where  his  presence  was  required 
owing  to  De  Boigne  having  announced  his  intention  of  resigning  his 
command.  But  on  the  25th  of  October,  Madhu  Eao,  the  Peshwii,  com- 
mitted suicide  at  Poonah.  In  the  hyperbolical  language  of  a  native 
historian,  which  is  worth  quoting  for  its  quaintness,  "The  Peshwii 
was  one  day  amusing  himself  flying  kites  on  a  terrace  of  his  palace, 
when,  as  Fate  ordained,  the  string  of  his  life  being  short,  his  foot 
slipped  and  he  fell  over  the  parapet,  and  the  kite  of  his  soul  flew  away 
into  the  air  !  "  Immediately  on  receipt  of  this  intelligence,  Sindhia, 
by  the  advice  of  his  prime  minister,  Balloba  Tantia,  returned  to 
Poonah  with  his  whole  army  to  contest  the  succession  of  Baji  Rao, 
whom  the  late  Peshwa  had  appointed  his  heir,  and  who  had  been 
immediately  installed  by  Nana  Farnavis,  the  powerful  and  determined 
enemy  of  the  House  of  Ujjain. 

De  Boigne  still  persisted  in  his  determination  to  retire  from  Daulat 
Rao's  service  and  return  to  Europe.  In  after  years  Perron  boasted 
that  it  was  his  intrigues  which  obliged  the  general  to  quit  the  country, 
but  it  is  probable  that  the  wish  was  father  to  the  thought.  Still  it 
cannot  be  contested  that  Perron  was  at  this  time  in  high  favour  with 
Sindhia,  and  in  constant  attendance  upon  his  person.  In  December 
De  Boigne  finally  quitted  Hindustan.  It  would  have  been  in  ac- 
cordance with  Indian  custom  had  he  recommended  a  successor,  but  it 
is  established  on  the  best  authority  that  he  did  not  do  so ;  on  the  con- 
trary, he  advised  Daulat  Eao  to  demolish  his  Brigades  rather  than 
put  them  under  the  command  of  one  person,  as  such  power  ought  not 
to  be  entirely  trusted  to  a  single  will  and  influence.  Directly  after 
his  departure  a  keen  competition  arose  between  Perron  and  Robert 
Sutherland  for  the  post  rendered  vacant.  Major  Fremont,  the  senior 
officer  in  the  force,  died  about  this  time,  leaving  Sutherland  at  the 
head  of  affairs  in  Hindustan,  who  conceived  this  gave  him  a  sort  of 
claim  to  the  permanent  appointment.  But  he  was  too  far  from  the 
seat  of  government  to  press  his  interests,  being  engaged  in  the  reduc- 
tion of  Bundelkhand,  which  occupied  him  for  six  months.  On  the 
other  hand  Perron  was  daily  at  Sindhia's  court,  and,  by  the  death  of 
Fremont,  was  left  senior  officer  in  the  Brigades.  He  made  the  most  of 
his  opportunities,  and  succeeded  so  well  that  before  the  end  of  the 
year  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  general  and  appointed  to  the 
chief  command  of  De  Boigue's  army. 


CHAPTER  II. 

PERRON  ASSUMES  COMMAND  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  HINDUSTAN. 

1797-1800. 

THE  army  which  De  Boigne  left  behind  him  in  Sindhia's  service 
consisted  of  24,000  infantry,  3,000  cavalry  and  120  guns,  besides 
garrison  troops  and  irregulars.  The  battalions  were  veteran  and 
undefeated,  and  their  spirit  and  organisation  unexcelled.  It  was  an 
army  the  command  of  which  might  have  filled  with  pride  any  soldier 
in  India,  whether  king's  or  Company's  officer  or  adventurer.  Behind  it 
was  a  proud  record  of  achievement ;  it  was  well  disciplined,  well 
paid,  and  well  equipped ;  and  in  addition  animated  by  that  esprit  de 
corps  which  lifts  men  out  of  themselves,  and  by  identifying  them 
with  the  flag  they  serve,  doubles  their  individual  worth.  De  Boigne's 
battalions  were  proud  of  their  prestige  and  jealous  of  their  honour, 
and  upheld  by  a  resolution  to  sustain  the  reputation  they  had  won  on 
many  battle-fields,  and,  where  possible,  to  increase  it.  They  were,  in 
short,  a  worthy  monument  to  the  man  who  had  created  them. 

Such  was  the  army  to  the  command  of  which  Perron  succeeded  in 
September  1796.  Making  over  the  First  Brigade  to  Captain  Drugeon, 
he  set  out  for  Mattra,  where  he  arrived  in  February  1797,  and  took 
over  charge  from  Jaggu  Bapu,  the  Maratha  general.  By  his 
commission  he  was  invested  with  the  full  powers  exercised  by  De 
Boigne,  and  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to  take  possession  of  the  Jaidad 
in  the  Doab.  Here,  in  October  of  the  following  year,  he  fixed  his 
headquarters,  considerably  enlarging  the  cantonment  of  Koil  and 
strengthening  the.  already  formidable  defences  of  Aligarh,  which 
defended  the  place.  During  his  first  year  of  office  he  had  little 
leisure  to  attend  to  external  affairs,  being  fully  employed  in 
acquainting  himself  with  the  details  of  the  Brigades,  and  the 
administration  of  the  territory  assigned  for  their  upkeep.  After  he 
had  established  his  power  and  authority  within  his  own  boundaries 


230  PERRON. 

he  turned  his  attention  to  the  more  extended  responsibilities  of  his 
post.  The  first  matter  that  occupied  him  was  the  state  of  affairs  at 
Delhi.  Directly  after  Perron's  appointment  to  the  supreme  command 
of  Hindustan,  Sindhia  had  issued  orders  to  the  Maratha  governor  of 
Delhi  to  make  over  charge  of  the  city.  But  Balloba  Tantia,  Sindhia's 
prime  minister  and  a  determined  enemy  to  Perron,  secretly  trans- 
mitted contrary  instructions  to  the  capital,  "  an  occurrence  "  observes 
a  contemporary  historian  "  by  no  means  uncommon  in  the  singular 
absurdity  of  Mahratta  politics."  The  Hindu  governor  of  Delhi,  only 
too  glad  to  retain  his  post,  refused  to  surrender  the  city,  and  in  May, 
1798,  Perron  ordered  Major  Pedron,  with  four  battalions,  to  lay  siege 
to  it,  and  obtain  possession  by  blockade,  bribery,  or  intrigue,  but  to 
avoid  a  bombardment  for  fear  of  offending  the  blind  emperor,  whose 
titular  authority  it  was  a  matter  of  policy  to  recognise  and  respect. 
After  a  close  blockade  of  five  weeks  Sutherland  arrived  and  the  gates 
were  opened  to  the  impulse  of  gold,  and  the  unfortunate  Shah  'Alam 
released  from  the  fears  and  privations  occasioned  by  the  conduct 
of  his  recent  guardian,  Nizam-ul-Din,  the  Cowrie  Fakir.  Perron 
appointed  Captain  Le  Marchant  governor  of  the  capital  and  custodian 
of  the  king's  person,  while  Pedron  returned  to  Koil,  where  the 
Second  Brigade,  commanded  by  Sutherland,  to  which  he  belonged, 
was  cantoned,  the  Third  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Pohlman,  being 
stationed  at  Mattra. 

The  insubordinate  example  of  the  Maratha  governor  of  Delhi  en- 
couraged the  commandant  of  Agra  to  resist.  This  person  was  a  brother 
of  Balloba  Tantia,  and  refused  to  yield  up  possession  of  the  fort  to 
Perron,  who  being  at  the  time  busily  employed  in  strengthening  the 
defences  of  Aligarh,  made  no  move  until  he  had  completed  the  task. 
He  then  marched  against  Agra  with  six  battalions  and  arrived 
unexpectedly  before  the  walls  on  the  17th  of  February,  1799.  The  town 
was  taken  completely  by  surprise,  and  Perron  entered  it  without  oppo- 
sition, proclaiming  his  authority  by  beat  of  drum.  But  the  fort  and 
citadel  held  out,  and  an  investment  was  necessary.  A  siege  followed 
and  lasted  fifty-eight  days,  at  the  end  of  which  a  successful  mine 
was  exploded  and  destroyed  a  salient  bastion  on  the  north-east  front. 
Whereupon,  to  avoid  the  calamity  of  an  assault,  the  garrison  sur- 
rendered on  condition  of  being  allowed  to  march  out  with  the 
honours  of  war.  From  first  to  last  the  capture  of  this  place  cost 
Perron  600  men,  and  it  was  an  achievement  not  unworthy  of 
the  reputation  of  De  Boigne's  battalions,  for  Agra  was  the  strongest 
fortress  in  Hindustan,  and  defended  by  a  force  of  4,000  men. 

With  the  possession  of  the  Key  of   India  Perron's  power  was 


COMMAND  OF  THE  AEMY  OF  HINDUSTAN.        231 

completely  established.  "  He  had  now  the  entire  and  merited 
confidence  of  Sindhia,"  writes  one  of  his  officers  in  a  contemporary 
journal,  "  and  was  invested  with  the  full  and  uncontrolled  government 
of  all  Sindhia's  possessions  from  the  Chumbul  to  Pateala — a 
country,  even  in  its  ruinous  state,  yielding  a  revenue  of  one  million 
sterling.  He  was  authorised  to  raise  armies  and  retain  or  discharge 
troops,  and  no  European,  not  even  De  Boigne,  ever  possessed  such 
confidence  and  power." 

This  at  first  sight  may  seem  a  strangely  rapid  rise,  but  it  is 
intelligible  when  the  circumstances  which  favoured  Perron  are 
considered.  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  on  his  accession  to  power  threw 
himself  completely  into  Deccan  politics.  His  predominant  desire 
was  to  render  his  influence  supreme  at  Poonah.  But  he  had  two 
obstacles  to  contend  against :  the  first  was  the  craft  and  power  of 
Nana  Farnavis,  the  Peshwa's  prime  minister,  whose  opposition  pro- 
longed the  contest  for  ascendancy  from  month  to  month  and  year 
to  year;  and  the  second  was  his  own  natural  weakness  of  character, 
and  the  base  elements  of  government  with  which  he  surrounded  him- 
self. Daulat  Rao  altogether  lacked  the  genius  of  his  uncle  Madhoji, 
and  possessed  little  real  ability.  He  squandered  his  time  in  riot  and 
dissipation,  and  indulged  in  the  worst  vices  of  a  debauched  Oriental 
sovereign.  Such  a  nature  as  his,  out  of  very  inertness,  surrendered 
the  power  it  should  have  wielded  to  hands  that  were  itching  to  grasp 
it.  With  Perron  the  beginning  was  more  than  half  of  the  whole. 
His  appointment  to  the  command  of  the  army  of  Hindustan  assured 
everything  else  ;  since  the  country  was  held  solely  by  that  army,  his 
battalions  constituting  the  real  power  behind  Sindhia's  throne.  Left 
to  himself  in  the  north,  Perron  assiduously  employed  his  time  and 
resources  in  increasing  his  strength.  He  made  Koil  an  immense 
fortified  camp,  and  laboured  to  render  Aligarh  impregnable.  "  The 
strength  of  the  place  cannot  be  described — a  seventy-four  might  sail 
in  the  ditch,"  wrote  Lord  Lake  of  the  fortress  four  years  later.  Its 
position  was  admirably  chosen,  for  from  his  headquarters  there 
Perron  held  both  Delhi  and  Agra  in  check.  Beneath  the  walls  of 
Aligarh  he  built  himself  a  palatial  residence— it  still  existed  in  1871, 
and  was  used  as  a  settlement  office — and  assumed  sovereign  state. 
During  the  seven  years  of  his  rule  the  dominion  of  Hindustan  lay  not 
at  Delhi,  nor  at  Poonah,  but  in  the  vast  fortified  camp  of  Koil,  from 
whence  the  chief  of  many  legions  issued  orders  to  the  princes  of  the 
neighbouring  districts  and  Rajputana,  and  so  far  as  Upper  India  was 
concerned  was  the  master  of  both  the  emperor  Shah  'Alam  and 
Daulat  Rao  Sindhia. 


232  PERRON. 

There  is  a  very  interesting  article  in  the  Asiatic  Review  for  1799, 
which  confirms  this  estimate  of  Perron's  power.  "  General  Perron," 
(it  runs)  "  a  French  officer  of  great  experience  and  consummate 
ability,  both  as  a  statesman  and  a  soldier,  represents  Dowlut  Rao 
Scindia  in  Hindostan,  and  is  invested  with  the  most  full  and  absolute 
authority  over  every  department,  both  civil  and  military.  This 
power,  which  exceeds  that  of  any  prince,  he  exercises  with  great 
moderation,  and  at  the  same  time  with  a  degree  of  judgment  and 
energy  that  evinces  very  superior  talents.  Amongst  his  European 
officers  none  have  a  character  for  superior  capacity,  although  very 
good  soldiers.  Yet  having  risen  from  very  low  situations,  and  not  having 
the  advantage  of  education,  none  of  them  have  displayed  any  abilities 
out  of  their  professional  line.  But  this  deficiency  in  his  officers  he 
may  easily  remedy  (and  no  doubt  will)  as  soon  as  peace  takes  place 
in  Europe,  when  innumerable  military  adventurers  will  flock  to  his 
standard,  qualified  for  the  highest  situations  civil  and  military.  The 
Mahratta  ports  on  the  Malabar  coast,  from  whence  supply  of 
ordnance  and  arms  and  mih'tary  stores  have  occasionally  been 
procured,  will  afford  them  an  easy  access,  so  that  before  long  we  may 
expect  to  see  the  northern  parts  of  Hindustan  swarming  with  needy 
and  intriguing  Frenchmen." 

Whilst  Perron  was  thus  engaged  in  establishing  and  consoh'dating 
his  power  in  the  north,  troubles  were  brewing  in  the  south,  occasioned 
by  the  rebellion  of  the  Bhais.  The  Bhais  were  the  widows  of  the 
late  Madhoji  Sindhia,  and  had  never  acquiesced  in  the  accession  of 
Daulat  Rao.  There  were  three  of  these  ladies,  one  of  whom, 
Bhagirthi,  was  young  and  beautiful.  Daulat  Rao,  as  in  honour 
bound,  promised  to  make  ample  provision  for  his  aunts,  and  they 
continued  to  reside  at  his  court.  But  time  passed  and  no  measures 
were  taken  to  ensure  their  permanent  establishment.  Presently  it 
was  whispered  that  an  intrigue  was  in  progress  between  Bhagirthi 
Bhai  and  Daulat  Rao,  and  the  two  elder  widows,  hearing  of  it,  were 
scandalised-,  and  expressed  their  abhorrence  at  the  incestuous 
criminality.  For  this  they  were  barbarously  ill-treated  by  Ghatkay 
Rao,  one  of  Sindhia's  creatures  in  authority.  This  wretch  not  only 
imprisoned  the  elder  widows,  but  caused  them  to  be  flogged.  Such 
degrading  treatment  aroused  the  wrath  of  the  Shenwi  Brahmins,  a 
high  caste  of  men  who  had  monopolised  all  the  principal  offices  of 
government  under  Madhoji  Sindhia ;  and  these  now  openly 
espoused  the  cause  of  the  widows  against  the  young  chief.  Much 
discussion  and  dissension  ensued,  until  it  was  agreed  that  the  Bhais 
should  reside  at  Borhanpur.  For  this  purpose  they  left  Poonah,  but 


COMMAND  OF  THE  AEMY  OF  HINDUSTAN.        233 

had  not  proceeded  far  before  they  were  treacherously  seized  and 
thrown  into  confinement  in  the  fort  of  Ahmednagar,  and  after  a  short 
imprisonment  brought  back  to  Daulat  Rao's  camp.  Before  long, 
however,  they  found  means  of  escaping,  and  threw  themselves  upon 
the  protection  of  Amrat  Rao,  who  was  brother  to  the  Peshwa,  and  a 
very  powerful  personage.  Just  prior  to  this,  Daula,t  Rao  married  the 
daughter  of  his  minion  Ghatkay  Rao.  She  was  a  woman  of  singular 
beauty,  who  exercised  a  complete  control  over  her  husband,  and  her 
influence  elevated  her  father  to  the  post  ol  prime  minister  in 
succession  to  Balloba  Tantia.  No  sooner  was  Ghatkay  Rao  in  power, 
than  he  urged  Sindhia  to  crush  the  conspiracy  of  the  Bhais  at  once. 
This  advice  was  adopted,  and  five  battalions  of  infantry  were 
detached  from  Drugeon's  Brigade  under  command  of  Captain  Du 
Prat  to  surprise  Amrat  Rao's  camp,  and  seize  the  refugees ;  but  the 
attempt  failed,  and  Du  Prat  was  beaten  and  obliged  to  retreat. 
Resource  was  now  had  to  further  negotiation,  and  with  all  the  duplicity 
of  his  Maratha  nature  Sindhia  promised  to  provide  his  aunts  with  a 
suitable  establishment  if  they  would  return  to  his  protection.  Where- 
upon, trusting  in  his  good  faith,  Amrat  Rao  come  to  Poonah  to 
arrange  the  matter,  but  was  attacked  by  two  battalions  and  twenty- 
five  guns  under  Drugeon,  who,  without  warning,  opened  fire  upon 
him  and  dispersed  his  troops.  This  gross  act  of  treachery  constituted 
a  declaration  of  war  against  the  Peshwa  himself,  in  whose  govern- 
ment Amrat  Rao  now  filled  the  post  of  prime  minister.  A  coalition 
of  chiefs  was  immediately  formed  against  Sindhia,  who  became 
alarmed ;  the  more  so  as  Perron  was  at  this  time  occupied  in  the 
siege  of  Agra,  which  he  had  not  yet  reduced,  and  where  the  faction 
of  the  late  prime  minister,  Balloba  Santia,  still  held  out.  A  general 
rising  against  Sindhia's  authority  in  Hindustan  and  the  Deccan 
threatened,  and  he  was  now  anxious  to  lay  the  storm  he  had  raised. 
But  Ghatkay  Rao,  who  had  been  the  primary  cause  of  all  the  trouble, 
having  tasted  blood,  thirsted  for  more,  and  disregarding  Sindhia's 
orders  to  effect  a  settlement  with  the  revolted  chiefs,  increased  the 
danger  of  the  situation  by  perpetrating  innumerable  fresh  outrages. 
At  last  Daulat  Rao  was  obliged  to  order  Ghatkay's  arrest,  which  was 
accomplished  by  two  of  his  European  officers,  Filoze  and  Hessing. 
After  this  a  peace  was  patched  up  with  the  Peshwa,  but  in  the  mean- 
time the  Bhais  had  retreated  to  Kolapur,  where  they  were  joined  by 
the  leading  Shenwi  Brahmins,  amongst  whom  was  Lakwa  Dada, 
one  of  Madhoji's  best  generals,  who  had  recently  been  dismissed  from 
his  appointment  of  commander-in-chief  of  the  Maratha  army  on 
account  of  his  attachment  to  the  ex-minister  Balloba  Tantia,  who 


284  PERRON. 

had  naturally  been  one  of  Ghatkay's  first  victims,  and  was  now 
languishing  in  a  cruel  confinement. 

Large  bodies  of  mounted  soldiery  flocked  to  Lakwa  Dada  as  soon  as 
be  erected  tbe  standard  of  rebellion,  and  openly  declared  for  tbe 
widows  of  the  old  prince.  Daulat  Kilo  attempted  in  vain  to  allay 
tbe  increasing  storm.  No  sooner  bad  bis  regular  battalions  under 
Du  Prat,  Drugeon,  Filoze,  and  Hessing  repressed  tbe  attacks  made 
on  bis  territories  by  tbe  rebels  and  returned  to  camp,  tban  tbe  latter 
faced  about  and  followed  tbem.  Tbe  flame  spread  through  Hindustan, 
and  Lakwa  Dada  soon  found  himself  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  20,000 
cavalry,  15  battalions  of  infantry,  and  20  guns,  and  sustained 
by  tbe  immense  prestige  which  still  attached  to  the  service  of  the 
widows  of  the  old  prince. 

It  was  at  this  critical  moment  in  his  affairs  that  Daulat  Rao  desired 
Perron  to  advance  against  Lakwa  Dada,  and  at  the  same  time  appointed 
another  chief,  named  Ambaji  Inglia,  to  the  bead  of  the  Maratba 
army,  and  ordered  him  to  co-operate  with  the  regular  Brigades. 

Perron  was  at  first  disposed  to  underrate  the  strength  of  tbe 
rebellion,  and  contented  himself  with  sending  two  battalions,  under 
Captain  Butterfield,  to  assist  Ambaji.  With  these  tbe  latter  marched 
to  Kotah,  where  be  met  the  insurgents  and  engaged  them;  but  Ambaji's 
troops  bad  been  tampered  with  by  Lakwa  Dada,  who  was  a  master  of 
intrigue,  and  lost  the  battle.  Of  the  1600  regular  infantry  under 
Butterfield,  one-third  were  killed  or  wounded,  the  whole  brunt  of  the 
action  falling  upon  them,  whilst  Ambaji's  Maratha  cavalry  showed 
scarcely  any  fight  at  all. 

Perron  now  ordered  Sutherland,  with  the  Second  Brigade,  to  rein- 
force the  defeated  army,  upon  which  Lakwa  Dada  fell  back  on  tbe  fort 
of  Cbitturgarh.  Ambaji,  at  tbe  same  time,  made  great  preparations 
to  retrieve  his  defeat,  and  engaged  George  Thomas,  with  6  battalions 
of  regular  infantry  and  60  guns,  on  a  monthly  pay  of  Bs.60,000. 
Supported  by  Sutherland  and  Thomas,  tbe  chief  advanced  against 
Chittur  about  the  middle  of  the  year  1799,  his  army  consisting  of 
20,000  horse  and  14,000  infantry.  A  good  deal  of  desultory  skirmish- 
ing ensued,  but  no  really  heavy  fighting,  nor  were  any  substantial 
results  achieved  by  either  party.  Meanwhile  Sutherland's  and 
Thomas's  troops,  being  far  removed  from  their  headquarters,  fell  into 
arrears  of  pay,  and  this  led  to  a  general  plundering  of  the  country 
round,  and  very  soon  every  village  within  fifty  miles  was  pillaged  and 
deserted. 

Perron  bad  always  been  jealous  of  Colonel  Sutherland,  and  he  now 
gave  a  ready  ear  to  a  report  that  he  was  secretly  intriguing  with 


COMMAND  OF  THE  ABMY  OF  HINDUSTAN.        235 

Lakwa  Dada  instead  of  fighting  him.  The  colonel  was  therefore 
suspended,  and  Major  Pohlman  sent  from  Mattra  to  take  command  of 
his  Brigade.  Captain  Butterfield  fell  a  victim  to  Perron's  malice  at 
the  same  time,  and  was  driven  to  leave  Sindhia's  service ;  but  Suther- 
land managed  to  clear  himself,  and  after  a  short  time  was  sent  to 
the  Deccan,  to  take  over  charge  of  the  First  Brigade  from  Du  Prat, 
who  had  recently  superseded  Drugeon  fallen  into  disgrace. 

Major  Pohlman  had  no  opportunity  of  distinguishing  himself 
against  Lakwa  Dada,  for  scarcely  had  he  taken  over  the  command 
than  news  came  that  Zarnan  Shah,  the  King  of  Kahul — a  grandson  of 
Ahmed  Shah  Abdali,  whose  name  was  dreaded  by  the  Marathas — was 
preparing  for  an  invasion  of  India,  with  the  intention  of  re-establish- 
ing a  Mahomedan  empire.  This  threatened  danger  brought  about  an 
immediate  concord  amongst  the  Marathas,  and  all  internal  feuds  and 
jealousies  were  forgotten.  Daulat  Eao  Sindhia  released  Balloba 
Tantia,  Lakwa  Dada's  staunch  friend,  from  confinement,  and  rein- 
stated him  in  his  former  post  of  prime  minister ;  whereupon  Lakwa 
and  Ambaji  exchanged  visits  of  amity,  and  shortly  afterwards  the 
former,  through  the  influence  of  Balloba,  was  again  elevated  to  the 
post  of  commander-in-chief.  This  typical  example  of  the  glorious 
uncertainty  of  office  in  a  Maratha  administration  left  Ambaji  without 
employment ;  and  feeling  hurt  at  a  humiliation  he  had  not  deserved, 
he  entered  into  retirement  for  a  season. 

All  the  Maratha  troops,  regular  and  irregular,  were  now  ordered  to 
concentrate  at  Mattra,  where  a  formidable  army  was  collected  in 
December,  1799,  under  the  chief  command  of  Perron,  who  marched 
thither  from  Koil.  From  Mattra  the  army  advanced  to  Delhi,  to  take 
up  a  position  to  oppose  Zaman  Shah,  and  here  for  some  time  the 
immense  host  was  encamped.  It  included  in  its  ranks  Perron's  Second 
and  Third  Brigades,  under  Pohhnan  and  Pedron,  100,000  Maratha 
cavalry  of  Lakwa's,  and  200  guns.  So  critical  was  the  danger  con- 
sidered, that  Perron  decided  to  further  augment  his  army,  and 
directed  Major  Pedron  to  raise  a  Fourth  Brigade.  The  English  also 
assembled  a  large  force  at  the  frontier  station  of  Anupshahr  under 
General  Craig,  to  assist  in  repulsing  the  Afghan  invasion.  Fortunately 
for  the  peace  and  security  of  Hindustan,  an  outbreak  at  Kabul  obliged 
Zaman  Shah  to  return  to  his  capital,  and  so  the  danger  passed  away. 

A  small  insurrection  in  the  Saharanpur  district  next  engaged 
Perron's  attention.  Here  a  religious  impostor,  whose  real  name  was 
Sultan  Shah,  gave  himself  out  to  be  Ghulam  Kadir,  asserting  that  it 
was  not  that  miscreant  who  had  been  captured  and  killed  at  Meerut 
in  1789,  and  proclaiming  his  authority  over  the  territories  of  the 


236  PEEEON. 

Rohilla  adventurer  whom  he  represented  himself  to  be.  Perron 
detached  Captain  Smith,  with  three  battalions  and  some  of  the  Begum 
Somru's  troops,  to  bring  the  impostor  to  book,  and  he  was  easily 
defeated,  and  sent  flying  for  refuge  to  the  Sikhs,  who  had  assembled 
in  force  near  Karnal,  with  the  object  of  assisting  Zaman  Shah. 

Perron  now  advanced  to  Karnal,  and  summoned  all  the  Sikh  chiefs 
between  the  Sutlej  and  the  Jumna  to  appear  before  him  and  tender 
their  submission.  These  included  the  Rajahs  of  Patiala,  Jhind, 
Kaithal,  and  Tane*sur,  who  had  long  been  a  source  of  annoyance  and 
danger  to  the  northern  frontier  of  Hindustan.  At  first  they  seemed 
inclined  to  resist ;  whereupon  Perron,  with  a  number  of  local  chiefs 
who  were  burning  to  avenge  past  injuries,  and  who  brought  with  them 
10,000  cavalry,  advanced  with  his  Third  Brigade  to  Tanesur.  This 
prompt  exhibition  of  strength  overawed  the  Sikhs,  and  they  submitted 
to  the  terms  imposed,  and  signed  the  treaty  required  from  them.* 
Perron  then  returned  to  Delhi,  chastising,  on  his  route,  several  large 
villages  which  had  been  backward  in  paying  their  revenue,  amongst 
them  being  some  over  which  George  Thomas  claimed  authority.  This 
invasion  of  the  latter's  rights — not  the  first  instance  of  its  kind — tended 
to  increase  the  ill-feeling  already  existing  between  the  two  adventurers, 
and  sowed  the  seeds  of  troubles  that  were  to  find  their  harvest  at 
Georgegarh  and  Hansi  two  years  later. 

*  "  It  was  about  this  time  that  Perron  sent  presents  to  Ran  jit  Singh,  of  Lahore, 
with  proposals  for  a  treaty  of  amity  and  friendship.  Bagh  Singh  of  Jhind, 
who  was  Ran  jit  Singh's  maternal  uncle,  was  induced  to  use  his  influence  in 
bringing  about  this  treaty,  but  Ranjit  declined  Perron's  overtures,  still  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  giving  offence.  He  had,  prior  to  this  time,  entered 
into  negotiations  with  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley  ;  and  he  explained  that  it  was 
'  a  difficult  matter  to  maintain  a  friendship  with  both  parties.'  In  the  end  he 
patched  up  an  understanding  with  Perron,  explaining  to  Colonel  Collins,  who 
had  been  the  medium  of  the  English  negotiations,  that '  although  my  friendship 
for  you  and  the  most  noble  the  Governor-general  is  great  beyond  the  possibility 
of  words,  yet  I  must  preserve  appearances  with  General  Perron,  in  consideration 
of  what  is  due  by  me  to  the  will  of  my  uncle,  Bhag  Singh.' 

"  A  little  later  Perron  proposed  to  Ranjit  Singh  to  join  him  in  attacking 
George  Thomas  at  Hansi,  but  this  the  Sikh  chief  refused  to  agree  to."— Extract, 
"  Bombay  State  Papers." 


CHAPTER   III. 

THE   BATTLE   OF   MALPURA,   AND   THE    STORM    OF   SOUNDA. 
1800-1801. 

YEARLY  in  the  year  1800  Lakwa  Dada  advanced  into  Rajputana,  to 
•*-'  collect  the  tribute  due  from  that  country.  He  was  supported  by 
Perron's  Second  Brigade  under  Major  Pohlman,  and  by  the  Chevalier 
Dudrenec's  corps.  Partab  Singh,  driven  to  exasperation  by  the 
exactions  of  Perron,  had  determined  to  throw  off  the  Maratha  yoke,  if 
possible,  and  assert  his  independence.  To  this  end  he  collected  a 
powerful  army  at  his  camp  at  Sanganir,  a  few  miles  south  of  Jaipur, 
where  on  the  4th  of  April  he  was  joined  by  10,000  Rathor  cavalry 
from  Jodhpur,  who,  for  the  first  time  since  their  defeat  by  De  Boigne 
at  Merta,  ventured  to  take  the  field  against  Sindhia.  Hearing  of 
these  preparations,  Perron  sent  an  ultimatum  to  Partab  Singh,  calling 
upon  him  to  pay  his  arrears  of  tribute  immediately ;  and  the  demand 
being  refused,  Lakwa  Dada  was  deputed  to  enforce  it. 

Upon  the  rejection  of  Perron's  ultimatum  great  activity  prevailed 
in  the  Jaipur  camp.  The  Rajah  mounted  his  state  elephant  and 
reviewed  his  troops ;  there  was  a  vast  amount  of  saluting  with 
cannons,  rockets,  and  small  arms  ;  rich  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the 
gods,  lakhs  of  eleemosynary  rupees  distributed  to  the  Brahmins,  and 
alms  in  abundance  bestowed  on  the  poor. 

By  this  time  Lakwa's  army  had  approached  to  within  fighting 
distance,  and  the  15th  of  April  being  declared  a  propitious  day  by  the 
court  astrologers,  Partab  Singh's  forces  moved  out  to  battle.  Lakwa 
had  chosen  a  good  position  near  Malpura,  where  he  formed  his  army 
in  two  lines  to  meet  the  attack,  the  advance  one  consisting  of  the 
regular  infantry  under  Pohlman  and  Dudrenec,  and  the  supporting 
one  of  the  Maratha  cavalry,  who  were  stationed  a  thousand  paces  in 
the  rear;  whilst  5,000  of  Perron's  Hindustani  horse  defended  the 
flanks  of  his  Brigade. 

237 


238  PERRON. 

At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  battle  began  with  a  brisk  artillery 
fire.  Presently  Pohlman,  who  was  on  the  right  of  the  line,  determined 
on  a  forward  movement,  and  led  his  Brigade  on,  but  with  orders  to 
withhold  their  fire  until  quite  close  to  the  enemy.  With  their  accus- 
tomed discipline  and  intrepidity  the  troops  obeyed,  but  the  cowardly 
Maratha  cavalry  held  back,  leaving  the  infantry,  as  usual,  to  fight  the 
battle  alone ;  in  consequence  of  which  Pohlman  was  soon  hard  pressed, 
and  at  one  time  in  imminent  danger  of  being  overwhelmed  by 
numbers.  But  he  displayed  generalship  equal  to  the  emergency.  By 
a  skilful  and  judicious  movement  he  massed  his  six  battalions  into 
square — a  formation  long  warfare  against  cavalry  had  made  them 
familiar  with — and  presented  a  front  to  the  enemy  on  all  sides  ;  and 
thus  drawn  up  they  met  and  resisted  every  charge.  After  a  desperate 
defence,  in  which  the  artillery  played  an  important  part,  Pohlman 
gradually  drove  the  Jaipur  troops  back,  and  captured  40  of  their 
guns  and  30  stand  of  colours,  but  not  without  heavy  loss,  for 
1000  of  his  men,  or  nearly  17  per  cent,  of  the  force  engaged,  were 
killed  and  wounded. 

On  the  left  of  the  line  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec  fared  differently. 
His  troops  were  composed  of  newly-raised  levies,  who  lacked  the 
discipline  that  enabled  Pohlman's  veterans  to  stand  firm  and  avoid 
panic.  Dudrenec  himself  was  a  gallant  soldier,  well  schooled  in 
adversity,  and  if  experience  of  disaster  could  make  a  great  general, 
he  would  have  had  every  claim  to  that  distinction.  But  he  was  fated 
to  suffer  yet  another  catastrophe  on  this  day.  It  fell  to  the  Bathers 
of  Jodhpur  to  oppose  his  portion  of  the  line,  and  they  had  memories 
to  obliterate  such  as  could  only  be  blotted  out  with  blood  ;  they  had 
historical  reproaches  to  silence,  whose  cutting  echoes  rang  through  a 
decade  of  shame,  and  could  only  be  drowned  in  the  din  of  battle ; 
and  ribald  rhymes  to  put  a  period  to,  whose  sting  could  only  be  stayed 
by  the  clash  of  steel.  To-day  they  sought  the  revanche  of  Merta, 
and  10,000  sons  of  Marwar  were  eager  to  fulfil  their  duty. 

There  is  a  stirring  and  vivid  description  of  their  charge  against 
Dudrenec's  corps  in  Colonel  James  Skinner's  memoirs,  which  depicts 
the  episode  in  language  singularly  glowing  and  graphic  ;  and 
although  it  is  not  free  from  old  "  Sikander's  "  habitual  exaggeration, 
no  apology  is  necessary  for  quoting  it  in  extenso.  These  are  Skinner's 
words : 

"We  now  saw  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  Brigade,  which  was  on  our 
left,  charged  by  the  Bhattores.  He  received  them  nobly,  but  was  cut 
to  pieces  by  them  :  out  of  8,000  men  he  had  not  200  left.  The 
Bhattores,  more  than  10,000  in  number,  were  seen  approaching  from 


THE  BATTLE  OF  MALPURA.  239 

a  distance,  the  tramp  of  their  immense  and  compact  body  rising  like 
thunder  above  the  roar  of  battle.  They  came  on,  first  at  a  slow  hand 
gallop,  which  increased  in  speed  as  they  approached.  The  well-served 
guns  of  the  Brigade  showered  grape  upon  this  dense  mass,  mowing 
down  hundreds  at  each  discharge,  but  this  had  no  effect  in  arresting 
their  progress.  On  they  came  like  a  whirlwind,  trampling  over  1,500 
of  their  own  body  destroyed  by  the  cannon  of  the  Brigade.  Neither 
the  murderous  volleys  from  the  muskets  nor  the  serried  hedge  of 
bayonets  could  check  or  shake  them.  They  poured  like  a  torrent  on 
and  over  the  Brigade,  and  rode  it  fairly  down,  leaving  scarce  a  vestige 
of  it  remaining,  as  if  the  sheer  weight  of  their  mass  had  ground  it  to 
pieces.  Then,  as  if  they  had  met  with  but  a  slight  obstacle,  they 
looked  not  even  behind  them  at  the  fallen,  but  went  on,  unshaken, 
and  still  in  their  formidable  mass,  to  attack  the  cavalry  of  the  second 
line.  These  ran  like  sheep,  while  the  Bhattores  pursued  them,  cutting 
them  down  for  several  miles.  In  this  charge  Captain  Paish  and 
several  other  officers  were  killed,  and  Dudrenec  only  escaped  by 
throwing  himself  down  amongst  the  dead." 

The  impetuous  frenzy  of  the  Bathors,  drunk  with  victory  and 
revenge,  proved  their  ruin.  By  then:  blind  pursuit  of  the  Maratha 
cavalry,  they  put  themselves  out  of  the  action  as  completely  as  if  they 
themselves  had  been  in  flight,  and  this  just  at  the  time  when  their 
presence  was  most  needed  ;  for  Pohlman  had  now  beaten  back  the 
Jaipur  troops,  and  advancing  in  his  turn,  recaptured  two  of  Dudrenec's 
lost  guns.  Upon  this  Partab  Singh,  with  6,000  of  his  chosen  body- 
guard, determined  to  emulate  the  feat  of  the  Bathors,  and  charge 
Pohlman,  But  the  latter,  seeing  him  moving  down  on  his  elephant, 
divined  his  purpose,  and  immediately  ordered  his  guns  to  the  front  of 
the  line ;  and  by  the  time  the  Bajah  had  approached  to  within  two 
hundred  yards,  the  word  was  given  to  fire,  and  a  discharge  of  artillery 
instantly  followed.  Partab  Singh's  elephant  was  killed,  but  not- 
withstanding this,  his  bouyguard  twice  attempted  to  charge,  but  were 
beaten  back  each  time.  On  the  second  occasion  the  Bajah  mounted 
his  horse,  arid  turning  tail  fled  to  his  capital,  followed  by  his  cavalry, 
who  never  drew  rein  until  they  found  refuge  within  the  walls  of 
Jaipur,  forty-five  miles  distant. 

Pohlman's  battalions  were  now  left  in  sole  possession  of  the  field. 
About  midday  the  Bathors  were  seen  returning  from  the  chase  of  the 
Maratha  cavalry,  beating  their  drums  in  token  of  victory.  On  nearing 
Pohlman's  camp  they  observed  the  Jaipur  colours,  which  had  been 
captured,  floating  above  it ;  and  this  circumstance  led  them  to  suppose 
that  Partab  Singh  had  been  as  successful  as  themselves  and  was  in 


240  PERRON. 

possession,  and  they  rode  up  in  loose  order  to  be  cruelly  undeceived 
by  a  discharge  of  grape  poured  into  them  from  thirty  guns.  When 
they  realised  the  fatal  mistake  into  which  they  had  fallen  they  made 
a  gallant  effort  to  retrieve  it  Twice  they  charged,  notwithstanding 
their  fatigued  condition,  but  were  repulsed,  although  many  brave 
individuals  broke  through  the  square  formed  to  receive  them,  and  met 
their  death  at  the  bayonet's  point.  But  the  task  was  an  impossible 
one,  and  at  last  they  drew  off,  and  finding  the  Jaipur  camp 
abandoned,  followed  the  direction  of  flight  taken  by  Partab  Singh, 
victims  of  their  blind  impetuosity  and  an  undeserved  misfortune. 

Pohlman's  Brigade  now  advanced  to  occupy  the  enemy's  deserted 
lines.  It  was  a  magnificient  encampment,  crowded  with  sumptuous 
tents  of  the  most  luxurious  description,  belonging  to  the  various 
chiefs.  Two  large  bazaars  ran  down  the  centre,  filled  with  movable 
shops,  in  which  every  imaginable  article  was  exposed  for  sale.  But 
not  a  trader  remained  behind  to  recommend  his  wares,  not  a  trooper 
to  strut  and  swagger  down  the  streets,  for  the  great  host  that  had 
thronged  this  tented  city  but  yesterday  had  melted  away  into 
nothingness. 

In  the  centre  of  the  camp  was  Rajab  Patab  Singh's  wooden 
pavilion,  or  palace.  It  was  a  beautiful  structure,  covered  with 
embroidery  and  crimson  velvet,  and  the  interior  a  blazing  sheen  of 
gold  and  silver  brocade.  Two  golden  idols  guarded  it,  whose  flashing 
diamond  eyes  peered  into  vacuity — two  golden  idols  before  whom 
the  might  of  Jaipur  had  ofttimes  bowed  in  adoration.  But,  impotent 
as  Baal  of  old,  they  were,  by  the  irony  of  circumstances,  the  very  first 
treasures  to  be  looted  from  the  camp,  which  soon  became  a  scene  of 
plunder  and  confusion. 

The  losses  on  both  sides  at  the  battle  of  MaJpurah  were  heavy. 
The  Maratha  cavalry  had  been  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Rilthors,  whose 
own  ranks,  on  their  return  from  the  chase,  had  been  decimated  by 
Pohlman's  fire.  Dudrenec's  Brigade,  which,  according  to  Smith's 
authority,  numbered  about  4,000  fighting  men,  lost  between  five  and 
six  hundred  killed  and  wounded,  whilst  Pohlman's  list  of  casualties 
totalled  136.  But  heavier  than  all  of  these  was  the  slaughter  that 
had  taken  place  in  the  ranks  of  the  Jaipur  army.  Partab  Singh 
never  recovered  the  blow  to  his  power  and  prestige  which  was  dealt 
him  on  this  eventful  day.  Of  the  eighty  pieces  of  cannon  which  he 
had  brought  into  the  field,  he  lost  seventy-four,  together  with  all  his 
camp,  baggage  and  warlike  stores. 

On  the  10th  of  May  Perron  arrived  from  the  Sikli  country  north  of 
Delhi,  where  he  had  been  engaged  in  reducing  his  neighbours  to 


THE  BATTLE  OF  MALPURA.  241 

order  and  obedience  at  Kaifnal.  He  brought  with  him  reinforce- 
ments of  five  battalions  of  infantry  and  his  bodyguard  of  500  cavalry, 
known  as  the  Khasi  Risdla.  Having  taken  over  the  chief  command 
from  Lakwa  Diida,  he  was  preparing  to  advance  against  Jaipur,  when 
Partab  Singh  sent  in  his  submission,  and  was  granted  peace  on  a 
payment  of  twenty-five  lakhs  of  rupees. 

A  treaty  having  been  drawn  out  and  signed,  the  Rajah  invited 
Perron  and  his  European  officers,  sixteen  in  number,  to  visit  his 
capital  and  experience  his  hospitality.  The  invitation  was  accepted, 
but  not  without  certain  qualms  as  to  its  prudence.  The  Rajah,  with 
a  cavalcade  of  twenty  elephants,  met  his  guests  outside  the  gates  of 
his  capital,  and  escorted  them  to  the  "  Palace  of  the  "Winds,"  under  a 
salute  of  twenty-one  guns.  Colonel  Skinner,  who  was  present, 
describes  the  city  as  "  the  handsomest  ever  seen ;  the  streets  were 
broad,  the  houses  regular  on  both  sides,  the  bazaars  extremely  fine, 
and  the  place  full  of  inhabitants,  who  seem  prosperous  and  happy." 
This  description,  recorded  nearly  a  century  ago,  would  hold  good  in 
the  present  day,  for  modern  Jaipur  is  without  exception  the  cleanest 
and  most  beautiful  city  in  the  native  states  of  India,  and  enjoys  the 
distinction  of  being  the  only  one  lighted  with  gas  ! 

Perron's  ceremonial  visit  passed  off  with  great  eclat,  despite  fear 
and  distrust  on  both  sides  at  the  commencement.  A  grand  entertain- 
ment in  the  Hindu  style  was  prepared,  whereat  nazzars  were 
presented  and  Jchiluts  bestowed.  This  was  followed  by  a  banquet,  at 
which  (observes  Skinner)  a  choice  assortment  of  Hindustani  liquors 
were  on  the  table,  and  the  whole  wound  up  with  elephant  battles, 
tiger  and  buffalo  fights,  and  the  inevitable  Natch  Dance,  when  several 
sets  of  handsome  girls  were  introduced. 

The  defeat  of  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur  had  a  salutary  effect  upon  his 
kinsman  of  Jodhpur,  who,  without  further  trouble,  paid  up  the  arrears 
of  tribute  due  from  him,  amounting  to  twelve  lakhs  of  rupees,  and 
tendered  his  formal  submission  to  the  Maratha  rule. 

Affairs  in  Rajputana  being  thus  satisfactorily  arranged,  Perron 
returned  to  Koil  towards  the  end  of  July,  leaving  Pohlman  and  six 
battalions  to  reduce  the  fort  of  Jajpur,  which  belonged  to  a  chief 
named  Kasri  Singh,  who  had  long  harassed  the  Rajah  of  Kotah,  an 
ally  of  the  Marathas  in  the  late  campaign.  Jajpur  was  a  stone 
fortress,  built  on  the  summit  of  a  steep  hill,  and  from  its  position  and 
the  solidity  of  its  masonry,  a  place  of  unusual  strength.  Kasri 
Singh  refused  to  surrender  to  Pohlman's  summons,  and  measures 
were  taken  to  forcibly  dispossess  him.  A  large  battering  train  was 
brought  to  bear  on  the  walls  of  the  town,  and  a  breach  soon  effected, 

16 


242  PERRON. 

and  the  following  night,  on  a  given  signal,  the  troops  advanced  and 
occupied  it  without  much  difficulty.  The  fort  now  remained  to  be 
taken,  and  it  was  found  necessary  to  make  regular  approaches.  A 
fortnight  was  consumed  in  advancing  the  lines  to  within  two  hundred 
yards,  during  which  the  Rajput  garrison  made  many  vigorous  sallies. 
When  everything  was  ready  the  bombardment  was  opened,  and  a 
portion  of  the  wall  being  battered  down,  a  storm  ordered.  The 
six  battalions  were  formed  into  two  columns ;  Pohlman  leading  one, 
and  Captain  Donelly,  his  second  in  command,  the  other,  and  just 
before  dawn  the  signal  for.  attack  was  given  by  lighting  a  port-fire, 
and  the  troops  rushed  forward.  But  the  garrison  was  prepared  to 
receive  them,  and  saluted  the  assailants  with  a  tremendous  fire  from 
cannon  and  small  arms.  The  stormers  pressed  gallantly  forward, 
and  reached  the  breach,  but  found  it  impracticable.  The  garrison 
seeing  this,  increased  their  exertions,  rolling  down  large  stones  and 
discharging  powder-pots  and  burning  thatch  upon  the  foe  below,  which 
caused  the  greatest  havoc  and  confusion  in  all  ranks.  Captain 
Donelly,  a  gallant  Irishman,  and  Lieutenant  Exshaw  lost  their  lives 
in  this  affair,  and  800  men  were  killed  and  wounded  before  the 
battalions  retired.  Four  days  later  the  assault  was  renewed,  and  this 
tune,  in  spite  of  the  heroic  defence  of  the  Rajputs,  the  fort  was 
captured  and  all  the  garrison  killed  and  wounded  with  the  exception 
of  Kasri  Singh  and  about  400  of  his  followers.  Pohhnan,  himself  a 
gallant  officer,  could  feel  for  these  brave  men,  and  offered  them 
terms  which,  seeing  all  was  lost,  they  accepted,  and  marched  out 
with  the  honours  of  war. 

During  the  next  few  weeks  Pohlman  was  engaged  in  reducing 
several  refractory  local  chiefs,  who  refused  to  pay  their  tribute  until 
compelled  by  force,  after  which  he  marched  his  Brigade  back  to 
Delhi,  after  a  short  but  successful  campaign. 

Whilst  this  expedition  had  been  in  progress  in  Rajpatana  there 
had  been  another  shuffling  of  the  cards  in  the  Deccan.  Early  in  the 
year  Daulat  Rao's  wife  had  induced  him  to  liberate  from  confinement 
her  father,  Ghatkay  Rao.  This  wretch  soon  regained  his  former  evil 
influence  over  his  son-in-law,  and  intrigued  successfully  against 
Balloba  Tantia,  the  minister  in  power.  Before  long  Balloba  fell  into 
disgrace,  and  in  June  was  seized  and  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of 
Ahmednagar,  where  he  shortly  afterwards  died  by  poison.  This 
event  had  a  disastrous  effect  on  the  fortunes  of  Lakwa  Dada,  who 
owed  his  restoration  to  power  to  the  friendship  of  the  late  minister, 
and  now  felt  certain  that  his  own  downfall  was  at  hand ;  notwith- 
standing that  Sindhia,  with  characteristic  deceit,  wrote  to  him  to  be 


THE  BATTLE  OF  MALPUBA.  243 

under  no  apprehension,  but  to  continue  zealously  in  the  performance 
of  his  duties  as  commander-in-chief.  But  in  spite  of  these 
reassurances,  with  in  a  very  few  weeks  Ambaji  Inglia  was 
summoned  from  his  retirement  and  appointed  to  supersede  Lakwa 
Dada,  who  had  already  sent  his  family  to  Jodhpur  for  safety,  where 
he  now  proceeded  to  join  them  and  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the 
prince  of  that  country. 

Directly  after  his  restoration  to  favour,  Ghatkay  Rao  recommenced 
urging  Daulat  Rao  to  crush  once  for  all  the  rebellion  of  the  Bhais, 
by  putting  to  death  every  man  of  note  who  was  suspected  of  sym- 
pathy with  them,  knowing  that  by  such  a  course  of  policy  many 
powerful  rivals  would  be  removed  from  his  own  path.  Sindhia 
listened  favourably  to  these  suggestions,  and  sanctioned  a  wholesale 
slaughter  of  the  leading  chieftains,  who  had  been  favourite  officers 
and  ministers  under  his  uncle  Modhoji,  and  were  all  men  of  high 
rank  and  ability.  This  atrocious  proceeding  at  once  alienated  the 
affections  of  Sindhia's  subjects :  but  it  did  more  than  this,  for  it  struck 
a  death-blow  at  the  Maratha  national  army,  and  left  Daulat  Rao 
almost  solely  dependent  upon  his  regular  Brigades  and  his  European 
officers. 

Such  of  the  chieftains  as  were  able  to  escape,  fled  for  refuge  to 
Sindhia's  enemies,  and  disorders  threatened  on  every  side.  Lakwa 
Dada  was  now  formally  dismissed  from  an  office  which  he  had  in 
practice  abdicated,  and  this  gave  the  signal  for  a  general  insurrection 
to  break  out.  The  Holkars,  who,  since  their  defeat  by  De  Boigne  at 
Lakhairi,  had  scarce  lifted  their  heads,  now  began  to  assert  themselves, 
and  under  the  direction  of  Jaswant  Rao,  a  natural  son  of  old  Takivji, 
who  died  in  1797,  raised  the  standard  of  their  house,  to  which  vast 
numbers  of  Siudhia's  late  adherents  began  to  flock. 

Scarcely  had  Perron  returned  to  Koil  in  July  than  news  of 
Lakwa  Dada's  defection  reached  him.  He  at  once  prepared  to 
return  to  Rajputana  to  attack  the  rebel  and  his  new  ally  of  Jodhpur, 
but  was  delayed  by  the  breaking  out  of  an  insurrection  north  of 
Delhi,  where  Sambunath,  the  subahdar  of  Saharanpur,  a  faithful 
adherent  of  Lakwa,  declared  for  his  patron  directly  he  heard  of  his 
supersession,  and,  collecting  an  army,  audaciously  avowed  his 
intention  of  invading  Perron's  Jaidad.  The  danger  from  such  an 
exhibition  of  insubordination  existed  more  in  its  example  than  in  its 
action,  and  it  was  imperative  to  crush  it  in  the  bud.  Captain  Smith 
was  at  once  detached  to  attack  Sambunath ;  but  although  he  inflicted 
a  slight  defeat,  more  energetic  measures  were  necessary.  Perron 
therefore  deferred  his  advance  against  Lakwa  Dada,  and  on  the  22nd 


244  PERRON. 

of  July  took  over  the  command  of  Captain  Smith's  force,  and  gave 
battle  to  Sambunath  at  Kataoli.  The  action  was  short  but  decisive, 
and  resulted  in  a  complete  victory  for  Perron.  Utterly  beaten  aad 
routed,  Sambunath  fled  to  the  Sikh  territory  and  the  general  returned 
to  Delhi  with  such  laurels  as  he  might  reasonably  claim  from  success 
against  an  individual  whom  George  Thomas  contemptuously  termed 
"  a  grain  merchant." 

Perron  stopped  a  short  time  at  the  capital,  watching  the  progress  of 
events,  and  whilst  there  paid  his  respects  to  the  blind  Emperor  with 
much  pomp  and  ceremony.  The  formality  of  "  entering  into  the 
presence  ''  was  one  he  never  omitted  to  observe  when  occasion 
allowed,  for  the  nominal  authority  of  the  Mughal  was  the  most 
powerful  moral  factor  in  his  hand. 

Just  about  this  time  Partab  Singh  was  going  to  be  married,  and  as 
Perron  had  promised  to  attend  the  ceremony  he  determined  to  visit 
Jaipur,  and  from  thence  march  to  the  attack  of  Lakwa  Dada. 
Collecting  a  strong  force  he  set  out  for  Bajputana,  but  on  arriving  at 
Balahera  on  the  14th  of  November,  learnt  that  the  rebel  chief  had 
left  Jodhpur  and  joined  the  Bhais  in  Malwa.  This  necessitated  a 
change  of  plans,  but  as  it  was  important  for  political  reasons  that 
Perron  should  keep  his  Jaipur  engagement,  he  detached  Major 
Bourguien  to  capture  Ajmir,  which  belonged  to  Lakwa,  and  him- 
self proceeded  to  Jaipur  to  be  present  at  the  nuptials  of  Partab 
Singh  on  the  26th  of  November,  and  add  to  the  ceremonial  that 
eclat  so  precious  to  Oriental  minds.  It  was  not  until  January,  1801, 
that  he  left  this  city,  and  in  fulfilment  of  his  original  design  of 
attacking  Lakwa  Diida  set  out  for  Malwa,  where  that  chief  was  last 
reported  to  be.  On  his  way  he  levied  a  heavy  fine  from  the  Rajah  of 
Unaria,  a  recalcitrant  chief  who  had  lately  defeated  one  of  Perron's 
detached  battalions  under  Skinner.  At  this  place  he  learnt  that 
Lakwa  had  evacuated  Malwa  and  gone  to  Datia  in  Bundelkhand, 
taking  the  Bhais  with  him,  and  tired  of  his  fruitless  hunt  Perron 
determined  to  discontinue  it,  and  retraced  his  steps  to  his  head- 
quarters at  Koil,  from  which  he  had  been  too  long  absent. 

Meanwhile  Ambaji  Inglia,  the  new  Maratha  commander-in-chief, 
was  ordered  to  take  up  the  chase  of  Lakwa,  who  had  now  entrenched 
himself  at  Sounda,  in  the  territory  of  the  Rajah  of  Datia,  and  was  at 
the  head  of  an  army  of  G,000  cavalry,  3,000  Bundela  troops,  and  a 
small  party  of  200  sepoys,  commanded  by  Colonel  W.  H.  Tone, 
and  10  guns.  The  position  he  had  chosen  was  an  exceedingly 
strong  one.  In  his  rear  was  the  fort  of  Sounda :  in  his  front  a 
network  of  ravines  extending  for  seven  miles :  and  his  flanks 


THE  BATTLE  OF  MALPUItA.  245 

were  defended  by  broken  country  and  several  strong  forts.  Through 
these  natural  defences  there  were  only  three  clear  passes  or  passages 
for  the  advance  of  an  enemy,  all  strongly  protected  with  infantry  and 
artillery. 

Ambaji  Inglia,  acting  under  orders  from  Sindhia,  collected  at 
Gwalior  an  army  of  5,000  horse  and  three  brigades  of  regular  infantry. 
Of  these  latter  one  was  sent  him  by  Perron,  consisting  of  eight 
battalions  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Pedron ;  a  second  was  one 
in  his  own  employ,  officered  by  two  Englishmen,  named  James 
Shepherd  and  Joseph  Bellasis,  and  the  third  an  inferior  corps 
commanded  by  a  native  named  Kaleb  Ah".  But  having  assembled 
this  army  Ambaji  hesitated  to  march  against  Lakwa,  who  was 
not  so  much  the  enemy  of  Sindhia  as  the  champion  of  the  Maratha 
chieftains  against  the  tyranny  of  Ghatkay  Rao,  a  personage  as  hateful 
to  Ambaji  himself  as  to  any  one,  whilst  the  tatter's  feelings  towards 
Lakwa  were,  at  the  bottom,  not  unfriendly.  When  at  length  an 
advance  could  no  longer  be  delayed,  Ambaji  deputed  his  brother  Bala 
Rao  to  take  command,  and  himself  remained  at  Gwalior. 

In  March,  1801,  the  army  moved  towards  Sounda,  and  a  series  of 
small  skirmishes  soon  took  place,  but  nothing  decisive  was  effected. 
Perron  now  began  to  recognise  the  gravity  of  the  situation,  for  Lakwa 
Dada  and  the  Bhais  had  by  this  time  prevailed  upon  Jaswant  Rao 
Holkar,  and  Ali  Bahadur,  a  powerful  independent  chief  in  Bundel- 
khand,  to  support  the  rebellion.  Thus  a  most  formidable  confederation 
was  projected  which  threatened  Daulat  Rao's  authority,  and  thereby 
shook  the  very  foundations  of  Perron's  own  position.  In  fact  the  insur- 
rection of  the  Bhais,  as  it  was  still  termed,  was  assuming  such  pro- 
portions that  it  seemed  likely  to  change  the  existing  balance  of  power 
in  the  Maratha  Empire,  and  opened  an  actual  danger  of  Sindhia  being 
crushed  by  a  hostile  alliance  of  all  the  other  chiefs  in  the  Deccan. 

This  induced  Perron  to  proceed  to  Sounda  in  person,  and  he  arrived 
in  May  with  an  escort  of  a  battalion  of  infantry  and  2,000  Hindustani 
horse.  He  found  anything  but  a  satisfactory  condition  of  affairs. 
Pedron,  overawed  by  the  natural  strength  of  Lakwa  Dada's  position, 
had  done  nothing  except  engage  in  a  few  unimportant  skirmishes. 
This  dilatory  conduct  angered  Perron,  who  determined  to  bring 
matters  to  an  immediate  issue,  and  gave  the  order  for  a  general 
assault  on  the  enemy's  entrenchments,  and  at  dawn  of  day  on  the 
3rd  of  May  the  troops  went  into  action. 

They  were  divided  into  three  columns  to  attack  the  three  passes 
that  led  to  Lakwa's  camp.  The  right  consisted  of  four  battalions 
under  Pedron ;  in  the  centre  were  Shepherd,  Bellasis  and  Kaleb  Ali 


246  PERKON. 

with  their  brigades  ;  aud  on  the  left  were  five  battalions  and  2,000 
Hindustani  horse  under  Captain  Symes.  The  pass  which  Pedron 
attacked  was  held  by  Colonel  Tone,  who  fought  with  great  gallantry, 
until  he  was  overpowered,  and  with  his  officers  taken  prisoner.  In 
the  centre  Shepherd  and  Bellasis  were  opposed  by  a  chief  named 
Barar  Singh,  whom  they  drove  back.  But  the  left  wing  under  Captain 
Symes  met  with  a  serious  reverse  at  the  hands  of  the  gallant  old 
Rajah  of  Datia,  and  sustained  great  slaughter. 

Perron  on  hearing  of  this  disaster  sent  to  Pedron  for  reinforcements 
of  two  battalions,  and,  placing  himself  at  their  head,  advanced  to 
Symes's  assistance.  After  rallying  and  reforming  the  routed  troops, 
he  led  them  back  to  the  assault  with  the  greatest  personal  daring  and 
courage.  Inspirited  by  his  presence  and  example  the  men  answered 
to  his  appeal,  and  the  position  was  now  stormed  with  complete  success. 
The  old  Rajah  of  Datia  fought  until  he  was  killed,  whilst  Perron 
was  himself  wounded  by  a  spear  thrust  during  an  attack  which  he 
pressed  home  until  it  came  to  hand  to  hand  work. 

This  decided  the  battle.  Barar  Singh  was  killed  fighting  bravely, 
and  Lakwa  Dada,  seriously  wounded  by  a  musket  shot  in  the  foot, 
escaped  with  the  greatest  difficulty.  The  Bhais  fled  on  horseback, 
and  all  the  rebel  troops  dispersed,  whilst  their  sixteen  guns  were 
taken  and  their  camp  plundered.  The  day  was  not,  however,  won 
without  serious  loss,  for  the  resistance  offered  was  obstinate.  In 
Pedron's  column  nearly  a  thousand  men  were  killed  and  wounded, 
amongst  the  latter  being  two  European  officers.  In  the  centre  column 
Bellasis  and  three  other  officers  were  killed,  and  1,500  men  placed 
hors  de  combat :  whilst  on  the  left  Captain  Symes  and  Lieutenant 
Paish  were  wounded,  and  nearly  half  their  men  cut  up.  Had  it  not 
been  for  Perron's  prompt  and  gallant  assistance  the  whole  of  this 
column  would  have  been  annihilated. 

Perron  behaved  with  great  humanity  and  kindness  to  Colonel  Tone, 
Captain  Evans  and  the  other  European  officers  who  were  taken 
prisoners.  To  the  former  he  offered  service  in  Sindhiu's  army,  but 
this  was  declined.  Whereupon  all  the  captives  were  permitted  to 
retire  to  Holkar's  territory,  Perron  furnishing  them  with  Rs.  10,000  to 
defray  their  expenses  and  enable  them  to  re-establish  their  fortunes. 

AH  this  time  Major  Bourguien  had  been  doing  but  little  in  Ajniir, 
which,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  Lakwa  Dada's  own  province. 
Having  arrived  before  the  fort  in  December,  1800,  he  endeavoured  to 
storm  it  on  the  eighth  of  the  mouth,  but  was  driven  back  by  the 
garrison.  He  then,  in  expressive  Oriental  phraseology,  "  sat  down  " 
before  it,  and  after  fruitlessly  attempting  its  reduction  by  siege,  bom- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  MALPURA.  247 

l';i ril i -i I  it  with  a  more  powerful  metal  than  iron,  and  after  five  long 
months  gained  possession  of  the  place  by  bribery  on  the  8th  of  May, 
1801;  so  that  in  one  week  Lakwa  Duda  sustained  two  crushing  defeats 
at  points  so  far  distant  as  Ajmir  and  Sounda.  But  before  news  of  the 
fall  of  the  former  place  reached  Perron  he  was  so  disgusted  with 
Bourgnien's  incompetence  that  he  sent  Captain  Symes  to  supersede 
him. 

From  Sounda  Perron  returned  to  Koil,  which  he  reached  early  in 
June,  having  in  one  short  but  brilliant  campaign  broken  up  the  rebel- 
lion of  the  Bhais  and  asserted  Sindhia's  supremacy. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PERRON    PARAMOUNT.      THE   BATTLE   OF   UJJAIN. 
1801. 

OERRON  was  now  at  the  zenith  of  his  career.  He  had  brought  all 
A  Hindustan  into  subjection,  and  was  supreme  within  the  boun- 
daries of  Sindhia's  northern  possessions.  When  he  succeeded  to  De 
Boigne's  post  two  formidable  enemies  stood  in  his  way,  Balloba  Tantia 
and  Lakwa  Dada.  The  former  was  dead,  the  latter  a  fugitive,  and 
for  the  moment  no  shadow  of  opposition  stood  between  Perron  and 
his  will.  From  Kotah  in  the  south  to  Saharanpur  in  the  north,  from 
Jodhpur  in  the  west  to  Koil  in  the  east,  his  power  was  paramount. 

An  enumeration  of  the  territories  Perron  governed  at  this  time, 
and  the  countries  and  states  he  dictated  to,  will  give  an  idea  of  the 
enormous  extent  of  his  influence.  In  the  vast  Jaidad  he  held,  and 
which  included  the  richest  districts  of  the  Doab,  he  enjoyed  the 
rights  and  privileges,  and  lived  in  the  state  and  dignity,  of  an  actual 
sovereign.  The  Subahs,  or  governorships,  of  Saharanpur,  Panipat, 
Delhi,  Narnol,  Agra,  and  Ajmir,  were  directly  under  his  control :  he 
drew  their  revenues  and  ordered  their  government.  He  directed  the 
politics  of,  and  received  tribute  from,  the  Kajahs  of  Jaipur  and 
Jodhpur,  and  many  lesser  Rajput  chiefs,  and  claimed  authority,  if 
he  did  not  actually  exercise  it,  over  the  Sikhs  between  the  Jumua  and 
the  Sutlej.  Within  Hindustan  proper  he  owned  the  monopoly  of  the 
salt  and  customs  duties,  the  two  most  valuable  sources  of  revenue 
that  existed,  and  enjoyed  the  exclusive  privilege  of  coining  money, 
and  his  annual  revenue  was  estimated  at  .£1,632,000  sterling.  His 
possession  of  the  person  of  the  Emperor,  Shah  'Alam,  enabled  him 
to  invoke  the  Imperial  authority  for  all  his  actions,  and  he  enforced 
his  will  by  the  terror  his  disciplined  army  inspired. 

It  is  not  wonderful  that  such  marvellous  success  turned  Perron's 
head.  From  hawking  handkerchiefs  in  a  French  provincial  town  to 

248 


THE  BATTLE  OF  UJJAIN.  249 

ruling  Hindustan  was  an  advancement  in  b'fe  that  might  have  dazzled 
the  most  sober  brain.  From  serving  as  a  sailor  on  board  a  French 
frigate  to  commanding  an  army  of  40,000  men  was  a  promotion  that 
finds  few  parallels  in  history.  Brave  in  the  field,  and  not  overbearing 
in  the  camp,  Perron  had  hitherto  been  respected  by  his  European 
officers  and  beloved  by  his  troops,  and,  until  now,  retained  the  charac- 
ter De  Boigne  had  conceived  of  him,  namely,  that  he  was  a  gallant 
soldier  and  a  man  of  plain  sense. 

But  in  1801  a  change  became  apparent  in  Perron's  nature  which 
soon  began  to  influence  his  behaviour.  He  grew  intoxicated  with 
success.  The  subtle  oil  of  Oriental  flattery  was  poured  into  his  ears, 
and  he  learnt  to  love  it.  Great  schemes  suggested  themselves  to  his 
mind,  and  he  indulged  in  dreams  of  establishing  an  independent 
kingdom  for  himself,  or  winning  a  place  in  his  country's  history  by 
restoring  to  France  the  dominion  of  the  East.  On  his  elevation  to  his 
present  post  he  had  entered  into  correspondence  with  Piron,  the  suc- 
cessor of  Raymond  at  Haidarabad,  and  with  the  French  faction  of 
Mysore,  with  whose  revolutionary  political  principles  he  was  in  entire 
sympathy.  Had  Fortune  permitted  such  a  combination  Perron  would 
have  joined  these  countrymen  of  his  in  a  concerted  endeavour  to 
establish  again  the  French  power  in  India.  But  Lord  Wellesley  broke 
up  Piron's  force  at  Haidarabad,  and  Tipu  Sultan's  French  auxiliaries 
surrendered  to  the  English  at  Seringapatam,  so  that  the  only  hope  re- 
maining to  the  French  of  reviving  their  ancient  rule  in  the  East  was 
centred  in  Perron,  for  he  was  now  the  sole  representative  of  the 
French  struggle  in  India.  The  role  of  a  national  champion  appealed 
to  his  vanity  and  pride,  and  he  shaped  his  policy  accordingly,  and 
displayed  a  decided  preference  for  Eepublican  principles.  He  did  not 
realise  that  the  presence  of  a  French  army — for  so  his  Brigades  came 
to  be  called — in  the  very  heart  of  Hindustan  must  raise  the  jealousy 
of  the  English ;  or,  if  he  did,  he  was  prepared  to  incur  the  risk,  for  he 
began,  without  any  disguise,  to  pursue  a  course  of  favouritism  in  order 
to  advance  the  views  he  had  adopted. ^  He  ignored  the  claims  of  merit 

*  The  following  footnote  in  Kaye's  "  Life  of  Lord  Metcalfe  "  is  interesting.  It 
is  an  extract  from  a  letter  of  the  latter,  dated  the  22nd  of  March,  1802. — "  Camp, 
Kashulghur. — Here  I  found  four  more  battalions  of  Perron's  troops.  One  of 

the  officers  came  to  visit  me,  anxious  to  hear  of  his  father,  Colonel  .    I 

obtained  some  information  from  him  relative  to  the  Mahratta  service.  It 
appears  that  promotion  depends  on  General  Perron,  who  is  naturally  disposed 
to  favour  his  own  countrymen.  So  far,  however,  as  the  rank  of  captain,  every 
officer  obtains  a  step  annually — i.e.  in  four  years  a  man  must  be  a  captain. 
The  rule  extends  no  higher.  The  uniform  of  the  Sepoys  is  the  same  as  the 
Company's  ;  so  are  the  accoutrements,  with  the  exception  that  they  carry  a 


250  PERRON. 

and  the  rights  of  regimental  seniority,  and  filled  all  the  posts  of  com- 
mand in  his  Brigades  with  his  own  countrymen,  who  were  pitch-forked 
over  the  heads  of  Europeans  of  other  nationalities,  without  justice 
and  without  desert.  This  policy  naturally  excited  the  enmity  and  dis- 
satisfaction of  all  foreigners  serving  under  him  and  created  a  spirit 
which  weakened  his  army.  It  was  a  gross  departure  from  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  hy  De  Boigne,  who,  above  all  things,  was  impartial, 
and  never  gave  preference  to  any  individual,  but  promoted  each  man 
by  seniority,  or  for  acknowledged  merit.  In  pursuing  an  opposite 
course  Perron  hardly  took  the  trouble  to  dissemble.  He  tolerated  his 
English  officers  only  from  necessity,  fully  prepared  to  discharge  them 
when  the  occasion  arose,  whilst  every  adventurer  who  could  boast  a 
French  extraction,  was  pushed  forward  into  appointments  of  respon- 
sibility and  emolument,  irrespective  of  claim  or  talent.  That  even- 
tually these  favoured  countrymen  of  his  rewarded  his  preference  by 
disloyalty  and  ingratitude  was  but  a  just  retribution.  His  downfall, 
indeed,  was  brought  about  by  the  very  men  whom  he  now  raised  from 
insignificance  to  power.  This  can  create  little  surprise  when  their 
characters  are  considered.  "Low  they  were,"  writes  one  of  the  super- 
seded English  officers,  "  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Low  in  birth, 
in  education,  and  in  principle.  Perron's  army  became  a  miniature 
of  the  French  Revolution.  Wretches  were  raised  from  cooks  and 
barbers  to  become  colonels  and  brigadiers,  and  absurdly  entrusted 
with  the  command  of  troops,  and  showed  into  paths  to  acquire  lakhs 
of  rupees.  This  was  the  quintessence  of  egalite,  the  acme  of  French 
Revolution,  the  principles  of  which  were  now  generally  affected  in 
the  Force." 

As  a  natural  consequence  every  English  officer  in  the  Brigades  soon 
came  to  detest  Perron.  Their  supersession  by  illiterate  and  reprobate 
Frenchmen  was  sufficient  to  raise  their  indignation.  How  unjustly 
they  suffered  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  in  the  period  of 
twenty  years  between  1783  and  180H,  during  which  De  Boigne's 
battalions  flourished,  only  four  Frenchmen  were  killed  in  active 
service,  whilst  fifteen  British-born  officers  met  their  death  on  the  field 
of  battle.  These  partisan  prejudices  which  Perron  displayed  were 
destructive  not  only  of  the  esprit  de  corps  that  had  previously  in- 
spired his  army,  but  of  the  political  harmony  which  should  have 
existed  between  the  Marathas  and  the  English.  To  the  promotion 
of  a  good  feeling  between  the  two  powers  De  Boigue  had  particularly 

sword  as  well  as  a  bayoiiet  and  musket.  The  band,  which  was  in  full  tune, 
as  they  marched  by  my  little  camp,  played  nothing  but  marches — perfectly  in 
the  European  style." 


THE  BATTLE  OF  UJJAIN.  251 

addressed  himself,  but  under  Perron  this  friendship  soon  changed  to 
mutual  distrust  and  hostility. 

But  this  was  not  the  only  enmity  Perron  raised  against  himself  and 
his  master.  As  his  power  and  influence  increased  Sindhia's  Maratha 
chiefs  found  their  own  declining,  and  with  each  augmentation  of  the 
regular  Brigades  their  feudal  troops  became  of  less  and  less  account, 
and  fewer  prizes  fell  to  their  share.  It  was  evident  their  occupation 
was  slipping  away,  and  with  it  those  hereditary  privileges  and  emolu- 
ments so  dear  to  the  native  heart.  Political  extinction  and  pecuniary 
ruin  threatened  them,  and  the  desperate  condition  of  their  prospects 
soon  instigated  them  to  plot  against  the  foreigner  who  had  usurped 
their  rights  and  to  enter  into  intrigues  to  effect  his  ruin. 

Heedless  of  these  gathering  dangers  Perron  pursued  his  course. 
Behind  his  political  ambition  there  was  an  even  greater  incentive 
to  personal  exertion,  and  that  was  his  love  of  money.  The  harvest 
was  rich,  the  season  prosperous,  the  husbandman  in  humour,  and  he 
reaped  and  reaped.  His  pay  and  allowances  were  enormous.  As 
commander-in-chief  of  the  Imperial  army  he  drew  Rs.15,000  per 
mensem,  with  a  liberal  extra  for  "  table  expenses."  For  the  support 
of  his  bodyguard  he  received  a  monthly  sum  of  Rs.32,000.  On  all  the 
revenue  collections  of  the  Jaidad  his  commission  was  5  per  centum, 
and  the  same  on  the  revenues  of  the  Subahs  he  administered.  In 
every  political  arrangement  he  sanctioned,  or  entered  into  with  the 
neighbouring  princes  and  feudatory  states,  he  exacted  a  nazzar,  or 
complimentary  donation,  of  25  per  cent.  The  wealth  of  the  man  was 
prodigious.  On  the  lowest  calculation,  exclusive  of  the  pay  of  his  troops, 
he  enjoyed  a  monthly  emolument  of  Rs.100,000,  which,  at  the  exchange 
of  the  day,  represented  an  annual  income  of  over  £150,000.  In  ad- 
dition to  this  there  must  have  been  many  other  sources  of  gain  open 
to  him,  for  his  savings  in  seven  years  were  variously  estimated  at 
from  one  to  two  millions  sterling. 

It  is  now] necessary  to  turn  to  a  contemplation  of  the  state  of  affairs 
in  the  Deccan,  where' Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  had  been  so  long  delayed, 
to  the  advantage  of  his  European  deputy  in  Hindustan. 

Early  in'the  year  1800  Nana  Farnavis,  the  great  Maratha  "minister, 
died,  and  a  dispute  immediately  broke  out  between  Sindhia  and  the 
Peshwa  over  the  division  of  the  immense  property  left  by  the  deceased. 
Daulat  ,FRao  illustrated  the  practical  application  of  the  adage  that 
possession  is  nine  points  of  the  law,  by  seizing  the  N  ana's  Jayhir,  or 
territory,  under  pretext  of  a  claim  of  a  million  sterling  against  the 
estate.  Plot  and  counterplot  succeeded,  too  long  and  too  complicated 


252  PERRON. 

to  be  detailed  here,  inextricably  interwoven  as  they  were  with  the 
insurrection  of  the  Bhais,  whose  cause  the  Feshwa  espoused  after  the 
barbarous  reprisals  and  bloodthirsty  executions  Sindhia  had  ordered, 
and  which,  as  explained  in  a  previous  chapter,  left  the  latter  without 
any  friends  or  adherents  amongst  his  own  countrymen,  except  his 
father-in-law,  Ghatkay  Rao.  Disorders  and  turmoils  broke  out  on 
every  side,  and  their  occurrence  prompted  Jaswant  Kao  Holkar  to 
take  advantage  of  the  difficulty  in  which  his  rival  was  plunged,  to 
reassert  the  political  influence  of  his  family,  which,  since  the  death  of 
Takuji  Holkar,  had  fallen  to  a  very  low  ebb. 

In  order  to  explain  Jaswant  Rao's  standing  it  is  necessary  to  go 
back  a  little  and  pick  up  the  thread  of  the  narrative  at  the  point  where 
mention  of  the  house  of  Holkar  ceased.  After  Takxiji's  crushing 
defeat  at  Lakhairi  in  1793  he  retired  to  his  capital,  where,  in  1797, 
he  followed  his  life-long  rival,  Madhoji  Sindhia,  to  the  burning  ghaut. 
Takuji  left  behind  him  four  sons,  two  legitimate  and  two  natural  ones. 
Of  the  former,  the  elder  and  acknowledged  heir  was  Khasi  Rao,  but 
he  was  weak  in  intellect  and  deformed  in  person,  whilst  the  younger 
brother,  Malhar  Kao,  was  brave  and  aspiring.  A  contest  for  the  suc- 
cession took  place  between  these  two,  and  Khasi  Rao,  with  fatal 
weakness,  applied  to  Sindhia  for  assistance.  So  excellent  an  oppor- 
tunity of  increasing  his  importance  and  influence  was  precisely  what 
Daulat  Rao  desired.  He  became  for  a  time  the  champion  of  the 
rightful  heir  of  the  house  of  Holkar,  and  in  the  struggle  that  ensued 
Malhar  Kao  lost  his  life  in  battle,  and  his  infant  son,  Khandi  Rao,  fell 
into  Sindhia's  hands.  Khasi  Rao  was  now  left  nominally  in  full 
possession  of  the  Government,  but,  in  reality,  wholly  dependent  on 
Sindhia. 

During  the  struggle  between  Khasi  Rao  and  Malhar  Rao,  the  two 
natural  sons,  Jaswant  Rao  and  Ithal  Rao,  supported  the  latter,  and 
when  he  was  killed  were  forced  to  flee.  Ithal  Rao  sought  refuge 
at  Kolapur,  and  eventually  met  a  violent  death  at  the  hands  of  his 
enemies.  Jaswant  Kilo,  in  the  first  instance,  found  protection  at 
Nagpur,  and  later  on,  after  numerous  vicissitudes,  in  which  his  life  was 
often  in  danger,  at  Dhar.  Being  a  chief  of  great  personal  gallantry 
and  talent  ho  was  soon  able,  in  the  distracted  state  of  politics,  to 
gather  around  him  many  adherents  of  his  father  who  were  prevented 
from  supporting  the  cause  of  Khasi  Rao  by  his  connection  with 
Sindhia.  Having  collected  a  formidable  following  Jaswant  Rao 
entered  on  the  life  of  a  professional  freebooter,  directing  his  enter- 
prises chiefly  against  Sindhia's  territories.  One  of  his  first  acts  was 
to  enter  into  an  alliance  with  a  celebrated  Pathau  soldier  of  fortune, 


THE  BATTLE  OF  UJJAIN.  258 

named  Amir  Khan,  who  was  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  free  lances, 
and  lived  by  rapine  and  foray.  Amir  Khan's  peculiar  ability,  audacity, 
and  fame  in  predatory  expeditions  marked  him  out  as  a  fit  auxiliary 
for  tin-  schemes  Jaswant  Rao  meditated,  and  the  Pathan,  on  his  part, 
was  not  blind  to  the  advantage  of  connecting  himself  with  a  chief  of 
such  high  dignity  as  Jaswant  Bao,  "through  whom"  (to  quote  from 
his  memoirs)  "  a  road  might  be  opened  to  the  management  of  great 
affairs,  even  to  the  very  highest,  from  behind  the  curtain." 

It  was  not  long  before  Khasi  Rao  proved  mentally  incapable  of 
ruling,  and  when  this  became  notorious  Jaswant  Rao  had  no  difficulty 
in  strengthening  his  position  by  proclaiming  that  he  was  acting  on 
behalf  of  Khandi  Eao,  the  nephew  and  heir  of  Khasi  Rao,  and  in  the 
name  of  this  infant  he  assumed  the  headship  of  the  house  of  Holkar. 
His  singular  success  and  the  depredations  he  committed  in  Sindhia's 
Narbada  districts  soon  roused  the  latter  to  action,  and  a  detachment 
of  regular  infantry  was  sent  against  him  under  the  command  of  the 
Chevalier  Dudrenec.  This  officer,  on  the  death  of  Takiiji,  had  cast  in  his 
lot  with  Khasi  Rao,  a  political  error  which  soon  became  apparent  to 
him,  but  never  more  clearly  than  on  this  occasion  when  he  was 
defeated  by  Jaswant  Rao,  whose  reputation  was  thereby  vastly  in- 
creased. The  reverse  he  sustained  decided  Dudrenec  to  change  his 
allegiance,  and  declaring  his  conviction  that  Khasi  Rao  was  incapable 
of  governing,  he  passed  over  with  all  his  battalions  to  the  service  of 
Jaswant  Rao. 

Jaswant  Rao's  fortunes  were  now  in  the  ascendant,  and  he  began  to 
dream  of  re-establishing  the  old  glory  and  influence  of  his  house. 
Soon  his  improved  circumstances  required  that  he  should  conform  to 
the  respectability  expected  in  a  chief  of  position,  and  he  reformed  his 
vagabond  army,  introduced  a  certain  degree  of  discipline  into  its 
ranks,  and  augmented  his  regular  battalions,  so  as  to  put  himself  on  a 
more  equal  footing  with  Sindhia.  Several  European  officers  were 
engaged  to  raise  corps  for  him,  and  men  of  character  and  ability 
tempted  to  enter  his  service  by  liberal  terms  of  remuneration.  As 
there  happened  to  be  a  greater  number  of  French  adventurers  in  the 
Deccan  than  of  any  other  nationality,  three-fourths  of  the  Europeans 
introduced  into  his  service  belonged  to  that  country.  In  addition  to 
Dudrenec's  Brigade  two  others  were  raised,  each  consisting  of  four 
battalions.  One  was  commanded  by  Captain  Gardner,  but  he  did  not 
remain  long  in  the  service,  being  succeeded  by  Captain  Dodd.  The 
other  was  under  Captain  Plumet,  "  a  Frenchman  and  a  gentleman  ; 
two  qualities  which  were  seldom  united  in  the  Mahratta  army."  The 
successes  achieved  by  these  infantry  Brigades  soon  enabled  Holkar  to 


254  PERRON. 

pay  them  with  tolerable  punctuality,  and  for  a  time  he  continued  to 
devastate  Sindhia's  territories  in  the  vicinity  of  Ujjain  without  oppo- 
sition. Sindhia  was,  in  fact,  sacrificing  everything  to  maintain  his 
influence  at  Poonah,  where  the  political  firmament  continued  to  be 
much  disturbed.  But  a  time  came  when  he  could  no  longer  dis- 
regard the  rapidly  growing  power  of  Jaswant  Rao,  and  he  felt 
compelled  to  take  action  against  him,  or  run  the  risk  of  his  own 
Malwa  districts  being  harried  into  a  wilderness.  And  so  in  1801  he 
left  the  Peshwa's  court,  and  accompanied  by  an  enormous  army  set 
out  on  his  return  to  Ujjain. 

His  progress  was  so  slow  that  it  allowed  Jaswant  Kuo  ample  time 
to  call  in  all  his  scattered  detachments  and  concentrate  them  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Sindhia's  capital,  with  the  intention  of  swooping 
down  upon  it  in  one  final  raid.  When  Daulat  Eao  reached  the  Tapti 
he  heard  of  the  threatened  danger,  and  in  his  alarm  sent  forward 
Major  George  Hessing  with  three  of  his  battalions  and  one  from 
Fidele  Filoze's  corps  to  protect  the  city.  By  this  time  the  rainy 
season  had  broken,  and  the  country  was  in  a  state  most  difficult  for  an 
army  to  traverse,  notwithstanding  which  Hessing  made  an  astonishingly 
rapid  route  and  reached  Ujjain  by  the  end  of  June.  A  few  days  after 
his  departure  from  Sindhia's  camp  the  chief's  anxiety  increased,  and 
he  ordered  Lieutenant  Maclntyre,  with  the  fourth  battalion  from 
Hessing's  Brigade,  and  a  second  from  Filoze's,  to  follow  and  support 
the  advanced  column.  Three  days  later  he  detached  two  of  Suther- 
land's battalions  from  the  First  Brigade,  under  Captain  Gautier,  to 
further  strengthen  Hessing,  and  finally  crowned  his  imbecility  by 
closing  up  the  rear,  after  another  interval,  with  two  more  of  Suther- 
land's battalions  and  a  park  of  artillery  under  Captain  Brownrigg. 

There  was  thus  an  echelle  of  small  isolated  detachments,  with 
twenty,  thirty,  and  forty  miles  between  each,  marching  against  an 
enemy  whose  entire  strength  was  concentrated  on  the  objective  point. 
Jaswant  Eao  was  too  able  a  general  to  let  such  an  opportunity  slip, 
and  at  once  prepared  to  attack  the  detachments  in  detail.  Passing 
by  Hessing,  who  had  reached  Ujjain,  he  fell  iipon  Maclntyre  at  Nuri 
and  compelled  him  to  surrender.  Elated  with  success  he  pushed  on 
to  attack  Brownrigg,  who,  on  hearing  of  the  disaster,  had  crossed  the 
Narbada  and  effected  a  junction  with  Gautier  near  the  town  of  Satwas, 
where  he  took  up  a  very  strong  position.  The  force  under  his  com- 
mand only  amounted  to  four  battalions  of  infantry  and  a  hundred 
Eohillas,  with,  however,  a  very  strong  park  of  artillery.  Holkar's 
army,  according  to  a  Bombay  paper  published  at  the  time,  consisted 
of  fourteen  regular  battalions,  under  Plumet,  5,000  Kohillas,  50,000 


THE  BATTLE  OF  UJJAIN.  255 

Mariitha  cavalry,  27  heavy  guns,  and  42  light  field-pieces ;  but  this 
appears  an  exaggerated  estimate.  Still  it  is  certain  he  had  an 
immense  numerical  superiority  over  Brownrigg.  The  battle  com- 
menced at  seven  .o'clock  in  the  morning  with  a  discharge  of  round 
and  grape  shot  from  Jaswaut  Rao's  guns.  An  artillery  duel  suc- 
ceeded, and  lasted  for  four  hours,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to 
advance  and  storm  Brownrigg's  position.  But  he  defended  himself 
with  such  resolution  and  judgment  that  all  Holkar's  attacks  were 
unavailing,  whole  files  of  his  infantry  being  cut  to  pieces  by  the 
chain  shot  discharged  against  them.  Before  long  the  men  became 
demoralised  and  refused  to  advance,  and  Major  Plumet  being  taken 
prisoner,*  Holkar  decided  on  a  retreat,  which  he  did  not  effect  with- 
out enormous  loss.  Brownrigg's  casualties  were  only  107,  but 
amongst  them  was  his  gallant  fellow-countryman,  Lieutenant  Row- 
bothain. 

Jaswant  Rao  now  retired  to  Indore,  from  whence  he  sent  urgent 
messages  to  Amir  Khan  to  join  him  with  all  speed.  But  the  Pathan 
chief  was  a  man  of  obstinate  metal,  and  preferred  to  retrieve  Holkar's 
reverse  rather  than  commit  himself  to  a  retrograde  movement.  So 
he  boldly  advanced  against  Ujjain  to  attack  Hessing,  whereupon 
Holkar  plucked  up  heart,  and,  hurrying  forward  with  two  brigades  of 
infantry,  effected  a  junction  with  his  ally.  On  the  2nd  of  July,  1801, 
the  combined  forces  moved  against  the  city.  They  found  Hessing 
drawn  up  ready  to  receive  them,  his  force  in  a  square  formation,  with 
its  rear  defended  by  the  battlements  of  the  capital.  Jaswant  Rao 
divided  his  army  into  two  equal  divisions,  making  over  the  command 
of  one  to  Amir  Khan  and  leading  the  other  himself.  The  Pathan 
opened  the  action  by  dispersing  Hessing's  considerable  body  of  Maratha 
horse  by  a  charge  of  his  own  cavalry,  and  then  directed  a  heavy 
cannonade  upon  the  four  battalions  of  regular  infantry.  These  were 
soon  thrown  into  confusion,  upon  which  their  commander,  a  half-caste 
son,  by  a  native  woman,  of  gallant  old  John  Hessing,  failed  to  demon- 
strate the  doctrine  of  heredity,  and  fled  at  an  early  stage  of  the  action, 
leaving  his  officers  to  meet  the  advance  of  Plumet's  brigade,  which 
was  now  commanded  by  a  Frenchman  named  Fleury.  The  result 
was  soon  placed  beyond  doubt,  for,  although  Hessing's  officers  behaved 
with  conspicuous  gallantry,  freely  sacrificing  their  lives  in  the  defence 
of  their  colours,  they  were  completely  overpowered,  and,  towards  the 
close  of  the  action,  annihilated  by  a  spirited  charge  of  the  Pathan 
cavalry  under  Amir  Khan  himself.  "  To  the  end,"  writes  a  contem- 
porary observer,  "  they  behaved  with  all  that  cool  and  collected 
*  So  stated  in  the  newspaper  quoted  from — but  the  fact  is  doubtful. 


256  PERRON. 

fortitude  which  belongs  to  true  heroism,  and  fell  covered  with  honour- 
able wounds."  Of  the  twelve  officers  engaged,  eight  were  killed 
and  three  wounded  and  made  prisoners,  Hessing  alone  escaping  to 
Bairungarh  by  a  craven  flight.  Those  who  lost  their  lives  were 
Captain-Lieutenant  John  Macpherson,  a  son  of  Captain  Macpherson 
in  the  Company's  service ;  Lieutenant  John  Graham,  son  of  Ensign 
Graham  in  the  same ;  Lieutenant  Edward  Montague,  son  of  Colonel 
Montague  of  the  Bengal  Artillery ;  Lieutenant  Doolan,  Ensigns 
Haddon  and  Urquhart,  all  of  Hessing's  brigade,  and  Lieutenants 
Lany  and  Meadows  of  Filoze's  corps.  Amongst  the  wounded  were 
Lieutenant  Humpherstone,  Captain  Dupont  and  Major  Deridon,  the 
latter  a  half-bred  Frenchman,  whose  sister  Perron  had  married.  He 
was  eventually  ransomed  by  Colonel  John  Hessing,  of  Agra  (who 
was  also  a  connection  of  his),  by  a  payment  of  Ks.40,000,  which  sum 
Sindhia  afterwards  refunded  with  unusual  generosity.  The  heads  of 
the  dead  officers  were  cut  off  and  carried  to  Holkar,  who  rewarded 
this  atrocious  act  of  mutilation  with  a  payment  of  Rs.1,000  for  each. 
Holkar  bought  the  victory  dear,  although  he  captured  20  guns.  In 
Amir  Khan's  memoirs  it  is  stated  that  200  Europeans  were  killed  in 
the  battle,  which  the  editor,  in  a  footnote,  explains  "  probably  in- 
cluded all  classes  of  Christians,  so  that  the  number  slain  may  have 
been  nearly  as  stated  in  the  text " ;  but  this  appears  very  doubtful, 
and  the  sportive  fancy  of  the  Amir's  biographer,  Basawan  Lai,  probably 
added  a  redundant  cipher  to  the  right  hand  of  the  total.  Hessing's 
camp  was  plundered  and  an  immense  booty  of  stores,  elephants, 
horses,  kettle-drums,  and  standards  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  victors 
in  addition  to  the  guns.  The  next  day  the  city  of  Ujjain  was  given 
over  to  pillage,  and  sacked  with  all  the  thoroughness  peculiar  to 
Asiatic  freebooters,  gifted  with  a  genius  for  the  discovery  of  caclita 
and  secret  hiding-places. 

Holkar's  prestige  was  enormously  increased  by  the  victory  of  Ujjain, 
and  overtures  for  an  alliance  were  now  made  to  him  by  Lakwa  Dada, 
the  champion  of  the  Bhais,  who,  although  wounded,  was  still  able  to 
intrigue.  This  chief  proposed  a  combination  between  AH  Bahadur, 
of  Bundelkhand,  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar,  and  himself  against  Sindhia, 
and  a  formidable  alliance  was  thus  promoted,  which  seriously  threatened 
the  great  house  of  Ujjain. 

Sindhia  was  at  Burhanpur  when  news  reached  him  of  the  disaster 
that  had  overwhelmed  Hessing's  brigade.  "  He  writhed  in  an  agony 
of  vexation  and  rage  at  hearing  of  it,"  writes  the  quaint  native  historian 
already  quoted.  His  first  act  was  to  send  orders  to  Perron  at  Delhi 
to  hurry  to  his  support.  The  moment  was  critical.  Every  day  helped 


THE  BATTLE  OF  UJJAIN.  257 

to  fan  into  flame  the  mouldering  embers  of  long  pent-up  hatred  and 
jealousy  that  existed  against  him  in  the  Deccan,  and  Danlat  Rao 
urged  on  Perron  the  supreme  necessity  of  using  every  exertion  in 
bringing  his  brigades  south,  and  simultaneously  recalled  to  his  head- 
quarters the  troops  he  had  left  at  Poonah  to  maintain  his  authority 
there.  These  included  10,000  Maratba  cavalry  under  Ghatkay  Rao, 
and  the  remaining  five  battalions  of  the  first  brigade  under  Colonel 
Robert  Sutherland.  As  soon  as  they  joined,  Sindhia's  confidence  began 
to  return,  and  he  only  awaited  Perron's  arrival  to  inflict  a  crushing 
blow  on  the  baseborn  upstart  of  the  rival  house  who  had  lowered  his 
pride  and  defeated  his  regular  infantry. 


17 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE   WAR  WITH   GEORGE    THOMAS. 
1801. 

A  BOUT  the  middle  of  1801  a  danger  which  had  for  some  time  past 
**•  been  troubling  Perron  began  to  assume  formidable  proportions. 
This  was  the  singular  rise  to  power  of  George  Thomas,  whose  history 
has  already  been  related.  Between  the  two  adventurers  enmity  had 
long  existed,  for  they  were  antagonistic  at  every  point  and  hated  each 
other  as  cordially  as  Briton  and  Frenchman  could  hate  at  that  period. 
Perron  was  both  jealous  and  fearful  of  Thomas's  increasing  influence, 
which  had  been  greatly  augmented  by  the  recent  brilliant  campaign 
against  the  Sikhs  of  the  Sutlej  States.  More  than  once  during  the 
past  year  the  Frenchman  had  made  a  sly  attack  on  Jhajjar  territory, 
thereby  raising  the  wrath  and  indignation  of  its  master.  A 
common  instinct  told  both  that  sooner  or  later  their  differences  would 
have  to  be  decided  by  the  sword,  and  the  Irishman,  with  whom  there 
was  never  any  time  like  the  present  for  fighting,  was  getting  ready  for 
the  fray.  Perron,  on  his  part,  having  disposed  of  Lakwa  Dada,  felt 
himself  free  to  approach  this  new  difficulty.  For  some  time  past  he 
had  urged  on  Sindhia  the  necessity  of  crushing  Thomas's  power,  and 
a  treaty  had  been  approved  by  the  chief,  framed  with  the  object  of 
reducing  Joivruj  Jung  to  a  position  of  subordination  to  Perron.  To 
impose  this  treaty  upon  Thomas,  Perron  came  to  Delhi  in  June,  1801, 
and  wrote  to  him  to  send  a  vakil  to  confer  on  the  matter.  Thomas, 
who  had  concluded  peace  with  the  Sikhs,  and  withdrawn  to  his  capital 
to  prepare  himself  for  resistance,  in  view  of  a  possible  rupture,  BO  far 
acquiesced  in  Perron's  wish  as  to  depute  an  agent  to  attend  the 
General. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  8th  of  July,  when  the 
battle  of  Ujjaiu  occurred,  and  Siudhia  ordered  Perron  to  proceed  at 
once  to  the  Deccau  with  two  complete  brigades  and  all  the  Hindustani 

258 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.       259 

horse.  This  was  tantamount  to  the  evacuation  of  Hindustan,  for 
compliance  with  these  orders  would  have  left  Upper  India  defenceless, 
saving  for  a  few  garrison  troops. 

But  Hindustan  was  as  completely  under  Perron's  sway  as  his  own 
Jaidad,  for  it  was  held  and  controlled  by  the  army  he  commanded. 
Although  for  the  sake  of  form  he  cited  the  Emperor's  name  as 
authority  for  his  actions,  and  from  time  to  time,  at  Darbar,  confessed 
himself  Siudhia's  humble  and  obedient  servant,  Perron  was  the 
paramount  lord  and  master  of  the  country  so  long  as  his  brigades 
were  at  his  back.  And  now  these  brigades  were  summoned  to  the 
south. 

It  was  impossible  to  let  them  go :  to  proceed  there  himself  would 
be  an  act  of  abdication.  His  own  duty  and  Sindhia's  sore  distress 
had  no  weight  in  his  mind  while  that  terrible  Irishman  paraded  his 
troops  and  won  his  victories  on  the  western  confines  of  Delhi.  What 
mattered  Daulat  Kao's  danger,  when  danger  threatened  Perron  ? 
Charity  begins  at  home,  and  the  former  must  be  met  with  temporising 
promises,  the  latter  with  the  brigades,  unless  perchance — it  was  a 
brilliant  idea  that  occurred  to  him — he  could  induce  Thomas  to  under- 
take the  fighting  in  the  Deccan,  and  leave  him,  with  his  troops 
intact,  in  Hindustan. 

For  some  time  past  it  had  been  apparent  that  the  General  was  neglect- 
ing Sindhia's  interests  and  consulting  only  his  own.  This  behaviour  was 
confirmed  now,  for  on  receiving  Daulat  Rao's  orders  to  proceed  to  his 
aid  Perron  at  once  lapsed  into  protestations,  and  with  these  began 
and  ended  his  response  to  his  master's  appeal.  His  sense  of  loyalty 
and  his  sentiments  of  gratitude  to  a  prince  who  had  loaded  him  with 
favours  and  raised  him  to  his  high  station  were  lost  in  apprehensions 
of  his  own  danger,  and  with  a  supreme  selfishness  he  sacrificed 
everything  to  his  own  interests. 

There  exists  a  very  detailed  record  of  Perron's  behaviour,  during  this 
critical  period  of  Sindhia's  affairs,  in  some  Persian  Akbars,  or  news- 
papers, printed  at  the  time,  and  the  following  extracts,  thrown  into  a 
narrative  form,  exhibit  the  true  character  of  the  man  of  whom  they 
treat. 

The  chronicle  commences  on  the  28th  of  June,  1801,  when  intima- 
tion was  received  at  Delhi  that  Thomas  had  made  peace  with  the 
Sikhs,  and  was  preparing  for  hostilities  with  Perron,  from  whom  he 
had  just  received  proposals  for  a  political  arrangement.  In  the  success 
of  these  Thomas  evidently  had  very  little  faith,  for  he  opened  com- 
munications with  Lakwa  Dada,  who  was  in  Datia  territory,  pro- 
posing an  alliance  against  the  Frenchman. 


260  PERRON. 

Ten  days  later,  on  the  8th  of  July,  Perron  received  information  of 
the  defeat  of  Hessing  at  Ujjain,  and  simultaneously  urgent  orders 
reached  him  from  Sindhia  to  march  to  the  Deccan  with  his  brigades. 
To  these  he  sent  a  reply  saying  he  would  start  at  once.  On  the 
15th  of  the  month  he  moved  out  one  stage  from  Delhi,  with  the 
ostensible  intention  of  proceeding  south,  but  having  encamped  at 
Barahpula,  remained  there  fast,  showing  no  inclination  to  continue 
his  march.  Here,  on  the  19th,  he  received  a  visit  from  Bapu  Sindhia, 
his  deputy-governor  in  the  Saharanpur  province.  As  this  district 
adjoined  Thomas's  territory  and  that  of  the  Sikhs  with  whom  he  had 
recently  been  at  war,  Bapu  was  certainly  the  person  most  qualified  to 
afford  information  about  Thomas,  to  obtain  which  was  probably  the 
reason  of  his  being  summoned  to  attend  Perron,  for  a  long  "  con- 
sultation "  was  reported  to  have  taken  place.  The  following  day 
Perron  returned  to  Delhi  with  four  of  his  European  officers,  and  went 
through  the  formal  ceremony  of  being  "  admitted  to  the  presence  "  of 
the  Emperor,  to  whom  the  usual  offerings  were  presented,  and  from 
whom  the  customary  gifts  were,  in  turn,  received. 

For  the  next  fortnight  Perron  remained  at  Delhi,  trying  to  bring  to 
an  issue  the  negotiations  with  Thomas,  for  on  the  7th  of  August  it 
was  publicly  given  out  that  "  the  General  was  diverted  from  his 
purpose  of  marching  to  Scindia's  aid  by  important  business  negotia- 
tions with  Thomas,  by  which  he  hopes  to  obtain  four  of  that  person's 
battalions  and  20,000  Sikh  horsemen  to  send  to  Oojein."  And  yet  in 
the  very  same  issue  it  is  stated  that  "  on  Perron's  speedy  arrival 
depends  the  fate  of  Scindia,  whose  situation  has  become  critical." 

On  the  8th  of  August  Perron  "  called  in  his  detachments,"  and  it 
was  notified  that  "  immediately  after  his  interview  with  Thomas  the 
General  intends  to  march  against  Holker."  Another  day  passed,  and 
he  wrote  to  one  of  his  native  officials  that  "  after  two  or  three  days, 
having  adjusted  matters  of  great  urgency,  I  will  set  out  to  join 
Scindia."  On  the  same  date,  with  his  usual  punctilio  in  revenue  col- 
lections, he  sent  a  warning  to  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur  to  be  up  to  time  in 
the  payment  of  his  tribute. 

Four  days  later  the  receipt  of  another  urgent  letter  from  Sindhia 
was  announced,  which  conveyed  the  information  that  Holkar's  army 
was  only  fifteen  miles  distant,  and  that  many  of  Daulat  Rao's  chiefs 
had  deserted  to  the  enemy,  and  once  more  urged  Perron  to  join  him 
with  all  speed.  On  the  19th  of  August  rumours  reached  Delhi  that 
matters  were  still  more  critical,  "  all  the  Deccan  chiefs  having  joined 
Jeswunt  Rao  Holker,"  but  still  Perron  made  no  sign  of  starting,  for 
negotiations  with  Thomas  were  coming  to  a  head,  and  his  whole 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.  261 

attention  was  monopolised  by  them.  The  next  day  he  moved  out  to 
Sitaram  Ka  Serai,  near  Bahadurgarh,  where  an  interview  took  place 
between  him  and  Jowruj  Jung.  It  appears  to  have  been  hedged 
abont  with  the  ceremonial  and  dilatoriness  of  Oriental  diplomacy,  for 
a  week  later  he  was  still  at  the  same  place. 

The  next  entry  occurs  on  the  5th  of  September.  The  Emperor 
Shah  'Alam  having  constantly  inquired,  "  When  is  General  Perron 
going  to  Oojein  ? "  and  as  constantly  been  informed,  "  In  two  or 
three  days,"  relieved  himself  of  the  sage  opinion  that  "  he  did  not 
think  the  General  showed  any  intention  of  going  at  all !  "  and  almost 
at  the  same  date  Rajah  Partab  Singh,  of  Jaipur,  who  had  evidently 
been  following  Perron's  movements  with  a  profound  interest,  an- 
nounced in  open  court  that  his  agent  at  Delhi  had  written  him  saying 
that  "  Perron  holds  forth  an  intention  of  joining  Scindia,  but  that  in 
reality  he  entertains  no  such  design,  and  has  commenced  a  secret 
correspondence  with  Luckwadada."  Commenting  on  which  the  Rajah 
observed  that  "  the  General  seems  to  have  detached  himself  from 
Scindia,  and  has  not  acted  well  in  so  doing." 

This  side-light  thrown  on  the  negotiations  between  Perron  and 
Thomas  is  interesting,  in  so  far  as  it  suggests  a  reason  why  the  latter 
was  disappointed  later  on  in  receiving  the  assistance  he  expected  from 
Lakwa  Dada,  whose  notoriously  treacherous  character  would  be  quite 
equal  to  encouraging  Thomas  to  resist,  and  coming  to  a  secret  under- 
standing with  Perron  to  stand  neutral. 

On  the  12th  of  September  it  was  reported  that  Perron  was  going  to 
the  camp  of  Ali  Bahadur,  one  of  the  allies  in  the  confederation  against 
Sindhia,  to  settle  certain  affairs,  and  about  the  same  time  the  report 
of  his  negotiations  with  Lakwa  Dada  was  confirmed. 

On  the  IGth  of  September  Perron  returned  to  Delhi,  all  attempts  to 
come  to  an  understanding  with  Thomas  having  proved  futile.  Shortly 
after  his  arrival  he  paid  his  respects  to  the  Emperor,  but  "on  receiving 
an  express  went  off  to  Coel."  A  week  later  it  was  reported  at  the 
capital  that  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  continued  repeatedly  writing  to 
Perron,  urging  him  by  every  means  in  his  power  to  help  him,  and  was 
at  the  same  time  so  sanguine  of  response  that  he  "  only  "  awaited  the 
arrival  of  the  General  to  attack  Holkar.  It  is  instructive  to  read, 
side  by  side  with  this,  that  "  it  is  publicly  reported  in  Hindustan  that 
General  Perron  has  withdrawn  from  the  contest  with  Jeswunt  Rao 
Holker ! " 

On  the  2Gth  of  September  Drugeon,  Commandant  of  the  fort  of 
Delhi  and  custodian  of  the  Emperor's  person,  received  a  letter  from 
Perron,  the  contents  of  which  he  made  known.  They  were  to  the 


262  PERRON. 

effect  that  Perron's  "  wish  had  been  to  remain  at  Delhi,  but  the 
necessity  of  sending  troops  to  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  obliged  him  to 
repair  suddenly  to  Koil,  and  lie  had  sent  a  brigade,  with  military 
stores  and  ammunition,  to  Daulat  Rao." 

Here,  at  last,  he  seems  to  have  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  duty, 
but,  as  will  presently  be  seen,  the  good  intention  withered  in  the 
bud. 

On  the  29th  of  September  came  the  news  of  the  defeat  of  Captain 
Smith's  force  at  Georgegarh  by  Thomas,  followed  two  days  later  by 
alarming  intelligence  of  a  sanguinary  battle,  in  which  Bourguien  and 
his  brigade  had  been  defeated  and  lost  3,000  men,  whilst  the  Irishman 
had  regained  Georgegarh,  and  was  in  possession  of  it.  No  sooner  did 
Perron  hear  of  this  than  he  sent  immediate  orders  to  Drugeon  at 
Delhi  to  entertain  fresh  levies,  despatched  Pedron  to  the  front  with 
reinforcements  of  five  battalions,  and  ordered  George  Hessing,  who 
had  evidently  arrived  at  Agra  from  Ujjain,  to  march  to  Bourguien's 
assistance  with  four  battalions.  At  the  same  time  he  collected  all  the 
available  troops  at  Koil,  and  gave  out  that  he  intended  to  take  the 
command  in  person  against  Thomas. 

The  total  force  at  this  time  under  Perron's  command  in  Hindustan 
consisted  of  three  brigades  of  infantry,  5,000  Hindustani  horse,  and 
the  garrison  troops.  Of  these,  two  brigades — the  third  under  Bourguien 
and  the  fourth  under  Pedron — and  most  of  the  cavalry  were  employed 
against  Thomas  at  Georgegarh.  It  is  probable  that  Pedron's  brigade 
was  the  one  which  Perron  informed  Drugeon  "  had  been  sent "  to 
Ujjain.  But  it  is  possible  that  when  he  so  wrote  he  was  referring  to 
the  second  brigade,  under  Pohlman,  whose  headquarters  were  at  Mattra. 
Whichever  it  was  it  is  very  certain  that  neither  proceeded  very  far 
towards  the  destination  indicated.  Pedron's,  as  has  been  shown,  was 
diverted  to  Georgegarh,  and  for  Pohlman's  there  was  a  more  remarkable 
task  assigned.  It  appears  that  some  time  previous  to  this  Perron,  in 
the  novel  capacity  of  a  pawnbroker,  had  lent  Partab  Singh,  of  Jaipur, 
a  large  sum  of  money,  for  the  security  of  which  the  Rajah  had  pledged 
his  jewels.  Perron  now  wanted  his  money  back.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  conjecture  what  doubts  and  fears  were  passing  through  his  mind 
and  making  him  anxious  to  realise  his  capital.  And  it  is  evident  that 
the  recovery  of  his  cash  was  a  far  more  important  business  in  his  eyes 
than  the  relief  of  Sindhia,  for  Pohlman,  who  might  certainly  have  been 
spared  for  the  Deccan,  was  deputed,  instead,  to  perform  bailiff's  work, 
and  obtain  from  Partab  Singh  an  immediate  settlement  of  his  account, 
under  pain  of  his  territory  being  laid  waste. 

It  is  interesting  to  observe  how  Pohlman  performed  this  honourable 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.  263 

commission.  Having  summoned  Partiib  Singh  to  pay  np,  he  did  not 
wait  for  a  reply,  but  added  a  point  to  his  demand  by  marching  from 
Chaksu  to  Hararu,  where  he  began  plundering  the  country  a  few 
miles  south  of  Jaipur.  The  Rajah  at  once  sent  Pohlnian  the  balance 
of  his  debt,  amoxmting  to  Rs.95,000,  and  asked  for  the  restoration  of 
his  jewels.  But  he  was  met  with  a  counterclaim  from  the  bailiff- 
general  in  possession  of  his  country,  who  presented  a  statement  of 
account  showing  a  balance  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees.  The  debtor  denied 
the  correctness  of  the  figures,  as  debtors  unskilled  in  the  casting  of 
compound  interest  are  apt  to  do  in  India,  and  his  agents  refused  to 
part  with  the  money  they  had  brought,  especially  after  eliciting  from 
Pohlman  the  acknowledgment  that  he  had  not  got  the  jewels  with 
him,  but  had  sent  for  them,  and  expected  them  to  arrive  in  four  or 
five  days.  This  delay  allowed  an  extension  of  time  for  pillaging,  and 
Pohlman  resumed  the  congenial  work  until  the  Rajah  bought  him  off 
with  a  payment  of  Rs.40,000  on  account.  Whereupon  Pohlman  con- 
sented to  hold  his  hand,  and  marched  south  to  Tonk — an  outlying 
district  belonging  to  Holkar — where  he  expelled  the  garrison  from  the 
chief  town  and  took  possession  of  it. 

Returning  now  to  Delhi,  news  was  received  there  on  the  8th  of 
October  of  the  death  of  Emilius  Felix  Smith,  just  as  Drugeon 
was  sending  off  200  newly  raised  cavalry  to  the  front.  On  the 
12th  Perron,  who  was  still  at  Koil,  was  reported  to  have  severely 
censured  Bourguien  for  his  misconduct  of  the  campaign,  and  super- 
seded him  by  Pedron,  "  who  will  now  have  a  chance  of  displaying 
his  valour."  Between  this  and  the  25th  of  October  there  were 
constant  reports  of  Thomas's  brave  defence  (which  have  been 
incorporated  in  the  sketch  of  his  life),  and  on  the  latter  date  Perron, 
never  unmindful  of  the  main  chance,  called  upon  the  Rajah  of  Jaipur 
to  pay  up  his  tribute,  promising,  if  he  did  so  punctually,  that,  as  soon 
as  Thomas  was  reduced,  he  would  march  into  the  Rajah's  territory  and 
put  him  in  possession  of  certain  revolted  districts,  in  fulfilment  of  a 
promise  previously  given.  On  hearing  which  Partab  Singh,  who 
was  a  prince  ever  in  trouble  with  his  own  tributaries,  sadly  observed 
that  "  General  Perron  had  entered  into  many  similar  engagements, 
but  never  performed  any  of  them,  and  that  he  regarded  nothing  but 
his  own  interests."  Which,  on  the  face  of  it,  seemed  a  reasonable 
remark  to  make. 

Such  is  the  tale  of  Perron's  ingratitude,  faithlessness,  and  treachery 
disclosed  by  the  Persian  newspapers  of  the  period.  Nor  are  all  these 
reports  mere  idle  gossip,  emanating  from  irresponsible  sources,  for  in 
the  majority  of  instances  the  authority  quoted  is  that  of  Mohan  Lai 


264  PERRON. 

Perron's  own  vakil,  or  agent,  resident  witb  the  Emperor,  whose  duty 
it  was  to  daily  report  his  master's  actions  to  the  King  of  Kings.  The 
truth  was  that  Perron  not  only  had  no  intention  of  assisting  Sindhia, 
but  even  desired  that  he  should  be  hard  pressed  by  Holkai-.  This  is 
confirmed  by  a  letter  from  Colonel  Collins,  the  Resident  at  Daulat  Rao's 
Court,  to  the  Governor-general,  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs, 
which  bears  upon  the  events  just  recorded  : — 

"  The  Mahratta  Chiefs  and  Sirdars,  envious  of  Perron,  do  not  scruple 
to  affirm  that  he  by  no  means  wishes  the  total  ruin  of  Holker,  since 
in  this  event  Scindia  would  be  unable  to  repair  to  Hindustan  to  take 
upon  himpelf  the  chief  direction  of  affairs  in  that  quarter.  .  .  .  General 
Perron  has  been  given  to  understand  that  he  must  relinquish  the 
collection  of  all  the  districts  which  he  now  possesses  in  Hindostan, 
excepting  those  appertaining  to  his  Jaidad,  the  annual  revenues  of 
which  are  estimated  at  40  lakhs,  while  at  present  the  General 
collects  nearly  80." 

It  must  here  be  observed  that  Colonel  Collins  under-estimated  very 
considerably  the  annual  collections  made  by  Perron,  towards  whom,  it 
may  be  added,  he  entertained  a  very  friendly  feeling.  Moreover,  the 
inference  that  Perron's  reported  desire  for  Holkar's  success  were  to 
be  traced  to  the  envy  and  malice  of  unscrupulous  Marutha  chiefs  seems 
unjust.  Perron's  own  actions  afforded  very  strong  grounds  for  this 
suspicion,  which  is  amply  corroborated  by  the  day-to-day  record  of 
his  doings  between  the  28th  of  June  and  the  15th  of  October  of  the  year 
under  review.  No  one  who  has  followed  his  sinuous  course  during 
these  four  months  can  have  any  doubts  left  as  to  his  real  character. 
He  was  no  longer  "  the  brave  and  faithful  soldier  "  he  once  had  been, 
but  a  traitor,  who  had  thrown  off  all  disguise,  and  was  fighting  for  his 
own  hand  alone.  His  greed  of  power  and  gold  had  overshadowed 
everything  else,  and  he  cared  not  how  desperate  was  the  cause  of  the 
master  who  had  lavished  so  many  favours  on  him  and  raised  him  to 
so  high  an  estate  when  his  own  paltry  lakh  of  rupees  was  at  stake. 
There  was  ample  work  for  the  army  of  Hindustan  in  crushing  that 
defiant  Irishman,  who  could  not  comprehend  the  meaning  of  defeat, 
at  Georgegarh  ;  but  if,  perchance,  a  brigade  could  be  spared,  it 
might,  in  Perron's  opinion,  be  more  profitably  employed  in  doing 
bailiffs  work  in  Rajputana  than  in  propping  up  the  tottering  power 
of  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  in  the  Deccan. 

Sindhia's  position  was  indeed  critical  while  all  this  procrastina- 
tion was  going  on.  The  alliance  against  him  was  overwhelming, 
for  Ragnji  Bhonsla  of  Berar,  a  chief  of  the  first  magnitude  in 
the  Marutha  Confederation,  had  decided  to  join  Holkar,  Lakwa 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.  266 

Dtiila,  Ali  Bahadur,  and  all  the  lesser  chiefs  who  were  leagued 
against  Daulat  Rao.  The  only  person  of  importance  who  remained 
true  to  Simlliia,  was  his  generalissimo,  Ambaji  Inglia,  who  was  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Jararu,  where  his  battalions,  under  James 
Shepherd,  were  successfully  holding  Lakwa  Dada  in  check. 

Simlliia,  in  this  distressful  situation,  was  anxious  to  stay  the  storm 
his  ambition  had  been  mainly  instrumental  in  raising ;  but  the 
Peshwa,  who  had  sided  with  his  enemies,  refused  to  listen  to  any 
overtures  for  reconciliation,  until  Daulat  Rao  had  made  peace  with 
the  Bhais,  who  continued  as  greatly  incensed  as  ever  against  their 
nephew.  Moreover,  Baji  Rao  demanded  a  nazzarnna,  or  peace 
offering,  of  fifteen  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  this  was  highly  inconvenient  to 
Sindhia,  who  was  in  his  chronic  state  of  impecuniosity,  and  engaged 
in  a  costly  campaign.  There  seemed,  indeed,  to  be  more  money  in 
Jaswaut  Rao's  camp  than  in  his  rival's,  for  the  former  was  constantly 
sending  remittances  and  reinforcements  to  Lakwa  Dada,  with  which 
to  oppose  Ambaji's  attack  and  Perron's  anticipated  march  from 
Delhi  to  Ujjain,  it  being  taken  for  granted  that  the  General,  as  he  had 
publicly  announced,  would  at  once  proceed  to  his  master's  assistance. 
At  Agra,  Colonel  John  Hessing  held  the  fort,  but  he  was  so  weakened 
by  the  despatch  of  his  son  and  the  four  battalions  to  Georgegarh,  that 
he  was  utterly  unable  to  help  Sindhia,  and,  on  the  contrary,  was 
continually  urging  Perron  to  send  him  reinforcements  as  Lakwa 
Dada's  intrigues  had  created  great  disturbances  in  his  government. 
In  short,  as  far  as  Hindustan  was  concerned,  there  seemed  to  be  no 
possible  hope  of  help  reaching  Sindhia  so  long  as  Thomas  held  out 
and  monopolised  the  attention  of  16,000  regular  infantry  and  the 
Hindustani  horse. 

But  now,  when  matters  were  at  their  worst  and  nothing  but 
danger,  difficulty,  and  disappointment  seemed  to  surround  Sindhia,  a 
saviour  arose  in  his  own  camp,  in  the  person  of  Robert  Sutherland, 
Colonel-Commandant  of  the  first  brigade.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
after  De  Boigne's  resignation  Sutherland  tried  hard  to  obtain  his  post, 
but  fortune  had  been  against  him  and  Perron  won  the  prize.  The 
competition  left  a  feeling  of  hatred  and  jealousy  in  Perron's  heart, 
which  had  on  more  than  one  occasion  influenced  his  treatment  of  the 
Scotchman.  Anxious  to  expel  him  from  Hindustan,  he  had  manu- 
factured a  charge  against  him  of  entering  into  treasonable  cor- 
respondence with  Sindhia's  enemies,  and  found  in  it  an  excuse  to 
transfer  him  to  the  Deccan,  giving  the  command  of  his  brigade  to 
Pohlman.  Sutherland  had  been  impotent  to  do  anything  but  obey. 
But  the  very  measure  intended  to  punish  and  undo  him,  now  gave 


266  PERRON. 

the  Scotchman  the  opportunity  of  proving  his  merit,  for  he  fonnd 
himself  filling  the  chief  post  of  defence  at  his  master's  side,  which 
Perron  had  basely  declined. 

For  nearly  three  months  after  the  battle  of  Ujjain  Sindhia  did 
little  but  wait  for  Perron  to  arrive,  and  endeavour,  by  every  means  in 
his  power,  to  strengthen  his  forces.  At  last  he  gave  up  all  hope  of 
assistance  from  Hindustan,  and  determined  to  try  and  retrieve  his 
fortunes  with  such  means  as  he  had  at  his  disposal.  On  the  24th  of 
September  he  crossed  the  Narbada,  on  the  south  bank  of  which  he  had 
been  compulsorily  encamped  since  the  rainy  season  commenced,  and 
entered  Malwa  with  eight  battalions  of  Sutherland's  brigade  and  four 
of  Filoze's.  A  week  later  he  formed  a  junction  with  14,000  Marathii 
horse  and  encamped  on  the  banks  of  the  Kotah  Sind  lliver.  Here  he 
remained  with  his  heavy  baggage,  sending  Sutherland  forward  to 
avenge  the  sacking  of  Ujjain  by  retaliating  on  Holkar's  capital  of 
Indore,  an  undertaking  which  the  troops  approached  in  the  highest 
spirits. 

Jaswant  Kao  immediately  advanced  towards  the  defence  of  his 
capital,  and  on  the  13th  of  October  the  two  armies  met  outside  its 
walls.  The  Indore  force  consisted  of  ten  battalions  of  regular  infantry, 
5,000  Eohillas,  12,000  Manitha  cavalry,  and  15,000  Pathan  horse  under 
Amir  Khan.  But  Holkar  was  without  European  officers,  which  was 
a  serious  loss  to  him.  The  reason  of  this  is  not  very  clear :  according 
to  one  authority  he  had  dismissed  all  in  his  employ  on  the  suspicion 
that  they  were  unfaithful  to  him  ;  but  Major  Ambrose,  an  officer  in  his 
service,  states  that  he  was  "  deserted  "  by  his  Europeans  just  before 
this  action,  and  that  this  was  the  cause  of  his  defeat. 

After  sending  off  his  baggage  and  reserves  to  the  further  side  of 
Indore,  Holkar,  during  the  night,  changed  ground,  and  placed  the 
city  between  him  and  the  enemy,  taking  post  behind  a  deep  ravine  to 
the  north  of  it,  and  training  his  guns  so  as  to  sweep  this  defence, 
whilst  Amir  Khan,  with  15,000  horse,  threatened  the  enemy's  rear  from 
a  place  about  five  miles  distant. 

Sutherland  commenced  the  attack  on  Holkar's  position  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  14th,  his  twelve  battalions  moving  briskly  forward, 
animated  by  a  determination  to  avenge  their  officers  and  comrades 
slain  at  Ujjain.  Owing  to  the  change  of  ground  made  by  the  enemy 
daring  the  night,  Sutherland  was  obliged  to  manoeuvre  his  army  to 
the  right,  over  some  difficult  and  broken  country,  before  he  could  form 
it  in  line  of  battle  for  attack,  and  it  was  not  until  three  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  that  the  action  began.  Having  detached  his  Maratha 
cavalry  to  keep  Amir  Khan  in  check,  the  Colonel  advanced  against  the 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.  267 

nullah  which  protected  Holkar,  and  was  met  with  a  tremendous 
fire  from  95  guns.  But  it  could  not  stay  the  steady  and  irre- 
sistible assault  of  the  regular  battalions,  who  forced  the  ravine  and 
captured  the  guns  in  their  position.  At  this  critical  moment 
Amir  Khiin,  having  defeated  the  Marathu  cavalry,  came  charging 
down  to  the  relief  of  Jaswant  Rao.  "Whereupon  Sutherland  boldly 
faced  round  with  a  portion  of  his  force  and  opened  a  heavy  fire  of 
grape  and  round  shot  upon  the  Pathan  as  he  was  struggling  through 
the  ravine  from  which  the  brigade  had  just  emerged,  and  the  Amir's 
horse  being  killed  he  fell  to  the  ground ;  whereupon  his  men, 
supposing  him  dead,  took  flight.  This  was  the  turning-point  of  the 
battle.  Sutherland's  infantry  now  stormed  Holkar's  entrenchments, 
which  they  carried  splendidly,  and  by  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  the 
victory  was  won  and  the  enemy  dispersed  in  full  flight.  Holkar  lost 
all  his  gunp,  ICO  tumbrils,  and  his  baggage,  and,  attended  by  his 
cavalry,  fled  headlong  to  Maheswar  ;  and  the  next  morning  Sindhia's 
standard  floated  over  Indore,  and  Ujjain  was  avenged.  An 
incident  happened  in  this  battle,  mention  of  which  should  not  be 
omitted.  Fidele  Filoze,  who  commanded  four  of  the  battalions 
engaged,  belonging  to  his  brigade,  had  a  short  while  before  entered 
into  a  traitorous  correspondence  with  Holkar,  and  when  the  action 
commenced,  with  a  dastardly  treachery,  fired  into  Sutherland's  troops. 
Happily  this  diabolical  act  failed  in  its  intention,  and  the  perpetrator 
was  apprehended  and  confined  in  prison,  where  he  shortly  after- 
wards committed  suicide.  Sutherland's  loss  at  Indore  was  400  men 
killed  and  wounded.  It  is  needless  to  add  that  Holkar's  capital  was 
thoroughly  pillaged,  and,  indeed,  rased  to  the  ground  by  Sindhia's 
predatory  horse,  who,  however  useless  in  fight,  were  masters  of  the 
art  of  extracting  the  last  grain  of  rice  from  any  city  given  over  to 
them  to  loot. 

The  victory  of  Indore  might  have  been  turned  into  a  decisive  battle 
of  Marathu  history  by  Sindhia  if  he  had  followed  up  his  advantage. 
But  he  over-estimated  his  success,  and  deluded  himself  into  the  idea 
that  Jaswant  Rao's  power  was  crushed  out.  But  this  was  not  the 
case,  and  Daulat  Rao's  imprudent  assumption  led  to  the  gravest 
results.  Holkar  and  kisfidus  acJiatcs,  Amir  Khan,  soon  resumed  their 
former  course  of  aggression  and  plunder,  attracting  to  their  camp  all 
the  discontented  soldiery  in  Central  India,  so  that  it  quickly  became 
filled  with  rude  and  reckless  freebooters,  who  came  to  be  known  by  the 
generic  term  of  Pindaris,  and  whose  deeds  and  misdeeds  during  the 
next  eighteen  years  laid  desolate  many  of  the  fairest  provinces  of  the 
peninsula,  and  constituted  a  period  to  which  the  natives  gave  the 


268  PERRON. 

expressive  appellation  of  the  Gardi-ka-Wakht,  or,  "Time  of  Trouble." 
No  longer  able  to  pay  his  troops,  Holkar  gave  them  free  license  to 
support  themselves  by  plunder,  though  he  continued  to  keep  up  his 
regular  infantry,  who,  after  Dudrenec's  desertion  to  Pen-on,  which 
shortly  took  place,  found  a  gallant  leader  in  the  person  of  a  young 
English  officer  named  Vickers. 

Sindhia's  unexpected  success  in  the  Deccan  gave  Perron  breathing 
space ;  but  the  relief  was  only  temporary,  and  the  effects  that  followed 
very  serious.  In  a  short  time  his  personal  fortunes  were  as  seriously 
threatened  as  Daulat  Rao's  had  been  before  Sutherland's  victory. 
Thomas  still  continued  to  hold  out  at  Georgegarh,  with  that  un- 
conquerable spirit  of  his  that  upset  all  calculations.  And  now 
Colonel  Sutherland's  star  was  in  the  ascendant,  and  the  distrust  and 
jealousy  with  which  Perron  regarded  this  officer  were  intensified  to 
an  enormous  degree,  and  he  even  began  to  be  fearful  of  being 
supplanted  by  the  Scotchman,  who  had  been  his  rival  in  the  past. 
As  yet  he  could  do  nothing  to  avert  the  threatened  danger,  for  he 
dared  not  leave  Hindustan  while  Thomas  was  undefeated.  And  so 
he  vacillated  in  an  agony  of  indecision,  uncertain  whether  to  proceed 
to  the  west  and  put  his  fortunes  to  the  test  of  au  assault  on  the 
fortified  camp  that  was  resisting  all  Pedron's  endeavours,  or  to  hurry 
to  the  south  and  re-establish  his  influence  at  Sindhia's  Court. 

On  the  10th  of  November  Georgegarh  fell,  but  even  as  Perron  was 
congratulating  himself  on  his  long-deferred  success,  he  heard  of 
Thomas's  escape  to  Hansi.  The  capture  of  the  man  was  far  more 
important  than  the  capture  of  his  outlying  camp,  and  the  victory  was 
robbed  of  its  chief  importance  by  the  failure  to  obtain  possession  of 
Thomas's  person.  Then  came  tidings  of  the  fresh  resistance  at 
Hansi,  and  the  knowledge  that  the  task  of  seizing  Thomas  had  been 
confided  to  Bourguien.  The  incapacity  of  this  officer  was  known  to 
Perron,  and  he  sickened  at  heart  as  he  reflected  how  his  interests 
were  in  the  keeping  of  a  man  who  had  always  failed  in  every  task 
allotted  to  him.  Week  after  week  Perron  waited,  in  feverish  anxiety, 
at  Koil,  eagerly  drinking  in  the  daily  news  from  the  seat  of  war, 
elevated  for  a  moment  when  he  heard  of  some  temporary  success, 
depressed  again  when  reverses  were  reported  :  hugging  himself  with 
joy  when  he  learnt  that  Jowruj  Jung  had  been  beaten  back  into  his 
citadel,  downcast  when  it  was  made  evident  that  there  was  still  fight 
left  in  the  terrible  Irishman. 

To  add  to  his  troubles  the  constant  messages  that  continued  to 
arrive  from  Daulat  Rao  were  now  couched  in  very  different  language 
to  that  affected  before  the  battle  of  Indore.  In  their  growing 


THE  WAR  WITH  GEORGE  THOMAS.  269 

insistence  there  were  ominous  expressions  of  auger;  they  were  no 
longer  appeals,  but  sharp  commands,  with  a  warning  ring  in  them 
that  indicated  danger  and  menace. 

The  tension  was  terrible,  but  at  lust  the  reprieve  came.  Bourguien 
the  incompetent,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  was  guilty  of  achieve- 
ment. Thomas  surrendered.  The  news  reached  Koil  early  in 
January,  1802,  and  with  a  great  gasp  of  relief  Perron  heard  that  his 
ene  had  been  delivered  into  his  hands. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

PERRON   VISITS   UJJAIN.      THE   BATTLE   OF   POONAH. 
1802. 

THE  defeat  of  Thomas  and  destruction  of  his  power  cleared  a  very 
serious  danger  from  Perron's  path  and  left  him  free  to  concen- 
trate his  endeavours  on  re-establishing  his  interest  at  Sindhia's  Court. 
Whilst  the  Irishman  was  undefeated  it  was  Perron's  policy  to  belittle 
his  importance,  but  after  the  fall  of  Hansi  the  vanquished  adventurer 
became  a  national  enemy,  who  had  threatened  the  disintegration  of 
the  Manitha  Empire,  and  in  his  letters  to  Sindhia  Perron  made  as 
much  of  his  victory  over  Thomas  as  if  he  had  defeated  a  Caesar  or  an 
Alexander. 

The  reason  of  this  change  cf  opinion  was  not  far  to  seek.  Perron 
wanted  an  excuse  to  explain  his  long  and  systematic  disobedience  of 
Sindhia's  orders  to  march  to  the  Deccan.  The  campaign  against 
Thomas  offered  a  plausible  exculpation,  and  the  more  he  extolled  its 
importance  the  greater  credit  would  be  reflected  on  himself  for 
destroying  such  a  formidable  public  enemy.  Moreover,  Perron  was 
now  as  anxious  to  proceed  to  Ujjain  as  he  had  before  been  unwilling. 
Colonel  Collins,  the  English  resident,  had  recently  joined  Daulat 
Rao's  camp,  and  Perron  distrusted  him,  fearing  he  might  have  come  to 
initiate  a  policy  hostile  to  the  brigades,  similar  to  that  under  which, 
four  years  previously,  the  British  Government  had  broken  up  and  dis- 
banded Raymond's  corps  at  Haidarabad.  This  was  one  of  the 
reasons  that  made  a  visit  to  Ujjain  necessary,  whilst  another  was 
Perron's  jealousy  of  Sutherland,_who,  since  the  battle  of  Indore,  had 
risen  high  in  Sindhia's  favour — a  state  of  affairs  highly  detrimental  to 
the  General,  since  the  Scotchman  was  next  to  him  in  seniority.  In 
fact  Perron  felt  it  was  imperative  to  counteract  the  growing  influence 
of  this  successful  subordinate,  who  already  held  their  master's  ear, 
and  at  the  same  time  learn  the  real  tenor  of  Colonel  Collins's  instruc- 
tion?, and  so  he  determined  to  proceed  to  the  south. 

270 


THE    EMPEROR   SHAH    'ALAM. 
[From  a  plate  in  Frattckliris  "History  of  the  Reign  o/Skah-Aulitm."] 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  271 

Matters  in  Hindustan  were  now  in  a  fairly  settled  state.  Bourguieu's 
brigade  bad  overawed  the  Sikh  country,  and  tbat  bold  brigadier  was 
engaged  in  levying  tribute  from  his  recent  allies,  under  guise  of 
collecting  a  contribution  towards  the  expenses  of  the  war,  so  that  the 
cost  of  expelling  Thomas  was  defrayed  by  the  chiefs  of  Patiala,  Jind, 
and  Kaithul.  At  Delhi  Drugeon  kept  watch  and  ward  over  the  blind 
Emperor — a  close  one,  too,  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  for  in  January 
of  this  year  Shah  'Alaui  wrote  to  Sindhia  in  terms  of  mild 
remonstrance,  saying  that  "  Although  General  Perron  certainly  made 
a  monthly  remittance  of  the  royal  stipend,  it  would  still  be  more 
agreeable  if  Dowlut  Rao  would  do  so  himself,  under  his  own 
immediate  supervision."  Pedron  had  returned  to  Koil  with  the 
fourth  brigade  (for  the  command  of  which  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec 
had  lately  been  engaged),  and  George  Hessing  to  Agra,  with  his  four 
battalions,  to  reinforce  his  father  in  command  there.  All  things 
were  in  order,  and  Perron  could  safely  be  spared.  His  departure 
was  accelerated  by  a  report  which  found  publicity  in  the  Persian 
akbars  at  Delhi  in  February  to  the  effect  that  "  Dowlat  Rao  Sciudia 
had  several  times  written  to  General  Perron  requiring  his  personal 
attendance,  but  without  effect ;  and  that  His  Highness  was  accord- 
ingly so  much  exasperated  at  the  General's  neglect  of  orders,  that  he 
instantly  broke  and  disbanded  the  regiments  under  his  command." 

This  was  the  climax,  and  at  the  end  of  the  month  Perron  left  Koil, 
and,  escorted  by  his  bodyguard  of  500  horse,  started  for  Ujjain.  A 
letter  written  by  him  at  this  period  is  given  in  the  appendix  of 
M.  St.  Genis'  "  Life  of  De  Boigne,"  and  the  following  translation  of 
it  may  conveniently  be  inserted  here  : — 

11  CAMP  BANDARES, 
"  February  28,  1802. 

"  MY  DEAE  GENERAL, — Since  your  departure  from  this  country 
there  have  been  nothing  but  troubles.  Four  years  ago  the  widows  of 
the  old  Prince  fled  from  thtir  nephew,  the  reigning  Prince,  and 
collected  a  considerable  force  in  opposition  to  him. 

"Three  years  ago  Luckwadiida,  who  also  turned  traitor  to  the 
Prince,  took  the  part  of  the  widows.  I  was  obliged  to  march  against 
these  two  factions  who  opposed  us.  Having  brought  them  to  action  I 
was  fortunate  enough  to  defeat  them.  Luckwadada  was  wounded 
in  the  battle,  and  since  his  defeat  the  widows  have  petitioned  the 
Prince  to  grant  them  terms. 

"  He  has  just  pardoned  them,  and  they  have  returned  to  their 
allegiance.  Luckwadada  died  of  his  wounds  ;  had  he  got  the  better 
of  me  he  would  never  have  spared  me. 


272  PERRON. 

"Jeswunt  Rao,  of  the  house  of  Holker,  has  also  been  at  war  with 
the  Prince  for  the  last  two  years.  He  is  plundering  and  desolating 
the  country  everywhere,  and  I  am  on  the  march  against  him  with  my 
cavalry. 

"  A  man  named  George  Thomas,  who  took  advantage  of  my  stay  in 
the  Deccan  to  raise  a  party  of  12,000  men  with  CO  guns,  seized  a 
considerable  tract  of  territory  on  the  Sikh  frontier,  where  he  built  a 
strong  fort  and  devastated  all  the  countryside  even  up  to  the  walls 
of  Delhi.  I  was  obliged  to  destroy  his  force  with  my  third  brigade, 
and  I  have  allowed  the  scoundrel  to  go,  but  prohibited  him  from 
again  entering  the  Prince's  territory. 

"You  are  a  soldier,  my  dear  General,  and  you  know  that  we 
always  lose  brave  soldiers  in  the  time  of  war.  M.  Rostock,  whom  you 
recommended  to  me,  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Indore.  M.  Bernier, 
one  of  the  best  and  bravest  officers  in  the  brigades,  met  the  same 
fate ;  also  the  younger  Smith,  Donelly,  your  protege,  and  several 
others  whom  you  do  not  know. 

"At  the  present  moment  the  Prince  has  only  Jeswunt  Rao  to 
subdue  to  assure  complete  peace  in  his  immense  possessions.  The 
brigades,  of  which  you  yourself,  my  dear  General,  were  the 
creator,  and  in  which  your  name  is  daily  invoked,  are  as  efficient  as 
ever.  It  is  in  reality  you  who  have  conquered  this  immense  territory. 

"  Following  your  example  in  the  discipline  which  I  insist  on,  and 
which  is  not  only  most  necessary  for  an  army,  but  the  basis  of  its 
success,  I  have  been  everywhere  victorious  with  the  brigades.  My 
command  is  made  happy  by  the  attachment  and  confidence  which  the 
troops  express  for  me,  and  I  have  always  won,  remaining  master  of 
the  situation  even  under  the  most  critical  circumstances. 

"  You  recommended  M.  Drugeon  to  me.  A  year  ago  I  reinstated 
him  in  the  brigades,  but  in  consideration  of  the  ability  which  you 
know  he  possesses,  I  appointed  him  to  an  even  more  honourable 
situation  than  any  I  could  have  given  him  in  the  army  itself.  I  have 
made  him  Governor  of  the  fort  of  Delhi  and  guardian  of  the 
Emperor's  person.  In  giving  him  this  post  I  have  overlooked  his 
former  shortcomings,  and  I  feel  perfectly  compensated  by  the  interest 
you  take  in  his  welfare. 

"Yes;  I  will  receive  with  pleasure  any  one  whom  you  may 
recommend  for  an  appointment  in  the  brigades.  My  friendship  for 
you  demands  this,  and  it  is  also  due  to  you  as  the  creator  of  the  brave 
soldiers  who  compose  this  force.  It  is  the  least  I  can  do  for  you,  and 
both  my  duty  and  gratitude  require  that  I  should  not  fail  in  fulfilling 
your  wishes.  "  CUILLIBR  PERRON." 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  273 

After  forming  a  junction  with  Pohlman's  brigade  on  the  road, 
Perron  marched  to  Ujjain,  which  he  reached  on  the  20th  of 
March,  1802.  Colonel  Sutherland's  brigade  arrived  at  the  same 
time  from  an  expedition  to  the  Barinda  Kiver,  where  it  had  been 
employed. 

The  story  of  Perron's  reception  at  Sindhia's  Court  is  so  graphically 
related  in  Colonel  Skinner's  memoirs  that  the  account  must  be 
borrowed  in  extenso.  This  is  how  it  runs  : — 

"  His  reception  was  not  of  a  nature  to  gratify  an  officer  like  Perron. 
It  was  not  until  the  25th  that  he  was  invited  to  call  upon  the 
Maharajah,  and  then,  having  proceeded  to  durbar  with  200  horsemen, 
he  was  kept  waiting  at  the  gates  for  two  hours  while  Scindia  was 
amusing  himself  by  flying  kites.  Not  a  chief  came  out  to  meet  him, 
while  he  sat  in  company  with  certain  discontented  chiefs  of  note,  among 
whom  was  old  Gopal  Rao  Bhow,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  army. 
This  officer,  addressing  Perron,  said,  '  Observe  to  what  the  old 
Pateil's  reign  has  come  !  Good  soldiers  are  all  forgotten :  none  but 
dirty  time-servers  and  flatterers  can  get  on.  But  mark  my  words,  he 
will  soon  find  out  his  error,  but  not  until  too  late  to  mend  it.'  To 
this  Perron  replied  that  he  was  but  a  servant,  and  all  he  knew  was  to 
obey.  This  sort  of  conversation  went  on  until  the  choleedars  announced 
the  approach  of  Scindia,  when  we  all  rose,  and  Perron  went  up  and 
presented  his  nuzzur.  Scindia  just  touched  it,  and  asked  him  if  he 
was  well ;  to  which  Perron  made  the  usual  reply,  '  By  your  favour,' 
and  then  we  all  in  turn  presented  our  nuzzurs,  and  were  desired  to 
sit  down. 

"  In  half  an  hour  Scindia  dismissed  the  durbar,  and  desired 
Perron  to  return  to  camp,  which  he  did,  completely  disgusted  with  the 
cold  and  slighting  reception  he  had  received  from  his  master.  Eight 
days  now  passed  without  the  slightest  notice  or  message  from  Scindia 
to  Perron,  and  Gopal  Rao  Bhow,  a  great  friend  of  the  latter,  signified 
to  him  he  had  best  be  on  his  guard,  as  the  Maharajah  had  resolved 
to  lay  hold  of  him.  Several  secret  visits  passed  at  this  tune  between 
Perron  and  Gopal  Rao  Bhow,  whilst  Colonel  Sutherland  and  Major 
Brownrigg  were  intriguing  against  the  former. 

"  Perron,  aware  of  the  intrigues  of  his  enemies,  became  depressed 
and  perturbed,  when  at  length  matters  seemed  likely  to  be  brought  to 
a  crisis.  A  day  was  appointed  for  holding  a  durbar,  to  which  Perron 
and  all  his  European  officers  were  invited.  At  the  durbar  Scindia, 
together  with  his  father-in-law,  Shirzee  Rao  Ghatkay,  had  formed  a 
plot  to  lay  hold  of  him,  and  had  employed  500  Pathans,  belonging  to 
Bahadhur  Khan,  a  chief  then  at  Malaghur,  and  several  others  of  his 

18 


274  PERRON. 

own  favourites  and  companions  in  vice  and  debauchery  to  carry  the 
purpose  into  effect. 

"  Perron,  however,  was  made  aware  of  this  plot,  and  ordered  all  the 
native  officers  of  both  brigades,  as  low  as  the  rank  of  jemadar,  as 
well  as  all  the  European  officers,  to  come  fully  armed  to  attend  his 
visit  to  Scindia.  Our  full  uniform  included  a  brace  of  pistols 
attached  to  our  sword-belts ;  and  these  he  directed  us  to  bring  loaded. 
We  amounted  in  all  to  300  native  and  30  European  officers,  and 
in  this  state  of  preparation  marched  to  the  durbar,  which  was  held 
in  a  large  tent  pitched  for  the  occasion. 

"  At  the  hour  of  nine  in  the  morning,  headed  by  Perron,  we 
reached  the  tent.  Scindia  rose  to  receive  us,  and  we  all  presented 
our  nuzzars.  We  were  then  directed  to  sit  down  on  the  left  side  of 
the  presence,  the  right  being  occupied  by  the  Pathans,  who  regarded 
us  very  fiercely.  When  we  were  seated,  Scindia,  turning  to  Perron, 
observed  that  the  invitation  had  been  extended  to  himself  and  his 
European  officers  only,  to  which  Perron  replied  that  in  arranging  his 
suite  he  had  only  followed  the  old  rule  laid  down  by  himself  and  his 
uncle ;  and  this  answer  silenced  him.  All  this  time  we  sat  quiet, 
eyeing  each  other,  whilst  much  whispering  went  on  between  Scindia, 
Gopal  Rao,  and  Shirzee  Rao.  I  believe  it  was  Gopal  Rao  who 
persuaded  him  not  to  attempt  any  violence,  for  that  not  only  himself, 
but  the  whole  party  would  be  cut  to  pieces  by  the  fine  body  of  men 
whom  Perron  had  brought  in. 

"  Scindia  then  ordered  the  Pathans  to  retire,  and  they  all  got  up, 
looking  as  if  they  would  eat  us,  while  our  men  sat  laughing  at  them 
with  the  most  perfect  unconcern. 

"  When  they  were  gone  Scindia  and  Shirzee  Rao  began  to  flatter  and 
endeavoured  to  throw  Perron  off  his  guard.  But  he,  assisted  as  he 
was  by  his  old  friend  Gopal  Rao,  was  too  old  a  soldier  to  be  so 
cajoled ;  and  so  Tthiluts  were  ordered  for  us  all,  and  after  receiving 
them  we  presented  our  nuzzurs,  which  Scindia  graciously  accepted. 
Beetul  was  then  handed  round,  and  we  received  leave  to  retire. 

"  Perron  then  got  up,  and  taking  off  his  sword,  laid  it  down  at 
Scindia's  feet,  saying  that  he  had  grown  old  in  the  service,  and  that 
it  did  not  become  him  to  be  disgraced  by  dissolute  knaves  and  bullies  ; 
that  all  he  wanted  was  his  discharge.  Then,  addressing  us,  he  said 
that  henceforth  we  must  look  to  Scindia,  for  that  he,  for  his  part, 
was  too  old  now  to  brook  affronts  and  must  retire.  Scindia  on  this  rose 
and  embraced  Perron,  telling  him  that  he  regarded  him  as  his  uncle, 
and  that  he  had  no  idea  what  offended  him.  Compliments  without 
measure  passed  between  both  parties,  but  on  taking  leave  Perron 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  275 

cautioned  Scindia  to  beware  of  Shirzee  Eao  Ghatkay,  for  be  would  be 
his  ruin — a  caution  in  which  all  the  old  Mahratta  chiefs  joined  cordially 
and  applauded  the  part  which  Perron  had  taken. 

"  At  length  we  reached  camp,  where  several  days  were  occupied  in 
the  transmission  of  messages  to  and  from  the  Court,  and  in  visits 
from  chieftains  who  were  sent  to  make  matters  up.  But  Perron  was 
too  indignant  to  be  pacified.  Colonel  Sutherland  in  the  meantime 
was  sent  to  the  second  brigade  and  Colonel  Pohlman  to  the  first, 
while  Major  Brownrigg  was  put  in  arrest  under  fixed  bayonets.  On 
the  15th  of  April  Perron  marched  with  the  second  brigade  for 
Hindostan." 

The  light  in  which  Perron's  conduct  is  here  depicted  is  a  very 
favourable  one,  but  Skinner  was  somewhat  of  a  partisan  officer,  and 
allowance  must  be  made  for  his  sympathies,  and  also  for  a  certain 
faultiness  of  memory.  The  account  of  Perron's  visit  that  comes  to 
us  from  other  sources  somewhat  modifies  the  impression  that 
Skinner's  version  leaves.  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  states  that  "  a 
storm  was  brewing  at  Oojein,  and  Perron  was  obliged  to  risk  his 
authority,  and  even  his  personal  safety,  by  proceeding  there.  But 
he  had  motives  for  this  dangerous  step,  wishing  to  find  out  by  closer 
inspection  what  were  the  views  of  Colonel  Collins,  the  British 
Resident,  Perron  being  jealous  of  the  Company.  Moreover,  he  began 
to  dread  Colonel  Sutherland,  who  commanded  the  first  brigade." 
There  was  good  cause  for  this,  if  any  trust  may  be  placed  in  a  report 
which  appeared  in  the  Persian  akbars  about  this  time,  and  which 
stated  that  Sindhia  had  actually  transferred  the  command  of  the 
brigades  to  Sutherland.  But  Perron,  although  "  determined  to  quit 
his  station  and  resign  his  authority  if  he  could  not  quell  the  storm 
that  was  rising  against  him,  succeeded  in  doing  so.  Perhaps  his 
apprehensions  were  greater  than  the  real  danger.  Perhaps  the  five 
lakhs  he  gave  Scindia  dissipated  the  dangers  he  feared,  and  which 
threatened  his  ambition."  Herein  we  have  a  much  more  likely 
explanation  of  his  success  than  that  which  Skinner  puts  forward.  It 
was  not  Perron's  injured  dignity  that  influenced  Sindhia,  but  his  hard 
cash.  Daulat  Eao  was  a  dissolute,  vicious  prince,  who  cared  nothing 
for  character :  a  good  man  in  distress  awakened  no  compassion  in  his 
heart.  But  a  wicked  man — and  assuredly  Perron  had  been  wickedly 
treacherous  during  the  past  year — with  five  lakhs  of  rupees  was 
worthy  to  be  taken  to  his  bosom  I 

"While  it  lasted  the  contest  between  Perron  and  Sutherland  must 
have  been  a  sharp  one,  but  the  former  triumphed,  and  secured  the 
Scotchman's  transfer  to  the  second  brigade,  which  was  to  return  to 


276  PERRON. 

Hindustan  with  the  General,  where  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the 
treatment  that  would  have  been  meted  out  to  the  vanquished  sub- 
ordinate. Sutherland,  however,  had  no  intention  of  subjecting  him- 
self to  such  a  risk,  for  "  he  took  some  offence  at  an  expression  of 
Perron's  and  his  extraordinary  behaviour  and  left  Oojein  for  Agra  with 
a  hundred  horsemen."  Whereupon  the  General  "  composed  the  minds 
of  the  troops  when  Sutherland  left  them  without  permission,  and 
promised  them  another  officer  of  equal  rank  to  command  their 
brigade." 

Early  in  May  Perron  commenced  his  return  march  to  Hindustan, 
and  on  the  14th  reached  Jaipur,  where  doubtless  there  was  a  little 
account  to  be  squeezed  out  of  Partab  Singh.  But  although  the 
General  returned  to  Koil  with  his  former  power  and  in  perfect  safety, 
still  it  was  clear  to  every  discerning  eye  that  his  influence  with 
Daulat  Rao  was  diminished.  This  is  confirmed  by  letters  written 
by  Colonel  Collins  to  the  Governor-general  soon  after  Perron's 
departure,  in  which  the  following  passages  occur  : — 

"  I  hear  on  very  good  authority  that  it  is  Scindia's  intention  as 
soon  as  he  can  get  to  Agra  to  deprive  Perron  of  the  command  of  the 
fortresses  he  possesses  in  Hindostan " ;  and  two  months  later, 
"  General  Perron  has  been  peremptorily  directed  by  Scindia  to  give 
up  all  the  mehals  in  his  possession  not  appertaining  to  his  Jaidad. 
I  understand  that  Perron  is  highly  displeased  with  the  conduct  of 
Scindia's  ministers,  and  that  he  entertains  serious  intentions  of 
relinquishing  his  present  command." 

The  Asiatic  Register,  in  a  communication  dated  June  2,  1802,  very 
clearly  summarises  what  Perron  actually  accomplished  by  his  visit 
to  Siudhia's  Court : — 

"  We  learn  by  a  letter  from  Oojein  that  Scindia  has  dismissed  the 
whole  of  the  British  officers  in  his  service.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
this  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  General  Perron j  who  has 
long  been  jealous  of  the  introduction  of  English  officers  into  Scindia's 
army,  and  has  occasionally  exerted  every  artifice  of  intrigue  to 
frustrate  their  views  and  to  impress  the  Prince  with  a  notion  that 
though  these  men  came  into  his  dominions  in  the  character  of 
independent  adventurers,  they  are  generally  emissaries  of  the  British 
Government,  in  whom  it  was  impossible  and  highly  unsafe  to  confide  ; 
and  Scindia  listened  to  these  untruths  and  acted  on  them." 

Perron  made  the  best  use  of  his  renewed  opportunities,  and  in  the 
shuffling  of  commands  that  resulted  Major  Brownrigg  was  the  only 
Englishman  who  kept  his  post.  He  was  last  heard  of,  upon  Skinner's 
authority,  under  fixed  bayonets,  but  he  appears  to  have  been  restored 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  277 

to  favour,  for  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  fifth  brigade, 
which  was  raised  shortly  after  this.  The  rest  of  Sindhia's  army 
passed  entirely  under  the  hands  of  foreigners.  Pohlman,  a  German, 
commanded  the  first  brigade  ;  George  Hessing,  a  Dutchman,  and 
nephew  to  Perron,  the  second ;  Louis  Bourguien,  also  a  relative  of 
Perron,  the  third ;  Dudrenec,  a  Frenchman,  the  fourth.  This 
officer  was  also  promoted  to  second  in  command,  and  destined  to 
succeed  the  general  when  he  retired.  The  independent  corps,  affiliated 
to  Perron's  command,  were  those  of  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze,  an  Italian, 
and  also  a  relative  of  the  general,  and  the  Begum  Somru's  under 
Colonel  Saleur,  a  Frenchman.  John  Hessing,  a  Dutchman,  com- 
manded the  fort  of  Agra,  Drugeon,  a  Savoyard,  that  of  Delhi,  and 
Pedron,  a  Frenchman,  had  charge  of  Aligarh.  Deridon,  Perron's 
brother-in-law,  also  filled  a  high  post.  Thus  every  Englishman  in 
the  force,  with  the  exception  of  Brownrigg,  was  debarred  from 
superior  employment,  although  the  British  subjects  in  the  brigades 
numbered  not  less  than  forty.  Country-borns — a  very  large  factor  in 
the  force — who  could  boast  a  British  origin  fared  no  better ;  and  so 
gross  was  the  favouritism  and  injustice  Perron  displayed,  that  even 
the  natives  could  not  conceal  their  contempt  for  it. 

These  intrigues  and  jealousies  which  contaminated  Sindhia's  court  and 
brigades  had  a  lamentable  effect  upon  his  interests.  His  own  country- 
men were  estranged,  and  their  complete  supersession  by  the  regular 
troops  shut  them  out  from  every  opportunity  of  following  a  soldier's 
career,  and  they  ceased  to  be  a  martial  people.  Daulat  Rao  himself 
plunged  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  mire  of  vice  and  degradation, 
neglecting  state  affairs  and  ignoring  the  duties  of  government,  and 
Perron,  on  his  return  to  Hindustan,  soon  became  as  independent  as  he 
had  been  before  his  visit  to  Ujjain.  Little  of  importance  occurred 
during  the  rest  of  the  year  1802,  the  only  matters  recorded  being 
some  desultory  fighting  against  Holkar's  Pindaris  in  the  Deccan,  and 
a  visit  paid  by  Perron  to  the  Sutlej,  where  Bourguien  with  the  third 
brigade  was  trying  to  reduce  the  Sikhs  to  the  same  state  of  subjection 
as  the  Eajputs,  and  was,  as  usual,  "  waiting  for  reinforcements." 

All  the  time  these  matters  had  been  taking  place  in  Sindhia's 
possessions  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar  had  not  been  idle.  He  and  Amir 
Khan  engaged  in  an  extensive  and  lawless  campaign,  during  which 
Rajputana  was  plundered  and  Khandesh  devastated.  Holkar's 
Pindari  army  might  appropriately  be  likened  to  the  mountain 
torrent,  which  gathers  volume  in  its  course.  In  a  predatory 
expedition  there  is  nothing  which  succeeds  like  success.  Malwa  was 
full  of  disbanded  soldiery,  to  whom  Jaswant  Rao's  remunerative 


278  PERfiON. 

rapine  constituted  a  call  to  arms.  From  all  quarters  he  was  joined 
by  wild  Deccan  horsemen  thirsting  to  share  the  pillage  of  his  route. 
Before  a  year  had  passed  he  completely  recovered  from  the  t-hock  of 
Indore,  and  was  at  the  head  of  a  mighty  host,  full  of  the  dash  and 
daring  acquired  by  a  long  course  of  successful  foray,  and  made  the 
more  formidable  by  two  complete  brigades  of  regular  infantry  in- 
cluded in  its  numbers. 

Holkar  now  began  to  turn  his  steps  towards  the  Deccan,  intent  on 
once  more  regaining  his  influence  in  the  councils  of  the  Peshwa.  As 
soon  as  his  intention  became  apparent,  the  Court  at  Poonah  took 
alarm,  and  endeavoured  by  every  means  to  stay  his  advance.  He 
was  even  desired  to  formulate  his  demands,  and  immediate  attention 
was  promised  to  them,  provided  he  would  only  remain  north  of  the 
Godavari.  But  this  Holkar  declined  to  do.  Personal  as  well  as 
political  motives  guided  his  course.  He  had  a  brother's  murder  to 
revenge,  for  Baji  Rao,  the  Peshwa,  had  in  the  previous  year  not  only 
ordered  the  death  of  Ithal  Rao,  Jaswant  Rao's  younger  brother,  but 
gazed  on  the  execution  as  it  was  being  carried  out  with  all  the 
shocking  barbarity  of  Oriental  pavagery. 

On  the  7th  of  October  HoLkar's  infantry  brigades,  under  the 
command  of  a  trusted  chief  named  Fateh  Singh,  came  upon  the 
Peshwa's  army,  and  after  a  short,  but  decisive,  action  completely 
defeated  it,  and  captured  all  its  cannon.  Two  days  later  Jaswant 
Rao,  who  had  been  elsewhere  engaged  with  his  cavalry,  effected  a 
junction  with  Fateh  Singh's  force,  and  at  once  marched  towards 
Poonah. 

The  Deccan  capital  was  now  at  Holkar's  mercy,  and  with  it  the 
Peshwa,  who  was  the  key  of  the  power  which  controlled  the  Haratha 
Confederacy.  On  Jaswant  Rao's  approach  overtures  for  peace  were 
opened  by  Baji  Rao,  but  they  led  to  nothing.  Holkar's  real  object 
was  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Peshwa's  person,  but  the  latter  would 
not  consent  to  a  meeting;  for,  in  the  language  of  a  native  historian,  "  the 
word  treachery  was  in  the  page  of  his  dealings  with  the  Holkar  family, 
and  his  eye  fell  on  it,  and  he  feared  to  trust  himself  in  the  power  of 
Jeswant  Rao."  But  nothing  short  of  this  would  satisfy  Holkar,  who 
was  determined  to  establish  himself  in  a  position  where  he  could 
enforce  his  ascendancy  to  the  exclusion  of  Sindhia's  influence 

Daulat  Rao  had  been  roused  to  action  by  Jaswant  Rao's  rapid 
advance,  and  directly  he  realised  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  latter 
to  attack  Poonah,  he  sent  an  army  from  Ujjain  to  assist  the  Peshwa. 
This  force  successfully  made  its  way  to  the  capital,  but  it  was 
utterly  inadequate  for  the  performance  of  the  work  assigned  to  it. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  279 

Holkar,  however,  before  proceeding  to  war,  determined  to  make  an 
attempt  to  divide  his  enemies,  hoping  to  overawe  the  Peshwa  into 
neutrality,  whilst  he  himself  first  settled  matters  with  Sindhia.  So 
he  wrote  a  diplomatic  letter  to  Baji  Rao,  saying  "  that  the  Holker 
and  Scindia  factions  were  the  same  in  the  balance  to  His  Highness  ; 
for  him  therefore  to  show  partiality  to  the  one  and  estrangement  to 
the  other,  much  less  to  side  absolutely  with  either,  was  not  the  part  of 
the  High  Lord  of  both.  That  it  would  be  more  becoming  to  his 
dignity  to  keep  up  a  friendly  understanding  with  the  two  parties,  and 
bring  about  a  friendly  reconciliation,  or  if  precluded  from  adopting 
this  course,  that  at  any  rate  he  should  give  protection  and  counten- 
ance to  neither,  but  stand  aloof  from  the  contest,  and  leave  them  to 
settle  matters  as  they  might." 

In  explanation  of  this  it  may  be  observed  that  Sindhia  still  held 
possession  of  the  person  of  Jaswant  Rao's  nephew,  Khandi  Rao,  the 
infant  son  of  Malhar  Rao,  and  the  rightful  heir  of  the  house  of 
Holkar.  For  political  reasons  Jaswant  Rao  had  constituted  himself  the 
champion  of  the  child  chief,  claiming  to  be  his  proper  guardian.  It 
was  therefore  a  matter  of  great  importance  to  procure  the  release  of 
this  youth,  and  Holkar  informed  the  Peshwa  that  his  present  action 
was  due  to  this  necessity. 

Of  course  Baji  Rao  would  not  consent  to  disconnect  himself  from 
Sindhia,  whom  he  had  taken  into  favour  again  after  his  victory  over 
Holkar  at  Indore.  The  Peshwa  had  no  choice  in  the  management  of 
his  political  machine,  except  to  use  one  chief  against  another,  and  so 
preserve  a  balance  between  them,  which  left  him  with  the  nominal 
control.  When  Sindhia  grew  too  powerful  the  Peshwa  sided  with 
Holkar,  Lakwa  Dada  and  the  Bhais,  and  now  that  Jaswant  Rao's 
star  was  dominant  Baji  Rao,  as  a  matter  of  course,  threw  himself  into 
Sindhia's  arms.  It  is  impossible  in  the  limits  of  a  short  sketch  to 
follow  the  shifting  currents  of  Maratha  intrigue  and  diplomacy,  but 
the  explanation  afforded  will  make  the  present  situation  intelligible. 

Negotiations  being  unsuccessful,  both  armies  prepared  for  battle, 
and  on  Sunday  the  95th  of  October  1802,  their  lines  were  formed  for 
action  on  the  plain  outside  Poonah.  Sindhia's  forces  consisted  of 
four  battalions  of  Pohlman's  brigade,  under  Captain  Dawes,  and 
seven  battalions  of  Ambaji  Inglia's  under  a  Mahomedan  commander, 
with  10,000  Maratha  cavalry  and  80  guns.  The  Peshwa  only  con- 
tributed four  very  inferior  battalions  of  infantry,  under  native  officers, 
and  6,000  cavalry.  The  position  the  allied  forces  took  up  was  a  strong 
one,  their  rear  being  protected  by  the  city  of  Poonah. 

Holkar  brought  into  the  field  an  army  superior  in  both  numbers  and 


280  PERRON. 

quality.  His  regular  infantry  consisted  of  four  battalions  under 
Major  Harding,  five  under  Major  Vickers,  and  four  under  Major 
Armstrong.  There  were  also  three  others  under  a  native  commander, 
and  5,000  irregular  Ilohilla  infantry.  His  cavalry  numbered  25,000, 
and  he  had  100  capital  guns. 

It  was  due  to  the  spirited  representations  of  Captain  Dawes  that 
battle  was  offered  to  a  force  so  superior  in  eveiy  way.  Dawes  was  a 
gallant  soldier,  and  strongly  advised  fighting,  although  there  were  but 
four  European  officers  in  the  allied  armies.  The  troops  were  accord- 
ingly formed  for  action,  and  Jaswant  Bao  eagerly  responded  to  the 
challenge.  Dawes  himself  took  post  in  the  centre,  with  the  artillery. 
On  the  right  were  the  Poonah  troops,  and  on  the  left  the  Maratha 
cavalry.  At  9.30  a.m.  the  action  commenced  with  a  sharp  and  inces- 
sant cannonade,  which  lasted  for  four  hours,  and  showed  great 
determination  on  both  sides.  An  advance  was  then  attempted  by 
Dawes,  and  for  a  time  the  superior  discipline  of  his  battalions  began 
to  tell ;  for,  owing  to  a  misunderstanding,  Jaswant  Bao's  cavalry  were 
ordered  to  make  an  ill-tuned  charge  on  Dawes's  left  flank,  during 
which  they  were  exposed  to  the  grape  of  the  artillery  in  such  re- 
peated discharges  as  to  threaten  the  loss  of  the  day  altogether,  for  seeing 
them  wavering  Dawes's  cavalry  attacked  them  with  fatal  effect.  "  The 
confusion,"  writes  the  quaint  native  historian  already  quoted,  "was 
like  that  of  the  Day  of  Judgment  :  no  one  knew  where  he  was  or 
what  he  was  about.  The  slaughter  was  great,  and  the  flight  of 
Holker's  troops  had  commenced." 

Jaswant  Bao,  who  had  taken  up  his  station  on  an  eminence,  in  order 
to  direct  the  operations  of  the  field,  perceived  this  critical  pass  to  which 
his  arms  had  corne.  It  roused  him  to  a  great  and  worthy  effort. 
Springing  on  his  horse,  he  drew  his  sword,  and  calling  out,  "  Now  or 
never  to  follow  Jaswant  Bao ! "  spurred  to  the  front,  rallied  the  fugitives, 
collected  a  compact  body  around  him,  and  turning  round  charged  back 
again  upon  the  enemy. 

As  he  reached  them  he  found  Ambaji's  battalions  already  beginning 
to  waver  before  the  steady  attack  of  Major  Harding,  whose  brigade  had 
advanced  to  the  rescue  of  the  cavalry.  Against  these  Holkar  dashed, 
and  scattered  them  like  chaff,  and  then  turned  his  charge  upon 
Dawes,  whose  troops  had  up  to  this  time  behaved  with  a  courage  and 
discipline  worthy  of  their  reputation.  As  Dawes  saw  the  Chief  and 
his  squadrons  approaching,  he  attempted  to  oppose  a  proper  resistance, 
but  his  small  body  of  men  was  completely  overwhelmed  by  the 
sheer  weight  of  numbers  and  thrown  into  confusion.  They  fought 
uesperately  to  the  very  last,  and  as  became  the  best  traditions  they  had 


THE  BATTLE  OF  POONAH.  281 

inherited  from  the  days  of  De  Boigne.  It  was  not  until  three  of  their 
officers  were  killed,  and  the  fourth  taken  prisoner,  and  600  men  out 
of  their  total  strength  of  1,400  killed  and  wounded,  that  they  sur- 
rendered. During  the  latter  part  of  the  action  a  terrible  explosion 
took  place  in  their  very  midst,  caused  by  a  cannon  shot  striking  one 
of  their  tumbrils,  and  this  added  to  their  disorder,  and  hastened  their 
defeat.  Almost  immediately  after  this  catastrophe  Dawes  was  killed, 
and  a  similar  fate  befel  Captain  Catts  and  Ensign  Douglas.  This  left 
the  force  with  only  one  officer — a  Frenchman  named  Hanove — who 
behaved  with  great  intrepidity,  carrying  with  him  the  colours  of  the 
corps,  until  he  was  made  prisoner. 

Jaswant  Rao,  to  whose  personal  bravery  and  spirit  the  victory  was 
due,  was  wounded  in  the  act  of  spearing  one  of  Dawes's  artillerymen 
at  his  gun,  to  the  very  muzzle  of  which  the  chief  had  charged. 
Major  Harding,  who  joined  him,  and  rode  by  his  side,  was  killed  by 
almost  the  last  cannonshot  fired.  Holkar  lost  1,600  men  in  this 
action,  whilst  on  the  side  of  the  allies  the  killed  and  wounded 
amounted  to  5,000.  Sixty-five  guns  were  captured,  of  which  twenty 
belonged  to  Dawes's  battalions.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that,  during 
eighteen  years  of  arduous  active  service  and  continual  fighting,  these 
were  the  first  guns  lost  by  any  of  De  Boigne's  old  brigades  since  their 
formation.  The  whole  of  Sindhia's  baggage  and  camp  were  taken, 
and  his  army,  bereft  of  their  officers,  was  routed  and  dispersed,  and 
fled  in  all  directions. 

The  consequences  of  this  defeat  were  far  more  more  disastrous  to 
the  Peshwa  than  to  Sindhia.  Early  in  the  morning  Baji  Eao,  not 
doubting  success,  left  his  palace  with  the  intention  of  being  present 
at  the  action.  But  the  noise  of  the  firing  frightened  him,  and  he 
withdrew  to  a  place  some  distance  south  of  Poonah.  Almost  before  a 
shot  was  fired  his  troops  deserted  Dawes,  and  retired  within  the  walls 
of  the  city,  and  as  soon  as  Baji  Eao  heard  of  the  impending  issue  of 
the  day,  he  fled,  attended  by  7,000  followers,  to  the  fort  of  Singarh, 
from  whence  he  proceeded  to  Mhar,  on  the  sea  coast.  Here  he  em- 
barked on  board  an  English  ship,  provided  for  his  reception  by  the 
Government  of  Bombay,  and  was  landed  at  Bassein,  a  fugitive  from 
his  throne,  and  indebted  for  his  safety  to  the  very  nation  from  whom 
it  had  been  the  policy  of  the  Maratha  nation  to  consistently  hold  aloof. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

WAR  WITH   THE   ENGLISH. 
1802-1803. 

"  TESWANT  RAO  HOLKER  has  taken  possession  of  Poonab,  and 
^  greatly  harassed  that  city  and  His  Highness  the  Peishwa.  I  am 
therefore  obliged  to  march  towards  Poonah  to  oppose  the  Holkers,  and 
immediately  on  receipt  of  this  letter  you  will  hasten  your  march  with 
all  your  troops  under  your  command  and  meet  us  at  that  place.  Our 
endeavours  must  be  strenuously  exerted  to  baffle  the  Holkers  in  all 
their  hostile  designs,  and  to  secure  the  country  from  their  infamous 
depredations  now  and  hereafter.  It  will  be  necessary  to  use  every 
means  in  our  power  to  crush  and  overwhelm  them  at  once,  that  they 
may  never  again  have  sufficient  ability  to  do  us  similar  mischief." 

Thus  wrote  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  to  General  Perron  on  the  16th  of 
November,  1802,  after  the  defeat  of  his  and  the  Peshwa's  troops  at 
Poonah.  On  receiving  this  letter  Perron  made  some  show  of  obedi- 
ence by  directing  Bourguien,  who  was  at  Jind,  to  proceed  to  the 
Deccan  with  the  third  brigade.  But  here  his  efforts  began  and 
ended  :  the  order  was  not  carried  out — probably  there  was  never  any 
serious  intention  of  having  it  executed — and  Perron  confined  himself 
to  copious  protestations,  declaring  he  was  about  to  march  south  "  im- 
mediately " — a  formula  that  had  an  elasticity  about  it  not  contem- 
plated by  the  framers  of  language. 

Other  reinforcements,  however,  reached  Sindhia.  Ambaji,  his 
Maratha  general,  despatched  five  of  the  Begum  Somru's  battalions, 
and  Raghuji  Bhonsla  of  Berar  sent  a  large  body  of  horse.  On  these 
joining  him  Daulat  Rao  marched  with  his  army  six  or  eight  miles  out 
of  Ujjain  on  the  1st  of  December,  with  the  intention  of  proceeding  to 
Poonah,  but  his  further  progress  was  arrested  by  sickness  which 
broke  out  amongst  his  troops,  and  by  a  belief  that  he  was  not  strong 
enongh  to  risk  a  conflict  with  Holkar,  and  reinstate  the  Peshwa,  who 

282 


WAR  WITH  THE  ENGLISH.  283 

was  continually  urging  him  to  come  to  bis  assistance,  and  drive 
Jaswant  Bao  out  of  the  capital. 

Perron  was  fully  aware  how  critical  the  moment  was.  Holkar  was 
not  only  in  possession  of  Poonah,  but  had  declared  Baji  Bao  deposed, 
and  elevated  to  the  masnad,  the  Peshwa's  brother,  Amrat  Bao,  whom 
he  desired  to  use  as  his  tool,  usurping  the  real  authority  himself. 
Driven  from  his  country,  a  fugitive  and  afraid,  it  was  hopeless  to  ex- 
pect Baji  Bao  to  accomplish  his  own  restoration.  There  were  but  two 
courses  open  to  him  :  either  to  trust  to  Sindhia  to  reinstate  him,  or  to 
throw  in  his  lot  with  the  English,  as  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad  had 
done  two  years  previously,  and  accept  from  them  the  services  of  a 
contingent  force  to  replace  him  in  power  and  keep  him  there.  But 
this  would  be  tantamount  to  the  surrender  of  the  independence  of  the 
Maratha  Empire,  and  Baji  Bao  naturally  hesitated  before  committing 
himself  to  such  an  irrevocable  step. 

During  the  two  months  of  indecision  that  followed,  Baji  Bao  re- 
peatedly appealed  to  Sindhia  for  military  assistance  against  Holkar, 
warning  him  that  if  help  was  deferred  he  would  be  compelled,  from 
sheer  necessity,  to  apply  to  the  British  Government  to  reinstate  him. 
Sindhia  as  repeatedly  despatched  express  messengers  to  Perron,  com- 
manding him  to  send  down  troops  to  the  Deccan  at  once,  as  without 
reinforcements  Daulat  Bao  dared  not  risk  a  battle.  But  Perron  pursued 
a  line  of  conduct  similar  to  that  which  he  had  adopted  in  the  previous 
year.  He  was  afraid  of  throwing  too  much  power  into  his  master's 
hands,  which  might  ultimately  be  turned  against  himself.  So  long  as 
he  kept  three  complete  brigades  under  his  personal  control  in  Hin- 
dustan, he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  his  enemies  at  the  Ujjain  Court ; 
but  the  transfer  of  one  of  them  from  Delhi  to  the  Deccan  would 
destroy  his  preponderance  of  power,  and  prejudice  the  political  plans 
he  had  in  view.  So  he  avoided  compliance  with  Sindhia's  commands, 
and  affected  an  excuse  for  his  disobedience  in  the  refractory  conduct 
of  Partab  Singh.*  Instead  of  marching  to  Ujjain  he  led  his  troops 
to  Jaipur,  announcing  that  he  expected  to  be  absent  on  this  expedition 
for  some  time.  But  Part.ab  Singh,  scared  at  Perron's  approach,  im- 
mediately paid  the  fine  demanded,  whereupon  the  general,  instead 

*  A  "news  letter"  in  a  Persian  journal  states  that  in  August,  1802, 
the  Rajah  of  Jaipur  wrote  several  letters  to  Ghat  -  kay  Bao,  Daulat  Rao's 
father-in-law,  and  Prime  Minister,  complaining  of  the  conduct  of  General 
Perron,  and  stating  some  other  matters  of  moment  to  himself.  These  letters 
were  intercepted  by  Perron's  Harkarras,  or  news  runners,  and  brought  to  him. 
Their  contents  "  effaced  all  the  impressions  of  friendship  he  felt  for  the  Bajah, 
and  determined  him  to  take  vigorous  measures  to  ruin  the  Prince." 


284  PERRON. 

of  proceeding  to  the  seat  of  war  in  the  Deccan,  returned  to  his  head- 
quarters at  Koil. 

And  this  at  a  moment  when  kingdoms  were  toppling  1  The  Peshwa, 
Holkar,  Sindhia,  all  were  threatened  directly  or  indirectly  by  the 
existing  state  of  affairs.  One  masterly  stroke  would  have  assured  the 
complete  ascendancy  of  Sindhia's  influence  ;  for  had  he  driven  Holkar 
out  of  Poonah,  and  reinstated  the  Peshwa,  Daulat  Bao's  power  would 
have  become  unassailable.  It  needed  but  Perron's  co-operation  to 
make  this  a  certainty  :  but  that  co-operation  was  withheld,  and  the 
failure  and  ruin  which  followed  were  solely  due  to  the  general's 
treachery.  Baji  Bao,  beholden  for  his  personal  safety  to  the  English 
at  his  elbow,  could  hold  out  no  longer.  Sindhia  was  even  invited  by 
Colonel  Collins,  the  British  Resident,  to  assist  in  the  restoration  of 
his  suzeraine,  but  his  anxiety  to  be  the  sole  agent  in  the  matter  would 
not  permit  him  to  act  in  concert  with  a  foreign  power,  and  one  which 
he  especially  feared  and  dreaded.  So  he  temporised  with  Colonel 
Collins,  and  carried  on  an  active  correspondence  with  Baji  Bao, 
promising  help,  which  never  came,  until  the  latter  grew  despairing 
as  he  daily  received  the  stereotyped  reply  that  Sindhia  "  would  march 
as  soon  as  he  was  strong  enough,"  whilst  every  hour  consolidated  the 
power  of  Holkar  at  Poonah,  and  tended  to  make  the  elevation  of 
Amrat  Bao  to  the  masnad  an  established  and  recognised  state  of 
things. 

At  last  the  Peshwa  could  no  longer  defer  coming  to  a  decision, 
and  on  the  31st  of  December,  1802,  the  die  was  cast,  and  he 
appended  his  signature  to  the  Treaty  of  Bassein.  It  sounded  the 
death-knell  of  Maratha  Independence,  and,  by  a  retributive  justice, 
of  Perron's  own  power,  for  his  subsequent  fall  was  distinctly  traceable 
to  this  event.  By  the  Treaty  of  Bassein  the  Peshwa  was  reduced  to 
the  status  of  a  protected  prince,  and  accepted  from  the  Company  the 
services  of  a  subsidiary  force  of  6,000  regular  native  infantry,  with 
the  usual  proportion  of  guns,  and  European  officers,  and  artillerymen. 
In  return  for  this  he  assigned  to  his  deliverers  vast  districts  in  Guzerat, 
and  on  the  Narbada  and  Tapti  Bivers,  which  yielded  a  revenue  of 
twenty-six  lakhs  of  rupees.  Moreover,  the  treaty  contained  a  clause 
directed  against  adventurers  of  Perron's  class,  for  by  the  eleventh 
article  the  Peshwa  agreed,  in  the  event  of  a  war  between  the  English 
and  any  European  nation,  to  "  discharge  any  European  or  Europeans 
in  his  service,  belonging  to  such  nation,  who  shall  have  meditated 
injury  towards  the  English,  or  entered  into  intrigues  hostile  to  their 
interests." 
Perron's  relations  with  the  French  Government  were  within  the 


WAR  WITH  THE  ENGLISH.  285 

knowledge  of  the  Marquis  "Wellesley.  Colonel  Skinner  mentions 
that  in  1801  the  general  "  was  so  puffed  up  with  riches  and  power 
that  he  allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  by  his  flatterers  into  sending 
an  ambassador  to  Bonaparte,  and  Monsieur  Desoutee  was  the  person 
despatched ;  but  the  purport  or  result  of  the  embassy  was  never 
known."  But  if  not  actually  known,  it  may  reasonably  be  suspected 
that  it  led  to  the  Expedition  which  the  First  Consul  ordered.  His 
designs  against  India  have  been  fully  explained  in  the  sketch  of  De 
Boigne's  life,  and  need  not  be  here  repeated.  But  Perron's  share  in 
them  must  be  noted.  Perron  was  a  Frenchman  and  a  revolutionist, 
in  close  sympathy  with  the  principles  which  the  French  nation 
affected  at  this  period,  and  after  his  own  personal  advantage  he 
honestly  desired  his  country's  welfare.  He  perceived  how  favour- 
able was  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  internal  commotions  in 
Hindustan  for  the  establishment  of  a  French  dominion  in  India, 
and  was  prepared  to  assist  that  consummation.  There  is  but  little 
doubt  that  the  elaborate  project  formed  at  Paris  owed  much  to 
his  practical  suggestion,  for  it  could  scarcely  have  been  any  other 
person  who  pointed  out  the  route  by  which  the  Expeditionary 
French  officers  were  to  reach  his  headquarters  through  Cuttack. 
It  is  known  that  Perron  pressed  his  views  on  the  attention 
of  Bonaparte,  and  that  an  important  communication  from  him 
reached  Paris  during  the  national  rejoicing  over  the  Peace  of  Amiens. 
It  could  not  have  arrived  at  a  more  seasonable  period,  for  the  treaty 
of  1802  opened  every  desirable  avenue  for  the  prosecution  of  the 
schemes  suggested.  An  arrangement  was  actually  settled  for  the 
assignment  to  the  Government  of  France  of  all  the  districts  that 
Perron  held,  the  transfer  of  which  was  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
Emperor  Shah  Alam,  in  whose  name,  and  under  whose  authority 
everything  was  to  be  done. 

Perron's  policy  in  Hindustan  was  subordinated  to  this  scheme,  for 
the  success  of  which  he  worked  and  waited,  and  sacrificed  Sindhia. 
The  three  brigades  which  Perron  kept  under  his  immediate  command, 
refusing  to  spare  any  of  them  for  the  Deccan,  were  required  for  its 
accomplishment.  They  were  regarded  as  "the  French  army  of 
Hindustan,"  and  contemporary  writers  constantly  refer  to  them  by 
that  designation.  Perron  only  awaited  a  full  complement  of  officers 
from  France  to  co-operate  in  any  attack  on  the  English  which  the 
First  Consul  might  order.  But,  unfortunately  for  Perron's  plot  and 
Bonaparte's  plans,  Lord  Wellesley  anticipated  them,  and  the  Treaty 
of  Bassein  was  one  of  the  countermoves  in  this  game  of  politics.  It 
established  the  paramount  influence  of  the  English  in  the  Maratha 


286  PERRON. 

dominions,  and  at  the  same  time  cut  the  ground  from  under  the  feet 
of  the  French  faction.  "  There  is  every  reason  to  believe,"  writes 
Lord  Wellesley  in  his  "  History  of  the  Mahratta  War,"  "  that  the 
Government  of  France  intended  to  make  the  unfortunate  Emperor 
of  Hindustan  the  main  instrument  of  their  designs  in  India,  and  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  authority  of  His  Majesty's  name  to  re- 
establish their  influence  and  power.  A  plan  to  this  effect  was 
actually  submitted  to  the  Chief  Consul  of  France,  in  1801,  by  an 
officer,  who  afterwards  accompanied  General  Decaen  to  India,  in 
1803."  This  plan  resulted  in  the  despatch  of  the  Expedition  to 
India,  which  was  preparing  to  sail  from  France  at  the  time  that  the 
battle  of  Poonah  took  place,  and  Perron  was  probably  aware  of  it 
when  he  received  Sindhia's  urgent  orders  to  join  him  "  with  all  his 
troops"— the  very  troops  who  were  to  be  officered  by  the  expected 
French  expedition.  To  detach  them  to  the  Deccan  under  such 
circumstances  was  manifestly  impossible,  and  so,  from  November 
to  February,  Perron  evaded  obedience,  expecting  at  any  moment 
to  hear  of  the  arrival  of  the  force  which  would  so  immeasurably 
strengthen  his  hand  as  to  make  him  independent.  But  the  French 
fleet  was  delayed,  and  did  not  appear  off  Pondicherry  till  June,  1803. 
Before  that  time  Perron  was  in  difficulties,  for  Sindhia  grew  "  warm 
and  positive "  in  his  tones,  and  the  Frenchman  had  not  sufficient 
staying  power  to  hold  out.  Hope  deferred  made  his  heart  sick,  and 
he  submitted  to  pressure,  which  a  stronger  man  might  have  resisted 
for  a  much  longer  time.  In  February,  1803,  he  sent  Sindhia  the 
fourth  brigade,  under  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec,  and  half  the  newly- 
raised  fifth  brigade,  under  Captain  Brownrigg,  thus  detaching  nearly 
half  his  army  to  the  Deccan.  It  was  the  acknowledgment  of  his 
defeat,  and  he  confirmed  it  by  tendering  his  resignation  at  the  same 
time. 

There  is  only  one  explanation  of  this  sudden  and  complete  collapse 
of  Perron's  policy.  He  suspected  the  designs  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment against  the  French  military  adventurers  in  the  Maratha  service, 
and  wished  to  secure  his  own  personal  safety  and  his  large  fortune 
before  any  further  political  complications  ensued.  Disappointed  in 
the  long  deferred  arrival  of  the  French  Expedition,  it  was  now 
evident  that  with  the  English  paramount  at  Poonah,  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  plans  was  impossible.  The  auspicious  moment  had,  in 
fact,  passed  away;  and  even  as  Sindhia's  projects  and  ambitions 
had  been  destroyed  by  Perron  withholding  assistance  from  him,  so 
were  Perron's  own  schemes  ruined  by  the  untoward  delay  in  the 
arrival  of  the  aid  from  France,  which  he  had  so  long  expected.  It  is 


WAR  WITH  THE  ENGLISH.  287 

curious  to  note  how  in  his  downfall  Perron  suffered,  step  by  step, 
from  almost  identically  similar  disasters  as  those  which,  through  his 
influence,  contributed  to  his  master's  undoing. 

At  the  same  time  that  Perron  tendered  his  resignation  to  Sindhia, 
he  applied  to  General  Lake,  the  Commander-in-chief  at  Cawnpore, 
for  leave  to  proceed  to  Lucknow,  with  an  escort  of  200  cavalry 
and  400  infantry,  on  his  return  to  Europe.  General  Lake  forwarded 
the  application  to  the  Marquis  Wellesley,  who  replied  that  he  was 
strongly  disposed  to  accelerate  Perron's  departure  from  Sindhia's 
service,  conceiving  it  to  be  an  event  which  promised  much  advantage 
to  the  British  interests  in  India.  A  willing  guarantee  was  accorded 
for  the  general's  safeguard  from  Lucknow  to  Calcutta,  necessary 
orders  issued  for  his  suitable  reception  and  treatment,  with  every 
mark  of  respect  and  consideration,  and  he  was  assured  that  a  proper 
guard  of  Sepoys  for  his  route  would  be  provided,  and  at  the  Presidency 
the  Governor-General  proposed  to  receive  him  in  a  manner  con- 
formable to  his  wishes,  and  to  use  every  means  to  facilitate  his  voyage 
to  Europe. 

Perron's  resignation  reached  Sindhia  towards  the  end  of  February, 
1803,  just  as  Colonel  Collins,  the  British  Kesident,  returned  to  the 
Maratha  prince's  camp  at  Burhanpur,  after  a  temporary  absence, 
bringing  with  him  a  copy  of  the  Treaty  of  Bassein,  whose  terms  he 
now  disclosed.  In  a  moment  the  whole  political  atmosphere  was 
changed.  Although  Sindhia  affected  to  consider  that  there  was 
nothing  in  the  treaty  he  could  object  to,  it  put  a  period,  with  one 
dash  of  the  pen,  to  the  whole  policy  of  aggrandisement  to  which  he 
and  his  uncle  before  him  had  devoted  their  entire  energies  for  the 
last  decade ;  for  it  placed  the  head  of  the  Maratha's  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  one  power  they  most  desired  to  keep  out  of  the  nation's 
councils.  No  instrument  could  have  been  more  complete  in  its  attack 
on  the  existing  condition  of  things,  or  more  unacceptable  to  the 
Marathas  at  large.  Every  Deccan  chief  was  startled,  and,  in  the 
face  of  this  common  danger,  all  internal  enmities  and  jealousies  were 
relegated  to  the  background.  The  note  of  alarm  was  sounded  by 
Eaghuji  Bhonsla,  of  Berar,  who  at  once  proposed  an  alliance  between 
Sindhia,  Holkar,  and  himself,  for  the  purpose  of  expelling  the  English 
and  restoring  the  national  independence  of  the  Peshwa.  All  the 
minor  chiefs  concurred  in  the  determination  to  resist,  and,  if  possible, 
overthrow  the  new  regime.  In  this  crisis  of  affairs  Sindhia  wrote  to 
Perron,  declining  to  accept  his  resignation,  and  informing  him  of 
the  Treaty  of  Bassein,  and  the  proposed  general  alliance  against  the 
Company. 


288  PEERON. 

A  false  ray  of  hope  shone  put  on  Perron,  who  thought  he  saw  the 
silver  lining  behind  the  black  cloud  of  disappointment.  It  is  not 
impossible  that  he  was  further  encouraged  by  advices  of  the  forward 
state  of  the  French  expedition  destined  to  strengthen  him.  At  any 
rate  he  decided  to  see  out  the  storm  that  was  now  gathering  in  the 
Deccan,  and  consented  to  withdraw  his  resignation  and  remain  in 
Sindhia's  service  for  another  year. 

War,  although  within  a  measurable  distance,  was  not  at  this  time 
declared.  But  at  Sindhia's  request  Perron  drew  out  a  plan  of 
campaign  to  be  followed  in  the  event  of  hostilities.  It  was  one  that 
did  credit  to  his  ability  as  a  general,  and,  although  it  was  never 
carried  into  effect,  its  details  are  worth  recording. 

The  forces  of  the  Confederate  chiefs  were  apportioned  as  follows  : 
Sindhia,  with  35,000  Maratha  cavalry,  was  to  penetrate  into  the 
Haidarabad  territory  and  compel  the  Nizam,  who  was  in  alliance 
with  the  English,  to  withdraw  his  forces  from  the  seat  of  war  in  the 
Deccan.  Eaghuji  Bhonsla,  with  30,000  horse,  was  to  enter  Bengal, 
cut  off  General  Lake  in  Oudh,  and  carry  fire  and  sword  into  the  rich 
districts  of  the  Ganges.  Holkar,  with  another  30,000  horse,  was  to 
invade  Benares  and  Behar,  and  Shamshir  Bahadur  (a  son  of  Ali 
Bahadur,  who  had  recently  died)  and  Ambaji  Inglia,  with  20,000 
cavalry,  were  to  desolate  Oudh  and  the  British  Doab  provinces. 
This  disposed  of  the  mounted  native  armies.  The  infantry  were 
detailed  for  defensive  work.  Perron,  with  three  brigades  of  twenty- 
four  battalions,  was  to  defend  the  passage  of  the  Jumna.  Holkar's 
infantry,  under  Vickers,  was  to  oppose  the  English  in  Surat.  Sindhia's 
Deccan  brigades,  consisting  of  Perron's  first  under  Pohlman,  half 
the  fifth  under  Brownrigg,  four  battalions  of  the  Begum  Somru's 
under  Saleur,  and  four  battalions  of  the  late  Fidele  Filoze's  under 
Dupont — in  all  twenty  battalions  were  to  defend  the  Adjanta  Ghat ; 
and,  finally,  fifteen  irregular  battalions  of  Eaghuji  Bhonsla's,  under 
native  commanders,  were  to  bar  the  passage  of  the  Kasabe'ri  Ghat. 
It  was  a  skilful  and  comprehensive  plan  of  campaign,  which  appor- 
tioned defensive  work  fer  94  battalions  of  infantry  at  four  widely 
divided  points,  and  offensive  operations  for  115,000  cavalry.  Had  it 
been  carried  out  in  its  entirety  it  must  have  resulted  in  a  long  and 
bloody  war.  But  the  ignorance,  distrust,  and  supineness  of  the 
Marathas,  and  the  treachery  of  Holkar,  who  withdrew  from  the  alliance 
at  the  last  moment,  ruined  all  hope  of  success. 

From  March  to  August,  1803,  Colonel  Collins,  the  British  Eesident, 
remained  in  Sindhia's  camp,  vainly  endeavouring  to  obtain  from  that 
chief  and  the  Eajah  of  Berar  the  withdrawal  of  their  armies  from 


WAR  WITH  THE  ENGLISH.  289 

the  frontiers  of  the  Nizam's  territory,  .where  they  were  encamped, 
and  which  they  threatened.  But  Sindhia,  in  reply,  demanded  the 
previous  retirement  from,  the  territories  of  the  Peshwa  of  the  army 
of  observation  assembled  under  the  command  of  Major-General 
Arthur  Wellesley.  To  consent  to  this  was  impossible  while  the 
Maratha  forces  retained  their  commanding  position  and  menaced 
Haidarabad.  In  the  Governor-General's  words,  "  It  would  have 
submitted  the  dignity,  honour,  and  interests,  if  not  the  very  existence, 
of  the  British  Government  in  India  to  the  most  faithless,  sanguinary, 
rapacious,  and  violent  of  Mahratta  adventurers.  We  should  have 
forfeited  the  opinion  of  the  native  powers,  which  forms  a  main  pillar 
of  the  fabric  of  our  Empire  ;  we  should  have  been  degraded  by  the 
native  states  of  Hindustan  and  the  Deccan  to  the  rank  of  a  secondary 
power  in  India  ;  of  a  power  secondary  to  Daulat  Rao  Scindia,  whose 
military  strength  rests  upon  the  support  of  French  adventure,  enter- 
prise, and  skill." 

During  these  negotiations  Perron  strenuously  advised  Sindhia  not 
to  form  any  connection  with  the  British  Government  nor  to  enter 
into  their  plans,  vowing  that  he  was  ready  to  sacrifice  his  life  and  his 
fortune  in  defending  the  cause  of  his  prince.  No  explanation  is  given 
of  this  newly-developed  loyalty  and  enthusiasm,  nor  does  any  suggest 
itself  for  Perron's  conduct  during  this  period,  except  the  arrival  at 
Pondicherry,  on  the  15th  of  June,  of  General  Decaen's  expedition 
from.  France.  Of  this  he  probably  received  early  intimation.  What- 
ever professions  he  made  to  Sindhia  he  certainly  substantiated  by 
the  uncommon  energy  with  which  he  prepared  for  war.  On  the  2Gth 
of  June  he  directed  Bourguien  to  withdraw  the  third  brigade  from 
the  Panjab  and  canton  it  at  Panipat,  whilst  the  second,  under 
George  Hessing,  was  concentrated  at  Sikandra,  near  Agra.  At 
Aligarh,  where  Pedron  was  in  command,  the  most  elaborate  prepara- 
tions were  made  for  hostilities.  On  the  25th  of  July  old  Colonel 
John  Hessing  died  at  Agra,  and  Perron  instantly  proceeded  there 
and  appointed  Colonel  George  Hessing  to  the  command-  of  the  fort, 
sending  a  French  officer  named  Geslin  to  take  over  charge  of  his 
brigade,  which  had  marched  to  Delhi. 

Notwithstanding  all  this  energy  and  the  display  of  loyalty  which 
these  preparations  seemed  to  indicate  on  the  part  of  Perron,  he  was 
fated  to  feel  the  reaction  of  his  former  treachery  to  Daulat  Kao 
Sindhia.  At  the  very  moment  when  he  was  really  working  honestly 
in  his  master's  interests  intrigues  against  him  were  being  brought  to 
a  successful  issue  in  the  Court  he  served.  Ambaji  Inglia  had  long 
coveted  the  Subahdari  of  Hindustan.  Despite  Perron's  protesta- 

19 


290  PERRON. 

tions  of  fidelity  there  existed  a  deep-set  feeling  of  distrust  against  him 
in  Sindhia's  breast.  His  past  actions  rose  up  to  condemn  him,  and 
Ambaji,  by  a  timely  gift  of  twenty-five  lakhs  of  rupees,  was  able  to 
gain  his  ends,  and  in  the  month  of  August,  on  the  very  eve  of  the 
declaration  of  war,  was  appointed  to  the  chief  command  of  Hindustan, 
with  instructions  to  supersede  Perron,  who  was  to  be  subordinate  to 
his  orders.  "  By  this  action,"  writes  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith, 
"  Scindia  delivered  Perron  over  to  his  most  implacable  enemy,  for 
Ambajee  would  have  assuredly  drained  Perron's  purse  if  he  had 
spared  his  life." 

On  the  3rd  of  August  Colonel  Collins  left  Sindhia's  camp,  and  the 
British  Government  forthwith  declared  war,  and  proceeded  to  carry 
into  execution  the  plan  of  military  operations  previously  determined 
upon. 

Perron  was  actually  the  last  man  in  the  Maratha  councils  to  hear 
of  it,  and  even  then  the  notification  came  to  him  from  General  Lake 
himself  after  the  British  advance  had  begun.  In  this  tremendous 
crisis  of  his  life  the  master  of  many  intrigues  was  destined  to  find 
himself  undone  by  the  craft  and  treachery  which  disclosed  themselves 
around  him.  He  was  unaware  that  Ambaji  Inglia  was  hastening  to 
Hindustan  to  wrench  the  baton  from  his  hands ;  or  that  the  Chevalier 
Dudrenec,  whom  he  had  given  service  to  and  destined  for  his  successor, 
had  declared  his  allegiance  to  the  new  commander-in-chief.  But  the 
cruellest  blow  of  all  was  yet  to  come,  for  Louis  Bourguien,  Perron's 
bosom  friend  and  most  trusted  lieutenant,  "  whom  he  had  raised  from 
obscurity  to  rank  and  riches,  with  outrage  and  injustice  to  other 
officers,"  was  the  first  in  Upper  India  to  revolt  against  the  hand  that 
had  lifted  him  from  the  gutter,  and  ere  many  days  had  past  to 
declare  the  deposition  and  attempt  the  life  of  the  man  before  whose 
frown  Hindustan  had  trembled  for  seven  years. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
LORD  WELLESLEY'S  DESPATCHES. 
1803. 

SO  far  the  narrative  has  followed  Perron  and  his  fortunes  from  the 
Maratha  point  of  view.     In  order  to  assist  a  broader  estimate  of 
his  political,  and  even  international,  importance,  it  is  necessary  to 
,  extract  a  few  passages  from  the  Marquis  Wellesley's  despatches  and 
correspondence,  which  will  illustrate  the  high  elevation  attained  by 
this  self-made  soldier  of  fortune. 

The  first  reference  to  Perron  in  those  voluminous  writings  occurs  in 
a  letter,  dated  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  February,  1798,  and 
addressed  to  the  Eight  Honourable  Henry  Dundas,  President  of  the 
Board  of  Control.  It  merely  indicates  Lord  Wellesley's  knowledge 
that  "  Scindia  employs  about  20,000  Sepoys,  disciplined  by  Europeans 
or  Americans.  The  commander  is  named  Perron,  a  Frenchman." 
The  next  reference  is  in  June,  1799,  by  which  time  the  Governor- 
General  has  become  alive  to  the  influence  French  adventurers  were 
exerting  in  the  Maratha  States,  for  addressing  the  same  correspondent, 
he  writes  : — "I  shall  endeavour  to  render  the  cession  of  territory 
(after  the  Mysore  war)  the  instrument  of  annihilating  every  remnant 
of  a  French  party  in  that  quarter,"  and  a  few  days  later  adds,  "  I  am 
anxious  to  find  some  mode  of  engaging  the  interests  of  Scindia  in  the 
new  settlement  of  Mysore,  under  the  condition  of  dismissing  all  the 
French  officers  from  his  service,  and  (if  possible)  under  that  of  his 
delivering  them  over  to  our  Government  for  the  purpose  of  being 
sent  to  Europe."  On  the  4th  of  July,  in  a  despatch  to  Colonel 
Palmer,  the  Eesident  at  Poonah,  he  further  emphasises  this  desire. 
"  The  whole  system  of  my  policy  is  an  earnest  of  my  anxiety  to 
expel  the  French  from  the  service  of  Scindia." 

But  the  action  of  this  policy  was  delayed  by  another  circumstance 
which  demanded  Lord  Wellesley's  attention  and  heavily  taxed  his 

291 


292  PEHRON. 

resources.  This  was  the  invasion  of  Egypt  by  Bonaparte,  which  was 
a  blow  aimed  directly  at  India,  and  all  current  intentions  had  to  be 
suspended  in  order  to  assist  in  repelling  this  new  danger  by 
despatching  a  powerful  contingent,  under  General  Baird,  to  co- 
operate with  General  Abercrombie  in  the  Delta  of  the  Nile. 

But  although  Lord  Wellesley's  local  policy  was  necessarily  deferred, 
it  was  by  no  means  abandoned,  and  in  1802,  on  the  termination  of 
the  Egyptian  campaign,  his  attention  was  once  more  focussed  on 
affairs  in  the  Deccan.  "  The  distractions  in  the  Mahratta  Empire,"  he 
writes,  "  occasioned  a  combination  of  circumstance  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  the  stability  of  the  British  power  in  India,  yet  pre- 
senting a  conjunction  of  affairs  which  appeared  to  afford  the  most 
advantageous  opportunity  that  has  ever  occurred  for  improving  the 
British  interests  in  that  quarter  on  solid  and  durable  foundations." 

This  was  writtenjjust  after  the  battle  of  Poonah,  when  Jaswant 
Rao  Holkar  had  defeated  the  combined  armies  of  Sindhia  and  the 
Peshwa,  and  the  latter,  a  fugitive  from  his  capital,  was  indebted  for 
his  personal  safety  to  British  protection.  In  the  diplomatic  trans- 
actions which  followed  the  treaty  of  Bassein  was  conceived  and 
executed,  and  the  road  opened  for  the  attack  on  the  "  French  army 
of  Hindustan,"  which  the  Governor-General  had  so  long  desired. 

On  the  27th  of  March,  1803,  the  name  of  Perron  again  appears  in  Lord 
Wellesley's  despatches,  on  the  occasion  of  his  acknowledging  a  letter 
from  General  Lake,  which  enclosed  an  application  from  Perron  to  be 
allowed  to  proceed  to  Europe  through  the  Company's  territories.  To 
this  sanction  was  accorded ;  but  before  it  reached  Perron  he  had 
changed  his  mind,  and  decided  to  throw  in  his  lot  with  Sindhia  in 
the  crisis  that  had  just  arisen,  and  was  instigating  him  to  resist  all 
the  demands  of  the  English.  Swayed  by  his  advice,  Daulat  Rao 
refused  all  accommodation,  and  at  last  became  threatening  and 
insolent  in  his  tone,  when,  as  a  final  resource,  a  separate  treaty  was 
offered  to  him.  Upon  his  rejection  of  this  the  Commander-in-chief 
was  ordered  to  make  preparations  for  war,  and  in  a  despatch  dated 
the  28th  of  June,  1803,  the  Governor-General  laid  downr  the  following 
objects  to  be  attained  by  force  of  arms  : — 

1.  The  seizure  of  all  Sindhia's  possessions  between  the  Ganges  and 
the  Jumna :  in  other  words,  Perron's  Jaidad. 

2.  To  take  the  person  of  the  Mughal  Shah  'Alain  under  British 
protection  :  he  was  at  the  time  in  Perron's  custody. 

3.  The  immediate  reduction  of  the  forces  under  the  command  of 
Perron. 

4.  The  formation  of  alliances  with  the  Rajputs  and  other  inferior 


LORD  WELLESLET8  DESPATCHES.  293 

states  beyond  the  Jumna  for  the  pupose  of  excluding  Sindhia  from 
the  northern  districts  of  Hindustan  :  these  states  were  tributary  to 
Perron. 

5.  The  occupation  of  Bundelkhand. 

It  is  very  plain  to  see  that  the  objective  of  the  campaign  was 
nothing  more  or  less  than  Pen-on.  Without  the  Frenchman  there 
would  have  been  no  war  at  all :  it  was  his  brigades  which  gave  Sindhia 
confidence  to  resist  and  the  British  Government  the  incentive  to 
attack.  As  witness  the  Governor-General's  note  on  the  subject : — 

"  M.  Perron's  forces  are  said  to  be  at  present  collected  at  Coel,  and 
to  consist  of  about  8,000  infantry  and  an  equal  number  of  cavalry.* 

"  Scindia,  it  is  generally  believed,  has  no  confidence  in  M.  Perron's 
attachment  to  his  government.  In  the  event  of  a  war  with  the  British 
Government  it  is  probable  that  Scindia  will  endeavour  to  propitiate 
M.  Perron,  and  the  prospect  of  this  crisis  of  affairs,  which  would  render 
M.  Perron's  conduct  an  object  of  attention  to  both  states,  may  have 
contributed  to  induce  M.  Perron  to  postpone  his  avowed  intention  of 
relinquishing  Scindia's  service,  in  the  hope  of  more  advantageous 
offers  from  Scindia  or  from  the  British  Government.  A  considerable 
number  of  the  Sepoys  who  were  discharged  from  the  British  Army  at 
the  late  reduction  are  said  to  have  entered  into  M.  Perron's  service. 
.  .  .  It  is  supposed  that  Scindia's  European  officers  might  be  induced 
to  resign  the  service  by  offers  of  present  subsistence  and  of  a  future 
establishment  in  the  service  of  some  of  the  allies  or  tributaries  of  the 

*  These  refer  to  the  local  forces  at  Koil  only,  for  in  the  Marquis  Wellesley's 
"  History  of  the  Mahratta  War  "  Sindhia's  army,  regular,  and  irregular,  in  June, 
1803,  was  estimated  as  follows : — 

Names  and  Description  of  Corps.                No.  of  Battalions.      No.  of  Men.  No.  of  duns. 

1st  Brigade.    M.  Louis  Bourguien          ..8  ..  7,000  50 

2nd      „            M.  Hessing 7  . .  5,600  50 

3rd       „            M.  Pohlman 8  . .  6,000  80 

4th       „            M.  Dudernaigue      . .         . .     7  . .  5,000  70 

5th       „  „  ..          ..    7  4,000 

Corps  under  M.  Dupont 4  . .  2,000  about  20 

Major  Brownrigg's  Corps  . .         . .          . .    5  . .  2,250  30 

Begum  Somru's  Corps         4  ..  2,400  20 

Late  Filoze's  Brigade           6  ..  3,000  60 

Ambaji  Inglia's  Brigade 16  . .  6,400  84 


Grand  Total      . .  72  43,650  464 

N.B. — The  force  in  this  estimate  is  exclusive  of  the  troops  employed  in 
garrisons,  of  irregular  infantry  Mewattis,  &c.,  the  number  of  which  is  con- 
siderable. 


294  PERRON. 

British  Government.  It  must  be  ascertained  whether  it  would  be 
safe  or  practicable  to  detach  M.  Perron,  or  any  of  the  European 
officers  in  Scindia's  service,  or  any  of  Scindia's  troops  from  their 
employment  with  Scindia,  and  whether  any  and  what  emissary 
should  be  sent  to  M.  Perron  or  to  the  officers." 

Ten  days  after  the  date  of  these  instructions  Lord  Wellesley  writes 
to  General  Lake :  "  I  wish  you  to  understand  that  I  consider  the 
reduction  of  Scindia's  power  in  the  North-west  Frontier  of  Hindustan 
to  be  an  important  object  in  proportion  to  the  probability  of  a  war 
with  France.  M.  du  Boigne  (sic),  Scindia's  late  general,  is.  now  the 
chief  confidant  of  Bonaparte.  He  is  constantly  at  St.  Cloud.  I  leave 
you  to  judge  why  and  wherefore." 

On  the  18th  of  July  a  secret  and  confidential  memorandum  is 
despatched  to  the  Commander-in-chief,  in  which  the  following 
passage  occurs : — 

"  The  defeat  of  Perron  is  certainly  the  first  object  of  the  campaign. 
The  Commander-in-chief  will  consider  what  advantage  can  be 
derived  from  any  negotiations  with  Perron  or  Hessing  (for  Agra). 
My  opinion  is  that  it  might  be  dangerous  to  attempt  any  negotiation 
with  any  of  Scindia's  officers  until  we  shall  be  masters  of  the  field. 

.  .  The  Rajput  and  Jaut  Rajahs  are  disgusted  with  Mahratta  rule, 
but  their  dread  of  Perron's  power  exceeds  their  wish  to  be  relieved, 
and  the  same  observation  applies  to  the  Sikh  chiefs.  .  .  .  Colonel 
Sutherland,  lately  dismissed  from  the  command  of  a  brigade  by 
Perron,  might  be  able  to  give  much  valuable  information,  and  be 
instrumental  in  drawing  over  other  officers  from  Perron.  ...  I  shall 
cheerfully  sanction  any  obligations  or  expenses  incurred  for  the 
purpose  of  conciliating  the  officers  or  ministers  of  the  Confederates." 

On  the  25th  of  July,  in  a  secret  despatch  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  the 
Governor-General  writes  :  "  The  state  of  preparation  required  by  the 
position  and  strength  of  Scindia's  French  corps,  under  the  command 
of  M.  Perron,  has  already  compelled  me  to  restore  the  native  corps  to 
the  war  establishment." 

Two  days  later,  in  a  despatch  to  the  Commander-in-chief,  Lord 
Wellesley  more  particularly  explains  his  opinions :  "  The  regular 
infantry  in  the  service  of  Scindia,  under  the  command  of  European 
officers,  is  supported  by  funds  derivable  almost  exclusively  from  the 
territorial  possessions  of  that  chief,  situated  between  the  Jumna  and 
the  Ganges,  and  the  mountains  of  Eamaon.  A  considerable  portion, 
if  not  the  whole,  of  the  territory  has  been  assigned  to  M.  Perron,  a 
French  officer  who  has  succeeded  M.  du  Boigne  (sic)  in  the  chief 
command  of  Scindia's  regular  infantry,  M.  Perron  has  formed  his 


LORD  WELLESLEY'S  DESPATCHES.  295 

territory  into  an  independant  state,  of  which  Scindia's  regular 
infantry  may  justly  be  termed  the  national  army.  The  inhabitants 
of  the  districts  comprehended  in  M.  Perron's  Jaghir  consider  that 
officer  as  their  immediate  sovereign,  while  the  troops  supported  from 
the  revenues  of  the  country  regard  M.  Perron  as  the  immediate 
executive  authority  from  which  the  army  is  to  receive  orders,  sub- 
sistence, and  pay.  Possessing  such  means,  M.  Perron  dictates  with 
the  authority  of  a  sovereign  state  of  a  superior  rank,  and  with  the 
vigour  of  efficient  military  power,  to  the  petty  states  occupying  the 
countries  to  the  southward  of  the  Jumna,  and  by  the  terror  of  his 
name  and  arms  holds  in  abject  submission  the  Rajput  states  of 
Jeypore  and  Jodpore,  together  with  the  Jhauts  and  the  state  of  Gohud, 
extending  his  influence  even  to  Bundelkhand  and  to  the  country 
occupied  by  the  Sikhs.  Scindia  retains  no  efficient  control  over  M- 
Perron,  or  over  his  regular  troops.  Various  instances  must  be 
familiar  to  your  Excellency's  knowledge  in  which  M.  Perron  has 
either  openly  disobeyed,  or  systematically  eTaded  the  orders  of 
Scindia,  especially  in  the  late  crisis  of  that  chiefs  affairs.  M.  Perron 
has  for  some  time  past  manifested  a  systematic  disposition  to  remove 
all  British  subjects  from  the  command  of  Scindia's  regular  infantry, 
and  to  introduce  French  officers  under  his  own  immediate  patronage. 
M.  Perron  is  supposed  to  have  amassed  a  considerable  fortune,  and 
your  Excellency  is  intimately  acquainted  with  his  anxious  desire  to 
retire  to  Europe,  and  to  dispose  of  his  actual  command,  and  of  his 
territorial  possessions  to  some  person  of  the  French  nation.  To  these 
considerations  it  is  important  to  add  that  M.  Perron  is  in  possession  of 
the  person  of  the  unfortunate  emperor,  Shah  Allum,  and  consequently 
is  master  of  the  nominal  authority  of  that  unhappy  prince,  and 
therefore  may  transfer  this  valuable  possession,  with  his  property  of 
any  other  description,  to  any  French  adventurer  or  officer  who  may 
be  enabled  to  complete  such  a  purchase.  Thus  the  coincidence  of 
various  extraordinary  and  uncontrollable  accidents,  and  the  weakness 
of  Scindia's  personal  character,  have  contributed  to  found  an 
Independant  French  State  on  the  most  vulnerable  part  of  the 
Company's  frontier.  Under  the  influence  of  a  succession  of  French 
adventurers,  this  state  must  be  exposed  to  the  intrigue  of  the  French 
in  India,  and  even  to  the  ambition  and  hostile  spirit  of  the  person 
who  now  rules  the  French  nation.  Nor  could  an  instrument  of 
destruction  more  skilfully  adapted  to  wound  the  heart  of  the  British, 
nation  be  presented  to  the  vindictive  hand  of  the  First  Consul  of 
France.  This  French  state  actually  holds  possession  of  the  person 
and  nominal  authority  of  the  Mogul,  maintains  the  most  efficient 


296  PERSON. 

army  of  regular  native  infantry  and  the  most  powerful  artillery 
existing  in  India  with  the  exception  of  the  Company's  troops,  and 
exercises  a  considerable  authority  over  the  neighbouring  states,  from 
the  banks  of  the  Indus  to  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and  Jumna. 
In  the  present  crisis,  when  every  circumstance  announces  the 
probability  of  a  renewal  of  the  war  with  France,  and  urges  the 
necessity  of  resorting  to  every  practicable  measure  of  precaution  and 
security,  the  safety  of  the  British  dominions  requires  the  reduction  of 
M.  Perron's  military  resources  and  power,  independantly  of  any 
question  which  might  exist  between  Scindia  and  the  British  Govern- 
ment." 

This  explicit  declaration  of  the  views  and  opinions  of  the  Marquis 
Wellesley  amply  confirms  the  testimony  previously  adduced  of 
the  high  political  position  held  by  Perron.  His  Jaidad  was  "  an 
Independent  French  State,"  in  which  he  "  dictated  with  the  authority 
of  a  sovereign  of  high  rank,"  and  his  army  constituted  "  a  menace  to 
the  British  dominion  in  India."  This  was  the  height  of  power  and 
influence  to  which  the  runaway  sailor  from  a  French  frigate  had 
raised  himself.  It  was  an  elevation  even  more  astounding  than  De 
Boigne's,  an  usurpation  of  authority  more  audacious  than  that  of  George 
Thomas.  Had  Perron  resigned  his  post  at  this  moment  he  would 
have  left  behind  him  a  reputation  second  to  no  adventurer's  in  India. 
But  the  splendour  of  his  success  was  to  be  marred  by  the  squalor  of 
his  dawnfall.  He  lacked  the  respectable  dignity  of  De  Boigne  and 
the  dauntless  defiance  of  George  Thomas  ;  and  in  the  last  few  days  of 
his  power,  when  summoned  to  face  the  culminating  crisis  of  his  life, 
he  showed  a  weakness  of  purpose  that  prejudices  all  his  previous 
achievements,  and  his  exit  from  the  scene  wherein  he  had  played  so 
prominent  a  part  was  that  of  a  poltroon,  clutching  his. money  bags 
and  crying  for  quarter  before  he  had  struck  a  single  blow. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

PERRON   DE   PROFUNDIS. 
1803. 

UPON  the  declaration  of  war  by  Lord  Wellesley,  Sindhia's  Regular 
Brigades  numbered  over  39,000  men,  with  5,000  Hindustani 
horse  and  464  guns.  In  addition  to  these  there  were  35,000  Maratha 
cavalry  and  fifteen  battalions  of  infantry  belonging  to  Ambaji  Inglia, 
and  also  sundry  garrison  troops,  so  that  the  entire  strength  was  not 
far  short  of  90,000  men-at-arms.  The  Rajah  of  Berar  contributed 
fifteen  battalions  of  infantry,  30,000  horse,'and  60  guns,  and  Shamshir 
Bahadur  10,000  troops  of  sorts.  The  Confederate  -army  was  divided 
as  follows  : — 

With  Sindhia,  in  the  Deccan,  were  Perron's  First  Brigade,  under 
Colonel  Pohlman,  four  battalions  of  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze's  corps,  under 
Dupont,  and  four  battalions  of  the  Begum  Somru's,  under  Colonel 
Saleur.  These  totalled  10,400  men.  The  Rajah  of  Berar's  infantry 
was  estimated  at  6,000,  and  the  combined  Maratha  cavalry  at  50,000. 
The  cannon  numbered  190  pieces. 

En  route  to  Hindustan  were  Perron's  Fourth  Brigade,  under 
Dudrenec,  and  five  battalions  of  the  Fifth  Brigade  under  Brownrigg 
— in  all  nearly  8,000  men.  Ambaji's  infantry  and  cavalry  increased 
the  total  to  about  25,000  of  all  arms. 

At  Ujjain  was  stationed  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze's  party  of  six  bat- 
talions, numbering  3,000  men,  with  60  guns.  They  were  destined  for 
the  defence  of  the  capital,  and  had  no  share  in  any  of  the  historical 
actions  of  the  war. 

With  Perron  in  Hindustan  were  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades, 
under  Bourguien  and  Geslin,  at  Delhi.  Two  battalions  of  the  Fifth 
Brigade  and  5,000  Hindustan  horse  at  Koil,  and  at  Aligarh  the 
garrison  troops  under  Pedron,  and  a  similar  body  at  Agra  under 
George  Hessing.  In  addition  there  were  about  10,000  Maratha 
cavalry. 


298  PERRON. 

As  far  back  as  the  month  of  March  Sindhia  had  ordered  Perron  to 
bring  his  army  into  a  state  of  readiness  to  take  the  field,  and  these 
instructions  were  faithfully  executed.  By  the  end  of  June  it  became 
publicly  known  that  war  was  inevitable.  Perron  was  busy  with  his 
preparations  at  Aligarh,  and  orders  were  issued  to  all  the  feudatory 
chiefs  in  Northern  India  to  rally  to  the  standard.  The  Emperor's 
royal  tent  was  pitched  at  Delhi,  and  it  was  proclaimed  that  Sindhia 
was  about  to  take  up  arms  against  the  English  in  order  to  defend  the 
Mughal  from  tyrants  who  sought  to  usurp  his  throne.  The  Second 
and  Third  Brigades  were  massed  at  the  capital  and  the  Fourth  was 
on  its  way  to  join  them,  after  its  fruitless  march  to  the  Deccan. 
Shah  'Alam  was  invited  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army — a 
proposal  the  helpless  old  man  was  not  in  a  position  to  decline 
Harsuk  Rai,  Perron's  chief  banker,  was  sent  to  the  capital  to  advance 
whatsoever  money  might  be  required  for  the  troops.  In  short,  all 
that  was  possible  was  done  to  put  the  army  on  a  sound  war  footing, 
and  bring  every  available  man  into  the  field. 

It  is  beyond  doubt  that  Perron's  fixed  determination  was  to  fight. 
However  spurious  his  lip-loyalty  had  been  in  the  past,  he  now  girded 
his  loins  for  war.  One  can  only  surmise  the  reason  for  this.  It  was 
certainly  not  his  fidelity  to  his  master's  cause,  for  he  had  displayed 
his  insensibility  to  this  too  often  ;  nor  was  it  to  secure  his  fortune,  for 
he  had  declined  the  offer  of  a  safe  conduct  to  Calcutta,  which  had 
been  recently  guaranteed  him ;  nor  could  it  have  been  for  the  pure 
love  of  fighting,  for  although  Perron  had  in  the  past  shown  himself 
a  gallant  man,  he  was  never  carried  away  by  that  lust  of  battle 
which  distinguished  George  Thomas.  Lord  Wellesley  Suggested  that 
he  stayed  on,  hoping  in  the  event  of  war  to  find  two  powers  bidding 
for  his  sword  ;  but  this  was  disproved  by  his  declining  overtures  sub- 
sequently made  to  him  by  General  Lake.  There  remains  only  one 
solution  to  account  for  his  line  of  conduct — his  relations  with  the  French 
Government.  He  was  too  deeply  committed  to  dare  to  withdraw  from 
Hindustan,  especially  with  the  knowledge  that  General  Decaen's 
expedition,  which  had  been  despatched  not  improbably  on  his  appli- 
cation, was  at  Pondicherry.  This  in  itself  made  his  return  to  France 
without  striking  a  blow  impossible.  Had  he  deserted  his  post  at  the 
eleventh  hour  he  could  never  have  faced  the  First  Consul,  to  whom  he 
had  sent  an  ambassador  offering  him  the  dominion  of  Hindustan. 
It  was  necessity,  not  choice,  which  made  him  apparently  loyal  to 
Sindhia,  and  decided  him  to  see  the  contest  out ;  to  which  end  he 
sent  his  family  and  treasure  to  Agra,  and  made  every  preparation  to 
resist  General  Lake, 


PEBEON  DE  PROFUNDIS.  299 

But  there  was  one  power  with  which  Perron  had  not  reckoned,  and 
whose  attack  he  had  not  even  anticipated.  This  was  the  enmity 
behind  him.  One  cannot  but  feel  a  compassion  for  this  faithless  man 
when  one  learns  the  reason  of  his  downfall.  For  even  as  he  was 
bracing  himself  for  the  momentous  struggle,  working  with  energy 
and  ability,  hurrying  from  post  to  post,  and  doing  everything  in  his 
power  to  safeguard  Sindhia's  interests,  intrigue  and  treachery  were 
leagued  against  him  in  secret  and  plotting  his  downfall.  As  he  had 
meted  it  out  to  his  master,  so  it  was  to  be  meted  out  to  him. 

Just  before  the  declaration  of  war,  Lord  Wellesley  issued  a  very 
judicious  proclamation  inviting  all  the  English  officers  in  Maratha 
employ  to  quit  their  stations  and  come  over  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment, under  promise  of  pensions  graduated  to  their  rank.  Most  of 
the  adventurers  in  Sindhia's  army  took  advantage  of  this.  Amongst 
them  were  Captain  Carnegie,  a  Scotchman,  and  Captain  Stewart,  a 
country-born — both  in  the  Second  Brigade — who  at  an  early  date 
signified  to  Perron  their  intention  of  leaving  the  service.  Hearing 
which  the  General  grew  furious,  and  summarily  dismissed  seven 
other  British-born  officers,  ordering  them  to  quit  Maratha  territory 
forthwith,  and  following  this  action  by  a  general  discharge  of  all 
British  and  British  country-born  subjects  in  the  brigades.  It  was  a 
swift  and  prompt  way  of  cutting  the  Gordian  knot,  and  was  resented 
by  not  a  few,  who  remonstrated  against  the  sweeping  decision.  But 
Perron's  wrath  was  roused,  and  the  only  reply  he  vouchsafed  was  a 
warning  to  them  not  to  be  found  within  reach  of  the  Maratha  camp 
after  a  certain  date.  His  conduct  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at :  for 
many  months  past  he  had  been  unpopular  with  his  English  sub- 
ordinates, whom  he  had  mortified  and  disgraced  in  the  most  unjust 
way.  Such  men  were  not  the  ones  to  rely  on  in  this  extremity  :  their 
prejudices  were  fixed  and  antagonistic  to  him.  Fully  realising  this, 
Perron  determined  to  expel  them  from  his  service,  and  to  repose  his 
confidence  on  his  own  countrymen  alone,  especially  on  those  related 
to  him  by  marriage  or  bound  to  him  by  ties  of  gratitude.  Herein  he 
made  his  last  and  most  fatal  mistake. 

On  the  20th  of  August  Perron  heard  of  General  Lake's  advance. 
He  immediately  wrote  to  the  British  Commander-in-chief,  expressing 
his  surprise  and  demanding  to  be  informed  if  war  had  been  declared 
against  Sindhia.  In  reply,  General  Lake  explained  his  march  in 
general  terms,  and  at  the  same  time  invited  Perron  to  send  a  con- 
fidential officer  to  confer.  This  was  in  accordance  with  instructions 
received  from  Lord  Wellesley,  who  had  shortly  before  written  to  the 
Commander-in-chief  in  the  following  terms  ; — 


300  PERRON. 

11  It  would  be  highly  desirable  to  detach  M.  Perron  from  Scindia's 
service  by  pacific  negotiation.  M.  Perron's  inclination  certainly  is  to 
dispose  of  his  power  to  a  French  purchaser.  I  should  not  be  sur- 
prised if  he  were  found  to  be  ready  to  enter  into  terms  with  your 
Excellency,  provided  he  could  obtain  a  sufficient  security  for  his 
personal  interests.  I  empower  your  Excellency  to  conclude  any 
agreement  for  the  security  of  M.  Perron's  personal  interests  and 
property,  accompanied  by  any  reasonable  remuneration  from  the 
British  Government,  which  shall  induce  him  to  deliver  up  the  whole 
of  his  military  resources  and  power,  together  with  all  his  territorial 
possessions  and  the  person  of  the  Mogul  and  the  heir-apparent,  into 
your  Excellency's  hands." 

Perron  sent  no  reply  to  General  Lake's  letter  until  the  27th  of 
August,  when  he  wrote  expressing  an  earnest  desire  to  find  some  con- 
venient means  of  avoiding  hostilities,  but  declining  the  proposition  of 
sending  a  confidential  officer  to  the  British  camp,  on  the  grounds  that 
such  a  step'would  excite  the  jealousy  of  Sindhia.  But,  as  a  counter  pro- 
posal, he  suggested  that  General  Lake  should  send  an  officer  to  him. 
With  this  the  latter  did  not  think  fit  to  comply,  but  in  conveying  his 
refusal  he  mentioned  that  the  aim  of  the  proposed  conference  with  a 
confidential  officer  of  Perron  had  no  reference  to  the  public  affairs  of 
the  British  Government,  but  to  the  private  interests  of  Perron,  and  to 
the  means  of  executing  with  ease  and  safety  his  recent  design  of 
withdrawing  from  Sindhia's  service. 

Perron's  reply  was  one  that  did  him  honour.  He  stated  that  it 
was  his  intention  to  stay  by  Sindhia  during  the  present  crisis,  and 
that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  retire  until  his  successor  was 
appointed.  But  he  added  that  he  would  send  his  aide-de-camp  to 
General  Lake,  and,  in  consequence,  Mr.  Beckett  attended  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief on  the  29th.  But  the  conversation  that  ensued  \vas 
of  a  vague  character,  excepting  that  Beckett  would  not  agree  to  any 
proposition  for  Perron's  surrender,  and  he  withdrew  without  any 
arrangement  being  concluded. 

General  Lake  had  during  these  communications  steadily  continued 
his  march,  and  when  they  were  concluded  he  was  at  the  gates  of 
Aligarh.  Directly  Mr.  Beckett  had  left  the  camp  the  British  army 
moved  out  to  attack  Perron,  whose  force  consisted  of  about  15,000 
cavalry,  which  included  his  own  5,000  regular  Hindustani  horse. 
The  position  they  had  taken  up  was  a  strong  one  and  favourable  for 
defence,  their  front  being  covered  by  an  extensive  swamp,  which  was 
unfordable  in  many  parts,  whilst  their  right  flank  was  protected  by 
the  fortress  of  Aligarh,  and  their  left  derived  considerable  advantage 


PEERON  DE  PROFUNDIS.  301 

from  the  nature  of  the  ground.  Directly  Perron  observed  indications 
of  the  hostile  movement  in  the  British  camp  he  struck  his  own  tents 
and  drew  up  his  cavalry  in  line  of  battle. 

General  Lake  determined  to  try  and  turn  the  left  flank  of  the 
enemy,  and,  forming  his  cavalry  up  in  two  lines  and  his  infantry  in 
three  or  four,  as  the  confused  nature  of  the  ground  permitted, 
advanced  to  the  attack.  As  he  was  executing  this  manosuvre  a  fine 
opportunity  was  afforded  Perron  of  making  a  bold  charge  with  his 
cavalry  upon  an  enemy  who  numbered  only  two  men  to  his  three ; 
but  he  did  not  dare  to  strike  a  blow,  being  intimidated  and  con- 
founded;  and  his  indecision  ran  through  the  ranks.  No  sooner  had 
General  Lake  fired  a  few  rounds  from  his  galloper-guns  than  Perron's 
force  turned  and  fled.  The  irregular  portion  disbanded  and  dispersed 
to  their  homes,  and  the  5,000  Hindustani  horse  followed  their  chief 
in  retreat  to  Mandu,  a  large  village  eight  miles  south  of  Koil. 

Amongst  the  British  officers  whom  Perron  had  recently  dismissed 
from  Sindhia's  service  were  Skinner  and  Stewart  (country-borns), 
Fergusson  and  Carnegie  (Scotchmen),  and  Lucan  and  Henessy 
(Irishmen) — the  latter  a  deserter  from  the  14th  Native  Infantry,  in 
which  he  had  been  sergeant-major.  They  had  started  from  Koil  on 
the  day  previous  to  the  battle,  and  were  proceeding  southward  to 
Agra,  where  their  families  resided.  About  midday  on  the  29th,  being 
encamped  by  the  roadside  during  the  heat  of  noon,  they  saw  the 
Maratha  horse  galloping  towards  them  in  a  disorderly  manner,  as 
they  fled  from  the  fight.  Presently  Perron  himself  dashed  up  "  in 
confusion  and  without  his  hat."  Skinner,  who  at  that  tune  was 
bound  by  no  tie  to  the  British  interest,  had  made  up  his  rnirifl.  to 
apply  to  Sindhia  for  redress,  since  his  remonstrance  against  summary 
dismissal  had  been  of  no  avail  with  Perron.  This  is  how  the  story  of 
what  now  occurred  is  told  in  his  memoirs : — 

"  Skinner  went  up  to  Perron  immediately,  and  told  him  he  had 
come  to  again  remonstrate  against  his  dismissal,  and  had  determined 
to  remain  in  the  service  and  share  his  fortunes.  'Ah  !  no,  no,' 
replied  Perron,  '  it  is  all  over.  These  fellows  [the  horse]  have  behaved 
ill ;  do  not  ruin  yourself ;  go  over  to  the  British ;  it  is  all  up  with 
us  ! '  '  By  no  means,'  replied  Skinner.  '  It  is  not  so.  Let  us  rally 
yet  and  make  a  stand.  You  may  depend  upon  having  many  yet  to 
fight  for  you.'  But  Perron  still  shook  his  head,  and  after  a  little 
while  said  in  his  bad  English,  '  Ah,  no,  Monsieur  Skinner.  I  not 
trust.  I  not  trust.  I  'fraid  you  all  go.'  Skinner  on  this  got  angry, 
and  retorted,  saying  that  in  that  case  it  was  Perron  who  was  the 
traitor,  if  he  meant  to  proceed  in  that  way ;  if,  on  account  of  one  or 


302  PERRON. 

two  ingrates,  he  should  lose  to  his  master  the  services  of  many 
faithful  persons,  this  was  the  way  to  ruin  the  cause .  But  that  if  he 
persevered  in  doing  all  for  the  best,  no  doubt  he  might  still  hold  the 
country  ami  effectively  serve  his  master.  But  Perron,  who  had  made 
up  his  mind  on  the  matter,  still  refused  to  have  anything  more  to  do 
either  with  him  or  any  of  his  brother  officers,  on  which  Skinner 
declared  he  would  go  to  Sindhia  himself  and  complain.  Perron 
answered  impatiently,  and  bidding  no  further  parley,  shook  his  head 
and  rode  off,  saying,  '  Good-bye,  Monsieur  Skinner.  No  trust,  no 
trust ! '  '  Then  you  may  go  to  the  devil ! '  roared  Skinner  after  him." 

Perron  pursued  his  way  to  Hathras,  where  he  made  over  the  com- 
mand of  the  Hindustani  horse  to  Monsieur  Fleurea,  and  ordered  him 
to  go  to  Cawnpore,  destroying  the  country  as  he  went.  Perron  him- 
self retreated  to  Agra,  where  his  family,  and  a  great  portion  of  his 
wealth  in  precious  stones,  jewels,  and  shawls,  had  been  sent. 

The  following  day,  the  30th  of  August,  General  Lake  sent  a  summons 
to  Colonel  Pedron  to  surrender  Aligarh.  Pedron  was  not  disinclined  to 
listen  to  terms,  but  he  simultaneously  received  a  letter  from  Perron, 
who  either  divined  or  was  informed  of  the  Commandant's  weakness, 
and  this  document  is  worth  quoting,  if  only  to  exhibit  the  singular 
effrontery  of  the  man  who,  having  himself  shamefully  avoided  battle 
under  the  walls  of  Aligarh  two  days  previously,  could  write  in  the 
strain  he  now  adopted  : — 

"  To  Colonel  Pedron. 

"  SIE, — You  will  have  received  the  answer  you  are  to  make  to  the 
propositions  of  General  Lake.  I  never  could  have  believed  that  for 
an  instant  you  could  have  thought  of  capitulation. 

"  Eemember  you  are  a  Frenchman,  and  let  no  action  of  yours  tarnish 
the  high  character  of  the  nation. 

"  I  hope  in  a  few  days  to  send  back  the  English  commander  as  fast, 
or  faster,  than  he  came.  Make  yourself  perfectly  easy  on  the  subject. 
Either  the  Emperor's  army  or  the  army  of  General  Lake  shall  find  a 
grave  before  the  fort  of  Alyghur.  Do  your  duty  ;  and  defend  the  fort 
while  one  stone  remains  upon  another. 

"  Once  more  remember  your  nation.  The  eyes  of  millions  are  fixed 
upon  you. 

"  I  am,  etc., 

"C.  PEKEON." 

Of  a  surety  a  characteristic  letter,  with  its  vainglorious  vauntings 
and  its  ineffable  French  vanity.  Nor  must  notice  be  omitted  of  the 


PEEEON  DE  PROFUNDIS.  303 

reference  to  the  Emperor's — not  Sindhia's — army,  by  whose  valour 
and  heroism  so  great  store  was  set.  And  yet,  even  as  he  invoked  its 
courage  and  protested  its  fidelity  till  death,  that  army  was  renouncing 
Perron  and  swearing  allegiance  to  Brigadier- General  Louis  Bourguien, 
ex-cook  of  Calcutta,  and  quondam  pyrotechnist  of  Lucknow,  awhile  it 
clamoured  for  the  life  of  the  man  who  cited  its  virtues. 

The  fortress  of  Aligarh  had  been  rendered  strong  by  all  the  skill  and 
pains  which  science  could  bestow,  and  Perron  reposed  the  most  im- 
plicit confidence  in  Pedron.  But  the  latter — "  a  stout,  elderly  man, 
dressed  in  a  green  jacket  with  gold  lace  and  epaulets  " — was  not  made 
of  that  stern  metal  requisite  for  defending  a  place  "  while  one  stone 
remained  upon  another."  On  the  contrary,  he  would  have  hailed 
capitulation  with  relief,  had  not  the  garrison  refused  to  agree  with 
him.  The  troops  in  the  fort  consisted  of  800  regulars,  1,000  Bajputs, 
and  1,200  irregulars,  and  a  squadron  of  horse.  These  men  resolved  to 
defend  the  place  to  the  end,  and  deposing  Pedron,  elected  for  their 
commander  a  Bahadari  Kajput  named  Baji  Rao,  who  signalised  his 
accession  to  office  by  confining  "  the  stout,  elderly  man  in  green,"  and 
occupying  the  place  of  honour  in  charge  of  the  gate  and  outer  fort. 

General  Lake,  finding  his  summons  disregarded  and  his  terms 
refused,  assaulted  the  stronghold  on  the  4th  of  September,  with  500 
Europeans  and  three  battalions  of  Sepoys.  This  force  left  the  camp 
at  2  a.m.,  and  reached  the  walls  a  little  before  dawn.  Lieutenant  Lucan, 
the  Irishman  who  had  recently  left  Sindhia's  service,  and  had  since 
been  received  by  General  Lake,  volunteered  to  lead  the  storming  party. 
A  picquet  of  50  men  with  a  6-pounder  gun  had  been  stationed  by  Baji 
Rao  about  fifty  yards  from  the  fort,  and  this  was  quickly  driven  back 
by  the  forlorn  hope,  who  captured  the  gun  after  a  desperate  tussle. 
They  then  made  for  the  moat,  which  was  so  broad  and  deep  that  a 
three-decker  might  have  floated  in  it,  and  crossed  it  by  a  narrow 
causeway  leading  to  the  gate,  which  was  raked  by  two  or  three  guns, 
and  flanked  by  a  bastion,  from  whence  a  most  destructive  fire  was  kept 
up.  Scaling-ladders  were  now  applied  to  the  walls  and  an  attempt  made 
to  mount  them,  but  the  stormers  were  repulsed.  A  12-pounder  was 
then  run  up  to  the  gate,  and  after  five  shots  it  was  blown  open.  The 
conflict  now  became  a  hand-to-hand  one,  the  garrison  fighting  with 
stubborn  bravery,  but  by  degrees  the  attacking  force  made  good  its 
footing,  and  eventually  succeeded  in  capturing  what  had  hitherto  been 
regarded  as  an  impregnable  fortress.  The  Rajputs  "  fought  like  lions," 
and  Baji  Rao  was  killed,  with  2,000  of  the  defenders.  Gallant  and 
loyal  men  they  were,  as  the  following  extract  from  General  Lake's 
letter  of  the  4th  of  September  shows  :  "I  had  tried  every  method  to 


304  PERRON. 

prevail  upon  these  people  to  give  up  the  fort,  and  offered  a  very  large 
sum  of  money,  but  they  were  determined  to  hold  out,  which  they  did 
most  obstinately,  and,  I  may  say,  most  gallantly.  From  the  extra- 
ordinary strength  of  the  place,  and  being  obliged  to  win  it  inch  by  inch, 
it  being  so  determinedly  defended,  in  my  opinion  British  valour  never 
shone  more  conspicuous." 

The  English  loss  at  the  storming  of  Aligarh  was  very  heavy,  no  less 
than  2'23  officers  and  men  being  killed  and  wounded.  One  hundred 
and  nine  guns  were  captured,  exclusive  of  wall-pieces,  and  a  vast 
quantity  of  warlike  stores  and  material,  including  thousands  of  regi- 
mental uniforms,  chiefly  blue  jackets  with  red  facings,  made  after  the 
French  fashion.  Pedron,  in  spite  of  himself,  had  the  honour  of  being 
made  a  prisoner  of  war. 

The  intrepid  coup  de  main  on  the  fort  of  Aligarh  was  a  mortal  blow, 
not  only  to  Perron,  but  to  Sindhia.  It  created  a  panic  in  the  minds  of 
the  natives,  and  astonished  every  prince  in  Hindustan,  giving  them 
exaggerated  ideas  of  European  valour  and  prowess. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  M.  Fleurea  had  been  detached  with 
Perron's  6,000  Hindustani  horse  to  harry  the  country  towards  Cawn- 
pore.  He  carried  out  his  orders,  and  to  him  belongs  the  single  success 
achieved  by  any  portion  of  Sindhia's  regular  army  during  the  war. 
Making  his  way  to  Shikohabad,  a  small  out-post  in  the  Company's 
frontier  district  of  Etawah,  held  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Coningham, 
with  five  companies  of  the  llth  Native  Infantry  and  one  gun,  Fleurea 
attacked  it  on  the  2nd  of  September.  From  four  in  the  morning  till 
two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  garrison  resisted  all  his  attempts  with 
great  spirit  and  resolution,  and  ultimately  obliged  him.  to  fall  back. 
The  attack  was,  however,  resumed  on  the  4th,  and  Colonel  Coning- 
ham, through  the  failure  of  his  ammunition,  was  compelled  to  capitu- 
late after  two  hours'  fighting,  and  to  give  his  parole  that  none  of  the 
garrison  should  serve  against  Sindhia  during  the  continuance  of  the 
war.  He  retired  to  Cawnpore  with  his  arms,  ammunition,  and  all 
his  private  property,  the  cantonment  being  burnt  and  pillaged,  but 
Mrs.  Wilson,  an  officer's  wife,  was  carried  off  by  the  Mahrattas.  Colonel 
Coningham  lost  four  of  his  officers  and  63  Sepoys  killed  and  wounded, 
whilst  Fleurea  purchased  his  victory  dearty,  at  the  expense  of  seven 
officers  and  500  men.  No  sooner  had  these  terms  been  arranged  than 
news  arrived  of  the  fall  of  Aligarh.  Fleurea's  troopers  refused  to 
believe  the  fort  had  been  taken  by  assault,  but  maintained  that  it 
had  been  treacherously  surrendered  by  Perron,  and  immediately  made 
their  way  to  Agra  in  great  indignation,  expecting  to  find  the  general 
there.  He  had,  however,  removed  with  his  family  and  effects  to 


PERSON  DE  PEOFUNDIS.  305 

Mattra,  taking  with  him  his  bodyguard  of  800  horsemen,  mounted 
from  his  own  stable,  and  here  Fleurea's  horse  joined  him — a  reinforce- 
ment which,  as  events  happened,  proved  highly  inconvenient. 

For  within  the  period  of  one  short  week  that  had  elapsed  since  his 
flight  from  Aligarh  Perron  was  destined  to  see  the  whole  fabric  of  his 
power  fall  in  fragments  to  the  ground,  and  the  army  he  had  so  long 
commanded  arrayed  in  revolt  against  him.  More  bitter  to  bear  than 
this  was  the  revelation  that  his  bosom  friend  Bourguien  was  at  the 
head  of  the  mutiny  which  declared  their  chiefs  deposition. 

Bourguien  had  received  early  intelligence  of  Ambaji's  appointment 
to  supersede  Perron,  and  on  the  first  rumour  reaching  him  began  to 
plot  and  intrigue  against  his  chief,  and  publicly  announced  that  he 
had  gone  over  to  the  English.  A  semblance  of  confirmation  was  given 
to  this  by  Perron's  supine  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Koil ;  and  no 
sooner  did  news  of  the  abortive  resistance  reach  Delhi,  than  Bourguien 
threw  off  all  disguise,  and  called  on  the  Third  Brigade  to  elevate  him 
to  the  supreme  control,  which  they  forthwith  did.  He  then  attempted 
to  win  over  the  Second,  under  Monsieur  Geslin,  but  this  officer  stood 
true  to  Perron,  and  denounced  Bourguien.  But  the  spirit  of  mutiny 
was  abroad,  and  his  men  placed  Geslin  and  all  their  officers  of  the 
Second  Brigade  in  arrest  under  fixed  bayonets,  and  declared  for  Bour- 
guien. The  latter  now  demanded  an  audience  with  the  Emperor,  and 
procured  from  him  a  Khilut  of  investure  as  Commander-in-chief  of 
the  Imperial  army.  The  blind  and  helpless  monarch,  in  no  position 
to  withhold  favours,  acquiesced  with  the  simple  faith  that  distinguished 
all  his  actions  whenever  he  was  complimented  by  the  request  for  an 
exhibition  of  his  regal  authority.  Never,  surely,  did  such  a  stalking 
horse  exist  for  knaves  to  veil  their  designs,  as  poor  old  Shah  'Alam, 
who  deputed  more  authority  from  a  prison  than  many  a  sovereign 
has  done  from  a  throne. 

But  Bourguien  had  not  reckoned  with  Captain  Drugeon,  the  keeper 
of  the  King.  Drugeon  had  been  in  trouble  once,  but  had  experienced 
Perron's  clemency  and  forgiveness.  He  remembered  this  now,  and  in 
the  moment  of  his  chief's  downfall  struck  a  loyal  blow  on  his  behalf. 
Eesisting  Bourguien's  demand  to  deliver  up  to  him  all  the  public 
treasure,  Drugeon  turned  out  his  garrison  of  5,000  men  and  expelled 
the  usurper  from  the  fort,  at  the  same  time  informing  the  Emperor 
that  he  would  obey  no  one  except  he  had  Perron's  orders. 

Bourguien  immediately  laid  siege  to  the  citadel  of  Delhi,  and 
planted  a  battery  of  eight  guns  in  front  of  the  Eajghat  bastion, 
which  he  battered  for  two  days  and  laid  level  with  the  ground.  Where- 
upon the  Emperor  begged  him  to  suspend  operations,  saying  he  would 

20 


306  PERRON. 

contrive  to  make  Drugeon  obey  orders.  Bourguien  having  in  the 
meantime  secured  the  person  of  Perron's  chief  banker,  Harsiik  Bai, 
found  sufficient  occupation  in  squeezing  several  lakhs  of  rupees  out  of 
him — at  which  interesting  point  the  story  stops. 

The  usurpation  of  Perron's  office  was  not  sufficient  for  Bourguien, 
who,  with  truly  Oriental  thoroughness,  determined  to  avoid  half 
measures,  and  complete  the  work  he  had  begun.  He  now  wrote  to 
the  native  officers  of  the  Hindustani  horse  at  Mattra,  denouncing 
Perron  as  a  traitor,  and  ordering  them  to  seize  him,  and,  if  necessary, 
put  him  to  death.  It  seems  scarcely  credible  that  a  man  who  owed 
everything  he  possessed  to  Perron  should  have  been  guilty  of  such 
black  and  dastardly  treachery.  But  its  confirmation  comes  circum- 
stantially, and  on  the  authority  of  Skinner,  Smith,  and  Perron  himself, 
who  adds  that  his  assassination  was  only  prevented  by  the  presence  of 
mind  of  his  aide-de-camp. 

This  was  the  last  drop  in  the  bitter  cup,  already  filled  to  overflowing. 
A  concatenation  of  disasters,  misfortunes,  and  dangers  was  crushing 
Perron  as  suddenly  as  swiftly.  F^st  came  the  fall  of  Aligarh ;  then 
his  supersession  by  Ambaji  Inglia,  his  implacable  enemy.  Simulta- 
neously the  revolt  of  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades,  and  the  news  that 
the  commander  of  the  Fourth  Brigade  had  already  pronounced  for 
Ambaji,  despite  the  fact  that  Dudrenec  had  been  selected  by  Perron  as 
his  own  successor.  Lastly  came  this  attempt  on  his  life,  instigated  by 
Bourguien,  at  the  hands  of  the  cavalry  who  had  come  hurrying  in  from 
Shikohabad,  already  incited  against  Perron  by  the  news  of  the  fall  of 
Aligarh,  which  seemed  to  them  primd  facie  evidence  of  his  treachery. 
All  these  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune  crowded  in  together, 
and  struck  home,  one  after  another,  within  the  period  of  a  few  hours. 
No  wonder  that  Perron  was  "  confounded  with  the  dangers  which 
surrounded  him,"  and  determined  to  throw  himself  on  the  liberality 
of  the  British  Government  for  protection  and  safety.  But  in  order  to 
accomplish  this  he  was  obliged  to  employ  stratagem.  Mustering 
his  Hindustani  horse  he  harangued  them,  condemning  Bourguien's 
conduct,  and  assuring  them  of  his  own  loyalty.  He  declared  he 
would  at  once  march  to  punish  the  mutineers  and  then,  if  they 
would  follow  him  faithfully,  drive  the  British  out  of  the  Doab.  These 
were  brave  words,  but  he  had  braver  material  behind  them.  As  an 
earnest  of  his  good  intentions,  he  handed  over  three  lakhs  of  rupees 
to  the  native  officers  to  be  distributed  amongst  the  men.  It  was  an 
astute  piece  of  liberality,  and  resulted,  as  Perron  had  counted,  in  the 
soldiery  quarrelling  over  the  division.  Meanwhile  he  prepared  their 
minds  for  his  departure,  by  announcing  that  he  would  cross  the  Jumna 
that  evening,  with  his  bodyguard,  en  route  for  Delhi. 


PERRON  DE  PROFUNDIS.  307 

Everything  turned  out  according  to  his  desires.  By  sunset  he  had 
placed  the  river  between  him  and  his  Hindustani  horse,  and,  hy 
bribing  the  ferrymen,  secured  the  retainment  of  every  boat  on  his  side 
of  the  stream  for  the  rest  of  the  night.  He  then  left,  saying  he  was 
going  to  encamp  a  short  distance  ahead ;  instead  of  which  he  made  a 
forced  march  of  thirty  miles  to  Sasni,  sending  on  an  express  to  General 
Lake  to  inform  him  that  he  had  resigned  Sindkia's  service,  and 
desired  to  renew  his  application  to  retire  within  the  Company's 
territories  to  Lucknow. 

In  this  letter,  which  reached  General  Lake  on  the  7th  of  September, 
Perron  mentioned  that  he  had  just  heard  of  the  appointment  of  his 
successor,  which  relieved  him  of  all  obligations  to  remain  at  his  post, 
and  further  observed  that  the  treachery  and  ingratitude  of  his  European 
officers  convinced  him  that  further  resistance  to  the  British  was 
useless. 

The  Commander-in-chief  immediately  complied  with  Perron's 
request,  and  detached  a  British  officer  to  meet  him  and  conduct  him 
in  safety  to  Lucknow.  He  also  permitted  Perron  to  retain  his  body- 
guard as  an  escort,  and  provided  for  his  reception  in  the  Company's 
territories  with  every  mark  of  respect  and  honour.  This  course  of 
action  was  later  on  approved  by  the  Governor-General,  who  wrote  :  "  I 
consider  the  ^retirement  of  General  Perron  in  the  present  crisis  of 
affairs  to  be  an  event  highly  favourable  to  the  success  of  the  British 
arms,  and  to  the  interests  of  the  British  Government  in  India.  It 
must  also  diminish  the  confidence  which  the  Native  powers  of  India 
have  been  accustomed  to  repose  in  the  fidelity  of  their  French 
officers." 

Thus  in  ten  days  from  General  Lake's  arrival  before  Aligarh 
Perron's  power  was  dissolved,  and  himself  a  fugitive  in  the  British 
camp.  Never  surely  did  a  master  of  so  many  legions  fall  so  swiftly, 
and  so  ignominiously  Not  a  single  blow  had  he  struck  to  uphold  that 
sovereign  power  which  he  had  wielded  for  seven  years.  All  his  brave 
schemes,  his  elaborate  plans  of  campaign,  his  protestations  of  fidelity, 
his  vauntings,  and  his  vanity  had  melted  into  nothingness  at  the  first 
eight  of  the  British  flag  flying  in  the  heart  of  his  domain.  With  a  lie 
on  his  lips,  and  his  trembling  hands  squandering  gold  to  bribe  the 
soldiery  he  dared  not  trust,  Perron  fled  from  his  kingdom,  followed 
by  the  execrations  of  his  troops  and  the  exultant  denunciation  of  his 
fellow-countrymen. 

The  causes  which  led  to  this  dramatic  downfall  were  many.  In 
the  first  place  Perron  had  calculated  that  the  British  army  would 
wait  for  the  termination  of  the  rainy  season  before  starting  from 


808  PEERON. 

Cawnpore,  whereas  General  Lake  marched  out  in  mid  monsoon.  He 
considered  that  Aligarh  would  sustain  a  siege  of  at  least  two  months, 
during  which  time  he  would  he  able  to  bring  up  his  brigades  and  fight 
an  advantageous  battle  beneath  its  walls.  But  his  impregnable  for- 
tress fell  in  a  single  day,  and  this,  in  itself,  appalled  him.  His  sudden 
supersession  by  Amhaji,  under  whom  he  was  ordered  to  serve,  con- 
fronted him  with  actual  danger  to  his  person  and  property.  The 
defection  of  his  brigades,  one  after  another,  paralysed  him  and  left  him 
helpless.  But,  above  all,  the  treachery  of  his  bosom  friend  Bourguien 
crowned  his  tribulations,  and  forced  from  him  the  et  tu  Brute  that 
bows  its  head  in  despair,  and  resigns  itself  to  fate. 


CHAPTER  X. 

BOURGUIEN    IN    EXCELSIS. 
1803. 

PERRON'S  flight  left  the  road  completely  clear  for  Louis  Bourguieu, 
who  was  a  man  as  weak  as  he  was  wicked,  as  conceited  as  he 
was  incompetent,  and  as  timid  as  he  was  treacherous.  It  was  in 
keeping  with  his  character  that  he  should  seek  to  make  a  stepping- 
stone  of  his  benefactor.  From  time  to  time  Bourguien's  shadow  has 
fallen  across  these  pages,  yet  never  once  gloriously.  Whether  at 
Ajmir,  endeavouring  to  bribe  an  enemy  he  could  not  beat,  or  at 
Georgegarh  keeping  out  of  range  of  fire,  or  at  Hansi,  entering  into 
foul  intrigue  to  ruin  a  brave  man,  he  is  always  an  inflated,  low-born 
fellow,  fitted  only  to  handle  his  native  skewers,  or  discharge  the 
rockets  of  braggadocio.  But  he  never  fell  so  despicably  low  as  when 
he  proved  a  traitor  to  Perron,  who  had  paid  him  the  compliment  of 
believing  in  him.  At  the  first  whisper  of  omen,  this  renegade 
braggart,  whom  every  consideration  should  have  impelled  to  remain 
true  to  his  chief,  was  the  first  to  declare  against  him,  and  on  the 
lofty  grounds — forsooth — of  loyalty  to  Sindhia's  service  !  Louis 
Bourguien  apostrophising  the  code  of  honour  is  an  idea  too  precious 
to  be  lost ! 

It  has  been  shown  how  Bourguien  tampered  with  the  brigades  at 
Delhi,  and  induced  them  to  elect  him  to  their  head,  and  how  Gesliii 
and  Drugeon  opposed  him  without  success.  He  gained  the  day,  and 
was  for  a  time  in  nominal  command  of  the  Imperial  army.  "But," 
says  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  "  he  baffled  his  own  ends.  If  once  the 
reins  of  subordination  are  thrown  aside,  and  the  soldiery  encouraged 
to  revolt,  it  is  difficult  to  check  or  repress  the  commotion  which  often, 
like  a  dangerous  instrument  in  feeble  hands,  recoils  on  him  who  holds 
it.  Such  was  the  result  of  the  mutinous  spirit  Bourguien  had  infused 
into  the  troops  of  the  two  brigades.  Licentious  with  impunity,  they 

809 


310  PERRON. 

despised  the  orders  of  him  who  had  taught  then  to  despise  their  own 
Commander-in-chief." 

After  the  fall  of  Aligarh  Delhi  became  the  rallying  point  for  the 
troops  Perron  had  deserted.  Thither  rode  Fleurea's  5,000  Hindustani 
horse,  convinced  now  that  Bourguien  was  a  true  man,  since  he  had 
warned  them  of  the  general's  defection.  When  they  arrived  at  the 
capital  they  found  the  brigades — which  included  eighteen  battalions 
and  110  pieces  of  cannon — in  a  state  of  mutinous  confusion  and 
anarchy.  Simultaneously  news  arrived  that  General  Lake,  with  rapid 
marches,  was  approaching.  A  change  at  once  came  o'er  the  spirit  of 
Bourguien's  dream,  and  he  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  troops  to 
retire  to  Hariana. 

This  opened  their  eyes  and  convinced  them  that  their  new  general 
was  as  craven  and  untrustworthy  as  their  discarded  one.  Never  in  the 
history  of  the  brigades  had  battle  been  shirked,  as  it  was  now  pro- 
posed to  shirk  it.  The  spirit  of  the  men  rebelled  against  the 
cowardice  of  their  officers,  and  they  forthwith  deposed  Bourguien  and 
placed  him  in  confinement,  electing  a  Native  name  Sarwar  Khan  to 
the  chief  command. 

Such  is  Skinner's  version  of  the  progress  of  events  at  Delhi  during 
the  few  days  preceding  General  Lake's  arrival.  But  Bourguien  must 
have  been  released  almost  immediately,  for  he  personally  superin- 
tended the  preparations  for  defence,  and  was  in  command  at  the  battle 
that  shortly  took  place.  On  the  9th  of  September  he  moved  his  two 
brigades  down  to  Patbarghat  and  began  to  cross  the  Jumna,  and  by  the 
llth  twelve  battalions  of  infantry,  5,000  Hindustani  horse,  and70  pieces 
of  cannon  had  effected  the  passage,  when  the  arrival  of  the  British 
army  compelled  him  to  form  his  troops  for  battle,  which  he  did  in 
tolerably  good  order,  but  taking  care  to  keep  himself,  with  some 
cavalry,  out  of  reach  of  fire. 

General  Lake  was  unaware  of  the  proximity  of  the  enemy,  for  they 
were  entirely  concealed  from  view  by  the  high  grass  jungle  which  in- 
tervened. Having  completed  a  fatiguing  march  of  eighteen  miles, 
and  reached  the  banks  of  the  Hindun  river,  six  miles  distant  from 
Delhi,  the  British  army  began  to  pitch  their  tents  ;  and  some  of  the 
Sepoys  were  actually  engaged  in  cooking  their  food,  when  a  large  body 
of  Bourguien's  horse  suddenly  appeared  so  close  at  hand  that  the 
grand  guard  and  advanced  pickets  were  at  once  turned  out.  The 
enemy's  numbers  increasing,  General  Lake  went  to  the  front  to  re- 
connoitre, accompanied  by  three  regiments  of  cavalry.  He  found 
Bourguien's  army  drawn  up  in  complete  order  of  battle,  on  rising 
ground,  and  with  their  guns  strongly  posted. 


BOUEGU1EN  IN  EXCEL  SIS.  311 

It  was  not  a  favourable  hour  to  accept  battle,  for  the  time  was  mid- 
day, and  the  British  troops  wearied  with  a  long  march,  having  been 
in  motion  since  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  heat  was  intense, 
and  under  the  fierce  rays  of  a  September  sun  many  of  the  Euro- 
peans had  been  prostrated  by  sunstroke.  General  Lake's  entire  force 
consisted  of  4,500  men,  and  included  one  King's  regiment  (the  7Gth), 
seven  battalions  of  Sepoys,  the  27th  Dragoons,  and  two  regiments  of 
Native  cavalry.  With  these  he  had  to  oppose  nearly  10,000  regular 
infantry,  5,000  Hindustani  horse,  and  70  guns,  posted  in  an  advan- 
tageous position. 

Bourguien  opened  the  action  with  a  heavy  cannonade,  which  caused 
General  Lake  to  send  orders  for  the  infantry  and  artillery  to  move  up 
instantly  to  the  front.  They  were  quickly  formed,  and  marched  for- 
ward in  columns  of  grand  divisions  from  each  battalion,  but  it  was  at 
least  an  hour  before  they  joined  the  general ;  and  all  this  time  hie 
cavalry  was  exposed  to  a  constant;and  well-directed  artillery  fire,  which 
occasioned  heavy  loss.  At  last  the  Commander-in-chief  (whose  horse 
had  been  shot  under  him),  perceiving  the  enemy  were  so  strongly  posted 
as  to  make  an  attack  not  only  difficult  but  hazardous,  determined  to 
draw  them  on  to  more  level  ground  by  a  feint,  and  ordered  the 
cavalry  to  retire  with  the  double  object  in  view  of  enticing  the  enemy 
from  their  position,  and  effecting  a  more  rapid  junction  with  the 
infantry,  than  if  he  had  waited  for  them  to  come  up.  The  manoeuvre 
was  entirely  successful,  for  Bourguien's  battalions  immediately  left 
their  ground,  and  pursued  the  retreating  cavalry  with  exultant  shouts 
of  victory.  But  they  halted  dead  when  suddenly  the  British  infantry 
came  in  sight.  General  Lake's  cavalry  at  once  opened  from  the  centre 
to  permit  the  infantry  to  pass  through  to  the  front,  then  the  line  was 
swiftly  formed,  whilst  the  cavalry  massed  and  took  up  a  position  about 
forty  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  right  wing. 

The  order  was  now  given  for  a  general  advance.  Led  by  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief in  person,  and  amidst  a  tremendous  fire  of  round,  grape, 
and  chain-shot,  the  regiments  pressed  forward  in  one  steady  desperate 
assault  of  bayonet  against  cannon.  The  men  fell  by  scores,  but  they 
never  took  their  muskets  from  their  shoulders  till  within  a  hundred 
paces.  Then  the  charge  was  sounded,  and  immediately  the  whole 
line  gave  a  single  volley  and  doubled  forward  upon  Bourguien's  guns 
and  battalions  with  such  impetuosity,  that  the  latter  refused  to  meet 
them,  and,  turning  rightabout  face,  fled  from  the  field.  As  soon  as 
the  infantry  charge  was  spent,  General  Lake  gave  the  order  to  break 
up  into  columns  of  companies,  leaving  gaps  through  which  the 
cavalry  charged  with  the  galloper  guns,  and  falling  upon  the  flying 


312  PEBBON. 

foe,  rendered  the  victory  a  complete  one.  The  battle  was  fought 
within  sight  of  the  minarets  of  Delhi,  and  before  sunset  the  British 
army  was  encamped  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Jumna,  opposite  the  city. 

It  was  the  first  tune  in  then*  famous  career  that  De  Boigne's 
battalions  had  given  way  without  showing  stubborn  fight.  Had  he 
who  created  them  commanded  them,  there  would  have  been  a 
different  tale  to  tell,  but,  deserted  by  their  officers,  and  left  without 
proper  control  or  direction,  they  obeyed  the  instincts  which  have 
always  asserted  themselves  in  Asiatic  troops  when  bereft  of  leaders. 
Bourguien  and  his  French  officers  were  the  first  to  fly  from  the  field, 
and,  accompanied  by  a  few  horsemen,  who  afforded  them  an  example 
of  fidelity,  they  sought  refuge  in  Delhi.  "  Here  the  miscreant "  (to 
quote  General  Lake's  despatch),  "after  plundering  the  city,  took  him- 
self and  his  vagabonds  off  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  and  the  country 
people  were  so  enraged  at  being  plundered  by  Bourguien,  that  they 
retaliated  by  plundering  the  baggage  of  his  fugitive  troops." 

In  the  battle  of  Delhi  General  Lake  lost  477  men  killed  and 
wounded,  of  whom  181  belonged  to  the  ranks  of  the  gallant  76th. 
In  Bourguien's  army  3,000  men  were  killed  and  wounded,  and  G8  guns, 
37  tumbrils  of  ammunition,  and  two  tumbrils  of  treasure  captured.  The 
report  of  the  ordnance  taken  is  an  interesting  document,  and  reflects 
credit  on  the  handiwork  of  Sangster.  Colonel  Horsford  thus  describes 
the  captured  pieces  :  "  The  iron  guns  (eight  in  number)  are  of  Europe 
manufacture.  The  brass  guns,  mortars,  and  howitzers  have  been  cast 
in  India,  one  Portuguese  three-pounder  excepted.  Some  bear  an  in- 
scription of  having  been  made  at  Muttra,  others  at  Agra  ;  but  the 
whole  are  evidently  from  the  designs  and  execution  of  an  European 
artist.  The  dimensions  are  hi  general  those  of  the  French,  and  the 
workmanship  is  of  as  high  a  finish  as  any  in  the  Company's  arsenal. 
The  whole  of  the  guns  are  furnished  with  well-made  elevating  screws 
of  the  latest  French  improvement." 

Three  days  after  the  battle  of  Delhi  General  Lake  began  the  cross- 
ing of  the  river,  and  on  the  16th  of  September  paid  his  first  visit  to 
the  Emperor,  Shah  'Alain.  His  progress  to  the  palace  was  slow,  for 
the  streets  were  thronged  with  the  populace,  eager  to  behold  the 
English  general  who  had  emancipated  them  from  the  bondage  of  the 
French  adventurers.  General  Lake  found  the  great  Mughal  seated 
under  a  small  tattered  canopy  in  a  mockery  of  regal  state.  The  aged 
monarch  showed  signs  of  all  the  oppressions  of  old  age,  degraded 
authority,  and  extreme  poverty,  and  his  miserable  appearance  was 
eloquent  of  his  recent  sufferings.  "  It  reflected,"  writes  Major  Thorn, 
"  indelible  disgrace  upon  the  merciless  oppressors  who  had  usurped 


BOUBGUIEN  IN  EXCELSIS.  313 

liis  dominion,"  and  Lord  Wellesley  records  that,  "in  the  metaphorical 
language  of  Asia,  the  Native  news-writers,  who  described  this  extra- 
ordinary scene,  have  declared  that  His  Majesty's  deliverance  restored 
the  sight  to  his  eyes  from  excess  of  joy."  In  addition  to  many  other 
marks  of  royal  favour  and  condescension,  the  Emperor  was  graciously 
pleased  to  confer  upon  General  Lake  the  pleasing  if  voluminous  title 
of  "  The  Sword  of  State ;  the  Hero  of  the  Land  ;  the  Lord  of  the  Age ; 
and  the  Victorious  in  War."  His  Majesty,  it  may  be  observed,  was  a 
poet,  and  given  to  composing  verses.  A  not  inelegant  translation  of 
one  of  his  elegies  is  given  in  the  Appendix  to  Francklin's  "  Life  of 
Shah  Allum." 

The  views  expressed  above  concerning  the  actual  condition  in  which 
Shah  'Alain  was  confined  must  be  accepted  with  a  certain  amount  of 
reserve.  It  was  almost  an  axiom  in  1803  that  a  Frenchman  could  do 
no  good.  Mills,  the  historian,  is  inclined  to  consider  that  the  Emperor 
was  very  fairly  treated,  even  though  Lord  Wellesley  talks  of  his  "  de- 
liverance from  degradation  and  bondage."  That  the  poor  old  man 
was  most  cruelly  used  in  the  past  has  been  shown  in  the  sketch 
of  De  Boigne's  life,  but  there  is  evidence  that  his  condition  was 
much  ameliorated  when  Drugeon  was  appointed  his  keeper.  Up  to 
that  time  Shah  'Alam  was  nearly  starved  by  Shahji  the  Fakir. 
After  this  there  is  an  indication  that  the  Emperor  was  far  from  satis- 
fied, for  he  wrote  to  Sindhia,  requesting  that  his  allowance  might  be 
paid  by  that  Prince  himself,  and  not  allowed  to  filter  through  channels 
which  evidently  showed  a  leakage.  The  income  allotted  to  Shah  'Alam 
was  nine  lakhs  of  rupees  annually,  but  Major  Thorn  asserts  that 
"not  more  than  Rs.50,000  were  actually  appropriated  for  that  purpose, 
so  that  the  descendant  o  Timur  (who  was  at  the  tune  eighty-three 
years  of  age)  and  his  immense  household  were  often  in  want  of  the 
common  necessaries  of  life."  The  suggestion  immediately  forces 
itself  forward — who  had  the  eight  and  a  half  lakhs  unaccounted  for  ? 
Not  Drugeon,  for  his  savings  amounted  to  only  Us.  30,000.  He  was, 
moreover,  merely  the  deputy  of  Perron,  to  whom  Sindhia  granted 
the  Soubahdari  of  Delhi  in  place  of  Shahji. 

Lord  Wellesley  thus  summarises  the  situation  after  the  occupation 
of  the  capital.  "By  the  success  of  our  arms  interesting  purposes  of 
humanity  were  accomplished,  and  so  far  as  the  object  is  regarded  in 
a  political  point  of  view,  His  Majesty  Shah  'Allum  being  placed  under 
the  protection  of  the  British  Government,  no  other  power  can  now 
avail  itself  of  the  weight  and  influence  which  the  Emperor's  name 
must  ever  possess  amongst  the  Mahomedan  inhabitants  of  Hindostan. 
The  attention  of  the  Governor-General  is  now  directed  to  the  forma- 


314  PERRON. 

tion  of  a  permanent  arrangement  for  the  future  dignity  and  comfort 
of  His  Imperial  Majesty.  ...  He  has  also  given  directions  to  provide 
for  the  nobility  and  the  great  officers  of  state  at  Delhi,  whose  fortunes 
have  been  destroyed  by  the  successful  usurpation  of  Scindia's  French 
adventurers." 

Thus,  after  a  life  of  singular  trial  and  vicissitude,  Shah  'Alam  found 
a  suitable  repose  in  his  extreme  old  age.  But  the  fact  must  not  be 
lost  sight  of  that  the  British  Government  never  attempted  to  restore 
that  authority  and  power  which  "  Scindia  and  the  French  adventurers 
had  usurped,"  but  merely  appropriated  it  itself.  The  moral  justifica- 
tion for  this  does  not  appear  to  be  discussed  in  any  official  work  on 
the  subject. 

Three  days  after  the  battle  of  Delhi  Louis  Bourguien  surrendered, 
with  four  of  his  officers,  whose  names  are  given  as  Gessin  (?  Geslin), 
Guerinnier,  Del.  Perron,  and  Jean  Pierre.  It  is  also  probable  that 
Drugeon  asked  and  obtained  quarter  at  the  same  time,  for  there  is  a 
reference  in  one  of  General  Lake's  despatches  to  a  sum  of  five  and  a 
half  lakhs  of  rupees  "  captured  in  the  hands  of  M.  Drugeon,"  which 
was  divided  as  prize-money.  Bourguien  and  the  officers  with  him 
were  confined  under  a  strong  guard,  and  a  little  later  sent  to  Fatehgarh, 
from  whence  they  were  deported  to  the  Presidency.  Their  surrender 
was  accelerated  by  the  dangers  that  threatened  them  from  the  enraged 
populace  of  the  capital,  to  escape  whose  resentment  they  were  very 
glad  to  solicit  British  protection. 

Thus,  within  the  space  of  a  fortnight  (including  the  interregnum 
during  which  he  was  imprisoned  by  his  own  troops),  began,  flourished, 
and  ended  the  reign  of  Brigadier-General  Bourguien.  Begotten  in 
treachery,  conducted  with  cowardice,  and  concluded  in  defeat  and 
dishonour,  Louis  Bourguien's  Indian  career  found  a  fitting  termina- 
tion. It  will  not,  perhaps,  surprise  the  reader  to  learn  that  on  the 
achievement  of  his  last  fortnight  he  founded  a  claim  to  having  vali- 
antly endeavoured  to  save  the  Maratha  Empire  from  destruction. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

LASWARI  AND   ASSAYE. 
1803. 

A  FTEB  establishing  matters  on  a  sound  footing  at  Delhi,  General 
•**•  Lake  marched,  on  the  24th  of  September,  for  Agra,  leaving  the 
capital  and  the  Emperor's  person  in  charge  of  Colonel  Ochterlony, 
who  was  supported  by  a  battalion  and  a  half  of  the  Company's  Native 
infantry,  and  two  newly-raised  regiments  of  Najibs,  recruited  from  men 
recently  in  Perron's  service,  and  commanded  by  Lieutenants  Birch  and 
Woodwill,  ex-officers  in  Sindhia's  employ.  It  should  also  be  men- 
tioned that  immediately  after  the  battle  of  Delhi  eight  Risalas  or 
squadrons  of  the  Hindustani  horse  came  over  to  General  Lake,  and 
were  taken  into  British  employ,  Captain  Skinner  being  appointed  to 
command  them.  These  subsequently  became  a  famous  regiment, 
kuown  as  Skinner's  Irregular  Horse. 

There  were  six  battalions  of  Perron's  Second  and  Third  Brigades 
which  had  failed  to  cross  the  Jumna  in  time  to  participate  in  the 
battle  of  the  llth.  So  soon  as  the  day  was  lost  they  fled  to  Fatehpur 
Sikri,  where  they  divided.  Three,  under  Sarwar  Khan,  effected  a 
junction  with  the  Fourth  Brigade,  which  was  on  its  way  from  the 
Deccan,  under  Dudrenec,  to  join  the  army  at  Delhi.  The  Chevalier, 
and  two  of  his  officers,  Major  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  and  Lieutenant 
Lapenet,  now  left  their  troops,  and  surrendered  to  Colonel  Vandeleur 
at  Mattra  on  the  30th  of  September,  the  command  of  the  Fourth 
Brigade  being  taken  over  by  Sarwar  Khan.  The  other  three  Delhi 
battalions  pushed  on  to  Agra,  where  they  joined  four  battalions  and 
twenty-six  pieces  of  cannon  belonging  to  Perron's  Fifth  Brigade, 
which  had  also  been  dispatched  from  the  Deccan,  under  Major 
Brownrigg,  to  strengthen  the  forces  in  Upper  India.  These  seven 
battalions,  being  denied  entrance  to  the  fort  by  the  garrison,  took  up 
a  position  on  the  glacis  outside.  The  troops  in  Agra  consisted  of 
4,000  fighting  men,  under  Colonel  George  Hessing.  They  had  broken 

315 


316  PERRON. 

into  mutiny  after  Perron's  defection,  and  made  Hessing  a  prisoner,  as 
well  as  the  European  officers  under  him.  In  the  fort  was  treasure 
amounting  to  twenty -five  lakhs  of  rupees  (.£800,000  sterling),  which 
had  been  sent  there  by  Perron  for  safety  when  hostilities  first 
threatened,  and  of  which  particular  mention  will  be  made  later  on. 
The  revolted  garrison  desired  to  divide  this  treasure,  but  their  mutual 
jealousies  prevented  them  from  agreeing  to  any  plan  of  apportion- 
ment, and  the  singular  circumstance  was  presented  of  these  muti- 
neers guarding  their  precious  charge  from  each  other  with  the  utmost 
vigilance.  When  they  heard  of  the  arrival  of  Brownrigg's  battalions, 
and  those  from  Delhi,  they  dreaded  their  strength  and  unanimity, 
and  refused  to  admit  them  into  the  fort.  But  still  they  did  not  dare 
to  broach  the  treasure  themselves,  being  intimidated  by  their  Euro- 
pean prisoners,  Colonels  George  Hessing  and  Eobert  Sutherland, 
Majors  Brownrigg  and  Deridon,  and  Captains  Harriot,  Marshall,  and 
Atkins,  who  warned  them  that  if  the  money  were  tampered  with  their 
lives  would  answer  for  it  when  the  British  arrived. 

On  the  2nd  of  October  General  Lake  reached  Mattra,  and,  forming 
a  junction  with  Colonel  Stevenson's  detachment,  moved  on  to  Agra, 
where,  at  2  p.m.  on  the  4th,  a  summons  was  sent  to  the  garrison  to 
surrender.  But  within  the  fort  all  was  anarchy  and  confusion,  and 
not  even  a  reply  was  returned. 

The  seven  battalions,  however,  who  were  encamped  on  the  glacis 
had  preserved  their  discipline,  and  now  prepared  to  show  fight, 
which,  considering  that  they  were  locked  out  of  the  fort  by  their 
fellows,  exhibited  uncommon  spirit  and  resolution.  So  long  as  they 
held  then:  position  it  was  impossible  for  General  Lake  to  make  any 
approaches  against  Agra,  and  accordingly  he  determined  to  dislodge 
them.  This  he  effected  on  the  10th,  with  nine  battalions  of  Native 
infantry,  but  it  cost  a  long  and  severe  fight,  and  his  loss  was  nine 
officers  and  218  men  killed  and  wounded.  The  seven  battalions 
resisted  stubbornly,  and  it  was  not  until  they  had  lost  600  men,  and 
all  their  twenty-six  guns  that  they  yielded.  "  The  enemy,"  wrote 
General  Lake  in  his  despatch  describing  the  action,  "fought  most 
desperately.  I  understand  they  are  supposed  to  be  the  best  Perron 
had,  and  they  were  so  advantageously  posted  that  it  was  almost  im- 
possible to  get  at  them."  Two  days  after  the  battle  the  survivors  of 
these  seven  battalions,  amounting  in  all  to  about  2,500  men,  tendered 
their  submission,  under  promise  of  being  taken  into  the  Company's 
service  on  the  same  pay  as  they  had  received  in  Sindhia's,  and  march- 
ing over  to  the  British  lines  on  the  13th  of  October,  encamped  along 
side  of  their  conquerors. 


LASWARI  AND  ASSAYS.  317 

The  siege  of  Agra  was  now  commenced.  Although  Sarwar  Khan 
with  the  Fourth  Brigade,  the  three  Delhi  battalions  (in  all  about 
9,000  infantry),  and  1,500  Hindustani  horse,  was  encamped  within 
thirty  miles,  he  made  no  attempt  to  relieve  the  fort ;  this  could  not 
have  been  from  want  of  spirit,  for  his  troops  had  plenty  of  fight  in 
them,  as  they  showed  before  the  month  was  out,  and  their  supine 
attitude  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  want  of  intelligent  direction,  due 
to  their  desertion  by  their  European  officers. 

A  breaching  battery  having  been  erected  within  350  yards  of  the 
south-east  side  of  Agra  fort,  preparations  were  made  for  a  bombard- 
ment. But  before  it  was  opened  the  garrison  released  Colonel  Suther- 
land from  confinement,  and  sent  him  to  ask  for  terms.  He  brought 
a  letter  signed  by  Hessing,  as  commandant  of  the  fort,  who  wrote 
that  "his  soldiery  had. become  a  little  more  reasonable  from  his 
having  repeatedly  told  them  that  any  further  resistance  on  their  part 
would  avail  them  nothing,  but  on  the  contrary  exasperate  the  English." 
They  were  now  prepared  to  deliver  up  the  fort,  guns,  stores,  &c.,  on 
condition  of  protection  to  themselves  and  their  private  property. 
"But,"  added  Hessing,  "should  any  unforseen  deviation  from  this 
proposal  take  place,  as  we  are  still  their  prisoners,  we  hope  your 
Excellency  will  not  impute  to  us  the  blame." 

In  reply,  General  Lake  sanctioned  the  terms  asked  for,  but  particu- 
larly specified  that  no  treasure  was  to  be  taken  out  of  the  fort.  He 
granted  one  hour's  grace  in  which  to  confirm  the  agreement.  This 
answer  was  taken  by  Captain  Salkeld,  but  after  receiving  it  fresh 
difficulties  and  divergences  of  opinion  arose  amongst  the  garrison, 
and  in  the  midst  of  them  the  firing  recommenced  from  the  fort, 
whereupon  Captain  Salkeld  immediately  retired. 

In  consequence  of  this  treacherous  act  all  negotiations  were  decreed 
ended,  and  the  breaching  battery  opened  on  the  morning  of  the  17th, 
doing  considerable  damage  to  the  high  stone  bastions  and  rampart. 
A  few  hours  sufficed  to  bring  the  garrison  to  their  knees,  and  the  next 
morning  the  place  capitulated,  and  the  English  marched  in.  The 
defeated  troops,  amounting  to  4,000  men,  were  permitted  to  depart, 
and  some  of  them  joined  the  British  service,  whilst  others  dispersed 
to  their  homes.  Twenty  tumbrils  laden  with  treasure,  amounting  to 
twenty-four  lakhs,  were  taken,  and  the  amount  distributed  as  prize- 
money.  The  ordnance  captured  consisted  of  76  brass  and  86  iron 
guns,  including  a  famous  piece  known  as  "  The  Great  Gun  of  Agra," 
which  was  composed  of  many  metals,  including  all  the  precious  ones, 
and  discharged  a  ball  measuring  twenty-two  inches  in  diameter,  and 
weighing  1,500  Ibs.  General  Lake  attempted  to  send  this  "Agra 


318  PERRON. 

Infant  "  as  a  trophy  to  Calcutta,  but  it  was  swamped  in  the  Jumna, 
and  under  the  golden  sands  of  that  river  found  a  final  resting-place. 

In  less  than  two  months  Aligarh  Delhi  and  Agra  had  been  captured, 
and  three  battles  won,  by  which  the  Second,  Third,  and  Fifth  Brigades 
had  been  practically  destroyed — only  the  Fourth,  and  three  of  the 
escaped  Delhi  battalions,  remained  undefeated,  but  this  force  had  been 
gradually  swollen  by  the  daily  arrival  of  refugees  and  small,  dispersed 
parties  from  Delhi  and  Agra,  so  that  it  now  numbered  twelve  or  four- 
teen battalions,  furnished  with  seventy-four  pieces  of  artillery.  Against 
this  formidable  force  General  Lake  turned  his  arms.  "  If  I  can  get 
hold  of  the  brigades  of  the  Deccan,"  he  writes,  "  not  a  Frenchman 
will  be  left  in  the  country."  He  had  information  of  their  position,  and 
at  first  made  overtures  to  their  commander,  Sarwar  Khan,  to  desert 
Sindhia's  cause,  offering  him  very  tempting  pecuniary  inducements. 
But  this  native  was  as  faithful  as  he  was  gallant,  and  rejected  them. 
It  speaks  well  for  the  loyalty  and  discipline  of  De  Boigne's  battalions 
that  in  those  dark  days,  when  they  were  deserted  by  all,  or  nearly  all, 
their  European  officers,  and  were  aware  that  every  action  hitherto 
fought  had  gone  against  them,  they  still  maintained  themselves  as  an 
army  and  stood  to  their  guns.  How  nobly  they  held  out  to  the  very 
end  let  the  story  of  Laswari  show. 

When  Sarwar  Khan  heard  of  the  fall  of  Agra  he  marched  from 
Fatehpur  Sikri,  where  he  was  encamped,  to  Bhartpur,  to  gain  the  pro- 
tection of  the  fort.  The  Rajah,  however,  refused  him  admittance, 
whereupon  he  prevailed  on  a  local  Maratha  chieftain  to  join  him  with 
about  5,000  irregular  cavalry,  and  commenced  his  march  towards  the 
Mewatti  country,  levying  contributions  as  he  went. 

General  Lake  started  from  Agra  in  pursuit  of  these  troops  on  the 
27th  of  October,  and  on  the  1st  of  November  overtook  them  at  the 
village  of  Laswari,  after  a  forced  march  of  twenty-six  miles,  performed 
at  night,  during  which  the  cavalry  had  outstripped  the  infantry. 
When  he  came  upon  the  enemy  at  sunrise  he  had  only  three  regi- 
ments of  dragoons  and  five  of  Native  cavalry  with  him,  but  with 
these  he  determined  to  make  an  immediate  attack  without  waiting  for 
the  arrival  of  the  infantry.  So  he  placed  himself  at  their  head,  and 
led  them  forward.  There  never  was  a  more  gallant  general  than 
Gerard  Lake,  who  was  "  a  man  of  action  "  in  the  boldest  sense  of  the 
word.  Throughout  this  Maratha  war  we  find  him  ever  heading 
charges  in  person,  just  as  if  he  had  been  the  colonel  of  a  cavalry  corps, 
and  constantly  having  his  horses  shot  under  him  on  the  field  of 
battle. 

He  now  attacked  and  forced  the  enemy's  first  line  in  the  face  of  a 


LASWAE1  AND  ASSAYS.  319 

tremendous  discharge  of  grape  and  musketry,  -which  created  great 
slaughter  amongst  his  squadrons,  whose  progress  was  seriously 
impeded  by  chains  fastened  to  the  enemy's  cannon  and  running  from 
one  battery  to  another.  "  Sarwar  Khan's  battalions  reserved  their 
fire,"  writes  Major  Thorn,  "  till  our  cavalry  came  within  a  distance  of 
twenty  yards  of  the  muzzles  of  their  guns,  which,  being  concealed  by 
the  high-grass  jungle,  became  perceptible  only  when  a  fierce  discharge 
of  grape  and  double-headed  shot  mowed  down  whole  divisions,  as  the 
sweeping  storm  of  hail  levels  the  growing  crop  of  grain  to  the  earth. 
But,  notwithstanding  the  shock  of  this  iron  tempest,  nothing  could 
repress  the  ardour  of  the  cavalry,  whose  velocity  overcame  every  resis- 
tance. Having  penetrated  the  enemy's  line,  they  immediately  formed 
again,  and  charged  backwards  and  forwards  three  times  amidst  the 
continued  roar  of  the  cannon  and  an  incessant  shower  of  grape,  and 
chain-shot,  with  surprising  order  and  effect.  The  scene  of  horror  was 
heightened  and  the  work  of  destruction  increased  by  the  disadvantage 
under  which  our  cavalry  had  to  act ;  for  no  sooner  had  they  charged 
through  than  the  artillerymen  of  the  enemy  (who,  to  save  themselves, 
had  taken  shelter  under  their  guns),  directly  our  men  had  passed,  re- 
loaded them  and  fired  upon  our  rear."  So  determined  was  this  resis- 
tance and  so  galling  the  fire,  that  at  last  General  Lake  found  it 
necessary  to  withdraw  out  of  reach  of  the  enemy's  guns,  and  await  the 
assistance  of  the  infantry  to  continue  the  battle. 

It  was  not  until  noon  that  the  rest  of  the  troops  came  up,  after 
having  covered  a  distance  of  twenty-five  miles  since  three  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  A  short  rest  being  absolutely  necessary,  two  hours 
were  allowed  the  fatigued  troops  in  which  to  recover  themselves. 
Taking  advantage  of  this  delay,  Sarwar  Khan  fell  back  and  concen- 
trated his  battalions  around  the  village  of  Mehalpur,  placing  the  Fourth 
Brigade  on  the  left,  and  the  refugees  of  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades, 
who  had  redeemed  their  character,  lost  at  Delhi,  by  repelling  the 
cavalry  charge,  on  the  right,  whilst  the  cavalry  was  stationed  in  the 
rear.  In  front  of  his  position  was  a  tank  or  large  pond  of  water,  the 
embankment  of  which  he  cut,  and  so  flooded  the  space  between  the 
two  armies.  His  front  was  covered  by  his  guns,  which  were  posted 
with  great  judgment. 

Soon  after  noon  General  Lake  formed  his  infantry  into  two  columns, 
and  directed  one  to  support  the  other  in  turning  the  right  flank  of  the 
enemy,  while  the  cavalry  were  detached  to  make  a  hostile  demonstra- 
tion against  their  front.  The  renewed  action  opened  with  a  tremen- 
dous cannonade,  and  as  soon  as  Sarwar  Khan  perceived  the  plan  of 
the  attack,  he  threw  back  his  right  wing  so  as  to  bring  it  at  almost 


820  PERRON. 

right  angles  with  his  front  and  left  wing,  both  rears  being  protected  by 
the  village  of  Mehalpur.  The  gallant  76th  led  the  way  against  this 
position,  supported  with  equal  alacrity  by  the  12th  Native  Infantry. 
When  they  arrived  within  a  hundred  and  fifty  paces  of  the  enemy's 
line  their  ranks  were  being  so  mown  down  by  Sarwar  Khan's  admir- 
ably-served guns,  that,  sooner  than  risk  a  temporary  halt  whilst  wait- 
ing for  the  reserves  to  come  up,  General  Lake  ordered  a  bayonet 
charge.  The  men  responded  magnificently,  and  rushing  forward  with 
a  ringing  British  cheer,  were  soon  in  the  thick  of  a  melee,  wherein  not 
even  a  spirited  charge  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  could  dismay  them ; 
and  when,  in  turn,  the  British  cavalry  spurred  forward  to  attack,  the 
day  was  won. 

But  splendid  as  was  the  advance,  equally  splendid  was  the  resist- 
ance. On  the  field  of  Laswari  De  Boigne's  battalions  surrendered  not 
only  their  glorious  career,  but  their  existence  as  an  army  and  then: 
lives  as  men.  There  was  no  confusion,  no  fear,  no  rout :  to  the  end 
they  were  staunch,  disciplined  veterans,  on  whose  colours  were  em- 
blazoned Patan,  Merta,  and  Lakhairi,  and  worthily  they  sustained  their 
proud  heritage.  Their  breasts  met  the  opposing  British  bayonets 
as  inch  by  inch  they  contested  every  point,  refusing  to  give  way  until 
they  had  lost  the  whole  of  their  guns,  and  even  then,  although  their 
situation  had  become  desperate,  they  continued  to  maintain  the  same 
courage  and  disposition.  When  at  last,  out-fought  by  British 
persistance,  they  fell  back,  it  was  in  steady  retreat  and  good  order. 
But  it  was  too  late  to  escape.  They  were  broken  in  column,  and  cut 
to  pieces  by  the  British  cavalry,  who  detoured  and  took  them  in  rear, 
sabreing  all  except  2,000  men.  These,  being  hemmed  in  on  all  sides, 
and  without  a  loophole  for  escape,  surrendered  as  prisoners  of  war. 
They  were  the  sole  survivors  of  fourteen  battalions  numbering  9,000 
men  who  had  been  ranged  in  the  field  that  morning  !  The  annals  of 
Indian  warfare  contains  no  more  dreadful  sacrifice  at  the  shrine  of 
duty. 

The  battle  was  over  by  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  enemy's 
camp  was  captured  as  it  stood,  with  all  their  baggage,  74  guns,  and  44 
stands  of  colours.  The  loss  on  the  British  side  amounted  to  834  men 
killed  and  wounded  of  all  grades,  including  42  officers.  Major- 
General  Ware  and  Colonel  Vandeleur  were  amongst  the  killed.  The 
Commander-in-chief  had  two  horses  shot  under  him,  and  his  son, 
Major  George  Lake,  was  wounded  in  the  act  of  tendering  his  charger 
to  his  father. 

No  sketch  of  the  battle  of  Laswari  could  do  complete  justice  to  the 
vanquished,  if  it  omitted  to  quote  General  Lake's  secret  despatch  to 


LASWARI  AND  ASSAYS.  321 

Lord  Wellesley,  dated  from  the  field  of  battle  on  the  2nd  of  November, 
1803.  The  following  is  an  extract  from  it : — 

"The  enemy's  battalions  are  most  uncommonly  well  appointed, 
have  a  most  numerous  artillery,  as  well  served  as  they  possibly  can  be, 
the  gunners  standing  to  their  guns  until  killed  by  the  bayonet.  All 
the  Sepoys  of  the  enemy  behaved  exceedingly  well,  and  if  they  had 
been  commanded  by  French  officers,  the  affair  would,  I  fear,  have 
been  extremely  doubtful.  I  never  was  in  so  severe  a  business  in  my 
life,  and  pray  God  I  never  may  be  in  such  a  situation  again.  Their 
army  is  better  appointed  than  ours  ;  no  expense  is  spared  whatever, 
and  they  have  three  times  the  number  of  men  to  a  gun  we  have. 
Their  bullocks,  of  which  they  have  many  more  than  we  have,  are  of 
a  very  superior  sort.  All  their  men's  knapsacks  and  baggage  are 
carried  upon  camels,  by  which  means  they  can  march  double  the 
distance.  .  .  .  These  fellows  fought  like  devils,  or  rather  heroes,  and 
had  we  not  made  a  disposition  for  attack  in  a  style  that  we  should 
have  done  against  the  most  formidable  army  we  could  have  been 
opposed  to,  I  verily  believe,  from  the  position  they  had  taken,  we 
might  have  failed." 

Skinner,  in  his  memoirs,  strikes  a  more  human  note,  as  indeed  he 
often  does  in  his  record  of  these  stirring  times. 

"  As  General  Lake  was  returning  from  the  battle  some  of  the 
Europeans  cheered  him.  He  took  off  his  hat  and  thanked  them,  but 
told  them  to  despise  death,  as  those  brave  fellows  had  done,  pointing 
to  the  Mahrattas  who  were  lying  thick  about  their  guns.  All  these 
guns  were  captured,  with  several  thousand  prisoners,  besides  killed 
and  wounded,  the  number  of  which  on  the  Mahratta  side  was  very 
great.  But  it  was  never  properly  ascertained,  as  I  believe  the  field 
was  never  cleared,  and  the  poor  fellows  were  left  to  the  wild 
beasts !  " 

At  Laswari  the  destruction  of  the  last  of  Perron's  battalions  in 
Hindustan  was  completed.  Twelve  had  been  routed  at  Delhi,  seven 
at  Agra,  and  ten  more  here,  exclusive  of  the  dispersed  fugitives  from 
the  previous  battles.  In  the  fortresses  of  Aligarh,  Agra,  and  Delhi, 
about  13,000  garrison  troops  had  been  broken  up,  and  the  5,000 
Hindustani  horse  never  paraded  again.  The  total  amounted  to 
nearly  40,000  men,  of  whom  twelve  weeks  after  the  declaration  of  war 
not  a  vestige  remained  in  opposition.  At  least-one  third  of  them  had 
been  actually  killed  or  wounded  in  fight — a  return  which  illustrates 
their  bravery  and  devotion  to  a  lost  cause  far  better  than  any 
words  can  hope  to  do.  Without  detracting  from  the  merits  of  the 
victors,  the  observation  may  be  permitted,  that  had  it  been  possible  to 

21 


322  PERRON. 

deprive  the  British  army,  suddenly  and  without  warning,  of  all  their 
commissioned  officers  at  the  commencement  of  the  campaign,  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  record  at  the  end  of  it  would  have  illustrated 
such  devotion  true  to  death  as  ennobled  the  passing  of  De  Boigne's 
Battalions. 

"Whilst  General  Lake  was  winning  victories,  and  Perron's  army 
crumbling  away  in  Hindustan,  the  same  process  had  been  going  on  in 
the  Deccan,  where  Sindhia  and  Bhonsla  were  opposed  by  General 
Arthur  Wellesley.  The  force  in  the  south  consisted  of  the  First  Bri- 
gade under  Major  Pohknan  ;  four  battalions  of  the  late  Fidele  Filoze, 
now  commanded  by  Major  Dupont,  and  generally  referred  to  as 
Dupont's  Corps  ;  five  battalions  of  the  Begum  Somru's  under  Colonel 
Saleur  ;  and  Sindhia's  grand  park  of  artillery  of  52  guns,  which,  added 
to  those  of  the  Brigades,  brought  up  the  total  to  115  pieces  in  the  field. 
In  addition  to  these  troops  there  were  35,000  irregular  Maratha 
cavalry. 

General  Wellesley's  first  exploit  was  the  capture  of  Ahinednaggar, 
a  strong  fortress  near  Poonah,  garrisoned  by  3,000  men,  "  including 
1,000  Sepoys,  in  white  jackets,  commanded  by  three  French  officers, 
a  little  dark  coloured,  who  wore  blue  clothes."  The  General  then 
marched  against  the  combined  armies  of  Sindhia  and  the  Eajah  of 
Berar.  These,  on  the  24th  of  August,  had  entered  the  territories  of 
the  Company's  ally,  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad,  by  the  Adjanta  Ghat, 
and  reached  Jalnapur,  a  place  forty  miles  east  of  Aurangabad.  After 
some  marching  and  countermarching,  which  only  gave  opportunity 
for  a  little  skirmishing,  General  Wellesley  managed  to  come  within 
striking  distance  of  an  enemy,  whose  disposition  had  been  to  avoid 
action.  Although  at  the  moment  a  considerable  portion  of  his  troops 
was  detached  at  a  distance  under  Colonel  Stevenson,  whereby  he  was 
much  weakened,  the  General  determined  not  to  lose  the  chance 
afforded  for  a  battle.  Leaving  his  baggage  under  guard  of  a  battalion 
and  a  half  of  Sepoys  at  Naulner,  he  marched,  on  the  23rd  of  September, 
with  the  74th  and  78th  King's  Regiments,  the  19th  Light  Dragoons, 
four  battalions  of  Native  infantry,  and  four  regiments  of  Native  cavalry 
to  the  place  where  the  enemy  were  known  to  be  encamped  near  the 
fortified  village  of  Assaye,  where  he  arrived  at  one  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  after  a  fatiguing  march  of  twenty-two  miles,  and  found 
the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  a  triangular  piece  of  ground,  between 
the  junction  of  two  small  rivers,  the  Kaitna  and  Juah.  He  deter- 
mined to  attack  at  once,  and  having  crossed  the  former  by  a  ford, 
near  its  junction  with  the  Juah,  formed  his  infantry  in  two  lines, 
with  the  cavalry  as  a  reserve  in  a  third,  and  from  the  apex  of  the 


LA8WABI  AND  ASS  AYE.  323 

triangle  wheeled  down  upon  the  foe,  who  quickly  ran  their  guns  into 
line  to  oppose  him.  Notwithstanding  the  terrible  artillery  fire  poured 
into  them,  the  British  troops  advanced  with  undaunted  firmness,  but 
the  execution  in  their  ranks  was  so  great,  and  especially  amongst  the 
men  and  bullocks  of  the  artillery,  that  their  cannon  had  to  be  left 
behind,  and  the  infantry  arid  cavalry,  led  in  person  by  General 
Wellesley,  advanced  without  any  support  whatever  from  their  artillery 
to  attack  a  line  of  115  guns. 

The  Marathas,  numerous  and  daring  as  they  were,  stood  astounded 
and  appalled  at  the  audacious  spirit  of  the  comparatively  insignificant 
array  that  thus  presumed  to  attack  their  formidable  host.  The  total 
number  of  men  under  General  Wellesley's  command  did  not  exceed 
4,500,  of  which  only  one  third  were  Europeans,  whilst  the  enemy 
numbered  50,000,  of  whom  10,500  were  disciplined  infantry. 

Moving  rapidly  forward  the  British  troops  fired  but  a  single  volley, 
and  stormed  the  first  line  of  guns  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.  Then 
advancing  again,  in  equally  good  order  to  the  second  line,  they 
captured  that  as  well.  But  meanwhile  many  of  the  artillerymen  of 
the  first  line,  who  had  thrown  themselves  down  and  simulated  death 
as  the  British  regiments  passed  over  them,  rose,  and  manning  their 
guns  again,  turned  them  round  and  poured  grape  and  chain  shot  into 
the  rear  of  the  victors,  who  were  obliged  to  return  and  drive  them  away 
from  then:  pieces.  Encouraged  by  this  seeming  retreat,  some  of 
Sindhia's  battalions,  who  had  been  retiring  in  good  order,  halted, 
faced  about,  and  advanced  to  the  attack,  whilst  their  cavalry  were 
emboldened  to  charge.*  This  was  the  critical  point  of  the  battle, 

*  The  following  interesting  Native  account  of  the  battle  of  Assaye  from  the 
pages  of  "  Paudurang  Hari "  is  perhaps  not  generally  known,  and  is  here 
inserted  as  confirming  with  singular  accuracy  the  account  above  given,  which 
has  been  culled  from  English  sources  :  "At  Assaye  we  opposed  a  great  English 
general.  He  attacked  our  left  wing,  and  we  changed  the  position  of  our  guns 
and  infantry.  The  English  advanced  to  the  attack  ;  our  fire  was  dreadfully 
destructive  to  them,  and  we  so  thinned  the  right  of  their  line,  that  a  body  of 
our  cavalry  was  induced  to  charge  it,  of  which  number  I  was  one.  We  thought 
ourselves  to  be  doing  business  pretty  satisfactorily,  until  we  found  that  the 
enemy's  cavalry  was  in  reserve  to  intercept  us.  They  repulsed  us  with  great 
slaughter.  These  English  are  large,  powerful  meii — perfect  war-tigers — and  the 
weight  of  their  sabres  almost  annihilated  my  poor  troopers.  They  unhorsed 
numbers  of  us  merely  by  riding  against  us — I  was  so  served  for  one,  and,  with 
many  others,  feigned  myself  dead.  Our  army  being  routed,  fled,  and  the 
English  pursuing  them,  left  the  guns  they  had  captured  in  the  rear.  These  I 
proposed  to  turn  upon  them ;  we  got  up  and  did  so  with  great  effect.  It  was 
clear  we  made  our  shot  tell  pretty  well,  for  a  body  of  the  Topee  Wallahs,  with 
their  general  at  their  head>  rode  up  to  put  a  stop  to  the  firing.  The  General  had 


Bii4 

and,  realising  the  danger,  General  Wellesley  put  himself  at  the  head 
of  the  78th  llegimeut  and  charged  the  Marathas  who  had  maimed 
the  guns,  whilst  at  the  same  moment  the  19th  Dragoons,  who  drew 
only  350  sabres,  and  the  Native  cavalry  delivered  their  attack.  After 
a  bloody  and  perilous  contest  General  Wellesley,  who  had  a  horse 
shot  under  him,  and  was  exposed  to  the  most  imminent  danger, 
achieved  his  object  by  recovering  the  cannon,  whilst  Colonel  Maxwell, 
with  the  cavalry,  so  vigorously  attacked  the  enemy's  main  line  of 
infantry,  which  had  reformed,  that  he  completed  their  overthrow,  but 
with  the  loss  of  his  own  life. 

Although  defeated  and  thrown  into  confusion,  Sindhia's  regular 
infantry  fought  to  the  end  with  the  desperate  fury  of  men  stung  by 
a  sense  of  shame  at  having  to  yield  to  an  inferior  force.  For  three 
hours  the  sanguinary  conflict  raged,  at  the  end  of  which  British 
resolution  triumphed  over  Asiatic  valour,  and  the  glorious  name  of 
Assaye  was  added  to  the  battle-roll  of  England's  victories.  Daulat 
Bao  Siudhia  and  the  Bajah  of  Berar  fled  from  the  field  soon  after 
the  commencement  of  the  action,  as  did  the  Maratha  cavalry,  who 
behaved  in  a  dastardly  way.  Pohlrnan  left  1,000  men  on  the  field, 
whilst  the  country  round  about  was  covered  with  his  wounded.  The 
whole  of  the  enemy's  camp  equipage  and  military  stores,  with  98 
guns  and  100  tumbrils,  fell  into  General  Wellesley's  hands.  On  the 
British  side  the  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  amounted  to  1,5CG  (of 
whom  COO  were  Europeans),  or  more  than  a  third  of  the  total  number 
engaged.  Such  a  percentage  of  loss  had  never  previously  been  re- 
corded in  any  general  action  since  the  establishment  of  the  English 
power  in  India.  The  74th  King's  Regiment  was  half  annihilated, 
17  officers  and  384  men  being  struck  down :  they  were  700  strong 
when  they  went  into  action.  Sindhia's  Prime  Minister,  Jadu  Eao, 
received  a  wound,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  afterwards  succumbed, 
and  an  European  of  distinction  was  found  dead  on  the  field.  It  is 
difficult  to  surmise  whom  this  could  have  been  ;  he  was  probably  one 
of  the  following,  whoso  names  appear  in  General  Wellesley's  despatches 
as  serving  with  the  enemy. 


Brigade-Major  D'Orton. 
Captain  Gautier. 
Captain-Lieutenant  Mercier. 
Captain-Lieutenant  Honore. 
Ensign  Wroughton. 


Ensign  Perrin. 

Ensign  Mars. 

Ensign  Cameron. 

Ensign  Brown. 

Cadet  Songster  (?  Sangster). 


his  horse  killed  under  him.  At  this  time  our  troops  still  hovered  about  one  part 
of  the  English  line.  At  length  we  fled,  leaving  ninety-eight  pieces  of  cannon 
and  seven  standards  in  the  hands  of  the  English." 


LASWARI  AND  ASSAYS.  325 

Beviewing  the  battle  of  Assaye,  it  was  acknowledged  by  all  the 
officers  present,  who  had  witnessed  the  power  of  the  French  artillery 
in  the  wars  of  Europe,  that  the  enemy's  guns  on  this  occasion  were 
equally  well  served,  and  that  they  fought  with  a  prowess  worthy  of  a 
European  nation.  "  The  battle,"  wrote  General  Wellesley  in  a  private 
letter  to  Colonel  Collins,  "  was  the  most  severe  I  have  ever  fought  in 
India.  Sindhia's  infantry  behaved  well.  They  were  driven  from  their 
guns  only  by  the  bayonet,  and  some  of  their  corps  retreated  in  great 
order  and  formed  again."  Lord  Wellesley,  the  Governor-General, 
termed  it  a  matchless  victory.  It  swept  out  of  existence  all  that  re- 
mained of  De  Boigne's  battalions,  and  cleared  the  way  for  the  treaty 
made  with  Daulat  Bao  Sindhia  on  the  30th  of  December,  1803,  by 
which  Hindustan  was  closed  to  French  influence  and  intrigue  for  ever. 

The  two  great  battles  won  by  Lake  and  Wellesley  rank  amongst 
the  most  notable  gained  by  the  English  in  India,  because  our 
arms  overcame  a  brave  and  powerful  enemy,  whose  defeat  meant 
something  more  than  the  mere  addition  of  another  inscription  on 
the  crowded  page  of  British  achievement.  The  foemen  were  worthy 
of  our  steel ;  the  fight  was  hard  and  desperate ;  the  victory  one  to  be 
proud  of ;  the  results  commensurate.  For  they  added  to  our  Eastern 
possessions  the  rich  Doab  districts  between  the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna, 
including  the  cities  and  forts  of  Delhi,  Agra,  and  Aligarh  ;  the  greater 
portion  of  the  province  of  Bundelkhand ;  the  whole  of  Cuttack  and 
Orissa;  and  a  large  extent  of  territory  in  Guzerat.  It  left  us  in  posses- 
sion of  the  entire  seaboard  of  India,  and  was  the  most  important  exten- 
sion of  frontier  our  Indian  conquests  have  ever  known,  since  it  secured 
to  us  not  merely  the  supremacy,  but  practically  the  annexation  of  the 
whole  of  the  peninsula ;  for  round  the  independent  states  that  still 
remained  the  cordon  of  the  red  line  was  closely  drawn,  supported  in 
its  rear  by  the  oceans  of  which  our  navy  was  the  master.  Finally, 
there  was  left  to  our  enemies  but  a  single  road  to  India — the  long  and 
dreary  one  through  Central  Asian  deserts,  over  which  they  are  still 
toiling. 

Commenting  on  these  two  battles,  thus  writes  an  eloquent  his- 
torian in  1807  :  "  At  Assaye  and  Laswaree  the  infantry  of  the  enemy 
stood  till  the  English  bayonets  came  to  their  breasts ;  the  artillerymen 
served  their  guns  without  receding  an  inch,  till  they  fell  under  the 
wheels  of  their  own  cannon ;  the  cavalry  charged  to  the  very  muzzles 
of  the  English  firelocks.  There  is  not  in  the  records  of  human  courage 
a  more  desperate  engagement  than  that  which  was  fought  between  the 
British  army  commanded  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  and  the  Mahrattas, 
aided  by  the  French  regular  battalions,  on  the  plains  of  Assaye. 


326  PERRON. 

Had  the  liberties  of  Europe  been  contested  with  equal  bravery,  the 
Continent  would  not  at  this  day  be  laid  prostrate  at  the  heel  of 
France." 

Thus  passed  away  De  Boigne's  battalions,  which  had  in  twenty 
years  increased  from  two  to  forty,  and  preserved  an  almost  unbroken 
record  of  victory  until  they  met  the  English.  Great  in  their  rise, 
they  were  not  less  great  in  their  fall,  but  worthy  to  the  last  of  the 
traditions  and  achievements  which  made  their  career  illustrious. 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

PERRON'S  RETIREMENT,  CHARACTER,  AND  DEATH. 
1803-1834. 

A  FTER  his  surrender  to  General  Lake,  Perron,  with  his  secretary 
**  and  aide-de-camp,  Beckett,  an  Englishman,  and  his  cavalry 
commandant,  Fleurea  (who  had  effected  his  escape  with  great  diffi- 
culty from  the  Hindustani  horse),  proceeded  to  Lucknow,  which 
they  reached  on  the  1st  of  October.  Under  special  orders  from  the 
Governor-General,  Perron  was  treated  with  the  respect  and  distinc- 
tion due  to  his  rank  in  Sindhia's  army,  and  received  the  customary 
salutes  and  marks  of  attention.  The  Eesident  at  Lucknow  was,  how- 
ever, ordered  to  accelerate  his  departure  for  Calcutta,  hut  notwith- 
standing this  his  start  was  delayed  by  several  circumstances. 

Soon  after  his  arrival  at  the  Oudh  capital  Perron  wrote  to  Lord 
Wellesley,  stating  that  at  the  time  of  quitting  Sindhia's  service  he 
had  deposited  twenty-two  lakhs  of  rupees  in  the  keeping  of  a  Native 
banker,  besides  other  valuable  personal  property,  and  that,  on  re- 
quiring their  restoration,  he  was  informed  the  money  and  valu- 
ables were  at  Agra,  and  could  not  therefore  be  delivered  up.  In 
consequence  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  money  behind  him,  and  now 
requested  that  it  might  be  restored. 

This  was  the  treasure  which  had  induced  the  garrison  at  Agra  to 
depose  and  confine  their  European  officers ;  but  they  had  been  fright- 
ened to  divide  it  owing  to  the  warnings  of  Colonel  George  Hessing, 
and  the  money  was  found  intact  when  General  Lake  captured  the 
fortress.  He  questioned  all  Sindhia's  European  officers  about  it,  who 
declared  it  was  public  treasure,  and  not  Perron's  private  property. 
It  was  clearly  in  the  possession  of  the  garrison  at  the  time  of  taking 
Agra,  and  although  the  terms  of  capitulation  permitted  the  troops 
to  carry  their  private  property  away  with  them,  they  left  this 
money  behind.  General  Lake,  on  these  groimds,  declared  it  to  be 

327 


828  PERRON. 

lawful  prize  money,  and  in  this  view  he  was  supported  by  the 
Governor-General,  who,  in  answer  to  Perron's  application,  informed 
him  that  when  he  was  allowed  to  retire  into  the  Company's  territory, 
the  safeguard  granted  only  extended  to  his  person  and  the  property 
he  carried  with  him,  and  that  the  British  Government  could  not 
guarantee  the  safety  of  anything  he  had  left  behind  in  the  hands  of 
an  enemy  with  whom  the  English  were  at  war. 

Of  this  incident  Perron,  who  was  naturally  much  exasperated  at 
losing  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  million  sterling  at  one  fell  swoop, 
made  considerable  capital  on  his  return  to  Europe,  by  which  time  the 
sum  in  question  appears  to  have  more  than  quadrupled  itself,  whilst 
its  confiscation  came  to  be  described  as  an  actual  robbery  on  the  part 
of  the  British  Government.  Major  Thorn  distinctly  traverses  this 
statement,  for  he  says,  "  Perron,  with  a  singular  effrontery,  but  with 
an  address  peculiar  to  adventurers,  being  no  doubt  well  acquainted 
with  the  deposit  of  the  treasure  at  Agra,  laid  claim  to  twenty-two 
lakhs  taken  there."  In  this  there  is  a  suggestion  of  mala  fides,  which 
is  not  confirmed  by  Louis  Ferdinand  Smith,  who  states  that  "  before 
the  declaration  of  war  Perron  sent  all  his  ready  money  to  the  fort  of 
Agra."  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  treasure  was  derived  from  his 
Jaidad  revenue  collections,  and  that  technically  it  was  Perron's ;  but 
it  had  passed  out  of  his  keeping  and  control  into  that  of  his  mutinous 
troops,  and  he  lost  it,  not  unfairly,  but  by  the  chances  of  war.  Its 
loss  by  no  means  crippled  him,  for  in  addition  to  the  property  he  was 
able  to  convey  away,  he  had  a  large  sum  of  money  (estimated  by  one 
authority  at  .£280,000)  invested  in  the  East  India  Company's  funds  ! 
In  pecuniary  investments  this  shrewd  Frenchman  ran  with  the  hare 
and  hunted  with  the  hounds. 

On  the  8th  of  October  Perron  left  Lucknow  for  Calcutta,  from 
whence  he  retired  to  Chandernagore,  where  he  resided  for  some  time 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  French  settlement.  It  was  not  until  the 
following  year  that  he  embarked  for  Europe,  nor  until  September, 
1805,  that  he  landed  at  Hamburg,  where  de  Bourienne  was  the  French 
Consul,  from  whose  memoirs  the  following  passage  is  extracted : — 

"Every  one  has  heard  speak  of  the  famous  General  Perron,  who 
has  played  such  a  great  role  amongst  the  Mahrattas.  In  1805  he 
arrived  at  Hamburg  and  applied  to  me  for  a  passport,  and  I  had  a 
most  interesting  conversation  with  him  about  his  truly  extraordinary 
adventures.  He  said  that  he  had  possessed  more  than  fifty  million 
francs,  but  that  in  order  to  obtain  permission  to  leave  India  he  had 
been  obliged  to  pay  the  English  three-quarters  of  the  money.  Most 
pf  his  goods  were  magnificent  cashmeres.  He  was  good  enough  to 


PERRON'S  RETIREMENT,  CHARACTER,  AND  DEATH.  329 

offer  me  one.  General  Perron  had  only  one  arm.  He  was  accom- 
panied by  two  copper-coloured  children — a  boy  and  a  girl — the  off- 
spring of  an  Indian  mother.  Their  costume  attracted  considerable 
attention  wherever  they  went.  They  did  not  speak  a  word  of  French. 
Their  father  exhibited  great  affection  for  them,  and  caressed  them 
continually. 

"  Some  days  after  General  Perron's  arrival  Bourguien  also  arrived 
and  applied  for  a  passport  for  France.  He  was  at  daggers  drawn 
with  Perron,  who  spoke  of  him  with  similar  bitterness.  They  pro- 
fessed a  profound  contempt  for  each  other,  and  accused  each  other  of 
being  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  Mahrattas.  Both  had  immense 
fortunes.  I  do  not  know  what  has  become  of  Bourguien,  but  General 
Perron  retired  to  a  magnificent  estate  which  he  bought  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Vendome." 

Perron,  after  landing,  proceeded  to  Paris,  where  he  was  coldly 
received  by  Bonaparte.  He  did  not  remain  long  in  the  capital, 
but  withdrew  to  a  domain  which  he  purchased  at  Fresnes,  near 
Montoire,  hi  the  department  of  Loire  et  Cher.  His  mother  and 
sisters  were  alive  when  he  returned  to  France,  and  received 
him  with  open  arms.  Soon  after  he  had  settled  down  he  married 
a  Madamoiselle  Du  Trochet,  by  whom  he  had  a  large  family. 
Two  of  his  daughters  by  this  union  were  subsequently  married 
to  two  members  of  the  Rochefoucauld  family,  one  of  whom,  the 
Countess  Frederic  de  Eochefoucauld,  died  so  recently  as  March, 
1892,  whilst  the  "  copper-coloured  damsel  "  gave  her  hand  to 
M.  Alfred  de  Montesquiou.  In  his  luxurious  retirement  at  Fresnes 
Perron  passed  nearly  thirty  years,  but  towards  the  end  of  his  life  he 
was  suspected  of  republicanism  and  subjected  to  police  surveillance 
by  the  French  Government,  and,  in  the  words  of  a  French  author, 
"  found  in  his  own  country  misery  and  persecution." 

Of  the  three  careers  of  military  adventure  which  have  been 
sketched  in  this  work,  Perron's  was,  without  doubt,  the  most  re- 
markable. Starting  from  a  beginning  as  humble  as  that  of  George 
Thomas,  he  obtained  a  political  power  exceeding  that  of  De  Boigne, 
notwithstanding  which  he  leaves  us  with  the  conviction  that  of  the 
three  he  was  the  inferior  man.  He  lacked  the  daring  and  the  per- 
sonal attraction  that  distinguished  Thomas,  and  he  wanted  the 
dignity  and  straightforwardness  of  De  Boigne.  Not  that  Perron  was 
deficient  in  personal  courage  or  self-esteem  :  no  one  could  impugn  his 
spirit  during  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  nor  deny  his  appreciation 
of  position  towards  its  close.  But  there  came  a  time  when  he  pre- 


880  PERRON. 

ferred  to  gain  bis  ends  by  cunning  and  intrigue  rather  tban  by  good 
bonest  figbting,  when  be  stooped  to  grossest  favouritism,  and  was 
guilty  of  injustice  and  treachery,  and  when  bis  proper  pride  degene- 
rated into  vulgar  vanity,  and  bis  actions  gave  the  h'e  to  his  protesta- 
tions of  courage  and  fidelity. 

It  is,  perhaps,  difficult  for  an  Englishman  to  approach  the  consider- 
ation of  Perron's  character  without  prejudice.  Had  he  carried  his 
pronounced  hostility  towards  the  British  nation  to  its  legitimate  end, 
and  fought  us  in  the  field  of  battle,  be  might  have  claimed  more 
from  our  generosity  than  he  can  from  our  impartiality.  But  be 
declined  to  cross  swords,  preferring  rather  to  accept  quarter,  which  be 
repaid  by  copious  abuse  when  his  personal  safety  was  no  longer  at 
risk,  and  this  rouses  oiir  indignation  and  ranges  us  against  him. 

And  when  we  come  to  judge  bis  career  as  a  whole  we  cannot  but 
condemn  much  that  was  evil  in  it.  His  later  loyalty  to  Sindbia,  and 
his  creditable  rejection  of  General  Lake's  overtures,  do  not  condone 
his  long  course  of  faithlessness  and  treachery  during  the  war  with 
Holkar,  when  he  sacrificed  his  master's  interests  with  callous  uncon- 
cern. His  courage  at  Sounda  is  obliterated  by  bis  craven  retreat  at 
Koil.  We  cannot  help  reading  with  contempt  bis  appeal  to  Pedron  to 
hold  the  fort  at  Aligarh,  when  we  remember  bis  own  spiritless  sur- 
render a  week  later.  And  if  bis  fall  was  due  to  his  desertion  by  bis 
chosen  favourites,  Bourguien  and  Dudrenec,  their  defection  suggests 
bow  little  there  must  have  been  that  was  lovable  in  their  chief. 
The  recriminations  Perron  entered  into  with  Bourguien  at  Hamburg 
display  bis  smallness  of  mind,  as  does  also  his  vainglorious  boast  that 
by  bis  intrigues  he  compelled  De  Boigne  to  resign  bis  post.  This 
latter  assertion  comes  to  us  on  the  authority  of  General  Belliard,  who 
was  in  a  confidential  post  under  Bonaparte  in  Egypt,  where  he  had 
charge  of  all  the  First  Consul's  intrigues  and  correspondence  with 
the  Native  states  of  India.  This  officer  records  that,  on  bis  return  to 
Europe,  Perron  boasted  that  he  had  compelled  De  Boigne  to  quit 
Sindbia's  service.  De  Boigne  never  stooped  to  notice,  far  less 
to  reply  to  these  allegations,  which  only  leave  in  our  minds 
a  wonder  that  Perron  should  so  self-convict  himself  of  baseness. 
That  Perron  was  cunning,  grasping,  and  avaricious,  bis  financial  feats 
clearly  show.  Who  shall  say  from  bow  many  helpless  wretches, 
and  by  what  dire  exactions,  his  fortune  was  accumulated  ?  If — as  he 
stated— it  amounted  to  two  millions  sterling,  ite  very  magnitude  is 
its  own  condemnation,  for  such  a  vast  sum  could  never  have  been 
honestly  accumulated  in  the  time  and  circumstances  which  were  open 
to  him, 


PERRON'S  RETIREMENT,  CHARACTER,  AND  DEATH.  331 

This  is  the  dark  side  of  the  picture.  On  the  other  hand  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  Perron  made  the.  most  of  his  opportunities,  and  if  he 
succeeded  to  a  great  position  by  favour  of  fortune  and  intrigue,  he 
held  and  improved  his  station  by  his  own  energy  and  determination. 
He  was  as  industrious  as  he  was  able.  Colonel  Collins  bears  testi- 
mony to  the  former  quality  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Governor- 
General  in  March,  1802,  just  after  Perron's  visit  to  Ujjain.  "  I 
noticed  "  (he  writes)  "  the  unwearied  attention  of  General  Perron  to 
improve  and  strengthen  the  works  of  the  different  fortresses  garrisoned 
by  his  troops,  and  mentioned  [to  the  Mahratta  ministers]  the  high 
estimate  in  which  he  was  held  by  all  the  Eajpoot  and  Sikh  sirdars, 
who  were  chiefly  guided  by  his  counsel  and  direction."  As  to  Perron's 
ability,  the  singular  success  with  which  he  wielded  the  power  left  to 
him  by  De  Boigne  admits  no  doubt  of  it.  His  methods  may  have  been 
questionable,  and  his  administration  unjust  and  venal,  but  he  held 
the  reins  with  a  firm  and  skilful  hand.  His  reputation  as  a  soldier 
was  established  by  the  capture  of  Kanaund  and  the  victory  of  Kardla. 
His  subjugation  of  Rajputana  and  his  defeat  of  Lakwa  Dada  were 
masterly,  vigorous,  and  brave  demonstrations  of  military  capacity. 
The  plan  of  campaign  which  he  proposed  for  the  war  against  the 
British  does  credit  to  his  powers  of  organisation  and  his  talent  as  a 
general,  and  had  it  been  carried  out  in  its  entirety  would  have  resulted 
in  a  long  and  bloody  struggle  for  supremacy.  Of  his  contest  with 
George  Thomas  perhaps  the  best  that  can  be  said  of  it  is  that  Perron 
won  ;  if  he  exhibited  signs  of  personal  weakness  in  its  conduct ;  if,  as 
has  been  suggested,  his  courage  was  doubtful,  he  at  least  continued  to 
keep  his  grip  on  Hindustan  throughout  the  crisis,  and  when  it  was 
over  immediately  advanced  his  power  to  the  Sutlej.  Even  when  his 
influence  with  Sindhia  was  gone,  and  he  was  peremptorily  ordered  to 
give  up  possession  of  all  the  districts  he  held,  except  his  own  Jaidad, 
he  evaded  obedience,  and  to  the  end  retained  his  government  intact. 
Throughout  his  career  he  was  opposed  by  many  enemies,  but  he 
triumphed  over  all.  The  three  most  powerful  ones  were  Balloba 
Tantia,  Lakwa  Dada,  and  George  Thomas  :  they  all  died  in  flight  or 
defeat.  Ambaji  Inglia  alone  prevailed  over  him,  and  the  victory  he 
purchased  with  gold  was  a  dear  and  empty  one. 

In  addition  to  these  internal  foes,  there  was  a  far  more  powerful 
external  hostility  opposed  to  him.  The  consideration  in  which  the 
Marquis  Wellesley  held  Perron's  influence  towards  the  end  of  his 
career  has  been  shown.  But  it  was  not  only  in  1803  that  the  Gover- 
nor-General considered  him  dangerous ;  so  far  back  as  1798,  when 
Zeman  Shah's  invasion  threatened  India,  Lord  Wellesley  wrote  to, 


382  PERRON. 

Colonel  Collins  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Your  particular  attention 
must  be  given  to  the  conduct  of  M.  Perron.  We  must  counteract  any 
attempt  from  him  to  establish  a  state  in  Hindustan.  He  would 
undoubtedly  assist  Zeman  Shah,  and  perhaps  enter  into  his  service  in 
the  event  of  Scindia's  fall.  ...  I  cannot  believe  that  M.  Perron  would 
give  a  cordial  support  to  any  cause  that  we  might  favour.  We  must 
never  forget  that  he  is  a  Frenchman." 

In  the  face  of  this  determination  Perron  did  establish  "  a  state  in 
Hindustan,"  as  Lord  Wellesley  admitted  four  years  later.  "  General 
Perron,"  he  recorded,  "  has  obtained  the  exercise  of  sovereign 
authority  over  a  territory  whose  annual  revenues  amount  to  near  two 
millions  sterling,  and  has  negotiated  treaties  and  alliances  with  several 
petty  states  in  his  own  name." 

When  we  consider  what  Perron  was — a  runaway  sailor  from  a 
French  frigate — and  what  he  became — a  person  exercising  sovereign 
authority  over  Hindustan — and  this  in  spite  of  the  active  opposition  of 
many  enemies  in  the  court  he  served,  and  Lord  Wellesley 's  expressed 
intention  of  opposing  him,  we  must  allow  him  the  full  credit  of  an 
achievement  as  extraordinary  as  it  was  great. 

It  has  been  asserted  that  the  Marquis  Wellesley  over-estimated 
Perron's  power,  and  that  the  adventurer  was  not  such  a  dangerous 
individual  as  the  Governor-General  found  it  convenient  to  make  out. 
It  was  not  the  man  but  the  principle  that  Lord  Wellesley  feared. 
He  regarded  Perron  as  the  active  representative  of  the  French  inte- 
rest in  India.  It  is  known  that  Perron  was  in  friendly  communica- 
tion with  Eaymond,  and  after  that  officer's  death  with  his  successor, 
Piron,  at  Haidarabad ;  and  also  with  the  French  faction  in  Mysore. 
The  alliance  of  these  three  parties,  which  was  solely  prevented  by 
Lord  Wellesley's  sagacity  and  statesmanship,  would  have  threatened 
the  English  with  a  graver  peril  from  French  ambition  than  any 
actually  experienced.  When  Piron's  corps  was  broken  up,  and  Tipu's 
French  auxiliaries  surrendered  at  Seringapatam  half  the  danger  of  the 
situation  was  demolished.  But  there  still  remained  sufficient  to 
require  the  most  eager  vigilance  and  precaution  ;  and  when  Perron 
sought  the  countenance  and  help  of  Bonaparte,  the  final  contest  could 
no  longer  be  safely  delayed,  nor  the  means  taken  to  secure  success  too 
carefully  guarded.  The  simultaneous  and  marvellously  rapid  victories 
of  Generals  Lake  and  Wellesley  gave  rise  to  an  impression  that  the 
enemy  they  vanquished  could  not  have  been  so  formidable  as  the 
Governor-General  asserted,  and  on  these  grounds  he  was  publicly 
attacked  by  many  persons,  notably  by  Sir  Philip  Frances — one  of 
those  virtuous  instruments  of  chastisement  not  altogether  unknown  in. 


PERRON'S  RETIREMENT,  CHARACTER,  AND  DEATH,  333 

modern  parliaments — and  by  the  discredited  historian  James  Mills. 
But  their  argument  that  because  Perron's  Brigades  were  so  soon 
defeated  and  dispersed,  therefore  they  could  not  have  been  as  power- 
ful as  Lord  Wellesley  represented,  was  unjust  to  many.  It  was 
unjust  to  De  Boigne's  stubborn  battalions,  who  displayed  such  heroic 
courage  at  Laswari  and  Assaye,  and  although  deserted  by  their  Euro- 
pean officers  fought  with  a  valour  that  has  never  been  equalled  by  any 
Native-led  armies  in  India.  It  was  unjust  to  Perron,  for  no  one  can 
deny  that  he  kept  his  army  up  to  its  ancient  standard  of  excellence — 
and  indeed  the  rank  and  file  who  fought  to  the  death  were  far  more 
worthy  of  praise  than  the  officers  who  left  them  before  a  shot  was 
fired.  It  was  unjust  to  General  Lake  and  General  Wellesley,  since  it 
belittled  their  achievements  by  suggesting  that  their  victories  were  too 
cheaply  won,  when  the  very  opposite  was  the  case.  And,  lastly,  it 
was  unjust  to  the  Governor-General,  whose  statesmanlike  policy  had 
weakened  the  effect  of  Perron's  power  by  previously  destroying  those 
who  would  have  been  his  allies  in  an  international  struggle  between 
France  and  England  for  the  possession  of  India. 

As  regards  Perron  himself,  it  is  true  that  his  influence  was  waning 
when  the  war  broke  out.  He  had  passed  his  zenith,  and  his  personal 
power  was  on  the  decline.  At  a  defined  period  in  his  career  this 
change  became  manifest,  and  it  was  due  in  a  principal  degree  to  his 
own  faults  and  failings.  Skinner  describes  the  commencement  of  this 
moral  decadence  in  1801.  "  Perron  now  began  to  feel  his  power,  and 
to  change  his  manner.  Instead  of  being,  as  formerly,  a  good,  plain, 
honest  soldier,  beloved  by  his  soldiery  and  esteemed  by  all  about  him, 
he  began  to  turn  his  ears  to  flattery,  and  to  neglect  merit,  while  bis 
favourites  got  all  the  good  appointments,  and  he  himself  only  thought 
of  amassing  money."  No  personal  government  could  safely  pursue 
such  a  course  without  risk :  it  was  bound  to  end  in  danger  and  dis- 
aster. When  once  the  controlling  hand  entrusted  the  reins  to  incom- 
petent subordinates,  and  began  to  grope  for  gold,  the  whole  fabric  of 
administration  was  weakened.  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  confirms  this. 
"Unfortunately  for  Perron,"  he  writes,  "every  low  Frenchman  he 
advanced  with  outrage  to  others  repaid  his  unjust  preference  with 
ingratitude.  His  army  was  a  miniature  of  the  French  Eevolution. 
Wretches  were  raised  from  cooks,  bakers,  and  barbers  to  majors  and 
colonels,  and  absurdly  entrusted  with  the  command  of  brigades.  .  .  . 
I  speak  the  calm  language  of  impartiality.  I  have  no  personal  dis- 
like to  Perron,  nor  have  I  received  more  injury  from  him  than  any 
other  British  subject  who  had  the  mortifying  misfortune  to  resort  to 
him  for  service.  Every  low  Frenchman  was  put  over  us  hi  rank. 


334  PERXON. 

This  would  not  have  been  so  unjust  if  they  had  superior,  or  even  equal 
merit" 

As  regards  Perron's  final  surrender,  Smith  judges  it  leniently.  "  I 
do  not  approve  of  Perron's  principles,  nor  do  I  admire  his  character, 
but  impartiality  obliges  me  to  declare  that  I  do  not  think  he  wanted 
either  sense,  prudence,  or  principle  in  quitting  Scindia's  service  when 
he  did,  and  seeking  protection  to  his  person  and  property  from  the 
British  Government.  I  condemn  him  for  not  advising  Scindia  to 
avoid  hostilities." 

De  Boigne's  opinion  of  Perron  has  been  quoted  in  an  earlier  part  01 
this  sketch  :  he  described  him  as  "  a  man  of  plain  sense,  of  no  talent, 
but  a  brave  soldier." 

Such  are  the  views  of  three  of  Perron's  contemporaries.  De 
Boigne's  we  may  accept  as  reflecting  truthfully  Perron's  character 
and  disposition  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  and  before  success 
had  turned  his  head.  With  regard  to  Skinner's  and  Smith's  opinions, 
even  admitting  the  unavoidable  prejudice  that  existed  in  their  minds, 
there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  hesitate  to  give  weight  to  their 
judgment.  Had  Perron's  resignation  occurred  just  after  he  won  the 
battle  of  Sounda,  his  name  might  have  been  handed  down  to  posterity 
with  De  Boigne's.  But,  like  many  another  great  man,  his  meridian 
splendour  was  dimmed  by  the  dark  clouds  that  shrouded  his  decline. 

"We  must  never  forget  that  he  is  a  Frenchman,"  wrote  Lord 
Wellesley  of  Perron,  in  1798.  Assuredly  we  never  can  forget  it,  for 
he  was  a  typical  son  of  France,  and  displayed  all  the  strength  and  all 
the  weakness  of  the  national  character.  How  earnest  he  was  in  his 
patriotism  it  is  difficult  to  estimate ;  how  much  may  be  forgiven 
him  on  the  plea  of  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  decide.  "  Remember 
you  are  a  Frenchman,  and  let  no  action  of  yours  tarnish  the  character 
of  your  nation "  were  Perron's  own  words  to  Pedron,  when  he 
exhorted  him  to  hold  the  fort  of  Aligarh  against  the  English.  "  Once 
more  remember  your  nation,"  he  reiterates ;  and  then  with  a  true 
ouch  of  Gallic  vanity,  "  The  eyes  of  millions  are  fixed  upon  you." 
If  those  were  Perron's  actual  thoughts,  how  much  more  focussed, 
must  he  have  considered,  the  eyes  of  France  upon  himself?  But  the 
knowledge,  however  much  it  influenced  his  actions,  did  not  make  him 
strong,  and  within  a  week  he  was  tendering  in  surrender  the  sword 
which  he  had  never  drawn  from  its  sheath. 

The  severest  condemnation  of  Perron  comes  from  one  of  his  own 
countrymen.  "  Perron,"  writes  a  French  critic  in  1822,  "  under  the 
protection  of  the  British  Government,  escaped  the  just  vengeance  of 
the  Marathas,  Sikhs,  Rajputs,  and  all  the  people  of  India.  He  has 


PEBBOWS  BET1BEMENT,  CHABACTEB,  AND  DEATH.  335 

returned  to  France  to  exMbit  before  our  eyes,  as  a  trophy  of  his 
infamy,  the  diamonds  and  the  millions  he  stole  from  the  miserable 
Sindhia  whom  he  betrayed.  His  infamous  treachery  was  so  odious 
to  the  Indians  that  his  name  was  long  execrated  by  them.  The  con- 
duct of  this  traitor  assured  to  the  English  the  supremacy  of  Hindu- 
stan, and  has  done  more  harm  to  the  name  of  France  than  fifty  years 
of  misconduct  and  misfortune  could  have  accomplished." 

He  died  at  his  Chateau  of  Fresnes  in  1834,  in  the  seventy-ninth 
year  of  his  age,  and  there  he  lies  buried.  And  though  it  may  seeru 
strange,  yet  it  is  true,  that  Death,  "  Eloquent,  Just,  and  Mighty,"  has 
denied  to  this  famous  Frenchman  "  those  two  narrow  words,  Hie 
jacet."  For  Pierre  Cuillier,  the  last  representative  of  the  French 
power  in  India,  and  who,  for  seven  years,  ruled  in  kingly  state  and 
with  sovereign  authority  the  fairest  provinces  of  Hindustan,  sleeps 
in  an  unmarked  grave,  above  which  posterity  may  not  even  read  the 
name  of  Perron. 


LIEUT.-COLONEL  JAMES  SKINNKR,  C.B. 
{From  a  plate  in  the  "Military  Memoir  of  Lieut. -Col.  James  Skinner,  C.B."] 


APPENDIX. 


A  MBKOSE,  E.  L.,  MAJOK.— Major  E.  L.  Ambrose  was  an  English 
f\  officer  in  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar's  service,  of  whom  little  or  nothing 
is  known,  excepting  that  he  was  the  author  of  an  Indian  tract  en- 
titled "  A  letter  on  the  present  crisis  of  affairs  in  India,  addressed  to 
Edward  Parry,  Chairman  of  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors  of 
the  Honourable  East  India  Company."  The  following  extracts  from 
the  pamphlet  are  of  interest,  as  touching  on  the  subject  of  military 
adventure  in  India  : — 

"Holker  detested — justly  detested — the  name  of  a  Frenchman, 
when  he  reflected  that  by  the  Chevalier  Dudernaigue  and  Monsieur 
Plumet,  to  whom  in  the  first  instance  he  entrusted  the  command  of 
his  brigades,  he  was  deserted  on  the  near  approach  of  Scindia's  army, 
and  left  with  his  infantry,  deprived  of  officers,  to  the  defeat  which  he 
experienced  at  Indore.  So  highly  irritated  was  he  that  he  never 
mentioned  the  country  without  signs  of  abhorrence,  and  it  was  his 
express  orders  to  the  commanders  of  brigades  subsequently  appointed, 
that  on  no  account  whatever  should  they  afford  employment  to  indi- 
viduals of  a  nation  by  him  entitled  the  Duggerbdz,  or  Faithless.  .  .  . 

"  It  is  well  known,  to  those  conversant  with  the  affairs  of  the  East, 
that  there  are  in  that  country  many  hundreds  of  thousands,  soldiers 
by  profession,  who  wander  continually  from  service  to  service,  from 
prince  to  prince,  as  the  pressure  of  the  moment  requires  their  assistance 
and  promises  them  employ.  Gain  is  their  god,  and  it  is  so  perfectly 
immaterial  to  them  whom  they  serve,  while  they  are  paid,  and  the 
minuticB  of  their  caste  attended  to,  that  an  utter  stranger,  with 
efficient  funds,  might  at  any  tune  raise  an  army  in  Hindustan,  who 
would  follow  him  and  fight  his  battles  as  long  as  his  resources  were 
sufficient  for  the  current  expenses  of  the  day.  Born  soldiers,  without 
any  other  profession  than  that  of  arms,  these  men  eagerly  flock  to  the 
standard  of  any  adventurer,  however  desperate  his  prospects,  if  he 
only  possesses  the  summum  bomtm  of  their  happiness.  In  the  minds 

22  s3' 


838  APPENDIX. 

of  these  people  no  such  sentiment  as  amor  patrice  is  to  be  found, 
above  affection  for  a  few  clods  of  earth  or  stumps  of  trees,  merely  from 
their  having  been  imprinted  on  their  recollection  from  the  sportive 
period  of  infancy.  The  Indian  is,  in  this  point,  a  citizen  of  the  world. 
It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  fathers,  sons,  and  brothers  embrace 
different  services,  and  meet  in  battle  array  on  the  ensanguined  plain 
against  each  other,  perhaps  unwittingly  to  fall  by  each  other's  hands." 

ARMSTRONG,  MAJOR. — Major  Armstrong  succeeded  Major  Plumet  in 
the  command  of  Holkar's  Second  Brigade  of  regular  infantry  in  1802, 
and  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Poonah  in  the  same  year. 
On  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with  the  English  in  1803,  Armstrong 
determined  to  quit  the  chief.  But  he  did  not  effect  this  without  the 
greatest  difficulty,  and  was  obliged  to  sacrifice  all  his  arrears  and 
most  of  his  property,  barely  saving  his  life  by  a  secret  flight.  Had  his 
intention  been  suspected  he  would  assuredly  have  shared  the  cruel 
fate  of  Vickers,  Dodd,  and  Eyan,  whom  Holkar  barbarously  put  to 
death  for  refusing  to  fight  against  their  own  countrymen.  Major 
Armstrong  lived  to  enjoy  a  pension  of  Rs.1,200  a  month  from  the 
British  Government,  as  a  compensation  for  his  loss  of  employ. 

BAOURS,  MAJOR  [orthography  doubtful ;  also  written  Bahors] . — 
Major  Baours  was  a  Frenchman,  and  began  his  career  in  the  Begum 
Somru's  force,  to  the  command  of  which  he  succeeded  in  1783,  after 
the  murder  of  Pauly  at  Delhi  When  De  Boigne  raised  his  first 
brigade  Baours  gladly  left  the  Begum's  employ  to  take  the  command 
of  a  battalion  in  Sindhia's  service.  His  career  was,  however,  soon  cut 
short,  for  he  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Patan  in  1790. 

BELLASIS,  JOSEPH  HARVKY,  CAPTAIN. — This  fine  young  adventurer 
was  probably  a  cadet  of  a  well-known  Bombay  family  of  the  same 
name,  one  member  of  which  rose  to  the  command  of  the  artillery  in 
the  Peshwa's  service.  Captain  Bellasis  was  originally  an  ensign  in  the 
Honourable  Company's  Corps  of  Engineers,  but  was  impelled  by  his 
pecuniary  embarrassments  to  seek  to  retrieve  his  fortunes  in  the  service 
of  the  Native  princes,  and  in  a  rash  moment  resigned  his  commission, 
and  penetrated  into  the  MarathA  dominions.  He  had  seen  and  heard 
of  many  adventurers  who  had  reached  the  summit  of  ambition,  power, 
and  riches  as  soldiers  of  fortune  in  the  interior  of  India,  and  who  did 
not  possess  greater  talents  or  stouter  resolution  than  himself ;  for  he 
was  a  young  man  allowed  by  all  to  be  an  honour  to  his  profession. 
His  courage  was  undaunted,  his  integrity  irreproachable,  and  his 


APPENDIX.  339 

generosity  unbounded.  He  had  an  excellent  knowledge  of  military 
science,  was  elegant  in  person,  and  endowed  with  great  activity  of 
body  and  energy  of  mind,  and  .was,  moreover,  an  excellent  scholar, 
conversant  with  Greek  and  Latin,  and  understanding  music  and 
painting.  To  these  accomplishments  he  added  a  fascinating  address 
and  an  open  disposition.  Such  was  the  young  English  gentleman 
who  in  1796  cut  himself  adrift  from  his  fellow  countrymen,  and  entered 
the  service  of  the  Maratha  chief,  Arnbaji  Inglia,  for  whom  he  raised 
four  battalions  of  regular  infantry.  He  soon  found  out  the  mistake  he 
had  made.  Ambaji  was  "  tainted  with  the  worst  principles  of  the 
worst  Asiatic,"  and  Bellasis  lacked  the  powers  of  intrigue,  the  as- 
siduity and  the  duplicity  necessary  to  rise  in  such  a  service.  Yet  he 
tried  hard  to  do  his  duty,  and  it  is  recorded  that  Ambaji's  battalions 
would  have  been  "  as  fine  as  any  in  Hindustan,  if  the  parsimony  of 
the  chief  had  not  rendered  futile  their  commander's  labour  and 
genius."  In  1797  Bellasis  was  engaged  in  the  storm  of  Lohar,  and 
in  an  assault  of  uncommon  boldness  his  battalions  suffered  heavily. 
Notwithstanding  this,  he  was  ordered,  immediately  after  the  capture, 
to  march  his  shattered  and  fatigued  corps  to  storm  another  fort,  named 
Gopalpur,  fifteen  miles  distant,  leaving  his  dead  unburied,  and  his 
wounded  unattended  to.  Such  inhuman  orders  could  only  be  justified 
by  the  most  cruel  necessity,  and  Bellasis,  with  the  fine  feelings  of  a 
soldier  and  the  propriety  of  a  commander,  refused  to  obey  them.  This 
refusal,  which  was  eagerly  expected,  was  made  the  pretext  for  dis- 
charging him  and  his  battalions,  and  plundering  their  effects.  Two 
years  later  his  distress  and  his  necessities  drove  him  once  more  into 
Ambaji's  service,  and  he  obtained  the  command  of  two  battalions  in 
James  Shepherd's  party.  With  these  he  took  part  in  the  siege  of 
Sounda,  and  whilst  gallantly  leading  his  men  on  to  victory  was  shot 
through  the  head  in  the  assault  on  Lakwa  Dada's  entrenchment. 

BERNIER,  AUGUSTINE,  MAJOR  [spelt  Bunnear  and  Burnear  by  con- 
temporary writers] . — Major  Bernier  was  a  French  adventurer,  and 
began  his  Indian  career  in  the  service  of  the  Begum  Somru,  and  was 
one  of  the  witnesses  to  that  lady's  marriage  with  Le  Vassoult  in  1793. 
Later  on  he  commanded  a  battalion  in  Perron's  Third  Brigade,  under 
Louis  Bourguien.  Bernier  was  a  brave  and  able  soldier,  and  Skinner 
states  that  at  the  battle  of  Georgegarh  in  1801  he  saved  Bourguien 
from  a  disastrous  defeat  by  his  ability  and  courage.  He  was  killed  a 
few  weeks  later  at  the  grand  assault  on  the  town  of  Hansi — a  fact 
which,  it  is  curious  to  note,  was  brought  to  light  so  recently  as  Novem- 
ber, 1891,  for  Skinner  erroneously  states  that  Bernier  was  killed  in  the 


840  APPENDIX. 

attack  on  Thomas's  outposts  whilst  rallying  his  men,  who  had  heen 
beaten  back.  A  correspondent  of  a  Lah6r  paper  thus  writes  on  the 
date  above  mentioned : — 

"  A  marble  tomb,  in  a  broken  condition,  has  been  found  by  Mr. 
Stanley  Skinner  in  his  village  of  Barsi,  close  by  Hansi,  bearing  an 
inscription  to  this  effect :  '  To  the  memory  of  Augustine  Bernier,  late 
Major  in  the  service  of  H.H.  Dowlut  Rdo  Scindia.  Killed  in  the 
storm  of  Hansi,  on  10th  December,  1801,  while  gallantly  leading  on 
his  troops.  Aged  32  years.' " 

Bernier  was  a  great  favourite  with  his  soldiery,  by  whom,  as  well 
as  by  his  fellow  officers,  his  death  was  deeply  regretted. 

BIRCH,  LIEUTENANT. — Lieutenant  Birch  was  originally  an  officer  in 
George  Thomas's  army,  in  which  he  fairly  distinguished  himself.  He 
proved  faithful  to  his  chief  during  the  long  and  trying  siege  of  George- 
garh,  and  accompanied  him  in  his  flight  to  Hansi,  which  he  helped  to 
defend  until  Thomas  was  forced  to  capitulate.  Birch  then  appears  to 
have  joined  Perron's  service,  for  he  remained  in  Hindustan,  and  was 
one  of  the  officers  in  Maratha  employ  who  took  advantage  of  Lord 
Wellesley's  proclamation  offering  pensions  to  all  British  subjects  who, 
on  the  declaration  of  the  war,  left  the  Marathas  and  passed  over  to 
the  English.  Birch  appears  to  have  been  awarded  a  pension  of  Rs.300 
a  month,  and  after  the  battle  of  Delhi,  when  General  Lake  left  Colonel 
Ochterlony  in  command  of  the  Capital,  received  the  command  of  two 
Najib  battalions  raised  to  assist  in  holding  the  city.  Soon  afterwards 
they  were  detached  against  Bapu  Sindhia,  Daulat  Rao's  governor 
in  the  Saharanpur  district,  but  were  shockingly  beaten,  and  lost  four 
of  their  guns — a  catastrophe  which  so  incensed  Colonel  Ochterlony 
that  he  refused  to  entrust  any  more  of  the  Company's  artillery  to 
Sindhia's  late  officers,  many  of  whom  were  now  in  the  British  service 
and  in  command  of  newly  raised  levies,  recruited  from  the  dispersed 
remnants  of  Perron's  Brigades.  Birch,  after  his  defeat  by  Bapii,  re- 
assembled his  battalions,  and  was  stationed  on  the  Punjab  frontier, 
where,  in  1804,  he  assisted  Skinner  to  defeat  a  large  body  of  Sikhs. 

BOYD,  J.  P.,  COLONEL. — Boyd  was  an  American.  When  Eaymond 
increased  his  corps  at  Haidarabad  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make  it  too 
formidable,  the  British  Government,  as  a  counterpoise,  suggested  to  the 
Nizam  that  he  should  raise  two  fresh  corps,  to  be  commanded  by  officers 
whose  sympathies  were  with  the  English.  Boyd,  who  owned  a  party 
described  as  "  a  ready  formed  and  experienced  corps  of  1,800  men," 
was  engaged,  and  in  1795  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Kardla.  In  the 


APPENDIX.  341 

following  year,  when  Baymond  was  at  the  height  of  his  power,  and  it 
was  rumoured  that  he  premeditated  an  attack  on  the  British  Resident's 
camp,  Boyd  and  Finglass  (another  English  adventurer  in  command 
of  a  corps)  at  once  paraded  their  troops,  and  signified  their  intention 
of  supporting  the  Company's  cause.  The  trouble,  however,  passed 
over,  and  they  were  not  called  upon  to  act.  A  few  months  later 
misunderstandings  arose  between  Boyd  and  the  Court  of  Haidarabad, 
fermented  probably  by  Raymond,  and  the  American  quitted  the 
service,  taking  his  party  with  him.  He  was  next  engaged  by  the 
Peshwa  of  Poonah,  who  paid  him  a  salary  of  Rs.  3,000  a  month.  In 
October,  1796,  Boyd  assisted  in  the  operations  which  resulted  in 
Baji  Rao  being  seated  on  the  masnad  as  Peshwa,  after  the  tragical 
death  by  suicide  of  Madhu  Rao.  The  next  year  he  was  raised  to  the 
command  of  the  Peshwa's  regular  Brigade,  and  the  last  mention  of 
him  is  in  connection  with  some  local  disturbances  which  broke  out  at 
Poonah  in  1797. 

BOUKGUIEN,  Louis,  COLONEL  [spelt  also  Bourguienne,  Bourquoin, 
Bourquin,  and  Bourkinj. — This  individual,  who  was  known  amongst 
the  Natives  as  Looee  Sahib,  was  a  Frenchman,  whose  real  name  was 
Louis  Bernard.  He  came  to  India  in  Admiral  Suffrein's  fleet,  land- 
ing at  Pondicherry,  where  he  remained  some  time.  He  then  made 
his  way  to  Calcutta,  and  enlisted  in  a  mercenary  regiment  of 
foreigners  in  the  Company's  service,  known  as  Captain  Doxat's 
Chasseurs.  Upon  the  reduction  of  that  force  Bourguieu  turned  his 
attention  to  civil  pursuits,  and  for  some  time  exercised  the  calling  of 
a  cook  at  Calcutta,  his  craft  in  culinary  matters  being  superior  to  his 
skill  in  military  ones.  Later  on  he  started  business  as  a  manufacturer 
of  fireworks,  and  in  this  capacity  accompanied  a  gentleman  named 
Gairard,  the  proprietor  of  the  Vauxhall  Gardens  at  Calcutta,  to 
Lucknow.  He  then  returned  to  the  military  profession,  and  obtained 
an  appointment  in  the  Beguni  Somru's  force,  from  which  he 
entered  that  of  De  Boigne  about  the  year  1794,  when  he  is  found 
rated  as  a  lieutenant  on  a  pay  of  Rs.  200  a  month.  No  mention 
of  his  name  appears  again  until  August,  1800,  when  he  joined  the 
Rajah  of  Jaipur,  with  one  of  Perron's  battalions,  to  assist  against 
Lakwa  Dada.  Soon  after  this  he  was  detached  to  capture  Ajmir, 
but  the  fort  proved  too  strong  to  be  taken,  and  he  was  defeated  in 
December  and  obliged  to  fall  back.  He  then  invested  the  place, 
and  on  the  7th  of  May,  1801,  secured  its  surrender  by  bribery.  But 
meanwhile  General  Perron  had  become  greatly  dissatisfied  with  his 
conduct  of  the  siege,  and  sent  Captain  Symes  to  supersede 


342  APPENDIX. 

Bourguien  was  BO  enraged  at  this  that  he  offered  his   services  to 
the   Kajah  of  Jaipur,  but  Partab   Singh   declined  to   accept  them 
for  fear  of  disobliging  General  Perron,  by  whom  he  had  recently 
been  reduced  to  a  state  of  abject  submission.     So  Bourguien  swal- 
lowed his  mortification,  and  retained  his  appointment  in  Sindhia's 
army.     He  seems  to  have  been  undeservedly  fortunate,  for  in  a  few 
weeks  he  was  promoted  to  the  command  of  the  Third  Brigade,  and 
in  August   entrusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  war  against  George 
Thomas.     A  full  account  of  this  campaign  has  been  given  in  the 
sketch  of  Thomas's  life.     Although  at  the  head  of  ten  fine  battalions 
of  infantry  and  a  large  body  of  Hindustani  horse,  Bourguien  was 
outwitted  and  outmanoeuvred  by  Thomas,  and  finally  defeated  at  the 
battle  of  Georgegarh.     This  led  to  his  supersession  for  incapacity  for 
the  second  time  within  the  year,  but  after  Pedron  had  retrieved  affairs 
Bourguien  was  once  again  entrusted  with  the  command  of  operations, 
and  eventually  forced  Thomas  to  surrender  at  Hansi.     He  was  then 
detached  with  his  brigade  to  collect  tribute  in  the  Sutlej  states,  and 
in  November,  1802,  we  find  him  at  Jind  negotiating  matters  of  con- 
siderable importance  with  Rajah  Bagh  Singh.     He  remained  in  the 
Sikh  country  till  the  middle  of  1803,  his  last  exploits  being  the  capture 
of  Kohtak,  and  the  levying  of  a  tribute  of  Us. 15,000  from  the  Karnal 
district.     In  June  of  this  year,  when  war  with  the  English  was  im- 
minent, Perron  ordered  Bourguien  to  encamp  at  Panipat,  and  shortly 
afterwards  to  march  down  and  occupy  Delhi.     In  August  hostilities 
broke  out,  and  simultaneously  Ambaji  Inglia  was  appointed  to  super- 
sede Perron.    Bourguien,  although  a  "  bosom  friend  "  of  the  General 
— Skinner  states  they  were  relatives — was  the  first  to  revolt  against 
him,  and  the  chief  instrument  in  effecting  his  downfall.     The  events 
leading  up   to  the  battle  of  Delhi,  and  Bourguien's  brief  tenure  of 
power,  have  been  fully  recorded.     He  surrendered  to  General  Lake 
shortly  after  the  British  victory,  and  was  deported  to  Calcutta,  from 
whence,  in  course  of  time,  he  found  his  way  to  Hamburg,  and  so  to 
France.     He  retired  with   "  an  immense  fortune,"   and  there  his 
history  ends.     "  He  was  not  only  a  coward,  but  a  fool,"  was  Skinner's 
brief  commentary  on  him,  and   Smith  describes  him  as  being  "  as 
wicked  as  he  was  weak."    He  gained  a  certain  reputation  from  the  mere 
fact  of  his  being  in  nominal  command  of  the  enemy  at  the  battle  of 
Delhi,  but  it  was  a  totally  spurious  one,  for  he  was  the  first  to  fly  the 
field.    With  the  exception  of  Sombre,  and  perhaps  Michael  and  Fidele 
Filoze,  there  is  no  more  contemptible  character  amongst  the  military 
adventurers  of  Hindustan  than  Louis  Bourguien,  cook,  pyrotechnist, 
and  poltroon. 


APPENDIX.  343 

BROWNKIGG,  MAJOR. — Major  Brownrigg  was  known  as  Burandee 
Sahib  amongst  the  natives,  but  there  is  no  proof  that  this  derogatory 
designation  was  anything  but  an  unhappy  corruption  of  his  proper 
name.  He  was  an  Irishman  by  birth,  and  a  very  brave  and  able 
officer,  much  liked  by  his  soldiery,  and  highly  esteemed  by  Daulat 
Rao  Sindhia,  for  whom  he  raised  an  independent  corps.  He  is  first 
heard  of  in  1799,  when  he  stormed  and  captured  the  fort  of  Kolapur, 
near  Poonah.  During  the  next  year  he  was  chiefly  employed  in 
opposing  Pareshram  Bhao,  the  Peshwa's  commander-in-chief,  during 
the  political  revolutions  and  disorders  that  prevailed  in  the  Deccan. 
He  then  accompanied  Sindhia  to  Malwa,  and  in  July,  1801,  made  his 
famous  defence  against  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar,  who,  after  defeating 
Maclntyre,  attacked  Brownrigg's  entrenched  camp  near  the  Narbada. 
Brownrigg's  force  was  vastly  inferior  in  numbers,  not  exceeding  four 
battalions,  but  his  position  was  an  exceedingly  strong  one,  with  the 
river  in  his  rear,  and  his  front  and  flanks  intersected  by  ravines, 
which  prevented  Holkar's  cavalry  from  acting.  He  was,  moreover, 
well  supplied  with  artillery,  being  accompanied  by  Sindhia's  grand 
park.  He  defended  his  position  with  great  judgment  and  intrepidity, 
and  finally  obliged  Holkar  to  retreat,  leaving  two  guns  behind  him. 
Three  months  after  this  Brownrigg  assisted  Sutherland  in  winning 
the  notable  battle  of  Indore,  in  which  Holkar's  entrenchments  were 
stormed  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  and  all  his  guns  taken.  By  this 
time  Brownrigg  had  risen  very  high  in  Sindhia's  favour,  which  made 
him  an  object  of  jealousy  to  Perron,  who,  when  he  came  to  Ujjain,  in 
March,  1802,  found  means  to  encompass  his  disgrace,  and  Skinner 
mentions  him  as  having  been  "  put  in.  arrest  under  fixed  bayonets  " 
for  intriguing  against  the  General.  What  became  of  Brownrigg's 
corps  after  this  is  not  quite  clear,  but  it  is  possible  it  was  incorporated 
in  Perron's  army,  for  a  few  months  later  Brownrigg  was  at  Koil, 
from  whence,  a  little  while  before  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with 
the  English,  he  was  sent  back  to  the  Deccan  in  command  of  five 
battalions  of  the  newly  raised  Fifth  Brigade.  Sindhia,  however,  soon 
ordered  him  back  to  reinforce  Perron's  army  in  Hindustan,  and  he 
reached  Agra  just  after  the  battle  of  Delhi  had  been  fought.  Although 
Brownrigg's  battalions  were  refused  entry  into  the  fort,  he  was  per- 
mitted to  join  Hessing,  Sutherland,  and  the  other  European  officers 
residing  there,  and  shared  with  them  the  confinement  they  were 
presently  placed  in  by  the  revolted  garrison.  After  the  fall  of  Agra, 
Brownrigg  entered  the  British  service,  obtained  the  command  of  some 
irregular  levies,  and  was  employed  in  the  war  against  Jaswant  Eao 
Holkar.  He  fell  in  an  unequal  conflict  before  Sirsa,  in  the  Hariana 


344  APPENDIX. 

district,  on  the  19th  of  February,  1804,  his  troops  being  overpowered 
by  superior  numbers  and  defeated  for  want  of  good  arms.  It  was  the 
first  repulse  he  had  experienced  in  the  course  of  twelve  years  of  active 
and  arduous  service.  He  was  an  amiable  man  and  a  fine  soldier, 
whose  defeat  of  Holkar  in  1801  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  episodes 
of  Maratha  civil  strife. 

BUTTEEFIELD,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Butterfield  was  the  son  of  an 
officer  in  the  Honourable  Company's  service.  He  appears  to  have 
sought  a  career  in  the  Native  courts  early  in  life,  and  before  1790 
was  employed  by  the  Rajah  of  Karaoli,  whom  he  quitted  in  order  to 
enter  the  service  of  Thakur  Durjan  Lai,  a  Rajput  chief,  from  which  he 
was  tempted  away  by  the  superior  inducements  of  Sindhia's  army. 
It  is  probable  that  he  joined  De  Boigne  when  the  Second  Brigade 
was  raised,  for  in  1794  he  had  risen  to  the  rank  of  a  captain,  though 
on  a  pay  of  only  Rs.  200  a  month.  Some  years  later  he  was  still  a 
captain  in  the  Second  Brigade  under  Colonel  Sutherland.  When 
Lakwa  Dada  joined  the  rebellion  of  the  Bhais,  Ambaji  Inglia  was 
ordered  to  attack  him,  and  Butterfield,  with  two  battalions  and  ten 
pieces  of  cannon,  acted  under  the  chief.  Marching  to  Eotah  they 
engaged  the  Bhais  army  at  a  place  called  Chand-kliori,  when  Ambaji's 
irregular  troops  deserted,  and  the  whole  brunt  of  the  attack  fell  upon 
Butterfield's  two  battalions.  After  fighting  for  two  hours  it  became 
apparent  that  not  only  cowardice  but  treachery  was  rife  in  Ambaji's 
army,  for  some  of  his  troops  went  over  to  Lakwa,  in  consequence  of 
which  Butterfield  was  forced  to  retire,  and  lost  a  great  number  of 
men  before  he  could  get  to  a  place  of  safety.  Eventually  he  made 
good  his  retreat  to  Shergarh.  For  his  conduct  on  this  occasion  he 
received  a  very  flattering  letter  from  Perron.  No  further  mention  of 
his  services  can  be  found. 

DAWES,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Dawes  was  an  officer  in  Perron's  First 
Brigade  under  Sutherland.  Little  is  known  of  his  career.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1802,  he  was  detached  by  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  to  pursue  Holkar 
after  his  defeat  at  Indore.  Dawes  had  only  four  battalions  of  regular 
infantry  and  six  ragamuffin  battalions  belonging  to  Ambaji,  and 
was  unable  to  effect  anything  of  importance,  or  stay  Holkar's  rapid 
predatory  course,  though  he  carried  on  a  desultory  campaign  in 
Khandesh  for  some  months,  and  won  a  few  small  skirmishes.  When 
Holkar  advanced  against  Poonah,  Dawes  was  sent  to  oppose  him. 
His  army  was  utterly  inadequate  for  the  work,  and  inferior  in  every 
respect  to  Jaswant  Rao's,  notwithstanding  which  he  strongly  urged 


APPENDIX.  345 

Sudaseo  Bhao,  the  Maratha  general,  to  force  a  battle.  The  defeat 
which  followed  is  historical,  and  was  the  indirect  cause  of  the  war 
between  the  English  and  Sindhia  in  the  following  year.  Dawes's 
battalions  behaved  with  signal  courage,  fully  sustaining  their  reputa- 
tion, but  they  were  completely  overpowered.  Of  their  four  officers, 
three  —  Dawes,  Catts,  and  Douglas  —  were  killed,  and  one  taken 
prisoner.  The  guns  lost  on  this  occasion  were  the  first  ever  captured 
in  action  from  any  of  De  Boigne's  battalions. 

DERRIDON,  Louis,  MAJOR  [spelt  also  Deridan,  Derridoven,  and 
Dareebdoon]. — Major  Derridon  was  a  half-bred  Frenchman  and 
brother-in-law  to  General  Perron,  who  married  his  sister.  He  was 
also  related  to  Colonel  John  Hessing,  probably  in  the  same  degree,  for 
the  Colonel's  son,  George  Hessing,  is  described  by  Skinner  as  Perron's 
nephew.  Major  Derridon  commanded  a  battalion  in  Hessing's  corps, 
and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Ujjain,  when  Holkar  defeated  four  of 
Sindhia's  battalions,  and  killed  nearly  all  their  officers.  In  this  action 
Derridon  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner,  and  Colonel  John  Hessing 
paid  Es.  40,000  to  ransom  him  from  Holkar,  though  Sindhia,  according 
to  a  local  paper  published  at  the  time,  subsequently  refunded  the 
amount.  Derridon  then  repaired  to  Hindustan,  and  when  Perron 
discharged  most  of  his  English  officers  in  1802,  received  a  high 
appointment  in  his  army.  He  was  at  Agra  when  the  fort  was 
captured  by  General  Lake  in  1803.  Lady  Fanny  Parkes,  in  her 
"  Wanderings  of  a  Pilgrim  in  Search  of  the  Picturesque,"  incidentally 
mentions  that  this  officer  was  living  at  Koil  in  1838,  "in  a  house 
formerly  the  property  of  General  Perron."  His  grandsons  were 
owners  of  the  same  property  as  late  as  1871. 

DODD,  MAJOR. — Major  Dodd  was  an  Englishman,  and  succeeded 
Captain  Gardner  in  the  command  of  a  brigade  in  Jaswant  Rao 
Holkar's  service,  which  was  composed  of  four  battalions  of  infantry, 
200  cavalry,  and  20  guns.  It  is  probable  he  took  part  in  the  battle  of 
Poonah.  He  was  one  of  the  British  officers  beheaded  by  Holkar  in 
1804  for  refusing  to  fight  against  their  own  countrymen. 

DONELLY,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Donelly  was  an  Irishman,  and  com- 
manded a  battalion  in  Perron's  Second  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Pohl- 
111  an.  All  that  is  known  of  him  is  that  he  was  killed  at  the  storming 
of  Shahpura  in  1799,  when  Pohlman  was  beaten  back  with  a  loss  of  a 
thousand  men  killed  and  wounded.  Perron  in  a  letter  to  De  Boigne 
mentions  the  death  of  this  officer,  whom  he  refers  to  as  "  your  protege, 
Donelly." 


346  APPENDIX. 

DRUGEON,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Drugeon  was  a  Savoyard  by  birth, 
and  a  countryman  of  De  Boigne.  He  was  born  at  Hyenne,  near 
Chambery  where  his  father  resided  in  the  chateau  of  Bergen.  The 
circumstance  of  his  brother  having  risen  to  the  rank  of  a  general  in  the 
Sardinian  army  seems  to  indicate  that  Captain  Drugeon  was  a  man  of 
good  family.  In  1787  he  was  at  Paris,  and  probably  came  out  to  India 
in  the  French  service.  He  was  one  of  De  Boigne's  oldest  officers,  and 
in  May,  1794,  was  Brigade-Major  of  the  Second  Brigade,  and  drawing 
Es.  400  a  month  pay.  When  Perron  was  transferred  to  the  command 
of  the  First  Brigade  and  sent  to  the  Deccan,  Drugeon  accompanied  him, 
and  succeeded  to  his  command  in  1797,  when  he  was  promoted  to  De 
Boigne's  vacated  post.  Drugeon  saw  some  fighting  at  Poonah,  but  not 
of  a  very  creditable  kind.  In  June,  1798,  after  the  Bhais  had  fled  for 
protection  to  Amrat  Rao,  that  chief  was  induced  by  Sindhia  to  repair  to 
Poonah  for  negotiation.  But  no  sooner  had  he  encamped  on  the  out- 
skirts of  the  city  than  Ghatkay  Rao,  Sindhia's  father-in-law,  made  a 
treacherous  attack  upon  him  with  two  Brigades  of  infantry  under 
Drugeon's  command.  Opening  fire  from  twenty-five  guns  upon  Amrat 
Rao's  unsuspecting  troops,  he  speedily  threw  them  into  confusion,  and 
then  charging  with  the  infantry  put  them  to  flight  and  plundered  their 
camp.  Soon  after  this  Drugeon  appears  to  have  fallen  into  some  grave 
trouble,  for  a  local  paper  records  that  he  was  deposed  by  his  own 
officers,  and,  under  orders  from  Perron,  superseded  by  Colonel  Duprat. 
He  attributed  his  disgrace  to  the  machinations  of  his  enemies.  In 
1800,  partly  at  the  request  of  De  Boigne,  who  appears  to  have  retained 
a  regard  for  him,  he  was  restored  to  Perron's  favour,  and  appointed  to 
the  commandantship  of  the  fort  at  Delhi,  and  ten  months  later  to  the 
charge  of  the  Emperor's  person,  on  a  salary  of  Rs.  800  a  month. 
About  this  time  he  wrote  an  interesting  letter  to  De  Boigne,  from 
which  many  of  the  following  particulars  are  gleaned.  He  mentioned 
he  had  saved  Rs.  30,000,  which  he  had  invested  in  the  Company's 
Funds,  and  hoped  to  be  able  to  pay  for  his  passage  to  Europe  without 
trespassing  on  this  capital,  which  would  constitute  a  sufficient  provi- 
sion for  his  old  age.  He  deplored  De  Boigne's  departure,  declaring 
that  his  presence  was  necessary  to  re-establish  Sindhia's  fortunes  on  a 
sound  basis,  and  that  his  return  would  be  hailed  like  that  of  a  Messiah, 
"  in  such  veneration  and  adoration  are  you  held,  especially  by  the 
troops,  who  invoke  your  name'  only  in  their  songs."  As  for  Perron, 
Drugeon  describes  him  as  "  like  the  King  of  Prussia  for  power,  and 
like  a  Croesus  as  regards  riches,  which  fall  on  him  night  and  day  like 
the  most  abundant  rain,  in  the  form  of  rupees.  He  is  courted  by  all 
the  rajahs  and  chiefs  of  the  country  and  also  by  Sindhia,  who  is  afraid 


APPENDIX.  347 

of  him.  You  have  made  the  soup,  which  he  has  only  the  trouble  of 
supping."  His  own  misfortunes,  Drugeon  goes  on  to  state,  had  been 
very  heavy.  "  If  my  jealous  enemies,"  he  protests,  "  had  not  done 
me  an  ill  turn  with  Perron,  I  would  have  been  a  rich  man  to-day.  I 
try  to  forget  them — for  what  can  I  do  ?  God  Almighty  cannot  undo 
what  has  already  been  done."  Such  is  his  philosophical  reflection, 
but  doubtless  he  found  a  balm  to  his  wounded  spirit  in  the  fact  that 
the  Emperor's  person,  his  correspondence,  and  all  his  household  were 
entrusted  to  his  care.  After  detailing  some  local  news,  which  has 
been  incorporated  in  the  sketch  of  Perron's  life,  Drugeon  goes  on  to 
say :  "  I  very  much  desire  to  return  to  Europe,  but  I  am  hindered 
from  doing  so  by  an  entanglement  with  a  lady  of  the  country,  whom 
I  love  very  much,  and  whom  I  have  taken  up  with  to  assist  me  to 
forget  my  past  cares.  As  to  taking  her  with  me,  can  I  do  so  ?  I  do 
not  at  all  wish  to  desert  her.  Kindly  give  me  your  advice.  She  is  a 
niece  to  the  Nawab  Suliman  Khan,  and  a  widow,  seventeen  years  old, 
and  is  incessantly  telling  me  she  would  rather  die  than  leave  me.  I 
am  speaking  to  you  as  a  confessor,  and  I  await  your  answer  before 
deciding  anything." 

Drugeon  remained  at  Delhi  till  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with  the 
English,  and  is  constantly  referred  to  in  the  Persian  newspapers  of 
the  period.  Much  of  the  information  concerning  Perron's  movements 
recorded  in  the  life  of  thai"  adventurer  has  been  gleaned  from  the 
published  reports  which  Drugeon  made  to  the  Emperor.  In  August, 
1803,  when  Bourguien  revolted  against  Perron,  and  stirred  up  a 
mutiny  in  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades,  Drugeon  resisted  him,  and 
after  refusing  to  surrender  the  treasure  he  had  charge  of,  turned  him 
out  of  the  fort,  which  he  prepared  to  defend  with  the  5,000  men  form- 
ing its  regular  garrison.  After  the  capture  of  Delhi  by  the  British, 
Drugeon,  who  seems  to  have  stuck  to  the  treasure,  attempted  to 
"  deposit  it  "  with  the  Emperor,  but  the  transaction  was  regarded  by 
General  Lake  as  a  "fraudulent  transfer,"  and  it  was  distributed 
as  prize  money  to  the  troops.  Drugeon  was  deported  to  Calcutta, 
and  eventually  found  his  way  to  Europe,  and  died  at  Nice  in  1824. 

DUDRENEC,  THE  CHEVALIER  [written  also  Du  Drenec,  Du  Dernaig, 
Duderneg,  Du  Dernec,  Dodernaigue,  Dudernaigue,  and  Dudernek. 
Known  to  the  natives  as  Hazur  Beg]. — Had  the  history  of  the  Chevalier 
Dudrenec  been  properly  recorded,  it  would  without  doubt  have  afforded 
as  interesting  a  career  of  romance  and  adventure  as  any  in  these  pages. 
The  following  fragmentary  particulars  have  been  pieced  together  from 
a  great  variety  of  sources,  and  even  in  their  skeleton  form  suggest  a 


348  APPENDIX. 

remarkably  eventful  life.  Dudrenec  was  a  native  of  Brest,  in  France, 
and  a  gentleman  of  refinement,  education,  and  agreeable  manners. 
He  came  of  a  good  family,  his  father  being  a  commodore  in  the 
French  navy.  The  Chevalier  arrived  in  India  about  the  year  1773, 
as  a  midshipman  on  board  a  French  man-of-war.  Leaving  his  ship, 
he  made  his  way  to  Delhi,  where  he  obtained  employment  in  Madoc's 
corps  in  1780,  two  of  his  fellow  officers  being  the  Count  do  Moidavre 
and  the  Chevalier  Cressy.  With  Madoc's  party  he  served  in  turns 
the  Rajahs  of  Bhartpur  and  Gohad,  and  Najaf  Kuli  Khan,  the  Wazir 
of  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam.  About  the  year  1782  Madoc  retired,  and 
Drudenec  entered  the  service  of  the  Begum  Somru,  whose  force  was 
at  this  time  commanded  by  Pauly.  With  this  lady  he  remained  till 
1791,  a  little  previous  to  which  he  obtained  the  command  of  her 
troops.  But  he  resigned  the  appointment  to  enter  the  service  of 
Tukaji  Holkar,  who  offered  him  Es.  3,000  a  month  to  raise  and 
discipline  a  brigade  of  four  battalions  of  regular  infantry.  In  the 
following  year  this  force  suffered  an  annihilating  defeat  from  De  Boigne, 
at  the  battle  of  Lakhairi,  when  all  its  guns  were  captured,  and  its  ranks 
broken  and  dispersed.  Dudrenec  only  saved  his  life  by  throwing  him- 
self down  amongst  the  dead,  and  simulating  death.  But  his  battalions 
had  shown  such  stubborn  fighting  powers  before  they  were  destroyed, 
that  Tukaji  Holkar  listened  to  their  commander's  representations  and 
consented  to  raise  another  brigade,  advancing  Dudrenec  a  large  sum 
for  this  purpose.  The  new  force  was  enlisted  in  1793,  and  two  years 
later  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Kardla,  being  associated  with  Perron's 
battalions  and  sharing  with  them  the  honour  of  a  somewhat  easy  and 
bloodless  victory.  From  the  seat  of  war  they  returned  to  Indore, 
where  they  reposed  in  peace  for  three  or  four  years,  and  by  1797  their 
strength  had  increased  to  six  battalions.  On  the  death  of  Tukaji 
Holkar,  Dudrenec  was  much  puzzled  whether  to  cast  in  his  lot  with 
the  imbecile  but  rightful  heir,  Kasi  Rao,  or  with  the  dashing  but  ille- 
gitimate Jaswant  Rao.  He  declared  for  the  former,  and  for  a  time 
carried  on  a  campaign  against  Jaswant  Rao,  whom  he  at  first 
defeated,  but  at  whose  hands  he  sustained  a  serious  reverse  in  1798. 
After  this  Amir  Khan,  Holkar's  brilliant  ally  &n((fidus  achates,  found 
means  to  tamper  with  Dudrenec's  troops,  and  by  offering  them  in- 
creased pay  gained  over  a  great  number,  and  created  a  mutiny  amongst 
the  rest,  when  they  were  encamped  at  Maheshwar.  The  Pathan  chief, 
galled  at  a  defeat  received  at  the  hands  of  the  Chevalier,  had  vowed 
not  to  wear  a  turban  till  he  had  reduced  Dudrenec.  This  came  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  latter  when  he  was  at  Maheshwar,  in  great  straits 
for  want  of  provisions,  and  he  sent  a  vakil  to  Amir  Khan  offering  to 


APPENDIX.  349 

come  to  terms  with  Jaswant  Rao.  The  Amir  reported  the  overture  to 
Holkar,  who,  with  characteristic  perfidy,  proposed  to  allure  the  French- 
man to  an  interview  and  then  assassinate  him.  But  the  Pathan, 
though  not  a  man  of  many  scruples,  could  not  hring  himself  to 
consent  to  this,  and,  after  some  persuasion,  extracted  a  promise  of 
honourable  terms  for  the  Frenchman.  Armed  with  this  authority,  he 
proceeded  to  Jamghat,  near  Maheshwar,  to  receive  the  Chevalier's 
surrender.  Dudrenec  met  him  some  distance  out  from  his  camp,  gave 
him  a  salute  with  all  honours,  and  invited  him  to  his  tent,  where 
he  first  desired  him  to  be  seated,  and  then  pointing  to  the  silk  hand- 
kerchief Amir  Khan  wore  in  lieu  of  a  turban,  took  off  his  own  head 
covering,  and,  with  joined  hands,  said :  "  As  your  vow  prevents  you 
from  wearing  a  turban  till  you  have  conquered  me,  see,  the  object  is 
accomplished  !  Bareheaded  I  lay  my  head's  covering  before  you,  and 
acknowledge  my  defeat.  Nay,  if  you  wish  to  make  me  your  prisoner, 
here  is  my  sword.  I  surrender  it,  and  you  may  take  me  to  your 
camp.''  This,  being  conformable  with  the  European  custom,  pleased 
Amir  Khan  very  much,  and  he  expressed  himself  fully  satisfied  with 
the  speech.  The  Chevalier  then  gave  the  Amir  his  own  turban,  and 
put  on  the  silk  handkerchief  the  Pathan  was  wearing,  after  which  he 
escorted  him  to  Maheshwar.  Having  transferred  to  him  all  his  jewels, 
stores,  and  treasures,  he  accompanied  him  to  the  Maratha  camp,  to  be 
presented  to  Jaswant  Kao.  In  consequence  of  the  protection  extended 
by  Amir  Khan,  Holkar  dared  not  harm  Dudrenec,  but  he  still  designed 
evil  against  him  in  his  heart.  "Whereupon,"  to  take  up  the  thread 
of  the  narrative  from  the  pages  of  a  Native  historian,  "  it  happened 
that  on  that  very  night  the  Maharajah  was  sitting  on  the  bank  of  the 
Narbada  river,  amusing  himself  with  firing  at  a  mark,  when  the  match- 
lock burst  and  inflicted  a  severe  wound  in  the  eye,  by  which  he  entirely 
lost  the  sight  of  it.  Of  a  truth  He  that  knows  all  things,  secret  and 
divalged,  is  not  to  be  deceived  !  In  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  upon  the 
eye  of  the  Maharajah  fell  this  just  retribution  for  the  treacherous 
designs  he  meditated  against  Hazur  Beg."  In  the  end  Holkar 
accepted  Dudrenec's  submission,  and  restoring  him  to  the  command 
of  his  brigade,  sent  him,  in  1798,  to  occupy  and  administer  the  districts 
of  Tonk  and  Kampura,  where  he  remained  two  years. 

In  1800,  when  Lakwa  Dada  was  restored  to  favour  by  Sindhia,  he 
appears  to  have  obtained  Dudrenec's  assistance  for  the  subjugation  of 
Jaipur,  in  which  Holkar  was  probably  interested.  On  the  12th  of 
March  of  that  year  the  Chevalier  effected  a  junction  with  Perron's 
second  brigade,  commanded  by  Pohlman,  and  shortly  afterwards  was 
engaged  with  his  corps  at  the  battle  of  Malpura.  A  spirited  account 


350  APPENDIX. 

of  the  charge  of  the  Rathor  cavalry,~which  destroyed  500  of  his  force, 
exists  in  the  pages  of  Skinner's  memoirs,  and  has  been  already  quoted 
in  the  sketch  of  Perron's  life. 

In  August  of  the  following  year  Dudrenec,  having  made  up  his 
mind  to  leave  Holkar,  showed  an  inclination  to  follow  the  fortunes 
of  Lackwa  Dada,  who  had  been  again  disgraced  and  deposed  from 
office  by  Sindhia,  but  he  eventually  decided  on  joining  Perron's  service, 
being  invited  to  do  so  by  the  General  himself,  who  offered  him  the 
post  of  second  in  command,  vice  Sutherland  dismissed,  and  a  brigade. 
Dudrenec  was  at  this  time  at  Rampura,  where  he  always  kept  his 
family  and  property  under  the  protection  of  Zalim  Singh.  He  had 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  escaping,  for  his  troops,  who  refused  to  follow 
his  fortunes,  pelted  him  out  of  camp,  and  then,  at  the  instigation  of 
a  Native  named  Shamrao  Nadik,  surrounded  his  house,  with  the 
intention  of  putting  him  to  death.  He  was  saved  by  the  intervention 
of  Zalim  Singh,  the  regent  of  the  ruler  of  the  territory.  Jaswant  Rao, 
on  hearing  of  this,  demanded  his  surrender  from  the  old  Rajput,  but 
the  latter  refused  to  perpetrate  such  an  act  of  treachery,  and  in  the 
end  a  small  sum  of  money  was  paid  by  Dudrenec  to  Holkar,  by  way 
of  compensation,  and  he  was  permitted  to  depart  to  Hindustan  with  all 
his  money  and  belongings. 

On  arriving  at  Koil  Dudrenec  entered  Perron's  army,  and  early  in 
1803  was  given  the  command  of  the  Fourth  Brigade.  In  February  of 
the  same  year  he  marched  to  the  Deccan  to  reinforce  Sindhia,  but 
just  before  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with  the  English  he  was  sent 
back  to  Hindustan,  and  left  Daulat  Rao's  camp  at  Jalgaon  on  the  18th 
of  July.  About  this  time  Ambaji  Inglia  was  appointed  to  supersede 
Perron  in  the  command  of  the  Brigades,  and  Dudrenec  exhibited  more 
attachment  to  the  Native  than  to  the  European  Commander-in-chief 
— a  desertion  which  stung  Perron  acutely.  On  his  way  to  Delhi 
Dudrenec  received  information  of  Bourguien's  defeat,  and  seeing  little 
prospect  of  ultimate  success,  abandoned  his  command,  and  on  the 
30th  of  November  surrendered  to  Colonel  Vandaleur  at  Mattra.  Thus 
ended  a  career  full  of  adventure,  incident,  and  peril.  The  Chevalier 
seems  to  have  been  a  singularly  unfortunate  commander,  for  he 
suffered  several  disastrous  defeats.  His  faithlessness  had  such  an 
effect  on  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar,  that  he  withdrew  all  countenance  from 
any  whose  nationality  was  French,  and  after  the  Chevalier's  defection 
gave  orders  that  no  adventurer  of  his  nation  should  be  allowed  to 
enter  his  service.  As  will  be  seen  by  this  slight  sketch  (in  which,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  there  are  many  inaccuracies  due  to  an  attempt  to 
reconcile  divergent  statements  and  dates),  Dudrenec  served  no  less 


APPENDIX.  351 

than  seven  different  masters  during  the  period  of  his  Indian  career. 
It  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  deserves  the  many  encomiums  that  have 
been  passed  on  him  by  various  writers,  for  there  is  no  record  of 
his  having  won  any  substantial  victory.  His  surrender  to  Amu- 
Khan  was  singularly  spiritless,  and  his  notions  of  loyalty  were 
decidedly  questionable. 

DUPONT,  JOHN  JAMES,  MAJOR.  —  Major  Dupont  was  a  native  of 
Holland,  and  an  officer  in  Filoze's  corps.  After  the  suicide  of  Fidele 
Filoze  he  succeeded  to  the  command  of  four  of  the  battalions  and  was 
with  Sindliia  when  war  with  the  English  broke  out.  His  force  took 
part  in  the  battle  of  Assaye,  where  they  shared  in  the  defeat  and  disper- 
sion of  Daulat  Rao's  army.  According  to  one  account  Dupont  was 
engaged  in  the  battle  of  Ujjain  in  1801,  where  he  was  wounded  and 
made  prisoner  with  Derridon  and  Humphertson. 

DUPRAT,  COLONEL. — Colonel  Duprat  was  a  Frenchman  and  an 
officer  in  Perron's  army.  He  succeeded  Drugeon  in  the  command  of 
the  First  Brigade  at  Poonah  in  1798,  but  only  held  the  post  for  a  year, 
being  relieved  by  Colonel  Sutherland.  He  was  in  command  of  five 
battalions  of  infantry  which  attempted  to  surprise  the  camp  of  Amrat 
Rao,  the  Peshwa's  brother,  after  the  Bhais  had  fled  to  him  for  protec- 
tion. This  occurred  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  June,  1798.  He  failed 
in  the  attempt,  and  being  briskly  attacked  in  return,  was  compelled  to 
draw  off,  and  it  was  not  without  considerable  loss  that  he  made  good 
his  retreat.  In  the  negotiations  which  followed  the  affair  Amrat  Rao 
was  prevailed  on  to  come  to  Poonah,  when  Drugeon  treacherously 
attacked  and  defeated  him.  Duprat's  name  does  not  appear  in  any 
subsequent  records. 

EVANS,  CAPTAIN  [also  spelt  Evens]. — Very  little  information  is  avail- 
able concerning  this  officer.  He  appears  to  have  commanded  the 
Begum  Somru's  party  after  Baours  left  it  in  1789.  He  then  entered 
De  Boigne's  service  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain  on  a  pay  of 
Rs.  400  per  mensem.  Skinner  mentions  an  officer  of  this  name  as 
having  been  taken  prisoner  with  Colonel  W.  H.  Tone  at  the  storm  of 
Sounda,  and  from  another  passage  it  is  made  apparent  that  he  passed 
into  Holkar's  service.  When  war  broke  out  with  the  English  in  1803 
a  Captain  Evens  availed  himself  of  Lord  Wellesley's  proclamation  and 
"came  in,"  receiving  a  pension  equal  to  the  pay  he  drew  in  the  service 
of  the  state  he  was  serving.  But  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  an 
officer  who  commanded  Somru's  party  so  far  back  as  1789  was  only 


352  APPENDIX. 

a  captain  in  1803,  and  there  may  have  been  two  adventurers  of  the 
same,  or  similar,  names. 

FILOZE,  FIDELE,  COLONEL  [also  spelt  Filose,  Felose,  and  Feloze]. 
— Fidele  Filoze  was  the  son  of  Michael  Filoze  by  a  Native  woman. 
"When  his  father  found  it  prudent  to  hastily  resign  Sindhia's  service 
and  leave  Poonah,  the  command  of  his  eleven  battalions  was  divided 
between  his  two  sons  Fidele  and  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze.  Fidele,  how- 
ever, retained  eight  of  these  with  him  in  the  Deccan  and  sent  three 
only  to  his  brother  who  was  at  Delhi.  The  first  mention  of  Fidele  is 
in  1798,  when  he  and  George  Hessing  were  directed  by  Sindhia  to 
arrest  Ghatkay  Rao,  whose  gross  misconduct  and  contempt  for  the 
prince's  authority  had  become  intolerable,  and  this  task  they  effected 
with  great  dexterity.  Soon  after  this  Fidele  succeeded  to  the 
command  of  his  father's  battalions.  In  1801  he  accompanied  Daulat 
Rao  to  Malwa,  and  on  reaching  the  Narbada  one  of  his  battalions  was 
detached  under  Colonel  George  Hessing  to  protect  Ujjain,  and  a 
second  shortly  followed  under  Captain  Maclntyre.  Both  were 
defeated  and  dispersed,  the  former  at  Ujjain,  the  latter  at  Niiri  The 
remaining  six  battalions  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Indore  in  October  of 
the  same  year,  and  directly  afterwards  Fidele  was  accused  of  a  foul 
act  of  treachery,  in  having  fired  into  Sutherland's  troops  as  they 
advanced.  It  was  asserted  he  had  entered  into  a  secret  understanding 
with  Holkar,  and  on  these  grounds  he  was  seized  and  confined. 
According  to  one  account  he  cut  his  throat  in  prison,  in  order  to  avoid 
the  disgrace  of  condign  punishment,  but  another  states  that  the  act  was 
done  in  a  fit  of  delirium  following  fever.  Smith,  though  admitting  his 
treason,  somewhat  unaccountably  describes  him  as  "  on  the  whole  a 
good,  ignorant  man,"  but  he  has  been  depicted  in  a  much  less  favour- 
able light  by  others,  and  Drugeon  condemns  him  as  a  traitor  who 
worked  to  ruin  a  master  who  had  loaded  him  with  favours.  This  is 
probably  the  more  correct  estimate  of  his  character. 

FILOZE,  JEAN  BAPTISTE  DE  LA  FONTAINE,  COLONEL  [known  to  the 
Natives  as  Jan  Batteejis]. — Baptiste  Filoze,  as  this  individual  is 
always  called,  was  the  younger  son  of  Michael  Filoze.  When  his 
father  fled  the  country  Baptiste  was  at  Delhi,  where  his  brother  Fidele 
sent  him  three  of  the  eleven  battalions  they  had  inherited,  and  to 
these  Baptiste  added  three  more  which  he  raised  hi  Hindustan.  This 
force  assisted  in  the  war  against  George  Thomas  in  1801,  but  was  in 
a  sorry  state  of  discipline,  and  extremely  insubordinate,  the  three 
original  battalions  being  on  one  occasion  expelled  from  Delhi  by  the 


APPENDIX.  353 

Emperor  Shah  'Alam's  orders  on  account  of  their  atrocious  conduct. 
This  appears  to  be  the  single  recorded  instance  of  that  king  of 
kings  having  voluntarily  promulgated  a  decree  which  was  carried 
into  effect,  and  both  the  order  and  its  prompt  execution  seem  to 
indicate  that  Baptiste's  battalions  were  a  public  nuisance.  After  the 
fall  of  Georgegarh  Baptiste — who,  according  to  Thomas's  memoirs, 
carried  on  a  traitorous  correspondence  with  him — returned  to  Delhi, 
and  Smith  says  that  Perron  procured  the  transfer  of  these  six 
battalions  to  his  command  by  intrigue,  and  that  they  formed  the 
foundation  of  the  Fourth  Brigade.  This  was  probably  the  case,  for  in 
1802  Baptiste  proceeded  to  Ujjain  to  take  over  the  command  of  the 
Deccan  battalions  left  vacant  by  the  suicide  of  his  brother  Fidele. 
When  war  broke  out  with  the  English  his  force  consisted  of  eight 
battalions  of  infantry,  500  cavalry,  and  45  guns.  Four  of  these  were 
beaten  and  dispersed  at  Assaye  under  Dupont,  and  Baptiste,  with  the 
remaining  four,  escaped  a  similar  fate  by  the  circumstance  of  his 
having  been  left  to  guard  Ujjain.  When  he  heard  of  Sindhia's 
crushing  defeat,  he  saved  himself  by  hurrying  off  to  Rajputana,  but 
rejoined  the  prince  on  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  and  remained  in  his 
service  for  many  years  afterwards,  being  the  single  military  adventurer 
of  Hindustan  who  survived  the  disasters  of  1803.  People  of  his  name, 
and  probably  his  descendants,  are  to  this  day  employed  in  the  court 
of  Sindhia,  and  Sir  Michael  Filoze  is  a  highly  respectable  architect  at 
Gwalior.  In  Broughton's  "  Mahratta  Camp "  there  are  several 
references  to  Baptiste  Filoze,  whose  circumstances  in  1809  were  far 
from  happy,  for  serious  disturbances  were  constantly  occurring  in  his 
corps,  which  was  seldom  out  of  a  state  of  regular  mutiny,  owing  to  the 
men  being  in  arrears  of  pay,  and  the  tyrannical  treatment  they 
experienced  from  Baptiste.  On  one  occasion  he  was  removed  from 
the  command,  after  he  and  his  European  officers  had  been  seized  and 
confined,  some  being  flogged,  while  others,  with  a  refinement  of 
cruelty,  had  their  ears  nipped  in  gunlocks,  after  which  they  were  all 
expelled  from  the  lines.  They  numbered  forty,  chiefly  half-castes,  but 
two  or  three  were  Englishmen.  A  little  later  on  Baptiste  was  rein- 
stated, through  the  interest  of  friends  at  court,  who  described  him  as 
"  one  of  the  greatest  generals  of  the  day  "  ;  which  elicited  the  shrewd 
comment  from  Sindhia  "  that  he  had  generally  found  these  very  great 
generals  were  also  very  great  rogues."  However,  Baptiste  obtained 
his  reappointment,  and  evidently  prospered,  as  the  following  extract 
from  Colonel  Sleeman's  "  Kambles  of  an  Indian  Official  "  testifies  : — 

"After  the  Dusera  festival  in  November  every  year,  the  Pindaris  go 
'  Kingdom  taking  '  as  regularly  as  English  gentlemen  go  partridge 

23 


854  APPENDIX. 

shooting  011  the  1st  of  September.  I  may  give  as  a  specimen  the 
excursion  of  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze,  who  sallied  forth  on  such  an  expedi- 
tion at  the  head  of  a  division  of  Scindia's  army  just  before  the  Piudari 
War.  From  Gwalior  he  proceeded  to  Kerowlee,  and  took  from  the 
chief  of  that  territory  the  district  of  Subughur,  yielding  four  lakhs 
annually.  He  then  took  the  territory  of  the  Rajah  of  Chundeylee,  one 
of  the  oldest  of  the  Bundlecund  chiefs,  which  yielded  about  seven 
lakhs  of  rupees.  The  Rajah  got  an  allowance  of  Rs.  40,000  a  year.  He 
then  took  the  territories  of  the  Rajahs  of  Ragooghur  and  Bahadhur- 
ghur,  yielding  three  lakhs  a  year,  and  the  three  princes  got  Rs.  50,000 
a  year  for  subsistence  amongst  them.  He  then  took  Lopar,  yielding 
two  lakhs  and  a  half,  and  assigned  the  Rajah  Rs.  25,000.  He  then 
took  Gurha  Kotlah  whose  chief  gets  subsistence  from  the  British 
Government.  Baptiste  had  just  completed  his  Kingdom  taking  when 
our  armies  took  the  field  against  the  Pindaris,  and  on  the  termination 
of  the  war  in  1817  all  these  acquisitions  were  confirmed  and  guaranteed 
to  Scindia."  Writing  in  1833  Colonel  Sleeman  adds :  "  The  present 
Gwalior  force  consists  of  three  regiments  of  infantry  under  Colonel 
Alexander,  six  under  Apajee,  eleven  under  Colonel  Jacob  (Broughton 
mentions  them  as  excellently  disciplined  in  1807,  their  commander 
enjoying  a  Jaidad  and  paying  them  regularly),  and  five  under  Colonel 
Jean  Baptiste  Filoze." 

Baptiste  remained  at  Gwalior  till  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities 
between  the  ruling  Sindhia  and  the  English  in  1843.  He  was  then 
commander-in-chief  of  the  State  army,  which  consisted  of  30,000 
regular  troops  and  the  famous  park  of  artillery  which  had  remained 
with  it  since  the  days  of  De  Boigne.  Just  before  the  battles  of  Maha- 
rajapur  and  Panniar,  Baptiste  arranged  that  he  should  be  locked  up 
by  his  own  men  so  as  to  avoid  fighting  the  English.  The  reason  of 
this  was  that  he  had  i'40,000  invested  in  Company's  paper.  With 
the  exception  of  two,  all  the  other  officers  of  his  army  withdrew  from 
the  contest,  knowing  the  hopelessness  of  success.  The  war  was  begun 
and  concluded  with  these  two  battles,  both  fought  on  the  same  day, 
and  after  it  Baptiste  and  his  officers  were  removed  from  their  com- 
mands and  employment  of  every  kind. 

Thus  Baptiste's  career  is  traced  for  forty-seven  years  in  the  service 
of  Sindhia — a  record  no  other  military  adventurer  can  boast  of. 

FILOZE,  MICHAEL,  COLONEL.  —  Michael  Filoze  was  a  low-bred 
Neapolitan  of  worthless  character,  yet  not  without  a  certain  address 
and  cunning  that  enabled  him  to  advance  his  interests.  In  his 
native  country  he  had  followed  the  calling  of  a  muleteer,  before 


APPENDIX.  355 

he  enlisted  in  the  French  army  and  came  out  to  Madras,  from 
whence,  after  several  vicissitudes,  he  made  his  way  to  Delhi,  and 
enlisted  in  the  Rana  of  Gohad's  service,  in  the  corps  commanded  hy 
Madoc.  De  la  Fontaine,  a  Frenchman,  was  a  fellow  officer,  and  it 
was  evidently  after  him  that  Michael  named  his  son  Baptiste,  who 
was  born  at  Gohad  in  1773.  In  1782,  when  the  Rana  was  defeated 
by  Sindliia  and  his  battalion  broken  up,  Michael  Filoze  lost  his 
employment,  and  it  has  been  stated  that  during  the  next  eight 
years  he  served  one  of  the  Native  states  of  Southern  India.  But 
if  so,  he  evidently  returned  to  Hindustan,  for  about  the  year  1790 
he  found  means  to  recommend  himself  to  De  Boigne,  who  ap- 
pointed him  to  the  command  of  a  battalion  in  his  First  Brigade. 
It  was  some  time  before  he  rose  to  any  substantial  rank,  for  in 
May,  1794,  he  was  only  rated  at  a  pay  of  Rs.  300  per  month.  In 
the  previous  year  he  had  been  selected  to  accompany  Madhoji 
Sindhia  to  the  Deccan,  and  later  on  he  successfully  intrigued  to 
get  his  battalion  made  into  a  separate  command,  independent  of 
De  Boigne's.  It  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  corps  he  raised,  which 
eventually  numbered  eleven  battalions.  In  1797  Michael  Filoze 
found  it  prudent  to  fly  from  Poonah,  under  the  following  circum- 
stances. Nana  Farnavis,  the  Peshwa's  prime  minister,  and  the  most 
able  statesman  in  Maratha  history,  was  induced  to  return  a  formal 
visit  of  ceremony  paid  him  a  few  days  previously  by  Daulat  Rao 
Sindhia,  of  whom  he  was  suspicious  and  distrustful.  But  Michael 
Filoze  pledged  his  word  of  honour  for  the  safety  of  the  old  minister, 
and  so  overcame  his  scruples ;  notwithstanding  which  the  Neapolitan 
seized  Nana  and  made  him  over  a  prisoner  to  Sindhia.  This  per- 
fidious act  excited  the  just  indignation  of  all  the  European  officers 
in  the  service  of  the  Native  states,  whose  general  character  was 
impugned  by  it,  and  who,  in  Grant  Duff's  words,  "  though  mere 
soldiers  of  fortune,  were  as  distinguished  for  good  faith  as  daring 
enterprise."  The  Marathas  themselves  excused  Michael's  treachery, 
saving  that  he  was  ignorant  of  what  was  intended,  and  ascribing 
it  to  sudden  coercion  by  Ghatkay  Rao.  It  should  further  be 
mentioned  that  in  a  letter  to  a  current  newspaper  Michael  Filoze 
strenuously  denied  his  guilt.  The  Nana  was  too  powerful  a  person- 
age to  be  kept  a  prisoner  long ;  for  a  time  he  was  confined  in  the  fort 
of  Ahmednagar,  but  in  the  following  year  he  obtained  his  liberty  by 
a  payment  of  ten  lakhs  of  rupees.  Directly  Filoze  heard  he  was 
treating  for  his  liberty,  and  likely  to  obtain  it,  he  decamped  to 
Bombay,  leaving  the  command  of  his  eleven  battalions  to  his  sons. 
Drugeon,  who  brands  Michael  Filoze  as  a  traitor,  mentions  that  he 


356  APPENDIX. 

set  out  for  Europe,  "but  died" — whether  on  the  voyage  or  after  his 
arrival  there  is  not  specified.  Grant  Duff  confirms  Drugeon's  estimate 
of  this  adventurer's  character,  as  does  Smith,  who  describes  Filoze's 
party  as  one  that "  never  performed  any  action  of  military  or  political 
consequence." 

FIN  GLASS,  CAPTAIN. — This  officer  was  an  Englishman,  and  formerly 
a  quarter-master  in  the  19th  Dragoons,  where  he  bore  a  good  cha- 
racter. He  and  Colonel  Boyd,  at  the  head  of  two  independent  parties, 
were  introduced  into  the  service  of  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad  as  a 
counterpoise  to  Raymond's  overgrown  power.  In  the  year  1795 
Finglass's  corps  numbered  about  800  men,  and  took  part  in  the 
battle  of  Kardla,  where  it  shared  in  the  defeat  the  Nizam  brought 
upon  himself  by  his  pusillanimity.  After  this  it  was  increased,  and 
in  1798  numbered  6,000  men.  Early  in  this  year  Eaymond  died,  and 
was  succeeded  by  Piron  in  the  command  of  the  "  French  army  " 
of  14,000,  which  was  disbanded  in  the  following  October  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Eoberts,  under  orders  from  the  Governor- 
General.  With  the  dispersion  of  these  troops,  and  the  cessation  of 
the  danger  they  threatened,  it  became  a  question  whether  or  not 
Finglass  should  be  allowed  to  retain  his  corps.  In  the  end  Lord 
Wellesley  sanctioned  its  continuance,  and,  furthermore,  permitted 
Finglass  from  time  to  time  to  purchase  ordnance,  ordnance  stores, 
and  muskets  at  Fort  St.  George.  It  is  possible  that  the  Haidarabad 
reformed  troops,  now  in  the  service  of  the  Nizam,  can  carry  their 
traditions  back  to  the  days  of  Captain  Finglass. 

FLEUEEA,  CAPTAIN  [also  written  FleuryJ. — Captain  Fleurea  was 
a  Frenchman  and  a  cavalry  officer  in  Perron's  army.  After  the 
battle  of  Koil  in  1803,  when  Perron  precipitately  fled  to  Agra,  he 
detached  Fleurea,  with  5,000  Hindustani  horse,  to  carry  fire  and 
sword  into  the  Company's  district  of  Cawnpore.  Fleurea  came  across 
a  small  British  outpost  at  Shikoabad,  commanded  by  Colonel  Con- 
ingham,  and  after  four  days'  fighting  forced,  it  to  surrender.  It  was 
not  a  very  brilliant  performance,  but  still  the  single  advantage  gained 
by  any  of  Perron's  troops  during  the  war.  On  hearing  of  the  fall  of 
Aligai'h,  Fleurea's  troopers  carried  him  back  to  Agra,  from  whence  he 
made  his  escape  with  great  difficulty  after  Perron's  flight,  joining  the 
General  at  Lucknow,  and  accompanying  him  to  Calcutta. 

FBEMONT,  COLONEL  [spelt  also  Frimont  and  Fremond]. — Colonel 
Fremont  was  a  lioyalist  and  commander  of  the  French  forces  at 


APPENDIX.  357 

Chandernagore.  But  he  quitted  the  service,  as  did  most  of  the  other 
officers  in  1790,  on  the  breaking  out  of  the  French  Revolution.  Pro- 
ceeding up  country,  he  applied  to  De  Boigne  for  employment,  and 
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  one  of  the  two  original  battalions, 
and,  when  the  Second  Brigade  was  formed,  promoted  to  the  head  of 
the  First  with  a  salary  of  Rs.  1,400  a  month.  In  1792  he  distinguished 
himself  at  the  storm  of  Balahiri,  a  hill  fort  forty-five  miles  east  of 
Jaipur,  on  which  occasion  Captain  Bulkeley  was  killed.  An  interest- 
ing account  of  this  campaign  appears  in  The  World  (a  newspaper 
printed  at  Calcutta),  in  the  following  letter,  dated  from  a  place  called 
"  Ringhass,"  on  August  6  and  10,  1792  :— 

"  We  arrived  at  this  place  on  the  5th,  our  force  consisting  of  the 
Second  Brigade  and  15,000  regular  Mahratta  horse,  but  excluding 
irregulars.  This  is  a  stone  fort,  upon  a  scientific  plan  of  construction, 
surrounded  by  a  ditch  thirty  feet  deep,  twenty-four  feet  wide,  and 
capable  of  defence  with  such  men  and  discipline  as  ours.  It  belonged 
to  the  Rajah  Deby  Sing,  a  tributary  to  the  Jeypore  Rajah,  to  whom 
he  has  refused  the  established  tribute,  amounting  to  two  lakhs  and  a 
half,  offering  only  a  small  portion.  We  arrived  early,  and  after 
summoning  the  place  to  that  effect,  at  nine  o'clock  we  opened  our 
trenches,  and  kept  up  a  severe  fire  on  the  place  till  ten  o'clock,  by 
which  time  we  had  effected  a  capital  breach  between  one  of  the 
bastions  and  a  head  of  the  curtain.  The  garrison  had  but  few  guns, 
with  which,  and  musketry,  they  contrived  to  annoy  us  heartily.  We 
opened  two  mortars  after  dark,  which  created,  as  was  intended, 
dreadful  confusion  among  them. 

"  Captain  Chambaud's  battalion  and  a  select  body  of  Rohillas  were 
ordered  for  the  storm  in  two  divisions,  with  orders  not  to  spare  the 
sioorci.  The  time,  three  in  the  morning.  However,  the  order  had 
reached  the  garrison,  and  by  a  capitulation  at  half-past  two  they 
saved  the  lives  of  the  remaining  people.  Deby  Sing  had  quitted  the 
fort  previously,  leaving  injunctions  to  his  officers  not  to  surrender  on 
any  terms.  The  garrison  are  all  prisoners  now  with  us,  and  the  stock 
of  provisions  and  stores  is  valuable  to  us.  The  valuable  property  was 
carried  off  to  the  Rajah  ;  however,  what  was  left  more  than  pays  the 
amount  offered. 

"  Deby  Sing  has  another  strong  fort,  called  Sikker,  about  eight 
cos  distant,  where  he  has  resolved  to  hold  out,  and  we  are  determined 
to  bring  him  to  implicit  obedience  or  bondage.  He  has  a  chosen 
force,  a  strong  fort,  good  guns,  and  three  months'  provisions,  and  the 
country  around  is  without  water." 

Fremont  brought  this  expedition  to  a  successful  conclusion.     The 


858  APPENDIX. 

next  mention  of  him  is  two  years  later,  at  Datia,  whither  he  was 
sent  to  punish  the  Rajah.  The  following  account  of  this  campaign  is 
extracted  from  the  "  Asiatic  Researches."  "  Gopal  Rao  Bhow  marched 
against  Dutieya  (in  1794)  to  compel  payment  of  tribute  and  exact  a 
fine.  He  was  opposed.  An  engagement  ensued,  in  which  the 
Dutieya  troops  charged,  sword  in  hand,  the  veteran  battalions  of 
De  Boigne,  which  were  commanded  by  Major  Fremont,  an  officer  of 
ability  and  experience.  The  Bundolhas  showed  no  fear  of  the  musket 
and  bayonet,  and  there  were  several  instances  of  grenadiers  cut  down, 
while  their  bayonets  were  buried  in  the  breast  of  their  assailants' 
horse.  The  Brigade  lost  300  men  in  the  attack,  and  Major  Frimont 
himself  assured  me  that  nothing  but  a  continual  discharge  of  grape 
from  the  guns  prevented  it  from  utter  destruction."  In  another 
account  the  victory  is  attributed  to  the  judicious  disposition  of  Fre- 
mont's artillery,  and  the  gallantry  of  his  men  in  some  severe  close 
fighting,  in  which  they  routed  the  enemy  with  considerable  slaughter. 

In  1795  or  1796  Fremont  died,  and  this  left  Perron  the  senior 
officer  in  the  force,  and  paved  the  way  for  his  promotion  to  the 
chief  command. 

GARDNER,  WILLIAM  LINAETJS,  COLONEL.  —  In  its  social  aspect 
Colonel  Gardner's  life  is  the  most  romantic  of  any  recorded  in  these 
pages.  Born  in  1770,  he  was  a  great  grandson  of  William  Gardner, 
of  Colleraine,  and  a  nephew  of  Alan,  first  Baron  Gardner,  a  distin- 
guished admiral  in  the  British  navy,  who  received  the  thanks  of 
Parliament  for  his  services.  Colonel  Gardner  was  educated  in 
France,  and  came  out  to  India  in  the  King's  service,  and  after  rising 
to  the  rank  of  captain  quitted  it  to  enlist  under  the  banners  of  the 
Native  princes.  There  was  a  Scotch  officer  of  the  same  name  who 
entered  Sindhia's  service  in  1792,  was  Brigade-Major  of  the  First 
Brigade  in  1793,  commanded  the  Second  'Brigade  in  1794,  and  was  at 
the  storm  and  capture  of  Sohawalgarh  in  1795,  where  he  was  assisted 
by  George  Thomas.  But  as  his  Christian  name  is  given  as  James  in 
one  place  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  was  the  same  individual  as  the 
officer  under  notice.  Colonel  William  Gardner  entered  Jaswant  Rao 
Holkar's  service  in  1798,  and  raised  a  brigade  of  regular  infantry  for 
that  chief.  But  a  disagreement  arose  between  them,  and  Gardner 
left  him.  The  story  of  his  escape  is  thus  told  by  himself: — 

"One  evening,  when  in  Holkar's  service,  I  was  employed  as  an 
envoy  to  the  Company's  forces,  with  instructions  to  return  within  a 
certain  time.  My  family  remained  in  camp.  Suspicion  of  treachery 
was  caused  by  my  lengthened  absence,  and  accusations  were  brought 
forth  against  me  at  the  durbar  held  by  Holkar  on  the  third  day  follow 


APPENDIX.  359 

ing  that  on  which  my  presence  was  expected.  I  rejoined  the  camp 
while  the  durbar  was  in  progress.  On  my  entrance  the  Maharajah, 
in  an  angry  tone,  demanded  the  reason  of  my  delay,  which  I  gave, 
pointing  out  the  impossibility  of  a  speedier  return.  Whereupon 
Holkar  exclaimed,  in  great  anger,  '  Had  you  not  returned  this  day  I 
would  have  levelled  the  Miandts  of  your  tent.'  I  drew  my  sword 
instantly  and  endeavoured  to  cut  His  Highness  down,  but  was  pre- 
vented by  those  around. him;  and  before  they  had  recovered  from  the 
amazement  and  confusion  caused. by  the  attempt,  I  rushed  from  the 
camp,  sprang  upon  my  horse,  and  was  soon  beyond  the  reach  of 
recall." 

To  account  for  Colonel  Gardner's  indignation  it  must  be  explained 
that  he  was  married  to  a  Native  lady,  and  that  the  Miandts,  or  can- 
vas walls  of  his  tent,  represented  the  privacy  of  the  zenana,  and  to 
have  cut  them  down  implied  the  exposure  of  the  inmates,  an  insult 
for  which  there  could  be  no  atonement.  Through  the  influence  of 
friends  Colonel  Gardner's  wife  and  family  were  allowed  to  join  him 
shortly  afterwards — a  piece  of  generosity  hardly  to  be  expected  from 
such  a  character  as  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar. 

The  story  of  Colonel  Gardner's  marriage,  as  related  by  himself  to 
Lady  Fanny  Parkes,  is  one  of  romantic  interest.  He  was  married  by 
Muhammadan  rites  to  a  princess  of  the  house  of  Cambay,  a  state  on 
the  western  seaboard  of  India,  and  probably  when  he  was  an  officer 
in  the  British  service.  This  is  his  description  of  the  incidents  leading 
to  the  union  : — 

"  When  a  young  man  I  was  entrusted  to  negotiate  a  treaty  with  one 
of  the  Native  princes  of  Cambay.  Durbars  and  consultations  were 
continually  held.  During  one  of  the  former,  at  which  I  was  present, 
a  curtain  near  me  was  gently  pulled  aside,  and  I  saw,  as  I  thought, 
the  most  beautiful  black  eyes  in  the  world.  It  was  impossible  to  think 
of  the  treaty :  those  bright  and  piercing  glances,  those  beautiful  dark 
eyes  completely  bewildered  me. 

"I  felt  flattered  that  a  creature,  so  lovely  as  she  of  those  deep  black, 
loving  eyes  should  venture  to  gaze  upon  me.  To  what  danger  might 
not  the  veiled  beauty  be  exposed  should  the  movement  of  the  purdah 
be  seen  by  any  of  those  present  at  the  durbar?  On  quitting  the 
assembly  I  discovered  that  the  bright-eyed  beauty  was  the  daughter 
of  the  prince,  At  the  next  durbar  my  agitation  and  anxiety  were 
extreme  to  again  behold  the  bright  eyes  that  haunted  my  dreams  and 
my  thoughts  by  day.  The  curtain  was  again  gently  waved,  and  my 
fate  was  decided. 

"  I  demanded  the  princess  in  marriage.     Her  relations  were  at  fi.rst 


860  APPENDIX. 

indignant,  and  positively  refused  my  proposal.  However,  on  mature 
deliberation,  the  ambassador  was  considered  too  influential  a  person 
to  have  a  request  denied,  and  the  hand  of  the  young  princess  was 
promised.  The  preparations  for  the  marriage  were  carried  forward. 
'  Remember,'  said  I,  '  it  will  be  useless  to  attempt  to  deceive  me. 
I  shall  know  those  eyes  again,  nor  will  I  marry  any  other  ! ' 

"  On  the  day  of  the  marriage  I  raised  the  veil  from  the  countenance 
of  the  bride,  and  in  the  mirror  that  was  placed  between  us,  in  accor- 
dance with  the  Mahomedan  wedding  ceremony,  I  beheld  the  bright 
eyes  that  had  bewildered  me.  I  smiled.  The  young  Begum  smiled 
too." 

This  young  princess  was  only  thirteen  years  old  when  she  was 
married :  "  An  event,"  says  Colonel  Gardner,  "  which  probably  saved 
both  our  lives."  She  was  eventually  adopted  as  a  daughter  by  Akbar 
Shah,  who  succeeded  Shah  'Alam  as  Emperor  of  Delhi.  For  over 
forty  years  husband  and  wife  lived  a  life  of  perfect  happiness,  and 
she  died  of  a  broken  heart  in  August,  1835,  six  months  after  Colonel 
Gardner. 

Subsequently  to  his  departure  from  Holkar's  service  Colonel 
Gardner  had  another  very  narrow  escape  for  his  life.  In  1803  he 
was  confined  a  prisoner  by  Amrat  Rao,  who,  when  war  broke  out  with 
the  English,  caused  Gardner  to  be  fastened  to  a  gun,  and  threatened 
with  immediate  execution  if  he  refused  to  take  the  field  against  his 
fellow  countrymen.  The  Colonel  remained  staunch,  and  in  the  hope 
of  wearying  him  out,  his  execution  was  suspended,  and  he  was  placed 
in  charge  of  a  guard,  who  had  orders  never  to  quit  sight  of  him  for 
a  single  instant.  "Walking  one  day  along  the  edge  of  a  steep  cliff, 
which  led  by  a  precipitous  descent  to  the  river  Tapti,  Gardner  was 
suddenly  inspired  to  make  a  daring  dash  for  liberty,  and  perceiving 
a  place  fitted  for  his  purpose,  he  called  out  "  Bismillah !  "  ("  In  the 
name  of  God  "),  and  flung  himself  down  a  declivity  some  forty  or  fifty 
feet  deep.  None  were  inclined  to  follow  him,  but  an  alarm  was 
sounded.  Recovering  his  feet,  he  made  for  the  river,  and  plunged  into 
it ;  but  after  swimming  for  some  distance  he  found  pursuers  were  gaming 
on  him,  and  sought  shelter  in  a  friendly  covert,  where,  with  merely  his 
mouth  above  water,  he  waited  until  they  had  passed.  He  then  landed 
on  the  opposite  side,  and  proceeded  by  unfrequented  paths  to  a  town  in 
the  neighbourhood,  which  was  under  the  command  of  a  Native  whom 
he  knew,  and  who  afforded  him  protection.  After  remaining  in 
hiding  for  some  time,  he  ventured  out  in  the  disguise  of  a  grass  cutter, 
and  reached  the  British  outposts  in  safety. 

At  one  time  it  would  appear,  from  a  passage  in  Major  Thorn's  "War 


APPENDIX.  361 

in  India,"  that  Colonel  Gardner  was  in  the  service  of  the  Rajah  of 
Jaipur  ;  but  in  1804  he  returned  to  his  allegiance  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment and  raised  a  famous  cavalry  corps  known  as  "  Gardner's  Horse," 
which  achieved  a  great  reputation.  His  best  services,  both  in  the  field 
and  in  diplomacy,  were  performed  under  the  King's  flag.  He  had  a 
profound  knowledge  of  the  native  character,  and  had  adopted  many 
of  the  ideas  and  opinions  of  the  people  with  whom  he  passed  a  great 
portion  of  his  life.  But  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  being  an 
acceptable  companion  to  his  own  countrymen,  with  whom  he  was 
always  a  great  favourite.  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  describes  him  as 
"  a  gentleman  and  a  soldier  of  pleasing  address  and  uncommon 
abilities."  His  figure  was  tall  and  commanding,  and  his  handsome 
countenance  and  military  air  rendered  his  appearance  very  striking. 
Lady  Fanny  Parkes,  from  whose  interesting  "  Wanderings  of  a 
Pilgrim  "  many  of  the  foregoing  facts  have  been  gleaned,  formed  an 
intimate  friendship  with  Colonel  Gardner,  and  speaks  of  him,  in  his 
old  age,  in  terms  of  the  warmest  admiration  and  regard.  For  many 
years  prior  to  his  death  he  resided  on  hisjaghir,  or  estate,  atKhasganj, 
sixty  miles  from  Agra.  His  Begum  bore  him  two  sons  and  a  daughter. 
His  eldest  son  James  married  a  niece  of  the  Emperor  Akbar  Shah. 
The  younger,  Alan,  was  united  to  Bibi  Sahiba  Hinga,  and  left  two 
daughters,  Suzan  and  Harmuzi.  The  latter  was  married  in  1836  to 
her  relative,  William  Gardner,  a  nephew  of  the  second  Baron  Gardner. 
Their  son,  Alan  Hyde  Gardner,  succeeded  to  the  title,  and  is  the 
present  holder  of  it.  He  married  in  1879  Jane,  a  converted  princess 
of  the  House  of  Delhi,  and  has  an  heir,  born  in  1881.  There  is  a  most 
interesting  pedigree  of  this  family  on  p.  420  (vol.  i.)  of  the  "  Wander- 
ings of  a  Pilgrim,"  which  illustrates  in  a  very  curious  way  the  thread  of 
connection  by  intermarriage  between  the  heirs  and  descendants  of  an 
English  Barony,  the  Imperial  House  of  Taimiir,  the  Kings  of  Oudh 
and  the  Princes  of  Cambay.  The  degree  of  relationship  is  too  intricate 
to  be  explained  in  detail,  but  the  present  Lord  Gardner  is  grandson  of 
a  Prince  of  Cambay,  and  nephew  to  a  late  Emperor  of  Delhi,  and 
a  late  King  of  Oudh.  This  sketch  cannot  be  more  suitably  concluded 
than  by  an  extract  from  Dod's  Peerage. 

"  GARDNER  (Ireland)  created  1800.  Baron  Gardner,  1806  (United 
Kingdom),  by  which  title  he  holds  his  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords. 
Baronet,  1794  (Great  Britain).  Alan  Hyde  Gardner,  son  of  the  late 
Stewart  William  Gardner,  grandson  of  the  first  baron.  B.  1836  :  M. 
1879,  Jane,  daughter  of  Angam  Shekoe.  Succeeded  his  kinsman  in 
1883.  Eesidence,  Village  Mnnowta,  near  Nadri,  Etah  district.  Heir, 
Son  Alan  Legge,  born  October  25,  1881," 


862  APPENDIX. 

GESLIN,  MAJOR. — Major  Geslin  was  a  Frenchman,  and  commanded 
a  battalion  in  Perron's  Second  Brigade.  When  the  war  of  1803  broke 
out  he  was  appointed  to  succeed  George  Hessing  in  command  of  the 
brigade,  the  latter  being  sent  to  take  up  the  commandantship  of  the 
fort  of  Agra,  rendered  vacant  by  the  death  of  his  father,  Colonel  John 
Hessing.  Geslin,  meanwhile,  joined  Bourguien  at  Delhi,  and  opposed 
him  when  he  revolted  against  Perron's  authority,  and  usurped  his 
command.  Bourguien,  having  failed  in  every  attempt  to  seduce 
Geslin  from  his  allegiance,  incited  the  brigade  to  mutiny  and  place 
the  Major  under  arrest,  which  they  did.  After  the  battle  of  Delhi, 
Geslin  was  one  of  the  officers  who  surrendered  to  Lord  Lake,  and 
were  deported  to  Calcutta. 

HARDING,  MAJOR.—  Major  Harding  was  a  very  gallant  young 
English  adventurer,  whose  career  though  short  was  brilliant.  He 
raised  a  brigade  of  four  battalions  for  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar,  which  he 
brought  to  a  high  state  of  efficiency  and  discipline.  He  met  his  death 
at  the  battle  of  Poonah,  whilst  charging  Dawes's  guns  side  by  side 
with  Holkar.  In  the  very  moment  of  victory  he  received  a  cannon 
shot  in  the  shoulder,  almost  the  last  one  fired  in  the  action.  Jaswant 
Rao,  although  wounded  in  three  places,  immediately  hurried  to  the 
spot  where  Harding  was  lying,  to  afford  him  assistance  and  consola- 
tion. But  the  wounded  officer  was  sinking  fast,  and  he  only  had  time 
to  express  a  wish  to  be  laid  to  rest  by  the  side  of  his  fellow  country- 
men in  the  burial  place  of  the  British  Residency  at  Poonah — a  dying 
request  that  was  scrupulously  fulfilled. 

HARRIOTT,  CAPTAIN.— Captain  Harriott  was  an  Englishman,  and  an 
officer  in  Perron's  Fifth  Brigade.  He  was  one  of  the  Europeans  con- 
fined by  the  mutinous  troops  at  Agra,  previous  to  the  capture  of  that 
fortress  by  General  Lake.  Taking  advantage  of  the  terms  of  Lord 
Wellesley's  proclamation,  he  passed  over  to  the  British  Government, 
and  obtained  the  command  of  one  of  Sindhia's  battalions  which  were 
taken  into  the  Company's  service  after  the  war,  and  saw  some  fighting 
with  it  in  the  Hariana  district  in  1804. 

HEARSEY,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Hearsey  was  one  of  Thomas's  officers, 
and  assumed  temporary  charge  of  the  camp  at  Georgegarh  after  the 
memorable  battle  of  the  4th  of  September,  1801.  It  was  owing  to  his 
error  of  judgment  in  not  retiring  to  Hansi,  that  Thomas's  fall  was  in- 
directly due.  He  appears  to  have  possessed  very  little  military  ability, 
but  was  faithful  to  his  chief,  and  not  only  accompanied  him  in  his  flight 


APPENDIX.  363 

to  Hansi,  but  fought  bravely  to  the  end.  After  Thomas's  fall  Hearsey 
entered  the  service  of  some  Native  state,  whether  Sindhia's  or 
Holkar's  it  is  impossible  to  say ;  but  he  was  one  of  the  officers  who 
availed  themselves  of  Lord  Wellesley's  proclamation  in  1803,  and 
received  a  pension  of  Es.  800  a  month  from  the  British  Government. 

HESSING,  GEORGE,  COLONEL. — George  Hessing  was  a  half-caste 
Dutchman,  being  a  son  of  Colonel  John  Hessing  by  a  "  Native 
woman."  But  though  Grant  Duff  describes  the  mother  in  these 
terms,  there  is  little  doubt  but  that  she  was  a  sister  of  Major 
Derridon  and  Madame  Perron,  for  Skinner  mentions  that  George 
Hessing  was  the  General's  nephew.  Hessing  was  known  amongst 
the  Natives  as  Jorus  Sahib,  a  corruption  of  his  Christian  name,  which 
cannot  bear  comparison  with  the  sonorous  Jowruj  applied  to  Thomas. 
The  first  mention  of  George  Hessing  is  in  1798,  when,  in  conjunction 
with  Fidele  Filoze,  he  expertly  effected  the  capture  of  Ghatkay  Rao. 
In  1800,  on  the  retirement  of  his  father,  he  succeeded  to  the  command 
of  a  brigade  of  four  battalions,  which  he  quickly  increased  to  eight. 
The  next  year  he  accompanied  Sindhia  to  Malwa,  and  on  reaching 
the  Narbada  was  sent  forward  to  protect  Ujjain  against  a  threatened 
attack  by  Holkar.  Although  it  was  in  the  rainy  season,  and  the 
country  flooded  with  water,  Hessing  made  an  astonishingly  rapid 
march,  and  arrived  at  the  capital  in  June.  Amir  Khan  soon  attacked 
him,  and  kept  him  in  play  till  Holkar  defeated  Maclntyre  and 
attempted  to  repeat  the  success  against  Brownrigg ;  but  being  re- 
pulsed by  the  latter  officers,  he  joined  Amir  Khan,  and  made  a  con- 
certed assault  on  Hessing's  entrenchments  outside  the  walls  of  Ujjain. 
Hessing  behaved  in  a  most  cowardly  manner,  flying  at  an  early 
period  of  the  action,  and  leaving  his  troops  to  be  annihilated,  and  his 
eleven  European  officers  killed  or  wounded  and  taken  prisoners. 
Just  previous  to  the  battle  of  Ujjain  he  had  despatched  four  of  his 
battalions  to  his  father  at  Agra,  whither  he  now  made  his  way.  He 
was  soon  called  upon  to  march  with  these  to  assist  in  the  war  against 
George  Thomas,  and  it  was  through  his  lines  that  Jowruj  Jung  cut 
his  way  when  he  escaped  to  Hansi.  After  this  Hessing  returned  to 
Agra.  Smith  states  that  his  four  battalions  were  taken  over  by  Perron 
in  1803,  and  made  the  foundation  of  the  Fifth  Brigade,  Hessing  being 
promoted  to  the  command  of  the  Second,  in  succession  to  Eobert 
Sutherland  ;  but  he  did  not  hold  the  appointment  long,  for  his  father 
died  in  July,  and  he  was  transferred  to  the  commandantship  of  Agra. 
He  was  here  when  General  Lake  captured  the  fort,  but  not  in  com- 
mand, for  he  had  been  previously  deposed  and  confined  by  his 


364  APPENDIX. 

mutinous  troops.  At  the  last  moment  he  was  put  forward  to  negotiate 
tenns  for  the  garrison.  Skinner  asserts  that  he  was  "  too  rich  a  man 
to  defend  the  fort  well,  and  soon  found  means  to  dissatisfy  the 
garrison,"  but  this  opinion  seems  ill  founded.  Hessing's  fortune  was 
estimated  at  five  lakhs  of  rupees,  besides  money  in  the  Company's 
funds.  After  his  surrender  he  retired  to  Chinsura  for  some  time,  and 
eventually  removed  to  Calcutta,  where  he  died  on  the  6th  of 
January,  1826,  aged  forty-four  years. 

HESSING,  JOHN,  COLONEL. — Colonel  Hessing  was  a  native  of  Holland, 
and  was  born  in  1740.  He  came  to  India  in  1764,  and  entered  the 
service  of  the  Native  princes.  After  many  adventures,  no  records  of 
which  appear  to  exist,  he  joined  De  Boigne,  and  obtained  the  com- 
mand of  one  of  the  first  two  battalions  the  General  raised.  He  was 
present  at  the  battles  of  Lalsot,  Chaksana,  Agra,  and  Patan.  After 
the  latter  he  quarrelled  with  his  commander  and  left  him.  Soon  after 
this  he  was  specially  employed  by  Madhoji  Sindhia  to  raise  a  body- 
guard for  that  chief,  and  accompanied  him  to  Poonah  in  1792.  By 
degrees  Hessing  increased  his  party  to  a  small  brigade  of  four  batta- 
lions. In  1800  ill-health  obliged  him  to  resign  his  command  in  favour 
of  his  son  George,  and,  "  covered  with  wounds  received  in  war,"  the 
fine  old  Dutchman  retired  to  fill  the  post  of  Commandant  of  the  Fort 
of  Agra.  Here  "  in  his  judicial  capacity  he  so  tempered  justice  with 
mercy,  that  he  was  universally  loved  and  esteemed,  and  in  this 
honourable  retreat  passed  the  remaining  years  of  his  life,  spending 
with  liberality  a  well-earned  fortune."  He  had  many  opportunities 
of  extending  hospitality  to  British  officers,  who  visited  Agra  for  amuse- 
ment or  curiosity.  Lord  Metcalfe,  then  a  young  civilian  and  Assistant 
Resident  at  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia's  camp,  met  John  Hessing  at  Agra  in 
March,  1801,  and  thus  describes  the  incident:— "I  breakfasted  by 
invitation  with  the  Dutch  Commandant,  Colonel  J.  Hessing.  I  found 
him  with  his  son,  who  commanded  in  the  engagement  at  Oojein, 
where  his  battalions  were  defeated ;  a  Mr.  Marshall,  an  Englishman, 
and  two  others,  whose  names  I  have  not  learnt.  The  breakfast 
consisted  of  kedgeree  (rice  and  eggs),  fish,  game,  fowls,  curry  and  rice, 
stews,  oranges,  pears,  pomegranates,  eggs,  bread-and-butter,  cakes  of 
all  kinds,  pancakes,  and  a  number  of  other  dishes  which  have  escaped 
my  recollection — amongst  others  I  have  forgotten  to  enumerate  cheese. 
The  Dutchman  was  as  polite  as  a  Dutchman  could  be,  and  very  well 
meaning,  I  am  certain.  On  the  following  day  I  breakfasted  and  dined 
with  him  again." 

John  Hessing  died  on  the  21st  of  July,  1803,  aged  sixty-three  years,  of 


APPENDIX.  365 

which  thirty-seven  had  been  spent  as  an  adventurer  in  military  service 
in  India.  From  some  passages  in  Skinner's  "  Memoirs  "  it  appears  the 
Colonel  was  father-in-law  to  Robert  Sutherland,  and  it  seems  certain 
that  his  wife  was  a  sister  of  Madame  Perron.  Smith  describes  John 
Hessing  as  "  a  good,  benevolent  man  and  a  brave  soldier."  A  beau- 
tiful mausoleum  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  the  Catholic  burial 
ground  at  Agra.  It  was  designed  in  imitation  of  the  Taj,  and  cost  a 
lakh  of  rupees ! 

HOPKINS,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Hopkins  was  the  son  of  a  field  officer 
in  the  Honourable  Company's  service,  and  one  of  George  Thomas's 
officers.  He  was  an  extremely  gallant  man,  greatly  beloved  by  his 
chief,  whom  he  accompanied  in  the  invasion  of  the  Sutlej  States, 
where  he  was  twice  wounded  whilst  gallantly  storming  Native  forts. 
He  met  his  death  at  the  battle  of  Georgegarh.  Thomas  was  deeply 
affected  by  his  loss,  and  thus  refers  to  him  in  his  memoirs  : — "  The 
firmness  of  his  behaviour  during  the  whole  period  of  his  service,  as 
well  as  the  manly  resignation  which  he  exhibited  at  the  close  of  life, 
stamps  his  character  as  that  of  an  amiable  man  and  a  brave  and 
gallant  soldier."  And  Skinner  gives  it  as  his  opinion  that,  "  had 
Thomas  possessed  another  officer  like  Captain  Hopkins,  he  would 
have  gained  the  day  at  Georgegarh."  Hopkins's  battalion  was  the 
only  one  that  remained  faithful  to  Thomas  to  the  last.  When  Thomas 
retired  into  British  territory,  after  his  surrender  at  Hansi,  he  sent  a 
present  of  Es.  2,000  to  Hopkins's  sister,  who  had  just  been  left  an 
orphan  by  the  death  of  her  father,  with  a  promise  that  if  this  sum 
was  not  thought  enough,  he  would  extend  further  benevolence  to  her 
out  of  his  ruined  fortunes. 

LEGGE,  THOMAS. — The  name  of  "  Tom  Legge  "  has  been  rescued 
from  oblivion  by  the  graphic  pen  of  Coloned  Tod,  the  author  of  "The 
Annals  of  Eaj'asthan,"  and  from  a  contribution  of  his  to  the  Asiatic 
Journal  the  following  particulars  are  excerpted : — Legge  was  a  native 
of  Danagadee,  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  his  father  being  a  shipowner 
in  a  small  way,  and  engaged  in  the  emigrant-carrying  trade  to 
America.  Tom  Legge  was  very  wild  in  his  youth,  and,  rejecting  all 
his  father's  offers  to  establish  him  in  a  respectable  calling,  ran  away 
from  home  and  shipped  on  board  the  Swallow,  sloop  of  war,  bound 
for  Madras.  Arrived  in  India,  his  vagrant  principle  asserted  itself, 
and,  deserting  his  ship,  he  tramped  his  way  to  Haidarabad,  in  Sind, 
supporting  himself  by  begging.  This  must  have  been  about  the  year 
1775.  He  stayed  in  the  lower  Indus  districts  for  five  or  six  years» 


366  APPENDIX. 

and  then  proceeded  to  Multan,  and  from  thence  through  the  desert  to 
Jaipur.  After  a  short  residence  in  Eajputana  he  entered  the  service 
of  the  Jat  Rana  of  Gohad,  being  appointed  to  a  post  in  Sangster's 
corps.  From  this  officer  Legge  learnt  the  art  of  casting  cannon  and 
whatever  belonged  to  their  management,  and  with  the  possession  of 
this  knowledge,  and  the  revival  of  the  errant  principle  within  him, 
he  resumed  his  travels.  Bidding  farewell  to  Sangster,  he  steered  his 
course  to  Kabul,  where  his  talents  gained  him  a  situation  on  a  pay  of 
three  rupees  a  day.  Here  he  remained  some  years,  receiving  very 
kind  treatment,  and  rendering  himself  so  useful  that,  when  he  desired  to 
leave,  he  was  obliged  to  escape  by  stealth.  Journeying  north,  he  crossed 
the  Hindu  Kush  and  entered  Badakshan,  and  was  so  well  received 
that  he  stayed  there  for  a  considerable  time  and  contracted  a  left-handed 
marriage.  On  quitting  this  country  he  went  to  Bokhara,  where  he 
exercised  his  art  for  some  time,  and  there,  as  elsewhere,  his  only 
difficulty  was  to  get  away.  He  afterwards  visited  Herat  and  Kan- 
dahar, and  in  this  mode  of  life  spent  twenty  years,  serving  almost 
every  power  between  the  Indus  and  the  Caspian.  At  length,  tired  of 
this  nomad  existence,  he  set  out  for  Jaipur,  where  he  determined  to 
settle  down  for  the  rest  of  his  days.  Here  he  married  a  daughter  of 
Dr.  de  Silva,  a  grandson  of  the  celebrated  Favier  de  Silva,  whom  the 
King  of  Portugal  sent  out  to  assist  the  astronomical  studies  of  Jai  Singh, 
the  prince  who  founded  Jaipur.  This  alliance  obtained  for  Legge 
the  command  of  a  Najib  battalion  in  the  Jaipur  army,  but  his  first 
service  with  it  proved  his  last,  for  in  storming  the  stronghold  of  a 
refractory  chief  he  received  two  wounds.  It  was  shortly  after  this 
that  he  came  to  Colonel  Tod's  camp  to  obtain  medical  assistance. 
"  I  was  poked  down  with  a  pike,  and  shot  through  my  thigh,  and  I've 
come  to  your  honour's  camp  to  get  cured,  for  they  can  make  no  hand 
at  it  at  Jaipur,"  was  his  explanation  of  his  appearance,  and  the 
speech  was  intermingled  with  forcible  and  patriotic  expressions  of  joy 
at  seeing  the  British  flag  waving  in  front  of  the  Colonel's  tent.  His 
stay  here  extended  for  some  months,  during  which  Colonel  Tod  heard 
all  the  incidents  of  his  adventurous  life,  and  records  the  pleasure  he 
felt  "  in  listening  to  the  variegated  history  of  this  singular  being,  who 
had  retained,  amidst  these  strange  vicissitudes,  an  artlessness  of 
manner  and  goodness  of  heart  which  were  displayed  in  many  notable 
instances  during  his  abode  of  some  months  in  our  camp."  Legge  was 
in  many  ways  an  eccentric  and  cosmopolitan  character.  He  practised 
the  healing  art,  alchemy,  and  divination.  He  was  very  benevolent, 
and  his  accurate  memory  had  mastered  and  retained  an  extraordinary 
stock  of  wild  Central  Asian  legends,  which  he  used  willingly  to  retail 


APPENDIX.  367 

to  any  one  who  would  listen  to  him.  He  suffered  from  a  delusion 
that  during  his  wanderings  he  had  discovered  the  Garden  of  Eden. 
The  road  which  led  to  it  was  through  a  spacious  and  dark  cavern,  and 
an  angel  with  flaming  wings  guarded  its  entrance.  Deep  down  in 
the  heart  of  a  mountain  was  situated  a  beautiful  garden,  filled 
with  delicious  fruit,  with  piles  of  gold  bricks  at  one  end,  and  of  silver 
at  the  other,  and  various  other  marvels.  The  location  of  this  imagi- 
nary spot  was  in  the  Hindu  Kho.  Another  striking  and  praiseworthy 
characteristic  of  Tom  Legge's  was  his  reverence  for  the  Bible,  a  copy 
of  which  he  carried  about  with  him  in  all  his  travels  and  wanderings. 
The  doctor  who  attended  Tom  Legge  was  a  Scotchman,  and  although 
his  patient's  brogue  could  not  be  mistaken,  there  was  blended  with  it 
a  strong  Scotch  accent,  and  the  doctor  fancied  he  recognised  a  country- 
man. "  At  this  Tom's  meek  spirit  took  fire ;  the  quaere  involved  a 
double  insult,  to  his  country  and  to  his  veracity,  and  he  exclaimed  with 
warmth,  '  You  may  take  me  for  a  Spaniard  or  a  Portugese,  or  what 
you  plase,  sir,  but  I  tell  you  nothing  but  the  truth,  your  honour,  when 
I  say  I'm  an  Irishman.'  Colonel  Tod  instantly  poured  the  oil  of 
gladness  on  his  wounded  spirit  by  saying  he  did  not  doubt  his  word, 
but  that  the  doctor  was  a  Scotchman,  and  wished  to  know  whether, 
from  his  accent,  he  might  not  claim  Tom  as  a  fellow-countryman. 
Tom's  countenance  brightened  as  he  rejoined,  with  a  tone  and  expres- 
sion which  could  only  come  from  a  genuine  son  of  Erin, '  Sure,  an'  was 
not  me  mother  a  Mackintosh  ?  '  " 

Tom's  wound  did  not  heal,  and  he  felt  himself  slowly  wasting  away. 
"  I  do  not  fear  death,  your  honour,"  he  said  to  Colonel  Tod,  ''  and 
could  I  get  my  life  written  and  my  boy  sent  to  Calcutta  I  should  die 
contented."  At  length  he  expressed  a  desire  to  return  to  Jaipur,  and 
everything  necessary  was  provided  him  ;  but  he  had  not  long  quitted 
the  camp  before  despair  overtook  him,  and,  throwing  away  his  clothes, 
he  took  up  his  post  in  a  deserted  tomb  and  proclaimed  himself  a 
Fakir.  In  this  condition  he  was  discovered  by  the  wife  of  Sindhia's 
General,  Jean  Baptiste  Filoze.  She  acted  the  good  Samaritan  towards 
him,  but  it  was  too  late,  and  poor  Tom  Legge  died  shortly  afterwards 
in  the  year  1808.  Alas !  the  pity  of  it  that  his  book  was  never  written. 
Literature  might  have  been  the  richer  by  another  work  like  "  Tom 
Coryat's  Crudities." 

LE  MARCHANT,  CAPTAIN  [also  written  Le  Marchand].— Captain  Le 
Marchant  was  a  Frenchman,  and  entered  De  Boigne's  service  about 
the  year  1792.  In  1794  he  had  risen  to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was 
drawing  Us.  300  a  month  pay.  Four  years  later  Perron  appointed  him 


368  APPENDIX. 

"  Prefect "  of  Delhi,  and  there,  in  command  of  two  battalions,  he 
faithfully  discharged  the  trust  reposed  in  him,  and  proved  himself  an 
active  and  diligent  officer.  He  died  in  November,  1799,  and  his  widow 
assumed  the  command  of  his  battalions,  and  refused  to  surrender 
them  to  a  successor.  In  March,  1800,  a  Native  was  appointed  to  the 
post,  but  the  spirited  widow  declined  to  recognise  his  authority,  and 
Perron  was  obliged  to  send  Emilius  Felix  Smith  to  dislodge  the  defiant 
lady.  She  had  taken  up  a  strong  position,  and  fortified  it  with  four 
guns,  but  despite  her  gallant  resistance  she  was  eventually  compelled 
to  surrender,  after  having  held  her  late  husband's  appointment  for  four 
months.  The  custom  of  a  widow  succeeding  to  the  command  and 
emoluments  enjoyed  by  her  husband  was  not  an  uncommon  one  in 
India.  The  example  of  the  Begum  Somru  naturally  suggests  itself, 
but  others  can  be  adduced  as  illustrating  this  somewhat  singular  system 
of  succession.  There  was  in  1790  in  the  Peshwa's  service  a  corps 
commanded  by  a  European  named  Yvon,  on  whose  death  an  English- 
man named  Eobinson  was  appointed  to  succeed  him.  But  Mrs.  Yvon 
immediately  hurried  to  Dharwar,  where  the  corps  was  stationed, 
deposed  Eobinson,  caused  him  to  be  imprisoned,  and  assumed  the 
command  herself.  Another  instance  occurred  in  the  service  of  Haidar 
Ali  of  Mysore.  A  Portugese  officer  named  Mequinez,  who  had  on 
one  occasion  rendered  signal  service  to  the  prince,  was  slain  in  a  battle 
with  the  Marathas.  Haidar  Ali  immediately  conferred  the  command 
of  his  battalion  upon  the  widow,  Madame  Mequinez,  and  invested 
her  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  which  she  was  to  enjoy  until  her  son 
became  old  enough  for  the  post.  This  lady  accompanied  the  regiment 
everywhere  ;  its  colours  were  carried  to  her  house,  and  she  had  a 
private  sentinel  at  her  door.  She  received  the  pay  of  the  force,  and 
caused  it  to  be  distributed,  and  the  deductions  made  from  it,  in  her 
own  presence.  When  the  regiment  was  drilled  and  paraded  she 
inspected  it  herself,  but  in  time  of  war  her  second  in  command  led  it 
into  action.  Her  fate  was  rather  a  humiliating  one.  She  married  a 
"  mongrel  Portugese  sergeant  "  ;  whereupon  Haidar  Ali  reduced  her 
to  a  sergeant's  rank  and  pay,  because,  by  her  own  voluntary  action, 
she  had  degraded  herself  1 

LESTINEAU,  MONSIEUR  [also  written  Lesteneau]. — Lestineau  was  a 
Frenchman,  and  commanded  a  regular  corps  in  the  service  of  Eanjit 
Singh,  the  Eujah  of  the  Jits,  about  the  year  1788.  After  the  defeat  of 
Lalsot,  Madhoji  Sindhia  entered  into  an  alliance  with  Eanjit  Singh, 
and  thus  it  happened  that  Monsieur  Lestirieau's  corps  acted  with  the 
Marathas  in  the  battles  of  Chaksaua  and  Agra.  In  the  former  his 


APPENDIX.  369 

troops  were  stationed  on  the  right  wing,  and  shared  with  De  Boigne's 
two  battalions  the  barren  honours  of  the  day,  and  after  making  a 
staunch  and  gallant  resistance,  were  forced  to  retire  owing  to  the 
desertion  of  the  Maratha  cavalry.  Lestineau  and  his  corps  accom- 
panied the  Marathas  to  Delhi  after  the  victory  of  Agra,  and  he  was 
detached  to  assist  in  the  pursuit  of  Ghulam  Kadir,  who  had  fled  to 
Meerut.  When  Ghulam  was  captured,  his  saddle-bags,  stuffed  with 
the  jewels  which  the  miscreant  had  looted  from  the  Emperor's  palace, 
fell  into  Lestineau's  hands,  who  with  these,  and  the  pay  of  his 
battalion,  absconded  shortly  after  his  return  to  the  capital.  He 
reached  British  territory  in  safety,  and  eventually  found  his  way  to 
Europe,  with  his  ill-gotten  wealth. 

LE  VASSOULT,  COLONEL  [spelt  also  Le  Vassou,  Le  Vaisseau,  Le 
Vaisseaux,  Le  Vaissaux,  Le  Vassoo]. — Le  Vassoult — assuming  this  to 
be  the  proper  orthography  of  his  name — was  a  Frenchman,  and  a 
person  of  talent,  good  birth,  and  pride  of  character.  He  entered  the 
Begum  Somru's  corps,  and  after  rendering  his  mistress  essential  ser- 
vice in  the  management  of  her  artillery,  was  promoted  to  the  command 
of  it  in  1793.  Two  years  later,  in  order  to  obtain  complete  control  of 
her  party,  he  married  the  Begum.  He  always  felt  a  profound  con- 
tempt for  the  officers  in  the  force,  and  refused  to  sit  at  meals  with 
them,  treating  them  in  a  haughty  manner,  and  attempting  to  reform 
the  character  of  the  troops  with  stern  severity.  This  speedily  led  to 
a  mutiny,  and  Le  Vassoult  lost  his  life  under  circumstances  which 
will  be  found  fully  related  under  the  heading  of  "  Sombre." 

LUCAN,  CAPTAIN  [also  spelt  Luccan]. — Captain  Lucan  was  an  Irish- 
man, and  an  officer  in  Perron's  army.  When  the  war  of  1803 
occurred,  he  availed  himself  of  the  Governor- General's  proclamation, 
and  left  Sindhia's  service.  At  the  storm  of  Aligarh  he  volunteered  to 
show  Lord  Lake's  troops  the  way  to  the  gate,  and  the  Commander-in- 
chief  mentions  him  in  the  following  terms  in  his  despatch  of  the  4th 
of  September,  1803,  announcing  the  capture  of  the  fortress : — "  I  feel  I 
shall  be  wanting  in  justice  to  the  merits  of  Mr.  Lucan,  a  native  of  Great 
Britain,  who  recently  quitted  the  service  of  Sindhia  to  avoid  serving 
against  his  country,  were  I  not  to  recommend  him  to  your  Lordship's 
particular  attention.  He  gallantly  undertook  to  lead  Colonel  Monson's 
storming  party  to  the  gate,  and  point  out  the  road  through  the  fort, 
which  he  effected  in  a  most  gallant  manner,  and  Colonel  Monson  has 
reported  having  received  infinite  benefit  from  his  service."  Lucan 
was  rewarded  with  a  commission  in  the  74th  Begiment,  and  a  donation 

24 


870  APPENDIX. 

of  Bs.  24,000 — "  for  the  job,"  as  Skinner  somewhat  disparagingly  puts 
it.  General  Lake  mentions  Lucan  again  in  his  despatch  of  the  10th 
of  October  following : — "  To  Mr.  Lucan's  information  and  exertions  on 
this  occasion  [the  battle  before  Agra]  as  well  as  on  every  other,  I 
feel  myself  very  much  indebted."  Subsequently  Captain,  or  as  he 
ought  perhaps  to  be  called,  Lieutenant  Lucan  was  appointed  to  the 
command  of  a  large  body  of  irregular  cavalry,  and  attached  to  the 
force  under  Colonel  Monson,  which  was  employed  in  keeping  Holkar 
in  check  Monson  met  with  a  disastrous  defeat  after  a  short 
campaign  in  Holkar's  territory,  and  Lucan  was  detached  to  pro- 
tect his  rear.  When  the  troops  were  leaving  Eampura  he  might 
have  saved  himself  if  he  had  retreated  directly  Jaswant  Bao's  advance 
guard  came  in  sight.  But  he  desired  to  win  a  name  for  himself,  and 
thought  he  might  do  so  by  making  a  brilliant  charge  before  falling 
back.  He  was  deserted  by  most  of  his  men,  and  soon  surrounded  by 
Holkar's  best  cavalry,  and  after  sustaining  a  gallant  fight,  in  which 
his  few  faithful  troops  were  cut  to  pieces,  he  was  wounded  and  taken 
prisoner.  He  was  confined  at  Kotah,  and  shortly  afterwards  died, 
according  to  various  accounts,  by  poison,  by  torture,  or  from  the 
effects  of  his  wounds.  In  the  "  Life  of  Amir  Khan,"  by  Bhosawan  Lai, 
it  is  made  to  appear  that  Lucan  fell  in  hand-to-hand  conflict  with 
Holkar  himself,  and  the  apocryphal  exploit  is  commemorated  by 
some  Persian  verses,  of  which  Prinsep  gives  the  following  metrical 
translation  : — 


"  The  Maharaj  at  Lucan  flew, 

As  swoops  the  falcon  on  its  prey, 
His  water-tempered  blade  he  drew 
And  streams  of  gushing  blood  found  way ! 

The  broken  host  took  flight  and  fled, 
Death  was  among  them  freely  dealt, 

Sepoys  and  soldiers,  black  and  white, 
The  sword's  keen  edge  in  plenty  felt. 

A  Raging  Lion,  Jeswunt  Rao, 
Came  upon  Lucan,  brave  and  bold, 

And  striking  at  his  neck  one  blow, 
His  head  upon  the  green  sward  rolled. 

The  army  saw  their  leader's  fate 
And  forthwith  in  confusion  turned  ; 

Such  the  reward  of  those,  whose  hate, 
Like  Lucan's  against  Holkar  burned." 


APPENDIX.  371 

It  is,  perhaps,  as  well  to  mention  that,  despite  these  circumstantial 
and  gory  details,  the  above  incident  is  purely  imaginary. 

MAC!NTYRE,  CAPTAIN. — Nothing  is  known  of  this  adventurer,  except 
that. he  was  an  officer  in  Hessing's  or  Filoze's  brigades,  and  was 
detached  by  Sindhia  in  June,  1801,  to  support  the  former  at  Ujjain 
with  two  battalions.  He  was  cut  off  by  Jaswant  Eao  Holkar  at 
Nuri,  twenty-seven  miles  distant  from  the  capital,  and  compelled  to 
surrender. 

MACKENZIE,  LIEUTENANT. — Lieutenant  MacKenzie  was  an  officer 
commanding  a  battalion  in  Perron's  Third  Brigade  under  Bourguien. 
He  was  present  during  the  campaign  against  Thomas,  and  behaved 
with  gallantry  at  the  final  assault  on  Hansi,  where  he  was  wounded. 

MADOC,  COLONEL  [spelt  also  Medoc]. — Next  to  Sombre's,  Madoc's 
was  the  oldest  "  party"  in  Hindustan.  Madoc  was  an  illiterate  and 
ignorant  Frenchman,  who  had  formerly  been  a  private  in  the  French 
army  in  Southern  India,  from  which  he  deserted  in  1774,  and  found 
his  way  to  Delhi,  where  he  entered  the  service  of  Najaf  Khan,  for 
whom  he  raised  a  corps  of  five  battalions  of  infantry,  500  cavalry,  and 
20  guns.  He  gathered  around  him  several  very  respectable  and  com- 
petent officers,  amongst  whom  were  the  Count  de  Moidavre  and  the 
Chevaliers  Dudrenec  and  Cressy.  Colonel  Malleson  states  that  Madoc 
commenced  his  career  as  early  as  1757,  and  that  he  was  one  of  Sombre's 
officers,  and  served  at  the  battle  of  Buxar.  He  was  a  gallant  man,  but 
deficient  in  military  knowledge,  and  with  more  enterprise  and  bravery 
than  prudence  and  science,  and  his  battalions  generally  failed  in  their 
attacks  from  the  rash  impetuosity  of  their  commander.  After  leaving 
Najaf  Khan's  service,  Madoc  entered  that  of  the  Eana  of  Gohad  in 
1776,  and  a  little  later  experienced  a  disastrous  defeat  in  the  defiles 
of  Biana  in  the  Mewatti  district,  where  his  force  was  attacked  by  a 
large  band  of  Eohillas,  during  a  heavy  storm  of  rain,  and  annihilated, 
twelve  of  his  European  officers  being  killed,  and  all  his  guns  and 
baggage  captured.  Madoc  escaped  by  flight,  and  found  refuge  at 
Fatehpur,  from  whence  he  repaired  to  Agra,  and  set  to  work  to  cast 
new  guns  and  raise  and  discipline  another  corps.  When  it  was  ready 
for  service,  by  a  species  of  transaction  not  uncommon  in  those  days, 
he  sold  it  to  the  Eana  of  Gohad  in  1782,  and  its  command  devolved 
on  Major  Sangster.  Madoc,  having  realised  a  small  fortune,  retired 
to  Europe,  where  he  was  net  long  afterwards  killed  in  a  duel. 


372  APPENDIX. 

MARSHALL,  JAMES,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Marshall  was  a  Scotchman, 
and  a  gentleman  of  good  family  and  education.  He  began  life  as  a 
midshipman  in  the  Company's  navy,  but  in  a  spirit  of  adventure  left 
the  sea,  and  took  service  with  the  Native  princes,  obtaining  the 
command  of  a  battalion  in  Hessing's  corps.  He  is  spoken  of  by  a 
contemporary  as  a  brave  soldier,  an  intelligent  officer,  and  a  man  of 
liberal  sentiments  and  amiable  manners.  Little  is  known  of  his  active 
career  in  Sindhia's  service,  except  that  he  was  one  of  the  officers  who 
was  confined  by  the  revolted  troops  at  Agra  in  1803,  and  it  is  probable 
he  was  engaged  in  the  war  against  George  Thomas.  Having  sur- 
rendered to  General  Lake  in  terms  of  the  Governor-General's  procla- 
mation, he  was  awarded  a  pension  of  Rs.  500  a  month  by  the  British 
Government,  and  shortly  afterwards  appointed  to  the  command  of 
some  newly-raised  levies,  and  sent  to  keep  order  in  the  Hariana 
district.  He  was  shot  through  the  heart  about  the  year  1804,  whilst 
gallantly  storming  a  town,  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty  to  his  King  and 
country.  "  Such  characters  are  rarely  seen,"  writes  Lewis  Ferdinand 
Smith.  "  I  knew  him  long,  and  he  was  esteemed  and  respected  by  all 
who  were  acquainted  with  his  many  excellent  and  amiable  qualities. 
He  was  cut  off  in  the  flower  of  his  life.  As  he  received  the  fatal  bullet, 
he  grasped  the  hand  of  his  friend,  Captain  Harriott,  smiled  at  him, 
and  dropped  back  dead." 

MARTINE,  CLAUDE,  GENERAL  [also  written  Claud  Martin].— Claude 
Martine  was  a  Frenchman.  He  was  born  in  the  year  1732  at  Lyons, 
where  his  father  carried  on  the  business  of  a  silk  manufacturer.  It  was 
intended  that  he  should  follow  the  same  calling,  but  his  adventurous 
spirit  would  not  submit  to  so  tame  a  career,  and  running  away  from 
home  at  an  early  age,  he  enlisted  in  the  French  army.  He  soon  dis- 
tinguished himself  by  his  activity  and  energy,  and  was  advanced  from 
an  infantry  to  a  cavalry  regiment.  In  1757  the  Count  de  Lally  was 
appointed  to  the  government  of  Pondicherry,  and  requiring  volunteers 
for  his  bodyguard,  Martine  made  application  to  be  enrolled,  and  was 
accepted.  Accompanying  Lally  to  India,  he  arrived  there  in  1758, 
but  had  not  been  long  in  the  country  before  he  began  to  experience 
trouble.  Lally's  ideas  of  discipline  were  inordinately  severe,  and  his 
behaviour  and  manners  toward  his  subordinates  harsh  and  tyrannical. 
His  treatment  might  have  been  necessary,  for  a  large  portion  of  his 
bodyguard  had  been  recruited  from  military  criminals  and  deserters 
under  sentence,  who  were  drafted  into  it  as  a  punishment.  But  Lally's 
sternness  had  the  effect  of  increasing  rather  than  diminishing  the  in- 
subordination, and  when,  a  little  later,  Coote  advanced  and  laid  siege 


APPENDIX.  373 

to  Pondicherry,  the  whole  of  the  Governor's  bodyguard  deserted  en 
masse  to  the  English,  by  whom  they  were  well  received.  On  the 
return  of  the  British  troops  to  Madras,  Martine  volunteered  to  raise  a 
corps  of  French  chasseurs  from  amongst  the  prisoners  of  war,  for 
service  under  the  Company's  flag.  His  proposal  was  entertained,  and 
he  received  a  commission  as  ensign.  Shortly  afterwards  he  was 
ordered  to  Bengal  with  his  corps,  but,  during  the  voyage,  the  ship  in 
which  he  sailed  sprang  a  leak,  and  it  was  only  with  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty that  he  saved  his  men  in  the  boats,  and  eventually  landed  them 
safely  in  Calcutta.  In  due  course  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of 
captain,  but  in  1764  his  men  mutinied,  notwithstanding  his  exertions 
to  keep  them  faithful,  and  the  corps  was  broken  up.  Marline's  conduct 
on  this  occasion  was  greatly  commended  by  the  authorities,  and,  being 
an  able  draughtsman,  he  was  rewarded  by  an  appointment  in  the 
north-eastern  districts  of  Bengal,  where  he  was  sent  to  survey  the 
country.  His  work  was  so  satisfactory  that,  on  its  completion,  a 
similar  appointment  was  found  for  him  in  the  province  of  Oudh. 

This  was  the  turning-point  in  his  career,  which  had  hitherto  been 
more  eventful  than  profitable.  Having  fixed  his  headquarters  at 
Lucknow,  he  employed  his  leisure  in  exercising  his  ingenuity  in 
several  branches  of  mechanics,  and,  amongst  other  things,  manufac- 
tured "  the  first  balloons  that  ever  floated  in  the  air  of  Asia."  This 
brought  him  under  the  notice  of  the  Nawab,  who  conceived  so  high  an 
opinion  of  his  abilities,  and  especially  his  skill  in  gunnery,  that  he 
solicited  permission  from  the  Bengal  Government  for  Marline's  ser- 
vices to  be  transferred  to  him,  and  this  being  granted,  the  adventurer 
was  appointed  superintendent  of  the  Nawab's  park  of  artillery  and 
arsenal. 

Martine  did  not  neglect  the  opportunities  tlras  opened  out  to  him, 
and  speedily  ingratiated  himself  with  his  new  master,  whose  con- 
fidential adviser  he  became.  In  the  many  political  changes  that  took 
place  in  Oudh  during  the  next  twenty  years  the  Frenchman  always 
contrived  to  remain  on  the  right  side,  making  himself  indispensable 
in  negotiations  between  the  Nawab  and  the  Company.  At  the  same 
time  he  was  careful  not  to  push  himself  forward  into  public  notice, 
preferring  to  remain  the  power  behind  the  throne  ;  and  although  he 
seldom  appeared  at  Darbar,  he  had  more  real  influence  than  the 
Nawab's  ministers  in  shaping  the  course  of  events. 

Martine's  salary  was  largely  increased,  and  he  enjoyed,  in  addition, 
extensive  sources  of  emolument,  such  as  were  always  open  to  men  in 
positions  of  confidence  in  the  Native  courts.  He  became  the  recog- 
nised channel  for  petitions  from  all  who  desired  any  favour  from  the 


374  APPENDIX. 

Government,  and  in  this  capacity  enormous  bribes  and  presents  of 
great  value  found  their  way  into  his  hands.  He  educated  the  Nawab 
into  an  appreciation  of  the  products  of  Europe,  and  then  acted  as  his 
agent  in  procuring  them.  He  established  extensive  credits  with  the 
Native  bankers,  and  so  obtained  a  large  share  in  the  profitable  public 
loans  made  to  his  master.  Finally  his  position  at  Court  was  esteemed 
so  secure  that,  in  a  country  distracted  by  war  and  internal  troubles, 
he  soon  became  a  sort  of  "  safe  deposit "  for  the  valuables  of  the 
Nawab's  subjects,  charging  a  commission  of  12  per  cent,  for  the 
custody  of  articles  committed  to  his  care.  By  these  and  similar 
methods  he  acquired  an  immense  fortune  during  his  long  residence  at 
Lucknow. 

Marline's  pleasure  in  life  seems  to  have  been  limited  to  the  mere 
accumulation  of  riches,  for  he  derived  none  from  spending  them. 
In  his  peculiar  way  he  was  sufficiently  hospitable,  but  his  table  was 
not  calculated  to  attract  guests,  either  by  the  elegance  of  the  enter- 
tainment or  the  geniality  of  the  host.  Of  his  private  bounty  during 
his  life  very  few  instances  are  recorded,  though  it  is  known  that  from 
time  to  time  he  assisted  his  family  at  Lyons.  The  principal  object  of 
his  ambition  or  vanity  seems  to  have  been  the  attainment  of  military 
rank,  a  fact  the  truth  of  which  is  emphasised  by  the  epitaph  he  wrote 
for  his  own  tomb.  During  the  time  he  resided  at  Lucknow  his  pro- 
motion in  the  Company's  service  continued  ;  for  although  he 
relinquished  his  pay  and  allowances,  he  retained  his  commission. 
In  1790,  at  the  commencement  of  the  first  war  with  Tipu  Sultan,  he 
presented  the  Company  with  a  number  of  fine  horses  to  mount  a 
troop  of  cavalry,  and  in  return  was  gazetted  to  the  rank  of  colonel, 
thus  achieving  the  object  for  which  the  gift  was  made.  Six  years 
later,  when  the  Company's  officers  received  brevet  rank  from  the 
King,  Martine's  name  was  included  in  the  Gazette,  and  to  his  infinite 
satisfaction  he  became  a  major-general.  Lord  Teignmouth  described 
him  in  1797  as  a  man  of  much  penetration  and  observation,  whose 
language  would  be  elegant  if  it  corresponded  with  his  ideas ;  but  he 
talked  very  broken  English,  interlarding  every  sentence  with  "  What 
do  you  call  it  ?  " — "  Do  you  see  ?  " 

Amongst  the  most  remarkable  points  connected  with  Martine  was 
his  house  at  Lucknow,  which  was  a  castellated  edifice  built  on  the  banks 
of  the  River  Gumti,  and  designed  for  defence  if  necessary.  It  was 
constructed  strictly  on  hygienic  principles,  for  it  contained  a  series  of 
rooms — or  flats,  as  we  should  call  them  in  these  modern  days — 
adapted  to  the  varying  temperature  of  the  different  seasons  of  the 
year.  Thus  in  the  hot  season  he  resided  in  a  subterranean  suite  of 


APPENDIX.  375 

chambers,  which  were  always  cool  and  sheltered  from  the  fierce  glare 
and  heat  outside.  When  the  rainy  season  came  on,  he  ascended  to  an 
upper  story  high  above  the  ground  level  and  its  malaria.  In  the 
cold  weather  he  changed  quarters  again,  and  descended  to  the  ground- 
floor.  The  house  was  fitted  with  many  curious  mechanical  con- 
trivances for  comfort ;  the  ceilings  of  the  different  apartments  were 
formed  of  elliptic  arches,  ornamented  most  elaborately,  whilst  the 
exterior  decorations  were  equally  fanciful  and  florid.  The  furniture 
was  on  a  par  with  the  building,  and  the  walls  of  the  rooms  were 
covered  with  glasses,  prints,  and  pictures,  estimated  at  many  thousand 
pounds  in  value.  Not  the  least  curious  feature  in  this  building — 
which  was  called  Constantia,  from  the  motto  Lahore  et  Constantia 
carved  on  its  front — was  a  room  containing  a  vault  designed  for 
Martine's  place  of  sepulture.  He  built  this  because  the  Nawab  refused 
to  pay  him  the  price  he  asked  for  the  edifice ;  whereupon,  in  a  fit 
of  pique,  he  declared  that  his  tomb  should  be  handsomer  than  any 
palace  in  the  kingdom.  His  subsequent  interment  therein  had  the 
effect  of  desecrating  the  place  in  the  eyes  of  the  Muhammadans,  for 
no  followers  of  the  Prophet  can  inhabit  a  tomb. 

For  the  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life  Martine  suffered  greatly  from 
stone.  He  cured  himself  once  by  a  successful  though  crude  and 
painful  course  of  treatment ;  but  a  recurrence  of  the  disease  ter- 
minated his  life  in  the  year  1800,  at  the  age  of  sixty-two. 

On  the  1st  of  January  of  the  same  year  he  executed  an  extra- 
ordinary will,  which  he  drew  up  himself.  It  contained  over  forty 
clauses,  and  began  by  acknowledging  with  penitence  that  self-interest 
had  been  his  guiding  principle  through  life.  His  fortune,  amounting 
to  nearly  half  a  million  sterling,  he  bequeathed  in  innumerable 
legacies.  Amongst  them  were  three  to  the  poor  of  Calcutta,  Chan- 
dernagore,  and  Lucknow,  the  interest  of  which  was  to  be  doled  daily 
at  certain  fixed  places,  distinguished  by  tablets  bearing  an  inscription 
in  English,  French,  or  Persian,  according  to  the  location,  and  notifying 
that  the  alms  distributed  were  the  gift  of  General  Martine,  and  to 
be  so  disbursed  in  perpetuity.  He  left  a  large  sum  in  trust  to  the 
Government  of  Bengal  for  the  establishment  and  endowment  of  a 
school  to  be  called  La  Martiniere,  which  still  exists,  and  where  on  the 
anniversary  of  his  death  a  sermon  was  to  be  preached,  followed  by  a 
public  dinner,  at  which  the  toast  of  "  The  Memory  of  the  Founder  " 
was  to  be  drunk  in  solemn  silence.  To  his  relatives  and  the  town  of 
Lyons  he  bequeathed  large  legacies,  and  two  separate  sums  to  that 
city  and  Calcutta,  their  interest  to  be  devoted  to  releasing  poor 
debtors  from  gaol  on  the  anniversary  of  his  death.  He  left  directions 


376  APPENDIX. 

that  bis  house  Constantia  should  never  be  sold,  but  serve  as  a  mauso- 
leum for  his  remains,  and  he  committed  it  to  the  care  of  the  ruling 
power  in  the  country  for  the  time  being.  Such  were  the  elaborate 
precautions  taken  by  this  eccentric  man  to  keep  his  memory  alive  and 
hand  it  down  to  posterity. 

The  thirtieth  clause  in  his  will  was  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of 
all.  It  ran  as  follows  :  "  When  I  am  dead,  I  request  that  my  body 
may  be  salted,  put  in  spirits,  or  embalmed,  and  afterwards  deposited 
in  a  leaden  coffin  made  of  some  sheet  lead  in  my  godown,  which  is 
to  be  put  in  another  of  sissoo  wood,  and  then  deposited  in  the  cave  in 
the  small  round  room  north-east  in  Constantia,  with  two  feet  of 
masonry  raised  above  it,  which  is  to  bear  the  following  inscription : — 

"  MAJOR-GENERAL  CLAUDE  MARTINE, 

Born  at  Lyons,  January,  1738. 

Arrived  in  India  as  a  common  soldier,  and  died  at  [Lucknow,  the 

13th  of  September,  1800]  a  major-general ; 

and  he  is  buried  in  this  tomb. 

Pray  for  his  soul." 

His  wishes  were  faithfully  fulfilled,  and  when  Lady  Fanny  Parkes 
visited  the  tomb  in  1831  she  mentions  that  a  bust  of  the  General 
adorned  the  vault,  lights  were  constantly  burning  before  the  tomb, 
and  the  figures  of  four  Sipahis,  as  large  as  life,  with  their  arms 
reversed,  stood  in  niches  at  the  side  of  the  monument.  In  the 
centre  of  the  vault  was  a  large  plain  slab  bearing  the  inscription 
above  recorded. 

Perchance  it  sufficiently  summarises  Martine's  life,  for  his  career 
was  disfigured  by  much  that  was  ignoble  and  inglorious.  Yet,  conning 
it  after  the  lapse  of  nearly  a  hundred  years,  one  cannot  help  reflecting 
on  the  achievements  of  the  man  epitomised  in  the  few  terse  words. 
Dynasties  have  died  out,  thrones  have  tottered  and  fallen,  kingdoms 
have  crumbled  into  dust  and  been  forgotten  since  this  private  soldier 
sought  to  perpetuate  his  name  ;  and  it  is  not  an  uupleasing  thought 
that  the  atonement  of  his  testamentary  charity  still  keeps  alive  the 
pious  memory  of  the  founder  of  La  Martiniere. 

MONTAGUE,  EDWARD,  LIEUTENANT. — Lieutenant  Montague  was  the 
son  of  Colonel  Montague,  of  the  Bengal  Artillery,  and  an  officer  in 
Hessing's  brigade.  He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Ujjain  in  1801. 
He  is  described  in  an  obituary  notice  published  at  the  time  as  a  most 
accomplished  young  man,  who  had  been  educated  at  the  Royal 


APPENDIX.  377 

Military  Academy  at  Kensington,  and  received  a  more  ample 
education  than  was  generally  esteemed  necessary  for  the  army. 
Tempora  mutantur;  as  witness  the  groups  of  great-brained,  young 
aspirants,  who  periodically  cluster  round  the  doors  of  Burlington 
House  to  prove  their  sufficient  intellectual  powers. 

MOKKIS,  JOHN. — John  Morris  was  an  Englishman,  and  commanded 
one  of  George  Thomas's  battalions.  He  is  only  mentioned  once  in 
Thomas's  memoirs — namely,  in  the  description  of  the  battle  of 
Fatehpur,  where  he  distinguished  himself  and  was  wounded.  "  He 
was  a  brave  man,"  wrote  his  master,  "  but  better  adapted  to  con- 
duct a  forlorn  hope  than  direct  the  motions  of  troops  on  the  field  of 
battle." 

PAI&H,  CAPTAIN. — There  appear  to  have  been  two  officers  of  this 
name.  One,  a  captain  in  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's  corps,  was  killed  at 
the  battle  of  Malpura  in  1799,  in  the  charge  of  Bathor  cavalry  that 
overwhelmed  the  force;  the  other,  a  lieutenant  in  Perron's  Fourth 
Brigade,  was  wounded  in  the  storm  of  Sounda,  in  1801.  As  both  inci- 
dents are  gleaned  from  Skinner's  memoirs,  it  is  possible  that  they 
refer  to  one  and  the  same  individual,  and  that  he  was  only  wounded, 
not  killed,  in  the  first  action. 

PAULY,  COLONEL  (PAOLI). — Colonel  Pauly  was  a  German,  and  selected 
by  the  Begum  Somru  to  command  her  husband's  party  after  Sombre's 
death  in  1778.  He  engaged  too  much  in  Oriental  politics,  and  espoused 
the  cause  of  Prince  Jiwan  Bakht,  who,  in  1782,  desired  to  rid  Shah 
'Alam  of  some  of  his  unruly  nobles,  and  undertook  to  secure  the  arrest 
of  a  powerful  minister  named  Mirza  Shafi  Khan ;  whereupon  the 
latter  fled,  and  the  Emperor  appointed  Jiwan  Bakht  Amir-ul-Umra, 
or  Chief  of  the  Nobles.  But  Mirza  Shafi  entered  into  an  alliance  with 
several  other  rebel  nobles,  and,  collecting  a  large  army,  marched  against 
Delhi,  sending  forward  a  vakil  to  Shah  'Alam,  demanding  his  restora- 
tion to  power.  The  Emperor  was  intimidated,  and  summoned  a  council, 
at  which  Jiwan  Bakht  proposed  to  sally  forth  and  fight  the  rebels,  a 
line  of  action  which  Pauly  strongly  supported,  undertaking  to  defeat 
Mirza  Shaft's  following  with  his  battalions  of  regulars.  But  the 
Emperor  was  too  frightened  to  act  boldly,  and  ordered  Pauly  to 
enter  into  an  amicable  arrangement.  The  German  obeyed,  and  a 
general  reconciliation  of  all  parties  was  outwardly  agreed  to,  but 
scarcely  had  Pauly  entered  the  rebels'  camp  to  arrange  for  carrying 
the  agreement  into  effect,  than  a  party  of  horse,  who  had  been  placed 


378  APPENDIX. 

in  ambuscade,  fell  upon  him,  and,  dispersing  his  escort,  "  by  a  bloody 
process  cut  off  the  head  of  Mr.  Pauly." 

PEDKON,  COLONEL. — Colonel  Pedron  was  a  Frenchman,  and  a 
native  of  Hennebon,  near  L'Orient.  He  served  in  Monsieur  Law's 
corps  at  Lucknow  in  1760.  Law,  it  may  be  mentioned,  was  a  son  of 
the  financial  genius  known  as  "  Mississippi "  Law,  whose  speculative 
enterprises  in  France  produced  a  parallel  to  our  South  Sea  Bubble  in 
England.  Law  was  at  Chandernagore  in  1756  when  Clive  captured  it, 
but  managed  to  make  his  escape  into  the  Upper  Provinces  with  about 
250  of  his  countrymen,  whom  he  kept  together  till  the  year  1761, 
when  he  was  defeated  and  forced  to  surrender  to  Major  Carnac.  But 
prior  to  this  a  great  number  of  his  Europeans  deserted,  and  amongst 
them  was  Pedron,  who  returned  to  Oudh,  and  took  service  with  the 
Nawab  Wazir  at  Lucknow.  When  the  French  were  expelled  from 
that  ruler's  dominions  at  the  instigation  of  the  English,  Pedron  ob- 
tained employment  under  the  Bajah  of  Berar.  After  this  a  great 
blank  occurs  in  his  history,  for  he  is  not  heard  of  again  till  1790,  when 
he  entered  De  Boigne's  First  Brigade  as  a  lieutenant,  and  was  posted 
to  Mattra,  and  shortly  afterwards  purchased  his  majority.  In  1795 
he  was  promoted  to  the  command  of  the  Third  Brigade,  and  must 
have  been  a  man  of  considerably  over  fifty  years  of  age.  In  1799  he 
was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Delhi,  which  the  Native  commandant, 
despite  Sindhia's  orders,  refused  to  deliver  over  to  Perron;  After  a 
blockade  of  five  weeks  the  gates  were  opened  "  to  the  impulse  of  gold," 
but  whether  to  Pedron  or  to  Sutherland  is  doubtful,  as  the  honour  has 
been  assigned  to  both.  In  1800  Pedron  raised  the  Fourth  Brigade 
when  the  threatened  invasion  of  Hindustan  by  Zeman  Shah  caused 
Perron  to  increase  his  army.  His  next  service  was  against  Lakwa 
Dada  at  Sounda  in  1801,  but  he  affected  so  little  with  his  eight  battalions 
that  Perron  proceeded  in  person  to  the  seat  of  war,  and  stormed  the 
rebel  chiefs  entrenchments.  Soon  after  this  hostilities  were  declared 
against  George  Thomas,  and  when^Bourguien  demonstrated  his  utter 
incapacity,  Pedron  was  sent  to  supersede  him.  That  he  was  success- 
ful was  again  due,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  "  impulse  of  gold  " — a 
metal  in  which  he  seems  to  have  had  more  faith  than  in  steel,  for  he 
displayed  little  military  talent,  and  no  courage,  whilst  the  methods  he 
adopted  of  tampering  with  Thomas's  troops  were  not  such  as  commend 
themselves  to  European  notions  of  honourable  warfare.  But  he  gained 
his  ends,  and  after  Thomas's  flight  to  Hansi,  made  over  the  command 
to  Bourguien  again,  and  returned  to  Aligarh  to  recruit  his  brigade, 
which  had  been  weakened  by  casualties  and  transfers  to  the  Third. 


APPENDIX.  379 

Here  he  remained  for  eighteen  months  in  charge  of  Perron's  head- 
quarters, and  when  the  rupture  with  the  British  Government  occurred 
in  1803  he  was  entrusted  with  the  defence  of  the  fort,  and  was  the 
recipient  of  the  famous  letter  from  Perron  which  exhorted  him  to 
hold  the  place  while  one  stone  remained  upon  another.  But  this 
desperate  resolution  was  not  in  Pedron,  and  he  was  anxious  to  sur- 
render without  a  blow,  and  only  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the  spirit 
of  the  troops  under  him,  who,  on  the  first  indication  of  his  weakness, 
deposed  and  confined  him,  and  elected  a  Eajput  named  Baji  Eao  to 
the  command.  Aligarh  was  taken  by  storm  on  the  4th  of  September, 
and  Pedron  was  made  a  prisoner  of  war,  or  to  be  more  exact,  was 
transferred  from  Maratha  to  English  bondage.  Thorn  describes  him 
as  "  an  elderly  man,  clad  in  a  green  jacket,  with  gold  lace  and  epau- 
lettes " — which  is  the  last  record  discovered  of  this  adventurer. 

FILLET,  J.,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  Pillet  was  a  Frenchman,  in  Les- 
tineau's  corps,  in  the  service  of  the  Edna  of  Gohad,  to  the  command 
of  which  he  succeeded  by  seniority  when  Lestineau  absconded  after 
securing  Gulam  Kadir's  saddle-bags.  He  was,  however,  unable  to 
control  the  men,  who  broke  into  mutiny  and  were  disbanded.  Pillet 
subsequently  entered  the  service  of  the  Eajah  of  Jaipur,  and  about  the 
year  1794  made  a  long  report  to  the  British  Government  on  the 
resources  of  that  country,  with  a  view  to  an  alliance.  As  the  leading 
feature  of  the  proposal  was  that  the  Eajah  should  keep  up  an  army  of 
50,000  men,  and  the  Company  pay  for  it,  it  did  not  receive  that  atten- 
tion which  doubtless  both  Partab  Sing  and  Pillet  fondly  hoped. 

PIRON,  COLONEL  [often  mis-spelt  Perron]. — Colonel  Piron,  who  is 
constantly  confounded  in  historical  books  with  General  Perron,  was  a 
native  of  Alsace.  He  was  in  the  service  of  the  Nizam  of  Haidarabad, 
and  second  in  command  to  the  famous  adventurer  Eaymond,  who 
raised  a  brigade  of  seventeen  battalions  for  that  ruler.  Piron  was  an 
outrageous  Jacobin,  and  in  close  touch  with  the  French  Eepublican 
faction  in  Mysore.  On  Eaymond's  death,  in  March,  1798,  he  succeeded 
to  the  command  of  the  14,000  men  comprising  the  force,  which  was 
supported  by  a  Jaidad  yielding  eighteen  lakhs  of  rupees  annually,  and 
included  a  strong  train  of  artillery  and  a  complete  military  equipment. 
One  of  his  first  acts  was  to  send  to  Perron,  Sindhia's  general,  a  silver 
tree  and  Cap  of  Liberty  as  a  souvenir.  His  corps  always  hoisted  the 
French  national  flag,  and  the  lapels  and  epaulettes  of  the  Sepoys' 
uniforms  were  embroidered  with  the  words  Liberte  et  Constitution. 
Piron  and  all  his  officers  entertained  ambitious  designs,  and  considered 


380  APPENDIX. 

themselves  as  forwarding  the  interests  of  France.  Their  undisguised 
hostility  to  the  English  and  pronounced  principles  soon  compelled 
Lord  Wellesley  to  take  action  against  them,  and  he  determined  to 
effect  the  disbandment  of  the  force.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Roberts, 
assisted  by  John  Malcolm,  was  told  off  for  the  task,  and  effected  it  with 
complete  success  on  the  22nd  of  October,  1798,  the  operation  being 
facilitated  by  the  fact  of  the  troops  being  in  a  state  of  open  mutiny, 
and  Piron  and  his  officers  in  danger.  The  following  account  of 
the  dispersal  of  this  "  French  Army  "  (as  Lord  Wellesley  calls  it)  is 
extracted  from  Kaye's  "  Life  of  Malcolm." 

"Having  reported  to  Colonel  Roberts  the  favourable  aspect  of 
affairs,  Malcolm  drew  up  his  detachment  on  the  heights  facing  the 
French  lines.  There  he  was  speedily  joined  by  the  European  officers 
of  the  French  corps,  elate  with  joy  at  their  escape  from  the  hands  of 
their  infuriate  soldiery,  and  actually,  in  the  conjuncture  that  had 
arisen,  regarding  the  English  as  friends  and  deliverers.  The  rest  was 
soon  accomplished.  The  Sepoys  left  their  guns,  laid  down  their  arms, 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  two  lines  of  British  troops,  moved  off  in  a 
deep  column  to  a  flag  planted  on  the  right  of  the  ground.  Not  a  shot 
was  fired,  not  a  drop  of  blood  was  shed.  Eleven  or  twelve  thousand 
men  were  dispersed  in  a  few  hours  ;  and  before  sunset  the  whole  can- 
tonment, with  all  their  storehouses,  arsenals,  gun  foundries,  and  powder 
mills,  were  completely  in  our  possession.  The  celebrated  French 
corps  of  Hydrabad  had  passed  into  tradition." 

Piron  and  his  compatriots  confessed  themselves  very  grateful,  not 
only  for  their  rescue  from  a  grave  peril,  but  for  the  humanity  with 
which  they  were  subsequently  treated.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate  the 
exact  qualities  of  this  adventurer.  Major  Kirkpatrick,  tbe  Resident 
at  Haidarabad,  writing  in  1797,  describes  him  as  younger  than  Ray- 
mond, and  far  more  enterprising  and  active,  and  particularly  fond 
of  the  military  profession.  But  Sir  John  Malcolm,  then  Kirkpatrick's 
assistant,  who  had  equally  good  opportunities  of  forming  an  opinion, 
records  that  "  Piron  is  a  rough,  violent  democrat,  a  man  with  more 
hostile  dispositions  to  us  than  his  predecessor  Raymond,  but  less 
dangerous ;  being  a  stranger  to  that  temper  and  those  conciliatory 
manners  by  which  the  latter  won  his  way  to  greatness.  Piron  has 
no  ability,  and  his  authority  is  far  from  being  generally  acknow- 
ledged." Events  proved  Piron  was  totally  unfitted  to  step  into  the 
post  made  vacant  by  Raymond's  death.  He  died  at  Chandernagore 
in  1805. 

PLUMET,  MAJOR. — Major  Plumet  was  "  a  Frenchman  and  a  gentle- 


APPENDIX.  381 

man — two  qualities  which  were  seldom  united  in  the  Mahratta 
Empire."  Such  is  Smith's  dictum.  Plumet  raised  a  party  for 
Jaswant  Eao  Holkar  in  1798,  and  had  a  principal  share  in  securing 
the  victory  of  Ujjain,  although  a  short  time  previously  he  had  sustained 
a  reverse  when  he  attacked  Major  Brownrigg's  position  on  the  Narbada. 
According  to  one  historian,  he  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  in 
the  latter  affair,  and  not  present  at  Ujjain ;  but  another,  with  equal 
insistence,  accords  to  him  the  honour  of  that  day.  He  soon  found 
Holkar  "  too  cruel,  cunning,  capricious,  and  ungrateful,"  and  left  his 
service.  Major  Ambrose  states  that  Plumet  deserted  his  chief  on  the 
eve  of  the  battle  of  Indore,  and  so  conduced  to  the  defeat  which 
Jaswant  Eao  sustained,  and  that  this  behaviour  caused  Holkar  to 
brand  all  Frenchmen  as  "Duggerbaz,"'  or  Faithless.  Major  Plumet, 
after  his  brief  career  in  the  Deccan,  retired  to  the  Isle  of  France. 

POHLMAN,  COLONEL  [also  written  Pholman  and  Balaman]. — Colonel 
Pohlman  was  a  native  of  Hanover,  and  a  sergeant  in  a  regiment  com- 
posed of  men  of  that  nationality,  formerly  quartered  at  Madras,  and 
one  of  several  similar  mercenary  corps  of  foreigners  in  the  Company's 
service,  such  as  Doxat's  Chasseurs,  the  Swiss  Begiment  de  Meuron, 
and  Claude  Martine's  company.  Pohlman  entered  De  Boigne's  brigades 
about  the  year  1792  or  1793,  and  was  a  captain  on  the  modest  pay  of 
Es.  200  a  month  in  1794.  In  April  of  the  following  year  he  was  in 
command  of  a  Najib  battalion  in  the  Second  Brigade  at  Mattra,  to 
which  James  Skinner  was  posted  when  he  first  joined  the  service. 
Between  this  and  1799  he  probably  saw  a  good  deal  of  service,  for 
it  is  a  period  of  which  Skinner  has  much  to  relate.  Early  in  1799 
Perron  distrusted  Sutherland,  who  was  in  command  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  and  removed  him  from  his  post,  which  he  bestowed  on 
Pohlman,  who  shortly  afterwards  sustained  a  severe  reverse  in 
an  unsuccessful  attack  upon  the  fort  of  Shapiira,  when  six  of  his 
battalions  were  beaten  back  with  a  loss  of  two  officers  and  1,000  men 
killed  and  wounded.  Eventually  he  captured  the  place,  when,  it  is 
pleasant  to  record,  he  treated  the  gallant  Eajput  garrison  with  great 
humanity  and  consideration,  permitting  them  and  their  women-folk 
to  march  out  with  all  the  honours  of  war,  and  the  respect  due  to  their 
heroic  defence.  In  the  following  May,  Pohlman  commanded  at  the 
important  battle  of  Malpura,  when  his  force  consisted  of  his  own 
brigade  of  eight  battalions,  five  of  the  Chevalier  Dudrenec's,  and  5,000 
cavalry.  He  inflicted  a  severe  defeat  on  Elijah  Partab  Singh,  and 
captured  74  of  his  guns.  This  was  the  action  in  which  Dudrenec's 
corps  was  ridden  down  by  the  Eathors,  and  the  victory  was  solely  due 


882  APPENDIX. 

to  Pohlman's  good  generalship.  For  the  next  two  years  he  appears 
to  have  been  quartered  in  Bajputana,  to  enforce  payment  of  the 
tribute  due,  and  keep  the  country  under  control  whilst  Perron's  other 
brigades  were  engaged  in  the  wars  against  Holkar,  Lakwa  Dada,  and 
George  Thomas,  in  none  of  which  Pohlman  seems  to  have  had  any 
part.  In  1802  he  escorted  Perron  to  Ujjain,  and  here,  for  the  second 
time,  superseded  Sutherland,  who  was  obliged  to  leave  the  service 
owing  to  Perron's  hostility.  Pohlman  and  the  First  Brigade  remained 
with  Sindhia  in  the  Deccan  till  war  broke  out  with  the  English.  It 
is  uncertain  whether  he  was  in  command  of  Sindhia's  infantry  at  the 
battle  of  Assaye,  in  which  his  brigade  fought  well,  the  artillery  being 
splendidly  served,  and  the  men  sustaining  a  stubborn  fight  against  the 
genius  of  Wellesley  and  the  valour  of  British  troops  for  three  hours. 
Pohlman  eventually  entered  the  Company's  service,  though  without 
rank,  and  re-enlisted  some  of  his  old  soldiers  to  form  an  irregular 
infantry  corps.  He  is  described  as  an  exceedingly  cheerful  and  enter- 
taining character,  who  lived  in  the  style  of  an  Indian  prince,  kept  a 
seraglio,  and  always  travelled  on  an  elephant,  attended  by  a  guard  of 
Mughals,  all  dressed  alike  in  purple  robes,  and  marching  in  file  in  the 
same  way  as  a  British  cavalry  regiment ;  notwithstanding  which 
melodramatic  weakness,  Pohlman  was  certainly  one  of  Perron's  most 
competent  officers. 

RAYMOND,  FRANCIS  DE,  GENERAL. — Fra^ois  de  Raymond  (whose 
name  Colonel  Malleson  gives  as  Michel  Joachim  Marie  Raymond)  was 
born  at  Serignac,  in  Gascony,  in  1755.  He  came  out  to  India  early  in 
life,  and  in  1775  obtained  employment  as  sub-lieutenant  in  a  battalion 
commanded  by  the  Chevalier  de  Lasse",  in  the  service  of  Haider  Ali 
of  Mysore.  His  conduct  brought  him  to  the  notice  of  the  military 
authorities,  and  he  received  a  commission  as  captain  in  the  French 
army  in  1783,  and  was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  the  famous  Bussy. 
Three  years  later,  on  Bussy's  death,  Raymond  entered  the  service  of 
the  Nizam  Ali  Khan  of  Haidarabad,  for  whom  he  raised  a  small 
corps  of  300  men,  hiring  the  weapons  with  which  they  were  armed 
from  a  French  merchant  on  the  toast,  at  the  rate  of  eight  annas  per 
mensem  for  each  musket.  When  the  confederate  war  against  Tipu 
Sultan  broke  out,  and  the  English,  Marathas,  and  the  Nizam  were 
leagued  against  the  ruler  of  Mysore,  Raymond's  command  was  raised 
to  700  men,  and  he  distinguished  himself  so  much  in  the  campaign 
that  he  grew  into  great  favour  with  Ah"  Khan,  and  his  force  was 
augmented  to  5,000  men,  his  own  pay  being  increased  to  Rs.  5,000  a 
month.  At  the  battle  of  Kardla  in  1795  Raymond's  battalions 


APPENDIX.  883 

numbered  10,840  men,  with  28  guns  and  46  tumbrils.  The  regularity 
with  which  this  force  was  paid  enabled  him  to  fill  its  ranks  with 
deserters  from  the  Company's  services,  to  whom  he  held  out  tempting 
inducements.  He  is  also  said  to  have  encouraged  French  prisoners 
of  war  on  parole  to  escape  and  take  service  under  his  flag.  The 
battle  of  Kardla  was  the  only  occasion  except  the  Mysore  war  in  which, 
during  a  service  of  seventeen  years,  Raymond  met  a  foreign  foe.  He 
was  forced  to  retire  from  the  field,  but  was  not  defeated,  for  the  retreat 
was  solely  due  to  the  Nizam's  pusillinamity,  and  ordered  at  a  moment 
when  Raymond's  battalions  were  stoutly  and,  peradventure,  success- 
fully holding  their  own.  He  was  next  employed  in  reducing  to  sub- 
mission the  Nizam's  rebellious  son  and  heir,  Ah  Jab.  In  this  he  met 
with  stout  resistance,  and  was  obliged  to  send  for  reinforcements  to 
one  of  his  subordinates  named  Baptiste,  on  being  joined  by  whom  he 
quickly  brought  the  expedition  to  a  conclusion,  and  secured  the  person 
of  Ali  Jah,  who  committed  suicide,  leaving  Sikander  Jah  heir  to 
the  throne.  This  Prince  was  accustomed  to  swear  "  by  the  head  of 
Raymond,"  whom  he  regarded  as  the  first  of  men,  with  the  single 
detraction  that  he  belonged  to  a  nation  that  had  murdered  its  king 
and  queen.  After  the  battle  of  Kardla  Raymond  tried  hard  to  obtain 
the  Karpa  district,  which  would  have  enabled  him  to  co-operate  with 
any  French  force  making  a  descent  on  the  Coromandal  coast,  with  or 
without  the  concurrence  of  the  Nizam.  He  already  possessed  an  im- 
mense military  territorial  assignment  which  yielded  fifty-two  lakhs  of 
rupees  a  year,  in  addition  to  an  estate  or  Jaghir  of  his  own,  the  income 
of  which  was  Rs.  50,000.  His  salary  was  princely,  and  in  the  style  of 
his  domestic  life  he  collected  round  him  every  luxury  and  elegance 
within  the  reach  of  a  European  in  India.  Previous  to  his  death 
he  further  increased  his  force,  which  he  considered  "  A  French  body 
of  troops,  employed  and  subsidised  by  the  Nizam,"  to  over  14,000 
men,  with  a  complete  train  of  artillery,  chiefly  brass  ordnance, 
worked  by  a  well-trained  corps  of  Europeans,  and  drawn  by  5,000 
bullocks.  His  cavalry  numbered  600.  He  possessed,  in  his  own 
right,  all  the  guns  and  military  equipage  belonging  to  the  force.  The 
physique  of  his  soldiers  was  not  to  be  compared  with  that  of  the 
stalwart  and  warlike  warriors  whom  De  Boigne  and  Perron  enlisted 
from  the  fine  recruiting  grounds  of  Upper  India,  but  the  men  were 
well  disciplined,  and  their  parade  appearance  was  good,  whilst  the 
service  itself  was  extremely  popular  with  the  Natives. 

Raymond  was  an  ambitious  and  intriguing  man,  and  one  who 
understood  the  art  of  gaining  his  ends  by  engaging  manners  and 
conciliatory  demeanour.  After  the  battle  of  Kardla  he  began  to 


884  APPENDIX. 

assume  an  almost  kingly  state,  for  his  power  made  him  the  arbitrator 
of  Haidarabad.  All  his  regimental  returns  were  headed  Corps  de 
Francois  de  Raymond,  and  he  was  received  in  his  own  cantonments 
with  a  royal  salute.  He  stood  in  a  position  which  would  have  enabled 
him,  in  the  event  of  the  Nizam's  death,  to  elevate  whom  he  pleased  to 
the  throne,  and  the  overpowering  influence  which  he  acquired  in  the 
country  was  a  serious  menace  to  English  interests.  He  was  in  close 
touch  with  the  Government  of  France,  and  with  Tipu  Sultan  of  Mysore, 
and  engaged  in  intrigues  which  had  for  their  object  an  alliance  against 
the  British  power  in  the  East.  He  was  also  in  correspondence  with 
some  of  the  European  officers  hi  Sindhia's  service,  and  an  interesting 
letter  exists  which  he  addressed  to  Michael  Filoze  in  January,  1798, 
on  the  subject  of  the  treacherous  seizure  of  Nana  Farnavis,  the 
Peshwa's  Prime  Minister.  This  is  worth  quoting  as  showing  Ray- 
mond's honourable  feelings,  and  because  of  a  rather  quaint  adaptation 
it  contains  of  the  "Eights  of  Man"  theory  to  eighteenth  century  Maratha 
politics — probably  the  first  and  last  tune  the  argument  was  used  in 
such  a  connection.  "  A  report  prevails,"  writes  Raymond,  "  that 
Nana  Farnavis  has  been  arrested  contrary  to  the  Rights  of  Man  and 
to  the  clauses  of  the  treaty  for  which  you  [Filoze]  were  security.  I  have 
no  other  interest  in  speaking  of  this  but  that  which  I  take  for  every 
European  whose  reputation  is  dear  to  me."  Then  he  goes  on  to  request 
Filoze  to  obtain  the  N ana's  restoration  to  liberty,  and  offers  him  a 
position  and  emoluments,  "one-fourth  more  than  you  have  with 
Scindia,  and  a  jagJiir  of  one  lakh  of  rupees  annually."  The  reason 
of  this  liberality  is  not  obvious  in  the  letter,  but  it  suggests  many 
inferences.  The  epistle  concludes  :  "I  will  be  shortly  on  your 
frontiers,  when  we  shall  be  able  to  keep  up  a  correspondence.  Burn 
this  letter  if  it  should  not  suit  you  ;  but  write  to  me.  Raymond." 

Two  months  later  Raymond  died — according  to  some  accounts  by 
poison — at  the  early  age  of  forty-three,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  a 
degree  of  power  and  consequence  never  reached  by  any  other  military 
adventurer  in  Southern  India. 

Raymond's  character  has  been  variously  estimated  by  different 
writers.  Major  Thorn  describes  him  as  "  a  man  of  extensive  know- 
ledge and  equal  activity."  Kaye,  in  his  "  Life  of  Malcolm,"  views 
his  character  in  the  following  light :  "  Raymond  was  a  man  of  great 
ability  and  address.  .  .  .  Had  he  lived  the  taking  of  his  men  (in  1798) 
would  not  have  been  an  easy  task.  .  .  .  His  troops  were  admirably 
disciplined  and  equipped.  Their  store-rooms  well  filled  with  arms 
and  accoutrements,  and  clothing  from  Europe  of  excellent  quality, 
and  they  could  with  ease  have  armed  12,000  more  men  in  a  few 


APPENDIX.  385 

months.  They  cast  excellent  cannon,  and  made  serviceable  muskets 
in  their  different  foundries,  all  of  which,  as  well  as  their  powder- 
mills,  were  under  the  direction  of  able  and  scientific  Europeans." 
Malcolm's  opinion  has  already  been  quoted  in  another  page,  namely, 
that  Raymond  was  a  man  of  "  temper  and  conciliatory  manners,  by 
which  he  won  his  way  to  greatness."  But  it  has  been  reserved  for  a 
contemporary  historian,  on  grounds  which  it  is  a  little  difficult  to 
understand,  to  elevate  Raymond  to  the  position  of  a  national  hero. 
"  This  remarkable  man,"  writes  Colonel  Malleson,  "  is  referred  to  by 
many  English  writers  simply  as  '  an  adventurer  named  Raymond.' 
That  he  was  an  adventurer  is  true,  but  he  was  one  in  the  best  sense 
of  the  term — chivalrous,  daring,  trustworthy,  and  a  splendid  or- 
ganiser; one  of  those  adventurers  who,  like  Garibaldi  in  our  own 
days,  leave  their  mark  on  the  history  of  the  country  in  which  their 
deeds  have  been  achieved.  ...  It  may  be  said  that  no  Indian  Prince, 
not  even  Madhajee  Scindia,  or  his  successor,  Dowlut  Rao,  ever  had  a 
finer  or  more  efficient  body  of  troops  in  his  service  [than  those  which 
Raymond  raised].  In  the  campaign  against  the  Mahrattas  in  1796  (?), 
it  was  Raymond  and  his  troops  who  repulsed  the  charge  of  the 
Mahratta  cavalry  and  would  have  beaten  them  back  altogether  had 
not  the  Nizam  and  his  troops  abandoned  the  field.  His  reputation, 
great  at  the  time,  still  survives,  and  it  may  be  said  with  truth  that 
the  name  of  no  European  connected  with  India  has  survived  seventy- 
six  years  after  the  demise  of  his  body,  to  live  with  such  eternal  green- 
ness in  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  the  country  as  does  the  name  of 
Raymond  in  the  memories  and  traditions  of  the  great  families  of 
Hydrabad." 

Those  who  have  read  these  pages  will  hardly  feel  inclined  to  agree 
with  this  estimate  of  Raymond's  superior  talents  as  a  military  ad- 
venturer. A  soldier  of  fortune  is  judged  by  his  deeds,  and  Raymond's 
achievements  in  the  tented  field  cannot  for  a  moment  bear  comparison 
with  those  of  De  Boigne,  Perron,  or  Thomas. 

Passing  to  the  other  side  of  the  picture,  we  have  the  opinion  of 
Major  Kirkpatrick,  who  was  British  Resident  at  Haidarabad  in  1797, 
and  wrote  of  Raymond  as  "by  no  means  a  man  of  vigorous  mind  or 
decided  character,  and  very  hard,  and  wanting  liberality  in  pecuniary 
matters,  which  makes  him  much  disliked  by  all  his  officers,  except 
one  or  two  he  favours.  He  never  showed  himself  to  be  much  of  a 
soldier,  but  was  artful,  and  had  an  arranging  head  and  conciliating 
manners  when  they  suited  his  purpose."  Captain  Fraser,  in  "  Our 
Faithful  Ally  the  Nizam,"  describes  Raymond  as  wanting  in  charac- 
ter, promptitude,  and  decision.  Colonel  Beatson,  in  his  History  of 

25 


886  APPENDIX. 

the  war  with  Tipu  Sultan,  has  recorded  the  following  opinion  of  the 
adventurer  and  his  party  : — "  The  corps  commanded  by  Colonel 
Raymond,  which,  during  the  last  war  in  Mysore,  amounted  to  no 
more  than  1,500  men,  was  at  that  period  so  defective  in  point  of 
discipline  as  to  be  rather  an  object  of  contempt  than  jealousy  to  the 
Government  of  India.  It  has  gradually  augmented  its  numbers  and 
improved  its  discipline  under  the  command  of  the  late  Monsieur 
Raymond,  until  it  nearly  reached  the  number  of  14,000,  and  had 
obtained  a  degree  of  discipline  superior  in  every  respect  to  that  of  any 
Native  infantry  in  India,  excepting  the  Sepoys  in  the  Company's 
service.  The  corps  formed  the  largest  and  most  efficient  branch  of 
the  military  establishment  of  His  Highness  the  Nizam,  and  the 
French  officers  had  acquired  a  considerable  ascendancy  in  his  do- 
minions and  councils,  and  had  manifested  on  several  occasions  the 
symptoms  of  a  disposition  so  arrogant,  overbearing,  and  adventurous, 
as  to  excite  alarm  in  the  minds  of  His  Highness  and  his  ministers." 

The  last  quotation  must  be  from  the  despatches  of  the  Marquis 
Wellesley.  "  Raymond's  force  was  avowedly  designed  to  cope  with 
one  De  Boigne  had  created  for  the  Mahrattas,  and  was  organised  on 
very  similar  lines.  Each  regiment  was  officered  by  two  Europeans, 
and  there  was  a  field  train  of  fifty  guns,  and  a  small  body  of  dis- 
ciplined cavalry  attached.  The  former  was  served  by  European 
gunners,  many  of  them  deserters  from  the  Company's  service.  The 
parade  appearance  of  the  force  was  good,  but  the  discipline  was  far 
from  strict,  and  the  slackness  in  this  respect,  combined  with  the 
regularity  of  pay,  made  the  service  a  very  popular  one  with  the 
Natives,  so  that  there  was  no  difficulty  in  keeping  the  brigade  up  to 
its  full  strength.  All  the  officers  were  Frenchmen,  devoted  to  the 
doctrines  of  Jacobinism,  and  any  amongst  them  who  evinced  Royalist 
tendencies  were  speedily  dismissed.  They  fought  under  the  French 
flag,  and  the  Cap  of  Liberty  was  engraved  on  their  buttons.  Raymond 
was  not  a  man  of  any  great  capacity  or  vigour,  but  in  craft  and 
intrigue  he  was  an  adept,  and  sustained  his  position  by  surrounding 
himself  with  a  few  favourites,  who  supported  him  through  thick  and 
thin.  With  his  other  officers  he  was  far  from  popular,  being  a  hard 
man,  and  in  pecuniary  matters  extremely  illiberal ;  for,  although  he 
derived  vast  revenues  from  enormous  territorial  assignments,  he  could 
never  divest  himself  of  his  inherent  avarice  and  meanness." 

ROBERTS,  LIEUTENANT. — Lieutenant  Roberts  was  an  Englishman, 
and  commanded  a  battalion  of  infantry  in  De  Boigne's  First  Brigade 
in  1790.  He  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Pathan  and  Merta,  and 


APPENDIX.  387 

was  severely  wounded  at  the  latter  by  a  missile  from  a  weapon  known 
as  an  "  organ,"  and  which  consisted  of  several  gun  barrels  so  joined 
together  as  to  fire  at  once.  Whereby  it  would  seem  that  the  Mitrail- 
leuse was  of  Rajputanic  origin  ! 

RYAN,  MAJOR. — This  unfortunate  officer  was  an  Irishman,  and 
commanded  a  battalion  in  the  service  of  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar.  His 
only  claim  to  be  remembered  is  as  a  victim  to  that  chiefs  treachery, 
for  he  was  one  of  the  three  British  subjects  who  were  cruelly 
beheaded  in  1804  for  refusing  to  take  the  field  against  their  fellow 
countrymen. 

SALEUR,  COLONEL  [also  spelt  Suleur  and  Saleure].--Colonel  Saleur 
was  a  Swiss  or  French  officer,  who  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the 
Begum  Somru's  corps,  after  the  suicide  of  Le  Vassoult  in  1795.  He 
had  taken  no  part  in  the  mutiny  which  led  to  his  predecessor's  death, 
but  had,  on  the  contrary,  done  everything  in  his  power  to  prevent  it. 
He  was  described  as  the  "only  respectable  officer"  who  signed  the 
Covenant  entered  into  between  the  Begum  and  her  rebellious  soldiery. 
Saleur,  who  had  been  in  the  force  almost  since  its  commencement, 
increased  its  strength  to  six  battalions,  with  40  guns  and  200  cavalry, 
and  in  1802  inarched  with  five  battalions  to  join  Sindhia  in  the  Deccan 
after  the  defeat  of  Ujjain.  The  men  were  in  a  state  of  mutiny  the 
whole  way,  as  many  of  the  colonel's  letters,  written  in  French,  to 
his  mistress  testified.  When  war  broke  out  with  the  English,  Saleur's 
troops  were  with  Sindhia,  but  only  one  battalion  took  part  in  the 
battle  of  Assaye,  the  other  four  having  been  left  behind  to  guard  the 
Maratha  camp  and  baggage,  and  owing  to  this  circumstance  they 
escaped  destruction ;  and  Colonel  Saleur  marched  them  safely  to 
Burhanpur,  and  from  thence  back  to  Sardhana.  Saleur  was  one  of 
the  witnesses  of  the  Begum's  marriage  to  Le  Vassoult  in  1793. 

SANGSTER,  MAJOR. — Major  Sangster  was  a  Scotchman,  and  a  person 
of  skill  and  ingenuity.  In  178ii  he  obtained  the  command  of  the 
disciplined  battalion  of  infantry  which  Madoc  raised  at  Agra  and 
sold  to  the  Rana  of  Gohad.  It  consisted  of  1,000  well-trained  Sepoys 
and  a  respectable  train  of  artillery.  Sangster  was.  skilled  in  the  art 
of  casting  cannon,  and  those  he  turned  out  could  compare  with  the 
best  the  Company  manufactured,  whilst  his  muskets,  produced  at  a 
cost  of  ten  rupees  each,  were  excellent  in  every  respect.  When  De 
Boigne  raised  his  first  two  battalions,  he  engaged  Sangster  (whose 
master  had  been  forced  to  surrender  to  Sindhia),  and  appointed  him 


388  APPENDIX. 

to  the  charge  of  the  arsenal  at  Agra.  He  appears  to  have  led  a  very 
busy  life,  for  in  process  of  time  other  arsenals  and  magazines  were 
established  at  Mattra,  Delhi,  Gwalior,  Kalpi,  and  Gohad,  of  all  of 
which  he  had  the  superintendence.  The  cannon  balls  were  cast  at 
Gwalior,  where  there  were  very  fine  iron  mines,  and  gunpowder  was 
manufactured  at  Agra,  the  saltpetre  and  sulphur  being  imported  from 
Bikanir.  No  mention  of  Sangster  can  be  found  after  De  Boigne's 
resignation,  though  in  1801  a  report  appears  in  one  of  the  Persian 
journals  that  "  Lakwa  Dada  has  employed  Mr.  Sangster's  son  to 
raise  and  discipline  a  battalion  for  him,"  which  seems  to  indicate 
that  the  father  was  still  in  the  country.  Young  Sangster  was  probably 
the  cadet  "  Songster  "  who  surrendered  to  General  Wellesley  after  the 
battle  of  Assaye. 

SHEPHERD,  JAMES,  COLONEL  [known  to  the  Natives  as  Jamus  Saliib]. 
— James  Shepherd  was  an  Englishman  of  unusual  enterprise  and 
courage.  When  hardly  emerged  from  childhood,  he  deserted  his 
ship  in  Calcutta,  and  accompanied  an  officer  to  De  Boigne's  camp  in 
the  quality  of  a  menial  servant.  He  afterwards  lived  in  the  same 
capacity  with  a  gentleman  at  Fatehpur.  Shepherd  was  described  as 
well  calculated  for  the  Native  service,  being  a  good-looking  man  and 
endowed  with  pliability  of  temper.  About  1799  he  took  service 
under  Ambaji  Inglia,  for  whom  he  raised  a  brigade  of  regular 
infantry,  which  numbered  five  battalions,  with  500  cavalry  and  25 
guns.  Ambaji  was  a  penurious  chief,  and  stinted  his  officer  in 
money,  or  he  would  have  created  a  much  more  efficient  force  than 
one  which  is  sometimes  alluded  to  as  the  "ragamuffin  battalions." 
Shepherd  was  engaged  in  the  attack  on  Lakwa  Dada's  position  at 
Sounda  in  1801,  when  he  materially  assisted  in  defeating  that  chief, 
but  lost  four  of  his  European  officers  killed  or  wounded — poor  Bellasis 
amongst  the  former — and  a  great  number  of  his  men.  He  was 
detached  to  pursue  Lakwa  Dada  after  his  flight,  and  kept  him  in  play 
during  Perron's  campaign  against  George  Thomas.  It  is  a  pity  there 
is  no  detailed  record  of  Shepherd's  services,  for  he  is  stated  to  have 
seen  much  and  been  frequently  wounded.  "  Without  birth,  educa- 
tion, or  protection,"  writes  Smith,  "  he  rose  from  obscurity  to  con- 
sequence by  his  bravery,  his  perseverance,  and  his  fidelity;  his 
diligent  toil  and  bold  enterprise  deserved  all  the  success  he  won." 
On  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with  the  English,  Shepherd  and  his 
party  passed  over  to  the  Company's  service,  and  he  distinguished 
himself  in  Bundelkhand  in  1804,  where  he  gave  the  celebrated  Free- 
booter Amir  Khan  a  sound  beating  at  Maltaon  Ghaut,  and  on  the  24th 


APPENDIX.  389 

of  June  completed  his  discomfiture  by  entirely  defeating  and  dis- 
persing his  force  near  Kunch .  Shepherds  corps  at  this  time  consisted 
of  3,180  men,  and  was  highly  praised  for  its  efficiency  when  General 
Lake  reviewed  it  in  1805. 

SKINNER,  JAMES,  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL,  C.B. — This  compilation  is 
so  much  indebted  to  "  The  Military  Memoirs  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
James  Skinner,  C.B.,"  that  although  that  delightful  and  graphic 
biography  of  the  stout  old  adventurer  exists,  a  sketch  of  his  career 
must  be  included  in  these  pages,  and  the  following  has  been  condensed 
from  the  above  work  : 

James  Skinner  was  born  in  1778.  His  father  was  a  native  of 
Scotland,  and  an  officer  in  the  Company's  service,  and  his  mother  a 
Rajputni,  the  daughter  of  a  Rajput  landholder  in  the  Mirzapur 
country.  She  was  taken  prisoner  in  the  war  with  Chait  Singh,  the 
Rajah  of  Benares,  during  an  action  near  Bijaigarh,  and  came  under 
the  protection  of  Ensign  Skinner,  to  whom  she  bore  six  children, 
three  sons  and  three  daughters.  The  latter  were  all  married  to 
gentlemen  in  the  Company's  service.  David,  the  eldest  son,  went  to 
sea ;  James,  the  second,  and  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  became  a 
military  adventurer ;  and  Robert,  the  youngest,  followed  in  his 
footsteps. 

Skinner's  mother  died  by  her  own  hand  in  1790,  because  it  was 
decided  that  her  daughters  should  be  sent  to  school,  and  she  con- 
ceived this  would  be  a  violation  of  the  sanctity  of  the  purdah,  and 
that  their  Rajput  honour  would  be  destroyed  in  consequence.  After 
her  death  James  and  Robert  were  sent  to  a  charity  school,  their 
father  being  still  only  a  lieutenant,  and  unable  to  pay  for  their 
education.  However,  when  he  obtained  his  captaincy  in  1793,  he 
removed  his  sons  to  a  boarding-school,  where  the  charge  was  Rs.  30  a 
month  for  each.  Two  years  later  James  was  bound  apprentice  to  a 
printer,  on  a  seven  years'  indenture,  and  sent  to  the  office  to  learn  his 
business. 

Three  days  sufficed  to  disgust  him  with  his  proposed  calling,  and 
he  determined  to  run  away  to  sea.  On  the  third  night  he  effected  his 
escape,  with  sixpence  in  his  pocket,  on  which  he  contrived  to  live  for 
six  days.  When  his  money  was  exhausted  he  wandered  about  the 
Calcutta  bazaar,  working  for  any  one  who  would  hire  him,  and  for 
some  tune  picked  up  a  precarious  living  by  carrying  loads  or  pulling 
the  drill  for  Native  carpenters  at  a  pay  of  threepence  a  day.  But 
before  long  he  was  recognised  by  a  servant  of  his  elder  sister,  Mrs. 
Templeton,  who  forthwith  bore  him  away  to  his  master's  house 


890  APPENDIX. 

After  getting  a  good  rating  from  his  uncle,  he  was  set  to  work  to 
copy  law  papers,  and  remained  so  employed  for  three  months,  until 
his  godfather,  Colonel  Burn,  arrived  at  the  Presidency.  This  gentle- 
man, finding  that  young  Skinner  burned  to  be  a  soldier,  gave  him 
Es.  300  and  sent  him  to  Cawnpore,  where  Captain  Skinner's  regiment 
was  stationed,  and  whither  the  Colonel  was  soon  returning. 

Here  Skinner  arrived  in  April,  1795,  and  a  fortnight  later  his 
godfather  followed,  and  furnished  him  with  a  letter  of  introduction 
to  General  de  Boigne  at  KoiL  Proceeding  there  the  youngster  was 
very  kindly  received  by  the  great  man,  who  gave  him  an  ensign's 
appointment  in  his  brigades,  on  a  pay  of  Es.  150  a  month,  and  posted 
him  to  a  Najib  battalion,  commanded  by  Captain  Pohlman,  at 
Mattra. 

Shortly  after  this  De  Boigne  retired,  and  the  temporary  command 
of  the  army  devolved  upon  Colonel  Eobert  Sutherland,  who  was  at 
the  head  of  the  Second  Brigade,  to  which  Skinner's  battalion  belonged. 
Skinner's  first  experience  of  active  service  was  during  a  campaign  in 
Bundelkhand,  where  Sutherland  and  Lakwa  Dada  were  engaged  in 
reducing  several  refractory  chiefs  and  rajahs  to  obedience.  Here  he 
assisted  in  two  field-battles,  and  the  storm  and  capture  of  five  or  six 
forts,  which  intensified  his  military  aspirations.  He  now  made  it 
his  study  to  master  all  the  modes  of  Native  warfare,  and  became  pro- 
ficient in  the  use  of  the  Maratha  spear,  the  bow  and  arrow,  and  the 
sword  exercise. 

In  1796  Perron  was  appointed  to  the  supreme  command  of  the 
army  of  Hindustan,  and  arrived  at  Mattra  in  February  of  the  follow- 
ing year.  Soon  after  this  the  rebellion  of  the  Bhais  broke  out,  and  a 
large  force  was  ordered  to  assemble  at  Gwalior,  under  Captain  Bntter- 
field,  to  which  Skinner's  battalion  was  attached.  The  first  action  in 
the  campaign  was  the  battle  of  Chandkhori,  where,  owing  to  his 
desertion  by  the  Maratha  cavalry,  Butterfield  was  defeated  and 
obliged  to  fall  back  with  a  loss  of  500  men.  Skinner  defended  his 
rear  during  the  retreat  to  a  fort  called  Shergarh,  behaving  very 
gallantly  in  the  face  of  great  difficulties  and  dangers,  and  bringing 
off  his  guns  with  safety.  For  this  he  received  great  commendation 
from  Captain  Butterfield,  and  General  Perron  hearing  of  it  promoted 
him  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant  with  the  pay  of  Es.  200  a  month. 

The  Bhais  had  now  been  joined  by  Lakwa  Dada,  and  retired  to 
Chiturgarh  in  Udaipur,  and  thither  Ambaji  Inglia,  the  new  Maratha 
commander-in-chief,  followed  them.  Captain  Butterfield  was  again 
in  command  of  the  infantry,  and  Skinner,  now  promoted  to  the 
charge  of  two  battalions,  accompanied  him,  A  great  deal  of 


APPENDIX,  391 

skirmishing  took  place,  but  nothing  decisive  was  effected.  Nor  were 
matters  mended  when  Ambaji  was  joined  by  Colonel  Sutherland  and 
George  Thomas,  who  had  been  temporarily  engaged  by  the  chief. 
The  campaign,  which  was  not  without  adventure  for  Skinner  himself, 
was  cut  short  by  political  considerations,  and  Colonel  Sutherland 
being  suspected  of  treachery  by  Perron,  was  superseded,  and  his 
command  conferred  on  Major  Pohlman,  an  officer  under  whom 
Skinner  subsequently  saw  much  service.  It  may  be  observed  that 
Skinner  did  not  care  much  for  Sutherland,  and  there  was  a  quarrel 
between  the  two  before  the  Colonel  left  the  brigade. 

Soon  after  assuming  command  Pohlman  was  directed  to  take  a 
fort  called  Jajpur,  which  was  in  the  possession  of  a  refractory  Rajput 
chief  named  Kasri  Singh.  In  the  first  assault  he  suffered  a  severe 
repulse,  but  four  days  later  succeeded  in  carrying  the  place  by  storm. 
This  was  one  of  the  hottest  affairs  Skinner  was  ever  engaged  in.  In 
Pohlman's  life  the  name  of  this  fort  is  given  as  Shapura  on  very  good 
authority,  but  from  internal  evidence  it  seems  more  likely  that 
Skinner's  location  of  the  scene  is  the  right  one,  there  being  a  strong 
fort  at  Jajpur  and  none  at  Shapura.  From  here  the  brigade  marched 
to  Delhi,  at  the  siege  and  capture  of  which,  as  well  as  at  that  of 
Agra,  Skinner  was  present,  both  cities  having  refused  to  acknowledge 
Perron's  authority. 

The  next  action  in  which  Skinner  was  engaged  was  the  battle  of 
Malpura,  in  which  he  showed  distinguished  gallantry.  Lord  William 
Bentinck,  when  he  was  Governor-General  of  India,  mentions  an 
incident  in  this  battle  in  one  of  his  political  despatches  to  the  Court 
of  Directors  on  the  subject  of  Skinner's  public  services.  "  I  cannot 
refrain,"  he  writes,  "  from  relating  an  anecdote  told  me  by  an  old 
Sirdar  in  the  Jeypore  service.  He  had  a  command  in  the  battle  of 
Buxar  in  1764,  and  he  must  have  been  a  hundred  years  of  age  ;  but 
he  had  still  retained  the  erectness  of  youth,  a  fine  martial  appearance, 
and  his  faculties  unimpaired.  He  described  to  me,  with  a  manner 
and  expression  glowing  with  gratitude,  how  in  the  battle  of  Jeypore 
(i.e.,  Malpura),  Colonel  James  Skinner,  then  a  youth,  led  a  charge 
of  cavalry,  captured  a  field  battery  which  the  Sirdar  commanded, 
and  then,  by  his  humane  and  decided  interference,  saved  his  life." 
It  is  worthy  of  Skinner's  habitual  modesty  that  he  does  not  relate 
this  incident  in  his  own  description  of  the  battle,  but  merely  mentions 
how  he  nearly  lost  his  own  life  in  the  final  repulse  of  the  Rathors, 
being  attacked  by  one  of  them,  who  charged  into  the  centre  of  the 
square  and  killed  his  horse,  Skinner  only  escaping  with  his  life  by 
an  undignified  retreat  under  a  tumbril,  After  the  battle  Skinner  was 


392  APPENDIX. 

the  first  to  reconnoitre  the  Jaipur  camp,  into  which  he  rode  boldly, 
only  to  find  it  deserted.  Here  he  looted  two  golden  idols  with 
diamond  eyes,  belonging  to  Rajah  Partab  Singh,  and  trinkets  to  the 
value  of  Rs.  2,000,  amongst  them  being  "  a  brass  fish,  with  two 
chotvrees  hanging  down  like  moustachios."  This  curious  object 
proved  to  be  the  Malii  maratib,  or  Fish  of  Dignities,  a  decorative 
symbol  conferred  by  the  Mughal  emperors  on  rajahs  of  the  highest 
rank,  and  equivalent  to  the  Three  horse  tails  of  the  Turkish  Empire, 
or  the  Button  of  the  Chinese  mandarin.  In  this  instance  the  decora- 
tion had  been  conferred  on  Rajah  Partab  Singh.  Skinner  presented 
this  valuable  acquisition  to  the  Maratha  General,  and  received  in 
return  a  handsome  JcJiilat  and  considerable  commendation. 

A  few  days  after  this  Perron  joined  the  army,  and  Skinner  visited 
Jaipur  in  his  suite.  From  here  he  was  detached,  in  independent 
command,  to  attack  a  fort  near  the  Chambal  river,  belonging  to  a 
Rajput  chief  named  Ram  Pal  Singh.  On  arriving  before  this  place, 
he  found  the  low  mud  walls  so  nearly  level  with  the  crest  of  the 
glacis,  that  there  was  no  touching  the  bastions  with  the  battering 
train.  He  therefore  opened  trenches,  and  advanced  by  regular 
approaches  to  the  glacis,  and  then  ordered  a  mine  to  be  carried  under 
it.  When  this  was  sprung  his  three  battalions  rushed  forward  to  the 
assault,  and  after  one  rather  severe  check  the  place  was  taken. 
Skinner  was  next  ordered  to  assist  the  Karaoli  Rajah,  who  had  fallen 
out  with  his  neighbour  of  Uniara,  and  hired  several  battalions, 
(amongst  them  Skinner's  from  Perron),  to  fight  his  battles  for  him. 
The  force  consisted  of  six  battalions  of  infantry,  2,000  cavalry,  and 
twenty  guns ;  of  these  the  only  efficient  troops  were  Skinner's. 

The  scene  of  the  campaign  was  between  the  territory  of  Tonk  and 
the  Bands  river,  and  here  the  two  armies  came  in  sight  of  one 
another.  But  the  Karaoli  chief  was  a  coward,  and  an  impecunious 
one  to  boot,  and  could  not  find  money  to  pay  his  mercenaries,  who 
became  so  dissatisfied  and  insubordinate,  that  Skinner  sent  for  rein- 
orcements  to  Colonel  Pohlman.  But  before  they  arrived  the  Uniara 
Rajah  took  advantage  of  the  troubles  in  his  enemy's  camp,  and  intri- 
gued with  the  discontented  levies,  and  a  little  later  moved  out  to 
give  battle ;  whereupon  the  whole  of  the  Karaoli  infantry,  with  the 
exception  of  Skinner's  battalion,  deserted  to  the  enemy. 

On  seeing  this,  Skinner  commenced  a  retreat  towards  a  deserted 
village  in  his  rear,  which  he  gained  with  difficulty,  driving  off  two 
of  the  enemy's  battalions  who  charged  him.  Then  the  whole  of  their 
cavalry  and  infantry,  amounting  to  6,000  men,  came  on  to  the  attack, 
and  upon  this  Skinner  recognised  it  was  hopeless  to  attempt  to  hold 


APPENDIX.  393 

the  village.  So  he  decided  to  retreat,  if  possible,  to  Tonk,  which  was 
six  miles  distant,  and  evacuated  his  position,  but  was  immediately 
attacked  by  the  two  battalions  who  had  previously  charged  him, 
and  were  now  aided  by  their  cavalry.  These  Skinner  repulsed,  but 
not  without  the  loss  of  one  of  his  five  guns,  and  his  horse  was  killed 
under  him.  The  remainder  of  the  enemy  now  came  up  fast,  and 
Skinner  found  further  progress  impossible,  so  he  drew  up  his  men  on 
a  level  plain,  and  then  made  them  a  short  but  spirited  speech,  telling 
them  they  could  but  die  once,  and  exhorting  them  to  fight,  and,  if 
needs  be,  fall  like  good  and  brave  soldiers. 

Allowing  the  enemy  to  approach  to  within  fifty  yards,  Skinner  gave 
them  a  volley  and  then  charged.  Those  in  front  gave  way,  and  he 
captured  their  guns  ;  but  their  flanks  wheeled  into  action,  and  galled 
him  terribly ;  whereupon  Skinner  threw  his  men  into  a  square,  and, 
as  a  last  resource,  attempted  to  gain  some  ravines  about  three  quarters 
of  a  mile  away.  But  it  was  to  no  purpose  ;  the  enemy,  inspirited  by 
his  retreat,  charged  again  and  again,  captured  three  more  of  his 
guns,  and  destroyed  so  many  of  his  men  that  he  had  but  300  and  a 
single  field  piece  left.  Driven  to  desperation,  he  called  on  his  men 
to  make  a  final  sally,  but  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  leading  them  forward 
he  was  shot  through  the  groin  by  a  matchlock  man,  and  fell  to  the 
ground,  and  the  remnants  of  his  brave  but  unfortunate  battalion  were 
destroyed. 

This  happened  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  he  did  not 
regain  consciousness  till  the  next  morning,  when  he  found  himself 
despoiled  of  everything  except  his  pantaloons.  Around  him  were 
heaps  of  his  dead  and  wounded  Native  officers  and  soldiers,  among 
them  a  Subahdar  with  his  leg  shot  off  below  the  knee,  and  a  Jemadar 
with  a  pike  thrust  through  the  body.  All  were  tortured  with  thirst, 
and  unable  to  move  ;  and  thus  they  remained  in  helpless  agony 
through  the  long  hot  day,  praying  for  death.  Night  came  at  last,  but 
neither  release  from  suffering  nor  assistance.  The  moon  was  full  and 
clear,  and  about  midnight  it  was  very  cold.  So  dreadful  did  the 
night  appear  that  Skinner  vowed  to  himself  that  if  he  survived  it  he 
would  never  go  soldiering  again,  and  if  he  lived  to  recover,  that  he 
would  build  a  church  to  the  God  of  his  white  father.  The  wounded 
on  all  sides  were  moaning  and  crying  out  for  water,  and  the  jackals 
kept  flitting  about  like  four-legged  ghouls,  tearing  the  dead,  and 
coming  closer  and  closer  to  the  living,  and  were  only  kept  off  by 
stones  feebly  thrown  at  them. 

Next  morning  an  old  man  and  woman  came  to  the  battlefield 
carrying  a  basket  and  a  pot  of  water.  To  every  wounded  man  the 


894  APPENDIX. 

latter  gave  a  piece  of  joari  bread  and  a  drink  of  water.  This  revived 
Skinner,  but  as  the  woman  was  a  Cliumarin  (an  outcaste)  the  Subah- 
dar,  who  was  a  high-class  Rajput,  would  take  nothing  from  her  hands, 
Baying  that  a  little  more  or  less  suffering  was  nothing,  and  that  he 
preferred  to  die  unpolluted. 

Skinner  was  eventually  rescued  by  a  party  of  the  Uniara  Rajah's 
men,  who  came  to  the  field  to  bury  the  dead,  and  send  the  wounded 
into  camp.  The  poor  Subahdar  now  got  some  water,  and  he  and 
Skinner  and  the  rest  were  lifted  in  sheets  and  taken  to  the  Rajah's 
encampment.  After  a  month  the  chief  gave  Skinner  his  liberty. 
It  is  pleasant  to  learn  that  the  brave  Subahdar  also  recovered,  and 
that  Skinner  sent  the  poor  Cliumarin  woman  a  present  of  a  thousand 
rupees,  and  a  message  that  he  considered  her  in  the  light  of  a  mother. 

His  wound  now  obliged  Skinner  to  take  leave,  and  in  February  he 
went  down  to  Calcutta,  where  he  stayed  several  months  with  his 
sister,  Mrs.  Templeton,  returning  to  his  duties  in  the  month  of 
January,  1801.  In  the  May  following  he  was  engaged  in  the  storm 
of  Sounda,  having  in  the  interval  been  transferred  from  the  Second  to 
the  Third  Brigade,  which,  under  Pedron,  had  been  entrusted  with  this 
attack.  The  column  to  which  Skinner  was  attached  lost  three  officers 
and  1,000  men  killed  and  wounded,  but  captured  Lakwa  Dada's  guns. 
The  casualties  are  Skinner's,  and  the  prudent  reader  will  do  well  to 
divide  all  his  figures  by  three  or  four,  and  sometimes  more ;  but  in 
this  sketch  they  are  all  given  as  he  estimates  them.  After  the  victory 
Skinner  returned  with  his  corps  to  Aligarh. 

Two  months  later  he  was  again  sent  on  active  service,  this  time 
against  George  Thomas.  The  Third  Brigade  was  now  commanded  by 
Louis  Bourguien,  an  officer  for  whom  Skinner  had  no  respect  what- 
ever. The  events  of  the  war  have  already  been  very  fully  detailed 
(chiefly  from  Skinner's  memoirs),  and  need  not  be  repeated  ;  although 
it  may  be  noted  that  Skinner  considers  the  battle  of  Georgegarh  the 
severest  one  in  which  he  was  present  during  his  military  career.  Later 
on  he  had  a  creditable  share  in  securing  for  Thomas  the  terms  which 
enabled  him  to  surrender  with  honour  to  himself,  and  Skinner's  con- 
duct on  this  occasion,  unassumingly  related  by  himself,  is  worthy  of 
the  highest  praise. 

In  March,  1802,  Skinner,  who  had  been  posted  back  to  his  old 
brigade,  the  Second,  accompanied  Perron  to  Ujjain,  and  was  present 
at  the  memorable  Darbar  when  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia's  intended 
treachery  was  averted  by  the  cunning  and  precaution  of  Perron. 
Skinner  returned  to  Hindustan  with  the  General,  and  a  period  of 
comparative  inaction  followed,  till  war  broke  out  with  the  English  in 


APPENDIX.  395 

August,  1803.  On  the  28th  of  that  month  all  the  British  subjects  in 
Perron's  brigades  were  summarily  dismissed  the  service,  and  a  few 
days  later  Skinner  joined  General  Lake's  camp,  under  circumstances 
which  his  dark  complexion  rendered  somewhat  mortifying  to  the 
amour  propre  of  a  gallant  man.  But  this  was  compensated  by  the 
treatment  he  received  from  the  Commander-in-chief,  who  took  a  great 
fancy  to  him,  and  shortly  afterwards,  when  2,000  of  Perron's  Hindu- 
stani horse  came  over  to  the  English  after  the  battle  of  Delhi, 
appointed  him  to  the  command.  On  this  occasion  occurred  an  inci- 
dent which  shows  how  Skinner  was  beloved  by  his  soldiery.  When 
the  troopers  were  asked  whom  they  would  have  for  their  commander, 
with  one  voice  they  shouted — "  Sikander  Sahib,"  that  being  the 
appellation,  half  name,  half  sobriquet,  given  Skinner  by  the  Natives. 
His  own  cognomen  they  pronounced  Is-Jcinner,  which  they  changed 
into  Sikander,  associated  in  their  minds  with  Alexander  the  Great,  as 
a  compliment  to  Skinner's  dauntless  valour,  which  was  a  bye- word 
amongst  them. 

With  Skinner's  subsequent  career  it  is  not  in  the  province  of  this 
compilation  to  deal.  Perron's  2,000  Hindustani  horse  became  a 
famous  British  irregular  cavalry  corps,  known  as  Skinner's  Horse, 
or  more  familiarly  and  affectionately  as  The  Yellow  Boys.  They  and 
their  leader  covered  themselves  with  glory  during  the  next  thirty 
years,  and  their  exploits  and  achievements  won  for  Skinner  the  sub- 
stantive rank  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  in  the  British  Army,  and  the 
coveted  distinction  of  the  C.B.  A  valuable  jaghir  in  the  Aligarh 
district  was  also  conferred  upon  him.  For  many  years  his  head- 
quarters were  at  George  Thomas's  old  capital  of  Hansi  (near  to  which 
some  of  his  descendants  are  still  living),  and  he  performed  able  service, 
although  his  after  life  was  not  unchequered  with  some  disappoint- 
ments which  he  did  not  deserve.  He  made  a  host  of  friends,  and 
found  many  admirers,  amongst  them  such  distinguished  men  as  Lord 
Lake,  Sir  John  Malcohn,  Lord  Metcalfe,  Lord  Minto,  the  Marquis  of 
Hastings,  Lord  Combermere,  and  Lord  William  Bentinck.  It  is 
goodly  roll  of  patrons  and  acquaintances  for  the  offspring  of  a  Com- 
pany's ensign  and  a  Rajpiitni  girl,  and  one  whose  only  introduction  to 
high  society  was  his  own  sterling  worth  ! 

Many  anecdotes  are  related  of  Skinner,  but  only  two  or  three  can 
be  here  recorded.  Perhaps  his  most  remarkable  characteristic  was 
his  modesty  and  utter  contempt  of  all  assumption.  To  the  end  of  his 
life  an  old  spoon  was  placed  on  his  breakfast  table  every  morning  to 
remind  him  of  his  own  humble  origin  and  early  days.  In  fulfilment 
of  the  vow  he  made  on  the  battlefield  of  Uniara,  to  build  a  church  to 


896  APPENDIX. 

the  God  of  his  father  if  his  life  were  spared,  he  erected  the  edifice  of 
St.  James  at  Delhi,  at  a  cost  of  .£20,000,  and  in  the  same  spirit  of 
modest  humility  before  noted,  often  expressed  a  desire  that  when  he 
died  he  should  be  buried,  not  within  it,  but  under  the  door  sill,  so  that 
all  persons  entering  might  trample  upon  "  the  chief  of  sinners." 

Skinner's  domestic  habits  were  in  some  respects  more  Muhammadan 
than  Christian,  and  he  left  behind  him  a  numerous  family  by  sundry 
wives,  of  whom  he  had  at  least  fourteen.  His  eldest  son,  Hercules 
Skinner,  was  educated  in  England,  and  through  the  influence  of  Lord 
William  Bentinck  received  a  commission  in  the  Hydrabad  Contin- 
gent, much  to  his  father's  delight.  In  1836  Colonel  Skinner  was 
confirmed,  and  during  his  latter  years  was  sincerely  pious,  constantly 
studying  the  Bible,  and  preparing  himself  for  his  end.  He  died  at 
Hansi  on  the  4th  of  December,  1841,  aged  sixty-three  years,  and  was 
buried  there  with  military  honours.  But  a  little  later  his  remains 
were  disinterred,  and  carried  to  Delhi  to  be  deposited  by  the  side  of 
his  dearly  loved  friend  and  comrade,  William  Fraser  (brother  to  his 
biographer),  under  the  altar  of  St.  James's  Church.  It  had  been  his 
wish  to  be  buried  near  Fraser,  and  it  was  felt  proper  that  this  wish 
should  be  fulfilled. 

On  the  17th  of  February  1842,  accompanied  by  the  whole  of  his 
corps,  and  a  great  concourse  of  people,  the  coffin  was  carried  from  Hansi 
to  Sitaram-ka-Sarai,  on  the  outskirts  of  Delhi.  Here  all  that  was 
mortal'  of  the  gallant  old  adventurer  was  met  by  the  civilians  and 
military  officers  of  the  station,  and  a  vast  multitude  from  the  city,  and 
so  escorted  to  its  final  resting-place.  "None  of  the  Emperors  of 
Hindustan,"  said  the  Natives,  "  were  ever  brought  into  Delhi  in  such 
state  as  Sikander  Sahib  !  " 

SKINKEB,  EGBERT,  MAJOR. — Robert  Skinner  was  the  younger  brother 
of  Colonel  James  Skinner.  He  entered  Perron's  army  in  November, 
1800,  with  an  ensign's  commission,  and  was  posted  to  do  duty  with 
his  brother's  battalion.  The  introduction  of  the  young  subaltern  to 
his  men  was  a  characteristic  one.  The  elder  Skinner  called  his  most 
trusty  Native  officers  together,  fine  old  soldiers,  with  scarred  faces  and 
grizzled  beards,  and  steady,  intrepid  fellows  every  one  of  them.  Then 
he  drew  himself  up  in  military  fashion,  and  pointing  to  Eobert,  said, 
"  This  is  my  brother ;  see  ye  be  his  protectors ! "  The  veterans, 
stroking  their  beards,  and  carrying  their  hands  on  their  foreheads, 
replied  with  grave  emphasis — "  On  our  heads  be  it !  "  James  Skinner 
was  not  quite  confident  of  his  brother's  discretion,  and  selected  this 
method  of  safeguarding  his  inexperience. 


APPENDIX.  397 

Eobert  Skinner  was  present  at  the  attack  on  Earn  Pal  Singh's  fort 
near  the  Chambal,  where  he  was  wounded  by  a  bullet  in  t!ie  neck,  and 
obliged  to  return  to  Aligarh  to  recover.  He  rejoined  his  brother  after 
the  defeat  of  Uniara,  and  was  soon  afterwards  promoted  to  the  rank 
of  lieutenant,  and  given  the  command  of  a  battalion  in  the  Second 
Brigade  under  Pohlman.  The  next  occasion  on  which  the  two 
brothers  served  side  by  side  was  in  the  war  against  George  Thomas. 
At  the  battle  of  Georgegarh  the  following  incident  occurred,  touchingly 
related  by  Fraser  in  Skinner's  memoirs  :  "  James  and  Eobert  Skinner 
were  engaged  at  different  parts  of  the  field,  so  that  neither  knew  how 
the  other  fared.  The  cannonade  was  so  fierce  and  continuous,  and 
the  slaughter  so  great,  that  all  was  smoke  and  carnage,  and  there  was 
little  communication  between  the  different  battalions  engaged.  "When 
the  battle  ceased,  a  report  came  to  James  that  his  brother  had  been 
killed,  whilst  a  similar  one  reached  Robert  as  to  James.  Both,  moved 
by  one  impulse,  ran  to  the  bloody  field,  without  thinking  of  rest  or 
refreshment,  and  sought  all  over  for  the  body  of  the  brother,  but  in 
the  darkness,  amidst  the  thousands  of  corpses,  torn  and  mutilated  by 
the  cannon  shot,  neither  found  what  he  sought,  and  after  a  weary 
and  fruitless  search,  they  returned  to  the  tent  of  their  commanding 
officer  to  make  their  report.  By  a  singular  chance  they  entered  from 
opposite  sides  at  the  same  moment,  and  the  first  thing  that  met  their 
eyes  was  the  object  on  which  their  thoughts  were  dwelling.  They 
saw  nothing  else,  but  ran  and  embraced,  calling  out  each  other's  names 
before  the  officers  that  filled  the  tent." 

Eobert  Skinner  was  engaged  at  the  siege  and  storm  of  Hansi,  and 
at  the  latter  led  one  of  the  three  assaulting  columns.  In  the  hand  to 
hand  street  fighting  he  approached  so  close  to  Thomas  on  one  occa- 
sion, that  "  he  got  a  cut  at  him,  but  his  armour  saved  Thomas."  It 
was  characteristic  of  Thomas's  generous  nature  that  after  his  sur- 
render he  was  "  particularly  gracious  to  the  younger  Skinner,  whom 
he  embraced,  and  showed  him  the  cut  he  had  received  from  him  on 
his  belt." 

On  the  occurrence  of  the  war  with  the  English  in  1803,  Eobert 
Skinner,  after  being  dismissed  from  Perron's  army,  repaired  to 
Sardhana,  and  took  service  with  the  Begum  Somru,  and  when  General 
Lake  arrived  at  Sikandra  was  deputed  by  that  lady  to  make  terms  for 
her,  which  he  did  successfully.  Subsequently  Skinner  entered  the 
Company's  service,  and  was  given  the  local  rank  of  lieutenant,  and 
appointed  to  the  cavalry  corps  his  brother  commanded.  In  this  he 
continued  to  serve  for  many  years,  performing  excellent  services,  and 
winning  many  encomiums.  In  1815  James  Skinner,  with  the 


898  APPENDIX. 

generosity  of  disposition  and  brotherly  affection  which  so  distinguished 
his  nature,  desired  to  sever  from  his  corps  a  portion  to  be  made  into 
a  separate  command  for  his  brother,  whose  interests  he  thus  hoped 
to  forward.  But  Lord  Hastings,  the  Governor-General,  preferred  the 
force  being  left  intact,  and  Robert  Skinner  remained  in  command  of 
the  second  regiment  in  it,  but  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  local 
Major.  In  1819  the  Government  granted  him  in  perpetuity  a  small 
jaghir  in  the  district  of  Aligarh  ;  but  he  did  not  live  to  enjoy  it  long, 
for  his  death  occurred  in  1821,  before  he  had  reached  his  fortieth 
year. 

SMITH,  LEWIS  FERDINAND,  MAJOR. — Major  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith, 
as  the  historian  of  the  military  adventures  of  Hindustan,  and  as  an 
adventurer  himself,  and  a  writer  of  considerable  ability,  deserves  a  far 
more  complete  biography  than  can,  unhappily,  be  compiled ;  for  he 
was  a  modest  soldiery  man,  who  preferred  to  write  of  the  achieve- 
ments of  others,  not  of  his  own  deeds.  Of  his  early  career  little  is 
recorded.  He  was  the  son  of  Major  Lewis  Smith,  an  officer  in  the 
Honourable  Company's  service,  and  entered  Sindhia's  army  during  the 
time  that  De  Boigne  was  in  command,  though  at  what  precise  date  it 
is  impossible  to  say.  He  evidently  knew  De  Boigne  well  and  inti- 
mately, for  in  1796  and  1797  he  contributed  two  excellent  letters,  de- 
scriptive of  the  General's  life  and  career,  to  the  Calcutta  Telegraph — 
a  curious  name  for  a  newspaper  in  the  last  century,  although,  so  far 
back  as  1767,  Edgeworth  had  invented  his  Telelograph,  contracted 
into  Tellograph,  "  a  machine  which  describes  words  at  a  distance." 
This  digression  is,  however,  parenthetical.  In  the  two  letters  alluded 
to,  Smith  indicates  that  he  had  a  long  daily  intercourse  with  De  Boigne. 
His  first  independent  command  on  active  service  seems  to  have  been 
in  1798,  when  he  defeated  the  forces  of  the  Bhopal  State  in  an  engage- 
ment, when  he  was  at  the  head  of  a  battalion  of  infantry  and  100 
cavalry.  In  December  of  the  following  year  he  was  entrusted  with 
the  conduct  of  a  more  considerable  campaign.  An  impostor  named 
Sultan  Shah  gave  himself  out  to  be  Ghulam  Kader,  the  miscreant 
who  blinded  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam  in  1788,  and  whom  he  declared 
had  never  been  killed,  but  escaped  and  reached  Mecca.  Sultan 
Shah,  claiming  this  personality,  pretended  he  had  been  ordered 
by  the  Prophet  to  recover  Hindustan  from  the  Marathas,  and 
re-establish  the  Muhammadan  Empire.  He  appeared  in  arms  in  the 
province  of  Saharanpur,  where  he  was  opposed  by  a  Maratha  official 
named  Eamchander  Falkia,  whom  he  easily  defeated.  The  eclat  of 
this  victory  brought  him  a  number  of  followers,  and  Perron  found  it 


4PPENDIX.  399 

necessary  to  send  Major  Smith  with  three  battalions  against  him. 
Smith  was  strengthened  by  some  of  the  Begum  Somru's  troops,  and 
the  combined  force  marched  against  Sultan  Shah,  and  on  the  22nd  of 
November,  1799,  came  upon  him  at  the  village  of  Delun,  near  the  Kali 
Nadi.  Smith  at  once  crossed  the  river,  but  the  Begum's  battalions 
remained  where  they  were,  "  for  more  security,"  as  a  contemporary 
chronicler  quaintly  puts  it.  An  action  took  place,  and  the  Impostor's 
army,  which  consisted  of  10,000  Eohillas,  400  cavalry,  and  some  small 
field  pieces  showed  poor  fight.  Smith  advanced  quickly  to  within 
grape-shot  range,  and  then  poured  several  discharges  into  the  enemy, 
who  forthwith  took  to  flight,  and  were  chased  for  a  considerable 
distance. 

The  next  record  of  Smith's  services  is  during  the  war  with  George 
Thomas,  in  which  his  achievements  at  first  were  less  satisfactory.  He 
was  hi  command  of  a  battalion  of  Bourguien's  Brigade,  and  de- 
tached with  this  and  two  others  to  beseige  Georgegarh,  whilst  the 
Colonel  followed  Thomas  on  a  wild-goose  chase  into  the  Sikh  country. 
The  latter  doubled  back,  shook  off  his  pursuers,  and  swooped  down  on 
Smith,  with  a  greatly  superior  numerical  force.  Smith  at  once  raised 
the  siege,  and  retreated  upon  Jhajjar.  "  Why  Thomas  did  not  follow 
me,"  he  writes  in  his  book,  "  I  cannot  say.  If  he  had  continued  the 
pursuit  I  must  have  lost  all  my  guns,  and  my  party  would  have  been 
completely  destroyed.  But  Thomas  spared  me  and  remained  at 
Georgegarh."  Smith  was  rescued  from  his  perilously  weak  position 
by  his  brother's  arrival  next  day ;  but  he  did  not  forget  Thomas's 
moderation,  and  amply  repaid  it.  He  was  present  throughout  the  whole 
of  the  campaign,  and  accompanied  Bourguien  to  Hansi ;  and  when  the 
latter  had  "  subdued  the  garrison  with  gold,  which  in  India  is  more 
irresistible  than  in  Europe,"  Smith  came  forward  to  assist  Thomas  to 
obtain  honourable  terms  of  surrender. 

In  1803  Smith  accompanied  Dudrenec's  Brigade  to  the  Deccan,  and 
later  in  the  year  returned  with  it  to  Hindustan,  and  surrendered  to 
Colonel  Vandeleur  at  Mattra,  a  few  days  after  the  battle  of  Delhi, 
availing  himself  of  the  Governor-General's  proclamation  offering 
pensions  to  all  British  subjects  in  the  Maratha  employ  who  resigned 
their  posts,  and  being  awarded  one  of  Es.  1,200  a  month.  "  I  have 
lost,"  he  writes,  "  the  hopes  of  an  independent  fortune,  which  I 
would  have  acquired  from  my  rank,  the  result  of  my  long  service,  in 
spite  of  Perron's  injustice  ;  and  I  should  have  starved  had  it  not  been 
for  the  political  and  munificent  generosity  of  the  Most  Noble  the 
Governor-General  in  allowing  liberal  provisions  to  the  British 
officers,  who  were  obliged  to  quit  Scindia's  service  on  the  declaration 


400  APPENDIX. 

of  war.  We  should  have  been  wanting  in  principle,  and  in  duty  to 
our  country,  had  we  continued  to  serve  its  enemies."  Besides  being 
the  author  of  "  A  Sketch  of  the  Regular  Corps  in  the  Service  of  the 
Native  Princes  of  India,"  Smith  contributed  several  papers  to  the 
Asiatic  Annual  Eegister  and  other  publications,  for  his  style  of  com- 
position can  easily  be  recognised  in  many  of  the  "  Newsletters " 
which  appeared  in  Indian  newspapers  during  the  tune  that  Perron 
flourished. 

SMITH,  EMILIUS  FELIX,  CAPTAIN. — Captain  E.  F.  Smith  was  a 
younger  brother  of  Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith,  and  was  born  in  Rohil- 
khand  in  1777.  He  entered  Sindhia's  service  at  a  very  early  age,  but 
left  on  obtaining  a  commission  in  the  36th  Regiment.  This,  how- 
ever, he  subsequently  resigned  in  order  to  remain  with  his  brother,  and 
to  this  end  re-entered  Sindhia's  service  in  1800.  Soon  after  this  he  was 
engaged  in  the  reduction  of  two  rebel  battalions,  commanded  by  the 
widow  of  Captain  Le  Marchant,  who  had  refused  submission  to  Perron's 
orders.  He  then  obtained  an  appointment  in  the  Hindustani  Horse, 
and  accompanied  Bourguien  on  the  campaign  against  George  Thomas. 
When  his  brother  was  defeated  at  Georgegarh,  and  obliged  to  fall 
back  on  Jhajjar,  Emilius  hurried  to  the  relief  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry, 
and  "  performed  an  astonishing  rapid  movement  of  eighty  miles  in  ten 
hours,  fraternal  affection  giving  impulse  to  his  course."  Two  days  later 
he  commanded  the  left  wing  of  Bourguien's  army  at  the  battle  of 
Georgegarh  ;  and  whilst  gallantly  leading  it  to  the  charge,  his  leg  was 
severely  shattered  by  a  four-pounder  cannon-ball.  He  was  removed  to 
Jhajjar,  where  he  bore  the  tortures  of  an  unskilful  operation  with 
manly  fortitude,  but  sank  under  the  fever  which  the  wound  and  shock 
to  the  system  induced.  He  died  on  the  8th  of  October,  1801,  aged 
twenty-four  years.  Just  before  he  expired  he  said  with  a  sigh — "  Ah, 
why  did  I  not  fall  on  the  plains  of  Egypt  with  my  regiment.  I  should 
then  have  died  without  a  regret."  He  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his  ardour 
for  his  profession.  He  was  a  young  man  of  fine  character,  affec- 
tionate disposition,  and  good  education.  Something  of  a  poet,  too, 
for  many  fugitive  pieces  from  his  pen  found  a  corner  in  the  Calcutta 
periodicals  of  the  day. 

SOMBRE,  OR  SOMRU. — His  infamy  rather  than  his  achievements 
have  rescued  the  name  of  this  notorious  adventurer  from  oblivion,  and 
awarded  it  an  unenviable  niche  in  Indian  history.  Sombre's  real 
name  was  Walter  Reinhard,  and  he  was  reputed  to  be  the  son  of  .a 
butcher  at  Saltsburg,  where  he  was  born  in  1720.  At  the  age  of  thirty 


APPENDIX.  401 

he  came  out  to  Pondicherry  on  board  a  French  frigate,  from  which 
he  deserted  in  order  to  enlist  in  the  French  army  of  Southern  India. 
To  hide  his  identity  he  assumed  the  name  of  Somers  as  a  nom  de 
guerre,  but  his  saturnine  features  and  lowering  mien  soon  caused  its 
corruption  into  the  sobriquet  of  Sombre,  which  in  turn  was  twisted  by 
Native  pronunciation  into  Somra. 

Sombre  appears  to  have  spent  some  years  in  the  Carnatic  and 
Southern  India  before  he  made  his  way  to  Bengal.  Arrived  here,  he 
first  of  all  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  a  Swiss  battalion  in  the 
employ  of  the  Company,  but  eighteen  days'  experience  of  it  sufficed, 
and  he  crossed  the  boundary  into  Chandernagore,  and  was  appointed 
a  sergeant  in  Mons.  Law's  force.  But  he  was  soon  discontented  with 
this,  and  once  more  abandoning  his  allegiance,  proceeded  to  the  Upper 
Provinces,  where  he  assumed  the  Native  style  of  dress,  and  entered 
the  service  of  Suraj-ud-Daula,  the  Nawab  of  Bengal,  as  a  common 
trooper.  This  situation  proved  even  less  to  his  liking  than  his  previous 
ones,  and  for  the  next  two  or  three  years  he  appears  to  have  led  a 
restless  and  vagabond  existence,  till  1760,  when  he  joined  the  rebel 
Faujddr  of  Parnea,  by  whom  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  a 
Email  force,  with  instructions  to  drill  it  in  the  European  method  and 
bring  it  into  discipline.  In  a  few  months  the  Faujddr  suffered  a 
reverse,  which  naturally  determined  Sombre  to  desert  him.  The 
adventurer  now  accepted  a  similar  post  under  an  Armenian  name, 
Gregory,  a  member  of  a  Calcutta  family  of  repute,  and  the  virtual 
minister  of  Kassim  Ali  Khan,  who  had  succeeded  Suraj-ud-Daula  as 
Nawab  of  Bengal.  Fortune  favouring  Sombre,  he  was  promoted  to 
the  command  of  two  battalions.  In  1763  a  rupture  occurred  between 
Kassim  Ali  and  the  Company,  and  the  former,  enraged  at  the  ill 
success  of  his  arms,  treacherously  attacked  and  captured  a  large  body 
of  English  residents  at  Patna,  and  in  a  spirit  of  wanton  and  blood- 
thirsty revenge,  ordered  them  to  be  executed. 

But  the  deed  was  too  dark  and  foul  a  one  for  any  of  Kassim  Ali's 
Native  officers  to  undertake,  and  it  was  reserved  for  Sombre  to  ingra- 
tiate himself  with  his  master  by  carrying  out  the  crime.  The  details 
of  this  "  execrable  villainy  "  are  thus  given  in  the  "  Annual  Register." 
"  Somers  invited  above  forty  officers  and  other  gentlemen,  who  were 
amongst  these  unfortunate  prisoners,  to  sup  with  him  on  the  day  he 
had  fixed  for  the  execution,  and  when  his  guests  were  in  full  security, 
protected  as  they  imagined  by  the  laws  of  hospitality,  as  well  as  by 
the  right  of  prisoners,  he  ordered  the  Indians  under  his  command  to 
fall  upon  them  and  cut  their  throats.  Even  these  barbarous  soldiers 
revolted  at  the  orders  of  this  savage  European.  They  refused  at  first 

26 


402  APPENDIX. 

to  obey,  and  desired  that  arms  should  be  given  to  the  English,  and 
that  they  would  then  engage  them.  Somers,  fixed  in  his  villainy, 
compelled  them  with  blows  and  threats  to  the  accomplishment  of 
that  odious  service.  The  unfortunate  victims,  though  thus  suddenly 
attacked  and  wholly  unarmed,  made  a  long  and  brave  defence,  and 
with  their  plates  and  bottles  even  killed  some  of  their  assailants,  but 
in  the  end  they  were  all  slaughtered.  Proceeding  then,  with  a  file  of 
Sepoys,  to  the  prison  where  a  number  of  the  prisoners  then  remained, 
he  directed  the  massacre,  and  with  his  own  hands  assisted  in  the 
inhuman  slaughter  of  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  defenceless  Euro- 
peans confined  within  its  walls — an  appalling  act  of  atrocity  that  has 
stamped  his  name  with  infamy  for  ever."  Justice  requires  it  to  be 
added  that  in  one  account  of  this  tragedy,  it  is  asserted  that 
Sombre's  own  life  would  have  been  forfeited  had  he  refused  to  carry 
out  Kassim  Ali's  commands. 

British  troops  were  soon  marching  up  from  Calcutta  to  avenge  this 
foul  deed,  and  Kassim  AH  Khan's  army  was  defeated.  But  before 
this  happened  Sombre  had  been  invited  by  the  Nawab  Wazir  of  Oudh 
to  enter  his  service,  and  seizing  the  opportunity  of  Kassim  Ali's  dis- 
tress, renounced  his  allegiance,  extorted  by  violence  the  arrears  of  pay 
due  to  him,  and  then  marched  his  two  battalions  to  Lucknow,  where 
he  entered  on  his  new  appointment. 

By  the  end  of  1763  Sombre's  force  had  increased  to  four  battalions 
of  infantry,  one  of  cavalry,  and  a  strong  complement  of  artillery,  and 
their  commander  enjoyed  a  high  influence  at  Court,  until  war  broke 
out  with  the  English,  and  the  Nawab  Wazir  was  defeated  at  the  battle 
of  Buxar,  and  compelled  to  sue  for  peace,  when  one  of  the  principal 
conditions  insisted  on  by  the  English  was  the  surrender  of  Sombre. 
The  Nawab  accepted  the  stipulation  in  theory,  but  pointed  out  that, 
in  practice,  Sombre  was  in  command  of  an  armed  force,  which  made 
his  apprehension  impossible.  He  proposed,  as  an  alternative,  to 
poison  or  assassinate  the  adventurer,  but  this  suggestion  was  declined. 
Meanwhile  Sombre,  suspecting  the  tenor  of  the  protracted  negotia- 
tions, took  advantage  of  the  delay  to  surround  and  plunder  the 
Nawab's  Begums,  who  had  been  entrusted  to  him  for  protection,  and 
also  to  rob  his  late  master,  Kassim  AH,  who  was  at  the  time  a  refugee 
at  the  Oudh  Court.  Having  thus  acquired^  large  sum  of  money  by 
methods  perfectly  in  keeping  with  his  past  career,  he  secured  the 
fidelity  of  his  force  by  paying  it  up  in  full,  and  then  marched  to 
Rohilkhand.  Here  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Afghan  chief,  Hafiz 
Kaimat  Ali — the  benevolent  Bohilla  ruler  of  Macaulay's  essay  on 
Warren  Hastings.  But  fear  of  the  English  soon  drove  him  to  leave 


THE    BEGUM    SOMBRE. 

\fro»i  a  inetlallion  in  Sleeman's  "  Rambles  ami  Recollections 
o/  an  Intiian  Official."} 


APPENDIX.  403 

the  neighbourhood,  and  marching  to  Dig,  he  enlisted  under  the  banners 
of  the  Jat  Eajah  of  Bhartpur.  His  connection  with  this  potentate  was 
of  a  very  short  duration,  for  in  a  few  months  he  was  serving  the  Eajah 
of  Jaipur  in  a  similar  capacity,  but  the  Bajpiit  prince  soon  dismissed 
a  mercenary  whom  he  found  too  villainous  for  his  service,  and  Sombre 
finally  tendered  his  sword  to  Najaf  Khan,  the  Wazir  of  Shah  'Alam, 
the  Emperor  of  Delhi,  and  a  nobleman  who  seldom  refused  the  pro- 
posals of  any  military  adventurers,  and  who  agreed  to  pay  Sombre 
Es.  65,000  a  month  for  the  services  of  his  party. 

Dp  to  this  period  of  his  career  Sombre  had  served  twelve  or  fourteen 
different  masters,  but  he  remained  in  the  service  of  the  Court  of 
Delhi  until  his  death.  This  fixity  of  employment  was  probably  due  to 
his  having  been  assigned  a  rich  jaghir  or  estate  at  Sardhana,  a  dis- 
trict some  forty  miles  north  of  the  capital,  where  he  built  and  fortified 
his  headquarters,  and  settled  down. 

From  the  time  that  he  had  quitted  civilisation  and  Chandernagore, 
Sombre  had  adopted  the  native  dress,  and  with  it  the  custom  of  keep- 
ing a  harem.  At  Sardhana  he  fell  in  love  with  a  very  beautiful,  and 
eke  remarkable  woman,  concerning  whose  parentage  there  are  various 
accounts.  One  historian  asserts  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  a 
decayed  Mughal  nobleman,  another  that  she  was  a  Kashmiri  dancing- 
girl,  and  a  third  that  she  was  by  birth  a  Syudani,  or  lineal  descendant 
of  the  Prophet.  Sombre  was  already  married  to  a  woman  of  the 
Massalman  faith,  who  was  still  alive  ;  but  this  did  not  prevent  him 
from  repeating  the  ceremony  with  this  girl  who  had  taken  his  fancy. 
His  connection  with  her  laid  the  foundation  of  the  fortunes  of  his 
family,  for  the  Begum  Somru,  as  she  came  to  be  called,  was  not  less 
notable  for  her  beauty  than  for  her  extraordinary  cleverness  and  force 
of  character.  She  soon  gained  a  great  ascendancy  over  Sombre,  and 
it  was  in  a'great  measure  owing  to  her  influence  that  he  abandoned 
his  roving  life  and  settled  down  permanently  at  Sardhana. 

Sombre  was  an  illiterate  man  who  could  neither  read  nor  write, 
though  he  spoke  Persian  and  Hindustani  fluently.  It  is  to  his  credit 
that  he  was  never  ashamed  of  his  humble  origin,  and  although  his 
services  were  eagerly  courted  and  bid  for,  and  he  enjoyed  a  position  of 
considerable  political  power  in  the  country,  he  despised  show,  and 
preferred  a  plain  unostentatious  mode  of  life.  But  with  this  single 
statement  the  category  of  his  virtues  is  begun  and  ended.  He  pos- 
sessed a  certain  degree  of  low  and  crafty  intelligence,  but  was  utterly 
destitute  of  military  skill,  martial  spirit,  or  personal  courage,  whilst, 
considering  the  possibilities  open  to  him,  he  was  singularly  devoid  of 
enterprise  and  ambition.  Shortly  after  entering  Najaf  Khan's  service, 


404  APPENDIX. 

he  was  offered  a  large  and  important  Jaidad,  or  military  assignment 
of  territory,  which  would  have  raised  him  to  a  princely  position,  but 
he  preferred  a  monetary  monthly  payment,  and  refused  the  proposal. 
It  is  probable  he  feared  the  risk  involved  in  occupying  an  extended 
territory  necessitating  the  distribution  of  his  troops,  and  preferred  to 
keep  them  together  and  concentrated  about  his  person.  For  it  is 
known  that  after  the  massacre  of  Patna  he  suffered  agonies  of 
remorse  and  fear,  and  lived  in  the  miserable  and  constant  terror  of 
being  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  the  English  to  expiate  his  crime.  To 
prevent  such  a  fate  he  always  carried  poison  about  his  person,  with 
which  to  terminate  his  existence  if  necessary,  and  if  his  courage  served 
him. 

Sombre's  disposition  was  merciless,  cruel,  and  bloodthirsty,  and  he 
was  totally  wanting  in  honour  and  fidelity.  Avaricious  and  unscru- 
pulous to  an  astounding  degree,  he  bartered  his  sword  to  the  highest 
bidder,  with  the  eagerness  of  a  huckster  disposing  of  perishable  goods, 
and  changed  his  fealty  with  the  same  unconcern  that  he  changed  his 
coat.  His  force  was  officered  by  Europeans,  but  few,  if  any,  of  them 
were  men  of  respectability,  and  those  he  engaged  were  generally  the 
very  dregs  and  dross  of  society.  The  consequence  was  that  his  troops 
were  generally  in  a  state  of  pronounced  mutiny  and  insubordination, 
committing  every  imaginable  outrage  upon  the  persons  of  their  officers, 
whom  they  despised.  They  seldom  obtained  their  pay  until  they  had 
put  their  commander  into  confinement,  and  made  him  dig  up  his 
hidden  treasure,  if  he  had  any,  or  borrow  from  bankers  if  he  had 
none.  If  the  troops  were  impatient  it  was  their  custom  to  divest 
Sombre  of  his  trousers  and  straddle  him  across  a  hot  gun.  When  one 
battalion  had  extracted  its  dues,  he  was  often  handed  over  to  another 
to  be  farther  squeezed.  In  later  years  the  Begum  herself  was  subjected 
to  the  starving  process,  but  Colonel  Sleeman  is  the  authority  for 
stating  that  she  was  never  actually  grilled  on  a  gun.  The  same 
writer  states  that  it  was  Sombre's  invariable  rule  when  engaged  in 
active  service  to  draw  np  at  a  safe  distance  and  await  the  course  of 
events.  If  victory  declared  for  the  enemy  he  sold  his  unbroken  force 
to  the  foe  for  a  cash  payment ;  if  his  own  friends  won,  he  promptly 
assisted  them  in  plundering,  and  so  secured  all  the  tangible  fruits  of 
victory. 

Lewis  Ferdinand  Smith  has  left  on  record  a  scathing  criticism  of 
Sombre's  character  as  a  soldier,  and  of  the  merits  and  qualities  of  his 
corps.  "  Sombre's  party,"  he  writes,  "  have  never  been  conspicuous 
for  their  military  achievements,  nor  famed  for  their  military  trophies. 
They  never  lost  a  gun  and  never  gamed  one,  until  they  were  defeated 


APPENDIX.  405 

by  the  British  army  near  Adjanta  Ghat  (Assaye).  But  they  were 
remarkable  for  their  excellent  retreats.  Sombre  made  it  a  rule  in 
every  action  to  draw  his  men  out  in  line,  fire  a  few  shots,  and  then 
form  square  and  retreat.  This  rule  his  party  has  ever  since  adhered 
to  with  inflexible  exactitude  ;  by  which  singular  mode  of  prudent  war- 
fare they  have  acquired  no  laurels,  yet  preserved  their  reputation. 
They  have  been  the  most  mutinous  troops  in  India,  and  v/oe  to  the 
unfortunate  European  who  was  compelled  by  his  necessities  to  enter 
into  this  party.  Disgrace,  if  not  death,  attended  them,  from  the  fre- 
quent revolts  of  the  soldiers,  when  they  regularly  wreaked  their 
ire  with  clubs  upon  the  shoulders  of  their  European  officers." 

The  latter  years  of  Sombre's  life  were  rendered  a  perfect  purgatory 
to  him  by  his  distrust  and  suspicion  of  all  around  him.  He  died  at 
Agra  on  the  4th  of  May,  1778,  aged  fifty-eight  years,  and  was  buried 
in  the  garden  of  his  residence  there.  But  three  years  later  his  widow, 
the  Begum  Somru,  on  being  baptized  and  received  into  the  Roman 
Catholic  faith,  caused  his  remains  to  be  disinterred  and  deposited  in 
the  churchyard  of  that  city.  The  following  is  the  Portugese  in- 
scription over  his  resting-place,  in  Padretola,  Agra  : — 


AQUIIAZ 
OWALT 
ERREINHA 
ED.  MOEB 


EO  AOS4 
DE  MAYO 
NOANNO 
DE  1778 


After  Sombre's  death  the  command  of  his  party,  its  pay,  and  the* 
jagJiir  of  Sardhana,  were  continued  to  the  Begum  Somru,  who  was 
always  known  by  that  name,  although  on  her  entry  into  the  church  she 
had  been  christened  Joanna  Nobilis.  By  means  of  her  uncommon 
ability,  gallantry,  and  masculine  force  of  character,  she  proved  herself 
equal  to  the  responsibility.  She  gave  the  command  to  a  German 
named  Pauly,  perhaps  because  he  was  a  countryman  of  her 
husband,  but,  it  has  been  suggested,  from  more  tender  reasons, 
and  gradually  entertained  a  considerable  body  of  Europeans,  both  as 
officers  and  to  work  her  artillery,  which  numbered  forty  pieces  of 
cannon.  These  Europeans  were  of  all  nationalities,  English,  French, 
Germans,  Swiss,  Portugese,  Armenians,  and  half-castes,  many  of  them 
being  deserters  from  the  Company's  service.  At  one  time  the  Begum 
employed  over  two  hundred  in  her  force. 

But  she  was  unfortunate  in  her  officers,  for  the  respectable  ones  all 
left  her,  and  the  others  were  a  worthless,  dissolute  set  of  men,  whose 
outrageous  conduct  often  incited  the  troops  to  mutiny.  Pauly  was 
murdered  "  by  a  bloody  process  "  in  1783  ;  Baours,  who  succeeded  him, 


406  APPENDIX. 

retired,  so  next  did  Evans  and  Dudrenec,  all  three  disgusted  with  the 
"beastly  habits"  of  their  European  subordinates.  It  was  about  this 
time  that  George  Thomas  rose  to  a  position  of  importance,  if  not  the 
actual  control  of  her  force  ;  he,  too,  was  forced  to  leave.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  he  was  the  officer  concerned  in  the  spirited  succour 
which  the  Begum  afforded  to  the  Emperor  Shah  'Alam,  when  he  was 
trying  to  reduce  Najaf  Kuli  Khan  in  1788.  Thomas  departed  about 
1793,  when  the  command  of  the  party  devolved  upon  Le  Vassoult,  a 
gallant  and  good-looking  soldier,  with  whom  the  Begum  carried  on  an 
intrigue.  She  was  presently  married  to  him  by  Father  Gregorio,  a 
Carmelite  monk,  MajorBernierand  Colonel  Saleur  being  the  witnesses 
of  the  marriage,  which  was  kept  secret.  Colonel  Sleeman  states  that 
Le  Vassoult  proposed  for  her  hand  as  the  best  method  of  securing  his 
ascendancy  over  Thomas,  to  whom  he  was  always  hostile.  Le  Vas- 
soult was  a  gentleman  by  birth  and  education,  and  a  soldier  of  honour- 
able feelings ;  but  he  was  stern  and  haughty  by  nature,  and  so 
thoroughly  despised  his  subordinates  that,  after  his  marriage,  he 
refused  to  associate  with  them  on  equal  grounds,  or  admit  them  to  a 
seat  at  his  table.  The  Begum  in  vain  endeavoured  to  persuade  her 
husband  to  alter  his  demeanour,  urging  that  their  personal  safety 
required  that  the  officers  should  be  conciliated.  But  her  warnings 
were  disregarded.  They  proved  too  true  ;  Le  Vassoult's  subordinates 
took  umbrage,  and  declared  that  no  man  should  command  them  who 
would  not  meet  them  on  terms  of  perfect  social  equality.  The  troops 
sided  with  the  officers,  and  determined  to  depose  the  Begum,  and 
elevate  Balthazar  Sombre,  a  son  of  Sombre  by  his  first  wife,  to  the 
government.  This  woman  was  still  living,  nor,  indeed,  did  she  die 
till  1888,  when  she  must  have  been  over  a  hundred  years  old.  She 
was  buried  at  Sardhana,  the  cemetery  of  which  place,  it  is  curious  to 
note,  contained  the  bones  of  many  centenarians. 

Matters  with  the  mutineers  were  brought  to  a  crisis  by  Le 
Vassoult's  harsh  treatment  of  a  German  officer  named  Legois  (a  friend 
of  George  Thomas),  who  was  degraded  for  endeavouring  to  dissuade  the 
Begum  from  making  an  attack  on  Hariana.  This  arbitrary  abuse  of 
power  disgusted  the  troops,  who  had  fought  under  Legois  for  many 
years,  and  were  incensed  at  seeing  him  superseded  by  a  junior  officer. 
After  remonstrating  in  vain  with  Le  Vassoult,  they  suddenly  broke 
out  into  open  mutiny.  The  Begum  and  her  husband  now  became 
frightened,  and  determined  to  seek  an  asylum  in  the  Company's 
territory.  Neither  of  them  understood  English,  but  Le  Vassoult, 
with  the  aid  of  a  grammar  and  dictionary,  managed  to  communicate 
his  wishes  to  Colonel  McGowan,  who  commanded  the  advance  post 


APPENDIX.  407 

of  the  British  army  at  Anupshahr.  After  some  difficulty  sanction 
was  ascorded,  but  a  stipulation  was  made  that  Le  Vassoult  should  be 
treated  as  a  prisoner  of  war  on  parole,  and  reside  with  his  wife  at  the 
French  settlement  of  Chandernagore.  This  was  in  May,  1795. 

The  Begum's  troops  had,  however,  obtained  information  of  what 
was  going  on,  and  immediately  summoned  Balthazar  Sombre — or,  as 
he  was  more  commonly  called,  from  a  title  bestowed  on  him  by  the 
Emperor  Shah  'Alam,  Zafar  Yab  Khan — from  Delhi  to  assume  the 
government  of  the  Sardhana  State.  Meanwhile  Le  Vassoult  and  the 
Begum  managed  to  slip  away,  but  their  departure  being  discovered, 
a  detachment  was  sent  in  pursuit  to  capture  them.  An  agreement 
existed  between  the  Begum  and  Le  Vassoult,  that  in  the  event  of 
their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  mutineers,  neither  should  survive  the 
other.  In  the  commotion  that  ensued,  consequent  upon  their  being 
overtaken  and  surrounded,  the  Begum  drew  a  dagger,  and  in  a  half- 
hearted way  slashed  herself  slightly  in  the  breast.  Her  attendants 
seeing  the  blood  flow  shouted  out  that  their  mistress  had  killed  herself. 
Le  Vassoult,  who  was  riding  a  short  distance  ahead,  hearing  the 
tumult,  inquired  what  it  arose  from.  He  was  toldVthat  his  wife  was 
dead.  A  second  time  he  repeated  the  question,  and  received  the 
same  answer.  He  then  drew  a  pistol  from  his  holster,  and  although 
he  might  easily  have  galloped  off  and  saved  himself,  placed  the 
muzzle  to  his  mouth  and  pulled  the  trigger.  The  ball  passed  through 
his  brain,  and  he  sprang  from  his  saddle  a  full  foot  into^the  ah*,  before 
he  fell  dead  to  the  ground.  His  corpse  was  subjected  to  every  in- 
dignity and  insult  that  the  gross  and  bestial  imagination  of  his  officers 
and  men  could  conceive,  and  left  to  rot,  unburied,  on  the  ground. 

The  Begum,  who  was  only  slightly  injured,  was  carried  back 
a  captive  to  Sardbana,  and  kept  chained  to  a  gun  for  seven  days,  and 
deprived  of  all  food  except  such  as  was  conveyed  to  her  by  stealth  by 
her  female  servants.  Balthazar  Sombre  was  seated  on  the  masnad. 
He  was  a  detestable  compound  of  ignorance,  weakness,  cruelty,  and 
debauchery,  and  it  was  not  long  before  it  became  evident  his  rule 
had  not  a  single  element  of  stability. 

The  actual  instrument  of  his  deposition,  and  the  Begum's  re- 
establishment  in  power,  was  George  Thomas,  with  whom  she  found 
means  to  communicate.  He  generously  laid  aside  old  animosities, 
and  responded  to  her  appeal  for  help.  Balthazar  Sombre  was  sent 
a  prisoner  to  Delhi,  where  he  died,  some  say  by  poison,  in  1803, 
leaving  a  daughter,  subsequently  married  to  Colonel  Dyce,  whose 
son  became  famous  as  the  principal  personage  in  the  great  Dyce- 
Sombre  law-suit. 


408  APPENDIX. 

The  command  of  the  Beguui's  force  was  now  bestowed  on  Colonel 
Saleur,  who,  with  thirty  other  European  officers,  signed  a  document 
swearing  fidelity  and  allegiance  to  their  mistress.  As  illustrating  the 
class  of  men  who  filled  the  posts  of  command  in  this  party,  it  may  be 
mentioned  that  Saleur  was  the  only  one  who  could  write  his  name, 
most  of  the  others  affixing  their  seals,  whilst  a  few,  to  show  the 
superiority  of  their  accomplishments,  subscribed  two  or  three  letters 
of  the  alphabet,  not  necessarily  those  representing  their  proper  initials, 
but  such  as  they  happened  to  be  able  to  form.  The  covenant  was 
drawn  out  by  a  Muhammadan  scribe  in  Persian,  and  as  his  conscientious 
scruples  prevented  him  from  acknowledging  Christ  as  the  son  of  God, 
the  precious  document  was  superscribed — "  In  the  name  of  Go<l,  and 
of  His  Majesty  Christ !  " 

The  Begum  never  publicly  declared  her  marriage  to  Le  Vassoult, 
and  immediately  after  his  death  resumed  her  former  name.  So 
anxious  was  she  to  bury  in  oblivion  an  episode  which  certainly  evinced 
weakness  in  a  woman  usually  strong  minded,  and  already  well 
advanced  in  years,  that  she  stipulated  in  her  will  that  her  heir, 
whose  family  patronymic  was  Dyce,  should  in  addition  assume  the 
name  of  Sombre.  To  complete  the  story  of  poor  Le  Vassoult's  fate  it 
should  be  added  that  doubts  have  been  cast  upon  the  bond  fides  of  the 
agreement  which  the  Begum  originated,  that  in  the  event  of  capture 
at  the  hands  of  the  mutineers  neither  should  survive  the  other.  This 
and  her  subsequent  mock  wound  have  been  denounced  as  a  piece  of 
treachery  on  her  part,  designed  to  rid  herself  of  her  husband.  There 
is,  however,  no  actual  proof  of  this,  and  Colonel  Sleeman,  writing  in 
1836,  mentions  that  he  heard  "  from  grave  old  Native  gentlemen,  who 
were  long  in  her  service,  that  there  really  was  too  much  truth  in  the 
story  of  her  intimacy  with  the  gallant  young  Frenchman,  though  God 
forgive  them  for  saying  so  of  a  lady  whose  salt  they  had  eaten  for  so 
many  years."  Under  these  circumstances  the  inhuman  atrocity  of 
the  above  suggestion  is  hardly  conceivable. 

Colonel  Saleur  raised  the  Begum  Somru's  party  to  six  battalions  ox 
infantry,  increased  the  artillery,  and  added  a  cavalry  force.  The  corps 
is  often  mentioned  in  the  political  history  of  the  next  eight  years,  but 
it  never  distinguished  itself,  nor  did  the  Begum  lapse  a  second  time 
rom  the  path  of  prudence.  Amidst  the  kaleidoscopic  changes  of 
Hindustan,  she  managed  to  preserve  her  power  and  independence 
intact,  until  her  army,  famous  in  peace,  if  not  in  war,  met  the 
English  on  the  plain  of  Assaye.  But  even  here  fortune  favoured 
them,  for  four  of  her  five  battalions,  being  left  to  guard  the  Maratha 
camp,  made  good  their  escape,  and  only  one  was  destroyed. 


APPENDIX.  409 

Just  before  the  declaration  of  war  iu  1803,  Robert  Skinner  joined 
the  Begum's  service,  and  after  the  fall  of  Aligarh  was  deputed  to 
arrange  for  her  submission  to  General  Lake.  James  Skinner  tells  the 
story  so  well  in  his  memoirs  that  its  quotation  cannot  be  resisted. 
"  When  the  Begum  came  in  person  to  pay  her  respects  to  General 
Lake,  an  incident  occurred  of  a  curious  and  characteristic  description. 
She  arrived  at  head-quarters  just  after  dinner,  and  being  carried  in  her 
palanquin  at  once  to  the  reception  tent,  the  General  came  out  to  meet 
and  receive  her.  As  the  adhesion  of  every  petty  chieftain  was,  in 
those  days,  of  consequence,  Lord  Lake  was  not  a  little  pleased  at  the 
early  demonstration  of  the  Begum's  loyalty,  and  being  a  little  elevated 
by  the  wine  which  had  just  been  drunk,  he  forgot  the  novel  circum- 
stance of  its  being  a  Native  female,  instead  of  some  well-bearded  chief, 
so  he  gallantly  advanced,  and,  to  the  utter  dismay  of  her  attendants, 
took  her  in  his  arms  aud  kissed  her  !  The  mistake  might  have  been 
awkward,  but  the  lady's  presence  of  mind  put  all  right  Receiving 
courteously  the  proffered  attention,  she  turned  calmly  round  to  her 
astonished  attendants  and  observed,  '  It  is  the  salute  of  a  padre 
(priest)  to  his  daughter.'  The  Begum  professes  Christianity,  and  thus 
the  explanation  was  perfectly  in  character,  though  more  experienced 
spectators  might  have  smiled  at  the  appearance  of  the  jolly  red-coated 
clergyman  exhibited  in  the  person  of  the  General." 

The  Begum  lived  for  many  years  after  this  in  friendly  intercourse 
with  the  British.  Bishop  Heber  saw  her  in  1825,  and  described  her  as 
"  a  very  queer  looking  old  woman,  with  brilliant  but  wicked  eyes,  and 
the  remains  of  beauty  in  her  features."  "  Queer  and  wicked  "  she  had 
been  in  some  of  her  actions,  as  the  following  anecdote  shows.  One 
day  two  of  her  slave  girls  set  fire  to  her  houses  at  Agra  in  order  to 
make  off  with  their  paramours,  two  soldiers  of  the  guard  left  in  charge 
of  them.  These  houses  had  thatched  roofs,  and  contained  all  the 
Begum's  valuables.  The  fire  was  put  out  with  much  difficulty  and 
great  loss  of  property,  and  the  two  slave  girls  were  soon  after  dis- 
covered in  the  bazaar  at  Agra,  and  brought  into  the  Begum's  camp. 
She  ordered  the  affair  to  be  investigated  by  a  drum-head  court- 
martial,  and  in  the  usual  summary  fashion.  Their  guilt  being 
established  they  were  first  of  all  flogged  until  they  were  senseless,  and 
then  buried  alive  in  a  pit  dug  in  front  of  her  tent.  Another  version  of 
this  atrocious  story,  related  in  Heber's  narrative,  states  that  the  girls 
were  buried  in  a  hole  dug  in  the  floor  of  the  Begum's  own  chamber, 
and  that  she  had  her  bed  drawn  over  it,  and  smoked  her  7iookah 
unconcernedly  over  this  living  grave.  But  Colonel  Sleeman,  who  was 
at  the  pains  of  sifting  the  story,  vouches  for  the  correctness  of  the 


410  APPENDIX. 

former  version — although  it  is  but  one  degree  less  horrible — which  he 
heard  from  an  old  Persian  merchant  named  Aga,  to  whom  the  slave 
girls  originally  belonged.  "  The  Begum's  object,"  explained  the  old 
Aga,  "  was  to  make  a  strong  impression  upon  the  turbulent  spirit  of 
her  troops  by  a  severe  example,  and  she  was  entirely  successful." 

When  the  Begum  submitted  to  the  English,  her  force  consisted  of 
six  battalions  of  infantry,  400  horse,  and  a  party  of  artillery  served 
chiefly  by  Europeans.  She  possessed  a  good  arsenal,  well  stored,  and 
a  foundry  for  cannon,  both  built  within  the  walls  of  the  fortress  of 
Sardhana.  The  cost  of  the  upkeep  of  her  military  establishment  was 
about  four  lakhs  of  rupees  a  year,  and  her  other  expenses  were  not 
less  than  two,  but  the  revenues  from  her  jagJiir  of  Sardhana  were 
sufficient  to  cover  both.  When  she  accepted  British  protection  her 
income  increased  very  greatly,  and  there  were  no  longer  any  calls  for 
the  payment  of  her  troops,  which  were  disbanded.  She  thus  became 
immensely  rich,  and  devoted  large  sums  to  charitable  and  religious 
institutions.  Amongst  other  gifts,  she  sent  to  the  Pope  at  Rome 
Bs.  150,000,  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  Bs.  50,000,  and  to  the 
Bishop  of  Calcutta  Bs.  100,000.  To  Catholic  Missions  in  India  sho 
subscribed  Bs.  130,000  ;  and  for  distribution  to  the  deserving  debtors 
of  Calcutta  Bs.  50,000.  She  also  built  a  handsome  Boman  Catholic 
Church  and  a  Protestant  Chapel  at  Meerut,  to  which  place  she  re- 
moved her  residence  during  her  latter  years.  The  Boman  Catholic 
bishop  here  was  an  Italian  from  Milan,  named  Julius  Caesar.  He 
was  the  medium  of  her  donation  to  the  Pope,  for  which  he  received 
his  bishopric.  His  Holiness  made  the  Begum's  recognised  heir  and 
step-grandson — Dyce-Sombre — a  Chevalier  of  the  Order  of  Christ, 
besides  presenting  Him  with  a  splint  from  the  real  cross  as  a  relic. 

The  Begum  was  very  diminutive  in  person,  but  possessed  a 
wonderful  dignity  of  carriage,  and  an  uncommon  resolution  of 
manner.  At  Meerut  she  entertained  from  time  to  time  several 
Governors-General  and  Commanders-in-chief.  During  the  closing 
years  of  her  life  an  immense  army  of  pensioners  enjoyed  her  bounty, 
and  she  acquired  the  character  of  a  kind-hearted  and  benevolent 
woman.  She  died  in  1836,  leaving  behind  her  a  fortune  of  .£700,000, 
a  large  portion  of  which  was  bequeathed  to  charities,  and  the  rest  to 
Mr.  Dyce-Sombre,  who  married  an  English  lady  of  title,  and  his  two 
Bisters,  one  of  whom  married  an  English  officer,  Captain  Troup, 
and  the  other  an  Italian  gentleman,  Signer  Sabroli. 

SUTHERLAND,  BOBEET,  COLONEL  [known  to  the  Natives  as  Sutlej 
Sahib].— Sutherland  was  a  Scotchman,  and  originally  an  officer  in  the 


APPENDIX.  411 

73rd  Eegiment,  from  which  he  was  cashiered.  He  entered  De  Boigne'e 
First  Brigade  in  1790,  and  in  May,  1794,  was  still  only  a  lieutenant  on  a 
pay  of  Rs.  200  a  month.    Soon  after  this  promotion  came  to  him,  and 
he  obtained  the  command  of  the  Third  Brigade,  and  on  the  death  of 
Colonel  Fremont  in  1795  was  transferred  to  that  of  the  Second.  "When, 
at  the  end  of  this  year,  De  Boigne  retired  Sutherland  was  senior  officer 
in  Hindustan,  and  acted  as  chief  commander  of  the  troops.     Perron 
was,  however,  considerably  senior  to  him,  and  being  in  the  Deccan 
with  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia,had  little  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  succession 
to  De  Boigne's  appointment,  in  spite  of  all  Sutherland's  endeavours  to 
secure  it  for  himself.     This  was  the  beginning  of  a  long  and  jealous 
feud  between  the  two  adventurers,  which  only  terminated  with  the 
Scotchman's  resignation  in  1802.     It  is  probable,  though  not  actually 
recorded,  that  Sutherland  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Patan  and 
Merta.     In  1796  he  was  employed  in  the  reduction  of  some  revolted 
districts  inBundelkhand,  bringing  into  obedience  several  petty  rajahs, 
during  which  (in  Skinner's  words)  he  fought  two  general  actions  and 
captured  half-a-dozen  forts.     His  next  service  was  against   Lakwa 
Dada  at  Chiturgarh.  This  was  the  occasion  when  Thomas  complained 
of  Sutherland's  conduct  in  having  arranged  a  concerted  attack  on  the 
rebel  chief  over  night,  and  then  unaccountably  drawn  off  his  forces 
without  any  assigned  reason.      Skinner  records  an  incident  which 
happened  during  this  campaign,  and  does  not  rebound  very  much   to 
Sutherland's  credit.     It  appears  that  during  the  desultory  progress  of 
the  war,  Skinner  was  one  morning  exercising  his  horse  "  in  full 
armour,"  and  chanced  to  meet  Harji  Sindhia,  a  Maratha  chieftain, 
and  a  relative  of  Daulat  Rao.     Harji  invited  Skinner  to  join  him  in 
his  ride  to  a  river  close  by,  whither  he  was  bound,  at  the  request  of 
the  Maratha  General,  Ambaji  Inglia,  to  look  for  a  ford.     This  ex- 
pedition was  subsequently  proved  to  be  a  snare  laid  by  Ambaji,  in 
collusion  with  Lakwa  Dada — the  enemy  he  was  supposed  to  be  fight- 
ing against — to  bring  about  the  destruction  of  Harji,  to  whom  both  the 
chiefs  were  hostile.     As  they  rode  along  Skinner's   suspicions  were 
aroused,  and  he  warned  Harji,  who  was  attended  by  500  of  his  men, 
to  be  on  his  guard.     His  fears  were  not  ill-founded,  for  almost  im- 
mediately afterwards  they  fell  into  an  ambuscade,  and  were  attacked 
by  a  thousand  of  Lakwa  Dada's  cavalry.     Skinner  and  Harji  im- 
mediately  offered  fight,   and  eventually    succeeded  in  beating  the 
enemy  off,  though  not  before  the  former's  horse  was  wounded  by  a 
sabre  cut,  and  he  himself  had  received  two  or  three  sword  blows  on 
the  body,  from  which  he  was  only  saved  by  his  armour.    Harji  was 
wounded,  but  Skinner  fortunately  cut  down  the  man  who  was  attack- 


412  APPENDIX. 

ing  him.  Keturning  to  camp,  Harji  invited  Skinner  to  his  tent,  where 
all  sat  down  in  Darbar.  Then  the  chief  arose  and  said,  "All  those 
who  fought  with  me  this  day  were  my  servants,  and  did  but  perform 
their  duty ;  but  you  are  my  friend,  and  fought  for  me  as  a  friend." 
He  then  took  a  pair  of  gold  bangles  set  with  diamonds,  and  put  them 
round  Skinnei's  wrists,  and  also  gave  him  a  sword,  a  shield,  and  a  fine 
horse. 

When  Colonel  Sutherland  heard  of  this  he  blamed  Skinner  for  what 
had  passed*  and  told  him  he  should  report  the  circumstance  of  his 
accompanying  the  chief,  without  leave,  to  Perron.  But  a  little  later 
he  caused  intimation  to  be  conveyed  to  Skinner  that  if  he  would  give 
him  the  horse  he  had  received  from  Harji,  nothing  should  be  said  of 
what  had  happened.  Skinner  sent  back  word  he  would  give  the 
bangles,  but  not  the  horse,  the  sword,  or  the  shield.  At  this  Suther- 
land was  much  incensed,  and  his  anger  was  increased  when  he  learnt 
that  Harji  had  himself  written  to  Perron  praising  Skinner's  conduct. 

"  Soon  after  this,"  adds  Skinner,  with  quiet  satisfaction,  "  the  Colonel 
himself  was  discovered  intriguing  with  the  Maratha  chiefs,  and  Perron 
discharged  him,  bestowing  his  command  on  Major  Pohlinan."  This 
incident  is  related  because  it  shows  the  existence  of  an  old-standing 
quarrel  between  Sutherland  and  Skinner,  and,  in  a  measure,  explains 
some  of  the  strictures  the  latter,  in  his  memoirs,  takes  occasion  to  pass 
upon  the  Scotchman. 

Not  long  after  this,  Sutherland,  having  been  forgiven  through  the 
interest  of  his  father-in-law,  Colonel  John  Hessing,  was  sent  to  the 
Deccan  to  take  over  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade.  The  side-light 
here  is  interesting,  for  it  establishes  a  connection  by  marriage  between 
Perron  and  Sutherland,  since  the  General  and  Hessing  had  married 
sisters.  In  another  part  of  his  memoirs  Skinner  mentions  that  Filoze 
and  Bourguien  were  both  related  to  Perron,  but  without  mentioning 
the  degree  of  connection.  It  would  thus  appear  that  there  was  a 
regular  family  party  in  command  of  Sindhia's  brigades,  for  Perron, 
the  two  Hessings,  Sutherland,  Derridon,  the  Filoze's,  and  Bourguien 
must  all  have  been  more  or  less  connected  by  marriage  ties.  Suther- 
land, indeed,  was  nephew  by  marriage  to  Perron,  having  married  the 
General's  niece  ;  but,  despite  this,  they  cordially  hated  one  another, 
and  the  -Frenchman  lost  no  opportunity  of  mortifying  and  vexing  the 
Scotchman,  with  the  object  of  getting  rid  of  him,  for  it  did  not  suit  his 
policy  that  his  second  in  command  should  be  a  British  subject. 

Sutherland  assumed  command  of  the  First  Brigade  in  1799.  Previous 
to  this  his  principal  services  had  been  the  storming  and  capture  of 
Narwar  with  four  battalions  in  1795,  and  the  siege  and  capture  of  Tori 


APPENDIX.  413 

Fatehpur  in  1796,  at  the  head  of  eight  battalions.  In  the  Deccan  he 
was  chiefly  engaged  in  helping  Daulat  Rao  Sindhia  to  consolidate  his 
power  at  Poonah,  and  it  was  not  until  1801  that  an  opportunity 
occurred  for  him  to  really  distinguish  himself.  In  this  year  Sindhia 
returned  to  Malwa,  leaving  Sutherland  and  a  portion  of  the  First 
Brigade  behind  to  support  his  interests  at  the  Deccan  capital  during 
his  absence.  Then  came  the  disastrous  defeat  of  Ujjain,  and  Suther- 
land was  at  once  summoned  to  his  master's  aid.  As  soon  as  the  rainy 
season  slackened,  and  the  Narbada  became  fordable,  Sutherland  was 
detached  to  retrieve  the  defeat  sustained  in  June.  With  fourteen 
battalions  of  regular  infantry  and  20,000  Maratha  horse  he  gave  battle 
to  Jaswant  Rao  Holkar  and  Amir  Khan  on  the  plain  outside  the  city 
of  Indore,  where  the  latter  had  taken  up  a  strong  position.  After  an 
obstinate  contest  he  gained  a  complete  victory,  drove  Holkar  and  his 
troops  from  their  entrenchments,  took  98  guns,  160  tumbrils,  and  all 
the  baggage,  and  wound  up  the  exploit  by  plundering  Indore.  He 
lost  400  men  in  the  action,  which  was  a  very  severe  one.  Although  a 
detailed  account  of  this  battle  has  been  given  in  the  sketch  of  Perron's 
life,  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote  the  following  description  of  it 
from  the  pages  of  "  Pandurang  Hari,"  which  gives  a  graphic  idea  of 
the  fight  from  a  Hindu  point  of  view.  Pandurang  Hari,  it  may  be 
mentioned,  was  at  the  time  a  cavalry  officer  in  Holkar 's  Maratha 
Horse. 

"  I  had  just  entered  upon  my.  new  service  when  despatches  arrived 
with  orders  for  us  to  march  to  Indore,  Holker's  capital.  ...  A 
Mahratta  army  consists  in  general  of  horse  and  foot  of  every  neigh- 
bouring nation,  religion,  and  costume.  It  makes  a  very  motley 
appearance,  as  it  is  under  no  discipline,  and  destitute  of  regular 
uniform.  Few  of  the  men  in  the  same  line,  either  cavalry  or  infantry, 
have  weapons  of  a  like  form.  Some  are  armed  with  sword  and  shield, 
others  with  matchlocks  or  muskets.  Some  carry  bows  and  arrows, 
others  spears,  lances,  or  war  rockets.  Many  are  expert  with  the 
battleaxe,  but  the  sabre  is  indispensable  to  all.  The  men  in  armour, 
of  whom  there  are  many  to  make  up  the  variety,  cut  a  very  curious 
appearance.  A  helmet  covers  not  only  the  head  and  ears,  but  pro- 
tects the  shoulders.  The  body  is  cased  in  iron  network,  or  in  a  thick 
quilted  vest.  They  give  preference  to  the  two-edged  sword  before  the 
curved  one  used  by  the  Persians  and  Arabs.  .  .  .  Every  rajah,  prince, 
or  leader  is  responsible  among  the  Mahrattas  to  the  Peishwa,  or  head 
of  the  empire,'for  his  general  conduct.  He  pays  tribute  for  his  district, 
and  attends  when  summoned  with  his  quota  of  men,  which  is  regu- 
lated by  his  wealth  and  population.  He  is  supreme  in  command  over 


414  APPENDIX. 

his  corps,  which  is  attached  alone  to  him  and  to  bis  fortunes,  and  ad- 
heres to  whatever  party  he  supports.  .  .  .  After  a  fatiguing  march  we 
reached  Indore,  the  capital  of  Jeswant  Rao  Holker.  Our  preparations 
were  now  complete,  and  we  were  confident  of  success.  Our  cavalry 
was  a  strange  rabble,  mounted  on  tall  and  short  horses  of  every  colour 
and  kind.  Saddles  were  always  slipping  off  for  want  of  girths  ;  strings 
fastened  to  any  old  pieces  of  iron  by  way  of  bits,  supplied  bridles ;  old 
turbans  served  for  martingales,  and  tent  ropes  for  cruppers.  The  in- 
fantry was  just  as  wretchedly  accoutred  as  the  cavalry.  Everything 
was  wanting  and  nothing  regular.  Here  voices  might  be  heard  roaring 
out  for  ball,  and  there  for  muskets  or  arms.  Those  who  were  not 
fortunate  enough  to  procure  any  weapon  at  all,  supplied  the  deficiency 
by  a  bamboo  pole,  which  they  dignified  with  the  designation  of  a  spear. 
.  .  .  The  eventful  day  at  length  dawned.  I  awoke  early,  and  opening 
my  tent,  looked  abroad.  All  was  dark  and  misty.  Soon  it  was  all 
alive  in  the  camp,  and  as  the  day  advanced  clamour,  turmoil,  and 
preparation  increased.  The  drums  roared  on  every  hand  the  call  to 
arms.  The  war-elephants,  caparisoned  and  ready,  yelled  with  im- 
patience, and  towered  loftily  over  all  other  living  objects.  The  neigh- 
ing of  horses,  the  clash  of  arms,  the  buzz  of  impatient  voices,  the 
sounds  of  command,  the  march  of  the  irregular  and  confused  masses 
to  their  stations,  was  an  impressive  scene.  Soon  the  firing  of  guns, 
at  first  slow  and!  irregular,  then  more  rapidly,  convinced  me  the  work 
of  death  had  begun  in  some  quarter,  and  it  seemed  speedily  extending 
itself  towards  the  station  of  my  troop,  which  I  had  joined,  well  mounted, 
and  with  which  I  remained, 'with  a  fluttering  heart,  in  awful  suspense. 
The  current  of  battle  now  rolled  close  by  me,  and  action  soon  took 
away  all  reflection,  for  we  had  enough  upon  our  hands.  Our  men 
were  all  lean  kine,  and  too  scantily  fed  to  be  much  heavier  than 
skeletons.  Our  horses  were  in  little  better  condition,  and  when 
Scindia's  cavalry  came  down  on  us  we  were  knocked  off  on  the  ground 
before  we  could  strike  a  blow.  In  vain  I  tried  to  rally  and  remount 
my  men.  I  succeeded  in  prevailing  upon  only  a  few  to  rally  ;  the  best 
part  of  them  turned  tail  and  fled  without  once  looking  behind.  Thus 
the  division  to  which  I  was  attached  was  speedily  disposed  of.  Our 
infantry  getting  mixed  with  the  cavalry  that  had  been  driven  back  by 
Scindia,  was  taken  by  it  for  the  infantry  of  that  chief,  instead  of  our 
own,  and  the  sabre  began  to  cut  among  them  as  if  they  were  a  field  of 
standing  corn.  I  laboured  in  vain  to  rectify  the  mistake,  and  stay  the 
carnage  of  our  own  men.  My  voice  was  lost  in  the  scene  of  death  and 
discord,  the  rush  of  rockets,  and  the  groans  of  the  dying.  How  long 
this  scene  might  have  continued  before  it  could  have  been  put  an  end 


APPENDIX.  415 

to  I  cannot  tell,  if  the  attention  of  the  cavalry  had  not  been  drawn  to 
something,  which  even  in  the  heat  of  battle  was  truly  appalling  to  the 
sight,  and  made  them,  even  there,  think  of  Belf-preservation.  A 
wounded  elephant  rushed  in  among  them,  mad  with  the  pain  of  a  ball 
he  had  just  received,  and  rolled  his  unwieldy  bulk  through  and  over 
the  slashed  infantry,  and  among  the  terrified  horse.  Beast  and  rider 
were  overturned  and  crushed  beneath  his  tread,  and  all  that  lay  in  his 
path  became  victims  to  his  fury.  This  effectually  put  a  stop  to  the 
havoc  the  cavalry  had  begun,  as  the  horses  took  fright  and  bore  their 
riders  off  the  field  of  action,  leaving  their  own  broken  infantry  to  be 
trampled  to  death  by  the  enraged  beast  At  this  moment  the  cavalry 
of  Scindia  charged  our  artillery  and  captured  it  all  together  with  our 
baggage.  This  was  decisive.  Jeswant  Rao  Holker  saw  his  world- 
conquering  heroes  disperse  in  every  direction,  and  the  battle  terminated 
iti  leaving  Scindia  no  enemies  in  view,  the  pursued  soon  leaving  their 
conquerors  far  in  the  rear.  The  virtue  of  leanness,  which  served  us 
so  ill  in  the  battle,  was  now  of  singular  service  in  making  our  escape." 

Pandurang  Hari  makes  a  mistake  in  describing  Sindhia  as  present 
in  person  at  the  battle,  for  he  was  some  miles  in  the  rear  with  his 
baggage,  and  Sutherland  was  in  command  of  the  victorious  army. 
It  is  curious  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the  regular  infantry  in  this 
spirited  description  of  the  fight.  The  victory  established  Sutherland's 
reputation  and  confirmed  him  in  his  master's  favour ;  so  much  so 
that  at  one  time  it  was  announced  he  had  been  appointed  to  super- 
sede Perron,  whose  jealousy  operated  as  much  as  any  other  cause  in 
bringing  him  to  Ujjain  in  March,  1802. 

Perron  soon  obtained  Sindhia's  ear,  and  although  Sutherland 
intrigued  assiduously,  he  was  disgraced  and  transferred  to  the 
command  of  the  Second  Brigade,  which  had  escorted  Perron  down 
from  Hindustan.  This  humiliation  and  "  a  remark  of  Perron's " 
caused  the  Scotchman  to  throw  up  his  commission  in  disgust,  and  he 
returned  to  Agra  "  without  leave,"  accompanied  by  a  hundred  cavalry. 
Sindhia,  it  was  stated,  was  very  much  distressed  at  his  departure,  and 
Perron  went  personally  to  pacify  his  brigade,  and  promised  them  a 
new  commander  of  equal  rank. 

Sutherland  remained  at  Agra  till  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  with 
the  English,  and  was  one  of  the  officers  confined  by  the  mutinous 
Agra  garrison.  He  was  associated  with  George  Hessing  in  arranging 
the  terms  of  capitulation,  and  the  bearer  of  the  letter  to  General 
Lake  which  "  demanded  a  cessation  of  hostilities  "  on  the  13th  of 
October,  1803.  Two  or  three  days  after  this  he  and  all  the  European 
officers  in  the  place  found  protection  under  the  British  flag. 


416  APPENDIX. 

On  the  whole,  Sutherland  seems  to  have  been  a  good  officer,  though 
doubtless  his  social  qualities  were  not  so  commendable  as  his  military 
abilities.  His  victory  at  Indore  justifies  his  claim  to  be  considered  a 
more  competent  commander  than  most  of  his  contemporaries.  On 
his  withdrawal  from  Sindhia's  service  he  obtained  a  pension  of 
Bs.  800  a  month,  under  favour  of  the  Governor-General's  proclama- 
tion, which  he  enjoyed  for  some  years.  He  died  at  Mattra,  but  the 
date  of  his  death  is  not  known. 

SYMES,  CAPTAIN  [known  to  the  natives  as  Sunk  Sahib] . — Captain 
Symes  was  the  commandant  of  a  Najib,  or  matchlock,  battalion  in 
Perron's  First  Brigade,  and  was  wounded  at  the  storm  of  Sounda. 
After  this  he  was  sent  to  supersede  Bourguien,  who  had  been 
fruitlessly  endeavouring  to  capture  Ajmir.  From  thence  he  pro- 
ceeded to  Tonk,  which  place  he  garrisoned  for  some  time,  until 
Jaswant  Rao  Holkar  attacked  him,  and  forced  him  to  retreat  to 
Bampura.  He  died  at  Sikandra  a  short  time  before  the  war  broke 
out  with  the  English. 

TONE,  WILLIAM  HENRY,  COLONEL. — Colonel  W.  H.  Tone  was  an 
Irishman,  and  brother  to  the  famous  Irish  rebel,  Theobald  Wolfe 
Tone.  William  was  born  in  August,  1764,  his  grandfather  being  a 
respectable  farmer  near  Naas,  in  county  Kildare,  and  his  father  a 
coachmaker,  who  was  ruined  by  litigation  over  the  family  property. 
Tone  was  intended  for  a  commercial  life,  and  bound  apprentice  at  the 
age  of  fourteen  to  an  eminent  bookseller.  This  enabled  him  to 
indulge  his  passion  for  reading,  and  he  perused  every  book  of  voyages 
and  travels  which  he  could  find,  and  also  some  of  military  history  and 
adventure.  This  literature  heated  an  imagination  naturally  warm 
and  enthusiastic  to  such  a  degree  that,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  he  ran 
away  to  London,  and  entered  as  a  volunteer  in  the  East  India  Com- 
pany's service.  His  first  experience  was  unfortunate,  for  instead  of 
finding  his  way  to  India,  as  he  desired,  he  was  sent  to  the  Island  of 
St.  Helena,  on  which  barren  rock  he  remained  in  garrison  for  six 
years,  and  then  returned  to  Europe.  It  was  highly  to  his  honour 
that,  though  he  entered  into  such  execrable  society  as  the  troops  in 
the  Company's  service  were  composed  of,  and  at  such  an  early  age, 
he  passed  through  the  ordeal  without  being  affected  by  the  contagion 
of  their  manners  or  their  principles.  He  even  found  means  in  that 
degraded  situation  and  remote  spot  to  cultivate  his  mind  to  a  certain 
degree,  so  that  his  brother,  Wolfe  Tone,  was  much  surprised  when  he 
met  him  in  London,  after  a  separation  of  eight  years,  to  find  him 


APPENDIX.  417 

with  the  manners  of  a  gentleman  and  a  considerable  acquaintance 
with  the  best  parts  of  English  literature.  Tone  had  a  natural  talent 
for  poetry,  which  he  much  improved,  and  composed  several  very 
elegant  sets  of  verses.  He  was  a  handsome,  well-made  man  with  a 
good  address,  and  extremely  well  received  among  women,  whom  he 
loved  to  excess.  He  was  as  brave  as  Caesar  and  devoted  to  soldiering. 

Having  remained  three  or  four  years  in  Europe,  by  which  time  his 
father  was  utterly  ruined  by  the  law-suit  alluded  to,  Tone  resolved 
to  try  his  fortune  in  India,  from  which  step  his  brother  did  not 
attempt  to  dissuade  him.  Ee-entering  the  Company's  service  in  1792, 
he  arrived  at  Madras  at  the  end  of  that  year.  With  an  advantageous 
figure,  a  good  address,  and  considerable  talents,  he  recommended 
himself  so  far  to  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  in  which  he  served,  that 
he  obtained  his  discharge  and  letters  of  introduction  to  persons  at 
Calcutta,  where  he  was  advised  to  push  his  fortunes.  A  small  military 
command  enabled  him  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  voyage,  and 
procured  him  a  gratification  of  <£50  on  his  arrival  at  his  destination 
as  a  reward  for  his  exertions  in  quelling  a  dangerous  mutiny  which 
broke  out  amongst  the  black  troops  under  his  command  on  board, 
who  had  formed  a  scheme  to  run  away  with  the  ship.  At  Calcutta 
the  persons  to  whom  he  had  come  recommended  introduced  him  to  a 
French  officer  named  Marigny,  who  was  second  in  command  of  the 
Nizam  of  Haidarabad's  army,  and  happened  to  be  at  the  Pre- 
sidency purchasing  military  stores  for  his  master.  Marigny  gave 
Tone  an  appointment  in  the  Nizam's  service,  and  promised  him  the 
command  of  a  battery  of  artillery  as  soon  as  they  should  arrive  at 
Haidarabad.  The  stores  being  purchased,  Tone  marched  with  the 
First  Division,  of  which  he  had  the  command,  and  arrived  safely  at 
the  Nizam's  capital.  After  some  time,  Marigny  followed  ;  but  by  an 
unforeseen  accident  all  Tone's  hopes  were  blasted.  A  quarrel  took 
place  between  Marigny  and  Eaymond,  the  Frenchman  in  command, 
in  which  Tone,  with  an  honourable  indiscretion,  sided  with  his  friend. 
The  consequence  was  that  Marigny  was  put  in  irons,  and  Tone  only 
escaped  a  similar  fate  by  appealing,  as  a  British  subject,  to  the 
Eesident  at  the  Nizam's  Court  for  protection.  This  circumstance, 
together  with  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  between  the  French  and 
English,  put  an  end  to  all  prospects  of  his  advancement,  as  all  the 
Europeans  in  the  Nizam's  army  were  Frenchmen. 

So  Tone  set  out  to  return  to  Calcutta.  On  his  journey,  having 
travelled  four  hundred  miles,  and  with  two  hundred  yet  to  travel, 
which  must  have  brought  him  into  the  district  of  Orissa,  he  dis- 
mounted from  his  horse  to  shoot  in  a  jungle  by  the  roadside.  On  his 

27 


418  APPENDIX. 

return  he  found  his  servants  and  horses  in  the  hands  of  five  ruffians, 
who  were  engaged  in  plundering  his  baggage.  He  immediately  ran 
up  and  fired  at  them,  and  shot  one  in  the  stomach,  whereupon 
another  returned  the  fire  with  one  of  Tone's  own  pistols,  which  they 
had  seized,  and  wounded  him  in  the  foot.  They  then  made  off  with 
their  booty,  and  in  this  distressed  condition  the  unfortunate  Irishman 
had  to  travel  two  hundred  miles  in  a  burning  climate  and  without 
resources.  But  his  coiirage  and  good  constitution  supported  him, 
and  he  at  length  arrived  at  Calcutta,  where  he  speedily  recovered  his 
health.  His  friends  there  had  not  forgotten  him,  and  when  an 
opportunity  offered  of  Major  Palmer  proceeding  to  Poonah  to  take 
up  the  appointment  of  Eesident  at  the  Court  of  the  Peshwa  of 
the  Marathas,  they  procured  Tone  a  strong  recommendation  to  that 
Court,  and  he  set  off  with  Major  Palmer  in  high  spirits  and  health, 
and  with  expectations  of  the  command  of  a  battery  of  artillery  at 
least. 

So  far  Tone's  history  has  been  extracted  from  the  memoirs  of  his 
brother  Wolfe  Tone.  Carrying  the  narrative  forward,  it  would  appear 
he  reached  Poonah  about  the  year  1796,  and  found  employment  in 
Boyd's  corps.  Two  years  later  he  was  selected  by  Amrat  Rao,  the 
Peshwa's  brother,  to  command  a  proposed  brigade  of  regular  infantry, 
all  the  officers  of  which  were  to  be  British  subjects,  but  the  idea  was 
abandoned.  In  1801  he  was  in  command  of  two  hundred  Sepoys 
assisting  Lakwa  Dada  and  the  Bhais  at  the  defence  of  Sounda, 
where  he  was  defeated  by  Perron's  troops  and  obliged  to  surrender. 
The  General  behaved  very  kindly  to  him  and  his  officers,  supplying 
them  with  a  handsome  camp  equipage,  such  as  tents,  camels, 
horses,  &c.  To  the  Colonel  he  offered  service  in  his  own  army,  but 
it  was  declined,  and  Tone  was  permitted  to  retire  to  Maheswur, 
the  capital  of  Holkar,  and  furnished  with  Us.  10,000  for  his  expenses, 
and  to  enable  him  and  his  comrades  in  misfortune  to  recover  their 
shattered  fortunes. 

Tone  was  killed  in  the  following  year,  being  struck  by  a  bullet  in 
the  right  temple  in  an  action  near  Choli  Maheswur  while  serving  with 
Holkar.  His  brother's  biographer  (his  own  nephew),  writing  in  1827, 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  this,  or,  at  least,  does  not  spe- 
cifically mention  it. 

Tone  was  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Some  Institutions  of 
the  Mahratta  People,"  which  has  been  frequently  quoted  by  various 
historians,  so  that  he  evidently  cultivated  his  taste  for  literature  to 
the  end.  Grant  Duff,  in  his  "  History  of  the  Mahrattas,"  refers  in 
very  appreciative  terms  to  three  letters  which  Tone  had  published, 


APPENDIX.  419 

giving  an  accurate  account  of  affairs  at  Poonah  in  1796.  "  I  have 
examined  minutely,"  he  writes,  "  all  which  that  intelligent  gentleman 
wrote  respecting  the  Mahrattas.  What  he  saw  may  be  relied  upon  ; 
as  to  what  he  heard,  I  am  less  surprised  that  he  should  have  fallen 
into  error  than  that  he  should  have  obtained  information  so  nearly 
correct."  Smith  describes  Tone  as  a  man  of  "  undaunted  valour  and 
persevering  enterprise  ;  an  unfortunate  gentleman  whose  abilities  and 
integrity  were  as  great  as  his  misfortunes  had  been  undeservedly 
severe,"  and  criticises  his  "  Institutions "  as  "  both  elegant  and 
accurate."  Every  one  who  was  brought  into  contact  with  William 
Henry  Tone  writes  well  of  him,  and  leaves  us  with  the  impression 
that  he  was  a  brave  and  amiable  man. 

VICKEES,  MAJOR. — Major  Vickers  was  a  half-caste,  and  an  exceed- 
ingly gallant  young  soldier.  He  entered  Perron's  army  as  a  lieutenant 
in  the  Second  Brigade,  under  Major  Pohlman,  and  commanded  one 
of  the  trenches  in  the  siege  of  Jhajgarh,  displaying  great  bravery  in 
leading  the  storm  of  that  formidable  place.  When  the  Chevalier 
Dudrenec  deserted  Holkar's  service,  Vickers  was  appointed  to  the 
command  of  his  corps,  and  behaved  with  great  courage  at  the  battle 
of  Poonah,  in  October,  1802,  his  intrepidity  and  steadiness  conducing 
much  towards  the  victory,  and  being  at  the  time  a  theme  of  admiration 
amongst  all  military  men.  In  1804,  when  war  broke  out  between 
Holkar  and  the  British,  the  chief  sent  for  Vickers,  and  asked  him  if 
he  would  fight  against  his  countrymen.  The  young  man  positively 
refused  to  do  so,  as  did  also  two  other  adventurers — Dodd  and  Eyan. 
Whereupon  Jaswant  Rao,  assigning  as  a  justification  a  treasonable 
correspondence  which  he  accused  them  of  carrying  on,  ordered  all 
three  to  be  beheaded,  and  the  sentence  was  carried  into  effect  at 
Nahar  Maghana  (Tiger's  Hill)  in  the  month  of  May,  1804.  Their 
heads  were  fixed  on  lances  in  front  of  Jaswant  Rao's  camp,  and  a 
public  crier  proclaimed  that  such  would  be  the  fate  of  any  European 
who  might  fall  into  Holkar's  clutches. 


FINIS. 


UNWIN  BROTHERS, 
CHIT.-WORTH  AND   t-ONDOK. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388 

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


MAY  0  2  2005 

i-F 
QUARTER  LOAf< 


A  '•'"•"  HIM  |l|||||||[||||l 

001  445  731 


I 


